

Logic and Algebraic Structures in Quantum Computing
Arising from a special session held at the 2010 North American Annual Meeting of
the ASL, this volume is an international cross-disciplinary collaboration with
contributions from leading experts exploring connections across their respective ﬁelds.
Themes range from philosophical examination of the foundations of physics and
quantum logic, to exploitations of the methods and structures of operator theory,
category theory, and knot theory in an effort to gain insight into the fundamental
questions in quantum theory and logic.
The book will appeal to researchers and students working in related ﬁelds,
including logicians, mathematicians, computer scientists, and physicists. A brief
introduction provides essential background on quantum mechanics and category
theory, which, together with a thematic selection of articles, may also serve as the
basic material for a graduate course or seminar.
Jennifer Chubb is Assistant Professor of Mathematics at the University of San
Francisco, where she teaches a wide range of courses, including quantum computing,
to students in physics, computer science, and mathematics. She has a background in
physics, dynamical systems, and pure and applied math. Her current research focuses
on computable structure theory and algorithmic mathematics.
Ali Eskandarian holds the positions of Dean and Professor at The George
Washington University. He is a theoretical physicist and a founding member of the
groups in astrophysics and quantum computing/information. He serves as co-director
of the Center for Quantum Computing, Information, Logic, and Topology.
Valentina Harizanov is a Professor of Mathematics at The George Washington
University, where she also serves as co-director of the Center for Quantum Computing,
Information, Logic, and Topology. She is internationally recognized for her research in
mathematical logic, particularly in computability theory and computable model theory.

LECTURE NOTES IN LOGIC
A Publication of The Association for Symbolic Logic
This series serves researchers, teachers, and students in the ﬁeld of symbolic
logic, broadly interpreted. The aim of the series is to bring publications to the
logic community with the least possible delay and to provide rapid
dissemination of the latest research. Scientiﬁc quality is the overriding
criterion by which submissions are evaluated.
Editorial Board
Jeremy Avigad
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
Zoe Chatzidakis
DMA, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris
Peter Cholak, Managing Editor
Department of Mathematics, University of Notre Dame, Indiana
Volker Halbach
New College, University of Oxford
H. Dugald Macpherson
School of Mathematics, University of Leeds
Slawomir Solecki
Department of Mathematics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Thomas Wilke
Institut für Informatik, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel
More information, including a list of the books in the series, can be found at
http://www.aslonline.org/books-lnl.html

LECTURE NOTES IN LOGIC 45
Logic and Algebraic Structures in
Quantum Computing
Edited by
JENNIFER CHUBB
University of San Francisco
ALI ESKANDARIAN
George Washington University, Washington DC
VALENTINA HARIZANOV
George Washington University, Washington DC
association for symbolic logic

University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107033399
Association for Symbolic Logic
Richard Shore, Publisher
Department of Mathematics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
http://www.aslonline.org
© Association for Symbolic Logic 2016
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2016
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data
Names: Chubb, Jennifer. | Eskandarian, Ali. | Harizanov, Valentina S.
Title: Logic and algebraic structures in quantum computing / edited by Jennifer Chubb,
University of San Francisco, Ali Eskandarian, George Washington University, Washington
DC, Valentina Harizanov, George Washington University, Washington DC.
Description: Cambridge : Cambridge University Press, 2016. | Series: Lecture notes in
logic | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2015042942 | ISBN 9781107033399 (hardback : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Quantum computing–Mathematics. | Logic, Symbolic and
mathematical. | Algebra, Abstract.
Classiﬁcation: LCC QA76.889 .L655 2016 | DDC 006.3/843–dc23 LC record available at
http://lccn.loc.gov/2015042942
ISBN 978-1-107-03339-9 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of
URLs for external or third-party Internet Web sites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such Web sites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.

CONTENTS
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
Jennifer Chubb, Ali Eskandarian, and Valentina Harizanov
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Jennifer Chubb and Valentina Harizanov
A (very) brief tour of quantum mechanics, computation, and category
theory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Allen Stairs
Could logic be empirical? The Putnam-Kripke debate . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
William C. Parke
The essence of quantum theory for computers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
Adam Brandenburger and H. Jerome Keisler
Fiber products of measures and quantum foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
Samson Abramsky and Chris Heunen
Operational theories and categorical quantum mechanics . . . . . . . . . . .
88
Bart Jacobs and Jorik Mandemaker
Relating operator spaces via adjunctions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
Andreas D¨oring
Topos-based logic for quantum systems and bi-Heyting algebras . . . .
151
Bob Coecke
The logic of quantum mechanics – Take II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
174
Dimitri Kartsaklis, Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh, Stephen Pulman, and Bob
Coecke
Reasoning about meaning in natural language with compact closed
categories and Frobenius algebras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
199
Louis H. Kauﬀman
Knot logic and topological quantum computing with Majorana
fermions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
223
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
337
v


PREFACE
This project grew out of a Special Session on Logic and the Foundations
of Physics at the 2010 North American Annual Meeting of the Association
for Symbolic Logic1. Many of the session’s lecturers investigated the role of
algebraic structures in the context of the foundations of quantum physics,
especially in quantum information and computation. In addition to this
session, attendees heard tutorial lectures on quantum computing (given by
Bob Coecke, University of Oxford) and an invited lecture on intuitionistic
quantum logic (by Klaas Landsman, Radboud University, Nijmegen). The
talks were so well-received by conference participants that we felt a volume of
collected works on this subject would be a valuable addition to the literature.
The articles in this volume by mathematicians, philosophers, and scientists
address foundational issues and fundamental abstract structures arising in
highly active areas of theoretical, mathematical, and even experimental physics
relevant to quantum information and quantum computation. We hope that
the present collection advances this worthwhile program of scientiﬁc and
mathematical progress.
We would like to thank the authors that contributed to this volume, and
the ASL and Cambridge University Press for publishing it. This project was
partially supported by the George Washington University Centers & Institutes
Facilitating Fund Grant and by the University of San Francisco Faculty
Development Fund. Many thanks also to Bryan Fregoso (a University of San
Francisco student) for his invaluable assistance in assembling this volume.
Jennifer Chubb
Ali Eskandarian
Valentina Harizanov
Summer, 2015, Washington, D.C.
1The full program is available in the Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, vol. 17 (2011), no. 1, pp. 135–137,
available online at https://www.math.ucla.edu/∼asl/bsl/1701-toc.htm.
vii


INTRODUCTION
JENNIFER CHUBB, ALI ESKANDARIAN, AND VALENTINA HARIZANOV
In the last two decades, the scientiﬁc community has witnessed a surge in
activity, interesting results, and notable progress in our conceptual understand-
ing of computing and information based on the laws of quantum theory. One
of the signiﬁcant aspects of these developments has been an integration of
several ﬁelds of inquiry that not long ago appeared to be evolving, more or less,
along narrow disciplinary paths without any major overlap with each other. In
the resulting body of work, investigators have revealed a deeper connection
among the ideas and techniques of (apparently) disparate ﬁelds. As is evident
from the title of this volume, logic, mathematics, physics, computer science
and information theory are intricately involved in this fascinating story. The
inquisitive reader might focus, perhaps, on the marriage of the most unlikely
and intriguing ﬁelds of quantum theory and logic and ask: Why quantum logic?
By many, “logic” is deemed to be panacea for faulty intuition. It is often
associated with the rules of correct thinking and decision-making, but not
necessarily in its most sublime role as a deep intellectual subject underlying the
validity of mathematical structures and worthy of investigation and discovery
in its own right. Indeed, within the realm of the classical theories of nature,
one may encounter situations that defy comprehension, should one hold to the
intuition developed through experiencing familiar macroscopic scenarios in
our routine impressions of natural phenomena.
One such example is a statement within the special theory of relativity that
the speed of light is the same in all inertial frames. It certainly deﬁes the
common intuition regarding the observation of velocities of familiar objects in
relative motion. One might be tempted to dismiss it as contrary to observation.
However, while analyzing natural phenomena for objects moving close to
the speed of light and, therefore, unfamiliar in the range of velocities we
are normally accustomed to, logical deductions based on the postulates of
the special relativity theory lead to the correct predictions of experimental
observations.
There exists an undeniable interconnection between the deepest theories of
nature and mathematical reasoning, famously stated by Eugene Wigner as
the unreasonable eﬃcacy of mathematics in physical theories. The sciences,
Logic and Algebraic Structures in Quantum Computing
Edited by J. Chubb, A. Eskandarian and V. Harizanov
Lecture Notes in Logic, 45
c⃝2016, Association for Symbolic Logic
1

2
JENNIFER CHUBB, ALI ESKANDARIAN, AND VALENTINA HARIZANOV
and in particular physics, have relied on, and beneﬁted from, the economy of
mathematical expressions and the eﬃcacy and rigor of mathematical reasoning
with its underlying logical structure to make deﬁnite statements and predictions
about nature. Mathematics has become the de facto language of the quantitative
sciences, particularly scientiﬁc theories, and the major discoveries and predictive
statements of these theories (whenever possible) are cast in the language of
mathematics, as it aﬀords them elegance as well as economy of expression.
What happens if the syntax and grammar of such a language become inadequate?
This seems to have been the case when some of the more esoteric predictions
of the then new theory of quantum mechanics began to challenge the scientiﬁc
intuition of the times around the turn of the 20th century. This violation
of intuition was so severe that even the most prominent of scientists were
not able to reconcile the dictates of their intuition with the experimentally
conﬁrmed predictions of the theory. The discomfort with some of the features
and predictions of quantum theory were, perhaps, most prominently brought
out in the celebrated work of Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen (EPR) in the
mid 1930s. EPR fueled several decades of investigations on the foundations
of quantum theory that continue to this day. The main assertion of the
EPR work was that quantum theory had to be, by necessity, incomplete.
Otherwise, long held understanding of what should be taken for granted as
“elements of reality” had to be abandoned. Here, according to EPR, logical
deductions based on primitives that were the very essence of reality and logical
consistency forced the conclusion of the incompleteness of quantum theory;
as if considering quantum theory as complete would question one’s logical
ﬁtness and one’s understanding of reality! Yet, in the decades since, with
increasing sophistication in experimentation, and multiple ways of testing
the theory, quantum theory has consistently outshined the alternatives. In
particular, many predictions relying on the sensibilities of classical theories,
where concepts such as separability, locality, and causality are the seemingly
indispensable factors in our understanding of reality, are found to be entirely
inconsistent with the actual reality around us. Quantum theory has not (as
yet) suﬀered any such blow.
Confronted with the stark inability to reconcile the predictions of a theory,
which are shown to be correct every time subjected to experimental veriﬁcation,
and a logical structure that seems to fall short in facilitating correct thinking
and correct decision making (at least, in so far as the behavior of natural
phenomena at the quantum level is concerned), one is forced to consider and
question the validity of the premises on which that logical structure is built, or
to discover alternative structures. Furthermore, the striking applications of
quantum theory in the theory of computation, development of new algorithms,
and the promising prospects for the building of a computing machine operating
on the basis of the laws of quantum theory, necessitate a deeper investigation of
alternative logical structures that encompass the elements of this new quantum

INTRODUCTION
3
reality. One must then give credence to the argument that, perhaps, the fault is
not with the revolutionary quantum theory; rather, it is with the inadequacies
of logical structures that were insuﬃcient to be expanded and applied to a
world that does not comply with the notions embodied in our understanding
of the macroscopic classical physical theories of nature.
The utility of logical rules is most pronounced when applied to the building
and operation of computing machines. With the advent of computing that
takes advantage of the laws of quantum theory, i.e., quantum computing,
it is only natural to search for those logical and algebraic structures that
underlie the scaﬀolding of the quantum rules in computations. As obvious
as it is that Boolean logic underlies classical computing and much of classical
reasoning, it is equally obvious that it is not suﬃcient to express the logic
underlying quantum mechanics or quantum computing. Birkhoﬀand von
Neumann were among the ﬁrst to propose a generalization of Boolean logic in
which propositions about quantum systems could be formulated. While their
endeavor was revolutionary, the Birkhoﬀ-von Neumann quantum logic was
not to be the ﬁnal word on the subject of a logic for quantum mechanics, and
indeed the investigation continues with increasing urgency.
In this volume, we present the work of a select group of scholars with an abid-
ing interest in tackling some of the fundamental issues facing quantum comput-
ing and information theory, as investigated from the perspective of logical and al-
gebraic structures. This selection, no doubt, reﬂects the intellectual proclivities
and curiosities of the editors, within the reasonable limitations of space and cov-
erage of topics for a volume of this size, and for the purpose of generating ideas
that would fuel further investigation and research in these and related ﬁelds.
The ﬁrst two articles, by Stairs and Parke, address philosophical and histori-
cal issues. Brandenburger and Keisler use ideas from continuous model theory
to explore determinism and locality in quantum mechanical systems. Abramsky
and Heunen, and Jacobs and Mandemaker describe the relationship between
the category-theoretic and operator-theoretic approaches to the foundations
of quantum physics. D¨oring gives a topos-based distributive form of quantum
logic as an alternative to the quantum logic of Birkhoﬀand von Neumann.
The papers by Coecke and Kartsaklis et al. use a diagrammatic calculus in
analyzing quantum mechanical systems and, very recently, in computational
linguistics. Kauﬀman’s article presents an extensive treatment of the prominent
role of algebraic structures arising from topological considerations in quantum
information and computing; the pictorial approach used in knot theory is
closely related to the quantum categorical logic presented in other articles in
this volume.
Could logic be empirical? The Putnam-Kripke debate, by Allen Stairs. In
his article in the present volume, Stairs outlines Hilary Putnam’s position that
quantum mechanics provides an empirical basis for a re-evaluation of our

4
JENNIFER CHUBB, ALI ESKANDARIAN, AND VALENTINA HARIZANOV
idea of logic and Saul Kripke’s response, in which he takes issue with the very
idea of a logic that is based on anything empirical. Stairs carefully interprets
their positions, and in the end oﬀers the beginnings of a compromise, which
includes “disjunctive facts,” which can be true even if their disjuncts are not,
and the notion of “l-complementarity,” to describe the relationship between
statements having non-commuting associated projectors. The article wrestles
with the idea of whether and how quantum mechanics should inform our logic
and reasoning processes.
The essence of quantum theory for computers, by William C. Parke. In this
article, Parke provides a thorough yet succinct introduction to the elements
of physical theories, classical and quantum, which are relevant to a deeper
understanding of the mathematical and logical structures underlying (or
derived) from such theories, and important in the appreciation of the more
subtle quandaries of quantum theory, leading to its utilization in computation.
The emphasis has been placed on the physical content of information and
elements of computation from a physicist’s point of view. This includes a
treatment of the role of space-time in the development of physical theories from
an advanced point of view, and the limitations that our current understanding
of space-time imposes on building and utilizing computing machines based
on the rules of quantum theory. The treatment of the principles of quantum
theory is also developed from an advanced point of view, without too much
focus on unnecessary details, but covering the essential conceptual ingredients,
in order to set the stage properly and provide motivation for the work of the
others on logical and algebraic structures.
Fiber products of measures and quantum foundations, by Adam Branden-
burger and H. Jerome Keisler. In this model-theoretic article, the authors use
ﬁber products of (probability) measures within a framework they construct
for empirical and hidden-variable models to prove determinization theorems.
These objects (ﬁber products) were conceived by Rae Shortt in a 1984 paper,
and were used recently by Ita¨ı Ben Yaacov and Jerome Keisler in their work on
continuous model theory (2009). Techniques in continuous model theory are
relevant to the notion of models of quantum structures as in that context the
“truth value” of a statement may take on a continuum of values, and can be
thought of as probabilistic. In this case, a technique employed in continuous
model theory is used in the construction of models in proofs of theorems
that assert that every empirical model can be realized by an extension that is
a deterministic hidden-variable model, and for every hidden-variable model
satisfying locality and -independence, there is a realization-equivalent (both
models extend a common empirical submodel) hidden-variable model satisfy-
ing determinism and -independence. The latter statement, together with Bell’s
theorem, precludes the existence of a hidden-variable model in which both
determinism and -independence hold. The notion of -independence was

INTRODUCTION
5
ﬁrst formulated by W. Michael Dickson (2005). It says that the choices made
by an entity as to which observable to measure in a system are not inﬂuenced
by the process of the determination of the value of a relevant hidden-variable.
Operational theories and categorical quantum mechanics, by Samson Abram-
sky and Chris Heunen. There are two complementary research programs in
the foundations of quantum mechanics, one based on operational theories
(also called general probabilistic theories) and the other on category-theoretic
foundation of quantum theory. Samson Abramsky and Chris Heunen establish
strong and important connections between these two formalisms. Operational
theories focus on empirical and observational content, and quantum mechan-
ics occupies one point in a space of possible theories. The authors deﬁne a
symmetric monoidal categorical structure of an operational theory, which they
call process category, and exploit the ideas of categorical quantum mechanics
to obtain an operational theory as a certain representation of this process
category. They lift the notion of non-locality to the general level of operational
category. They further propose to apply a similar analysis to contextuality,
which can be viewed as a broader phenomenon than non-locality.
Relating operator spaces via adjunctions, by Bart Jacobs and Jorik Mande-
maker. By exploiting techniques of category theory, Jacobs and Mandemaker
clarify and present in a uniﬁed framework various, seemingly diﬀerent results
in the foundation of quantum theory found in the literature. They use category-
theoretic tools to describe relations between various spaces of operators on
a ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space, which arise in quantum theory, including
bounded, self-adjoint, positive, eﬀect, projection, and density operators. They
describe the algebraic structure of these sets of operators in terms of modules
over various semirings, such as the complex numbers, the real numbers, the
non-negative real numbers. The authors give a uniform description of such
modules via the notion of an algebra of the multiset monad. They show how
some spaces of operators are related by free constructions between categories
of modules, while the other spaces of operators are related by a dual adjunction
between convex sets (conveniently described via a monad) and eﬀect modules.
Topos-based logic for quantum systems and bi-Heyting algebras, by Andreas
D¨oring. D¨oring replaces the standard quantum logic, introduced by Birkhoﬀ
and von Neumann, which comes with a host of conceptual and interpretational
problems, by the topos-based distributive form of quantum logic. Instead of
having a non-distributive orthomodular lattice of projections, he considers
a complete bi-Heyting algebra of propositions. More speciﬁcally, D¨oring
considers clopen subobjects of the presheaf attaching the Gelfand spectrum to
each abelian von Neumann algebra, and shows that these clopen subojects form
a bi-Heyting algebra. He gives various physical interpretations of the objects
in this algebra and of the operations on them. For example, he introduces two

6
JENNIFER CHUBB, ALI ESKANDARIAN, AND VALENTINA HARIZANOV
kinds of negation associated with the Heyting and co-Heyting algebras, and
gives physical interpretation of the two kinds of negation. D¨oring considers the
map called outer daseinisation of projections, which provides a link between
the usual Hilbert space formalism and his topos-based quantum logic.
The logic of quantum mechanics – Take II, by Bob Coecke. Schr¨odinger
maintained that composition of systems is the heart of quantum computing,
and Coecke agrees. He suggests that the Birkhoﬀ-von Neumann formulation
of quantum logic fails to adequately and elegantly capture composition of
quantum systems. The author puts forth a model of quantum logic that is
based on composition rather superposition. He axiomatizes composition
without reference to underlying systems using strict monoidal categories as
the basic structures and explains a graphical language that exactly captures
these structures. Imposing minimal additional structure on these categories
(to obtain dagger compact categories) allows for the almost trivial derivation
of a number of quantum phenomena, including quantum teleportation and
entanglement swapping. This (now widely adopted) formalism has been used
not only to solve open problems in quantum information theory, but has also
provided new insight into non-locality.
Coecke’s framework has been applied both to logic concerned with natural
language interpretations, and to more formal automated reasoning processes.
In this article, the focus is on the former. Coecke applies the graphical language
of dagger compact categories to natural language processing—“from word
meaning to sentence meaning”—implementing Lambek’s theory of grammar
and the notion of words as “meaning vectors.” He argues that sentence
meaning amounts to more than the meanings of the constituent words, but
also the way in which they compose.
In the end, Coecke confesses that dagger compact categories do not capture
all we might want them to, in particular, measurement, observables, and
complementarity are left by the wayside. The model can be expanded (using
spiders!)
in such a way that all these are captured.
Coecke closes with
speculation about an important question: Where is the traditional logic hiding
in all this?
Reasoning about meaning in natural language with compact closed categories
and Frobenius algebras, by Dimitri Kartsaklis, Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh, Stephen
Pulman, and Bob Coecke. The authors apply category-theoretic methods to
computational lingustics by mapping the derivations of the grammar logic to
the distributional interpretation via a strongly monoidal functor. Such functors
are structure preserving morphims. Grammatical structure is modeled through
the derivations of pregroup grammars. A pregroup is a partially ordered
monoid with left and right adjoints for every element in the partial order. The
authors build tensors for linguistic constructs with complex types by using
a Frobenius algebra. The Frobenius operations allow them to assign and

INTRODUCTION
7
compare the meanings of diﬀerent language constructs such as words, phrases,
and sentences in a single space. The authors present their experimental results
for the evaluation of their model in a number of natural languages.
Knot logic and topological quantum computing with Majorana fermions, by
Louis H. Kauﬀman. Kauﬀman presents several topics exploring the relation-
ship between low-dimensional topology and quantum computing. These topics
have been introduced and developed by Kauﬀman and Samuel J. Lomonaco
over the last ten years. Kauﬀman uses the diagrammatic approach, and is
particularly interested in models based upon the Temperley-Lieb categories.
He discusses from several diﬀerent perspectives the Fibonacci model related
to the Temperley-Lieb algebra at ﬁfth roots of unity. Kauﬀman shows how
knots are related to braiding and quantum operators, as well as to quantum
set-theoretic foundations. For example, the negation can generate the fusion
algebra for a Majorana fermion, which is a particle that interacts with itself
and can even annihilate itself. Thus, Kauﬀman calls the negation the mark.
He investigates the relationship between knot-theoretic recoupling theory
and topological quantum ﬁeld theory. Kauﬀman works with braid groups
and their representations, and produces unitary representations of the braid
groups that are dense in the unitary groups. He describes the Jones polynomial
in terms of his bracket polynomial and applies his approach to design a
quantum algorithm for computing the colored Jones polynomials for knots
and links. Kauﬀman also gives a quantum algorithm for computing the
Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev invariant of three manifolds.
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS
UNIVERSITY OF SAN FRANCISCO
SAN FRANCISCO, CA 94117
E-mail: jcchubb@usfca.edu
DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS
VIRGINIA SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY CAMPUS
GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
ASHBURN, VIRGINIA 20147
E-mail: ea1102@gwu.edu
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS
GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20052
E-mail: harizanv@gwu.edu

A (VERY) BRIEF TOUR OF QUANTUM MECHANICS,
COMPUTATION, AND CATEGORY THEORY
JENNIFER CHUBB AND VALENTINA HARIZANOV
This chapter is intended to be a brief treatment of the basic mechanics,
framework, and concepts relevant to the study of quantum computing and
information for review and reference. Part 1 (sections 1–4) surveys quantum
mechanics and computation, with sections organized according to the com-
monly known postulates of quantum theory. The second part (sections 5–7)
provides a survey of category theory. Additional references to works in this
volume are included throughout, and general references appear at the end.
Part 1: Quantum mechanics & computation
§1. Qubits & quantum states.
Postulate of quantum mechanics: Representing states of systems. The state of
a quantum system is represented by a unit-length vector in a complex Hilbert
space1, H, that corresponds to that system. The state space of a composite
system is the tensor product of the state spaces of the subsystems.
The Dirac bra-ket notation for states of quantum systems is ubiquitous
in the literature, and we adopt it here. A vector in a complex Hilbert space
representing a quantum state is written as a ket, |⟩, and its conjugate-transpose
(adjoint, or sometimes Hermitian conjugate) is written as a bra, ⟨|. In this
notation, a bra-ket denotes an inner product, ⟨ϕ|⟩, and a ket-bra denotes an
outer product, |ϕ⟩⟨|.
Each one-dimensional subspace of H corresponds to a possible state of the
system, and a state is usually described as a linear combination in a relevant
orthonormal basis. The basis elements are often thought of as basic states.
Quantum systems can exist in a superposition of more than one basic state: If a
quantum system has access to two basic states, say |α⟩and |⟩, then, in general,
the system’s “current state” can be represented by a linear combination of
these states in complex Hilbert space:
|⟩= c1|α⟩+ c2|⟩, where ||⟩| = 1.
1A Hilbert space is a complete, normed metric space, where the norm and distance function
are induced by an inner product deﬁned on the space.
Logic and Algebraic Structures in Quantum Computing
Edited by J. Chubb, A. Eskandarian and V. Harizanov
Lecture Notes in Logic, 45
c⃝2016, Association for Symbolic Logic
8

QUANTUM MECHANICS & CATEGORY THEORY
9
The complex coeﬃcients, c1 and c2, of |α⟩and |⟩give classical probabilistic
information about the state. For example, the value |c1|2 is the probability that
the system would be found to be in state |α⟩upon measurement. The coeﬃcient
itself, c1, is called the probability amplitude. Two vectors in H represent the
same state if they diﬀer only by a global phase factor: If |⟩= ei|ϕ⟩, then
|⟩and |ϕ⟩represent the same state, and the (real) probabilities described by
the coeﬃcients are the same.
The squared norm of the state vector |⟩is the inner product of |⟩with
itself, i.e., the bra-ket ⟨|⟩. The quantity |⟨ϕ|⟩|2 is the probability that
upon measurement, |⟩will be found to be in state |ϕ⟩, and ⟨ϕ|⟩is the
corresponding probability amplitude. (More about measurement of quantum
systems can be found in Section 3 below.)
1.1. Qubits. A classical bit can be in only one of two states at a given
time, |0⟩or |1⟩. A quantum bit or qubit may exist in a superposition of these
basic (orthogonal) states, |⟩= c1|0⟩+ c2|1⟩, where c1 and c2 are complex
probability amplitudes. More precisely, a qubit is a 2-dimensional quantum
system, the state of which is a unit-length vector in H = C2. The basic states
for this space are usually thought of as |0⟩and |1⟩, but at times other bases
are used (for example, {|+⟩, |−⟩} or {|↑⟩, |↓⟩}). Basic states are typically
the eigenstates (eigenvectors) of an observable of interest (see discussion of
measurement below).
Any unit vector that is a (complex) linear combination of the basic states
is a pure state and non-trivial linear combinations are superpositions. So-
called mixed states are not proper state vectors, they are classical probabilistic
combinations of pure states and are best represented by density matrices.
The state space of a qubit is often visualized as a point on the Bloch sphere.
The norm of a state vector is always one, and states that diﬀer only by a global
phase factor are identiﬁed, so two real numbers,  and φ, suﬃce to specify a
distinct state via the decomposition
|⟩= cos

2

|0⟩+ eiφ sin

2

|1⟩.
Respectively, the range of values taken on by  and φ may be restricted
to the intervals [0, 	] and [0, 2	) without any loss of generality, and so the
corresponding distinct states may be mapped uniquely onto the unit sphere in
R3. In this visualization, the basic vector |0⟩points up and |1⟩points down, 
describes the latitudinal angle, and ϕ the longitudinal angle. Orthogonal states
are antipodal on the Bloch sphere. Note that states that diﬀer by a global
phase factor will (by design) coincide in this visualization.
1.2. Composite quantum systems. As described above, a single quantum
system (for example, a single qubit) exists in a pure state that may be a
superposition of basic states. A composition of systems may exist either in a

10
JENNIFER CHUBB AND VALENTINA HARIZANOV
separable or an entangled state. Separable states are states that can be written
as tensor products of pure states of the constituent subsystems. Entangled
states cannot be so written; they are non-trivial (complex) linear combinations
of separable states. In the case of an entangled state, the subsystems cannot be
thought of as existing in states independent of the composed system.
Example 1.1. Suppose we have a system of two qubits, the ﬁrst in state
|⟩= (|0⟩+ |1⟩)/
√
2 and the second in state |ϕ⟩= (|0⟩−|1⟩)/
√
2. The state
of the combined system is
|⟩⊗|ϕ⟩= |⟩|ϕ⟩= 1
2(|00⟩−|01⟩+ |10⟩−|11⟩).
Such a state of the composite system that can be written as a tensor product of
pure states is called separable.
Example 1.2. The Bell states of a 2-qubit system are not separable; they are
important and canonical examples of entangled states:
|00⟩+ |11⟩
√
2
|00⟩−|11⟩
√
2
|01⟩+ |10⟩
√
2
|01⟩−|10⟩
√
2
Example 1.3. The GHZ states (for Greenberger-Horne-Zeilinger) are ex-
amples of entangled states in composite systems that have three or more
subsystems. The GHZ state for a system with n subsystems is
|0⟩⊗n + |1⟩⊗n
√
2
.
For more on entangled states, see Parke’s article in this volume, or Section 6
of Kauﬀman’s article.
§2. Transformations and quantum gates.
Postulate of quantum mechanics: Evolution of systems. The time evolution
of a closed quantum system is described by a unitary transformation.
A transformation is unitary if its inverse is equal to its adjoint.
Such
transformations preserve inner products and are reversible, deterministic, and
continuous. In quantum computing, algorithms are often described as circuits
in which information (and time) ﬂows from left to right. Quantum gates
represent unitary transformations applied to qubits in such a circuit.
Example 2.1. The Hadamard gate. The 1-qubit Hadamard gate has as input
and output one qubit, as shown in the simple circuit diagram below:

QUANTUM MECHANICS & CATEGORY THEORY
11
Its matrix representation (with respect to the basis

|0⟩= [1 0]T, |1⟩= [0 1]T
)
is:
H =
1
√
2
 1
1
1
−1

.
This transformation applied to the basic state |0⟩=
 1
0

results in the
superposition H|0⟩=
1
√
2(|0⟩+ |1⟩) =
1
√
2
 1
1

.
Example 2.2. The controlled-not gate. Another important quantum gate is
the controlled-not or CNOT gate. The gate requires two inputs, one designated
as the control input (passing through the solid dot) and the other as the target
input:
When the control input is in state |0⟩, the gate does nothing. If the control is
in state |1⟩(as it is in the diagram above), the gate acts by “ﬂipping” the non-
control (target) input as follows: If the target input is in state |⟩= c0|0⟩+c1|1⟩,
then ﬂipping transforms the state to |′⟩= c0|1⟩+ c1|0⟩. The gate does not
alter the control bit. The matrix representation of CNOT is the following (given
with respect to the basis

|00⟩= [1 0 0 0]T, |01⟩= [0 1 0 0]T, |10⟩= [0 0 1 0]T,
|11⟩= [0 0 0 1]T
):
CNOT = 1
2
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
⎤
⎥⎥⎦.
For more on quantum gates and unitary transformations of quantum systems,
see Parke’s and Kauﬀman’s articles in this volume.
§3. Measurement.
Postulate of quantum mechanics: Measurement. The notion of measurement
is described in terms of observables represented by Hermitian (self-adjoint)
matrices. (It should be noted that not all such matrices describe physically
meaningful measurements.)
A Hermitian matrix has all real eigenvalues, and these represent the possible
values obtained upon measurement of the observable. Moreover, distinct
eigenvalues yield orthogonal eigenvectors. These matrices are often described
in terms of their spectral decompositions. Upon measurement, a system’s

12
JENNIFER CHUBB AND VALENTINA HARIZANOV
state (or wave function) experiences a “collapse” and is not preserved. After
measurement, the state of the system is the eigenvector corresponding to the
eigenvalue that was the result of the measurement.
Example 3.1. If the matrix A corresponding to an observable A has (real)
eigenvalue a and corresponding unit-length eigenvector |va⟩, then the proba-
bility that measuring A on state |ϕ⟩will yield the value a is given by |⟨va|ϕ⟩|2.
If a is the result of the measurement of A on |ϕ⟩, the system is left in state
|va⟩. If we consider the result of such a measurement as a random variable,
the expected value (expectation value) of that quantity is given by ⟨ϕ|A|ϕ⟩.
Very brieﬂy, if the matrices representing two diﬀerent observables are non-
commuting, then the observables are often referred to as complementary
and measurements of these observables are subject to uncertainty limits.
Complementary observables suﬀer from necessarily limited precision when
measured simultaneously as a result of the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle.
§4. No-go theorems and teleportation.
4.1. No cloning. In classical computation, it is possible to implement error
correction by simply duplicating the classical data as needed. This is not the
case in quantum computations.
Let |⟩be an arbitrary state in state space H, and |e⟩be an ancillary state
(independent of |⟩) in an identical state space. To “clone” the state |⟩,
we would need to have a unitary transformation that when applied to |⟩|e⟩
replaces the ancillary state with a copy of |⟩, yielding |⟩|⟩.
Theorem 4.1 (No-cloning theorem). There is no unitary operator U so that
for all states |⟩and ancillary states |e⟩,
U|⟩|e⟩= |⟩|⟩.
To see why, consider the possibility that there does exist such an operator U.
As U must be unitary, it must preserve inner products, hence for any  and ϕ,
we must have the following:
⟨ϕ|⟩= ⟨e|⟨ϕ|⟩|e⟩= ⟨e|⟨ϕ|U †U|⟩|e⟩= ⟨ϕ|⟨ϕ|⟩|⟩= (⟨ϕ|⟩)2.
We see that ⟨ϕ|⟩must be either 0 or 1 in order for this equality to hold, and
so such a U preserves inner product only selectively—the states |ϕ⟩and |⟩
must be identical or orthogonal.
4.2. The EPR paradox, hidden variables, and Bell’s Theorem. In 1935, Ein-
stein, Podolsky, and Rosen (EPR) questioned the completeness of quantum
mechanics in the form of a thought experiment involving the measurement of
one part of a 2-particle entangled system. According to EPR, two mutually
exclusive conclusions may be reached regarding quantum mechanics: either
quantum mechanics is incomplete, or the physical quantities associated with
two non-commuting operators cannot have simultaneous reality. Subsequently,

QUANTUM MECHANICS & CATEGORY THEORY
13
building on the behavior of a two-component system under the laws of quantum
theory, EPR argue for the incompleteness of quantum theory.
The following scenario captures the idea of the quandary they posed. Imagine
that two particles, A and B, interact and then part ways. If one measures
the momentum of particle A, he may compute the momentum of particle B
exactly due to entanglement. If he subsequently measures the momentum
of particle B, the result will be exactly that computed value. Similarly, the
particles’ positions may be observed, computed, and checked. However, the
measurement operators corresponding to these observables (position and
momentum) do not commute, and hence an exact knowledge of position
entails some uncertainty in the value of momentum. The EPR argument makes
a case for being able to assign two diﬀerent wave functions (or states) to the
same reality (particle B), by judicious choice of measurements on particle A,
which leads to the conclusion that quantum mechanics must be incomplete.
A related question is this: How does particle B “know” to have a precisely
deﬁned momentum and an uncertain position when particle A’s momentum
is measured? According to the principle of locality, a physical process occur-
ring in one place should not be able to aﬀect a physical process in another
location (outside the light cone of the ﬁrst process). This scenario seems to
entail either superluminal transmission of information between the particles
(violating locality), or some “hidden variable” or “element of reality” encoding
the information as yet unaccounted for by quantum mechanics (assuming
determinism or realism). This is the idea underlying the famous EPR paradox.
In 1964, John Stewart Bell formalized (mathematically) the notions of
locality and realism, and gave a set of inequalities that would provide a test
of quantum mechanics against a local hidden variable theory. In the 1970s
and 1980s, physical experiments (carried out most famously by Alain Aspect)
demonstrated in favor of the former. What is known as Bell’s Theorem is the
summary of all this, asserting that no locally realistic theory can make the
predictions of quantum mechanics.
Another related theorem is the Kochen-Specker Theorem, which says that a
non-contextual hidden variable theory (one in which the value of an observable
in a system is independent of the apparatus used to measure it) is unable to
make the predictions of quantum mechanics.
4.3. Quantum teleportation. It would be diﬃcult to overstate the importance
of entanglement in quantum computing and the diﬃculty in representing and
interpreting this phenomenon in possible quantum logics. A basic illustration
of the power of entanglement is in the quantum teleportation protocol: An EPR
pair, that is, a pair of qubits in a (entangled) Bell state, are prepared. One qubit
is in the possession of entity A (Alice) and the other is in the possession of
entity B (Bob). Alice also has a qubit, |⟩, which she would like to send to Bob.
To do this, Alice applies a CNOT transformation to her two qubits, using |⟩as
the control, followed by an application of the Hadamard transformation to |⟩.

14
JENNIFER CHUBB AND VALENTINA HARIZANOV
She then measures both of her qubits2 (they are destroyed in the process), and
(classically) communicates to Bob the (classical) information that results of
her measurements. Upon receiving this information, Bob preforms one of four
corresponding transformations, T, resulting in the transformation of his qubit
into the state |⟩, which Alice wished to transmit to him.
Note that this protocol does not violate the no-cloning theorem (Alice’s copy
is destroyed), nor Bell’s Theorem (classical information must be transmitted
subluminally).
For alternative formulations of the quantum teleportation protocol in a
graphical language and another (similar) formulation in quantum topology,
see Coecke’s and Kauﬀman’s (respectively) articles in this volume.
For more detailed exposition on all these ideas and topics, the following
texts may be useful:
Textbooks at the undergraduate level
• Quantum Computing for Computer Scientists, by Noson S. Yanofsky and
Mirco A. Mannucci, Cambridge University Press, 2008.
• An Introduction to Quantum Computing, by Phillip Kaye, Raymond
Laﬂamme, and Michele Mosca, Oxford University Press, 2007.
• Quantum Computing: A Gentle Introduction, by Eleanor Rieﬀel and
Wolfgang Polak, MIT Press, 2011.
• Quantum Computer Science, by N. David Mermin, Cambridge University
Press, 2007.
At the graduate or research level
• Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, by Michael A. Nielsen
and Isaac L. Chuang, Cambridge University Press, 2011.
Part 2: Category theory for quantum computing
In physics, in the 1970s, Penrose used graphical language to represent
linear operators, their products, and tensor products: boxes for operators,
incoming wires for superscripts, and outgoing wires for subscripts. These
diagrams represented various categories, which are of importance in physics
2This entire process is sometimes called a Bell measurement.

QUANTUM MECHANICS & CATEGORY THEORY
15
and quantum computing. Of particular importance are tensor categories,
also called monoidal categories, which have been used by S. Abramsky and
B. Coecke as a framework for quantum theory. Their categorical quantum
mechanics can be also viewed as a suitable quantum logic. We will give a brief
survey of monoidal categories. For more details see [3] and [1].
§5. Basic category theory. A category C consists of a class of objects, ob(C),
and a class of morphisms, hom(C), also called maps or arrows with speciﬁc
abstract properties. For every pair of objects, A and B, there is a class of
morphisms denoted by homC(A, B), or simply hom(A, B) when the category
is clear from the context.
A morphism f has a domain dom(f) (also
called source) and a codomain cod(f) (also called target), which we write
f : dom(f) →cod(f). The morphisms are equipped with composition
◦, which is an associative operation that respects domain and codomain
information. That is,
(i) (f ◦g) ◦h = f ◦(g ◦h),
where f : A →B, g : D →A, and h : C →D. For every object A, the set
hom(A, A) contains the identity morphism idA such that for every f : A →B,
we have
(ii) f ◦idA = f
and
(iii) idB ◦f = f.
The equations (i)–(iii) can be viewed as the axioms for the categories. The
opposite category (also called dual category) of C is formed by reversing the
morphisms, that is, by interchanging the domain and the codomain of each
morphism. It is denoted by Cop. A category C is called small if both ob(C) and
hom(C) are sets, and it is called locally small is for every pair of objects A, B,
the class hom(A, B) is a set.
A morphism f : A →B is called a monomorphism or monic if f ◦g1 = f ◦g2
implies g1 = g2 for all morphisms g1, g2 : C →A. A morphism f : A →B has
a left inverse, also called a retraction of f, if there is a morphism g : B →A such
that g ◦f = idA. Clearly, a morphism with a left inverse is a monomorphism.
The converse may not be true. A morphism f : A →B is called an epimorphism
or epic if g1 ◦f = g2 ◦f implies g1 = g2 for all morphisms g1, g2 : B →C. A
morphism f : A →B has a right inverse, also called a section of f, if there is a
morphism g : B →A such that f ◦g = idB. A morphism with a right inverse
is an epimorphism, but the converse may not be true. If a morphism has both a
left inverse and a right inverse, then the two inverses are equal. Hence we have
the following deﬁnition. A morphism f : A →B is called an isomorphism if
there exists a morphism g : B →A such that f ◦g = idB and g ◦f = idA. If

16
JENNIFER CHUBB AND VALENTINA HARIZANOV
it exists, g is unique and is called the inverse of f, and hence f is the inverse
of g.
Examples of well-known categories include the category of sets as objects
with functions as morphisms, the category of vector spaces as objects with
linear maps as morphisms, and the category of Hilbert spaces as objects with
unitary transformations as morphisms. In the graphical representation, object
variables label edges (“wires”) and morphism variables label nodes (“boxes”).
The composition is represented by connecting the outgoing edge of one diagram
to the incoming edge of another, while the identity morphism is represented as
a continuing edge.
Functors capture the notion of a homomorphism between two categories.
They preserve identity morphisms and composition of morphisms. More
precisely, a functor Φ from a category C to a category D is a function that maps
every object A of C to an object Φ(A) of D, as well as every morphism of C to
a corresponding morphism of D such that the following is satisﬁed. For every
pair A, B of objects from C, each morphism f ∈hom(A, B) in C is mapped to
a morphism Φ(f) ∈hom(Φ(A), Φ(B)) in D such that
Φ(g ◦h) = Φ(g) ◦Φ(h) ∧Φ(idA) = idΦ(A).
A functor from C to D is also called a covariant functor, in order to distinguish
it from a contravariant functor, which reverses the order of composition. A
contravariant functor Ψ from C to D is a map that associates to each object A
in C an object Ψ(A) in D, and associates to each morphism f ∈hom(A, B) in
C a morphism Ψ(f) ∈hom(Ψ(B), Ψ(A)) in D such that
Ψ(g ◦h) = Ψ(h) ◦Ψ(g) ∧Ψ(idA) = idΨ(A).
A functor Φ between locally small categories C and D is called faithful if it is
injective when restricted to each set of morphisms that have a given domain
and codomain. That is, for every pair A, B of objects in C, the induced function
ΦA,B : homC(A, B) →homD(Φ(A), Φ(B))
is injective. On the other hand, a faithful functor may not be injective on
objects or morphisms. A functor Φ is called full if the induced functions ΦA,B
are surjective.
Natural transformations capture the notion of a homomorphism between
two functors. That is, given two categories, C and D, and two functors from C
to D, Φ and Ψ, a natural transformation N : Φ →Ψ consists of the family of
morphisms for every object A of C, 
A : Φ(A) →Ψ(A), such that for every
f ∈homC(A, B), we have
Ψ(f) ◦
A = 
B ◦Φ(f).

QUANTUM MECHANICS & CATEGORY THEORY
17
The content of the equation is captured by the following diagram.
Φ(A)

A
> Ψ(A)
Φ(B)
Φ(f)∨

B
> Ψ(B)
Ψ(f)∨
§6. Monoidal categories. A monoidal category captures the notion of a
tensor product as a binary operation of objects, A ⊗B, and of morphisms,
f ⊗g. The domain of f ⊗g is the tensor product of the domains of f and g,
and the codomain of f ⊗g is the tensor product of the codomains of f and g.
The tensor product of objects is associative in the sense that for every triple
(A, B, C) of objects, there is an isomorphism
αA,B,C : (A ⊗B) ⊗C →A ⊗(B ⊗C).
The tensor product is a bifunctor, which means that it satisﬁes the following
equations for morphisms:
(f1 ⊗f2) ◦(f3 ⊗f4) = (f1 ◦f3) ⊗(f2 ◦f4)
and
idA⊗B = idA ⊗idB.
(See Coecke’s article in this volume for a wire diagram representation of this
equation.)
A monoidal category also has a constant unit object denoted by I . For every
object A, there is an isomorphism (left)
A : I ⊗A →A
and an isomorphism (right)
A : A ⊗I →A.
For morphisms f : A →A′, g : B →B′, h : C →C ′, we have
(f ⊗(g ⊗h)) ◦αA,B.C = αA′,B′.C ′ ◦(f ⊗g) ⊗h),
f ◦A = A′ ◦(idI ⊗f),
f ◦A = A′ ◦(f ⊗idI ).
In addition, the following triangle axiom is satisﬁed for every pair of objects
A, B:
A ⊗idB = (idA ⊗B) ◦αA,I,B.

18
JENNIFER CHUBB AND VALENTINA HARIZANOV
Both sides map (A ⊗I ) ⊗B to A ⊗B. This equation is captured in the
following diagram.
(A ⊗I ) ⊗B
αA,I,B
> A ⊗(I ⊗B)
A ⊗B
idA⊗B
<
A⊗idB
>
Also, the following pentagon axiom is satisﬁed for every quadruple of objects
A, B, C, D:
(idA ⊗αB,C,D) ◦(αA,B⊗C,D ◦(αA,B,C ⊗idD)) = αA,B.C⊗D ◦αA⊗B,C,D.
Both sides map ((A ⊗B) ⊗C ) ⊗D to A ⊗(B ⊗(C ⊗D)). This relationship
is visualized in the following diagram.
(A ⊗(B ⊗C )) ⊗D
αA,B⊗C,D
> A ⊗((B ⊗C) ⊗D)
((A ⊗B) ⊗C) ⊗D
αA,B,C ⊗idD
∧
A ⊗(B ⊗(C ⊗D))
idA⊗αB,C,D∨
(A ⊗B) ⊗(C ⊗D)
αA,B,C⊗D
>
αA⊗B,C,D
>
In the graphical language, the tensor product of objects is represented
by parallel wires (input or output) from the bottom to the top, and the
unit object is represented by no wire.
Tensor product of morphisms is
represented by stacking their diagrams. Examples of monoidal categories
are vector spaces, or Hilbert spaces, with either direct sum or tensor product,
as well as sets with direct products or disjoint unions. When no additional
properties are assumed for a monoidal category, we often call it planar monoidal
category.
Joyal and Street [2] established a coherence theorem for planar monoidal
categories, which captures the correspondence between the formal language
and the graphical language we described. The formal language of categories
uses object variables and morphism variables, and object constants (such
as I ) and morphism constants (such as idA), and operation symbols (such
as ◦and ⊗). These are used to form terms and equations (formulas). The
coherence theorem of Joyal and Street states that an equation in the language
of monoidal categories follows from the axioms of monoidal categories if and
only if it holds in the graphical language, up to planar equivalence. Roughly
speaking, here, a diagram D1 is planar equivalent to a diagram D2 if it is
possible to transform D1 to D2 by continuously moving the boxes and wires
of D1 (without crossing or cutting). Other coherence theorem for special

QUANTUM MECHANICS & CATEGORY THEORY
19
categories are of the similar nature. The part of a coherence theorem that states
that an equation following from the axioms holds in the graphical language
is called a soundness theorem, and its converse is called a completness theorem.
Soundness is guaranteed by assuring that the axioms hold in the graphical
language.
A braided monoidal category is a monoidal category with a family of
isomorphisms for every pair of objects A, B,
A,B : A ⊗B →B ⊗A.
Hence −1
A,B exists, where
−1
A,B : B ⊗A →A ⊗B.
Two hexagon axioms are satisﬁed for every triple of objects A, B, C:
(idB ⊗A,C ) ◦αB,A,C ◦(A,B ⊗idC ) = αB,C,A ◦A,B⊗C ◦αA,B,C
and
(idB ⊗−1
C,A) ◦αB,A,C ◦(−1
B,A ⊗idC) = αB,C,A ◦−1
B⊗C,A ◦αA,B,C .
The ﬁrst of these axioms is captured in the diagram below.
(B ⊗A) ⊗C
αB,A,C> B ⊗(A ⊗C)
(A ⊗B) ⊗C
A,B⊗idC
∧
B ⊗(C ⊗A)
idB⊗A,C
∨
A ⊗(B ⊗C )
αA,B,C∨
A,B⊗C> (B ⊗C) ⊗A
αB,C,A
∧
It follows that
A,B ◦−1
A,B = idA⊗B.
Graphical language is extended to picture braiding A,B and is represented by
an under- (over-) crossing.
A symmetric monoidal category is a braided monoidal category where the
braiding A,B is the inverse −1
B,A. It is called symmetry and is graphically
represented by a crossing.
For monoidal categories C and D, a functor Φ : C →D is called a monoidal
functor if there are also morphisms φA,B : Φ(A) ⊗Φ(B) →Φ(A ⊗B) and

20
JENNIFER CHUBB AND VALENTINA HARIZANOV
φ : ID →Φ(IC), which preserve the tensor structure as follows. For every
triple of objects A, B, C of C,
Φ(αA,B,C ) ◦φA⊗B,C ◦(φA,B ⊗idΦ(C)) = φA,B⊗C ◦(idΦ(A) ⊗φB,C) ◦
αΦ(A),Φ(B),Φ(C),
Φ(A) = Φ(A) ◦φA,I ◦(idΦ(A) ⊗φ),
Φ(A) = Φ(A) ◦φI,A ◦(φ ⊗idΦ(A)).
For example, the last equation has the diagram:
I ⊗Φ(A)
Φ(A) > Φ(A)
Φ(I ) ⊗Φ(A)
φ⊗idΦ(A)∨
φI,A> Φ(I ⊗A)
Φ(A)
∧
If the maps φA,B and φ are also invertible (isomorphisms), the functor is called
a strong monoidal functor; if they are the identity maps, the functor is called a
strict monoidal functor.
Given two monoidal categories, C and D, and two strong monoidal functors
from C to D, Φ with φΦ and Ψ with φΨ, a natural transformation N : Φ →Ψ
with morphisms 
A : Φ(A) →Ψ(A) is a monoidal natural transformation if for
every pair of objects A, B of C, we have

A⊗B ◦φΦ
A,B = φΨ
A,B ◦(
A ⊗
B).
For braided monoidal categories C and D, a monoidal functor Φ : C →D is
called a braided monoidal functor if it is compatible with braiding as follows.
For every pair of objects A, B of C,
Φ(A,B) ◦φA,B = φB,A ◦Φ(A),Φ(B).
An example of a symmetric monoidal category is the category of sets with
functions as morphisms, with Cartesian product, and symmetry given by
A,B(x, y) = (y, x). Another example of a symmetric monoidal category is the
category of vector spaces with linear maps as morphisms, with tensor product,
and symmetry given by A,B(x ⊗y) = y ⊗x.
A monoidal category C is called right autonomous if every object A of C
has a right dual, denoted by A∗, and there are two morphisms, the unit
A : I →A∗⊗A and the counit A : A ⊗A∗→I , which satisfy the following
adjunction triangle equalities:
idA = (A ⊗idA) ◦(idA ⊗A),
(idA∗⊗A) ◦(A ⊗idA∗) = idA∗.
A∗, A, A and the ﬁrst triangle equality are graphically represented as follows:

QUANTUM MECHANICS & CATEGORY THEORY
21
A
idA⊗A> A ⊗A∗⊗A
A
εA⊗idA
∨
idA
>
A left autonomous monoidal category is deﬁned dually and a left dual of A is
denoted by ∗A. A monoidal category is autonomous if it is both right and left
autonomous. In a braided right autonomous category, a right dual of A is also
a left dual of A, so the category is autonomous. A compact closed category
is a right autonomous symmetric monoidal category. A category of sets with
binary relations as morphisms and direct product as tensor product and where
A∗= A is a compact closed category. The category of ﬁnite dimensional vector
spaces (or ﬁnite dimensional Hilbert spaces) with tensor product and with A∗
being the dual space of A is a compact closed category. On the other hand,
if we allow inﬁnite dimensional vector spaces, the categories of vector spaces
and of Hilbert spaces are not autonomous.
§7. Dagger categories. A dagger category is a category C equipped with a
contravariant functor † : C →C, which is identity on the objects and involutive
on the morphisms.
More speciﬁcally, to each morphism f : A →B a
morphism f† : B →A is assigned such that
(f†)† = f ∧id
†
A = idA,
and for every morphism g : B →C,
(g ◦f)† = f† ◦g†.
Morphism f† is called the adjoint of f. The adjoint is diagrammatically
represented by reversing the location but not the direction of the wires and by
marking the upper right corner (in contrast to the upper left corner) in the
box. In general, the adjoint of a diagram is its mirror image.
The category of sets with binary relations as morphisms is a dagger category
with relational inverse R† as adjoint of R. The category of Hilbert spaces with
bounded linear maps is a dagger category with the usual adjoints. A morphism
f is called Hermitian if it is self-adjoint: f† = f. A morphism f is called
unitary if it is an isomorphism and f−1 = f†. A dagger functor Φ between two
dagger categories C and D is a functor that satisﬁes the following additional

22
JENNIFER CHUBB AND VALENTINA HARIZANOV
equality for every morphism f in C:
Φ(f†) = (Φ(f))†.
A dagger monoidal category C is a category that is both monoidal and dagger
and the two structures are compatible in the sense that the morphisms from
the monoidal structure, αA,B,C , A, A, are unitary and the following equality
is satisﬁed for every pair of morphisms f, g:
(f ⊗g)† = f† ⊗g†.
A dagger symmetric monoidal category is a dagger braided monoidal category
such that its symmetry (braiding) is unitary. A dagger compact closed category
C, also simply called dagger compact category, is a dagger symmetric monoidal
category that is also compact closed, together with a relation to connect the
dagger structure to the compact structure. Speciﬁcally, the dagger is used to
connect the unit to the counit so that for all objects A in C, we have:
A = A⊗A∗◦†
A .
Dagger compact categories are of great importance for foundations of
quantum information and computing. Selinger [4] proved a completeness
and hence coherence result for dagger compact closed categories. That is, he
established that an equation follows from the axioms of dagger compact closed
categories if and only if it holds in ﬁnite dimensional Hilbert spaces. Thus,
this coherence theorem allows us to use the diagrammatic calculus of dagger
compact categories to precisely express and verify some fundamental quantum
information notions and protocols.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Abramsky and B. Coecke, A categorical semantics of quantum protocols, Proceedings of
the 19th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, IEEE, 2004, pp. 415–425.
[2] A. Joyal and R. Street, The geometry of tensor calculus I, Advances in Mathematics, vol. 88
(1991), pp. 55–112.
[3] P. Selinger, A survey of graphical languages for monoidal categories, New Structures for
Physics (B. Coecke, editor), Lecture Notes in Physics, vol. 813, Springer, 2011, pp. 289–355.
[4]
, Finite dimensional Hilbert spaces are complete for dagger compact closed categories,
Logical Methods in Computer Science, vol. 8 (2012), pp. 1–12.
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS
UNIVERSITY OF SAN FRANCISCO
SAN FRANCISCO, CA 94117
E-mail: jcchubb@usfca.edu
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS
GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20052
E-mail: harizanv@gwu.edu

COULD LOGIC BE EMPIRICAL? THE PUTNAM-KRIPKE DEBATE
ALLEN STAIRS
Abstract. Not long after Hilary Putnam published “Is Logic Empirical,” Saul Kripke presented
a critique of Putnam’s argument in a lecture at the University of Pittsburgh. Kripke criticized both
the substance of Putnam’s version of quantum logic and the idea that one could “adopt” a logic
for empirical reasons. This paper reviews the debate between Putnam and Kripke. It suggests
the possibility of a “middle way” between Putnam and Kripke: a way in which logic could be
broadly a priori but in which empirical considerations could still bear on our views about the
logical structure of the world. In particular, considerations drawn from quantum mechanics might
provide an example.
Some years ago, Hilary Putnam published a paper called “Is Logic Empiri-
cal?” [7] in which he argued that quantum mechanics provides an empirical case
for revising our views about logic. (The paper was republished in his collected
works as “The Logic of Quantum Mechanics”. Page references will be to the
reprinted version.) In 1974, Saul Kripke presented a talk at the University
of Pittsburgh called “The Question of Logic,” oﬀering a detailed rebuttal of
Putnam’s case. As of this writing, almost 40 years later, Kripke’s paper still
hasn’t appeared in print and apart from my 1978 dissertation and a paper I
published 28 years later [9], very little has been written on the disagreement
between Putnam and Kripke. This is unfortunate; the issues are well worth
investigating. In my 2006 paper [9], I adopted the device of writing about Paul
Kriske and Prof. Tupman out of deference to the fact that there is no published
version of Kripke’s talk. Here I’ll simply write directly about Putnam and
Kripke. If I get Kripke wrong, I hope he’ll let us know.
As for the plan of the paper, we begin by reviewing Putnam’s arguments;
after that we move to Kripke’s rebuttal. This will lead to a larger discussion of
what logic and the empirical might have to do with one another.
§1. Putnam on quantum logic. We think of logical truths as a special case
of necessary truths, but Putnam reminds us that we now reject certain claims
about geometry that once seemed necessary. We would once have said that
if two lines are straight and a constant distance apart over some portion
of their span, they can’t converge elsewhere. For anyone not familiar with
Logic and Algebraic Structures in Quantum Computing
Edited by J. Chubb, A. Eskandarian and V. Harizanov
Lecture Notes in Logic, 45
c⃝2016, Association for Symbolic Logic
23

24
ALLEN STAIRS
non-Euclidean geometry, Putnam claims that this seems as intuitively clear
as saying that there are no married bachelors, or that nothing can be scarlet
all over and bright green all over at the same time. In the case of the lines,
however, we’ve come to believe not just that the claim might be false but that
in some instances it is false.
We might say that what Putnam describes applies to geodesics, but “geodesic”
doesn’t mean “straight line.” However, Putnam insists that this won’t do. On
our intuitive conception, shortest paths are straightest and conversely. The
notion of a geodesic preserves this, and lines that depart from geodesics will
not seem straighter. One way to put it: if we say that geodesics behaving as
Putnam describes aren’t straight lines, we’ll have to say that there can be points
with no straight line between them. Putnam thinks we miss the signiﬁcance of
relativity if we represent its geometrical claims as mere changes of meaning.
He writes:
The important point is that [‘straight line’] does not ‘change meaning’
in the trivial way one might at ﬁrst suspect. Once one appreciates
that something that was formerly literally unimaginable has indeed
happened, then one also appreciates that the usual ‘linguistic’ moves
only help to distort the nature of the discovery and not to clarify it.
(p. 177)
Putnam argues that we’ve made a similar discovery about logic itself. We pair
statements about quantum quantities with subspaces of Hilbert space and we
can extend this map from simple statements to compound ones by associating
“or” with subspace span (p ∨q), “and” with subspace intersection (p ∧q), and
“not” with orthocomplement (p⊥). If we take the mapping seriously, however,
we have a conﬂict with classical logic. Suppose the quantity A has two possible
values a1 and a2, associated with rays α1 and α2. Suppose, likewise, that B
has two values b1 and b2 associated with rays 1 and 2. Now consider the
expressions
(A = a1 or A = a2), (B = b1 or B = b2)
and associate them with the subspaces
(α1 ∨α2), (1 ∨2).
Quantum mechanics, read as Putnam reads it, gives us cases where both
disjunctions are true. That means the conjunction
(A = a1 or A = a2) and (B = b1 or B = b2)
is also true. However each of the following pick out the null subspace of
Hilbert space
(α1 ∧1), (α1 ∧2), (α2 ∧1), (α2 ∧2)
and so the corresponding conjunctions are false. Hence
(A = a1∧B = b1)∨(A = a1∧B = b2)∨(A = a2∧B = b1)∨(A = a2∧B = b2)

COULD LOGIC BE EMPIRICAL? THE PUTNAM-KRIPKE DEBATE
25
is false but this discrepancy between the distributed and undistributed formulas
is impossible classically. Putnam writes:
Conclusion: the mapping is nonsense—or, we must change our logic.
(p. 179)
On the other hand, if we do “adopt the heroic course of changing our logic”
there’s a straightforward way to proceed:
. . . just read the logic oﬀfrom the Hilbert space H(S). (p. 179)
The advantage, says Putnam, is that
all so-called anomalies in quantum mechanics come down to the
non-standardness of the logic. (p. 179)
and the anomalies go away if we change our logic.
Putnam oﬀers several illustrations. “Complementarity,” understood as
the failure of quantum mechanics to specify joint values for noncommuting
quantities comes down to logical incompatibility in quantum logic; the com-
plementary quantities don’t share eigenspaces. He also argues that quantum
logic accounts for the two-slit experiment. To derive the incorrect classical
probabilities, we have to distribute a proposition R about where the photon
hits the screen over a disjunction of propositions A1 and A2 about which
hole the photon passes through. If we treat ‘R ∧(A1 ∨A2)’ as equivalent to
‘(R ∧A1) ∨(R ∧A2)’, then we end up with the wrong probabilities.
Putnam also claims that if we analyze barrier penetration quantum logically,
we avoid explaining the eﬀect by appeal to a supposedly mysterious ‘disturbance
by the measurement.’ (p. 182) In fact, the account he gives (on p. 183) can’t be
right for any ﬁnite population of atoms (exercise for the reader; look especially
at statement (8) and Putnam’s comment on it) but let that pass. In classical
physics, the state provides a complete description relative to the terms of
the theory, of the system. In quantum theory, there are “states” or “state
descriptions,” but Putnam writes that
A system has no complete description in quantum mechanics; such
a thing is a logical impossibility (p. 185)
Quantum states are “logically strongest consistent statements” but they aren’t
states “in the sense of statements which imply every true proposition about
S” (p. 185) This might suggest that quantum states are like statistical states in
classical mechanics, and that their failure to provide a complete list of all the
truths is a reﬂection of our epistemic situation. However, this isn’t Putnam’s
view. Rather, he tells us that a quantum system has, e.g., a position by virtue of
the truth of a disjunction of position statements and it also has a momentum by
virtue of the truth of disjunction of momentum statements1. Here is Putnam
articulating what we will call the value-deﬁniteness thesis:
1Putnam knows that strictly, there are no position and momentum eigenstates; the oversimpliﬁ-
cation is merely for illustration.

26
ALLEN STAIRS
1. For any such question as ‘what is the value of M(S) now?’ where
M is a physical magnitude, there exists a statement Ui which
was true of S at t0 such that had I known Ui was true at t0, I
could have predicted the value of M(S) now, but
2. It is logically impossible to possess a statement Ui which was
true of S at t0 from which one could have predicted the value
of every magnitude M now.
We can predict any one magnitude, if we make an appropriate
measurement, but we can’t predict them all.
The advantage of giving up classical logic, according to Putnam, is this:
These examples makes the principle clear. The only laws of classical
logic that are given up in quantum logic are distributive laws . . . and
every single anomaly vanishes once we give these up. (p. 184)
Putnam’s argument for adopting quantum logic is that if we do, the interpre-
tive puzzles of the theory dissolve. If we insist on classical logic, we have to say
such supposedly objectionable things as that measurements create the values
of the quantities measured or that there is a “cut between the observer and the
observed” or that there are undetectable hidden variables. But Putnam says
. . . I think it is more likely that classical logic is wrong than that there
are either hidden variables or “cuts between the observer and the
system”, etc.
This completes the analogy with geometry. We could preserve Euclidean
geometry, but only by paying the high intellectual price of admitting gratuitous
universal forces. Likewise for classical logic: we can preserve it only by paying
an unacceptable price in the coin of untoward claims about quantum systems.
§2. Kripke on Putnam. Kripke’s critique of Putnam has two parts. One
deals with the particulars of Putnam’s argument. There Kripke’s case is strong.
However, granting that Kripke is right about Putnam’s particular quantum
logical proposal wouldn’t show that logic isn’t empirical, nor would it show
that quantum mechanics doesn’t give us a reason to change our views about
logic. In the second part of his critique, Kripke argues that the very idea of
changing logic for empirical reasons is confused.
In what follows, I quote at length from my partial transcript of Kripke’s talk.
The indirect debate between Kripke and Putnam was an important episode,
and the reader will get a better sense of it if s/he reads Kripke’s own words. To
be sure, there is a matter of propriety here, but Kripke’s own words do a better
job than my paraphrase would of spelling out his view and therefore, it seems
fairest to him to use those words.
2.1. Quantum logic and simple arithmetic. The ﬁrst part of Kripke’s argu-
ment is intended to show that if we follow Putnam, we have to agree to the

COULD LOGIC BE EMPIRICAL? THE PUTNAM-KRIPKE DEBATE
27
untoward conclusion that 2 × 2 ≥5. According to Putnam, if M has possible
values m1, m2, . . . , mn then there is a true statement ascribing one of these
values to M. The statement
M = m1 ∨M = m2 ∨· · · ∨M = mn
is true, Putnam would say, and the summary of the value-deﬁniteness thesis
above makes clear what he means: one of the disjuncts really is true, and if we
knew which, we could predict the outcome of an M-measurement. However,
the logically strongest statement about the system may not tell us which disjunct
is true.
Is it really clear that Putnam meant this? Here’s a passage that would be
hard to make sense of otherwise. Sz is a position state and T1, T2, etc. are
momentum states. (Substitute eigenstates of diﬀerent spin components if you
prefer.) We suppose Sz to be known.
The idea that momentum measurement ‘brings into being’ the value
found arises very naturally if one does not appreciate the logic being
employed in quantum mechanics. If I know that Sz is true, then I
know that for each Tj the conjunction Sz ·Tj is false. It is natural to
conclude (smuggling in classical logic) that Sz · (T1 ∨T2 ∨· · · ∨TR)
is false, and hence that we must reject (T1 ∨T2 ∨· · · ∨TR)—i.e.,
we must say ‘the particle has no momentum’. Then one measures
momentum, and one gets a momentum—so the measurement must
have ‘brought it into being’. However, the error was in passing
from the falsity of Sz · T1 ∨Sz · T2 ∨· · · ∨Sz · TR to the falsity of
Sz · (T1 ∨T2 ∨· · · ∨TR). This latter statement is true (assuming
Sz) and so it is true that ‘the particle has a momentum’ . . . and
the momentum measurement merely ﬁnds this momentum (while
disturbing the position); it does not create it, or disturb it in any
way. It is as simple as that. (p. 186)
“Simple” or not, Kripke draws out an untoward consequence. Suppose we’re
given two quantities, A and B, each with two possible values 1 and 2. Thus the
set {1, 2} is the set of possible values of A and also of B. Putnam will say that
1. A = 1 ∨A = 2
2. B = 1 ∨B = 2
are both true. However, he will also say that each of the following are false:
1. A = 1 ∧B = 1
2. A = 1 ∧B = 2
3. A = 2 ∧B = 1
4. A = 2 ∧B = 2
But Kripke argues:

28
ALLEN STAIRS
The usual mathematical deﬁnition of multiplication is this: suppose
we have two sets with two elements. Then the cardinality of their
product is the cardinality of the Cartesian product of the two sets
. . . where x comes from the ﬁrst set and y comes from the second
set, so where x comes from {a, b} and y comes from {c, d} where
{a, b} and {c, d} are our two two-element sets. We want to consider
how many ordered pairs there are. So the classical arithmetician
says “There are four, namely ⟨a, c⟩, ⟨a, d⟩, ⟨b, c⟩, ⟨b, d⟩. . . ” But we
can all see the fallacy in any conclusion that these are the only pairs.
The “fallacy” is that if x comes from {a, b}, then we have the disjunction
x = a ∨x = b
and similarly we have
y = c ∨y = d.
Now suppose that the set {a, b} is the set of possible values of the quantity A
above (i.e., {a, b} = {1, 2}) and {c, d} is the set of values of the quantity B
(i.e., {c, d} = {1, 2} as well.) We’ll let Kripke pick up the story:
Now I claim that there is a ﬁfth pair ⟨A, B⟩where these are the
two quantities mentioned by Putnam. Remember that Putnam
does not think these are funny pseudo-numbers. The idea is that A
was already one of the two numbers 1 and 2 [and] B was already
one of the numbers 1 and 2. So A is certainly in the ﬁrst set [i.e.,
{a, b} = {1, 2}—AS] because A is equal either to 1 or to 2. B is
certainly in the second set [i.e., {c, d} = {1, 2}— AS] because B is
either equal to 1 or to 2, though we may not have measured which.
So the pair ⟨A, B⟩is in our Cartesian product. But certainly we
cannot say that ⟨A, B⟩equals ⟨1, 1⟩if we adopt the usual criterion
of identity of ordered pairs because that would mean that A = 1 and
B equals 1, and that contradicts [the falsity of (3)]. Also, ⟨A, B⟩
does not equal ⟨1, 2⟩because it is false that A equals 1 and B equals
2. And ⟨A, B⟩does not equal ⟨2, 1⟩[and] ⟨A, B⟩does not equal
⟨2, 2⟩. . . So there is a ﬁfth and hitherto overlooked, I might say,
ordered pair in the Cartesian product of these two ﬁnite sets.
Kripke’s point, of course, is that this is absurd, but that it’s where we end up if
we follow Putnam.
There may be various ways Putnam could respond, but Kripke insists that
one obvious rejoinder won’t do: it won’t do to accuse Kripke of begging the
question. Kripke insists: he’d only be begging the question if he had assumed
a premise that Putnam rejects. However, the distributive law isn’t a premise in
his argument. Kripke simply reasons from premises that Putnam accepts to
the conclusion that if none of the pairs ⟨1, 1⟩, ⟨1, 2⟩, ⟨2, 1⟩, ⟨2, 2⟩gives the joint
values for A and B, then joint values require that there be another pair in the

COULD LOGIC BE EMPIRICAL? THE PUTNAM-KRIPKE DEBATE
29
Cartesian product. Since Putnam would claim that none of the four ordered
pairs gives the joint values, and would also claim that both quantities really do
have values, the untoward (and absurd) conclusion follows. As Kripke puts it
in connection with a closely-related example
. . . if you say that I am begging the question then you yourself, I
think, are begging the question, because only if my reasoning was
invalid did I need any extra premise which I have begged against
Putnam.
2.2. The impossibility of “adopting” a logic. Kripke is right, I believe: there’s
no convincing quantum-logical defense of the value-deﬁniteness thesis. (See [8]
for more discussion) and in what follows, we will assume that value-deﬁniteness
doesn’t hold. Kripke’s larger point is that there is a problem at the core of
Putnam’s view. Putnam, he thinks, believes that we could somehow decide
to “adopt” a logic; Kripke insists that this is incoherent. We misunderstand
logic if we think there are “logics” among which we could somehow choose.
There is reasoning. Speciﬁc formal systems may or may not adequately capture
aspects of correct reasoning. But there is no neutral place outside logic from
which to decide what “logic” to adopt.
Whether Putnam really holds the view of logic that Kripke attributes to him
isn’t clear. That said, it’s a useful foil for making Kripke’s own view of logic
clearer. Therefore, while we won’t ignore the question of how well Kripke’s
criticisms ﬁt Putnam, the exegetical question won’t be our main concern.
Putnam remarked on our intuitive sense of contradiction when faced with
his geometrical example. Kripke reads Putnam this way:
Just as in the case of non-Euclidean geometry we throw intuition to
the wind and adopt an axiomatic system as supposedly describing
the real physical world . . . so on every other domain we cannot
rely on intuition. Once one has a rival system of axioms, the mere
fact that an old system struck us as the only intuitively acceptable
one should be given little weight. Once alternative geometries are
under consideration, we abandon any mere intuitive preference
for Euclidean geometry, and once alternative logics are under
consideration, we abandon any mere intuitive preference for a
particular system of logic.
Kripke thinks there is a deep confusion here. Formal systems are not logic.
Formal systems may or may not faithfully reﬂect correct principles of reasoning,
but we have no alternative to using “intuition,” by which Kripke means
reasoning, to assess the formal systems. If changing our formal system is
supposed to entail changing the way we reason, then we have no place to stand
outside of reasoning from which to do this. “Logics” qua formal systems aren’t
logic. As Kripke sees it, Putnam’s fundamental error lies in missing this point.

30
ALLEN STAIRS
Once we grasp this, the idea that we could change our logic in response to
empirical considerations makes no sense.
Even if we grant that there’s no place to stand outside reasoning, there’s a
more general phenomenon here. What William Alston called doxastic practices
(see his [1, Ch. 4], for instance) typically have the sort of self-supposing quality
that Kripke’s point relies on. We can reconsider how to evaluate beliefs based
on sensory input; when we do, we’ll need to rely on at least some such beliefs
and hence on the practice of forming beliefs based on sense evidence. We can
consider what memory can and can’t teach us; we can’t avoid relying on at least
some memories when we do. Equally important, these practices aren’t insulated
from one another. In considering what weight to give memory, for example,
we’ll make use of claims that we’ve accepted on the basis of the implicit and
explicit rules/practices we use for assessing other kinds of empirical claims.
We can also reason about how to reason, as Kripke would be the ﬁrst to insist.
Putnam may seem to be saying that we can evaluate logic without relying on
logic broadly conceived (i.e., on logic qua reasoning) but it’s not clear that he
means this or needs to say it. In order to rebut a measured version of Putnam’s
view, Kripke would have to show that reasoning is the one doxastic practice
to which the deliverances of other doxastic practices are irrelevant. Putnam’s
larger point would be made if sometimes what we discover empirically can
properly enter into our deliberations about how to reason.
Be that as it may, Putnam’s main argument seems to be that if we give up the
distributive law, we’ll be blocked from drawing untoward conclusions. Thus,
we won’t be able to argue that the probabilities in the two-slit experiment must
ﬁt a crude application of the law of total probability, and we won’t need to
say that measurement creates the values that it records. However, this is too
quick. We might be able to avoid any number of unwelcome conclusions if we
simply refused to reason in certain ways; that hardly makes a case for merely
opportunistic “revisions” of logic. And while Putnam might judge that a failure
of the distributive law is “more likely” than hidden variables or “cuts between
observer and observed,” Kripke can reply that without something more than
a mere and tendentious cost-beneﬁt analysis, we haven’t been presented with
an intelligible alternative. The distributive law seems to be a correct way to
reason. Putnam hasn’t shown us any deep problems with the idea that there are
Bohmian-style hidden variables; he merely tells us that he ﬁnds them unlikely.
He objects to the idea that measurement might bring the values it yields into
being. However, his main objection seems to be that this is a strange notion of
“measurement.” This threatens to turn the argument into a mere quibble. The
idea that the interactions we call measurements bring new states of aﬀairs into
being might be a reason to pick or invent a diﬀerent word, but it doesn’t count
against the possibility that things really work this way.
We leave the vexed issue of measurement (or “measurement”) aside and turn
to a diﬀerent part of Kripke’s reply: his case that the very idea of “adopting a

COULD LOGIC BE EMPIRICAL? THE PUTNAM-KRIPKE DEBATE
31
logic” makes no sense. Kripke takes his cue from Lewis Carroll’s “What the
Tortoise Said to Achilles” and from Quine’s “Truth by Convention”. He says:
The basic problem is this: if logical truths are mere hypotheses . . .
and one can adopt them as one will, how, unless one has a logic in
advance, can one possibly deduce anything from them?
Kripke develops the example of universal instantiation at greatest length.
Imagine someone who doesn’t see that from a universal claim, each instance
follows. Imagine further that our poor reasoner is willing to accept Kripke’s
authority that all ravens are black and is also willing to accept Kripke’s authority
in more general logical matters. There’s a raven, J, out of our subject’s sight,
but he doesn’t see that believing this and accepting that all ravens are black
commits him to accepting that J is black. Kripke tells the tale charmingly:
So I say to him “Oh. You don’t see that. Well let me tell you: from
every universal statement, each instance follows.” He will say “Oh.
Yes. I believe you.” So now I say to him, “Ah. So ‘All ravens
are black’ is a universal statement and ‘This raven is black’ is an
instance.” “Yes. Yes” He agrees. So I say to him “All universal
statements imply their instances. This particular statement that all
ravens are black implies this particular instance.” “Well, hmm, I’m
not entirely sure,” he will say. “I don’t really see that I’ve got to
accept that!”
The problem is clear. As Kripke puts it
If he was not able to make the simple inference “All ravens are black,
therefore J is black” where J is a particular raven, then giving him
some super-premise like “Every universal statement implies each
instance” won’t help him either.
It won’t help because he would already have to be in command of the principle
to apply it; the idea that he could adopt it is incoherent. Kripke makes similar
points about non-contradiction, adjunction and Lewis Carroll’s modus ponens
example. We can embody these principles in formal systems, but there’s no
sense to the idea that someone, so to speak, standing outside these principles
could adopt them.
These are all cases where we couldn’t adopt a particular principle unless
we already grasped it intuitively. Perhaps that doesn’t apply to all logical
principles, and in any case Putnam’s example had to do with giving up rather
than adopting a principle. However, Kripke thinks this would miss the point.
Here’s what he says:
. . . I don’t really mean that we adopt as basic just those things to
which we can ﬁgure out that this argument applies, What I mean is
this: you can’t undermine intuitive reasoning in the case of logic and
try to get everything on a much more rigorous basis. One has just

32
ALLEN STAIRS
to think not in terms of some formal set of postulates but intuitively.
That is, one has to reason. One can’t just adopt a formal system
independently of any reasoning about it because if one tried to do
so one wouldn’t understand the directions for setting up the system
itself. And so any comparison of logic to geometry which says that
in the case of logic as in the supposed case of geometry, intuition can
be thrown to the dogs—that is, any reasoning outside the system of
postulates can be thrown to the dogs—must be wrong. One can only
reason as we always did, independently of any special set of rules
called “logic,” in setting up a formal system or in doing anything
else. And if proof by cases was part of our intuitive apparatus then
there is no analogy to geometry which says that this should not be
respected.
Kripke is surely right: logic isn’t just a matter of formal systems. We can
also agree that questions about how to reason have a special status among the
various kinds of questions we can ask. We can agree further that for at least
some logical principles there’s no sense to be made of the idea that we might
“adopt” them, and we can even concede that nothing could count as adopting
a logic wholesale. Whether this scuttles the idea that empirical considerations
could bear on logic is less clear, however.
2.3. Rejecting subalternation as a case of change in logic. To make progress,
we need to look at what Kripke concedes about changes in logic and how he
accounts for them. The most useful place to begin is with what he says about
the principle of subalternation for universal categoricals—in particular, that
“All P are Q” implies “Some P are Q.”2 Logicians once accepted this principle,
and yet we no longer do. What Kripke says is surely right: if we accept
subalternation, we overlook the case where ‘P’ is empty. ‘All deserters will be
shot on sight’ may be true, and that may be exactly the reason why there are no
deserters. But if there are no deserters, it would be very odd to say that some
deserters are shot. Intuitive reﬂection makes clear that something has to give.
If we overlook empty terms, we’ll be tempted to think subalternation is valid.
We correct ourselves by mere reﬂection—by ordinary reasoning. However, we
can ask if this is always so. When we discover that we’ve overlooked a case and
accepted an incorrect logical principle as a result, is this always a matter of
ordinary reasoning, or do empirical considerations sometimes come into play?
2Kripke talks brieﬂy about cases where we see that an argument we once accepted is invalid.
Here we change our beliefs about logic, but we do so simply and straightforwardly by reasoning.
He also oﬀers a cursory discussion of intuitionism. Here he claims that the intuitionists introduced
new connectives, deﬁned in terms of provability, and so the intuitionist’s apparent rejection, e.g.,
of excluded middle isn’t really in competition with the classical principle. Whether that’s the best
reading of intuitionists such as Brouwer I will leave to others to decide.

COULD LOGIC BE EMPIRICAL? THE PUTNAM-KRIPKE DEBATE
33
2.4. Future contingents, bivalence and the empirical. Consider a debate that
Kripke doesn’t mention but that has a long history: whether propositions
about the future provide reasons to give up bivalence. Two sorts of views
suggest that the answer might be yes. One is that some propositions about the
future (e.g. “There will be a sea battle tomorrow” or “This atom will decay an
hour from now”) are contingent in a more-than-merely-logical sense. Another
is the view that only the present exists, usually called “presentism” and the
“growing block” view, according to which the present and the past but not the
future are real. The diﬀerence between presentism proper and the growing
block won’t matter for our purposes, we’ll use “presentism” for both.
Neither future contingent propositions nor presentism alone make the case
against bivalence. Suppose some propositions about the future are contingent
in the sense of not being determined by facts about the past. Suppose, that
is, that determinism is false. If the so-called “block universe view” is correct,
all events, past present and future, are ontologically on a par. In that case,
the facts about the events making up the block entire settle the truth or falsity
of future contingent propositions even if determinism is false. An event’s
being undetermined is a matter of its relationship to other events and to the
laws of nature; whether we live in a block universe and whether the laws are
deterministic are independent questions. On the other hand, suppose that
presentism is correct. Then even though future states of aﬀairs don’t exist,
deterministic laws plus the facts about the present could suﬃce to settle the
truth or falsity of propositions about the future.
What, then, if presentism is true and determinism false? Perhaps bivalence
about future contingent propositions can still be defended, though it’s not clear
how or why. What if it can’t? One response is to abandon excluded middle—to
claim that when ‘P’ is indeterminate, ‘P ∨not-P’ is likewise indeterminate
(a view usually associated with Łukasiewicz.) However, there’s a plausible
objection: if ‘P’ is indeterminate, then it’s not true that P, hence ‘not-P’ is true.
If so, then even if ‘P’ is indeterminate, ‘P ∨not-P’ will be true by virtue of its
second disjunct.3
Another familiar account of future contingents appeals to branching time
and supervaluation (see [12]). On this approach, a statement about the future
is true at the present moment just in case it holds on each branch or history
passing through this moment, and false if it is false on each such branch.
Contingent statements about the future will therefore be neither true nor
false. However, this permits true disjunctions with no true disjuncts. Suppose
{P1, P2, . . . , Pn} is a set of future contingent propositions that are mutually
exclusive, not logically exhaustive, but such that on each branch passing through
3Scope matters here; using ‘F ’ as a future-tense operator, the claim is that when ‘F (X)’ is
indeterminate, ‘not-F (X)’ is true, even though ‘F (not-X)’ is indeterminate. See Bourne [3, pp. 82
ﬀ.] for useful discussion.

34
ALLEN STAIRS
the present, one of them is true. An artiﬁcial example: suppose a coin will
be tossed, that the outcome isn’t determined, but that on each branch the
outcome is either Heads or Tails. Then
The coin will come up heads or the coin will come up tails
is true at the present moment even though neither disjunct is.
Supervaluation preserves excluded middle and non-contradiction. Whether
it preserves all classical logical truths might be more of an accounting issue
than a substantive one. Even with excluded middle intact, the possibility of a
true disjunction with no true disjuncts isn’t part of logical business as usual.
The novelty seems at ﬁrst to sit comfortably with Kripke’s view. Our belief that
true disjunctions require true disjuncts came from overlooking a (complex)
possibility: the combination of presentism and future contingents. However,
further thought may seem to favor Putnam. This particular case for true
disjunctions without true disjuncts depends on assumptions about the world:
that the block universe view and determinism are both false. The overlooked
possibility is a substantive one, and reasoning alone won’t tell us if it holds.
This suggests that matters of logic depend on the way things are, as Putnam’s
view would maintain.
The status of determinism is a contingent, empirical matter. However, as we
noted above, even if determinism is false, this wouldn’t be enough to undermine
bivalence. The crucial additional assumption is presentism, and it might be
argued that this is not an empirical matter; certainly the debate has often
proceeded as though it’s not. However, there are able defenders of the coherence
of presentism and of the block universe. If both views are indeed coherent,
empirical considerations plausibly bear on which is correct. Indeed, Putnam
himself famously invoked special relativity to argue against presentism (albeit
not under that name) in “Time and Physical Geometry.” [6] His argument that
past, present and future are equally “real” don’t rest on general philosophical
considerations; it depends on the structure of Minkowski space-time. It may
be, then, that whether presentism is true depends on the facts about space-time.
If so, it suggests that assessing the need for the logical revisions at issue in
the debate over future contingents depends on contingent, empirical facts
about the world.4 The broad issue is whether claims about reality could have
consequences for logic. Future contingent propositions give rise to a dilemma:
if bivalence holds for such propositions, it’s because of something about the
world: the falsity of presentism or the truth of determinism. If bivalence fails,
it’s because presentism is true and determinism false. In either case, the claim is
empirical. The question of determinism is certainly empirical and the question
of presentism is at least arguably so. Thus, whether bivalence holds is an
empirical matter, and that, it seems, is enough to make Putnam’s larger point.
4Of course, not everyone agrees that Putnam’s arguments are sound. See, for example, Stein [11]
and Bourne [3]. To repeat, the point here is not to take sides in this debate.

COULD LOGIC BE EMPIRICAL? THE PUTNAM-KRIPKE DEBATE
35
The arguments above are skeletal and open to challenge, but suppose we
grant them. There’s a plausible Kripkean reply. Whether bivalence holds
might be an empirical matter, but if so the correct conclusion is that bivalence
is not a principle of logic. Furthermore, the conclusion that bivalence isn’t a
correct principle of logic is not an empirical one. We come to it by reﬂecting
on the possibilities, and we discover that there is a genuine possibility we had
overlooked: the possibility that there are no facts to ground the truth or falsity
of certain propositions about the future. That this is possible remains so even
if the possibility isn’t realized.
2.5. D´etente? What’s just been said concedes something important to
Kripke, but suggests a possibility for d´etente. Logic writ large (let’s write
bold-face ‘logic’ for that) would remain a matter of reasoning, broadly under-
stood. The logic of the actual world could still be a contingent matter. The
analogy with geometry helps here. Suppose (unlikely, but science sometimes
takes strange turns) we became convinced that the world is Euclidean after
all. We would still know that the scenario Putnam describes is possible in a
broad sense. It would just be that it’s never actualized. The question of what
the detailed geometry of a world could be would remain, broadly speaking, a
priori; the question of what it is in fact would be empirical. That the world
could be pseudo-Riemannian is not empirical knowledge. That it is or isn’t
pseudo-Riemannian is an empirical claim. Likewise, that bivalence could fail is
arguably not empirical knowledge. That it does (or does not) fail in a particular
way is arguably empirical. And though we won’t try to give a general account
of what counts as a question of logic, questions about the status of bivalence
plausibly count.
This raises two questions. The ﬁrst is whether there’s a case of this sort to be
made by appeal to quantum mechanics. We’ll take that up in the following
section. The second question will be raised but no more than raised: in light
of what quantum mechanics teaches us, is it quite so clear that logic really is
something we can know by a priori?
§3. Quantum logic reconsidered. Putnam’s quantum logical proposal oﬀered
a formal structure and some interpretative principles and rationales. The
structure is the lattice of subspaces of Hilbert space, but the beginnings of the
disagreement with Kripke come from the interpretive overlay. Let ‘Sz = + 1
2’
say that the electron has spin +1/2 in direction z, and similarly for ‘Sx = + 1
2’
and ‘Sx = −1
2.’ Putnam, as we know, would say that when
Sz = +1
2 ∧

Sx = +1
2 ∨Sx = −1
2

is true, one of the disjuncts in parentheses really is true, but that it’s logically
impossible for us to know which. However, there’s another approach: treat

36
ALLEN STAIRS
‘(Sx = + 1
2 ∨Sx = −1
2)’ as a disjunctive fact—as a case of a disjunction that’s
true in spite of not having a true disjunct. We’ve already seen reasons of one
sort for taking the idea of disjunctive facts seriously. Quantum mechanics gives
reasons of a diﬀerent sort.
What follows is intended merely as a sketch, and if the reader ﬁnds it hand-
waving, that’s because the author is waving his hands. The goal isn’t to defend
a view in detail (indeed, I am by no means certain that the view is correct) but
simply to make its outlines clear enough to consider.
The paradigmatically curious quantum example is the case of two quantities—
call them P and Q—that share no eigenstates. This is the heart of what Bohr
called complementarity and it has two characteristic features. First, there’s no
arrangement that measures P and Q at the same time. Second, if we’re certain
what outcome a P-measurement would yield, we are not certain what outcome
a Q-measurement would yield; all values of Q have at least some positive
probability. The goal in this section is to see how we might move from here
to something more clearly relevant to logic, and to do it in a way that doesn’t
stray far from what a typical physicist would ﬁnd plausible. Note that we aren’t
following Putnam’s approach. Putnam argued that if we adopt a strong set
of logical claims, we solve the interpretive problems of quantum mechanics.
There’s no such goal here. We’re trying to see what quantum mechanics might
teach us about logic if we start from things that many physicists already believe.
The ﬁrst point is simple: quantum mechanical quantities can have values. A
system can have an energy or a spin in a particular direction. Few physicists
would disagree.5 The second point goes beyond ordinary common sense but not
beyond the common sense of most physicists. Stick with our complementary
quantities P and Q. When P has a value, Q does not. Thus: if there’s a true
statement
P = pi
then there is no true statement
Q = Qj.
No doubt most physicists believed this before no-hidden-variable proofs became
widely known, but those proofs provide another reason. If we accept a handful
of plausible constraints, then it’s impossible for all quantum quantities to have
values at the same time. Those constraints aren’t beyond challenge, but our
purpose isn’t to make an iron-clad case. It’s to make it plausible that quantum
mechanics has consequences for logic.
The third point starts with a piece of physics common sense and then moves
a bit beyond. It’s that there are purely disjunctive truths about quantum
5Though few would disagree, this isn’t the same as saying none would. Quantum Bayesians
such as Carleton Caves, Christopher Fuchs and R¨udiger Schack are exceptions. See, for example,
their [4]. For some relevant discussion see Stairs [10]

COULD LOGIC BE EMPIRICAL? THE PUTNAM-KRIPKE DEBATE
37
mechanical systems. To see why this is plausible, start with a special case of
our ﬁrst point: degenerate quantities can have values. For example: energy is
often degenerate; the subspace that goes with
E = e
for some values e of the energy may not be one-dimensional. In spite of
this, there’s nothing strange about saying that the system really can have
energy e—that ‘E = e’ can be true. With that in mind, consider a simple but
instructive example: a spin-one system whose z-spin is 0. The state |z0⟩is a
superposition of |x+⟩and |x−⟩. On any orthodox account, the statement
Sx = 0
is deﬁnitely false; |z0⟩and |x0⟩are orthogonal. It’s also of a piece with our
second point to say that the system doesn’t have a deﬁnite x-spin. Neither
‘Sx = +1’ nor ‘Sx = −1’ is true. But consider the degenerate quantity (Sx)2—
the square of the spin in the x direction. Again, on any orthodox account, this
quantity has a value: +1. Few physicists would be shocked to be told that
‘(Sx)2 = +1’ is true when ‘Sz = 0’ is true. But if the square of the spin is +1,
it would be gratuitously peculiar to say that ‘Sx = +1’ and ‘Sx = −1’ are both
false. Instead, we can say that for (Sx)2 to take the value +1 and for
Sx = +1 ∨Sx = −1
to be true are one and the same fact: ‘Sx = +1 ∨Sx = −1’ is true even
though neither disjunct is. In short, bivalence fails, though for diﬀerent
reasons than in the case of future contingents, and we have a true disjunction
with indeterminate disjuncts.6 ‘Sx = +1’ and ‘Sx = −1’ stand in a diﬀerent
relationship to ‘Sz = 0’ than ‘Sx = 0’ does. ‘Sz = 0’ excludes ‘Sx = 0’ in an
old-fashioned classical way: the two are contraries. The relationship between
‘Sz = 0’ on the one hand and ‘Sx = +1’ and ‘Sx = −1,’ is not found in
classical physics. For the states that go with these statements, the term is
superposition, but there’s no standard word for the relationship between the
statements themselves. For present purposes, I propose l-complementarity.
In the language of Hilbert space, propositions are l-complementary when
their associated projectors don’t commute. But while that picks out the sorts
of cases we’re interested in, it doesn’t make a connection with logic. It’s also
too restrictive: in principle l-complementarity is more general than Hilbert
space non-commutativity. Kochen and Specker’s [5] partial Boolean algebra
approach is a better way to characterize l-complementarity formally. When
X and Y are l-complementary they do not belong to a common Boolean
6Note that even if someone insisted that each disjunct is false, we’d still have a true disjunction
with no false disjunct. Why anyone would insist on any such thing, however, is unclear to say the
least.

38
ALLEN STAIRS
subalgebra of the partial Boolean algebra.7 However, this leaves the logical
point unclear. The proposal on oﬀer is that l-complementarity goes with
a particular kind of failure of bivalence: if propositions X and Y are l-
complementary, then there are possible states of aﬀairs in which X is true but
Y is neither true nor false.
With this in mind, consider distribution. In particular, consider
Sz = 0 ∧(Sx = +1 ∨Sx = −1).
The proposal is that both conjuncts are true, but neither disjunct of the
disjunction is true. That’s why we can’t distribute. The expression
(Sz = 0 ∧Sx = +1) ∨(Sz = 0 ∧Sx = −1)
either fails to pick out an element of the algebra of propositions (on the partial
Boolean algebra approach) or picks out a statement that can’t be true (on a
lattice approach.) The distributive law fails, but not in a way that threatens
looming arithmetical catastrophe; Kripke’s “missing pair” is nowhere in the
neighborhood.
This isn’t what Putnam would say. He would say that the x-spin has a
deﬁnite value, either +1 or -1 but that it’s logically impossible to state this
value along with the z-spin value. However, once we recognize the possibility
of disjunctive facts, it’s clear that Putnam’s picture goes beyond saying that
‘Sx = +1 ∨Sx = −1’ is true. We can assert the disjunction without accepting
the value-deﬁniteness thesis.
The proposal under consideration includes these points:
1. Quantum mechanical quantities sometimes have values, though not all
quantities have values at once.
2. Bivalence fails; some statements about quantum systems are neither true
nor false;
3. Disjunctions can be true even though none of their disjuncts are.
4. Unrestricted distribution of “and” over “or” fails.
Perhaps (1)–(4) ﬁt quantum systems; perhaps not. What I hope to have made
plausible is that they aren’t shocking. A full discussion would call for much
more detail (see Stairs [9] for some additional thoughts) but we turn to a
diﬀerent question: how well does the proposal meet Kripke’s worries?
First, there’s no question of “standing outside logic” and choosing a logic.
This is a case of revision in light of ﬁnding an overlooked possibility: the possi-
bility of l-complementary propositions. On the one hand, if l-complementarity
is a genuine possibility, it’s one that we came to by way of quantum mechanics,
and quantum mechanics was an empirical discovery. However, grasping the
7A partial Boolean algebra is a family of Boolean algebras that share a common 0 and 1. X ∨Y
and X ∧Y are only deﬁned when X and Y belong to a common member of the family.

COULD LOGIC BE EMPIRICAL? THE PUTNAM-KRIPKE DEBATE
39
implications for logic comes from reasoning about the theory and the con-
clusions about logic, and it would survive a change of physics. Recall the
case of geometry. We can (dimly) imagine discovering that the best theory of
space-time is Euclidean after all. However even if non-Euclidean geometry
didn’t ﬁt this world, non-Euclidean space-time would be a genuine, albeit
unrealized possibility. Reasoning won’t tell us the actual geometrical structure
of the world, but empirical discoveries won’t tell us what the geometrical
possibilities are. Similarly, for all we can say for sure, we’ll ﬁnd that the correct
account of quantum phenomena is some version of Bohmian mechanics. If
we do, physics would give us no reason to believe that the world exhibits
l-complementarity, nor disjunctive facts, nor failures of distributivity. How-
ever, this wouldn’t undermine the possibility of l-complementarity, nor the
possibility of disjunctive facts, nor the possibility of a world where distributivity
fails. The analogy with geometry is still apt: the possible structures, logical or
geometrical, go beyond the actual. Empirical ﬁndings may prompt us to have
thoughts we wouldn’t have had otherwise, but the discovery that something is
a non-actual possibility is not an empirical discovery. However, the structure
that the world actually instantiates—logical or geometrical—is something we
can only discover empirically.
§4. Coda: Some loose ends and some thoughts on logic and the limits of
thought. A question that often comes up in discussions of quantum logic is
whether it’s meant to apply universally, so to speak—whether quantum logic
is ‘the true logic,’ to use the phrase in Bacciagaluppi’s “Is Logic Empirical?”
[2] The point of view of this paper is that this is a misleading question. The
proposal, rather, is that if quantum mechanics is true, the world embodies
a logical relationship that hadn’t been noticed before: the one we’ve called
l-complementarity. If so, not all propositions are bivalent and distributivity
fails in certain special circumstances. Even if l-complementarity is a genuine
possibility, however, it doesn’t apply to every set of propositions. Compare:
suppose failures of bivalence are possible because it’s possible that determinism
and the block universe picture both fail. That admission wouldn’t call for
treating all propositions as neither true nor false, nor for saying that bivalence
fails in every domain.8 The point, rather, is that something we might have
taken to hold in all cases—as a matter of logic—holds only in some.
What’s been said also doesn’t take issue with the idea that our knowledge
of logic is a matter of reasoning. That’s not because this is beyond dispute.
It’s because a central aim of the paper was to see where things stand if we
concede to Kripke that what we’ve labeled logic is a matter of reasoning. We
have argued that even if Kripke is right and logic is not empirical, there’s still a
8In particular, to take one important example, it gives no reason at all to think that mathematical
propositions are non-bivalent.

40
ALLEN STAIRS
place for empirical considerations in thinking about logic. The empirical is not
about what the logical possibilities are, but about which ones are realized.
That leaves a perplexing possibility that we’ll raise but not unravel. The
quantum logical story sketched here sees what we’ve called l-complementarity
as a feature of the world. The world, so this story goes, has logical structure
just as surely as it has geometrical structure; a bit too cutely, logic is empirical
even if logic isn’t. However, if this is correct it has an interesting implication:
we might not be capable of grasping all of what logic encompasses. This, in
turn could have the consequence that we are incapable of grasping the full
logical structure of the actual world.
Go back to the case of geometry.
Suppose space-time indeed has the
structure of a pseudo-Riemannian manifold. In order to ﬁgure this out, we
needed the capacity to grasp the relevant concepts. That wasn’t inevitable; after
all, there are individual people who lack that capacity. Even if we had all been
unable to think the right thoughts, the world would still be pseudo-Riemannian.
The same goes if the l-complementarity-based account of quantum mechanics
gets the character of the world right. We are, collectively, lucky enough to be
able to grasp the relevant structures and concepts; collective truth though this
may be, it doesn’t apply to everyone and need not have applied to anyone.
However, it might be that the actual geometrical structure or the actual
logical structure of the world isn’t what we think it is. And it might be that
whatever that structure is lies beyond our cognitive reach. Logic would come
unpinned from reasoning in a diﬀerent way than the one Kripke argued against.
One might dismiss this as a silly kind of skepticism. That would be fair if
the suggestion were that we might be deeply and radically ignorant about logic.
However, that’s not the thought. On the contrary (though we haven’t discussed
this) a full explication of l-complementarity assumes that propositions are
sometimes related exactly as classical logic says they are. (A partial Boolean
algebra, after all, is a family of Boolean algebras. Similar remarks apply to
orthomodular lattices.)
The point, rather, is this. What quantum mechanics may well represent is a
case in which we stumbled on a surprising exception to logical business as usual.
However, a full account of l-complementarity calls for positing relationships
among properties that we don’t grasp easily. Studying, for example, partial
Boolean algebras, as abstract mathematical structures is, of course, not the
issue. The diﬃculty is in grasping what it means for states of aﬀairs in the
world to mirror that structure. One might fairly say that the persistent diﬃculty
in understanding quantum mechanics has been understanding what it means
for the world to have the structure that the mathematics seems to attribute to it.
In light of this, the possibility that there might be yet more esoteric exceptions
to business as usual doesn’t seem quite so silly. A proper modesty suggests
that there’s no guarantee that we’ll ﬁnd them even if they exist. And a healthy
suspicion about our limitations suggests there’s no guarantee we would be

COULD LOGIC BE EMPIRICAL? THE PUTNAM-KRIPKE DEBATE
41
able to recognize them even if they’re there. Logic in its fullness just might be
beyond our grasp.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Alston, Perceiving God, Cornell University Press, Ithaca New York, 1991.
[2] G. Bacciagaluppi, Is logic empirical?, Handbook of Quantum Logic (D. Gabbay,
D. Lehmann, and K. Engesser, editors), Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2009, pp. 49–78.
[3] C. Bourne, A Future for Presentism, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2006.
[4] C. M. Caves, C. A. Fuchs, and R. Schack, Subjective probability and quantum certainty,
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, vol. 38 (2007), p. 255.
[5] S. Kochen and E. Specker, The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics, Journal
of Mathematics and Mechanics, vol. 17 (1967), pp. 59–87.
[6] H. Putnam, Time and physical geometry, Journal of Philosophy, vol. 64 (1967), pp. 240–247.
Reprinted in Mathematics, Matter and Method, Cambridge University Press, 1975, pp. 198-205.
[7]
, Is logic empirical?, Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science (Robert S. Cohen
and Marx W. Wartofsky, editors), vol. 5, D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1968, pp. 216–241. Reprinted as
The logic of quantum mechanics in Mathematics, Matter and Method, Cambridge University Press,
1975, pp. 174-197.
[8] A. Stairs, Quantum logic, realism and value-deﬁniteness, Philosophy of Science, vol. 50
(1983), pp. 578–602.
[9]
, Kriske, Tupman and Quantum Logic: the quantum logician’s conundrum, Physical
Theory and its Interpretation (W. Demopoulos and I. Pitowsky, editors), Springer, 2006.
[10]
, A loose and separate certainty: Caves, Fuchs and Schack on quantum probability
one, Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, vol. 42 (2011), pp. 158–166.
[11] H. Stein, On Einstein-Minkowski space-time, The Journal of Philosophy, vol. 65 (1968),
pp. 5–23.
[12] R. H. Thomason, Indeterminist time and truth value gaps, Theoria, vol. 36 (1970), pp. 264–
281.
DEPARTMENT OF PHILOSOPHY
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND
COLLEGE PARK, MD 20742
E-mail: stairs@umd.edu

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
WILLIAM C. PARKE
Abstract. Quantum computers take advantage of interfering quantum alternatives in order
to handle problems that might be too time consuming with algorithms based on classical logic.
Developing quantum computers requires new ways of thinking beyond those in the familiar classical
world. To help in this thinking, we give a description of the foundational ideas that hold in all
of our successful physical models, including quantum theory. Our emphasis will be on the proper
interpretation of our theories, and not just their statements. Our tact will be to build on the concept
of information, which lies central to the operation of not just computers, but the Universe. For
application to quantum computing, the essence of quantum theory is given, together with special
precautions and limitations.
§1. Introduction. Having a grasp on the ideas behind a theory helps to apply
it correctly, to understand its limitations, and to generate new ideas. Getting
a ﬁrm hold on quantum theory is not an easy task, because our experiences
and even our genetic predispositions have been developed in a world in which
quantum eﬀects are largely washed out.1 Remarkably, our predilection for
ﬁnding logic behind the behavior of what we observe,2 including that of
electrons and atoms, has led us to quantum theory, a description of nature that
is hard for us to conceptualize, but is logical, accurate, and explains a wide
variety of phenomena with only a few statements and input.
As background to quantum theory and quantum computing, an attempt
is made here to give the primitive notions and essential observations that
underlie current physical theories, so that foundational ideas are explicit, and a
common language is established. In our description, information storage and
transfer is made central.3 A short description of quantum theory follows, and
1Although these days, macroscopic quantum eﬀects can be seen in the actions of lasers and of
quantum ﬂuids.
2Our curiosity is enhanced by genetic selection, as there is advantage to being able to make
sense of what goes on around us, so that we can anticipate what might happen next.
3Traditionally, energy transfer is used to characterize interactions in current theories. However,
the concept of energy is several steps removed from more basic ideas. Moreover, information
processing is not only the purpose of computers, but also lies underneath all natural processes.
Logic and Algebraic Structures in Quantum Computing
Edited by J. Chubb, A. Eskandarian and V. Harizanov
Lecture Notes in Logic, 45
c⃝2016, Association for Symbolic Logic
42

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
43
then applied to quantum computing, focusing on what the theory says, and
particularly does not say, in areas where conceptual diﬃculties have arisen.
§2. Physical theory and reality. A physical theory is a logical model capable
of making predictions of what we observe. It is judged by its accuracy in
matching measurements, and by its economy, i.e. whether the proposed theory
has only a few relationships and input data needed for its ability to explain
observations over a wide realm.4
We should not, however, become too enamored with the auxiliary structures
within a successful theory. Just as it is possible to transform, isomorphically,
a logical structure into an equivalent one involving distinctly diﬀerent rela-
tionships and symbols, it is also possible to so transform a physical theory. A
good example is the transformation of Maxwellian electrodynamics into an
action-at-a-distance form. The transformed theory, invented by Wheeler and
Feynman,5 no longer contains electric or magnetic ﬁelds. Even so, it makes
the same predictions as Maxwell’s theory.6 A lesson from this example and
others is that one should not endow physical meaning to all the symbols and
relationships in a theory. Electric ﬁelds do not ‘exist’ in nature. They exist as
symbols on paper and in our minds. But Maxwell’s theory does make deﬁnite
statements about observations using the electric ﬁeld concept. Only those
points in the theory that are stated as predictions can be connected to nature.
In quantum theory, wave functions are clearly not physical; in general, they
are complex numbers. They can also be transformed away in alternate but
equivalent theories.7 Rather, one should think of the symbols and relationships
in a theory as tools for making predictions. Predictions are the touchstones in
the theory. All else is ancillary.
Here is another caution: Predictions of pure counts are testable as either true
or false, but predictions of continuous values will never be proved to match
nature exactly, since our measuring instruments are ﬁnite. Theories which take
space as continuous implicitly do so only down to the scale permitted by our
instruments. There should be no implication that even continuity exists at ﬁner
scales.
4In information theory terms, the information contained in the independent data explained by
a theory should be much larger than the information needed to express the theory.
5J. A. Wheeler and R. P. Feynman, Classical electrodynamics in terms of direct interparticle
action, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 21 (1949), pp. 425–433.
6We generally use Maxwell’s theory to solve electrodynamics problems because the Wheeler-
Feynman theory is a more complicated mathematical system.
7For example, Werner Heisenberg’s formulation of quantum theory, shown by P. A. M.
Dirac to be completely equivalent to Erwin Schr¨odinger’s, uses no wave functions. Neither do
various so-called hydrodynamic formulations, such as that of E. Madelung in Quantentheorie in
hydrodynamischer Form, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, vol. 40 (1927), pp. 322–326.

44
WILLIAM C. PARKE
Our best physical theory so far is the so-called ‘Standard Model’,8 which
describes, with quantum ﬁeld theory, all of the interactions yet detected, except
for gravity. The Standard Model has made remarkable and now veriﬁed
predictions and agrees with the most precise of measurements made to one
part in a trillion. Even so, the theory is not tight, having many unexplained
interaction strengths and masses. We expect new theories will give a deeper and
simpler explanation of particles, of their interactions, and of the yet unexplored
regions in nature.
In the next section, a set of tentative propositions and observations underlying
all physical theories is proposed, building toward the foundations of quantum
theory and application to quantum computing. Information storage and
transfer will be seen to be fundamental to natural processes.
§3. Basic properties of physical systems. The natural world is divisible into
a collection of observable subsystems. Each observable subsystem will be
referred to as a physical system. If a physical system can be further divided,
the parts may be called ‘components’ of the system. The number of divisions
may reach a limit.
A physical system can store information, taken to be an additive quantity
which grows with the number of distinct ways that the system may be conﬁgured
under given physical constraints. The number of ways is called the system’s
‘multiplicity’, W .9 To be additive across independent systems, the information
I in a system must be proportional to ln W .10 With I = ln2 W , the information
is given in ‘bits’.11 If the multiplicity W of a system decreases, we say the
system has become more ‘ordered’.12
8For a personal perspective in the development of the Standard Model, see S. Weinberg’s
article, The making of the standard model, European Physical Journal C, vol. 34 (2004), pp. 5–13.
9One of the many remarkable implications of quantum theory is that the count W can be
performed over a denumerable number of quantum states of a system.
10If there were two independent systems of multiplicity W1 and W2, then the multiplicity
of both together would be W1W2. The condition f(W1W2) = f(W1) + f(W2) makes f(W )
proportional to ln(W ).
11If a given system subject to physical constraints cannot be re-conﬁgured, then that system
has no information. If the system has two possible conﬁgurations, its reading transmits one bit of
information, the equivalent of a yes or a no, but no more, and so forth.
12In the late nineteenth century, Ludwig Boltzmann introduced the number W (‘Wahrschein-
lichkeit’), connecting it to the disorder (Clausius’ ‘entropy’, S) of a system with S = k ln W ,
where k is Boltzmann’s constant. Le´o Szil´ard showed that each bit of information we gather from
a system and discard necessarily requires an increase in entropy of at least k ln 2. (L. Szil´ard,
On the decrease of entropy in a thermodynamic system by the intervention of intelligent beings,
Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, vol. 53 (1929), pp. 840–856.) Claude Shannon developed the formalism of
information theory, including information transfer in the presence of noise. (C. E. Shannon, A
mathematical theory of communication, Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 27 (July & October,
1948), pp. 379–423 & 623–656.)

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
45
An interaction between two physical systems, by deﬁnition, exchanges
information between them. An open physical system can interact with other
systems. Observation is made by allowing two physical systems to interact,
one of which is prepared as a measuring instrument. A measuring instrument
is a physical system whose information gathered from an observed system is
capable of being copied with a relatively high assurance. The copy will act as
a record of the observation. Statements about a physical system are veriﬁed
only by observations.13 A statement about a physical system is predictive
if it relates a number of observations of that system. A physical system is
isolatable if the measurable eﬀect of all interactions with other external systems
can be made arbitrarily small.14 An isolated physical system is said to be
‘closed’ when external interactions which might inﬂuence the results of intended
measurements of that system are negligible.
If a set of observations of a system is found to repeat, that system can act as a
clock, with time deﬁned and measured by the number of repeats, each smallest
repeating cycle called a period of the clock. If a large set of independent
periodic systems, prepared in the same way, are found to consistently have the
same number N of periods, these clocks are said to be ‘good’ to a precision of
at least one part in 1/N.
The distance between two interacting physical systems is deﬁned, up to a
selected constant factor, to be the minimum time needed for an observable
change in one of those two systems to cause an observable eﬀect on the other.
Space is deﬁned to be the set of available distances between all systems. Two
systems with a ﬁnite distance between them are said to be spatially separated. If
one isolatable system can be spatially separated from all others, it is localizable.15
If N localizable systems can be spatially separated from each other by the same
distance, then space has at least N −1 spatial dimensions. A system localizable
in each spatial dimension can be referred to as a body. The spatial coordinates
of a body are the minimal set of numbers that uniquely determine a deﬁnable
location within the body. These coordinates are measured by one observer
relative to an ‘origin’, a location used by that observer to coordinate a set of
bodies. In an N dimensional space, a complete set of such coordinates for one
location is denoted {x1, x2, . . . , xN}. An event, {x0, x1, x2, . . . , xN}, speciﬁes
when and where an observation has occurred.
13This grounding is particularly poignant in quantum theory, wherein a quantum system is
described by a set of interfering possible states for each observable, with only one such state
realized by observation.
14We will use the term ‘small’ for a quantity which has the property that if made smaller, there
would be no signiﬁcant eﬀect.
15Deﬁning the localizability of zero-mass particles with spin greater than 1/2 (in units of
Planck’s constant over 2	), such as the photon, is tricky. For a deﬁnition, and references back to
Wolfgang Pauli, see M. Hawton, Photon position operator with commuting component, Physical
Review A, vol. 59 (1999), no. 2, pp. 954–959.

46
WILLIAM C. PARKE
A frame of reference characterizes how one observer records events. If the
spatial separation between two bodies changes with the observer’s time, we say
they have relative motion. Bodies with no macroscopic motion relative to the
observer are said to be stationary. The velocity of a body is its spatial change
per unit observer’s time along each of the independent spatial directions, and
the acceleration is the change of velocity per unit time, each measurement
made in a single frame of reference.
A particle is a localizable physical system with some identiﬁable intrinsic
characteristics, i.e. quantities that are independent of how the observer measures
them. A fundamental particle is a particle that suﬀers no measurable change in
its intrinsic information even after engaging in all available interactions. A ‘free
particle’ is a particle whose interactions with other systems can be neglected.
Recording a complete set of observables in a system determines (to the degree
possible) the information present in that system at the time of measurement
and before any further interaction with the system. The selection of observables
is made such that the measurement of any one does not change the result that
would be found for the measurement of any other in the selected set. Those
observables that are time independent are called conserved.
The ‘dynamics’ of a physical system, i.e. a description of how interacting
subsystems change over time, follows logical predictive schemes which reveal
cause and eﬀect. These schemes are most easily tested using isolatable ‘simple
systems’, i.e. those with only a few discernible component subsystems and
low information content. So far, all physical systems can be described by the
interactions of fundamental particles in space-time.
Systems with many interacting components, called ‘complex systems’ or
‘macrosystems’, have been successfully described when those components can
be tracked, or when statistical likelihood arguments become meaningful. Sys-
tematics in the behavior of complex systems make global properties referred to
as emergent relationships. Those of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics
are examples. Rules for optimal dynamics in biosystems16 form others.
Some systems, through the mutual interactions of their particles, will form
bound bodies, i.e. systems that retain their localized character provided external
interactions are suﬃciently weak. A conﬁned system is one which, when initially
localized in a certain volume with zero average velocity, and then left alone, will
have a non-zero lower bound on the probability of being found in the initial
volume later in time. The ability to create bound systems gives preference
to the evolution of diﬀerentiated systems and to condensation into locally
ordered subsystems. With a suﬃcient variety of particles and interactions,
16A ‘biosystem’ is a physical system whose activities support life. A life system is one which is
capable of self-replication by interactions with external systems, using information stored within
the life system.

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
47
the evolution of complexity in open subsystems is natural,17 including the
evolution of life.
The Universe is deﬁned as the collection of everything that can be observed.
§4. Space-time as background to quantum theory. The Universe appears to
have existed in a ﬁnite number of current clock periods, and the volume of our
Universe apparently is also ﬁnite. There is a limit to the greatest separation
between bodies. The dimension of our space is at least three.18 The distance
between widely separated bodies has been growing relative to the size of the
smallest bodies since time started.
Observation shows that, to a good approximation, there exist inertial frames
in which an isolated body nearby and initially stationary relative to the observer
will continue to be nearly stationary. We will use the term ‘inertial observer’ for
an observer in an inertial frame. In inertial frames, an interaction experienced
by one body can always be associated with the eﬀect of other local bodies. At
small scales, the relationships between local events can be expressed in a form
that is independent of the observer’s position, orientation, or motion relative
to the events. This is the grand ‘Principle of Relativity’.19 The Principle of
Relativity allows for the existence of a ﬁnite universal limiting speed for all
bodies.20 Examination shows that our Universe has a ﬁnite limiting speed. To
the precision of current measurement, the interactions due to electromagnetism
and gravity carry information between bodies at the universal speed c.
17L. Onsager, Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes, I & II, Physical Review, vol. 37 &
38 (1931), pp. 405–426, 2265–2279; I. Prigogine, Introduction to Thermodynamics of Irreversible
Processes, Interscience, New York, 1955.
18Three dimensions is also the minimum dimension needed to build a computer or brain having
more than four devices with mutual connections. At present, there is no evidence for higher
extended dimensions than three. The strong experimental support of our conservation laws in
three dimensions suggests that if higher dimensions of space existed, matter and energy would
have had extreme diﬃculty passing into or out of it.
19Radiation from distant galaxies and radiation left over from the hot big bang do establish a
unique frame of reference, but these are taken as part of the initial conditions in dynamics and so
do not vitiate the relativity principle. In our Universe, the residual eﬀects of these initial conditions
on present observations of local events are often small.
20As demonstrated by H. Poincar´e in L’´etat actuel et l’avenir de la physique math´ematique, St.
Louis Conference, Bulletin des sciences math´ematiques, vol. 28 (1904), pp. 302–324. Einstein’s
second postulate, the constancy of the speed of light, is not needed. Relativity alone, under
reasonable assumptions about how events are measured in close by inertial frames with relative
motion, initially aligned, allows only one relationship between their space-time coordinates. That
relationship is the Lorentz transformation, containing a ﬁxed universal speed called c. Explicitly,
if the second inertial frame moves at a speed v away along the positive x-axis of the ﬁrst, then
x2 = (x1 −vt1)/

1 −(v/c)2, y2 = y1, z2 = z1, t2 = (t1 −(v/c2)x1)/

1 −(v/c)2. The
Galilean transformation is approached when the universal speed in the Lorentz transformation is
taken much larger than the relative speeds of the observed bodies. This makes t2 ∼
= t1, so that
time becomes universal in this limit.

48
WILLIAM C. PARKE
In Relativity, one observer’s measure of spatial separation between two
bodies is related to a combination of space and time coordinates of another
observer moving relative to the ﬁrst. This makes the concept of space and
time inseparable, and gives utility to the idea of a four-vector using the
coordinates in space and time for a pair of close by events, in the form
{dx
} = {dx0, dx1, dx2, dx3}, where x0 ≡ct. Any other ordered set of four
quantities forms a four-vector if they transform by coordinate transformations
just like {dx
} does.
Relativity makes the small interval between two events, ds =

g
dx
dx
invariant,21 i.e. independent of the observer’s frame of reference. The set of
quantities {g
} form what is called the metric tensor. Each inﬁnitesimal
space-time region within any inertial frame can be covered by an orthogonal
coordinate grid, so that the metric tensor is well approximated by {g
} ≈
diag{1, −1, −1, −1}. A vector ‘dual’ to {dx
} can be deﬁned by dx
 ≡g
dx,
so that dx
dx
 is a ‘scalar’, i.e. a number who value is independent of the
frame of reference of the observer. The sum A
B
 deﬁnes the scalar product
of the two vectors, and the length of A is A
A
. An important example of a
four-vector is a particle’s four-momentum, {p
}, with cp0 being the energy of
the particle and ⃗p its spatial momentum. The length of {p
}/c is the mass of
the particle.22
A general coordinate transformation between frames of reference, x′ = f(x),
becomes a ‘Poincar´e transformation’ when x′
 = a
x +b
 and the coeﬃcients
{a
} satisfy g
a
κa
 = gκ.23
Rotations, Lorentz transformations, and
displacements are included. The set {a
, bκ} forms the so-called ‘Poincar´e
group’, with the product rule {a′′
, b′′κ} = {a′
a
, (a′
b + b′κ)}.24
A body initially stationary in an inertial frame, but acted on by one other
body some distance away, will accelerate. If a duplicate of the ﬁrst body is
weakly bound to the ﬁrst, and the experiment repeated, then the acceleration
of the pair will be half the rate of the single one. We say the pair has twice the
‘inertial mass’ of the single body. The inertial mass of a particle is an intrinsic
property.
The observation of the eﬀects on the motion of bodies due to the acceleration
of the observer’s frame with respect to an inertial frame is locally indistin-
guishable from the eﬀects of gravity. This is Einstein’s Equivalence Principle.
Einstein’s Equivalence Principle makes inertial mass the same as ‘gravitational
21By convention, repeated indices, one upper, one lower, should be summed from 0 to 3.
22The energy and momentum of a system are best deﬁned, in our successful theories, through
the generators of time and space translations, with a scale determined by gravity. These ideas will
be presented shortly in the context of Noether’s Theorem and Einstein’s General Relativity Theory.
23Note that this relation makes the metric components an ‘invariant tensor’, in that the
components take the same values after a coordinate transformation.
24Reﬂections are excluded by imposing det |a| = 1. Then the transformations are called
‘proper’.

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
49
mass’, which is the intrinsic property of a body that determines the strength of its
gravitational inﬂuence on nearby systems.25 The mass of any localized system
(including the equivalent mass of any associated localized ﬁeld energy) can be
measured by using the gravitational pull that system creates on a distant mass.
The Equivalence Principle, together with the Principle of Relativity, requires
that the distance measure of space-time in the presence of a gravitating body
be non-Euclidean, i.e. there will be intrinsic curvature to the space-time around
a body with mass, and the metric tensor {g
} can no longer be transformed
by a coordinate choice to the form {g
} = diag{1, −1, −1, −1} in any ﬁnite
region of the space near the body. However, even in the presence of mass,
inertial observers will still ﬁnd an approximate ﬂat metric in their inﬁnitesimal
neighborhood.
Einstein showed that the eﬀects of gravity due to masses could be found
from conditions on the Riemannian curvature of space-time. Curvature can
be characterized by the behavior of vectors as they are moved from one
point to another across space. Inﬁnitesimal changes in any vector that are
observed while transporting that vector along a path deﬁne the ‘covariant
derivative’: DκA
 = ∂κA
 −Γ
κA. The changes due to the underlying
geometry come from the ‘connections’ Γ
κ in the space. In Riemannian
geometry, the connections are determined by gradients of the metric tensor.26
The vector A
(x0)−
 x
x0 Γ
κA dxκ is said to be the components of the ‘parallel
transport’ of the original vector at x0 along a particular path to x. The
change □A
 in the components of any vector ﬁeld, A
(x), by carrying the
vector in parallel transport around an inﬁnitesimal closed loop, must be
proportional to the area of the loop and the size of the original vector ﬁeld.
The proportionality constants in each small patch of space-time deﬁnes the
curvature tensor {R
κ} in that patch, to wit: □A
 = R
κA dxκdy, where
the loop is given orthogonal sides dx
 and dy
.
Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity27 is the simplest of a class of theories
that incorporate the Equivalence Principle and the Principle of Relativity.28
Einstein discovered that in empty space, the condition on the metric curvature
tensor29 given by R
κ
 = 0 numerically predicts: Newtonian gravitational
ﬁelds when the eﬀects of gravity diﬀer little from ﬂat space; The size of the
extra perihelion precession of Mercury’s orbit; The amount of the gravitational
25The Equivalence Principle also means that mass m can be measured in distance units by
giving Gm/c2, where G is Newton’s gravitational constant that determines the strength of gravity.
26In the form g
Γ
κ = (1/2)(∂κg
 + ∂g
 −∂
gκ).
27A. Einstein, Die Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie, Annalen der Physik, vol. 49
(1916), pp. 50–205.
28More general theories can be constructed using higher derivatives of the metric tensor in the
ﬁeld equations than the second.
29The metric curvature tensor {R

} is that part of the local curvature tensor {R
κ} due
solely to changes in the metric across space-time.

50
WILLIAM C. PARKE
deﬂection of light, and; The interval for the slowing of clocks in a gravitational
ﬁeld. All these and more have been conﬁrmed to the precision of current
instruments.30
In both the Special and the General Theory of Relativity,
time is not
universal. If two good clocks are synchronized in one frame of reference, and
one is set in motion relative to the other, they may diﬀer in the number of
periods each had when they are brought back together.31
In General Relativity, bodies acted on by gravity follow a ‘geodesic’, i.e. a
path that makes the invariant four-dimensional distance

ds along the path
between ﬁxed initial and ﬁnal points of the motion extreme. Free particles that
travel at the ultimate speed c also follow geodesics, are necessarily massless,
carry no charge, and cannot spontaneously decay.32
Einstein’s General Relativity Theory describes how the classical ﬁeld {g
}
should vary over space-time. All ‘dynamical ﬁelds’, to be consistent with
quantum theory, must have corresponding quanta.33
We expect that the
quantum aspects of gravity will be important near the ‘Planck scale’ 34

ℏG/c3 ≈1.6 × 10−35 m. Although this is far smaller than the regions
we can explore with current accelerators, the very rarely detected ultra-high
energy cosmic rays may be scattered by this quantum granularity of space.
§5. Quantum theory.
5.1. The essence of quantum theory. Boiled down to its essence, quantum
theory follows from a prescription due to Feynman:35
30Calculations of position on Earth using Global Positioning Satellites at height h and speed
v over an Earth of mass ME and radius RE, have Special Relativity corrections included to
order v2/c2 for the relativistic Doppler shift and General Relativity corrections included to order
GMEh/(c2R2
E) for clock slowing in a gravitational ﬁeld. Without these, errors in positions would
be unacceptable!
31This leads to the ‘Twin Paradox’, that one twin can end up younger than the other, yet
each sees the other move away and then come back. The resolution came from Einstein using
his General Theory of Relativity. The diﬀerence in the time elapsed by the clocks will be the
diﬀerence between the values of
 
|g
 dx
dx|/c, integrated along the path of each clock from
the common starting point to the common endpoint.
32In relativistic quantum theory, no localizable charge can be carried by a massless particle with
spin greater than 1/2, nor can there be a localizable ﬂow of energy and momentum for massless
particles with spin greater than 1. See S. Weinberg and E. Witten, Limits on massless particles,
Physics Letters, vol. B 96 (1980), no. 1–2, pp. 59–62.
33See, for example, M. P. Bronstein, Quantentheorie schwacher Gravitationsfelder, Physikalische
Zeitschrift der Sowjetunion, vol. 9 (1936), pp. 140–157. Generally, a dynamical ﬁeld varies both
over space and in time. Formally, ﬁelds which have a kinetic energy term in the Lagrangian for the
system are dynamic.
34M. Planck, ¨Uber irreversible Strahlungsvorg¨ange. F¨unfte Mitteilung, Sitzungsberichte der
K¨oniglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin (1899), pp. 440–480.
35Feynman began thinking of these ideas in 1942. They are described in: R. P. Feynman and
A. R. Hibbs, Quantum Mechanics and Path Integrals, McGraw Hill, 1965.

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
51
For each particle that was initially observed at A and later observed at
B, construct a complex number, called the transition amplitude, as a sum of
unimodular complex numbers according to:
⟨B|A⟩= N

paths
exp (2	iS/h) .
(1)
The factor N will be ﬁxed by a ‘normalization’ condition, introduced shortly.
Each exponential term in the sum has a phase given by 2	S/h. The number h
is called Planck’s constant. The quantity S is called the action, deﬁned by a
time-integration from A to B of a function L:
S =
 B
A
L dt .
(2)
The Feynman sum Eq. (1) is carried over all distinct paths between A
and B.36
The function L, called the Lagrangian, depends on the particle coordinates
and time changes of coordinates for the possible paths between A and B. The
Lagrangian is presumed known, and often can be expressed as the particle’s
kinetic energy minus its potential energy. Helping to strongly limit the possible
Lagrangians is the imposition of the symmetries we observe, such as the
Poincar´e symmetry of Relativity.
By reversing the order of the time limits in the action integral Eq. (2), the
phases of the Feynman amplitudes change sign, so that time reversal of a
transition amplitude is equivalent to taking its complex conjugate: ⟨B|A⟩=
⟨A|B⟩∗. Let B range over all possible states into which A may evolve. Then

B ⟨A|B⟩⟨B|A⟩gives the amplitude for the state A to explore all possible
alternatives but then return to itself. We can take this amplitude to be unity
and thereby ﬁx the magnitude of the normalization constant N. We will then
have

B
⟨A|B⟩⟨B|A⟩=

B
| ⟨B|A⟩|2 = 1.
(3)
This relation makes it possible to interpret the magnitude square of the Feynman
amplitude as a probability for a given transition. Doing so creates quantum
theory. That’s it. All of quantum mechanics follows.
In contrast to the determinism of Newtonian theory,37 quantum theory gives
probabilities for the result of each measurement of a system. These probabilities
are not simply the result of statistics applied to events. In quantum theory, a
system can be in an interfering combination of possible realizable events before
36For an excellent description on how Feynman paths are constructed, see H. Kleinert, Path
Integrals in Quantum Mechanics, Statistics, Polymer Physics, and Financial Markets, 5th edition,
World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2009.
37The assumption that systems have a deﬁnite state of existence between interactions would
follow from having only a ‘single’ path dominate the Feynman sum over paths.

52
WILLIAM C. PARKE
one of these events is determined by interactions with another system such as
by measurement.38
If one takes ﬁeld quantities as a set of equivalent particle oscillators in
each inﬁnitesimal volume of space, with the ﬁeld amplitudes as the particle
displacements, then quantum ﬁeld theory follows.
5.2. The classical limit. Note that the summation of unit complex numbers
with wildly diﬀerent phases will tend to cancel (think of adding unit vectors
in a plane with arbitrary angles between them), while a collection of such
complex numbers with almost the same phase tend to add coherently. This
observation applied to the Feynman path sum shows how to take the classical
limit, in that those paths causing the least change in the action S relative to the
size of h contribute the most to the probability. Classical physics includes only
those paths between two events that minimize S. This is the famous ‘Principle
of Least Action’, from which Newton’s laws and Maxwell’s electrodynamics
can be derived, after the appropriate choice of L.39 When compared with
quantum theory, Newtonian theory for particles, Maxwell’s electrodynamics,
and statistics applied to Newtonian systems with a large number of particles
are together in a realm called ‘Classical Physics’.
A ‘classical computer’ is a dedicated physical system which transforms a
prepared initial state into a desired output state by applying the equivalent of
Boolean logic in one or more steps between input and output.
5.3. Superposition. From the observation that the action satisﬁes SBA =
SAC + SCB, it follows from Eq. (1) that
⟨B|A⟩=

C
⟨B|C⟩⟨C|A⟩.
(4)
Quantum amplitudes contain a linear superposition of possible intermediate
states. If the allowed Feynman paths from A to B are restricted to only
those that pass through two small intermediate regions, say C1 and C2, there
will be interference of the amplitudes constructed to pass through C1 with
those constructed to pass through C2. This interference can be completely
38The fact that certain predictions of quantum theory have intrinsic probabilistic character
and that the possible realizable states of a system retain strange correlations over arbitrarily long
distances between particles, greatly disturbed Einstein. But John von Neumann showed that
quantum theory cannot be trivially subsumed into a bigger deterministic theory. See J. von
Neumann, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Princeton University Press, 1955,
Chapter 4. For more recent work, see R. Colbeck and R. Renner, No extension of quantum
theory can have improved predictive power, Nature Communications, vol. 2 (2011), pp. 411–416. So
far, all careful observations are consistent with quantum theory, even ones that Einstein called
‘spooky action at a distance’.
39That non-relativistic quantum mechanics has Newtonian theory as a limit is an example of
the ‘correspondence limit’ which we impose on any new theory in order to sustain the veriﬁed
predictions of earlier observations. After all, Newton’s theory predicts natural processes quite well
for massive slowly moving bodies, like baseballs, moons, and spacecraft.

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
53
destructive, so that repeated searches for a particle at B that was launched from
A come up practically empty. This eﬀect is observed, and has no explanation
in classical particle theory. Yes, you might say, but isn’t the particle a wave?
No, we never observe particles as waves. We never ﬁnd a particle ‘spread out’.
Rather, the probability of ﬁnding a particular particle somewhere can be spread
out over space. Individual particles are always found localized. Quantum
theory lets us calculate these new kinds of probabilities. New, because these
probabilities are found by ﬁrst adding complex amplitudes, a formulation for
probabilities unheard of before the second decade of the 1900s. Addition of
amplitudes allows for interference eﬀects, even for a single particle. This makes
the resultant probabilities an intrinsic property of the theory, and not just due
to ignorance of states in a more deterministic theory.
5.4. Wave functions and quantum states. The Feynman transition amplitude
for a particle to leave any earlier location A with coordinates x0 at time t0 and
arrive at B having the location x at time t is called the wave function for that
particle over the spatial coordinates x at the time t:
(x, t) = ⟨B(x, t)|A(x0, t0)⟩.
(5)
From Eq. (3),

∗(x, t)(x, t) dx = 1. The symbol dx in the integral is to be
interpreted as the volume element in space. We see that ∗(x, t)(x, t)dx is
the probability of ﬁnding the particle within the volume dx. Dirac recognized
that wave functions may be considered a projection of the ‘state of the system’
described by a vector denoted |⟩onto a speciﬁc state (‘eigenstate’) of position:
(x, t) = ⟨x| (t) ⟩. Each ‘quantum state’ |⟩can be considered a vector in a
Hilbert space.40 Superposition allows us to expand the quantum state into a
complete set of basis states:
|⟩=

a
|a⟩⟨a| ⟩.
(The sum over ‘a’ may be given continuous regions as an approximation to
discrete sums which are dense in those regions.)
From the Feynman path sums, the state of a system evolves in time according
to a linear transformation
|(t)⟩= U(t, t0) |(t0)⟩,
(6)
where, to keep the total probability of ﬁnding the particle anywhere unity,
the operation U must be unitary: U †U = 1. (The ‘dagger’ here performs a
transpose-complex-conjugate operation, rather than just complex-conjugation,
to include cases in which  is taken to have components.) The Feynman
path summation divided into small time steps means we can write U =
exp(−i

H dt/ℏ). (The sign in the exponent is conventional. The constant
ℏ= h/(2	).) The operator H, called the Hamiltonian, satisﬁes the ‘Hermiticity
40Essentially a vector space with lengths and angles deﬁned, but possibly inﬁnite dimensional.

54
WILLIAM C. PARKE
condition’ H = H †. In the language of Lie groups, H is a generator of time
translations. For small shifts in time,  satisﬁes a linear equation:
iℏ∂t(x, t) = H(x, t) .
(7)
This is a wave equation, which formed the basis of the dynamics of quantum
theory originated by Schr¨odinger.
5.5. Particles in relativistic quantum theory. Our present quantum theory
incorporates Einstein’s Special Theory of Relativity.41 P. A. M. Dirac, recog-
nizing that Relativity requires that physical laws be expressible with space and
time on an equal footing, wrote the Hamiltonian as a linear operator in the
generators of space translation, so that the wave equation took the form42
3


=0

(iℏ∂
 −(e/c)A
) = mc .
(8)
When the ﬁelds A
 vanish, there are plane wave solutions  ∝exp (−ip
x
)/ℏ),
so that g
iℏ∂
iℏ∂ = p
p
 = m2c2, and the ’s must satisfy

 + 
 = 2g
I .
If we add the assumption of reﬂection symmetry, the ’s are square matrices
with even dimension at least four. Taking the ’s to be dimension four, and
the ﬁelds A
 as the electromagnetic vector potentials due to other charges, the
Dirac equation very accurately describes electrons in the ﬁeld of other charges,
and therefore atomic structure and, in principle, all of chemistry and molecular
biology. The components of electron wave function can be decomposed into
two pairs, each pair corresponding to the two possible intrinsic spin directions
measurable, and the combined pair corresponding to the electron carrying
positive or negative energy. As an indication of the profound reach gained
by merging quantum theory and Relativity, Dirac was able to show that the
electron spin and its magnetic moment followed from relativistic quantum
theory, and that antimatter must exist, a prediction before anyone dreamed of
the concept.
The possibility that fundamental particles can be created and destroyed
is included into quantum theory by taking the particle wave functions and
interacting ﬁelds as quantum ﬁelds, entering into the action S with their own
dynamics. We ﬁnd that if disturbed, particle pairs can even ‘bubble’ out of empty
space. The time-and-space-reversed wave function for a particle describes
the forward progression of a corresponding antiparticle. This becomes the
41A. Einstein, Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter K¨orper, Annalen der Physik, vol. 17 (1905),
pp. 891–921.
42P. A. M. Dirac, The Quantum Theory of the Electron, Part I & II, Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, vol. A 117 & A 118 (1928), pp. 610–624 & pp. 351–361.

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
55
‘CPT Theorem’ in quantum ﬁeld theory, referring to the operations of charge
conjugation, parity transformation, and time reversal.
Quantum ﬁeld theory distinguishes particles with half-odd integer spin,
called ‘fermions’, from those with integer spin, called ‘bosons’.43 The quantum
ﬁeld in a three-dimensional space and associated with a pair of identical
particles will undergo a phase change when those two particles are exchanged:
|(1, 2)⟩= (−1)2s |(2, 1)⟩. If the particles are fermions (s = 1/2, 3/2, . . . )
the phase change is −1, while no phase change occurs if the particles are
bosons (s = 0, 1, 2, . . . ). This means no two fermions of the same type (such
as electrons in atoms) can occupy the same quantum state. This is the ‘Pauli
Exclusion Principle’. Any number of bosons of the same type can be in the
same quantum state (e.g. photons in lasers).
The fundamental particles making up the structure of materials currently
appear to be three generations of the doublet electron-neutrino,44 and three
generations of a doublet of quarks, all fermions. The family of electrons and
neutrinos are called ‘leptons’. Each generation of quark comes in one of
three distinct varieties according to their ‘color charge’. The bound state of a
‘red’, ‘green’, and ‘blue’ quark and any other ‘color-neutral’ combination of an
odd number of quarks generates a ‘baryon’, such as the familiar proton and
neutron. A zoo of more ﬂeeting particles exist, including ‘mesons’ coming from
bound color-neutral quark-anitiquark systems. The large family of baryons
and mesons, all strongly interacting particles, are called ‘hadrons’. In the
Standard Model, leptons have no direct strong interactions.
5.6. Interactions in quantum theory. All the observed interactions of one
particle with another can be categorized by the so-called strong, electromagnetic,
weak, and gravitational forces.45
The numerical strength of a particle’s interactions with other particles is
always associated with an intrinsic property called its ‘charge’. For each
category of interaction, there is one or more corresponding charges. If the
total charge of a closed physical system is preserved during a sequence of
43Particles must have quantized spin with length

s(s + 1)ℏand projection along some
measurement axis of 
ℏ, where s is either a half or whole integer, and −s ≤
 ≤s. It is
conventional to use the label s to characterize the particle spin, as in “The electron has spin
1/2”. Particles that move at the speed of c have only two projections of their spin, called their
‘helicities’, either along their momentum, or in the opposite direction. The characteristic properties
of particles following from relativistic quantum theory were ﬁrst described by Eugene Wigner in
On unitary representations of the inhomogeneous Lorentz group, Annals of Mathematics, vol. 40
(1939), no. 1, pp. 149–204.
44Our observations of the sky together with General Relativistic cosmology seem not to allow
more than three generations.
45The electromagnetic and weak interactions were linked, principally by the work of Salam,
Glashow, Weinberg, Higgs, ’t Hooft, and Veltman, from 1964 to 1975.

56
WILLIAM C. PARKE
interactions within that system, we say the charge has been ‘conserved’. In
nature, all charges are quantized, i.e., they come from a countable set.46
The existence of conserved and localizable charges means one can always
deﬁne an interaction ﬁeld that has those charges as its source, using the following
argument: If {j
} = {c, ⃗v} represents the charge density and current density
for a set of charges, then the local conservation of the total charge, Q ≡

 d 3x,
can be read from ∂
j
 = 0. But this implies the existence of an ‘interaction
ﬁeld’ {F 
}, antisymmetric in its indices, satisfying ∂κF κ ∝j. An associated
ﬁeld, F ∗
 ≡(1/2)
κF κ deﬁnes a ‘dual’ conserved charge with current
j∗ ∝∂
F ∗
.47 If no such dual charge exists in a region of space, then the ﬁeld
{F 
} can be expressed in terms of a vector ﬁeld {A
} by F 
 = ∂
A −∂A
.
The ﬁeld {A
} is called the ‘gauge ﬁeld’ going with the corresponding charge.
Gauge ﬁelds are not uniquely determined, but may be transformed into new
ﬁelds {A′
} which have the same interaction ﬁeld {F 
} by adding a gradient:
A′
 = A
 + ∂
Λ. The choice of the ‘gauge function’ Λ(x) is open, provided

∂
Λdx
 vanishes for all closed loops in regions where the gauge ﬁeld acts.
Theories whose predictions are independent of the choice of gauge have ‘gauge
symmetry’.48
Conventional theory describes particle interactions by introducing inter-
action ﬁelds which ‘mediate’ the eﬀect of one charge on another. We say
each particle with a charge of some kind ‘creates’ an interaction ﬁeld in the
space around it, and that ﬁeld acts on other particles having the same kind
of charge. In the case of electromagnetic interactions, the interaction ﬁeld is
{F 
} with components that are the electric and magnetic ﬁeld, while the gauge
ﬁeld {A
} is called the electromagnetic vector potential. Maxwell’s equations,
∂κF κ = (4	/c)j and ∂κF ∗κ = 0, then express two conditions: Electric
charge is conserved locally, and there is no observable local magnetic charge.
How particles react to other charges requires knowledge of the dynamics for
those particles. Dynamics is incorporated into quantum theory.
In quantum theory, a second kind of gauge transformation occurs when the
phase of particle wave functions are shifted. A constant shift has no observable
eﬀect. But making a shift in phase which depends on location will introduce a
relative phase between wave components. If those component waves converge,
their interference is observable in the associated particle probability. Now,
46Dirac showed that if magnetic monopoles exist, then electric charge must be quantized.
See P. A. M. Dirac, Quantised singularities in the electromagnetic ﬁeld, Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, vol. A 133 (1931), pp. 60–71.
47The {
κ} is the completely antisymmetric tensor in four dimensions, with 0123 = 1,
called the Levi-Civita symbol. Like g
, its components are invariant under a proper Poincar´e
transformation.
48The use of ‘gauge symmetry’ was introduced by Herman Weyl in his consideration of theories
with invariance in the scale of length. (H. Weyl, Gravitation und Elektrizit¨at, Sitzungsberichte der
K¨oniglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin (1918), pp. 465–480.)

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
57
if, along with the phase shift, a shift in the derivatives of the wave function
occurs, one can make the combined shifts cancel. This is the property built
into ‘gauge symmetric quantum theories’. In fact, all the interactions among
fundamental particles have been found to follow from theories which satisfy
gauge symmetry!
Another property of our current dynamical theories can be called the
principle of quasi-local interactions: The known interactions of one particle
with another can be described by ‘quasi-local’ eﬀects, castable into a form that
requires only knowledge of the ﬁelds of other particles in a small local space-
time neighborhood of the aﬀected particle. These ﬁelds are the gauge ﬁelds
described above. Consider the free-electron Dirac equation ℏ
i∂
 = mc.
A gauge transformation of the second kind on the wave function can be
expressed as ′(x) = exp

−i(e/(ℏc))Λ(x)

(x). The free-particle wave
equation becomes 
(iℏ∂
 −(e/c)∂
Λ)′ = mc′. Gauge symmetry can be
enforced by adding to the derivative term a gauge ﬁeld A
 which undergoes a
gauge transformation of the ﬁrst kind: A′
 = A
 + ∂
Λ. We arrive at the full
Dirac equation (8). This technique for introducing interactions is referred to
as the ‘minimal coupling principle’.49
A marvelous theorem was derived by Emmy Noether,50 who showed that
symmetries of our theories based on continuous groups of transformations,
such as the Poincar´e group and the gauge transformations, lead to conservation
laws. In the case of the Poincar´e symmetry, the conserved quantities are total
energy-momentum, total angular momentum, and the velocity of the center-
of-energy. An important example is the symmetry under time translation: If
experiments done now with a given system have the same set of results as
those done at any time later, then the system’s energy is ﬁxed. Symmetry
under constant phase shifts of a lepton or baryon wave function makes lepton
and baryon number conservation. Gauge symmetry makes the corresponding
charges conserved.
As the gauge ﬁelds have their own dynamics, quantum theory requires
that gauge ﬁelds be quantized. That means that the interactions between
material particles occur only by the exchange of quanta. These quanta are
necessarily bosons. For electromagnetic interactions, the gauge-ﬁeld quantum
49Gauge symmetry in quantum theory can be re-expressed in terms of the action of ‘covariant’
derivatives D
 = ∂
 + i(e/(ℏc))A
, acting on a quantum state for a particle. In this interpretation,
the interactions arise from the behavior of quantum states by parallel transport across space.
When the gauge ﬁelds themselves are taken to be operators on the internal components of a
quantum state, the gauge group elements may not commute. These kind of ‘non-abelian’ gauge
ﬁelds were introduced by C. N. Yang and R. Mills (Conservation of isotopic spin and isotopic
gauge invariance, Physical Review, vol. 96 (1954), no. 1, pp. 191–195) and are used in the Standard
Model to describe interactions between fundamental particles grouped into families. For example,
the quark color charge follows from an SU3 gauge symmetry.
50E. Noether, Invariante Variationsprobleme, Nachr. d. K¨onig. Gesellsch. d. Wiss. zu G¨ottingen,
Math.-phys. Klasse (1918), pp. 235–257.

58
WILLIAM C. PARKE
is the photon. The photon at present appears to travel at the maximum speed
in Relativity, has unit spin, and carries no electric charge.51 For the strong
interactions between quarks, the quanta of the ﬁeld are called gluons. Gluons
also have unit spin but they carry various ‘color’ charges. By having charge,
gluons can directly interact with themselves, making their dynamics more
complicated than for photons. For example, the gluon ﬁelds, through their
self-interaction, can form ﬂux tubes between quarks.
5.7. Prepared states and measurement. Each possible quantum state of a
system is referred to as a ‘pure quantum state’, as contrasted to a ‘mixed
quantum state’, for which we may only know probabilities for the system to be
in given quantum states. A pure quantum state made from a superposition
of component states is called a ‘coherent quantum state’ when all the phases
between its various component states are known to be ﬁxed.
A quantum system is prepared by ﬁrst selecting a physical system, isolating
the system from unwanted interactions, determining its initial conﬁguration,
and then stimulating or allowing the system to approach a desired initial state.
Isolating a system and determining its initial conﬁguration are often daunting
tasks.
The state of most macrosystems will be practically impossible to
completely specify. Some interactions, such as those from stray ﬁelds or
background radiation, may be diﬃcult or impossible to eliminate. Helping the
eﬀort are quantum states with unusual stability. These stable states are changed
only by the input of energies larger than typically available, so they are eﬀectively
isolated until such energies enter the system.52 After isolation, a system will
evolve by quantum dynamics following a unitary transformation, and may
eventually become a ‘steady state’, i.e. one with no change in probability
densities for its particles, if these were observed.
Consider the expansion of a pure quantum state into component states
which together span the system’s Hilbert space:
|⟩=

i
αi |φi⟩.
(9)
If the phases between two or more components of the quantum state are related,
then these components are said to be in ‘coherence’. Quantum interference
between various possible outcomes of a measurement requires some coherence
in a quantum state. The states |φ1⟩and |φ2⟩might be two possible interfering
states of a single electron, or even a trapped atom. The two states of the atom
51A particle with charge will carry energy associated with the ﬁeld of that charge, and therefore,
if it can be separated from other particles, must have mass, and must move slower than the
universal speed c.
52Such stability is a pure quantum eﬀect, since, if the energy states in a bound subsystem were
not quantized, any small energy could excite the subsystem. Subsystems such as bound electrons,
bound atoms, nuclei, and topologically constrained subsystems, are all stable at suﬃciently low
energy arriving from the outside.

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
59
might have opposite motions, so that the wave function for each state can
oscillate back and forth across the trap. Then the probability distribution of
ﬁnding the atom at a speciﬁc location within the trap shows an interference
pattern.53 This quantum eﬀect, however, is no diﬀerent in principle than that
seen as an interference pattern made by the bright spots of light on the surface
of a phosphor plate, those spots produced by electrons passing through two
slits in a screen, one electron at a time, and then hitting the phosphor.
Starting with a set of identically prepared systems in a coherent state rep-
resented by Eq. (9), measurements of the observable A will have an average

ij α∗
i αj ⟨φi| A |φj⟩. Interference will arise from terms for which ⟨φi| A |φj⟩
are not zero for i ̸= j. However, if a quantum system interacts with another
system or with a measuring device, some or all of the components of residual
quantum states for that system may be left with no well-deﬁned phase relation-
ships. This is a process of ‘decoherence’. During the measurement, information
is transferred between the system and the measuring device, and some may be
lost to the environment.
One of the important measurements of a system locates the position of
particles. After a number of such measurements in each small region dx of
space, we ﬁnd a distribution of positions. For one particle, the wave function
determines the probability density for position across space, so the distribution
of measured positions is predicted to be an approximation of (x)∗(x)dx.
The average position over all space is predicted to be ⟨| x |⟩. More generally,
each distinct measurement of a property of the system can be associated with a
Hermitian operator A that acts on wave functions for the system  as follows:
The average value of A will be
⟨A⟩=

†(x, t)A(x, ˆpx)(x, t) dx ,
(10)
wherein ˆpx is taken proportional to the space translation operator in accord
with Noether’s Theorem.54 The operators A may also act on the spin and other
components of the wave function.
Those states |a⟩satisfying
A |a⟩= a |a⟩
53This game was played using a Beryllium atom by Dr. Christopher Monroe and colleagues at
the National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, Colorado. See C. Monroe et al., A
‘Schr¨odinger cat’ superposition of an atom, Science, vol. 272 (May 24, 1996), pp. 1131–1136. Some
members of the press mis-represented the observation as indicating that one atom can be found in
two places at once. For example, see M. W. Browne’s article Physicists put atom in 2 places at
once, published in the New York Times, May 28, 1996.
54The proportionality constant is ﬁxed by noting that if a free particle is left unobserved, then
within some bounded region its wave function becomes a ‘plane’ wave φ ∝exp ((ipxx −iEt)/ℏ),
for which ˆpxφ = −iℏ∂xφ. The order of non-commuting operators in A must be determined by
physical arguments.

60
WILLIAM C. PARKE
are called the ‘eigenstates’ of A and a an ‘eigenvalue’. For Hermitian operators
A, i.e. A† = A, the eigenvalues a will be real numbers, and therefore each is
a value which may result from a measurement. The elements of the set {|a⟩}
for distinct values a will be ‘orthogonal’, i.e. ⟨a′|a⟩= a′a, and ‘complete’, i.e.
they span the space of possible states, expressible as 
a |a⟩⟨a| = I by reading
from |⟩= 
a |a⟩⟨a |⟩. The measured values of A will have an uncertainty
deﬁned by ΔA ≡

⟨(A −⟨A⟩)2⟩. This means that after measurement of A
for a number of identically prepared systems, the observed values will be
distributed around the average with a ‘width’ of ΔA.
After a single measurement of the observable A for a system in a pure
quantum state |⟩that has A as one of its observables, one of the eigenvalues
of A, say a, will be found, and the system will be left in the state |a⟩. The eﬀect
of measurement can be represented by a ‘projection operation’: Pa ≡|a⟩⟨a|.
The measurement of A has ‘collapsed’ the quantum state to |a⟩∝Pa |⟩. The
collapse evidently does not preserve unitarity for the system, expressed by
|(t)⟩= U(t, t0) |(t0)⟩, unless the system was already in an eigenstate of A.
Quantum unitarity applies to isolated systems. The measurement process has
involved another interacting system which reduced the system’s available states
in a subsequent measurement.
The interaction (called the ‘coupling’) between two systems during a measure-
ment may cause one or more of the phase diﬀerences between the components
in the resulting quantum states to become indeterminate, especially likely if
the measuring device is macroscopic. After the measurement, the system may
be left in a ‘mixed’ state, for which only the probabilities pk for any particular
pure quantum state |k⟩are known. Then a subsequent measurement of the
observable A will have an average value of ⟨A⟩= 
k pk ⟨k| A |k⟩. This
expression can be usefully re-written in terms of a ‘density operator’, deﬁned
by ˆ ≡
k pk |k⟩⟨k|, so that ⟨A⟩= Tr( ˆA). In this way, the choice of the
mixed state is left implicit. A pure state can then be simply characterized by
ˆ2 = ˆ.
5.8. Entangled states. An ‘entangled quantum system’, by deﬁnition, has
two or more particles in a quantum state which cannot be factorized into states
for each particle.55 For example, if we let the quantum state |
κ⟩represent
the electron labeled by κ and having a spin projection along the z-axis of
(
 −1/2) ℏ, then one of the possible entangled two-electron states can be
written
|0⟩= (1/
√
2)(|01⟩|12⟩−|11⟩|02⟩),
which happens to have a total spin of zero.
55There is a special caution for quantum states describing photons, in that the number of photons
is not ﬁxed, but rather has an uncertainty which increases as the phase of the electromagnetic wave
becomes more deﬁnite.

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
61
The outcome of a measurement of one of the electrons in an entangled
pair will be correlated with the outcome of measurement of the other, even
when they are far apart. This kind of correlation also occurs under classical
conditions. Suppose you put a jack in one envelope and a queen in another.
Now send one of the envelopes to one friend, the second envelope to a second
friend. If one friend opens your envelope and ﬁnds a jack, then your other
friend must ﬁnd a queen even before hearing from your ﬁrst friend. However,
there is a twist in the quantum world. Take the case when a pair of electrons is
prepared in a zero total spin state along a z-axis expressed above, and then the
electrons are allowed to move far apart. Next, while the electrons are in ﬂight,
have one of the distant observers rotate her electron-spin measuring apparatus
away from the z-axis direction to an angle of her choosing, i.e. the ﬁrst distant
observer makes a ‘delayed-choice experiment’.56 If this ﬁrst observer ﬁnds
an electron aligned along her new axis, then the second observer, far away,
will ﬁnd the other electron aligned along the negative direction of the new
axis constructed by the ﬁrst observer. Now we, on ﬁrst hearing and with our
classical thinking, should be surprised! Even so, this is the way nature acts.
The result does not mean that the pair interacted after traveling apart, nor
was there ‘superluminal’ transmission of information.57 This suggestion of
faster-than-light signaling is a misinterpretation of quantum theory, and such
information transfer has not been seen. Rather, those who say so are likely to
have been tripped up by picturing each unobserved electron as being localized
between observations!
5.9. Non-classical interactions. There are interactions predicted by quantum
theory without classical explanation. Yakir Aharonov and David Bohm58
showed that a single electron wave which never enters a region of electric or
magnetic ﬁeld could never-the-less have a measurable shift in the probability
of ﬁnding that electron after an electric or magnetic ﬁeld changes in the
excluded region. The eﬀect occurs, for example, when the electron passes on
either side but does not enter a tube where a magnetic ﬁeld is conﬁned. The
diﬀerence in phase of that wave when followed around a closed loop is given
by e

A
dx
/(ℏc), where {A
} is the electromagnetic potential. This is the
56If the decision on how a component of a system is measured comes after that system has had
suﬃcient time to cause interference between quantum alternatives for that component, then this
becomes a delayed-choice experiment as introduced by John Wheeler in Mathematical Foundations
of Quantum Theory, edited by A. R. Marlow, Academic Press (1978).
57Information transmitted by a wave disturbance that started at a certain time cannot be
transferred faster than the outgoing wavefront from that disturbance. In Special Relativity, the
speed of the wavefront, also called the signal speed, is always less than or equal to the universal
limiting speed, c. There is no such restriction on the group velocity or the phase velocity of the
wave.
58Y. Aharonov and D. Bohm, Signiﬁcance of electromagnetic potentials in the quantum theory,
Physical Review, vol. 115 (1959), pp. 485–491.

62
WILLIAM C. PARKE
ﬂux of magnetic ﬁeld somewhere inside the loop.59 The shift in the observed
interference pattern produced by the electrons when the magnetic ﬂux is turned
on has no explanation in classical physics.
Measurement of a system may disturb the system. If the measurement
process transfers complete information about a system, that system will no
longer contain entangled states. This eﬀect leads to the ‘no-cloning theorem’,60
the statement that a general quantum system for which we have no prior
knowledge cannot be identically copied. If a copy of a quantum state could
be made, then we could defeat the interfering eﬀect of measurement by ﬁrst
making a copy, and then measuring the copy, leaving the original system
undisturbed.
The wave function for a particle conﬁned to a ﬁxed region of space and
initially localized to a much smaller part of that region and then left with
no external interaction will diﬀuse outward in space as time progresses. The
wave for an unobserved particle will spread over the entire allowed region, and
eventually the probability for ﬁnding the particle in any small location will have
no measurable change in time, and its quantum wave function will be steady.61
A localized and isolated physical system will have denumerable (‘quantized’)
possible values for its measurable energies and momenta. Periodicities of the
wave function also enforce quantization if there is a simply-connected closed
path over which the corresponding particle can move. For example, periodicity
in the azimuthal angle in the wave function makes the measured values of
the projection of the orbital angular momentum along a measurement axis
become denumerable.
Suppose two observables A and B for a given system in the state |⟩are
measured in a certain time order. If these two measurements are repeated for
identically prepared systems, a change in the order of measurement may change
the probability for ﬁnding a given value for the second observable. In general,
one can show that the uncertainties satisfy ΔA ΔB ≥(1/2) |⟨AB −BA⟩|.
This is called the uncertainty principle of Heisenberg. If the ‘commutator’
[A, B] ≡(AB −BA) vanishes, then the observables A and B may be measured
‘simultaneously’, i.e. without the measurement of one aﬀecting the results of
measuring the second. The state of a physical system can be labeled by a set of
measured values for a maximal set of mutually commuting observables that
are also conserved over time.
59Mandelstam re-expressed the local interaction with {A
} as a non-local eﬀect of the electric
and magnetic ﬁelds, i.e. a topological eﬀect of ﬁelds over space-time. See S. Mandelstam, Quantum
electrodynamics without potentials, Annals of Physics, vol. 19 (1962), pp. 1–24.
60W. Zurek, A single quantum cannot be cloned, Nature, vol. 299 (1982), pp. 802–803; D. Dieks,
Communication by EPR devices, Physics Letters, vol. A 92 (1982), no. 6, pp. 271–272.
61Steady wave functions necessarily have a sinusoidal time dependence through a factor of the
form exp (−it), making the probability †dx time independent.

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
63
5.10. Quantum theory for complex systems. After a relaxation time for a
system containing a large number of interacting particles, the most likely
distribution of particles in the available quantized energy states will be those
that tend to maximize, under the physical constraints, the multiplicity W ,
simply because as the system evolves through various conﬁgurations, it will
spend most of its time in those conﬁgurations which have many ways to be
constructed. One can then show62 that if the number of particles ni in each
quantum state labeled by the index i is also large, then ni ∝exp (−i/(kT)),
where i is the energy of the corresponding quantum state, and T is the
temperature of the system. Interactions from the outside can change the total
energy, E = 
i nii, of a system either by changing the ‘occupation numbers’
{ni}, and/or by changing the energies {i} of the quantum states. The ﬁrst
kind of change is heat transfer and the second is work transfer. By increasing
the multiplicity of the system, putting heat into a system is a ‘disordering
process’. Work involves changing the particle energies by changing the volume
of the system, without moving particles between quantum states.63 These ideas
incorporate the ﬁrst and second law of thermodynamics.
In terms of information, the second law of thermodynamics implies that if
two systems interact, each with ﬁxed volumes, then that system of the two which
has the smaller variation in its information content as its total energy changes
will tend to spontaneously transfer information into the second system.64
These are important concepts for quantum computers, as there is an intimate
connection between entropy, information, decoherence, wave function collapse,
and heat from memory loss.
§6. Quantum computation. Feynman65 considered the possibility that we
might take advantage of quantum systems to perform computations quicker
than so-called classical computers. Modern classical computers use bistable
systems to store information, and logical gates to perform Boolean operations
on sets of ones and zeros.66
For some problems involving numbers with
62L. Boltzmann, ¨Uber die Beziehung zwischen dem zweiten Hauptsatze der mechanischen
W¨armetheorie und der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung respektive den S¨atzen ¨uber das W¨armegleich-
gewicht, Sitzungsberichte der Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Wien, vol. 76 (1877), pp. 373–435.
63If particles remain in their quantum states, no heat is transferred, and the process is called
‘adiabatic’.
64If a system near thermal equilibrium is held at ﬁxed volume and a small amount of energy
dE is put in, causing an increase in its information content by dI , then the ratio dE/dI turns out
to be proportional to the temperature of that system. The spontaneous ﬂow of information, i.e.
non-forced ﬂow, results from statistical likelihood.
65R. Feynman, Simulating physics with computers, International Journal of Theoretical Physics,
vol. 21 (1982), pp. 467–488.
66These discrete-level computers are often referred to as ‘digital’, in contrast to ‘analog’
computers that use internal signals that are assumed to vary smoothly with time. Mechanical
computers, which work by the movement and interaction of shaped objects, and molecular

64
WILLIAM C. PARKE
n digits and that may require solution times that rise exponentially with n
when performed on computers using only Boolean logic, the computation on
a quantum computer may take times that rise no faster than a power of n.
Below are some of the special consequences of quantum theory for quantum
computers and communications:
The simplest system for the storage of information gives only two possible
values by a measurement. These values can be taken as 0 or 1, in which case
the states are called |0⟩and |1⟩. Classically, such a system stores one bit of
information. A quantum system can be constructed that has only these two
values for the outcome of a measurement, but whose quantum state is a linear
combination of the two possible outcome states |0⟩and |1⟩:
|q⟩= α |0⟩+  |1⟩.
This state is called a ‘qubit’, where α and  are complex numbers satisfying
|α|2 + ||2 = 1. An alternative parameterization takes α = cos (/2) and
 = exp (iφ) sin (/2). Evidently, the possible qubit states can be pictured as
points on a unit sphere (called the ‘Bloch sphere’) with |0⟩at the north pole
and |1⟩at the south. Two-valued qubit states are easily realized in nature: The
electron spin has only two possible projection values ± 1/2ℏ, and the photon
has only two possible helicity values ± 1ℏ.
As it is always possible to expand an arbitrary quantum state into a basis
set for that state’s Hilbert space, N-particle states in a quantum computer can
be made by constructing these quantum states from a linear combination of
the states for each of the N particles. Taking these particles to have only two
internal quantum states, the state of the computer is expressible by
|N⟩=

{ik=0,1}
i1i2i3,...iN |i1⟩1 |i2⟩2 |i3⟩3 . . . |iN⟩N
=
2N

i=1
i |i1i2i3 . . . iN⟩with

i
|i|2 = 1 .
(11)
In the second line of the equation, the product base state is represented
in a shortened form, in which the order of the 0’s and 1’s corresponds to
computers, that work through molecular interactions and transformations, are a mixed breed. The
phrase digital computer, referring to counts base ten, can now mean any device which manipulates
information by discrete changes. These days, the changes are made in systems which can ﬂip
between oﬀand on in a speciﬁed clock time, i.e. a binary coding. By using such switching to
encode information, digital computers can be more tolerant of a small amount of noise than
analog devices. Shannon and Hartley showed that the maximum number of bits per second that
can be transmitted from one storage location to another is given by B log2 (1 + S/N), where B is
the bandwidth (in cycles per second), S is the average signal power, and N is the average noise
power. See R. V. L. Hartley, Transmission of information, Bell System Technical Journal (July
1928); C. E. Shannon, Communication in the presence of noise, Proc. Institute of Radio Engineers,
vol. 37 (January 1949), no. 1, pp. 10–21.

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
65
the labeling of each of the separate qubits, and i = i1i2i3 . . . iN is a binary
number constructed from the i’s.
If the quantum state |N⟩cannot be
factorized, it harbors entanglement. Quantum computation takes advantage
of entanglement within those states.67 It follows that a useful initial state of
a quantum computer has at least a subset of particles prepared in one of the
maximally entangled states, i.e. states with equal probability for all possible
conﬁgurations of its component particles, making it also that state which has
maximum information content.68 The maximally entangled states made from
qubits as in Eq. (11) will have all |i|2 = 1/N, leaving (2N −1) free relative
phases between the basis states.69
To sustain coherence, quantum computers must operate on the input infor-
mation stored in quantum states by unitary transformations. In the following,
the substage of a quantum computation holding the intermediate state of a
calculation will be called |(k)⟩, where k labels a particular intermediate state,
with k = 0 labeling the initial state. For a given quantum computer, a solution
to a solvable problem is a unitary transformation US that carries the input
quantum state |(0)⟩encoding the required initial data into an output quantum
state that carries the information about the solution, at least in probabilistic
terms. To be a non-classical computer, at least some the intermediate states
must be entangled. It is possible that US can be decomposed into a ﬁnite
product of simpler or more universal unitary operations: US = 
i Ugi, where
the set {Ugi} are called ‘quantum gates’, a generalization of classical logic
gates. Each term in the product acts on the state |(k)⟩left by the previous
operation labeled by k and produces |(k + 1)⟩.
Since a general unitary transformation will contain continuous parameters,
US might only be approximated by a ﬁnite sequence of quantum gates. In the
classical case, all Boolean operations on a set of bits can be performed by a
combination of NAND gates. This makes NAND gates universal for classical
computing. The same is true of NOR gates. In the quantum case, there
are ‘universal’ sets of simple gates that can be used to build arbitrarily close
representations of a general unitary transformation, such as US. (Arbitrarily
close here means that if VS is the approximation, then |⟨| (US −VS) |⟩|
2
is a number that can be made arbitrarily small for all |⟩by increasing the
number of universal gates used in VS.)
Quantum gates acting on a single qubit can all be represented by a general
unitary transformation U⃗ which is an arbitrary rotation in Hilbert space:
U⃗ = exp (i ˆn · ⃗/2) = cos (/2) I + i ˆn · ⃗ sin (/2),
67See, for example,R. Jozsa and N. Linden, On the role of entanglement in quantum computational
speed-up, Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
vol. 459 (2002), no. 2036, pp. 2011–2032.
68One learns most when the outcomes are least predictable!
69These maximally entanglement states are also called ‘generalized Bell states’.

66
WILLIAM C. PARKE
where  is an angle of rotation around an axis ﬁxed by the direction ˆn, and the
{i ; i = 1, 2, 3} are the Pauli matrices,
x =
0
1
1
0

,
y =
0
−i
i
0

,
z =
1
0
0
−1

which act on the base states |0⟩=
0
1

and |1⟩=
1
0

. For an initial state
consisting of the many qubits (perhaps realized by many particles capable of
being in two distinct quantum states), such as |i1i2i3 . . . iN⟩, a 2N dimensional
unitary transformation would be implemented to carry out one step of a
computation.
If noise or other spurious interactions occur in the system, quantum coher-
ence may be degraded or lost, and there will be both a ‘coherence time’ and a
‘coherence length’ over which the system retains a semblance of its coherence.
A fault-tolerant quantum computer uses states that have long coherence times,
quantum entangled states with long life times, and/or error correcting schemes.
Systems for transferring qubits over long distances require long coherence
lengths.70
A new measurement acting on a quantum state generally causes some
decoherence, so that a number of components of the wave function may have
their phase become stochastically indeterminate. The observation of the state
of a particle in a multi-particle entangled state removes the entanglement of
that particle. As we have seen, measurement of an observable is the equivalent
of projecting out a subspace of the initial state. Such a projection into a proper
subspace is irreversible and non-unitary. The resulting state of the system no
longer holds information about the projected state.
In quantum theory, all processes preserve the condition that the probability
of ﬁnding any of the possible states of the system add to unity. Formally,
quantum states evolve by a unitary transformation. In the ‘Copenhagen’ view,
the act of measurement causes the wave function for the system to ‘collapse’.
A collapse of a quantum state from a superposition of substates to one such
substate violates unitarity, and therefore is outside the formalism of quantum
theory. This produces a paradox: The measuring instrument is also a physical
system, so that the larger system that contains the observed system and the
measuring devices, left unobserved, should evolve by a unitary transformation,
and no wave function ‘collapse’ should occur. There is no easy way out of this
paradox.
70Transferring qubits across space was ﬁrst described by C. H. Bennett et al. in Teleporting an
unknown quantum state via dual classical and Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen channels, Physical Review
Letters, vol. 70 (1993), pp. 1895–1899. Note that transferring a qubit from one system to another
does not violate the no-cloning theorem, because the initial qubit is destroyed in the process, and
that the transfer is cannot be superluminal, as two classical bits must be sent from the ﬁrst system
to the second before reconstruction of the qubit can take place.

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
67
The measuring devices in the larger combined system must introduce inter-
actions that do not project out quantum substates in the combined system,
but rather redistribute the amplitudes for various quantum states, making the
observed state highly probable, and the other possible states in the observed
system left with very small amplitudes. Being unitary for the combined system
of the observed and the measuring device, such a measurement process is,
in principle, ‘reversible’. The entanglement of an observed system with a
measurement instrument and subsequent restoration of the original quantum
state has been demonstrated for simple systems and measuring devices with
highly restricted interactions.71 But for a multitude of interactions, restoration
after interactions is typically unfeasible with our current resources.72 It is
also possible that nature does not just scatter information so much that we
cannot easily put systems such as broken eggs back together again, but rather
actually does lose information over time. This possibility is outside the realm
of quantum theory.
The same ideas apply to quantum computers. In quantum theory, even the
measurement of a ﬁnal state after a computer calculation is a reversible process
for the computer, the measurement device and the surrounding interacting
systems. In principle, no information is lost. But if the information transferred
by erasing a quantum memory state produces heat in the environment, some
information is practically lost.
If one of the particles in an entangled state is sent to a second observer as a
form of communication, then attempts to intercept that particle will degrade
or destroy the entanglement, and therefore will be detectable. This opens
the possibility of ‘absolute’ security in transmission lines, particularly since
macroscopically long coherence lengths have been realized with laser beams.
If a set of identical particles are restricted to a two-dimensional surface, or the
space is not simply connected, the quantum state representing two particles may
gain a phase factor of exp(2i	p) when the two particles are exchanged, where
p need not be integer or half-integer.73 If the phase factor p is not n/2 (where
n is integer), the particles are called ‘anyons’. For three particles, if the order in
which the particles are exchanged produces a diﬀerent wave function phase, the
group of such exchanges is non-abelian. This consideration may be important
in the construction of quantum computers through the storing of information in
the topological braiding of non-abelian anyons as they progress in space-time.
Topological structures have been shown to be important in quantum theory.
For example, the continuity condition for the wave function describing particles
71See, for example, N. Katz et al., Reversal of the weak measurement of a quantum state in a
superconducting phase qubit, Physical Review Letters, vol. 101 (2008), p. 200401.
72This diﬃculty is related to the ergotic hypothesis in classical mechanics, and the development
of entropy concept in statistical thermodynamics.
73By contrast, in a connected region of three dimensional space, there is a space transformation
that will ‘untangle’ the pair, and make p an integer multiple of 1/2.

68
WILLIAM C. PARKE
adds signiﬁcance to global space-time topology. In some models, particle
charges come from topological structures. A variety of promising systems for
quantum computers take advantage of the diﬃculty of breaking topological
structures in order to preserve quantum coherence, making the system more
‘fault immune’ against the eﬀect of noise and other external interactions.
§7. Limits to computing.
7.1. Practical limits to computing and information storage. Classical com-
puters have practical limitations in density. Gates and memory elements smaller
than nanoscale will suﬀer quantum ﬂuctuations, with growing uncertainties
in bit structures and Boolean transformations as the size of the elements are
reduced. Even our DNA code can be mutated by quantum tunneling. If the
system has a certain level of noise, classical correction schemes can eliminate
errors, at a cost of size. The techniques to control heat buildup also require
volume in the ancillary heat sinks or channels for radiative cooling. Taking
systems at the nanoscale and ﬁnding technology that minimizes heat production
toward the Szil´ard value of kTln2 per bit lost gives an upper limit to computer
density made from materials. Memory and gates based on information in
light beams have corresponding limits due to pulse duration and wave length
uncertainties.
Quantum computers require coherence within the involved quantum states of
the computer during computation. Working against us are physical limitations.
For example, the quantum states being used to store information typically
have ﬁnite lifetimes through spontaneous decay, resulting in the collapse of
the employed coherent states. Uncontrollable interactions both within and
from the outside a quantum computer will tend to collapse coherent states.
After suﬃcient time, coupling to the environment will cause decoherence and
disentanglement within a quantum system.
Coherence can be maintained for some period of time by using quantum
states which have some intrinsic stability and suﬀer little debilitating interactions
with adjacent systems or with the environment. Explorations to ﬁnd strategies
which minimize the limitations are ongoing. Evidently, each quantum gate
must act within the shortest coherence time. Some mixing and degradation
in quantum states can be tolerated by using repeated calculations and/or
Implement error corrections which can reconstruct, with some assurance,
a degraded quantum state. Overall, even though we can anticipate severe
practical diﬃculties to building a quantum computer which can outperform its
classical cousin, we see no fundamental limitation, unless our ambitions reach
across the cosmos.
7.2. Cosmological limits. Strong gravitational ﬁelds exist near black holes,
which are predicted by Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity to occur when
the density of an object of mass m exceeds about 3c6/(25	G3m2). Such black

THE ESSENCE OF QUANTUM THEORY FOR COMPUTERS
69
holes got their name because no form of radiation can escape from the hole
if it starts out within a region around the hole bounded by a surface called
the ‘horizon’. For a non-spinning hole without charge, this surface has the
‘Schwarzschild radius’74 RS ≡2Gm/c2. Astronomers have found stellar-mass
black holes in binary systems by analyzing the orbits of companion stars.
Nearby large galaxies are known to contain one or more super-massive black
holes at their center, and we suspect all large galaxies do.
Using quantum theory, Hawking showed75 that the ﬂuctuations in particle
ﬁelds near but outside the horizon of a black hole can produce particle
pairs with some of the positive energy particles having suﬃcient kinetic
energy to reach large distances away, while the negative energy particles
fall into the black hole. Thus, quantum theory requires that black holes
evaporate, with a mass loss rate inversely proportional to the square of the hole
mass m

dm/dt = −ℏc4/(3 · 5 · 210	G2 m2)

. The ﬂux of photons emitted
is close to that of a hot body at a temperature inversely proportional to m

T = ℏc3/(8	kGm)

.
However, to be consistent with quantum theory, a system initially containing
an object and a black hole, with the object destined to disappear into the
black hole, with no other interaction but gravity, cannot lose information: The
quantum state of the hole and the object evolves unitarily. One resolution
of this paradox is to have the object’s information transferred to a region
close to the horizon of the black hole.76 In this way, Hawking radiation
can carry the stored information back out (so the radiation is not perfectly
thermal). Even before Hawking proposed that black holes evaporate, Jacob
Berkenstein77 conjectured that the entropy of a black hole, which is also the
information storage capacity, is proportional to the area of the hole’s horizon,
4	R2
S, and inversely proportional to the square of Planck’s length. Hawking
then calculated the proportionality constant to be k/4, where k is Boltzmann’s
constant.
General Relativity limits the density of a computer, and concurrently the
density of information storage. As a computer becomes larger in a given
volume, its density eventually forces the computer to collapse into a black hole.
This leads to the idea that the limiting density of information storage may be
eﬀectively two dimensional, with each bit stored in a Planck-size area. Some
(as yet untested) theories even have the information of the whole Universe
reﬂected by a kind of holographic image in one less dimension.
74K. Schwarzschild, ¨Uber das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen
Theorie, Sitzungsberichte der K¨oniglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, vol. 1 (1916),
pp. 189–196.
75S. W. Hawking, Black hole explosions?, Nature, vol. 248 (1976), no. 5443, pp. 30–31.
76It is even possible that the volume surrounded by a black hole horizon is completely empty,
even of any space-time structure, with any infalling matter ending up just outside the horizon.
77J. D. Bekenstein, Black holes and entropy, Physical Review D, vol. 7 (1973), pp. 2333–2346.

70
WILLIAM C. PARKE
A cosmological limitation on computation also comes from the fact that
we appear to live in a ﬁnite Universe. A computer can be no larger than the
Universe itself. Any smaller computer cannot hold the data of the Universe at
one time, which is needed to unambiguously project the Universe’s future. In
addition, being that the computer is within the Universe, it cannot predict both
itself and the Universe. Our current theories do not incorporate these kinds of
limitations, although there are propositions that connect the very small to the
very large.
§8. Conclusions. Quantum computers take advantage of quantum opera-
tions in physical systems in order to solve well-posed problems. Quantum
theory describes these operations based on how nature processes informa-
tion. Space and time are important primitives in quantum theory, and active
participants in both information transfer and information storage. While we
formulate how nature handles information, we should recognize that our physi-
cal theories are always tentative. Each covers a limited realm and has a limited
accuracy. Also, since each theory has a variety of equivalent formulations, with
their own language, our main focus should be on the predictions of a theory.
Even though very successful, quantum theory makes some rather non-intuitive
and thought-provoking predictions. Correspondingly, there are a variety of
precautions to which we should be attentive when applying and interpreting the
theory. Reﬂecting on the underlying ideas central to quantum theory should
help us in the exploration of possibilities for future quantum computers.
DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS
COLUMBIAN SCHOOL OF ARTS & SCIENCES
THE GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20052
E-mail: wparke@gwu.edu

FIBER PRODUCTS OF MEASURES AND QUANTUM
FOUNDATIONS
ADAM BRANDENBURGER AND H. JEROME KEISLER
Abstract. With a view to quantum foundations, we deﬁne the concepts of an empirical model (a
probabilistic model describing measurements and outcomes), a hidden-variable model (an empirical
model augmented by unobserved variables), and various properties of hidden-variable models, for
the case of inﬁnite measurement spaces and ﬁnite outcome spaces. Thus, our framework is general
enough to include, for example, quantum experiments that involve spin measurements at arbitrary
relative angles. Within this framework, we use the concept of the ﬁber product of measures to
prove general versions of two determinization results about hidden-variable models. Speciﬁcally,
we prove that: (i) every empirical model can be realized by a deterministic hidden-variable model;
(ii) for every hidden-variable model satisfying locality and -independence, there is a realization-
equivalent hidden-variable model satisfying determinism and -independence.
§1. Introduction. Hidden variables are extra variables added to the model
of an experiment to explain correlations in the outcomes. Here is a simple
example. Alice’s and Bob’s computers have been prepared with the same
password. We know that the password is either p2s4w6r8 or 1a3s5o7d, but we
do not know which it is. If Alice now types in p2s4w6r8 and this unlocks her
computer, we immediately know what will happen when Bob types in one or
other of the two passwords. The two outcomes—when Alice types a password
and Bob types a password—are perfectly correlated. Clearly, it would be wrong
to conclude that, when Alice types a password on her machine, this somehow
causes Bob’s machine to acquire the same password. The correlation is purely
informational: It is our state of knowledge that changes, not Bob’s computer.
Formally, we can consider an r.v. (random variable) X for Alice’s password, an
r.v. Y for Bob’s password, and an extra r.v. Z. The r.v. Z takes the value z1 or
z2 according as the two machines were prepared with the ﬁrst or the second
We are grateful to Samson Abramsky, Bob Coecke, Amanda Friedenberg, Barbara Rifkind,
Gus Stuart, and Noson Yanofsky for valuable conversations, to John Asker, Axelle Ferri`ere,
Tobias Fritz, Elliot Lipnowski, Andrei Savochkin, participants at the workshop on Semantics of
Information, Dagstuhl, June 2010, and participants at the conference on Advances in Quantum
Theory, Linnaeus University, V¨axj¨o, June 2010, for helpful input, to a referee and the volume
editors for very important feedback, and to the Stern School of Business for ﬁnancial support.
Logic and Algebraic Structures in Quantum Computing
Edited by J. Chubb, A. Eskandarian and V. Harizanov
Lecture Notes in Logic, 45
c⃝2016, Association for Symbolic Logic
71

72
ADAM BRANDENBURGER AND H. JEROME KEISLER
password. Then, even though X and Y will be perfectly correlated, they will
also be independent (trivially so), conditional on the value of Z. In this sense,
the extra r.v. Z explains the correlation.
Of course, even in the classical realm, there are much more complicated
examples of hidden-variable analysis.
But, the most famous context for
hidden-variable analysis is quantum mechanics (QM). Having started with
von Neumann [23, 1932] and Einstein, Podolosky, and Rosen [13, 1935], the
question of whether a hidden-variable formulation of QM is possible was
re-ignited by Bell [3, 1964], whose watershed no-go theorem gave conditions
under which the answer is negative. The correlations that arise in QM—for
example, in spin measurements—cannot be explained as reﬂecting the presence
of hidden variables.
Let us specify a little more what we mean by an experiment. We imagine
that Alice can make one of several measurements on her part of a certain
system, and Bob can make one of several measurements on his part of the
system. Each pair of measurements (one by Alice and one by Bob) leads to a
pair of outcomes (one for Alice and one for Bob). We can build an empirical
model of the experiment by choosing appropriate spaces for the sets of possible
measurements and outcomes, and by specifying, for each pair of measurements,
a probability measure over pairs of outcomes. An associated hidden-variable
(henceforth h.v.) model is obtained by starting with the empirical model and
then appending to it an extra r.v.
We can deﬁne various types of h.v. model, according to what properties we ask
of the model. One property is locality (Bell [3, 1964]), which can be decomposed
into parameter independence and outcome independence (Jarrett [18, 1984],
Shimony [20, 1986]). Another property is -independence (the term is due to
Dickson [12, 2005]), which says that the choices of measurement by Alice and
Bob are independent of the process determining the values of any h.v.’s. Bell
[5, 1985, p. 95] describes this as the condition that “the settings of instruments
are in some sense free variables.” We will use the term “free variables” below.
Here are two basic types of h.v. question one can ask:
(i) The existence question. Suppose we are given a certain physical system
and an empirical probability measure e on the observable variables of
the system. Can we ﬁnd an extended space that includes h.v.’s, and a
probability measure p on this space, where p satisﬁes certain properties
(as above) and realizes (via marginalization) the empirical probability
measure e?
(ii) The equivalence question. Suppose we are given an empirical probability
measure e on the observable variables of a system, and an h.v. model,
with probability measure p that satisﬁes certain properties and realizes e.
Can we ﬁnd another h.v. model, with probability measure q, where q
satisﬁes other stipulated properties and also realizes e?

FIBER PRODUCTS OF MEASURES AND QUANTUM FOUNDATIONS
73
Bell’s Theorem is the most famous negative answer to (i), obtained when
the physical system is quantum and the properties demanded are locality and
-independence.
In this chapter we will focus on positive results for questions of both
types (i) and (ii). These positive results involve yet another property of h.v.
models: The (strong) determinism property says that for each player, the h.v.’s
determine ‘non-probabilistically’ (formally: almost surely) the outcome of any
measurement. As we will see in Section 4, determinism implies locality. We
consider the following positive results on questions (i) and (ii):
(i) First determinization result. Every empirical model (whether generated
by a classical or quantum or even superquantum system) can be realized
by an h.v. model satisfying determinism.
(ii) Second determinization result. Given an h.v. model satisfying locality and
-independence, there is a realization-equivalent h.v. model that satisﬁes
determinism and -independence.
Put together, these two results tell us a lot about Bell’s Theorem. The ﬁrst
determinization result says that for every empirical model, an h.v. model with
determinism is possible. It is also true that for every empirical model, an h.v.
model with -independence is possible. (This is a trivial construction, which we
note in Remark 5.1.) As usually stated, Bell’s Theorem asks for an h.v. model
satisfying locality and -independence. In light of the second determinization
result, Bell’s Theorem can be equivalently stated as asking for determinism and
-independence. Thus, Bell’s Theorem teaches us that: It is possible to believe
that Nature (in the form of QM) is deterministic, or it is possible to believe that
measurement choices by experimenters are free variables, but it is not possible to
believe both.
The goal of this chapter is to prove the two determinization results at
a general measure-theoretic level (Theorems 5.2 and 5.3). Bell [4, 1971]
mentioned the idea of the ﬁrst determinization result. Fine [14, 1982] produced
the ﬁrst version of the second determinization result. Both results have been
(re-)proved for various formulations in the literature. A notable aspect of
our formulation is that we allow for inﬁnite measurement spaces. Thus, our
set-up is general enough to include, for example, experiments that involve spin
measurements at arbitrary relative angles. We assume that outcome sets are
ﬁnite (such as spin up or spin down).
Our treatment uses the concept of the ﬁber product of measures.
The
construction of these objects comes from Shortt [21, 1984]. The ﬁber product
generalizes independence in probability theory, and has in turn been generalized
in several directions in the literature (e.g., see Adler [2, 2009] and Ben Yaacov
and Keisler [7, 2009] in model theory, Dawid and Studen´y [11, 1999] in graph
theory, and Flori and Fritz [15, 2013] in category theory. Fiber products of

74
ADAM BRANDENBURGER AND H. JEROME KEISLER
measures turn out to be well suited to the questions in quantum foundations
which we study in this chapter.
§2. Empirical and hidden-variable models. Alice has a space of possible
measurements, which is a measurable space (Ya, Ya), and a space of possible
outcomes, which is a measurable space (Xa, Xa). Likewise, Bob has a space of
possible measurements, which is a measurable space (Yb, Yb), and a space of
possible outcomes, which is a measurable space (Xb, Xb). Throughout, we will
restrict attention to bipartite systems. (We will comment later on the extension
to more than two parts.) There is also an h.v. space, which is an unspeciﬁed
measurable space (Λ, L). Write
(X, X) = (Xa, Xa) ⊗(Xb, Xb),
(Y, Y) = (Ya, Ya) ⊗(Yb, Yb),
Ψ = (X, X) ⊗(Y, Y),
Ω = (X, X) ⊗(Y, Y) ⊗(Λ, L).
Deﬁnition 2.1. An empirical model is a probability measure e on Ψ.
We see that an empirical model describes an experiment in which the pair
of measurements y = (ya, yb) ∈Y is randomly chosen according to the
probability measure margY e, and y and the joint outcome x = (xa, xb) ∈X
are distributed according to e.
Deﬁnition 2.2. A hidden-variable (h.v.) model is a probability measure p
on Ω.
Deﬁnition 2.3. We say that an h.v. model p realizes an empirical model e if
e = margΨp. We say that two h.v. models, possibly with diﬀerent h.v. spaces,
are (realization-)equivalent if they realize the same empirical model.
An h.v. model is an empirical model which has an extra component, viz.,
the h.v. space, and which reproduces a given empirical model when we average
over the values of the h.v. The interest in h.v. models is that we can ask
them to satisfy properties that it would be unreasonable to demand of an
empirical model. Thus, in the example we began with, the property we ask for
is conditional independence—which we would only expect once the extra r.v.
Z is introduced. We will come to other properties in Section 4.
§3. Products and ﬁber products of measures. We ﬁrst introduce notation
and recall some well-known facts about product measures. For background
on the relevant measure theory, see e.g. Billingsley [8, 1995].
Recall that by a product (X, X) ⊗(Y, Y) of two measurable spaces (X, X)
and (Y, Y) is meant the (Cartesian) product space X × Y equipped with the
-algebra generated by the measurable rectangles J × K, where J ∈X and

FIBER PRODUCTS OF MEASURES AND QUANTUM FOUNDATIONS
75
K ∈Y. We use the following two conventions. First, when p is a probability
measure on (X, X) ⊗(Y, Y) and q = margX p, then for each J ∈X we write
p(J) = p(J × Y) = q(J),
and for each q-integrable f : X →R we write

J
f(x) dp =

J×Y
f(x) dp =

J
f(x) dq.
Thus, in particular, a statement holds for p-almost all x ∈X if and only if it
holds for q-almost all x ∈X.
Second, when p is a probability measure on a product space (X, X)⊗(Y, Y)⊗
(Z, Z), J ∈X, and z ∈Z, we write p[J||Z] for the conditional probability of
J given z. Here, we refer to the concept of conditional probability given a sub
-algebra; see Billingsley [8, 1995, Section 33] for a presentation. Formally,
p[J||Z] denotes a function from Z into [0, 1] such that
p[J||Z]z = p[J × Y × Z|{X × Y, ∅} ⊗Z](x,y,z).
(Note that {X ×Y, ∅} is the trivial -algebra over X ×Y, so that the right-hand
side does not depend on (x, y).)
We use similar notation for (ﬁnite) products with factors to the left of (X, X)
or to the right of (Z, Z). Note that if q = margX×Zp, then q[J||Z] = p[J||Z].
We will also need the concept of conditional expectation given a sub -algebra
(Billingsley [8, 1995, Section 34]), and we will use an analogous notation. Thus,
given an integrable function f : X →R, and z ∈Z, we deﬁne E[f||Z] by:
E[f||Z]z = E[f ◦	|{X × Y, ∅} ⊗Z](x,y,z),
where we write 	 for the projection from X × Y × Z to X.
Lemma 3.1. The mapping z →p[J||Z]z is the p-almost surely unique Z-
measurable function f : Z →[0, 1] such that for each set L ∈Z,

L
f(z) dp = p(J × L).
Proof. Existence: Let f(z) = p[J||Z]z. Using the deﬁnition of p[J||Z],
we see that

L
f(z) dp =

X×Y×L
E[1J×Y×Z|{X × Y, ∅} ⊗Z] dp =

X×Y×L
1J×Y×Z dp = p((X × Y × L) ∩(J × Y × Z)) = p(J × L),
as required.
Uniqueness: If p(J) = 0, then f(z) = g(z) = 0 p-almost surely. Suppose
p(J) > 0. Let f and g be two such functions and let L = {z : f(z) < g(z)}.

76
ADAM BRANDENBURGER AND H. JEROME KEISLER
Then L ∈Z. If p(J × L) > 0, then p(L) > 0, and
0 <

L
g(z) dp −

L
f(z) dp =

L
(g(z) −f(z)) dp = 0,
a contradiction. Therefore p(J × L) = 0, so p(L) = 0 and hence f(z) ≥g(z)
p-almost surely. Similarly, g(z) ≥f(z) p-almost surely, so f(z) = g(z)
p-almost surely.
⊣
Corollary 3.2. Let q be the marginal of p on X × Z. Then, for each J ∈X,
we have p[J||Z] = q[J||Z] q-almost surely.
Lemma 3.3. If p[J||Z] ∈{0, 1} p-almost surely, then p[J||Y ⊗Z] = p[J||Z]
p-almost surely.
Proof. Let L0 = {z ∈Z : p[J||Z]z = 0} and L1 = {z ∈Z : p[J||Z]z =
1}. Then L0, L1 ∈Z and p(L0 ∪L1) = 1. By Lemma 3.1,

L0
p[J||Z]z dp = 0 = p(J × L0),

L1
p[J||Z]z dp = p(L1) = p(J × L1).
By Lemma 3.1 again,

Y×L0
p[J||Y ⊗Z](y,z) dp = p(J × Y × L0) = p(J × L0) = 0,
so
p[J||Y ⊗Z](y,z) = 0 = p[J||Z]z ∀(y, z) ∈Y × L0.
Similarly,

Y×L1
p[J||Y ⊗Z](y,z) dp = p(J × Y × L1) = p(J × L1) = p(L1),
so
p[J||Y ⊗Z](y,z) = 1 = p[J||Z]z ∀(y, z) ∈Y × L1,
as required.
⊣
When x ∈X, we write p[x||Z]z = p[{x}||Z]z.
For the particular
case of ﬁnite X , we get, by the properties of probability measures, that

x∈X p[x||Z]z = 1 p-almost surely.
Given probability measures p on (X, X)⊗(Y, Y) and r on (Y, Y), we say that
p is an extension of r if r = margYp. We say that two probability measures p
and q on (X, X) ⊗(Y, Y) agree on Y if margYp = margYq.
Given probability spaces (X, X, q) and (Y, Y, r), the product measure p =
q ⊗r is the unique probability measure p on (X, X) ⊗(Y, Y) such that q and r
are independent with respect to p, that is,
p(J × K) = q(J) × r(K)

FIBER PRODUCTS OF MEASURES AND QUANTUM FOUNDATIONS
77
for all J ∈X and K ∈Y. Note that p is a common extension of q and r.
Remark 3.4. Let (X, X, q) and (Y, Y, r) be as above and let p be a common
extension of q and r on (X, X) ⊗(Y, Y). The following are equivalent:
(i) p = q ⊗r.
(ii) The -algebras X ⊗{Y, ∅} and {X, ∅} ⊗Y are independent with respect
to p, that is,
p(J × K) = p(J) × p(K)
for all J ∈X and K ∈Y.
(iii) p[J||Y]y = p(J) p-almost surely for all J ∈X.
We next introduce the notion of a ﬁber product of measures. For the
remainder of this section we let X = (X, X), Y = (Y, Y), Z = (Z, Z) be
measurable spaces.
Deﬁnition 3.5. Let q and r be probability measures on X ⊗Z and Y ⊗Z,
respectively. Assume that q and r have the same marginal s on Z. We say that
a probability measure p on X ⊗Y ⊗Z is a ﬁber product of q and r over Z, in
symbols p = q ⊗Z r, if
p(J × K × L) =

L
q[J||Z]z × r[K||Z]z ds
for all J ∈X, K ∈Y, and L ∈Z.
Intuitively, the ﬁber product q ⊗Z r is the common extension of q and r
with respect to which q and r are as independent as possible given that they
have the same marginal on Z. There are examples where a ﬁber product does
not exist (see Swart [22, 1996] and Dawid and Studen´y [11, 1999]). But it is
easily seen that if a ﬁber product q ⊗Z r does exist, then it is unique. Next is a
characterization of the ﬁber product in terms of conditional probabilities and
extensions.
Lemma 3.6. Let q and r be as in Deﬁnition 3.5, and let p be a common
extension of q, r on X ⊗Y ⊗Z. Then the following are equivalent:
(i) p = q ⊗Z r.
(ii) p[J × K||Z]z = q[J||Z]z × r[K||Z]z p-almost surely, for all J ∈X and
K ∈Y.
(iii) p[J × K||Z]z = p[J||Z]z × p[K||Z]z p-almost surely, for all J ∈X and
K ∈Y.
(iv) p[J||Y ⊗Z](y,z) = p[J||Z]z p-almost surely, for all J ∈X.
Proof. It is clear that (i), (ii), and (iii) are equivalent.
Consider any
J ∈X, K ∈Y, and L ∈Z. Assume (i). To prove (iv), it is enough to show
that

K×L
p[J||Z] dp = p(J × K × L).

78
ADAM BRANDENBURGER AND H. JEROME KEISLER
We have

K×L
p[J||Z] dp =

Y×L
p[J||Z] × 1K dp.
By the rules of conditional expectations,
E[p[J||Z] × 1K||Z] = p[J||Z] × E[1K||Z] = p[J||Z] × p[K||Z].
Therefore

Y×L
p[J||Z] × 1K dp =

L
p[J||Z] × p[K||Z] dp
=

L
q[J||Z] × r[K||Z] dp.
By (i), this is equal to p(J × K × L), which shows that (i) implies (iv).
Now assume (iv). Then
p(J × K × L) =

K×L
p[J||Y ⊗Z] dp =

K×L
p[J||Z] dp
=

Y×L
p[J||Z] × 1K dp.
As in the preceding paragraph,

Y×L
p[J||Z] × 1K dp =

L
q[J||Z] × r[K||Z] dp,
and condition (i) is proved.
⊣
A version g(J, z) of the conditional probability q[J||Z]z is regular if g(·, z0)
is a probability measure on X for each ﬁxed z0 ∈Z. It is well known that when
X and Z are both Polish spaces, then q[J||Z]z has a regular version. It is also
easily seen that when X is ﬁnite and Z is any measurable space, then q[J||Z]z
has a regular version. This is the case we will need in this chapter. The next
lemma is from Swart [22, 1996]:
Lemma 3.7. Let q and r be as in Deﬁnition 3.5. If q[J||Z]z has a regular
version, then the ﬁber product q ⊗Z r exists.
Corollary 3.8. Let q and r be as in Deﬁnition 3.5. If the space X is ﬁnite,
then the ﬁber product q ⊗Z r exists.
§4. Properties of hidden-variable models. We can now formulate the various
properties of h.v. models which we listed in the Introduction (we will not repeat
their sources) and establish some relationships among them. At this point, we
adopt:
Assumption: The outcome spaces Xa and Xb are ﬁnite, and Xa and Xb are the
respective power sets.

FIBER PRODUCTS OF MEASURES AND QUANTUM FOUNDATIONS
79
Also, whenever we write an equation involving conditional probabilities, it will
be understood to mean that the equation holds p-almost surely. By the term
“measure” we will always mean “probability measure.” Fix an h.v. model p.
We will often make use of the following notation:
pa = margXa×Y×Λp,
pb = margXb×Y×Λp,
qa = margXa×Ya×Λp,
qb = margXb×Yb×Λp,
r = margY×Λp,
pY = margYp,
pΛ = margΛp.
Λ
Λ
Λ
Λ
Ya
Ya
Ya
Ya
Ya
Yb
Yb
Yb
Yb
Xa
Xa
Xa
Xb
p
pa
qa
r
pY
Λ
pΛ
All expressions below which are given for Alice have counterparts for Bob,
with a and b interchanged.
Deﬁnition 4.1. The h.v. model p satisﬁes locality if for every x ∈X we
have
p[x||Y ⊗L] = p[xa||Ya ⊗L] × p[xb||Yb ⊗L].
Deﬁnition 4.2. The h.v. model p satisﬁes parameter independence if for
every xa ∈Xa we have
p[xa||Y ⊗L] = p[xa||Ya ⊗L].
Here is a characterization of parameter independence in terms of ﬁber
products.
Corollary 4.3. p satisﬁes parameter independence if and only if pa =
qa ⊗Ya×Λ r and pb = qb ⊗Yb×Λ r.
Proof. By Lemma 3.6, pa = qa ⊗Ya×Λ r if and only if
pa[xa||Y ⊗L] = pa[xa||Ya ⊗L]
for all xa ∈Xa. Since p is an extension of pa, this holds if and only if
p[xa||Y ⊗L] = p[xa||Ya ⊗L]
for all xa ∈Xa. Similarly, pb = qb ⊗Yb×Λ r if and only if
p[xb||Y ⊗L] = p[xb||Yb ⊗L]
for all xb ∈Xb. The result follows.
⊣

80
ADAM BRANDENBURGER AND H. JEROME KEISLER
Deﬁnition 4.4. The h.v. model p satisﬁes outcome independence if for every
x = (xa, xb) ∈X we have
p[x||Y ⊗L] = p[xa||Y ⊗L] × p[xb||Y ⊗L].
The following corollary characterizes outcome independence in terms of
ﬁber products.
Corollary 4.5. p satisﬁes outcome independence if and only if
p = pa ⊗Y×Λ pb.
Proof. This follows easily from Lemma 3.6.
⊣
The next proposition follows Jarrett [18, 1984, p. 582].
Proposition 4.6. p satisﬁes locality if and only if it satisﬁes parameter
independence and outcome independence.
Proof. It is easily seen from the deﬁnitions that if p satisﬁes parameter
independence and outcome independence, then p satisﬁes locality.
Suppose that p satisﬁes locality. We have
{xa} × Xb =

xb∈Xb
{(xa, xb)},
so
p[xa||Y ⊗L] = p[{xa} × Xb||Y ⊗L]
=

xb∈Xb
p[xa, xb||Y ⊗L]
=

xb∈Xb
(p[xa||Ya ⊗L] × p[xb||Yb ⊗L])
= p[xa||Ya ⊗L] ×

xb∈Xb
p[xb||Yb ⊗L]
= p[xa||Ya ⊗L] × 1 = p[xa||Ya ⊗L].
Similarly,
p[xb||Y ⊗L] = p[xb||Yb ⊗L].
It follows that p satisﬁes parameter independence.
Again, supposing that p satisﬁes locality, we have
p[xa, xb||Y ⊗L] = p[xa||Ya ⊗L] × p[xb||Yb ⊗L],
and hence
p[xa, xb||Y ⊗L] = p[xa||Y ⊗L] × p[xb||Y ⊗L],
so p satisﬁes outcome independence.
⊣
We immediately get a characterization of locality in terms of ﬁber products.

FIBER PRODUCTS OF MEASURES AND QUANTUM FOUNDATIONS
81
Corollary 4.7. p satisﬁes locality if and only if
p = pa ⊗Y×Λ pb,
pa = qa ⊗Ya×Λ r,
pb = qb ⊗Yb×Λ r.
Proof. By Proposition 4.6 and Corollaries 4.3 and 4.5.
⊣
Deﬁnition 4.8. The h.v. model p satisﬁes -independence if for every event
L ∈L,
p[L||Y]y = p(L).
Remark 4.9. We observe:
(i) The -independence property for p depends only on r.
(ii) Any h.v. model p such that Λ is a singleton satisﬁes -independence.
By Remark 3.4, we have:
Lemma 4.10. The following are equivalent:
(i) p satisﬁes -independence.
(ii) The measure r is the product pY ⊗pΛ.
(iii) The -algebras Y and L are independent with respect to p, i.e.,
p(K × L) = p(K) × p(L)
for every K ∈Y, L ∈L.
The distinction between strong and weak determinism in the next two
deﬁnitions is from Brandenburger and Yanofsky [10, 2008]. Strong determinism
is the notion discussed in the Introduction.
Deﬁnition 4.11. The h.v. model p satisﬁes strong determinism if for each
xa ∈Xa we have
p[xa||Ya ⊗L](ya,) ∈{0, 1}.
This says that the set Ya × Λ can be partitioned into sets {Axa : xa ∈Xa} such
that p[xa||Axa] = 1 for each xa ∈Xa.
Deﬁnition 4.12. The h.v. model p satisﬁes weak determinism if for each
x ∈X we have
p[x||Y ⊗L](y,) ∈{0, 1}.
This says that the set Y × Λ can be partitioned into sets {Ax : x ∈X} such
that p[x||Ax] = 1 for each x ∈X.
Lemma 4.13. The following are equivalent:
(i) p satisﬁes weak determinism.
(ii) For each xa ∈Xa we have
p[xa||Y ⊗L](y,) ∈{0, 1}.

82
ADAM BRANDENBURGER AND H. JEROME KEISLER
Proof. It is clear that (ii) implies (i).
Assume (i). Then for p-almost all (y, ) there is an x ∈X such that
p[x||Y ⊗L](y,) = 1, and hence
p[xa||Y ⊗L](y,) = 1
for each xa ∈Xa. Therefore (ii) holds.
⊣
Proposition 4.14. If p satisﬁes strong determinism then it satisﬁes weak
determinism.
Proof. Suppose p satisﬁes strong determinism. By Lemma 3.3, we have
p[xa||Ya ⊗L] = p[xa||Y ⊗L]
p-almost surely, and therefore
p[xa||Y ⊗L] ∈{0, 1},
so p satisﬁes weak determinism by Lemma 4.13(ii).
⊣
Proposition 4.15. If p satisﬁes weak determinism then it satisﬁes outcome
independence.
Proof. Suppose p satisﬁes weak determinism. By Lemma 4.13, we have
p[xa||Y ⊗L] ∈{0, 1}.
Therefore
p[x||Y ⊗L] = p[xa||Y ⊗L] × p[xb||Y ⊗L],
as required.
⊣
Proposition 4.16. p satisﬁes strong determinism if and only if it satisﬁes
weak determinism and parameter independence.
Proof. Suppose p satisﬁes strong determinism. By Lemma 3.3,
p[xa||Ya ⊗L] = p[xa||Y ⊗L],
so p satisﬁes parameter independence. By Proposition 4.14, p satisﬁes weak
determinism.
For the converse, suppose p satisﬁes weak determinism and parameter
independence. Fix xa ∈Xa. By weak determinism and Lemma 4.13,
p[xa||Y ⊗L](y,) ∈{0, 1}.
By parameter independence,
p[xa||Y ⊗L] = p[xa||Ya ⊗L].
Therefore
p[xa||Ya ⊗L](y,) ∈{0, 1},
so p satisﬁes strong determinism.
⊣

FIBER PRODUCTS OF MEASURES AND QUANTUM FOUNDATIONS
83
Corollary 4.17. p satisﬁes strong determinism if and only if it satisﬁes weak
determinism and locality.
Proof. By Propositions 4.6, 4.15, and 4.16.
⊣
We can summarize the properties we have considered and the relationships
among them in the above Venn diagram.
§5. Determinization theorems. Given an h.v. model p, we call the probability
space (Λ, L, pΛ) the h.v. space of p.
Remark 5.1. Every empirical model e can be realized by an h.v. model p
where p satisﬁes -independence and the h.v. space of p has only one element.
Proof. For every probability space (Λ, L, pΛ), the product measure p =
e⊗pΛ is an h.v. model that realizes e and satisﬁes -independence. In particular,
we can take Λ to be a one-element set and take (Λ, L, pΛ) to be the trivial
probability measure.
⊣
We now state and prove our determinization results.
Theorem 5.2. Every empirical model e can be realized by an h.v. model p
where p satisﬁes strong determinism and the h.v. space of p is ﬁnite.
Proof. Let s = margX e. Build an h.v. space (Λ, L, s) where Λ is a copy of
X and L is the power set of X . Build a probability measure d on X × Λ so

84
ADAM BRANDENBURGER AND H. JEROME KEISLER
that, for each x ∈X and x′ ∈Λ,
d(x, x′) =

s(x)
if x = x′,
0
otherwise.
Note that d is an extension of s.
Let p be the ﬁber product p = d ⊗X e. Then p is realization-equivalent
to e. Since Λ is a copy of the ﬁnite space X, Λ is ﬁnite. For each xa ∈Xa and
x′ ∈Λ, we have
p[xa||x′] = d[xa||x′] ∈{0, 1}.
By Lemma 3.3, for each xa we have
p[xa||Ya ⊗L](ya,x′) ∈{0, 1}
p-almost surely. This shows that p satisﬁes strong determinism.
⊣
Theorem 5.3. Given an h.v. model p satisfying locality and -independence,
there is a realization-equivalent h.v. model ¯p that satisﬁes strong determinism
and -independence.
Proof. Suppose p satisﬁes locality and -independence. We will construct a
new h.v. model ¯p whose h.v. space ( ¯Λ, ¯L, ¯p ¯Λ) will be the product of (Λ, L, pΛ)
and the Lebesgue unit square
([0, 1]a, Ua, ua) ⊗([0, 1]b, Ub, ub).
Here, [0, 1]a is a copy of the real unit interval, Ua is the set of Borel subsets of
[0, 1]a, and ua is Lebesgue measure on Ua; similarly for b.
Let Xa = {x1
a, . . . , xA
a }. For each ya ∈Ya and  ∈Λ, partition [0, 1]a into
A consecutive intervals
Ia(x1
a, ya, ), Ia(x2
a, ya, ), . . . , Ia(xA
a , ya, ),
where, for each xa ∈Xa, Ia(xa, ya, ) has length
ua(Ia(xa, ya, )) = p[xa||Ya ⊗L](ya,).
Note that the boundary point between the ith and (i + 1)th intervals is the
(Ya ⊗L)-measurable function
n

i=1
p[xi
a||Ya ⊗L](ya,).
We carry out the same construction with b in place of a.
Let ¯r = r ⊗ua ⊗ub. Since p satisﬁes -independence, r = pY ⊗pΛ, and
thus ¯r = pY ⊗¯p ¯Λ. Let sa be the unique probability measure on
(Xa, Xa) ⊗(Ya, Ya) ⊗(Λ, L) ⊗([0, 1]a, Ua)

FIBER PRODUCTS OF MEASURES AND QUANTUM FOUNDATIONS
85
such that for each xa ∈Xa, Ka ∈Ya, L ∈L, and Ua ∈Ua, we have
sa({xa} × Ka × L × Ua) =

Ka×L×Ua
1Ia(xa,ya,)(α) d ¯r,
where we write α for a typical element of [0, 1]a. Deﬁne sb in a similar way.
Now deﬁne ¯pa, ¯pb, and ¯p as the ﬁber products
¯pa = sa ⊗Ya×Λ×[0,1]a ¯r, ¯pb = sb ⊗Yb×Λ×[0,1]b ¯r, ¯p = ¯pa ⊗Y× ¯Λ ¯pb.
We see that the h.v. model ¯p is a common extension of sa, sb, and ¯r. It also
satisﬁes -independence because ¯r = pY ⊗¯p ¯Λ. By Lemma 3.1,
sa[xa||Ya ⊗L ⊗Ua] = 1Ia(xa,ya,) ∈{0, 1}.
By Lemma 3.3,
sa[xa||Ya ⊗¯L] ∈{0, 1}.
Similarly for sb. Therefore ¯p satisﬁes strong determinism.
It remains to prove that ¯p is an extension of p. By Fubini’s Theorem,
sa({xa} × Ka × L) =

Ka×L×[0,1]a
1Ia(xa,ya,)(α) d ¯r
=

Ka×L
 1
0
1Ia(xa,ya,)(α) dua dr
=

Ka×L
ua(Ia(xa, ya, )) dr
=

Ka×L
qa[xa||Ya ⊗L](ya,) dr
= qa({xa} × Ka × L).
Thus sa is an extension of qa. Similarly, sb is an extension of qb.
Since both p and ¯p satisfy locality, and ¯p extends ¯r = r ⊗ua ⊗ub, by Fubini’s
Theorem we have
¯p({x} × K × L) =

K×L×[0,1]a×[0,1]b
¯p[x||Y ⊗¯L] d ¯r
=

K×L×[0,1]a×[0,1]b
sa[xa||Ya ⊗¯L] × sb[xb||Yb ⊗¯L] dr
=

K×L
 1
0
 1
0
sa[xa||Ya ⊗¯L] × sb[xb||Yb ⊗¯L] dua dub dr
=

K×L
qa[xa||Ya ⊗L] × qb[xb||Yb ⊗L] dr
= p({x} × K × L).

86
ADAM BRANDENBURGER AND H. JEROME KEISLER
Thus ¯p is an extension of p, and hence ¯p is realization-equivalent to p. This
completes the proof.
⊣
All the results in Section 4 (“Properties of hidden-variable models”), and
Theorems 5.2 and 5.3 in this section, extend immediately to multipartite
systems. The only adjustment needed is that parameter independence must
now be stated in terms of sets of parts instead of individual parts. Interestingly,
outcome independence and locality do not need to be restated.
§6. Endnote. To keep things simple, we assumed in this chapter that the
outcome spaces Xa and Xb are ﬁnite. However, the only result in this chapter
that requires this assumption is Theorem 5.2. We show in [9, 2012] that all of
the results in Section 4 hold for arbitrary outcome spaces Xa and Xb. Also,
the arguments in [9, 2012] can be adapted to show that Theorem 5.3 holds
assuming only that the outcome spaces have countably generated -algebras
of events Xa and Xb.
It would be of interest to extend the methods in this chapter to formulate
other properties that have usually been studied only for the case of ﬁnite sets
of measurements. For ﬁnite probability spaces, Abramsky and Brandenburger
[1, 2011] establish a strict hierarchy of three properties: non-locality (`a la
Bell) is strictly weaker than possibilistic non-locality (exhibited by the Hardy
[17, 1993] model), which is strictly weaker than strong contextuality (exhibited
by the Greenberger, Horne, and Zeilinger [16, 1989] model). (In this language,
the Kochen-Specker Theorem [19, 1967] is a model-independent proof of
strong contextuality.) Extending these latter properties to the general measure-
theoretic setting appears to be an open direction.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Abramsky and A. Brandenburger, The sheaf-theoretic structure of non-locality and
contextuality, New Journal of Physics, vol. 13 (2011), p. 113036.
[2] H. Adler, A Geometric Introduction to Forking and Thorn-Forking, Journal of Mathematical
Logic, vol. 9 (2009), pp. 1–21.
[3] J. Bell, On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox, Physics, vol. 1 (1964), pp. 195–200.
[4]
, Introduction to the hidden-variable question, Foundations of Quantum Mechanics,
Proceedings of the International School of Physics ‘Enrico Fermi,’ Course IL (New York), Academic
Press, 1971, (Reprinted in [6, 1987, pp. 29–39],), pp. 171–181.
[5]
, An exchange on local beables, Dialectica, vol. 39 (1985), pp. 85–96.
[6]
, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, Cambridge University Press,
1987.
[7] I. Ben Yaacov and H. J. Keisler, Randomizations of models as metric structures, Conﬂuentes
Mathematici, vol. 1 (2009), pp. 197–223, also available at http://www.math.wisc.edu/keisler.
[8] P. Billingsley, Probability and measure, 3rd ed., Wiley, 1995.
[9] A. Brandenburger and H. J. Keisler, A canonical hidden-variable space, (2012), available
at http://www.adambrandenburger.com and http://www.math.wisc.edu/keisler.

FIBER PRODUCTS OF MEASURES AND QUANTUM FOUNDATIONS
87
[10] A. Brandenburger and N. Yanofsky, A classiﬁcation of hidden-variable properties,
Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, vol. 41 (2008), p. 425302.
[11] A. P. Dawid and M. Studen´y, An Alternative Approach to Conditional Independence,
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics 99, Proceedings of the 7th Workshop (D. Heckerman and
J. Whittaker, editors), Morgan Kaufmann, 1999, pp. 32–40.
[12] W. M. Dickson, Quantum Chance and Non-Locality: Probability and Non-Locality in the
Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[13] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Can quantum-mechanical description of physical
reality be considered complete?, Physical Review, vol. 47 (1935), pp. 777–780.
[14] A. Fine, Hidden variables, joint probability and the Bell inequalities, Physical Review
Letters, vol. 48 (1982), pp. 291–295.
[15] C. Flori and T. Fritz, Compositories and Gleaves, (2013), available at http://arxiv.org/
abs/1308.6548.
[16] D. M. Greenberger, M. A. Horne, and A. Zeilinger, Going beyond Bell’s theorem, Bell’s
Theorem, Quantum Theory and Conceptions of the Universe (M. Kafatos, editor), Kluwer, 1989,
pp. 69–72.
[17] L. Hardy, Nonlocality for two particles without inequalities for almost all entangled states,
Physical Review Letters, vol. 71 (1993), pp. 1665–1668.
[18] J. Jarrett, On the physical signiﬁcance of the locality conditions in the Bell arguments,
Noˆus, vol. 18 (1984), pp. 569–589.
[19] S. Kochen and E. Specker, The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics, Journal
of Mathematics and Mechanics, vol. 17 (1967), pp. 59–87.
[20] A. Shimony, Events and processes in the quantum world, Quantum Concepts in Space and
Time (R. Penrose and C. Isham, editors), Oxford University Press, 1986, pp. 182–203.
[21] R. Shortt, Universally measurable spaces: An invariance theorem and diverse characteriza-
tions, Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 121 (1984), pp. 169–176.
[22] J. Swart, A conditional product measure theorem, Statistics & Probability Letters, vol. 28
(1996), pp. 131–135.
[23] J. von Neumann, Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik, Springer-Verlag,
1932, (Translated as Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Princeton University
Press, 1955.).
STERN SCHOOL OF BUSINESS
NEW YORK UNIVERSITY
NEW YORK, NY 10012
E-mail: adam.brandenburger@stern.nyu.edu
URL: www.adambrandenburger.com
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS
UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN-MADISON
MADISON, WI 53706
E-mail: keisler@math.wisc.edu
URL: www.math.wisc.edu/∼keisler

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM
MECHANICS
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
Abstract. A central theme in current work in quantum information and quantum foundations
is to see quantum mechanics as occupying one point in a space of possible theories, and to
use this perspective to understand the special features and properties which single it out, and
the possibilities for alternative theories. Two formalisms which have been used in this context
are operational theories, and categorical quantum mechanics. The aim of the present paper is to
establish strong connections between these two formalisms. We show how models of categorical
quantum mechanics have representations as operational theories. We then show how non-locality
can be formulated at this level of generality, and study a number of examples from this point of
view, including Hilbert spaces, sets and relations, and stochastic maps. The local, quantum, and
no-signalling models are characterized in these terms.
§1. Introduction. A central theme in current work in quantum information
and quantum foundations is to see quantum mechanics as occupying one point
in a space of possible theories, and to use this perspective to understand the
special features and properties which single it out, and the possibilities for
alternative theories.
Two formalisms which have been used in this context are operational theories
[48, 41, 52, 47], and categorical quantum mechanics [6, 7].
• Operational theories allow general formulations of results in quantum
foundations and quantum information [11, 12, 10]. They also play a
prominent rˆole in current work on axiomatizations of quantum mechanics
[36, 19, 49, 25].
• Categorical quantum mechanics enables a high-level approach to quantum
information and quantum foundations, which can be presented in terms
of string-diagram representations of structures in monoidal categories [7].
This has proved very eﬀective in providing a conceptually illuminating
and technically powerful perspective on a range of topics, including
quantum protocols [6], entanglement [24], measurement-based quantum
computing [29], no-cloning [1], and non-locality [22].
Logic and Algebraic Structures in Quantum Computing
Edited by J. Chubb, A. Eskandarian and V. Harizanov
Lecture Notes in Logic, 45
c⃝2016, Association for Symbolic Logic
88

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
89
The aim of the present paper is to establish strong connections between
these two formalisms.
We shall begin by reviewing operational theories.
We then show how a proper formulation of compound systems within the
operational framework leads to a view of operational theories as representa-
tions of monoidal categories of a particular form. We call these operational
representations.
We then review some elements of categorical quantum mechanics, and
show how monoidal dagger categories, equipped with a trace ideal, give rise to
operational representations. Thus there is a general passage from categorical
quantum mechanics to operational theories.
We go on to show how non-locality can be formulated at this level of
generality, and study a number of examples from this point of view, including
Hilbert spaces, sets and relations, and stochastic maps. The local, quantum,
and no-signalling models are characterized in these terms.
We shall assume some familiarity with the linear-algebraic formalism of
quantum mechanics, and with the ﬁrst notions of category theory. To make
the paper reasonably self-contained, we include an appendix which reviews the
basic deﬁnitions of monoidal categories, functors and natural transformations.
We also include another appendix which proves a number of technical results
on trace ideals. These are mathematically interesting, but would break up the
ﬂow of ideas in the main body of the paper.
§2. Why operational theories? Before proceeding to a formal description of
operational theories, it may be useful to discuss the motivation for studying
them.
As we see it, operational theories have the following attractions:
• Firstly, they focus on the empirical content of theories, and the means
by which we can gain knowledge of the microphysical world. Any viable
theory must account for this content.
• By focussing on this empirical and observational content, operational
theories allow meaningful results to be formulated and proved about the
‘space of theories’ as a whole. At a stage in the development of physics
where the next step is far from clear, this is a useful perspective, which
may prove useful in ﬁnding ‘deeper’ theories.
• Indeed, the operational framework has proved fruitful as a basis for
general results, e.g. on the information processing capabilities of theories
under various assumptions [11, 12, 10]; and provides the setting for recent
work on axiomatic reconstructions of quantum mechanics [36, 19, 49, 25].
On the debit side, operational theories attract criticism on philosophical
grounds. They are seen as linked to an ‘instrumentalist’ or ‘epistemic’ view of
physics, as opposed to a ‘realistic’ approach. From our perspective, the fact
that we study operational theories does not indicate any such philosophical

90
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
commitment. Rather, they are pragmatically useful for the reasons already
mentioned, and can be seen as expressing some irreducible minimum of
empirical content, which will have to be accounted for by any presumptive
‘deeper’ theory.
§3. Operational theories formalized. An operational theory is formulated
in terms of directly accessible ‘operations’, which can be performed e.g. in a
laboratory. We assume there are several diﬀerent types of system, A, B, C, etc.
For each system type A, the theory speciﬁes the following:
• A set of preparations PA which produce systems of that type.
• A set TA of transformations which may be performed on systems of
type A. More generally, we can consider transformations TA,B which can
be performed on systems of type A to produce systems of type B.
• A set of measurements MA which can be performed on systems of that
type.
Each measurement has a set of possible outcomes. In this paper, we shall only
consider ‘ﬁnite-dimensional’ theories, or parts of theories. This means that
each measurement has only ﬁnitely many possible outcomes. For convenience,
we shall assume a ﬁxed inﬁnite set of outcomes O, which will apply to all
measurements. Any measurement with a ﬁnite set of outcomes O′ ⊆O can be
represented using O, where those outcomes outside O′ have zero probability
of occurring.
The empirical predictions of the theory are given by its evaluation rule, which
is a function
vA : PA × MA × O →[0, 1]
which assigns a probability vA(p, m, o) to the event that a system of type A,
prepared by p, yields outcome o when measurement m is performed on it.
For each choice of p and m, the function vA(p, m, −) deﬁnes a probability
distribution on outcomes. We shall use the function
dA : PA × MA →D
dA(p, m): o →vA(p, m, o)
where D is the set of probability distributions of ﬁnite support on O.
3.1. Compound systems. An important additional ingredient is to give an
account of compound systems, i.e. putting systems, possibly space-like separated,
together.
This leads to the following additional requirements.
• For each pair of system types A, B, a compound system type AB.
• Ways of combining preparations, measurements, etc. on A and B to yield
corresponding operations on the compound system AB.
Moreover, these operations should be subject to axioms yielding a coherent
mathematical structure on these notions.

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
91
Rather than trying to develop such ‘meta-operations’ and axioms from ﬁrst
principles, we see the essential elements as provided by monoidal categories,
which have been developed extensively as a setting for quantum mechanics and
quantum information in the categorical quantum mechanics programme [6, 7].
We shall therefore proceed by giving a precise formulation of operational
theories with compound system structure as a certain class of representations
of monoidal categories, which we call operational representations.
3.2. Operational representations: concrete description. Before giving the
‘oﬃcial’ deﬁnition of operational representation, which is mathematically
elegant but a little abstract, we shall give a more concrete account, which shows
the naturalness of the ideas, and also indicates why guidance from category
theory is helpful in ﬁnding the right structural axioms.
For each system type A, we can gather the relevant data provided by an
operational theory into a single structure
(PA, MA, dA : PA × MA →D).
This immediately suggests the notion of Chu space [14, 20], which has received
quite extensive development [54], and was applied to the modelling of physical
systems in [2]. Indeed, it can be seen as a generalization of the notion of
model of a physical system proposed by Mackey in his inﬂuential work on the
foundations of quantum mechanics [48].
There is a natural equivalence relation on preparations: p is equivalent to
p′, where p, p′ ∈PA, if for all m ∈MA:
dA(p, m) = dA(p′, m).
This is exactly the notion of extensional equivalence in Chu spaces [2]. We can
regard states operationally as equivalence classes of preparations [51].
In an entirely symmetric fashion, there is an equivalence relation on mea-
surements. We deﬁne m to be equivalent to m′, where m, m′ ∈MA, if for all
p ∈PA:
dA(p, m) = dA(p, m′).
We can regard observables operationally as equivalence classes of measurements.
Quotienting an operational system (PA, MA, dA) by these equivalences
corresponds to the biextensional collapse of a Chu space [2].
Having identiﬁed operational systems with Chu spaces, we now turn to
morphisms. A transformation in TA,B induces a map f∗: PA →PB. That is,
preparing a system of type A according to preparation procedure p, and then
subjecting it to a transformation procedure t resulting in a system of type B, is
itself a procedure for preparing a system of type B.
Such a transformation can also be seen as a procedure for converting
measurements of type B into measurements of type A: given a measurement
m ∈MB, to apply it to a state prepared by p ∈PA, we apply the transformation

92
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
t to obtain a preparation of type B, to which m can be applied. Thus we can
also associate a map f∗: MB →MA to the transformation t. The formal
relationship that links the two maps f∗and f∗is that, whether we measure
f∗(p) with m, or p with f∗(m), we should observe the same probability
distribution on outcomes:
dB(f∗(p), m) = dA(p, f∗(m)).
(1)
This can be seen as an abstract form of the relationship between the Schr¨odinger
and Heisenberg ‘pictures’ of quantum dynamics.
The equation (1) says exactly that the pair of maps (f∗, f∗) deﬁnes a
morphism of Chu spaces
(f∗, f∗): (PA, MA, dA) →(PB, MB, dB).
Thus we see that in an entirely natural way, we can associate an operational
theory with a sub-category of Chu spaces, more precisely of Chu(Set, D) [54].
This sub-category will not in general be full, since not every Chu morphism
will arise from a transformation in the theory.
However, this does not yet provide an account of compound systems. While
Chu spaces have a standard monoidal structure, and indeed form ∗-autonomous
categories [20], we should not in general expect that operational theories will
give rise to monoidal sub-categories of Chu spaces. Rather, we should see the
notion of compound system as an important degree of freedom, which is to be
speciﬁed by the theory.
Thus given operational systems A = (PA, MA, dA) and B = (PB, MB, dB),
we should be able to form a system A ⊗B = (PA⊗B, MA⊗B, dA⊗B).
What general properties should such a notion satisfy? One important
requirement, which appears in one form or another in the various formulations
of operational theories, is to have an inclusion of pure tensors. This is given by
maps
P
A,B : PA × PB →PA⊗B,
M
A,B : MA × MB →MA⊗B.
For readability, we shall write p ⊗p′ rather than P
A,B(p, p′), and similarly for
measurements.
The fundamental property which this inclusion must satisfy relates to the
evaluation. For all p ∈PA, p′ ∈PB, m ∈MA, m′ ∈MB, we must have:
dA⊗B(p ⊗p′, m ⊗m′) = dA(p, m) · dB(p′, m′).
(2)
This expresses the probabilistic independence of pure tensors. Conceptually,
pure tensors arise by preparing states or performing measurements indepen-
dently on subsystems.
In addition, there are a number of coherence conditions which are needed
to get a mathematically robust notion. Rather than writing these down in an
ad hoc fashion, we shall now turn to a more systematic way of deﬁning the

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
93
categorical structure of operational theories, in which these conditions arise
naturally from standard notions.
3.3. Operational representations: functorial formulation. We shall now take
a diﬀerent view, in which the structure of an operational theory arises from
a symmetric monoidal category, which we think of as a process category.
The operational theory will amount to a certain form of representation of
this process category. The receiving category for the representation will be
(Set, ×, 1), viewed as a symmetric monoidal category.
Given a symmetric monoidal category C, an operational representation of
C is speciﬁed by the following data:
• A symmetric monoidal sub-category Ct of C. This will usually have
the same objects as C, and only those morphisms which correspond to
admissible transformations.
• A symmetric monoidal functor P: Ct →Set which represents, for each
object A of Ct, viewed as a type of system, the corresponding set of
preparations or states.
• A contravariant symmetric monoidal functor M: Cop
t
→Set which for
each A represents the measurements on A. Note that Cop
t
is a symmetric
monoidal category.
• A dinatural symmetric monoidal transformation
d: P × M
··→KD
which gives the evaluation rule of the theory. Here KD is the constant
functor valued at D. Note that a constant symmetric monoidal functor
valued at a set M is just a commutative monoid (M, ·, 1) in Set. We take
D to be a commutative monoid under pointwise multiplication.
We shall assume that the functors P, M are embeddings, i.e. injective on objects
and faithful.
Let us now unpack this deﬁnition.
• The general point of view is that the structure of the operational theory
is controlled by the ‘abstract’ category C. The types of the theory are the
objects of Ct.
• Rather than a single set of preparations, we have a variable set P, which
for each type A gives us a set PA. Moreover, this acts functorially on
the admissible transformations f : A →B in Ct to produce functions
f∗: PA →PB, where f∗:= P(f). Thus these functions take preparations
on A to preparations on B, as already discussed.
• Similarly, the functor M speciﬁes a variable set MA of measurements for
each system type A. The contravariant action of this functor is again as
expected from our previous discussion.
The ﬁrst new ingredient which picks up the issue of monoidal structure is
that P and M are required to be monoidal functors. The fact that P and M are

94
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
monoidal means that there are natural transformations
P
A,B : PA × PB →PA⊗B,
M
A,B : MA × MB →MA⊗B.
i.e. inclusions of pure tensors. Naturality means that the diagrams
PA × PB
f∗×g∗

P
A,B
 PA⊗B
(f⊗g)∗

PA′ × PB′
P
A′,B′
 PA′⊗B′
MA × MB
M
A,B
 MA⊗B
MA′ × MB′
f∗×g∗

M
A′,B′
 MA′⊗B′
(f⊗g)∗

commute. The coherence conditions for monoidal natural transformations
complete the required properties of pure tensors.
The dinatural transformation dA : PA × MA →D represents the evaluation
function. Dinaturality says that for each admissible transformation f : A →B:
PB × MB
dB

PA × MB
f∗×1B

1A×f∗

D
PA × MA
dA

Thus we see that dinaturality is exactly the Chu morphism condition (1).
Monoidality of d is the equation (2).
3.4. Operational categories. If we are given an operational representation
(C, Ct, P, M, d) we can construct from this a single category, recovering the
picture given in Section 3.2.
For each object A of C, we have the Chu space (PA, MA, dA). By dinaturality
of d, each morphism f : A →B gives rise to a Chu morphism
(f∗, f∗): (PA, MA, dA) →(PB, MB, dB).
By functoriality of P and M, we obtain a sub-category of Chu spaces.
Moreover, since P and M are embeddings, we can push the symmetric
monoidal structure on C forward to this sub-category:
PA ⊗PB := PA⊗B,
f∗⊗f′
∗:= (f ⊗f′)∗,
MA ⊗MB := MA⊗B,
f∗⊗f′∗:= (f ⊗f′)∗.
Thus we obtain a symmetric monoidal category, whose underlying category
is a sub-category of Chu spaces. We call this the operational category arising
from the operational representation.

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
95
3.5. Generalized representations. The structural properties of operational
representations and categories are independent of the particular choice of the
monoid D used in specifying the dinatural transformation d.
We shall deﬁne a generalized operational representation with weights W,
where (W, ·, 1) is a commutative monoid with a zero element, to be a tuple
(C, Ct, P, M, d), where d now has the form
d: P × M
··→KW
and KW is the constant symmetric monoidal functor valued at W. This yields
the deﬁnition of operational representation given previously when W = D.
We now have a general scheme for representing symmetric monoidal cate-
gories as operational categories. So far, however, we have no examples. We
shall now show how monoidal dagger categories give rise to operational repre-
sentations in a canonical fashion, following the ideas of categorical quantum
mechanics [7].
§4. Monoidal dagger categories. Monoidal dagger categories are the basic
structures used in categorical quantum mechanics [7]. We shall brieﬂy review
the deﬁnitions, and give a number of examples.
A dagger category is a category C equipped with an identity-on-objects,
contravariant, strictly involutive functor. Concretely, for each arrow f : A →B,
there is an arrow f† : B →A, and this assignment satisﬁes:
1† = 1,
(g ◦f)† = f† ◦g†,
f†† = f .
We deﬁne an arrow f : A →B in a dagger category to be a dagger-isomorphism
if:
f† ◦f = 1A,
f ◦f† = 1B.
A symmetric monoidal dagger category is a dagger category with a symmetric
monoidal structure (C, ⊗, I, , , α, ) such that
(f ⊗g)† = f† ⊗g†
and moreover the natural isomorphisms , , α,  are componentwise dagger-
isos.
Examples.
• The category Hilb of Hilbert spaces and bounded linear maps, and its (full)
sub-category FHilb of ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces. Here the dagger
is the adjoint, and the tensor product has its standard interpretation for
Hilbert spaces. More generally, any symmetric monoidal C*-category
is an example [33, 28]. This includes categories of (right) Hilbert C*-
modules, which are Hilbert spaces whose inner product takes values in
an arbitrary C*-algebra instead of C.

96
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
• The category Rel of sets and relations. Here the dagger is relational
converse, while the monoidal structure is given by the cartesian product.
This generalizes to relations valued in a commutative quantale [55], and
to the category of relations for any regular category [18]. Small categories
as objects and profunctors as morphisms behave very similarly to Rel,
even though they only form a bicategory [16].
• A common generalization of FHilb and FRel, the category of ﬁnite sets
and relations, is obtained by forming the category FMat(S), where S is a
commutative semiring with involution. FMat(S) has ﬁnite sets as objects,
and maps X × Y →S as morphisms, which we think of as ‘X times Y
matrices’. Composition is by matrix multiplication, while the dagger is
conjugate transpose, where conjugation of a matrix means elementwise
application of the involution on S. The tensor product of X and Y is
given by X × Y, with the action on matrices given by componentwise
multiplication. (This corresponds to the ‘Kronecker product’ of matrices).
If we take S = C, this yields a category equivalent to FHilb, while if we
take S to be the Boolean semiring {0, 1} (with trivial involution), we get
FRel.
• An inﬁnitary generalization of FMat(C) is given by LMat. This category
has arbitrary sets as objects, and as morphisms matrices M : X × Y →C
such that for each x ∈X, the family {M(x, y)}y∈Y is ℓ2-summable;
and for each y ∈Y , the family {M(x, y)}x∈X is ℓ2-summable. Hilb is
equivalent to a (non-full) sub-category of LMat.
• If C and D are symmetric monoidal dagger categories, then so is the cate-
gory [C, D] of functors F : C →D that preserve the dagger. Morphisms
are natural transformations. This accounts for several interesting models.
For example, setting D = FHilb and letting C be a group, we obtain the
category of unitary representations. Any topological or conformal quan-
tum ﬁeld theory is a sub-category of the case where D = FHilb and C is
the category of cobordisms [45, 8, 56]. Letting C be the discrete category
N, and letting D be either FHilb or FRel, we recover FMat(D(I, I )).
The doubling construction. All of the above examples are variations on the
theme of matrix categories. Indeed, it seems hard to ﬁnd natural examples
which are not of this form. However, there is a construction which produces a
symmetric monoidal dagger category from any symmetric monoidal category.
Although the construction is formal, it is interesting in our context since it can
be seen as a form of quantization; it converts classical process categories into a
form in which quantum constructions are meaningful.
Given a category C, we deﬁne a dagger category C⇆as follows. The objects
are the same as those of C, and a morphism (f, g): A →B is a pair of
C-morphisms f : A →B, g : B →A. Composition is deﬁned componentwise;
while (f, g)† = (g, f). This is in fact the object part of the right adjoint to the

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
97
evident forgetful functor DagCat →Cat; see [38, 3.1.17]. Thus for each dagger
category C, there is a dagger functor C : C →C⇆which is the identity on
objects, and sends f to (f, f†). This has the universal property with respect
to dagger functors C →D⇆for categories D.
This cofree construction of a dagger category lifts to the level of symmetric
monoidal categories. If C is a symmetric monoidal category, then C⇆is a
symmetric monoidal dagger category, with the monoidal structure deﬁned
componentwise: thus (f, g) ⊗(h, k) := (f ⊗h, g ⊗k). Note in particular that
the structural isos in C turn into dagger isos in C⇆.
4.1. Additional structure. We shall require two further structural ingredients.
The ﬁrst is zero morphisms: for each pair of objects A, B, a morphism
0A,B : A →B such that, for all f : C →A and g : B →D,
0A,B ◦f = 0C,B,
g ◦0A,B = 0A,D.
Note that if zero morphisms exist, they are unique.
In the context of symmetric monoidal dagger categories, we further require
that
f ⊗0 = 0 = 0 ⊗g,
0† = 0.
Examples. All the examples of symmetric monoidal dagger categories given
above have zero morphisms in an evident fashion. Functor categories have
componentwise zero morphisms. Zero morphisms in C⇆are pairs of zero
morphisms in C. For more examples, see [39].
The ﬁnal ingredient we shall require is a trace ideal in the sense of [4].1 Firstly,
we recall that in any monoidal category, the scalars, i.e. the endomorphisms of
the tensor unit I , form a commutative monoid [44].
An endomorphism ideal in a symmetric monoidal category C is speciﬁed by
a set I(A) ⊆End(A) for each object A, where End(A) = C(A, A) is the set of
endomorphisms on A. This is subject to the following closure conditions:
g : A →B, f ∈I(A), h : B →A ⇒g ◦f ◦h ∈I(B)
f ∈I(A), g ∈I(B) ⇒f ⊗g ∈I(A ⊗B),
I(I ) = End(I )
0 ∈I(A).
If C is a dagger category, I is a dagger endomorphism ideal when additionally
f ∈I(A) ⇒f† ∈I(A),
but we will also call these endomorphism ideals for short. A trace ideal is an
endomorphism ideal I, together with a function
TrA : I(A) →End(I )
1Strictly speaking, we are deﬁning the more restricted notion of global trace of an endomorphism,
rather than a parameterized trace as in [4]. This restricted notion is all we shall need.

98
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
for each object A, subject to the following axioms:
TrA(g ◦f) = TrB(f ◦g)
(f : A →B, g : B →A,
g ◦f ∈I(A), f ◦g ∈I(B))
TrA⊗B(f ⊗g) = TrA(f)TrB(g),
TrI (s) = s.
A dagger trace ideal additionally satisﬁes
TrA(f†) = TrA(f)†,
but we will also call these trace ideal for short. We call a morphism f ∈I(A)
trace class.
Examples. All of the examples given above have trace ideals. In the case
of ﬁnite matrices, the usual matrix trace is a total operation. In the case of
Hilb, we interpret trace class in the standard sense for Hilbert spaces, and
similarly for LMat. Through the GNS-embedding [33, Proposition 1.14], this
also provides a trace ideal for any C*-category.
In the case of relations, the summation over the diagonal becomes a supre-
mum in a complete semilattice, which is always deﬁned.
Any symmetric monoidal dagger sub-category of [C, D] inherits endomor-
phism ideals and zero morphisms from D componentwise, and has a trace
function Tr(α) = 
A Tr(αA) as soon as D(I, I ) has an operation  satisfying

A s†
A = (
A sA)†, 
A s = s, and (
A sAtA) = (
A sA)(
A tA), where A
ranges over the objects of C. This is the case when C is a ﬁnite group, as well
as for topological quantum ﬁeld theories.
The doubling construction turns trace ideals into dagger trace ideals. For
(f, g): A →A, deﬁne (f, g) ∈I(A) if and only if f ∈I(A) and g ∈I(A),
and TrA(f, g) = (TrA(f), TrA(g)). Thus if C is a symmetric monoidal category
with zero morphisms and a trace ideal, C⇆is a dagger category with the same
structure.
In Appendix B, we prove a number of results about trace ideals:
• We characterize when trace ideals exist, and to what extent they are
unique.
• We show that we really need to restrict to ideals to consider traces: the
category of Hilbert spaces does not support a trace on all morphisms.
• As a corollary, we derive that dual objects in the category of Hilbert
spaces are necessarily ﬁnite-dimensional.
• Finally, we prove in some detail that the category of Hilbert spaces indeed
has a trace ideal; the details turn out to be quite subtle.
This material would have unduly interrupted the main ﬂow of the paper, but
is of mathematical interest in its own right.
§5. From categorical quantum mechanics to operational categories. Let C
be a symmetric monoidal dagger category with zero morphisms and a trace

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
99
ideal. We shall show that C gives rise to an operational representation and
operational category in a canonical fashion, directly inspired by quantum
mechanics.
5.1. Transformations. We take Ct to be the sub-category with the same
objects as C, and with dagger-isomorphisms as arrows. This is a groupoid, i.e.
all morphisms are invertible.
It is easily seen to be a monoidal dagger sub-category of C.
5.2. States. A morphism f ∈End(A) in a dagger category is positive if for
some g : A →B, f = g† ◦g. We deﬁne a state on A to be a positive morphism
f ∈End(A) which is trace class, and such that TrA(f) = 1. We write PA for
the set of states on A.
In Hilb, this deﬁnition yields exactly the standard notion of density operator
as used in quantum mechanics.
Pure states can also be deﬁned in this setting. An arrow  : I →A has unit
norm if † ◦ = 1. Given such an arrow,  ◦† ∈PA. Indeed, this arrow is
clearly positive, and
TrA( ◦†) = TrI († ◦) = TrI (1) = 1
using our assumption on  and the axioms for the trace.
Given a dagger isomorphism f : A →B in C, the function f∗: PA →PB is
deﬁned by
f∗: s →f ◦s ◦f†.
Functoriality holds, since
g∗◦f∗(s) = g ◦(f ◦s ◦f†) ◦g† = (g ◦f) ◦s ◦(g ◦f)† = (g ◦f)∗(s).
Inclusion of pure tensors is given by
P
A,B : (s, t) →s ⊗t.
It is straightforward to check the coherence conditions.
5.3. Measurements. A dagger idempotent, or projector, on A is an arrow
P ∈End(A) such that
P2 = P,
P = P†.
A family {fi}i∈I of endomorphisms on A is:
• Pairwise disjoint if fi ◦fj = 0, i ̸= j;
• Jointly monic if for all g, h : B →A:
[ ∀i ∈I. fi ◦g = fi ◦h ] ⇒g = h.
A projective measurement on A with ﬁnite set of outcomes O′ ⊆O is a family
of dagger idempotents {Po}o∈O′ on A which is pairwise disjoint and jointly
monic. We take MA to be the set of projective measurements on A.

100
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
The functorial action of the measurement functor on dagger isomorphisms
f : A →B in C is deﬁned by
f∗(Po) = f† ◦Po ◦f.
It is easily veriﬁed that f∗preserves disjointness and joint monicity of fam-
ilies of projectors, and hence carries projective measurements to projective
measurements. Functoriality is also easily veriﬁed.
Inclusion of tensors is deﬁned pointwise on projectors:
P
A,B : (Po, Po′) →Po ⊗Po′.
Note that the combined measurement will have a ﬁnite set of outcomes which,
perhaps with some relabelling, can be regarded as a subset of O.
5.4. Evaluation. The transformation d is deﬁned as follows, where s ∈PA,
and m = {Po}o∈O′ ∈MA:
dA(s, m)(o) :=
 TrA(s ◦Po),
o ∈O′
0,
otherwise.
Note that d is valued in the commutative monoid of scalars W := End(I )O.
By the assumption of zero morphisms, this monoid has a zero element.
The dinaturality of this transformation, i.e. the Chu morphism condition, is
just:
TrB(f ◦s ◦f† ◦Po) = TrA(s ◦f† ◦Po ◦f).
The monoidality of d is veriﬁed as follows:
dA⊗B(s ⊗s′, m ⊗m′)(o, o′) = TrA⊗B(s ⊗s′ ◦Po ⊗Po′)
= TrA⊗B(s ◦Po ⊗s′ ◦Po′)
= TrA(s ◦Po)TrB(s′ ◦Po′)
= dA(s, m)(o) · dB(s′, m′)(o′).
5.5. The canonical operational representation. We collect the constructions
described in this section together. Given a symmetric monoidal dagger category
C with zero morphisms and a trace ideal, we have deﬁned a sub-category Ct,
monoidal functors P and M, and a dinatural transformation d.
Proposition 3. The tuple (C, Ct, P, M, d) is an operational representation
with weights W. We call this the canonical operational representation of C.
The corresponding operational category is the canonical operational category
for C.
⊣
We say that the canonical representation is distributional if the monoid of
scalars End(I ) has an addition making it a commutative semiring, and for
each state s ∈PA and measurement m ∈MA:

o∈O
dA(s, m)(o) = 1.
(4)

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
101
We say that it is probabilistic if moreover the image of d embeds into the
semiring of non-negative reals.
§6. Examples of operational categories. We shall now examine the opera-
tional categories arising from various examples of symmetric monoidal dagger
categories.
6.1. Hilbert spaces. The deﬁnitions of states, measurements and evaluation
are directly inspired by those used in the standard Hilbert-space formulation
of quantum mechanics. Thus it is immediate that the states in the canonical
representation for Hilb are the density matrices, while the dagger-isomorphisms
are the unitary transformations.
For measurements, we have the following result.
Proposition 5. Measurements in Hilb have exactly their standard meaning.
More precisely, observables with ﬁnite discrete spectra correspond exactly to
the interpretation in Hilb of the abstract notion of measurements as deﬁned in
Section 5.3 for dagger categories.
Proof. We think of the outcomes as labelling the eigenvalues of the observ-
able; then the family {Po}o∈O′ should correspond to the spectral decomposition
of the observable. Clearly, dagger idempotents correspond exactly to projectors
in Hilb, and so does the notion of a pairwise disjoint family of projectors. It
remains to show that the joint monicity condition captures the fact that a
pairwise disjoint family of projectors {Pi}i∈I yields a resolution of the identity,
i.e.

i∈I
Pi = 1A.
Indeed, if 
i∈I Pi = 1A and Pi ◦g = Pi ◦h for all i, then
g = 1A ◦g =

i∈I
Pi

◦g =

i∈I
Pi ◦g
=

i∈I
Pi ◦h =

i∈I
Pi

◦h = 1A ◦h = h.
For the converse, suppose that 
i∈I Pi ̸= 1A. This implies that for some
non-zero vector , Pi() = 0 for all i. Then for f : C →A given by 1 →,
we have Pi ◦f = Pi ◦0 for all i, so the family is not jointly monic.
⊣
Finally, the deﬁnition of d matches the standard statistical algorithm of
quantum mechanics. Thus we obtain the standard interpretations of states,
transformations, (projective) measurements, and probabilities of measurement
outcomes.
The operational category arising from Hilb is of course probabilistic.

102
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
The same analysis holds for C*-categories through their GNS-construction,
and for subcategories of [C, Hilb] such as topological quantum ﬁeld theories.
states and measurements in such categories are just natural transformations
whose components are states or measurements respectively. Because the tensor
unit in such categories is the constant functor KI , they have the same scalars
as Hilb. Therefore the induced operational categories are probabilistic.
6.2. Relations. We shall now give a general analysis of the operational
representation for locale-valued relations. This level of generality will be useful
when we go on look at non-locality in operational categories.
We recall that a locale [42] (also known as a frame or complete Heyting
algebra) is a complete lattice Ω such that the following distributive law holds:
a ∧

i∈I
bi =

i∈I
a ∧bi.
The category Rel(Ω) has sets as objects, while the morphisms R : X →Y are
Ω-valued relations (or matrices) R : X × Y →Ω. We write xRy =  for
R(x, y) = . Composition is relational composition (or matrix multiplication)
evaluated in Ω. If R: X →Y and S : Y →Z, then:
x(S ◦R)z :=

y∈Y
xRy ∧ySz.
Clearly, Rel is the special case that Ω is the Boolean semiring {⊥, ⊤}, where we
identify ⊥, the bottom element of the lattice, with 0, and ⊤, the top element,
with 1. Note that the full sub-category FRel(Ω) of ﬁnite sets is identical to
FMat(Ω), where we regard Ω as a semiring with idempotent addition and
multiplication. Indeed, in the ﬁnite case, completeness of Ω need not be
assumed, and we are simply in the case of matrices over idempotent semirings.
We shall take the tensor unit in Rel(Ω) to be I = {•}.
By an Ω-subset of a set X, we mean a function X →Ω. Any family {Si} of
Ω-subsets of X has a ‘union’ 
i Si given by x →
i Si(x), and an ‘intersection’

i Si given by x →
i Si(x). In particular, we write ⊤X for the Ω-subset of
X given by x →⊤, and ⊥X for the Ω-subset of X given by x →⊥. Given a
set X, we say that a family {Si}i∈I of Ω-subsets of X is a disjoint cover of X if:
Si ∧Sj = ⊥X (i ̸= j),

i∈I
Si = ⊤X .
Given a Ω-subset S of X, we deﬁne a Ω-relation ΔS : X →X by
xΔSy =
 S(x)
if x = y,
⊥
if x ̸= y.
Note that
ΔS ◦ΔT = ⊥X×X ⇐⇒S ∧T = ⊥X ,

i∈I
ΔSi = 1A ⇐⇒

i∈I
Si = ⊤X . (6)

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
103
Proposition 7. Projective measurements on X in Rel(Ω) consist of families
of relations {ΔSi }i∈I , where {Si}i∈I is a disjoint cover of X.
Proof. Clearly any family of relations of this form is a projective measure-
ment. For the converse, suppose we have a projective measurement {Pi}i∈I
on X. The fact that Pi is a projector in Rel(Ω) means that xPiy = yPix
and xPz = 
yxPy ∧yPz, which implies that xPix ≥xPiy. Sup-
pose for a contradiction that xPiy =  > ⊥where x ̸= y.
Deﬁne
R, S : I →X by •Rx =  = •Sy, and •Rz = ⊥= •Sz for
other z.
Then •(Pi ◦R)x = 
z•Rz ∧zPix =  ∧xPix = 
since xPix ≥yPix = , and also •(Pi ◦S)x = .
Similarly
•(Pi ◦R)y =  = •(Pi ◦S)y, and •(Pi ◦R)z = ⊥= •(Pi ◦S)z for
other z. Hence Pi ◦R = Pi ◦S. Moreover, Pj ◦R = Pj ◦S = ⊥for any
j ̸= i, by disjointness of the family, since e.g. ⊥< xPjz ≤xPjx implies
Pi ◦Pj ̸= ⊥. Thus Pk ◦R = Pk ◦S for all k ∈I , contradicting joint monicity.
Hence Pi must have the form Pi = ΔSi for some Si ⊆X . The fact that the
family {Si}i∈I is a disjoint cover of X now follows from (6).
⊣
Next we analyze states in Rel(Ω). Firstly, we give an explicit description of
the trace. If R: X →X is an Ω-valued relation,
•TrX (R)• =

x
xRx.
Thus the trace can be viewed as a predicate on endo-relations, which is satisﬁed
to the extent that the relation has a ‘ﬁxpoint’, i.e. a reﬂexive element.
Note that Ω-valued relations R: I →X of unit norm correspond to Ω-
subsets S of X satisfying

x
S(x) = ⊤.
The corresponding pure state is PS, deﬁned by xPSy = S(x) ∧S(y).
We say that states s, t on X are equivalent if for all Ω-subsets S of X:
TrX (s ◦ΔS) = TrX (t ◦ΔS).
Proposition 8. Every state in Rel(Ω) is equivalent to a pure state.
Proof. If s is a state on X, then it satisﬁes ⊤= 
xxsx, and for some
relation R,
xsy =

z
xRz ∧yRz.
Deﬁne an Ω-subset S = dom(s) of X by x →xsx. We claim that s is
equivalent to PS. Indeed, for any Ω-subset T of X,
TrX (s ◦ΔT) =

x
[x(s ◦ΔT )x]

104
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
=

x,y
xΔTy ∧ysx
=

x
T(x) ∧xsx
=

x
T(x) ∧S(x)
=

x,y
yPSx ∧xΔTy
= TrX (PS ◦ΔT).
⊣
Finally, we consider evaluation. The scalars in Rel(Ω) can be identiﬁed with
the locale Ω. Because states correspond to Ω-subsets S satisfying 
x S(x) = ⊤,
and measurements to disjoint covers, we see that equation (4) is satisﬁed. Thus
we have the following result.
Proposition 9. The operational category arising from Rel(Ω) is distribu-
tional.
Proof. Let ΔS be a state, and m be a measurement given by a disjoint cover
{So} of X. Then

o
dA(ΔS, m)(o) =

o
TrX (ΔS ◦ΔSo)
=

o,x,y
xΔSy ∧yΔSox
=

o,x
S(x) ∧So(x)
=

x
S(x) ∧

o
So(x)

=

x
S(x)
= ⊤.
⊣
Discussion. These results highlight two important diﬀerences between Rel(Ω)
and Hilb as operational categories. In Hilb, every projector can appear as
part of a projective measurement, while in Rel(Ω) the collective conditions of
disjointness and joint monicity impose the constraint that projectors have to be
sub-identities ΔS. Moreover, in Rel(Ω) the distinction between superpositions
of pure states, and convex combinations to form mixed states, is lost, so that
every state is equivalent to a pure one. The relevance of this will become
apparent when we discuss non-locality in Rel(Ω) in Section 9.2.

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
105
§7. Classical operational categories. The construction of operational repre-
sentations on monoidal dagger categories is directly inspired by quantum me-
chanics. However, operational theories should also include classical physics—
or its discrete operational residue. Our notion of operational representation is
indeed broad enough for this, as we shall now show.
The basic classical setting we shall consider is the category Stoch. The
objects are ﬁnite sets, and the morphisms M : X →Y are the X × Y-matrices
valued in [0, 1] which are row-stochastic. Thus for each x ∈X, we have a
probability distribution on Y.
An alternative description of Stoch is as the Kleisli category for the monad
of discrete probability distributions; see [40].
The monoidal structure is deﬁned as for FMat(S). Note that Stoch is not
closed under matrix transposition. Indeed, we have the following result.
Proposition 10. There is no dagger structure on Stoch.
Proof. Note that if a category C has a dagger structure, it is in particular
self-dual, i.e. equivalent to Cop. However, the one-element set is terminal but
not initial in Stoch, which is thus not self-dual.
⊣
It follows that we cannot directly apply the construction of Section 5. One
might consider using the formal doubling construction on Stoch to obtain
a dagger symmetric monoidal category with a dagger trace ideal. But this
would not yield the expected result; for example, the dagger would not be given
by transpose of (bi-stochastic) matrices. However, it is easy to give a direct
deﬁnition of an operational representation, as follows.
• The sub-category Stocht is deﬁned by restricting to the functions (deter-
ministic transformations), represented as matrices by their characteristic
maps. Thus if f : X →Y is a function, for each x ∈X the corresponding
probability distribution is f(x).
• A state on X is a morphism I →X in Stoch, or equivalently a probability
distribution on X . This is the classical notion of mixed state. The
functorial action of states is described as follows. Given f : X →Y, we
deﬁne
f∗(s)(y) =

f(x)=y
s(x).
• A measurement on X is a function m : X →O with ﬁnite image O′ ⊆O.
This is just a discrete random variable. The functorial action on f : X →
Y is just
m →m ◦f.
• The evaluation is deﬁned by:
dX (s, m)(o) =

m(x)=o
s(x).

106
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
The following result is easily veriﬁed.
Proposition 11. The above data speciﬁes a probabilistic operational repre-
sentation of Stoch.
⊣
Various generalizations of this construction are possible:
• We can generalize to ‘distributions’ over an arbitrary commutative semir-
ing, as in [40]. This will still yield a distributional operational representa-
tion.
• We can generalize to probability measures over general measure spaces.
This amounts to using the Kleisli category of the Giry monad [34].
§8. Non-locality in operational categories. Having set up a general frame-
work for operational categories, we shall now investigate an important founda-
tional notion in this general setting; namely non-locality.
Throughout this section, we ﬁx a distributional operational representation
(C, Ct, P, M, d) on a monoidal category C.
8.1. Empirical models. We shall begin by showing how probability models
of the form commonly studied in quantum information and quantum founda-
tions can be interpreted in the corresponding operational category. In these
models, there are n agents or sites, each of which has the choice of one of
several measurement settings; and each measurement has a number of distinct
outcomes. For each choice of a measurement setting by each of the agents, we
have a probability distribution on the joint outcomes of the measurements.
We shall associate objects A1, . . . , An with the n sites. We deﬁne A :=
A1 ⊗· · · ⊗An. We ﬁx a state s ∈PA. For each combination of measurements
(m1, . . . , mn), where mi ∈MAi for i = 1, . . . , n, we obtain the measurement
m := m1 ⊗· · · ⊗mn by inclusion of pure tensors. Now the probability of
obtaining a joint outcome o := (o1, . . . , on) for m is given by
p(o|m) := dA(s, m)(o).
We can regard these models as observational ‘windows’ on the operational
theory. They represent the directly accessible information predicted by the
theory, and provide the empirical yardstick by which it is judged.
8.2. Non-locality. We now deﬁne what it means for an empirical model of
the kind described in the previous sub-section to exhibit non-locality. We
shall follow the traditional route of using hidden variables explicitly, although
we could equivalently, and perhaps more elegantly, formulate non-locality in
terms of the (non-)existence of a joint distribution [31, 5].
We are assuming a ﬁxed distributional model, with a semiring of weights W.
A W-distribution on a set X is a function d : X →W of ﬁnite support, such
that

x∈X
d(x) = 1.

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
107
A hidden-variable model for an empirical model is deﬁned using a set Λ
of hidden variables, with a ﬁxed distribution d.2
For each  ∈Λ, the
model speciﬁes a distribution q(o|m) on outcomes o for each choice of
measurements m. The required condition for the hidden variable model to
realize the empirical model p is that, for all m and o:
p(o|m) =

∈Λ
q(o|m) · d().
That is, we recover the empirical probabilities by averaging over the hidden
variables.
We say that the hidden-variable model is local if, for all  ∈Λ, m =
(m1, . . . , mn), and o := (o1, . . . , on):
q(o|m) =
n

i=1
q(oi|mi).
Here q(oi|mi) is the marginal:
q(oi|mi) =

o′
i =oi,m′
i =mi
q(o′|m′).
We say that the empirical model p is local if it is realized by some local
hidden-variable model; and non-local otherwise.
Note that the deﬁnition of non-locality makes sense for any distributional
operational category. Thus we can lift these ideas to the general level of
operational categories. We say that an operational category exhibits non-
locality if it gives rise to a non-local empirical model. Ultimately, we have a
criterion for ascribing non-locality to monoidal process categories themselves,
relative to a given distributional operational representation.
§9. Examples of non-locality. We shall now investigate non-locality in a
number of examples.
9.1. Hilbert spaces. As expected, the operational category arising from Hilb,
which is essentially the ﬁnite-dimensional part of standard quantum mechanics,
does exhibit non-locality.
As a standard example—essentially the one used by Bell in his original proof
of Bell’s theorem—consider the following table.
(0, 0)
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
(1, 1)
(a, b)
1/2
0
0
1/2
(a, b′)
3/8
1/8
1/8
3/8
(a′, b)
3/8
1/8
1/8
3/8
(a′, b′)
1/8
3/8
3/8
1/8
2The assumption of a ﬁxed distribution d is technically the condition of ‘-independence’ [26].

108
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
It lists the probabilities that one of two outcomes (0 or 1) occurs when
simultaneously measured with one of two measurements at two sites (a or a′ at
the ﬁrst site, and b or b′ at the second). This table can be realized in quantum
mechanics, e.g. by a Bell state, written in the Z basis as
|↑↑⟩+ |↓↓⟩
√
2
,
subjected to spin measurements in the XY-plane of the Bloch sphere, at a
relative angle of 	/3.
A standard argument (see e.g. [15, 5]) shows that this table cannot be realized
by a local hidden-variable model.
The same reasoning applies to C*-categories and subcategories of [C, Hilb],
taking the hidden variables componentwise. The constant functor valued e.g. at
the model described above then still shows that such operational categories are
non-local.
9.2. Relations. Suppose we are given an empirical model in the distributional
operational category obtained from Rel(Ω). The types are sets X1, . . . , Xn,
there is a state s = ΔS for a Ω-subset S of X := 
i Xi satisfying 
x S(x) = ⊤,
and measurements mi = {ΔSi
o}o∈O′, where {Si
o} is a disjoint cover of Xi. For
each combination of measurements m and outcomes o, we have:
p(o|m) =
 
x S(x) ∧Si
o(x)
if o ∈O′,
0
otherwise.
We shall now construct a local hidden-variable model which realizes this
empirical model, using the elements of X as the hidden variables. We deﬁne
the distribution ds on X as x →S(x). Note that we are working over Ω (the
locale of scalars in Rel(Ω)), so this is a well-deﬁned distribution, which sums
to 1.
We deﬁne px(o|m) ≡
i Si
oi(xi), so this hidden-variable model is local by
construction.
We must verify that this model agrees with the empirical model. This comes
down to the following calculation for o ∈O′:
p(o|m) =

x
S(x) ∧Si
o(x) =

x
S(x) ∧

i
Si
oi (x) =

x
px(o|m) ∧ds(x).
We conclude from this that Rel(Ω), despite being a ‘quantum-like’ monoidal
dagger-category, does not admit non-local behaviour. This stands in interesting
counter-point to the fact that, as shown extensively in [3], relational models can
be used to give ‘logical’ proofs of non-locality and contextuality, in the style of
‘Bell’s theorem without inequalities’ [35]. The key point is that these logical
proofs are based on showing the non-existence of global sections compatible
with a given empirical model; while here we are looking at empirical models
generated by states in Rel(Ω), which are exactly sets of global elements.

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
109
The key feature of quantum mechanics, by contrast, is that quantum
states under suitable measurements are able to realize families of probability
distributions which have no global sections.
Bearing in mind that ﬁnite-dimensional quantum mechanics corresponds to
the operational category arising from FMat(C), while FRel(Ω) is FMat(Ω),
this shows that idempotence of the scalars implies that only local behaviour can
be realized; thus non-locality can only arise in non-idempotent situations.
9.3. Classical stochastic maps. We now consider the case of classical sto-
chastic maps, as discussed in Section 7. This is in fact quite similar to the case
for Rel. Given an empirical model realized by sets X1, . . . , Xn, a state s which
is a probability distribution on X := 
i Xi, and measurements mi : Xi →O,
we again take the hidden variables to be the elements of X. We can write s as
a convex combination
s =

x∈X

xx.
Note that 
 is a probability distribution on X . We can deﬁne px(o|m) :=
o(m(x)). Clearly px(o|m) = 
i px(oi|mi), so this hidden-variable model is
local.
It is straightforward to verify that the probabilities p(o|m) are recovered by
averaging over the deterministic hidden variables.
Thus we conclude, as expected, that Stoch does not exhibit non-locality.
In fact, we can say more than this. We can calibrate the expressiveness of an
operational theory in terms of which empirical models it realizes. We shall now
show that Stoch realizes exactly those models which have local hidden-variable
realizations.
To see this, suppose we are given sets of measurements M1, . . . , Mn. We deﬁne
M := 
i Mi, the disjoint union of these sets of measurements, and X := OM.
Thus elements of X simultaneously assign outcomes to all measurements. For
each m = (m1, . . . , mn) ∈
i Mi, we deﬁne a map ˆm : X →O by
ˆm : x →(x(m1), . . . , x(mn)).
For each m, we get the probability distribution on outcomes given by
dm : o →

ˆm(x)=o
s(x).
This is the empirical model realized by the state x, viewed as a probability
distribution on the hidden variables X ; and as shown e.g. in [5], all local models
are of this form.
9.4. Signed stochastic maps. We shall now consider a variant of Stoch which
has much greater expressive power in terms of the empirical models it realizes.
This is the category SStoch of signed stochastic maps; real matrices such that
each row sums to 1. Thus for each input, there is a ‘signed probability measure’

110
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
on outputs, which may include ‘negative probabilities’ [61, 27, 50, 30]. An
operational representation can be deﬁned for SStoch in the same fashion as
for Stoch; it is still distributional.
The following result can be extracted from [5, Theorem 5.9], using the same
encoding of empirical models which we employed in the previous sub-section.
The reader should refer to [5, Theorem 5.9] for the details, which are non-trivial.
Proposition 12. The class of empirical models which are realized by the
operational category obtained from SStoch are exactly the no-signalling models;
thus they properly contain the quantum models.
This says that the operational category obtained from SStoch is more expres-
sive, in terms of the empirical models it realizes, than the canonical operational
category derived from Hilb, which corresponds to quantum mechanics.
Example. We consider the bipartite system with two measurements at each
site, each with outcomes {0, 1}. Thus the disjoint union M of the two sets
of measurements has four elements, and X = {0, 1}M has 16 elements. Now
consider the following state:
x := [1/2, 0, 0, 0, −1/2, 0, 1/2, 0, −1/2, 1/2, 0, 0, 1/2, 0, 0, 0].
The distributions it generates for the various measurement combinations can
be listed in the following table.
(0, 0)
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
(1, 1)
(a, b)
1/2
0
0
1/2
(a′, b)
1/2
0
0
1/2
(a, b′)
1/2
0
0
1/2
(a′, b′)
0
1/2
1/2
0
This can be recognized as the Popescu-Rohrlich box [53], which achieves
super-quantum correlations.
The state x can be obtained from the PR-box speciﬁcation by solving a
system of linear equations; see [5] for details.
§10. Final remarks. This paper makes a ﬁrst precise connection between
monoidal categories, and the categorical quantum mechanics framework, on the
one hand, and operational theories on the other. Clearly, this can be taken much
further. We note a number of directions which it would be interesting to pursue.
• We have used our framework of operational categories to study non-
locality in a general setting. In particular, we have a clear deﬁnition of
whether a model of categorical quantum mechanics exhibits non-locality
or not, as explained at the end of Section 8. As we saw, while Hilbert-space
quantum mechanics does, the category of sets and relations, which forms
a very useful ‘foil’ model for quantum mechanics in many respects [60, 22],
does not. An important further direction is to apply a similar analysis to

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
111
contextuality, which can be seen as a broader phenomenon, of which non-
locality is a special case. In [5], a general setting is developed allowing a uni-
ﬁed treatment of contextuality and non-locality. We would like to extend
the present account to this setting, in which compatibility of measurements
is explicitly represented, leading to a natural sheaf-theoretic structure.
• Such a development would also lead to a more satisfactory treatment of
outcomes, in place of the somewhat clumsy device used in the present
paper.
• It would also be interesting to interpret some of the general results which
have been proved for operational theories, relating e.g. to no-broadcasting
[11], teleportation [12], and information causality [10], in our categorical
framework, and ultimately to obtain such results for classes of monoidal
process categories.
• We would also like to examine the issue of axiomatization or ‘reconstruc-
tion’ of quantum mechanics from the categorical point of view.
• There are various constructions for turning a monoidal category of ‘pure’
states into one of ‘mixed’ states [57, 23]. It would be interesting to relate
these constructions to our canonical operational categories. Similarly,
there is a category embodying Spekkens’ toy theory [60, 21]. It would
be of interest to study the associated operational category.
Regarding related work, we note that in [13], the structure of the concrete
category of convex operational theories is investigated.
Acknowledgements. Financial support from EPSRC Senior Research Fel-
lowship EP/E052819/1 and the U.S. Oﬃce of Naval Research Grant Number
N000141010357 is gratefully acknowledged. We thank Shane Mansﬁeld for a
number of useful comments, which in particular led to an improved formulation
of Proposition 8.
Appendix A. First notions from category theory. We shall review some basic
notions from category theory. For more detailed background, see [9].
A category C has a collection of objects A, B, C, . . . , and arrows f, g, h, . . . .
Each arrow has speciﬁed domain and codomain objects: notation is f : A →B
for an arrow f with domain A and codomain B.
The collection of all
arrows with domain A and codomain B is denoted as C(A, B). Given arrows
f : A →B and g : B →C, we can form the composition g ◦f : A →C.
Composition is associative, and there are identity arrows 1A : A →A for each
object A, with f ◦1A = f, 1A ◦g = g, for every f : A →B and g : C →A.
An arrow f : A →B is called an iso(morphism) when f ◦f−1 = 1B and
f−1 ◦f = 1A for some arrow f−1 : B →A. An arrow f : A →B is split
monic when g ◦f = 1A for some g : B →A, and it is split epic when f ◦g = 1A
for some g : B →A; by abuse of notation, we will write g = f−1 in both cases.

112
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
If C is a category, we write Cop for the opposite category, with the same
objects as C, and arrows A →B corresponding to arrows B →A in C.
If C and D are categories, a functor F : C →D assigns an object FA of
D to each object A of C; and an arrow Ff : FA →FB of D to every arrow
f : A →B of C. These assignments must preserve composition and identities:
F (g ◦f) = F (g) ◦F (f), and F (1A) = 1FA.
Given functors F, G : C →D, a natural transformation t : F
·→G is a family
of arrows {tA : FA →GA} indexed by the objects of C, such that, for every
f : A →B in C, the following naturality diagram commutes:
FA
tA

Ff

GA
Gf

FB
tB
 GB
A natural isomorphism is a natural transformation whose components are
isomorphisms. An equivalence of categories is a pair of functors F : C →D
and G : D →C such that there are natural isomorphisms F ◦G ∼= 1D and
G ◦F ∼= 1C.
A symmetric monoidal category is a structure (C, ⊗, I, α, , , ) where:
• C is a category;
• ⊗: C × C →C is a functor (tensor);
• I is a distinguished object of C (unit);
• α, , ,  are natural isomorphisms (structural isos) with components
αA,B,C : A ⊗(B ⊗C) →(A ⊗B) ⊗C
A : I ⊗A →A
A : A ⊗I →A
A,B : A ⊗B →B ⊗A
such that certain coherence diagrams commute.
Products are a classical example of symmetric monoidal structure; the category
is then called Cartesian. The symmetric monoidal structure can also support
entanglement; the category is then called compact [7].
Let C and D be symmetric monoidal categories. A symmetric monoidal
functor
(F, e, m): C →D
comprises
• a functor F : C →D,
• an arrow e : ID →FIC,
• a natural transformation mA,B : FA ⊗FB →F (A ⊗B),
subject to coherence conditions with the structural isomorphisms. The sym-
metric monoidal functor is called strong when m is a natural isomorphism.

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
113
Let (F, e, m), (G, e′, m′): C →D be symmetric monoidal functors.
A
monoidal natural transformation between them is a natural transformation
t : F
·→G such that the following diagrams commute.
I
e

e′
	
FI
tI

GI
FA ⊗FB
mA,B 
tA×tB

F (A ⊗B)
tA⊗B

GA ⊗GB
m′
A,B
 G(A ⊗B)
Appendix B. Trace ideals. This appendix further studies the notion of trace
ideal, introduced in Section 4.1. It presents several technical results that are
mathematically interesting, but would break up the ﬂow of the main text. For
example, we characterize when trace ideals exist, and to what extent they are
unique. Also, we show that we really need to restrict to ideals to consider traces:
the category of Hilbert spaces does not support a trace on all morphisms. As a
conceptually satisfying corollary, we derive that dual objects in the category of
Hilbert spaces are necessarily ﬁnite-dimensional. Finally, we prove in some
detail that the category of Hilbert spaces indeed has a trace ideal; this was
claimed in Section 4.1, but the details are quite subtle.
B.1. Existence. The question whether a category allows a trace ideal at all
can be answered as follows.
A sub-category D of C is called tracial when endomorphisms in C factoring
through D can only do so in a way unique up to isomorphism. More precisely:
if f1 : X →Y, f2 : Y →X, f′
1 : X →Y ′, f′
2 : Y ′ →X are morphisms of
C, and Y and Y ′ are objects of D, and f2 ◦f1 = f′
2 ◦f′
1, then there is a
morphism i : Y →Y ′ in D that is either split monic or split epic, such that
f′
1 = i ◦f1 and f′
2 = f2 ◦i−1.
Y
f2

i

X
f1

f′
1

X
Y ′
f′
2

i−1

The category C is called traceable when the full sub-category consisting of the
monoidal unit I is tracial. Notice that traceability generalizes the fact, holding
in any monoidal category, that the scalars are commutative.
Proposition 13. Any dagger monoidal tracial sub-category D of C with a
trace ideal induces a trace ideal
I(X) = {f ∈C(X, X) | f = f2 ◦f1 with f1 : X →Y, f2 : Y →X
and Y in D, f1 ◦f2 ∈ID(Y)}

114
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
Tr(f) = TrD(f1 ◦f2)
on C.
Proof. One directly checks that I(X) is an endomorphism ideal; in partic-
ular I(I ) = D(I, I ) = C(I, I ). Because D is tracial, Tr is well-deﬁned. The
axioms for the trace function are also readily veriﬁed.
⊣
Theorem 14. A dagger monoidal category has a unique minimal trace ideal
I(X) = {f : X →X | f factors through I }
Tr(f) = b ◦a, when f = a ◦b with a : I →X and b : X →I
and hence has any trace ideal whatsoever, if and only if it is traceable.
Proof. That the given data form a trace ideal follows from the previous
proposition, because the full sub-category consisting of just the monoidal unit
I is certainly (totally) traced. To see that this trace ideal is minimal, i.e. that
any trace ideal must contain this one, follows from the ﬁrst and third axioms
of endomorphism ideal.
⊣
As a consequence of the previous theorem, the evaluation of measurements
on pure states is completely determined by the structure of the category,
independent of the trace ideal. If s =  ◦† is a pure state on X, and {Po} a
measurement, then for every outcome o:
Tr(s ◦Po) = Tr( ◦† ◦Po) = Tr(† ◦Po ◦) = † ◦Po ◦.
Therefore, the only possible freedom the choice of a trace ideal brings comes
out in behaviour on mixed states.
B.2. Uniqueness. We now consider uniqueness of trace ideals. The following
proposition proves that trace ideals are a categorical invariant, in the sense
that they are preserved under equivalence. A dagger monoidal equivalence
is a pair of functors F : C →D and G : D →C that form an equivalence
of categories, such that F (f†) = F (f)† and G(f†) = G(f)†, and there are
natural isomorphisms F (I ) ∼= I , G(I ) ∼= I , F (X ⊗Y) ∼= F (X ) ⊗F (Y) and
G(X ⊗Y) ∼= G(X ) ⊗G(Y) that interact with the coherence isomorphisms in
the appropriate way.
Proposition 15. Trace ideals are preserved under dagger monoidal equiva-
lence: if F : C →D and G : D →C are strong monoidal functors that preserve
daggers and form an equivalence of categories, and (I, TrI) is a trace ideal in C,
then
J (X) = G−1(I(G(X))) = {g ∈D(X, X) | G(g) ∈I(G(X))},
TrJ
X (g) = F (TrI
G(X)(G(g))),
form a trace ideal in D.

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
115
Proof. First, observe that if f ∈I(X), and g : X →Y is an isomorphism
with inverse h, then Tr(f) = Tr(gfh). Then, to verify that J is an endomor-
phism ideal, the ﬁrst requirement follows from functoriality of G; the second
from the fact that G is monoidal; and the third from fullness of G together
with monoidality of G. It is a dagger endomorphism ideal because G preserves
daggers. Verifying that TrJ satisﬁes the requirements is completely analogous,
except that the last condition additionally uses F (G(s)) ∼= s.
⊣
However, trace ideals need not be unique. In fact, there may even be more
than one trace function making a ﬁxed endomorphism ideal into a trace ideal,
as the following example shows.
Example 16. A tracial state on a C*-algebra A is a linear map  : A →C
satisfying (a∗a) ≥0, (1) = 1, and (ab) = (ba). There exists a unital
C*-algebra A with distinct tracial states  ̸= ′ : A →C [46].
Make a category C as follows. Objects are natural numbers. There are only
endomorphisms. Morphisms 0 →0 are complex numbers; the identity is 0,
and composition is addition. For n ≥1, morphisms n →n are elements of the
n-fold direct sum A⊕A⊕· · ·⊕A; the identity is (1, 1, . . . , 1), and composition
is pointwise multiplication.
We give this category a monoidal structure by letting the tensor product of
objects n and m be n + m. If one of n or m is 0, the action on morphisms is
by scalar multiplication. For n, m ≥1, the action on morphisms is clear. The
monoidal unit is the object 0.
Taking I(X) to be all endomorphisms on X certainly gives an endomorphism
ideal. Deﬁne Tr0(z) = z, and Trn(a1, . . . , an) = n
i=1 (ai) for n ≥1. This
satisﬁes all the conditions needed to make I into a trace ideal. But the very
same construction with ′ gives a diﬀerent trace function.
The previous example is in stark contrast to Cartesian categories or compact
categories, where traces are unique; see [59] and [37], respectively.
The
counterexample above is somewhat artiﬁcial, because all morphisms are
endomorphisms. It remains unclear whether trace ideals on, for example,
compact categories, are unique.
B.3. The need for trace ideals. We will now show that in the category Hilb,
there exists no trace ideal consisting of all morphisms. More precisely, we will
show that Hilb is not an instance of the established notion of traced monoidal
category [43]. This notion asks not just for traces of all endomorphisms, but
requires a ‘partial trace’ of morphisms f : X ⊗U →Y ⊗U, resulting in a
morphism TrU(f): X →Y. There are then several additional axioms, such
as the following naturality:
TrU(f) ◦g = TrU(f ◦(g ⊗1U))
for f : X ⊗U →Y ⊗U, g : X ′ →X.
We will now show that the monoidal category (Hilb, ⊗) cannot be traced
monoidal. Subsequently, we will show that it does have a trace ideal. This

116
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
justiﬁes working with trace ideals in monoidal categories instead of traced
monoidal categories. We are indebted to Peter Selinger for the following proof.
Lemma 17. Suppose (Hilb, ⊗) is traced monoidal. Then Tr(f +g) = Tr(f)+
Tr(g) for all endomorphisms f, g : H →H.
Proof. Choose an orthonormal basis {|0⟩, |1⟩} for C2, and write |+⟩=
|0⟩+|1⟩. Recall that C2 ⊗H ∼= H ⊕H. Deﬁne F : C2 ⊗H →H via the block
matrix
 f
g!
. Hence F ◦(|0⟩⊗1H) = f and F ◦(|1⟩⊗1H) = g. Now:
Tr(f + g) = Tr(F ◦(|+⟩⊗1H))
= Tr(F ) ◦|+⟩
(by naturality)
= (Tr(F ) ◦|0⟩) + (Tr(F ) ◦|1⟩)
= Tr(F ◦(|0⟩⊗1H)) + Tr(F ◦(|1⟩⊗1H)
(by naturality)
= Tr(f) + Tr(g).
The third equality uses that composition is bilinear.
⊣
Theorem 18. The monoidal category (Hilb, ⊗) is not traced monoidal.
Proof. Suppose (Hilb, ⊗) was traced monoidal.
Let H be an inﬁnite-
dimensional Hilbert space. Then there exist isomorphisms ϕ : H ⊕C
∼
=→H
and  : H
∼
=→C ⊕H. Write them in block matrix form as ϕ =
 ϕ1
ϕ2
!
and
 =
1
2

. Consider the morphisms f1, f2, f3 : H ⊕C ⊕H →H ⊕C ⊕H
given by the following block matrices.
f1 =
⎛
⎝
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
⎞
⎠
f2 =
⎛
⎝
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
⎞
⎠
f3 =
⎛
⎝
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
⎞
⎠
Let g = ϕ ⊕ : (H ⊕C) ⊕H →H ⊕(C ⊕H). Then
g ◦f2 =
⎛
⎝
ϕ1
ϕ2
0
0
0
1
0
0
2
⎞
⎠◦
⎛
⎝
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
⎞
⎠=
⎛
⎝
ϕ1
ϕ2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
⎞
⎠
=
⎛
⎝
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
⎞
⎠◦
⎛
⎝
ϕ1
ϕ2
0
0
0
1
0
0
2
⎞
⎠= f1 ◦g.
Hence
Tr(f1) = Tr(f1 ◦g ◦g−1) = Tr(g ◦f2 ◦g−1) = Tr(f2 ◦g−1 ◦g) = Tr(f2).
But Tr(f2) = Tr(f1 + f3) = Tr(f1) + Tr(f3) by Lemma 17. And because f3
has ﬁnite rank, we know that Tr(f3) = Tr(1C) = 1. Thus Tr(f2) = Tr(f2) + 1,
which is a contradiction.
⊣

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
117
B.4. Dual objects in Hilb are ﬁnite-dimensional. The previous theorem al-
lows an interesting corollary. Recall that the main characteristic of compact
categories is that objects have duals: objects L, R in a monoidal category are
called dual when there are maps : I →R ⊗L and ε : L ⊗R →I making the
following two composites identities.
L ∼= L ⊗I
1⊗
−−→L ⊗(R ⊗L) ∼= (L ⊗R) ⊗L
ε⊗1
−−→I ⊗L ∼= L
R ∼= I ⊗R
⊗1
−−→(R ⊗L) ⊗R ∼= R ⊗(L ⊗R)
1⊗ε
−−→R ⊗I ∼= R
It is well-known that if H ∈Hilb is ﬁnite-dimensional, then H and H ∗are dual
objects by (1) = n
i=1 |i⟩⊗⟨i| and ε(|i⟩) = 1, for any choice of orthonormal
basis {|i⟩}i=1,...,n for H; see [44, 43, 7]. This recipe does not work when H is
inﬁnite-dimensional, because 
i |i⟩does not converge in that case. However,
this does not exclude the possibility that there might be other H ∗, , ε making
H into a dual object. No rigorous proof that inﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert
spaces cannot have duals has been published, as far as we know.
Corollary 19. Objects in (Hilb, ⊗) with duals are precisely ﬁnite-dimensional
Hilbert spaces.
Proof. Let H be an inﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space. Suppose H has a
dual object H ∗. For f : H →H, deﬁne TrH(f) as the following composite.
I
−→H ∗⊗H ∼= H ⊗H ∗
f⊗1H∗
−−−−→H ⊗H ∗
ε−→I
This satisﬁes all equations for a trace function, as far as these make sense
‘locally’, for just one object H. In Hilb, the object C always has a dual, and
if H and K have duals, then so does H ⊕K. Now, notice that the proof
of Theorem 18 only uses the trace properties ‘locally’, i.e. for the objects
C, H, C2 ⊗H ∼= H ⊕H, H ⊕C, H ⊕C⊕H. Hence the contradiction it results
in holds here, too.
⊣
In fact, in any monoidal category with biproducts, one can show that if
A ∼= A ⊕I , then TrA(1A) = TrA(1A) + 1. We thank Jamie Vicary for this
observation.
B.5. Trace class maps form a trace ideal in Hilb. To show that the usual trace
of continuous linear maps between Hilbert spaces does in fact give a trace ideal
requires some work, as virtually all textbooks only consider endomorphisms,
whereas the deﬁning conditions of trace ideals also involve morphisms between
diﬀerent objects.
We need to recall some terminology; for any unexplained terms, we refer
to [17]. Other good references are [32, 58]. A linear map f : H →K between
Hilbert spaces is Hilbert-Schmidt when 
n ∥f(en)∥2
K < ∞for an orthonormal
basis (en) of H. A positive continuous linear map f : H →H is trace class
when 
n
&&⟨en | f(en)⟩
&& < ∞for an orthonormal basis (en) of H. An arbitrary
continuous linear map f : H →H is trace class when its absolute value
|f|: H →H is trace class. Both deﬁnitions are independent of the choice of

118
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
basis (en). If f is trace class, then ⟨en | f(en)⟩is absolutely summable, and
hence the following trace property holds:
Tr(f) =

n
⟨en | f(en)⟩
is a well-deﬁned complex number. The Cauchy-Schwarz inequality states that
&&⟨x | y⟩
&& ≤
 
∥x∥2 · ∥y∥2!1/2
for any two elements x, y of a Hilbert space. The H¨older inequality states that

n
|xn · yn| ≤

n
|xn|2
1/2
·

n
|yn|2
1/2
for any two sequences (xn) and (yn) of complex numbers with 
n |xn|2 < ∞
and 
n |yn|2 < ∞.
Lemma 20. Let H
f
K
g

be morphisms in Hilb. Then g ◦f is trace class if
and only if f and g are Hilbert-Schmidt.
Proof. By polar decomposition, there is a unique partial isometry w : H →
K satisfying g ◦f = w ◦|g ◦f| and ker(w) = ker(g ◦f). It follows that
|g ◦f| = w† ◦g ◦f. Hence, for an orthonormal basis (en) of H,

n
&&⟨en | |g ◦f|(en)⟩
&& =

n
&&⟨en | w† ◦g ◦f(en)⟩
&&
=

n
&&⟨g† ◦w(en) | f(en)⟩
&&
≤

n
 
∥g† ◦w(en)∥2 · ∥f(en)∥2!1/2
(by Cauchy-Schwarz)
=

n
&&∥g† ◦w(en)∥· ∥f(en)∥
&&
≤

n
∥g† ◦w(en)∥2
1/2
·

n
∥f(en)∥2
1/2
.
(by H¨older)
Therefore gf is trace class if and only if 
n ∥f(en)∥2 < ∞and 
n ∥g† ◦
w(en)∥2 < ∞. Because w is a partial isometry, the latter inequality holds if
and only if 
n ∥g(en)∥2 < ∞. That is, g ◦f is trace class if and only if f and
g are Hilbert-Schmidt.
⊣
Proposition 21. The category Hilb has a dagger trace ideal consisting of the
usual trace class maps and the usual trace function.
Proof. That the trace class maps on a Hilbert space H are closed under
adjoint and tensor products is easily seen. Also, any morphism C →C is

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
119
trivially trace class. Now suppose that f : H →H is trace class. By the
previous lemma, we can write f = f2 ◦f1 for Hilbert-Schmidt maps fi.
If g : H →K and h : K →H are arbitrary morphisms, then g ◦f2 and
f1 ◦h are again Hilbert-Schmidt. Therefore, by the previous lemma again,
g ◦f ◦h = (g ◦f2) ◦(f1 ◦h) is trace class. Thus trace class maps indeed form
an endomorphism ideal.
One easily sees from the trace property that trace is the identity on scalars,
is multiplicative on tensor products, and preserves daggers. To prove that
Tr(g ◦f) = Tr(f ◦g) for f : H →K and g : K →H with both f ◦g and g ◦f
trace class, we rely on Lidskii’s trace formula for separable H: if h is trace class,
then (
n n(h) is absolutely convergent and) Tr(h) = 
n n(h), where n(h)
are the eigenvalues counted up to algebraic multiplicity [58, Theorem 3.7].
But g ◦f and f ◦g have precisely the same spectrum, so that Tr(g ◦f) =

n n(g ◦f) = 
n n(f ◦g) = Tr(f ◦g).
Finally, we claim that for positive, trace class functions h : H →H on any
(possibly nonseparable) Hilbert space H, Lidskii’s formula still holds, which
ﬁnishes the proof that trace class operators form a trace ideal, because we may
then replace g ◦f and f ◦g above by their absolute value. Pick an orthonormal
basis {ei} for H. Since h is trace class, 
i⟨ei | h(ei)⟩= 
i ∥
√
h(ei)∥is
summable. Hence ker(h)⊥= ker(
√
h)⊥can only contain countably many
ei. Because h is positive, its range is ker(h†)⊥= ker(h)⊥. Thus h : H →H
restricts to a function h : ker(h)⊥→ker(h)⊥on a separable space.
⊣
We have written the above example out in more detail than the reader might
have thought necessary, because it is easy to overlook subtleties. For example,
it is not true that if f : H →K and g : K →H are morphisms such that
g ◦f is trace class, then f ◦g is trace class, too. For a counterexample, let
H = K = ℓ2(N), and deﬁne f(x, y) = (0, x) and g(x, y) = (x, 0). Then
certainly g ◦f = 0 is trace class. But it is easy to see that f†(x, y) = (y, 0),
that g = g† = g† ◦g, and hence that g = g† ◦g = (f ◦g)† ◦(f ◦g) ≥0.
Therefore |f ◦g| = g, and
Tr(f ◦g) =

m,n
⟨|f ◦g|(em, en) | (em, en)⟩
=

m,n
⟨em | em⟩+ ⟨0 | en⟩= dim(H) = ∞,
so that f ◦g is not trace class.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Abramsky, No-Cloning in Categorical Quantum Mechanics, Semantic Techniques in
Quantum Computation (S. Gay and I. Mackie, editors), Cambridge University Press, 2010,
pp. 1–28.

120
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
[2] S. Abramsky, Big toy models: Representing physical systems as Chu spaces, Synthese,
vol. 186(3) (2012), pp. 697–718.
[3]
, Relational Hidden Variables and Non-Locality, Studia Logica, vol. 101 (2013),
no. 2, pp. 411–452, available as arXiv:1007.2754.
[4] S. Abramsky, R. Blute, and P. Panangaden, Nuclear and trace ideals in tensored *-categories,
Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra, vol. 143 (1999), pp. 3–47.
[5] S. Abramsky and A. Brandenburger, The sheaf-theoretic structure of non-locality and
contextuality, New Journal of Physics, vol. 13 (2011), p. 113036.
[6] S. Abramsky and B. Coecke, A categorical semantics of quantum protocols, Proceedings of
the 19th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, IEEE, 2004, pp. 415–425.
[7]
, Categorical quantum mechanics, Handbook of Quantum Logic and Quantum Struc-
tures: Quantum Logic, Elsevier Science, 2008, pp. 261–324.
[8] M. F. Atiyah, Topological quantum ﬁeld theories, Publications Mathematiques de l’I.H. ´E,S.,
vol. 68 (1988), pp. 175–186.
[9] S. Awodey, Category Theory, Oxford University Press, 2010.
[10] H. Barnum, J. Barrett, L. O. Clark, M. Leifer, R. Spekkens, N. Stepanik, A. Wilce,
and R. Wilke, Entropy and information causality in general probabilistic theories, New Journal of
Physics, vol. 12 (2010), p. 033024.
[11] H. Barnum, J. Barrett, M. Leifer, and A. Wilce, Generalized no-broadcasting theorem,
Physical review letters, vol. 99 (2007), no. 24, p. 240501.
[12]
, Teleportation in general probabilistic theories, Arxiv preprint arXiv:0805.3553,
(2008).
[13] H. Barnum, R. Duncan, and A. Wilce, Symmetry, compact closure and dagger compactness
for categories of convex operational models, Journal of Philosophical Logic, vol. 42 (2013), pp. 501–
523, DOI 10.1007/s10992-013-9280-8.
[14] M. Barr, ∗-autonomous categories, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 752, Springer,
1979.
[15] J. S. Bell, On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox, Physics, vol. 1 (1964), no. 3, pp. 195–
200.
[16] J. B´enabou, Distributors at work, 2000, available at http://www.mathematik.
tu-darmstadt.de/∼streicher/FIBR/DiWo.pdf.
[17] J. Blank, P. Exner, and M. Havl´ıˇcek, Hilbert space operators in quantum physics, second
ed., Springer, 2008.
[18] C. Butz, Regular categories and regular logic, Technical Report LS-98-2, BRICS, October
1998.
[19] G. Chiribella, G. M. D’Ariano, and P. Perinotti, Informational derivation of quantum
theory, Physical Review A, vol. 84 (2011), no. 1, p. 012311.
[20] P.-H. Chu, Constructing ∗-autonomous categories, In ∗-Autonomous Categories? [14],
pp. 103–137.
[21] B. Coecke and B. Edwards, Spekkens’ toy theory as a category of processes, Mathematical
Foundations of Information Flow (S. Abramsky and M. Mislove, editors), American Mathematical
Society, 2012, arXiv:1108.1978.
[22] B. Coecke, B. Edwards, and R. W. Spekkens, Phase groups and the origin of non-locality
for qubits, Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 270 (2011), no. 2, pp. 15–36.
[23] B. Coecke and C. Heunen, Pictures of complete positivity in arbitrary dimension, Quantum
Physics and Logic 2012, Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 158, 2014,
pp. 1–14.
[24] B. Coecke and A. Kissinger, The compositional structure of multipartite quantum entan-
glement, Automata, Languages and Programming, (2010), pp. 297–308.

OPERATIONAL THEORIES AND CATEGORICAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
121
[25] B. Dakic and C. Brukner, Quantum Theory and Beyond: Is Entanglement Special?,
Deep Beauty: Understanding the Quantum World through Mathematical Innovation, Cambridge
University Press, 2011, pp. 365–392.
[26] W. M. Dickson, Quantum Chance and Non-Locality, Cambridge University Press, 1999.
[27] P. A. M. Dirac, The physical interpretation of quantum mechanics, Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, vol. 180 (1942), no. 980,
pp. 1–40.
[28] S. Doplicher and J. E. Roberts, A new duality theory for compact groups, Inventiones
mathematicae, vol. 98 (1989), pp. 157–218.
[29] R. Duncan and S. Perdrix, Rewriting measurement-based quantum computations with
generalised ﬂow, Automata, Languages and Programming, (2010), pp. 285–296.
[30] R. P. Feynman, Negative probability, Quantum Implications: Essays in Honour of David
Bohm (B. J. Hiley and F. D. Peat, editors), Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1987, pp. 235–248.
[31] A. Fine, Joint distributions, quantum correlations and commuting observables, Journal of
Mathematical Physics, vol. 23 (1982), p. 1306.
[32] D. J. H. Garling, Inequalities, Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[33] P. Ghez, R. Lima, and J. E. Roberts, W ∗-categories, Paciﬁc Journal of Mathematics,
vol. 120 (1985), pp. 79–109.
[34] M. Giry, A categorical approach to probability theory, Categorical Aspects of Topology
and Analysis, Springer, 1982, pp. 68–85.
[35] D. M. Greenberger, M. A. Horne, A. Shimony, and A. Zeilinger, Bell’s theorem without
inequalities, American Journal of Physics, vol. 58 (1990), p. 1131.
[36] L. Hardy, Quantum theory from ﬁve reasonable axioms, Arxiv preprint quant-ph/0101012,
(2001).
[37] M. Hasegawa, On traced monoidal closed categories, Mathematical Structures in Computer
Science, vol. 19 (2008), pp. 217–244.
[38] C. Heunen, Categorical Quantum Models and Logics, Ph.D. thesis, Radboud University
Nijmegen, 2009.
[39] C. Heunen and B. Jacobs, Quantum logic in dagger kernel categories, Order, vol. 27 (2010),
no. 2, pp. 177–212.
[40] B. Jacobs, Convexity, duality and eﬀects, Theoretical Computer Science (Cristian S. Calude
and Vladimiro Sassone, editors), IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology,
vol. 323, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 1–19.
[41] J. M. Jauch, Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley, 1968.
[42] P. T. Johnstone, Stone Spaces, Studies in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 3, Cambridge
University Press, 1986.
[43] A. Joyal, R. Street, and D. Verity, Traced monoidal categories, Mathematical Proceedings
of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, vol. 3 (1996), pp. 447–468.
[44] G. M. Kelly and M. L. Laplaza, Coherence for compact closed categories, Journal of
Pure and Applied Algebra, vol. 19 (1980), pp. 193–213.
[45] J. Kock, Frobenius Algebras and 2D Topological Quantum Field Theories, London Math-
ematical Society Student Texts, no. 59, Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[46] R. Longo, A remark on crossed product of C*-algebras, Journal of the London Mathematical
Society (2), vol. 23 (1981), pp. 531–533.
[47] G. Ludwig, Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, vol. 1, Springer-Verlag, 1983.
[48] G. W. Mackey, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Benjamin, 1963.
[49] L. Masanes and M. P. M¨uller, A derivation of quantum theory from physical requirements,
New Journal of Physics, vol. 13 (2011), p. 063001.
[50] J. E. Moyal, Quantum mechanics as a statistical theory, Mathematical Proceedings of the
Cambridge Philosophical Society, vol. 45 (1949), no. 1, pp. 99–124.
[51] A. Peres, Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods, vol. 57, Kluwer, 1993.

122
SAMSON ABRAMSKY AND CHRIS HEUNEN
[52] C. Piron, Foundations of Quantum Physics, WA Benjamin, Inc., Reading, MA, 1976.
[53] S. Popescu and D. Rohrlich, Quantum nonlocality as an axiom, Foundations of Physics,
vol. 24 (1994), no. 3, pp. 379–385.
[54] V. R. Pratt, Chu spaces from the representational viewpoint, Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, vol. 96 (1999), no. 1-3, pp. 319–333.
[55] K. I. Rosenthal, Quantales and their applications, Pitman Research Notes in Mathematics,
Longman Scientiﬁc & Technical, 1990.
[56] G. Segal, The deﬁnition of conformal ﬁeld theory, Topology, Geometry and Quantum Field
Theory, London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, vol. 308, Cambridge University Press,
2004, pp. 421–577.
[57] P. Selinger, Dagger compact closed categories and completely positive maps, Quantum
Programming Languages, Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 170, Elsevier,
2007, pp. 139–163.
[58] B. Simon, Trace Ideals and Their Applications, Mathematical surveys and monographs,
no. 120, American Mathematical Society, 1979.
[59] A. Simpson and G. Plotkin, Complete axioms for categorical ﬁxed-point operators, Logic
in Computer Science, 2000, pp. 30–41.
[60] R. W. Spekkens, Evidence for the epistemic view of quantum states: A toy theory, Physical
Review A, vol. 75 (2007), no. 3, p. 032110.
[61] E. Wigner, On the quantum correction for thermodynamic equilibrium, Physical Review,
vol. 40 (1932), no. 5, p. 749.
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE
UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
WOLFSON BUILDING, PARKS ROAD
OXFORD OX1 3QD
E-mail: samson.abramsky@cs.ox.ac.uk
E-mail: heunen@cs.ox.ac.uk

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
Abstract. This chapter uses categorical techniques to describe relations between various sets of
operators on a Hilbert space, such as self-adjoint, positive, density, eﬀect and projection operators.
These relations, including various Hilbert-Schmidt isomorphisms of the form tr(A−), are expressed
in terms of dual adjunctions, and maps between them. Of particular interest is the connection with
quantum structures, via a dual adjunction between convex sets and eﬀect modules. The approach
systematically uses categories of modules, via their description as Eilenberg-Moore algebras of a
monad.
§1. Introduction. There is a recent exciting line of work connecting research
in the semantics of programming languages and logic, and research in the
foundations of quantum physics, including quantum computation and logic,
see [9] for an overview. This paper ﬁts in that line of work. It concentrates
on operators (on Hilbert spaces) and organises and relates these operators
according to their algebraic structure. This is to a large extent not more than
a systematic presentation of known results and connections in the (modern)
language of category theory. However, the approach leads to clarifying results,
like Theorem 14 that relates density operators and eﬀects via a dual adjunction
between convex sets and eﬀect modules (extending earlier work [25]). It is
in line with many other dual adjunctions and dualities that are relevant in
programming logics [31, 1, 30]. Indeed, via this dual adjunction we can put
the work [11] on quantum weakest preconditions in perspective (see especially
Remark 15).
The article begins by describing the familiar sets of operators (bounded, self-
adjoint, positive) on a (ﬁnite-dimensional) Hilbert space in terms of functors
to categories of modules. The dual adjunctions involved are made explicit,
basically via dual operation V →V ∗, see Section 2. Since the algebraic
structure of these sets of operators is described in terms of modules over
various semirings, namely over complex numbers C (for bounded operators),
over real numbers R (for self-adjoint operators), and over non-negative real
numbers R≥0 (for positive operators), it is useful to have a uniform description
of such modules. It is provided in Section 3, via the notion of algebra of
Logic and Algebraic Structures in Quantum Computing
Edited by J. Chubb, A. Eskandarian and V. Harizanov
Lecture Notes in Logic, 45
c⃝2016, Association for Symbolic Logic
123

124
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
a monad (namely the multiset monad). This abstract description provides
(co)limits and the monoidal closed structure of such algebras (from [33]) for
free. We then use that convex sets can also be described as such algebras
of a monad (namely the distribution monad), and elaborate the connection
with eﬀect modules (also known as convex eﬀect algebras, see [36]).
In
this setting we discuss various ‘Gleason-style’ correspondences, between
projections, eﬀects, and density matrices. We borrow the probabilistic Gelfand
duality between (Banach) eﬀect modules and (compact) convex sets from [29]
for the ﬁnal steps in our analysis.
This duality formalises the diﬀerence
between the approaches of Heisenberg (focusing on observables/eﬀects) and
Schr¨odinger (focusing on states), see e.g. [22]. It allows us to reconstruct
all sets of operators on a Hilbert space from its projections, see Table 1 for
an overview. The main contribution of the paper thus lies in a systematic
description.
We should emphasise that the investigations in this paper concentrate on
ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert and vector spaces.
1.1. Operator overview. For a (ﬁnite-dimensional) Hilbert space H we shall
study the following sets of operators H →H.
Pr(H)
 

B(H)
SA(H)
 

Pos(H)
 

Ef (H)
 

DM(H)
 

(1)
where:
Notation
Description
Structure
B(H)
bounded/continuous linear
vector space over C
SA(H)
self-adjoint A† = A
vector space over R
Pos(H)
positive: A ≥0
module over R≥0
Ef (H)
eﬀect: 0 ≤A ≤I
eﬀect module over [0, 1]
Pr(H)
projection: A2 = A = A†
orthomodular lattice
DM(H)
density: A ≥0 and tr(A) = 1
convex set
The emphasis lies on the ‘structure’ column. It describes the algebraic structure
of the sets of operators that will be relevant here. It is not meant to capture all
the structure that is present. For instance, the set B(H) of endomaps is not
only a vector space over the complex numbers, but actually a C ∗-algebra.
As is well-known, operators on Hilbert spaces behave in a certain sense
as numbers. For instance, by taking H to be the trivial space C of complex

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
125
numbers, the diagram (1) becomes:
{0, 1}
 	

C
R
 

R≥0
 

[0, 1]
 

{1}

 

§2. Operators and duality. This section concentrates on the ﬁrst three sets
of operators in (1), namely on B(H) ← SA(H) ← Pos(H). It will focus on
isomorphisms V ∼= V ∗, for V = B(H), SA(H), Pos(H). These isomorphisms
turn out to be natural in H, in categories of modules (or vector spaces). This
serves as motivation for further investigation of the structures involved, in
subsequent sections. Only later will we study the density and eﬀect operators
DM(H) and Ef (H), capturing ‘states and statements’ in quantum logic. The
material in this section thus serves as preparation. It is not new, except possibly
for the presentation in terms of maps of adjunctions.
We start by recalling that the category VectC of vector spaces over the complex
numbers C carries an involution given by conjugation: for a vector space V we
write V for the conjugate space, with the same vectors as V , but with scalar
multiplication given by z •V x = z •V x, where the complex number z ∈C has
conjugate z ∈C. This yields an ‘involution’ endofunctor (−): VectC →VectC
which is the identity on morphisms. A linear map f : V →W is sometimes
called conjugate linear, because it satisﬁes f(z • v) = z • f(v). Complex
conjugation z →z is an example of a conjugate linear (isomorphism) C
∼
=
−→C
in VectC. We refer to [6, 16, 27] for more information on involutions in a
categorical setting.
We shall write V ⊸W for the ‘exponent’ vector space of linear maps V →
W between vector spaces V and W . There is the standard correspondence
between linear functions U →(V ⊸W ) and U ⊗V →W .
One uses this exponent ⊸to form the dual space V ∗= V ⊸C. If
V is ﬁnite-dimensional, say with a basis e1, . . . , en, written in ‘ket’ notation
as | j ⟩= ej, there is the familiar isomorphism of V with its dual space
V ∗= V ⊸C given as:
V
∼
=
 V ∗∼= V ⊸C
 
j zj| j ⟩
! 
  
j zj⟨j |
!
,
(2)
where the ‘bra’ ⟨j |: V →C sends a vector w = (
k wk| k ⟩) to its j-th
coordinate ⟨j | w⟩= 
k wk⟨j | k⟩= wj. Clearly, this yields an isomorphism
V
∼
=→V ∗, because these functions ⟨j | form a ‘dual’ basis for V ∗. This
isomorphism (2) is a famous example of a non-natural mapping, depending
on a choice of basis. It will play a crucial role below, where V is a vector space
of operators on a Hilbert space.

126
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
The mapping V →V ∗= (V ⊸C) yields a functor VectC →(VectC)
op; for
a map C : H →K we have C ∗: K∗→H ∗given by f →f ◦C. This functor
(−)∗is adjoint to itself, in the sense that there is a bijective correspondence
(suggested by the double lines) as on the left below, forming an adjunction as
on the right.
V −→(W ⊸C)
=============
V ⊗W −→C ∼= C
===============
V ⊗W ∼= V ⊗W −→C
=============
W −→(V ⊸C)
VectC
(−)∗=(−)⊸C 
⊥
(VectC) op
(−)∗=(−)⊸C

In the next step, let FdHilb be the category of ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert
spaces with bounded linear maps between them. One can drop the bounded-
ness requirement, because a linear map between ﬁnite-dimensional spaces is
automatically bounded (i.e. continuous). As is usual, we write B(H) for the
homset of endomaps H →H in FdHilb. This set B(H) of “operators on H”
is a vector space over C, of dimension n2 with the outer products | j ⟩⟨k |, for
j, k ≤n, as basis—assuming a basis | 1 ⟩, . . . , | n ⟩for H. Such outer product
projections | j ⟩⟨k | may be understood as the matrix with only 0s except for a
single 1 in the j-th row of the k-th column. In general, an operator A: H →H
can be written as matrix A = 
j,k Ajk| j ⟩⟨k |, where the matrix entries Ajk
may be described as ⟨j |A| k ⟩.
The mapping H →B(H) is functorial, and will be used here as functor
B: FdHilb →VectC.
On a map C : H →K it yields a linear function
B(H) →B(K), written as B(C), and given by:
B(C)
'
H
A
−→H
(
=

K
C †
−→H
A
−→H
C
−→K

.
(3)
The operator C † = C
T is the conjugate transpose of C , satisfying ⟨Cv | w⟩=
⟨v | C †w⟩. It makes FdHilb into a dagger category, see e.g. [2]. This dagger
forms an involution on the vector space B(H). Also, it is adjoint to itself, as in:
V
f
−−→W
=========
W −−→
f†
V
FdHilb
(−)†

⊥
FdHilbop
(−)†

In the next result we apply the duality isomorphism V ∼= V ∗in (2) for
V = B(H). As we shall see, it involves the trace operation tr: B(H) →C of
which we ﬁrst recall some basic facts. For A ∈B(H) the trace tr(A) can be
deﬁned as the sum 
j Ajj of the diagonal matrix values. This deﬁnition is
independent of the choice of matrix/basis. This trace tr satisﬁes the following

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
127
basic properties.
tr(A + B) = tr(A) + tr(B)
tr(zA) = z tr(A)
where z ∈C
tr(AB) = tr(BA)
the so-called cyclic property
tr(AT) = tr(A)
where (−)T is the transpose operation
tr(A†) = tr(A)
which results from previous points
tr(A) ≥0
when A is positive: A ≥0, i.e. ⟨v | Av⟩≥0.
Proposition 1. For a ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space H the duality isomor-
phism (2) applied to the vector space B(H) of endomaps boils down to a trace
calculation, namely:
B(H)
hsB
∼
=
 B(H)∗= B(H) ⊸C
is
hsB(A)= B. tr(AB†),
where the -notation is borrowed from the -calculus, and used for function
abstraction: B. · · · describes the function B →· · · .
This map B(H)
∼
=
−→B(H)∗is independent of the choice of basis. More
categorically, it yields a natural isomorphism involving adjoint (−)† and dual
(−∗= (−) ⊸C in:
B ◦(−)†
hsB
∼
=
 (−)∗◦B,
Pictorially, thishsB is a natural transformation FdHilb


 ∼
=
Vectop
C between
the two functors FdHilb ⇒Vectop
C given in:
FdHilbop
B

FdHilb
(−)†

B

VectCop
VectC
(−)∗

Moreover, this hsB is part of a map of adjunctions (see [34, IV,7]) in the following
situation.
FdHilb
(−)†

B

⊥
FdHilbop
(−)†

B

VectC
(−)∗

⊥
VectCop
(−)∗

The letters ‘h’ and ‘s’ in the map hsB stand for Hilbert and Schmidt, since
the inner product (A, B) →tr(AB†) = hsB(A)(B) is commonly named after
them. The subscript B is added because we shall encounter analogues of this
isomorphism for other operators. We drop the subscript when confusion is
unlikely.

128
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
Proof. If | 1 ⟩, . . . , | n ⟩is a basis for H, then the map hs : B(H) →B(H)∗
becomes, according to (2),
A =

j,k
Ajk| j ⟩⟨k |

−→B. 
j,k AjkBjk = B. 
j,k Ajk(B†)kj
= B. 
j (AB†)jj
= B. tr(AB†).
Since the trace of a matrix is basis-independent, so is this isomorphism hs.
Naturality amounts to commutation of the following diagram, for each map
C : H →K in FdHilb.
B(H)
hsH
∼
=
 B(H)∗= B(H) ⊸C
B(K)
B(C †)

hsK
∼
=
 B(K)∗= B(K) ⊸C
B(C)∗

This diagram commutes because:
(B(C)∗◦hsK)(A)(B) = (hsK(A) ◦B(C))(B)
= hsK(A)(B(C)(B))
= hsK(A)(CBC †)
= tr(A(CBC †)†)
= tr(ACB†C †)
= tr(C †ACB†)
by the cyclic property
= hsH(C †AC)(B)
= hsH(B(C †)(A))(B)
= (hsH ◦B(C †))(A)(B).
Finally, we use the basic fact that, because these hsH’s are natural in H and
componentwise isomorphisms, the inverses hs−1
H are also natural in H, see
e.g. [4, Lemma 7.11]. The details of the map of adjunctions in the above
diagram are left to the interested reader.
⊣
The remarkable thing about this result is that whereas the maps V
∼
=
−→V ∗
in (2) are not natural, the instantiations hs : B(H)
∼
=
−→B(H)∗are, because
they involve a trace calculation that is base-independent. We brieﬂy describe the
inverse of hs = A. tr(A−): B(H)
∼
=
−→B(H)∗= (B(H) ⊸C), via a choice
of basis | 1 ⟩, . . . , | n ⟩for H. So suppose we have a linear map f : B(H) →C.
Deﬁne an operator hs−1(f) ∈B(H) with matrix entries:
 
hs−1(f)
!
jk= f(| j ⟩⟨k |).
(4)

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
129
Then we recover f via the trace calculation:
hs
 
hs−1(f)
!
(B) = tr
 
hs−1(f)B†!
= tr

j,k
hs−1(f)jk| j ⟩⟨k |)B†

=

j,k
hs−1(f)jk tr
 
| j ⟩⟨k |B†!
=

j,k
f(| j ⟩⟨k |) tr
 
⟨k |B†| j ⟩
!
=

j,k
f(| j ⟩⟨k |) tr
 
(B†)kj
!
=

j,k
f(| j ⟩⟨k |)Bjk
=

j,k
f(Bjk| j ⟩⟨k |),
because f is conjugate linear
= f

j,k
Bjk| j ⟩⟨k |

= f(B).
Again, this mapping f →Af is independent of a choice of basis, because its
inverse A →tr(A−) does not depend on such a choice.
Self-adjoint operators. We now restrict ourselves to self-adjoint operators
SA(H) →B(H). We recall that an operator A: H →H is called self-adjoint
(or Hermitian) if A† = A. In terms of matrices this means that Ajk = Akj.
In particular, all entries Ajj on the diagonal are real numbers, and so is the
trace (as sum of these Ajj). The set of self-adjoint operators SA(H) forms a
vector space over R. The mapping H →SA(H) can be extended to a functor
SA: Hilb →VectR, by:
SA(C)
'
H
A
−→H
(
=
'
K
C †
−→H
A
−→H
C
−→K
(
.
like for B in (3). This is well-deﬁned since if A is self-adjoint then so is
SA(C)(A), since:
 
SA(C)(A)
!† =
 
CAC †!† = C ††A†C † = CAC † = SA(C)(A).
There are serveral ways to turn a linear operator into a self-adjoint one. For
instance, for each complex number z ∈C and B ∈B(H) we have self-adjoint
operators:
zB + zB†
and
izB −izB†.
(5)

130
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
In this way we obtain mappings B(H) →SA(H) in VectR. If the real part
Re(z) is non-zero, the mapping:
B −→
1
2Re(z)
 
zB + zB†!
is a left-inverse of the inclusion a SA(H) →B(H), making it a split mono.
By moving from B to SA we get the following analogue of Proposition 1.
Proposition 2. For H ∈FdHilb, the subset SA(H) →B(H) of self-adjoint
operators on H is a vector space over R, for which one obtains a natural
isomorphism in VectR:
SA(H)
hsSA
∼
=
 SA(H)∗= SA(H) ⊸R
by
hsSA(A)(B) = tr(AB).
(6)
It gives rise to a map of adjunctions:
FdHilb
(−)†

SA

⊥
FdHilbop
(−)†

SA

VectR
(−)⊸R

⊥
VectRop
(−)⊸R

Proof. If A, B : H →H are self adjoint operators, then tr(AB†) = tr(AB)
is a real number, since:
tr(AB) = tr
 
(AB)†!
= tr
 
B†A†!
= tr (BA) = tr(AB).
Conversely, suppose we have a (linear) map f : SA(H) →R in VectR. It can
be extended to a function f′ : B(H) →C via
f′(B) = 1
2
 
f(B + B†) + if(iB −iB†)
!
using, as described in (5), that B + B† and iB −iB† are self-adjoint. It is not
hard to see that f′ preserves sums of operators and satisﬁes f′(zB) = zf′(B).
This f′ really extends f since in the special case when B is self-adjoint we get
f′(B) = 1
2
 
f(2B) + if(0)
!
= f(B) by linearity.
By Proposition 1 there is a unique A ∈B(H) with:
f′ = hsB(A) = tr(A(−)†) : B(H) −→C.
We now put hsSA
−1(f) = 1
2(A + A†) ∈SA(H), and check for B ∈SA(H):
hsSA
 
hsSA
−1(f)
!
(B)
= tr
 
hsSA
−1(f)B
!
= 1
2
 
tr(AB) + tr(A†B)
!

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
131
= 1
2
 
tr(AB†) + tr((BA)†)
!
since B is self-adjoint
= 1
2
 
f′(B) + tr(BA)
!
= 1
2
 
f(B) + tr(AB)
!
since f(B) = f′(B) when B ∈SA(H)
= 1
2
 
f(B) + f(B)
!
= 1
2
 
f(B) + f(B)
!
because f(B) is real valued
= f(B)
since f is linear.
In the other direction, one obtains hsSA
−1 
hsSA(A)
!
= A by uniqueness.
We prove uniqueness in the self-adjoint case too. Assume a self-adjoint
operator C ∈SA(H) also satisﬁes f = hsSA(C): SA(H) →R. We need to
prove C = A = 1
2(A′ + A′†). We plan to show Ajk = Cjk wrt. an arbitrary
basis, and thus A = C. We prove the equality Ajk = Cjk in two steps, by
proving that both their real and imaginary parts are the same.
Re(Cjk) = 1
2
 
Cjk + Cjk
!
= 1
2
 
Cjk + (C †)kj
!
= 1
2
 
Cjk + Ckj
!
= 1
2 (⟨j |C| k ⟩+ ⟨k |C| j ⟩)
= 1
2
 
tr(⟨j |C| k ⟩) + tr(⟨k |C| j ⟩)
!
= 1
2
 
tr(C(| k ⟩⟨j | + | j ⟩⟨k |))
!
= 1
2
 
tr(A(| k ⟩⟨j | + | j ⟩⟨k |))
!
by assumption, using that | k ⟩⟨j | + | j ⟩⟨k | is self-adjoint
= . . . (as before)
= Re(Ajk).
Similarly, Im(Cjk) = Im(Ajk), by writing Im(Cjk) = 1
2
 
−iCjk + iCjk
! and
using the self-adjoint operator −i| j ⟩⟨k | + i| k ⟩⟨j |.
⊣
Implicitly, the proof gives a formula for the inverse hsSA
−1 of the Hilbert-
Schmidt map for self-adjoint operators.
Positive operators. An operator A: H →H is called positive if the inner
product ⟨Ax | x⟩is a non-negative real number, for each x ∈H. In that case

132
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
one writes A ≥0. This is equivalent to: A = BB†, for some operator B, and
also to: all eigenvalues are non-negative reals. In a spectral decomposition
A = 
j j| j ⟩⟨j | a positive operator A has eigenvalues j ∈R≥0 for all j.
Hence the trace tr(A) is a non-negative real number. The set of positive
operators on H is written here as Pos(H). It forms a module over the semiring
R≥0 of non-negative reals since positive operators are closed under addition
and under scalar multiplication with r ∈R≥0. A positive operator is clearly
self-adjoint, since A† = (BB†)† = B††B† = BB† = A.
Thus there are
inclusion maps Pos(H) →SA(H) →B(H). We can describe taking positive
operators as a functor Pos : Hilb →ModR≥0 from Hilbert spaces to modules
over the non-negative real numbers. The action of Pos on maps is like for SA
and B in (3), and is well-deﬁned, since if C : H →K in Hilb and A ≥0, then
Pos(C)(A) = CAC † ≥0 since for each x ∈K,
⟨CAC †x | x⟩= ⟨AC †x | C †x⟩≥0.
As an aside we recall that via positivity one obtains the L¨owner order on
arbitrary operators A, B, deﬁned as: A ≤B iﬀB −A ≥0. Thus: A ≤B iﬀ
∃P ∈Pos(H). A + P = B. Hence the spaces Pos(H) →SA(H) →B(H)
are actually ordered (see also [37, 15]).
Proposition 3. For H ∈FdHilb, the subset Pos(H) →SA(H) of positive
operators is a module over the non-negative reals R≥0, for which there is a natural
isomorphism in ModR≥0:
Pos(H)
hsPos
∼
=
 Pos(H)∗= Pos(H) ⊸R≥0 by hsPos(A)(B) = tr(AB).
(7)
This isomorphism gives rise to a map of adjunctions:
FdHilb
(−)†

Pos

⊥
FdHilbop
(−)†

Pos

ModR≥0
(−)⊸R≥0

⊥
ModR≥0
op
(−)⊸R≥0

Proof. We ﬁrst have to check that tr(AB) ≥0, for A, B ∈Pos(H), so that
indeed tr(A−) has type Pos(H) →R≥0. We do so by ﬁrst writing the spectral
decomposition as A = 
j j| j ⟩⟨j |, with j ≥0. Then:
tr(AB) =

j
jtr(| j ⟩⟨j |B) =

j
jtr(⟨j |B| j ⟩) =

j
jtr(⟨Bj | j⟩)
=

j
j⟨Bj | j⟩
≥0,
since ⟨Bj | j⟩≥0.

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
133
These maps hsPos = tr(A−) clearly preserve the module structure: additions
and scalar multiplication (with a non-negative real number). Next, assume
we have a linear map f : Pos(H) →R≥0 in ModR≥0. Like before, we wish
to extend it, this time to a map f′ : SA(H) ⊸R. If we have an arbitrary
self-adjoint operator B ∈SA(H) we can write it as diﬀerence B = Bp −Bn of
its positive and negative parts Bp, Bn ∈Pos(H). One way to do it is to write
B = 
j j| j ⟩⟨j | as spectral decomposition, and to separate the (real-valued)
eigenvalues j into negative and non-negative ones. Then take:
Bp =

j≥0
j| j ⟩⟨j |
and
Bn =

j<0
−j| j ⟩⟨j |.
(8)
Now we can deﬁne f′(B) = f(Bp)−f(Bn) ∈R. This outcome is independent
of the choice of Bp, Bn, since if C, D ∈Pos(H) also satisfy B = C −D, then
Bp + D = C + Bn, so that by linearity:
f(Bp) + f(D) = f(Bp + D) = f(C + Bn) = f(C) + f(Bn),
and thus:
f′(B) = f(Bp) −f(Bn) = f(C) −f(D).
It is not hard to see that the resulting function f′ : SA(H) →R is linear (in
VectR). Hence by Proposition 2 there is a unique A = hsSA
−1(f′) ∈SA(H)
with f′ = hsSA(A) = tr(A−): SA(H) →R.
For a positive operator
B ∈Pos(H) we then get tr(AB) = f′(B) = f(B) ≥0, since B = Bp for such
a positive B.
We now write A = Ap −An as in (8), where An = 
j<0 −j| j ⟩⟨j |.
Projection operators of the form | j ⟩⟨j | are positive, so that we get for each j
with j < 0
0 ≤tr(A| j ⟩⟨j |) = tr(Ap| j ⟩⟨j |) −tr(An| j ⟩⟨j |)
= 0 −(−j)
= j.
But this is impossible, since we assumed j < 0. Hence An = 0, and A = Ap is
a positive operator. Thus we have f = tr(A−): Pos(H) →R≥0, as required,
so that we can take hsPos
−1(f) = hsSA
−1(f′).
We brieﬂy check uniqueness: if C ∈Pos(H) also satisﬁes f = tr(C−), then
for an arbitrary B ∈SA(H),
f′(B) = f(Bp) −f(Bn) = tr(CBp) −tr(CBn) = tr(C(Bp −Bn)) = tr(CB).
But then C = A by the uniqueness from Proposition 2.
⊣
This concludes our description of the spaces of operators B(H)← SA(H) ←
Pos(H) on a (ﬁnite-dimensional) Hilbert space H, as naturally self-dual
modules. Before we proceed to density operators DM(H) and eﬀects Ef (H)

134
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
on H we wish to explore and exploit the similarities between these modules
(over C, R, and R≥0) in terms of algebras of a monad.
§3. Categories of modules as algebras. We recall that a semiring [20] is like
a ring but without an additive inverse. Modules are vector spaces except that
the scalars need only be a ring, and not a ﬁeld. Here we generalise further and
will also consider modules over a semiring. In fact we have already done in the
previous section, when we talked about positive operators forming a module
over the non-negative reals R≥0. As we now proceed more systematically, we
shall see that such a module over a semiring consists of a commutative monoid
of vectors, with scalar multiplication by elements of the semiring. It will be
captured as algebra of the multiset monad.
In this section we thus start with the standard description of categories of
modules, over a semiring S, as categories of algebras of a monad, namely of the
multiset monad MS associated with S. We shall be especially interested in the
examples S = R≥0, R, C giving us a uniform description of the categories of
modules in which the spaces of operators Pos(H), SA(H), B(H) on a Hilbert
space H live. The general theory of monads—see e.g. [34, 5, 35, 7]—gives us
certain structure for free, see Theorem 4 below.
The main result in this section, Theorem 6, relates the three spaces of
operators Pos(H), SA(H), B(H) via free constructions between categories of
modules.
To start, let S be a semiring, consisting of a commutative additive monoid
(S, +, 0) and a multiplicative monoid (S, ·, 1), where multiplication distributes
over addition. One can deﬁne a “multiset” functor MS : Sets →Sets by:
MS(X) = {ϕ : X →S | supp(ϕ) is ﬁnite},
where supp(ϕ) = {x ∈X | ϕ(x) ̸= 0} is the support of ϕ. For a function
f : X →Y one deﬁnes MS(f): MS(X) →MS(Y) by:
MS(f)(ϕ)(y)= 
x∈f−1(y) ϕ(x).
(9)
Such a (ﬁnite) multiset ϕ ∈Ms(X) may be written as formal sum s1| x1 ⟩+
· · · + sk| xk ⟩where supp(ϕ) = {x1, . . . , xk} and si = ϕ(xi) ∈S describes the
“multiplicity” of the element xi. The ket notation | xi ⟩is justiﬁed because
these elements are vectors, and useful, because it distinguishes x as element
of X and as vector in MS(X). These formal sum are quotiented by the usual
commutativity and associativity relations. Also, the same element x ∈X may
be counted multiple times, so that s1| x ⟩+ s2| x ⟩is considered to be the same
as (s1 + s2)| x ⟩. With this formal sum notation one can write the application
of MS on a map f as MS(f)(
i si| xi ⟩) = 
i si| f(xi) ⟩.
This multiset functor is a monad, whose unit : X →MS(X ) is (x) =
1| x ⟩, and multiplication 
: MS(MS(X)) →MS(X) is 
(
i si| ϕi ⟩)(x) =

i si · ϕi(x), where · is multiplication in S.

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
135
In order to emphasise that elements of MS(X) are ﬁnite multisets, one may
call MS the ﬁnitary multiset monad. In order to include non-ﬁnite multisets,
one has to assume that suitable inﬁnite sums exist in the underlying semiring S.
This is less natural.
For the semiring S = N one gets the free commutative monoid MN(X )
on a set X. The monad MN is also known as the ‘bag’ monad, containing
ordinary (N-valued) multisets. If S = Z one obtains the free Abelian group
MZ(X) on X. The Boolean semiring 2 = {0, 1} yields the ﬁnite powerset
monad Pﬁn = M2. Here we shall be mostly interested in the cases where S is
R≥0, R, or C.
An (Eilenberg-Moore) algebra α : MS(X) →X for the multiset monad
corresponds to a monoid structure on X—given by x + y = α(1| x ⟩+1| y ⟩)—
together with a scalar multiplication •: S ×X →X given by s • x = α(s| x ⟩).
It preserves the additive structure (of S and of X) in each coordinate separately.
This makes X a module, for the semiring S. Conversely, such an S-module
structure on a commutative monoid M yields an algebra MS(M) →M by

i si| xi ⟩→
i si • xi. Thus the category of algebras Alg(MS) is equivalent
to the category ModS of S-modules. When S happens to be a ﬁeld, this
category ModS is the category VectS of vector spaces over S. Thus we have a
uniform description of the three categories of relevance in the previous section,
namely:
Alg(MR≥0) = ModR≥0
Alg(MR) = ModR = VectR
Alg(MC) = ModC = VectC.
We continue this section with a basic result in the theory of monads, which is
stated without proof, but with a few subsequent pointers.
Theorem 4. Let A be a symmetric monoidal category, which is both complete
and cocomplete, and let T : A →A be a monad on A. The category Alg(T) of
algebras is:
(a) also complete, with limits as in A;
(b) cocomplete as soon as certain special colimits exist in Alg(T), namely
colimits of reﬂexive pairs;
(c) symmetric monoidal closed in case these colimits exist and the monad
T is symmetric monoidal (commutative), where the free algebra functor
F : A →Alg(T) preserves the monoidal structure (i.e. is strong monoidal).⊣
A category of algebras is always “as complete” as its underlying category,
see e.g. [35, 5]. Cocompleteness always holds for algebras over Sets and follows
from a result of Linton’s, see [5, § 9.3, Prop. 4] using the existence of coequalisers
of reﬂexive pairs in Sets. We shall mostly use this result for A = Sets, so that
we don’t have to worry about these special colimits; the monoidal structure
on the underlying category Sets is thus cartesian. Monoidal structure (I, ⊗)
in categories of algebras goes back to [33] (see also [23]). The tensor unit

136
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
I is simply F (1), for the free algebra functor F : Sets →Alg(T) and the
ﬁnal (singleton) set 1. The tensor ⊗is obtained as a suitable coequaliser of
algebras. Algebra maps X ⊗Y →Z then correspond to bi-homomorphisms
UX × UY →UZ. In particular, there is a universal bi-homomorphism
⊗: UX × UY →U(X ⊗Y). The free functor preserves these tensors.
The multiset monad MS is symmetric monoidal if S is a (multiplicatively)
commutative semiring. In that case categories ModS are monoidal closed,
with S ∼= MS(1) as tensor unit. Maps M ⊗N →K in ModS correspond
to bilinear maps M × N →K (linear in each argument separately). The
associated exponent is written as ⊸, like before.
For modules M, N ∈ModS there are obvious correspondences:
M
 (N ⊸S)
================
M ⊗N
 S
==================
N ⊗M
 S
================
N
 (M ⊸S)
This means that there are adjunctions:
ModS
(−)⊸S

⊥
(ModS) op
(−)⊸S

(10)
as used in the previous section.
In summary, we have a sequence of categories of algebras of monads:
Alg(MR≥0)
Alg(MR)

Alg(MC)

ModR≥0
VectR
VectC
(11)
where the maps between them can be understood as arising from maps of
monads in the other direction:
MR≥0
 MR
 MC
via semiring inclusions
R≥0
 R
 C.
This follows from the following general result.
Proposition 5. A homomorphism of semirings f : S →S′, preserving both
the additive and multiplicative monoid structures, gives rise to a map of monads
MS ⇒MS′, by
 
j sj| xj ⟩
!
→
 
j f(sj)| xj ⟩
!
, and thus to a functor
Alg(MS′) →Alg(MS), by (MS′(X) →X) −→(MS(X) →MS′(X) →X).
This functor always has a left adjoint.
⊣
The left adjoint exists because categories of modules Alg(MS) = ModS are
cocomplete; it can be constructed via a coequaliser, see e.g. [23, 29]. Thus,
modules over their semirings have the structure of a biﬁbration [24].

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
137
The diﬀerent spaces of operators B(H), SA(H), Pos(H) on a Hilbert space
H turn out to be related via free constructions. This was used implicitly in the
proofs of Propositions 2 and 3 in the previous section, and also in [8].
Theorem 6. Write the left adjoints to the two forgetful functors in (11) as:
ModR≥0
R
 VectR
C
 VectC.
(12)
For a ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space H, the canonical inclusion morphisms
Pos(H) →SA(H) in ModR≥0, and SA(H) →B(H) in VectR yield via these
adjunctions (transposed ) maps that turn out to be isomorphisms:
R
 
Pos(H)
!
∼
=
 SA(H)
and
C
 
SA(H)
!
∼
=
 B(H).
Thus we have the following situation of triangles commuting up-to-isomorphism.
FdHilb
Pos

SA

B

ModR≥0
R
free  VectR
C
free  VectC.
Proof. The proof uses explicit constructions of the left adjoints R and C
in (12). A module X over R≥0 can be turned into a vector space over R via the
same construction that turns a commutative monoid into a commutative group
R(X) = (X × X)/∼
where
(x1, x2) ∼(y1, y2)
⇐⇒∃z. x1 + y2 + z = y1 + x2 + z.
Addition is done componentwise: [x1, x2]+[y1, y2] = [x1+y1, x2+y2], minus by
reversal: −[x1, x2] = [x2, x1], and scalar multiplication •: R × R(X ) →R(X)
via:
r • [x1, x2] =

[r • x1, r • x2]
if r ≥0
[(−r) • x2, (−r) • x1] if r < 0
(Notice the reversal of the xi in the second case.)
A vector space X over R can be turned into a vector space over C, simply
via C(X) = X × X. The additive structure is obtained pointwise, and scalar
multiplication •: C × C(X) →C(X) is done as follows.
(a + ib) • (x1, x2) = (a • x1 −b • x2, b • x1 + a • x2).
The inclusion morphism Pos(H) →SA(H) in ModR≥0 yields as transpose
the map ϕ : R(Pos(H)) →SA(H) in VectR given by ϕ([B1, B2]) = B1 −B2.
It is surjective since each A ∈SA(H) can be written as A = Ap −An for
Ap, An ∈Pos(H) as in (8). Thus A = ϕ([Ap, An]).
Similarly, the inclusion SA(H) →B(H) in VectR gives rise to a transpose
 : C(SA(H)) →B(H) in VectC, given by (B1, B2) = B1 + iB2.
Also

138
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
this map is surjective since each A ∈B(H) can be written as A = 1
2(A +
A†) + 1
2i(−iA + iA†), where A + A† and −iA + A† are self-adjoints. Hence
A = ( 1
2(A + A†), 1
2(−iA + iA†)).
⊣
§4. Convex sets and eﬀect modules. In the previous section we have seen
how the spaces of operators Pos(H), SA(H), B(H) ﬁt in the context of
modules. The spaces DM(H) of density operators (states) and Ef (H) of
eﬀects (statements/predicates) require more subtle structures that will be
introduced in this section, namely convex sets and eﬀect modules. We show
that they are related by a dual adjunction, and that there exists a map of
adjunctions from Hilbert spaces, like in Section 2.
First we recall the deﬁnition of the two sets of operators that are relevant in
this section.
DM(H) = {A ∈Pos(H) | tr(A) = 1}
Ef (H) = {A ∈Pos(H) | A ≤I },
where I is the identity map H →H and ≤is the L¨owner order (described
before Proposition 3). A further subset of Ef (H) is the set of projections,
given as:
Pr(H) = {A ∈B(H) | A† = A = AA}.
For a projection A ∈Pr(H) there is an orthosupplement A⊥∈Pr(H) with
A + A⊥= I . This shows A ≤I , since I −A = A⊥is positive.
Before we investigate the algebraic structure of these sets of operators we
brieﬂy mention the following alternative formulation of eﬀects. It is used
for instance in [11], where these eﬀects A are called predicates; they give a
“quantum expectation value” tr(AB) for a density matrix B (see the map hsEf
in Theorem 14 below, elaborated in Remark 15).
Lemma 7. A positive operator A ∈Pos(H) is an eﬀect if and only if all of its
eigenvalues are in [0, 1].
Proof. Suppose A is an eﬀect with spectral decomposition A = 
j j|j⟩⟨j|,
where we may assume that the eigenvectors | j ⟩form an orthonormal basis.
The eigenvalues j are necessarily real and positive. They satisfy:
j = j⟨j | j⟩= ⟨j |j| j ⟩= ⟨j |A| j ⟩≤⟨j |I | j ⟩= ⟨j | j⟩= 1.
Conversely, assume a positive operator A with spectral decomposition A =

j j| j ⟩⟨j | where the | j ⟩form an orthonormal basis and j ∈[0, 1]. Then:
A = 
j j| j ⟩⟨j | ≤
j | j ⟩⟨j | = I .
⊣
4.1. Convex sets. We start with convex sets, and (conveniently) describe
them via a monad, so that we can beneﬁt from general results like in Theo-
rem 4. Analogously to the multiset monad one deﬁnes the distribution monad

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
139
D: Sets →Sets as:
D(X)= {ϕ : X →[0, 1] | supp(ϕ) is ﬁnite and 
x∈X ϕ(x) = 1}.
(13)
Elements of D(X) are convex combinations s1| x1 ⟩+ · · · + sk| xk ⟩, where the
probabilities si ∈[0, 1] satisfy 
i si = 1. Unit and multiplication making D a
monad can be deﬁned as for the multiset monad MS. This multiplication 
 is
well-deﬁned since:

x


i
siϕi

(x) =

x

i
si · ϕi(x) =

i
si ·

x
ϕi(x)

=

i
si = 1.
The distribution monad D is always symmetric monoidal (commutative). Here
it is deﬁned for probabilities in the unit interval [0, 1], but the more general
structure of an “eﬀect monoid” may be used instead, see [26].
The following result goes back to [39], see also [32, 13, 25].
Theorem 8. The category Alg(D) of algebras of the monad D is the category
Conv of convex sets with aﬃne maps between them.
⊣
Here we shall identify such a convex set simply with an algebra a : D(X) →X
of the monad D. It thus consists of a set X in which there is an interpretation
a(
j sj| xj ⟩) ∈X for each formal convex combination 
j sj| xj ⟩∈D(X).
In particular, for each r ∈[0, 1] and x, y ∈X there is an interpretation of the
convex sum rx + (r −1)y, namely as a(r| x ⟩+ (1 −r)| y ⟩) ∈X. The unit
interval [0, 1] of real numbers is an obvious example of a convex set. Actually, it
is a free one since [0, 1] ∼= D({0, 1}). Aﬃne maps preserve such interpretations
of convex combinations. We recall that in the present context all such convex
combinations involve only ﬁnitely many elements xj.
Lemma 9. Let FdHilbUn be the category of ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces
with unitary maps between them. Taking density operators yields a functor
DM: FdHilbUn →Conv = Alg(D).
Proof. As is well-known, the set DM(H) of density operators is convex:
given ﬁnitely many Aj ∈DM(H) and rj ∈[0, 1] with 
j rj = 1, the operator
A = 
j rjAj is positive and has trace 1, since:
tr(A) = tr

j
rjAj

=

j
rjtr(Aj) =

j
rj = 1.
Moreover, if U : H →K is unitary—i.e. UU † = I and (thus) U †U = I ,
so that U † = U −1—then DM(U)(A) = UAU † : K →K is in DM(K), if
A ∈DM(H), since:
tr
 
DM(U)(A)
!
= tr(UAU †) = tr(U †UA) = tr(IA) = tr(A) = 1.
⊣
The three example categories Alg(MS) of interest here—that arise from
multiset monads MS for S = R≥0, R, C—are diﬀerent from the category
Alg(D) of convex sets in at least three aspects:

140
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
• These categories Alg(MS) are dually self-adjoint via the functor (−) ⊸S
as in (10).
• They have biproducts, because the monads MS are ‘additive’, see [10].
• The tensor unit in Alg(D) = Conv is the singleton set 1, since D(1) ∼= 1,
so that tensors ⊗in Conv have projections (see [23]).
The mapping X →Conv(X, [0, 1]), for X a convex set, does not yield an
adjunction as in (10), but does lead to an interesting dual adjunction with a
category of ‘eﬀect modules’. This will be the described in the next subsection.
But ﬁrst we conclude this part on convex sets with an observation like in
Theorem 6. There is an obvious map of monads D ⇒MR≥0, that gives rise to
an inclusion functor ModR≥0 = Alg(MR≥0) →Alg(D) = Conv, saying that
modules over non-negative reals are convex sets—in a trivial manner. For
general reasons, this functor has a left adjoint, that can be described explicitly
in terms of a representation contruction that goes back to [38] (see also [25]).
This left adjoint S : Conv →ModR≥0 is given on X ∈Conv by:
S(X) = {0} + R>0 × X,
with addition for u, v ∈S(X ), in trivial cases given by u + 0 = u = 0 + u and:
(s, x) + (t, y) = (s + t,
s
s + t x +
t
s + t y).
A scalar multiplication •: R≥0 × S(X) →S(X) is deﬁned as:
s • u =

0
if u = 0 or s = 0
(s · t, x)
if u = (t, x) and s ̸= 0.
This makes S(X) a module over R≥0.
Theorem 10. For a ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space H, transposing the in-
clusion DM(H) →Pos(H) in Conv gives an isomorphism S(DM(H))
∼
=
−→
Pos(H) in ModR≥0.
In this way one obtains a triangle commuting up-to-
isomorphism:
FdHilbUn
DM

Pos

Alg(D) = Conv
S
free
 ModR≥0 = Alg(MR≥0)
Proof. The induced mapS(DM(H)) = {0} + R≥0 × DM(H)
ϕ
−→Pos(H)
is given by 0 →0 and (r, A) →rA. It is injective, since if rA = sB for
A, B ∈DM(H), then r = r · tr(A) = tr(rA) = tr(sB) = s · tr(B) = s, and
thus A = B. It is also surjective: since each non-zero B ∈Pos(H) can be
written as B = tr(B)
 
B
tr(B)
!
= ϕ
 
tr(B),
B
tr(B)
!
, where the operator
B
tr(B) has
trace 1 by construction.
⊣

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
141
By combining this result with Theorem 6 we see that each of the spaces of
operators B(H), SA(H), Pos(H) can be obtained from the space DM(H)
of density operators via free constructions. As we will see in Theorem 14
below, density matrices and eﬀects can be translated back and forth: Ef (H) ∼=
Conv(DM(H), [0, 1]) and DM(H) ∼= EMod(Ef (H), [0, 1]).
Hence these
density operators and eﬀects are in a sense most fundamental among the
operators on a Hilbert space.
4.2. Eﬀect modules. Eﬀect modules are structurally like modules over a
semiring. But instead of a semiring of scalars one uses an eﬀect monoid, such
as the unit interval [0, 1]. Such an eﬀect monoid is a monoid in the category of
eﬀect algebras, just like a semiring is a monoid in the category of commutative
monoids. Thus, in order to deﬁne an eﬀect module, we need the notion of
eﬀect algebra and of monoid in eﬀect algebras. This will be introduced ﬁrst.
But in order to deﬁne an eﬀect algebra, we need the notion of partial
commutative monoid (PCM). Before reading the deﬁnition of PCM, think
of the unit interval [0, 1] with addition +. This + is obviously only a partial
operation, which is commutative and associative in a suitable sense. This will
be formalised next.
A partial commutative monoid (PCM) consists of a set M with a zero
element 0 ∈M and a partial binary operation : M × M →M satisfying
the three requirements below. They involve the notation x ⊥y for: x  y is
deﬁned; in that case x, y are called orthogonal.
1. Commutativity: x ⊥y implies y ⊥x and x  y = y  x;
2. Associativity: y ⊥z and x ⊥(y  z) implies x ⊥y and (x  y) ⊥z
and also x  (y  z) = (x  y)  z;
3. Zero: 0 ⊥x and 0  x = x;
For each set X the lift {0} + X of X, obtained by adjoining a new element 0, is
an example of a PCM, with u0 = u = 0u, and  undeﬁned otherwise. Such
structures are also studied under the name ‘partially additive monoid’, see [3].
The notion of eﬀect algebra is due to [18], see also [14] for an overview.
Deﬁnition 11. An eﬀect algebra is a PCM (E, 0, ) with an orthosupple-
ment. The latter is a unary operation (−)⊥: E →E satisfying:
1. x⊥∈E is the unique element in E with x  x⊥= 1, where 1 = 0⊥;
2. x ⊥1 ⇒x = 0.
A homomorphism E →D of eﬀect algebras is given by a function f : E →D
between the underlying sets satisfying f(1) = 1, and if x ⊥x′ in E then both
f(x) ⊥f(x′) in D and f(x  x′) = f(x)  f(x′).
Eﬀect algebras and their homomorphisms form a category, called EA.
The unit interval [0, 1] is a PCM with sum of r, s ∈[0, 1] deﬁned if r + s ≤1,
and in that case r  s = r + s. The unit interval is also an eﬀect algebra with
r⊥= 1−r. Each orthomodular lattice is an eﬀect algebra, see [14, 17] for more

142
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
information and examples. In particular, the projections Pr(H) of a Hilbert
space form an eﬀect algebra, with P ⊥Q iﬀP ≤Q⊥. In [26] a notion of
‘convex category’ is introduced in which homsets Hom(X, 2) are eﬀect algebras
(where 2 = 1 + 1 and 1 is ﬁnal). Most importantly in the current setting,
the set of eﬀects Ef (H), consisting of positive operators A ≤I is an eﬀect
algebra, with A ⊥B iﬀA + B ≤I , and in that case A  B = A + B; further,
A⊥= I −A. This yields a functor Ef : FdHilbUn →EA.
In [28] it is shown that the category EA is symmetric monoidal, where
morphisms E ⊗D →C in EA correspond to ‘bimorphisms’ f : E × D →C ,
satisfying f(1, 1) = 1, and for all x, x′ ∈E and y, y′ ∈D,

x ⊥x′ =⇒f(x, y) ⊥f(x′, y) and f(x  x′, y) = f(x, y)  f(x′, y)
y ⊥y′ =⇒f(x, y) ⊥f(x, y′) and f(x, y  y′) = f(x, y)  f(x, y′).
The tensor unit is the two-element eﬀect algebra 2 = {0, 1}. Since 2 is at the
same time initial in EA we have a ‘tensor with coprojections’ (see [23] for
‘tensors with projections’). One can think of elements of the tensor E ⊗D as
ﬁnite sums j xj ⊗yj, where one identiﬁes:
0 ⊗y = 0
x ⊗0 = 0
(x  x′) ⊗y = (x ⊗y)  (x′ ⊗y)
x ⊗(y  y′) = (x ⊗y)  (x ⊗y′),
when x ⊥x′ and y ⊥y′.
Example 12. For an arbitrary set X the powerset P(X) is a Boolean algebra,
and so an orthomodular lattice, and thus an eﬀect algebra. For U, V ∈P(X)
one has U ⊥V iﬀU ∩V = ∅and in that case U  V = U ∪V . The tensor
product [0, 1]⊗P(X) of eﬀect algebras is then given by the set of step functions
f : X →[0, 1]; such functions have only ﬁnitely many output values. When X
is a ﬁnite set, say with n elements, then [0, 1] ⊗P(X) ∼= [0, 1]n, see [21].
As special case we have [0, 1] ⊗{0, 1} ∼= [0, 1], since {0, 1} is the tensor unit.
One writes MO(n) for the orthomodular lattice with 2n + 2 elements, namely
0, 1, i, i⊥, for 1 ≤i ≤n, with only minimal equations. Thus MO(0) = {0, 1}
and MO(1) ∼= P({0, 1}), so that [0, 1] ⊗MO(1) ∼= [0, 1]2. It can be shown
that [0, 1] ⊗MO(2) is an octahedron.
Using this symmetric monoidal structure (⊗, 2) on EA we can consider, in a
standard way, the category Mon(EA) of monoids in the category EA of eﬀect
algebras. Such monoids are similar to semirings, which are monoids in the
category of commutative monoids, i.e. objects of Mon(CMon). A monoid
S ∈Mon(EA) consists of a set S carrying eﬀect algebra structure (0, , (−)⊥)
and a monoid structure, written multiplicatively, as in: S ⊗S
·→S ←2. Since
2 is initial, the latter map S ←2 does not add any structure. The monoid
structure on S is thus determined by a bimorphism ·: S ×S →S that preserves
 in each variable separately and satisﬁes 1 · x = x = x · 1.

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
143
For such a monoid S ∈Mon(EA) we can consider the category ActS(EA) =
EModS of S-monoid actions (scalar multiplications), or ‘eﬀect modules’ over
S (see [34, VII,§4]). Again this is similar to the situation in Section 3 where
the category ModS of modules over a semiring S may be described as the
category ActS(CMon) of commutative monoids with S-scalar multiplication.
In this section an eﬀect module X ∈ActS(EA) thus consists of an eﬀect
algebra X together with an action (or scalar multiplication) •: S ⊗X →X,
corresponding to a bimorphism S × X →X. A homomorphism of eﬀect
modules X →Y consists of a map of eﬀect algebras f : X →Y preserving
scalar multiplication f(s • x) = s • f(x) for all s ∈S and x ∈X.
By completely general reasoning the forgetful functor EModS →EA has a
left adjoint, given by tensoring with S, as in:
EModS = ActS(EA)
⊣
EA
S⊗(−) 
(14)
See [34, VII,§4] for details.
The main example of a (commutative) monoid in EA is the unit interval
[0, 1] ∈EA via ordinary multiplication. If r1 +r2 ≤1, then we have the familiar
distributivity in each variable, as in:
s · (r1  r2) = s · (r1 + r2) = (s · r1) + (s · r2) = (s · r1)  (s · r2).
We shall be most interested in the associated category EMod[0,1] = Act[0,1](EA).
In the sequel ‘eﬀect module’ will mean ‘eﬀect module over [0, 1]’. In particular,
we shall write EMod for EMod[0,1]. These eﬀect modules have been studied
earlier under the name ‘convex eﬀect algebras’, see [36]. We prefer the name
‘eﬀect module’ to emphasise the similarity with ordinary modules.
The eﬀects Ef (H) of a Hilbert space form an example of an eﬀect module,
with the usual scalar multiplication [0, 1] × Ef (H) →Ef (H). It is not hard to
see that this mapping H →Ef (H) yields a functor FdHilbUn →EMod.
A (dual) adjunction between convex sets and eﬀect algebras is described
in [25]. Here it is strengthened to an adjunction between convex sets and eﬀect
modules.
Proposition 13. By “homming into [0, 1]” one obtains an adjunction:
Conv
Conv(−,[0,1])

⊥
EModop
EMod(−,[0,1])

Proof. Given a convex set, the homset Conv(X, [0, 1]) of aﬃne maps is
an eﬀect module, with f ⊥g iﬀ∀x ∈X. f(x) + g(x) ≤1. In that case
one deﬁnes f  g = x ∈X. f(x) + g(x). It is easy to see that this is
again an aﬃne function. Similarly, the pointwise scalar product r • f =

144
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
x ∈X. r · f(x) yields an aﬃne function. This mapping X →Conv(X, [0, 1])
gives a contravariant functor since for h : X →X ′ in Conv pre-composition with
h yields a map (−) ◦h : Conv(X ′, [0, 1]) →Conv(X, [0, 1]) of eﬀect modules.
In the other direction, given an eﬀect module Y, the homset EMod(Y, [0, 1])
of eﬀect module maps yields a convex set: for a formal convex sum 
j rj| fj ⟩,
where fj : Y →[0, 1] in EMod, we can deﬁne an actual sum f : Y →[0, 1]
by f(y) = 
j rj · fj(y). This f forms a map of eﬀect modules. Again,
functoriality is obtained via pre-composition.
The dual adjunction between Conv and EMod involves a bijective correspon-
dence that is obtained by swapping arguments, like in (10). For X ∈Conv and
Y ∈EMod, we have:
X
f
 EMod(Y, [0, 1])
in Conv
====================
Y
g
 Conv(X, [0, 1])
in EMod
What needs to be checked is that for a map f of convex sets as indicated,
the swapped version )
f = y ∈Y. x ∈X. f(x)(y): Y →Conv(X, [0, 1]) is
a map of eﬀect modules—and similarly for g. This is straightforward.
⊣
With this adjunction in place we can give a clearer picture of density matrices
and eﬀects, forming a map of adjunctions (like in Section 2. The isomorphisms
involved are well-known, see e.g. [8], but the framing of the relevant structure
in terms of maps of adjunctions is new.
Theorem 14. There is a ‘dual adjunction’ between convex sets and eﬀect
modules as in the lower part of the diagram below. Further, there are natural
isomorphisms:
Ef (H)
hsEf
∼
=  Conv
 
DM(H), [0, 1])
DM(H)
hsDM
∼
=  EMod
 
Ef (H), [0, 1])
A 
 tr(A−)
B 
 tr(B−)
(15)
that give rise to a map of adjunctions given by states DM and statements (eﬀects)
Ef in:
FdHilbUn
(−)†

DM

⊥
FdHilbUnop
(−)†

Ef

Conv
Conv(−,[0,1])

⊥
EModop
EMod(−,[0,1])

Proof. This map of adjunctions involves natural isomorphisms (15), in the
categories EMod and Conv. We start with the ﬁrst one, labeled hsEf in (15),

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
145
and note that it is well-deﬁned: for A ∈Ef (H) and B ∈DM(H) one has:
hsEf (A)(B) = tr(AB) ≤tr(IB) = tr(B) = 1.
Injectivity of hsEf is obtained as follows. Assume A1, A2 ∈Ef (H) satisfy
hsEf (A1) = hsEf (A2), i.e. tr(A1−) = tr(A2−): DM(H) →[0, 1]. for an
arbitrary non-zero element x ∈H there is a density matrix Bx = | x ⟩⟨x |
|x|2
: H →
H. Thus tr(A1Bx) = tr(A2Bx). Then:
⟨(A1 −A2)x | x⟩= ⟨x | A1x⟩−⟨x | A2x⟩
= tr(⟨x |A1| x ⟩) −tr(⟨x |A2| x ⟩)
= tr(A1| x ⟩⟨x |) −tr(A2| x ⟩⟨x |)
= |x|2 
tr(A1Bx) −tr(A2Bx)
!
= 0.
Since this equation holds for all x ∈H, including x = 0, we get A1 −A2 ≥0,
and thus A2 ≤A1. Similarly A1 ≤A2, and thus A1 = A2.
For surjectivity of hsEf assume a morphism of convex sets h : DM(H) →
[0, 1]. We turn it into a linear map h′ : Pos(H) →R≥0 in the category ModR≥0
of modules over R≥0 via:
h′(B) =

0
if B = 0, or equivalently, tr(B) = 0
tr(B) · h
'
B
tr(B)
(
otherwise.
This is well-deﬁned since tr(
B
tr(B)) = tr(B)
tr(B) = 1. We check linearity of h′. It is
easy to see that h′(rB) = rh′(B), for r ∈R≥0, and for non-zero B, C ∈Pos(H)
we have:
h′(B) + h′(C)
= tr(B) · h

B
tr(B)

+ tr(C) · h

C
tr(C)

= tr(B + C) ·

tr(B)
tr(B + C) · h

B
tr(B)

+
tr(C)
tr(B + C) · h

C
tr(C)

= tr(B + C) ·

h

tr(B)
tr(B + C) ·
B
tr(B) +
tr(C)
tr(B + C) ·
C
tr(C)

since h preserves convex sums and:
tr(B)
tr(B + C) +
tr(C)
tr(B + C) =
tr(B)
tr(B) + tr(C) +
tr(C)
tr(B) + tr(C) = 1
= tr(B + C) · h

B + C
tr(B + C)

= h′(B + C).

146
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
By Proposition 3 there is a unique A = hsPos
−1(h′) ∈Pos(H) with h′ =
tr(A−): Pos(H) →R≥0. For a density operator B ∈DM(H) →Pos(H)
we get tr(AB) = h′(B) = h(B) ∈[0, 1]. We claim that A is an eﬀect, i.e. is in
Ef (H) →Pos(H). Write A = 
j j| j ⟩⟨j | as spectral decomposition, where
the | j ⟩form an orthonormal basis. By Lemma 7 we need to prove j ≤1.
Each operator | j ⟩⟨j | is a density matrix, and thus j = tr(A| j ⟩⟨j |) =
h′(| j ⟩⟨j |) = h(| j ⟩⟨j |) ≤1.
We turn to the second map hsDM in (15). Injectivity is obtained like for
hsEf , using that each operator | x ⟩⟨x | is a projection and thus an eﬀect. For
surjectivity assume a map of eﬀect modules g : Ef (H) →[0, 1], we extend it
to a linear map g′ : Pos(H) →R≥0 by:
g′(B) = n · g
 1
n B

where n ∈N is such that 1
n B ∈Ef (H).
Such an n can be found in the following way. Take the spectral decomposition
B = 
j j| j ⟩⟨j |, where j ≥0, because B is positive, and the | j ⟩form
an orthonormal basis. We can ﬁnd an n ∈N with j ≤n for each j. Then
1
nB = 
j
1
nj| j ⟩⟨j | is an eﬀect by Lemma 7. We also have to check that the
deﬁnition of g′ is independent of the choice of n: if also 1
mB ∈Ef (H), assume,
without loss of generality m ≤n; then we use that g is a map of [0, 1]-actions:
n · g
 1
n B

= n · g
m
n · 1
m B

= n · m
n · g
 1
m B

= m · g
 1
m B

.
It is easy to see that the map g′ is linear. Hence by Proposition 3 there is
a (unique) B = hsPos
−1(g′) ∈Pos(H) with g′ = tr(B−): Pos(H) →R≥0.
Then for A ∈Ef (H) we have g(A) = g′(A) = tr(BA) ∈[0, 1]. In particular
1 = g(I ) = tr(BI ) = tr(B), so that B ∈DM(H).
One of the equations that hsEf and hsDM should satisfy to ensure that we
have a map of adjunctions is the following; the other one is similar and left to
the reader.
DM(H)
=B. h. h(B)  EMod
 
Conv(DM(H), [0, 1]), [0, 1])
(−)◦hsEf

EMod(Ef (H), [0, 1])
hsDM
−1

DM(H)
This triangle commutes since for B ∈DM(H),
'
hsDM
−1 ◦
 
(−) ◦hsEf
!
◦
(
(B) = hsDM
−1 ◦(B) ◦hsEf
= hsDM
−1 ◦A. (B)(hsEf (A))
= hsDM
−1 ◦A. hsEf (A)(B)

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
147
= hsDM
−1 ◦A. tr(AB)
= hsDM
−1 ◦A. tr(BA)
= hsDM
−1 ◦tr(B−)
= B.
⊣
Remark 15. In [11] a quantum weakest precondition calculus is developed
using eﬀects on a ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space as predicates and density
matrices as states. The underlying duality can be made explicit in the current
setting. Programs act on states and are thus modeled as “state transformer”
maps DM(H) →DM(K).
Here we ignore complete positivity aspects
and simply consider these state transformers as aﬃne maps, i.e. as maps in
the category Conv. Corresponding to such programs there are “predicate
transformers” Ef (K) →Ef (H) going in the opposite direction. Naturally we
consider them to be maps of eﬀect modules. The (dual) correspondence between
state transformers and predicate transformers can then be derived using the
adjunction Conv ⇆EModop from Proposition 13 and the isomorphisms (15)
from Theorem 14:
DM(H)
 DM(K)
in Conv
============================= (15)
DM(H)
 EMod(Ef (K), [0, 1])
============================== (Prop. 13)
Ef (K)
 Conv(DM(H), [0, 1])
============================ (15)
Ef (K)
 Ef (H)
in EMod
Such correspondences form the basis of Dijkstra’s seminal work on program
correctness, see e.g. [12]. For a state transformer f : DM(H) →DM(K)
the corresponding predicate transformer wp(f, −): Ef (K) →Ef (H) is the
“weakest precondition operation”. It is given by:
wp(f, A) = hsEf
−1 
B ∈DM(H). hsDM(f(B))(A)
!
= hsEf
−1 
B ∈DM(H). tr(f(B)A)
!
,
where we use the isomorphisms hsDM : DM(K)
∼
=
−→EMod(Ef (K), [0, 1])
and hsEf
−1 : Conv(DM(H), [0, 1])
∼
=
−→Ef (H) from (15). By elaborating the
formulas for the matrix entries wp(f, A)jk, the weakest precondition can be
computed explicitly (for instance, by a computer algebra tool).
The dual adjunction Conv ⇆EModop from Proposition 13 can be restricted
to a (dual) equivalence of categories, giving a probabilistic version of Gelfand
duality, see [29]. One obtains an equivalence CCHobs ≃BEModop between
‘observable’ convex compact Hausdorﬀspaces and Banach eﬀect modules.
The latter are suitably complete with respect to a deﬁnable norm. The map of

148
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
adjunctions from Theorem 14 then restricts to a map of equivalences:
FdHilbUn
(−)†

DM

≃
FdHilbUnop
(−)†

Ef

CCHobs
Hom(−,[0,1])

≃
BEModop
Hom(−,[0,1])

We refer to [29] for further details. This equivalence leads to a reformulation of
Gleason’s Theorem [19]. In original form it says that projections on a Hilbert
space H (of dimension at least 3) correspond to measures:
DM(H) ∼=
EA
 
Pr(H), [0, 1]) .
In [29] it is shown that Gleason’s theorem is equivalent to:
Ef (H) ∼=
[0, 1] ⊗Pr(H).
This says that eﬀects form the free eﬀect module on projections. We can now
summarise how the whole ediﬁce of operators on a Hilbert space H can be
obtained from its projections Pr(H), see Table 1.
Table 1. Various operators on a Hilbert space H, constructed
from the projections Pr(H).
Operators
Formula
Description
eﬀects
Ef (H) ∼= [0, 1] ⊗Pr(H)
Gleason’s Theorem
density matrices
DM(H) ∼= EMod(Ef (H), [0, 1])
Theorem 14
positive operators
Pos(H) ∼= S(DM(H))
Theorem 10
self-adjoint operators
SA(H) ∼= R(Pos(H))
Theorem 6
bounded operators
B(H) ∼= C(SA(H))
Theorem 6
This concludes our overview of the categorical structure of the various
operators on a (ﬁnite dimensional) Hilbert space.
Acknowledgements. The ﬁrst steps of the research underlying this work was
carried out during a sabbatical visit of the ﬁrst author (BJ) to the Quantum
Group at Oxford University in April and May 2010. Special thanks, for
discussion and/or feedback, go to Bob Coecke, Rick Dejonghe, Chris Heunen,
Klaas Landsman, Bas Spitters, and Dusko Pavlovi´c.

RELATING OPERATOR SPACES VIA ADJUNCTIONS
149
REFERENCES
[1] S. Abramsky, Domain theory in logical form, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, vol. 51
(1991), pp. 1–77.
[2] S. Abramsky and B. Coecke, A categorical semantics of quantum protocols, Handbook
of Quantum Logic and Quantum Structures: Quantum Logic (K. Engesser, D. M. Gabbay, and
D. Lehmann, editors), North Holland, Elsevier, Computer Science Press, 2009, pp. 261–323.
[3] M. A. Arbib and E. G. Manes, Algebraic Approaches to Program Semantics, Texts and
Monographs in Computer Science, Springer, Berlin, 1986.
[4] S. Awodey, Category Theory, Oxford Logic Guides, Oxford University Press, 2006.
[5] M. Barr and Ch. Wells, Toposes, Triples and Theories, Springer, Berlin, 1985, revised and
corrected version available from URL: www.cwru.edu/artsci/math/wells/pub/ttt.html.
[6] E. J. Beggs and S. Majid, Bar categories and star operations, Algebras and Representation
Theory, vol. 12 (2009), pp. 103–152.
[7] F. Borceux, Handbook of Categorical Algebra, Encyclopedia of Mathematics, vol. 50, 51
and 52, Cambridge University Press, 1994.
[8] P. Busch, Quantum states and generalized observables: a simple proof of Gleason’s Theorem,
Physical Review Letters, vol. 91 (2003), no. 12, p. 120403.
[9] B. Coecke (editor), New Structures for Physics, Lecture Notes in Physics, vol. 813, Springer,
Berlin, 2011.
[10] D. Coumans and B. Jacobs, Scalars, monads and categories, Compositional Methods in
Physics and Linguistics (C. Heunen and M. Sadrzadeh, editors), Oxford University Press, 2012,
See arxiv.org/abs/1003.0585.
[11] E. D’Hondt and P. Panangaden, Quantum weakest preconditions, Mathematical Struc-
tures in Computer Science, vol. 16 (2006), pp. 429–451.
[12] E. W. Dijkstra and C. Scholten, Predicate Calculus and Program Semantics, Springer,
Berlin, 1990.
[13] E.-E. Doberkat, Eilenberg-Moore algebras for stochastic relations, Information and Com-
putation, vol. 204 (2006), pp. 1756–1781, Erratum and addendum in: 206(12):1476–1484, 2008.
[14] A. Dvureˇcenskij and S. Pulmannov´a, New Trends in Quantum Structures, Kluwer,
Dordrecht, 2000.
[15] A. Edalat, An extension of Gleason’s theorem for quantum computation, International
Journal of Theoretical Physics, vol. 43 (2004), pp. 1827–1840.
[16] J. M. Egger, On involutive monoidal categories, Theory and Applications of Categories,
vol. 25 (2011), pp. 368–393.
[17] D. J. Foulis, Observables, states and symmetries in the context of CB-eﬀect algebras,
Reports on Mathematical Physics, vol. 60 (2007), pp. 329–346.
[18] D. J. Foulis and M. K. Bennett, Eﬀect algebras and unsharp quantum logics, Foundations
of Physics, vol. 24 (1994), pp. 1331–1352.
[19] A. Gleason, Measures on the closed subspaces of a Hilbert space, Journal of Mathematics
and Mechanics, vol. 6 (1957), pp. 885–893.
[20] J. S. Golan, Semirings and their Applications, Kluwer, 1999.
[21] S. Gudder, Examples, problems and results in eﬀect algebras, International Journal of
Theoretical Physics, vol. 35 (1996), pp. 2365–2376.
[22] T. Heinosaari and M. Ziman, The Mathematical Language of Quantum Theory. From
Uncertainty to Entanglement, Cambridge University Press, 2012.
[23] B. Jacobs, Semantics of weakening and contraction, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic,
vol. 69 (1994), pp. 73–106.
[24]
, Categorical Logic and Type Theory, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1999.

150
BART JACOBS AND JORIK MANDEMAKER
[25]
, Convexity, duality and eﬀects, IFIP Theoretical Computer Science 2010 (Boston)
(C. S. Calude and V. Sassone, editors), IFIP Advances in Information and Communication
Technology, vol. 82, Springer, 2010, pp. 1–19.
[26]
, Probabilities, distribution monads and convex categories, Theoretical Computer
Science, vol. 412 (2011), pp. 3323–3336.
[27]
, Involutive categories and monoids, with a GNS-correspondence, Foundations of
Physics, vol. 42 (2012), pp. 874–895.
[28] B. Jacobs and J. Mandemaker, Coreﬂections in algebraic quantum logic, Foundations of
Physics, (10 May 2012), pp. 932–958, http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1007/s10701-012-9654-8.
[29]
, The expectation monad in quantum foundations, Quantum Physics and Logic
(QPL) 2011 (B. Jacobs, P. Selinger, and B. Spitters, editors), 2012, EPTCS, to appear; see
arxiv.org/abs/1112.3805.
[30] B. Jacobs and A. Sokolova, Exemplaric expressivity of modal logics, Journal of Logic and
Computation, vol. 20 (2010), pp. 1041–1068.
[31] P. T. Johnstone, Stone Spaces, Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 3,
Cambridge University Press, 1982.
[32] K. Keimel, The monad of probability measures over compact ordered spaces and its
Eilenberg-Moore algebras, Topology and its Applications, vol. 156 (2008), pp. 227–239.
[33] A. Kock, Closed categories generated by commutative monads, Journal of the Australian
Mathematical Society, vol. XII (1971), pp. 405–424.
[34] S. Mac Lane, Categories for the Working Mathematician, Springer, Berlin, 1971.
[35] E. G. Manes, Algebraic Theories, Springer, Berlin, 1974.
[36] S. Pulmannov´a and S. Gudder, Representation theorem for convex eﬀect algebras,
Commentationes Mathematicae Universitatis Carolinae, vol. 39 (1998), pp. 645–659, available
from http://dml.cz/dmlcz/119041.
[37] P. Selinger, Towards a quantum programming language, Mathematical Structures in
Computer Science, vol. 14 (2004), pp. 527–586.
[38] M. H. Stone, Postulates for the barycentric calculus, Annali di Matematica Pura ed
Applicata, vol. 29 (1949), pp. 25–30.
[39] T. Swirszcz, Monadic functors and convexity, Bulletin de l’Acad. Polonaise des Sciences.
S´er. des sciences math., astr. et phys., vol. 22 (1974), pp. 39–42.
INSTITUTE FOR COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCES (ICIS)
RADBOUD UNIVERSITY NIJMEGEN, THE NETHERLANDS
E-mail: bart@cs.ru.nl

TOPOS-BASED LOGIC FOR QUANTUM SYSTEMS AND
BI-HEYTING ALGEBRAS
ANDREAS D ¨ORING
Abstract. To each quantum system, described by a von Neumann algebra of physical quantities,
we associate a complete bi-Heyting algebra. The elements of this algebra represent contextualised
propositions about the values of the physical quantities of the quantum system.
§1. Introduction. Quantum logic started with Birkhoﬀand von Neumann’s
seminal article [4]. Since then, non-distributive lattices with an orthocom-
plement (and generalisations thereof) have been used as representatives of
the algebra of propositions about the quantum system at hand. There are
a number of well-known conceptual and interpretational problems with this
kind of ‘logic’. For review of standard quantum logic(s), see the article [6].
In the last few years, a diﬀerent form of logic for quantum systems based
on generalised spaces in the form of presheaves and topos theory has been
developed by Chris Isham and this author [12, 13, 14, 15, 9, 16, 11, 10]. This
new form of logic for quantum systems is based on a certain Heyting algebra
Subcl Σ of clopen, i.e., closed and open subobjects of the spectral presheaf Σ.
This generalised space takes the rˆole of a state space for the quantum system.
(All technical notions are deﬁned in the main text.) In this way, one obtains a
well-behaved intuitionistic form of logic for quantum systems which moreover
has a topological underpinning.
In this article, we will continue the development of the topos-based form of
logic for quantum systems. The main new observation is that the complete
Heyting algebra Subcl Σ of clopen subobjects representing propositions is
also a complete co-Heyting algebra. Hence, we relate quantum systems to
complete bi-Heyting algebras in a systematic way. This includes two notions of
implication and two kinds of negation, as discussed in the following sections.
The plan of the paper is as follows: in section 2, we brieﬂy give some
background on standard quantum logic and the main ideas behind the new
topos-based form of logic for quantum systems. Section 3 recalls the deﬁni-
tions and main properties of Heyting, co-Heyting and bi-Heyting algebras,
Logic and Algebraic Structures in Quantum Computing
Edited by J. Chubb, A. Eskandarian and V. Harizanov
Lecture Notes in Logic, 45
c⃝2016, Association for Symbolic Logic
151

152
ANDREAS D ¨ORING
section 4 introduces the spectral presheaf Σ and the algebra Subcl Σ of its
clopen subobjects. In section 5, the link between standard quantum logic
and the topos-based form of quantum logic is established and it is shown
that Subcl Σ is a complete bi-Heyting algebra. In section 6, the two kinds of
negations associated with the Heyting resp. co-Heyting structure are consid-
ered. Heyting-regular and co-Heyting regular elements are characterised and a
tentative physical interpretation of the two kinds of negation is given. Section 7
concludes.
Throughout, we assume some familiarity with the most basic aspects of the
theory of von Neumann algebras and with basics of category and topos theory.
The text is interspersed with some physical interpretations of the mathematical
constructions.
§2. Background.
Von Neumann algebras. In this article, we will discuss structures associated
with von Neumann algebras, see e.g. [28]. This class of algebras is general
enough to describe a large variety of quantum mechanical systems, including
systems with symmetries and/or superselection rules. The fact that each von
Neumann algebra has ‘suﬃciently many’ projections makes it attractive for
quantum logic. More speciﬁcally, each von Neumann algebra is generated
by its projections, and the spectral theorem holds in a von Neumann alge-
bra, providing the link between self-adjoint operators (representing physical
quantities) and projections (representing propositions).
The reader not familiar with von Neumann algebras can always take the
algebra B(H) of all bounded operators on a separable, complex Hilbert space
H as an example of a von Neumann algebra. If the Hilbert space H is ﬁnite-
dimensional, dim H = n, then B(H) is nothing but the algebra of complex
n × n-matrices.
Standard quantum logic. From the perspective of quantum logic, the key
thing is that the projection operators in a von Neumann algebra N form
a complete orthomodular lattice P(N ). Starting from Birkhoﬀand von
Neumann [4], such lattices (and various kinds of generalisations, which we
don’t consider here) have been considered as quantum logics, or more precisely
as algebras representing propositions about quantum systems.
The kind of propositions that we are concerned with (at least in standard
quantum logic) are of the form “the physical quantity A has a value in the Borel
set Δ of real numbers”, which is written shortly as “A ε Δ”. These propositions
are pre-mathematical entities that refer to the ‘world out there’. In standard
quantum logic, propositions of the form “A ε Δ” are represented by projection
operators via the spectral theorem. If, as we always assume, the physical
quantity A is described by a self-adjoint operator ˆA in a given von Neumann
algebra N, or is aﬃliated with N in the case that ˆA is unbounded, then the

TOPOS-BASED LOGIC FOR QUANTUM SYSTEMS AND BI-HEYTING ALGEBRAS
153
projection corresponding to “A ε Δ” lies in P(N). (For details on the spectral
theorem see any book on functional analysis, e.g. [28].)
Following Birkhoﬀand von Neumann, one then interprets the lattice
operations ∧, ∨in the projection lattice P(N) as logical connectives between
the propositions represented by the projections. In this way, the meet ∧
becomes a conjunction and the join ∨a disjunction. Moreover, the orthogonal
complement of a projection, ˆP′ := ˆ1 −ˆP, is interpreted as negation. Crucially,
meets and joins do not distribute over each other. In fact, P(N) is a distributive
lattice if and only if N is abelian if and only if all physical quantities considered
are mutually compatible, i.e., co-measurable.
Quantum systems always have some incompatible physical quantities, so N
is never abelian and P(N ) is non-distributive. This makes the interpretation of
P(N) as an algebra of propositions somewhat dubious. There are many other
conceptual diﬃculties with quantum logics based on orthomodular lattices,
see e.g. [6].
Contexts and coarse-graining. The topos-based form of quantum logic that
was established in [13] and developed further in [9, 16, 11, 10] is fundamentally
diﬀerent from standard quantum logic. For some conceptual discussion,
see in particular [11]. Two key ideas are contextuality and coarse-graining
of propositions.
Contextuality has of course been considered widely in
foundations of quantum theory, in particular since Kochen and Specker’s
seminal paper [29]. Yet, the systematic implementation of contextuality in
the language of presheaves is comparatively new. It ﬁrst showed up in work
by Chris Isham and Jeremy Butterﬁeld [21, 23, 24, 27, 25, 26, 22] and was
substantially developed by this author and Isham. For recent, related work see
also [18, 5, 20, 19] and [1, 2].
Physically, a context is nothing but a set of compatible, i.e., co-measurable
physical quantities (Ai)i∈I . Such a set determines and is determined by an
abelian von Neumann subalgebra V of the non-abelian von Neumann algebra
N of (all) physical quantities. Each physical quantity Ai in the set is represented
by some self-adjoint operator ˆA in V.1 In fact, V is generated by the operators
( ˆAi)i∈I and the identity ˆ1, in the sense that V = {ˆ1, ˆAi | i ∈I }′′, where
{S}′′ denotes the double commutant of a set S of operators (see e.g. [28]).2
Each abelian von Neumann subalgebra V of N will be called a context, thus
identifying the mathematical notion and its physical interpretation. The set
of all contexts will be denoted V(N ). Each context provides one of many
‘classical perspectives’ on a quantum system. We partially order the set of
1From here on, we assume that all the physical quantities Ai correspond to bounded self-adjoint
operators that lie in N. Unbounded self-adjoint operators aﬃliated with N can be treated in a
straightforward manner.
2We will often use the notation V ′ for a subalgebra of V, which does not mean the commutant
of V. We trust that this will not lead to confusion.

154
ANDREAS D ¨ORING
contexts V(N) by inclusion. A smaller context V ′ ⊂V represents a ‘poorer’,
more limited classical perspective containing fewer physical quantities than V.
Each context V ∈V(N) has a complete Boolean algebra P(V ) of projections,
and P(V ) clearly is a sublattice of P(N). Propositions “A ε Δ” about the
values of physical quantities A in a (physical) context correspond to projections
in the (mathematical) context V. Since P(V ) is a Boolean algebra, there are
Boolean algebra homomorphisms  : P(V ) →{0, 1} ≃{false, true}, which
can be seen as truth-value assignments as usual. Hence, there are consistent
truth-value assignments for all propositions “A ε Δ” for propositions about
physical quantities within a context.
The key result by Kochen and Specker [29] shows that for N = B(H),
dim H ≥3, there are no truth-value assignments for all contexts simultaneously
in the following sense: there is no family of Boolean algebra homomorphisms
(V : P(V ) →{0, 1})V ∈V(N ) such that if V ′ = V ∩˜V is a subcontext of both
V and ˜V, then V ′ = V |V ′ =  ˜V |V ′, where V |V ′ is the restriction of V to
the subcontext V ′, and analogously  ˜V |V ′. As Isham and Butterﬁeld realised
[23, 27], this means that a certain presheaf has no global elements. In [7], it is
shown that this result generalises to all von Neumann algebras without a type
I2-summand.
In the topos approach to quantum theory, propositions are represented
not by projections, but by suitable subobjects of a quantum state space. An
obstacle arises since the Kochen-Specker theorem seems to show that such a
quantum state space cannot exist. Yet, if one considers presheaves instead of
sets, this problem can be overcome. The presheaves we consider are ‘varying
sets’ (SV )V ∈V(N ), indexed by contexts. Whenever V ′ ⊂V, there is a function
deﬁned from SV, the set associated with the context V, to SV ′, the set associated
with the smaller context V ′. This makes S = (SV )V ∈V(N ) into a contravariant,
Set-valued functor.
Since by contravariance we go from SV to SV ′, there is a built-in idea of
coarse-graining. V is the bigger context, containing more self-adjoint operators
and more projections than the smaller context V ′, so we can describe more
physics from the perspective of V than from V ′. Typically, the presheaves
deﬁned over contexts will mirror this fact: the component SV at V contains
more information (in a suitable sense, to be made precise in the examples in
section 4) than SV ′, the component at V ′. Hence, the presheaf map S(iV ′V ) :
SV →SV ′ will implement a form of coarse-graining of the information
available at V to that available at V ′.
The subobjects of the quantum state space, which will be called the spectral
presheaf Σ, form a (complete) Heyting algebra. This is typical, since the
subobjects of any object in a topos form a Heyting algebra. Heyting algebras
are the algebraic representatives of (propositional) intuitionistic logics. In
fact, we will not consider all subobjects of the spectral presheaf, but rather the
so-called clopen subobjects. The latter also form a complete Heyting algebra,

TOPOS-BASED LOGIC FOR QUANTUM SYSTEMS AND BI-HEYTING ALGEBRAS
155
as was ﬁrst shown in [13] and is proven here in a diﬀerent way, using Galois
connections, in section 5. The diﬀerence between the set of all subobjects
of the spectral presheaf and the set of clopen subobjects is analogous to the
diﬀerence between all subsets of a classical state space and (equivalence classes
modulo null subsets of) measurable subsets.
Together with the representation of states (which we will not discuss here, but
see [13, 8, 11, 17]), these constructions provide an intuitionistic form of logic
for quantum systems. Moreover, there is a clear topological underpinning,
since the quantum state space Σ is a generalised space associated with the
nonabelian algebra N.
The construction of the presheaf Σ and its algebra of subobjects incorporates
the concepts of contextuality and coarse-graining in a direct way, see sections 4
and 5.
§3. Bi-Heyting algebras. The use of bi-Heyting algebras in superintuition-
istic logic was developed by Rauszer [36, 37].
Lawvere emphasised the
importance of co-Heyting and bi-Heyting algebras in category and topos
theory, in particular in connection with continuum physics [30, 31]. Reyes,
with Makkai [35] and Zolfaghari [38], connected bi-Heyting algebras with
modal logic. In a recent paper, Bezhanishvili et al. [3] prove (among other
things) new duality theorems for bi-Heyting algebras based on bitopological
spaces. Majid has suggested to use Heyting and co-Heyting algebras within
a tentative representation-theoretic approach to the formulation of quantum
gravity [33, 34].
As far as we are aware, nobody has connected quantum systems and their
logic with bi-Heyting algebras before.
The following deﬁnitions are standard and can be found in various places in
the literature; see e.g. [38].
A Heyting algebra H is a lattice with bottom element 0 and top element 1
which is a cartesian closed category. In other words, H is a lattice such that
for any two elements A, B ∈H, there exists an exponential A ⇒B, called the
Heyting implication (from A to B), which is characterised by the adjunction
C ≤(A ⇒B)
if and only if
C ∧A ≤B.
(3.1)
This means that the product (meet) functor A ∧
: H →H has a right adjoint
A ⇒
: H →H for all A ∈H.
It is straightforward to show that the underlying lattice of a Heyting algebra
is distributive. If the underlying lattice is complete, then the adjoint functor
theorem for posets shows that for all A ∈H and all families (Ai)i∈I ⊆H, the
following inﬁnite distributivity law holds:
A ∧

i∈I
Ai =

i∈I
(A ∧Ai).
(3.2)

156
ANDREAS D ¨ORING
The Heyting negation is deﬁned as
¬ : H −→H op
(3.3)
A −→(A ⇒0).
The deﬁning adjunction shows that ¬A = {B ∈H | A ∧B = 0}, i.e., ¬A is
the largest element in H such that A ∧¬A = 0. Some standard properties of
the Heyting negation are:
A ≤B implies ¬A ≥¬B,
(3.4)
¬¬A ≥A,
(3.5)
¬¬¬A = ¬A
(3.6)
¬A ∨A ≤1.
(3.7)
Interpreted in logical terms, the last property on this list means that in a
Heyting algebra the law of excluded middle need not hold: in general, the
disjunction between a proposition represented by A ∈H and its Heyting
negation (also called Heyting complement, or pseudo-complement) ¬A can
be smaller than 1, which represents the trivially true proposition. Heyting
algebras are algebraic representatives of (propositional) intuitionistic logics.
A canonical example of a Heyting algebra is the topology T of a topological
space (X, T ), with unions of open sets as joins and intersections as meets.
A co-Heyting algebra (also called Brouwer algebra) J is a lattice with bottom
element 0 and top element 1 such that the coproduct (join) functor A∨: J →J
has a left adjoint A ⇐
: J →J, called the co-Heyting implication (from A).
It is characterised by the adjunction
(A ⇐B) ≤C iﬀA ≤B ∨C.
(3.8)
It is straightforward to show that the underlying lattice of a co-Heyting
algebra is distributive. If the underlying lattice is complete, then the adjoint
functor theorem for posets shows that for all A ∈J and all families (Ai)i∈I ⊆J,
the following inﬁnite distributivity law holds:
A ∨

i∈I
Ai =

i∈I
(A ∨Ai).
(3.9)
The co-Heyting negation is deﬁned as
∼: J −→J op
(3.10)
A −→(1 ⇐A).
(3.11)
The deﬁning adjunction shows that ∼A = {B ∈J | A ∨B = 1}, i.e., ∼A
is the smallest element in J such that A ∨∼A = 1. Some properties of the

TOPOS-BASED LOGIC FOR QUANTUM SYSTEMS AND BI-HEYTING ALGEBRAS
157
co-Heyting negation are:
A ≤B implies ∼A ≥∼B,
(3.12)
∼∼A ≤A,
(3.13)
∼∼∼A = ∼A
(3.14)
∼A ∧A ≥0.
(3.15)
Interpreted in logical terms, the last property on this list means that in a
co-Heyting algebra the law of noncontradiction does not hold: in general, the
conjunction between a proposition represented by A ∈J and its co-Heyting
negation ∼A can be larger than 0, which represents the trivially false propo-
sition. Co-Heyting algebras are algebraic representatives of (propositional)
paraconsistent logics.
We will not discuss paraconsistent logic in general, but in the ﬁnal section 6,
we will give and interpretation of the co-Heyting negation showing up in the
form of quantum logic to be presented in this article.
A canonical example of a co-Heyting algebra is given by the closed sets C
of a topological space, with unions of closed sets as joins and intersections as
meets.
Of course, Heyting algebras and co-Heyting algebras are dual notions. The
opposite H op of a Heyting algebra is a co-Heyting algebra and vice versa.
A bi-Heyting algebra K is a lattice which is a Heyting algebra and a co-
Heyting algebra. For each A ∈K, the functor A ∧
: K →K has a right
adjoint A ⇒
: K →K, and the functor A ∨
: K →K has a left adjoint
K ⇐
: K →K. A bi-Heyting algebra K is called complete if it is complete
as a Heyting algebra and complete as a co-Heyting algebra.
A canonical example of a bi-Heyting algebra is a Boolean algebra B. (Note
that by Stone’s representation theorem, each Boolean algebra is isomorphic to
the algebra of clopen, i.e., closed and open, subsets of its Stone space. This
gives the connection with the topological examples.) In a Boolean algebra, we
have for the Heyting negation that, for all A ∈B,
A ∨¬A = 1,
(3.16)
which is the characterising property of the co-Heyting negation. In fact, in a
Boolean algebra, ¬ = ∼.
§4. The spectral presheaf of a von Neumann algebra and clopen subobjects.
With each von Neumann algebra N , we associate a particular presheaf, the
so-called spectral presheaf. A distinguished family of subobjects, the so-
called clopen subobjects, are deﬁned and their interpretation is given: clopen
subobjects can be seen as families of local propositions, compatible with
respect to coarse-graining. The constructions presented here summarise those
discussed in [12, 13, 16, 17].

158
ANDREAS D ¨ORING
Let N be a von Neumann algebra, and let V(N) be the set of its abelian von
Neumann subalgebras, partially ordered under inclusion. We only consider
subalgebras V ⊂N which have the same unit element as N , given by the
identity operator ˆ1 on the Hilbert space on which N is represented. By
convention, we exclude the trivial subalgebra V0 = Cˆ1 from V(N). (This will
play an important rˆole in the discussion of the Heyting negation in section 6.)
The poset V(N) is called the context category of the von Neumann algebra N.
For V ′, V ∈V(N) such that V ′ ⊂V, the inclusion iV ′V : V ′ →V restricts
to a morphism iV ′V |P(V ′) : P(V ′) →P(V ) of complete Boolean algebras. In
particular, iV ′V preserves all meets, hence it has a left adjoint
o
V,V ′ : P(V ) −→P(V ′)
(4.1)
ˆP −→o
V,V ′( ˆP) =

{ ˆQ ∈P(V ′) | ˆQ ≥ˆP}
that preserves all joins, i.e., for all families ( ˆPi)i∈I ⊆P(V ), it holds that
o
V,V ′

i∈I
ˆPi

=

i∈I
o
V,V ′( ˆPi),
(4.2)
where the join on the left hand side is taken in P(V ) and the join on the right
hand side is in P(V ′). If W ⊂V ′ ⊂V, then o
V,W = o
V ′,W ◦o
V,V ′, obviously.
We note that distributivity of the lattices P(V ) and P(V ′) plays no rˆole here.
If N is a von Neumann algebra and M is any von Neumann subalgebra such
that their unit elements coincide, ˆ1M = ˆ1N , then there is a join-preserving map
o
N ,M′ : P(N) −→P(M)
(4.3)
ˆP −→o
N ,M( ˆP) =

{ ˆQ ∈P(M) | ˆQ ≥ˆP}.
Recall that the Gel’fand spectrum Σ(A) of an abelian C ∗-algebra A is the
set of algebra homomorphisms  : A →C. Equivalently, the elements of the
Gel’fand spectrum Σ(A) are the pure states of A. The set Σ(A) is given the
relative weak*-topology (as a subset of the dual space of A), which makes it
into a compact Hausdorﬀspace. By Gel’fand-Naimark duality, A ≃C (Σ(A)),
that is, A is isometrically ∗-isomorphic to the abelian C ∗-algebra C(Σ(A)) of
continuous, complex-valued functions on Σ(A), equipped with the supremum
norm. If A is an abelian von Neumann algebra, then Σ(A) is extremely
disconnected.
We now deﬁne the main object of interest:
Deﬁnition 1. Let N be a von Neumann algebra. The spectral presheaf Σ of
N is the presheaf over V(N) given
(a) on objects: for all V ∈V(N), ΣV := Σ(V ), the Gel’fand spectrum of V,

TOPOS-BASED LOGIC FOR QUANTUM SYSTEMS AND BI-HEYTING ALGEBRAS
159
(b) on arrows: for all inclusions iV ′V : V ′ →V,
Σ(iV ′V ) : ΣV −→ΣV ′
(4.4)
 −→|V ′.
The restriction maps Σ(iV ′V ) are well-known to be continuous, surjective
maps with respect to the Gel’fand topologies on ΣV and ΣV ′, respectively. They
are also open and closed, see e.g. [13].
We equip the spectral presheaf with a distinguished family of subobjects
(which are subpresheaves):
Deﬁnition 2. A subobject S of Σ is called clopen if for each V ∈V(N), the
set SV is a clopen subset of the Gel’fand spectrum ΣV. The set of all clopen
subobjects of Σ is denoted as Subcl Σ.
The set Subcl Σ, together with the lattice operations and bi-Heyting algebra
structure deﬁned below, is the algebraic implementation of the new topos-based
form of quantum logic. The elements S ∈Subcl Σ represent propositions about
the values of the physical quantities of the quantum system. The most direct
connection with propositions of the form “A ε Δ” is given by the map called
daseinisation, see Def. 3 below.
We note that the concept of contextuality (cf. section 2) is implemented
by this construction, since Σ is a presheaf over the context category V(N).
Moreover, coarse-graining is mathematically realised by the fact that we use
subobjects of presheaves. In the case of Σ and its clopen subobjects, this
means the following: for each context V ∈V(N), the component SV ⊆ΣV
represents a local proposition about the value of some physical quantity. If
V ′ ⊂V, then SV ′ ⊇Σ(iV ′V )(SV ) (since S is a subobject), so SV ′ represents
a local proposition at the smaller context V ′ ⊂V that is coarser than (i.e., a
consequence of) the local proposition represented by SV.
A clopen subobject S ∈Subcl Σ can hence be interpreted as a collection of
local propositions, one for each context, such that smaller contexts are assigned
coarser propositions.
Clearly, the deﬁnition of clopen subobjects makes use of the Gel’fand
topologies on the components ΣV, V ∈V(N ). We note that for each abelian
von Neumann algebra V (and hence for each context V ∈V(N )), there is an
isomorphism of complete Boolean algebras
αV : P(V ) −→Cl(ΣV )
(4.5)
ˆP −→{ ∈ΣV | ( ˆP) = 1}.
Here, Cl(ΣV ) denotes the clopen subsets of ΣV.
There is a purely order-theoretic description of Subcl Σ: let
P :=

V ∈V(N )
P(V )
(4.6)

160
ANDREAS D ¨ORING
be the set of choice functions f : V(N ) →*
V ∈V(N ) P(V ), where f(V ) ∈
P(V ) for all V ∈V(N). Equipped with pointwise operations, P is a complete
Boolean algebra, since each P(V ) is a complete Boolean algebra. Consider
the subset S of P consisting of those functions for which V ′ ⊂V implies
f(V ′) ≥f(V ) (this comparison is taken in P(V ), into which P(V ′) can be
included). The subset S is closed under all meets and joins (in P), and clearly,
S ≃Subcl Σ.
We deﬁne a partial order on Subcl Σ in the obvious way:
∀S, T ∈Subcl Σ :
S ≤T :⇐⇒(∀V ∈V(N) : SV ⊆T V ).
(4.7)
We deﬁne the corresponding (complete) lattice operations in a stagewise
manner, i.e., at each context V ∈V(N) separately: for any family (Si)i∈I ,
∀V ∈V(N) :

i∈I
Si

V
:= int
+
i∈I
Si;V

,
(4.8)
where Si;V ⊆ΣV is the component at V of the clopen subobject Si. Note that
the lattice operation is not just componentwise set-theoretic intersection, but
rather the interior (with respect to the Gel’fand topology) of the intersection.
This guarantees that one obtains clopen subsets at each stage V, not just closed
ones. Analogously,
∀V ∈V(N) :

i∈I
Si

V
:= cl

i∈I
Si;V

,
(4.9)
where the closure of the union is necessary in order to obtain clopen sets, not
just open ones. The fact that meets and joins are not given by set-theoretic
intersections and unions also means that Subcl Σ is not a sub-Heyting algebra
of the Heyting algebra Sub Σ of all subobjects of the spectral presheaf. The
diﬀerence between Sub Σ and Subcl Σ is analogous to the diﬀerence between the
power set PX of a set X and the complete Boolean algebra BX of measurable
subsets (with respect to some measure) modulo null sets. For results on
measures and quantum states from the perspective of the topos approach, see
[8, 17].
In section 5, we will show that Subcl Σ is a complete bi-Heyting algebra.
Example 1. For illustration, we consider a simple example: let N be an
abelian von Neumann of diagonal matrices in 3 dimensions. This is given by
N := C ˆP1 + C ˆP2 + C ˆP3,
(4.10)
where ˆP1, ˆP2, ˆP3 are pairwise orthogonal rank-1 projections on a Hilbert space
of dimension 3. The projection lattice P(N) of N has 8 elements,
P(N) = {ˆ0, ˆP1, ˆP2, ˆP3, ˆP1 + ˆP2, ˆP1 + ˆP3, ˆP2 + ˆP3, ˆ1}.
(4.11)
Of course, P(N) is a Boolean algebra.

TOPOS-BASED LOGIC FOR QUANTUM SYSTEMS AND BI-HEYTING ALGEBRAS
161
The algebra N has three non-trivial abelian (von Neumann) subalgebras,
Vi := C ˆPi + C(ˆ1 −ˆPi),
i = 1, 2, 3.
(4.12)
Hence, the context category V(N ) is the 4-element poset with N as top element
and Vi ⊂N for i = 1, 2, 3.
The Gel’fand spectrum ΣN of N has three elements 1, 2, 3, where
i( ˆPj) = ij.
(4.13)
The Gel’fand spectrum ΣV1 of V1 has two elements ′
1, ′
2+3 such that
′
1( ˆP1) = 1,
′
1(ˆ1 −ˆP1) = 0,
′
2+3( ˆP1) = 0,
′
2+3(ˆ1 −ˆP1) = 1.
(4.14)
(Note that ˆ1−ˆP1 = ˆP2 + ˆP3.) Analogously, the spectrum ΣV2 has two elements
′
1+3, ′
2, and the spectrum ΣV3 has two elements ′
1+2, ′
3.
Consider the restriction map of the spectral presheaf from ΣN to Σ1:
Σ(iV1,N)(1) = ′
1,
Σ(iV1,N )(2) = Σ(iV1,N )(3) = ′
2+3.
(4.15)
The restriction maps from ΣN to ΣV2 resp. ΣV3 are deﬁned analogously. This
completes the description of the spectral presheaf Σ of the algebra N.
We will now determine all clopen subobjects of Σ. First, note that the
Gel’fand spectra all are discrete sets, so topological questions are trivial here.
We simply have to determine all subobjects of Σ. We distinguish a number of
cases:
(a) Let S ∈Subcl Σ be a subobject such that SN = ΣN = {1, 2, 3}. Then
the restriction maps of Σ dictate that for each Vi, i = 1, 2, 3, we have
SVi ⊃Σ(iVi,N )(SN) = ΣVi , so S must be Σ itself.
(b) Let S be a subobject such that SN contains two elements, e.g. SN =
{1, 2}. Then SV1 = ΣV1 and SV2 = ΣV2, but SV3 can either be {′
1+2}
or {′
1+2, ′
3} (since Σ(iV3,N )(SN ) = {′
1+2} must be contained in, but
not necessarily equal to SV3 by the deﬁnition of subobjects), so there are
two options. Moreover, there are three ways of picking two elements
from the three-element set ΣN , so we have 3 · 2 = 6 subobjects S with
two elements in SN .
(c) Let S be such that SN contains one element, e.g. SN = {1}. Then SV1
can either be {′
1} or {′
1, ′
2+3}; SV2 can either be {′
1+3} or {′
1+3, ′
2};
and SV3 can either be {′
1+2} or {′
1+2, ′
3}. Hence, there are 23 options.
Moreover, there are three ways of picking one element from ΣN, so there
are 3 · 23 = 24 subobjects S with one element in SN .
(d) Finally, consider a subobject S such that SN = ∅. Since the Vi are not
contained in one another, there are no conditions arising from restriction
maps of the spectral presheaf Σ. Hence, we can pick an arbitrary subset
of ΣVi for i = 1, 2, 3. Each ΣVi has 2 elements, hence there are 4 subsets
of ΣVi for i = 1, 2, 3, so we have 43 = 64 subobjects S with SN = ∅.

162
ANDREAS D ¨ORING
In all, Subcl Σ has 64+24+6+1 = 95 elements. This can be compared with the
8-element Boolean algebra P(N) that we started from. The increased number
of elements is not due to non-distributivity, but results from considering all
subcontexts (i.e., Boolean subalgebras).
Apart from the spectral presheaf, there are a number of other presheaves that
play a role in the new mathematical description of quantum system provided
by the topos approach to quantum theory. We do not discuss these other
presheaves here, see [16] for details. The topos in which the spectral presheaf
and the other presheaves lie is the topos SetV(N )op of presheaves over the context
category V(N).
§5. Representation of propositions and bi-Heyting algebra structure.
Deﬁnition 3. Let N be a von Neumann algebra, and let P(N) be its lattice
of projections. The map
o : P(N) −→Subcl Σ
(5.1)
ˆP −→o( ˆP) := (αV (o
N ,V ( ˆP)))V ∈V(N )
is called outer daseinisation of projections.
This map was introduced in [13] and discussed in detail in [11, 10]. It
can be seen as a ‘translation’ map from standard quantum logic, encoded
by the complete orthomodular lattice P(N) of projections, to a form of
(super)intuitionistic logic for quantum systems, based on the clopen subobjects
of the spectral presheaf Σ, which conceptually plays the rˆole of a quantum
state space.
In standard quantum logic, the projections ˆP ∈P(N) represent propositions
of the form “A ε Δ”, that is, “the physical quantity A has a value in the Borel
set Δ of real numbers”. The connection between propositions and projections
is given by the spectral theorem. Outer daseinisation can hence be seen as a
map from propositions of the form “A ε Δ” into the bi-Heyting algebra Subcl Σ
of clopen subobjects of the spectral presheaf. A projection ˆP, representing a
proposition “A ε Δ”, is mapped to a collection (o
N ,V ( ˆP))V ∈V(N ), consisting
of one projection o
N ,V ( ˆP) for each context V ∈V(N). (Each isomorphism
αV, V ∈V(N), just maps the projection o
N ,V ( ˆP) to the corresponding clopen
subset of ΣV, which does not aﬀect the interpretation.)
Since we have o
N ,V ( ˆP) ≥ˆP for all V, the projection o
N ,V ( ˆP) represents
a coarser (local) proposition than “A ε Δ” in general. For example, if ˆP
represents “A ε Δ”, then o
N ,V ( ˆP) may represent “A ε Γ” where Γ ⊃Δ.
The map o preserves all joins, as shown in section 2.D of [13] and in [11].
Here is a direct argument: being left adjoint to the inclusion of P(V ) into
P(N), the map o
N ,V preserves all colimits, which are joins. Moreover, αV

TOPOS-BASED LOGIC FOR QUANTUM SYSTEMS AND BI-HEYTING ALGEBRAS
163
is an isomorphism of complete Boolean algebras, so αV ◦o
N ,V preserves all
joins. This holds for all V ∈V(N), and joins in Subcl Σ are deﬁned stagewise,
so o preserves all joins.
Moreover, o is order-preserving and injective, but not surjective. Clearly,
o(ˆ0) = 0, the empty subobject, and o(ˆ1) = Σ. For meets, we have
∀ˆP, ˆQ ∈P(N) : o( ˆP ∧ˆQ) ≤o( ˆP) ∧o( ˆQ).
(5.2)
In general, o( ˆP)∧o( ˆQ) is not of the form o( ˆR) for any projection ˆR ∈P(N).
See [13, 11] for proof of these statements.
Let (Si)i∈I ⊆Subcl Σ be a family of clopen subobjects of Σ, and let
S ∈Subcl Σ. Then
∀V ∈V(N) :

S ∧

i∈I
Si

V
=

i∈I
(SV ∧Si;V ),
(5.3)
since Cl(ΣV ) is a distributive lattice (in fact, a complete Boolean algebra) in
which ﬁnite meets distribute over arbitrary joins. Hence, for each S ∈Subcl Σ,
the functor
S ∧
: Subcl Σ −→Subcl Σ
(5.4)
preserves all joins, so by the adjoint functor theorem for posets, it has a right
adjoint
S ⇒
: Subcl Σ −→Subcl Σ.
(5.5)
This map, the Heyting implication from S, makes Subcl Σ into a complete
Heyting algebra. This was shown before in [13]. The Heyting implication is
given by the adjunction
R ∧S ≤T
if and only if
R ≤(S ⇒T).
(5.6)
(Note that S ∧
=
∧S.) This implies that
(S ⇒T) =

{R ∈Subcl Σ | R ∧S ≤T}.
(5.7)
The stagewise deﬁnition is: for all V ∈V(N),
(S ⇒T)V = { ∈ΣV | ∀V ′ ⊆V : if |V ′ ∈SV ′, then |V ′ ∈T V ′}.
(5.8)
As usual, the Heyting negation ¬ is deﬁned for all S ∈Subcl Σ by
¬S := (S ⇒0).
(5.9)
That is, ¬S is the largest element of Subcl Σ such that
S ∧¬S = 0.
(5.10)
The stagewise expression for ¬S is
(¬S)V = { ∈ΣV | ∀V ′ ⊆V : |V ′ /∈SV ′}.
(5.11)

164
ANDREAS D ¨ORING
In Subcl Σ, we also have, for all families (Si)i∈I ⊆Subcl Σ and all S ∈Subcl Σ,
∀V ∈V(N) :

S ∨

i∈I
Si

V
=

i∈I
(SV ∨Si;V ),
(5.12)
since ﬁnite joins distribute over arbitrary meets in Cl(ΣV ). Hence, for each S
the functor
S ∨
: Subcl Σ −→Subcl Σ
(5.13)
preserves all meets, so it has a left adjoint
S ⇐
: Subcl Σ −→Subcl Σ
(5.14)
which we call co-Heyting implication. This map makes Subcl Σ into a complete
co-Heyting algebra. It is characterised by the adjunction
(S ⇐T) ≤R
iﬀ
S ≤T ∨R,
(5.15)
so
(S ⇐T) =

{R ∈Subcl Σ | S ≤T ∨R}.
(5.16)
One can think of S ⇐
as a kind of ‘subtraction’ (see e.g. [38]): S ⇐T is the
smallest clopen subobject R for which T ∨R is bigger then S, so it encodes
how much is ‘missing’ from T to cover S.
We deﬁne a co-Heyting negation for each S ∈Subcl Σ by
∼S := (Σ ⇐S).
(5.17)
(Note that Σ is the top element in Subcl Σ.) Hence, ∼S is the smallest clopen
subobject such that
∼S ∨S = Σ
(5.18)
holds. We have shown:
Proposition 1. (Subcl Σ, ∧, ∨, 0, Σ, ⇒, ¬, ⇐, ∼) is a complete bi-Heyting al-
gebra.
We give direct arguments for the following two facts (which also follow from
the general theory of bi-Heyting algebras):
Lemma 1. For all S ∈Subcl Σ, we have ¬S ≤∼S.
Proof. For all V ∈V(N), it holds that (¬S)V ⊆ΣV \SV, since (¬S ∧S)V =
(¬S)V ∩SV = ∅, while (∼S)V ⊇ΣV \SV since (∼S ∨S)V = (∼S)V ∪SV =
ΣV.
⊣
The above lemma and the fact that ¬S is the largest subobject such that
¬S ∧S = 0 imply
Corollary 1. In general, ∼S ∧S ≥0.

TOPOS-BASED LOGIC FOR QUANTUM SYSTEMS AND BI-HEYTING ALGEBRAS
165
This means that the co-Heyting negation does not give a system in which a
central axiom of most logical systems, viz. freedom from contradiction, holds.
We have a glimpse of paraconsistent logic.
In fact, a somewhat stronger result holds: for any von Neumann algebra
except for Cˆ1 = M1(C) and M2(C), we have ∼S > ¬S and ∼S ∧S > 0 for all
clopen subobjects except 0 and Σ. This follows easily from the representation
of clopen subobjects as families of projections, see beginning of next section.
§6. Negations and regular elements. In this section, we will examine the
Heyting negation ¬ and the co-Heyting negation ∼more closely. We will
determine regular elements with respect to the Heyting and the co-Heyting
algebra structure.
Throughout, we will make use of the isomorphism αV : P(V ) →Cl(ΣV )
(deﬁned in (4.5)) between the complete Boolean algebras of projections in
an abelian von Neumann algebra V and the clopen subsets of its spectrum
ΣV. Given a projection ˆP ∈P(V ), we will use the notation S ˆP := αV ( ˆP).
Conversely, for S ∈Cl(ΣV ), we write ˆPS := α−1
V (S).
Given a clopen subobject S ∈Subcl Σ, it is useful to think of it as a collection
of projections; consider
( ˆPSV )V ∈V(N ) = (αV (SV ))V ∈V(N ),
(6.1)
which consists of one projection for each context V. The fact that S is a
subobject then translates to the fact that if V ′ ⊂V, then ˆPSV ′ ≥ˆPSV . (This is
another instance of coarse-graining.)
If  ∈ΣV and ˆP ∈P(V ), then
( ˆP) = ( ˆP2) = ( ˆP)2 ∈{0, 1},
(6.2)
where we used that ˆP is idempotent and that  is multiplicative.
Heyting negation and Heyting-regular elements. We consider the stagewise
expression (see eq. (5.11)) for the Heyting negation:
(¬S)V = { ∈ΣV | ∀V ′ ⊆V : |V ′ /∈SV ′}
(6.3)
= { ∈ΣV | ∀V ′ ⊆V : |V ′( ˆPSV ′ ) = 0}
(6.4)
= { ∈ΣV | ∀V ′ ⊆V : ( ˆPSV ′ ) = 0}
(6.5)
=

 ∈ΣV
&&&& 
 
V ′⊆V
ˆPSV ′

= 0
,
(6.6)
As we saw above, the smaller the context V ′, the larger the associated projection
ˆPSV ′. Hence, for the join in the above expression, only the minimal contexts
V ′ contained in V are relevant. A minimal context is generated by a single

166
ANDREAS D ¨ORING
projection ˆQ and the identity,
V ˆQ := { ˆQ, ˆ1}′′ = C ˆQ + Cˆ1.
(6.7)
Here, it becomes important that we excluded the trivial context V0 = {ˆ1}′′ =
Cˆ1. Let
mV := {V ′ ⊆V | V ′ minimal} = {V ˆQ | ˆQ ∈P(V )}.
(6.8)
We obtain
(¬S)V =

 ∈ΣV
&&&& 
 
V ′∈mV
ˆPSV ′

= 0
,
(6.9)
=

 ∈ΣV
&&&& 

ˆ1 −

V ′∈mV
ˆPSV ′

= 1
,
(6.10)
= Sˆ1−
V ′∈mV ˆPSV ′ .
(6.11)
This shows:
Proposition 2. Let S ∈Subcl Σ, and let V ∈V(N). Then
ˆP(¬S)V = ˆ1 −

V ′∈mV
ˆPSV ′ ,
(6.12)
where mV = {V ′ ⊆V | V ′ minimal}.
We can now consider double negation (¬¬S)V = Sˆ1−
V ′∈mV ˆP(¬S)V ′ , so
ˆP(¬¬S)V = ˆ1 −

V ′∈mV
ˆP(¬S)V ′ .
(6.13)
For a V ′ ∈mV, we have ˆP(¬S)V ′ = ˆ1 −
W ∈mV ′ ˆPSW , but mV ′ = {V ′}, since
V ′ is minimal, so ˆP(¬S)V ′ = ˆ1 −ˆPSV ′ . Thus,
ˆP(¬¬S)V = ˆ1 −

V ′∈mV
(ˆ1 −ˆPSV ′ ) =

V ′∈mV
ˆPSV ′ .
(6.14)
Since ˆPSV ′ ≥ˆPSV for all V ′ ∈mV (because S is a subobject), we have
ˆP(¬¬S)V =

V ′∈mV
ˆPSV ′ ≥ˆPSV
(6.15)
for all V ∈V(N), so ¬¬S ≥S as expected. We have shown:
Proposition 3. An element S of Subcl Σ is Heyting-regular, i.e., ¬¬S = S,
if and only if for all V ∈V(N), it holds that
ˆPSV =

V ′∈mV
ˆPSV ′ ,
(6.16)
where mV = {V ′ ⊆V | V ′ minimal}.

TOPOS-BASED LOGIC FOR QUANTUM SYSTEMS AND BI-HEYTING ALGEBRAS
167
Deﬁnition 4. A clopen subobject S ∈Subcl Σ is called tight if
Σ(iV ′V )(SV ) = SV ′
(6.17)
for all V ′, V ∈V(N) such that V ′ ⊆V.
For arbitrary subobjects, we only have Σ(iV ′V )(SV ) ⊆SV ′. Let S ∈Subcl Σ
be an arbitrary clopen subobject, and let V, V ′ ∈V(N ) such that V ′ ⊂V.
Then Σ(iV ′V )(SV ) ⊆SV ′ ⊆ΣV ′, so ˆPΣ(iV ′V )(SV ) ∈P(V ′). Thm. 3.1 in [13]
shows that
ˆPΣ(iV ′V )(SV ) = o
V,V ′( ˆPSV ).
(6.18)
This key formula relates the restriction maps Σ(iV ′V ) : ΣV →ΣV ′ of the
spectral presheaf to the maps o
V,V ′ : P(V ) →P(V ′). Using this, we see that
Proposition 4. A clopen subobject S ∈Subcl Σ is tight if and only if ˆPSV ′ =
o
V,V ′( ˆPSV ) for all V ′, V ∈V(N) such that V ′ ⊆V.
It is clear that all clopen subobjects of the form o( ˆP), ˆP ∈P(N), are tight
(see Def. 3).
Proposition 5. For a tight subobject S ∈Subcl Σ, it holds that ¬¬S = S,
i.e., tight subobjects are Heyting-regular.
Proof. We saw in equation (6.14) that ˆP(¬¬S)V = 
V ′∈mV ˆPSV ′ for all
V ∈V(N). Moreover, ˆP(¬¬S)V ≥ˆPSV from equation (6.15). Consider the
minimal subalgebra V ˆPSV = { ˆPSV , ˆ1}′′ of V. Then, since S is tight, we have
o
V,V ˆPSV
( ˆPSV ) =

{ ˆQ ∈P(V ˆPSV ) | ˆQ ≥ˆPSV } = ˆPSV ,
(6.19)
so, for all V ∈V(N),
ˆP(¬¬S)V =

V ′∈mV
ˆPSV ′ = ˆPSV .
(6.20)
⊣
Corollary 2. Outer daseinisation o : P(N) →Subcl Σ maps projections
into the Heyting-regular elements of Subcl Σ.
We remark that in order to be Heyting-regular, an element S ∈Subcl Σ need
not be tight.
Co-Heyting negation and co-Heyting regular elements. For any S ∈Subcl Σ,
by its deﬁning property ∼S is the smallest element of Subcl Σ such that
S ∨∼S = Σ.
Let V be a maximal context, i.e., a maximal abelian subalgebra (masa) of
the non-abelian von Neumann algebra N. Then clearly
(∼S)V = ΣV \SV .
(6.21)
Let V ∈V(N), not necessarily maximal. We deﬁne
MV := { ˜V ⊇V | ˜V maximal}.
(6.22)

168
ANDREAS D ¨ORING
Proposition 6. Let S ∈Subcl Σ, and let V ∈V(N). Then
ˆP(∼S)V =

˜V ∈MV
(o
˜V ,V (ˆ1 −ˆPS ˜V )),
(6.23)
where MV = { ˜V ⊇V | ˜V maximal}.
Proof. ∼S is a (clopen) subobject, so we must have
ˆP(∼S)V ≥

˜V ∈MV
(o
˜V ,V (ˆ1 −ˆPS ˜V )),
(6.24)
since (∼S)V, the component at V, must contain all the restrictions of the
components (∼S) ˜V for ˜V ∈MV (and the above inequality expresses this using
the corresponding projections).
On the other hand, ∼S is the smallest clopen subobject such that S ∨∼S = Σ.
So it suﬃces to show that for ˆP(∼S)V = 
˜V ∈MV (o
˜V ,V (ˆ1 −ˆPS ˜V )), we have
ˆP(∼S)V ∨ˆPSV = ˆ1 for all V ∈V(N), and hence ∼S ∨S = Σ.
If V is maximal, then ˆP(∼S)V = o
V,V (ˆ1 −ˆPSV ) = ˆ1 −ˆPSV and hence
ˆP(∼S)V ∨ˆPSV = ˆ1. If V is non-maximal and ˜V is any maximal context
containing V, then ˆP(∼S)V ≥ˆP(∼S) ˜V and ˆPSV ≥ˆPS ˜V , so ˆP(∼S)V ∨ˆPSV ≥
ˆP(∼S) ˜V ∨ˆPS ˜V = ˆ1.
⊣
For the double co-Heyting negation, we obtain
ˆP(∼∼S)V =

˜V ∈MV
o
˜V ,V (ˆ1 −ˆP(∼S) ˜V )
(6.25)
=

˜V ∈MV
o
˜V ,V

ˆ1 −

W ∈M ˜V
o
W, ˜V (ˆ1 −ˆPSW )

.
(6.26)
Since ˜V is maximal, we have M ˜V = { ˜V }, and the above expression simpliﬁes
to
ˆP(∼∼S)V =

˜V ∈MV
o
˜V ,V (ˆ1 −(ˆ1 −ˆPS ˜V ))
(6.27)
=

˜V ∈MV
o
˜V ,V ( ˆPS ˜V ).
(6.28)
Note that the fact that S is a subobject implies that
ˆP(∼∼S)V ≤ˆPSV
(6.29)
for all V ∈V(N), so ∼∼S ≤S as expected. We have shown:

TOPOS-BASED LOGIC FOR QUANTUM SYSTEMS AND BI-HEYTING ALGEBRAS
169
Proposition 7. An element S of Subcl Σ is co-Heyting-regular, i.e., ∼∼S =
S, if and only if for all V ∈V(N) it holds that
ˆPSV =

˜V ∈MV
o
˜V ,V ( ˆPS ˜V ),
(6.30)
where MV = { ˜V ⊇V | ˜V maximal}.
Proposition 8. If S ∈Subcl Σ is tight, then ∼∼S = S, i.e., tight subobjects
are co-Heyting regular.
Proof. If S is tight, then for all V ∈V(N ) and for all ˜V ∈MV, we
have ˆPSV = o
˜V ,V ( ˆPS ˜V ), so 
˜V ∈MV o
˜V ,V ( ˆPS ˜V ) = ˆPSV . By Prop. 7, the result
follows.
⊣
Corollary 3. Outer daseinisation o : P(N) →Subcl Σ maps projections
into the co-Heyting-regular elements of Subcl Σ.
Physical interpretation. We conclude this section by giving a tentative
physical interpretation of the two kinds of negation. For this interpretation,
it is important to think of an element S ∈Subcl Σ as a collection of local
propositions SV (resp. ˆPSV ), one for each context V. Moreover, if V ′ ⊂V, then
the local proposition represented by SV ′ is coarser than the local proposition
represented by SV.
Let S ∈Subcl Σ be a clopen subobject, and let ¬S be its Heyting complement.
As shown in Prop. 2, the local expression for components of ¬S is given by
ˆP(¬S)V = ˆ1 −

V ′∈mV
ˆPSV ′ ,
(6.31)
where mV is the set of all minimal contexts contained in V. The projection
ˆP(¬S)V is always smaller than or equal to ˆ1 −ˆPSV , since ˆPSV ′ ≥ˆPSV for all
V ′ ∈mV. For the Heyting negation of the local proposition in the context V,
represented by SV or equivalently by the projection ˆPSV , one has to consider all
the coarse-grainings of this proposition to minimal contexts (which are the ‘max-
imal’ coarse-grainings). The Heyting complement ¬S is determined at each
stage V as the complement of the join of all the coarse-grainings ˆPSV ′ of ˆPSV .
In other words, the component of the Heyting complement ¬S at V is not
simply the complement of SV, but the complement of the disjunction of all
the coarse-grainings of this local proposition to all smaller contexts. The
coarse-grainings of SV are speciﬁed by the clopen subobject S itself.
The component of the co-Heyting complement ∼S at a context V is given by
ˆP(∼S)V =

˜V ∈MV
(o
˜V ,V (ˆ1 −ˆPS ˜V )),
(6.32)
where MV is the set of maximal contexts containing V. The projection ˆP(∼S)V
is always larger than or equal to ˆ1 −ˆPSV , as was argued in the proof of Prop. 6.

170
ANDREAS D ¨ORING
This means that the co-Heyting complement ∼S has a component (∼S)V at
V that may overlap with the component SV, hence the corresponding local
propositions are not mutually exclusive in general. Instead, ˆP(∼S)V is the
disjunction of all the coarse-grainings of complements of (ﬁner, i.e., stronger)
local propositions at contexts ˜V ⊃V.
The co-Heyting negation hence gives local propositions that for each context
V take into account all those contexts ˜V from which one can coarse-grain
to V. The component (∼S)V is deﬁned in such a way that all the stronger local
propositions at maximal contexts ˜V ⊃V are complemented in the usual sense,
i.e., ˆP(∼S) ˜V = ˆ1 −ˆPS ˜V for all maximal contexts ˜V. At smaller contexts V, we
have some coarse-grained local proposition, represented by ˆP(∼S)V , that will in
general not be disjoint from (i.e., mutually exclusive with) the local proposition
represented by ˆPSV .
§7. Conclusion and outlook. Summing up, we have shown that to each
quantum system described by a von Neumann algebra N of physical quantities
one can associate a (generalised) quantum state space, the spectral presheaf
Σ, together with a complete bi-Heyting algebra Subcl Σ of clopen subobjects.
Elements S can be interpreted as families of local propositions, where ‘local’
refers to contextuality; each component SV of a clopen subobject represents a
proposition about the value of a physical quantity in the context (i.e., abelian
von Neumann subalgebra) V of N . Since S is a subobject, there is a built-in
form of coarse-graining which guarantees that if V ′ ⊂V is a smaller context,
then the local proposition represented by SV ′ is coarser than the proposition
represented by SV.
The map called outer daseinisation of projections (see Def. 3) is a convenient
bridge between the usual Hilbert space formalism and the new topos-based
form of quantum logic. Daseinisation maps a propositions of the form “A ε Δ”,
represented by a projection ˆP in the complete orthomodular lattice P(N)
of projections in the von Neumann algebra N , to an element o( ˆP) of the
bi-Heyting algebra Subcl Σ.
We characterised the two forms of negation arising from the Heyting and the
co-Heyting structure on Subcl Σ by giving concrete stagewise expressions (see
Props. 2 and 6), considered double negation and characterised Heyting regular
elements of Subcl Σ (Prop. 3) as well as co-Heyting regular elements (Prop. 7).
It turns out that daseinisation maps projections into Heyting regular and
co-Heyting regular elements of the bi-Heyting algebra of clopen subobjects.
The main thrust of this article is to replace the standard algebraic repre-
sentation of quantum logic in projection lattices of von Neumann algebras
by a better behaved form based on bi-Heyting algebras. Instead of having a
non-distributive orthomodular lattice of projections, which comes with a host
of well-known conceptual and interpretational problems, one can consider

TOPOS-BASED LOGIC FOR QUANTUM SYSTEMS AND BI-HEYTING ALGEBRAS
171
a complete bi-Heyting algebra of propositions. In particular, this provides
a distributive form of quantum logic. Roughly speaking, a non-distributive
lattice with an orthocomplement has been traded for a distributive one with
two diﬀerent negations.
We conclude by giving some open problems for further study:
(a) It will be interesting to see how far the constructions presented in this
article can be generalised beyond the case of von Neumann algebras. A
generalisation to complete orthomodular lattices is immediate, but more
general structures used in the study of quantum logic(s) remain to be
considered.
(b) Bi-Heyting algebras are related to bitopological spaces, see [3] and
references therein. But the spectral presheaf Σ is not a topological (or
bitopological) space in the usual sense. Rather, it is a presheaf which has
no global elements. Hence, there is no direct notion of points available,
which makes it impossible to deﬁne a set underlying the topology (or
topologies). Generalised notions of topology such as frames will be
useful to study the connections with bitopological spaces.
(c) All the arguments given in this article are topos-external. There is an
internal analogue of the bi-Heyting algebra Subcl Σ in the form of the
power object PO of the so-called outer presheaf, see [17], so one can
study many aspects internally in the topos SetV(N )op associated with the
quantum system. This also provides the means to go beyond propositional
logic to predicate logic, since each topos possesses an internal higher-order
intuitionistic logic.
Acknowledgements. I am very grateful to the ASL, and to Reed Solomon,
Valentina Harizanov and Jennifer Chubb personally, for giving me the oppor-
tunity to organise a Special Session on “Logic and Foundations of Physics”
for the 2010 North American Meeting of the ASL, Washington D.C., March
17–20, 2010. I would like to thank Chris Isham and Rui Soares Barbosa for
discussions and support. Many thanks to Dan Marsden, who read the manu-
script at an early stage and made some valuable comments and suggestions.
The anonymous referee also provided some very useful suggestions, which
I incorporated. Finally, Dominique Lambert’s recent talk at Categories and
Physics 2011 at Paris 7 served as an eye-opener on paraconsistent logic (and
made me lose my fear of contradictions ;-) ).
REFERENCES
[1] S. Abramsky and A. Brandenburger, The sheaf-theoretic structure of non-locality and
contextuality, New Journal of Physics, vol. 13 (2011), p. 113036.
[2] S. Abramsky, S. Mansﬁeld, and R. Soares Barbosa, The cohomology of non-locality and
contextuality, Proceedings 8th International Workshop on Quantum Physics and Logic, Nijmegen,

172
ANDREAS D ¨ORING
Netherlands, October 27-29, 2011 (B. Jacobs, P. Selinger, and B. Spitters, editors), Electronic
Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 95, Open Publishing Association, 2012, eprint
available at arXiv:1111.3620 [quant-ph], pp. 1–14.
[3] G. Bezhanishvili et al., Bitopological duality for distributive lattices and heyting algebras,
Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, vol. 20 (2010), pp. 359–393.
[4] G. Birkhoﬀand J. von Neumann, The logic of quantum mechanics, Annali di Matematica
Pura ed Applicata, vol. 37 (1936), pp. 823–843.
[5] M. Caspers, C. Heunen, N. P. Landsman, and B. Spitters, Intuitionistic quantum logic of
an n-level system, Foundations of Physics, vol. 39 (2009), pp. 731–759.
[6] M. L. Dalla Chiara and R. Giuntini, Quantum logics, Handbook of Philosophical Logic
(G. Gabbay and F. Guenthner, editors), vol. VI, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2002, pp. 129–228.
[7] A. D¨oring, Kochen-specker theorem for von Neumann algebras, International Journal of
Theoretical Physics, vol. 44 (2005), pp. 139–160.
[8]
, Quantum states and measures on the spectral presheaf, Adv. Sci. Lett., vol. 2 (2009),
pp. 291–301, special issue on “Quantum Gravity, Cosmology and Black Holes”, ed. M. Bojowald.
[9]
, Topos theory and ‘neo-realist’ quantum theory, Quantum Field Theory, Competitive
Models (B. Fauser, J. Tolksdorf, and E. Zeidler, editors), Birkh¨auser, Basel, Boston, Berlin, 2009.
[10]
, The physical interpretation of daseinisation, Deep Beauty (H. Halvorson, editor),
Cambridge University Press, 2011, pp. 207–238.
[11]
, Topos quantum logic and mixed states, Proceedings of the 6th International
Workshop on Quantum Physics and Logic (QPL 2009), Oxford, vol. 270, Electronic Notes in
Theoretical Computer Science, no. 2, 2011.
[12] A. D¨oring and C. J. Isham, A topos foundation for theories of physics: I. Formal languages
for physics, Journal of Mathematical Physics, vol. 49 (2008), p. 053515.
[13]
, A topos foundation for theories of physics: II. Daseinisation and the liberation of
quantum theory, Journal of Mathematical Physics, vol. 49 (2008), p. 053516.
[14]
, A topos foundation for theories of physics: III. Quantum theory and the representa-
tion of physical quantities with arrows ˘( ˆA) : Σ →R↔, Journal of Mathematical Physics, vol. 49
(2008), p. 053517.
[15]
, A topos foundation for theories of physics: IV. Categories of systems, Journal of
Mathematical Physics, vol. 49 (2008), p. 053518.
[16]
, ‘What is a Thing?’: Topos Theory in the Foundations of Physics, New Structures for
Physics (B. Coecke, editor), Lecture Notes in Physics, vol. 813, Springer, Heidelberg, Dordrecht,
London, New York, 2011, pp. 753–937.
[17]
, Classical and quantum probabilities as truth values, Journal of Mathematical
Physics, vol. 53 (2012), p. 032101.
[18] C. Heunen, N. P. Landsman, and B. Spitters, A topos for algebraic quantum theory,
Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 291 (2009), pp. 63–110.
[19]
, Bohriﬁcation, Deep Beauty (H. Halvorson, editor), Cambridge University Press,
2011, pp. 271–313.
[20]
, Bohriﬁcation of von Neumann algebras and quantum logic, Synthese, (2011),
pp. 719–752, Online ﬁrst, DOI: 10.1007/s11229-011-9918-4.
[21] C. J. Isham, Topos theory and consistent histories: The internal logic of the set of all
consistent sets, International Journal of Theoretical Physics, vol. 36 (1997), pp. 785–814.
[22]
, Is it true; or is it false; or somewhere in between? the logic of quantum theory,
Contemporary Physics, vol. 46 (2005), pp. 207–219.
[23] C. J. Isham and J. Butterﬁeld, A topos perspective on the Kochen-Specker theorem: I.
Quantum states as generalised valuations, International Journal of Theoretical Physics, vol. 37
(1998), pp. 2669–2733.
[24]
, A topos perspective on the Kochen-Specker theorem: II. Conceptual aspects and
classical analogues, International Journal of Theoretical Physics, vol. 38 (1999), pp. 827–859.

TOPOS-BASED LOGIC FOR QUANTUM SYSTEMS AND BI-HEYTING ALGEBRAS
173
[25]
, Some possible roles for topos theory in quantum theory and quantum gravity,
Foundations of Physics, vol. 30 (2000), pp. 1707–1735.
[26]
, A topos perspective on the Kochen-Specker theorem: IV. Interval valuations,
International Journal of Theoretical Physics, vol. 41 (2002), pp. 613–639.
[27] C. J. Isham, J. Hamilton, and J. Butterﬁeld, A topos perspective on the Kochen-Specker
theorem: III. Von Neumann algebras as the base category, International Journal of Theoretical
Physics, vol. 39 (2000), pp. 1413–1436.
[28] R. V. Kadison and J. R. Ringrose, Fundamentals of the Theory of Operator Algebras, vol.
I, II, Academic Press, New York, 1983.
[29] S. Kochen and E. P. Specker, The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics,
Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics, vol. 17 (1967), pp. 59–87.
[30] F. W. Lawvere, Introduction, Categories in Continuum Physics (Buﬀalo 1982), Lecture
Notes in Mathematics, vol. 1174, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, Tokyo, 1986, pp. 1–16.
[31]
, Intrinsic co-heyting boundaries and the leibniz rule in certain toposes, Category
Theory, Proceedings, Como 1990 (A. Carboni, M. C. Pedicchio, and G. Rosolini, editors), Lecture
Notes in Mathematics, vol. 1488, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1991, pp. 279–281.
[32] S. Mac Lane and I. Moerdijk, Sheaves in Geometry and Logic: A First Introduction to
Topos Theory, Springer, New York, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1992.
[33] S. Majid, Foundations of Quantum Group Theory, Cambridge University Press, 1995.
[34]
, Quantum spacetime and physical reality, On Space and Time (S. Majid, editor),
Cambridge University Press, 2008, pp. 56–140.
[35] M. Makkai and G. E. Reyes, Completeness results for intuitionistic and modal logic in a
categorical setting, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, vol. 72 (1995), pp. 25–101.
[36] C. Rauszer, Semi-boolean algebras and their applications to intuitionistic logic with dual
operations, Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 83 (1973), pp. 219–249.
[37]
, Model theory for an extension of intuitionistic logic, Studia Logica, vol. 36 (1977),
pp. 73–87.
[38] G. E. Reyes and H. Zolfaghari, Bi-heyting algebras, toposes and modalities, Journal of
Philosophical Logic, vol. 25 (1996), pp. 25–43.
E-mail: andreas.doering@posteo.de

THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS – TAKE II
BOB COECKE
Abstract. We put forward a new take on the logic of quantum mechanics, following Schr¨o-
dinger’s point of view that it is composition which makes quantum theory what it is, rather than its
particular propositional structure due to the existence of superpositions, as proposed by Birkhoﬀ
and von Neumann. This gives rise to an intrinsically quantitative kind of logic, which truly deserves
the name ‘logic’ in that it also models meaning in natural language, the latter being the origin of
logic, that it supports automation, the most prominent practical use of logic, and that it supports
probabilistic inference.
§1. The physics and the logic of quantum-ish logic. In 1932 John von Neu-
mann formalized Quantum Mechanics in his book “Mathematische Grund-
lagen der Quantenmechanik”. This was eﬀectively the oﬃcial birth of the
quantum mechanical formalism which until now, some 75 years later, has re-
mained the same. Quantum theory underpins so many things in our daily lives
including chemical industry, energy production and information technology,
which arguably makes it the most technologically successful theory of physics
ever.
However, in 1935, merely three years after the birth of his brainchild, von
Neumann wrote in a letter to American mathematician Garrett Birkhoﬀ: “I
would like to make a confession which may seem immoral: I do not believe
absolutely in Hilbert space no more.” (sic)—for more details see [73].
Soon thereafter they published a paper entitled “The Logic of Quantum
Mechanics” [13]. Their ‘quantum logic’ was cast in order-theoretic terms,
very much in the spirit of the then reigning algebraic view of logic, with the
distributive law being replaced with a weaker (ortho)modular law.
The work presented here is supported by the British Engineering and Physical Research Council
(EPSRC), the US Oﬃce of Naval Research (ONR) and the Foundational Questions Institute
(FQXi). The content of this paper reﬂects a series of seminars in 2010–2012 with as titles:
“Monoidal categories as an axiomatic foundation”, “In the beginning God created tensor . . .
then matter . . . then speech”, “How computer science helps bringing quantum mechanics to the
masses”, “Selling categories to the masses”, or the actual title of this paper itself. We thank David
Corﬁeld and Pascal Vaudrevange for feedback on a previous version.
Logic and Algebraic Structures in Quantum Computing
Edited by J. Chubb, A. Eskandarian and V. Harizanov
Lecture Notes in Logic, 45
c⃝2016, Association for Symbolic Logic
174

THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS – TAKE II
175
This resulted in a research community of quantum logicians [68, 71, 47, 30].
However, despite von Neumann’s reputation, and the large body of research
that has been produced in the area, one does not ﬁnd a trace of this activity
neither in the mainstream physics, mathematics, nor logic literature. Hence, 75
years later one may want to conclude that this activity was a failure.
What went wrong?
1.1. The mathematics of it. Let us consider the raison d’ˆetre for the Hilbert
space formalism. So why would one need all this ‘Hilbert space stuﬀ’, i.e. the
continuum structure, the ﬁeld structure of complex numbers, a vector space
over it, inner-product structure, etc. Why? According to von Neumann, he
simply used it because it happened to be ‘available’. The use of linear algebra
and complex numbers in so many diﬀerent scientiﬁc areas, as well as results
in model theory, clearly show that quite a bit of modeling can be done using
Hilbert spaces. On the other hand, we can also model any movie by means
of the data stream that runs through your cables when watching it. But does
this mean that these data streams make up the stuﬀthat makes a movie?
Clearly not, we should rather turn our attention to the stuﬀthat is being
taught at drama schools and directing schools. Similarly, von Neumann turned
his attention to the actual physical concepts behind quantum theory, more
speciﬁcally, the notion of a physical property and the structure imposed on
these by the peculiar nature of quantum observation. His quantum logic gave
the resulting ‘algebra of physical properties’ a privileged role. All of this leads
us to . . .
1.2. . . . the physics of it. Birkhoﬀand von Neumann crafted quantum logic
in order to emphasize the notion of quantum superposition In terms of states
of a physical system and properties of that system, superposition means that
the strongest property which is true for two distinct states is also true for
states other than the two given ones. In order-theoretic terms this means,
representing states by the atoms of a lattice1 of properties [69], that the join
p ∨q of two atoms p and q is also above other atoms. From this it easily
follows that the distributive law2 breaks down: given atom3 r ̸= p, q with
r < p ∨q we have r ∧(p ∨q) = r while (r ∧p) ∨(r ∧q) = 0 ∨0 = 0. Birkhoﬀ
and von Neumann as well as many others believed that understanding the deep
structure of superposition is the key to obtaining a better understanding of
quantum theory as a whole. But as already mentioned, 75 years later quantum
logic did not break through.
1I.e. a partially ordered set with a minimal element 0 and maximal element 1, and in which each
pair of elements has a supremum and an inﬁmum. In fact, there are physical resons for assuming
that this lattice is complete [71, 69], i.e. arbitrary suprema and inﬁma exist.
2Distributivity means that for any elements a, b, c of the lattice we have that a ∧(b ∨c) =
(a ∧b) ∨(a ∧c) and that a ∨(b ∧c) = (a ∨b) ∧(a ∨c).
3An atomis an element p ̸= 0 which is such that whenever a < p then a = 0.

176
BOB COECKE
The Achilles’ heel of quantum logic is the fact that it fails to elegantly
capture ‘composition of quantum systems’, that is, how do we describe multiple
quantum systems given that we know how to describe the individual quantum
systems. On the other hand, also in 1935, Schr¨odinger pushed forward the
idea that the stuﬀwhich truly characterizes quantum behavior is precisely
the manner in which quantum systems compose [74]. Over the past 30 years
or so we have seen ample evidence for this claim. So-called ‘quantum non-
locality’ was experimentally conﬁrmed, and the focus on quantum information
processing has revealed a wide range of quantum phenomena which all crucially
depend on the manner in which quantum systems compose, most notably
exponential quantum computational speed-up which led to the quantum
computing paradigm [79].
Now reversing the roles, rather than explaining all of quantum theory in
terms of superposition, can we maybe explain all of quantum theory in term
of the manner in which quantum systems compose, including superposition?
1.3. The game plan. Here is the list of tasks we’ve set ourselves:
• Task 0. First we want to solve:
tensor product structure
the other Hilbert space stuﬀ= ???
that is, we want to know what remains of the Hilbert space formalism
if we ‘remove all of its structure except for the manner in which systems
compose’. In other words, we want to axiomatize composition of systems,
which we denote by ⊗, without any reference to underlying spaces.
• Task 1. Next we investigate which additional assumptions on ⊗are
needed in order to deduce experimentally observed phenomena? That
is, given that the structure deduced in Task 0 applies to a wide range of
theories (as we shall see below in Section 2) what extra structure do we
need to add such that the resulting framework allows us to derive typical
quantum behaviors.
• Task 2. Once this ‘typically quantum’ structure has been identiﬁed, we
take on the challenge to ﬁnd this same structure elsewhere in what we
usually conceive as ‘our classical reality’. This may involve looking at
this classical reality through a ‘novel pair of glasses’.
And, . . . here are the resulting outcomes:
• Outcome 0: That was an easy one. The solution to this has been around
for quite a while. It is called symmetric monoidal category[11]. In fact, as
discused in [23, 32], physical processes themselves form a strict symmetric
monoidal category, while set theory based models such as the Hilbert
space model are typically non-strict, which invokes so-called ‘coherence
conditions’ [67] between ‘natural transformations’ [45]. But one can show
that an arbitrary symmetric monoidal category is always ‘categorically

THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS – TAKE II
177
equivalent’ to a strict symmetric monoidal category, which means that, up
to isomorphisms, whatever one can do with a non-strict one, one can do
with a strict one too. Hence, here we will only spell out strict symmetric
monoidal categories, in terms of their graphical language [70, 59], that is,
a language which is such that an equational statement holds in it if and
only if it follows from the axioms of a strict symmetric monoidal category.
• Outcome 1a: Quoting Princeton philosopher Hans Halvorson in his
editorial to the volume Deep Beauty: Understanding the Quantum World
through Mathematical Innovation which marked 75 years since the pub-
lications of von Neumann’s quantum formalism [52]: “What is perhaps
most striking about Coecke’s approach is the sheer ratio of results to
assumptions.” As we shall see below, with very little additional structure
one can already derive a wide range of quantum phenomena, and the
required computations are utterly trivial. This is in sharp contrast with
Birkhoﬀ-von Neumann quantum logic where one couldn’t derive much;
and in the case that one could derive something physically relevant one
had to work really hard.
• Outcome 1b: Moreover, exposing this structure has already helped to
solve standing open problems in quantum information, e.g. [44, 57, 14],
and provided novel insights in the nature of quantum non-locality [27, 26].
• Outcome 1c: The diagrammatic framework underpinning strict symmet-
ric monoidal categories has meanwhile been adopted by several leading
researchers in quantum foundations e.g. [49, 17, 54]; quoting Lucien
Hardy in [54]: “[. . .] we join the quantum picturalism revolution [23]”.
• Outcome 2a: Observe the following similar looking pictures:

178
BOB COECKE
These are respectively taken from a physics paper on the ﬂow of infor-
mation in quantum protocols [1, 20, 23], a linguistics paper on how to
compute the meaning of a given the meaning of its words [19, 37], and
a probability theory paper that axiomatizes Bayesian inference [38]. The
graphical calculi are in each case very similar, which points at a common
reasoning system in each of these very distinct areas. Note in particular
that in each case the data of interest is of a fundamentally quantitative
nature. Could this be pointing at the existence of some sort of quantitative
logic, which is not typical to these areas but of a more universal nature?
So let us now consider . . .
1.4. . . . the logic of it. What is logic? The previous century has known a
huge proliferation of logics of various kinds, and there probably are as many
opinions of what logic actually is. Rather than making a case for one or
another logical paradigm we will take a pragmatic stance and conceive logic in
terms of its origin and its most prominent practical use:
• Origin: structure in natural language. The origin of logic, tracing back
to Aristotle, is that it is about ‘arguments in natural language’. Consider
for example the sentence:“Alice and Bob either ate everything or nothing,
then got sick.” By using connectives, quantiﬁers, variable f referring
to food, constants a(lice) and b(ob), and predicates Sick(person) and
Eat(person, some kind of food) we can formalize this as follows:
(∀f : Eat(a, f) ∧Eat(b, f)) ∨¬(∃f : Eat(a, f) ∨Eat(b, f)) ⇒
Sick(a), Sick(b)
However, statements like this are still tightly related to a truth-concept,
that is, we classify statements in terms of these either being true or not.
Clearly there is a lot more to the meaning of a sentence than it either being
true or false. This leads us to the following questions: What do we mean
by meaning? What is the logic governing meaning, more speciﬁcally, how
do meanings of words interact to form meanings of sentences?
• Use: automated reasoning. Logic now forms the foundation for ﬁelds like
automated proof checking and automated theorem proving in computer
science, which are key to modern methods for verifying the correctness
of new software and hardware. Logic also controls robot behaviors
in artiﬁcial intelligence. Even more adventurous is automated theory
exploration, where one does not only try to automatically prove theorems,
but also generate them, which is a much harder task (cf. P vs. NP)—see
also Figure 1.
Our diagrammatic framework appeals to both of these senses of logic, and in
doing so produced important new applications in each of these areas:

THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS – TAKE II
179
Figure 1. The theory[mine] website which allows one to
buy an automatically generated theorem and name it after
someone. It is a novelty gift spin-oﬀfrom the automated
theory exploration expertise at Edinburgh University—see
[15] for the science.
• The above depicted framework for modeling how meanings of words
interact to form meanings of sentences, introduced by Clark, Sadrzadeh
and the author in [19, 37], is the ﬁrst to do so based on a clear conceptual
underpinning. It was a cover heading feature in New Scientist [5] and
meanwhile greatly improved performance of several natural language
processing tasks [51]. We explain this framework in Section 4, as well as
its structural relationship the graphical quantum formalism.
• The diagrammatic formalism underpins the automated reasoning software
quantomatic developed at Oxford and Google by Dixon, Kissinger,
Merry, Duncan, Soloviev and Frot—see also Figure 2. More recently,
work on automated theory exploration of graphical theories also started
at Oxford [61], building further on the work done at Edinburgh [58]. We
won’t discuss this here; details are in [40, 42, 41] and on the quantomatic
website.
§2. Minimal process logic. By a process logic we simply mean any strict
symmetric monoidal category, and by minimal we mean that at this stage we
consider no structure (yet) other than the strict symmetric monoidal structure.
We explain this structure in terms of its graphical language.
We could as well have given a symbolic presentation. We refer the reader
to [23, 32] for such a symbolic presentation, exempliﬁed for the speciﬁc case
of cooking processes, and how they compose to make up recipes—[23] also
discusses how a process logic explains why tigers have stripes while lions don’t.
2.1. Graphical language. The data of a minimal process logic consists of
processes, represented by boxes, each of which takes some type of systems as

180
BOB COECKE
Figure 2. Screenshot of the quantomatic software de-
veloped in a collaboration between Oxford and Google,
which can be downloaded from http://sites.google.com/site/
quantomatic/.
its input, represented by (an) input wire(s), and some type of system as its
output:
These types may be compound, or trivial, i.e. representing ‘no system’:
one system
n sub-systems
no system
-./0
1
-
./
0
n
-./0
0
Examples of types could be a particular quantum system, classical data
of a certain size, grammatical types, e.g. the type of a noun, verb, or a
sentence, etc. A process with no input wire is called a state—one can think
of these as ‘preparation processes’. Those with neither an input type nor an
output type are called values. A process without an output type is called a
valuation.
The connectives of a minimal process logic constitute composition of
processes. There are two modes: sequential or causal or connected composition,

THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS – TAKE II
181
Figure 3. Examples of quantum mechanical concepts that
can be expressed in purely topological terms, with the help of
some new graphical elements. They are taken from [22, 36,
34, 25, 28].
and, parallel or acausal or disconnected composition , respectively depicted as:
So by post-composing a state with a valuation one obtains a value. Note that
sequential composition requires the output type of f to be equal to the input
type of g while no such restriction exists for parallel composition .
The formal paradigm underpinning minimal process logic is a topological
one:
The topology captures ‘what interacts with what’, a wire standing for interaction
while no wire stands for no interaction. It is surprising how many concepts
can be expressed purely in these topological terms—e.g. see Figure 3 for some
topologically characterized quantum mechanical concepts.
The computational content of minimal process logic boils down to the
simple intuitive rule that topologically equivalent diagrams are equal. Hence
computation proceeds by topological deformations:

182
BOB COECKE
There is no additional equational content to a minimal process logic. This
may sound surprising, since a strict symmetric monoidal category is subject
to a number of axioms. The explanation is that in the graphical language
all these equations become tautologies. For example, denoting sequential
composition by ◦and parallel composition by ⊗, the ‘bifunctoriality equation’
(g ◦f) ⊗(k ◦h) = (g ⊗k) ◦(f ⊗h) of monoidal categories becomes:
In terms of processes this means that ‘g after f, while, k after h’ is the same as
‘g while k, after, f while h’.
§3. Quantum process logic - Take IIa. Our next goal is to derive some non-
trivial quantum phenomena by endowing a minimal process logic with a tiny
bit of extra structure, identiﬁed by Abramsky and the author in [1, 2].
3.1. Dagger compact structure. The ﬁrst bit of extra structure will induce
some kind of metric on the states, namely, we will ask that each state can be
turned into a valuation; applying this valuation to any other state will yield a
value. Note that this is exactly how the highly successful Dirac notation [39]
works: a ket |⟩can be turned into a bra ⟨|, and when composing ⟨| with
another ket |φ⟩we obtain a bra-ket ⟨|φ⟩i.e. an inner-product. Since states
may themselve arise by composing processes other than states, we will allow
for the inputs and the outputs of any process to be ‘ﬂipped’:
∀
∃!

THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS – TAKE II
183
Note that ﬂipping twice yields the original box, so ﬂipping is involutive, and it
is also clear that it preserves parallel composition , while it reverses sequential
composition . We refer to ﬂipping as the adjoint or dagger4
So far we haven’t said anything speciﬁc about the parallel composition . Now
we will truly follow Schr¨odinger’s path and specify in which manner quantum
systems compose diﬀerently than classical systems. In other words, we will
assert that pure quantum states admit entanglement, diagrammatically:
quantum
classical
=
That is, a quantum state of two systems can in general not be described
by describing the state of its parts. Note that this is also not the case for
probabilistic classical data: a situation of two systems which comes with the
promise that the states of the system are the same but unknown, can also not
be described by independently describing the state of each system. However, in
quantum theory this already occurs for states on which there is no uncertainty,
that is, for which there exists a measurement that yields a particular outcome
with certainty.
So how do we provide a constructive witness for the fact that the state of
two systems does not ‘disconnect’ in two separate one-system states? Simply
by explicitly introducing a special two system state which is obtained by
(internally) connecting its two outputs with a cup-shaped wire:5
Sticking to our topological paradigm, such a cup-shaped state for example
obeys:
(1)
The equivalent symbolic expression for this equation would be:
(
⊗1) ◦(1 ⊗
) = 1
4From the perspective of Birkhoﬀ-von Neumann quantum logic, one could conceive this as the
analog to an orthocomplementation on the lattice structure. That is, an order-reversing involution.
Note in particularly that for non-Boolean lattices an orthocomplementation is a structure, not
a property, as there can exist many diﬀerent ones on the same lattice. In lattice theoretic terms
the linear algebraic adjoint indeed arises as an expression involving Galois adjoints (−)∗and
orthocomplementation (−)′, namely f†(a) = (f∗(a′))′ [46, 29].
5Note that a state of two systems doesn’t have inputs, so this is more like ”internal wiring” of
its outputs e.g. the bad way to ﬁx an old fashion fuse by means of a copper wire.

184
BOB COECKE
where 1 stands for a single straight wire and
is obtained simply by ﬂipping
i.e. its adjoint. We obtain a strict dagger-compact category [1, 2].
3.2. Deriving physical phenomena. We assumed the existence of an adjoint
for any box and represent it via ﬂipping. Cup- and cap-shaped wires also
enable us to ‘deﬁne’ the transpose which we depict by rotating a box 180o:
It then immediately follows that we have:
that is, we can slide boxes across cup- and cap-shaped wires. Going berserk,
that is, we can treat the entire graphical calculus for dagger compact categories
in terms of beads which slide on wires. Now for some physics. We have:
and we choose f such that its composite with its adjoint yields the identity,
something to which we refer as unitarity Hence:

THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS – TAKE II
185
Introducing agents Alice and Bob yields quantum teleportation:
Note that, given that the quantum mechanical formalism was born in 1932,
that this phenomenon took 60 years to be discovered [12]. The standard quan-
tum mechanical formalism provides no indication whatsoever that something
like this would be possible, so one had to rely on sheer luck to discover it.
A more detailed discussion of this graphical derivation and its physical
interpretation is in [20, 23]. Similarly we derive another quantum mechanical
feature, the entanglement swapping protocol [81]:
So how much quantum mechanics can we derive in this calculus?
3.3. Logical completeness wrt Hilbert spaces. The diagrammatic language
presented above is directly related to the symbolic notion of a dagger compact
category as follows:
Theorem 1 (Kelly-Laplaza; Selinger [60, 77]). An equational statement be-
tween expressions in the dagger compact categorical language holds if and only if
it is derivable in the above described graphical calculus.
Evidently there are many dagger compact categories, to mention two:
• Wires represent ﬁnite dimensional Hilbert spaces, boxes linear maps, the
dagger is the linear algebraic adjoint, sequential composition is ordinary
function composition , and the parallel composition of wires is the tensor
product while parallel composition of boxes is the Kronecker product.

186
BOB COECKE
• Wires represent sets, boxes relations, the dagger is the relational con-
verse, sequential composition is composition of relations, and parallel
composition is the cartesian product.
The description of the compact structure for each of these as well as some
more examples can be found in [32]. Evidently these two examples have very
diﬀerent spaces and one would evidently not associate sets and relations with
quantum processes. Hence one could wonder how much one can actually
derive in (the graphical calculus for) dagger compact categories. The answer is
surprising.
Theorem 2 (Hasegawa-Hofmann-Plotkin;Selinger [55, 78]). An equational
statement between expressions in dagger compact categorical language holds if
and only if it is derivable in the dagger compact category of ﬁnite dimensional
Hilbert spaces, linear maps, tensor product and linear algebraic adjoints.
To put this in more quantum physics related terms, any equation involving:
• states, operations, eﬀects, . . .
• Bell-state, Bell-eﬀect, transposition, conjugation, . . .
• inner-product, linear-algebraic trace, Hilbert-Schmidt norm, . . .
• adjoints (e.g. self-adjointness and unitarity), projections, positivity, . . .
• complete positivity (cf. [77]), . . .
holds in quantum theory if and only if it can be derived in the graphical
language.
§4. Natural language process logic. Before continuing with the further de-
velopment of quantum process logic, we turn our attention on something
completely diﬀerent: meaning in natural language, in particular, the from-
word-meaning-to-sentence-meaning process. Meaning here manifestly goes
beyond simply assigning truth values to sentences.
4.1. From word meaning to sentence meaning. Consider as given the mean-
ings of words. This can mean many things, for example, one has a dictionary
available. On the other hand, there are no dictionaries for entire sentences.
So how do we know what a sentence means? There must be some kind of
mechanism, used by all of us, for transforming the meaning of words into
the meaning of a sentence, since surely, we all understand sentences that we
may have never heard before in our lives, provided we understand all of its
words.
There is a technological side to this. Search engines such as google and other
natural language processing tools also have an understanding of meanings of
words which they use to provide us with the most relevant outputs for our
queries. The model of word meaning which these engines employ enables them
to produce outputs that include words that are closely related to the words in
our query, i.e. there doesn’t have to be an exact match.

THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS – TAKE II
187
However, searching on Google for “I want something that allows me to
go faster than when I only use my legs” returns among its top hits: “Dif-
ference Between Oxycontin and Oxycodone”, “What are good ways for a
girl to [XXX]”, “How to Sprint Faster: 6 steps - wikiHow’, “My Story
- Onelegtim.com - Retired Police Oﬃcer & [. . .]” and “Golf Swing Power:
What Your Legs Should Be Doing [. . .]”. Neither of these point me in the
direction of appropriate vehicles that would serve my purpose, so clearly
there is no understanding of the meaning of my query. The reason is the
lack of a theory that produces the meaning of a sentence from the meanings
of its words, whatever the manner is in which we describe the meaning of
words.
Now, representing grammatical types of words by wires and their meanings
by state-boxes we can depict a string of words as:
But the overall type, i.e. the overall wire structure, depends on the grammatical
structure of the sentence. However, sentences with diﬀerent grammatical
structure may have the same meaning, and more generally, we would like to
have a ﬁxed type for the meaning of all sentences. Hence there is some process,
the from-word-meaning-to-sentence-meaning process, which transforms the
meanings of the string of words in the meaning of the sentence made up from
these:
What drives this process? That is, given a string of words, what mediates their
interaction? The answer is obvious:
since grammatically incorrect sentences have no clear meaning anyway.
We can now describe the problem for from-word-meaning-to-sentence-
meaning processes in more precise terms:
• Given a theory of word meaning, and given a theory of grammar, how
can we combine these into an algorithm which produces the meaning of
sentences from the meanings of its words?

188
BOB COECKE
As already mentioned, this problem was addressed by Clark, Sadrzadeh and
the author in [19, 37]. Let’s stay at an abstract level a bit longer, before we will
describe concrete theories of word meaning and grammar. What is a verb? A
transitive verb is something that requires an object and a subject in order to
yield a grammatically correct sentence. So we can think of a transitive verb as
a process with three wires, two respectively requiring an object and a subject,
and one producing the sentence:
Since we rather represent a verb as a state we can use transposition, as deﬁned
above, to turn inputs into outputs and represent the verb as:
You may ask where these cups suddenly come from, but here we already
anticipate the description of grammatical structure that we discuss below.
Note in particular also that for these kinds of word-states we again have:
since otherwise, for the case of a transitive verb, the meaning of the sentence
would not depend on the meanings of the nouns, which could have dramatic
consequences. For example, considering the verb ‘hate’, it would be suﬃcient
for one person to hate another person in order for everyone to hate everyone.
4.1.1. A theory for word meaning. The current dominant theory of word
meaning for natural language processing tasks is the so-called distributional or
vector space model of meaning [75]. It takes inspiration from Wittgensteins’
philosophy of ‘meaning is use’ [80], whereby meanings of words can be
determined from their context, and works as follows. One ﬁxes a collection
of n words, the context words, and considers an n dimensional vector space
with chosen basis where each basis vector represents one of the context words.
Then one selects a huge body of written text, the corpus. E.g. the internet, all
editions of a certain newspaper, all novels, the British National Corpus6 which
is a 100 million word collection of samples of written and spoken language
from a wide range of sources, etc. Next one decides on a scope, that is, a small
6This can be accesses at http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/.

THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS – TAKE II
189
integer k, and for each context word x one counts how many times Nx(a) a
word a to which one wants assign a meaning occurs at a distance of at most k
words from x. One obtains a vector (N1(a), . . . , Nn(a)), which one normalizes
in order to obtain (φ1(a), . . . , φn(a)), the meaning vector of a. Now, in order
to compare meanings of words, in particular, how closely their meanings are
related, one can simply compute the inner-product of their meaning vectors.
4.1.2. A theory of grammar. Algebraic gadgets that govern grammatical
types have been around for quite a bit longer [4, 10, 18, 64]. There are
several variants available, each with their pro’s and con’s; here we will focus on
Lambek’s pregroups [65]. Philosophically, these algebraic gadgets trace back
to Freges’ principle that the meaning of a sentence is a function of the meaning
of its parts [48]. However, this is only manifest in that these algebras all have a
composition operation that allows to build larger strings of words from smaller
strings of words. These algebras also have a relation ≤where a · · · · · z ≤t
means that the string of types a . . . z has as its overall type t. For example,
n · tv · n ≤s expresses the fact that a noun, a transitive verb and a noun make
up a sentence s. Finally, there are additional operations subject to certain laws
which make up the actual structure of the algebra, and these would allow one
to derive correct statements such as n · tv · n ≤s.
For the speciﬁc case of pregroups, these additional operations are a left inverse
−1(−) and a right inverse (−)−1, subject to x · −1(x) ≤1 and (x)−1 · x ≤1
where 1 is the unit for the composition operation, as well as to 1 ≤−1(x)·x and
1 ≤x · (x)−1. Now we have to assign grammatical types to the elements of a
pregroup. Some will be atomic, i.e. indecomposable, while others like transitive
verbs will be assigned compound types. Concretely, tv = −1(n) · s · (n)−1,
hence
n · tv · n = n ·
 −1(n) · s · (n)−1!
· n =
 
n · −1(n)
!
· s ·
 
(n)−1 · n
!
≤1 · s · 1 = s,
so the string of types ‘noun transitive verb noun’ indeed makes up a grammati-
cally correct sentence. We can depict this computation graphically as follows.
We start with ﬁve systems of respective types n, −1(n), s, (n)−1 and n:
Then, we use caps to indicate that n and −1(n), and, (n)−1 and n, cancel out:
so that at the end the only remaining system is the sentence type. The caps here
represent the equations x · −1(x) ≤1 and (x)−1 · x ≤1. In fact, this is not
just an analogy with the graphical language of compact categories. Pregroups
are in fact compact categories! To see this, any partial order is a category,

190
BOB COECKE
the composition provides the tensor, and while equations x · −1(x) ≤1 and
(x)−1 · x ≤1 provide caps, equations 1 ≤−1(x) · x and 1 ≤x · (x)−1 provide
cups. More details on this are in [37]. The reason that there are two kinds of
caps and cups is the fact that we are not allowed to change the order of words
in a sentence while two physical systems do not come with some ordering. In
category-theoretic terms, here we are dealing with a non-symmetric tensor
4.2. Combining theories. The structural similarity between the pregroup
theory of grammar, and the vector spaces for word meaning when organized
as a dagger compact category, is exactly what we will exploit to explicitly
construct the from-word-meaning-to-sentence-meaning process. We consider
the graphical representation of the proof of grammatical correctness of a
sentence, substitute the sentence types by meaning vectors of the particular
words we are interested in, and substitute the caps by the vector space caps, so
we obtain:
where the dotted line indicates the linear map that when applied to the vector
−−−→
Alice ⊗−−−→
hates ⊗−−→
Bob produces the vector that we take to be the meaning of a
sentence. By rewriting this using transposition, as in Section 4.1, the verb now
acts as a fuction on the object and the subject:
The meanings of all sentences live in the same vector space so we can again
simply use the inner-product to measure their similarity. Grefenstette and
Sadrzadeh have recently exploited this theory for standard natural processing
tasks and their method outperforms all existing ones [51].
What about the cups? They can be used to model ‘special words’ like “does”
and “not”, which have a clear ‘logical’ meaning. Here is an example of this:
As above, the wire structure here is obtained from the types of these words
according to the pregroup grammar. Using cups we can model the meaning of

THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS – TAKE II
191
‘does’, that is, ‘does nothing really’, and ‘not’, that is, ‘negates meaning’, for
which we use an input-output not-box that does just that:
and then we can simply use homotopy to compute:
which is exactly what we would expect the meaning of ‘Alice does not like Bob’
to be: the negation of Alice liking Bob. This example also shows how the
wires are mediating the ‘ﬂow’ of word meaning in sentences. They allow for
the words Alice and like, while far apart in the sentence, to interact.
Turning things upside-down, one can now ask the question: why are there
algebraic gadgets that describe grammatical correctness, i.e. why do these even
exist. Our theory of word meaning explains this: they witness the manner of
how word meanings interact to form the meaning of a sentence.
4.3. An aside: quantizing grammar. An interesting analogy arises, which
was ﬁrst observed by Louis Crane, and which is discussed in detail in [72].
An important area of contemporary mathematics is the study of Topological
Quantum Field Theory (TQFT) [6, 8, 7]. While it takes its inspiration from
quantum ﬁeld theory, it has become an area of research in its own right, mainly
within topology. The object of study is a monoidal functor:
F : nCob →FVectK ::
→V
from the compact category of closed (n −1)-dimensional manifolds with
diﬀeomorphism classes of n-dimensional manifolds connecting the closed
(n −1)-dimensional manifolds as morphisms, to the compact category of
vector spaces over some ﬁeld K.7 Now, rather than taking a category of
topological structures as domain, we can take a pregroup as domain, i.e. a
category of grammatical structures, and obtain a grammatical quantum ﬁeld
7If the ﬁeld has a non-trivial involution then this category has a dagger too (̸= transposition).

192
BOB COECKE
theory:
F : Pregroup →FVectR+ ::
→V
§5. Quantum process logic - Take IIb. Dagger compact categories cap-
ture a substantial number of quantum mechanical concepts, and the dagger
compact category FdHilb related to the von Neumann model described in
Section 3.3, is complete with respect to them. But they are by no means
universal with respect to quantum theory, by which we can mean two diﬀerent
things:
• that they do not capture all quantum mechanical concepts, and,
• that the language is not rich enough to describe all processes in FdHilb.
Examples of concepts that are not captured by dagger compact language are
the classical data obtained in measurements, observables themselves, and re-
lationships between these e.g. complementarity. Examples of FdHilb-processes
not expressible in dagger compact language are basic quantum computa-
tional gates such as the CNOT-gate, phase-gates etc. We will now present
an extended graphical language which does capture all of these. This was
established in a series of papers by Pavlovic, Paquette, Duncan, and the author
in [34, 33, 24, 25]. The calculus was also rich enough to address a number of
concrete quantum computational and quantum foundational problems e.g. see
[44, 27, 57, 14, 26].
Rather than only allowing for wires we allow for ‘dots’ at which wires branch
into multiple wires, or none. We refer to these dots as . . .
‘spiders’ =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
m
/
0-
.
-
./
0
n
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
n,m
So what is the analogue of the topological calculus with cups and caps, and in
particular, eq.(1)? Similarly to ‘however one bends a wire, it still remains just a
wire that acts as an identity’, any web of spiders with the same overall number
of inputs and outputs, independent of how the web is build up, is again the

THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS – TAKE II
193
same. So for any k > 0:
m+m′−k
/
0-
.
-
./
0
n+n′−k
Hence, the rule governing spider calculus is that if two spiders ‘shake legs’,
they fuse together. Again in other words, it only matters what is connected to
what, but not the manner in which this connection is realized.
This in particular implies that for the speciﬁc spiders:
2
/
0-
.
-
./
0
0
and
0
/
0-
.
-
./
0
2
we obtain eq.(1):
0+2−1
/
0-
.
-
./
0
2+0−1
so reasoning with spiders strictly generalizes reasoning with wires
In FdHilb a family of spiders of the above kind on-the-nose captures an
orthonormal basis, which is a non-trival result. Firstly, one can show that
reasoning with those spiders is equivalent to working with a so-called dagger
special commutative Frobenius algebra [62, 63, 31]. Next one shows that these
dagger special commutative Frobenius algebras in FdHilb are the same thing
as orthonormal bases [35]. Since bases allow to represent observables and
classical data, we almost reached our goal, except for the fact that quantum
theory only becomes interesting if we consider several ‘incompatible’ bases.

194
BOB COECKE
So now we consider two diﬀerent families of spiders, represented by a
diﬀerent gray scale. What happens if a dark gray and a light gray spider which
represent complementary observables ‘shake legs’? Well, their ‘legs fall oﬀ’:
This was shown by Duncan and the author in [25]. Such a pair of diﬀerently
colored spider families that interact in this manner forms the basis of a rich
calculus with many more extra features than the ones described here. We refer
the interested reader to [23, 25, 26] for more details and concrete applications.
§6. The remaining challenge. In this paper we pushed forward the idea
that the diagrammatic languages describing quantum phenomena as well
as meaning-related linguistic phenomena may constitute some new kind of
quantitative logic. The same logic also governs Bayesian inference, Bayesian
inversion boiling down to nothing but transposition for appropriately chosen
cups and caps:
This was established by Spekkens and the author in [38], to which we refer for
details. So where does traditional logic ﬁt into this picture?
One perspective is to start with standard categorical logic [66, 3, 9]. The
compact structure can then be seen as a resource sensitive variant (as in
Linear Logic [50, 76]) which is degenerate in the sense that conjunction and
disjunction coincide [43, 21].8 We do not subscribe (anymore) to conceiving
the diagrammatic logic as a ‘degenerate hyper-deductive variant’ of standard
logic in categorical form since this does not recognize the quantitative nor the
process content.
Rather, we would like to conceive the quantitative diagrammatic logic as
‘the default thing’ from which traditional qualitative logic arises via some kind
of structural collapse. There are several results that could be taken as a starting
point in this direction, for example, the generalization in [33] of Carboni and
Walters’ axiomatization of the category of relations [16]. But since this still
belongs to the world of speculation, we leave this to future writings.
8There is also ongoing work on relating traditional quantum logic with dagger compact
categories or related structures at a purely structural level e.g. [53, 56].

THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS – TAKE II
195
REFERENCES
[1] S. Abramsky and B. Coecke, A categorical semantics of quantum protocols, Proceedings of
the 19th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), IEEE Computer Society,
2004, Extended version: arXiv:quant-ph/0402130, pp. 415–425.
[2]
, Abstract physical traces, Theory and Applications of Categories, vol. 14(6) (2005),
pp. 111–124.
[3] S. Abramsky and N. Tzevelekos, Introduction to categories and categorical logic, New
Structures for Physics (B. Coecke, editor), Lecture Notes in Physics, Springer, 2011, pp. 3–94.
[4] K. Ajdukiewicz, Die syntaktische Konnexit¨at, Studia Philosophica, vol. 1 (1937), pp. 1–27.
[5] J. Aron, Quantum links let computers read, New Scientist, vol. 208(2790) (2010), pp. 10–11.
[6] M. Atiyah, Topological quantum ﬁeld theories, Publications Math´ematiques de l’IH ´ES,
vol. 68(1) (1988), pp. 175–186.
[7] J. C. Baez, Quantum quandaries: a category-theoretic perspective, The Structural Foundations
of Quantum Gravity (D. Rickles, S. French, and J. T. Saatsi, editors), Oxford University Press,
2006, arXiv:quant-ph/0404040, pp. 240–266.
[8] J. C. Baez and J. Dolan, Higher-dimensional algebra and topological quantum ﬁeld theory,
Journal of Mathematical Physics, vol. 36 (1995), p. 6073, arXiv:q-alg/9503002.
[9] J. C. Baez and M. Stay, Physics, topology, logic and computation: a Rosetta stone, New
Structures for Physics (B. Coecke, editor), Lecture Notes in Physics, Springer, 2011, pp. 95–172.
[10] Y. Bar-Hillel, A quasiarithmetical notation for syntactic description, Language, vol. 29
(1953), pp. 47–58.
[11] J. Benabou, Categories avec multiplication, Comptes Rendus des S´eances de l’Acad´emie
des Sciences. Paris, vol. 256 (1963), pp. 1887–1890.
[12] C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, C. Crepeau, R. Jozsa, A. Peres, and W. K. Wootters,
Teleporting an unknown quantum state via dual classical and einstein-podolsky-rosen channels,
Physical Review Letters, vol. 70(13) (1993), pp. 1895–1899.
[13] G. Birkhoﬀand J. von Neumann, The logic of quantum mechanics, Annals of Mathematics,
vol. 37 (1936), pp. 823–843.
[14] S. Boixo and C. Heunen, Entangled and sequential quantum protocols with dephasing,
Physical Review Letters, vol. 108 (2012), p. 120402.
[15] A. Bundy, F. Cavallo, L. Dixon, M. Johansson, and R. McCasland, The Theory behind
TheoryMine.
[16] A. Carboni and R. F. C. Walters, Cartesian bicategories I, Journal of Pure and Applied
Algebra, vol. 49 (1987), pp. 11–32.
[17] G. Chiribella, G. M. D’Ariano, and P. Perinotti, Informational derivation of quantum
theory, Physical Review A, vol. 84 (2011), no. 1, p. 012311.
[18] N. Chomsky, Tree models for the description of language, I.R.E. Transactions on Information
Theory, vol. IT-2 (1956), pp. 113–124.
[19] S. Clark, B. Coecke, and M. Sadrzadeh, A compositional distributional model of meaning,
Proceedings of the Second Quantum Interaction Symposium (QI-2008), 2008, pp. 133–140.
[20] B. Coecke, Kindergarten quantum mechanics — lecture notes, Quantum Theory: Reconsid-
erations of the Foundations III (A. Khrennikov, editor), AIP Press, 2005, arXiv:quant-ph/0510032,
pp. 81–98.
[21]
, Automated quantum reasoning: Non logic – semi-logic – hyper-logic, AAAI Spring
Symposium: Quantum Interaction, AAAI, 2007, pp. 31–38.
[22]
, Axiomatic description of mixed states from Selinger’s CPM-construction, Electronic
Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 210 (2008), pp. 3–13.
[23]
, Quantum picturalism, Contemporary Physics, vol. 51 (2009), pp. 59–83,
arXiv:0908.1787.

196
BOB COECKE
[24] B. Coecke and R. Duncan, Interacting quantum observables, Proceedings of the 37th
International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 2008.
[25]
, Interacting quantum observables: categorical algebra and diagrammatics, New
Journal of Physics, vol. 13 (2011), p. 043016, arXiv:quant-ph/09064725.
[26] B. Coecke, R. Duncan, A. Kissinger, and Q. Wang, Strong complementarity and
non-locality in categorical quantum mechanics, Proceedings of the 27th Annual IEEE Symposium
on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), IEEE Computer Society, 2012, arXiv:1203.4988.
[27] B. Coecke, B. Edwards, and R. W. Spekkens, Phase groups and the origin of non-locality
for qubits, Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 270(2) (2011), arXiv:1003.5005.
[28] B. Coecke and A. Kissinger, The compositional structure of multipartite quantum entan-
glement, Automata, Languages and Programming, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer,
2010, Extended version: arXiv:1002.2540, pp. 297–308.
[29] B. Coecke and D. J. Moore, Operational Galois adjunctions, Current Research in Opera-
tional Quantum Logic: Algebras, Categories and Languages (D. J. Moore B. Coecke and A. Wilce,
editors), Fundamental Theories of Physics, vol. 111, Springer-Verlag, 2000, pp. 195–218.
[30] B. Coecke, D. J. Moore, and A. Wilce, Operational quantum logic: An overview, Current
Research in Operational Quantum Logic: Algebras, Categories and Languages (B. Coecke, D. J.
Moore, and A. Wilce, editors), Fundamental Theories of Physics, vol. 111, Springer-Verlag, 2000,
arXiv:quant-ph/0008019, pp. 1–36.
[31] B. Coecke and E. O. Paquette, POVMs and Naimark’s theorem without sums, Electronic
Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 210 (2008), pp. 15–31, arXiv:quant-ph/0608072.
[32]
, Categories for the practicing physicist, New Structures for Physics (B. Coecke,
editor), Lecture Notes in Physics, Springer, 2011, arXiv:0905.3010, pp. 167–271.
[33] B. Coecke, E. O. Paquette, and D. Pavlovic, Classical and quantum structuralism,
Semantic Techniques in Quantum Computation (S. Gay and I. Mackie, editors), Cambridge
University Press, 2010, arXiv:0904.1997, pp. 29–69.
[34] B. Coecke and D. Pavlovic, Quantum measurements without sums, Mathematics of
Quantum Computing and Technology (L. Kauﬀman G. Chen and S. Lamonaco, editors), Taylor
and Francis, 2007, arXiv:quant-ph/0608035, pp. 567–604.
[35] B. Coecke, D. Pavlovic, and J. Vicary, A new description of orthogonal bases, Mathemat-
ical Structures in Computer Science, 2011, to appear; arXiv:quant-ph/0810.1037.
[36] B. Coecke and S. Perdrix, Environment and classical channels in categorical quantum
mechanics, Proceedings of the 19th EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic (CSL),
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6247, 2010, Extended version: arXiv:1004.1598, pp. 230–
244.
[37] B. Coecke, M. Sadrzadeh, and S. Clark, Mathematical foundations for a compositional
distributional model of meaning, Linguistic Analysis, vol. 36 (2010), pp. 345–384.
[38] B. Coecke and R. W. Spekkens, Picturing classical and quantum Bayesian inference,
Synthese, (2011), pp. 1–46, arXiv:1102.2368.
[39] P. A. M. Dirac, The principles of quantum mechanics (third edition), Oxford University
Press, 1947.
[40] L. Dixon and R. Duncan, Graphical reasoning in compact closed categories for quantum
computation, Annals of Mathematics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 56(1) (2009), pp. 23–42.
[41] L. Dixon, R. Duncan, B. Frot, A. Merry, A. Kissinger, and M. Soloviev, quantomatic,
2011, http://dream.inf.ed.ac.uk/projects/quantomatic/.
[42] L. Dixon and A. Kissinger, Open graphs and monoidal theories, Mathematical Structures
in Computer Science, 2011, to appear; arXiv:1011.4114.
[43] R. Duncan, Types for Quantum Computation, Ph.D. thesis, Oxford University, 2006.

THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS – TAKE II
197
[44] R. Duncan and S. Perdrix, Rewriting measurement-based quantum computations with
generalised ﬂow, Proceedings of ICALP, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2010,
pp. 285–296.
[45] S. Eilenberg and S. Mac Lane, General theory of natural equivalences, Transactions of the
American Mathematical Society, vol. 58(2) (1945), p. 231.
[46] Cl-.A. Faure, D. J. Moore, and C. Piron, Deterministic evolutions and Schr¨odinger ﬂows,
Helvetica Physica Acta, vol. 68(2) (1995), pp. 150–157.
[47] D. J. Foulis and C. H. Randall, Operational statistics. I. Basic concepts, Journal of
Mathematical Physics, vol. 13(11) (1972), pp. 1667–1675.
[48] G. Frege, ¨Uber Sinn und Bedeutung, Zeitschrift f¨ur Philosophie und Philosophische Kritik,
vol. 1007 (1892), pp. 25–50.
[49] G. M. D’Ariano G. Chiribella and P. Perinotti, Probabilistic theories with puriﬁcation,
Physical Review A, vol. 81 (2010), no. 6, p. 062348.
[50] J.-Y. Girard, Linear logic, Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 50(1) (1987), pp. 1–101.
[51] E. Grefenstette and M. Sadrzadeh, Experimental support for a categorical compositional
distributional model of meaning, EMNLP, ACL, 2011, pp. 1394–1404.
[52] H. Halvorson, Deep Beauty: Understanding the Quantum World Through Mathematical
Innovation, Cambridge University Press, 2011.
[53] J. Harding, A link between quantum logic and categorical quantum mechanics, International
Journal of Theoretical Physics, vol. 48(3) (2009), pp. 769–802.
[54] L. Hardy, A formalism-local framework for general probabilistic theories including quantum
theory, arXiv:1005.5164, (2010).
[55] M. Hasegawa, M. Hofmann, and G. D. Plotkin, Finite dimensional vector spaces
are complete for traced symmetric monoidal categories, Pillars of Computer Science (A. Avron,
N. Dershowitz, and A. Rabinovich, editors), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4800,
Springer, 2008, pp. 367–385.
[56] C. Heunen and B. Jacobs, Quantum logic in dagger kernel categories, Order, vol. 27(2)
(2010), pp. 177–212.
[57] C. Horsman, Quantum picturalism for topological cluster-state computing, New Journal of
Physics, vol. 13 (2011), p. 095011, arXiv:1101.4722.
[58] M. Johansson, L. Dixon, and A. Bundy, Conjecture synthesis for inductive theories,
Journal of Automated Reasoning, vol. 47(3) (2011), pp. 251–289.
[59] A. Joyal and R. Street, The geometry of tensor calculus I, Advances in Mathematics,
vol. 88 (1991), pp. 55–112.
[60] G. M. Kelly and M. L. Laplaza, Coherence for compact closed categories, Journal of
Pure and Applied Algebra, vol. 19 (1980), pp. 193–213.
[61] A. Kissinger, Synthesising graphical theories, arXiv:1202.6079, (2012).
[62] J. Kock, Frobenius Algebras and 2D Topological Quantum Field Theories, vol. 59, Cam-
bridge University Press, 2004.
[63] S. Lack, Composing PROPs, Theory and Applications of Categories, vol. 13 (2004),
pp. 147–163.
[64] J. Lambek, The mathematics of sentence structure, American Mathematics Monthly, vol. 65
(1958), pp. 154–170.
[65]
, Type grammar revisited, Logical Aspects of Computational Linguistics, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1582, 1999, pp. 1–27.
[66] J. Lambek and P. J. Scott, Introduction to Higher Order Categorical Logic, Cambridge
University Press, 1988.
[67] S. Mac Lane, Natural associativity and commutativity, The Rice University Studies,
vol. 49(4) (1963), pp. 28–46.
[68] G. M. Mackey, The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, W. A. Benjamin,
New York, 1963.

198
BOB COECKE
[69] D. J. Moore, On state spaces and property lattices, Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics, vol. 30(1) (March 1999), pp. 61–83.
[70] R. Penrose, Applications of negative dimensional tensors, Combinatorial Mathematics and
its Applications, Academic Press, 1971, pp. 221–244.
[71] C. Piron, Foundations of Quantum Physics, W. A. Benjamin, 1976.
[72] A. Preller and M. Sadrzadeh, Bell states and negative sentences in the distributed model
of meaning, Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 270(2) (2011), pp. 141–153.
[73] M. Redei, Why John von Neumann did not like the Hilbert space formalism of quantum
mechanics (and what he liked instead ), Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics,
vol. 27(4) (1996), pp. 493–510.
[74] E. Schr¨odinger, Discussion of probability relations between separated systems, Cambridge
Philosophical Society, vol. 31 (1935), pp. 555–563.
[75] H. Sch¨utze, Automatic word sense discrimination, Computational Linguistics, vol. 24(1)
(1998), pp. 97–123.
[76] R. A. G. Seely, Linear logic, ∗-autonomous categories and cofree algebras, Contemporary
Mathematics, vol. 92 (1989), pp. 371–382.
[77] P. Selinger, Dagger compact closed categories and completely positive maps, Electronic
Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 170 (2007), pp. 139–163.
[78]
, Finite dimensional Hilbert spaces are complete for dagger compact closed categories
(extended abstract), Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 270(1) (2011), pp. 113–
119.
[79] P. W. Shor, Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete logarithms on a
quantum computer, SIAM Journal on Computing, vol. 26(5) (1997), pp. 1484–1509.
[80] L. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, Basil & Blackwell, 1972.
[81] M. Zukowski, A. Zeilinger, M. A. Horne, and A. K. Ekert, Event-ready-detectors Bell
experiment via entanglement swapping, Physical Review Letters, vol. 71 (1993), pp. 4287–4290.
UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD,
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE,
QUANTUM GROUP
E-mail: coecke@cs.ox.ac.uk

REASONING ABOUT MEANING IN NATURAL LANGUAGE
WITH COMPACT CLOSED CATEGORIES AND FROBENIUS
ALGEBRAS
DIMITRI KARTSAKLIS, MEHRNOOSH SADRZADEH, STEPHEN PULMAN, AND BOB
COECKE
Abstract. Compact closed categories have found applications in modeling quantum informa-
tion protocols by Abramsky-Coecke. They also provide semantics for Lambek’s pregroup algebras,
applied to formalizing the grammatical structure of natural language, and are implicit in a distribu-
tional model of word meaning based on vector spaces. Speciﬁcally, in previous work Coecke-Clark-
Sadrzadeh used the product category of pregroups with vector spaces and provided a distributional
model of meaning for sentences. We recast this theory in terms of strongly monoidal functors and
advance it via Frobenius algebras over vector spaces. The former are used to formalize topological
quantum ﬁeld theories by Atiyah and Baez-Dolan, and the latter are used to model classical data
in quantum protocols by Coecke-Pavlovic-Vicary. The Frobenius algebras enable us to work in a
single space in which meanings of words, phrases, and sentences of any structure live. Hence we can
compare meanings of diﬀerent language constructs and enhance the applicability of the theory. We
report on experimental results on a number of language tasks and verify the theoretical predictions.
§1. Introduction. Compact closed categories were ﬁrst introduced by Kelly
[19] in early 1970’s. Some thirty years later they found applications in quantum
mechanics [1], whereby the vector space foundations of quantum mechanics
were recasted in a higher order language and quantum protocols such as
teleportation found succinct conceptual proofs. Compact closed categories
are complete with regard to a pictorial calculus [19, 35]; this calculus is used
to depict and reason about information ﬂows in entangled quantum states
modeled in tensor spaces, the phenomena that were considered to be mysteries
of quantum mechanics and the Achilles heel of quantum logic [4]. The pictorial
calculus revealed the multi-linear algebraic level needed for proving quantum
information protocols and simpliﬁed the reasoning thereof to a great extent,
by hiding the underlying additive vector space structure.
Most quantum protocols rely on classical, as well as quantum, data ﬂow. In
the work of [1], this classical data ﬂow was modeled using bi-products deﬁned
over a compact closed category. However, the pictorial calculus could not
Support by EPSRC grant EP/F042728/1 is acknowledged by the ﬁrst two authors.
Logic and Algebraic Structures in Quantum Computing
Edited by J. Chubb, A. Eskandarian and V. Harizanov
Lecture Notes in Logic, 45
c⃝2016, Association for Symbolic Logic
199

200
D. KARTSAKLIS, M. SADRZADEH, S. PULMAN, AND B. COECKE
extend well to bi-products, and their categorical axiomatization was not as
clear as the built-in monoidal tensor of the category. Later, Frobenius algebras,
originally used in group theory [14] and later widely applied to other ﬁelds of
mathematics and physics such as topological quantum ﬁeld theory (TQFT)
[2, 21, 3], proved useful. It turned out that the operations of such algebras
on vector spaces with orthonormal basis correspond to a uniform copying
and deleting of the basis, a property that only holds for, hence can be used to
axiomatize, classical states [8].
Compact closed categories have also found applications in two completely
orthogonal areas of computational linguistics: formalizing grammar and
reasoning about lexical meanings of words. The former application is through
Lambek’s pregroup grammars [23], which are compact closed categories [31]
and have been applied to formalizing grammars of a wide range of natural
languages, for instance see [24]. The other application domain, referred to as
distributional models of meaning, formalizes meanings of words regardless of
their grammatical roles and via the context of their occurrence [13]. These
models consist of vector spaces whose basis are sets of context words and
whose vectors represent meanings of target words. Distributional models have
been widely studied and successfully applied to a variety of language tasks
[34, 25, 26] and in particular to automatic word-synonymy detection [10].
Whereas the type-logical approaches to language do not provide a convincing
model of word meaning, the distributional models do not scale to meanings of
phrases and sentences. The long standing challenge of combining these two
models was addressed in previous work [6, 9, 32]. The solution was based
on a cartesian product of the pregroup category and the category of ﬁnite
dimensional vector spaces. The theoretical predictions of the model were made
concrete in [17], then implemented and veriﬁed in [15]. In this article, we ﬁrst
recast the theoretical setting of [9] using a succinct functorial passage from a
free pregroup of basic types to the category of ﬁnite dimensional vector spaces.
Then, we further advance the theory and show how Frobenius algebras over
vector spaces provide solutions for the problem of the concrete construction
of linear maps for predicative words with complex types. As a result, we are
able to compare meanings of phrases and sentences with diﬀerent structures,
and moreover compare these with lexical vectors of words. This enhances the
domain of application of our model: we show how the theoretical predictions
of the model, and in particular the Frobenius algebraic constructions, can be
empirically veriﬁed by performing three experiments: the disambiguation task
of [15], comparing meanings of transitive and intransitive sentences, and a new
term/deﬁnition classiﬁcation task.
§2. Recalling some categorical deﬁnitions. We start by recalling some def-
initions. A monoidal category [19] is a category C with a monoidal tensor
⊗, which is associative. That is, for all objects A, B, C ∈C, we have that

REASONING ABOUT MEANING IN NATURAL LANGUAGE
201
A ⊗(B ⊗C) ∼= (A ⊗B) ⊗C. Moreover there exists an object I ∈C, which
serves as the unit of the tensor, that is, A⊗I ∼= A ∼= I ⊗A. These isomorphisms
need to satisfy the usual coherence conditions.
A monoidal category is called symmetric whenever we have A ⊗B ∼= B ⊗A,
again satisfying the standard conditions. Furthermore, a monoidal category is
compact closed whenever any object A ∈C has a left Al and a right adjoint Ar,
that is, the following morphisms exist:
r
A : A ⊗Ar →I
r
A : I →Ar ⊗A
l
A : Al ⊗A →I
l
A : I →A ⊗Al
and they satisfy the following yanking conditions:
(1A ⊗l
A) ◦(l
A ⊗1A) = 1A
(r
A ⊗1A) ◦(1A ⊗r
A) = 1A
(l
A ⊗1Al) ◦(1Al ⊗l
A) = 1Al
(1Ar ⊗r
A) ◦(r
A ⊗1Ar) = 1Ar
In a symmetric compact closed category, the left and right adjoints collapse
into one, that is we have A∗:= Al = Ar and the above four equalities collapse
to the following two:
(A ⊗1A) ◦(1A ⊗A) = 1A
(1A∗⊗A) ◦(A ⊗1A∗) = 1A∗
A functor F from a monoidal category C to a monoidal category D is a
monoidal functor [20], whenever F is a functor and moreover there exists a
morphism I →F(I ) and the following is a natural transformation:
F(A) ⊗F(B) →F(A ⊗B)
satisfying the corresponding coherence conditions. A monoidal functor is
strongly monoidal [20], whenever the above morphism and natural transforma-
tion are invertible.
A strongly monoidal functor on two compact closed categories C and D
preserves the compact structure, that is F(Al) = F(A)l and F(Ar) = F(A)r.
To see this, consider the case of the left adjoint, for which we have the following
two compositions of morphisms:
F(Al) ⊗F(A) →F(Al ⊗A) →F(I ) →I
I →F(I ) →F(A ⊗Al) →F(A) ⊗F(Al)
From these, and since adjoints are unique, it follows that F(Al) must be left
adjoint to F(A). The case for the right adjoint is similar.
An example of a compact closed category is a Lambek pregroup [23], denoted
by (P, ≤, 1, ·, (−)l, (−)r); we refer to this category by Preg. This is a partially
ordered monoid where each element of the partial order has a left and a right
adjoint, that is we have the following inequalities, which are the partial order
versions of the yanking conditions of a compact closed category:
p · pr ≤1 ≤pr · p
pl · p ≤1 ≤p · pl

202
D. KARTSAKLIS, M. SADRZADEH, S. PULMAN, AND B. COECKE
An example of a pregroup is the set of all unbounded monotone functions
on integers, with function composition as the monoidal tensor and the identity
function as its unit. The left and right adjoints are deﬁned using the standard
deﬁnition of adjoints and in terms of the min and max operations on the
integers as follows, for f ∈ZZ and m, n ∈Z:
fr(n) =

{m ∈Z | f(m) ≤n}
fl(n) =

{m ∈Z | n ≤f(m)}
An example of a symmetric compact closed category is the category of ﬁnite
dimensional vector spaces and linear maps over a ﬁeld (which for our purposes
we take to be the set of real numbers R); we refer to this category by FVect.
The monoidal tensor is the tensor product of vector spaces whose unit is the
ﬁeld. The adjoint of each vector space is its dual, which, by ﬁxing a basis {ri}i,
becomes isomorphic to the vector space itself, that is we have A∗∼= A (note
that this isomorphism is not natural). The  and  maps, given by the inner
product and maximally entangled states or Bell pairs, are deﬁned as follows:
A : A ⊗A →R
given by

ij
cij ri ⊗rj →

ij
cij⟨ri | rj⟩
A : R →A ⊗A
given by
1 →

i
ri ⊗ri
An example of a monoidal functor is Atiyah’s deﬁnition of a topological
quantum ﬁeld theory (TQFT). This is a representation of category of manifolds
and cobordisms Cob (representing, respectively possible choices of space and
spacetime) over the category of ﬁnite dimensional vector spaces FVect. This
representation is formalized using a strongly monoidal functor from Cob to
FVect by Baez and Dylon [3], and assigns a vector space of states to each
manifold and a linear operation to each cobordism.
§3. Category theory in linguistics. We brieﬂy review two orthogonal models
of meaning in computational linguistics: pregroup grammars and distributional
models of meaning, and we show how one can interpret the former in the latter
using a strongly monoidal functor.
3.1. Type-logical pregroup grammars. Consider the simple grammar gener-
ated by the following set of rules:
S →Np Vp
itV →smile
Vp →tV Np | N
tV →build
Np →Adj Np | N
Adj →strong
N →man, woman, house
The above rules are referred to as generative rules. The rules on the left describe
the formation of a grammatical sentence S in terms of other non-terminals.
According to these rules, a sentence is a noun phrase Np followed by a verb

REASONING ABOUT MEANING IN NATURAL LANGUAGE
203
phrase Vp, where a verb phrase itself is a transitive verb tV followed either
by a Np or a noun N, and a noun phrase is an adjective Adj followed either
by a Np or a noun N. The rules on the right instantiate all but one (S) of
the non-terminals to terminals. According to these, ‘smile’ is an intransitive
verb, ‘build’ is a transitive verb, ‘strong’ is an adjective, and ‘man’, ‘woman’,
and ‘house’ are nouns. We treat these words as lemmas and take freedom in
conjugating them in our example sentences.
In a predicative approach, the non-terminals of the above grammar (except
for S) are interpreted as unary or binary predicates to produce meaning for
phrases and sentences. There are various options when interpreting these
non-terminals: for instance, according to the ﬁrst rule, we can either interpret
a verb phrase as a binary predicate that inputs a noun phrase and outputs a
sentence, or we can interpret a noun phrase as a binary predicate that inputs a
verb phrase and outputs a sentence. We adhere to the more popular (among
computational linguistics) verb-centric view and follow the former option. The
types of the resulting predicates, obtained by recursively unfolding the rules,
form an algebra of types, referred to as a type-logical grammar.
A pregroup type-logical grammar, or a pregroup grammar for short, is the
pregroup freely generated over a set of basic types which, for the purpose
of this paper, we take to be {n, s}. We refer to this free pregroup grammar
by PregF . Here, n is the type representing a noun phrase and s is the type
representing a sentence. The complex types of this pregroup represent the
predicates. For instance, nr · s is the type of an intransitive verb, interpreted as
a unary predicate that inputs a noun phrase and outputs a sentence. Explicit
in this type is also the fact that the intransitive verb has to be on the right
hand side of the noun phrase. This fact is succinctly expressed by the adjoint r
of the type n. Similarly, nr · s · nl is the type of a transitive verb, which is a
binary predicate that inputs two noun phrases, has to be to the right of one
and to the left of the other, and outputs a sentence. Finally, n · nl is the type
of an adjective in attributive position, a unary predicate that inputs a noun
phrase and outputs another noun phrase; furthermore, it has to be to the left
of its input noun phrase. These types are then assigned to the vocabulary of
a language, that is to the non-terminals of the generative rules, via a relation
referred to as a type dictionary. Our example type dictionary is as follows:
man
woman
houses
strong
smiled
built
n
n
n
n · nl
nr · s
nr · s · nl
Every sequence of words w1w2 · · · wn from the vocabulary has an associated
type reduction, to which we refer to by αw1w1···wn. This type reduction represents
the grammatical structure of the sequence. In a pregroup grammar, a type
reduction is the result of applying the partial order, monoid, and adjunction
axioms to the multiplication of the types of the words of the sequence. For

204
D. KARTSAKLIS, M. SADRZADEH, S. PULMAN, AND B. COECKE
example, the type reduction αstrong house associated to the sequence ‘strong
house’ is computed by multiplying the types of ‘strong’ and ‘house’, that is
n·nl ·n, then applying to it the adjunction and monoid axioms, hence obtaining
n · nl · n ≤n. Similarly, the type reduction of the sentence ‘strong man built
houses’ is as follows:
αstrong man built houses
:
n · nl · n · nr · s · nl · n ≤n · nr · s ≤s
In categorical terms, the type reduction is a morphism of the category PregF ,
denoted by tensors and compositions of the  and identity maps. For instance,
the morphisms corresponding to the above adjective-noun phrase and sentence
are as follows:
strong man
strong man built houses
1n ⊗l
n
(r
n ⊗1s) ◦(1n ⊗l
n ⊗1nr·s ⊗l
n)
The generative rules formalize the grammar of a natural language and
their consequent type-logical grammars provide a predicative interpretation
for the words with complex types. However, all the words with the same
type have the same interpretation, and even worse, words with basic types
are only interpreted as atomic symbols. In the next section, we will see how
distributional models of meaning address this problem.
3.2. Distributional models of word meaning. Meanings of some words can
be determined by their denotations. For instance, meaning of the word ‘house’
can be the set of all houses or their images; and the answer to the question ‘what
is a house?’ can be provided by pointing to a house. Matters get complicated
when it comes to words with complex types such as adjectives and verbs. It is
not so clear what is the denotation of the adjective ‘strong’ or the verb ‘build’.
The problem is resolved by adhering to a meaning-as-use model of meaning,
whereby one can assign meaning to all words, regardless of their grammatical
type, according to the context in which they often appear. This context-based
approach to meaning is the main idea behind the distributional models of
meaning.
First formalized by Firth in 1957 [13] and about half a century later
implemented and applied to word sense disambiguation by Sch¨utze [34], distri-
butional models of meaning interpret words as vectors in a highly dimensional
(but ﬁnite) vector space with a ﬁxed orthonormal basis over real numbers.
A basis for this vector space is a set of target words, which in principle can
be the set of all lemmatized words of a corpus of documents or a dictionary.
In practice, the basis vectors are often restricted to the few thousands most
occurring words of the corpus, or a set of specialized words depending on
the application domain, e.g. a music dictionary. Alternatively, they can be
topics obtained from a dimensionality reduction algorithm such as single value
decomposition (SVD). We refer to such a vector space with an orthonormal

REASONING ABOUT MEANING IN NATURAL LANGUAGE
205
basis {wi}i, no matter how it is built, as our basic distributional vector space
W ; and to FVect restricted to tensor powers of W as FVectW .
In this model, to each word is associated a vector, which serves as the
meaning of the word. The weights of this vector are obtained by counting how
many times the word has appeared ‘close’ to a basis word, where ‘close’ is a
window of n (usually equal to 5) words. This number is usually normalized,
often in the form of Tf-Idf values which show how important is a speciﬁc basis
word by taking into account not only the number of times it has occurred to the
document, but also the number of documents in which it appears in the corpus.
human
- mortal
6







brick





man




woman
	
	
	
	
	
	

build






9
house
Figure 1. A toy distributional model of meaning.
As an example, consider the toy vector space of Figure 1.
The set
{human, mortal, brick} is the basis of this vector space and the words ‘man’,
‘woman’, ‘house’ and ‘build’ each have a vector assigned to them. The words
that have often appeared in the same context have a smaller angle between
their vectors. For instance, ‘house’ and ‘build’ often appear close to ‘brick’,
whereas ‘man’ and ‘woman’ often appear close to ‘mortal’ and ‘human’. The
cosine of the angle between the word vectors has proved to be a good measure
in predicting synonymy of words [10]. Despite these good predictions, the
distributional models of meaning cannot serve as the deﬁnite models of natural
language, as there is more to a language than the contexts of its words and
these models on their own do not scale up to the interpretations of phrases and
sentences. In the next section, we will see how a combination of type-logical
and distributional models overcome both of their corresponding shortcomings.
3.3. Quantizing the grammar. We provide a mapping of the free pregroup
grammar PregF to FVectW via a strongly monoidal functor F. This functor

206
D. KARTSAKLIS, M. SADRZADEH, S. PULMAN, AND B. COECKE
assigns the basic vector space W to both of the basic types, that is, we have:
F(n) = F(s) = W
By functoriality, the partial orders between the basic types (for example those
presented in [23]) are mapped to linear maps from W to W . The adjoints of
basic types are also mapped to W , since for x ∈{n, s} we have the following,
motivated by the above mentioned fact that W ∗∼= W :
F(xl) = F(xr) = F(x)
Since W ∗∗∼= W ∗∼= W , the iterated adjoint types are also mapped to W :
F(xll) = F(xrr) = F(x)
The complex types are mapped to tensor products of vector spaces, that is:
F(n · nl) = F(nr · s) = W ⊗W
F(nr · s · nl) = W ⊗W ⊗W
Similarly, the type reductions are mapped to the compositions of tensor
products of identity and  maps of FVectW , for instance the type reduction of
a transitive sentence is mapped as follows:
F(αsbj verb obj) = F(r
n ⊗1s ⊗l
n)
= W ⊗1W ⊗W : W ⊗(W ⊗W ⊗W ) ⊗W −→W
Now we can use the deﬁnition of [9] to provide a meaning for phrases and
sentences of our grammar. The meaning of a sequence of words w1w2 · · · wn
with type reduction αw1w2···wn is:
Deﬁnition(*)
F(αw1w2···wn) (−→
w1 ⊗−→
w2 ⊗· · · ⊗−→
wn)
As an example, take:
−−→
men =

i
cmen
i
−→
wi
−−−→
houses =

k
chouses
k
−→
wk
built =

ijk
cbuilt
ijk (−→
wi ⊗−→
wj ⊗−→
wk)
Substituting these in Deﬁnition(*), we obtain the following for the meaning of
the sentence ‘men built houses’:
F
'
r
n ⊗1s ⊗l
n
( '−−→
men ⊗built ⊗−−−−→
houses
(
= (W ⊗1W ⊗W )
'−−→
men ⊗built ⊗−−−−→
houses
(
=

ijk
cbuilt
ijk ⟨−−→
men|−→
wi⟩⟨−→
wk|−−−−→
houses⟩−→
wj
This deﬁnition ensures that the interpretations of noun phrases and sentences
of any grammatical structure, for instance intransitive or transitive, will be a
vector in W , hence we can measure the cosine of the angle between them and
compute their synonymy. In order to determine that this measure of synonymy
provides good predictions, we need to run some experiments. However, whereas
we know very well how to build vectors in W for words with basic types such

REASONING ABOUT MEANING IN NATURAL LANGUAGE
207
as ‘man’ and ‘house’, our method further requires interpretations of words
with complex types to be in tensor spaces, and there is no known standard
procedure to construct these. In the next section we show how the notion of a
Frobenius algebra over a vector space can be of use in addressing this matter.
§4. Frobenius algebras. Frobenius algebras were originally introduced in
1903 by F. G. Frobenius in the context of proving representation theorems for
group theory [14]. Since then, they have found applications in other ﬁelds of
mathematics and physics, e.g. in topological quantum ﬁeld theories [21] and in
categorical quantum mechanics [8]. The general categorical deﬁnitions recalled
below are due to Carboni and Walters [5]. Their concrete instantiations to
algebras over vector spaces were developed in [8].
A Frobenius algebra over a symmetric monoidal category (C, ⊗, I ) is a tuple
(F, , , 
, ), where for an F object of C the triple (F, , ) is an associative
coalgebra, that is, the following are morphisms of C, satisfying the coalgebraic
associativity and unit conditions:
 : F →F ⊗F
 : F →I
The triple (F, 
, ) is an associative algebra, that is, the following are morphisms
of C, satisfying the algebraic associativity and unit conditions:

: F ⊗F →F
 : I →F
Moreover, the above  and 
 morphisms satisfy the following Frobenius
condition:
(
 ⊗1F ) ◦(1F ⊗) =  ◦
 = (1F ⊗
) ◦( ⊗1F )
A Frobenius Algebra is commutative if it satisﬁes the following two conditions
for  : X ⊗Y →Y ⊗X, the symmetry morphism of (C, ⊗, I ):
 ◦ = 

 ◦ = 
Finally, a Frobenius Algebra is isometric or special if it satisﬁes the following
condition:

 ◦ = Id
In the category FVect, any vector space V with a ﬁxed basis {−→
vi }i has a
commutative special Frobenius algebra over it, explicitly given as follows:
 :: −→
vi →−→
vi ⊗−→
vi
 :: −→
vi →1

 :: −→
vi ⊗−→
vi →−→
vi
 :: 1 →−→
vi
In a Frobenius algebra over an orthonormal vector space, the coalgebra and
algebra operations relate to each other via the equation † = 
, where † is the
adjoint, equal to the transpose for vector spaces over reals.
In such Frobenius algebras, the operation  corresponds to copying and
its unit  corresponds to deleting of the vectors. They enable one to faithfully

208
D. KARTSAKLIS, M. SADRZADEH, S. PULMAN, AND B. COECKE
encode vectors of W into spaces with higher tensor ranks, such as W ⊗W, W ⊗
W ⊗W, · · · . In linear algebraic terms, for v ∈W , we have that (v) is a
diagonal matrix whose diagonal elements are weights of v. The operation 
 is
referred to as uncopying; it loses some information when encoding a higher
rank tensor into a lower rank space. In linear algebraic terms, for z ∈W ⊗W ,
we have that 
(z) is a vector consisting only of the diagonal elements of z,
hence losing the information encoded in the non-diagonal part.
§5. Pictorial calculi. The framework of compact closed categories comes
with a complete diagrammatic calculus that allows convenient graphical
representations of the derivations. We brieﬂy introduce the fragment of this
calculus that we are going to use in this paper. The objects of this fragment are
the tensors of multi-linear algebra; that is, a vector is a rank-1 tensor, a matrix
is a rank-2 tensor, and a 3d-array is a rank-3 tensor. Each tensor is represented
by a triangle, whose rank can be determined by its wires. Words are represented
by tensors that correspond to their meaning: subjects and objects are rank-1
tensors (vectors), adjectives and intransitive verbs are rank-2 tensors, and
transitive verbs are rank-3 tensors. The  maps are depicted as cups, whereas
the identity morphism is a vertical straight line. The tensor products of vectors
are represented by juxtaposing their corresponding triangles. For example,
the meaning of a transitive sentence, following Deﬁnition(*), is depicted as
follows:
Men
built
houses
W
WWW
W
Computations with Frobenius algebras can also be represented within the
more general diagrammatic calculus of symmetric monoidal categories, referred
to as string diagrams, ﬁrst formalized in [18]. Speciﬁcally, the linear maps of
the coalgebra and algebra are depicted by:
(, ) =
(
, ) =
The Frobenius condition is depicted by:
=
=
The commutativity conditions are shown as:

REASONING ABOUT MEANING IN NATURAL LANGUAGE
209
=
=
The isometry condition is depicted by:
=
Finally, the Frobenius conditions guarantee that any diagram depicting a
Frobenius algebraic computation can be reduced to a normal form that only
depends on the number of input and output wires of the nodes, provided that
the diagram of computation is connected. This justiﬁes depicting computations
with Frobenius algebras as spiders, referring to the right hand side diagram
below:
...
=
· · ·
· · ·
...
For an informal introduction to compact closed categories, Frobenius
algebras, and their diagrammatic calculi, see [7].
§6. Building tensors for words with complex types. The type-logical models
of meaning treat words with complex types as predicates. In a matrix calculus,
predicates can be modeled as matrices (or equivalently, linear maps ), over
the semiring of booleans. In vector spaces over reals, one can extend these
0/1 entries to real numbers and model words with complex types as weighted
predicates. These are predicates that not only tell us which instantiations of
their arguments are related to each other, but also that to what extent these
are related to each other. For instance, a transitive verb is a binary predicate
that, in the type-logical model, tells us which noun phrases are related to other
noun phrases. In a vector space model, the verb becomes a linear map that
moreover tells us to what extent these noun phrases are related to each other.
Building such linear maps from a corpus turns out to be a non-trivial task.
In previous work [17, 15] we argue that such a linear map can be constructed
by taking the sum of the tensor products of the vectors/linear maps of its
arguments. For instance, the linear map representing an n-ary predicate p
with arguments a1 to an is 
i a1 ⊗· · · ⊗an, where aj is the vector/linear map
associated to the argument aj and the index i counts the number of times
each word aj has appeared in the corpus as the argument of p. Following

210
D. KARTSAKLIS, M. SADRZADEH, S. PULMAN, AND B. COECKE
this method, the linear maps corresponding to the predicates of our simple
grammar are as follows:
intransitive verb
transitive verb
adjective

i
−→
sbji

i
(−→
sbji ⊗−→
obji)

i −−→
nouni
There is a problem: this method provides us with a linear map in a space whose
tensor rank is one less than the rank of the space needed by Deﬁnition(*). For
instance, the linear map of the transitive verb ends up being in W ⊗W , but
we need a linear map in W ⊗W ⊗W . This problem is overcome by using
the operations of a Frobenius algebra over vector spaces. We use the pictorial
calculi of the compact closed categories and Frobenius algebras to depict the
resulting linear maps and sentence vectors.
6.1. Adjectives and intransitive verbs. The linear maps of adjectives and
intransitive verbs are elements of W . In order to encode them in W ⊗W , we
use the Frobenius  operation and obtain the following linear map:
For the intransitive verb, when substituted in Deﬁnition(*), that is, when
applied to its subject, the above will result in the left hand side vector below,
which is then normalized to the right hand side vector.
=
When an adjective is applied to a noun, the order of the above application is
swapped: the triangle of the adjective will change place with the triangle of the
subject of the intransitive verb.
6.2. Transitive verbs. The linear map of a transitive verb is an element of
W ⊗W ; this has to be encoded in W ⊗W ⊗W . We face a few options here,
which geometrically speaking provide us with diﬀerent ways of “diagonally”
placing a plane into a cube.
CpSbj. The ﬁrst option is to copy the “row” dimension of the linear map
corresponding to the verb; this dimension encodes the information of the
subjects of the verb from the corpus. In the left hand side diagram below we
see how  transforms the verb in this way. Once substituted in Deﬁnition(*),
we obtain the diagram in the right hand side:

REASONING ABOUT MEANING IN NATURAL LANGUAGE
211
Verb:
Sentence:
In this case, the  map transforms the matrix of the verb as follows:
 ::

ij
cij(−→
ni ⊗−→
nj )
→

iij
cii(−→
ni ⊗−→
ni ⊗−→
nj )
CpObj. Our other option is to copy the “column” dimension of the matrix,
which encodes the information about the objects of the verb from the corpus:
Verb:
Sentence:
Now the -map does the following transformation:
 ::

ij
cij(−→
ni ⊗−→
nj )
→

ijj
cjj(−→
ni ⊗−→
nj ⊗−→
nj )
The diagrams above simplify the calculations involved, since they suggest a
closed form formula for each case. Taking as an example the diagram of the
copy-subject method, we see that: (a) the object interacts with the verb; (b)
the result of this interaction serves as input for the  map; (c) one wire of the
output of  interacts with the subject, while the other branch delivers the result.
Linear algebraically, this corresponds to the computation (verb × −→
obj)T × −→
sbj,
which expresses the fact that the meaning of a sentence is obtained by ﬁrst
applying the meaning of the verb to the meaning of the object, then applying
the ( version of the) result to the meaning of the subject. This computation
results in the Equation 1 below:
−−−−−−−→
sbj verb obj = −→
sbj ⊙(verb × −→
obj)
(1)
This order of application is the exact same way formalized in the generative
rules of the language. On the contrary, the meaning of a transitive sentence for
the copy-object results is given by Equation 2 below, which expresses the fact
that the meaning of a sentence is obtained by ﬁrst applying the (transposed)
meaning of the verb to the meaning of the subject and then applying the result
to the meaning of the object:
−−−−−−−→
sbj verb obj = −→
obj ⊙(verb
T × −→
sbj)
(2)
Note that equipped with the above closed forms we do not need to create or
manipulate rank-3 tensors at any point of the computation, something that
would cause high computational overhead.
Purely syntactically speaking, in a pregroup grammar the order of application
of a transitive verb does not matter: it is applied to its subject and object in

212
D. KARTSAKLIS, M. SADRZADEH, S. PULMAN, AND B. COECKE
parallel. Semantically, as originated in the work of Montague [28], a transitive
verb is ﬁrst applied to its object and then to its subject. In the more modern
approaches to semantics via logical grammars, this order is some times based
on the choice of the speciﬁc verb [12]. Our work in this paper is more inline
with the latter approach, where for the speciﬁc task of disambiguating the verbs
of our dataset, ﬁrst applying the verb to the subject then to the object seems
to provide better experimental results. According to our general theoretical
setting, the linear map corresponding to the transitive verb should be a rank-3
tensor, but at the moment, apart from work in progress which tries to conjoin
eﬀorts with Machine Learning to directly build these as rank-3 tensors, we do
not have the technology to do other than described in this paper. However, in
the ideal case that the linear maps of words are already in the spaces allocated
to them by the theory, these choices will not arise, as the compact nature of
the matrix calculus implies that the application can be done in parallel in
all the cases that parallel applications are prescribed by the syntax. From a
linear-algebra perspective, fully populated rank-3 tensors for verbs satisfy the
following equality:
subj verb obj = (verb × −→
obj)T × −→
subj = (verb
T × −→
subj) × −→
obj
which shows that the order of application does not actually play a role.
MixCpDl. We can also use a mixture of  and 
 maps. There are three
reasonable options here, all of which start by applying two ’s to the two wires
of the linear map of the verb (that is, one for each of the dimensions). Then
one can either apply a  to one of the copies of the ﬁrst wire, or a  to one of
the copies of the second wire. These two options are depicted as follows:
The ﬁrst diagram has the same normal form as the copy-subject option, and
the second one has the same normal form as the copy-object option.
Finally, one can apply a 
 to one wire from each of the copied wires of the
verb, the result of which is depicted in the following left hand side diagram.
When substituted in Deﬁnition(*), we obtain the following right hand side
diagram for the meaning of the transitive sentence:
Verb:
Sentence:

REASONING ABOUT MEANING IN NATURAL LANGUAGE
213
The normal form of the diagram of the sentence is obtained by collapsing the
three dots and yanking the corresponding wires, resulting in the following
diagram:
Linear algebraically, the spider form of the verb is equivalent to 
i(−−→
sbji ⊙−−→
obji).
A verb obtained in this way will only relate the properties of its subjects and
objects on identical bases and there will be no interaction of properties across
bases. For instance, for a certain verb v, this construction will result in a
vector that only encodes to what extent v has related subjects and objects
with property −→
w1, and has no information about to what extent v has related
subjects with property −→
w1 to objects with property −→
w2. The closed form of the
above diagram is:
−→
sbj ⊙
 
i
(−→
sbji ⊙−→
obji)
!
⊙−→
obj
6.3. Encoding the existing non-predicative models. Apart from the predica-
tive way of encoding meanings of words with complex types, there exists two
other approaches in the literature, who simply work with the context vectors
of such words [27, 16]. These two approaches are representable in our setting
using the Frobenius operations.
Multp. To represent the model of [27] in our setting, in which the meaning
of a sentence is simply the point-wise multiplication of the context vectors of
the words, we start from the context vector of the verb, denoted by −−→
verb, and
apply three ’s and then one 
 to it. The result is depicted in the left hand side
diagram below; once this verb is substituted in Deﬁnition(*), we obtain the
right hand side diagram below as the meaning of a transitive sentence:
Verb:
Sentence:
The normal form of the diagram of the sentence and its closed linear algebraic
form are as follows:
=
−→
sbj ⊙−−→
verb ⊙−→
obj
Kron. In the model of [16], the tensor of a transitive sentence is calculated
as the Kronecker product of the context vector of the verb with itself, so we

214
D. KARTSAKLIS, M. SADRZADEH, S. PULMAN, AND B. COECKE
have verb = −−→
verb ⊗−−→
verb. To encode this, we start from the Kronecker product
of the context vector of the verb with itself, apply one  to each one of the
vectors and then a 
 to both of them jointly. The result is the following left
hand side verb, which when substituted in the equation of Deﬁnition(*) results
in a normal form (depicted in the right hand side below) very similar to the
normal form of the Multp model:
Verb:
Sentence:
Linear algebraically, the above normal form is equivalent to:
−→
sbj ⊙−−→
verb ⊙−−→
verb ⊙−→
obj
(3)
§7. Experiments. The diﬀerent options presented in Section 6 and summa-
rized in Table 1 provide us a number of models for testing our setting. We
train our vectors on the British National Corpus (BNC), which has about
six million sentences and one million words, classiﬁed into a hundred million
diﬀerent lexical tokens. We use the set of its 2000 most frequent lemmas as a
basis of our basic distributional vector space W . The weights of each vector
are set to the ratio of the probability of the context word given the target word
to the probability of the context word overall. As our similarity measure we
use the cosine distance between the vectors.
Table 1. The models.
Model
Description
CpSbj
Copy subject on relational matrices
CpObj
Copy object on relational matrices
MixCpDl
Diagonalize on relational matrices
Kron
Diagonalize on direct matrices
Multp
Multiplicative model
7.1. Disambiguation. We ﬁrst test our models on a disambiguation task,
which is an extension of Sch¨utze’s original disambiguation task from words
to sentences. A dataset for this task was originally developed in [27] for
intransitive sentences, and later extended to transitive sentences in [15]; we use
the latter. The goal is to assess how well a model can discriminate between the
diﬀerent senses of an ambiguous verb, given the context (subject and object)
of that verb. The entries of this dataset consist of a target verb, a subject,
an object, and a landmark verb used for the comparison. One such entry

REASONING ABOUT MEANING IN NATURAL LANGUAGE
215
for example is, “write, pupil, name, spell”. A good model should be able
to understand that the sentence “pupil write name” is closer to the sentence
“pupil spell name” than, for example, to “pupil publish name”. On the other
hand, given the context “writer, book” these results should be reversed. The
evaluation of this experiment is performed by calculating Spearman’s , which
measures the degree of correlation of the cosine distance with the judgements
of 25 human evaluators, who has been asked to assess the similarity of each pair
of sentences using a scale from 1 to 7. As our baseline we use a simple additive
model (Addtv), where the meaning of a transitive sentence is computed as the
addition of the relevant context vectors.
Results. The results of this experiment are shown in Table 2, indicating that
the most successful model for this task is the copy-object model. The better
performance of this model against the copy-subject approach provides us some
insights about the role of subjects and objects in disambiguating our verbs.
By copying the dimension associated with the object, the compression of the
original sentence matrix, as this was calculated in [15], takes place along the
dimension of subjects (rows), meaning that the resulting vector will bring much
more information from the objects than the subjects (this is also suggested
by Equation 2). Hence, the fact that this vector performs better than the one
of the copy-subject method provides an indication that the object of some
ambiguous verbs (which turns out to be the case for our dataset) can be more
important for disambiguating that verb than the subject. Intuitively, we can
imagine that the crucial factor to disambiguate between the verbs “write”,
“publish” and “spell” is more the object than the subject: a book or a paper
can be both published and written, but a letter or a shopping list can only be
written. Similarly, a word can be spelled and written, but a book can only be
written. The subject in all these cases is not so important.
Table 2. Disambiguation results. High and Low refer to
average scores for high and low landmarks, respectively. Up-
perBound refers to agreement between annotators.
Model
High
Low

Addtv
0.90
0.90
0.050
Multp
0.67
0.60
0.163
MixCpDl
0.75
0.77
0.000
Kron
0.31
0.21
0.168
CpSbj
0.95
0.95
0.143
CpObj
0.89
0.90
0.172
UpperBound
4.80
2.49
0.620

216
D. KARTSAKLIS, M. SADRZADEH, S. PULMAN, AND B. COECKE
The copy-object model is followed closely by the (Kron) and the Multp
models. The similar performance of these two is not a surprise, given their
almost identical nature. Finally, the bad performance of the model (MixCpDl)
that is obtained by the application of the uncopying 
 map conforms to the
predictions of the theory, as these were expressed in Section 6.
7.2. Comparing transitive and intransitive sentences. In this section we will
examine the potential of the above approach in practice, in the context of
an experiment aiming to compare transitive and intransitive sentences. In
order to do that, we use the dataset of the previous verb disambiguation
task (see detailed description in Section 7.1) to conduct the following simple
experiment: We create intransitive versions of all the transitive sentences from
target verbs and their high and low landmarks by dropping the object; then,
we compare each transitive sentence coming from the target verbs with all the
other intransitive sentences, expecting that the highest similarity would come
from its own intransitive version, the next higher similarity would come from
the intransitive version that uses the corresponding high landmark verb, and
so on. To present a concrete example, consider the entry “write, pupil, name,
spell, publish”. Our transitive sentence here is str = “pupil write name”; the
intransitive version of this is sin = “pupil write”. We also create intransitive
versions using the high and the low landmarks, getting shi = “pupil spell” and
slo = “pupil publish”. If the similarity between two sentences s1 and s2 is given
by sim(s1, s2), we would expect that:
sim(str, sit) > sim(str, shi) > sim(str, slo) > sim(str, su)
where su represents an unrelated intransitive version coming from a target verb
diﬀerent than the one of str. The results of this experiment are shown in Table 3
below, for 100 target verbs.
Table 3. Results of the comparison between transitive and
intransitive sentences.
Case
Errors
%
sim(str, shi) > sim(str, sit)
7 of 93
7.5
sim(str, slo) > sim(str, sit)
6 of 93
5.6
sim(str, su) > sim(str, sit)
36 of 9900
0.4
The outcome follows indeed our expectations for this task. We see, for
example, that the highest error rate comes from cases where the intransitive
sentence of the high landmark verb is closer to a transitive sentence than the
intransitive version coming from the sentence itself (ﬁrst row of the table).
Since the meaning of a target verb and the high landmark verb were speciﬁcally

REASONING ABOUT MEANING IN NATURAL LANGUAGE
217
selected to be very similar given the context (subject and object), this is naturally
the most error-prone category. The seven misclassiﬁed cases are presented in
Table 4, where the similarity of the involved intransitive versions is apparent.
Table 4. Errors in the ﬁrst category of comparisons.
str
sin
shi
people run round
people run
people move
boy meet girl
boy meet
boy visit
management accept responsibility
management accept
management bear
patient accept treatment
patient accept
patient bear
table draw eye
table draw
table attract
claimant draw beneﬁt
claimant draw
claimant attract
tribunal try crime
tribunal try
tribunal judge
The six cases of the second category (where an intransitive sentence from a
low-landmark gives higher similarity than the normal intransitive version) are
quite similar, since in many cases dropping the object leads to semantically
identical expressions. For the transitive sentence “tribunal try crime”, for
example, the low-landmark intransitive version “tribunal test” has almost
identical meaning with the normal intransitive version “tribunal try”, so it
is easier to be “mistakenly” selected by the model as the one closest to the
original transitive sentence.
Finally, the model performs really well for cases when an unrelated intran-
sitive sentence is compared with a transitive one, with only a 0.4% error rate.
Here many of the misclassiﬁcations can also be attributed to the increased
ambiguity of the involved verbs when the object is absent. For example, the
similarity between “man draw sword” and “man draw” is considered smaller
than the similarity of the ﬁrst sentence with “man write”. Although this is
an obvious error, we should acknowledge that the two intransitive sentences,
“man draw” and “man write”, are not so diﬀerent semantically, so the error
was not completely unjustiﬁed.
7.3. Deﬁnition classiﬁcation. The ability of reliably comparing the meaning
of single words with larger textual fragments, e.g. phrases or even sentences,
can be an invaluable tool for many challenging NLP tasks, such as deﬁnition
classiﬁcation, sentiment analysis, or even the simple everyday search on the
internet. In this task we examine the extend to which our models can correctly
match a number of terms (single words) with a number of deﬁnitions. Our
dataset consists of 112 terms (72 nouns and 40 verbs) extracted from a junior
dictionary together with their main deﬁnition. For each term we added two
more deﬁnitions, either by using entries of WordNet for the term or by simple

218
D. KARTSAKLIS, M. SADRZADEH, S. PULMAN, AND B. COECKE
paraphrase of the main deﬁnition using a thesaurus, getting a total of three
deﬁnitions per term. In all cases a deﬁnition for a noun-term is a noun phrase,
whereas the deﬁnitions for the verb-terms consist of verb phrases. A sample of
the dataset entries can be found in Table 5.
Table 5. Sample of the dataset for the term/deﬁnition com-
parison task (noun-terms in the top part, verb-terms in the
bottom part).
Term
Main deﬁnition
Alternative def. 1
Alternative def. 2
blaze
large strong ﬁre
huge potent ﬂame
substantial heat
husband
married man
partner of a woman
male spouse
foal
young horse
adolescent stallion
juvenile mare
horror
great fear
intense fright
disturbing feeling
apologise
say sorry
express regret or
sadness
acknowledge
shortcoming or failing
embark
get on a ship
enter boat or vessel
commence trip
vandalize
break things
cause damage
produce destruction
regret
be sad or sorry
feel remorse
express dissatisfaction
We approach this evaluation problem as a classiﬁcation task, where terms
have the role of classes. First, we calculate the distance between each deﬁnition
and every term in the dataset. The deﬁnition is “classiﬁed” to the term that
gives the higher similarity. Due to the nature the dataset, this task did not
require human annotation and we evaluate the results by calculating separate
F1-scores for each term, and getting their average as an overall score for the
whole model. The results are presented in Table 6.
Table 6. Results of the term/deﬁnition comparison task.
Nouns
Verbs
Model
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
Addtv
0.21
0.17
0.16
0.28
0.25
0.23
Multp
0.21
0.22
0.19
0.31
0.30
0.26
Reltn
0.22
0.24
0.21
0.32
0.28
0.27
Results. Since this experiment includes verb phrases, where the subject is
missing, we construct our verb vectors by summing over all context vectors of
objects with which the verb appears in the corpus; that is, we use verb = 
i
−−→
obji.

REASONING ABOUT MEANING IN NATURAL LANGUAGE
219
This is referred to as the relational model (Reltn), and is compared with the
multiplicative model. Additive model serves again as our baseline. We evaluate
separately the performance on the noun terms and the performance on the
verb terms, since a mixing of the two sets would be inconsistent.
The relational model delivers again the best performance, although the
diﬀerence from the multiplicative model is small. All models perform better on
the verb terms than the noun part of the dataset, yet in general F-scores tend
to be low. This is natural, since the challenge that this task poses to a machine
is great, and F-score considers anything but the perfect result (every deﬁnition
assigned to the correct term) as unacceptable.
An error analysis shows that for the noun-term set the relational model
returns the correct main deﬁnition in 25 of the 72 cases, whereas in 47 cases
(65%) the correct deﬁnition is in the top-ﬁve list for that term (Table 7). The
multiplicative model performs similarly, and better for the verb-term set. For
this experiment we also calculated Mean Reciprocal Ranks values, which again
were very close for the two models. Furthermore, some of the “misclassiﬁed”
cases can also be considered as somehow “correct”. For example, the deﬁnition
we originally assigned to the term ‘jacket’ was ‘short coat’; however, the system
“preferred” the deﬁnition ‘waterproof cover’, which is also correct. Some
interesting other cases are presented in Table 8.
Table 7. Results of the term/deﬁnition comparison task
based on the rank of the main deﬁnition.
Multp
Reltn
Rank
Count
%
Count
%
Nouns
1
26
36.1
25
34.7
2-5
20
27.8
22
30.6
6-10
11
15.3
5
6.9
11-72
15
20.8
20
27.8
Verbs
1
15
37.5
8
20.0
2-5
10
25.0
13
32.5
6-10
6
15.0
4
10.0
11-40
9
22.5
15
37.5
§8. Conclusion and future work. In summary, after a brief review of the
deﬁnitions of compact closed categories and monoidal functors, we ramiﬁed
their applications to natural language syntax and semantics. We recasted the
categorical setting of [9], which was based on the product of the category of
a pregroup type-logic with the category of ﬁnite dimensional vector spaces,

220
D. KARTSAKLIS, M. SADRZADEH, S. PULMAN, AND B. COECKE
Table 8. A sample of ambiguous cases where the model
assigned a diﬀerent deﬁnition than the original.
Term
Original deﬁnition
Assigned deﬁnition
rod
ﬁshing stick
round handle
jacket
short coat
waterproof cover
mud
wet soil
wet ground
labyrinth
complicated maze
burial chamber
in terms of a monoidal functor from the former to the latter. This passage
is similar to the vector space representation of category of manifolds in a
topological quantum ﬁeld theory. We showed how the operations of Frobenius
algebras over vector spaces provide a concrete instantiation of this setting and
used their pictorial calculus to simplify the multi-linear algebraic computations.
This instantiation resulted in meanings of all sentences living in a basic vector
space W , hence we became able to compare their meanings with one another
and also with meanings of single words and phrases. We developed experiments
based on this instantiation and evaluated the predictions of our model in a
number of sentence and phrase synonymy tasks.
We conclude that the concrete setting of this paper provides a robust and
scalable base for an implementation of the framework of [9], ready for further
experimentation and applications. It overcomes the shortcomings of our
ﬁrst implementation [15], whose main problem was that the vector space
representation of the atomic type s was taken to be the tensor space W ⊗W
(for a transitive sentence), hence the logical and the concrete types did not
match. As a consequence, sentences with nested structures such as ‘Mary saw
John reading a book’ could not be assigned a meaning; furthermore, meanings
of phrases and sentences with diﬀerent grammatical structure lived in diﬀerent
vector spaces, so a direct comparison of them was not possible.
An experimental future direction is a higher order evaluation of the deﬁnition
classiﬁcation task using an unambiguous vector space along the lines of [34],
where each word is associated with one or more sense vectors. A model like
this will avoid encoding diﬀerent meanings of words in one vector, and will
help us separate the two distinct tasks of composition and disambiguation that
currently are interwoven in a single step.
From the theoretical perspective, one direction is to start from type-logical
grammars that are more expressive than pregroups. In recent work [33] we have
shown how the functorial passage to FVect can be extended from a pregroup
algebra to the Lambek Calculus [22], which has a monoidal (rather than
compact) structure. It remains to show how this passage can be extended to
more expressive versions of Lambek calculi, such as Lambek-Grishin algebras

REASONING ABOUT MEANING IN NATURAL LANGUAGE
221
[29], calculi of discontinuity [30], or abstract categorial grammars [11]. More
speciﬁcally, one wants to investigate if the new operations and axioms of these
extensions are preserved by the vector space semantic functor.
Another venue to explore is meanings of logical words, where any context-
dependant method fails to succeed. The abstract operations of Frobenius
algebras have been used to model a limited class of logical operations on vector
spaces [8], hence these might turn out to be promising in this aspect too.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Abramsky and B. Coecke, A categorical semantics of quantum protocols, Proceedings of
the 19th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, 2004, arXiv:quant-ph/0402130,
pp. 415–425.
[2] M. Atiyah, Topological quantum ﬁeld theories, Publications Math´ematique de l’Institut des
Hautes ´Etudes Scientiﬁques, vol. 68 (1989), pp. 175–186.
[3] J. C. Baez and J. Dolan, Higher-dimensional algebra and topological quantum ﬁeld theory,
Journal of Mathematical Physics, vol. 36 (1995), pp. 6073D0–6105.
[4] G. Birkhoﬀand J. von Neumann, The logic of quantum mechanics, Annals of Mathematics,
vol. 35 (1936), pp. 823–843.
[5] A. Carboni and R. F. C. Walters, Cartesian bicategories I, Journal of Pure and Applied
Algebra, vol. 49 (1987).
[6] S. Clark and S. Pulman, Combining symbolic and distributional models of meaning,
Proceedings of AAAI Spring Symposium on Quantum Interaction, AAAI Press, 2007.
[7] B. Coecke and E. Paquette, Categories for the practicing physicist, New Structures for
Physics (B. Coecke, editor), Lecture Notes in Physics, vol. 813, Springer, 2011, pp. 167–271.
[8] B. Coecke, D. Pavlovic, and J. Vicary, A new description of orthogonal bases, Mathematical
Structures in Computer Science, vol. 1 (2008).
[9] B. Coecke, M. Sadrzadeh, and S. Clark, Mathematical foundations for distributed compo-
sitional model of meaning, Lambek Festschrift (J. van Benthem, M. Moortgat, and W. Buszkowski,
editors), Linguistic Analysis, vol. 36, 2010, pp. 345–384.
[10] J. Curran, From Distributional to Semantic Similarity, Ph.D. thesis, University of Edin-
burgh, 2004.
[11] P. de Groote, Towards abstract categorial grammars, Proceedings of Association for
Computational Linguistic, 2001, pp. 148–155.
[12] P. de Groote and F. Lamarche, Classical non-associative Lambek calculus, Studia Logica,
vol. 71 (2002), pp. 355–388.
[13] J. R. Firth, A synopsis of linguistic theory 1930-1955, Studies in Linguistic Analysis,
(1957).
[14] F. G. Frobenius, Theorie der hyperkomplexen Gr¨oßen, Sitzungsberichte der Preußischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, (1903).
[15] E. Grefenstette and M. Sadrzadeh, Experimental support for a categorical compositional
distributional model of meaning, Proceedings of Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), 2011.
[16]
, Experimenting with Transitive Verbs in a DisCoCat, Proceedings of Workshop on
Geometrical Models of Natural Language Semantics (GEMS), 2011.
[17] E. Grefenstette, M. Sadrzadeh, S. Clark, B. Coecke, and S. Pulman, Concrete
compositional sentence spaces for a compositional distributional model of meaning, International
Conference on Computational Semantics (IWCS’11), 2011.

222
D. KARTSAKLIS, M. SADRZADEH, S. PULMAN, AND B. COECKE
[18] A. Joyal and R. Street, The geometry of tensor calculus I, Advances in Mathematics,
vol. 88 (1991).
[19] G. M. Kelly, Many-variable functorial calculus (I ), Coherence in Categories (G. M. Kelly,
M. Laplaza, G. Lewis, and S. MacLane, editors), Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 281, Springer,
1972, pp. 66–105.
[20] A. Kock, Strong functors and monoidal monads, Archiv der Mathematik, vol. 23 (1972),
pp. 113–120.
[21] J. Kock, Frobenius Algebras and 2D Topological Quantum Field Theories, London Math-
ematical Society Student Texts, Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[22] J. Lambek, The mathematics of sentence structure, American Mathematics Monthly, vol. 65
(1958), pp. 154–170.
[23]
, From Word to Sentence, Polimetrica, Milan, 2008.
[24] J. Lambek and C. Casadio, Computational Algebraic Approaches to Natural Language,
Polimetrica, Milan, 2006.
[25] T. Landauer and S. Dumais, A solution to Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis
theory of acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge, Psychological Review, (1997).
[26] C. D. Manning, P. Raghavan, and H. Sch¨utze, Introduction to Information Retrieval,
Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[27] J. Mitchell and M. Lapata, Vector-based models of semantic composition, Proceedings of
the 46th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2008, pp. 236–244.
[28] R. Montague, English as a formal language, Formal Philosophy, Yale University Press,
New Haven, 1974, pp. 189–223.
[29] M. Moortgat, Symmetric categorial grammar, Journal of Philosophical Logic, (2009),
pp. 681–710.
[30] G. Morrill, Discontinuity in categorial grammar, Linguistics and Philosophy, vol. 18
(1995), pp. 175–219.
[31] A. Preller and J. Lambek, Free compact 2-categories, Mathematical Structures in Com-
puter Science, vol. 17 (2007), pp. 309–340.
[32] A. Preller and M. Sadrzadeh, Bell states and negative sentences in the distributed model
of meaning, Proceedings of the 6th QPL Workshop on Quantum Physics and Logic, Electronic
Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 270, 2011, pp. 141–153.
[33] M. Sadrzadeh, E. Grefenstette, and B. Coecke, Lambek vs. Lambek: Vector Space
Semantics and String Diagrams for Lambek Calculus, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, vol. 164
(2013), pp. 1079–1100.
[34] H. Sch¨utze, Automatic word sense discrimination, Computational Linguistics, vol. 24
(1998), pp. 97–123.
[35] P. Selinger, A survey of graphical languages for monoidal categories, New Structures for
Physics (B. Coecke, editor), Springer-Verlag, 2011, pp. 275–337.
SCHOOL OF ELECTRONIC ENGINEERING AND COMPUTER SCIENCE
QUEEN MARY UNIVERSITY OF LONDON
E-mail: d.kartsaklis@qmul.ac.uk
E-mail: mehrnoosh.sadrzadeh@qmul.ac.uk
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE
UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
WOLFSON BUILDING, PARKS ROAD
OXFORD, OX1 3QD
E-mail: stephen.pulman@cs.ox.ac.uk
E-mail: coecke@cs.ox.ac.uk

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
WITH MAJORANA FERMIONS
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Abstract. This paper is an introduction to relationships between quantum topology and quan-
tum computing. We show how knots are related not just to braiding and quantum operators, but to
quantum set theoretical foundations, algebras of fermions, and we show how the operation of nega-
tion in logic, seen as both a value and an operator, can generate the fusion algebra for a Majorana
fermion. We call negation in this mode the mark, as it operates on itself to change from marked to
unmarked states. The mark viewed recursively as a simplest discrete dynamical system naturally
generates the fermion algebra, the quaternions and the braid group representations related to Ma-
jorana fermions. The paper begins with these fundamentals. It then discusses unitary solutions to
the Yang-Baxter equation that are universal quantum gates, quantum entanglement and topologi-
cal entanglement, and gives an exposition of knot-theoretic recoupling theory, its relationship with
topological quantum ﬁeld theory and applies these methods to produce unitary representations of
the braid groups that are dense in the unitary groups. These methods are rooted in the bracket state
sum model for the Jones polynomial. A self-contained study of the quantum universal Fibonacci
model is given. Results are applied to give quantum algorithms for the computation of the col-
ored Jones polynomials for knots and links, and the Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev invariant of three
manifolds. Two constructions are given for the Fibonacci model, one based in Temperley-Lieb
recoupling theory, the other quite elementary and also based on the Temperley-Lieb algebra. This
paper begins an exploration of quantum epistemology in relation to the structure of discrimination
as the underpinning of basic logic, perception and measurement.
§1. Introduction. This paper is an introduction to relationships between
quantum topology and quantum computing. We take a foundational approach,
showing how knots are related not just to braiding and quantum operators,
but to quantum set theoretical foundations and algebras of fermions. We show
how the operation of negation in logic, seen as both a value and an operator,
can generate the fusion algebra for a Majorana fermion, a particle that is
its own anti-particle and interacts with itself either to annihilate itself or to
produce itself. We call negation in this mode the mark, as it operates on itself
to change from marked to unmarked states. The mark viewed recursively as a
simplest discrete dynamical system naturally generates the fermion algebra, the
quaternions and the braid group representations related to Majorana fermions.
The paper begins with these fundmentals. They provide a conceptual key to
Logic and Algebraic Structures in Quantum Computing
Edited by J. Chubb, A. Eskandarian and V. Harizanov
Lecture Notes in Logic, 45
c⃝2016, Association for Symbolic Logic
223

224
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
many of the models that appear later in the paper. In particular, the Fibonacci
model for topological quantum computing is seen to be based on the fusion
rules for a Majorana fermion and these in turn are the interaction rules for
the mark seen as a logical particle. It requires a shift in viewpoint to see that
the operator of negation can also be seen as a logical value. This is explained
in Sections 3, 4 and 5. The quaternions emerge naturally from the reentering
mark. All these models have their roots in unitary representations of the Artin
braid group to the quaternions.
An outline of the parts of this paper is given below.
§1. Introduction
§2. Knots and braids
§3. Knot logic
§4. Fermions, Majorana fermions and algebraic knot sets
§5. Laws of Form
§6. Quantum mechanics and quantum computation
§7. Braiding operators and universal quantum gates
§8. A remark about EPR entanglement and Bell’s inequality
§9. The Aravind hypothesis
§10. SU(2) representations of the Artin braid group
§11. The bracket polynomial and the Jones polynomial
§12. Quantum topology, cobordism categories, Temperley-Lieb algebra
and topological quantum ﬁeld theory
§13. Braiding and topological quantum ﬁeld theory
§14. Spin networks and Temperley-Lieb recoupling theory
§15. Fibonacci particles
§16. The Fibonacci recoupling model
§17. Quantum computation of colored Jones polynomials
and the Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev invariant
§18. A direct construction of the Fibonacci model
Much of what is new in this paper proceeds from thinking about knots
and sets and distinctions. The Sections 3, 4 and 5 are self-contained and
self-explanatory. These sections show how a formal system discovered by
Spencer-Brown [92], underlying Boolean logic, is composed of a “logical
particle”, the mark
, that interacts with itself to either produce itself or to
cancel itself.
−→
−→
In this sense the mark is a formal model of a Majorana fermion. The oirginal
formal structure of the mark gives the fusion algebra for the Majorana fermion.
In Section 5 we show that this iconic representation of the particle is directly

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
225
related to modeling with surface cobordisms and this theme occurs throughout
the paper. In Section 5 we also show that the mark, viewed as a generator of
a discrete dynamical system, generates the Cliﬀord algebra associated with
a Majorana fermion and we end this section by showing how this iterant
viewpoint leads naturally to the Dirac equation using the approach of [86].
This is part of the contents of the Sections 3, 4, 5. In these sections we examine
relationships with knots as models of non-standard set theory. The algebra of
fermions is directly relevant to this knot set theory and can be formulated in
terms of the Cliﬀord algebra of Majorana fermions.
We weave this material with the emergence of unitary braid group represen-
tations that are signiﬁcant for quantum information theory. In particular we
weave the topology with the algebra of fermions and in order to clarify this
development, we give a quick summary of that algebra and a quick summary
of topological quantum computing in the rest of this introduction.
Fermion algebra. Recall fermion algebra. One has fermion annihilation
operators  and their conjugate creation operators †. One has 2 = 0 =
(†)2. There is a fundamental commutation relation
† + † = 1.
If you have more than one of them say  and φ, then they anti-commute:
φ = −φ.
The Majorana fermions c satisfy c† = c so that they are their own anti-particles.
There is a lot of interest in these as quasi-particles and they are related to
braiding and to topological quantum computing. A group of researchers [78]
claims, at this writing, to have found quasiparticle Majorana fermions in edge
eﬀects in nano-wires. (A line of fermions could have a Majorana fermion
happen non-locally from one end of the line to the other.) The Fibonacci
model that we discuss is also based on Majorana particles, possibly related to
collective electronic excitations. If P is a Majorana fermion particle, then P
can interact with itself to either produce itself or to annihilate itself. This is the
simple “fusion algebra” for this particle. One can write P2 = P + 1 to denote
the two possible self-interactions the particle P. The patterns of interaction
and braiding of such a particle P give rise to the Fibonacci model.
Majoranas are related to standard fermions as follows: The algebra for
Majoranas is c = c† and cc′ = −c′c if c and c′ are distinct Majorana fermions
with c2 = 1 and c′2 = 1.
One can make a standard fermion from two
Majoranas via
 = (c + ic′)/
√
2,
† = (c −ic′)/
√
2.

226
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Similarly one can mathematically make two Majoranas from any single fermion.
Now if you take a set of Majoranas
{c1, c2, c3, . . . , cn}
then there are natural braiding operators that act on the vector space with
these ck as the basis. The operators are mediated by algebra elements
k = (1 + ck+1ck)/
√
2,
−1
k
= (1 −ck+1ck)/
√
2.
Then the braiding operators are
Tk : Span{c1, c2, . . . , , cn} −→Span{c1, c2, . . . , , cn}
via
Tk(x) = kx−1
k .
The braiding is simply:
Tk(ck) = ck+1,
Tk(ck+1) = −ck,
and Tk is the identity otherwise. This gives a very nice unitary representaton
of the Artin braid group and it deserves better understanding.
It is worth noting that a triple of Majorana fermions say a, b, c gives
rise to a representation of the quaternion group. This is a generalization
of the well-known association of Pauli matrices and quaternions. We have
a2 = b2 = c2 = 1 and they anticommute. Let I = ba, J = cb, K = ac. Then
I 2 = J 2 = K2 = IJK = −1,
giving the quaternions. The operators
A = (1/
√
2)(1 + I )
B = (1/
√
2)(1 + J)
C = (1/
√
2)(1 + K)
braid one another:
ABA = BAB,
BCB = CBC,
ACA = CAC.
This is a special case of the braid group representation described above for an
arbitrary list of Majorana fermions. These braiding operators are entangling
and so can be used for universal quantum computation, but they give only
partial topological quantum computation due to the interaction with single
qubit operators not generated by them.
In Section 5 we show how the dynamics of the reentering mark leads to
two (algebraic) Majorana fermions e and  that correspond to the spatial

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
227
and temporal aspects of this recursive process. The corresponding standard
fermion operators are then given by the formulas below.
 = (e + i)/
√
2
and
† = (e −i)/
√
2.
This gives a model of a fermion creation operator as a point in a non-
commutative spacetime. This suggestive point of view, based on knot logic
and Laws of Form, will be explored in subsequent publications.
Topological quantum computing. This paper describes relationships between
quantum topology and quantum computing as a modiﬁed version of Chapter
14 of the book [12] and an expanded version of [60] and an expanded version
of a chapter in [62]. Quantum topology is, roughly speaking, that part of
low-dimensional topology that interacts with statistical and quantum physics.
Many invariants of knots, links and three dimensional manifolds have been
born of this interaction, and the form of the invariants is closely related to the
form of the computation of amplitudes in quantum mechanics. Consequently,
it is fruitful to move back and forth between quantum topological methods
and the techniques of quantum information theory.
We sketch the background topology, discuss analogies (such as topological
entanglement and quantum entanglement), show direct correspondences
between certain topological operators (solutions to the Yang-Baxter equation)
and universal quantum gates. We describe the background for topological
quantum computing in terms of Temperley-Lieb (we will sometimes abbreviate
this to TL) recoupling theory. This is a recoupling theory that generalizes
standard angular momentum recoupling theory, generalizes the Penrose theory
of spin networks and is inherently topological. Temperley-Lieb recoupling
Theory is based on the bracket polynomial model [35, 39] for the Jones
polynomial. It is built in terms of diagrammatic combinatorial topology.
The same structure can be explained in terms of the SU(2)q quantum group,
and has relationships with functional integration and Witten’s approach to
topological quantum ﬁeld theory. Nevertheless, the approach given here is
elementary. The structure is built from simple beginnings and this structure
and its recoupling language can be applied to many things including colored
Jones polynomials, Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants of three manifolds,
topological quantum ﬁeld theory and quantum computing.
In quantum computing, the simplest non-trivial example of the Temperley-
Lieb recoupling Theory gives the so-called Fibonacci model. The recoupling
theory yields representations of the Artin braid group into unitary groups U(n)
where n is a Fibonacci number. These representations are dense in the unitary
group, and can be used to model quantum computation universally in terms
of representations of the braid group. Hence the term: topological quantum
computation. In this paper, we outline the basics of the Temperley-Lieb
Recoupling Theory, and show explicitly how the Fibonacci model arises from

228
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
it. The diagrammatic computations in the sections 12 to 18 are completely
self-contained and can be used by a reader who has just learned the bracket
polynomial, and wants to see how these dense unitary braid group repre-
sentations arise from it. In the ﬁnal section of the paper we give a separate
construction for the Fibnacci model that is based on 2 × 2 complex matrix
representations of the Temperley-Lieb algebra. This is a completely elementary
construction independent of the recoupling theory of the previous sections.
We studied this construction in [61] and a version of it has been used in [89].
The relationship of the work here with the mathematics of Chern-Simons
theory and conformal ﬁeld theory occurs through the work of Witten, Moore
and Seiberg and Moore and Read [76]. One can compare the mathematical
techniques of the present paper with the physics of the quantum Hall eﬀect
and its possibilities for topological quantum computing. This part of the story
will await a sequel to the present exposition.
Here is a very condensed presentation of how unitary representations
of the braid group are constructed via topological quantum ﬁeld theoretic
methods, leading to the Fibonacci model and its generalizations.
These
representations are more powerful, in principle, than the representations we
have just given, because they encompass a dense collection of all unitary
transformations, including single qubit transformations needed for universal
quantum computing. One has a mathematical particle with label P that can
interact with itself to produce either itself labeled P or itself with the null label
∗. We shall denote the interaction of two particles P and Q by the expression
PQ, but it is understood that the “value” of PQ is the result of the interaction,
and this may partake of a number of possibilities. Thus for our particle P, we
have that PP may be equal to P or to ∗in a given situation. When ∗interacts
with P the result is always P. When ∗interacts with ∗the result is always ∗. One
considers process spaces where a row of particles labeled P can successively
interact, subject to the restriction that the end result is P. For example the
space V [(ab)c] denotes the space of interactions of three particles labeled P.
The particles are placed in the positions a, b, c. Thus we begin with (PP)P. In
a typical sequence of interactions, the ﬁrst two P’s interact to produce a ∗, and
the ∗interacts with P to produce P.
(PP)P −→(∗)P −→P.
In another possibility, the ﬁrst two P’s interact to produce a P, and the P
interacts with P to produce P.
(PP)P −→(P)P −→P.
It follows from this analysis that the space of linear combinations of processes
V [(ab)c] is two dimensional. The two processes we have just described can
be taken to be the qubit basis for this space. One obtains a representation
of the three strand Artin braid group on V [(ab)c] by assigning appropriate

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
229
phase changes to each of the generating processes. One can think of these
phases as corresponding to the interchange of the particles labeled a and b in
the association (ab)c. The other operator for this representation corresponds
to the interchange of b and c. This interchange is accomplished by a unitary
change of basis mapping
F : V [(ab)c] −→V [a(bc)].
If
A : V [(ab)c] −→V [(ba)c]
is the ﬁrst braiding operator (corresponding to an interchange of the ﬁrst two
particles in the association) then the second operator
B : V [(ab)c] −→V [(ac)b]
is accomplished via the formula B = F −1RF where the R in this formula acts
in the second vector space V [a(bc)] to apply the phases for the interchange of
b and c. These issues are illustrated in Figure 1, where the parenthesization of
the particles is indicated by circles and by also by trees. The trees can be taken
to indicate patterns of particle interaction, where two particles interact at the
branch of a binary tree to produce the particle product at the root. See also
Figure 50 for an illustration of the braiding B = F −1RF .
Figure 1. Braiding anyons.
In this scheme, vector spaces corresponding to associated strings of particle
interactions are interrelated by recoupling transformations that generalize the
mapping F indicated above. A full representation of the Artin braid group
on each space is deﬁned in terms of the local interchange phase gates and the

230
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
recoupling transformations. These gates and transformations have to satisfy
a number of identities in order to produce a well-deﬁned representation of
the braid group. These identities were discovered originally in relation to
topological quantum ﬁeld theory. In our approach the structure of phase
gates and recoupling transformations arise naturally from the structure of the
bracket model for the Jones polynomial. Thus we obtain a knot-theoretic basis
for topological quantum computing.
In modeling the quantum Hall eﬀect [94, 19, 10, 90], the braiding of quasi-
particles (collective excitations) leads to non-trival representations of the Artin
braid group. Such particles are called Anyons. The braiding in these models is
related to topological quantum ﬁeld theory. It is hoped that the mathematics
we explain here will form a bridge between theoretical models of anyons and
their applications to quantum computing.
Acknowledgements. Much of this paper is based upon joint work with
Samuel J. Lomonaco in the papers [56, 54, 58, 71, 72, 73, 63, 57, 59, 56, 61, 62].
I have woven this work into the present paper in a form that is coupled with
recent and previous work on relations with logic and with Majorana fermions.
The relations with logic stem from the following previous papers of the author
[67, 33, 45, 34, 40, 47, 51, 31, 32, 65, 64, 46, 50, 52]. These previous papers
are an exploration of the foundations of knot theory in relation to Laws of
Form, non-standard set theory, recursion and discrete dynamical systems. At
the level of discrete dynamical systems the papers are related to foundations of
physics. More work needs to be done in all these domains.
Two recent books contain material relevant to the context of this paper.
They are [87] and [86]. The interested reader should examine these approaches
to fundamental physics. It is planned to use this paper and other joint work as
a springboard for a book [55] on topological quantum information theory and
for a book that expands on the foundational issues raised in this paper and the
previous papers of the author.
§2. Knots and braids. The purpose of this section is to give a quick intro-
duction to the diagrammatic theory of knots, links and braids. A knot is an
embedding of a circle in three-dimensional space, taken up to ambient isotopy.
The problem of deciding whether two knots are isotopic is an example of a
placement problem, a problem of studying the topological forms that can be
made by placing one space inside another. In the case of knot theory we
consider the placements of a circle inside three dimensional space. There are
many applications of the theory of knots. Topology is a background for the
physical structure of real knots made from rope of cable. As a result, the ﬁeld
of practical knot tying is a ﬁeld of applied topology that existed well before
the mathematical discipline of topology arose. Then again long molecules
such as rubber molecules and DNA molecules can be knotted and linked.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
231
There have been a number of intense applications of knot theory to the study
of DNA [17] and to polymer physics [42]. Knot theory is closely related to
theoretical physics as well with applications in quantum gravity [91, 85, 53]
and many applications of ideas in physics to the topological structure of knots
themselves [39].
Quantum topology is the study and invention of topological invariants via the
use of analogies and techniques from mathematical physics. Many invariants
such as the Jones polynomial are constructed via partition functions and
generalized quantum amplitudes. As a result, one expects to see relationships
between knot theory and physics. In this paper we will study how knot theory
can be used to produce unitary representations of the braid group. Such
representations can play a fundamental role in quantum computing.
Figure 2. A knot diagram.
Figure 3. The Reidemeister moves.
That is, Two knots are regarded as equivalent if one embedding can be obtained
from the other through a continuous family of embeddings of circles in three-
space. A link is an embedding of a disjoint collection of circles, taken up to
ambient isotopy. Figure 2 illustrates a diagram for a knot. The diagram is
regarded both as a schematic picture of the knot, and as a plane graph with
extra structure at the nodes (indicating how the curve of the knot passes over
or under itself by standard pictorial conventions).
Ambient isotopy is mathematically the same as the equivalence relation
generated on diagrams by the Reidemeister moves. These moves are illustrated

232
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Figure 4. Braid generators.
in Figure 3. Each move is performed on a local part of the diagram that
is topologically identical to the part of the diagram illustrated in this ﬁgure
(these ﬁgures are representative examples of the types of Reidemeister moves)
without changing the rest of the diagram.
The Reidemeister moves are
useful in doing combinatorial topology with knots and links, notably in
working out the behaviour of knot invariants. A knot invariant is a function
deﬁned from knots and links to some other mathematical object (such as
groups or polynomials or numbers) such that equivalent diagrams are mapped
to equivalent objects (isomorphic groups, identical polynomials, identical
numbers). The Reidemeister moves are of great use for analyzing the structure
of knot invariants and they are closely related to the Artin braid group, which
we discuss below.
Figure 5. Closing braids to form knots and links.
A braid is an embedding of a collection of strands that have their ends in
two rows of points that are set one above the other with respect to a choice of
vertical. The strands are not individually knotted and they are disjoint from
one another. See Figure 4, Figure 5 and Figure 6 for illustrations of braids and

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
233
Figure 6. Borromean rings as a braid closure.
moves on braids. Braids can be multiplied by attaching the bottom row of one
braid to the top row of the other braid. Taken up to ambient isotopy, ﬁxing
the endpoints, the braids form a group under this notion of multiplication. In
Figure 4 we illustrate the form of the basic generators of the braid group, and
the form of the relations among these generators. Figure 5 illustrates how to
close a braid by attaching the top strands to the bottom strands by a collection
of parallel arcs. A key theorem of Alexander states that every knot or link can
be represented as a closed braid. Thus the theory of braids is critical to the
theory of knots and links. Figure 6 illustrates the famous Borromean Rings (a
link of three unknotted loops such that any two of the loops are unlinked) as
the closure of a braid.
Let Bn denote the Artin braid group on n strands. We recall here that Bn is
generated by elementary braids {s1, . . . , sn−1} with relations
1. sisj = sjsi for |i −j| > 1,
2. sisi+1si = si+1sisi+1 for i = 1, . . . n −2.
See Figure 4 for an illustration of the elementary braids and their relations.
Note that the braid group has a diagrammatic topological interpretation, where
a braid is an intertwining of strands that lead from one set of n points to
another set of n points. The braid generators si are represented by diagrams
where the i-th and (i + 1)-th strands wind around one another by a single
half-twist (the sense of this turn is shown in Figure 4) and all other strands
drop straight to the bottom. Braids are diagrammed vertically as in Figure 4,
and the products are taken in order from top to bottom. The product of two
braid diagrams is accomplished by adjoining the top strands of one braid to
the bottom strands of the other braid.
In Figure 4 we have restricted the illustration to the four-stranded braid
group B4. In that ﬁgure the three braid generators of B4 are shown, and then
the inverse of the ﬁrst generator is drawn. Following this, one sees the identities
s1s−1
1
= 1 (where the identity element in B4 consists in four vertical strands),
s1s2s1 = s2s1s2, and ﬁnally s1s3 = s3s1.
Braids are a key structure in mathematics. It is not just that they are a
collection of groups with a vivid topological interpretation. From the algebraic
point of view the braid groups Bn are important extensions of the symmetric

234
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
groups Sn. Recall that the symmetric group Sn of all permutations of n distinct
objects has presentation as shown below.
1. s2
i = 1 for i = 1, . . . n −1,
2. sisj = sjsi for |i −j| > 1,
3. sisi+1si = si+1sisi+1 for i = 1, . . . n −2.
Thus Sn is obtained from Bn by setting the square of each braiding generator
equal to one. We have an exact sequence of groups
1 −→Pn −→Bn −→Sn −→1
exhibiting the Artin braid group as an extension of the pure braids Pn (inducing
the identity permutation), by the symmetric group.
In the next sections we shall show how representations of the Artin braid
group are rich enough to provide a dense set of transformations in the unitary
groups. Thus the braid groups are in principle fundamental to quantum
computation and quantum information theory.
§3. Knot logic. We shall use knot and link diagrams to represent sets. More
about this point of view can be found in the author’s paper “Knot Logic” [41].
Set theory is about an asymmetric relation called membership. We write
a ∈S to say that a is a member of the set S. In this section we shall diagram
the membership relation as in Figure 7.
Figure 7. Membership.
The entities a and b that are in the relation a ∈b are diagrammed as
segments of lines or curves, with the a-curve passing underneath the b-curve.
Membership is represented by under-passage of curve segments. A curve or
segment with no curves passing underneath it is the empty set.
In the Figure 8, we indicate two sets. The ﬁrst (looking like a right-angle
bracket that we refer to as the mark) is the empty set. The second, consisting
of a mark crossing over another mark, is the set whose only member is the
empty set. We can continue this construction, building the von Neumann
construction of the natural numbers in this notation as in Figure 9.
This notation allows us to also have sets that are members of themselves as
in Figure 10, and and sets can be members of each other as in Figure 11. This
mutuality is diagrammed as topological linking. This leads to the question

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
235
Figure 8. Von Neumann 1.
Figure 9. Von Neumann 2.
beyond ﬂatland: Is there a topological interpretation for this way of looking at
set-membership?
Figure 10. Omega is a member of Omega.
Figure 11. Mutual membership.
Consider the example in Figure 12, modiﬁed from the previous one. The
link consisting of a and b in this example is not topologically linked. The two

236
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Figure 12. Cancellation.
components slide over one another and come apart. The set a remains empty,
but the set b changes from b = {a, a} to empty. This example suggests the
following interpretation.
Regard each diagram as specifying a multi-set (where more than one instance
of an element can occur), and the rule for reducing to a set with one representative
for each element is: Elements of knot sets cancel in pairs. Two knot sets are said
to be equivalent if one can be obtained from the other by a ﬁnite sequence of pair
cancellations.
This equivalence relation on knot sets is in exact accord with the ﬁrst
Reidemeister move as shown in Figure 13.
Figure 13. Reidemeister 2.
There are other topological moves, and we must examine them as well. In
fact, it is well-known that topological equivalence of knots (single circle embed-
dings), links (mutltiple circle embeddings) and tangles (arbitrary diagrammatic
embeddings with end points ﬁxed and the rule that you are not allowed to move
strings over endpoints) is generated by three basic moves (the Reidemeister
moves) as shown in Figure 14. See [39].
It is apparent that move III does not change any of the relationships in the
knot multi-sets. The line that moves just shifts and remains underneath the
other two lines. On the other hand move number one can change the self-
referential nature of the corresponding knot-set. One goes, in the ﬁrst move,
between a set that indicates self-membership to a set that does not indicate self-
membership (at the site in question). See Figure 15 This means that in knot-set
theory every set has representatives (the diagrams are the representatives of

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
237
Figure 14. Reidemeister moves.
the sets) that are members of themselves, and it has representatives that are
not members of themselves. In this domain, self-membership does not mean
inﬁnite descent. We do not insist that
a = {a}
implies that
a = {{{{. . . }}}}.
Rather, a = {a} just means that a has a little curl in its diagram. The Russell
set of all sets that are not members of themselves is meaningless in this domain.
Figure 15. Reidemeister I: Replacing self-membership with
no self-membership.
Figure 16. Trefoil is an empty knotset.

238
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Figure 17. Chain.
Figure 18. Borromean rings.
We can summarize this ﬁrst level of knot-set theory in the following two
equivalences:
1. Self-Reference: a = {b, c, . . . } ⇐⇒a = {a, b, c, . . . }
2. Pair Cancellation: S = {a, a, b, c, . . . } ⇐⇒S = {b, c, . . . }
With this mode of dealing with self-reference and multiplicity, knot-set theory
has the interpretation in terms of topological classes of diagrams. We could
imagine that the ﬂatlanders felt the need to invent three dimensional space and
topology, just so their set theory would have such an elegant interpretation.
But how elegant is this interpretation, from the point of view of topology?
Are we happy that knots are equivalent to the empty knot-set as shown in
Figure 16? For this, an extension of the theory is clearly in the waiting. We
are happy that many topologically non-trivial links correspond to non-trivial
knot-sets. In the Figure 17 , a chain link becomes a linked chain of knot-sets.
But consider the link shown in Figure 18. These rings are commonly called the
Borromean Rings. The Rings have the property that if you remove any one of
them, then the other two are topologically unlinked. They form a topological
tripartite relation. Their knot-set is described by the three equations
a = {b, b}
b = {c, c}
c = {a, a}.
Thus we see that this representative knot-set is a “scissors-paper-stone”
pattern. Each component of the Rings lies over one other component, in a
cyclic pattern. But in terms of the equivalence relation on knot sets that we
have used, the knot set for the Rings is empty (by pair cancellation).

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
239
In order to go further in the direction of topological invariants for knots and
links it is necessary to use more structure than the simple membership relation
that motivates the knots-sets. Viewed from the point of view of the diagrams
for knots and links there are a number of possible directions. For example, one
can label all the arcs of the diagram and introduce algebraic relations at each
crossing. This leads to the fundamental group and the quandle [39]. One can
also label all the arcs of the diagram from an index set and view this labeling
as a state in analogous to a state of a physical system in statistical mechanics.
Then evaluations of these states and summations of the evaluations over all
the states give the class of knot invariants called quantum invariants for knots
and links [39]. These include the Jones polynomial and its generalizations.
In this paper we will explain and use the Jones polynomial and the so-called
colored Jones polynomials. See Section 17 for this development. The purpose
of this section has been to introduce the subject of knot and link diagrams
in the context of thinking about foundations of mathematics. However, it
is worthwhile adding structure to the knot set theory so that it can at least
see the higher order linking of the Borommean rings. We do this in the next
subsection by keeping track of the order in which sets are encountered along
the arc of a given component, and by keeping track of both membership and
co-membership where we shall say that A is co-member of B if B is a member
of A. As one moves along an arc one sequentially encounters members and
co-members.
3.1. Ordered knot sets. Take a walk along a given component. Write down
the sequence of memberships and belongings that you encounter on the walk
as shown in Figure 19.
Figure 19. An ordered knot set.
In this notation, we record the order in which memberships and “co-member-
ships” (a is a co-member of b if and only if b is a member of a) occur along
the strand of a given component of the knot-set. We do not choose a direction
of traverse, so it is ok to reverse the total order of the contents of a given
component and to take this order up to cyclic permutation. Thus we now have
the representation of the Borromean Rings as shown in Figure 20.
With this extra information in front of us, it is clear that we should not allow
the pair cancellations unless they occur in direct order, with no intervening
co-memberships. Lets look at the revised Reidemeister moves as in Figure 21.

240
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Figure 20. Borromean rings as ordered knot set.
Figure 21. Reidemeister moves for ordered knot sets.
As is clear from the above diagrams, the Reidemeister moves tell us that we
should impose some speciﬁc equivalences on these ordered knot sets:
1. We can erase any appearance of a[a] or of [a]a inside the set for a.
2. If bb occurs in a and [a][a] occurs in b, then they can both be erased.
3. If bc is in a, ac is in b and a[b] is in c, then we can reverse the order of
each of these two element strings.
We take these three rules (and a couple of variants suggested by the diagrams)
as the notion of equivalence of ordered knot-sets. One can see that the ordered
knot-set for the Borromean rings is non-trivial in this equivalence relation.
In this sense we have a a proof that the Borromean rings are linked, based
on their scissors, paper, stone structure. The only proof that I know for the

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
241
non-triviality of the Borommean ordered knot set uses the concept of coloring
discussed in the next subsection.
Knots and links are represented by the diagrams themselves, taken up the
equivalence relation generated by the Reidemeister moves. This calculus of
diagrams is quite complex and it is remarkable, the number and depth of
diﬀerent mathematical approaches that are used to study this calculus and its
properties. Studying knots and links is rather like studying number theory. The
objects of study themselves can be constructed directly, and form a countable
set. The problems that seem to emanate naturally from these objects are
challenging and fascinating. For more about knot-sets, see [40]
3.2. Quandles and colorings of knot diagrams. There is an approach to
studying knots and links that is very close to our ordered knot sets, but starts
from a rather diﬀerent premise. In this approach each arc of the diagram
receives a label or “color”. An arc of the diagram is a continuous curve in the
diagram that starts at one under crossing and ends at another under crossing.
For example, the trefoil diagram is related to this algebra as shown in Figure 22.
Figure 22. The quandle for the trefoil knot.
Each arc corresponds to an element of a “color algebra” IQ(T) where T
denotes the trefoil knot. We have thatIQ(T) is generated by colors a,b and
c with the relations c ∗b = a, a ∗c = b, b ∗a = c, a ∗a = a. Each of these
relations is a description of one of the crossings in T. These relations are
speciﬁc to the trefoil knot. If we take on an algebra of this sort, we want its
coloring structure to be invariant under the Reidemeister moves. This implies
the following global relations:
x ∗x = x
(x ∗y) ∗y = x
(x ∗y) ∗z = (x ∗z) ∗(y ∗z)
for any x, y and z in the algebra (set of colors) IQ(T). An algebra that satisﬁes
these rules is called an Involutory Quandle (See [39]), hence the initials IQ.
These global relations are really expressions of the concept of self-crossing and
iterated crossing in the multiplicity of crossings that are available in a calculus
of boundaries where the notation indicates the choice of interpretation, where

242
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
one boundary is seen to cross (over) the other boundary. If we adopt these
global relations for the algebra IQ(K) for any knot or link diagram K, then
two diagrams that are related by the Reidemeister moves will have isomorphic
algebras. They will also inherit colorings of their arcs from one another. Thus
the calculation of the algebra IQ(K) for a knot or link K has the potentiality
for bringing forth deep topological structure from the diagram.
In the case of the trefoil, one can see that the algebra actually closes at the
set of elements a, b, c. We have the complete set of relations
c ∗b = a, a ∗c = b, b ∗a = c, a ∗a = a, a ∗a = a, b ∗b = b, c ∗c = c,
forming the three-color quandle. Three-coloring turns out to be quite useful
for many knots and links. Thus we have seen that the trefoil knot is knotted
due to its having a non-trivial three-coloring. By the same token, one can
see that the Borommean rings are linked by checking that they do not have
a non-trivial three-coloring! This fact is easy to check by directly trying to
color the rings. That uncolorability implies that the rings are linked follows
from the fact that there is a non-trivial coloring of three unlinked rings (color
each ring by a separate color). This coloring of the unlinked rings would then
induce a coloring of the Borommean rings. Since there is no such coloring, the
Borommean rings must be linked.
The ordered knot set corresponding to a link can be colored or not colored
in the same manner as a link diagram. The spaces between the letters in the
ordered code of the knot set can be assigned colors in the same way as the
arcs of a link diagram. In this way, the coloring proofs can be transferred to
ordered knot sets in the case of links. We leave the details of this analysis of
link sets to another paper.
Knot theory can be seen as a natural articulation not of three dimensional
space (a perfectly good interpretation) but of the properties of interactions of
boundaries. Each boundary can be regarded as that boundary transgressed by
another boundary. The choice of who is the transgressed and who transgresses
is the choice of a crossing, the choice of membership in the context of knot-set
theory.
§4. Fermions, Majorana fermions and algebraic knot sets. In the last part of
our discussion of knot sets we added order and co-membership to the structure.
In this way of thinking, the knot set is an ordered sequence of memberships
and co-memberships that are encountered as one moves along the strand of
that part of the weave. Lets take this view, but go back to the ordinary knot
sets that just catalog memberships. Then the knot set is a ordered list of the
memberships that are encountered along the weave. For example, in Figure 17
we have a = {b}, b = {a, c}, c = {b, d}, c = {c}, and this would become the
algebraic statements a = {b}, b = {ac}, c = {bd}, c = {c}, where we remove
the parentheses and write the contents of each set as a algebraic product. We

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
243
retain the brackets in order to continue to diﬀerentiate the set from its contents.
Then we would have that {bccd} = {bd} since repetitions are eliminated, and
we see that the rule x2 = 1 should be obeyed by this algebra of products of set
members.
What shall we do about a = {bcdc}? We could decide that xy = yx for all x
and y in a given knot set. This commutative law would disregard the ordering,
and we would have {bcdc} = {bccd} = {bd}. The simplest algebraic version
of the knot sets is to have a commutative algebra with x2 = 1 for all members.
Then we can deﬁne XΔY for sets X = {α} and Y = {} by the equation
XΔY = {α}
where α represents the product of the members of X and Y taken together.
The operation X ΔY represents the union of knot sets and corresponds to
exclusive or in standard set theory.
For example, suppose
A = {yx}, B = {zy}, C = {xz}.
Then we have A2 = B2 = C 2 = {1} where it is understood that {1} = {}
represents the empty set. (That is, in the algebra 1 represents the empty word.)
Furthermore we have AB = C, BC = A, CA = B. The relations in this
example are very close to the quaternions. This example suggests that we could
change the algebraic structure so that members satisfy xy = −yx, adding a
notion of sign to the algebraic representation of the knot sets. We then get
the pattern of the quaternion group: A2 = B2 = C 2 = ABC = −1 where −1
denotes the “negative” empty set.
By introducing the Cliﬀord algebra with x2 = 1 and xy = −yx for generators,
we bring the knot sets into direct correspondence with an algebra of Majorana
fermions. The generators of this Cliﬀord algebra represent fermions that are
their own anti-particles. For a long time it has been conjectured that neutrinos
may be Majorana fermions. More recently, it has been suggested that Majorana
fermions may occur in collective electronic phenomena [74, 28, 8, 26, 70].
There is a natural association of fermion algebra to knot sets. In order
to explain this association, we ﬁrst give a short exposition of the algebra of
fermion operators. In a standard collection of fermion operators m1, . . . , mk
one has that each mi is a linear operator on a Hilbert space with an adjoint
operator m†
i (corresponding to the anti-particle for the particle created by mi)
and relations
m2
i = 0,
mim†
i + m†
i mi = 1,
mimj + mjmi = 0
when i ̸= j.

244
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
There is another brand of Fermion algebra where we have generators c1, . . . ck
and c2
i = 1 while cicj = −cjci for all i ̸= j. These are the Majorana fermions.
There is a algebraic translation between the fermion algebra and Majorana
fermion algebra. Given two Majorana fermions a and b with a2 = b2 = 1 and
ab = −ba, deﬁne
m = (a + ib)/
√
2
and
m† = (a −ib)/
√
2.
It is then easy to see that a2 = b2 = 1 and ab = −ba imply that m and m† form
a fermion in the sense that m2 = (m†)2 = 0 and mm† + m†m = 1. Thus pairs
of Majorana fermions can be construed as ordinary fermions. Conversely, if
m is an ordinary fermion, then formal real and imaginary parts of m yield a
mathematical pair of Majorana fermions. A chain of electrons in a nano-wire,
conceived in this way can give rise to a chain of Majorana fermions with
a non-localized pair corresponding to the distant ends of the chain. The
non-local nature of this pair is promising for creating topologically protected
qubits, and there is at this writing an experimental search for evidence for the
existence of such end-eﬀect Majorana fermions.
We now see that it is exactly the Majorana fermion algebra that matches the
properties of the knot sets. Here is an example that shows how the topology
comes in. Let x, y, z be three Majorana fermions. Let A = yx, B = zy, C = xz.
We have already seen that A, B, C represent the quaternions. Now deﬁne
s1 = (1 + A)/
√
2, s2 = (1 + B)/
√
2, s3 = (1 + C)/
√
2.
It is easy to see that si and sj satisfy the braiding relation for any i ̸= j. For
example, here is the veriﬁcation for i = 1, j = 2.
s1s2s1 = (1/2
√
2)(1 + A)(1 + B)(1 + A)
= (1/2
√
2)(1 + A + B + AB)(1 + A)
= (1/2
√
2)(1 + A + B + AB + A + A2 + BA + ABA)
= (1/2
√
2)(1 + A + B + AB + A −1 −AB + B)
= (1/
√
2)(A + B).
Similarly,
s2s1s2 = (1/2
√
2)(1 + B)(1 + A)(1 + B)
= (1/2
√
2)(1 + A + B + BA)(1 + B)
= (1/2
√
2)(1 + A + B + BA + B + AB + B2 + BAB)
= (1/2
√
2)(1 + A + B + BA + B −BA −1 + A)
= (1/
√
2)(A + B).

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
245
Thus
s1s2s1 = s2s1s2,
and so a natural braid group representation arises from the Majorana fermions.
This braid group representation is signiﬁcant for quantum computing as we
shall see in Section 7. For the purpose of this discussion, the braid group
representation shows that the Cliﬀord algebraic representation for knot sets is
related to topology at more than one level. The relation x2 = 1 for generators
makes the individual sets, taken as products of generators, invariant under the
Reidemeister moves (up to a global sign). But braiding invariance of certain
linear combinations of sets is a relationship with knotting at a second level.
This multiple relationship certainly deserves more thought. We will make one
more remark here, and reserve further analysis for a subsequent paper.
These braiding operators can be seen to act on the vector space over the
complex numbers that is spanned by the fermions x, y, z. To see how this
works, consider
s = 1 + yx
√
2
,
T(p) = sps−1 = (1 + yx
√
2
)p(1 −yx
√
2
),
and verify that T(x) = y and T(y) = −x. Now view Figure 23 where we have
illustrated a topological interpretation for the braiding of two fermions. In the
topological interpretation the two fermions are connected by a ﬂexible belt. On
interchange, the belt becomes twisted by 2	. In the topological interpretation
a twist of 2	 corresponds to a phase change of −1. (For more information on
this topological interpretation of 2	 rotation for fermions, see [39].) Without
a further choice it is not evident which particle of the pair should receive the
phase change. The topology alone tells us only the relative change of phase
between the two particles. The Cliﬀord algebra for Majorana fermions makes
a speciﬁc choice in the matter and in this way ﬁxes the representation of the
braiding.
Finally, we remark that linear combinations of products in the Cliﬀord
algebra can be regarded as superpositions of the knot sets. Thus xy + xz is
a superposition of the sets with members {x, y} and{x, z}. Superposition of
sets suggests that we are creating a species of quantum set theory and indeed
Cliﬀord algebra based quantum set theories have been suggested (see [18]) by
David Finkelstein and others. It may come as a surprise to a quantum set
theorist to ﬁnd that knot theoretic topology is directly related to this subject.
It is also clear that this Cliﬀord algebraic quantum set theory should be related
to our previous constructions for quantum knots [58, 71, 72, 73, 63]. This
requires more investigation, and it suggests that knot theory and the theory of
braids occupy a fundamental place in the foundations of quantum mechanics.

246
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Figure 23. Braiding action on a pair of fermions.
§5. Laws of Form. In this section we discuss a formalism due the G. Spencer-
Brown [92] that is often called the “calculus of indications”. This calculus is a
study of mathematical foundations with a topological notation based on one
symbol, the mark:
.
This single symbol represents a distinction between its own inside and outside.
As is evident from Fgure 24, the mark is regarded as a shorthand for a rectangle
drawn in the plane and dividing the plane into the regions inside and outside
the rectangle.
Figure 24. Inside and outside.
The reason we introduce this notation is that in the calculus of indications
the mark can interact with itself in two possible ways. The resulting formalism
becomes a version of Boolean arithmetic, but fundamentally simpler than
the usual Boolean arithmetic of 0 and 1 with its two binary operations and
one unary operation (negation). In the calculus of indications one takes a
step in the direction of simplicity, and also a step in the direction of physics.
The patterns of this mark and its self-interaction match those of a Majorana
fermion as discussed in the previous section. A Majorana fermion is a particle

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
247
that is its own anti-particle. [74]. We will later see, in this paper, that by adding
braiding to the calculus of indications we arrive at the Fibonacci model, that
can in principle support quantum computing.
In the previous section we described Majorana fermions in terms of their
algebra of creation and annihilation operators. Here we describe the particle
directly in terms of its interactions. This is part of a general scheme called
“fusion rules” [76] that can be applied to discrete particle interacations. A
fusion rule represents all of the diﬀerent particle interactions in the form of a
set of equations. The bare bones of the Majorana fermion consist in a particle
P such that P can interact with itself to produce a neutral particle ∗or produce
itself P. Thus the possible interactions are
PP −→∗
and
PP −→P.
This is the bare minimum that we shall need. The fusion rule is
P2 = 1 + P.
This represents the fact that P can interact with itself to produce the neutral
particle (represented as 1 in the fusion rule) or itself (represented by P in the
fusion rule). We shall come back to the combinatorics related to this fusion
equation.
Is there a linguistic particle that is its own anti-particle? Certainly we have
∼∼Q = Q
for any proposition Q (in Boolean logic). And so we might write
∼∼−→∗
where ∗is a neutral linguistic particle, an identity operator so that
∗Q = Q
for any proposition Q. But in the normal use of negation there is no way that
the negation sign combines with itself to produce itself. This appears to ruin
the analogy between negation and the Majorana fermion. Remarkably, the
calculus of indications provides a context in which we can say exactly that a
certain logical particle, the mark, can act as negation and can interact with
itself to produce itself.
In the calculus of indications patterns of non-intersecting marks (i.e. non-
intersecting rectangles) are called expressions. For example in Figure 25 we see
how patterns of boxes correspond to patterns of marks.
In Figure 25, we have illustrated both the rectangle and the marked version
of the expression. In an expression you can say deﬁnitively of any two marks
whether one is or is not inside the other. The relationship between two marks is

248
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Figure 25. Boxes and marks.
either that one is inside the other, or that neither is inside the other. These two
conditions correspond to the two elementary expressions shown in Figure 26.
Figure 26. Translation between boxes and marks.
The mathematics in Laws of Form begins with two laws of transformation
about these two basic expressions. Symbolically, these laws are:
1. Calling:
=
,
2. Crossing:
= .
The equals sign denotes a replacement step that can be performed on instances
of these patterns (two empty marks that are adjacent or one mark surrounding
an empty mark). In the ﬁrst of these equations two adjacent marks condense
to a single mark, or a single mark expands to form two adjacent marks. In
the second equation two marks, one inside the other, disappear to form the
unmarked state indicated by nothing at all. That is, two nested marks can be
replaced by an empty word in this formal system. Alternatively, the unmarked
state can be replaced by two nested marks. These equations give rise to a natural
calculus, and the mathematics can begin. For example, any expression can be
reduced uniquely to either the marked or the unmarked state. The following
example illustrates the method:
=
=
=
=
.
The general method for reduction is to locate marks that are at the deepest
places in the expression (depth is deﬁned by counting the number of inward
crossings of boundaries needed to reach the given mark). Such a deepest mark
must be empty and it is either surrounded by another mark, or it is adjacent to
an empty mark. In either case a reduction can be performed by either calling
or crossing.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
249
Laws of Form begins with the following statement. “We take as given the
idea of a distinction and the idea of an indication, and that it is not possible
to make an indication without drawing a distinction. We take therefore the
form of distinction for the form.” Then the author makes the following two
statements (laws):
1. The value of a call made again is the value of the call.
2. The value of a crossing made again is not the value of the crossing.
The two symbolic equations above correspond to these statements. First
examine the law of calling. It says that the value of a repeated name is the
value of the name. In the equation
=
one can view either mark as the name of the state indicated by the outside of
the other mark. In the other equation
=
.
the state indicated by the outside of a mark is the state obtained by crossing
from the state indicated on the inside of the mark. Since the marked state is
indicated on the inside, the outside must indicate the unmarked state. The Law
of Crossing indicates how opposite forms can ﬁt into one another and vanish
into nothing, or how nothing can produce opposite and distinct forms that ﬁt
one another, hand in glove. The same interpretation yields the equation
=
where the left-hand side is seen as an instruction to cross from the unmarked
state, and the right hand side is seen as an indicator of the marked state.
The mark has a double carry of meaning. It can be seen as an operator,
transforming the state on its inside to a diﬀerent state on its outside, and it
can be seen as the name of the marked state. That combination of meanings is
compatible in this interpretation.
From the calculus of indications, one moves to algebra. Thus
A
stands for the two possibilities
=
←→A =
=
←→A =
In all cases we have
A
= A.

250
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
By the time we articulate the algebra, the mark can take the role of a unary
operator
A −→A .
But it retains its role as an element in the algebra. Thus begins algebra with
respect to this non-numerical arithmetic of forms. The primary algebra that
emerges is a subtle precursor to Boolean algebra. One can translate back and
forth between elementary logic and primary algebra:
1.
←→T
2.
←→F
3.
A ←→∼A
4. AB ←→A ∨B
5.
A
B
←→A ∧B
6. A B ←→A ⇒B
The calculus of indications and the primary algebra form an eﬃcient system
for working with basic symbolic logic.
By reformulating basic symbolic logic in terms of the calculus of indications,
we have a ground in which negation is represented by the mark and the mark is
also interpreted as a value (a truth value for logic) and these two intepretations
are compatible with one another in the formalism. The key to this compatibility
is the choice to represent the value “false” by a literally unmarked state in the
notational plane. With this the empty mark (a mark with nothing on its inside)
can be interpreted as the negation of “false” and hence represents “true”. The
mark interacts with itself to produce itself (calling) and the mark interacts
with itself to produce nothing (crossing). We have expanded the conceptual
domain of negation so that it satisﬁes the mathematical pattern of an abstract
Majorana fermion.
Another way to indicate these two interactions symbolically is to use a
box,for the marked state and a blank space for the unmarked state. Then one
has two modes of interaction of a box with itself:
1. Adjacency:
and
2. Nesting:
.
With this convention we take the adjacency interaction to yield a single box,
and the nesting interaction to produce nothing:
=
=

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
251
We take the notational opportunity to denote nothing by an asterisk (*). The
syntatical rules for operating the asterisk are Thus the asterisk is a stand-in for
no mark at all and it can be erased or placed wherever it is convenient to do so.
Thus
= ∗.
At this point the reader can appreciate what has been done if he returns to
the usual form of symbolic logic. In that form we that
∼∼X = X
for all logical objects (propositions or elements of the logical algebra) X. We
can summarize this by writing
∼∼=
as a symbolic statement that is outside the logical formalism. Furthermore,
one is committed to the interpretation of negation as an operator and not as
an operand. The calculus of indications provides a formalism where the mark
(the analog of negation in that domain) is both a value and an object, and so
can act on itself in more than one way.
The Majorana particle is its own anti-particle. It is exactly at this point
that physics meets logical epistemology.
Negation as logical entity is its
own anti-particle. Wittgenstein says (Tractatus [96] 4.0621) “. . . the sign ‘∼’
corresponds to nothing in reality.” And he goes on to say (Tractatus 5.511)
“How can all-embracing logic which mirrors the world use such special catches
and manipulations? Only because all these are connected into an inﬁnitely ﬁne
network, the great mirror.” For Wittgenstein in the Tractatus, the negation sign
is part of the mirror making it possible for thought to reﬂect reality through
combinations of signs. These remarks of Wittgenstein are part of his early
picture theory of the relationship of formalism and the world. In our view,
the world and the formalism we use to represent the world are not separate.
The observer and the mark are (formally) identical. A path is opened between
logic and physics.
The visual iconics that create via the boxes or half-boxes of the calculus of
indications a model for a logical Majorana fermion can also be seen in terms
of cobordisms of surfaces. View Figure 27. There the boxes have become
circles and the interactions of the circles have been displayed as evolutions in an
extra dimension, tracing out surfaces in three dimensions. The condensation
of two circles to one is a simple cobordism betweem two circles and a single
circle. The cancellation of two circles that are concentric can be seen as the
right-hand lower cobordism in this ﬁgure with a level having a continuum of
critical points where the two circles cancel. A simpler cobordism is illustrated
above on the right where the two circles are not concentric, but nevertheless
are cobordant to the empty circle. Another way of putting this is that two
topological closed strings can interact by cobordism to produce a single string

252
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
or to cancel one another. Thus a simple circle can be a topological model for a
Majorana fermion.
Figure 27. Calling, crossing and cobordism.
In Sections 15 and 16 we detail how the Fibonacci model for anyonic
quantum computing [68, 81] can be constructed by using a version of the two-
stranded bracket polynomial and a generalization of Penrose spin networks.
This is a fragment of the Temperley-Lieb recoupling theory [41].
5.1. The square root of minus one is an eigenform and a clock. So far we
have seen that the mark can represent the fusion rules for a Majorana fermion
since it can interact with itself to produce either itself or nothing. But we have
not yet seen the anti-commuting fermion algebra emerge from this context of
making a distinction. Remarkably, this algebra does emerge when one looks at
the mark recursively.
Consider the transformation
F (X) = X .
If we iterate it and take the limit we ﬁnd
G = F (F (F (F (. . . )))) =
. . .
an inﬁnite nest of marks satisfying the equation
G = G .
With G = F (G), I say that G is an eigenform for the transformation F . See
[47] for more about this point of view. See Figure 28 for an illustration of
this nesting with boxes and an arrow that points inside the reentering mark
to indicate its appearance inside itself. If one thinks of the mark itself as a
Boolean logical value, then extending the language to include the reentering
mark G goes beyond the boolean. We will not detail here how this extension
can be related to non-standard logics, but refer the reader to [40]. Taken at face

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
253
value the reentering mark cannot be just marked or just unmarked, for by its
very deﬁnition, if it is marked then it is unmarked and if it is unmarked then it is
marked. In this sense the reentering mark has the form of a self-contradicting
paradox. There is no paradox since we do not have to permanently assign
it to either value. The simplest interpretation of the reentering mark is that
it is temporal and that it represents an oscillation between markedness and
unmarkedness. In numerical terms it is a discrete dynamical system oscillating
between +1 (marked) and −1 (not marked).
...
=
Figure 28.
With the reentering mark in mind consider now the transformation on real
numbers given by
T(x) = −1/x.
This has the ﬁxed points i and −i, the complex numbers whose squares are
negative unity. But lets take a point of view more directly associated with the
analogy of the recursive mark. Begin by starting with a simple periodic process
that is associated directly with the classical attempt to solve for i as a solution
to a quadratic equation. We take the point of view that solving x2 = ax + b is
the same (when x ̸= 0) as solving
x = a + b/x,
and hence is a matter of ﬁnding a ﬁxed point. In the case of i we have
x2 = −1
and so desire a ﬁxed point
x = −1/x.
There are no real numbers that are ﬁxed points for this operator and so we
consider the oscillatory process generated by
T(x) = −1/x.
The ﬁxed point would satisfy
i = −1/i
and multiplying, we get that
ii = −1.

254
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
On the other hand the iteration of T yields
1, T(1) = −1, T(T(1)) = +1, T(T(T(1))) = −1, +1, −1, +1, −1, . . . .
The square root of minus one is a perfect example of an eigenform that occurs
in a new and wider domain than the original context in which its recursive
process arose. The process has no ﬁxed point in the original domain.
Looking at the oscillation between +1 and −1, we see that there are naturally
two phase-shifted viewpoints. We denote these two views of the oscillation by
[+1, −1] and[−1, +1]. These viewpoints correspond to whether one regards
the oscillation at time zero as starting with +1 or with −1. See Figure 29. We
shall let the word iterant stand for an undisclosed alternation or ambiguity
between +1 and −1. There are two iterant views: [+1, −1] and [−1, +1] for
the basic process we are examining. Given an iterant [a, b], we can think of
[b, a] as the same process with a shift of one time step. The two iterant views,
[+1, −1] and [−1, +1], will become the square roots of negative unity, i and
−i.
... +1, -1, +1, -1, +1, -1, +1, -1, ...
[-1,+1]
[+1,-1]
Figure 29.
We introduce a temporal shift operator  such that
[a, b] = [b, a]
and
 = 1
for any iterant [a, b], so that concatenated observations can include a time step
of one-half period of the process
. . . abababab . . . .
We combine iterant views term-by-term as in
[a, b][c, d] = [ac, bd].
We now deﬁne i by the equation
i = [1, −1].
This makes i both a value and an operator that takes into account a step in
time.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
255
We calculate
ii = [1, −1][1, −1] = [1, −1][−1, 1] = [−1, −1] = −1.
Thus we have constructed a square root of minus one by using an iterant
viewpoint. In this view i represents a discrete oscillating temporal process and
it is an eigenform for T(x) = −1/x, participating in the algebraic structure of
the complex numbers. In fact the corresponding algebra structure of linear
combinations [a, b]+[c, d] is isomorphic with 2×2 matrix algebra and iterants
can be used to construct n × n matrix algebra. We treat this generalization
elsewhere [46, 50].
Now we can make contact with the algebra of the Majorana fermions. Let
e = [1, −1]. Then we have e2 = [1, 1] = 1 and e = [1, −1] = [−1, 1] = −e.
Thus we have
e2 = 1,
2 = 1,
and
e = −e.
We can regard e and  as a fundamental pair of Majorana fermions. This
is a formal correspondence, but it is striking how this Marjorana fermion
algebra emerges from an analysis of the recursive nature of the reentering mark,
while the fusion algebra for the Majorana fermion emerges from the distinctive
properties of the mark itself. We see how the seeds of the fermion algebra live
in this extended logical context.
Note how the development of the algebra works at this point. We have that
(e)2 = −1
and so regard this as a natural construction of the square root of minus one
in terms of the phase synchronization of the clock that is the iteration of the
reentering mark. Once we have the square root of minus one it is natural to
introduce another one and call this one i, letting it commute with the other
operators. Then we have the (ie)2 = +1 and so we have a triple of Majorana
fermions:
a = e, b = , c = ie
and we can construct the quaternions
I = ba = e, J = cb = ie, K = ac = i.
With the quaternions in place, we have the braiding operators
A =
1
√
2
(1 + I ), B =
1
√
2
(1 + J), C =
1
√
2
(1 + K),
and can continue as we did in Section 4.
There is one more comment that is appropriate for this section. Recall from
Section 4 that a pair of Majorana fermions can be assembled to form a single
standard fermion. In our case we have the two Marjorana fermions e and 

256
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
and the corresponding standard fermion annihilation and creation operators
are then given by the formulas below.
 = (e + i)/
√
2
and
† = (e −i)/
√
2.
Since e represents a spatial view of the basic discrete oscillation and  is the
time-shift operator for this oscillation it is of interest to note that the standard
fermion built by these two can be regarded as a quantum of spacetime, retrieved
from the way that we decomposed the process into space and time. Since all
this is initially built in relation to extending the Boolean logic of the mark to a
non-boolean recursive context, there is further analysis needed of the relation
of the physics and the logic. This will be taken up in a separate paper.
5.2. Relativity and the Dirac equation. Starting with the algebra structure
of e and  and adding a commuting square root of −1, i, we have constructed
fermion algebra and quaternion algebra. We can now go further and construct
the Dirac equation. This may sound circular, in that the fermions arise from
solving the Dirac equation, but in fact the algebra underlying this equation
has the same properties as the creation and annihilation algebra for fermions,
so it is by way of this algebra that we will come to the Dirac equation. If the
speed of light is equal to 1 (by convention), then energy E, momentum p and
mass m are related by the (Einstein) equation
E2 = p2 + m2.
Dirac constructed his equation by looking for an algebraic square root of
p2 + m2 so that he could have a linear operator for E that would take the
same role as the Hamiltonian in the Schrodinger equation. We will get to this
operator by ﬁrst taking the case where p is a scalar (we use one dimension
of space and one dimension of time. Let E = αp + m where α and  are
elements of a a possibly non-commutative, associative algebra. Then
E2 = α2p2 + 2m2 + pm(α + α).
Hence we will satisﬁy E2 = p2 + m2 if α2 = 2 = 1 and α + α = 0. This
is our familiar Cliﬀord algebra pattern and we can use the iterant algebra
generated by e and  if we wish. Then, because the quantum operator for
momentum is −i∂/∂x and the operator for energy is i∂/∂t, we have the Dirac
equation
i∂/∂t = −iα∂/∂x + m.
Let
O = i∂/∂t + iα∂/∂x −m
so that the Dirac equation takes the form
O(x, t) = 0.
Now note that
Oei(px−Et) = (E −αp + m)ei(px−Et)

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
257
and that if
U = (E −αp + m)α = αE + p + αm,
then
U 2 = −E2 + p2 + m2 = 0,
from which it follows that
 = Uei(px−Et)
is a (plane wave) solution to the Dirac equation.
In fact, this calculation suggests that we should multiply the operator O by
α on the right, obtaining the operator
D = Oα = iα∂/∂t + i∂/∂x + αm,
and the equivalent Dirac equation
D = 0.
In fact for the speciﬁc  above we will now have D(Uei(px−Et)) = U 2ei(px−Et) =
0. This way of reconﬁguring the Dirac equation in relation to nilpotent algebra
elements U is due to Peter Rowlands [86]. We will explore this relationship
with the Rowlands formulation in a separate paper.
Return now to the original version of the Dirac equation.
i∂/∂t = −iα∂/∂x + m.
We can rewrite this as
∂/∂t = α∂/∂x + im.
We see that if i is real, then we can write a fully real version of the Dirac
equation. For example, we can take the equation
∂/∂t = e∂/∂x + em.
where we represent
e =
 −1
0
0
1

and
 =
 0
1
1
0

as matrix versions of the iterants associated with the reentering mark. For the
case of one dimension of space and one dimension of time, this is the Majorana
representation for the Dirac equation (compare [65]). Since the equation can
have real solutions, these are their own complex conjugates and correspond
to particles that are their own anti-particles. As the reader can check, the
corresponding Rowland nilpotent U is given by the formula
U = −iE + iep + em.

258
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
For eﬀective application to the topics in this paper, one needs to use two
dimensions of space and one dimension of time. This will be explored in
another paper. In the present paper we have given a picture of how, starting
with the mark as a logical and recursive particle, one can tell a story that reaches
the Dirac equation and its algebra.
§6. Quantum mechanics and quantum computation. We shall quickly indi-
cate the basic principles of quantum mechanics. The quantum information
context encapsulates a concise model of quantum theory:
The initial state of a quantum process is a vector |v⟩in a complex vector
space H. Measurement returns basis elements  of H with probability
|⟨ |v⟩|2/⟨v |v⟩
where ⟨v |w⟩= v†w with v† the conjugate transpose of v. A physical process
occurs in steps |v⟩−→U |v⟩= |Uv⟩where U is a unitary linear transformation.
Note that since ⟨Uv |Uw⟩= ⟨v |U †U|w⟩= ⟨v |w⟩= when U is unitary, it
follows that probability is preserved in the course of a quantum process.
One of the details required for any speciﬁc quantum problem is the nature
of the unitary evolution. This is speciﬁed by knowing appropriate information
about the classical physics that supports the phenomena. This information is
used to choose an appropriate Hamiltonian through which the unitary operator
is constructed via a correspondence principle that replaces classical variables
with appropriate quantum operators. (In the path integral approach one needs
a Langrangian to construct the action on which the path integral is based.)
One needs to know certain aspects of classical physics to solve any speciﬁc
quantum problem.
A key concept in the quantum information viewpoint is the notion of the
superposition of states. If a quantum system has two distinct states |v⟩and
|w⟩, then it has inﬁnitely many states of the form a|v⟩+ b|w⟩where a and b
are complex numbers taken up to a common multiple. States are “really” in
the projective space associated with H. There is only one superposition of a
single state |v⟩with itself. On the other hand, it is most convenient to regard
the states |v⟩and |w⟩as vectors in a vector space. We than take it as part of
the procedure of dealing with states to normalize them to unit length. Once
again, the superposition of a state with itself is again itself.
Dirac [15] introduced the “bra-(c)-ket” notation ⟨A |B⟩= A†B for the inner
product of complex vectors A, B ∈H. He also separated the parts of the
bracket into the bra ⟨A | and the ket |B⟩. Thus
⟨A |B⟩= ⟨A | |B⟩
In this interpretation, the ket |B⟩is identiﬁed with the vector B ∈H, while the
bra < A | is regarded as the element dual to A in the dual space H ∗. The dual
element to A corresponds to the conjugate transpose A† of the vector A, and

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
259
the inner product is expressed in conventional language by the matrix product
A†B (which is a scalar since B is a column vector). Having separated the bra
and the ket, Dirac can write the “ket-bra” |A⟩⟨B | = AB†. In conventional
notation, the ket-bra is a matrix, not a scalar, and we have the following
formula for the square of P = |A⟩⟨B | :
P2 = |A⟩⟨B ||A⟩⟨B | = A(B†A)B† = (B†A)AB† = ⟨B |A⟩P.
The standard example is a ket-bra P = |A ⟩⟨A| where ⟨A |A⟩= 1 so that
P2 = P. Then P is a projection matrix, projecting to the subspace of H that is
spanned by the vector |A⟩. In fact, for any vector |B⟩we have
P|B⟩= |A⟩⟨A | |B⟩= |A⟩⟨A |B⟩= ⟨A |B⟩|A⟩.
If {|C1⟩, |C2⟩, . . . |Cn⟩} is an orthonormal basis for H, and
Pi = |Ci ⟩⟨Ci|,
then for any vector |A⟩we have
|A⟩= ⟨C1 |A⟩|C1⟩+ · · · + ⟨Cn |A⟩|Cn⟩.
Hence
⟨B |A⟩= ⟨B |C1⟩⟨C1 |A⟩+ · · · + ⟨B |Cn⟩⟨Cn |A⟩
One wants the probability of starting in state |A⟩and ending in state |B⟩.
The probability for this event is equal to |⟨B |A⟩|2. This can be reﬁned if we
have more knowledge. If the intermediate states |Ci⟩are a complete set of
orthonormal alternatives then we can assume that ⟨Ci |Ci⟩= 1 for each i and
that Σi|Ci⟩⟨Ci| = 1. This identity now corresponds to the fact that 1 is the
sum of the probabilities of an arbitrary state being projected into one of these
intermediate states.
If there are intermediate states between the intermediate states this formu-
lation can be continued until one is summing over all possible paths from A
to B. This becomes the path integral expression for the amplitude ⟨B|A⟩.
6.1. What is a quantum computer? A quantum computer is, abstractly, a
composition U of unitary transformations, together with an initial state and a
choice of measurement basis. One runs the computer by repeatedly initializing
it, and then measuring the result of applying the unitary transformation U to
the initial state. The results of these measurements are then analyzed for the
desired information that the computer was set to determine. The key to using
the computer is the design of the initial state and the design of the composition
of unitary transformations. The reader should consult [79] for more speciﬁc
examples of quantum algorithms.
Let H be a given ﬁnite dimensional vector space over the complex numbers C.
Let
{W0, W1, . . . , Wn}

260
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
be an orthonormal basis for H so that with |i⟩:= |Wi⟩denoting Wi and ⟨i|
denoting the conjugate transpose of |i⟩, we have
⟨i|j⟩= ij
where ij denotes the Kronecker delta (equal to one when its indices are equal
to one another, and equal to zero otherwise). Given a vector v in H let
|v|2 := ⟨v|v⟩. Note that ⟨i|v is the i-th coordinate of v.
An measurement of v returns one of the coordinates |i⟩of v with probability
|⟨i|v|2. This model of measurement is a simple instance of the situation with a
quantum mechanical system that is in a mixed state until it is observed. The
result of observation is to put the system into one of the basis states.
When the dimension of the space H is two (n = 1), a vector in the space
is called a qubit. A qubit represents one quantum of binary information. On
measurement, one obtains either the ket |0⟩or the ket |1⟩. This constitutes
the binary distinction that is inherent in a qubit. Note however that the
information obtained is probabilistic. If the qubit is
|⟩= α|0⟩+  |1⟩,
then the ket |0⟩is observed with probability |α|2, and the ket |1⟩is observed
with probability ||2. In speaking of an idealized quantum computer, we
do not specify the nature of measurement process beyond these probability
postulates.
In the case of general dimension n of the space H, we will call the vectors
in H qunits. It is quite common to use spaces H that are tensor products of
two-dimensional spaces (so that all computations are expressed in terms of
qubits) but this is not necessary in principle. One can start with a given space,
and later work out factorizations into qubit transformations.
A quantum computation consists in the application of a unitary transfor-
mation U to an initial qunit  = a0|0⟩+ · · · + an|n⟩with ||2 = 1, plus an
measurement of U. A measurement of U returns the ket |i⟩with probability
|⟨i|U|2. In particular, if we start the computer in the state |i⟩, then the
probability that it will return the state |j⟩is |⟨j|U|i⟩|2.
It is the necessity for writing a given computation in terms of unitary
transformations, and the probabilistic nature of the result that characterizes
quantum computation. Such computation could be carried out by an idealized
quantum mechanical system. It is hoped that such systems can be physically
realized.
§7. Braiding operators and universal quantum gates. A class of invariants
of knots and links called quantum invariants can be constructed by using
representations of the Artin braid group, and more speciﬁcally by using
solutions to the Yang-Baxter equation [7], ﬁrst discovered in relation to 1 + 1
dimensional quantum ﬁeld theory, and 2 dimensional statistical mechanics.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
261
Braiding operators feature in constructing representations of the Artin braid
group, and in the construction of invariants of knots and links.
A key concept in the construction of quantum link invariants is the asso-
ciation of a Yang-Baxter operator R to each elementary crossing in a link
diagram. The operator R is a linear mapping
R: V ⊗V −→V ⊗V
deﬁned on the 2-fold tensor product of a vector space V, generalizing the
permutation of the factors (i.e., generalizing a swap gate when V represents
one qubit). Such transformations are not necessarily unitary in topological
applications. It is useful to understand when they can be replaced by unitary
transformations for the purpose of quantum computing. Such unitary R-
matrices can be used to make unitary representations of the Artin braid
group.
A solution to the Yang-Baxter equation, as described in the last paragraph
is a matrix R, regarded as a mapping of a two-fold tensor product of a vector
space V ⊗V to itself that satisﬁes the equation
(R ⊗I )(I ⊗R)(R ⊗I ) = (I ⊗R)(R ⊗I )(I ⊗R).
From the point of view of topology, the matrix R is regarded as representing
an elementary bit of braiding represented by one string crossing over another.
In Figure 30 we have illustrated the braiding identity that corresponds to the
Yang-Baxter equation. Each braiding picture with its three input lines (below)
and output lines (above) corresponds to a mapping of the three fold tensor
product of the vector space V to itself, as required by the algebraic equation
quoted above. The pattern of placement of the crossings in the diagram
corresponds to the factors R ⊗I and I ⊗R. This crucial topological move
has an algebraic expression in terms of such a matrix R. Our approach in this
section to relate topology, quantum computing, and quantum entanglement is
through the use of the Yang-Baxter equation. In order to accomplish this aim,
we need to study solutions of the Yang-Baxter equation that are unitary. Then
the R matrix can be seen either as a braiding matrix or as a quantum gate in a
quantum computer.
=
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
Figure 30. The Yang-Baxter equation.
The problem of ﬁnding solutions to the Yang-Baxter equation that are
unitary turns out to be surprisingly diﬃcult. Dye [16] has classiﬁed all such

262
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
matrices of size 4 × 4. A rough summary of her classiﬁcation is that all
4 × 4 unitary solutions to the Yang-Baxter equation are similar to one of the
following types of matrix:
R =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1/
√
2
0
0
1/
√
2
0
1/
√
2
−1/
√
2
0
0
1/
√
2
1/
√
2
0
−1/
√
2
0
0
1/
√
2
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
R′ =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
a
0
0
0
0
0
b
0
0
c
0
0
0
0
0
d
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
R′′ =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
0
0
0
a
0
b
0
0
0
0
c
0
d
0
0
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
where a, b, c, d are unit complex numbers.
For the purpose of quantum computing, one should regard each matrix as
acting on the stamdard basis {|00⟩, |01⟩, |10⟩, |11⟩} of H = V ⊗V, where V is
a two-dimensional complex vector space. Then, for example we have
R|00⟩= (1/
√
2)|00⟩−(1/
√
2)|11⟩,
R|01⟩= (1/
√
2)|01⟩+ (1/
√
2)|10⟩,
R|10⟩= −(1/
√
2)|01⟩+ (1/
√
2)|10⟩,
R|11⟩= (1/
√
2)|00⟩+ (1/
√
2)|11⟩.
The reader should note that R is the familiar change-of-basis matrix from the
standard basis to the Bell basis of entangled states.
In the case of R′, we have
R′|00⟩= a|00⟩, R′|01⟩= c|10⟩,
R′|10⟩= b|01⟩, R′|11⟩= d|11⟩.
Note that R′ can be regarded as a diagonal phase gate P, composed with a
swap gate S.
P =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
a
0
0
0
0
b
0
0
0
0
c
0
0
0
0
d
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
263
S =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
Compositions of solutions of the (Braiding) Yang-Baxter equation with the
swap gate S are called solutions to the algebraic Yang-Baxter equation. Thus
the diagonal matrix P is a solution to the algebraic Yang-Baxter equation.
Remark 1. Another avenue related to unitary solutions to the Yang-Baxter
equation as quantum gates comes from using extra physical parameters in this
equation (the rapidity parameter) that are related to statistical physics. In [99]
we discovered that solutions to the Yang-Baxter equation with the rapidity
parameter allow many new unitary solutions. The signiﬁcance of these gates
for quatnum computing is still under investigation.
7.1. Universal gates. A two-qubit gate G is a unitary linear mapping G :
V ⊗V −→V where V is a two complex dimensional vector space. We say
that the gate G is universal for quantum computation (or just universal) if G
together with local unitary transformations (unitary transformations from V
to V ) generates all unitary transformations of the complex vector space of
dimension 2n to itself. It is well-known [79] that CNOT is a universal gate.
(On the standard basis, CNOT is the identity when the ﬁrst qubit is |0⟩, and it
ﬂips the second qbit, leaving the ﬁrst alone, when the ﬁrst qubit is |1⟩.)
A gate G, as above, is said to be entangling if there is a vector
|α⟩= |α⟩⊗|⟩∈V ⊗V
such that G|α⟩is not decomposable as a tensor product of two qubits. Under
these circumstances, one says that G|α⟩is entangled.
In [11], the Brylinskis give a general criterion of G to be universal. They prove
that a two-qubit gate G is universal if and only if it is entangling.
Remark 2. A two-qubit pure state
|φ⟩= a|00⟩+ b|01⟩+ c|10⟩+ d|11⟩
is entangled exactly when (ad −bc) ̸= 0. It is easy to use this fact to check
when a speciﬁc matrix is, or is not, entangling.
Remark 3. There are many gates other than CNOT that can be used as
universal gates in the presence of local unitary transformations. Some of these
are themselves topological (unitary solutions to the Yang-Baxter equation,
see [57]) and themselves generate representations of the Artin braid group.
Replacing CNOT by a solution to the Yang-Baxter equation does not place
the local unitary transformations as part of the corresponding representation
of the braid group. Thus such substitutions give only a partial solution to
creating topological quantum computation. In this paper we are concerned

264
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
with braid group representations that include all aspects of the unitary group.
Accordingly, in the next section we shall ﬁrst examine how the braid group on
three strands can be represented as local unitary transformations.
Theorem 1. Let D denote the phase gate shown below. D is a solution to the
algebraic Yang-Baxter equation (see the earlier discussion in this section). Then
D is a universal gate.
D =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
−1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
Proof. It follows at once from the Brylinski Theorem that D is universal.
For a more speciﬁc proof, note that CNOT = QDQ−1, where Q = H ⊗I , H
is the 2 × 2 Hadamard matrix. The conclusion then follows at once from this
identity and the discussion above. We illustrate the matrices involved in this
proof below:
H = (1/
√
2)
 1
1
1
−1

Q = (1/
√
2)
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
1
0
0
1
−1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
−1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
D =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
−1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
QDQ−1 = QDQ =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠= CNOT
⊣
Remark 4. We thank Martin Roetteles [84] for pointing out the speciﬁc
factorization of CNOT used in this proof.
Theorem 2. The matrix solutions R′ and R′′ to the Yang-Baxter equation,
described above, are universal gates exactly when ad −bc ̸= 0 for their internal
parameters a, b, c, d. In particular, let R0 denote the solution R′ (above) to the
Yang-Baxter equation with a = b = c = 1, d = −1.
R′ =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
a
0
0
0
0
0
b
0
0
c
0
0
0
0
0
d
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
265
R0 =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
−1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
Then R0 is a universal gate.
Proof. The ﬁrst part follows at once from the Brylinski Theorem. In fact,
letting H be the Hadamard matrix as before, and
 =
 1/
√
2
i/
√
2
i/
√
2
1/
√
2

,  =
 1/
√
2
1/
√
2
i/
√
2
−i/
√
2


 =
 (1 −i)/2
(1 + i)/2
(1 −i)/2
(−1 −i)/2

.
Then
CNOT = ( ⊗
)(R0(I ⊗)R0)(H ⊗H).
This gives an explicit expression for CNOT in terms of R0 and local unitary
transformations (for which we thank Ben Reichardt).
⊣
Remark 5. Let SWAP denote the Yang-Baxter Solution R′ with a = b =
c = d = 1.
SWAP =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
SWAP is the standard swap gate. Note that SWAP is not a universal gate. This
also follows from the Brylinski Theorem, since SWAP is not entangling. Note
also that R0 is the composition of the phase gate D with this swap gate.
Theorem 3. Let
R =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1/
√
2
0
0
1/
√
2
0
1/
√
2
−1/
√
2
0
0
1/
√
2
1/
√
2
0
−1/
√
2
0
0
1/
√
2
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
be the unitary solution to the Yang-Baxter equation discussed above. Then R is a
universal gate. The proof below gives a speciﬁc expression for CNOT in terms
of R.
Proof. This result follows at once from the Brylinksi Theorem, since R is
highly entangling. For a direct computational proof, it suﬃces to show that
CNOT can be generated from R and local unitary transformations. Let
α =
 1/
√
2
1/
√
2
1/
√
2
−1/
√
2


266
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
 =
 −1/
√
2
1/
√
2
i/
√
2
i/
√
2

 =
 1/
√
2
i/
√
2
1/
√
2
−i/
√
2

 =
 −1
0
0
−i

Let M = α ⊗ and N =  ⊗. Then it is straightforward to verify that
CNOT = MRN.
This completes the proof.
⊣
Remark 6. See [57] for more information about these calculations.
7.2. Majorana fermions generate universal braiding gates. Recall that in Sec-
tion 4 we showed how to construct braid group representations by using
Majorana fermions in the special case of three particles. Here we generalize
this construction and show how the Marjorana fermions give rise to univer-
sal topological gates. Let c1, c2, . . . cn denote n Majorana fermion creation
operators. Thus we assume that
c2
k = 1
and
cicj = −cjci
for each k = 1 . . . n and whenever i ̸= j. Then deﬁne operators
sk =
1
√
2
(1 + ck+1ck)
for k = 1 . . . n −1. Then by the same algebra as we explored in Section 4
it is easy to verify that sk+1sksk+1 = sksk+1sk and that sisj = sjsi whenever
|i −j| > 1. Thus the si give a representation of the n-strand braid group Bn.
Furthermore, it is easy to see that a speciﬁc representation is given on the
complex vector space Vn with basis {c1, c2, . . . cn} via the linear transformations
Tk : Vn −→Vn deﬁned by
Tk(v) = skvs−1
k .
Note that s−1
k
=
1
√
2(1 −ck+1ck). It is then easy to verify that
Tk(ck) = ck+1,
Tk(ck+1) = −ck
and that Tk is the identity otherwise.
For universality, take n = 4 and regard each Tk as operating on V ⊗V
where V is a single qubit space. Then the braiding operators Tk each satisfy the
Yang-Baxter equation and so we have universal gates (in the presence of single

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
267
qubit unitary operators) from Majorana fermions. If experimental work shows
that Majorana fermions can be detected and controlled, then it is possible that
quantum computers based on these topological unitary representations will be
constructed.
In the later sections of this paper we will describe the Fibonacci model,
which also uses Majorana fermions, and a diﬀerent subtler representation of
the braid groups that is also promising for topological quantum computing.
§8. A remark about EPR, entanglement and Bell’s inequality. A state |⟩∈
H ⊗n, where H is the qubit space, is said to be entangled if it cannot be written
as a tensor product of vectors from non-trivial factors of H ⊗n. Such states turn
out to be related to subtle nonlocality in quantum physics. It helps to place
this algebraic structure in the context of a gedanken experiment to see where
the physics comes in. Thought experiments of the sort we are about to describe
were ﬁrst devised by Einstein, Podolosky and Rosen, referred henceforth as
EPR.
Consider the entangled state
S = (|0⟩|1⟩+ |1⟩|0⟩)/
√
2.
In an EPR thought experiment, we think of two “parts” of this state that
are separated in space. We want a notation for these parts and suggest the
following:
L = ({|0⟩}|1⟩+ {|1⟩}|0⟩)/
√
2,
R = (|0⟩{|1⟩} + |1⟩{|0⟩})/
√
2.
In the left state L, an observer can only observe the left hand factor. In
the right state R, an observer can only observe the right hand factor. These
“states” L and R together comprise the EPR state S, but they are accessible
individually just as are the two photons in the usual thought experiement. One
can transport L and R individually and we shall write
S = L ∗R
to denote that they are the “parts” (but not tensor factors) of S.
The curious thing about this formalism is that it includes a little bit of
macroscopic physics implicitly, and so it makes it a bit more apparent what
EPR were concerned about. After all, lots of things that we can do to L or R
do not aﬀect S. For example, transporting L from one place to another, as
in the original experiment where the photons separate. On the other hand, if
Alice has L and Bob has R and Alice performs a local unitary transformation
on “her” tensor factor, this applies to both L and R since the transformation
is actually being applied to the state S. This is also a “spooky action at a
distance” whose consequence does not appear until a measurement is made.

268
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
To go a bit deeper it is worthwhile seeing what entanglement, in the sense
of tensor indecomposability, has to do with the structure of the EPR thought
experiment. To this end, we look at the structure of the Bell inequalities using
the Clauser, Horne, Shimony, Holt formalism (CHSH) as explained in the
book by Nielsen and Chuang [79]. For this we use the following observables
with eigenvalues ±1.
Q =
 1
0
0
−1

1
,
R =
 0
1
1
0

1
,
S =
 −1
−1
−1
1

2
/
√
2,
T =

1
−1
−1
−1

2
/
√
2.
The subscripts 1 and 2 on these matrices indicate that they are to operate on
the ﬁrst and second tensor factors, repsectively, of a quantum state of the form
φ = a|00⟩+ b|01⟩+ c|10⟩+ d|11⟩.
To simplify the results of this calculation we shall here assume that the
coeﬃcients a, b, c, d are real numbers. We calculate the quantity
Δ = ⟨φ|QS|φ⟩+ ⟨φ|RS|φ⟩+ ⟨φ|RT|φ⟩−⟨φ|QT|φ⟩,
ﬁnding that
Δ = (2 −4(a + d)2 + 4(ad −bc))/
√
2.
Classical probability calculation with random variables of value ±1 gives the
value of QS + RS + RT −QT = ±2 (with each of Q, R, S and T equal to
±1). Hence the classical expectation satisﬁes the Bell inequality
E(QS) + E(RS) + E(RT) −E(QT) ≤2.
That quantum expectation is not classical is embodied in the fact that Δ can be
greater than 2. The classic case is that of the Bell state
φ = (|01⟩−|10⟩)/
√
2.
Here
Δ = 6/
√
2 > 2.
In general we see that the following inequality is needed in order to violate the
Bell inequality
(2 −4(a + d)2 + 4(ad −bc))/
√
2 > 2.
This is equivalent to
(
√
2 −1)/2 < (ad −bc) −(a + d)2.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
269
Since we know that φ is entangled exactly when ad −bc is non-zero, this shows
that an unentangled state cannot violate the Bell inequality. This formula also
shows that it is possible for a state to be entangled and yet not violate the Bell
inequality. For example, if
φ = (|00⟩−|01⟩+ |10⟩+ |11⟩)/2,
then Δ(φ) satisﬁes Bell’s inequality, but φ is an entangled state. We see from
this calculation that entanglement in the sense of tensor indecomposability,
and entanglement in the sense of Bell inequality violation for a given choice
of Bell operators are not equivalent concepts. On the other hand, Benjamin
Schumacher has pointed out [88] that any entangled two-qubit state will violate
Bell inequalities for an appropriate choice of operators. This deepens the
context for our question of the relationship between topological entanglement
and quantum entanglement. The Bell inequality violation is an indication of
quantum mechanical entanglement. One’s intuition suggests that it is this sort
of entanglement that should have a topological context.
§9. The Aravind hypothesis. Link diagrams can be used as graphical devices
and holders of information.
In this vein Aravind [5] proposed that the
entanglement of a link should correspond to the entanglement of a state.
Measurement of a link would be modeled by deleting one component of the
link. A key example is the Borromean rings. See Figure 18. Deleting any
component of the Boromean rings yields a remaining pair of unlinked rings.
The Borromean rings are entangled, but any two of them are unentangled.
In this sense the Borromean rings are analogous to the GHZ state |GHZ⟩=
(1/
√
2)(|000⟩+ |111⟩). Measurement in any factor of the GHZ yields an
unentangled state. Aravind points out that this property is basis dependent.
We point out that there are states whose entanglement after an measurement is a
matter of probability (via quantum amplitudes). Consider for example the state
|⟩= |001⟩+ |010⟩+ |100⟩.
Measurement in any coordinate yields probabilistically an entangled or an
unentangled state. For example
|⟩= |0⟩(|01⟩+ |10⟩) + |1⟩|00⟩.
so that projecting to |1⟩in the ﬁrst coordinate yields an unentangled state,
while projecting to |0⟩yields an entangled state.
New ways to use link diagrams must be invented to map the properties
of such states. One direction is to consider appropriate notions of quantum
knots so that one can formlate superpositions of topological types as in
[58]. But one needs to go deeper in this consideration. The relationship of
topology and physics needs to be examined carefully. We take the stance that
topological properties of systems are properties that remain invariant under

270
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
certain transformations that are identiﬁed as “topological equivalences”. In
making quantum physical models, these equivalences should correspond to
unitary transformations of an appropriate Hilbert space. Accordingly, we
have formulated a model for quantum knots [71, 72, 73, 63] that meets these
requirements. A quantum knot system represents the “quantum embodiment”
of a closed knotted physical piece of rope. A quantum knot (i.e., an element
|K⟩lying in an appropriate Hilbert space Hn, as a state of this system, represents
the state of such a knotted closed piece of rope, i.e., the particular spatial
conﬁguration of the knot tied in the rope. Associated with a quantum knot
system is a group of unitary transformations An, called the ambient group,
which represents all possible ways of moving the rope around (without cutting
the rope, and without letting the rope pass through itself.) Of course, unlike
a classical closed piece of rope, a quantum knot can exhibit non-classical
behavior, such as quantum superposition and quantum entanglement. The
knot type of a quantum knot |K⟩is simply the orbit of the quantum knot under
the action of the ambient group An. This leads to new questions connecting
quantum computing and knot theory.
§10. SU(2) representations of the Artin braid group. The purpose of this
section is to determine all the representations of the three strand Artin braid
group B3 to the special unitary group SU(2) and concomitantly to the unitary
group U(2). One regards the groups SU(2) and U(2) as acting on a single qubit,
and so U(2) is usually regarded as the group of local unitary transformations
in a quantum information setting. If one is looking for a coherent way to
represent all unitary transformations by way of braids, then U(2) is the place to
start. Here we will show that there are many representations of the three-strand
braid group that generate a dense subset of U(2). Thus it is a fact that local
unitary transformations can be “generated by braids” in many ways.
We begin with the structure of SU(2). A matrix in SU(2) has the form
M =

z
w
−¯w
¯z

,
where z and w are complex numbers, and ¯z denotes the complex conjugate of z.
To be in SU(2) it is required that Det(M) = 1 and that M † = M −1 where
Det denotes determinant, and M † is the conjugate transpose of M. Thus if
z = a +bi and w = c + di where a, b, c, d are real numbers, and i2 = −1, then
M =

a + bi
c + di
−c + di
a −bi

with a2 + b2 + c2 + d 2 = 1. It is convenient to write
M = a
 1
0
0
1

+ b
 i
0
0
−i

+ c

0
1
−1
0

+ d
 0
i
i
0

,

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
271
and to abbreviate this decomposition as
M = a + bI + cJ + dK
where
1 ≡
 1
0
0
1

, I ≡
 i
0
0
−i

, J ≡

0
1
−1
0

, K ≡
 0
i
i
0

so that
I 2 = J 2 = K2 = IJK = −1
and
IJ = K
JK = I
KI = J
JI = −K
KJ = −I
IK = −J.
The algebra of 1, I, J, K is called the quaternions after William Rowan Hamilton
who discovered this algebra prior to the discovery of matrix algebra. Thus
the unit quaternions are identiﬁed with SU(2) in this way. We shall use
this identiﬁcation, and some facts about the quaternions to ﬁnd the SU(2)
representations of braiding. First we recall some facts about the quaternions.
1. Note that if q = a +bI +cJ +dK (as above), then q† = a −bI −cJ −dK
so that qq† = a2 + b2 + c2 + d 2 = 1.
2. A general quaternion has the form q = a + bI + cJ + dK where the
value of qq† = a2 + b2 + c2 + d 2, is not ﬁxed to unity. The length of q is
by deﬁnition

qq†.
3. A quaternion of the form rI + sJ + tK for real numbers r, s, t is said to
be a pure quaternion. We identify the set of pure quaternions with the
vector space of triples (r, s, t) of real numbers R3.
4. Thus a general quaternion has the form q = a + bu where u is a pure
quaternion of unit length and a and b are arbitrary real numbers. A unit
quaternion (element of SU(2)) has the addition property that a2 +b2 = 1.
5. If u is a pure unit length quaternion, then u2 = −1. Note that the
set of pure unit quaternions forms the two-dimensional sphere S2 =
{(r, s, t)|r2 + s2 + t2 = 1} in R3.
6. If u, v are pure quaternions, then
uv = −u · v + u × v
whre u · v is the dot product of the vectors u and v, and u × v is the
vector cross product of u and v. In fact, one can take the deﬁnition of
quaternion multiplication as
(a + bu)(c + dv) = ac + bc(u) + ad(v) + bd(−u · v + u × v),
and all the above properties are consequences of this deﬁnition. Note
that quaternion multiplication is associative.

272
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
7. Let g = a + bu be a unit length quaternion so that u2 = −1 and
a = cos(/2), b = sin(/2) for a chosen angle . Deﬁne φg : R3 −→R3
by the equation φg(P) = gPg†, for P any point in R3, regarded as a pure
quaternion. Then φg is an orientation preserving rotation of R3 (hence
an element of the rotation group SO(3)). Speciﬁcally, φg is a rotation
about the axis u by the angle . The mapping
φ : SU(2) −→SO(3)
is a two-to-one surjective map from the special unitary group to the
rotation group. In quaternionic form, this result was proved by Hamilton
and by Rodrigues in the middle of the nineteeth century. The speciﬁc
formula for φg(P) as shown below:
φg(P) = gPg−1 = (a2 −b2)P + 2ab(P × u) + 2(P · u)b2u.
We want a representation of the three-strand braid group in SU(2). This
means that we want a homomorphism  : B3 −→SU(2), and hence we want
elements g = (s1) and h = (s2) in SU(2) representing the braid group
generators s1 and s2. Since s1s2s1 = s2s1s2 is the generating relation for B3,
the only requirement on g and h is that ghg = hgh. We rewrite this relation as
h−1gh = ghg−1, and analyze its meaning in the unit quaternions.
Suppose that g = a + bu and h = c + dv where u and v are unit pure
quaternions so that a2 + b2 = 1 and c2 + d 2 = 1. then ghg−1 = c + dφg(v)
and h−1gh = a + bφh−1(u). Thus it follows from the braiding relation that
a = c, b = ±d, and that φg(v) = ±φh−1(u). However, in the case where there
is a minus sign we have g = a + bu and h = a −bv = a + b(−v). Thus we
can now prove the following Theorem.
Theorem 4. Let u and v be pure unit quaternions and g = a + bu and
h = c + dv have unit length. Then (without loss of generality), the braid relation
ghg = hgh is true if and only if h = a + bv, and φg(v) = φh−1(u). Furthermore,
given that g = a +bu and h = a +bv, the condition φg(v) = φh−1(u) is satisﬁed
if and only if u · v = a2−b2
2b2
when u ̸= v. If u = v then g = h and the braid
relation is trivially satisﬁed.
Proof. We have proved the ﬁrst sentence of the Theorem in the discussion
prior to its statement.
Therefore assume that g = a + bu, h = a + bv,
and φg(v) = φh−1(u). We have already stated the formula for φg(v) in the
discussion about quaternions:
φg(v) = gvg−1 = (a2 −b2)v + 2ab(v × u) + 2(v · u)b2u.
By the same token, we have
φh−1(u) = h−1uh = (a2 −b2)u + 2ab(u × −v) + 2(u · (−v))b2(−v)
= (a2 −b2)u + 2ab(v × u) + 2(v · u)b2(v).

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
273
Hence we require that
(a2 −b2)v + 2(v · u)b2u = (a2 −b2)u + 2(v · u)b2(v).
This equation is equivalent to
2(u · v)b2(u −v) = (a2 −b2)(u −v).
If u ̸= v, then this implies that
u · v = a2 −b2
2b2
.
⊣
The Majorana fermion example. Note the case of the theorem where
g = a + bu, h = a + bv.
Suppose that u · v = 0. Then the theorem tells us that we need a2 −b2 = 0
and since a2 + b2 = 1, we conclude that a = 1/
√
2 and b likewise. For
deﬁniteness, then we have for the braiding generators (since I , J and K are
mutually orthogonal) the three operators
A =
1
√
2
(1 + I ),
B =
1
√
2
(1 + J),
C =
1
√
2
(1 + K).
Each pair satisﬁes the braiding relation so that ABA = BAB, BCB = CBC,
ACA = CAC. We have already met this braiding triplet in our discussion of
the construction of braiding operators from Majorana fermions in Section 4.
This shows (again) how close Hamilton’s quaternions are to topology and how
braiding is fundamental to the structure of fermionic physics.
The Fibonacci example. Let
g = eI = a + bI
where a = cos() and b = sin(). Let
h = a + b[(c2 −s2)I + 2csK]
where c2 + s2 = 1 and c2 −s2 = a2−b2
2b2 . Then we can rewrite g and h in matrix
form as the matrices G and H. Instead of writing the explicit form of H, we
write H = FGF † where F is an element of SU(2) as shown below.
G =
 ei
0
0
e−i

F =
 ic
is
is
−ic


274
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
This representation of braiding where one generator G is a simple matrix of
phases, while the other generator H = FGF † is derived from G by conjugation
by a unitary matrix, has the possibility for generalization to representations of
braid groups (on greater than three strands) to SU(n) or U(n) for n greater
than 2. In fact we shall see just such representations constructed later in this
paper, by using a version of topological quantum ﬁeld theory. The simplest
example is given by
g = e7	I/10
f = I + K√
h = fgf−1
where 2+ = 1. Then g and h satisfy ghg = hgh and generate a representation
of the three-strand braid group that is dense in SU(2). We shall call this the
Fibonacci representation of B3 to SU(2).
Density. Consider representations of B3 into SU(2) produced by the method
of this section. That is consider the subgroup SU[G, H] of SU(2) generated
by a pair of elements {g, h} such that ghg = hgh. We wish to understand when
such a representation will be dense in SU(2). We need the following lemma.
Lemma 1. eaI ebJecI = cos(b)eI (a+c) + sin(b)eI (a−c)J. Hence any element
of SU(2) can be written in the form eaI ebJecI for appropriate choices of angles
a, b, c. In fact, if u and v are linearly independent unit vectors in R3, then any
element of SU(2) can be written in the form
eauebvecu
for appropriate choices of the real numbers a, b, c.
Proof. See [59] for the details of this proof.
⊣
This Lemma can be used to verify the density of a representation, by ﬁnding
two elements A and B in the representation such that the powers of A are dense
in the rotations about its axis, and the powers of B are dense in the rotations
about its axis, and such that the axes of A and B are linearly independent
in R3. Then by the Lemma the set of elements Aa+cBbAa−c are dense in
SU(2). It follows for example, that the Fibonacci representation described
above is dense in SU(2), and indeed the generic representation of B3 into
SU(2) will be dense in SU(2). Our next task is to describe representations of
the higher braid groups that will extend some of these unitary representations
of the three-strand braid group. For this we need more topology.
§11. The bracket polynomial and the Jones polynomial. We now discuss the
Jones polynomial. We shall construct the Jones polynomial by using the
bracket state summation model [35]. The bracket polynomial, invariant under
Reidmeister moves II and III, can be normalized to give an invariant of all three

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
275
Reidemeister moves. This normalized invariant, with a change of variable, is
the Jones polynomial [29, 30]. The Jones polynomial was originally discovered
by a diﬀerent method than the one given here.
The bracket polynomial , < K > = < K > (A), assigns to each unoriented
link diagram K a Laurent polynomial in the variable A, such that
1. If K and K ′ are regularly isotopic diagrams, then < K > = < K′ >.
2. If K ⊔O denotes the disjoint union of K with an extra unknotted and
unlinked component O (also called ‘loop’ or ‘simple closed curve’ or
‘Jordan curve’), then
< K ⊔O > =  < K >,
where
 = −A2 −A−2.
3. < K > satisﬁes the following formulas
<  > = A < ≍> +A−1 <)(>
<  > = A−1 < ≍> +A <)(>,
where the small diagrams represent parts of larger diagrams that are identical
except at the site indicated in the bracket. We take the convention that the
letter chi, , denotes a crossing where the curved line is crossing over the straight
segment. The barred letter denotes the switch of this crossing, where the curved
line is undercrossing the straight segment. See Figure 31 for a graphic illustration
of this relation, and an indication of the convention for choosing the labels A
and A−1 at a given crossing.
A
A
-1
A
-1
A
A
-1
A
<
> = A <
> +
<
>
-1
A
<
> =
A
<
> +
<
>
-1
A
Figure 31. Bracket smoothings.
It is easy to see that Properties 2 and 3 deﬁne the calculation of the bracket on
arbitrary link diagrams. The choices of coeﬃcients (A and A−1) and the value

276
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
of  make the bracket invariant under the Reidemeister moves II and III. Thus
Property 1 is a consequence of the other two properties.
In computing the bracket, one ﬁnds the following behaviour under Reide-
meister move I:
<  >= −A3 <⌣>
and
<  >= −A−3 <⌣>
where  denotes a curl of positive type as indicated in Figure 32, and  indicates
a curl of negative type, as also seen in this ﬁgure. The type of a curl is the sign
of the crossing when we orient it locally. Our convention of signs is also given
in Figure 32. Note that the type of a curl does not depend on the orientation
we choose. The small arcs on the right hand side of these formulas indicate the
removal of the curl from the corresponding diagram.
The bracket is invariant under regular isotopy and can be normalized to an
invariant of ambient isotopy by the deﬁnition
fK(A) = (−A3)−w(K) < K > (A),
where we chose an orientation for K, and where w(K) is the sum of the crossing
signs of the oriented link K. w(K) is called the writhe of K. The convention
for crossing signs is shown in Figure 32.
or
or
+
-
+
+
-
-
+
-
Figure 32. Crossing signs and curls.
One useful consequence of these formulas is the following switching formula
A <  > −A−1 <  >= (A2 −A−2) < ≍> .
Note that in these conventions the A-smoothing of  is ≍, while the A-
smoothing of  is )(. Properly interpreted, the switching formula above says
that you can switch a crossing and smooth it either way and obtain a three
diagram relation. This is useful since some computations will simplify quite
quickly with the proper choices of switching and smoothing. Remember that it
is necessary to keep track of the diagrams up to regular isotopy (the equivalence
relation generated by the second and third Reidemeister moves). Here is an
example. View Figure 33.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
277
K
U
U'
Figure 33. Trefoil and two relatives.
Figure 33 shows a trefoil diagram K, an unknot diagram U and another
unknot diagram U ′. Applying the switching formula, we have
A−1 < K > −A < U >= (A−2 −A2) < U ′ >
and < U >= −A3 and < U ′ >= (−A−3)2 = A−6. Thus
A−1 < K > −A(−A3) = (A−2 −A2)A−6.
Hence
A−1 < K >= −A4 + A−8 −A−4.
Thus
< K >= −A5 −A−3 + A−7.
This is the bracket polynomial of the trefoil diagram K.
Since the trefoil diagram K has writhe w(K) = 3, we have the normalized
polynomial
fK(A) = (−A3)−3 < K >= −A−9(−A5 −A−3+A−7) = A−4+A−12 −A−16.
The bracket model for the Jones polynomial is quite useful both theoretically
and in terms of practical computations. One of the neatest applications is to
simply compute, as we have done, fK(A) for the trefoil knot K and determine
that fK(A) is not equal to fK(A−1) = f−K(A). This shows that the trefoil is
not ambient isotopic to its mirror image, a fact that is much harder to prove by
classical methods.
The state summation. In order to obtain a closed formula for the bracket,
we now describe it as a state summation. Let K be any unoriented link diagram.
Deﬁne a state, S, of K to be a choice of smoothing for each crossing of K.
There are two choices for smoothing a given crossing, and thus there are 2N
states of a diagram with N crossings. In a state we label each smoothing with
A or A−1 according to the left-right convention discussed in Property 3 (see
Figure 31). The label is called a vertex weight of the state. There are two
evaluations related to a state. The ﬁrst one is the product of the vertex weights,
denoted
< K|S > .
The second evaluation is the number of loops in the state S, denoted
||S||.

278
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Deﬁne the state summation, < K >, by the formula
< K > =

S
< K|S > ||S||−1.
It follows from this deﬁnition that < K > satisﬁes the equations
<  > = A < ≍> +A−1 <)(>,
< K ⊔O > =  < K >,
< O > = 1.
The ﬁrst equation expresses the fact that the entire set of states of a given
diagram is the union, with respect to a given crossing, of those states with
an A-type smoothing and those with an A−1-type smoothing at that crossing.
The second and the third equation are clear from the formula deﬁning the state
summation. Hence this state summation produces the bracket polynomial as
we have described it at the beginning of the section.
Remark 7. By a change of variables one obtains the original Jones polyno-
mial, VK(t), for oriented knots and links from the normalized bracket:
VK(t) = fK(t−1
4 ).
Remark 8. The bracket polynomial provides a connection between knot
theory and physics, in that the state summation expression for it exhibits it as a
generalized partition function deﬁned on the knot diagram. Partition functions
are ubiquitous in statistical mechanics, where they express the summation
over all states of the physical system of probability weighting functions for the
individual states. Such physical partition functions contain large amounts of
information about the corresponding physical system. Some of this information
is directly present in the properties of the function, such as the location of
critical points and phase transition. Some of the information can be obtained
by diﬀerentiating the partition function, or performing other mathematical
operations on it.
There is much more in this connection with statistical mechanics in that the
local weights in a partition function are often expressed in terms of solutions to
a matrix equation called the Yang-Baxter equation, that turns out to ﬁt perfectly
invariance under the third Reidemeister move. As a result, there are many ways
to deﬁne partition functions of knot diagrams that give rise to invariants of
knots and links. The subject is intertwined with the algebraic structure of Hopf
algebras and quantum groups, useful for producing systematic solutions to the
Yang-Baxter equation. In fact Hopf algebras are deeply connected with the
problem of constructing invariants of three-dimensional manifolds in relation
to invariants of knots. We have chosen, in this survey paper, to not discuss
the details of these approaches, but rather to proceed to Vassiliev invariants
and the relationships with Witten’s functional integral. The reader is referred

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
279
to [35, 37, 41, 36, 43, 39, 4, 29, 30, 66, 82, 83, 27, 93] for more information
about relationships of knot theory with statistical mechanics, Hopf algebras
and quantum groups. For topology, the key point is that Lie algebras can be
used to construct invariants of knots and links.
11.1. Quantum computation of the Jones polynomial. Can the invariants
of knots and links such as the Jones polynomial be conﬁgured as quantum
computers? This is an important question because the algorithms to compute
the Jones polynomial are known to be NP-hard, and so corresponding quantum
algorithms may shed light on the relationship of this level of computational
complexity with quantum computing (See [23]). Such models can be formulated
in terms of the Yang-Baxter equation [35, 37, 39, 44, 56]. The next paragraph
explains how this comes about.
In Figure 34, we indicate how topological braiding plus maxima (caps)
and minima (cups) can be used to conﬁgure the diagram of a knot or link.
This also can be translated into algebra by the association of a Yang-Baxter
matrix R (not necessarily the R of the previous sections) to each crossing and
other matrices to the maxima and minima. There are models of very eﬀective
invariants of knots and links such as the Jones polynomial that can be put into
this form [44]. In this way of looking at things, the knot diagram can be viewed
as a picture, with time as the vertical dimension, of particles arising from the
vacuum, interacting (in a two-dimensional space) and ﬁnally annihilating one
another. The invariant takes the form of an amplitude for this process that
is computed through the association of the Yang-Baxter solution R as the
scattering matrix at the crossings and the minima and maxima as creation and
annihilation operators. Thus we can write the amplitude in the form
ZK = ⟨CUP|M|CAP⟩
where ⟨CUP| denotes the composition of cups, M is the composition of
elementary braiding matrices, and |CAP⟩is the composition of caps. We
regard ⟨CUP| as the preparation of this state, and |CAP⟩as the measurement of
this state. In order to view ZK as a quantum computation, M must be a unitary
operator. This is the case when the R-matrices (the solutions to the Yang-
Baxter equation used in the model) are unitary. Each R-matrix is viewed as a a
quantum gate (or possibly a composition of quantum gates), and the vacuum-
vacuum diagram for the knot is interpreted as a quantum computer. This
quantum computer will probabilistically (via quantum amplitudes) compute
the values of the states in the state sum for ZK.
We should remark, however, that it is not necessary that the invariant be
modeled via solutions to the Yang-Baxter equation. One can use unitary
representations of the braid group that are constructed in other ways. In fact,
the presently successful quantum algorithms for computing knot invariants
indeed use such representations of the braid group, and we shall see this below.

280
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
M
<CAP|
|CUP>
Z     = <CAP| M |CUP>
K
(measurement)
(preparation)
(unitary braiding)
Figure 34. A knot quantum computer.
Nevertheless, it is useful to point out this analogy between the structure of the
knot invariants and quantum computation.
Quantum algorithms for computing the Jones polynomial have been dis-
cussed elsewhere. See [44, 57, 3, 56, 2, 97]. Here, as an example, we give a local
unitary representation that can be used to compute the Jones polynomial for
closures of 3-braids. We analyze this representation by making explicit how
the bracket polynomial is computed from it, and showing how the quantum
computation devolves to ﬁnding the trace of a unitary transformation.
The idea behind the construction of this representation depends upon the
algebra generated by two single qubit density matrices (ket-bras). Let |v⟩
and |w⟩be two qubits in V, a complex vector space of dimension two over
the complex numbers. Let P = |v⟩⟨v| and Q = |w⟩⟨w| be the corresponding
ket-bras. Note that
P2 = |v|2P,
Q2 = |w|2Q,
PQP = |⟨v|w⟩|2P,
QPQ = |⟨v|w⟩|2Q.
P and Q generate a representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra (See Section
12 of the present paper). One can adjust parameters to make a representation
of the three-strand braid group in the form
s1 −→rP + sI,
s2 −→tQ + uI,
where I is the identity mapping on V and r, s, t, u are suitably chosen scalars.
In the following we use this method to adjust such a representation so that it
is unitary. Note also that this is a local unitary representation of B3 to U(2).

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
281
We leave it as an exersise for the reader to verify that it ﬁts into our general
classiﬁcation of such representations as given in section 10 of the present paper.
Here is a speciﬁc representation depending on two symmetric matrices U1
and U2 with
U1 =
 d
0
0
0

= d|w⟩⟨w|
and
U2 =

d −1
√
1 −d −2
√
1 −d −2
d −d −1

= d|v⟩⟨v|
where w = (1, 0), and v = (d −1,
√
1 −d −2), assuming the entries of v are
real. Note that U 2
1 = dU1 and U 2
2 = dU1. Moreover, U1U2U1 = U1 and
U2U1U2 = U1. This is an example of a speciﬁc representation of the Temperley-
Lieb algebra [35, 44]. The desired representation of the Artin braid group
is given on the two braid generators for the three strand braid group by the
equations:
Φ(s1) = AI + A−1U1,
Φ(s2) = AI + A−1U2.
Here I denotes the 2 × 2 identity matrix.
For any A with d = −A2 −A−2 these formulas deﬁne a representation of
the braid group. With A = ei, we have d = −2 cos(2). We ﬁnd a speciﬁc
range of angles  in the following disjoint union of angular intervals
 ∈[0, 	/6] ⊔[	/3, 2	/3] ⊔[5	/6, 7	/6] ⊔[4	/3, 5	/3] ⊔[11	/6, 2	]
that give unitary representations of the three-strand braid group.
Thus a
specialization of a more general represention of the braid group gives rise to a
continuous family of unitary representations of the braid group.
Lemma 2. Note that the traces of these matrices are given by the formulas
tr(U1) = tr(U2) = d while tr(U1U2) = tr(U2U1) = 1. If b is any braid, let
I (b) denote the sum of the exponents in the braid word that expresses b. For b a
three-strand braid, it follows that
Φ(b) = AI (b)I + Π(b)
where I is the 2 × 2 identity matrix and Π(b) is a sum of products in the
Temperley-Lieb algebra involving U1 and U2.
We omit the proof of this Lemma. It is a calculation. To see it, consider an
example. Suppose that b = s1s−1
2 s1. Then
Φ(b) = Φ(s1s−1
2 s1) = Φ(s1)Φ(s−1
2 )Φ(s1)
= (AI + A−1U1)(A−1I + AU2)(AI + A−1U1).
The sum of products over the generators U1 and U2 of the Temperley-Lieb
algebra comes from expanding this expression.

282
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Since the Temperley-Lieb algebra in this dimension is generated by I ,U1,
U2, U1U2 and U2U1, it follows that the value of the bracket polynomial of the
closure of the braid b, denoted < b >, can be calculated directly from the trace
of this representation, except for the part involving the identity matrix. The
result is the equation
< b >= AI (b)d 2 + tr(Π(b))
where b denotes the standard braid closure of b, and the sharp brackets denote
the bracket polynomial. From this we see at once that
< b >= tr(Φ(b)) + AI (b)(d 2 −2).
It follows from this calculation that the question of computing the bracket
polynomial for the closure of the three-strand braid b is mathematically
equivalent to the problem of computing the trace of the unitary matrix Φ(b).
The Hadamard test. In order to (quantum) compute the trace of a unitary
matrix U, one can use the Hadamard test to obtain the diagonal matrix elements
⟨|U|⟩of U. The trace is then the sum of these matrix elements as |⟩runs
over an orthonormal basis for the vector space. We ﬁrst obtain
1
2 + 1
2Re⟨|U|⟩
as an expectation by applying the Hadamard gate H
H|0⟩=
1
√
2
(|0⟩+ |1⟩)
H|1⟩=
1
√
2
(|0⟩−|1⟩)
to the ﬁrst qubit of
CU ◦(H ⊗1)|0⟩|⟩=
1
√
2
(|0⟩⊗|⟩+ |1⟩⊗U|⟩.
Here CU denotes controlled U, acting as U when the control bit is |1⟩and the
identity mapping when the control bit is |0⟩. We measure the expectation for
the ﬁrst qubit |0⟩of the resulting state
1
2(H|0⟩⊗|⟩+ H|1⟩⊗U|⟩)
= 1
2((|0⟩+ |1⟩) ⊗|⟩+ (|0⟩−|1⟩) ⊗U|⟩)
= 1
2(|0⟩⊗(|⟩+ U|⟩) + |1⟩⊗(|⟩−U|⟩)).
This expectation is
1
2(⟨| + ⟨|U †)(|⟩+ U|⟩) = 1
2 + 1
2Re⟨|U|⟩.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
283
The imaginary part is obtained by applying the same procedure to
1
√
2
(|0⟩⊗|⟩−i|1⟩⊗U|⟩
This is the method used in [3], and the reader may wish to contemplate its
eﬃciency in the context of this simple model. Note that the Hadamard test
enables this quantum computation to estimate the trace of any unitary matrix
U by repeated trials that estimate individual matrix entries ⟨|U|⟩. We
shall return to quantum algorithms for the Jones polynomial and other knot
polynomials in a subsequent paper.
§12. Quantum topology, cobordism categories, Temperley-Lieb algebra and
topological quantum ﬁeld theory. The purpose of this section is to discuss the
general idea behind topological quantum ﬁeld theory, and to illustrate its
application to basic quantum mechanics and quantum mechanical formalism.
It is useful in this regard to have available the concept of category, and we shall
begin the section by discussing this far-reaching mathematical concept.
Deﬁnition 1. A category Cat consists in two related collections:
1. Obj(Cat), the objects of Cat, and
2. Morph(Cat), the morphisms of Cat.
satisfying the following axioms:
1. Each morphism f is associated to two objects of Cat, the domain of f and
the codomain of f. Letting A denote the domain of f and B denote the
codomain of f, it is customary to denote the morphism f by the arrow
notation f : A −→B.
2. Given f : A −→B and g : B −→C where A, B and C are objects of
Cat, then there exists an associated morphism g ◦f : A −→C called the
composition of f and g.
3. To each object A of Cat there is a unique identity morphism 1A : A −→A
such that 1A ◦f = f for any morphism f with codomain A, and
g ◦1A = g for any morphism g with domain A.
4. Given three morphisms f : A −→B, g : B −→C and h : C −→D,
then composition is associative. That is
(h ◦g) ◦f = h ◦(g ◦f).
If Cat1 and Cat2 are two categories, then a functor F : Cat1 −→Cat2 consists
in functions FO : Obj(Cat1) −→Obj(Cat2) and FM : Morph(Cat1) −→
Morph(Cat2) such that identity morphisms and composition of morphisms
are preserved under these mappings. That is (writing just F for FO and FM),
1. F (1A) = 1F (A),
2. F (f : A −→B) = F (f) : F (A) −→F (B),
3. F (g ◦f) = F (g) ◦F (f).

284
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
A functor F : Cat1 −→Cat2 is a structure preserving mapping from one
category to another. It is often convenient to think of the image of the functor
F as an interpretation of the ﬁrst category in terms of the second. We shall
use this terminology below and sometimes refer to an interpretation without
specifying all the details of the functor that describes it.
The notion of category is a broad mathematical concept, encompassing
many ﬁelds of mathematics. Thus one has the category of sets where the
objects are sets (collections) and the morphisms are mappings between sets.
One has the category of topological spaces where the objects are spaces and
the morphisms are continuous mappings of topological spaces. One has
the category of groups where the objects are groups and the morphisms are
homomorphisms of groups. Functors are structure preserving mappings from
one category to another. For example, the fundamental group is a functor
from the category of topological spaces with base point, to the category of
groups. In all the examples mentioned so far, the morphisms in the category
are restrictions of mappings in the category of sets, but this is not necessarily
the case. For example, any group G can be regarded as a category, Cat(G),
with one object ∗. The morphisms from ∗to itself are the elements of the
group and composition is group multiplication. In this example, the object
has no internal structure and all the complexity of the category is in the
morphisms.
The Artin braid group Bn can be regarded as a category whose single object
is an ordered row of points [n] = {1, 2, 3, . . . , n}. The morphisms are the
braids themselves and composition is the multiplication of the braids. A given
ordered row of points is interpreted as the starting or ending row of points
at the bottom or the top of the braid. In the case of the braid category, the
morphisms have both external and internal structure. Each morphism produces
a permutation of the ordered row of points (corresponding to the begiinning
and ending points of the individual braid strands), and weaving of the braid is
extra structure beyond the object that is its domain and codomain. Finally, for
this example, we can take all the braid groups Bn (n a positive integer) under
the wing of a single category, Cat(B), whose objects are all ordered rows of
points [n], and whose morphisms are of the form b : [n] −→[n] where b is a
braid in Bn. The reader may wish to have morphisms between objects with
diﬀerent n. We will have this shortly in the Temperley-Lieb category and in the
category of tangles.
The n-Cobordism Category, Cob[n], has as its objects smooth manifolds of
dimension n, and as its morphisms, smooth manifolds M n+1 of dimension n+1
with a partition of the boundary, ∂M n+1, into two collections of n-manifolds
that we denote by L(M n+1) and R(M n+1). We regard M n+1 as a morphism
from L(M n+1) to R(M n+1)
M n+1 : L(M n+1) −→R(M n+1).

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
285
As we shall see, these cobordism categories are highly signiﬁcant for quantum
mechanics, and the simplest one, Cob[0] is directly related to the Dirac notation
of bras and kets and to the Temperley-Lieb algebara. We shall concentrate
in this section on these cobordism categories, and their relationships with
quantum mechanics.
One can choose to consider either oriented or non-oriented manifolds, and
within unoriented manifolds there are those that are orientable and those that
are not orientable. In this section we will implicitly discuss only orientable
manifolds, but we shall not specify an orientation. In the next section, with the
standard deﬁnition of topological quantum ﬁeld theory, the manifolds will be
oriented. The deﬁnitions of the cobordism categories for oriented manifolds
go over mutatis mutandis.
Lets begin with Cob[0]. Zero dimensional manifolds are just collections
of points. The simplest zero dimensional manifold is a single point p. We
take p to be an object of this category and also ∗, where ∗denotes the empty
manifold (i.e. the empty set in the category of manifolds). The object ∗occurs
in Cob[n] for every n, since it is possible that either the left set or the right set
of a morphism is empty. A line segment S with boundary points p and q is a
morphism from p to q.
S : p −→q
See Figure 35. In this ﬁgure we have illustrated the morphism from p to p.
Identity 
p
f: p                 p
p
p
p
*
p
p
*
Figure 35. Elementary cobordisms.
The simplest convention for this category is to take this morphism to be the
identity. Thus if we look at the subcategory of Cob[0] whose only object is
p, then the only morphism is the identity morphism. Two points occur as
the boundary of an interval. The reader will note that Cob[0] and the usual
arrow notation for morphisms are very closely related. This is a place where
notation and mathematical structure share common elements. In general the
objects of Cob[0] consist in the empty object ∗and non-empty rows of points,
symbolized by
p ⊗p ⊗· · · ⊗p ⊗p.
Figure 35 also contains a morphism
p ⊗p −→∗

286
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
and the morphism
∗−→p ⊗p.
The ﬁrst represents a cobordism of two points to the empty set (via the
bounding curved interval). The second represents a cobordism from the empty
set to two points.
In Figure 36, we have indicated more morphisms in Cob[0], and we have
named the morphisms just discussed as
|Ω⟩: p ⊗p −→∗,
⟨Θ| : ∗−→p ⊗p.
The point to notice is that the usual conventions for handling Dirac bra-kets
are essentially the same as the compostion rules in this topological category.
Thus in Figure 36 we have that
⟨Θ| ◦|Ω⟩= ⟨Θ|Ω⟩: ∗−→∗
represents a cobordism from the empty manifold to itself. This cobordism is
topologically a circle and, in the Dirac formalism is interpreted as a scalar. In
order to interpret the notion of scalar we would have to map the cobordism
category to the category of vector spaces and linear mappings. We shall discuss
this after describing the similarities with quantum mechanical formalism.
Nevertheless, the reader should note that if V is a vector space over the
complex numbers C, then a linear mapping from C to C is determined by the
image of 1, and hence is characterized by the scalar that is the image of 1. In
this sense a mapping C −→C can be regarded as a possible image in vector
spaces of the abstract structure ⟨Θ|Ω⟩: ∗−→∗. It is therefore assumed that in
Cob[0] the composition with the morphism ⟨Θ|Ω⟩commutes with any other
morphism. In that way ⟨Θ|Ω⟩behaves like a scalar in the cobordism category.
In general, an n + 1 manifold without boundary behaves as a scalar in Cob[n],
and if a manifold M n+1 can be written as a union of two submanifolds Ln+1
and Rn+1 so that that an n-manifold W n is their common boundary:
M n+1 = Ln+1 ∪Rn+1
with
Ln+1 ∩Rn+1 = W n
then, we can write
⟨M n+1⟩= ⟨Ln+1 ∪Rn+1⟩= ⟨Ln+1|Rn+1⟩,
and ⟨M n+1⟩will be a scalar (morphism that commutes with all other mor-
phisms) in the category Cob[n].

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
287
Identity 
|     >
<     |
<     |
>
<    |
|    >
 =
U
Θ
Ω
Θ
Θ
Ω
Ω
 =
 =
U U  = |    >
Ω
<    |
Θ
Ω
Θ
<    |    >
 =
|    >
Ω
<    |
Θ
Ω
Θ
<    |    >
 =
Ω
Θ
<    |    >
U
Figure 36. Bras, kets and projectors.
S
I
S    =  I
2
SU = US = U
Figure 37. Permutations.
<    |
|    >
1
<    |
|    >
1
 =
 =
P
Q
|     >
<     |
1
1
{
} {
}
Θ
Θ
Ω
Ω
Θ
Ω
{
}
}
{
Figure 38. Projectors in tensor lines and elementary topology.
Getting back to the contents of Figure 36, note how the zero dimensional
cobordism category has structural parallels to the Dirac ket–bra formalism
U = |Ω⟩⟨Θ|
UU = |Ω⟩⟨Θ|Ω⟩⟨Θ| = ⟨Θ|Ω⟩|Ω⟩⟨Θ| = ⟨Θ|Ω⟩U.
In the cobordism category, the bra–ket and ket–bra formalism is seen as
patterns of connection of the one-manifolds that realize the cobordisms.
Now view Figure 37. This Figure illustrates a morphism S in Cob[0] that
requires two crossed line segments for its planar representation. Thus S can
be regarded as a non-trivial permutation, and S2 = I where I denotes the
identity morphisms for a two-point row. From this example, it is clear that

288
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Cob[0] contains the structure of all the syymmetric groups and more. In fact, if
we take the subcateogry of Cob[0] consisting of all morphisms from [n] to [n]
for a ﬁxed positive integer n, then this gives the well-known Brauer algebra (see
[9]) extending the symmetric group by allowing any connections among the
points in the two rows. In this sense, one could call Cob[0] the Brauer category.
We shall return to this point of view later.
In this section, we shall be concentrating on the part of Cob[0] that does not
involve permutations. This part can be characterized by those morphisms that
can be represented by planar diagrams without crossings between any of the
line segments (the one-manifolds). We shall call this crossingless subcategory
of Cob[0] the Temperley-Lieb Category and denote it by CatTL. In CatTL we
have the subcategory TL[n] whose only objects are the row of n points and the
empty object ∗, and whose morphisms can all be represented by conﬁgurations
that embed in the plane as in the morphisms P and Q in Figure 38. Note that
with the empty object ∗, the morphism whose diagram is a single loop appears
in TL[n] and is taken to commute with all other morphisms.
The Temperley-Lieb Algebra, AlgTL[n] is generated by the morphisms in
TL[n] that go from [n] to itself. Up to multiplication by the loop, the product
(composition) of two such morphisms is another ﬂat morphism from [n] to
itself. For algebraic purposes the loop ∗−→∗is taken to be a scalar algebraic
variable  that commutes with all elements in the algebra. Thus the equation
UU = ⟨Θ|Ω⟩U.
becomes
UU = U
in the algebra. In the algebra we are allowed to add morphisms formally and
this addition is taken to be commutative. Initially the algebra is taken with
coeﬃcients in the integers, but a diﬀerent commutative ring of coeﬃcients
can be chosen and the value of the loop may be taken in this ring. For
example, for quantum mechanical applications it is natural to work over the
complex numbers. The multiplicative structure of AlgTL[n] can be described by
generators and relations as follows: Let In denote the identity morphism from
[n] to [n]. Let Ui denote the morphism from [n] to [n] that connects k with k for
k < i and k > i+1 from one row to the other, and connects i to i +1 in each row.
Then the algebra AlgTL[n] is generated by {In, U1, U2, . . . , Un−1} with relations
U 2
i = Ui
UiUi+1Ui = Ui
UiUj = UjUi : |i −j| > 1.
These relations are illustrated for three strands in Figure 38. We leave the
commuting relation for the reader to draw in the case where n is four or greater.
For a proof that these are indeed all the relations, see [48].

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
289
Figure 38 and Figure 39 indicate how the zero dimensional cobordism
category contains structure that goes well beyond the usual Dirac formalism.
By tensoring the ket–bra on one side or another by identity morphisms, we
obtain the beginnings of the Temperley-Lieb algebra and the Temperley-Lieb
category. Thus Figure 39 illustrates the morphisms P and Q obtained by such
tensoring, and the relation PQP = P which is the same as U1U2U1 = U1
Note the composition at the bottom of the Figure 39.
Here we see a
composition of the identity tensored with a ket, followed by a bra tensored with
the identity. The diagrammatic for this association involves “straightening”
the curved structure of the morphism to a straight line. In Figure 40 we have
elaborated this situation even further, pointing out that in this category each
of the morphisms ⟨Θ| and |Ω⟩can be seen, by straightening, as mappings
from the generating object to itself. We have denoted these corresponding
morphisms by Θ and Ω respectively. In this way there is a correspondence
between morphisms p ⊗p −→∗and morphims p −→p.
In Figure 40 we have illustrated the generalization of the straightening proce-
dure of Figure 39. In Figure 39 the straightening occurs because the connection
structure in the morphism of Cob[0] does not depend on the wandering of
curves in diagrams for the morphisms in that category. Nevertheless, one
can envisage a more complex interpretation of the morphisms where each
one-manifold (line segment) has a label, and a multiplicity of morphisms
can correspond to a single line segment. This is exactly what we expect in
interpretations. For example, we can interpret the line segment [1] −→[1] as a
mapping from a vector space V to itself. Then [1] −→[1] is the diagrammatic
abstraction for V −→V, and there are many instances of linear mappings from
V to V .
At the vector space level there is a duality between mappings V ⊗V −→C
and linear maps V −→V . Speciﬁcally, let
{|0⟩, . . . , |m⟩}
be a basis for V . Then Θ : V −→V is determined by
Θ|i⟩= Θij |j⟩
(where we have used the Einstein summation convention on the repeated index
j) corresponds to the bra
⟨Θ| : V ⊗V −→C
deﬁned by
⟨Θ|ij⟩= Θij.
Given ⟨Θ| : V ⊗V −→C, we associate Θ : V −→V in this way.
Comparing with the diagrammatic for the category Cob[0], we say that
Θ : V −→V is obtained by straightening the mapping
⟨Θ| : V ⊗V −→C.

290
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Note that in this interpretation, the bras and kets are deﬁned relative to the
tensor product of V with itself and [2] is interpreted as V ⊗V . If we interpret
[2] as a single vector space W, then the usual formalisms of bras and kets still
pass over from the cobordism category.
<    |
|    >
1
<    |
|    >
1
 =
 =
P
Q
|     >
<     |
1
1
{
} {
}
Θ
Θ
Ω
Ω
Θ
Ω
{
}
}
{
 =
 =
PQP      P
 =
 = R
R
1
 =
Figure 39. The basic Temperley-Lieb relation.
φ
|    >
ψ
|    >
Θ
Ω
Ω
Θ
φ
|    >
ψ
|    >
Ω
Θ
φ
|    >
ψ
|    >
 =
|     >
<     |
Θ
|     >
Ω
<     |
Ω
Θ
Figure 40. The key to teleportation.
Figure 40 illustrates the staightening of |Θ⟩and ⟨Ω|, and the straightening
of a composition of these applied to |⟩, resulting in |φ⟩. In the left-hand
part of the bottom of Figure 40 we illustrate the preparation of the tensor
product |Θ⟩⊗|⟩followed by a successful measurement by ⟨Ω| in the second
two tensor factors. The resulting single qubit state, as seen by straightening, is
|φ⟩= Θ ◦Ω|⟩.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
291
From this, we see that it is possible to reversibly, indeed unitarily, transform
a state |⟩via a combination of preparation and measurement just so long
as the straightenings of the preparation and measurement (Θ and Ω) are
each invertible (unitary). This is the key to teleportation [49, 13, 1]. In the
standard teleportation procedure one chooses the preparation Θ to be (up to
normalization) the 2 dimensional identity matrix so that |⟩= |00⟩+ |11⟩. If
the successful measurement Ω is also the identity, then the transmitted state |φ⟩
will be equal to |⟩. In general we will have |φ⟩= Ω|⟩. One can then choose
a basis of measurements |Ω⟩, each corresponding to a unitary transformation
Ω so that the recipient of the transmission can rotate the result by the inverse
of Ω to reconsitute |⟩if he is given the requisite information. This is the basic
design of the teleportation procedure.
There is much more to say about the category Cob[0] and its relationship with
quantum mechanics. We will stop here, and invite the reader to explore further.
Later in this paper, we shall use these ideas in formulating our representations
of the braid group. For now, we point out how things look as we move upward
to Cob[n] for n > 0. In Figure 41 we show typical cobordisms (morphisms) in
Cob[1] from two circles to one circle and from one circle to two circles. These
are often called “pairs of pants”. Their composition is a surface of genus one
seen as a morphism from two circles to two circles. The bottom of the ﬁgure
indicates a ket-bra in this dimension in the form of a mapping from one circle
to one circle as a composition of a cobordism of a circle to the empty set and a
cobordism from the empty set to a circle (circles bounding disks). As we go
to higher dimensions the structure of cobordisms becomes more interesting
and more complicated. It is remarkable that there is so much structure in the
lowest dimensions of these categories.
Figure 41. Cobordisms of 1-manifolds are surfaces.
§13. Braiding and topological quantum ﬁeld theory. The purpose of this
section is to discuss in a very general way how braiding is related to topological

292
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
quantum ﬁeld theory. In the section to follow, we will use the Temperley-Lieb
recoupling theory to produce specﬁc unitary representations of the Artin braid
group.
The ideas in the subject of topological quantum ﬁeld theory (TQFT) are
well expressed in the book [6] by Michael Atiyah and the paper [95] by Edward
Witten. Here is Atiyah’s deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 2. A TQFT in dimension d is a functor Z(Σ) from the cobordism
category Cob[d] to the category Vect of vector spaces and linear mappings
which assigns
1. a ﬁnite dimensional vector space Z(Σ) to each compact, oriented d-
dimensional manifold Σ,
2. a vector Z(Y ) ∈Z(Σ) for each compact, oriented (d + 1)-dimensional
manifold Y with boundary Σ.
3. a linear mapping Z(Y ) : Z(Σ1) −→Z(Σ2) when Y is a (d + 1)-manifold
that is a cobordism between Σ1 and Σ2 (whence the boundary of Y is the
union of Σ1 and −Σ2.
The functor satisﬁes the following axioms.
1. Z(Σ†) = Z(Σ)† where Σ† denotes the manifold Σ with the opposite
orientation and Z(Σ)† is the dual vector space.
2. Z(Σ1 ∪Σ2) = Z(Σ1) ⊗Z(Σ2) where ∪denotes disjoint union.
3. If Y1 is a cobordism from Σ1 to Σ2, Y2 is a cobordism from Σ2 to Σ3 and
Y is the composite cobordism Y = Y1 ∪Σ2 Y2, then
Z(Y) = Z(Y2) ◦Z(Y1) : Z(Σ1) −→Z(Σ2)
is the composite of the corresponding linear mappings.
4. Z(φ) = C (C denotes the complex numbers) for the empty manifold φ.
5. With Σ × I (where I denotes the unit interval) denoting the identity
cobordism from Σ to Σ, Z(Σ × I ) is the identity mapping on Z(Σ).
Note that, in this view a TQFT is basically a functor from the cobordism
categories deﬁned in the last section to Vector Spaces over the complex numbers.
We have already seen that in the lowest dimensional case of cobordisms of
zero-dimensional manifolds, this gives rise to a rich structure related to quatum
mechanics and quantum information theory. The remarkable fact is that
the case of three-dimensions is also related to quantum theory, and to the
lower-dimensional versions of the TQFT. This gives a signiﬁcant way to think
about three-manifold invariants in terms of lower dimensional patterns of
interaction. Here follows a brief description.
Regard the three-manifold as a union of two handlebodies with boundary
an orientable surface Sg of genus g. The surface is divided up into trinions as
illustrated in Figure 42. A trinion is a surface with boundary that is topologically
equivalent to a sphere with three punctures. The trinion constitutes, in itself a

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
293
cobordism in Cob[1] from two circles to a single circle, or from a single circle to
two circles, or from three circles to the empty set. The pattern of a trinion is a
trivalent graphical vertex, as illustrated in Figure 42. In that ﬁgure we show the
trivalent vertex graphical pattern drawn on the surface of the trinion, forming
a graphical pattern for this combordism. It should be clear from this ﬁgure
that any cobordism in Cob[1] can be diagrammed by a trivalent graph, so that
the category of trivalent graphs (as morphisms from ordered sets of points to
ordered sets of points) has an image in the category of cobordisms of compact
one-dimensional manifolds. Given a surface S (possibly with boundary) and a
decomposition of that surface into triions, we associate to it a trivalent graph
G(S, t) where t denotes the particular trinion decomposition.
In this correspondence, distinct graphs can correspond to topologically
identical cobordisms of circles, as illustrated in Figure 44. It turns out that the
graphical structure is important, and that it is extraordinarily useful to articulate
transformations between the graphs that correspond to the homeomorphisms
of the corresponding surfaces. The beginning of this structure is indicated in
the bottom part of Figure 44.
In Figure 45 we illustrate another feature of the relationship betweem
surfaces and graphs. At the top of the ﬁgure we indicate a homeomorphism
between a twisted trinion and a standard trinion. The homeomorphism leaves
the ends of the trinion (denoted A,B and C) ﬁxed while undoing the internal
twist. This can be accomplished as an ambient isotopy of the embeddings in
three dimensional space that are indicated by this ﬁgure. Below this isotopy
we indicate the corresponding graphs. In the graph category there will have to
be a transformation between a braided and an unbraided trivalent vertex that
corresponds to this homeomorphism.
Trinion
Figure 42. Decomposition of a surface into trinions.

294
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
a
b
c
d
e
f
a
b
c
ε
V(            )
V(                                )
ε
Figure 43. Trivalent vectors.
=
Figure 44. Trinion associativity.
A
B
C
A
B
C
=
Figure 45. Tube twist.
From the point of view that we shall take in this paper, the key to the
mathematical structure of three-dimensional TQFT lies in the trivalent graphs,
including the braiding of grapical arcs. We can think of these braided graphs as
representing idealized Feynman diagrams, with the trivalent vertex as the basic
particle interaction vertex, and the braiding of lines representing an interaction
resulting from an exchange of particles. In this view one thinks of the particles
as moving in a two-dimensional medium, and the diagrams of braiding and

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
295
trivalent vertex interactions as indications of the temporal events in the system,
with time indicated in the direction of the morphisms in the category. Adding
such graphs to the category of knots and links is an extension of the tangle
category where one has already extended braids to allow any embedding
of strands and circles that start in n ordered points and end in m ordered
points. The tangle category includes the braid category and the Temperley-Lieb
category. These are both included in the category of braided trivalent graphs.
Thinking of the basic trivalent vertex as the form of a particle interaction
there will be a set of particle states that can label each arc incident to the vertex.
In Figure 43 we illustrate the labeling of the trivalent graphs by such particle
states. In the next two sections we will see speciﬁc rules for labeling such states.
Here it suﬃces to note that there will be some restrictions on these labels, so
that a trivalent vertex has a set of possible labelings. Similarly, any trivalent
graph will have a set of admissible labelings. These are the possible particle
processes that this graph can support. We take the set of admissible labelings of
a given graph G as a basis for a vector space V (G) over the complex numbers.
This vector space is the space of processes associated with the graph G. Given
a surface S and a decomposition t of the surface into trinions, we have the
associated graph G(S, t) and hence a vector space of processes V (G(S, t)). It is
desirable to have this vector space independent of the particular decomposition
into trinions. If this can be accomplished, then the set of vector spaces and
linear mappings associated to the surfaces can consitute a functor from the
category of cobordisms of one-manifolds to vector spaces, and hence gives rise
to a one-dimensional topological quantum ﬁeld theory. To this end we need
some properties of the particle interactions that will be described below.
A spin network is, by deﬁnition a lableled trivalent graph in a category of
graphs that satisfy the properties outlined in the previous paragraph. We shall
detail the requirements below.
The simplest case of this idea is C. N. Yang’s original interpretation of the
Yang-Baxter equation [98]. Yang articulated a quantum ﬁeld theory in one
dimension of space and one dimension of time in which the R-matrix giving the
scattering ampitudes for an interaction of two particles whose (let us say) spins
corresponded to the matrix indices so that Rcd
ab is the amplitude for particles of
spin a and spin b to interact and produce particles of spin c and d. Since these
interactions are between particles in a line, one takes the convention that the
particle with spin a is to the left of the particle with spin b, and the particle with
spin c is to the left of the particle with spin d. If one follows the concatenation
of such interactions, then there is an underlying permutation that is obtained
by following strands from the bottom to the top of the diagram (thinking of
time as moving up the page). Yang designed the Yang-Baxter equation for R
so that the amplitudes for a composite process depend only on the underlying
permutation corresponding to the process and not on the individual sequences of
interactions.

296
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
In taking over the Yang-Baxter equation for topological purposes, we can
use the same interpretation, but think of the diagrams with their under- and
over-crossings as modeling events in a spacetime with two dimensions of space
and one dimension of time. The extra spatial dimension is taken in displacing
the woven strands perpendicular to the page, and allows us to use braiding
operators R and R−1 as scattering matrices. Taking this picture to heart, one
can add other particle properties to the idealized theory. In particular one
can add fusion and creation vertices where in fusion two particles interact
to become a single particle and in creation one particle changes (decays)
into two particles. These are the trivalent vertices discussed above. Matrix
elements corresponding to trivalent vertices can represent these interactions.
See Figure 46.
Figure 46. Creation and fusion.
Once one introduces trivalent vertices for fusion and creation, there is the
question how these interactions will behave in respect to the braiding operators.
There will be a matrix expression for the compositions of braiding and fusion or
creation as indicated in Figure 25. Here we will restrict ourselves to showing the
diagrammatics with the intent of giving the reader a ﬂavor of these structures.
It is natural to assume that braiding intertwines with creation as shown in
Figure 49 (similarly with fusion). This intertwining identity is clearly the sort
of thing that a topologist will love, since it indicates that the diagrams can be
interpreted as embeddings of graphs in three-dimensional space, and it ﬁts
with our interpretation of the vertices in terms of trinions. Figure 47 illustrates
the Yang-Baxter equation. The intertwining identity is an assumption like the
Yang-Baxter equation itself, that simpliﬁes the mathematical structure of the
model.
=
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
Figure 47. Yang-Baxter equation.
It is to be expected that there will be an operator that expresses the recoupling
of vertex interactions as shown in Figure 50 and labeled by Q. This corresponds
to the associativity at the level of trinion combinations shown in Figure 44.
The actual formalism of such an operator will parallel the mathematics of

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
297
= R
Figure 48. Braiding.
=
Figure 49. Intertwining.
recoupling for angular momentum. See for example [41]. If one just considers
the abstract structure of recoupling then one sees that for trees with four
branches (each with a single root) there is a cycle of length ﬁve as shown in
Figure 51. One can start with any pattern of three vertex interactions and go
through a sequence of ﬁve recouplings that bring one back to the same tree
from which one started. It is a natural simplifying axiom to assume that this
composition is the identity mapping. This axiom is called the pentagon identity.
F
Figure 50. Recoupling.
F
F F
F
F
Figure 51. Pentagon identity.
Finally there is a hexagonal cycle of interactions between braiding, recoupling
and the intertwining identity as shown in Figure 52.
One says that the
interactions satisfy the hexagon identity if this composition is the identity.

298
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
=
R
R
R
F
F
F
Figure 52. Hexagon identity.
Remark 9. It is worth pointing out how these identities are related to the
braiding. The hexagon identity tells us that
R−1FRF −1RF = I
where I is the identity mapping on the process space for trees with three
branches. Letting
A = R
and
B = F −1RF,
we see that the hexagon identity is equivalent to the statement
B = R−1F −1R.
Thus
ABA = R(R−1F −1R)R = F −1R2 = (F −1RF )F −1R
= (R−1F −1R)F −1R = (R−1F −1R)R(R−1F −1R) = BAB.
Thus the hexagon relation in this context, implies that A and B satisfy the
braiding relation. The combination of the hexagon and pentagon relations
ensures that the braid group representations that are generated are well-deﬁned
and ﬁt together as we include smaller numbers of strands in larger numbers of
strands. We omit the further details of the veriﬁcation of this statement.
A graphical three-dimensional topological quantum ﬁeld theory is an algebra
of interactions that satisﬁes the Yang-Baxter equation, the intertwining identity,
the pentagon identity and the hexagon identity. There is not room in this
summary to detail the way that these properties ﬁt into the topology of knots
and three-dimensional manifolds, but a sketch is in order.
For the case

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
299
of topological quantum ﬁeld theory related to the group SU(2) there is a
construction based entirely on the combinatorial topology of the bracket
polynomial (See Sections 11 to 18 of this paper.). See [39, 41] for more
information on this approach.
Now return to Figure 42 where we illustrate trinions, shown in relation
to a trivalent vertex, and a surface of genus three that is decomposed into
four trinions. It turns out that the vector space V (Sg) = V (G(Sg, t)) to a
surface with a trinion decomposition as t described above, and deﬁned in
terms of the graphical topological quantum ﬁeld theory, does not depend
upon the choice of trinion decomposition. This independence is guaranteed
by the braiding, hexagon and pentagon identities. One can then associate a
well-deﬁned vector |M⟩in V (Sg) whenenver M is a three manifold whose
boundary is Sg. Furthermore, if a closed three-manifold M 3 is decomposed
along a surface Sg into the union of M−and M+ where these parts are
otherwise disjoint three-manifolds with boundary Sg, then the inner product
I (M) = ⟨M−|M+⟩is, up to normalization, an invariant of the three-manifold
M3. With the deﬁnition of graphical topological quantum ﬁeld theory given
above, knots and links can be incorporated as well, so that one obtains a
source of invariants I (M 3, K) of knots and links in orientable three-manifolds.
Here we see the uses of the relationships that occur in the higher dimensional
cobordism categories, as descirbed in the previous section.
The invariant I (M 3, K) can be formally compared with the Witten [95] integral
Z(M 3, K) =

DAe(ik/4	)S(M,A)WK(A).
It can be shown that up to limits of the heuristics, Z(M, K) and I (M 3, K) are
essentially equivalent for appropriate choice of gauge group and corresponding
spin networks.
By these graphical reformulations, a three-dimensional TQFT is, at base,
a highly simpliﬁed theory of point particle interactions in 2 + 1 dimensional
spacetime. It can be used to articulate invariants of knots and links and
invariants of three manifolds. The reader interested in the SU(2) case of this
structure and its implications for invariants of knots and three manifolds can
consult [41, 39, 69, 14, 77]. One expects that physical situations involving 2 + 1
spacetime will be approximated by such an idealized theory. There are also
applications to 3 + 1 quantum gravity[53, 85, 91]. Aspects of the quantum
Hall eﬀect may be related to topological quantum ﬁeld theory [94]. One can
study a physics in two dimensional space where the braiding of particles or
collective excitations leads to non-trival representations of the Artin braid
group. Such particles are called Anyons. Such TQFT models would describe
applicable physics. One can think about applications of anyons to quantum
computing along the lines of the topoological models described here.

300
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
F
R
B = F   RF
-1
F -1
Figure 53. A more complex braiding operator.
A key point in the application of TQFT to quantum information theory
is contained in the structure illustrated in Figure 53. There we show a more
complex braiding operator, based on the composition of recoupling with the
elementary braiding at a vertex. (This structure is implicit in the Hexagon
identity of Figure 52.) The new braiding operator is a source of unitary
representations of braid group in situations (which exist mathematically) where
the recoupling transformations are themselves unitary. This kind of pattern
is utilized in the work of Freedman and collaborators [22, 20, 23, 24, 21]
and in the case of classical angular momentum formalism has been dubbed
a “spin-network quantum simlator” by Rasetti and collaborators [75, 25]. In
the next section we show how certain natural deformations [41] of Penrose
spin networks [80] can be used to produce these unitary representations of
the Artin braid group and the corresponding models for anyonic topological
quantum computation.
§14. Spin networks and Temperley-Lieb recoupling theory. In this section
we discuss a combinatorial construction for spin networks that generalizes the
original construction of Roger Penrose. The result of this generalization is a
structure that satisﬁes all the properties of a graphical TQFT as described in the
previous section, and specializes to classical angular momentum recoupling the-
ory in the limit of its basic variable. The construction is based on the properties
of the bracket polynomial (as already described in Section 11). A complete de-
scription of this theory can be found in the book “Temperley-Lieb Recoupling
Theory and Invariants of Three-Manifolds” by Kauﬀman and Lins [41].
The “q-deformed” spin networks that we construct here are based on the
bracket polynomial relation. View Figure 54 and Figure 55.
In Figure 54 we indicate how the basic projector
(symmetrizer, Jones-
Wenzl projector) is constructed on the basis of the bracket polynomial expan-
sion. In this technology a symmetrizer is a sum of tangles on n strands (for
a chosen integer n). The tangles are made by summing over braid lifts of

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
301
...
...
n strands
=
n
n
=
(A    )
-3 t(   )
σ
~σ
(1/{n}!) Σ
σ ε Sn
~
=
A
A-1
= -A2
-2
- A
=
+
{n}! = Σ
σ ε Sn
(A    )t(   )
σ
-4
=
n
n
= 0
= d
Figure 54. Basic projectors.
=
−1/δ
=
−Δ    /Δ
n
n+1
n 1 1
n 1
1
n
1
=
2
δ
Δ
1
Δ
=
-1= 0
Δ 0
Δ n+1 =
Δ n -
n-1
Figure 55. Two strand projector.
permutations in the symmetric group on n letters, as indicated in Figure 54.
Each elementary braid is then expanded by the bracket polynomial relation as
indicated in Figure 54 so that the resulting sum consists of ﬂat tangles without
any crossings (these can be viewed as elements in the Temperley-Lieb algebra).
The projectors have the property that the concatenation of a projector with
itself is just that projector, and if you tie two lines on the top or the bottom

302
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
a
b
c
i
j
k
a
b
c
i + j = a
j + k = b
i + k = c
Figure 56. Vertex.
of a projector together, then the evaluation is zero. This general deﬁnition of
projectors is very useful for this theory. The two-strand projector is shown in
Figure 55. Here the formula for that projector is particularly simple. It is the
sum of two parallel arcs and two turn-around arcs (with coeﬃcient −1/d, with
d = −A2 −A−2 is the loop value for the bracket polynomial. Figure 55 also
shows the recursion formula for the general projector. This recursion formula
is due to Jones and Wenzl and the projector in this form, developed as a sum
in the Temperley-Lieb algebra (see Section 12 of this paper), is usually known
as the Jones-Wenzl projector.
The projectors are combinatorial analogs of irreducible representations of a
group (the original spin nets were based on SU(2) and these deformed nets are
based on the corresponding quantum group to SU(2)). As such the reader can
think of them as “particles”. The interactions of these particles are governed by
how they can be tied together into three-vertices. See Figure 56. In Figure 56
we show how to tie three projectors, of a, b, c strands respectively, together to
form a three-vertex. In order to accomplish this interaction, we must share lines
between them as shown in that ﬁgure so that there are non-negative integers
i, j, k so that a = i +j, b = j +k, c = i +k. This is equivalent to the condition
that a+b+c is even and that the sum of any two of a, b, c is greater than or equal
to the third. For example a + b ≥c. One can think of the vertex as a possible
particle interaction where [a] and [b] interact to produce [c]. That is, any two
of the legs of the vertex can be regarded as interacting to produce the third leg.
There is a basic orthogonality of three vertices as shown in Figure 57. Here
if we tie two three-vertices together so that they form a “bubble” in the middle,
then the resulting network with labels a and b on its free ends is a multiple of
an a-line (meaning a line with an a-projector on it) or zero (if a is not equal
to b). The multiple is compatible with the results of closing the diagram in the
equation of Figure 57 so the two free ends are identiﬁed with one another. On
closure, as shown in the ﬁgure, the left hand side of the equation becomes a
Theta graph and the right hand side becomes a multiple of a “delta” where
Δa denotes the bracket polynomial evaluation of the a-strand loop with a
projector on it. The Θ(a, b, c) denotes the bracket evaluation of a theta graph
made from three trivalent vertices and labeled with a, b, c on its edges.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
303
There is a recoupling formula in this theory in the form shown in Figure 58.
Here there are “6-j symbols”, recoupling coeﬃcients that can be expressed,
as shown in Figure 58, in terms of tetrahedral graph evaluations and theta
graph evaluations. The tetrahedral graph is shown in Figure 59. One derives
the formulas for these coeﬃcients directly from the orthogonality relations for
the trivalent vertices by closing the left hand side of the recoupling formula
and using orthogonality to evaluate the right hand side. This is illustrated in
Figure 60. The reader should be advised that there are speciﬁc calculational
formulas for the theta and tetrahedral nets. These can be found in [41]. Here
we are indicating only the relationships and external logic of these objects.
=
Θ(   ,   ,   )
Δ
a
b
a c
a
c
d
d
a
δ a
b
a
c
d
a =
a
= Θ(   ,   ,   )
a c d
a
a
=
= Δa
Figure 57. Orthogonality of trivalent vertices.
{ }
a b
c d
i
j
Σ
=
j
a
a
b
b
c
c
d
d
i
j
Figure 58. Recoupling formula.
b
c
d
a
=
k
[
]
Tet
a b
c d
i
k
i
Figure 59. Tetrahedron network.
Finally, there is the braiding relation, as illustrated in Figure 36.

304
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
{ }
a b
c d
i
j
Σ
=
j
a
a
b
b
c
c
d
d
i
j
k
Σ
=
j
Θ(   ,   ,   )
a
Θ(   ,   ,   )
c d
Δ
b j
j
j δ j
k
k
{ }
a b
c d
i
j
=
Θ(   ,   ,   )
a
Θ(   ,   ,   )
c d
Δ
b
{ }
a b
c d
i
k
k
k
k
=
Θ(   ,   ,   )
{
}
a b
c d
i
k
[
]
Tet
a b
c d
i
k
Θ(   ,   ,   )
k
k
d
c
a b
Δ j
Δ j
Δ k
Figure 60. Tetrahedron formula for recoupling coeﬃcients.
a b
c
λ
a
a
b
b
c
c
(a+b-c)/2
(a'+b'-c')/2
x' = x(x+2)
a b
c
λ
=
= (-1)
A
Figure 61. Local braiding formula.
With the braiding relation in place, this q-deformed spin network theory
satisﬁes the pentagon, hexagon and braiding naturality identities needed for a
topological quantum ﬁeld theory. All these identities follow naturally from
the basic underlying topological construction of the bracket polynomial. One
can apply the theory to many diﬀerent situations.
14.1. Evaluations. In this section we discuss the structure of the evaluations
for Δn and the theta and tetrahedral networks. We refer to [41] for the details
behind these formulas. Recall that Δn is the bracket evaluation of the closure
of the n-strand projector, as illustrated in Figure 57. For the bracket variable
A, one ﬁnds that
Δn = (−1)n A2n+2 −A−2n−2
A2 −A−2
.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
305
One sometimes writes the quantum integer
[n] = (−1)n−1Δn−1 = A2n −A−2n
A2 −A−2 .
If
A = ei	/2r
where r is a positive integer, then
Δn = (−1)n sin((n + 1)	/r)
sin(	/r)
.
Here the corresponding quantum integer is
[n] = sin(n	/r)
sin(	/r) .
Note that [n + 1] is a positive real number for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . , r −2 and that
[r −1] = 0.
The evaluation of the theta net is expressed in terms of quantum integers by
the formula
Θ(a, b, c) = (−1)m+n+p [m + n + p + 1]![n]![m]![p]!
[m + n]![n + p]![p + m]!
where
a = m + p, b = m + n, c = n + p.
Note that
(a + b + c)/2 = m + n + p.
When A = ei	/2r, the recoupling theory becomes ﬁnite with the restriction
that only three-vertices (labeled with a, b, c) are admissible when a + b + c ≤
2r −4. All the summations in the formulas for recoupling are restricted to
admissible triples of this form.
14.2. Symmetry and unitarity. The formula for the recoupling coeﬃcients
given in Figure 60 has less symmetry than is actually inherent in the structure
of the situation. By multiplying all the vertices by an appropriate factor, we
can reconﬁgure the formulas in this theory so that the revised recoupling
transformation is orthogonal, in the sense that its transpose is equal to its
inverse. This is a very useful fact. It means that when the resulting matrices are
real, then the recoupling transformations are unitary. We shall see particular
applications of this viewpoint later in the paper.
Figure 62 illustrates this modiﬁcation of the three-vertex. Let Vert[a, b, c]
denote the original 3-vertex of the Temperley-Lieb recoupling theory. Let
ModVert[a, b, c] denote the modiﬁed vertex. Then we have the formula
ModVert[a, b, c] =
√ΔaΔbΔc

Θ(a, b, c)
Vert[a, b, c].

306
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Lemma 3. For the bracket evaluation at the root of unity A = ei	/2r the factor
f(a, b, c) =
√ΔaΔbΔc

Θ(a, b, c)
is real, and can be taken to be a positive real number for (a, b, c) admissible (i.e.
a + b + c ≤2r −4).
Proof. By the results from the previous subsection,
Θ(a, b, c) = (−1)(a+b+c)/2 ˆΘ(a, b, c)
where ˆΘ(a, b, c) is positive real, and
ΔaΔbΔc = (−1)(a+b+c)[a + 1][b + 1][c + 1]
where the quantum integers in this formula can be taken to be positive real. It
follows from this that
f(a, b, c) =
:
[a + 1][b + 1][c + 1]
ˆΘ(a, b, c)
,
showing that this factor can be taken to be positive real.
⊣
In Figure 63 we show how this modiﬁcation of the vertex aﬀects the non-zero
term of the orthogonality of trivalent vertices (compare with Figure 57). We
refer to this as the “modiﬁed bubble identity.” The coeﬃcient in the modiﬁed
bubble identity is
:
ΔbΔc
Δa
= (−1)(b+c−a)/2
:
[b + 1][c + 1]
[a + 1]
where (a, b, c) form an admissible triple. In particular b + c −a is even and
hence this factor can be taken to be real.
We rewrite the recoupling formula in this new basis and emphasize that
the recoupling coeﬃcients can be seen (for ﬁxed external labels a, b, c, d) as a
matrix transforming the horizontal “double-Y” basis to a vertically disposed
double-Y basis. In Figure 64, Figure 65 and Figure 66 we have shown the
form of this transformation,using the matrix notation
M[a, b, c, d]ij
for the modiﬁed recoupling coeﬃcients. In Figure 64 we derive an explicit
formula for these matrix elements. The proof of this formula follows directly
from trivalent–vertex orthogonality (See Figure 57 and Figure 60.), and is
given in Figure 64. The result shown in Figure 64 and Figure 65 is the following
formula for the recoupling matrix elements.
M[a, b, c, d]ij = ModTet
 a
b
i
c
d
j

/

ΔaΔbΔcΔd

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
307
where √ΔaΔbΔcΔd is short-hand for the product
:
ΔaΔb
Δj
:
ΔcΔd
Δj
Δj
= (−1)(a+b−j)/2(−1)(c+d−j)/2(−1)j
:
[a + 1][b + 1]
[j + 1]
:
[c + 1][d + 1]
[j + 1]
[j + 1]
= (−1)(a+b+c+d)/2
[a + 1][b + 1][c + 1][d + 1]
In this form, since (a, b, j) and (c, d, j) are admissible triples, we see that this
coeﬃent can be taken to be real, and its value is independent of the choice of i
and j. The matrix M[a, b, c, d] is real-valued.
It follows from Figure 58 (turn the diagrams by ninety degrees) that
M[a, b, c, d]−1 = M[b, d, a, c].
In Figure 67 we illustrate the formula
M[a, b, c, d]T = M[b, d, a, c].
It follows from this formula that
M[a, b, c, d]T = M[a, b, c, d]−1.
Hence M[a, b, c, d] is an orthogonal, real-valued matrix.
a
b
c
a
b
c
=
Δ    Δ    Δ    
Θ(     ,     ,     )
a
b
c
c
a
b
Figure 62. Modiﬁed three vertex.
Theorem 5. In the Temperley-Lieb theory we obtain unitary (in fact real
orthogonal) recoupling transformations when the bracket variable A has the
form A = ei	/2r for r a positive integer. Thus we obtain families of unitary
representations of the Artin braid group from the recoupling theory at these roots
of unity.
Proof. The proof is given the discussion above.
⊣
In Section 16 we shall show explictly how these methods work in the case of
the Fibonacci model where A = e3i	/5.
§15. Fibonacci particles. In this section and the next we detail how the
Fibonacci model for anyonic quantum computing [68, 81] can be constructed
by using a version of the two-stranded bracket polynomial and a generalization
of Penrose spin networks. This is a fragment of the Temperley-Lieb recoupling

308
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
=
Θ(   ,   ,   )
Δ
a
b
a
c
a
c
a
b
a
a
b
c
a
=
Δ    Δ    Δ    
a
b
c
a
b
c
a
=
a
Θ(   ,   ,   )
a
c
b
a
b
c
Δ
Δ
Δ
a
b
c
Figure 63. Modiﬁed bubble identity.
Σ
=
j
a
a
b
b
c
c
d
d
i
k
Σ
=
Δ j δ j
k
k
=
d
=
[
]
ModTet
a b
c d
i
a b
c d i j =
b
c
d
a
i
j
Δ    Δ    Δ    Δ   
a
b
c
d
a b
c d i
a b
c d i
j
a
b
c
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
j
j
k
k
k
Δ j
j
d
a b
c d i
a
b
c
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
j
j
j
Δ j
d
a
b
c
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
j
j
Figure 64. Derivation of modiﬁed recoupling coeﬃcients.
theory [41]. We already gave in the preceding sections a general discussion of
the theory of spin networks and their relationship with quantum computing.
The Fibonacci model is a TQFT that is based on a single “particle” with two
states that we shall call the marked state and the unmarked state. The particle
in the marked state can interact with itself either to produce a single particle in

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
309
a b
c d i j
Σ
=
j
a
a
b
b
c
c
d
d
i
j
Figure 65. Modiﬁed recoupling formula.
a b
c d i j =
b
c
d
a
i
j
Δ    Δ    Δ    Δ   
a
b
c
d
M[a,b,c,d]i j =
a b
c d i j
Figure 66. Modiﬁed recoupling matrix.
a b
c d
=
b
c
d
a
i
j
Δ    Δ    Δ    Δ   
a
b
c
d
b
c
d
a
i
j
Δ    Δ    Δ    Δ   
a
b
c
d
a b
c d
T
-1
=
=
Figure 67. Modiﬁed matrix transpose.
the marked state, or to produce a single particle in the unmarked state. The
particle in the unmarked state has no inﬂuence in interactions (an unmarked
state interacting with any state S yields that state S). One way to indicate these
two interactions symbolically is to use a box,for the marked state and a blank
space for the unmarked state. Then one has two modes of interaction of a box
with itself:
1. Adjacency:
and
2. Nesting:
.

310
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
With this convention we take the adjacency interaction to yield a single box,
and the nesting interaction to produce nothing:
=
=
We take the notational opportunity to denote nothing by an asterisk (*). The
syntatical rules for operating the asterisk are Thus the asterisk is a stand-in for
no mark at all and it can be erased or placed wherever it is convenient to do so.
Thus
= ∗.
*
P
P
P
P
P
Figure 68. Fibonacci particle interaction.
We shall make a recoupling theory based on this particle, but it is worth
noting some of its purely combinatorial properties ﬁrst. The arithmetic of
combining boxes (standing for acts of distinction) according to these rules
has been studied and formalized in [92] and correlated with Boolean algebra
and classical logic. Here within and next to are ways to refer to the two sides
delineated by the given distinction. From this point of view, there are two
modes of relationship (adjacency and nesting) that arise at once in the presence
of a distinction.
*
*
*
*
| 0 >
| 1 >
111
0
1111
0
dim(V         ) = 2
dim(V      ) = 1
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Figure 69. Fibonacci trees.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
311
From here on we shall denote the Fibonacii particle by the letter P. Thus
the two possible interactions of P with itself are as follows.
1. P, P −→∗
2. P, P −→P
In Figure 69 we indicate in small tree diagrams the two possible interactions of
the particle P with itself. In the ﬁrst interaction the particle vanishes, producing
the asterix. In the second interaction the particle a single copy of P is produced.
These are the two basic actions of a single distinction relative to itself, and they
constitute our formalism for this very elementary particle.
In Figure 69, we have indicated the diﬀerent results of particle processes
where we begin with a left-associated tree structure with three branches, all
marked and then four branches all marked. In each case we demand that the
particles interact successively to produce an unmarked particle in the end, at
the root of the tree. More generally one can consider a left-associated tree with
n upward branches and one root. Let T(a1, a2, . . . , an : b) denote such a tree
with particle labels a1, . . . , an on the top and root label b at the bottom of the
tree. We consider all possible processes (sequences of particle interactions) that
start with the labels at the top of the tree, and end with the labels at the bottom
of the tree. Each such sequence is regarded as a basis vector in a complex
vector space
V a1,a2,...,an
b
associated with the tree. In the case where all the labels are marked at the top
and the bottom label is unmarked, we shall denote this tree by
V 111...11
0
= V (n)
0
where n denotes the number of upward branches in the tree. We see from
Figure 69 that the dimension of V (3)
0
is 1, and that
dim(V (4)
0 ) = 2.
This means that V (4)
0
is a natural candidate in this context for the two-qubit
space.
Given the tree T(1, 1, 1, . . . , 1 : 0) (n marked states at the top, an unmarked
state at the bottom), a process basis vector in V (n)
0
is in direct correspondence
with a string of boxes and asterisks (1’s and 0’s) of length n −2 with no repeated
asterisks and ending in a marked state. See Figure 69 for an illustration of the
simplest cases. It follows from this that
dim(V (n)
0
) = fn−2
where fk denotes the k-th Fibonacci number:
f0 = 1, f1 = 1, f2 = 2, f3 = 3, f4 = 5, f5 = 8, . . .

312
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
where
fn+2 = fn+1 + fn.
The dimension formula for these spaces follows from the fact that there are fn
sequences of length n −1 of marked and unmarked states with no repetition
of an unmarked state. This fact is illustrated in Figure 70.
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Tree of squences with no occurence of **
Figure 70. Fibonacci sequence.
§16. The Fibonacci recoupling model. We now show how to make a model
for recoupling the Fibonacci particle by using the Temperley Lieb recoupling
theory and the bracket polynomial. Everything we do in this section will be
based on the 2-projector, its properties and evaluations based on the bracket
polynomial model for the Jones polynomial. While we have outlined the
general recoupling theory based on the bracket polynomial in earlier sections
of this paper, the present section is self-contained, using only basic information
about the bracket polyonmial, and the essential properties of the 2-projector as
shown in Figure 71. In this ﬁgure we state the deﬁnition of the 2-projector, list
its two main properties (the operator is idempotent and a self-attached strand
yields a zero evaluation) and give diagrammatic proofs of these properties.
In Figure 72, we show the essence of the Temperley-Lieb recoupling model for
the Fibonacci particle. The Fibonaccie particle is, in this mathematical model,
identiﬁed with the 2-projector itself. As the reader can see from Figure 72,
there are two basic interactions of the 2-projector with itself, one giving a
2-projector, the other giving nothing. This is the pattern of self-iteraction of
the Fibonacci particle. There is a third possibility, depicted in Figure 72, where
two 2-projectors interact to produce a 4-projector. We could remark at the
outset, that the 4-projector will be zero if we choose the bracket polynomial
variable A = e3	/5. Rather than start there, we will assume that the 4-projector
is forbidden and deduce (below) that the theory has to be at this root of unity.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
313
=
=
=
= 0
= 0
=
=
=
− 1/δ
−(1/δ)δ
− 1/δ
− 1/δ
Figure 71. The 2-projector.
=
Forbidden
Process
Figure 72. Fibonacci particle as 2-projector.
Note that in Figure 72 we have adopted a single strand notation for the particle
interactions, with a solid strand corresponding to the marked particle, a dotted
strand (or nothing) corresponding to the unmarked particle. A dark vertex
indicates either an interaction point, or it may be used to indicate the single
strand is shorthand for two ordinary strands. Remember that these are all
shorthand expressions for underlying bracket polynomial calculations.
In Figures 73–78 we have provided complete diagrammatic calculations of
all of the relevant small nets and evaluations that are useful in the two-strand
theory that is being used here. The reader may wish to skip directly to Figure 79
where we determine the form of the recoupling coeﬃcients for this theory. We
will discuss the resulting algebra below.
For the reader who does not want to skip the next collection of ﬁgures, here
is a guided tour. Figure 73 illustrates three basic nets in case of two strands.

314
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
These are the theta, delta and tetrahedron nets. In this ﬁgure we have shown
the decomposition on the theta and delta nets in terms of 2-projectors. The
Tetrahedron net will be similarly decomposed in Figure 77 and Figure 78. The
theta net is denoted Θ, the delta by Δ, and the tetrahedron by T. In Figure 74
we illustrate how a pedant loop has a zero evaluation. In Figure 75 we use the
identity in Figure 74 to show how an interior loop (formed by two trivalent
vertices) can be removed and replaced by a factor of Θ/Δ. Note how, in this
ﬁgure, line two proves that one network is a multiple of the other, while line
three determines the value of the multiple by closing both nets.
=
=
Θ =
=
=
=
Δ
Τ
Figure 73. Theta, delta and tetrahedron.
=
=
=
=
0
−1/δ
Figure 74. LoopEvaluation – 1.
Figure 76 illustrates the explicit calculation of the delta and theta nets. The
ﬁgure begins with a calculation of the result of closing a single strand of
the 2-projector. The result is a single stand multiplied by ( −1/) where
 = −A2 −A−2, and A is the bracket polynomial parameter. We then ﬁnd that
Δ = 2 −1
and
Θ = ( −1/)2 −Δ/ = ( −1/)(2 −2).

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
315
=
=
=
=
=
=
Θ
Δ
=
Θ Δ
=
/
x
y
+
x
x
x
x
Θ Δ
=
/
x
Figure 75. LoopEvaluation – 2.
=
Θ
=
=
=
Δ
=
− 1/δ
=
(δ − 1/δ)
(δ − 1/δ)
(δ − 1/δ) δ
=
Δ
δ    − 1
2
=
− 1/δ
= (δ − 1/δ)
δ
2
− Δ/δ
Θ
Figure 76. Calculate Theta, Delta.
Figure 77 and Figure 78 illustrate the calculation of the value of the
tetrahedral network T. The reader should note the ﬁrst line of Figure 77
where the tetradedral net is translated into a pattern of 2-projectors, and
simpliﬁed. The rest of these two ﬁgures are a diagrammatic calculation, using
the expansion formula for the 2-projector. At the end of Figure 78 we obtain
the formula for the tetrahedron
T = ( −1/)2(2 −2) −2Θ/.

316
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
=
=
Τ
=
=
− 1/δ
=
− Θ/δ =
− 1/δ
− Θ/δ
=
− (1/δ)
− Θ/δ
(δ − 1/δ)    δ
2
Figure 77. Calculate tetrahedron – 1.
=
− (1/δ)
− Θ/δ
(δ − 1/δ)    δ
2
=
− 1/δ
− Θ/δ
− (δ − 1/δ)    
2
Τ
=
(δ − 1/δ)    δ
3
− (1/δ)Θ 
− Θ/δ
− (δ − 1/δ)    
2
=
(δ − 1/δ)    (δ    − 2)    −  2Θ/δ
2
2
Figure 78. Calculate Tetrahedron – 2.
Figure 79 is the key calculation for this model. In this ﬁgure we assume that
the recoupling formulas involve only 0 and 2 strands, with 0 corresponding to
the null particle and 2 corresponding to the 2-projector. (2+2 = 4 is forbidden
as in Figure 72.) From this assumption we calculate that the recoupling matrix
is given by
F =
 a
b
c
d

=

1/Δ
Δ/Θ
Θ/Δ2
TΔ/Θ2

Figure 80 and Figure 81 work out the exact formulas for the braiding at a
three-vertex in this theory. When the 3-vertex has three marked lines, then the

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
317
a
b
c
d
+
+
=
=
a
=
a = 1/Δ
b
=
Θ 
Θ    /Δ
2
= b
b = Δ/Θ
= c
c =
2
= d
=
d
Τ Δ/Θ 2
Θ/Δ
Figure 79. Recoupling for 2-projectors.
-
+
+
-
=
+
+
=
=
A-1
=
A-1
= -A3
= -A4
−1/δ
2
+(2/δ    )
Figure 80. Braiding at the three-vertex.
braiding operator is multiplication by −A4, as in Figure 58. When the 3-vertex
has two marked lines, then the braiding operator is multiplication by A8, as
shown in Figure 81.
Notice that it follows from the symmetry of the diagrammatic recoupling
formulas of Figure 79 that the square of the recoupling matrix F is equal to the

318
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
=
=
=
− 1/δ
=
− 1/δ
-A3
=
− 1/δ
-A3
=
= -A3
=
− 1/δ
A6
= A
1 - A
2
-4
 + (            )
=
− 1/δ
A8(
)
= A8
Figure 81. Braiding at the null-three-vertex.
identity. That is,
 1
0
0
1

= F 2 =

1/Δ
Δ/Θ
Θ/Δ2
TΔ/Θ2
 
1/Δ
Δ/Θ
Θ/Δ2
TΔ/Θ2

=

1/Δ2 + 1/Δ
1/Θ + TΔ2/Θ3
Θ/Δ3 + T/(ΔΘ)
1/Δ + Δ2T 2/Θ4

.
Thus we need the relation
1/Δ + 1/Δ2 = 1.
This is equivalent to saying that
Δ2 = 1 + Δ,
a quadratic equation whose solutions are
Δ = (1 ±
√
5)/2.
Furthermore, we know that
Δ = 2 −1
from Figure 76. Hence
Δ2 = Δ + 1 = 2.
We shall now specialize to the case where
Δ =  = (1 +
√
5)/2,
leaving the other cases for the exploration of the reader. We then take
A = e3	i/5

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
319
so that
 = −A2 −A−2 = −2 cos(6	/5) = (1 +
√
5)/2.
Note that  −1/ = 1. Thus
Θ = ( −1/)2 −Δ/ =  −1.
and
T = ( −1/)2(2 −2) −2Θ/ = (2 −2) −2( −1)/
= ( −1)( −2)/ = 3 −5.
Note that
T = −Θ2/Δ2,
from which it follows immediately that
F 2 = I.
This proves that we can satisfy this model when Δ =  = (1 +
√
5)/2.
For this specialization we see that the matrix F becomes
F =
 1/Δ
Δ/Θ
Θ/Δ2
TΔ/Θ2

=
 1/Δ
Δ/Θ
Θ/Δ2
(−Θ2/Δ2)Δ/Θ2

=
 1/Δ
Δ/Θ
Θ/Δ2
−1/Δ

This version of F has square equal to the identity independent of the value of
Θ, so long as Δ2 = Δ + 1.
The ﬁnal adjustment. Our last version of F suﬀers from a lack of symmetry.
It is not a symmetric matrix, and hence not unitary. A ﬁnal adjustment of
the model gives this desired symmetry. Consider the result of replacing each
trivalent vertex (with three 2-projector strands) by a multiple by a given quantity
α. Since the Θ has two vertices, it will be multiplied by α2. Similarly, the
tetradhedron T will be multiplied by α4. The Δ and the  will be unchanged.
Other properties of the model will remain unchanged. The new recoupling
matrix, after such an adjustment is made, becomes

1/Δ
Δ/α2Θ
α2Θ/Δ2
−1/Δ

For symmetry we require
Δ/(α2Θ) = α2Θ/Δ2.
We take
α2 =
√
Δ3/Θ.
With this choice of α we have
Δ/(α2Θ) = ΔΘ/(Θ
√
Δ3) = 1/
√
Δ.
Hence the new symmetric F is given by the equation
F =

1/Δ
1/
√
Δ
1/
√
Δ
−1/Δ

=


√
√
−


320
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
where Δ is the golden ratio and  = 1/Δ. This gives the Fibonacci model.
Using Figure 80 and Figure 81, we have that the local braiding matrix for the
model is given by the formula below with A = e3	i/5.
R =
 −A4
0
0
A8

=
 e4	i/5
0
0
−e2	i/5

.
The simplest example of a braid group representation arising from this theory
is the representation of the three strand braid group generated by S1 = R and
S2 = FRF (Remember that F = F T = F −1.). The matrices S1 and S2 are
both unitary, and they generate a dense subset of the unitary group U(2),
supplying the ﬁrst part of the transformations needed for quantum computing.
§17. Quantum computation of colored Jones polynomials and the Witten-
Reshetikhin-Turaev invariant. In this section we make some brief comments
on the quantum computation of colored Jones polynomials. This material will
be expanded in a subsequent publication.
= 0
a
b
if b = 0
Σ
=
0
0
0
=
x
y
,
x
y
0
B(x,y)
0
0
0
=
a
a
a
a a a
a
a
a
a
Σ
=
x
y
,
x
y
0
B(x,y)
a
a
=
0
a
a
B(0,0)
0
0
= B(0,0) Δ a
(     ) 2
B
P(B)
Figure 82. Evaluation of the plat closure of a braid.
First, consider Figure 82. In that ﬁgure we illustrate the calculation of the
evalutation of the (a)-colored bracket polynomial for the plat closure P(B) of a
braid B. The reader can infer the deﬁnition of the plat closure from Figure 82.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
321
One takes a braid on an even number of strands and closes the top strands with
each other in a row of maxima. Similarly, the bottom strands are closed with a
row of minima. It is not hard to see that any knot or link can be represented as
the plat closure of some braid. Note that in this ﬁgure we indicate the action of
the braid group on the process spaces corresponding to the small trees attached
below the braids.
The (a)-colored bracket polynonmial of a link L, denoted < L >a, is the
evaluation of that link where each single strand has been replaced by a parallel
strands and the insertion of Jones-Wenzl projector (as discussed in Section 14).
We then see that we can use our discussion of the Temperley-Lieb recoupling
theory as in sections 14,15 and 16 to compute the value of the colored bracket
polynomial for the plat closure PB. As shown in Figure 82, we regard the
braid as acting on a process space V a,a,...,a
0
and take the case of the action on
the vector v whose process space coordinates are all zero. Then the action of
the braid takes the form
Bv(0, . . . , 0) = Σx1,...,xnB(x1, . . . , xn)v(x1, . . . , xn)
where B(x1, . . . , xn) denotes the matrix entries for this recoupling transforma-
tion and v(x1, . . . , xn) runs over a basis for the space V a,a,...,a
0
. Here n is even
and equal to the number of braid strands. In the ﬁgure we illustrate with n = 4.
Then, as the ﬁgure shows, when we close the top of the braid action to form
PB, we cut the sum down to the evaluation of just one term. In the general
case we will get
< PB >a= B(0, . . . , 0)Δn/2
a .
The calculation simpliﬁes to this degree because of the vanishing of loops in
the recoupling graphs. The vanishing result is stated in Figure 82, and it is
proved in the case a = 2 in Figure 74.
The colored Jones polynomials are normalized versions of the colored bracket
polymomials, diﬀering just by a normalization factor.
In order to consider quantumn computation of the colored bracket or
colored Jones polynomials, we therefore can consider quantum computation of
the matrix entries B(0, . . . , 0). These matrix entries in the case of the roots of
unity A = ei	/2r and for the a = 2 Fibonacci model with A = e3i	/5 are parts
of the diagonal entries of the unitary transformation that represents the braid
group on the process space V a,a,...,a
0
. We can obtain these matrix entries by
using the Hadamard test as described in section 11. As a result we get relatively
eﬃcient quantum algorithms for the colored Jones polynonmials at these roots
of unity, in essentially the same framework as we described in section 11, but
for braids of arbitrary size. The computational complexity of these models is
essentially the same as the models for the Jones polynomial discussed in [3].
We reserve discussion of these issues to a subsequent publication.

322
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
δ
A
4
-4
= A
+
+
δ
A
4
-4
=
A
+
+
-
=
4
A
A-4
-
(
)
-
(
)
-
=
4
A
A-4
-
(
)
-
(
)
=
A8
Figure 83. Dubrovnik polynomial specialization at two strands.
It is worth remarking here that these algorithms give not only quantum
algorithms for computing the colored bracket and Jones polynomials, but also
for computing the Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev (WRT) invariants at the above
roots of unity. The reason for this is that the WRT invariant, in unnormalized
form is given as a ﬁnite sum of colored bracket polynomials:
WRT(L) = Σr−2
a=0Δa < L >a,
and so the same computation as shown in Figure 82 applies to the WRT. This
means that we have, in principle, a quantum algorithm for the computation
of the Witten functional integral [95] via this knot-theoretic combinatorial
topology. It would be very interesting to understand a more direct approach
to such a computation via quantum ﬁeld theory and functional integration.
Finally, we note that in the case of the Fibonacci model, the (2)-colored
bracket polynomial is a special case of the Dubrovnik version of the Kauﬀman
polynomial [38]. See Figure 83 for diagammatics that resolve this fact. The
skein relation for the Dubrovnik polynomial is boxed in this ﬁgure. Above the
box, we show how the double strands with projectors reproduce this relation.
This observation means that in the Fibonacci model, the natural underlying
knot polynomial is a special evaluation of the Dubrovnik polynomial, and the
Fibonacci model can be used to perform quantum computation for the values
of this invariant.
§18. A direct construction of the Fibonacci model. In section 10 of this paper,
we give elementary constructions for unitary representations of the three strand

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
323
braid group in U(2). In section 11 we show how to use unitary representations
of the three strand brand group to devise a quantum computation for the
Jones polynomial. In this section we return to these considerations, and show
how to construct the Fibonacci model by elementary means, without using the
recoupling theory that we have explained in the previous sections of the paper.
This ﬁnal approach is signiﬁcant in that it shows an even closer relationship of
the Fibonacci model with the Temperley Lieb algebra representation associated
with the Jones polynomial.
The constructions in this section are based on the combinatorics of the
Fibonacci model. While we do not assume the recoupling theory of the
previous sections, we essentially reconstruct its patterns for the particular
purposes of the Fibonacci model. Recall that in the Fibonacci model we have
a (mathematical) particle P that interacts with itself either to produce P or to
produce a neutral particle ∗. If X is any particle then ∗interacts with X to
produce X . Thus ∗acts as an identity trasformation. These rules of interaction
are illustrated in Figure 68, Figure 69, Figure 70 and Figure 84.
*
P
P
P
P
P
*
P
P
P
*
*
*
*
*
Figure 84. The Fibonacci particle P.
λ
=
*
P
P
P
P
P
*
P
P
μ
=
P
P
P
Figure 85. Local braiding.

324
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
The braiding of two particles is measured in relation to their interaction. In
Figure 85 we illustrate braiding of P with itself in relation to the two possible
interactions of P with itself. If P interacts to produce ∗, then the braiding
gives a phase factor of 
. If P interacts to produce P, then the braiding gives
a phase factor of . We assume at the outset that 
 and  are unit complex
numbers. One should visualize these particles as moving in a plane and the
diagrams of interaction are either creations of two particles from one particle,
or fusions of two particles to a single particle (depending on the choice of
temporal direction). Thus we have a braiding matrix for these “local” particle
interactions:
R =
 
0
0


written with respect to the basis {|∗⟩, |P⟩} for this space of particle interactions.
We want to make this braiding matrix part of a larger representation of the
braid group. In particular, we want a representation of the three-strand braid
group on the process space V3 illustrated in Figure 6. This space starts with
three P particles and considers processes associated in the patttern (PP)P
with the stipulation that the end product is P. The possible pathways are
illustrated in Figure 86. They correspond to (PP)P −→(∗)P −→P and
(PP)P −→(P)P −→P. This process space has dimension two and can
support a second braiding generator for the second two strands on the top of
the tree. In order to articulate the second braiding we change basis to the process
space corresponding to P(PP) as shown in Figure 87 and Figure 88. The change
of basis is shown in Figure 88 and has matrix F as shown below. We want a
unitary representation  of three-strand braids so that (1) = R and (2) =
S = F −1RF . See Figure 88. We take the form of the matrix F as follows.
F =
 a
b
b
−a

where a2 + b2 = 1 with a and b real. This form of the matrix for the basis
change is determined by the requirement that F is symmetric with F 2 = I .
The symmetry of the change of basis formula essentially demands that F 2 = I .
If F is real, symmetric and F 2 = I , then F is unitary. Since R is unitary we
see that S = FRF is also unitary. Thus, if F is constructed in this way then
we obtain a unitary representation of B3.
Now we try to simultaneously construct an F and construct a representation
of the Temperley-Lieb algebra. We begin by noting that
R =
 
0
0


=
 
0
0


+
 
 −
0
0
0

=
 
0
0


+−1
 
0
0
0

where  = (
 −). Thus R = I + −1U where U =
 
0
0
0

so that
U 2 = U. For the Temperley-Lieb representation, we want  = −2 −−2.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
325
Hence we need −2 −−2 = (
 −), which implies that 
 = −−3. With
this restriction on 
, we have the Temperley-Lieb representation and the
corresponding unitary braid group representation for 2-strand braids and the
2-strand Temperley-Lieb algebra.
P
P
P
x
P
|x> : |*>   or   |P>
Figure 86. Three strands at dimension two.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
*
*
*
P
P
P
F
F
a
b
b
-a
+
+
Figure 87. Recoupling formula.
Now we can go on to B3 and TL3 via S = FRF = I + −1V with
V = FUF . We must examine V 2, UVU and VUV . We ﬁnd that
V 2 = FUFFUF = FU 2F = FUF = V,
as desired and
V = FUF =
 a
b
b
−a
  
0
0
0
  a
b
b
−a

= 
 a2
ab
ab
b2

.
Thus V 2 = V and since V = |v⟩⟨v| and U = |w⟩⟨w| with w = (1, 0)T and
v = Fw = (a, b)T (T denotes transpose), we see that
VUV = 3|v⟩⟨v|w⟩⟨w|v⟩⟨v| = 3a2|v⟩⟨v| = 2a2V.
Similarly UVU = 2a2U. Thus, we need 2a2 = 1 and so we shall take
a = −1. With this choice, we have a representation of the Temperley-Lieb
algebra TL3 so that 1 = AI + A−1U and 2 = AI + A−1V gives a unitary
representation of the braid group when A =  = ei and b =
√
1 −−2 is real.
This last reality condition is equivalent to the inequality
cos2(2) ≥1
4,
which is satisﬁed for inﬁnitely many values of  in the ranges
[0, 	/6] ∪[	/3, 2	/3] ∪[5	/6, 7	/6] ∪[4	/3, 5	/3].

326
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
a4
F
x
x
λ
F-1
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
R
S = F   RF
-1
(x)
R
Figure 88. Change of basis.
With these choices we have
F =
 a
b
b
−a

=

1/
√
1 −−2
√
1 −−2
−1/

real and unitary, and for the Temperley-Lieb algebra,
U =
 
0
0
0

, V = 
 a2
ab
ab
b2

=
 a
b
b
b2

.
Now examine Figure 89. Here we illustrate the action of the braiding and
the Temperley-Lieb Algebra on the ﬁrst Fibonacci process space with basis
{|∗⟩, |P⟩}. Here we have 1 = R, 2 = FRF and U1 = U, U2 = V as described
above. Thus we have a representation of the braid group on three strands and a
representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra on three strands with no further
restrictions on .
So far, we have arrived at exactly the 3-strand braid representations that
we used in our papers [44, 56] giving a quantum algorithm for the Jones
polynomial for three-strand braids.
In this paper we are working in the
context of the Fibonacci process spaces and so we wish to see how to make
a representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra to this model as a whole, not
restricting ourselves to only three strands. The generic case to consider is the

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
327
P
*
Use 
Use 
μ.
λ.
Braiding
Use F.
Use F.
*
P
Temperley-Lieb
Multiply by δ.
Multiply by 0.
Use V.
Use V.
x
P
P P
P
Two Dimensional Process Space
|x>
Figure 89. Algebra for a two dimensional process space.
P
P
P
x
P
P
y
|xyz>:  |PPP>
           |P *P >
           |* P* >
           |*PP >
           |PP* >
z
P
Figure 90. A ﬁve dimensional process space.
action of the Temperley-Lieb algebra on process spaces of higher dimension as
shown in Figure 90 and Figure 91. In Figure 91 we have illustrated the triplets
from the previous ﬁgure as part of a possibly larger tree and have drawn the
strings horizontally rather than diagonally. In this ﬁgure we have listed the
eﬀects of braiding the vertical strands 3 and 4. We see from this ﬁgure that the
action of the Temperley-Lieb algebra must be as follows:
U3|P ∗P⟩= a|P ∗P⟩+ b|PPP⟩,
U3|PPP⟩= b|P ∗P⟩+ b2|PPP⟩,
U3| ∗P∗⟩= | ∗P∗⟩,
U3| ∗PP⟩= 0,
U3|PP∗⟩= 0.
Here we have denoted this action as U3 because it connotes the action on
the third and fourth vertical strands in the sequences shown in Figure 91.
Note that in a larger sequence we can recognize Uj by examining the triplet
surrounding the j −1-th element in the sequence, just as the pattern above is

328
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
P P
P
|PPP>
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
*
*
*
*
*
|P * P>
|* P *>
|* P P>
|P P *>
Use F.
Use F.
Use 
Use 
Use 
μ.
λ.
λ.
Braiding
Temperley-Lieb
Use V.
Use V.
Multiply by 
δ.
Multiply by 0.
Multiply by 0.
Five Dimensional Process Space
x
y
z
|xyz>
Figure 91. Algebra for a ﬁve dimensional process space.
governed by the elements surrounding the second element in the sequence. For
simplicity, we have only indicated three elements in the sequences above. Note
that in a sequence for the Fibonacci process there are never two consecutive
appearances of the neutral element ∗.
We shall refer to a sequence of ∗and P as a Fibonacci sequence if it contains
no consecutive appearances of ∗. Thus |PP ∗P ∗P ∗P⟩is a Fibonacci sequence.
In working with this representation of the braid group and Temperley-Lieb
algebra, it is convenient to assume that the ends of the sequence are ﬂanked by
P as in Figure 90 and Figure 91 for sequences of length 3. It is convenient to
leave out the ﬂanking P’s when notating the sequence.
Using these formulas we can determine conditions on  such that this is
a representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra for all Fibonacci sequences.
Consider the following calculation:
U4U3U4|PPPP⟩= U3U2(b|PP ∗P⟩+ b2|PPPP⟩)
= U4(bU3|PP ∗P⟩+ b2U3|PPPP⟩)
= U4(0 + b2(b|P ∗PP⟩+ b2|PPPP⟩)
= b2(bU4|P ∗PP⟩+ b2U4|PPPP⟩)
= 2b4U4|PPPP⟩.
Thus we see that in order for U4U3U4 = U4, we need that 2b4 = 1.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
329
It is easy to see that 2b4 = 1 is the only remaining condition needed to make
sure that the action of the Temperley-Lieb algebra extends to all Fibonacci Model
sequences.
Note that 2b4 = 2(1 −−2)2 = ( −1/)2. Thus we require that
 −1/ = ±1.
When  −1/ = 1, we have the solutions  = 1±
√
5
2
. However, for the reality
of F we require that 1 −−2 ≥0, ruling out the choice  = 1−
√
5
2
. When
 −1/ = −1, we have the solutions  = −1±
√
5
2
. This leaves only  = ±φ
where φ = 1+
√
5
2
(the Golden Ratio) as possible values for  that satisfy the
reality condition for F . Thus, up to a sign we have arrived at the well-known
value of  = φ (the Fibonacci model) as essentially the only way to have an
extension of this form of the representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra for
n strands. Let’s state this positively as a Theorem.
Theorem 6 (Fibonacci Theorem). Let Vn+2 be the complex vector space with
basis {|x1x2 . . . xn⟩} where each xi equals either P or ∗and there do not occur
two consecutive appearances of ∗in the sequence {x1, . . . xn}. We refer to this
basis for Vn as the set of Fibonacci sequences of length n. Then the dimension
of Vn is equal to fn+1 where fn is the n-th Fibonacci number: f0 = f1 = 1
and fn+1 = fn + fn−1. Let  = ±φ where φ = 1+
√
5
2
. Let a = 1/ and
b =
√
1 −a2. Then the Temperley-Lieb algebra on n + 2 strands with loop value
 acts on Vn via the formulas given below. First we give the left-end actions.
U1| ∗x2x3 . . . xn⟩= | ∗x2x3 . . . xn⟩,
U1|Px2x3 . . . xn⟩= 0,
U2| ∗Px3 . . . xn⟩= a| ∗Px3 . . . xn⟩+ b|PPx3 . . . xn⟩,
U2|P ∗x3 . . . xn⟩= 0,
U2|PPx3 . . . xn⟩= b| ∗Px3 . . . xn⟩+ b2|PPx3 . . . xn⟩.
Then we give the general action for the middle strands.
Ui|x1 . . . xi−3P ∗Pxi+1 . . . xn⟩= a|x1 . . . xi−3P ∗Pxi+1 . . . xn⟩
+ b|x1 . . . xi−3PPPxi+1 . . . xn⟩,
Ui|x1 . . . xi−3PPPxi+1 . . . xn⟩= b|x1 . . . xi−3P ∗Pxi+1 . . . xn⟩
+ b2|x1 . . . xi−3PPPxi+1 . . . xn⟩,
Ui|x1 . . . xi−3 ∗P ∗xi+1 . . . xn⟩= |x1 . . . xi−3 ∗P ∗xi+1 . . . xn⟩,
Ui|x1 . . . xi−3 ∗PPxi+1 . . . xn⟩= 0,
Ui|x1 . . . xi−3PP ∗xi+1 . . . xn⟩= 0.

330
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
Finally, we give the right-end action.
Un+1|x1 . . . xn−2 ∗P⟩= 0,
Un+1|x1 . . . xn−2P∗⟩= 0,
Un+1|x1 . . . xn−2PP⟩= b|x1 . . . xn−2P∗⟩+ b2|x1 . . . xn−2PP⟩.
Remark 10. Note that the left and right end Temperley-Lieb actions depend
on the same basic pattern as the middle action. The Fibonacci sequences
|x1x2 . . . xn⟩should be regarded as ﬂanked left and right by P’s just as in the
special cases discussed prior to the proof of the Fibonacci Theorem.
Corollary 1. With the hypotheses of Theorem 2, we have a unitary represen-
tation of the Artin Braid group Bn+2 to TLn+2,  : Bn+2 −→TLn+2 given by the
formulas
(i) = AI + A−1Ui,
(−1
i
) = A−1I + AUi,
where A = e3	i/5 where the Ui connote the representation of the Temperley-Lieb
algebra on the space Vn+2 of Fibonacci sequences as described in the Theorem
above.
Remark 11. The Theorem and Corollary give the original parameters of the
Fibonacci model and shows that this model admits a unitary representation of
the braid group via a Jones representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra.
In the original Fibonacci model [60], there is a basic non-trivial recoupling
matrix F .
F =

1/
1/
√

1/
√

−1/

=


√
√
−

where  = 1+
√
5
2
is the golden ratio and  = 1/. The local braiding matrix is
given by the formula below with A = e3	i/5.
R =
 A8
0
0
−A4

=
 e4	i/5
0
0
−e2	i/5

.
This is exactly what we get from our method by using  =
1+
√
5
2
and
A = e3	i/5. Just as we have explained earlier in this paper, the simplest example
of a braid group representation arising from this theory is the representation of
the three strand braid group generated by 1 = R and 2 = FRF (Remember
that F = F T = F −1.). The matrices 1 and 2 are both unitary, and they
generate a dense subset of U(2), supplying the local unitary transformations
needed for quantum computing. The full braid group representation on the
Fibonacci sequences is computationally universal for quantum computation.
In our earlier paper [60] and in the previous sections of the present work, we gave

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
331
a construction for the Fibonacci model based on Temperely-Lieb recoupling
theory. In this section, we have reconstructed the Fibonacci model on the
more elementary grounds of the representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra
summarized in the statement of the Fibonacci Theorem and its Corollary.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Abramsky and B. Coecke, Categorical quantum mechanics, Handbook of Quantum
Logic and Quantum Structures: Quantum Logic, Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2009,
pp. 261–323.
[2] D. Aharonov and I. Arad, The BQP-hardness of approximating the Jones polynomial,
quant-ph/0605181.
[3] D. Aharonov, V. F. R. Jones, and Z. Landau, A polynomial quantum algorithm for
approximating the Jones polynomial, STOC’06: Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium
on Theory of Computing (New York), ACM, 2006, quant-ph/0511096, pp. 427–436.
[4] Y. Akutsu and M. Wadati, Knot invariants and critical statistical systems, J. Phys. Soc.
Japan, vol. 56 (1987), pp. 839–842.
[5] P. K. Aravind, Borromean entanglement of the GHZ state, Potentiality, Entanglement and
Passion-at-a-Distance (R. S. Cohen et al., editors), Kluwer, 1997, pp. 53–59.
[6] M. F. Atiyah, The Geometry and Physics of Knots, Cambridge University Press, 1990.
[7] R. J. Baxter, Exactly Solved Models in Statistical Mechanics, Acad. Press, 1982.
[8] C. W. J. Beenakker, Search for majorana fermions in superconductors, arXiv: 1112.1950.
[9] G. Benkart, Commuting actions – a tale of two groups, Lie algebras and their representations
(Seoul 1995), Contemp. Math. Series, vol. 194, American Mathematical Society, 1996, pp. 1–46.
[10] N. E. Bonesteel, L. Hormozi, G. Zikos, and S. H. Simon, Braid topologies for quantum
computation, Physical Review Letters, vol. 95 (2005), pp. 140503, 4 pp., quant-ph/0505665.
[11] J. L. Brylinski and R. Brylinski, Universal quantum gates, Mathematics of Quantum
Computation (R. Brylinski and G. Chen, editors), Chapman & Hall/CRC Press, Boca Raton,
Florida, 2002.
[12] G. Chen, L. Kauﬀman, and S. Lomonaco (editors), Mathematics in Quantum Computation
and Quantum Technology, Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2007.
[13] B. Coecke, The logic of entanglement, quant-phy/0402014.
[14] L. Crane, 2-d physics and 3-d topology, Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 135
(1991), pp. 615–640.
[15] P. A. M. Dirac, Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 1958.
[16] H. A. Dye, Unitary solutions to the yang-baxter equation in dimension four, Quantum Inf.
Process, vol. 2 (2002/3), pp. 117–151, arXiv:quant-ph/0211050.
[17] C. Ernst and D. W. Sumners, A calculus for rational tangles: Applications to DNA
recombination, Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, vol. 108 (1990),
pp. 489–515.
[18] D. Finkelstein, Quantum Relativity: A Synthesis of the Ideas of Einstein and Heisenberg,
Springer-Verlag, 1996.
[19] E. Fradkin and P. Fendley, Realizing non-abelian statistics in time-reversal invariant
systems, Theory Seminar, Physics Department, UIUC, 4/25/2005.
[20] M. Freedman, Topological views on computational complexity, Documenta Mathematica,
Extra Volume, ICM, 1998, pp. 453–464.
[21]
, Quantum computation and the localization of modular functors, Foundations of
Computational Mathematics, vol. 1 (2001), pp. 183–204, quant-ph/0003128.

332
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
[22]
, A magnetic model with a possible chern-simons phase, Communications in Mathe-
matical Physics, vol. 234 (2003), pp. 129–183, With an appendix by F. Goodman and H. Wenzl;
quant-ph/0110060v1 9 Oct 2001.
[23] M. Freedman, M. Larsen, and Z. Wang, A modular functor which is universal for
quantum computation, Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 227 (2002), pp. 605–622,
quant-ph/0001108v2, 1 Feb 2000.
[24] M. H. Freedman, A. Kitaev, and Z. Wang, Simulation of topological ﬁeld theories
by quantum computers, Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 227 (2002), pp. 587–603,
quant-ph/0001071.
[25] S. Garnerone, A. Marzuoli, and M. Rasetti, Quantum automata, braid group and link
polynomials, quant-ph/0601169.
[26] L. S. Georgiev, Topological quantum computation with the universal R matrix for Ising
anyons, Lie Theory and Its Applications in Physics VII (Soﬁa) (H. D. Doebner and V. K. Dobrev,
editors), Heron Press, 2008, pp. 256–265.
[27] V. G.Turaev, The Yang-Baxter equations and invariants of links, Inventiones mathematicae,
vol. 92, Fasc. 3, pp. 527–553, LOMI preprint E-3-87, Steklov Institute, Leningrad, USSR.
[28] D. A. Ivanov, Non-abelian statistics of half-quantum vortices in p-wave superconductors,
Physical Review Letters, vol. 86 (2001), p. 268.
[29] V. F. R. Jones, Hecke algebra representations of braid groups and link polynomials, Annals
of Mathematics, vol. 126 (1987), pp. 335–338.
[30]
, On knot invariants related to some statistical mechanics models, Paciﬁc J. Math.,
vol. 137 (1989), pp. 311–334.
[31] L. H. Kauﬀman, Reﬂexivity and foundations of physics, Search for Fundamental Theory,
The VIIth Intenational Symposium Honoring French Mathematical Physicist Jean-Pierre Vigier,
Imperial College, London, UK, 12-14 July 2010 (Melville, N.Y.) (R. Amaroso, P. Rowlands, and
S. Jeﬀers, editors), AIP, American Institute of Physics Pub., pp. 48–89.
[32]
, Space and time in computation, topology and discrete physics, Proceedings of the
Workshop on Physics and Computation, PhysComp ’94, Nov. 1994, Dallas, Texas, IEEE Computer
Society Press, pp. 44–53.
[33]
, Sign and space, Religious Experience and Scientiﬁc Paradigms. Proceedings of
the 1982 IASWR Conference, Stony Brook (New York), Institute of Advanced Study of World
Religions, 1985, pp. 118–164.
[34]
, Self-reference and recursive forms, Journal of Social and Biological Structures,
vol. 10 (1987), pp. 53–72.
[35]
, State models and the Jones polynomial, Topology, vol. 26 (1987), pp. 395–407.
[36]
, New invariants in the theory of knots, Amer. Math. Monthly, vol. 95 (1988),
pp. 195–242.
[37]
, Statistical mechanics and the Jones polynomial, AMS Contemp. Math. Series,
vol. 78 (1989), pp. 263–297.
[38]
, An invariant of regular isotopy, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 318 (1990), pp. 417–
471.
[39]
, Knots and Physics, World Scientiﬁc Publishers, 1991, Second Edition (1993),
Third Edition (2002), Fourth Edition (2012).
[40]
, Knot logic, Knots and Applications (L. Kauﬀman, editor), World Scientiﬁc Pub.,
1994, pp. 1–110.
[41]
, Temperley-Lieb Recoupling Theory and Invariants of Three-Manifolds, Annals
Studies, vol. 114, Princeton University Press, 1994.
[42] L. H. Kauﬀman (editor), Knots and Applications, World Scientiﬁc Pub. Co., 1996.
[43] L. H. Kauﬀman (editor), The Interface of Knots and Physics, AMS PSAPM, vol. 51,
American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1996.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
333
[44]
, Quantum computing and the Jones polynomial, Quantum Computation and Infor-
mation (S. Lomonaco Jr., editor), AMS CONM/305, American Mathematical Society, 2002,
math.QA/0105255, pp. 101–137.
[45]
, Time imaginary value, paradox sign and space, Computing Anticipatory Sys-
tems, CASYS, Fifth International Conference, Liege, Belgium (2001) (D. Dubois, editor), AIP
Conference Proceedings, vol. 627, 2002.
[46]
, Non-commutative worlds, New Journal of Physics, vol. 6 (2004), pp. 173.1–173.47,
(Short version in “Spin, Proceedings of ANPA 25”, K. Bowden (ed.), Pub. May 2004).
[47]
, Eigenform, Kybernetes, The International Journal of Systems and Cybernetics,
vol. 34 (2005), pp. 129–150.
[48]
, Knot diagrammatics, Handbook of Knot Theory (Menasco and Thistlethwaite,
editors), Elsevier B. V., Amsterdam, 2005, math.GN/0410329, pp. 233–318.
[49]
, Teleportation topology, Opt. Spectrosc., vol. 9 (2005), pp. 227–232, quant-
ph/0407224, (in the Proceedings of the 2004 Byelorus Conference on Quantum Optics).
[50]
, Glafka-2004:
non-commutative worlds, International Journal of Theoretical
Physics, vol. 45 (2006), pp. 1443–1470.
[51]
, Reﬂexivity and eigenform: The shape of process, Kybernetes, vol. 4(3) (2009).
[52]
, Eigenforms, discrete processes and quantum processes, Journal of Physics: Con-
ference Series. EmerQuM11: Emergent Quantum Mechanics 2011 (Heinz von Foerster Congress),
Vienna Austria 11-13 November 2011 (G. Grossing, editor), vol. 361, IOP Publishing, 2012,
p. 012034.
[53] L. H. Kauﬀman and T. Liko, Knot theory and a physical state of quantum gravity, Classical
and Quantum Gravity, vol. 23 (2006), p. R63, hep-th/0505069.
[54] L. H. Kauﬀman and S. J. Lomonaco Jr., Entanglement criteria: Quantum and topolog-
ical, Quantum Information and Computation, Spie Proceedings, 21-22 April, 2003, Orlando, FL
(E. Donkor, A. R. Pirich, and H. E. Brandt, editors), vol. 5105, pp. 51–58.
[55]
, Topological Quantum Information Theory, (Book in preparation).
[56]
, Quantum entanglement and topological entanglement, New Journal of Physics,
vol. 4 (2002), pp. 73.1–73.18.
[57]
, Braiding operators are universal quantum gates, New Journal of Physics, vol. 6
(2004), pp. 1–39.
[58]
, Quantum knots, Quantum Information and Computation II, Proceedings of Spie,
12 -14 April 2004 (E. Donkor, A. R. Pirich, and H. E. Brandt, editors), 2004, pp. 268–284.
[59]
, q-deformed spin networks, knot polynomials and anyonic topological quantum
computation, J. Knot Theory Ramiﬁcations, vol. 16 (2007), pp. 267–332.
[60]
, Spin networks and quantum computation, Lie Theory and Its Applications in
Physics VII, Heron Press, Soﬁa, 2008, pp. 225–239.
[61]
, The Fibonacci Model and the Temperley-Lieb Algebra, International J. Modern
Phys. B, vol. 22 (2008), pp. 5065–5080.
[62]
, Topological quantum information theory, Proceedings of the AMS Short Course
in Quantum Computation and Quantum Information held in Washington, D.C. January 3-4, 2009
(S. J. Lomonaco Jr., editor), Proceedings of Symposia in Applied Mathematics, vol. 68, American
Mathematical Society, 2010, pp. 103–176.
[63]
, Quantizing knots groups and graphs, Quantum Information and Computation IX,
Spie Proceedings, April 2011 (H. E. Brandt, E. Donkor, and A. R. Pirich, editors), Proceedings of
Spie, vol. 8057, SPIE, 2011, pp. 80570T–1–80570T–15.
[64] L. H. Kauﬀman and P. Noyes, Discrete physics and the derivation of electromagnetism
from the formalism of quantum mechanics, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A, vol. 452
(1996), pp. 81–95.
[65]
, Discrete physics and the dirac equation, Physics Letters A, vol. 218 (1996),
pp. 139–146.

334
LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN
[66] L. H. Kauﬀman and D. E. Radford, Invariants of 3-manifolds derived from ﬁnite
dimensional Hopf algebras, Journal of Knot Theory and its Ramiﬁcations, vol. 4 (1995), pp. 131–
162.
[67] L. H. Kauﬀman and F. G. Varela, Form dynamics, Journal of Social and Biological
Structures, (1980), pp. 171–206.
[68] A. Kitaev, Anyons in an exactly solved model and beyond, Annals of Physics, vol. 321
(2006), pp. 2–111, arXiv.cond-mat/0506438 v1 17 June 2005.
[69] T. Kohno, Conformal Field Theory and Topology, AMS Translations of Mathematical
Monographs, vol. 210, American Mathematical Society, 1998.
[70] M. Leijnse and K. Flensberg, Introduction to topological superconductivity and Majorana
ferminons, Semiconductor Science and Technology, vol. 27 (2012), p. 124003, arXiv:1206.1736.
[71] S. J. Lomonaco and L. H. Kauﬀman, Quantum knots and mosaics, Journal of Quantum
Information Processing, vol. 7 (2008), pp. 85–115, http://arxiv.org/abs/0805.0339.
[72]
, Quantum knots and lattices, or a blueprint for quantum systems that do rope
tricks, Quantum Information Science and its Contributions to Mathematics (Providence, RI), Proc.
Sympos. Appl. Math., vol. 68, Amer. Math. Soc., 2010, pp. 209–276.
[73]
, Quantizing braids and other mathematical structures: the general quantization
procedure, Quantum Information and Computation IX, Spie Proceedings, April 2011 (H. E. Brandt,
E. Donkor, and A. R. Pirich, editors), Proceedings of Spie, vol. 8057, SPIE, 2011, pp. 805702–1–
805702–14.
[74] E. Majorana, A symmetric theory of electrons and positrons, I Nuovo Cimento, vol. 14
(1937), pp. 171–184.
[75] A. Marzuoli and M. Rasetti, Spin network quantum simulator, Physics Letters A, vol. 306
(2002), pp. 79–87.
[76] G. Moore and N. Read, Noabelions in the fractional quantum Hall eﬀect, Nuclear Physics
B, vol. 360 (1991), pp. 362–396.
[77] G. Moore and N. Seiberg, Classical and quantum conformal ﬁeld theory, Communications
in Mathematical Physics, vol. 123 (1989), pp. 177–254.
[78] V. Mourik, K. Zuo, S. M. Frolov, S. R. Plissard, E. P. A. M. Bakkers, and L. P.
Kouwenhuven, Signatures of Majorana fermions in hybred superconductor-semiconductor devices,
arXiv: 1204.2792.
[79] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information,
Cambridge University Press, 2000.
[80] R. Penrose, Angular momentum: An approach to combinatorial spacetime, Quantum
Theory and Beyond (T. Bastin, editor), Cambridge University Press, 1969.
[81] J. Preskill, Topological computing for beginners, (slide presentation), Technical report,
Caltech, http://www.iqi.caltech.edu/∼preskill/ph219.
[82] N. Y. Reshetikhin and V. Turaev, Ribbon graphs and their invariants derived from quantum
groups, Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 127 (1990), pp. 1–26.
[83]
, Invariants of three manifolds via link polynomials and quantum groups, Inventiones
mathematicae, vol. 103 (1991), pp. 547–597.
[84] M. Roetteles, (Private conversation, fall 2003).
[85] C. Rovelli and L. Smolin, Spin networks and quantum gravity, Physical Review D, vol. 52
(1995), pp. 5743–5759.
[86] P. Rowlands, Zero to Inﬁnity: The Foundations of Physics, Series on Knots and Every-
thing, vol. 41, World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company, 2007.
[87] B. Schmeikal, Primordial Space: Point-free Space and Logic Case, Nova Publishers,
2012.
[88] B. Schumacher, Communication, Correlation, and Complementarity, Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of Texas at Austin, 1990.

KNOT LOGIC AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING
335
[89] P. W. Shor and S. P. Jordan, Estimating Jones polynomials is a complete problem for one
clean qubit, Quantum Information & Computation, vol. 8 (2008), pp. 681–714.
[90] S. H. Simon, N. E. Bonesteel, M. H. Freedman, N. Petrovic, and L. Hormozi, Topological
quantum computing with only one mobile quasiparticle, Physical Review Letters, vol. 96 (2006),
pp. 070503, 4 pp., quant-ph/0509175.
[91] L. Smolin, Link polynomials and critical points of the chern-simons path integrals, Modern
Physics Letters A, vol. 4 (1989), pp. 1091–1112.
[92] G. Spencer-Brown, Laws of Form, George Allen and Unwin Ltd., London, 1969.
[93] V. G. Turaev and O. Viro, State sum invariants of 3-manifolds and quantum 6j symbols,
Topology, vol. 31 (1992), pp. 865–902.
[94] F. Wilczek, Fractional Statistics and Anyon Superconductivity, World Scientiﬁc Publishing
Company, 1990.
[95] E. Witten, Quantum ﬁeld Theory and the Jones Polynomial, Communications in Mathe-
matical Physics, vol. 121 (1989), pp. 351–399.
[96] L. Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, New York: Harcourt, Brace and
Company, Inc., London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co. Ltd., 1922.
[97] P. Wocjan and J. Yard, The Jones polynomial: quantum algorithms and applications in
quantum complexity theory, quant-ph/0603069.
[98] C. N. Yang, Some exact results for the many-body problem in one dimension with repulsive
delta-function interaction, Physical Review Letters, vol. 19 (1967), p. 1312.
[99] Y. Zhang, L. H. Kauﬀman, and M. L. Ge, Yang-Baxterizations, universal quantum gates
and Hamiltonians, Quantum Information Processing, vol. 4 (2005), pp. 159–197.
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS, STATISTICS AND COMPUTER SCIENCE (M/C 249)
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT CHICAGO
851 SOUTH MORGAN STREET
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60607-7045
E-mail: kauﬀman@uic.edu


INDEX
Abelian algebra, 153, 155, 158, 159, 161, 165,
167, 170
Abelian group, 135
additive model, 215, 219
adjacency, 250, 309, 310
adjoint, 10, 21, 126, 127, 183–186, 191, 201–203,
206, 207
self-adjoint, 124, 129–131, 138, 140, see also
operator, self-adjoint
adjunction, 31, 125–128, 130, 132, 136–138, 140,
143, 144, 146–148, 155, 156, 163, 164
dual, 123, 138, 140, 143, 144, 147
triangle inequalities, 20
aﬃne map, 139, 143, 147
Alice & Bob, 13, 71, 72, 74, 79
ambient group, 270
annihilation operator, 225, 247, 256, 279
antimatter, 54
anyon, 229, 230, 299, see also particle, sub-
atomic
arrow, 111, 112, see also morphism
Artin group, 224, 226–230, 232–234, 260, 261,
263, 270, 281, 284, 292, 299, 300, 307, 330
Aspect, Alain, 13
associativity, 134, 141
atoms (of a lattice), 175
automated
proof checking, 178
reasoning, 178, 179
theorem proving, 178
theory exploration, 178, 179
barrier penetration, 25
basic distributional vector space, 205, 214
basic state, 8, 9, 11
Bayesian inference, 178, 194
Bell measurement, 14
Bell pairs, 202
Bell state, 10, 13, 108
Bell’s inequality, 267–269
Bell’s Theorem, 12–14, 73
Bell, John Stewart, 13, 72, 73
biextensional collapse, 91
biﬁbration, 136
bifunctor, 17
bilinear map, 136
bimorphism, 142, 143
bipartite system, 110
biproduct, 140
bit, 9
bivalence, 33–35, 37–39
black hole, 68, 69
Bloch sphere, 9, 108
block universe, 33, 34, 39
Boolean algebra, 154, 157–160, 162
complete Boolean algebra, 154, 163, 165
Boolean logic, 224, 247, 252, 256, 310
Borel set, 152, 162
Borromean rings, 233, 238–240, 269
boson, see particle, subatomic
bounded operator, 152, 153
box, 179, 183–187
input-output, 191
bra, 258, 259, 289
bra-ket notation, 8, 125, 134, 258, 259, 280,
285–291
bracket polynomial, 227, 228, 230, 252, 274,
275, 277, 278, 280, 282, 299–302, 304, 307,
312–314
colored, 320–322
braid, 226, 230, 232–234, 245, 270, 272, 280–282,
284, 293–295, 300, 320, 321, 324–326
generators, 232–234, 272, 273, 281, 324
group, 223, 225–228, 230, 231, 233, 234, 245,
263, 264, 266, 267, 272, 274, 279, 281, 284,
291, 298, 300, 320, 321, 323–326, 328, 330
337

338
Index
three-strand group, 270, 272, 274, 280–282,
326
braiding, 223, 225, 226, 229, 230, 244–247, 261,
263, 271–274, 279, 291, 294, 296–300, 303,
304, 316–318, 324, 326, 327, 330
local, 304, 320, 323
universal gate, 266
braiding operator, 223, 226, 229, 245, 255, 260,
261, 266, 273, 296, 300, 317
Brauer algebra, 288
Brouwer algebra, 156
Carroll, Lewis, 31
cartesian product, 186
category, 14–16, 18, 152, 283–286, 288, 289,
291–293, 295
axioms for, 15
Cartesian, 112, 115
cocomplete, 135, 136
compact, 112, 115, 117, 189, 191
dagger, 22
compact closed, 21, 199–201, 209, 210, 219
complete, 135, 147
dagger, 21, 89, 95–101, 105, 108, 113, 114
dagger-compact, 184–186, 190, 192–194
distributional, 100, 107, 108
dual, 15
homomorphisms of, 16
Kleisli, 106
locally small, 15
monoidal, 15, 17–20, 88, 89, 91–101, 105–108,
110–117, 124, 135, 136, 139, 142, 176, 177,
179, 182, 200, 201
autonomous, 21
braided, 19, 20
dagger, 22
dagger braided, 22
dagger symmetric, 22
left autonomous, 21
planar, 18
right autonomous, 20
symmetric, 19, 20, 201, 207, 208
of convex sets, 139
of ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces, 126, 139,
see also Hilbert space, ﬁnite-dimensional
of Hilbert spaces, 16, 21
of modules, 123, 125, 134, 136, 143
of sets, 16, 20, 21
of vector spaces, 16, 20, 125, 135
operational, 94, 95, 98–102, 104–111
opposite, 15
small, 15
strict, 176, 177, 179, 182, 184
symmetric, 93–98, 100, 101, 105, 112, 135,
136, 139, 142, 176, 177, 179, 182
tangle, 284, 295
tensor, 15
traceable, 113, 114
traced, 114–116
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, 118
choice function, 160
Chu space, 91, 92, 94
classical computation, 12
classical computer, 52, 63
classical perspective, 153, 154
Cliﬀord algebraic representation, 225, 243, 245,
256
clock, 45, 47, 50
clopen sets, 157, 159, 160, 162, 165
clopen subobject, 151, 152, 154, 155, 157, 159–
165, 167–170
CNOT gate, 11, 13, 192, 263–266
co-measurable physical quantities, 153
coalgebra, 207, 208
coarse-graining, 153–155, 157, 159, 165, 169,
170
cobordism, 225, 251, 252, 283, 285–287, 291–
293
category, 284–292, 295, 299
coequaliser of algebras, 135, 136
coherence, 58, 66, 68
conditions, 176
theorem, 18, 22
colimit, 135, 162
commutant, 153
commutativity, 134, 141
commutator, 62
compact space, 158
complement, 169, 170
complementarity, 25, 36
complementary observables, 12
completeness theorem, 19
complex matrix, 152
complex number, 123–125, 129, 175
complex vector, 258, 262, 263, 266, 280, 311,
329
composition, 15, 16, 96, 102, 111, 112, 115, 116,
174, 176, 180, 185
category-theoretic, 180–183, 185, 186, 189,
190
of systems, 176
parallel, 181–183, 185, 186

Index
339
sequential, 180–183, 185, 186
compound system, 89–92
conditional probability, 75
conjugate, 125, 126
conjunction, 153, 157
connective, 178, 180
conservation laws, 57
constant, 178
context, 153, 154, 159, 162, 165, 169, 170
maximal context, 167–170
minimal context, 165, 169
subcontext, 154
trivial context, 166
context category, 158, 159, 161
context vector, 200, 213–215
context-based approach, 204
contextuality, 108, 111, 153, 155, 159, 170
convex algebra, 124, 143
convex combination, 104, 109
convex set, 123, 124, 138–140, 143–145
convex sum, 139, 144
coordinate transformation, 48
gauge, 57
Lorentz, 48
Poincar´e, 48
Copenhagen view, 66
copy object on relational matrices, 214
copy subject on relational matrices, 214
corpus, 188
coupling, 60
CPT Theorem, 55
creation, 225, 227, 247, 256, 266, 279, 296
crossing, 234, 239, 241, 242, 248–250, 252, 261,
275–279, 288, 296, 301
sign, 276
cyclic property, 127, 128
dagger, see adjoint
daseinisation
of projections, 162, 170
outer, 162, 167, 169, 170
decoherence, 59, 66, 68, see also coherence
deﬁnition classiﬁcation, 200, 217, 220
delayed-choice experiment, 61
density matrix, 9, 138, 145, 146
density operator, 60, 99
determinism, 13, 33, 34, 39, 73, 83
strong, 73, 81–85
weak, 81–83
diagonalize, 214
diagrammatic calculus, 208, 209
diagrammatic formalism, 177–179, 185, 194
diagrammatic logic, 194
Dirac notation, see bra-ket notation
Dirac, Paul, 54
direct matrices, 214
disambiguation, 200, 204, 212, 214–216, 220
disjoint cover, 102–104, 108
disjunction, 153, 156, 169, 170
distributional model of meaning, 200, 202, 204,
205
distributive law, 25–28, 30, 38, 39, 102, 174, 175
distributivity, 175
double-slit experiment, 25, 30, 59
dual, 117, 123, 125, 127, 130, 132, 133, 136–138,
140, 146, 147, see also adjunction, dual, see
also space, dual
duality, 123–127, 147, see also Gelfand duality
eﬀect algebra, 124, 141–143
eﬀect module, 123, 124, 138, 140, 141, 143, 144,
146–148
eigenform, 252, 254, 255
eigenstates, 9
eigenvalue, 12, 132, 133, 135, 138, 268
eigenvalues, 11
eigenvector, 9, 12
Eilenberg-Moore algebra, 123
Einstein, Albert, 12
Einstein, Podolosky, and Rosen, see EPR
electromagnetic force, 55
emergent relationships, 46
empirical model, 72–74, 83, 106–110
endomorphism, 97, 99, 113, 115–117
endomorphism ideal, 97, 98, 114, 115, 119
entangled quantum systems, 60, 67, see also
quantum state, entangled
entangled state, 10, 262, 267, 269
entanglement, 13, 88, 112, 183, 185, 226, 263,
265
entanglement swapping, 185
entropy, 69
epimorphism, 15
EPR, 61, 72
EPR pair, 13
EPR paradox, 12, 13
equational statement, 177, 185, 186
Equivalence Principle, 48, 49
error analysis, 219
error correction, 12, 66, 68
evaluation, 92, 94, 100, 101, 104, 105, 114
evaluation problem, 218

340
Index
evaluation rule, 90, 93
event, 45
expectation value, 12
exponent, 125, 136
expression, 228, 241, 247, 248, 259, 261, 265,
278, 281, 296, 313
fault-tolerant, 66
fermion, 223, 225, 227, 242–246, 252, 255, 256,
see also particle, subatomic
Majorana, 223–226, 230, 242–247, 250–252,
255, 266, 267, 273
Feynman, Richard, 63
ﬁber products, 77–80, 84, 85
of measures, 73, 74, 77
Fibonacci, 273, 274, 326, 328–331
model, 224, 225, 227, 228, 247, 252, 267, 307,
308, 312, 320–323, 329–331
number, 227, 311, 329
particle, 307, 310, 312, 313, 323
sequence, 312, 328–330
tree, 310
ﬁnite dimensional vector space, 200, 202, 204,
220
ﬂipping (a box), 183, 184
formal sum, 134, 139, 144
four-vector, 48
frame, 102, 171
frame of reference, 46
free construction, 134, 137, 141
free group, 135
free pregroup, 200, 203, 205
Frobenius algebra, 193, 200, 207–210, 220, 221
Fubini’s Theorem, 85
functor, 16–20, 89, 93, 95–97, 100, 102, 108,
112–114, 123, 126, 127, 129, 132, 136, 139,
140, 142, 143, 156, 157, 163, 164, 182, 283,
284, 292, 295
contravariant, 16, 21, 144, 154
covariant, 16
dagger, 21
endofunctor, 125
faithful, 16
forgetful, 137, 143
free, 135, 136
full, 16
homomorphisms of, 16
monoidal, 19, 191
braided, 20
strict, 20
strong, 20, 201, 202, 205
multiset, 134
product functor, 155
fusion, 223–225, 247, 252, 255, 296
gauge ﬁeld, 56
gauge symmetric quantum theories, 57
gauge symmetry, 56, 57
gauge transformation, 57
Gel’fand topology, 159, 160
Gelfand duality, 124, 147
generative rule, 202–204, 211
geometry
Euclidean, 26, 29, 35, 39
non-Euclidean, 24, 29, 39
GHZ state, 10
Giry monad, 106
global element, 154, 171
grammar
theory of, 187–191
grammatical types, 180, 187, 189, see also word
graphical language, 14, 16, 18, 19, 177, 179, 182,
186, 189, 192
gravitational force, 55
Greenberger-Horne-Zeilinger state, see GHZ
state
group, 137, see also Abelian group, see also free
group
growing block, 33
Hadamard gate, 10, 13
Hadamard test, 282, 283, 321
hadron, see particle, subatomic
Hamiltonian, 256, 258
Hausdorﬀspace, 158
Hawking radiation, 69
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, 12, 62
Hermitian matrix, 11
Hermitian operator, 59, 60
Hermiticity condition, 54
hexagon axioms, 19
hexagon identity, 297–300, 304
Heyting algebra, 102, 151, 154–157, 160, 163,
165
bi-Heyting algebra, 151, 152, 155, 157, 159,
160, 162, 164, 170, 171
co-Heyting algebra, 151, 155–157, 164, 165
complete Heyting algebra, 154, 157, 164, 171
Heyting implication, 155, 163
co-Heyting implication, 156, 164
Heyting negation, 156, 158, 163, 165, 169, 170

Index
341
co-Heyting negation, 156, 157, 164, 165, 167,
168, 170
hidden variable, 12, 13, 26, 30, 36, 71–74, 106–
109
hidden-variable model, 72–74, 78–81, 83, 84, 86
high landmark verb, 216
Hilbert space, 8, 16, 22, 24, 25, 35, 37, 88, 89, 95,
98, 101, 107, 110, 113, 116–119, 123–125,
132–134, 137, 138, 141–143, 148, 158, 160,
170, 174–176, 185, 186, 243, 270
complex, 152
ﬁnite-dimensional, 123, 124, 126, 127, 137,
139, 140, 147
separable, 152
Hilbert-Schmidt isomorphisms, 123
homomorphism, 16, 136, 141, 143, 154, 158
bi-homomorphism, 136
homotopy, 191
horizon, 69
H¨older inequality, 118
idempotent, 99, 101, 102
identity, 153, 166
inclusion map, 130, 132, 136, 137, 140
inertial frames, 47
inﬁmum, 175
information storage, 68
initial element, 105
initial state, 258, 259
injectivity, 145, 146
inner product, 8, 10, 127, 131, 258, 259, 299
operation, 182, 186, 189, 190
structure, 175
interaction ﬁeld, 56
interference, 52, 53
intuitionistic logic, 151, 154–156, 162, 171
inverse, 16
left, 15, 189
right, 189
involution, 125, 126, 183
iso(morphism), 111, 112
isometric, 207, 209
isometry, 118
isomorphism, 15, 125–128, 130, 132, 137, 140,
144, 147, see also Hilbert-Schmidt isomor-
phism
coherence, 114
dagger, 95, 99–101
natural, 112, 114
isotopy, 276, 293
ambient, 230, 231, 233, 276, 277, 293
iterant, 225, 254–257
join, 153, 156–158, 160, 162–165, 169
joint distribution, 106
Jones polynomial, 227, 230, 231, 239, 274, 275,
277–280, 283, 312, 320–323, 326
ket, 258–260, 289
ket notation, see bra-ket notation
knot, 223–225, 230–234, 236, 238, 239, 241, 242,
245, 270, 275, 277–280, 283, 295, 298, 299,
321, 322
invariant, 227, 232, 239, 260, 261, 278–280,
299
logic, 227, 234
quantum, 245, 269, 270
set, 225, 236–245
Kochen-Specker Theorem, 13, 86
Kripke, Saul, 23, 26–35, 38–40
Kronecker product, 185, 213
l-complementarity, 37–40
Lagrangian, 51
-independence, 72, 73, 81, 83–85
-notation, 127
Lambek pregroup, 200, 201
languages
dagger compact, 192
lattice, 102, 151, 153, 155–160, 171, 175, 183
complete, 102, 152, 155, 156, 160, 162, 170,
171
distributive, 153, 163, 170
orthomodular, 124, 141, 142
projection, 162, 170
law of excluded middle, 156
law of noncontradiction, 157
least action, principle of, 52
left adjoint, 136, 137, 140, 143, 156–158, 162,
164
left inverse, 15
lepton, see particle, subatomic
light cone, 13
linear algebra, 175
linear map, 200, 202, 206, 208–210, 212
linear mapping, 263, 286, 292
linear operator, 14
link, 227, 230–236, 238–242, 260, 261, 269, 275–
279, 295, 299, 321
local model, 109
locality, 13, 72, 73, 79, 80, 83, 84, 86, see also
non-locality
logic, 174, 178, 194

342
Index
logical algebra, 251
logical connective, 153
low-landmark verb, 216, 217
L¨owner order, 132, 138
manifold, 227, 278, 284–289, 291–293, 295, 298–
300
map, see morphism
mass
gravitational, 49
inertial, 48
matrix, 228, 255, 257, 259, 261–264, 270, 271,
273, 274, 278, 279, 281–283, 291, 295, 296,
306, 307, 309, 316, 317, 319–321, 324, 330
Hadamard, 264, 265, 282, 321
transpose, 309
matrix transposition, 105
maximal element, 175
Maxwell’s equations, 56
meaning, 174, 178, 186–191, 194
distributional, 188
of a sentence, 178, 179, 186–191, 200, 203,
206, 211–213, 220
of a word, 178, 179, 186–191, 205
scope, 188
vector, 188–190
basis vector, 188
vector space, 188, 190
measure theory, 73, 86
measurement, 11–14, 25–28, 30, 36, 58, 60, 62,
66, 67, 90–93, 99–111, 114, 258–260, 267,
269, 279, 290, 291
measurement operator, 13
measuring instrument, 45
meet, 153, 155–158, 160, 163, 164
meson, see particle, subatomic
metric, 182
metric tensor, 48
minimal coupling principle, 57
minimal element, 175
mixed state, 9
model theory, 175
module, 123, 124, 132–138, 140, 141, 143, 145,
see also eﬀect module
modus ponens, 31
momentum, 13
monad, 123, 124, 134–136, 138–140
distribution, 124, 138, 139
multiset, 124, 134–136, 138, 139
monoid, 134–136, 141–143
commutative, 134, 135, 137, 141–143
eﬀect, 139, 141
partially additive, 141
monoidal functor, 201, 202, 219
monoidal tensor, 200, 202
monomorphism, 15
morphism, 15–18, 21, 125, 142, 145, 283–289,
291, 293, 295
adjoint, 21
counit, 20, 22
Hermitian, 21
identity, 15, 16
inclusion, 137
self-adjoint, 21
tensor product of, 18
unit, 20, 22
unitary, 21
zero, 97, 98, 100
multiplicative model, 214, 219
multiplicity of an element, 134
natural language, 174, 178, 179, 186, 188, 204,
205, 219
natural transformation, 89, 94, 96, 112, 113
negation, 151–153, 166, 170, 223, 224, 246, 247,
250, 251
nesting, 250, 252, 309, 310
no-cloning theorem, 12, 14, 62, 66, 88
no-signalling model, 88, 89, 110
Noether’s Theorem, 59
Noether, Emmy, 57
non-contradiction, 31, 34
non-locality, 86, 88, 89, 102, 104, 106–111, 176,
177, see also locality
possibilistic non-locality, 86
norm, 9
noun, see word, noun
object, 15–18, 111, 154, 171, see also subobject
codomain, 111
domain, 111
dual, 98, 113, 117
tensor product of, 18
unit, 17
observable, 9, 11–13, 45, 66, 91, 101, 124, 147,
268
octahedron, 142
operational representation, 89, 91, 93–95, 99,
100, 102, 105–107, 110
operational theory, 88–93, 105, 106, 109–111
operator, 123–132, 138–141, 146, 148
bounded, 123–125, 148

Index
343
density, 123–125, 133, 138, 139, 141, 146
eﬀect, 123–125, 133, 138, 141–144, 146–148
linear, 124, 125, 129
positive, 123–125, 131–134, 138, 142, 148
projection, 123, 124, 133
self-adjoint, 123–125, 129–133, 148
space of, 133, 134, 137, 138, 141
orthocomplement, 151
orthocomplementation, 183
orthonormal basis, 116–119, 138, 146, 259, 260,
282
orthosupplement, 138, 141
outcome, 90, 92, 99–101, 106–111, 114
outcome independence, 72, 80, 82, 86
paraconsistent logic, 157, 165
parameter independence, 72, 79, 80, 82, 86
partial order, 175, 189
particle, 46
free, 46, 50
fundamental, 46
subatomic
anyon, 67
baryon, 55, 57
boson, 55, 57
fermion, 55
gluon, 58
hadron, 55
lepton, 55, 57
meson, 55
photon, 58
quark, 55
Pauli Exclusion Principle, 55
Pauli matrices, 66, 226
Penrose, Roger, 14
pentagon axiom, 18
pentagon identity, 297–299, 304
perihelion precession of Mercury’s orbit, 49
phase gate, 192
physical quantity, 152–154, 159, 162, 170
physical system, 44, 91, 175, 190
conﬁned, 46
interaction, 45
isolatable, 45
localizable, see also locality
predictive, 45
Planck scale, 50
plat closure, 320, 321
Podolsky, 12
Poincar´e
group, 48, 57
symmetry, 51, 57
Popescu-Rohrlich box, 110
position, 13
pre-composition, 144
predicate, 138, 147, 178
predicative models, 203, 204, 213
pregroup, 189, 191
grammar, 190
preparation, 90–93
preparation process, 180
prepared states, 58
presentism, 33, 34
presheaf, 151, 153–155, 157–159, 162, 171
spectral presheaf, 151, 152, 154, 155, 157–162,
167, 170, 171
probability, 258–260, 268, 269, 278
probability amplitude, 9
probability distribution, 90, 92, 105, 106, 109
discrete, 105
process logic, 179–182, 186, 192
process space, 228, 295, 298, 321, 324, 326–328
product measures, 74, 76, 83
program correctness, 147
projection, 152–154, 160, 162, 163, 165–170
projection operation, 60
projection operator, 123, 152
projective
measurement, 99, 100, 103, 104
projector, 99–101, 103, 104, 287, 300–302, 304,
312–317, 319, 321, 322
proposition, 152–154, 156, 157, 159, 162, 170,
171
local proposition, 169, 170
pure state, 9, 10, 158
Putnam, Hilary, 23–31, 34–36, 38
quandle, 239, 241, 242
quantiﬁer, 178
quantitative diagrammatic logic, see diagram-
matic logic
quantum ampliudes, 227, 231, 269, 279
quantum computer, 259–261, 267, 279, 280
quantum computing, 10, 13, 15, 22, 88, 176
quantum correlations, 110
quantum expectation, 268
quantum ﬁeld theory, 52
quantum formalism, 177, 179
quantum gate, 10, 11, 65, 192
quantum information, 22, 176, 177
quantum integer, 305, 306
quantum interference, 58

344
Index
quantum logic, 13, 15, 23–29, 35, 39, 40, 123,
125, 151–153, 157, 159, 162, 170, 171, 174–
177, 183, 194
quantum mechanics, 51, 88, 89, 91, 99, 101, 105,
107–111, 174, 185
categorical, 88, 89, 91, 95, 98, 110
quantum model, 110
quantum operator, 223, 256, 258
quantum phenomenon, 176, 177, 182, 184, 194
quantum protocol, 88, 178, 185, 199
quantum state, 53
coherent, 58
entangled, 65, 66
mixed, 58, 60
pure, 58, 60
quantum system, 8, 9, 11
quantum teleportation, 13, 14, see also telepor-
tation
quantum theory, 54, 174–176, 183, 186, 192,
193
quantum topology, 223, 227, 231, 283
quark, see particle, subatomic
quasi-local interactions, principle of, 57
quasi-particles, 225, 230
quaternion, 223, 224, 226, 243, 244, 255, 256,
271–273
qubit, 9, 10, 13, 14, 226, 228, 244, 260, 261, 263,
266, 267, 269, 270, 280, 282, 290, 311
Quine, Willard Van Orman, 31
random variable, 12, 268
realism, 13
realization-equivalence, 74, 84, 86
recoupling, 227–230, 296, 297, 300, 303–310,
312, 316, 317, 319, 321, 323, 325, 330
regular conditional probability, 78
regular element, 152, 165–167, 169, 170
Reidemeister moves, 231, 232, 236, 237, 239–
242, 245, 274, 276, 278
relational model, 219
relativity, 47, 49, 58
general, 49, 50, 68, 69
special, 50, 54
restriction map, 159, 161, 167
retraction, 15
reversible process, 67
right adjoint, 155, 157, 163
right dual, 20
right inverse, 15
Rosen, Nathan, 12
rotation, 245, 272, 274
scalar, 256, 259, 280, 286, 288
Schr¨odinger, Erwin, 54
Schwarzschild radius, 69
section, 15
self-adjoint matrix, 11
self-adjoint operator, 152–154
self-reference, 236, 238
semiring, 96, 100–102, 106, 123, 132, 134–136,
141–143
sentence, 178, 180, 186–191, see also meaning
of a sentence
sentiment analysis, 217
separable space, 119
separable state, 10
single value decomposition, 204
soundness theorem, 19
source, 15
space, 132, 138, 141
compact, 147
conjugate, 125
convex, 147
dual, 125
Hausdorﬀ, 147
trivial, 124
spacetime, 227, 256, 296, 299
Spearman’s , 215
special relativity, 24, 34
spectral decomposition, 11, 101
spider, 192–194
spider form of the verb, 213
spin, 108
spin network, 295, 300, 304
split-epic, 111, 113
split-monic, 111, 113
Standard Model, 44, 55
state, 91–93, 99–106, 108–110, 124, 125, 138,
144, 147, 175, 180–183, 186, 188, 223, 239,
248–250, 258–260, 263, 267–270, 274, 277–
279, 282, 290, 291, 295, 308, 309, 311, 312,
see also entangled state, see also initial state
Bell, 10, 13, 108
mixed, 104, 105, 111, 114
pure, 99, 103, 104, 111, 114
tracial, 115
state space, 8, 151, 154, 155, 162, 170
stochastic map, 88, 89, 105, 109
stochastic matrix
bi-, 105
row-, 105
Stone space, 157
string diagram, 208

Index
345
string-diagram representation, 88
strong contextuality, 86
strong force, 55
strongly monoidal functor, see functor, mono-
idal, strong
sub-category, 92–96, 98–100, 102, 105, 113, 114
tracial, 113, 114
subalgebra, 153, 158
minimal subalgebra, 167
subalternation, 32
subobject, 154, 155, 157, 159, 161, 163–168, 170,
see also clopen subobject
tight, 167, 169
superposition, 8, 9, 11, 52, 53, 58, 66, 104,
174–176, 245, 258, 269, 270
supervaluation, 33, 34
support, 134, 139
supremum, 175
surjectivity, 145, 146
switching formula, 276, 277
symmetric monoidal category, see category,
monoidal, symmetric
symmetry, 19, 20
tangle category, see category, tangle
target, 15
teleportation, 66, 185, 290, 291
Temperley-Lieb
algebra, 228, 280–283, 285, 288, 289, 301,
302, 323–331
recoupling theory, 227, 252, 292, 300, 305,
307, 308, 312, 321, 331
temporal shift operator, 254, 256
tensor, 100, 136, 140, 142, 143, 174, 190, 260,
261, 263, 267–269, 287, 290
non-symmetric, 190
product, 8, 10, 14, 17, 118, 119, 176, 185, 186
pure, 92, 94, 99
rank, 208, 210
rank-1, 208
rank-2, 208
rank-3, 208, 211, 212
unit, 97, 102, 135, 136, 140, 142
terminal element, 105
tetrahedron network, 303, 314
three vertex, 297, 302, 305, 307, 316–318
top element, 155, 156, 161, 164
topological quantum computing, 67, 68, 224–
228, 230, 263, 267, 300
topological quantum ﬁeld theory, 96, 98, 102,
191, 200, 202, 207, 220, 227, 228, 230, 274,
283, 291, 292, 294, 295, 298–300, 304, 308
topological space, 156, 157, 171
topology, 156, 158, 171, 181, 183, 191, 192
topos theory, 151, 152, 154, 155, 170, 171
trace, 98, 99, 103, 113–115, 117–119, 126–129,
132, 139, 140
global, 97
parameterized, 97
partial, 115
trace class, 98, 99, 117–119
trace ideal, 89, 97–100, 105, 113–115, 117–119
trace property, 118, 119
transformation, 91–95, 100
natural, 16, 20
monoidal, 20
unitary, 53, 66
transition amplitude, 51
transpose, 126, 127, 137, 184, 186, 188, 190, 191,
194
trefoil, 237, 241, 242, 277
triangle axiom, 17
trinion, 292–294, 296, 299
truth-value, 154
Twin Paradox, 50
two-particle system, 12
two-slit experiment, see double-slit experiment
type dictionary, 203
type of a transitive verb, 203
type reduction, 203, 204, 206
type-logical grammar, 202–204, 220
type-logical model, 200, 205, 209
uncertainty principle, see Heisenberg Uncer-
tainty Principle
uncopying, 208, 216
unit, 113–115
tensor, 97, 102
unit norm, 99, 103
unitarity, 60
unitary group, 227, 228, 234, 264, 270, 272, 320
unitary map, 139
unitary operator, 12
unitary representation, 224–228, 231, 261, 267,
274, 279–281, 292, 300, 307, 322–325, 330
unitary transformation, 10, 11, 16, 228, 258–
261, 263–265, 267, 270, 280, 291, 300, 305,
321, 330
universal quantum gate, 227, 260
Universe, 47

346
Index
valuation, 180–182
value, 181, 182
value-deﬁniteness, 25, 27, 29, 38
variable, 178
vector cross product, 271
vector space, 124–127, 129, 130, 134, 137, 226,
229, 245, 258, 259, 261–263, 266, 271, 280,
282, 286, 289, 290, 292, 295, 299, 311, 329
of meanings, 188, 190
vector space model, 209
verb, see word, verb
von Neumann algebra, 152–154, 157–159, 161,
162, 165, 167, 170, 171
wave equation, 54
wave function, 12, 53
wave-particle duality, 53
weak force, 55
wire, 16, 18, 21, 181, 183–188, 190–193
cap-shaped, 184, 189, 190, 192, 194
cup-shaped, 183, 184, 188, 190, 192, 194
input, 180
Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants, 227, 320,
322
word, see also meaning of a word
context, 188, 189
noun, 180, 188, 189
scope, 188
verb, 180, 188, 190
transitive, 188, 189
writhe, 276, 277
Yang-Baxter equation, 227, 260–266, 278, 279,
295, 296, 298
yanking conditions, 201
zero, 141

