Synthese Library
Studies in Epistemology, Logic, Methodology,
and Philosophy of Science
390
Paul Needham
Macroscopic 
Metaphysics
Middle-Sized Objects and Longish 
Processes

Synthese Library
Studies in Epistemology, Logic, Methodology,
and Philosophy of Science
Volume 390
Editor-in-Chief
Otávio Bueno, University of Miami, Department of Philosophy, USA
Editorial Board
Berit Brogaard, University of Miami, USA
Anjan Chakravartty, University of Notre Dame, USA
Steven French, University of Leeds, UK
Catarina Dutilh Novaes, University of Groningen, The Netherlands

The aim of Synthese Library is to provide a forum for the best current work in the
methodology and philosophy of science and in epistemology. A wide variety of
different approaches have traditionally been represented in the Library, and every
effort is made to maintain this variety, not for its own sake, but because we believe
that there are many fruitful and illuminating approaches to the philosophy of science
and related disciplines.
Special attention is paid to methodological studies which illustrate the interplay
of empirical and philosophical viewpoints and to contributions to the formal
(logical, set-theoretical, mathematical, information-theoretical, decision-theoretical,
etc.) methodology of empirical sciences. Likewise, the applications of logical
methods to epistemology as well as philosophically and methodologically relevant
studies in logic are strongly encouraged. The emphasis on logic will be tempered by
interest in the psychological, historical, and sociological aspects of science.
Besides monographs Synthese Library publishes thematically uniﬁed anthologies
and edited volumes with a well-deﬁned topical focus inside the aim and scope of the
book series. The contributions in the volumes are expected to be focused and
structurally organized in accordance with the central theme(s), and should be tied
together by an extensive editorial introduction or set of introductions if the volume
is divided into parts. An extensive bibliography and index are mandatory.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/6607

Paul Needham
Macroscopic Metaphysics
Middle-Sized Objects and Longish Processes
123

Paul Needham
Department of Philosophy
University of Stockholm
Stockholm, Sweden
Synthese Library
ISBN 978-3-319-70998-7
ISBN 978-3-319-70999-4
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017958162
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology
now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Preface
This book is about matter. It involves our ordinary concept of matter in so far as this
deals with enduring continuants that stand in contrast to the occurrents or processes
in which they are involved and concerns the macroscopic realm of middle-sized
objects of the kind familiar to us on the surface of the earth and their participation
in medium-term processes. But the emphasis will be on what science rather than
philosophical intuition tells us about the world and on chemistry rather than the
physics that is more usually encountered in philosophical discussions. Accordingly,
the ﬁner relativistic niceties that come into play at speeds approaching the speed of
light, conundrums raised by the undermining of the distinction between intensive
and extensive thermodynamic properties in the strong gravitational ﬁelds in distant
corners of the universe, or the paradoxical nature of the quantum domain won’t
be troubling us. In so far as science bears on the discussion, it is the everyday
science of macroscopic objects characterised by differences of chemical substance
and geological and biological complexity rather than the exotic science that is the
principal concern of philosophers of physics.
The discussion might be characterised as descriptive metaphysics, being content,
to paraphrase Strawson’s use of the term, to describe the structure of our scientiﬁc
thought about the actual world (whereas he said it is “content to describe the
actual structure of our thought about the world” (Strawson 1959, p. 9)). The
method in the central chapters dealing with the nature of matter will be to
pursue key steps in the historical development of scientiﬁc thought about chemical
substance and related concepts with a view to tracing the emergence of a systematic
ontological interpretation. Aristotle’s and the Stoics’ discussions of elements and
mixtures, based on a continuous view of matter, bear some resemblance to modern,
macroscopic conceptions and therefore have some interest as precursors to modern
views and are of conceptual interest in their own right. Some of the issues they
raised are still reﬂected in modern discussions, despite the considerable increase
in complexity of the subject. Other ideas, such as the intimate connection between
what modern science distinguishes as substance and phase, maintained their grip
on the understanding of matter until the end of the eighteenth century. These are
some of the important aspects of the properties of matter that have been neglected
v

vi
Preface
by linguistic concerns that have dominated the recent study of mass terms and which
the present study seeks to redress. It will be of interest to see how the bounds of pos-
sibility are delimited by the laws governing the appropriate use of concepts reﬁned
for the purpose of describing the behaviour of matter. But the concern with modality
will not stretch to venturing into the realms of metaphysical possibility governed by
philosophical speculation about individual essences and underlying natures.
Like many contemporary discussions of material objects, this one relies heavily
on mereology. Unlike several such discussions, this one adheres to the classical
principles of mereology governing the usual dyadic relations of part, overlapping,
etc. and the operations of sum, product and difference. These principles apply to
the mereological structure of regions of space, intervals of time, processes and
quantities of matter. Deviations from classical mereology are often motivated by
appeal to circumstances applying speciﬁcally to material objects understood to gain
and lose parts, which some authors take to call for a modiﬁcation of the classical
dyadic mereological relations to triadic relations with the introduction of a third
term referring to time and others see as challenging the extensionality of mereology.
Although the proper treatment of the temporal aspect of the features of material
objects is a central issue in this book, however, the topics falling under this heading
are not addressed by relativising mereological concepts to time. Rather, a distinction
is drawn between quantities of matter, which don’t gain or lose parts over time,
and individuals, which are typically constituted of different quantities of matter at
different times. This distinction undermines the motivation for challenging what is
usually understood as the extensionality of mereology.
These general indications of scope and limitations of the study are now supple-
mented with a brief synopsis of the various chapters, giving an overview of the main
lines of argument and providing some hints about details some readers might like to
skip, at least on a ﬁrst reading.
Synopsis
An ontology of continuants and occurrents to be developed in the course of the book
within a framework of regions of space and intervals of time is initially outlined
in Chap. 1. Much of the chapter is concerned with explaining how mereology is
understood. First and foremost, quantities of matter, to which the principles of
classical mereology are held to apply, are distinguished from material objects,
here called individuals, that change their constitutive matter over time and to
which mereological principles don’t apply. The motivation for this and the detailed
development of the features of the constitutes relation (as distinct from mereological
parthood) is discussed in Chaps. 2 and 3. On this understanding, certain lines of
objection to classical principles of mereology are put aside. Rehearsing reasons for
rejecting some other suggestions for modifying classical principles of mereology
serves further to illustrate how the mereological concepts are understood here. But
the main thrust of the chapter is to emphasise what the mereological principles say
and what they leave open concerning the relations of part, overlap, separation and

Preface
vii
identity and the operations of sum, product and difference. Classical mereology
is an incomplete theory whose axioms can be supplemented in various ways to
characterise the kind of objects to which they apply. It is shown how this can
be done for a theory reasonably called a theory of temporal intervals and again
when supplemented with an additional nonmereological primitive to develop a
theory of spatial regions. Both theories are complete ﬁrst-order theories (i.e. no
further independent axioms can be added without contradiction). An analogous
development doesn’t seem possible for a pure mereological theory of quantities of
matter. Developing a theory of quantities of matter requires introducing times and
spaces, as well as other entities, along with predicates relating these various kinds of
entities, which is pursued in the following chapters. Readers who are not interested
in the technical details may like to skim quickly over the presentations of the theories
of times and spaces, together with the proof of completeness, in Sects. 1.3 and 1.4
and their corresponding subsections, and proceed directly to the ﬁnal section of the
chapter which outlines the strategy for the remainder of the book.
A fundamental relation connecting matter with space and time is the occupies
relation. The occupies relation stands between a material body, a region of space
and an interval of time, and its features and related concepts are pursued in
Chap. 2. Individuals are the material bodies considered ﬁrst, and it is argued that
it is unnecessary to consider the regions they occupy to be bounded by boundary
entities. An account of the abutment of individuals is presented on the basis of
the spatial regions described in Chap. 1 without needing to introduce boundaries
as distinct entities. This is a time-dependent relation which treats times as intervals
and accommodates the fact that the bodies in question might move whilst abutting,
calling on an account of the occupies relation that accommodates movement. What
I call an accumulation condition, formulated in mereological terms, is introduced
for this purpose. Analogues of this mereological condition for other predicates are
discussed in the sequel.
It transpires that individuals don’t in general occupy the same regions as the
quantities of matter that constitute them. Although a head might be said to abut a
torso (Smith and Varzi’s example) or the atmosphere abuts the sea (Leonardo), this
doesn’t mean that the matter constituting these bodies abuts during the time at issue.
Blood circulates between head and torso, and matter (water, CO2, etc.) is exchanged
between the sea and the atmosphere. This calls for a distinction between individuals
(the sea, the atmosphere) and the corresponding quantities of matter of which they
are constituted (seawater, air).
The constitution relation is the subject of Chap. 3. It is a three-place relation
standing between an individual, a quantity of matter and a time, allowing for the
typically changing constitution of individuals over time. The fact that times are
intervals is accommodated and the relations between the occupies relation are
explored, in terms of which coincidence is deﬁned. Time-dependent analogues of
the mereological relations are deﬁned as triadic relations between two individuals
and a time, but there are no corresponding analogues of the mereological operations.
Modal features of individuals and quantities are compared. An appendix criticis-
ing van Inwagen’s understanding of parthood as time dependent concludes the
chapter.

viii
Preface
The following four chapters take up the features of quantities of matter, distin-
guished from individuals by their mereological structure. This structure is reﬂected
in the character of certain predicates expressing the property of being a particular
kind of substance, say, water, and exhibiting one or more phases, such as being
liquid and being gas. Such predicates seem to ascribe an amorphous character to
their subjects, which authors have tried to more precisely capture in terms of a
distributive and a cumulative condition, formulated in terms of the mereological
part relation and sum operation, respectively. These conditions are presented in
Chap. 4 and generalised to apply to relational predicates. This generalisation is
obviously needed for relational predicates like “is the same substance as” and “is
warmer than”. But substance and phase predicates, by contrast with the monadic
predicates “is a time” and “is a spatial region”, are also taken to be relational. The
relational interpretation follows the chemist’s understanding of the permanence of
matter throughout chemical change, which has been standard at least since the time
of Lavoisier. Aristotle and the Stoics can be reasonably interpreted, it seems, to have
thought that the distributive condition holds for substance and phase predicates,
as discussed in Chap. 5. Whether the conditions can be upheld from a modern
perspective is discussed in Chap. 7.
Substance and phase predicates fall under the linguistic category of mass predi-
cates in accordance with grammatical criteria for their use with articles in singular
inﬂexion and qualiﬁcation as much/little rather than many/few. This category is
more extensive and includes terms whose normal translations into some foreign
languages don’t comply with the grammatical criteria for mass predicates whilst
lacking terms whose normal translations into some foreign languages do comply
with the grammatical criteria. It is therefore fallacious to argue that features not
applying to all mass predicates (of a particular natural language) don’t apply to
substance or phase predicates. But whilst linguistically inspired characterisations of
mass predicates don’t necessarily say anything about the nature of substances and
phases, Quine presents a general reason for rejecting the distributive condition on all
mass predicates which he speciﬁcally illustrates with substance predicates based on
his understanding of what science tells us about the atomic nature of matter. Quine’s
case is discussed in Chap. 4, but as we will see in Chap. 7, it isn’t the last word on
the import of the microscopic view of matter presented by modern science for the
distributive condition.
Taking advantage of what has been said about the occupies relation in Chap. 2,
versions of the general distributive and cumulative conditions restricted to spatial
parts are formulated. This raises the issue of co-occupancy, and the ﬁnal section
of Chap. 4 reviews some of what has been about this and the very little argument
against the feasibility of the idea.
Ancient theories of substance based on a continuous view of matter are taken up
in Chap. 5. They bear some resemblance to modern, macroscopic conceptions and
therefore have some interest as precursors of modern views and are of conceptual
interest in their own right. Aristotle’s views of the matter were based on the
fundamental tenet that a homogeneous quantity comprises a single substance.
Combined with the thesis of the impossibility of co-occupancy (disputed by the

Preface
ix
Stoics), he was thus able to provide a criterion for a quantity comprising a single
substance (i.e. being a pure sample of a substance), namely, one whose all parts are
of the same substance. He distinguished four elements, characterised by properties
they exhibit in isolation, which combine in one of two kinds of mixing process that
he distinguished to yield other substances. It follows from his fundamental tenet that
these derived substances have no parts that are elements. The elements are held to
be potentially present in the sense that a suitable “decomposition” process would
change the quantity into one that is partly one element, partly another and so on for
the four elements. There are suggestions and problems associated with this account
that are not developed or resolved in the extant texts, but some of the central ideas
are clear enough and remain at issue in some related guise in modern chemical
theory. The Stoics thought the elements are present in their compounds (blends),
which agrees, it has been said, with the modern view. This led them to accept the
possibility of co-occupancy and claim that the elements occupy the same place as
one another and the blend which they form (which doesn’t entail that an element
occupies the same-sized region—of the same volume—when combined as when
isolated). However, they failed, as far as I can see, to address the issue of giving
a characterisation of the elements that is not only applicable when in isolation.
The chapter closes with a discussion of the distinction between potential parts and
potential qualities in connection with Holden’s recent book on the early modern
discussion of the inﬁnite divisibility of matter.
An important feature of the transition from ancient to modern views of matter is
recognition of the distinction between substance and phase and the realisation that
a substance like water is not necessarily liquid, as Aristotle thought, but the same
substance might be solid or gas too. As discussed in Chap. 6, the older view was
surprisingly tenacious, and even Lavoiser had difﬁculty abandoning it completely
although he prepared the ground for doing so. The distinction was clear enough
throughout most of the nineteenth century but received its deﬁnitive formulation
in Gibbs’ phase rule which he presented in connection with his formulation
of chemical thermodynamics in the late 1870s. The import of this fundamental
principle of chemistry is discussed and illustrated in the ﬁnal sections.
With this background, the dyadic predicate “water” is discussed in some detail
in Chap. 7 as illustrative of substance predicates. The familiar claim “Water is H2O”
cannot be construed as a claim about the constitution of water at the microlevel
but is a purely macroscopic claim about what chemists call the composition of
water. Relating the macroscopic term “water” to microscopic constitution must take
cognizance of the fact that the situation is a dynamic one, not a ﬁxed, unchanging
structure. The continual restructuring renders macroscopic quantities effectively
homogeneous for macroscopic times, say, of the order of a millionth of a second
or longer. (Spectroscopists describe the structure accessible over shorter times via
higher frequency radiation as indiscernible—blurred—over the longer times probed
by lower frequency radiation.) What should we say about extremely small parts of
a quantity of water for extremely short subintervals of time?
Inﬁnite divisibility of time entails that intervals have proper subintervals without
limit. A uniform treatment of quantities is less obviously appropriate in moving

x
Preface
from the macro- to the microdomain of quantum mechanically indiscernible entities.
Nevertheless, a uniform treatment is considered, bearing in mind that the parts are
parts of a macroscopic quantity for the times at issue and not isolated from the
bulk matter. But an alternative treatment is developed, where following French and
Krause’s two-sorted interpretation in which identity is meaningfully predicated of
macro- but not microentities, the mereology of quantities is restricted to exclude
microentities as parts. This is consistent with the conclusion that might be drawn
from the discussion in Chap. 4, that the quantity, time and space variables to which
predicates at issue here are afﬁxed range over macroscopic domains.
Phase predicates don’t follow the same pattern, mereologically speaking, as
substance predicates. The microscopic understanding of the dynamic equilibrium
between the exchange of matter and abutting phases calls for a different mereolog-
ical interpretation, and an accumulation condition similar to that applying to the
occupies relation comes into play.
Processes are introduced in Chap. 8. In the wake of a discussion of the notion of
change, any idea of introducing occurrents on the basis of a distinction between
intrinsic and Cambridge changes in continuants is abandoned. The understand-
ing of occurrents as temporally extended processes—causings rather than relata
of a dyadic causal relation—based on the analysis of thermodynamics in the
second half of the nineteenth century is conceptually more illuminating. The
chapter continues with a development in the mereological features of processes.
Mereological properties include distinguishing temporal parts, parts arising from
a consideration of the parts of bodies involved and parts of complex processes
such as the elementary reactions underlying complex chemical reactions. The
relational character of processes (arising from the several bodies typically involved
in processes) and their modal character are taken up in the ﬁnal sections.
Modal features of quantities are discussed in the ﬁnal chapter, beginning with a
discussion of how resilient the same substance, in particular the same element, is
to possible changes in states of combination. The chapter continues by pursuing the
analysis of the idea of being possible for a quantity to be such and such. Claims
difﬁcult to capture with conventional sentential modal operators lead to the use of
possible states to achieve appropriate expressive power. Incorporation of possible
processes is a natural development, linking up with the discussion in the previous
chapter.
The various citings of Duhem’s works throughout the book give some indication
of the source of inspiration that he has provided. I would also like to acknowledge
and give thanks for the support from several of my contemporaries. Many subjects
discussed in this book have been aired at various conferences and seminars. I
am grateful to audiences at the meetings of the Baltic Workshop for Logic and
Philosophy of Science, the International Society for the Philosophy of Chemistry,
the (American) Philosophy of Science Association, the European Philosophy of
Science Association and conferences and seminars at the Universities of Bristol,
Copenhagen, Durham, Geneva, Ghent, Gothenburg, Leuven, Stockholm and Upp-
sala. But I would particularly like to thank Robin Hendry, Jaap van Brakel, Stephen
Weininger, Michael Weisberg and my colleagues at Stockholm Sören Häggqvist,

Preface
xi
Dugald Murdoch and Åsa Wikforss, for lending a sympathetic ear. Much of the
material in the book has been discussed in a course I taught at Stockholm University,
and I am grateful for the enthusiastic response of students who participated. An
anonymous referee provided some much-appreciated comments which were helpful
in ﬁnalising the manuscript. Finally, thanks to Otavio Bueno for putting me in touch
with Chris Menzel, who helped me sort out some of my problems with Latex.
Acknowledgements
Various portions of the book derive from some of my previous publications,
although with revisions and additions when forming part of the book. The material
I have drawn on comes from the following sources:
•
Section 1.3 is based on “Temporal Intervals and Temporal Order”, Logique et
Analyse, 93 (1981), 49–64. Reprinted by permission of the editor.
•
Substantial parts of Chap. 3 are based on “Transient Things and Permanent
Stuff”, Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 88 (2010), 147–66. Reprinted by
permission of Routledge.
•
Parts of Chap. 5 are based on “Macroscopic Mixtures”, Journal of Philosophy,
104 (2007), 26–52, by permission of the editors.
•
Parts of Chap. 5 are based on “Duhem’s Theory of Mixture in the Light of
the Stoic Challenge to the Aristotelian Conception”, Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science, 33 (2002), 685–708; “An Aristotelian Theory of Chemical
Substance”, Logical Analysis and History of Philosophy, 12 (2009), 149–64; and
“Méréologie des substances chimiques et de leur transformation: une approche
analytique”, forthcoming in La chimie, cette inconnue?, ed. Jean-Pierre Llored,
Editions Hermann, Paris, 2016. All reprinted by permission of the editors.
•
Section 6.4 draws on “A Mereological Interpretation of the Phase Rule”,
Philosophy of Science, (2010), 77, 900–10, by permission of the editors.
•
Sections 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3 draw on “Substance and Time”, British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 61 (2010), 485–512. Reprinted by permission of Oxford
University Press.
•
Chapter 8 draws on “Macroscopic Processes”, Philosophy of Science, 66 (1999),
310–331, and “Process and Change: From a Thermodynamic Perspective”,
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 64 (2013), 395–422, by permission
of the editors and Oxford University Press.
Stockholm, Sweden
Paul Needham
April 2016
Reference
Strawson, P. F. (1959). Individuals: An essay in descriptive metaphysics. London: Methuen.

Contents
1
Mereology .....................................................................
1
1.1
Continuants and Occurrents ............................................
1
1.2
Mereology ...............................................................
5
1.3
Times ....................................................................
11
1.3.1
Directed Time ...................................................
15
1.4
Regions of Space ........................................................
18
1.4.1
Completeness of the Theory of Regions .......................
21
1.5
Taking Stock ............................................................
23
2
Occupying Space .............................................................
29
2.1
Boundaries...............................................................
29
2.2
Doing Without Boundaries .............................................
31
2.3
Keeping in Touch .......................................................
32
2.4
Abutment Without Material Abutment.................................
35
2.5
Mathematical Analysis and Indispensability ..........................
38
2.6
Occupying a Region Exactly ...........................................
44
3
Constitution...................................................................
47
3.1
Distinguishing Constitution and Parthood .............................
47
3.2
Individuals...............................................................
51
3.3
Occupation for Individuals .............................................
56
3.4
Component Parts ........................................................
59
3.5
Operations on Component Parts? ......................................
61
3.6
Modality .................................................................
66
3.7
Appendix: Van Inwagen’s Understanding of Parthood
as Time-Dependent .....................................................
71
4
Distributivity and Cumulativity ............................................
75
4.1
Mass Predicates .........................................................
75
4.2
The Distributive and Cumulative Conditions ..........................
77
4.3
Relational Predicates....................................................
78
xiii

xiv
Contents
4.4
Generalising the Cumulative Condition................................
81
4.5
Spatial Parts .............................................................
83
4.6
Is Cooccupancy Really Possible? ......................................
86
5
The Ancients’ Ideas of Substance ..........................................
89
5.1
Doing Without Atoms ..................................................
89
5.2
Aristotle’s Conception of Substances as Homogeneous ..............
91
5.3
Two Kinds of Mixing Process ..........................................
93
5.4
Simplicity, Actuality and Potentiality ..................................
96
5.5
The Stoic Alternative to Potential Presence ...........................
99
5.6
Formalisation ............................................................ 101
5.7
Potential Parts and Potential Qualities ................................. 106
6
The Nature of Matter ........................................................ 113
6.1
The Scope of Metaphysics in the Enlightenment...................... 113
6.2
Phase-Bound Substances ............................................... 115
6.3
Distinguishing Substance and Phase ................................... 118
6.4
Thermodynamics and the Phase Rule .................................. 120
7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description to Microstructure ........... 127
7.1
Water is H2O ............................................................ 127
7.2
What Do Substance Predicates Apply To?............................. 129
7.3
What Do Phase Predicates Apply To? ................................. 138
7.4
Indiscernible Particles .................................................. 142
7.4.1
Discussion....................................................... 149
8
Longish Processes ............................................................ 151
8.1
Occurrents ............................................................... 151
8.2
Change................................................................... 153
8.3
Distinguishing Processes from States .................................. 158
8.4
Causings ................................................................. 164
8.5
Relating Processes to Quantities, Regions and Times................. 166
8.6
The Mereological Structure of Processes .............................. 169
8.7
The Relational Character of Processes ................................. 172
8.8
Modality ................................................................. 176
9
Modal Properties of Quantities............................................. 179
9.1
Introduction ............................................................. 179
9.2
Elements and Compounds .............................................. 180
9.3
Water is H2O Again ..................................................... 185
9.4
Possible States........................................................... 188
9.5
Possible Processes ...................................................... 190
Appendix
Summary of Some Main Principles .............................. 201
Mereological Axioms for Quantities ......................................... 201
Abutment ...................................................................... 202

Contents
xv
Occupancy ..................................................................... 202
Static Abutment ......................................................... 203
Abutment on the Move ................................................. 203
Constitution.................................................................... 204
Lavoisier’s Principle of the Indestructibility of Matter ...................... 205
Distributivity and Cumulativity............................................... 206
Processes....................................................................... 207
Modal Properties of Quantities ............................................... 208
Glossary ........................................................................... 209
Bibliography ...................................................................... 211
Index............................................................................... 219

Chapter 1
Mereology
1.1
Continuants and Occurrents
Middle-sized objects range from things very large to things very small on a
human scale, and are included in what science counts as macroscopic objects and
treats as classically identiﬁable. They are the material objects that metaphysics
has traditionally been concerned with and what most of the world’s scientists are
engaged in studying. In the terminology of Johnson (1921) they are continuants,
with the general feature that they may have different properties at different times,
or stand in different relations to different times. A continuant might be warm at one
time and cold at another, subject to a pressure of one atmosphere at one time and to
half that at another, and so on. Johnson distinguished continuants from occurrents,
which don’t persist over time although they extend over time. It is their different
temporal parts, and not they themselves, that have different properties at different
times. A more familiar term is “processes”. Philosophers more usually speak of
events. But although no distinction between the two is developed here, the idea of a
process continuously unrolling over time is more suggestive of their character than
that of the event of an accomplished action with no temporal extension.
Three-dimensionalists, as advocates of continuants in the fundamental ontology
are sometimes called, think that continuants have no temporal parts. Rather, they
endure from one time to another in the sense that the same (identical) object
has one property at the one time and possibly another at the other. This claim is
sometimes glossed as saying that continuants are “wholly present” at a time when
they exist. The use of identity is hardly elucidated by this expression, which I
venture to say offers no improvement on the statement that objects endure in the
sense that they may have different properties at different times. Only processes
(Johnson’s occurrents), which don’t endure over time and have temporal extension,
have temporal parts. Earlier and later parts of a process are proper parts of that
process, and not identical with one another nor with the whole process.
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P. Needham, Macroscopic Metaphysics, Synthese Library 390,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4_1
1

2
1
Mereology
The autonomy of these two categories has been questioned. Philosophers such as
Lombard (1986) and Lowe (2006) have argued that occurrents are but changes in
continuants, and so reducible to changes in continuants (reduction thesis 1). Others,
such as Donald Davidson, and philosophers standing in the tradition of “process
philosophy” after A. N. Whitehead, have argued for the importance of recognising
events or processes in the basic ontology, some going so far as to argue for a
reduction of continuants to processes (reduction thesis 2) although not Davidson.
I’m with Davidson on this point (although not on several other points concerning
occurrents), and processes will be systematically introduced here in due course as
autonomous entities alongside continuants.
This general scheme of continuants and occurrents has been subject to a more
radical challenge from so-called four-dimensionalists, such as Heller (1990), Sider
(2001) and Hawley (2002). They argue that the only physical entities are four-
dimensional ones which, rather than being warm at one time and cold at another,
have a temporal part which is warm and another temporal part which is cold.
According to the four-dimensionalist’s account of how ordinary objects persist
over time, it perdures by virtue of really being a four-dimensional object. Some
four-dimensionalists (so-called “worm theorists”) think that perduring from one
time to another is a matter of being different temporal parts of an extended
four-dimensional object. Other four-dimensionalists (so-called “stage theorists”)
have it that what actually exist are instantaneous four-dimensional entities, and
perduring from one time to another is a matter of different stages standing in an
appropriate counterpart relation. Perduring, whether on the worm-theorists’ or the
stage-theorists’ account, stands in contrast to the three-dimensionalists’ conception
of persistence over time for which the term “endurance” is used in the literature.
If four-dimensional entities are events or processes, as textbook accounts of the
four-dimensional Minkowski space-time of special relativity often suggest, then
the four-dimensionalist’s challenge might be subsumed under reduction thesis 2.
Four-dimensionalists adopt very different arguments from the process philosophers,
however.
There are many varieties of three-dimensionalism, quite apart from whether their
proponents advocate reduction thesis 1 or not. Some don’t accept the distinction
that will be maintained here between an individual and its constitutive matter,1
arguing that “constitution is identity”, as Noonan (1993) puts it. Even some of
those who do put it in a radically different way from the way I will develop it
(e.g. Baker 1997, 2000). Many of the disputes hang on the understanding and
application of mereology, a formal theory of parthood which will ﬁgure heavily
in the present investigation. One of the main sticking points is the operation of
summation, involving in its most general form the unique existence of the sum of
objects satisfying an arbitrary condition. Some philosophers would have a restriction
to spatially connected objects; others claim the attempt to formulate a summation
1Following Chappell (1973) in the use of the term “individual” for what he distinguishes from
“matter”.

1.1
Continuants and Occurrents
3
principle with restrictions is incoherent. Some deny the existence of sums and
maintain that all that exists are the basic entities of their ontology.
As this discussion illustrates, authors often enter this arena with very substantial
initial commitments, and it would be overly naive to expect that arguments can
always, or even usually, be resolved by appeal to easily identiﬁed neutral ground.
Explicitness is, of course, a prime virtue in this context. I will be particularly
concerned with the conceptual development of the scientiﬁc study of the matter
constituting individuals of variable composition, from the ideas of Aristotle and the
Stoics on the nature of substance and mixture to modern chemical theory. Where
this conceptual history is not clearly at issue in the preparatory chapters setting up
the framework for this discussion, I will be predisposed to take a lead from natural
science and avoid metaphysical speculation about essence. The major concern will
be with the medium-sized objects and longish processes typiﬁed, but by no means
exhausted by, the entities we see around us. Science has applied itself to the study of
such things, improving the precision of everyday claims by explicitly and ever more
carefully specifying the limits of error within which systematically used concepts
are applied (cf. Duhem 1954, pp. 174–9, 190–5), and delivered a theoretically well-
developed conception of macroscopic phenomena which is empirically supported up
to the articulated limits of error.2 This is not the glamorous science of the scientiﬁc
revolution at the beginning of the twentieth century. Accordingly, since the present
study won’t be overly concerned with bodies approaching one another at near-
luminal velocities, the corresponding spatio-temporal considerations will not be a
priority. Nor is the study primarily concerned to describe the features of bodies in
a context where the gravitational forces are so large as to seriously infringe on the
notion of additivity on which the thermodynamic distinction between extensive and
intensive properties is based. At the other limit of applicability of thermodynamics,
it will not be dealing with matter on such a small scale that statistical ﬂuctuations
become signiﬁcant. And it will certainly not be entering the domain of such short
times that the time-energy uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics comes into
play. A priori speculation about what holds at instants will accordingly be avoided
here. The object is to provide an account of the ontology of continuants and
occurrents as these ﬁgure in middle-range, macroscopic phenomena, recognising
that this may not be straightforwardly applied or extended to entities outside this
range. Others may have the ambition of embracing a broader ontology. I will only
say that, just as a claim isn’t scientiﬁcally precise simply by virtue of omitting to
make a reasonable claim about limits of error, so this aim is not ensured merely
by omitting to acknowledge the limits of applicability of relevant empirically based
theories.
2The reference to Duhem reminds us that concern with the macroscopic realm is not equivalently
expressed as a concern with the observable as opposed to the theoretical. Two points about
his fundamental argument against a rigid distinction between the two (1954, pp. 144–64) are
noteworthy here. His holistic argument applies to the macroscopic domain, and the holism is
restricted. It is not the global holism of Quine’s “Two Dogmas” which has confused Duhem’s
point with the so-called “Duhem-Quine” thesis which sanctions the underdetermination thesis.

4
1
Mereology
Medium-sized, moderately long-lived inhabitants of the macroscopic realm, from
which philosophers usually draw for their examples, are sometimes said to be
eliminable in favour of a more fundamental realm of microscopic entities. But the
arguments for reduction on which such views rely no longer receive the broad, unre-
ﬂecting support that they once enjoyed. The underlying mechanical vision driving
such claims is said to rely on extra-mechanical principles whose sole motivation
seems to be the anticipated reduction (Sklar 1993, pp. 371–2). Standard reviews
of statistical mechanics continue to list the seemingly insurmountable problems
facing the would-be reductionist (amongst which is the fact that the standard
practice of physicists is to use the Gibbs formulation of statistical mechanics,
whereas a reduction would require the Boltzmann approach—see Frigg 2008).
Belief in reductionism seems more like an existential leap of faith than an appeal to
considered scientiﬁc judgement.
Recognition of the microworld is not sufﬁcient to motivate eliminative ontologi-
cal reductionism. Another view of the relation between micro- and the macroscopic
theory is that they work in tandem. I have argued elsewhere that this is how the
standard example of reduction, the relation between gas temperature and the average
kinetic energy of the gas molecules, should be viewed, whereas construing the rela-
tion as reductive is circular (Needham 2009b, 2010). If reductionism is not plausible
in this supposedly paradigm case of reduction, it certainly isn’t more plausible in
more complicated cases. Science cannot even specify the microscopic correlates of
the thermodynamic properties of water beyond a rough qualitative description. It is
if not tautological then a scientiﬁc truism to say that the microstructure of water
is arranged “waterwise” because we’ve known of the existence of the microrealm
since Perrin’s investigations of Brownian motion. The challenge of reduction is to
rise above such platitudes, and nothing short of an adequate demonstration will do.3
3Philosophers with a special agenda may seek to circumvent the requirement of providing the
details of a successful reduction by handwaving generalisation from a simple case that in no way
justiﬁes the general eliminative claim. This is not to deny that it may provide motivation for the
proponent to pursue the line of enquiry and seek to ﬂesh out the view. But it is in no way adequate to
block the pursuit of alternative views not sharing the same vision. Thus, as a step in the presentation
of his ontological structuralism, French (2014, Ch. 7) suggests that the general notion of the solidity
of material objects is to be understood in terms of, and so eliminated in favour of, the way the Pauli
exclusion principle (the antisymmetry requirement) governs the electronic structure of molecules.
This leaves untouched the detailed problem of reducing to the properties of elementary particles
the melting point of water, the point of maximum density of liquid water, and so on for virtually
all the speciﬁc properties characterising macroscopic objects. In a later chapter he trades on the
difﬁculties of characterising individual biological organisms (see e.g. Dupré and O’Malley 2009)
to indicate how the structuralist viewpoint he advocates might be applicable outside the narrow
conﬁnes of quantum physics, but without offering any deﬁnitive proposal of comparable detail.
In this connection it is interesting to note that the concept of an organism has once more become
central to biology, having been denigrated in the twentieth century by population statistics and
molecule biochemistry to “nothing more than an epiphenomenon of its genes”. Now, organisms
are taken to be the primary agents of evolutionary change and the reductionist tenets of the central
dogma, with its excessive reliance on molecular-level explanations, have given way to the view that
DNA replication, protein synthesis, etc. proceeds “by virtue of the enabling conditions afforded by
the pre-existing fundamental organization of the cell as a whole” (Nicholson 2014, pp. 348, 353).

1.2
Mereology
5
The notion of a part plays a central role both in the conception of those
continuants referred to here as quantities of matter and of processes developed in
later chapters. It ﬁgures differently in the understanding of some of those who take
a different view of these matters. For the sake of clarity, then, even if it would be
too much to hope to circumvent controversy, the following sections endeavour to
explain how mereology, the formal theory of parthood, is understood and applied
here and what position is taken on some of the controversies concerning the
application of the theory. The chapter concludes with a statement of the strategy for
approaching the general features of quantities of matter in the light of the limitations
of purely mereological concepts. This is based on a contrast with what can be done
by way of elaborating the character of times and spaces. Readers who might like to
gloss lightly over the technical details in the mereologically-based theories of times
and spaces in Sects. 1.3 and 1.4 will understand the strategical points if they simply
accept the completeness of these theories.
1.2
Mereology
The term “mereology” was coined by the Polish logician Lesniewski (1916) on
the basis of the Greek o&, “part”. The term was taken to refer to an algebraic
theory of parthood which Lesniewski sought to use as a way of bypassing Russell’s
paradox in the theory of sets (see Simons 1987, p. 102). The theory has since been
imported into analytic philosophy as the basis of understanding “concrete” objects,
as distinct from “abstract” objects of the kind mathematics is taken to deal with
and typically exempliﬁed by sets. It inspired Nelson Goodman’s nominalism, which
was an attempt to circumvent as far as possible the need to appeal to an ontology of
abstract objects.
General ideas captured by the system of mereology appeared before Lesniewski’s
work. Potter (2004, p. 23) says that “Frege . . . deserves credit for having ﬁrst laid
out the properties of fusions [sums] clearly. A fusion, he said, ‘consists of objects;
it is an aggregate, a collective unity, of them; if so it must vanish when these objects
vanish. If we burn down all the trees in a wood, we thereby burn down the wood.
Thus there can be no empty fusion.’ (1895, pp. 436–7, modiﬁed)”. Potter continues,
“it was plainly fusions, not collections, that Dedekind had in mind in Was sind und
was sollen die Zahlen? when he avoided the empty set and used the same symbol
for membership and inclusion . . . —two tell-tale signs of a mereological conception.
He drafted an emendation adopting the collection-theoretic conception only much
later”.
While set theory went its own way after Zermelo’s axiomatisation of the notion
of collection, the sum concept was developed in algebraic fashion in, for example,
the early paper of Huntington (1904). In what is possibly the ﬁrst application of
mereology, Huntington (1913) develops a formulation of Euclidean geometry on
the basis of a notion of a region of space rather than a point, with two primitives
“inclusion” and “sphere”. Although he didn’t use the term “part” it is clear that it is

6
1
Mereology
the mereological relation he had in mind, and this was made explicit in Tarski’s short
1926 paper designed to accomplish essentially the same task. Regions of space are
the paradigm examples of mereologically related entities, and mereological relations
such as being a part of, overlapping and being separate from are naturally pictured
as relations between regions in the accompanying ﬁgure.
The word “mereology” is naturally regarded as a technical term, referring to
an algebraic system in this tradition, and whether mereology is applicable to the
elucidation of particular kinds of entities depends upon whether the mereological
relations (part, overlap, separate from, etc.) and operations (sum, product, differ-
ence) are applicable with the features prescribed by a system of this kind. Where
these features don’t apply, the concepts concerned are not mereological concepts.
This is how the term is used here. Some philosophers have in recent times used
the term differently, referring to any use of the word “part” or an expression
deemed to have some such import as mereological. Noting that ordinary usage
doesn’t always comply with the traditional mereological principles, these principles
are questioned and modiﬁcations sometimes suggested. Objections against what
is called the mereological principle of extensionality, otherwise known as the
mereological criterion of identity (same parts, same thing), motivated by regarding
the constitution relation as mereological parthood are dealt with here by giving a
detailed treatment of the constitution relation (Chap. 3) on the understanding that it
is not a mereological relation. Other targets for criticism have been the mereological
principle of the transitivity of the part relation and the existence of unrestricted sums.
Rescher (1955, p. 10) started the trend with the claim that “There are various
nontransitive senses of ‘part.’ In military usage, . . . persons can be parts of small
units, and small units parts of larger ones; but persons are never parts of large units.
. . . A part (i.e., a biological sub-unit) of a cell is not said to be a part of the organ of
which that cell is a part”. Johanna Seibt (2000, p. 256–7) adds other examples: “The
moulding is part of a door. The door is part of a house. *The moulding is part of a
house.” Again, “Changing diapers is part of being a mother. Opening the box with
wipes is part of changing diapers. Pressing your thumb upward is part of opening
the box with wipes. *Pressing your thumb upward is part of being a mother.” David-
Hillel Ruben tries to put more ﬂesh on the bones with his example:
Suppose I have an alarm clock, one of whose parts is a light by which one can tell the time
at night. Suppose that I use the clock to make a bomb that detonates when the clock’s hands
reach a speciﬁed position. The light makes no contribution to the working of the bomb. The
light is one of the parts of the clock, and the clock is one of the parts of the bomb, and yet
it is false that the light is one of the parts of the bomb. This seems to show that the relation
of being a part of is non-transitive. (Ruben 1983, p. 231–2).

1.2
Mereology
7
There are two things to say about examples such as these. First, as putative coun-
terexamples to the transitivity of the part relation they are remarkably unconvincing.
Take the last example. If Ruben really means both that the light is part of the clock
and the clock is part of the bomb, then I cannot for the life of me see how he can
deny that the light is part of the bomb. It seems that in afﬁrming the falsity of the
conclusion he is interpreting the one premise, that the clock is part of the bomb, to
imply the denial of the other, that the light is part of the clock. There is a simple
equivocation on the term “clock” as the contraption that includes the light and as
a more specialised device serving as a detonator. The other examples are no more
plausible. It is not easy to see that the ﬁrst premise, “The moulding is part of a door”,
deals with the same relation as the second, “The door is part of a house”, in one of
Seibt’s putative counterexamples. The ﬁrst is an idiomatic way of expressing that the
door has a certain kind of shape and can hardly be interpreted as literally ascribing
the part relation at issue in the second premise to a pair of objects. A clear and
unambiguous interpretation of the premises in the other putative counterexample
of hers quoted above is also wanting. What sort of thing is being a mother? Is it
to be thought of as a universal, or perhaps as a process? A process interpretation,
which seems to be at issue in the other premises, is perhaps not the most natural
interpretation of the ﬁrst premise or the conclusion. But uniformly interpreted true
premises and a false conclusion is what is required, and it is far from clear that this
is such a case.
Second, even if these or other examples were plausible counterexamples to
the transitivity of the part relation, that would only show that what is at issue is
something other than the mereological part relation. Those pioneering the use of
mereology didn’t take it upon themselves to provide an analysis accommodating
all the nuances which can be conveyed with the word “part”. That in no way
detracts from the use of mereology in the elucidation of concepts where it is clearly
applicable, such as the theories of temporal intervals, regions of space, quantities of
matter and processes to be explored presently. As it stands, classical mereology is an
incomplete theory, and there is little sense in making it even weaker in the attempt to
provide an analysis accommodating all the nuances which might in various contexts
be conveyed with the word “part”. It might be said that such usage should be clearly
ﬂagged by speaking of mereological parthood rather than simply of parthood. But
this would be unnecessarily cumbersome here since I shall only be speaking of
mereological parthood when speaking of parts. In any case, in view of the difﬁculty
of ﬁnding convincing counterexamples to transitivity, it is the non-transitive usage
which should really be ﬂagged, for example by ﬁnding another word for the concept
in question. This is the policy adopted here, where in a later chapter the part-like
notion of constitution is taken to be a triadic relation between an individual (such
as a biological organism), a quantity of matter and a time. Mereology is involved
in elucidating this relation in virtue of the mereological relations and operations
sustained by some of the relata, namely quantities and times. But the relation

8
1
Mereology
itself calls for a somewhat more complicated analysis than simply taking it to be
a mereological relation.4
Another matter on which critics take issue with traditional mereology is the
principle of so-called unrestricted summation. This principle sanctions, so the critics
say, the existence of the mereological sum of anything that exists. We have a man
and his wife, and so by the principle the sum of the two. But what is that? A man and
his wife are humans, but hardly their sum—this comprises independently moveable
parts, has two heads rather than the usual one, and so on. As with the putative
counterexamples to transitivity, however, this is a travesty of the principle at issue.
Summation is an operation generating an object of the same general kind as that
on which the operation acts. The operation of addition generates numbers from
numbers, the operation of differentiation generates a function from functions and the
operation of disjunction generates a sentence from sentences. So with mereology,
a mereological operation generates an entity of the same kind as those on which it
operates. Accordingly, if the putative sum of a man and his wife is not a human,
then the operation of mereological summation is not applicable to humans. Humans
do not sustain mereological relations and operations.
An axiom for the real number system states
8x 9y .x C y D 0/:
No one would take seriously the objection that there is nothing that could be added to
Socrates to generate zero. The axiom is understood to apply to a restricted domain
of objects, which mathematicians make explicit, for example by ﬁrst writing “To
each pair of real numbers x; y there is associated a real number, denoted by x C y,
called the sum of x and y,” and then for the above axiom, “If x is an element of R,
then there exists an element y 2 R such that x Cy D yCx D 0” (Lang 1969, p. 15).
When arguing above that the sum of two humans is not a human it was implicitly
assumed that the universe of discourse (comprising everything of the general kind at
issue) was humans. Were it animals or Englishmen, the corresponding point would
be that two animals or two Englishmen cannot be summed to yield an animal or
an Englishman, respectively. Any application of the formal theory of mereology
similarly has a domain of application, so that universal and existential quantiﬁers
range over this domain. But as already indicated, the domain of objects of interest
here includes objects not subject to mereological operations, so there is no general
axiom to the effect that to each pair of objects there is an associated object which is
their sum, still less that for all objects satisfying a predicate ', there is a sum of all
and only those objects.
There are several ways of capturing the restriction. One would be to introduce a
ﬁrst-order language with the one-place predicates “quantity (of matter)”, “(spatial)
region”, “(interval of) time” and “individual” and lay down axioms to the effect
4Those who argue that constitution is identity will complain that this is moving the goalposts.
But I reply that they set up their discussion by imposing their construal from the outset, and only
consider compliant examples.

1.2
Mereology
9
that the sum of any things satisfying the ﬁrst predicate exists, the sum of any things
satisfying the second predicate exists and the sum of any things satisfying the third
predicate, together with a further condition to be discussed presently, exists. There
would be no axiom providing for the existence of sums of individuals. Another way
of proceeding might be to lay down the existence of sums of objects which are not
individuals. There is nothing in principle wrong with allowing entities which are,
say, the sum of a time and a spatial region, or of a spatial region and a quantity of
matter, or of all three. But these thingummybobs are not times, nor are they spatial
regions nor quantities of matter. What would have to be done is to speciﬁcally
distinguish those sums of times as times, those sums of regions as regions and those
sums of quantities as quantities from thingummybobs in general. But since I have
nothing to say about thingummybobs, the primarily expository account developed
here will be facilitated by circumventing such things altogether.
The procedure adopted here is to regiment with a many-sorted language, reserv-
ing the familiar variables x; y; z; . . . for individuals, and introducing the variables
t; t0; t00; : : : ; t1; t2 . . . for times, the variables p; q; r; : : : ; p1; p2 . . . for regions of
space and the variables ; ; ; . . . for quantities of matter. Finally, processes are
referred to by variables e; f; g; . . . . The mereological axioms governing each kind
of entity to which they apply are laid down separately. This ensures that sums do not
sum over entities from several different categories. The procedure is illustrated by
laying down the classical axioms of mereology for quantities of matter, following
Leonard and Goodman (1940) except that their use of set theory is avoided by
conﬁning the axiomatisation to a ﬁrst-order theory with an axiom schema.
Using “j” for the mereological predicate “is separate from”, which is taken as
primitive, the part relation, written , is deﬁned by
Df      8 . j    j /:
This part relation is to be distinguished from the notion of a proper part, written 
and deﬁned by
Df     .    ^  ¤ :
Overlapping, or having a common part, ı, is deﬁned by
Df ı
 ı   9 .   ^   /:
There are inﬁnitely many axioms, namely the two sentences
MQ1 8 8 .   ^    .  D /,
specifying the criterion of identity for quantities, and
MQ2 8 8 . ı    . j //;
governing the mereological relations, together with all sentences of the kind
MQ3 9 '  9 8 . j   8.'   j //;
where ' is a formula. This last postulate is not a single formula but an axiom-
schema, representing every formula formed from the schema by replacing ' with

10
1
Mereology
a deﬁnite formula. It provides for the existence of sums. Uniqueness follows,
permitting the deﬁnition of the sum of '-ers, † './, by
Df † 9 './ .  D † './  8 . j   8 .'./   j //:
Because there is no null element, the sum of '-ers is not deﬁned unless there is at
least one '-er; hence the existential condition in MQ3 and Df †. The binary sum,
 [ , is deﬁned by the condition “is identical with  or ”:
Df [  [  D † . D  _  D /;
existence in this case being provided for by the theorem of predicate logic: 9 . D
 _  D /.
These axioms are adequate to establish the classical properties of the mereolog-
ical relations, such as transitivity and reﬂexivity for , transitivity and irreﬂexivity
for , symmetry and irreﬂexivity for j, symmetry and reﬂexivity for ı and classical
principles such as
 ª   9 .   ^  j /;
where  ª  abbreviates .  /. Simons (1987, p. 29) calls the left-to-right
implication here the strong supplementation principle. It couldn’t be satisﬁed if
there were a null element, which would trivialise separation and overlap by being a
part of every quantity and entail that nothing would be separate from anything else
(everything overlaps everything). Thus, a quantity  not part of the null element
would, by the principle, have a part separate from the null element; but there could
be no such part.
The unrestricted or general sum, † './, is of course restricted (in the larger
context of a many-sorted system) in the sense that only quantities are incorporated
in the summation. It is unrestricted in the sense that it is deﬁned for any predicate
of quantities, ', provided at least something satisﬁes it. Summation appropriate for
times will not be unrestricted in this sense. There is an allied operation deriving
from the notion of part, which is an ordering relation (transitive, antisymmetric—
i.e. MQ1—and reﬂexive), namely that of being the least upper bound of the '-ers,
including all and only the parts of the '-ers. This is symbolised as ƒ './ and
deﬁned by
Df ƒ 9 './ .  D ƒ './  8 .    8 .'./    //:
It can be shown that the unrestricted sum † './ is identical with the correspond-
ing least upper bound, ƒ './.
An unrestricted product operation, the product of '-ers, written … './, can
be deﬁned in terms of the sum operation, as the sum of the parts common to all the
'-ers. A prerequisite ensuring the existence of a common part must be satisﬁed:
Df … 9 8 .'./    /  … './ D † 8 .'./    /:
Existence and uniqueness of the product are then an immediate consequence of
the existence and uniqueness of sums. Again, where the predicate ' is simply “is
identical with  or ” the product in question is the binary product of  and ,
written  \ .

1.3
Times
11
The difference between two elements  and  introduces a third element, which
can again be deﬁned in terms of the sum operation as the sum of all those parts of
 separate from . The existential prerequisite is therefore 9 .   ^  j /.
But this is equivalent with  ª  by the equivalence mentioned above involving
the strong supplementation principle and its converse. Accordingly, the difference
operation, , is deﬁned by:
Df   ª      D † .   ^  j /:
Finally, although the axiom MQ3 doesn’t allow for the existence of the sum of
things satisfying an impossible condition, such as being not self identical, which
would yield a null element, it does allow the existence of the sum of things satisﬁed
by everything, such as being self-identical. The corresponding sum is called the or
the universe of quantities, Uq, formally deﬁned by:
Df Uq Uq D † . D /:
The complement of a quantity , written , can then be deﬁned as Uq provided
 ¤ Uq. In this case the prerequisite for the existence of the difference is always
satisﬁed for any quantity, , except Uq.
The purely mereological features introduced in this section are not sufﬁcient to
bring out characteristic properties of quantities of matter that distinguish them from
other entities subject to mereological relations and operations. For that purpose,
further vocabulary will be introduced presently relating quantities to other kinds of
entity in characteristic fashion. In the case of times, supplementing the mereological
principles with further axioms without further primitives goes a long way to
delimiting what kind of entity they are.
1.3
Times
There are certainly extended times or intervals. The times explicitly or implicitly
required for the description of the features and behaviour of ordinary, middle-
sized objects and quantum objects are intervals. Intervals are the times needed to
sustain the properties and relations of continuants and the times it takes processes to
occur: colliding, combustion and erosion take time. Various arguments from science
can be given that macroscopic bodies take time to change state and cannot do
so instantaneously. If a projectile were to change direction instantaneously when
rebounding from a wall, for example, inﬁnite forces would be required. Special
relativity requires time for the effect of an impact stopping a body to be conveyed
from the front to the back. Again, all the atoms constituting a moving body, even a
solid one, are in motion relative to the centre of mass, and it is their time-averaged
motion that constitutes an overall motion of the macroscopic body. The same could
be said of any change of state of a body involving, for example, a change of
temperature or of phase. Time averages and relaxation times for the re-establishment
of equilibrium presuppose intervals of time. Aristotle contemplated the paradox

12
1
Mereology
arising from the idea that time comprises a series of instants, which would seem
to require that a body starting to move either has a last instant of immobility and
no ﬁrst instant of motion or no last moment of rest and a ﬁrst of motion, with no
grounds for determining which. Hamblin (1969, 1971) proposed an analysis of time
as comprising intervals and not instants, in terms of which the question doesn’t arise.
Whether there are any good positive arguments for the existence of instants is by
no means clear. It has been suggested that if intervals are construed as sets then the
distinction between open and closed intervals can be used to account for Vendler’s
(1967) distinction between activities and accomplishments (described by the use
of the preterit tense in Spanish), thus providing motivation for the introduction
of boundary instants. On this view, activities predicate open intervals, whilst
accomplishments predicate closed intervals. This way of marking the distinction
is highly implausible as a semantic analysis and an alternative account can be given
without resorting to instants once an account of intervals is available which doesn’t
treat them as sets of instants. An activity predication is distributive (it holds of every
subinterval of a time at which it holds) and cumulative (if it holds of two overlapping
or abutting times, then it holds of their sum). An accomplishment predication of
time, on the other hand, holds for exactly the time at issue, and not for any sub- or
superinterval.5
Hamblin’s approach takes a dyadic relation he calls abutment as primitive,
construed as asymmetric with axioms ensuring it is irreﬂexive and transitive, in
terms of which a dyadic earlier than relation and mereological concepts such as the
overlapping relation and dyadic operations of “intersection” and “join” are deﬁned.
Following the spirit but not the letter of Hamblin’s proposal, the system outlined
here (essentially that of Needham 1981) is based on mereological primitives, in
terms of which a symmetric dyadic relation of abutment is deﬁned as well as a triadic
relation of betweenness. The possibility of doing this depends upon appropriate
axioms, which when added to the basic mereological axioms ensure the adequacy
of the deﬁnitions. It can be shown that a dyadic order relation is not deﬁnable in
terms of these concepts. This leaves it open to supplant the theory with something
providing the basis for the deﬁnition of a direction of time and a dyadic earlier than
relation, as discussed for example in the following subsection.
Taking mereological separation as the sole primitive, two standard mereological
axioms are laid down by analogy with MQ1 and MQ2 of the last section:
MT1
8t1 8t2 .t1  t2 ^ t2  t1 . t1 D t2/
MT2
8t1 8t2 .t1 ı t2   .t1 j t2//;
where part and overlapping, as well as proper part, are deﬁned as in the last section.
The relation of abutment, A, can then be deﬁned in purely mereological terms, to
5Extending the mereological base by accommodating distinctions of open and closed intervals in
the manner of Clarke (1981, 1985) and as developed by Randlee et al. (1992) will not, therefore,
be of interest here.

1.3
Times
13
the effect that abutting intervals are overlapped by some interval every overlapping
interval of which overlaps one or other of two intervals at issue. Formally,
Df. A At1t2 . t1 j t2 ^ 9t3 .t3 ı t1 ^ t3 ı t2 ^ 8t4 .t4 ı t3 :
t4 ı t1 _ t4 ı t2//:
It will be convenient to say that two intervals are connected, C, if they either abut or
overlap; formally,
Df. C Ct1t2 . At1t2 _ t1 ı t2:
Distant intervals, that neither abut nor overlap, are said to be disconnected.
Intervals don’t have gaps. The time stretching from noon to 2 o’clock and then
from 6 o’clock to 8 o’clock is not an interval; it may be possible to interpret the
expression “the time” here as a measure totalling in this case 4 h, but it is not a
time, which must be unbroken. On this understanding, there is no sum of the time
stretching from noon to 2 o’clock and that stretching from 6 o’clock to 8 o’clock,
as there would be if an unrestricted general sum operation were introduced like that
governing quantities. A restriction on summation is required ensuring that there are
no such interrupted times. Accordingly, summation is introduced in the form of a
binary operation, [, by ﬁrst laying down the following existence axiom:
MT3
Ct1t2  9t3 8t4 .t4 j t3 . t4 j t1 ^ t4 j t2/,
after which uniqueness is readily established, allowing the deﬁnition of a dyadic
sum operation as follows
Df. [ Ct1t2 . t3 D t1 [ t2  8t4 .t4 j t3 . t4 j t1 ^ t4 j t2/.
In the absence of a general sum operation, a universal time cannot be deﬁned by
a universal condition as a universal quantity was deﬁned, and the possibility of a
ﬁnite iteration of the dyadic operator lapping up all the times in a universal time is
precluded by later axioms ensuring the inﬁnite extent of time.
With no general sum, the binary product cannot be deﬁned as a sum, and separate
provision must be made for the product operation with an appropriate axiom for
existence (provided the intervals in question overlap), from which uniqueness is
readily established allowing the dyadic product, \, to be deﬁned in the usual way:
MT4
t1 ı t2  9t3 8t4 .t4 j t3 . t4 j t2 _ t4 j t2/
Df. \ t2 ı t2 . t3 D t2 \ t2  8t4 .t4 j t3 . t4 j t2 _ t4 j t2/:
Difference, , can be deﬁned along essentially the usual lines, except that
precautions must be taken to ensure that intervals with holes are not generated by
imposing a restriction conﬁning subtraction to an interior end part. The relation of
being an interior end part to a time, denoted by E, is in turn deﬁned in terms of
being both a proper part and standing in the relation of internal abutment, I, the
latter deﬁned in terms of the existence of a common abutting interval:

14
1
Mereology
Df. I
It1t2 . t1 ı t2 ^ 9t3 .At3t1 ^ At3t2/:
Df. E
Et1t2 . It1t2 ^ t1  t2:
Df. –
Et1t2 . t3 D t2  t1  8t4 .t4  t3 . t4  t2 ^ t4 j t1/.
A betweenness relation, B, can be deﬁned and standard betweenness axioms
(MT5—MT7 below) laid down ensuring a linear order to time. The general idea
of the deﬁnition is that t2 lies between t1 and t3 if everything including all of t1 but
no part of t2 is separate from everything including all of t3 but no part of t2. This
deﬁnition wouldn’t be adequate if time were circular (or had the form of a ﬁgure
“8”, or other closed forms), because t2 might lie between t1 and t3 and intervals
including t1 and t3, respectively, might overlap despite each being separate from t2.
In the present case, the possibility of circular time is precluded by the axiom MT6.6
Df. B
Bt1t2t3 . t1 j t2 ^ t2 j t3 ^ 8t5 8t4 .t1  t5 ^ t3  t4 ^
t5 j t2 ^ t4 j t2 : t5 j t4/
MT5
t1 j t2 ^ t2 j t3 ^ t3 j t1 .. Bt1t2t3 _ Bt1t3t2 _ Bt2t1t3
MT6
 .Bt1t2t3 ^ Bt1t3t2/
MT7
Bt1t2t3 ^ t4 j t1 ^ t4 j t2 ^ t4 j t3 .. Bt1t2t4 _ Bt4t2t3.
The properties Bt1t2t3  Bt3t2t1 (1–3 symmetry) and Bt1t2t3  t1 j t3 are
immediate consequences of the deﬁnition of betweenness. It also follows from the
deﬁnition of betweenness and the existence of binary sums that abutment implies
the absence of any intervening interval.
Further axioms can be laid down. What might be called the unity of time, that
intervals always have abutting neighbours, is ensured by
MT8
t1 j t3 . At1t3 _ 9t2 .Bt1t2t3 ^ At1t2 ^ At2t3/.
Time’s inﬁnite extent in both directions is expressed by
MT9
9t1 9t3 Bt1t2t3.
In another context, this might be considered compatible with time being circular,
and so not implying time’s inﬁnite extent. Euclid’s second postulate, that a straight
line can be produced continuously in a straight line, is ambiguous between merely
saying that a line is boundless—there is always another point further along, without
end—and asserting that a line is inﬁnite in extent. But interpreting it in the manner
of MT9 allows it to be satisﬁed by the points along a great circle on the surface
of a sphere, or the straight lines of Riemann geometry. In the present context, the
other axioms require times to be intervals with parts and not structureless instants.
6An appropriate order relation for circular time (or time in an incomplete theory which leaves the
question of linearity or circularity open) would be a 4-place relation of separation closure, which
could be deﬁned on the basis of the same mereological resources but will not be pursued here (see
Needham 1981, p. 57).

1.3
Times
15
Intervals along a circle can be successively summed with their neighbours so as to
ﬁnally incorporate the entire circle in a single time which can’t be ﬂanked by others,
in contradiction with MT9. In any case, if time were circular Bt1t2t3 would imply
Bt1t3t2, which is precluded by MT6. The latter axiom is not therefore independent
of the other axioms.
Finally, with the addition of an axiom expressing the inﬁnite divisibility of time,
MT10 9t1 t1  t2,
the axiomatisation of intervals is complete. That is to say, considered as a ﬁrst-
order theory dealing only with times, the theory described in this section is complete
Needham (1981, pp. 60–2). Other deﬁnite alternatives (such as the existence of a
single endpoint while the other end remains open instead of MT9) yield alternative
complete systems, but dropping axioms on which we might not want to make a stand
leaves the axiomatisation incomplete.
We have now seen how a restricted sum operation can be introduced with the
consequence that there is no universal time. A further consequence is that the least
upper bound of two intervals is not necessarily their sum. There is no sum of the two
times stretching from noon to 2 o’clock and from 6 o’clock to 8 o’clock, whose least
upper bound is the interval stretching from noon to 8 o’clock. The restriction on the
summation of intervals has repercussions on the summation of processes, which are
discussed in Chap. 8.
Supplementing mereology in this way has given us a theory whose entities can
be construed as times standing in a linear order. The only primitive is a mereological
one. It is therefore hardly surprising that the ordering is undirected, like that
along a spatial dimension. A simple application of Padoa’s method shows that an
asymmetric dyadic order relation cannot be deﬁned with the resources of this theory.
Conventionally assigning one of two selected times as the earlier of the two sufﬁces
to impose a direction on the betweenness ordering that can be expressed as a general
deﬁnition of the earlier than relation. But there is a view which sees the direction
of time as having its origin in the naturally occurring causal processes in the world.
The mereological theme of this chapter is interrupted with a bare sketch of how this
idea might be implemented in the present context in the following subsection.
1.3.1
Directed Time
Suppose t1; t2; t3; t4 are pairwise distinct (non-overlapping) times, and consider the
two pairs .t1; t2/; .t3; t4/. The pairs could be said to have the same direction if all
four times were temporally betweenness ordered as the corresponding variables
are spatially betweenness ordered when displayed, for example, thus: t1; t2; t3; t4,
but not when, for example, displayed thus: t2; t1; t3; t4. There are 12 (4! / 2) ways
of arranging four pairwise distinct intervals t1; t2; t3; t4 on a line, six of which
correspond to the pair .t1; t2/ having the same direction as the pair .t3; t4/. A general
deﬁnition of having the same direction in terms of these six alternatives can be
conveniently formulated by ﬁrst deﬁning the four-place relation B.t1; t2; t3; t4/ by

16
1
Mereology
B.t1; t2; t3; t4/  : B.t1; t2; t3/ ^ B.t2; t3; t4/:
The four-place relation SD.t1; t2; t3; t4/, for “the pair t1; t2 has the same direction as
the pair t3; t4” is then deﬁned by
SD.t1; t2; t3; t4/  : B.t1; t2; t3; t4/ _ B.t1; t3; t2; t4/
_ B.t1; t3; t4; t2/ _ B.t3; t1; t2; t4/ _ B.t3; t4; t1; t2/:
The general idea of the causal theory of the direction of time is that the times in
each pair are causally related in some way. On the relational theory of causation,
according to which causation takes the form of one event standing in the causal
relation as the cause of another, the times in a pair could be the times of occurrence
of these events. A pair of times could then be understood as standing in the relation
K deﬁned by
K.t1; t2/  9e1 9e1 .Occurs.e1; t1/ ^ Occurs.e2; t2/ ^ e1 causes e2/:
A somewhat different view has it that a causal process transforms one state into
another, and the times of our pairs would be the times when the states obtain. With
a function T.s/ assigning a time when a state s obtains, the relation K might then be
deﬁned along the lines
K.t1; t2/  9e 9s1 9s1 .Tr.e; s1; s2/ ^ t1  T.s1/ ^ t2  T.s2//;
where Tr.e; s1; s2/ is understood to say that process e transforms state s1 into state s2.
At all events, with some such relation between a pair of times, the contention of the
causal theory is that an empirical generalisation holds along the lines of
For any four pairwise distinct (separate) times t1; t2; t3; t4 it holds that: if K.t1; t2/ ^ K.t3; t4/
then SD.t1; t2; t3; t4/,
or perhaps a slightly weaker statistical generalisation
For nearly all four pairwise distinct times t1; t2; t3; t4 it holds that: if K.t1; t2/ ^ K.t3; t4/
then SD.t1; t2; t3; t4/,
which allows for the occasional case of backwards causation.
The earlier than relation serves as the basis for determining the direction of
causation in the regularity theory of causation, where the relation of constant
conjunction does not itself sufﬁce to provide an asymmetric relation. Even those
who don’t adhere to the regularity theory may wonder how it is possible to
distinguish cause from effect, and the problem may be of independent interest for
those who allow cause and effect to be simultaneous.
Reichenbach addressed this problem of ﬁnding an independent criterion of causal
priority in his early causal theory of time, which was more ambitious than the
present theory and sought to provide a causal basis of the temporal ordering itself
and not merely the direction of time. He had the idea of distinguishing the cause by
making a small modiﬁcation or mark. If it really is the cause that is modiﬁed, then

1.3
Times
17
the mark will be transferred to the effect, whereas if the event marked is the effect,
then there will be no corresponding modiﬁcation of the cause. In other words, if
events of the kind X cause events of the kind Y, and “” indicates a variation, then
only event pairs of the following kinds are observed:
fX; Yg; fX; Yg; fX; Yg;
and never event pairs of the kind:
fX; Yg:
However, it was objected that we might well observe the following six events:
x1; y1; x
2; y
2; x3; y
3;
where x1 is of type X, x
2 is of type X, and so forth. Reichenbach wants us to
interpret this sequence in such a way that it comprises the three pairs
fx1; y1g; fx
2; y
2g; fx3; y
3g;
and the pair fx
2; y1g doesn’t occur. But why should we do this if we don’t already
take for granted that there is something corresponding to the left-to-right ordering
in the sequence? If we know no more than that the six events occur, we could pair
them in the following way:
fx2; y1g; fx3; y
2g; fx1; y
3g:
In other words, the mark method is circular!
With the lesser ambition of seeking a causal basis merely for the direction of time
rather than the entire order opens up a way of circumventing the objection and using
the mark method as a criterion of causal priority (Needham 1985, pp. 167–9; Faye
1997 , pp. 221–2). Suppose that the following six events are temporally betweenness
ordered in such a way as to correspond to the spatial betweenness ordering of the
letters:
x1; y1; x
2; y
2; x3; y
3:
Choosing of the desired pairs without presupposing the direction of time is possible
by considering the interval between the events in a sufﬁciently large number of
similar cases. Making the assumption that all causally connected events x; y of
type fX; Yg are always temporally separated by equally long intervals of time, a
sufﬁciently large number of observations would exhibit constant (the same) interval
lengths only between pairs of events of the following kinds:
fX; Yg; fX; Yg; fX; Yg;

18
1
Mereology
and the unwanted pairs of the kind
fX; Yg
would be excluded. Presupposing a betweenness ordering weakens the original
ambition of the causal theorists, but provides for an approach to causal priority
adequate for present purposes.
An alternative approach to the direction of time is based on the idea of increasing
entropy along the lines formulated by Denbigh and Denbigh in the following
passage
Consider a number of macroscopic systems [bodies, possibly a system of several bodies]
A; B; C, etc., each of them adiabatically isolated. Let ti; tj; tk, etc., refer to a sequence of
clock readings, but without reference to which direction of the sequence is the direction of
‘later than’ or ‘the future’. Further, let SA
ti, etc., be the measured entropy (relative to some
standard state) of system A, etc., at the instant ti.
Now the empirical content of the Second Law can be expressed as follows:
If SA
ti  SA
tj then SB
ti  SB
tj
or
if SA
ti  SA
tj then SB
ti  SB
tj
Therefore, in either case, we have:
.SA
ti  SA
tj/.SB
ti  SB
tj/  0
since the brackets have the same sign whether this be positive or negative. A similar
reasoning can then be applied to any other system, B; C; D, etc., considered pairwise, and
also to any pair of clock times. (Denbigh and Denbigh 1985, p. 16)
The second proposal above for the deﬁnition of the relation K.t1; t2/ is well-
suited for adapting this suggestion.
1.4
Regions of Space
A theory of spaces based on mereological principles is developed in this section,
analogous to the theory of times just presented although it will be necessary to
introduce a speciﬁcally spatial primitive predicate in addition to the mereological
primitive of separation. On the other hand, it will not be necessary to introduce
the same kind of restriction on the underlying mereological sum operation that
was essential to the exclusion of unconnected intervals and the adequacy of the
deﬁnitions of abutment and betweenness as they apply to intervals. Unconnected
regions are recognised with a view to allowing them to be occupied by scattered
quantities of matter. This leaves it open whether there is a universal region including
all of space, and a corresponding universal sum operation. It does seem natural to
follow the same course and say that just as time itself is not an interval, so space
itself is not a region. As with time, a general sum operation in conjunction with

1.4
Regions of Space
19
an axiom ensuring the indeﬁnite extension of space (MS8 below) would entail the
existence of an inﬁnite region, whereas there was no such corollary to the existence
of general sums of quantities. Spatial regions provide possible locations of quantities
of matter, which are macroscopic objects occupying ﬁnite regions, and although the
possibility of there being regions larger than that occupied by any quantity of matter
is not to be discounted, no quantity could occupy the whole of inﬁnitely extended
space. Accordingly, dyadic operations of sum and product will sufﬁce for present
purposes, and there is no universal sum operation.
With variables, p; q; r; . . . ranging over regions of space, the principles of
classical mereology governing mereological relations—analogues of MT1 and
MT2—are adopted:
MS1
8p 8q .p  q ^ q  p . p D q/
MS2
8p 8q .p ı q   .p j q//.
Although there will be call for a notion of connected regions, there is no general
restriction on sums of regions analogous to that on sums of times precluding
disconnected regions. General sums of regions might, therefore, be allowed unless it
is thought inappropriate that the whole of inﬁnite space should be counted a region.
Without any strong reason for disallowing a universal region, but for the sake of
formulating a deﬁnite system of axioms, summation will be conﬁned to the binary
sum operation, [, introduced by the existence axiom
MS3
9p3 8p4 .p4 j p3
. p4 j p1 ^ p4 j p2/:
Uniqueness is easily established and the dyadic sum operation deﬁned by
Df. [ p3 D p1 [ p2
. 8p4 .p4 j p3
. p4 j p1 ^ p4 j p2/:
As with times, the product operation must then be introduced by a distinct axiom
with a restriction to preclude the existence of null elements,
MS4
p1 ı p2
 9p3 8p4 .p4 j p3
. p4 j p1 _ p4 j p2/;
and establishment of uniqueness allows the operation \ to be deﬁned:
Df. \ p1 ı p2
. p3 D p1 \ p2
 8p4 .p4 j p3
.
p4 j p1 _ p4 j p2/:
There is a speciﬁcally spatial primitive, the 1-place predicate Sp, read “p is
a stratum”. A stratum can be thought of as a region extending inﬁnitely in two
directions like a plane of Euclidean geometry, but unlike a plane in so far as it is
inﬁnitely divisible into parallel strata (as laid down in axiom MS9 below), i.e. a
stratum has “thickness” and is 3-dimensional like any other region. Strata stand in a
betweenness relation, B, analogous to the way intervals of time do, deﬁned by
Df. B
Bpqr
. SŒp; q; r ^ p j q ^ q j r ^ 8p1 8r1 .SŒp1; r1
^ p  p1 ^ r  r1 ^ q j p1; r1 . p1 j r1/:

20
1
Mereology
In order to shorten formulas, the conjunction Sp ^ Sq ^ Sr has been abbreviated
SŒp; q; r. SŒp1; r1 is understood similarly, and q j p1; r1 abbreviates the conjunction
q j p1 ^ q j r1. When these kinds of abbreviation will be used in the sequel, they are
always ﬂagged by the occurrence of a comma or square brackets.
Immediate consequences of the deﬁnition are that Bpqr implies Brqp and p j r.
The remaining basic principles of order are laid down as axioms:
MS5
SŒp; q; r ^ p j q ^ q j r ^ p j r .. Bpqr _ Bqpr _ Bprq
MS6
 .Bpqr ^ Bprq/
MS7
Bpqr ^ Ss ^ s j p; q; r .. Bpqs _ Bsqr:
As with times, further questions arise about the structure of spaces that are not
easily decided. Here it is simply assumed (with a view to making the axiomatisation
complete) that there is no end to a series of betweenness-ordered strata:
MS8
SŒp; q ^ p j q . 9r Bpqr:
In view of the 1–3 symmetry of betweenness, it follows that Bpqr  9sBspq. It is
also assumed that strata are inﬁnitely divisible in the sense that each is the sum of
two separate strata:
MS9
Sp  9q 9r .SŒq; r ^ q j r ^ p D q [ r/:
Elements in a series of betweenness-ordered strata are said to be parallel. More
generally, being parallel, k, is deﬁned on strata by
Df. k
p k q . SŒp; q ^ 9p19q1 9r .p1  p ^ q1  q ^ Bp1q1r/:
Symmetry of the parallel relation follows immediately from the deﬁnition, and
reﬂexivity for strata follows given MS9 and MS8. A proof of transitivity can be
sketched as follows. Assume p k q ^ q k r. If p j r then a stratum in r lies
between one in p and some other not overlapping either introduced directly by the
assumption, or by applications of MS8. If p and r are not separate they overlap,
and MS9 will provide the parts of each which stand in the betweenness relation to
something by MS8. An axiom expressing the unity of space can now be written
MS10 p k q  9r .Sr ^ p; q  r/:
A stratum which is not parallel to a given stratum will be orthogonal to it, where
orthogonality, #, is deﬁned by
Df. #
p#q . SŒp; q ^  .p k q/:
Symmetry of orthogonality follows from that of the parallel relation. Further,
orthogonality implies overlapping by MS8 and classical mereology (MS2). Now,
there are in fact at least three orthogonal series of strata, the strata in each series
being parallel to one of three mutually orthogonal strata which exist in accordance
with the axiom
MS11 9p 9q 9r .p#q ^ q#r ^ p#r/:

1.4
Regions of Space
21
Moreover, it is a feature of space that three mutually orthogonal strata will not only
overlap pairwise, as already implied; they will overlap in a region common to all
three:
MS12 p#q ^ q#r ^ p#r . 9s .s  p; q; r/:
The largest such region common to three mutually orthogonal strata (i.e. the product
or intersection of the three) is called a box, described by the predicate Box:
Df. Box Box.s/  9p 9q 9r .p#q ^ q#r ^ p#r ^
8u .u  s  u  p; q; r//:
With this concept of a box available it is now possible to deﬁne a notion of abutment,
A along broadly the same lines that abutment was deﬁned for temporal intervals:
Df. A
Apq . p j q ^ 9r .Box.r/ ^ r ı p ^ r ı q ^
8s .s ı r . s ı p _ s ı q//:
This allows that either of two regions connected with one another may be scattered,
understanding “connected” as a 2-place predicate, C, analogous to the relation of
being connected deﬁned, like the analogous relation on times in the last section, as
abutting or ovelapping. In particular, every region is connected with itself. There
is another notion of connectedness, expressed by a 1-place predicate, of being
a connected region with the sense of not being scattered. A connected region,
described by the predicate Conn, is deﬁned as one that can’t be exhaustively
partitioned into non-abutting regions:
Df. Conn Conn.p/  8q 8r .q j r ^ p D q [ r . Aqr/.
Thus although regions, unlike intervals, are not in general connected, some of
them are.
Like the theory of times, the ﬁrst-order theory of regions presented in this section
can be shown to be complete by the same general method. The proof is outlined in
the following subsection.
1.4.1
Completeness of the Theory of Regions
Abstracting from the regimentation project based on a many-sorted language
introduced earlier, the theory of spatial regions presented in the foregoing section
can be considered a ﬁrst-order theory based on the two primitives “j” and “S”. In
view of axioms such as MS8 and MS9, there are no ﬁnite models of this theory.
It can therefore be shown to be complete by establishing @0-categoricity (Vaught’s
theorem), for which purpose a denumerable model is described based on the rational
numbers. The domain of this model comprises the following sets of triples of
rational numbers:

22
1
Mereology
(i) For any pair of rational numbers (positive or negative) a1 and a2, the sets
fhx; y; zi W a1 < x < a2g, interpreted as a family, Sx, of parallel strata, each
orthogonal to any member of the family, Sy, of parallel strata fhx; y; zi W b1 <
y < b2g, for any pair of positive or negative rational numbers b1 and b2,
which are in turn orthogonal to any member of the family, Sz, of parallel strata
fhx; y; zi W c1 < z < c2g, for any pair of positive or negative rational numbers
c1 and c2.
(ii) The family B of boxes fhx; y; zi W a1 < x < a2; b1 < y < b2; c1 < z < c2g.
(iii) Any ﬁnite union or non-null intersection of elements drawn from B, Sx, Sy,
or Sz.
The interpretation of the predicate S is given in (i). Separation is interpreted as
null intersection, in which case overlapping amounts to having some member of the
domain in common. Two elements abut if a box overlaps both and is separate from
anything separate from either of the two elements in question. Inspection shows that
the axioms are all satisﬁed by the model.
Clearly, the domain is denumerable. Let m0; m1; m2; : : : be an enumeration of
the elements of the domain of this model, and consider an arbitrary denumerable
model whose elements can be enumerated thus: q0; q1; q2; : : : . A standard back-
and-forth technique of mapping the one structure onto the other establishes that
they are isomorphic. The inductive deﬁnition of a 1-1 function f from the domain
of the standard model to that of the arbitrary model preserving atomic formulas can
be outlined as follows.
Put r0 identical with m0, and choose f.r0/ to be the ﬁrst stratum in the
enumeration q0; q1; q2; : : : if r0 is a stratum; otherwise, let f.r0/ be the ﬁrst member
of q0; q1; q2; : : : which is not a stratum. Assume f.r0/; f.r1/; : : : ; f.rn1/ have
already been deﬁned in such a way that for all i, j from 0 to n–1,
ri j rj iff f.ri/ j f.rj/; and
Sri iff Sf.ri/:
Then consider the nth assignment. Suppose ﬁrst that n is odd, and let rn be the
ﬁrst element in the enumeration m0; m1; m2; : : : not yet assigned. Consider how
rn is related to r0; r1; : : : ; rn1 and assign f.rn/ from the remaining elements of
q0; q1; q2; : : : according to which of the following alternatives holds, ensuring at
the same time that if Srn, then f.rn/ is chosen so that Sf.rn/, and otherwise, so that
not Sf.rn/.
(i) rn is separate from each of r0; r1; : : : ; rn1. Then for f.rn/ choose any element
p in the arbitrary model separate from each of f.r0/; f.r1/; : : : ; f.rn1/.
(ii) rn overlaps rk, for one or more k such that 0  k  n  1. The others are treated
as in (i), but for each such k, one of the following alternatives holds:
(a) rn D rk, so put f.rn/ D f.rk/.
(b) rn  rk, so choose f.rn/ so that f.rn/  f.rk/.
(c) rk  rn, so choose f.rn/ so that f.rk/  f.rn/.

1.5
Taking Stock
23
(d) there is a proper part, r, of rn which is separate from rk and a proper part,
r0, of rk separate from rn, so choose f.rn/ such that f.rn/ overlaps f.rk/ and
there is a proper part, p, of f.rn/ which is separate from f.rk/ and a proper
part, p0, of f.rk/ which is separate from f.rn/.
If n is even, then consider the ﬁrst element in the enumeration q0; q1; q2; : : : not
yet assigned and let this element be f.rn/ for some rn taken from the enumeration
m0; m1; m2; : : : chosen so that Srn iff Sf.rn/ and further according to which of the
alternatives analogous to (i) and (ii)(a)–(d) holds in respect of how this new element
from the arbitrary model is related to f.r0/; f.r1/; : : : ; f.rn1/.
The axioms ensure that these choices are always available. Clearly, the induction
shows that f is a 1-1 function and for elements, mi; mj, of the standard model,
mi j mj iff f.mi/ j f.mj/; and
Smi iff Sf.mi/;
so that the two models are isomorphic. Hence, the theory of spatial regions is
complete.
1.5
Taking Stock
The paucity of the bare mereological principles is apparent from these latter
developments of theories of regions and times. Quantities were allowed a general
notion of summation whereas summation of times and regions was restricted to
a binary sum operation. But nothing like the development from the mereological
basis that serves to characterise times as extended, linearly ordered entities in a
complete theory is forthcoming for quantities. There are no further axioms, over and
above the purely mereological ones but conﬁned to the mereological terminology,
that would give some positive speciﬁcation of how quantities differ from times.
There won’t even be a simple axiom stating the discreteness of matter, nor even
a denial of atomism afﬁrming its inﬁnite divisibility. Regions were distinguished
from times with the help of an additional, non-mereological primitive in terms of
which a complete axiomatisation was formulated. We will have to look towards
the introduction of further vocabulary for a positive speciﬁcation of the features of
quantities that distinguish them from those of times and regions. These will not be
non-mereological primitives applying solely to quantities, as the non-mereological
primitive “stratum” applied to regions, and allowing for the making of a pure theory,
much less a complete theory, of quantities analogous to the pure theory of times and
the pure theory of regions. They will be relations standing between one or more
quantities and one or more of the other kinds of entity referred to in the many-
sorted framework introduced here, notably the occupies relation placing quantities
and individuals in a region of space at a time, the constitutes relation specifying a
quantity’s relation to an individual at a time, substance and phase relations relating

24
1
Mereology
quantities to times and relations specifying how quantities are involved in processes.
The details are developed in the ensuing chapters. But the general idea can be
illustrated with the principle
8 8t 9p Occ.; p; t/;
where Occ is the occupying relation, stating that quantities are always somewhere
and conﬁned to regions in the present sense.7
This approach is at variance with that taken by philosophers who read into the
mereological relations a content that might be suggested by English expressions for
these relations, but goes beyond what the mereological axioms justify. The policy
here is to understand mereology as the theory of the relations of part, separation, etc.
and operations of sum, product and difference as determined by the classical axioms
speciﬁed above. Application is restricted to times, spaces, quantities and processes
which don’t infringe the classical axioms. Any call on issues going beyond pure
mereology raises questions of what additional vocabulary or principle is required,
which should be formulated explicitly. This will not issue in a complete theory,
and therefore leave several questions unanswered—in some cases raising doubts
about the appropriateness of the question. But I hope it will go some way towards
clarifying the interrelations between, and therefore the character of, the middle-sized
objects of interest here.
Several of the features ascribed to times and regions in the theories presented
earlier are ones we can’t be certain about. Whether intervals of time and spatial
regions are inﬁnitely divisible or ultimately discrete, for example, are controversial
issues which should, perhaps, be left open. Much the same might be said about
whether they are indeﬁnitely extendable in the sense of MT9 and MS8. This
doesn’t really detract from the point made at the beginning of this section about the
paucity of the purely mereological principles governing quantities, which can be
contrasted with a range of alternative complete mereologically-based systems for
7What Lowe (1998, p. 96) calls existing in time distinguishing material from abstract objects calls
for speciﬁc predicates like “occupies”. It is not sufﬁcient to have some property at a time, or as
Lowe would have it, to have had, to have now or to be going to have a property. Although I wouldn’t
say that 2 + 2 = 4 is ever, and certainly not always, true (nor as Arthur Prior would have it, that
it always was, is and always will be that 2 + 2 = 4), numbers do nevertheless stand in relations
to times. For example, 4 could well be the present volume of a quantity of gas in cubic meters,
or the length in seconds of an interval of time, or the factor by which one interval is longer than
another, or the factor by which the length of an interval in seconds is greater than the weight of a
quantity of matter in grammes. A time-dependent existence predicate E.; t/ expressing existence
in time could be deﬁned in terms of a speciﬁc predicate like “occupies” as 9p Occ.; p; t/. But I
wouldn’t call the relation between 4 and t deﬁned by “There is a quantity  whose volume in m3 at
t is 4” time-dependent existence expressing the existence of the number 4 in time. The difference
regarding existence in time is not merely a matter of being related to times, but speciﬁcally that
quantities of matter occupy a region of space at a time whereas numbers don’t. Other features that
presuppose occupying a region of space, such as participating in a process of reacting chemically
with another substance, are also marks of existence in time.

1.5
Taking Stock
25
times and regions drawn up from alternative sets of axioms, imposing boundedness,
for example, instead of unboundedness. It might not even be necessary to go so far
as to formulate complete theories of space and time in order to make the point about
the little the purely mereological principles say about the nature of quantities.
Meagre though they may be, this is not to say that the mereological principles
are without content. They impose constraints on the objects falling within their
domain, and any application of mereology must consider whether the objects of
interest do in fact comply. Regions and intervals are paradigm cases. Material
objects call for a pause for thought. Loosely understood, it seems that sometimes
they do, sometimes they don’t. Rather than trying to accommodate the recalcitrant
cases by bending mereology, a distinction is drawn here between quantities, which
do, and individuals, which don’t, comply with basic mereological principles. Both
may be considered material objects, but it is those which are quantities that are
of primary interest here. Chapter 3 will say enough about individuals to make the
contrast clear and establish that quantities are not to be confused with individuals.
Questions about how individuals are distinguished are pursued up to a point, but
without any claim to tackle the ﬁner details of the individuation of, for example,
biological organisms. Drawing such a distinction may be at odds with the intuitions
of some of those who argue for modifying mereological principles. But I argue that
it conforms to intuitions shaped by the elementary science learnt in school which
arose in the course of the history of science and was subsequently developed into the
more sophisticated modern science of macroscopic objects to deal with the complex
behaviour of matter.
Throughout the development of additional principles articulating the notion of a
quantity by relating quantities to other kinds of object, the mereological relations
and operations retain their strictly algebraic character. Summation, in particular, is
an operation that generates entities from entities of the same kind. Its application
to quantities is illuminatingly contrasted with the lack of a corresponding operation
on individuals (Sect. 3.5). Summation is also to be distinguished from a process
of generating a quantity from others and taking place in time, or as arising as
a result of parts sticking together. Quantities will be related to processes taking
place in time, but not in this way, and questions pursued concerning the relation of
mereological relations and operations to the combination of elements in compounds,
the interaction of solutes with solvents in solutions and the intermolecular forces
underlying the various phases of matter. But there is no Special Composition
Question to be answered seeking the kind of cohesion serving as the criterion for
“when summation happens” or whatever the appropriate expression might be.
When van Inwagen (1987) raises his Special Composition Question, he considers
contact, fastening, cohesion and fusion to defy precise deﬁnition and concludes
that answers are too vague to justify the existence of sums in a wide variety of
cases. But these notions, vague or not, are completely irrelevant to the question
of what stands in mereological relations or what the application of a mereological
operation refers to. A mixture of oxygen and hydrogen in the ratio of one mole
to two at normal pressure and a temperature over 100 ıC, say 150 ıC, is not at

26
1
Mereology
thermodynamic equilibrium, but is to all intents and purposes stable if not subject
to short sharp imputs of energy that would start a chain reaction. The mixture is a
mereological sum of the quantity of oxygen and the quantity of hydrogen. It is not a
compound of these two quantities. That would be induced by, say, a short exposure
to a ﬂame, which would result in the combination of hydrogen and oxygen yielding
the compound known to us as water. Under the same conditions of temperature
and pressure, this mereological sum of hydrogen and oxygen would then occupy
two-thirds of the volume occupied by the uncompounded mixture, and conforms to
thermodynamic criteria of comprising a single substance8 (discussed in Sect. 6.4
below). The ﬂame has not induced the formation of a mereological sum from
something that wasn’t. It has changed the state of one and the same mereological
sum from that of being a mixture (a solution) to that of being a compound, so that it
now bears the property of being water that it didn’t before.
Mereology has nothing to do with the notion of composition, compound forma-
tion or any other notion of bodies adhering to one another. As we saw when deﬁning
the notion of abutment for times and for spatial regions, even the notion of contact
is beyond the scope of mereology and deﬁnable only with the addition of further
axioms in the one case, and further axioms together with an additional primitive in
the other. When we come to deal with the general notion of abutment or contact
between quantities and between individuals in the next chapter, we will see that it
presupposes all this and more. Being a homogeneous mixture (i.e. a solution), being
a compound (daltonide or berthollide), being a colloid, and so on, are chemical
concepts involving some kind of interaction which might yield to analysis on a basis
that includes purely mereological concepts, but not on these alone. Cohesion is not a
mereological concept. Certainly, van Inwagen’s Special Composition Question has
no bearing on mereology if it literally asks for a physical process, let alone one akin
to a human action as suggested by the passage:
Suppose one had certain non-overlapping material objects, the xs ... what would one have
to do—what could one do—to get the xs to compose something? (van Inwagen 1987, p. 23)
Nor does it if it asks for some state of cohesion. Confusion on this point is best
avoided by not speaking of composition when summation9 is at issue. Accordingly,
“summation” is the term used here for the mereological operation; “composition” is
reserved for something else.
This might be the place to emphasise that there is no assumption underlying
the discussion in the following chapters of the existence of instants in the sense of
indivisible atoms of time with no duration. In particular, there is no presumption
that a predicate holding of an interval of time (as well, perhaps, of regions and
quantities) holds, or depends upon other predicates holding, of any, let alone every,
8“Substance”, here and throughout this book, is used in its ordinary English sense of “chemical
substance”.
9Or van Inwagen’s richer notion of a mereological partition (mutually separate parts whose sum is
identical with the whole). In Sect. 9.2 it is argued that a quantity of water cannot be mereologically
partitioned into hydrogen and oxygen, nor substances in general into atoms.

1.5
Taking Stock
27
instant purportedly making up the interval. The word “interval” is naturally used
to describe a time and is so used here, without any commitment to the usage in
set theory in the sense of a set of all the elements, usually numbers, lying between
two limits along a linearly ordered set-theoretical structure. Unless the contrary is
explicitly indicated, any set-theoretical usage of admittedly ambiguous terminology
should be assumed not to be at issue. Similarly, regions are not assumed to comprise
points and quantities are not assumed to comprise point particles.
The minute composition underlying the continuous matter we are familiar with
at the macroscopic level has fascinated philosophers since the times of the ancients.
In his interesting recent assessment of discussions of the paradoxes of inﬁnite
divisibility of matter in renaissance and enlightenment philosophy, Holden (2004)
rejects the standard modern interpretations which treat the issues as mathematical
exercises and criticise older writers for their ignorance of the properties of denseness
and limits exhibited by rational and real numbers:
Given this standard interpretation, the paradoxes turn out to be quite easy to disarm. ...
[T]hey rest on the period’s halting and ﬂawed mathematical understanding of the logic of
limits and the inﬁnite series. ... But this mathematical interpretation is quite mistaken ...
[T]his sort of mathematical model that considers the form or structure of inﬁnitely divisible
body in abstracto, divorced from all thought of the actual physical ﬁlling or stufﬁng of
real concrete bodies, may indeed be perfectly unproblematic. ... [N]atural philosophers of
the period saw the inﬁnite divisibility of material body as the key problem, and not the
inﬁnite divisibility of space or extension in general. ... Those philosophers, such as the
Newtonians, who ... draw a distinction between body on the one hand and space on the
other phrase the problem in terms of the divisibility of body, not space. ... But this point is
lost in much of the recent commentary. (Holden 2004, pp. 20–1)
The underlying thesis remains as true as ever. The continuity of macroscopic
matter is not understood in quasi-mathematical fashion by postulating points in
abstraction from considerations of “the actual physical ﬁlling or stufﬁng of real
concrete bodies”. But the situation is not redressed for the modern reader by
“missing premises” of the kind:
(a) the argument [Zeno’s metrical paradox applied to bodies] assumes actual parts, and
hence an actual inﬁnity of m[etaphysically]-indivisible ultimate parts [spatially distinct
parts which could exist separately—at a distance—from one another]; (b) those ultimate
parts are all the same size; and (c) they could not be extensionless—[in view of which] the
argument is much more compelling than the recent literature has allowed. (Holden 2004,
p. 47)
Nor is there any plausibility in postulating either material points or material
extended, partless atoms. Purely mechanical material points are paradoxical: they
don’t stand in contact and collisions call on extra-material forces. This is not
advanced, as Holden (pp. 263–72) notes, by Boscovich’s strategy of associating
a material point with a force ﬁeld. The central points are not independent thing-
like entities, just centres of the ﬁelds of force, and identifying matter exclusively
with forces or powers invokes an inﬁnite regress of interrelated dispositions that
never engage with anything actual, and never amounts to a concrete reality. Nor is
the continuity of macroscopic matter better understood in terms of a constitution

28
1
Mereology
of impenetrable Daltonian atoms, which are equally paradoxical. Collisions would
be inelastic (otherwise, they have an internal structure of parts which would mean
that they are not atoms), calling on inﬁnite forces. Chemical combination, which
amounts to more than mere juxtaposition of atoms, is without explanation, as are
weaker interactions underlying differences of phase.
What there really is down there in very small regions for very short intervals of
time is something of a mystery. Successively taking proper parts of a macroscopic
body will not lead to ever smaller particles and ultimately, classical point masses.
Moving from the macroscopic scale takes us to the mesoscopic scale of bodies
ranging from micrometers down to bodies the size of collections of atoms such
as make up a molecule. Macroscopic behaviour is distorted by statistical ﬂuctuations
and quantum effects begin to appear. At still smaller scales we are entirely within
the quantum world, governed by indeterminacy relations forbidding simultaneous
possession of exact momentum and position, and raising issues about the conjoint
deﬁniteness of time and energy (Hilgevoord 2002). We are told that classical
particles emerge from the quantum world as a result of decoherence in which
environmental effects nullify the interference in probabilities characteristic of
quantum systems. With no pretensions to delve into this submicroscopic world
of the really brief and very small, I prefer to leave incomplete the mereological
theory of quantities, regions and times rather than making unreasonable claims
about points, point-particles and instants or their atomic counterparts, and leave
unanswered questions about how the boundary between the macroscopic and
microscopic realms is to be articulated.

Chapter 2
Occupying Space
2.1
Boundaries
Aristotle’s puzzle about starting and stopping was mentioned by way of initial
motivation of the treatment of times as extended intervals without recognising
the existence of instants as the boundaries of the intervals (Sect. 1.3). Since the
system is made complete by adopting postulates about the inﬁnite extent and
denseness of time, it cannot easily be said to presuppose the existence of instants
but merely not mention them. Analogous questions arise regarding the existence of
boundaries in space, about which a similar position has been anticipated with the
development of a theory of regions analogous to that of temporal intervals which
is also complete when postulates determining whether space is ﬁnite or inﬁnite in
extent and discrete or dense are adopted. Underlying the adoption of these systems
is the idea that the extended spaces and times are all that is needed to accommodate
the spatio-temporal features of continuants and processes. These issues are pursued
in greater detail—something that would be severely limited by merely adopting an
understanding of parthood in a “basic spatio-temporal sense”—after considering
how some philosophers have tried to motivate the introduction of boundary entities
in dealing with the spatio-temporal features of continuants.
Varzi (2013, p. 11) quotes a suggestive passage of Leonardo da Vinci’s:
What is it ...that divides the atmosphere from the water? It is necessary that there should
be a common boundary which is neither air nor water but is without substance, because
a body interposed between two bodies prevents their contact, and this does not happen in
water with air. ...Therefore a surface is the common boundary of two bodies which are
not continuous, and does not form part of either one or the other, for if the surface formed
part of it, it would have divisible bulk, whereas, however, it is not divisible and nothingness
divides these bodies the one from the other. (Leonardo da Vinci, Notebooks, 1938, pp. 75–6)
Smith and Varzi (2000) adopt some ideas from this source with a little modiﬁcation
in defense of what they call their realist stance on the question of boundaries. They
credit Brentano with the view that there is genuine contact between entities such as
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P. Needham, Macroscopic Metaphysics, Synthese Library 390,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4_2
29

30
2
Occupying Space
John’s head and (the rest of) his body, understood to mean that “there are . . . two
boundaries (one belonging to the head and one to the body) which share exactly the
same location” (Smith and Varzi 2000, p. 406). This is an example of what they call
a ﬁat boundary, which relates the adjacent bodies symmetrically. Each body has
its own boundary, and these coincide. Two material bodies cannot coincide, but
boundaries can because, in Leonardo’s phrase, they are “not possessed of divisible
bulk” (Smith and Varzi 2000, p. 416).
Fiat boundaries are contrasted with natural, or bona ﬁde, boundaries, which are
marked by a discontinuity as in Leonardo’s example and mark an asymmetrical
sense of adjacency. In cases of the latter sort, there is a single boundary belonging
to one of the two adjacent bodies which is closed, whilst the other lacks a boundary
and is open. As with Aristotle’s example of starting and stopping, this seems to raise
an obvious objection of arbitrariness in determining which body is closed and which
open. But Smith and Varzi dismiss the difﬁculty and simply maintain that
the open/closed distinction is not in and of itself counterintuitive. Indeed, in some cases
it seems quite reasonable: ordinary material objects are naturally the owners of their
boundaries (their surfaces, in effect), and there is nothing counterintuitive in the thought
that the environments in which objects are embedded are open. (Smith and Varzi 2000, p.
407)
This is counterintuitive, relying on some tacit understanding that material on
either side of a phase boundary (between, say, gas and liquid or between liquid and
solid) can be distinguished as an object and its environment. They don’t even attempt
to justify this clearly arbitrary division and they certainly don’t offer any general
guidelines indicating how the distinction is to be applied. In Leonardo’s example,
the air is less dense than the water, which might be taken as reason to downgrade
the air to the subsidiary status of environment. (Casati and Varzi (1999, p. 90) seem
to think only solids are material, regarding gases as “immaterial, airy bodies”.) But
then a stone at the bottom of a glass of water is more dense than the water, and by
this criterion would be the closed body with the water now constituting the open
environment. They don’t say that density is their criterion, but where we have a
stone at the bottom of a glass of water in contact with the air, either the water is the
environment with respect to one object (the stone) and not the other (the air), or both
the stone and the air are counted environments of the water which for some reason
never constitutes an environment, or some further (unstated) criterion determines
when water is and when it is not the environment of adjacent bodies. It is ludicrous
to suggest that any of these alternatives is intuitively plausible, let alone so obviously
right as not to need justiﬁcation.
If, as Smith and Varzi maintain, there is no need to introduce material bodies
as boundary entities, the question remains whether the spatial and temporal
ontology must include such entities in order to accommodate the relations between
macroscopic bodies. The unsatisfactory arbitrariness of their manner of introducing
such boundary entities provides some motivation for investigating whether we can
do without them. I now turn to consider this suggestion.

2.2
Doing Without Boundaries
31
2.2
Doing Without Boundaries
Consider the following passage:
Descartes and Spinoza ... allow that the parts of any given body are separable one from
another. Any given part can continue to exist without being adjacent to any other particular
portion of matter. This is because the parts of the plenum that constitute bodies are moveable
one from another (contrast the parts of Newtonian space, which are immobile). (Holden
2004, p. 13)
What is it for an object to be immobile? Doesn’t it mean that the object occupies
one and the same place all the time, and is not able to occupy another region at
any time? But this is not the reason that space is not moveable because it doesn’t
fulﬁl the ﬁrst conjunct, even if the second conjunct might, for this same reason, be
construed as true. Space doesn’t occupy space; a region doesn’t ever occupy another
region. Holden may take space to be immobile because it doesn’t make sense to say
that space moves. But it doesn’t seem to be anything like this that is being denied
by allowing that the parts of a body are moveable from one another. Rather, it is
that they are not somehow irremediably stuck together. The suggested contrast is a
superﬁcial one that breaks down as soon as anciliary concepts, over and above the
strictly mereological ones, are introduced explicitly to make the notion of movement
on which it depends clear.
A body will be said to move (be moveable) if it occupies one region at one
time and (possibly) another at another. Reserving the term “separate” for its strictly
mereological sense introduced earlier, a body is said to be distant from another at
a time if the regions occupied at that time by each are each parts of distinct strata
between which there lies another stratum. A body is said to be removed (removeable)
from another if they abut at one time and (might) not at another. This calls for the
introduction of a new primitive relation of occupying relating individuals, regions
and times, in terms of which a deﬁnition of a time-dependent relation of abutment
between bodies can be formulated.
A continuant, x, is related to space and time by virtue of occupying a certain
region, p, for a certain time, t, expressed here by writing Occ.x; p; t/. (Predicates
which relate different kinds of entities—referred to by different kinds of variable—
will be written in this manner, with brackets and commas, in contrast with the way
betweenness, for example, is written as holding between three regions as Bpqr,
without brackets or commas.) The occupies relation will be interpreted to mean
that the continuant in question occupies exactly the region in question for the time
in question, and so conforms to the axiom:
Occ.x; p; t/ ^ p ¤ q : Occ.x; q; t/:
An alternative course would be to take Occ.x; p; t/ to imply that x occupies all the
subregions (proper parts) of p at t, and to work consistently with this interpretation
instead. But the course adopted here will prove to be the most useful. The alternative

32
2
Occupying Space
concept is not lost; a body, x, is said to cover a region p during t, symbolised
Cov.x; p; t/, iff 9q .p  q ^ Occ.x; q; t//.
A natural ﬁrst shot at deﬁning abutment for two individuals, x and y, is to say that
they occupy abutting regions at t:
A.x; y; t/  9p 9q .Occ.x; p; t/ ^ Occ.y; q; t/ ^ Apq/:
(Although the two relations of abutment are each symbolised by A, they are of
different arity, and the style and number of the variables appearing after “A” together
with the convention that the variables following a predicate are enclosed in brackets
where they are of different sorts sufﬁces to distinguish them.) A book lying on a
table, for example, abuts the table as deﬁned. This shows that it is possible to give an
account of two bodies being in contact—as close as can be with no body interposed
between them yet not actually interpenetrating—without resorting to a notion of a
boundary. It sufﬁces to deal with the sort of cases considered by Smith and Varzi, at
least as they seem to understand them. France and Germany are not separated as a
natural phase boundary separates heterogeneous parts of a mixture like the oily and
watery parts of a vinaigrette dressing. But the present solution is just as applicable
as that offered by the ﬁat boundaries of Smith and Varzi. Questions can be raised
about how far down into the earth’s core France and Germany extend, and how far
into the atmosphere. On the present approach, it would have to be determined what
the objects are that actually abut. But analogous issues arise for Smith and Varzi.
Fiat country boundaries cannot be simple lines but must extend over a surface.
Other questions can be raised about what the actual bodies are that are at issue
here. This is clearly a problem when considering the relation between John’s head
and the rest of his body when they are connected with a continually moving blood
stream, which is taken up in Sect. 2.4. Putting this issue aside for the moment,
assume the individuals in question comprise solid bodies that don’t exchange matter
with their environment. Still the above deﬁnition doesn’t take into account all the
ramiﬁcations of the time at issue being an interval. There is a possibility that one
or both of two bodies might abut while expanding, contracting, or undergoing
deformation during this time, or they might both undergo wholesale motion during
this time, raising the prior issue of how “occupies” is to be interpreted in order to
take these possibilities into account.
2.3
Keeping in Touch
The region occupied during a time might vary in the course of that time. This may
be due to translational motion of the body, or internal movement such as vibration,
contraction, deformation or expansion, all of which I take to be subsumed under the
term “motion”. An object in motion during a given time is naturally understood to
occupy the region it sweeps out during that time. This will cover the special case in
which it is stationary throughout the period, when the region “swept out” is one and

2.3
Keeping in Touch
33
the same region occupied at any subinterval of this time. The general principle at
issue is here called a principle of accumulation, and can be conveniently expressed
in the following manner:
Occ.x; p; t/  8q .9t0  t Occ.x; q; t0/  q  p/:
An alternative thought might be to consider the region occupied for a time to be
the common part covered (forming a subregion of) every region occupied at any
subinterval of the time in question. But for an object moving further than its own
length in the time in question, there would be no such common part.
The second implication cannot be replaced by an equivalence; some subregions
of p might be too large, small or scattered to be occupied by x at any time. A point
of detail disguised by this generalisation is a continuity condition to the effect that
Occ.x; q1; t1/ ^ Occ.x; q2; t2/ ^ At1t2 : Cq1q2;
where C is the relation of being connected (abutting or overlapping). The region
p occupied throughout an interval is then the region swept out during the interval,
being a sum of its subregions occupied by x during subintervals in the sense that
Occ.x; p; t/  8t1 8t2 .t D t1 [ t2 
9q1 9q2 .Occ.x; q1; t1/ ^ Occ.x; q2; t2/ ^ p D q1 [ q2//:
If general sums of spatial regions were allowed, this could be more compactly
written as
Occ.x; p; t/  p D †q 9t0  t Occ.x; q; t0/:
But in any case, since sums are unique, the principle of accumulation encompasses
the point of interpretation already mentioned, that occupying a region means
occupying exactly that region. Accordingly, bodies occupying distinct places at the
same time are distinct, and a given body never occupies two places at the same time.
In view of the uniqueness of the region occupied, the occupies relation Occ.; p; t/
can be equivalently expressed as a function, Occ.; t/ D p, which will sometimes
facilitate the formulation of a principle.
Once the possibility of movement is recognised, it can be seen that the deﬁnition
of abutment proposed in the previous section doesn’t even provide a sufﬁcient
condition. It would allow that x and y abut if they pass by one another during the
time at issue without ever coming really close, but such that the regions swept out
abut. The one might have missed the boat, as it were, because the other took off
earlier.
We might try to remedy this by requiring abutment to hold throughout whenever
it holds:
bA.x; y; t/  8t0  t 9p 9q .Occ.x; p; t0/ ^ Occ.y; q; t0/ ^ Apq/:

34
2
Occupying Space
But this won’t quite do the trick because it doesn’t allow for two moving bodies
continually abutting while in motion and sweeping out regions that overlap.
Although it is possible that when on the move, abutting bodies don’t occupy
overlapping regions, that depends on the shapes of the bodies and the direction
of the motion in relation to the regions occupied immediately prior to the time in
question. What has just been deﬁned is adequate for the special case (recorded by
the circumﬂex) where there is no overlapping of regions occupied. But in general,
abutting bodies could well occupy regions which overlap (at least for part of the
time at issue), and this possibility must be taken into account. The temptation is
to say that they abut instantaneously throughout the interval. But since instants are
not recognised here, the challenge is to address the issue without resorting to a
conception of instantaneous abutment.
Where there is overlapping, the common region covered by two abutting bodies
on the move is ever smaller for smaller subintervals of the time of abutment. But
what is required is not just a matter of approaching an ever smaller region for
ever shorter times, as the denseness of space and time would allow, since this
could be an ever closer approach to a ﬁxed region as times become indeﬁnitely
shorter. All subregions of the region common to those swept out during the time
in question must be considered. The possibility that two individuals may spatially
overlap although they cannot abut because one is a component part of the other, as
the engine is a component part of a car, must also be taken into account since the
region swept out by a car has less in common with that swept out by its engine the
shorter the time. Using “x ˚t y” to symbolise the relation “x and y have a common
component part during t” symmetric in x and y (discussed and deﬁned in the next
chapter (Sect. 3.4)),1 abutment on the move can then be deﬁned by:
eA.x; y; t/ : Occ.x; t/ ı Occ.y; t/ ^ .x ˚t y/ ^
8p; q .9t0; t00  t .p D Occ.x; t0/ \ Occ.y; t0/ ^
q D Occ.x; t00/ \ Occ.y; t00/ ^ t0  t00/  p  q/,
where the functional form of the occupies relation has been used.
Drawing these proposals together in a general deﬁnition, it should be recognised
that bodies abutting during a time may or may not occupy overlapping regions
during one or more subintervals of this time. Where there is no overlapping of
regions occupied, the above proposal for abutment between bodies under this
condition (i.e. bA) is adequate. But the alternative must be incorporated into a general
deﬁnition, which replaces the deﬁnition of A given in the previous section:
A.x; y; t/  8t0  t .bA.x; y; t0/ _ eA.x; y; t0//:
The alternative covered by bA is not conﬁned to the case of stationary or static
abutment where there is no change of regions occupied, but it should be possible to
1A stronger requirement would be that the individuals have no constituent matter in common. But
as we will see shortly (Sect. 2.4), abutting individuals may exchange matter.

2.4
Abutment Without Material Abutment
35
characterise this special case. The conditions deﬁning bA are necessary for abutment
of stationary bodies, but not sufﬁcient since two bodies might continually abut while
in motion without any overlap of the regions they sweep out. Static abutment,
covering the case when there is no translational motion or change of shape or
volume, must imply that each body occupies one and the same region throughout
the time in question. This can be expressed by moving the existential quantiﬁers in
the deﬁnition ofbA to the left of the universal quantiﬁer, and deﬁning static abutment,
SA, by
SA.x; y; t/  9p 9q 8t0  t .Occ.x; p; t0/ ^ Occ.y; q; t0/ ^ Apq/:
This can hardly be described as an elegant solution to the problem of keeping in
touch, but in as much as it does the job, a serious potential objection to the adequacy
the pointless ontology of spaces and times is overcome.
2.4
Abutment Without Material Abutment
Does Leonardo’s example of nothingness dividing the water from the air present
us with a case of two connected material bodies abutting? That depends on what
is meant by a material body. For only very short periods at best, the water and
other material making up the sea abuts the nitrogen, oxygen, etc. making up the air.
Modern science tells us that, as conditions of temperature and pressure vary, the
proportion of water vapour in the air varies, as do the proportions of the various
substances from the air—oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, etc.—dissolved in the
water. Parts of the liquid phase are transformed into the vapour phase and enter
the air, or parts of the water vapour in the air enter the liquid phase, along with
parts of the oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, etc. in the air which dissolve in the
liquid. Even when equilibrium obtains at constant temperature and pressure, there
is still an exchange of microparticles between the phases. While equilibrium holds
at the macroscopic level, there is a dynamic equilibrium at the microscopic level
in which the more energetic water particles leaving the liquid phase are matched
by less energetic water particles in the gas phase entering the liquid phase. Thus,
a quantity of air immediately above a quantity of water, as in Leonardo’s example,
which is connected at some relatively short time will not remain so for long but
become scattered as parts dissolve in the water; likewise for a quantity of water
immediately below such a quantity of air. Consequently, these quantities, which
may abut in the sense of occupying abutting regions for a very short period, will not
do so for longish times on the macroscale, of the order of a microsecond (106 s.)
and longer.
What is required to accommodate Leonardo’s example to the modern understand-
ing of matter is a distinction between the notion of an individual and its constitutive
matter, the individual remaining the very same thing throughout the variations in its

36
2
Occupying Space
material constitution. The sea and the air are often thought of as individual bodies
in this sense in everyday contexts, as for example when we talk of the air becoming
more polluted and increasing its proportion of carbon dioxide. To seal the distinction
with a name, the term “atmosphere” might be called on for this use, and the term
“air” reserved as a predicate applicable to its constitutive matter (or at least the
gaseous part). Similarly, “the sea” names the individual and the term “water” can
be reserved as a predicate to describe some of its constitutive matter. Then we can
say that at least some of the air dissolves in the sea, but not that the atmosphere
does so, and that some of the water from the sea, but not the sea itself, enters the
atmosphere. A more graphic example is Smith and Varzi’s abutting head and body,
which stand in this relation despite the continual circulation of blood between the
two. We might well say that these are two abutting material bodies, but it is not the
matter that abuts.
Individuals are related to quantities by being constituted of them, typically
different quantities at different times. The constitutive matter of an individual
doesn’t necessarily vary over time. The marble or bronze of a well-preserved statue
is to all intents and purposes constant throughout the life of the statue (whose demise
is by no means the demise of its constitutive matter). But in general a quantity, ,
stands to an individual, x, as its constitutive matter for some part of the lifetime
of the individual, and so the constitution relation is a triadic one, Const.x; ; t/.
An individual like the atmosphere exchanges matter with its environment pretty
much continuously. Over aeons, we know that its chemical composition has changed
entirely. Ammonia has disappeared and oxygen appeared as the result of chemical
processes in matter on the earth’s surface. Hydrogen has been lost to outer space
because the gravitational pull couldn’t hold it back.
In the special case where an individual’s constitutive matter remains ﬁxed, the
region occupied by the individual is just that occupied by its matter. But where
the constitutive matter varies, the situation is not so simple. Two ways of thinking
about an individual’s constitutive matter at an interval of time during which the
matter varies suggest themselves. Either this matter is the mereological product
of the constitutive matter at all subintervals of the time in question, i.e. what
remains throughout this time, or it is the sum of all that is constitutive matter
for any subinterval of the time in question. These alternatives coincide where the
constitutive matter is ﬁxed. But where this is not so, the product in the ﬁrst option
becomes ever smaller as the time in question becomes longer, and would not be
deﬁned for the atmosphere for a time stretching over aeons during which all the
original matter ceases to constitute it and is completely replaced by other matter
since mereology doesn’t allow that there is a null quantity. On the second alternative,
the constitutive matter satisﬁes an accumulation condition of the same general kind
already introduced for the occupies relation,
Const.x; ; t/   D † 9t0  t Const.x; ; t0/;
and this is how the constitution relation will henceforth be understood.

2.4
Abutment Without Material Abutment
37
Neither alternative offers a satisfactory way of reducing occupancy by an
individual to occupancy by its constitutive matter, and I see no alternative which
does. The problem is compounded by the fact that an individual might grow or
diminish in size during the time in question. Accordingly, both of the predicates
Occ.; p; t/ and Occ.x; p; t/ are treated as primitive. Occupying by quantities is
likewise interpreted as occupying exactly a given region at a time:
Occ.; p; t/ ^ p ¤ q : Occ.; q; t/;
and satisfying a spatial accumulation principle analogous to that satisﬁed by
individuals:
Occ.; p; t/  8q .9t0  t Occ.; q; t0/  q  p/:
There is not in general an analogue of the continuity condition because a quantity
might be scattered. But the region p occupied for a time by a quantity is a sum of its
subregions occupied by the quantity during subintervals in the sense that
Occ.; p; t/  8t1 8t2 .t D t1 [ t2 
9q1 9q2 .Occ.; q1; t1/ ^ Occ.; q2; t2/ ^ p D q1 [ q2//:
Sums of regions are related to sums of quantities via the further principle that the
region occupied by a sum of quantities is the sum of the regions occupied by these
quantities. Capitalising on the functional form of the occupies relation, Occ.; t/ D
p, this principle can be neatly expressed in terms of the binary sum as follows:
Occ. [ ; t/ D Occ.; t/ [ Occ.; t/:
More generally, it would have been convenient to be able to speak of the region
occupied by the sum, † './, of quantities satisfying a condition './ by writing
Occ.† './; t/ D †p 9 .'./ ^ Occ.; t/ D p/:
But summation over regions was conﬁned to the binary sum (and its iterations) in
Sect. 1.4, and this mode of expression is not available.
Occupying by quantities and individuals is related by the principle
Occ.; p; t/ ^ Occ.x; q; t/ ^ Const.x; ; t/ : q  p;
which puts a constraint on the region occupied by an individual by its constituent
matter, but no more than that. Where an individual’s constitutive matter does vary
over time, it will in general occupy a more inclusive region than that occupied by
the individual at the same time.

38
2
Occupying Space
Again, since sums are unique, the principle of accumulation for the region
occupied by a quantity entails that the principle that occupying a region means
occupying exactly that region also applies to quantities. Accordingly, quantities
occupying distinct places at the same time are distinct, and a given quantity never
occupies two places at the same time. From this we deduce that, if static abutment,
SA, of two quantities is deﬁned as it was for individuals, by
SA.; ; t/  9p 9q 8t0  t .Occ.; p; t0/ ^ Occ.; q; t0/ ^ Apq/;
then quantities occupying abutting regions at a time are separate. For every part of
the one region is distinct from every part of the other and so occupied by distinct
parts of the two bodies, which therefore have no part in common. The deﬁnition
of static abutment for quantities thus implies that abutting quantities are separate,
which speaks for the adequacy of the deﬁnition.
This explicates what is afﬁrmed and denied in the claim that the atmosphere
statically abuts the sea but not the constituent air and water (for the same time).
Finally, the atmosphere differs from many examples of individuals in one respect
which is worth noting. Thanks to the distinction between an individual and its
varying constitutive matter, the atmosphere can be said to abut the earth, i.e. the
land and sea, for appreciable times during which the constitutive air and water don’t
abut. The atmosphere is bounded below, as it were, in the sense that it is in contact
with (statically abuts) the land and the sea. But it is not clear that the atmosphere is
bounded above, and that it exactly occupies a ﬁnite region. This is not just a matter
of there being no quantity of matter or no individual abutting it from above. The
density of matter gets indeﬁnitely smaller moving away from the earth. Suitable
inﬁnite regions would be available if the sum operation on regions were not limited
to binary sums but admitted general sum. As matters stand, however, with no general
sums of regions, it seems that we have to recognise that some individuals do not
occupy any region, although there are regions that they cover. The deﬁnition of
static abutment given at the end of Sect. 2.3 must be modiﬁed if we still want to
say that such individuals abut others, as the atmosphere abuts the earth. In such
cases, we might appeal to the notion of a component part deﬁned in the next chapter
(Sect. 3.4), and allow that an individual statically abuts another if either it or one of
its component parts does.
2.5
Mathematical Analysis and Indispensability
Material objects on the macroscopic scale are generally thought of as continuous.
This is not to deny that there are heterogeneous quantities of matter, but that
sufﬁciently small quantities are homogeneous while still on the macroscopic scale.
In other words, a heterogeneous quantity has homogeneous parts. Macroscopic
theory that systematically treats such objects is typically formulated in terms of the
differential and integral calculus of classical mathematical analysis. This captures

2.5
Mathematical Analysis and Indispensability
39
the idea of a smooth function that moves along successive values as the argument
successively covers all the numbers within given limits which is not merely
continuous, but also without kinks, that is, differentiable at all points in the range of
argument values. Classical thermodynamics already treats the energy and entropy
as differentiable functions of the amounts of the various substances making up the
mass of the body to which the theory is applied, which is certainly not to treat the
arguments as ranging over integers as the discrete structure of matter would seem
to require. Its extension to irreversible or non-equilibrium thermodynamics, where
the thermodynamic magnitudes are treated as functions of a position vector and a
time, is more grist to the mill. It also presents a challenge to the pointless ontology
of space and time presented here. A literal interpretation of the theory would
suggest that there should be objects with features corresponding to those ascribed
by the theory to numbers in the inﬁnitesimal limit invoked by differentiability.
Nominalists have tried to show that we can dispense with the mathematical entities
themselves. That is not the present issue, however, which is concerned with whether
the theory should be literally interpreted with physical elements corresponding to
the mathematical elements in the formalism.
A body is in a deﬁnite state when it is at equilibrium. Only then does a reading
registered by a thermometer record a temperature and a reading registered by a
pressure meter record a pressure. These are intensive properties, exhibited by the
body when each of its parts exhibit the same temperature or pressure. Classical
thermodynamics provides a theory within which the modern concept of absolute
temperature is developed, independent of the properties of any particular thermo-
metric material on which the traditional mercury, alcohol and gas thermometers are
based, and with an absolute zero, colder than which it is impossible to become.2 It is
extended to a theory that copes with the effects of smooth differences in temperature,
exempliﬁed by a temperature gradient, throughout a body in the theory of non-
equilibrium thermodynamics along the following lines.
In what Callen (1985) calls the entropy representation of a body treated by
classical thermodynamics, the entropy is taken to be a function, S.U; V; N1; : : : ; Nk/,
of the other extensive variables, here taken to be the energy, U, and the volume,
V, of the body comprising k different substances in amounts measured by Ni,
1  i  k. The condition of equilibrium is that the rates of change of the entropy
with respect to each of the extensive magnitudes on which it depends is zero. These
rates of change are intensive magnitudes of the entropy representation. @S=@U, for
example, is the inverse of the temperature, 1=T. If there are differences in the inverse
temperature (because there are differences in the temperature) within the system—
for example if there is a temperature gradient over the system—then this gradient
acts as a kind of force, driving a heating of (a ﬂow of energy into) one part of
2The negative absolute temperatures ﬁrst obtained by Purcell and Pound (1951) do not infringe
this principle; they are warmer than any positive temperature (see Zemansky and Dittman 1981,
Ch. 19). The negative sign arises because temperature is equated with a derivative, which can be
negative even though it is usually positive—see below.

40
2
Occupying Space
the system by another until the gradient is eliminated and equilibrium established.
When accommodating the formalism to deal with irreversible processes arising in
non-equilibrium situations that drive the system towards equilibrium, it is assumed
that the extensive variables on which S depends are functions of position, x, and
time t. Associated with the energy, U, then, are three components along each of
the Cartesian coordinates and their corresponding rates of change, called the energy
ﬂuxes in each direction, which are the components of the vector, JU, for the energy
current density giving the amount of energy ﬂowing across unit area in unit time.
Similarly, there are ﬂuxes of each of the different substances describing the ﬂow of
a particular substance per unit area per unit time.
Entropy is deﬁned in classical thermodynamics for bodies at equilibrium.
The concept is adapted to non-equlibrium situations by postulating that
To an inﬁnitesimal region we associate a local entropy S.X0; X1; : : : /, where, by deﬁnition,
the functional dependence of S on the local extensive parameters X0; X1; : : : is taken to
be identical to the dependence in equilibrium. That is, we merely adopt the equilibrium
fundamental equation to associate a local entropy with the local parameters (Callen 1985,
p. 310).
Equilibrium is thus assumed to obtain at sufﬁciently (inﬁnitesimally) small loca-
tions, and the differential dS D †iFiXi where the Fi are the partial derivatives,
@S=@Xi, of S with respect to the extensive variable Xi. Taking the magnitudes per
unit volume—replacing entropy by entropy density, denoted by the corresponding
small letter, etc.—this becomes ds D †iFixi, where the term for the volume, V, is
removed from the summation.
A short argument leads Callen to the following expression for the rate of local
production of entropy, Ps:
Ps D
X
i
rFi 	 Ji:
The gradient of the entropy-representation intensive parameter, rFi, is the gen-
eralised force or afﬁnity that drives the ﬂux of the corresponding magnitude
(energy density, concentration of kth substance, . . . ) to change in the direction of
equilibrium. The afﬁnity associated with the energy current density, for example, is
r.1=T/, and the afﬁnity associated with the amount of the kth substance ﬂowing
through unit area in unit time is r.k=T/ where k is the chemical potential of
the kth substance. The theory of non-equilibrium thermodynamics developed on this
basis deals successfully with irreversible processes arising in situations not too far
from equilibrium in what is called the linear regime.
Without pursuing the details any further, this brief review indicates how assump-
tions and techniques of analysis are applied in setting up a theory of smooth
variation of macroscopic properties over space and time. Focusing on one property
in particular, the temperature, this is clearly a step in the direction of acknowledging
that the concept can be extended to situations in which it varies smoothly over space
and time. In this connection, Callen notes that

2.5
Mathematical Analysis and Indispensability
41
the local intensive parameter Fi is taken to be the same function of the local extensive
parameters as it would be in equilibrium. It is because of this convention, incidentally,
that we can speak of the temperature varying continuously in a bar, despite the fact that
thermostatics implies the existence of temperature only in equilibrium systems. (Callen
1985, p. 310)
Consider what this means if its formal representation is taken literally. A smooth
function is not merely continuous in the mathematical sense, but differentiable at
all points (which excludes angular chinks). A derivative is deﬁned as the limit of a
converging sequence of quotients of numbers, and such limits must exist everywhere
in the range of the argument of a function if the function is to be differentiable
everywhere. The rational numbers are dense—between any two there is a third—
so that there are inﬁnitely many rational numbers between any two. But that is not
enough to ensure differentiability. There are gaps into which yet more numbers must
be pressed to guarantee the existence of these limits. The real numbers are complete
in the sense that the limit of every Cauchy sequence fxig, for which
8 9n 8m .m > n  j xm  xn j< /;
exists. This is not the case with the rational numbers, which are not order-complete.
It is difﬁcult to see how a temperature gradient could be literally understood in
this way.3 The temperature would fall off at a constant or varying rate along a
given Cartesian axis, so that the derivative of the temperature as a function of
the Cartesian coordinate is deﬁned with a deﬁnite value at each point. But at a
sufﬁciently small scale matter is granular, and for a gas that is not too dense
nor at a temperature close to a phase change, the temperature is determined by
statistical features of the gas molecules that are not deﬁned for sufﬁciently small
regions containing only a few molecules, not to mention even smaller regions not
large enough to be occupied by a molecule. The denseness of the rationals seems
already to go beyond corresponding physical features in the sense that there isn’t
anything occupying points in space with a structure corresponding to that of triples
of rational numbers at points in time similarly corresponding to the rationals which
can bear a temperature. There certainly seems to be nothing corresponding to the
limits of Cauchy sequences. It seems that the representation of smoothness at the
macroscopic level by differentiable functions calls for features on a very small
scale—below that of the scale of the microscopic constituents of macroscopic
bodies—that cannot be interpreted realistically. What should we say about the
Quinean doctrine that we can’t shun the ontological commitments of our theories?
To repeat what was said earlier, there is no suggestion of nominalism here—
i.e. the doctrine that denies that “numbers, functions, sets or any similar entities
exist” (Field 1980, p. 1). I am denying that there is anything corresponding to
3The same applies to an alternative approach to the foundations of analysis that treats inﬁnitesimals
literally as entities supplementing the real numbers rather than eliminating them contextually in
terms of limits (Bell 2008).

42
2
Occupying Space
certain mathematical structures in the ontology of macroscopic objects with which
the theory of irreversible thermodynamics deals.
A non-literal interpretation is described in Kondepudi and Prigogine’s textbook:
temperature is well deﬁned when the velocity distribution is “Maxwellian” [when the
probability that a molecule has a given velocity is speciﬁed by the Maxwell distribution]. ...
In practice, only under very extreme conditions do we ﬁnd signiﬁcant deviations from the
Maxwell distribution. Any initial distribution of velocities quickly becomes Maxwellian
due to molecular collisions. Computer simulations of molecular dynamics have revealed
that the Maxwell distribution is reached in less than 10 times the average time between
collisions, which in a gas at a pressure of 1 at, is about 108s. Consequently, physical
processes that perturb the system signiﬁcantly from the Maxwell distribution have to be
very rapid. (Kondepudi and Prigogine 1998, p. 334)
They go on to illustrate what this means for the time when chemical reactions are at
issue. Only a very small percentage of molecular collisions are reactive collisions
in the sense that they lead to chemical change. Rates of an order corresponding to
nearly every one of, for example, the 1031 collisions per litre per second in a gas at
a pressure of 1 atm are extremely rare.
Most of the reaction rates we encounter indicate that reactive collision rates are several
orders of magnitude smaller than overall collision rates. Between reactive collisions the
system quickly relaxes to equilibrium, redistributing the change in energy due to the
chemical reaction. In other words, any perturbation of the Maxwell distribution due to
a chemical reaction quickly relaxes back to the Maxwellian with a slightly different
temperature. Hence, on the timescale of chemical reactions, temperature is locally well
deﬁned. (loc. cit., my emphasis)
A similar tale is told about the spatial dependency of the thermodynamic
magnitudes. These magnitudes undergo ﬂuctuations about their mean values, and
a value for a thermodynamic magnitude can only be meaningfully associated with
a small volume, V, when the size of the ﬂuctuations is very small compared
with the value of the thermodynamic magnitude itself. “Clearly, if V is too small,
this condition will not be satisﬁed” (Kondepudi and Prigogine 1998, p. 335). They
show that
if QN is the number of particles in the considered volume, then ... the ﬂuctuations ı QN D
QN1=2. As an example, let us consider an ideal gas for which N D QN=NA D .p=RT/V.
For a given V it is easy to compute the relative value of the ﬂuctuation ı QN D QN1=2. To
understand how small V can be, we consider a gas at a pressure p D 1 atm and T D 298
K, and compute the ﬂuctuations in the number of particles QN in a volume V D .1m/3 D
1015L. We ﬁnd that ı QN= QN  4  107. For liquids and solids the same value of ı QN= QN
will correspond to an even smaller volume. Hence, it is meaningful to assign a mole number
density to a volume with a characteristic size of a micrometer. The same is generally true of
other thermodynamic variables. If we are to assign a number density to a volume V, then
the number density in this volume should be nearly uniform. This means that the variation
of number density with position on the scale of a micrometer should be very nearly uniform,
a condition satisﬁed by most macroscopic systems. This shows that a theory based on local
equilibrium is applicable to a wide range of macroscopic systems. (loc. cit.)
Clearly, these authors defend the principles of continuity embodied in the theory
on a sufﬁciently large scale of time and space. There is no question of taking the
theory literally on a smaller scale, and certainly not of treating matter as comprising

2.5
Mathematical Analysis and Indispensability
43
point particles occupying points of space corresponding to triples of real numbers
at instants of time corresponding to real numbers. I venture to say that viewing
the treatment of the properties of matter with the aid of the tools of mathematical
analysis along these lines is standard practice for scientists.
Avoiding a literal interpretation of a theory is often taken as the hallmark of
an antirealist stance. But ascribing such a view to Kondepudi and Prigogine is not
easily reconciled with their clear afﬁrmation of the reality of microscopic particles
and the adequacy (substantial truth) of the macroscopic theory of non-equilibrium
thermodynamics. It is misleading to put too much emphasis on the purely mathe-
matical aspects of the theory. Speciﬁc empirical claims are routinely made precise
by accompanying them with detailed speciﬁcation of how the recognised sources
of systematic error are accommodated and a proper statistical assessment of the
probable limits of error due to the spread in the measurements. (As Duhem (1954,
p. 169–71) makes clear, empirical claims lacking such qualiﬁcations are hopelessly
vague, indicating no more than ignorance of how to specify likely error.) Much the
same idea carries over to the manner in which scientists claim theories are true.
Kondepudi and Prigogine circumscribe the intended domain of application of non-
equilibrium thermodynamics in some detail, including limitations on the smallness
of bodies as we have just seen. This is how they formulate their claim about the truth
of the theory. There is no question of adopting an antirealist stance.
Kondepudi and Prigogine’s qualiﬁcations might be taken to suggest an elimi-
native view of macroscopic reality, to the general effect that all there is is the
microscopic realm. But as Kondepudi and Prigogine point out, the Maxwellian
distribution gives the probability that a molecule has a given velocity as a function of
temperature. Derivations of one or other form of the Maxwell velocity distribution
rely on an identiﬁcation of a term in statistical mechanics (usually denoted ˇ)
with 1=kT, where T is the absolute temperature introduced in classical equilib-
rium thermodynamics, by consideration of principles taken from thermodynamics
(Zemansky and Dittman 1981, p. 284; Denbigh 1981, p. 352). The statistical
features of the microscopic realm are developed in standard texts in conjunction with
principles of classical equilibrium thermodynamics. There is no attempt to present
the theory as a reduction of the latter to the former, and it behoves the would-be
reductionist to show how such a reconstrual is possible without blatant circularity.
It therefore seems that, just as the Quinean indispensability argument speaks for
the existence of purely mathematical entities such as real numbers and functions,
it also speaks for the indispensability of macroscopic theory, in particular classical
equilibrium thermodynamics, along with the corresponding macroscopic ontology
in providing a picture of the world that includes the microscopic realm. This is not
a conclusive argument; it allows that dispensability might actually be demonstrated.
But it is quite clear where the onus of proof lies. Short of actually rising to the
challenge and giving us the demonstration, the would-be reductionist doesn’t have
any case at all.

44
2
Occupying Space
2.6
Occupying a Region Exactly
How plausible is the interpretation of the “occupies” relation as occupying exactly
a certain region at a time? In Sects. 2.2 and 2.4, an object o was said to occupy a
region p exactly at t in accordance with the principle
Occ.o; p; t/ ^ p ¤ q : Occ.o; q; t/;
where o is either an individual or a quantity. There is no problem with wholesale
movement or any vibration or rotation during t, which is accommodated by the
principle of accumulation. But this notion of exactness may seem problematic in
the light of the principle of inﬁnite divisibility of space, which is included in the
complete theory of spatial regions presented in Sect. 1.4. Probing the structure of a
macroscopic object down to the molecular level, it might be difﬁcult to say how the
electronic structure of the outlying molecular structure of a physical object such as
a table precisely delimits the region occupied by the table. Just how exactly can a
body occupy a region?
The question is whether, at the level of electrons, any region of space is delimited
at all. Electrons aren’t the sort of thing that occupies regions. They are described
by a wavefunction assigning a complex number to points in space at instants of
time which when multiplied by its complex conjugate and integrated over a region
yields the probability of ﬁnding an electron within that region.4 Chemists look at the
presence of electrons in molecules in terms of the variation of electron probability
density over molecular structure. For many practical purposes, the distribution of
95% of the electron density usually covers a region not too far from the nuclei and
is taken to provide a fair picture of the molecule. But there is no bound beyond
which the electron density falls to zero. Consideration of the quantum behaviour of
a table’s microconstituents doesn’t show the macroscopic region it occupies to be
vaguely drawn; it fails to delimit any speciﬁc region within the whole of space as
that within which its constituents are deﬁnitely located.
Occupying a region is a macroscopic concept applicable to macroscopic objects.
Quantities are treated in science as having a speciﬁc volume, made precise by
considering the statistical ﬂuctuations along the lines indicated in the last section.
Individuals that occupy a deﬁnite region may raise different issues—for example,
how much of the air in the vicinity of a mouth and nose is part of the constitutive
matter of a human being at a given time may be unclear. But this concerns
the constitution relation, not the region occupied by speciﬁc quantities of matter
or the region occupied by speciﬁc individuals, which is not deﬁned by the region
occupied by its constitutive matter. Considered in the abstract, it seems that space is
inﬁnitely divisible, as expressed by axiom MS9 of Sect. 1.4. Does the macroscopic
4The probability interpretation requires that the wavefunction is normalised, so that the total
probability of ﬁnding an electron somewhere is 1. For this purpose the product of the wavefunction
with its complex conjugate is integrated over the whole of space.

2.6
Occupying a Region Exactly
45
character of quantities require that this axiom be abandoned? It wouldn’t be
abandoned in favour of an axiom introducing spatial atoms—regions with no proper
parts—which is not motivated by the considerations above. Perhaps the appropriate
moral to draw is that what seems to be a reasonable goal of attaining a complete
system for spatial regions when considered in the abstract doesn’t necessarily
carry over for a more comprehensive treatment dealing with objects that are not
purely spatial and their relations to regions. Such a theory doesn’t give a complete
speciﬁcation of the spatial parthood relation. What might seem unmotivated when
considering the theory of spatial regions in abstracto, as a mathematical exercise in
pure geometry, need not be so when part of a theory of material objects. The Holden
message is that the purely mathematical interpretation of the properties of material
objects is quite mistaken. How to make a positive suggestion in the light of this
insight is less easily addressed.
How might the principle of exact occupation be softened to accommodate
sensibly indistinguishable regions? Taking a cue from the treatment of inﬁnitesimals
by Bell (2008), we might toy with the idea of associating a region p with a
neighbourhood of indistinguishability, ƒp, such that for any indistinguishable
variation, ", in p, p [ " and p  " are indistinguishable from p. (Following the
analogy with Bell’s inﬁnitesimal neighbourhood of 0 (2008, pp. 2–6), members
of ƒp would not be distinct from p—i.e. not non-identical with p—without being
identical with p.) The principle of occupying exactly a particular region would give
way to a principle of the kind
Occ.; p; t/ ^ Occ.; q; t/ :  I.p; q/;
where I.p; q/ means that q is indistinguishable from p.
The problem with any such idea is that there is a fundamental point of disanalogy.
Bell emphasises that the characteristic property of inﬁnitesimals is that they are
so small that their higher powers can be neglected and “the property of being a
nilsquare inﬁnitesimal is an intrinsic property, that is, in no way dependent on
comparison with other magnitudes or numbers” (2008, p. 2). But the lower bounds
of insensitivity to ﬂuctuations depend on environmental circumstances such as
temperature and pressure and the susceptibility of the particular kind of matter
occupying a given region at a given time to the determination of its properties by
these conditions, and are in no way intrinsic to particular regions or their occupants.
In view of this, the most reasonable course would seem to be to uphold the inﬁnite
divisibility of space and time, and to understand the principle of exact occupation in
the spirit of Kondepudi and Prigogine’s remarks on making precise the variations in
volume tolerated by macroscopic description. At all events, the inﬁnite divisibility
of space doesn’t entail a corresponding principle regarding matter along the lines of
Occ.; p; t/ ^ q  p : 9   Occ.; q; t/:
No such principle is afﬁrmed here, and nor is any kind of opposing atomistic
principle. The matter is left open.

Chapter 3
Constitution
3.1
Distinguishing Constitution and Parthood
Advocates, but more especially critics, of an ontology of continuants have saddled
it with a notion of parthood that is time dependent on the strength of the supposition
that one and the same continuant gains and loses parts over time. Sider claims that
on the three-dimensional theory, “parthood-at-t must be primitive” (2001, p. 57).
But a corresponding time-dependent operation of summation (if the proposal is to
systematically reformulate mereology by replacing a primitive dyadic relation with
a triadic relation) is not, it seems, faithful to the notion of a continuant. A sum is
a unique collection, not one that can gain and lose parts. In fact the idea seems
incoherent since the sum operation acts on entities of a given kind to yield an entity
of the same kind, whereas a putative time-dependent sum of continuants doesn’t
seem to be a continuant. As we have seen, the standard notion of a sum does apply
to quantities, yielding a quantity as an operation should. But quantities neither gain
nor lose parts over time. Continuants that gain and lose material are individuals, and
these are not sums of their material or of anything else.
Sider seems to suggest that ordinary mereology (with the standard time-inde-
pendent, dyadic relations and operations) must deal with four-dimensional objects.
But quantities are just as much continuants as are individuals, and the fact that
they sustain ordinary mereological relations and operations no more implies that
quantities are four-dimensional than do the mereological relations and operations
sustained by times and spatial regions imply that they are four-dimensional objects.
Quantities’ relation to time can be seen from the time-dependent relations they
sustain, exempliﬁed by the substance and phase properties mentioned shortly and
explored in greater detail in later chapters, as well as the constitution and occupation
relations discussed in some detail below. In the interests of clarity, where distinctive
applications of standard mereology in the sense of an algebraic system of dyadic
relations and operations are present, it will be prudent to reserve the terminology of
standard mereology for mereological concepts and ﬁnd other terms for concepts
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P. Needham, Macroscopic Metaphysics, Synthese Library 390,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4_3
47

48
3
Constitution
which, despite any superﬁcial linguistic analogies, are not mereological ones.
The constitution relation, relating individuals to their accruing and discarded matter,
though superﬁcially analogous to parthood, is a case in point.
The beginnings of a distinction amongst material objects, between individuals
and the quantities of matter of which they are constituted, appeared in the last
chapter. The atmosphere, which abuts the sea, is not the same as the mixture of
gases we call the air, which doesn’t abut the saline solution constituting the sea, and
the abutting of a head with its body doesn’t imply that their constitutive matter abuts.
The blood in particular ﬂows continuously between heart and head. Constitution is a
triadic relation between an individual, a quantity of matter and a time, the principal
features of which are developed in this chapter. Other aspects of individuals that
some philosophers have sought to capture by relativising parthood to time will be
addressed by calling on the mereological features of those entities standing in the
constitution relation that do lend themselves to treatment with standard mereology,
and the difﬁculties of developing a sum operation on individuals will be discussed
in greater detail.
The general idea of distinguishing individuals from their constituent matter is by
no means unfamiliar, although terminology varies. But the viability of the notion
isn’t a matter of linguistic distinctions. Wiggins (2004, p. 36) suggests there is a
fourth sense of “is”, in addition to the copula, existence and identity, namely the
“is” of constitution, but his example, “The soufﬂé you are eating is ﬂour, eggs and
milk”, is unconvincing. As Pickel (2010, p. 7) says, a more natural way of putting
this would be “The soufﬂé you are eating is made from ﬂour, eggs and milk”. The
preposition would seem to be all-important in distinguishing between the original
ingredients that the souﬂé was made from and what is there after mixing and heating,
which the souﬂé is made of, the latter being a direct expression of the constitution
relation. A better illustration of Wiggins’s proposal would be “Humans are (mostly)
water”.1
Use of the “made from” idiom suggests that some corresponding use of the
“made of” idiom would be appropriate if only we knew enough about the chemistry
of the “making from” process. I’ve no idea what a cooked soufﬂé is made of, but
I don’t doubt there is something. This applies to the general idea that Arthur Prior
nicely formulated in the following passage:
... the things of which we make our predications ... include things that have not always
existed and/or will not always do so ... [These] countable ‘things’ are made or grow from
bits of stuff, or from other countable ‘things’, that are already there. (Prior 1967, p. 174)
The plausible picture of middle-sized ontology sketched here portrays individuals
(“countable things”) as constituted of matter (“stuff”) or comprising other individ-
uals. It is not susceptible to the general criticism that constitution is identity, which
1Almotahari (2013) makes a linguistic case against Kit Fine’s argument for distinguishing an object
from its constitutive matter based on claims such as “The statue is Romanesque but the piece of
alloy of which it is made isn’t”. But this argument plays no role in justifying the distinction as
advanced here.

3.1
Distinguishing Constitution and Parthood
49
can’t apply to a theory with the ambition of capturing Prior’s “made of” relation
because this is clearly a time-dependent relation, i.e. a three-place relation between
an individual, a quantity of matter and a time. Whereas individuals are transient
beings, existing for some time and not at other times, quantities “are already there”
as Prior puts it, i.e. they are permanent existents. Consequently, an individual is
constituted of a quantity of matter for no longer than the time it exists. In fact many
individuals, including but by no means exhausted by biological organisms, exchange
matter with the environment, and a particular quantity may constitute an individual
for a considerably shorter time than the individual’s lifetime. This conception of
constitution will be elaborated in sufﬁcient detail to make it clear that the objection
fails. The mereological accounts of quantities, regions and times shows that they
have entirely different kinds of identity conditions from those of the individuals
constituted by quantities at times.
Quantities conform to the fundamental principle of the non-destruction of matter
employed in chemists’ understanding of chemical reactions at least since Lavoisier
“demonstrated”, as Poincaré (1913, p. 65) put it, “the indestructibility of matter by
demonstrating the invariability of mass”. In accordance with what is represented
by the familiar balancing equations representing chemical reactions, quantities of
matter bearing properties of being such-and-such substance kinds are brought into
contact and undergo reaction, when parts combine with other parts resulting in
these very same quantities bearing new substance properties. The mereological
sum of the quantities at the end of the reaction is identical with the mereological
sum of the quantities introduced at the start of the reaction. Change in chemical
kinds is a matter of quantities loosing and acquiring different substance properties,
which are relational, expressed by two-place predicates applying to a quantity
and a time. Electrolysis of water under standard temperature and pressure, for
example, transforms a quantity so that it no longer possesses the features of being
water, liquid and spatially connected, acquiring instead the features of being partly
free hydrogen, partly free oxygen, and entirely gas distributed throughout the
atmosphere. Quantities’ transtemporal identity conditions are simply their identity
conditions—same parts, same thing. This shouldn’t be confused with conditions of
preservation of properties such as being a particular substance kind or in a speciﬁc
state of mixture such as being a solution or heterogeneous matter exhibiting three
phases, which depend on the appropriate criteria for the sustaining of these features
over a period of time drawn from chemical theory.
Quantities of matter constituting familiar objects have undergone many chemical
changes over the billions of years during which their elemental components were
formed in the course of the evolution of stars and eventually found their way to
our corner of the universe. The elements have combined to form water, carbon
dioxide, minerals, carbohydrates, proteins and all the other compounds which, in
various kinds of mixture, make up the atmosphere, the oceans, geological structures
and biological organisms. The chemical substance kinds born by quantities for
particular intervals of time are important factors determining whether they can
constitute particular individuals at these times. But what chemists call the phase
is also important. The water forming part of the constitutive matter of the sea and

50
3
Constitution
human beings must be in the liquid phase, whereas the water forming part of the
constitutive matter of the Antarctic ice cap and the comet Hale-Bopp is in the solid
phase. Tectonic plates would not give rise to earthquakes at their boundaries unless
their constitutive matter was solid, and their material wouldn’t be renewed as it is
unless it could change from solid to liquid and from liquid to solid under varying
conditions of temperature and pressure.
These features of quantities are pursued in greater detail in ensuing chapters. This
outline should be sufﬁcient for the purposes of understanding the features ascribed
to individuals and the constitution relation in the following sections.
As these last few examples illustrate, many properties assigned to individuals
are in fact, or directly derived from, properties of their constitutive matter. The
melting point of water (or more generally, the phase boundary separating solid and
liquid as pressure varies) is the property of the stuff water systematically recorded
in thermodynamic studies which allows Hale-Bopp and the Antarctic ice cap to
have a shape which is not determined by a solid container or imposed forces (like
the shapes of liquids and gases) and which is relatively stable under the inﬂuence
of ambient forces. This understanding of the bearing of general features of kinds of
matter on the features of individuals is directly opposed to the suggestion (Robinson
2004, p. 21) that distinguishing the clay constituting a statue from the statue would
give us two objects each weighing, say, 10 pounds which should have a total weight
of 20, and not just 10, pounds. This is quite clearly gratuitous; the statue’s weight
is the weight of its constitutive matter, which shouldn’t be counted twice. One and
the same individual weighs 10 kg when a baby and 70 kg as an adult because of
its changing constitutive matter, not 20 and 80 kg, or 80 and 140 kg. Robinson
obviously has a different view, but it goes no deeper than the bare statement of it. No
argument is offered in support of it which an opponent could address. Sider’s (2001,
p. 141) criticism of the idea that an individual is constituted of a distinct entity on
the grounds of impenetrability fares no better. He simply assumes without offering
any justiﬁcation or overview that the laws of physics give him this conclusion (see
Sect. 3.3 below).
Critics such as Robinson’s three-dimensionalist and Sider, a four-dimensionalist,
may each ﬁnd that objects in their own preferred ontologies make no call on a
constitution relation distinct from identity, but that doesn’t amount to an objection
to the present proposals. Sider chooses to criticise a constitution theorist who
maintains that individuals coincide with their constituent matter in the sense of
having parts all of which are common (Sider 2001, pp. 141–2). But this is just to
deﬁne coincidence as identity by the mereological criterion, and simply assumes
without arguing from generally accepted premises that constitution is identity.
It recalls Sider’s own remark that many of the arguments against four-dimensional
entities are irrelevant or plain silly, often illicitly treating them as three-dimensional
entities (such as Judith Jarvis Thomson’s claim that stages constantly come into
existence ex nihilo). Individuals as understood here don’t coincide in Sider’s sense
with their constituent matter because they don’t have any parts in common with
their constituent matter. A more relevant concern is the relation between the regions
occupied by an individual and its constitutive matter, which is taken up in Sect. 3.3.

3.2
Individuals
51
3.2
Individuals
The changing character of the material content of identiﬁable objects is the major
reason for introducing a constitution relation and distinguishing individuals from
their constituent matter. With a primitive three-place relation of being constituted
of standing between objects, quantities and times, individuals are taken to be
objects that stand in the constitution relation to some quantity at some time.
I see no reason why this shouldn’t include the special case of individuals which
have a ﬁxed constitution and are constituted of the same quantity whenever they
are constituted of any quantity of matter, leaving it open that some individuals
merely might be, although they actually aren’t, constituted of different quantities of
matter. But the modal argument for distinguishing individuals and their constituent
matter won’t play any role in the present discussion. Note, however, that the case
envisaged by Hawley (2004, p. 7) of a statue and a large lump of clay being formed
simultaneously and subsequently destroyed simultaneously, misconstrues the notion
of ﬁxed constitution as the constitution relation is understood here. Again, I see no
reason why individuals shouldn’t include artifacts, although I do not rely on appeal
to artifacts. What constitutes a statue, however, is a quantity of matter, which, even
if it could exhibit the chemical properties of clay and the physical features of a lump
for precisely the lifetime of the statue, would be neither created when the statue is
nor destroyed when the statue is.
As understood here, an individual is constituted of exactly one quantity at a
given time. This allows us to talk of parts of the quantity partially constituting
an individual at a given time if they are parts of the quantity constituting the
individual at that time. A question arises about how this unique quantity is to be
understood analogous to that which arose for the occupation relation. Consider
an interval of time t, not necessarily the entire lifetime of the atmosphere, but a
considerably shorter one, say a day, a minute or a second. The chemical process
of photosynthesis will be taking place wherever green plants are illuminated by the
sun, extracting carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and combining it with water to
produce carbohydrates. At the same time animals will be removing oxygen from
the atmosphere as part of their metabolism, generating carbon dioxide which is
put into the atmosphere. These and many other chemical processes together with
physical processes such as evaporation and condensation contribute to the continual
interchange of matter between the atmosphere and things on the earth’s surface.
What, then, is the constitutive matter of the atmosphere at time t? We might consider
narrower and broader sums as possible candidates. On the one hand, there is the
narrower mereological sum of all quantities of matter occupying some part of the
region forming a thin shell around the earth throughout the whole of t. On the other
hand, there is the mereological sum of all quantities of matter occupying some part
of the region at some time during t. The former sum excludes all matter entering
the atmosphere after the beginning of the period in question as well as all matter
leaving during this time. Over sufﬁciently short times, the deﬁning condition will
be satisﬁed and the sum actually exist. It is part of the second sum, which also
includes the matter excluded from the ﬁrst sum, and the two sums converge as the
time in question is taken to be shorter.

52
3
Constitution
Either of the broader or the narrower sum would satisfy the requirement that the
constituting quantity is unique since mereological sums are unique, but there is a
possibility that, for sufﬁciently long times, the narrower sum doesn’t exist because
there is no null quantity. On the grounds that an individual is always constituted of
matter, the constituting quantity is taken to be the broader sum and the following
principle of accumulation adopted:
(PA) For any time t, if a quantity constitutes an individual at t, then that quantity
is the mereological sum of all quantities constituting that individual for some
subinterval of t.
Formally,
Const.x; ; t/   D †  9t0  t Const.x; ; t0/;
where Const.x; ; t/ stands for “x is constituted of  at t0”. Accordingly, the
constitution relation is not in general to be construed to the effect that an individual
is constituted of a quantity of matter throughout (at all subintervals of) some time t.
Further, a proper part of a quantity constituting an individual at t doesn’t constitute
that individual at t. Should the need arise, such a proper part can, as already noted,
be said to partially constitute the individual at t, although it must be emphasised that
the mereological relation obtains between the two quantities. Constitution is not a
mereological relation between a quantity and an individual.
The principle of accumulation entails that the weight of an individual as recorded
by some such method as weighing on a bathroom scale is not in general the weight
of its constitutive matter over a period longer than the weighing process. The latter,
assuming it can be suitably assembled and the gravitational force on its mass
measured, will in general increase with the length of time that the matter is the
individual’s constitutive matter, whereas the weight of an individual shows nothing
like the same variation. Suppose I determine my weight on a bathroom scale to be
75.0 kg. If I repeat the measurement at regular intervals over a longish time (a day
or more), or even remain standing on the scale, assuming it monitors continuously
(and assuming that I remain perfectly still so as not to create spurious forces),
my weight remains constant (within the limits of sensitivity of the bathroom scale),
or if there is any variation, it doesn’t show the same pattern of variation as does my
constitutive matter over the same day (or more). There is no question of counting
the same weight twice (cf. Robinson’s objection mentioned in the last section). For
the very short interval which is the time the bathroom scale takes to complete the
process of recording my weight, my weight is the weight of my constitutive material,
but not for longer times. If the bathroom scale were far more sensitive than such
scales typically are, distinguishing the weights of masses to say ˙1010 kg, with a
much shorter response time for the measurement process, then the time when the
individual is ascribed a weight would have to be correspondingly narrowed down
much more ﬁnely than as it is ordinarily vaguely understood as the weight of a ﬁve-
year old child, a middle-aged man, after the Christmas festivities, and so on. (And
other factors bearing on the systematic error of the weighing process, such as the
variation of the gravitational ﬁeld at different places on the earth’s surface, would
have to be explicitly stated.)

3.2
Individuals
53
The principle of accumulation is compatible with an individual coming to be
constituted of the same quantity for a second time. Suppose, for example, the
quantity in question is the wood of the timbers constituting the original ship of
Theseus. As planks are changed, the constituting material during this time becomes
ever greater. After yet more time, all the planks are exchanged, but the initial planks
have been meticulously preserved. Finally, the new planks are all replaced by these
original planks. For a time just after this replacement has been made, the constituting
material is a quantity identical with the constituting quantity shortly after the ship
was ﬁrst built. Although artifacts may be susceptible to such possibilities, the
corresponding situation doesn’t seem to arise in the course of nature for naturally
occurring objects, which are the primary focus here. But I don’t think that the
possibility is ruled out by any principle governing the workings of nature.
Although ﬁxed for a ﬁxed time, the material constituting an individual can
vary from time to time. This allows that the material of two individuals might be
successively interchanged during some time t, so that although each is constituted
of different matter at shorter subintervals of t, they are constituted of the same
matter at t. Examples of this kind are counterinstances to a criterion of identity
in terms of sameness of constitutive matter, at least on one understanding of this
condition. But the notion of constitution can serve as the basis of a closely related
but more plausible criterion of identity requiring having the same matter throughout
(at all subintervals of) any time, t. In other words, let the notion of the sameness of
constitutive matter be understood by deﬁning it as a three-place relation SameConst
of having the same constitution between individuals x and y and an interval t when,
for all subintervals t0 of t, some quantity constitutes both x and y at t0:
SameConst.x; y; t/  8t0  t 9 .Const.x; ; t0/ ^ Const.y; ; t0//:
Then the criterion of identity is: If x and y ever have the same constitution, they are
identical, i.e.
(CI)
SameConst.x; y; t/  x D y.
By this criterion, there is no time throughout which distinct individuals have the
same constitution. They are not constituted of the same matter for at least some
part of any time, which is not to say that they are constituted of different matter for
at least some part of any time—see next paragraph. The criterion allows that two
individuals completely interchange their constitutive matter over a certain period
and so are constituted of the same matter for that period if they don’t have the same
constitution for all subintervals of that period during which they are interchanging
matter.
It might seem that the criterion is threatened with trivialisation in view of the
position taken earlier that individuals, unlike quantities, are ﬂeeting things which
come into and go out of existence. Were it the case that individuals had the
same constitution at times when they don’t exist, then there would be just one
individual. This is not a problem, however, since the deﬁnition of having the same
constitution doesn’t, as things stand, have this implication. But to be quite clear,

54
3
Constitution
a time-dependent existence predicate, E.x; t/, appropriate for transient beings is
readily deﬁned in terms of the constitution relation, as “x is constituted of some
quantity at t”. An individual’s lifetime is then just the maximal period the individual
is constituted of something, described by the relation L:
L.t; x/  : E.x; t/ ^ 9t0 .t  t0 ^ E.x; t0//:
These deﬁnitions presuppose a principle of restricted lifetime which should be made
explicit, that any individual is constituted of some matter for some time but not for
any other times:
9t .9 Const.x; ; t/ ^ 8t0 .t j t0  9Const.x; ; t0///:
From these deﬁnitions and underlying principle it can be seen that at times when
two individuals don’t exist, they are not constituted of anything, and so not of a null
quantity because mereology allows no such thing.
The identity criterion is correct, it seems to me, as it stands (in so far as
individuals are considered material objects), but a possible strengthening of the
condition (i.e. a weakening of the criterion—of the implication as a whole)
might be considered. The existential quantiﬁcation in the antecedent cannot be
simply strengthened to universal quantiﬁcation since it wouldn’t then apply to any
individual because individuals, as just explained, are not permanent existents. But
the criterion can be weakened by requiring sameness of constitution for a common
lifetime:
L.t; x/ ^ L.t; y/ ^ SameConst.x; y; t/ : x D y:
Distinct individuals would have different lifetimes or be constituted of different
matter for at least some time during their lifetime. For the purposes of comparing
this second, weaker criterion with the ﬁrst, stronger criterion (CI), consider a
scenario described by Simons (1987, pp. 201–2) of a variation on the ship of
Theseus where another vessel is reconstructed from the original planks, which have
been saved after successive replacements have resulted in complete reﬁtting of the
original ship with new timbers. Simons suggests that these two vessels coincide up
to the ﬁrst reﬁt because they are made of the same material. But the ﬁrst criterion
wouldn’t allow that two vessels are constituted of the same material throughout a
time, and would therefore suggest that a new vessel is created after the reﬁtting of
the original ship. It would be natural to say that the reﬁtted ship is identical with
the original one, and the new ship is the one subsequently made from the original
timbers. The second criterion doesn’t rule out the possibility of there being two
ships constituted of the same matter for a part of their lifetimes provided that this
is a proper part, so that they are distinguished either by different lifetimes or, as in
Simons’ scenario, by being constituted of different matter at other times.

3.2
Individuals
55
The identity criteria at issue here are not independent of how the constitution
relation is applied (nor is the application of this relation independent of the
principles governing it, including the identity criterion). When an individual begins
to exist or whether it ceases to exist when its constitutive material is changed
rather than continuing to exist are questions concerning how the constitution
relation is applied. An ordinary ship may be deemed to continue to exist when its
planks are exchanged for new ones, but not a ship of historical interest. Extensive
efforts are made to preserve the material of the warship Vasa, which founded in
Stockholm harbour in 1628 but was salvaged in 1961 and is now housed in the
Vasa Museum. Had it collapsed during the salvage operation or been subjected to
complete replacement of planks before being raised, and the original planks were
then reassembled, constitution of the original material would no doubt be deemed
to determine what is Vasa. Yet a third interpretation consistent with (CI) would
be to say that the ﬁrst ship ceases to exist when all its material has been replaced
and a new ship sees the light of day alongside the other new ship constructed from
the old material. The notion of an individual is a very broad one, and the identity
criterion (CI) determines distinctions up to a certain point, deﬁnitely eliminating
only proposals inconsistent with it and perhaps leaving several alternatives which
can only be eliminated by more speciﬁc considerations of the kind of individual at
issue.
In this example of Simons’ I favour the ruling given by the stronger, ﬁrst criterion,
which is simpler, although the difference may not be very signiﬁcant if it only turns
on unusual situations realised by artifacts. An example not involving artifacts which
is something of a time-reversed analogue of Simons’ example would be two pools
of water which grow as the rain continues and eventually merge, yielding a single
large puddle. On the stronger criterion (CI), the analogous interpretation would be
that one of the two pools consumes the other, which ceases to exist after the fusion.
But we might equally say that both pools cease to exist and a new puddle is created
by the fusion, or even that there is just one puddle, which is scattered at ﬁrst but
becomes connected after fusion. Perhaps the range of seemingly equally acceptable
alternatives is indicative of the feeble claim a pool of water has to being rated an
individual rather than merely an accumulating mass of material—neither a quantity
nor yet a fully-ﬂedged individual—for which no general term has been introduced
here. But as with the previous example, the identity criterion allows but doesn’t
determine what is the most natural interpretation, which depends on other factors.
Adopting the weaker identity criterion of having the same constitution throughout
the same lifetime would allow the possibility of the two pools combining to form a
single pool after merging, analogous to Simons’ ship.
Something like the constitution criterion is the ﬁrst of what Ayers thinks of as
two equivalent identity criteria:
The traditional view that individual[s] ... are distinguished at any one time by their matter
can be expressed in two equivalent ways. First, as the principle that two distinct individual[s]
... cannot be composed of the same matter at the same time. Second, as the principle that, if
two individual[s] ... have at any time all parts in common, they are identical. (Ayers 1991,
p. 84)

56
3
Constitution
But as noted above, the condition of being constituted of the same matter must hold
for all subintervals of the time in question. Perhaps Ayers was thinking of times
as instants, although I hardly think that the traditional view would be committed
to this. The second principle is often denied, Ayers goes on to say, by modern
philosophers who radically reinterpret it “by introducing the paradoxical notion that
material objects have temporal parts”. No such radical reinterpretation is advocated
here. Although a notion of time-dependent parthood is introduced below, it is that of
temporary parts (cf. Simons 1987, p. 175) and not the four-dimensionalist’s notion
of temporal parts that Ayers objects to. Nevertheless, I wouldn’t accept the second
formulation literally as an equivalent formulation of the ﬁrst because constitution
is not mereological parthood and no part of an individual’s constituent matter is
counted part of the individual. An equivalent formulation of the criterion of identity
is to be had in terms of the notion of occupying a region of space, which is discussed
in the next section.
3.3
Occupation for Individuals
The relation of occupying between a quantity of matter, a region and a time has been
taken as primitive. Since an individual is constituted of a deﬁnite quantity at a given
time, a natural thought might be that the region occupied by an individual at a time is
that occupied by its constituent matter at that time. While this might be appropriate
for individuals with unchanging constitution, it isn’t for typical individuals which
vary their constitutive matter. A river, for example, is ordinarily thought to occupy
a region delimited by its banks, the river-bed and the water level. But in view
of the principle of accumulation for the constitution relation, the deﬁnition just
given would always make a river with any ﬂow at all occupy a region exceeding
this. Accordingly, an individual’s occupying a place can’t be reduced to what its
constituent material occupies, and will have to be treated autonomously.
In the interesting cases, then, there is no question of an individual coinciding with
its constitutive matter. But authors who ﬁnd coincidence problematic will, no doubt,
still object to spatial overlapping, for example a river’s occupying a proper part of
the region occupied by its constituent matter for a given time. Thus, Sider (2001, p.
141) conjectures, “The actual laws of nature presumably prohibit interpenetration of
distinct material objects”. Whether this is true of the thermodynamics of mixtures
or the quantum mechanics of bosons is not so obvious, and Sider doesn’t go into any
more detail. But in any case, it is unclear what bearing it has on objects distinguished
as individuals occupying part of the region occupied by their constitutive matter.
Presumably, to use Sider’s word, the laws he has in mind apply to the constitutive
matter. The claim here is not that two individuals occupy overlapping regions, or that
two quantities occupy overlapping regions, but that an individual and its constitutive
matter occupy overlapping regions. The antagonist must engage with this claim,
show that physics states laws about individuals and not just about quantities of
matter, and show how these laws preclude the kind of spatial overlapping actually
at issue here.

3.3
Occupation for Individuals
57
Rivers don’t have to be taken seriously when doing pure chemistry, concerned
as it is with an ontology of quantities and an ideology of substances, phases and
conditions affecting the possession of such features. But for ecology and geography,
and other disciplines for which they are signiﬁcant, rivers do have to be taken
seriously. No general thesis of the reduction of special sciences to physics is
assumed here. In particular, it seems that the notion of a river’s occupying a place
can’t be reduced to what its constituent material occupies, and must be treated
autonomously. But even if the region occupied by an individual is not simply
the region occupied by its constitutive matter, occupying is closely tied to being
constituted of, and thus to time-dependent existence as the notion was introduced
in the previous section. The general principle connecting the two concepts, which I
refer to as the equivalence principle, is: When individuals x and y occupy the same
place, they are constituted of the same matter, and conversely. Formally,
(EP)
9p .Occ.x; p; t/ ^ Occ.y; p; t//  9 .Const.x; ; t/ ^ Const.y; ; t//.
The use of distinct variables doesn’t, of course, imply that they refer to distinct
objects, and where x D y this reduces to: x occupies some place at t iff it is
constituted by some quantity of matter at t. Occupying somewhere at t is therefore
equivalent to existing at t as this was deﬁned in the last section. It follows from
this that the principle of restricted lifetime in the last section can be equivalently
formulated as
9t .9p Occ.; p; t/ ^ 8t0 .t j t0  9pOcc.; p; t0///:
This stands in contrast with what holds for quantities, which always occupy
somewhere:
9p Occ.; p; t/:
The point of the more general formulation of the equivalence principle is that it
naturally yields an equivalent formulation of the identity criterion for individuals
presented in the last section, as I will now argue.
Rivers swell and contract with the seasons, and over longer periods even change
course, either naturally or as a result of human intervention. Plants and animals
grow, and move or are moved around. Think of a weed chased around the garden
by the gardener pulling up shoots from one end of a root and stimulating it to grow
at the other. So the time-dependency is just as much a feature of occupancy for
individuals as for quantities. The times at issue are still intervals, so account must
be taken of the possibility of movement during the interval, and the principle of
accumulation for occupation introduced in Sect. 3.3 of the last chapter is repeated
here:
(AO) For any time t, if an individual occupies a region p at t, then that region
is the mereological sum of all regions occupied by that individual for some
subinterval of t.

58
3
Constitution
If a river’s water were completely stagnant with no evaporation or supplementation
by, for example, rainfall for a certain time, the region occupied by the river would
be the same as that occupied by its constituent water during that time. But such
circumstances never obtain, if only because there is a continual exchange of water
between the liquid in the river and the water in the gas phase in the atmosphere.
Accordingly, a river doesn’t ever occupy the same place as its constitutive water. It
might conceivably cooccupy with a proper part of the constituent water, namely a
part which occupies a region at the source-end of the river at the beginning of the
time in question and which just reaches the estuary at the end of the period. But
this assumes no turbulence along the course of the river intermingling quantities of
water as they transverse the river’s length, and no evaporation or exchange with the
gas phase making the quantity occupy a larger region than that occupied by the river,
or rainfall making the quantity occupy a smaller region.
Therefore individuals and their constituent matter spatially overlap and in the
extreme case, coincide (occupy the same region) at the same time. The same cannot
be said of pairs of individuals, which are subject to a restriction on cooccupancy. The
appropriate principle must take account of the time at issue being an interval with
proper parts. Over sufﬁciently long times, the regions swept out by two individuals
in motion may well overlap and even be identical—two test tubes counterbalancing
one another as they rotate in a centrifuge, for example. But then if shorter intervals
are considered, the regions swept out merely overlap, and for sufﬁciently short
intervals, don’t overlap at all. Individuals x and y will be said to coincide at t if at
all subintervals of t they cooccupy some region, i.e. if they occupy the same region
as each other at each subinterval of t. The order of the quantiﬁers is important in the
deﬁnition of the Coin relation:
Coin.x; y; t/  8t0  t 9p .Occ.x; p; t0/ ^ Occ.y; p; t0//:
For a ﬁxed time, the coincidence relation so deﬁned is clearly transitive in view of
the assumption of the uniqueness of the region occupied by an individual at a time,
and it is clearly reﬂexive (for ﬁxed t).
Remembering Simons’ example discussed in the last section involving the
building of a new ship from the planks removed from the original ship of Theseus,
it was argued against the possibility raised by Simons that the two ships are made
of the same material before the second building operation by appeal to the stronger
criterion of identity. This was the criterion (CI), to the effect that individuals having
the same constitution throughout some time are identical. It could equally be said
that individuals that coincide throughout some time are identical, so that there are
not two coinciding ships prior to the second building as Simons would have it, just
one. In fact, in view of the equivalence principle, the notion of having the same
constitution throughout some time is equivalent to that of coinciding throughout
this same time, so that from the ﬁrst criterion of identity it follows that individuals
coinciding throughout some time are identical, and vice versa. The restriction on
cooccupancy yields, therefore, an equivalent criterion of identity:
Coin.x; y; t/  x D y:

3.4
Component Parts
59
There is no time throughout which distinct individuals coincide: at any time, either
they don’t exist (don’t occupy any region) at that time or they don’t occupy the same
region throughout that time.
Just as the ﬁrst identity criterion could be weakened by restricting the times to
the individuals lifetimes, so the equivalence principle yields an equivalent weakened
criterion of identity in terms of coincidence throughout the individuals’ lifetimes.
But this is not adopted here.
3.4
Component Parts
There is another way of considering at least some sufﬁciently complex individual’s
make-up, in which physiology rather than chemical constitution is of primary
interest. Individuals, or at least some of them, might be considered to have a
structure of components, themselves individuals constituted of matter, arranged and
joined in such a way as to form the individual in question. A component part of an
organism might be an organ, for example, and a component part of the earth is the
lithosphere. Like constituent matter, an individual’s components might change from
time to time, so that x could well be a component of y for only a part of y’s lifetime.
The relation of being a component part is therefore a time dependent one.
The question immediately arises of how the components are related to the
constitutive matter. A summation principle suggests itself to the effect that an
individual’s constituent matter is the sum of the constituent matter of each of its
components. But it is not obvious that the constitutive matter of the component parts
jointly exhausts the matter of an individual in this way. The air under a car bonnet at
t does not constitute the material of any component of the car. Is this air reasonably
discounted as part of the material constituted by the car at t? What about the
lubricating oil? These stuffs may not be necessary for a car on display; but they are
for a car running normally. Similar considerations apply to the petrol in the tank, the
oxygen needed for its combustion and the water and glycol antifreeze in the cooling
system. It is difﬁcult to see how they could be excluded from the constitutive matter
of a car at a time t when it is speeding along the road, although they don’t seem to
form part of the constitutive matter of what are ordinarily called components. But
perhaps construing components as solid, which is what leads to these problems, is
a special case which shouldn’t be taken as typical. The solidity apparently required
of car components is not required of the organs of the human body, one of which is
the lympho-reticular system, which includes the liquids blood and lymph (as well
as the bone marrow, parts of the liver, and so forth). Suppose, for the sake of the
following discussion, that components can be so construed to ensure the truth of the
summation principle by encompassing all the constitutive matter of the individual
in the constitutive matter of the components. If any criterion of identity formulated
in terms of components is not to conﬂict with the criterion already formulated in
terms of constituent matter, then something like the summation principle is crucial.
Perhaps the moral to draw is that the criterion of identity in terms of constituent

60
3
Constitution
matter is fundamental, and doesn’t in general yield one in terms of components.
This should appeal to those who think that some sort of circularity afﬂicts identity
criteria for a kind of entity formulated in terms of the same kind of entities.
The physiology of an individual introduces a level of structure over and above its
chemical constitution. Thinking of this structure as spatial, it is natural to wonder
whether it is possible to delimit the notion of a component in terms of the apparatus
already introduced. In fact, a time-dependent analogue of the mereological part
relation, naturally thought of as spatial parthood, can be deﬁned in terms of the
occupancy relation, for which corresponding analogues of some of the basic features
of order relations exhibited by mereological parthood can be established. Spatial
parthood between individuals might be considered a natural interpretation of the
component relation introducing constituent parts.2 At any rate, component parts are
naturally thought of as spatial parts, and since spatial parts as deﬁned here will
be individuals, the converse might be more readily accepted. Component parts are
the “other countable ‘things’ ” that Prior says countable things are made from.
A ﬁrst shot at deﬁning “x is a proper spatial part of y at t” might run “the region
occupied by x at t is a proper part of the region occupied by y at t”, in which the
time-dependency, lacking in the dyadic proper part relation of mereology standing
between the regions, is introduced via the occupancy relation. But this would count
the smaller of two bodies encircling one another as a proper spatial part of the larger
one when it sweeps out a region at t which is a proper part of that swept out by
the larger one. For sufﬁciently short times, however, the regions swept out don’t
overlap. A time-dependent relation of proper spatial part between individuals which
wouldn’t count the smaller of the two bodies in this example as a spatial part of the
larger one can be deﬁned by considering all subintervals of the time in question.
Accordingly, “x is a proper spatial part of y at t”, symbolised x @t y, is deﬁned as
“for all subintervals t0 of t, the region occupied by x at t0 is a proper part of the region
occupied by y at t0”:
x @t y  8t0  t 9p 9q .Occ.x; p; t0/ ^ Occ.y; q; t0/ ^ p  q/:
As already noted, an individual’s occupying somewhere at a time implies existing
at that time in view of the equivalence principle and the deﬁnition of time-dependent
existence for individuals. The deﬁnition of individuals standing in the proper spatial
part relation at a time therefore implies that they both exist at that time. And given
the assumption of the uniqueness of the region occupied by an individual at a
time, transitivity (for ﬁxed t) of component (spatial) parthood follows from that of
the mereological proper part relation. Irreﬂexivity follows similarly, and so proper
component parthood is asymmetric.
2Spatial parthood provides an interpretation of what Simons (1987, p. 158) understands as con-
stitution when he says “constitution is transitive”. Holding times ﬁxed, constitution as understood
here is not transitive because it is always a quantity which constitutes an individual.

3.5
Operations on Component Parts?
61
Pairing proper component parthood with the transitive and symmetric relation
of coincidence deﬁned in the last section, a more general reﬂexive and transitive
relation of component parthood, x vt y, can be deﬁned as “x is either a proper
spatial part of or coincident with y at t”:
x vt y  : x @t y _ Coin.x; y; t/;
where x vt y is read “x is a component (spatial) part y at t”. This implies the
existence of x and y at t since both disjuncts do. A symmetric relation, ˚t, of spatial
overlapping can then be deﬁned by analogy with mereological overlapping as the
existence of a common component,
x ˚t y  9z .z vt x ^ z vt y/;
and implies the existence of each of the overlapping individuals at the time in
question.
Time-dependent analogues of the mereological relations can thus be deﬁned with
the appropriate properties. What about corresponding analogues of the mereological
operations? This raises questions of existence which can’t be settled simply by
deﬁnition. But we might tentatively consider how a time-dependent analogue of
mereological summation would be introduced.
3.5
Operations on Component Parts?
Following the way summation is deﬁned in standard mereology in terms of
overlapping, a time-dependent sum operation, Stx '.x/, of '-ers at time t would
be deﬁned along the lines of
9Š'.x/  : y D Stx '.x/  8z .z ˚t y  9x .'.x/ ^ z ˚t x//:
Because there are no null elements in mereology, an existential clause ensuring that
there are '-ers at time t would have to be satisﬁed. This is written here as 9Š'.x/,
leaving the question of its speciﬁc form aside for the moment. If the deﬁnition is
to be justiﬁed, it would have to be established, given the existence of '-ers at time
t, both that there exists an entity y such that 8z .z ˚t y  9x .'.x/ ^ z ˚t x// and
that this entity is unique. Following standard mereology, where the existence clause
is laid down as an axiom schema, what would be required in the present case is
something along the lines of
9Š'.x/  9y 8z .z ˚t y  9x .'.x/ ^ z ˚t x//;
which would take a precise form once 9Š'.x/ is clariﬁed. Uniqueness in the case of
standard mereology is established from the properties of the mereological relations

62
3
Constitution
deriving from the other axioms. In the present case, uniqueness would have to be
established in one way or another. Finally, since what is at issue is an operation on
individuals, time-dependent sums of individuals would themselves be individuals.
The open formula '.x/ in the existence prerequisite, 9Š'.x/, is an arbitrary
formula, and might express some condition on x obtaining well before the time
t. Suppose, for example, it is the condition of being a dinosaur, and t is the present.
In view of the temporal existence implications of spatial parthood, no dinosaur is
a spatial part of, or spatially overlaps, anything now. Accordingly, the existence
prerequisite 9Š'.x/ cannot simply be 9x '.x/, as it is in standard mereology, but
should be complemented with a temporal existence condition along the lines of
8x .'.x/  E.x; t//. This is not quite subtle enough, however.
Just as an individual may well be constituted of different matter at different times,
it may well survive a change of components. A forest survives the refurbishment
of component trees by others as they die and decay and are replaced by new
growth. Whereas quantities of matter don’t go out of existence, components are
individuals which may well do so. Over a sufﬁciently long period, an individual’s
initial components may have all been removed and destroyed by the end of its
lifetime, having been exchanged for new components which were not in existence
at the beginning of its lifetime. In order to accommodate this, the tentative deﬁnition
of a sum must be modiﬁed and the existence prerequisite ampliﬁed. As it stands, the
deﬁnition only sums over individuals which are overlapped throughout the time t to
which the sum is relativised—it is whatever is overlapped throughout t by whatever
overlaps some '-er throughout t (cf. deﬁnitions of the spatial relations of part and
overlap). This would exclude components coming into existence after the beginning
of this period or going out of existence before the end of this period. A qualiﬁcation
must be introduced quantifying over subintervals of the time of summation along
the following lines:
9Š'.x/  : y D Stx '.x/  9t0  t 8z .z ˚t0 y  9x .'.x/ ^ z ˚t0 x//:
(3.1)
A corresponding modiﬁcation of the additional condition mentioned in the last
paragraph, 8x .'.x/  E.x; t//, to be incorporated in the existence requirement
9Š'.x/ is also required. It should (i) be generalised to 8x .'.x/  9t0  t E.x; t//,
allowing that the '-ers don’t necessarily exist throughout the time t to which the
sum is relativised. Further, (ii) this should be supplemented with the condition
8t0  t 9x .'.x/ ^ E.x; t0// ensuring that there is always some '-er during t.
The upshot is that time-dependent sums of individuals have something of the
character introduced by the accumulation conditions on the matter constituting and
on the region occupied by individuals during a period of time. The sum would
include everything that would have been included in sums taken over subintervals
of the time in question, even though these things may not exist throughout the
time over which the sum is taken. Such individuals are not component (i.e. spatial)
parts of the sum for the time to which the sum is relativised, however, because
spatial parthood at a time entails existence at that time. In fact, such time-relativised
entities as these sums are not individuals as these have been understood here.

3.5
Operations on Component Parts?
63
Individuals are temporary existents, ﬁrst presented as having varying constituent
matter, then as having varying component parts. The varying constituent matter
was taken as one reason for not identifying individuals with quantities of matter.
Likewise, because of their varying components, an individual can’t be identiﬁed
with the sum, for some appropriate time, say its lifetime, of its component parts.
Since sums may be different for different times, some deﬁnite time must be settled
on for a putative identiﬁcation with an individual. The lifetime of the individual
seems the least arbitrary choice to make. But this would include all the past, present
and future components of the individual, and wouldn’t itself be something with
varying component parts. As something which survives change in its components,
an individual is not a time-relativised object x-at-t,3 as sums deﬁned in terms of
time-dependent analogues of mereological relations necessarily are. Whatever they
are, these putative sums are not operations generating individuals from individuals,
and so not sums properly so called.
The difﬁculty that the sum includes things which are not spatial parts at the time
in question would be circumvented by a different conception of sum in accordance
with the original suggestion, without introducing the existential quantiﬁcation
over subintervals in (3.1) and without the corresponding complications in the
existential prerequisite 9Š'.x/. On this simpler conception, sums would include
only those things x satisfying the deﬁning condition '.x/ throughout the time to
which the sum is relativised. But they would still be time-relativised entities, which
individuals aren’t, and thus not the result of an operation generating individuals
from individuals. They certainly wouldn’t be things which change their component
(spatial) parts from time to time.4
There doesn’t seem to be a viable sum operation standing to the time-dependent
analogues of the mereological relations as mereological summation stands to the
mereological relations. Analogues of other operations ordinarily deﬁned in terms
of the sum operation in standard mereology fall by the wayside along with the
time-dependent sums. In particular, the absence of a difference operation leads me
to agree with van Inwagen (1981) in rejecting something like what he calls “The
Doctrine of Arbitrary Undetached Parts” or DAUP for short, understanding in his
statement of the doctrine,
3This would remain true even if individuals were deﬁned, for the purposes of reducing the four-
sorted language to a single-sorted language, in terms of constitution as entities x such that for some
quantity  and some time t; x is constituted of  at t, because of the existential quantiﬁcation.
4The thought that individuals are not sums of their components was captured by the seventeenth-
century philosopher Stephanus Chauvinus: “We call properly individual, not what cannot in any
way be divided, but what cannot be divided into several individuals of the same kind as itself or
into several individuals speciﬁcally similar to him” (quoted by Chauvier 2017, p. 6). Complex
biological organisms like dandelions, with a composite ﬂower consisting of many tiny ﬂowers or
ﬂorets, and Portuguese men o’war, which are integrated colonies of specialised organisms called
polyps, are not a sum of such components because they are not dandelions or Portuguese men
o’war.

64
3
Constitution
for any proper part of a material object like Descartes, there exists an object which is the
material object in question less the proper part.
that the notion of a proper part at issue would be that of a proper component or
spatial part. Van Inwagen illustrates what he sees as the problem by supposing that
Descartes looses his left leg and that there is a remainder, Descartes less his left leg,
which he calls Descartes-minus. Both Descartes and Descartes-minus survive the
amputation, from which it seems natural to conclude that Descartes and Descartes-
minus are identical. But before the amputation it seems equally natural to say that
Descartes and Descartes-minus are not identical. “At t, Descartes lost L [his left leg]
and lost no other parts (save parts of him that overlapped L)” (van Inwagen 1981,
p. 126), where t is the time of amputation. So before t, Descartes had a part which
is not a part of Descartes-minus, which is why they are not identical. But this is in
direct contradiction with what the principle of the transitivity of identity apparently
requires:
Descartes = Descartes-minus + his left leg.
Descartes = Descartes-minus.
)
Descartes-minus = Descartes-minus + his left leg
This latter argument is to be rejected because the identity statements are improper:
there is no sum or difference operation generating objects which could stand in an
identity relation to anything. But this is probably not how van Inwagen would put it.
Van Inwagen feels he can’t solve the problem by denying the existence
of Descartes-minus without drawing the “even more striking conclusion” that
Descartes’s left leg doesn’t exist either:
there was never any such thing as Descartes’s left leg. We need only one premise to reach
this conclusion, namely that if L existed, D-minus did too. And this premise seems quite
reasonable, for it would seem wholly arbitrary to accept the existence of L and to deny
the existence of D-minus. In more senses than one, L and D-minus stand or fall together.
If these things existed, they would be things of the same sort. Each would be an arbitrary
undetached part of a certain man. This fact may be disguised by our having (problems of
multiplicity and vagueness aside) what is a customary and idiomatic name for L if it is
a name for anything: “Descartes’s left leg.” But this is a linguistic accident that reﬂects
our interests. (We may imagine a race of rational beings who raise human beings as meat
animals. Suppose these beings, for religious reason, never eat left legs. They might very
well have in their language some customary and idiomatic phrase that stands to D-minus in
the same relation as that in which the English phrase ‘Descartes’s left leg’ stands to L.) (van
Inwagen 1981, p. 196)
But we might well take a different line on this. Time-dependent analogues of the
mereological relations can be accepted without taking the further step of accepting
corresponding analogues of the mereological operations. We can see, then, that
Descartes’s left leg might well be thought to exist during Descartes’s lifetime as one
of his components, but this need not imply that the remainder of Descartes’s body
amounts to a component and the existence of what van Inwagen calls Descartes-
minus. This is to be distinguished from the matter comprising the remainder of
Descartes’s body once the matter constituting his left leg for some chosen time has
been subtracted (bearing in mind that the latter will include matter such as the blood

3.5
Operations on Component Parts?
65
circulating thought both the left leg and the rest of the body during this time), over
which quantities a generally viable difference operation is deﬁned. It is therefore
not “wholly arbitrary”, as van Inwagen claims, to accept the existence of the leg but
not the difference, Descartes-minus.
Some of the views van Inwagen has since developed on relativising mereological
concepts to a time, which are even further at variance with those put forward here,
are discussed in the appendix to this chapter.
The question of the summation principle discussed at the beginning of this
section has not been completely resolved and the criterion of identity in terms
of constitutive matter stands. It remains to be seen whether this is equivalent, for
individuals with component parts, to a criterion in terms of sameness of component
parts.
One reason for seeking a sum operation over individuals might derive from a
wish to recognise non-connected individuals like the solar system, whose scattered
components we might like to think of as bound together by an operation generating
an individual from individuals. Such individuals provide one kind of counterex-
ample to the strategy of reducing individuals to connected quantities of some sort.
But in the absence of a suitable sum operation, we should just recognise that some
individuals are like the solar system, with scattered components. In this connection,
lack of an analogue of mereological summation for individuals means that there is
no analogue of the principle that the region occupied by a sum of quantities is the
sum of the regions occupied by those quantities (Sect. 2.4). Some such idea might
nevertheless be feasible in terms of a suitable notion of a collection of individuals.
Plural logic has been developed to accommodate a notion of a plurality, distinct
from that of a set or a mereological sum, which is at issue in saying, for example,
that the children encircled the bonﬁre, the boxes take up most of the space in the
attic or the planets and asteroids form the solar system. The claim that a plurality, X,
occupies a place p at a time t, Occ.X; p; t/, which is the sum of the places occupied
by each of the individuals, x, that is an X (written x " X) could then be expressed as
Occ.X; t/ D †p 9x .x " X ^ Occ.x; p; t//:
Again we see how convenient it would be if general summation over regions were
allowed, in the absence of which we have to envisage an iteration of binary sums
over the regions occupied by the individuals of the plurality taken in some order.
Lack of an analogue of mereological sum for individuals doesn’t, therefore, leave
us without a notion of a collection of individuals. The plurality notion would seem
to be the appropriate one. But this relies, of course, on not identifying pluralities
with sums.
By way of a ﬁnal word on this discussion, individuals are understood to be
continuants, bearing properties and enduring for some period, to be constituted of
matter, occupy spatial regions, enter into numerous other relations and participate
in processes. But no simple, general criterion of what systematically distinguishes
individuals from non-individuals, such as spatio-temporal boundedness or indepen-
dence, has been offered. We might hope that in a restricted domain such as biology

66
3
Constitution
the notion of an organism could be delimited as a special case of an individual in
the light of the theory of evolution as the bearer of traits that have been selected for
the advantage they bestow on the individual, and not to any component part or more
inclusive aggregate. But even here an examination of recalcitrant cases in the face
of a multiplicity of well-motivated but mutually inconsistent proposals shows that
We know that counting particular lumps of living matter, and not others, allows us to
describe and make predictions about evolutionary processes. Yet we lack a theory telling
us which lumps to count. (Clarke 2010, p. 323)
The present notion of an individual is considerably broader than that of a biological
organism. But it seems to be presupposed by the notion of an organism. And just as
failure to precisely delimit the concept has not prevented philosophers of biology
from arguing for the centrality of the notion of an organism in biology, I don’t
see that problems with adjudicating between borderline cases detracts from the
centrality of the notion of an individual in the ontology of continuants.
3.6
Modality
The proponents of the “constitution is identity” thesis constrain their discussion
of examples to suit their view, choosing objects with unchanging constitution and
leaving only modal properties to distinguish them. Katherine Hawley, we saw, goes
so far as to consider the fantastic case of a statue and its constituent clay being
created and subsequently destroyed at the same times. Whatever possible world
this situation might obtain in, it is difﬁcult to see what bearing it could have on
the character of ordinary objects. More measured modal claims concerning what is
possible under feasible circumstances are more interesting.
The fact that individuals typically undergo a change of constitutive matter with
time is naturally understood to have a modal correlate. Individuals might well have
been constituted of different matter from that of which they are actually constituted.
I leave it open whether there might be individuals with a necessary constitution
(perhaps historically valuable artifacts like the warship Vasa), but an organism
like a plant, for example, would be constituted of different matter from that now
constituting it if it had been moved and consequently carried out its photosynthesis
processes in a different region of the atmosphere. A given individual might have
had a longer or a shorter lifetime than it had. The possibility of a longer lifetime
would entail not merely that it might have been constituted of a different quantity
from that which in fact constituted it, but that it might have been constituted of
something when it wasn’t in fact constituted of anything. A possibly shorter lifetime
would imply that it might not have existed when it actually did. It would seem
that entire individuals might not have existed at all, or that there might possibly
be individuals that don’t ever actually exist, such as Wittgenstein’s possible son
or perhaps a machine that will transform the power of waves into a useful energy
source.

3.6
Modality
67
Quantities, by contrast, are permanent entities that do not gain or lose parts. The
modal correlate of this is that they have their parts essentially, with no possibility of
gain or loss:
MEss
(i)      .  /
and
(ii)  ª    . ª /.
In fact, quantities are entities which can, in accordance with Lavoisier’s principle
of the indestructibility of matter, be neither created nor destroyed. This is a modal
thesis, stating not merely that no quantities of matter ever come into existence or are
destroyed, but that it is not possible that there are quantities which don’t actually
exist, or that quantities don’t exist which actually do. Perhaps it could be stipulated
that quantities are destroyed or come into existence in fairy-tale worlds as some sort
of metaphysical possibility. But such scenarios hardly tell us what is possible for
matter and fall outside the scope of the modality envisaged here. Quantities comply
with what is called the single domain interpretation of quantiﬁed modal logic, and
satisfy the Barcan formula,
BF
8  '   8 ',
equivalently, Þ 9 '  9 Þ ',
and its converse,
CBF
 8 '  8  ',
equivalently, 9 Þ '  Þ 9 '.
Times and regions of space are, like quantities, permanent objects which are never
created or destroyed. The Barcan formula and its converse therefore holds for
entities of these kinds too, along with the principles of mereological essentialism.
Kripke devised his variable domain interpretation to invalidate the Barcan
formula and its converse, neither of which he thought should be part of the basic
structure of modal predicate logic. The present line of argument suggests that these
considerations apply to individuals, to which the Barcan formula and its converse
don’t apply. Taking ' to be 9t E.x; t/, where E.x; t/ is the time-dependent existence
predicate deﬁned in Sect. 3.2, the antecedent Þ 9x 9t E.x; t/ of the equivalent form
of the Barcan formula could well be true—the actual existence of individuals shows
that their existence is certainly possible. But we might want to allow that the
consequent, 9x Þ 9t E.x; t/, is false—the universe might have developed in such
a way that individuals were never formed from matter. Less drastically, without
going to such extremes, the above counterexample of the machine that transforms
wave power into usable energy might exist, but there is no individual that might be
turned to such a purpose. The converse Barcan formula is even more obviously
invalid when applied to individuals. A typical individual might well not exist:
9x Þ  9t E.x; t/. But it couldn’t possibly be the case that there is something that
doesn’t exist: Þ 9x9t E.x; t/.
Kripke’s own suggestion of how to formulate the axioms corresponding to the
variable domain interpretation is generally thought inappropriate, and the usual way
of doing this is to adapt the principles of free logic in which the truth-functional
tautologies, the reﬂexivity and substitution axioms for identity and the rules of
modus ponens and generalisation are supplemented with the axioms and axiom
schemas:

68
3
Constitution
Q1
8x ' . Ey  .y=x/'
Q2
'  8x ',
provided x is not free in '
Q3
8x .'   / : 8x '  8x  
Q4
8x Ex
Q5
Þ Ex
The instantiation axiom of standard predicate logic is qualiﬁed with an existence
predicate, Ex (which could be deﬁned as 9t 9 Const.x; ; t/), in axiom Q1, in view
of which the right-to-left implication of Q2 is no longer provable as in standard
predicate logic and is laid down as an axiom for the purposes of modal quantiﬁcation
theory (ensuring that 8x '  9x ' is a theorem), and an additional axiom Q4
governing the existence predicate is added. Q3 is as in standard predicate logic.5
Axiom Q4 is not expressed by an open formula, Ex, because the free variables are
held to range over a so-called outer domain of all possible objects which, in view
of Q5, comprises possible (possibly existing) individuals. All entities, possible and
actual, referred to by the free variables are referred to rigidly, i.e. satisfy the ridigity
principles
R1
x D y   x D y
R2
x ¤ y   x ¤ y,
ensuring that a term’s denotation is preserved necessarily and cannot be otherwise.
As Quine pointed out, R1 is straightforwardly provable from the identity axioms and
the basic rule of necessitation in normal modal logic. R2 is provable as a theorem
in stronger modal logics which include the “Brouwer” axiom, and otherwise is laid
down as an axiom. The rigidity principles imply that possibly distinct individuals
are necessarily distinct by the contraposition of R1, Þ x ¤ y  x ¤ y, and R2.
Similarly, Þ x D y  x D y by the contraposition of R2 whence Þ x D y   x D
y by R1. Corresponding rigidity principles for quantity, time and space variables
follow in normal modal logic with the principles of standard predicate logic from
the principles of mereological essentialism.
The application of these axioms can be illustrated by a puzzle originally raised
by Wiggins (1976) as a way of questioning the usual treatment of necessity as
a sentential operator. Formulating what he takes to be the true claim, “Cicero is
necessarily a man”, in terms of a sentential operator as  M.a/ and “Cicero is a
man entails men exist” as  .M.a/  9x M.x//, it follows in normal modal logic
that  9x M.x/. But it is patently false that men necessarily exist. Not wishing to
reject the principle of existential generalisation, Wiggins proposes to circumvent
the problem with an alternative treatment of necessarily as a predicate modiﬁer.
But we might instead question the usual formulation of the principle of existential
generalisation when applied to individuals in modal contexts. The principle of
existential generalisation in free logic is given by the contraposition of Q1, namely
5For completeness of the basic system of quantiﬁed normal modal logic (Garson 1984), a “mixing”
rule must be added in addition to the sentential modal principles of system K, namely
If ` 	 _ . . Ey  .y=x/'/ then ` 	 _ .  8x'/, provided x is not free in  .

3.6
Modality
69
Ey^.y=x/' : 9x '. As this view would have it, if the second premise of Wiggins’s
argument is to be true, it should be formulated as  .M.a/ ^ E.a/ : 9x M.x//, in
which case the deduction no longer holds. An additional premise,  E.a/, would be
required for the conclusion to follow, which is precisely the point at issue, that it is
not necessary that Cicero exists.
How does Wiggins’s argument fare when applied to quantities? An example
might be
 Water./,
 .Water./  9 Water.//,
)
 9 Water./.
The former objection to the second premise fails because with the Barcan formula
and its converse holding for universal quantiﬁcation over quantities, which cannot
disappear or be created, there is no call to modify the principle of existential
generalisation in standard predicate logic. But by the same token, the ﬁrst premise
is false. Unlike a man, who is necessarily a man, a quantity is not necessarily water
in view of water’s susceptibility to conversion into other substances in the course
of chemical reactions. A quantity which is water doesn’t disappear when it ceases
to be water but becomes, in accordance with Lavoisier’s principle, the bearer of
different substance properties. The “Water” predicate is time dependent, applying
to a quantity at a time. Similarly, what is not water might in fact be water as the
result of chemical reactions, so that, whereas whoever is a man is necessarily a man,
and whoever not not, neither of the following two claims hold:
Water.; t/   Water.; t/;
Water.; t/  Water.; t/:
Still, the argument would seem to be valid. A similar application of the argument to
quantities where the premises are true is
 Ponderable./,
 .Ponderable./  9 Ponderable.//,
)
 9 Ponderable./.
Here the property of being ponderable (having mass) would seem to be an essential
property, the second premise is true (existential generalisation and necessitation) and
the conclusion is acceptable. In fact, 9  './   9 './ is a theorem. The
existence of any particular species, or organisms in general, may not be naturally
necessary, but the very existence of matter is another thing.
Kripke’s suggestion of the necessity of origin might be a general essential
property of individuals, necessarily true of every individual that has it, as being
ponderable is necessarily true of every quantity. A way of putting this within the
present apparatus is to ﬁrst deﬁne an initial composition of an individual by
Init.; x/  9t 9 .L.x; t/ ^ Comp.x; ; t/ ^    ^ 9t0 .t0  t ^
9t00 .EAt00t ^ EAt00t0 ^ Comp.x; ; t0////,
where EAt0t is the relation of t0 being earlier than and abutting t. A quantity 
would then be distinguished as the original composition of x, Orig.; x/, if it is

70
3
Constitution
the smallest initial composition of x—that which is part of every initial composition
of x. The assumption would be that each individual is formed during some initial
interval of time from a minimal quantity of matter, any proper part of which would
not be sufﬁcient to compose the individual. The modal claim would then be that
if the individual has an original composition, implying that it exists at the time
when thus composed, then this quantity is necessarily the original composition
of the individual. A plant might well be constituted of different matter than it is
during its lifetime if it had been moved, but its original matter couldn’t have been
different. And an individual might have had a longer or a shorter lifetime than it
in fact had, but this affects the possible time of its demise and not the time of
its initial formation, which it necessarily ﬁxed by its necessary composition of its
original matter. Something more might be said about the kind or kinds of substance
instanced by the original quantity and its parts in the speciﬁc case of each individual
or perhaps kind of individual, but such details would go beyond the general principle
for individuals of whatever kind. The case for such an assumption has often been
reiterated for organisms and artefacts. Planets have recently been deemed to have
acquired a minimal seize, requiring a minimal quantity of matter (sufﬁcient to ensure
a spherical shape by self-gravitation and gravitationally dominate their vicinity), in
order to qualify as such. But whether the principle holds for everything that counts
as an individual with a possibly varying composition is another matter, and not one
I feel able to conﬁdently assert.
Like Cicero, individuals don’t in general exist necessarily, and it is not easy to
think of any particular kind of individual that does. Not only might actually existing
individuals not exist; it seems that we can entertain the idea of a merely possible
individual, namely an individual x such that
9t Þ E.x; t/ ^ 9t E.x; t/:
The ﬁrst conjunct is 9t Þ 9 Const.x; ; t/ by the deﬁnition of the time-dependent
existence predicate, and by CBF the latter implies (and together with BF is
equivalent with) 9t 9 Þ Const.x; ; t/. So there is (without qualiﬁcation) a quantity
of matter which a merely possible individual would be constituted of, and since
there is only so much matter to go round, this imposes a restriction on the nature
and number of individuals that would be jointly merely possible.
Many properties of individuals are either in fact properties of their constituent
matter or depend on their constituent matter in some way. If I were to eat less, I
would be constituted of matter with less mass, and thus be lighter than I am or
otherwise would be. Unlike a quantity, then, an individual needn’t be as heavy as it
is, although this is not to deny that everything is necessarily as heavy as it is in the
sense that it would be contradictory otherwise. That an individual might have had a
longer lifetime than it had can be expressed along the lines of
L.t; x/ ^ Þ L.t0; x/ ^ t  t0;

3.7
Appendix: Van Inwagen’s Understanding of Parthood as Time-Dependent
71
which, even if it doesn’t capture the lengths of the intervals in question, does capture
a prerequisite for time t0 being longer than that of t in terms of a relation that holds
rigidly between the times in question in virtue of the principle of mereological
essentialism. Similarly, an individual’s being possibly heavier than it is comes down
to a rigid relation of proper parthood between quantities:
Const.x; ; t/ ^ Þ Const.x; ; t/ ^   :
It will be interesting in the sequel to consider whether there are any such modal
comparisons which do not come down to rigid mereological relations between the
appropriate entities.
An individual that might at some time have different constitutive matter from
that it in fact has isn’t constituted of its matter necessarily. The identity criterion
CI of being constituted of the same matter should certainly not be weakened to
 SameConst.x; y; t/  x D y otherwise little or nothing would satisfy it. Cor-
respondingly, strengthening the identity criterion to Þ SameConst.x; y; t/  x D y
would be too easily satisﬁed because whether actual or possible, individuals are
constituted from the same pool of matter and it can’t be ruled out that, had the past
of one individual been less fortunate, it might have provided the matter of another
individual. This suggests that an additional principle such as that of common origin
is needed to determine cases of possible identity.
3.7
Appendix: Van Inwagen’s Understanding of Parthood
as Time-Dependent
Mereological relations of parthood, overlapping and separation are dyadic. This
leaves no possibility for changing of parts over time. Having seen what sort of
entities mereological concepts are applied to here, this is just as it should be.
Times obviously do not change their parts over time, and nor do regions of
space. Quantities of matter conforming to the principles of elementary science,
and in particular Lavoisier’s principle of the conservation of mass, interpreted with
Poincaré to mean that “Lavoisier [. . . ] has demonstrated the indestructibility of
matter by demonstrating the invariability of mass” (Poincaré 1913, p. 65) do not
gain or lose parts with time either. But van Inwagen maintains the contrary. We
might well suspect that this turns once again on an equivocation between a proper
treatment of entities standing in mereological relations and material objects with
changing constitutional matter. Perhaps the issue is purely verbal, with van Inwagen
essentially referring to what is here called the constitution relation as mereological
parthood. But taking the challenge at face value, van Inwagen defends his thesis
by mounting an attack and claiming to show that the idea that mereological sums
cannot change their parts is “groundless” (van Inwagen 2006, p. 614). This claim
is distinctly less startling when we learn that he changes the basic mereological

72
3
Constitution
relations to 3-place relations with the extra place reserved for a time and introduces
what he calls a sum-relation, which is related to a time and departs in essential
respects from the mereological sum operation, notably by not being unique and so
not an operation. Moving the goal posts reduces the likelihood of persuading the
opposition unless there are convincing arguments for having to make these changes
from reasonably neutral ground. But we will see that this so-called argument is shot
through with his own presuppositions, and powerless against anyone not already
committed to the same view.
Van Inwagen claims to show that every object is a mereological sum, so that
if any object can change its parts, so can mereological sums. Then he disputes an
argument claiming to show that no object can change its parts and concludes that
speaking of mereological sums changing their parts is not to misapply the concept
of mereological sum. But of course it is, since mereological sums are not one
thing at one time and another at another. Van Inwagen is not really talking about
mereological sums at all.
The ﬁrst move is to claim that “everything has parts: itself if no others”
(van Inwagen 2006, p. 620), from which it would uncontroversially follow that
everything is a sum of its parts. The reﬂexivity theorem, 8x .x  x/, is supposed
to show that everything has parts. But as noted in Sect. 1.2, such a universally
quantiﬁed formula only says that everything in the universe of discourse of the
formalised theory has the feature in question. A perfectly coherent formulation of
the idea that some but not all things obey mereological principles was presented in
the ﬁrst chapter. An argument would be required to show this was mistaken. But
what van Inwagen offers is simply the bare claim 8x .x  x/, that is, the assumption
on his part that everything has parts. There is no trace of an argument here.6
The next stage of the procedure is an appeal to authority in the form of a
quotation:
It really is the most obvious common sense that a physical object can acquire and lose parts.
Parthood surely is a three-place relation, among a pair of objects and a time. (Thomson
1983, p. 213)
But Thomson’s example of a house loosing a brick or two is clearly that of an
object with varying material constitution, and not of a quantity of matter. Van
Ingwagen doesn’t recognise this distinction, but proposes instead to come to grips
with the circumstance that a continuant loses and gains what he wants to call parts
by relinquishing the uniqueness characteristic of mereological sums and settling
for a 3-place relation, “x is at t the sum of the ys” (within a framework of plural
quantiﬁcation). This allows that x at t is the same sum as x at t0 even if the things
summed in the sum x at t0 differ from the things summed in the sum x at t. A brick
house, for example, is said to be a sum of a given collection of bricks on Tuesday,
but later, having lost a brick, this same house is the sum of the Tuesday bricks less
6We might wonder whether spaces and times are included in van Inwagen’s universe of discourse
and whether he takes his argument to show that mereological parthood between regions and
between times is time dependent.

3.7
Appendix: Van Inwagen’s Understanding of Parthood as Time-Dependent
73
the lost one. What does “same sum” mean here? Van Inwagen deﬁnes “x is the same
mereological sum as y” by
x is the same mereological sum as y iff x is a mereological sum and y is a mereological sum
and x D y. (2006, p. 626)
So the identity of van Inwagen’s sums is not determined by a mereological criterion
at all, but whatever determines x D y, the identity of continuants. What stronger
indication could there be that it is not mereology that is at issue here?
The point becomes even clearer in the treatment van Inwagen offers as he
proceedes to consider an argument purporting to show that objects cannot change
their parts. The argument envisages an object ˛ which is the “mereological sum”
of A, B and C (which he writes by putting ˛ = A + B + C). After some time, C
is annihilated, and the question posed whether ˛ still exists. A + B exists, as it did
before C’s annihilation. But ˛ wasn’t identical with that then and cannot become
identical with something else later. Van Inwagen identiﬁes two premises in this
argument which he says are doubtful, but considers only one, to the effect that before
C’s annihilation, A and B had a mereological sum. (We have seen that van Inwagen
questioned this in his 1981 article. But he doesn’t refer to that discussion in the 2006
article.) This, he supposes, is accepted on the strength of the principle (p. 629) that
For any xs, if those xs exist at t, those xs have at t at least one mereological sum.
But this he rejects because he rejects arbitrary sums, and says (p. 630) that he
therefore sees no reason to suppose that an object cannot change its parts. Since
he claims to have shown that everything is a mereological sum, he further concludes
that mereological sums can change their parts.
This argument that van Inwagen rejects is not one that would be advanced here
in support of the claim that objects cannot change their parts because no entities
envisaged here as forming sums come into or go out of existence with time, and
in particular, none are subject to annihilation. But van Inwagen is sufﬁciently
impressed that he takes refuting it to support his own thesis that objects can change
their parts. Like others who put forward arguments of the same general kind,
however, he is surprisingly evasive in his handling of time given his commitment
to the time-dependence of mereological concepts.
Van Inwagen’s presentation of the argument hangs on the role of a changed state
of affairs before and after a certain time. Why, then, symbolise “the mereological
sum of x and y” as “x C y”, using the dyadic operator “+” if it is to be sensitive to
the time when a sum is formed? Why not write something like x Ct y instead? The
suspicion arises that presentations of this kind of argument trade on ambiguities in
the imposition of concepts of what van Inwagen calls mereology. It would seem that
anything identical with the time-relativised sum A Ct B Ct C is a time-relativised
object, ˛t. And at t0, after t, when C has, according to the tale, been annihilated, there
is an object ˛t0 = A Ct0 B, time-relativised to the new time t0. It seems that there just
isn’t any object, ˛, plain and simple, of which we can ask whether it is both A Ct
B Ct C and A Ct0 B and complete the reductio argument. But van Inwagen insists
that there is one and the same object, ˛, plain and simple (time independent, like a
continuant), which is a sum A Ct B Ct C and a sum A Ct0 B, where t0 ¤ t.

74
3
Constitution
I agree with van Ingwagen that standard mereology is not adequate to yield an
account of changes undergone by individuals, but I see no reason why mereology
should be massacred in the attempt to redress the issue. Perhaps he is essentially
(small points of divergence aside) talking about what is here called the consti-
tution relation. Mereology should be kept plain and simple, to be applied where
appropriate. These gains should not be cast to the wind and a two-tier system of
mereological concepts as originally conceived and modiﬁed mereological concepts
should deﬁnitely be avoided. Issues which outstrip mereology should be met by
additions to accommodate them.
Time clearly has a role to play in a reasonably full account of material objects—
quantities and individuals. The question is how it is to be brought into the picture.
Rather than modifying mereological concepts, which have such clear applications
as originally conceived, alternative analyses are suggested here. Usually this will
take the form of treating some non-mereological predicate as having place-holders
for times. Suggestions along these lines have already been broached by speaking of
constitution as a relation between an individual, a quantity and a time, which allows
for the expression of the idea that individuals are constituted of different matter
at different times. Material objects—quantities and individuals—might occupy
different regions at different times. Chemical reactions mean that quantities might
bear different substance properties at different times. We have seen here that van
Inwagen proffers a different view, but has no independent arguments not assuming
from the outset premisses that his antagonist would regard as contentious. It remains
to see whether the opposing views offered here give a more plausible and complete
picture.

Chapter 4
Distributivity and Cumulativity
4.1
Mass Predicates
Quantities of matter are distinguished from individuals by their mereological
structure. This is reﬂected in the general features of certain predicates expressing
properties of matter such as being of a kind of substance (e.g. “water”) and
exhibiting one or more phases (e.g. “liquid”, “smoke”), which will be of particular
interest in the following chapters. Such predicates are often called mass predicates
in the philosophical literature after Otto Jespersen (1924) coined the term “mass
word”. The term alludes to the non-particulate, formless character of matter as it
appears on the macroscopic scale, and writers on metaphysics often use the term
in this sense, as when Holden (2004, p. 80) speaks of the structure of bodies
as “a metaphysically simple (noncomposite) structure best described with mass
terms” (taken up in Sect. 5.7 below). It would seem that it is to mass predicates we
should look for general features of the quantities of matter constituting countable
individuals.
Mass predicates are contrasted with predicates expressed by count nouns, which
are said to individuate what they apply to. Count nouns occur in natural language in
both singular and plural forms, the latter applying to a countable group of entities.
“Apples”, for example, applies to a countable number of fruits, and stands in contrast
to predicates like “salt” and “brine”, which don’t have a plural form (with the same
mass term sense, as opposed to, e.g., speaking of the halogen salts of the alkali
metals) nor do they individuate what they apply to into one or more countable
entities. We can ask How much? of what mass predicates apply to, but not How
many?, associating measurability with mass predicates as countability is associated
with count nouns. Humans comprise a lot of water, very little selenium and lots of
blood but many blood vessels, a few limbs and only one heart.
However, a terminological confusion threatens. There are non-count nouns like
“furniture”, “clergy” and “information” that also fulﬁl grammatical criteria of the
kind just indicated but which are clearly not mass predicates in the sense of
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P. Needham, Macroscopic Metaphysics, Synthese Library 390,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4_4
75

76
4
Distributivity and Cumulativity
attributing a non-particulate, formless character to matter. Nevertheless, they are
classiﬁed as mass predicates by linguists and linguistically inspired philosophers.
The class of non-count predicates is clearly broader, but its actual extent is
notoriously peculiar to particular languages. Whereas the English worry about “lots
of false information”, the French speak of “les fausses informations qui circulent”.
The German “Möbel” takes an indeﬁnite article, whereas the Swedish “möbel”
resembles the English “apple” in taking an indeﬁnite article and the correlates of
“many” and “few” when used in the plural rather than “much” and “little”, although
it can also be used (like “apple” and unlike the German “Möbel”) in the singular
with the correlates of “much” and “little”. We can’t ask How much? of clergy, and
although it is grammatically correct to ask How much? of furniture, there is no real
basis for measuring how much furniture except by counting the items or measuring
the amount of their constitutive matter.
It comes as no surprise that linguists generally concur in rejecting a mereological
analysis of mass predicates on their understanding of the term. Whether we should
attach any metaphysical signiﬁcance to this is another matter. We don’t, in particular,
have to agree with Gillon that a mereological analysis is inappropriate
for reasons set out by Parsons (1970, section VI.A). Under the standard and plausible
mereological assumption that two wholes are identical if and only if they have the same
proper parts, it turns out that, in a world in which all furniture is made of wood and all
wood has been made into furniture, the whole of wood would be identical with the whole
of furniture—an implausible consequence. (Gillon 1992, p. 599)
Expressing his indebtedness to Quine, Parsons himself says “parts of chairs might
be wood without being furniture” (1970, p. 377). But as argued here, the “made of”
relation in which the wood is said to stand to furniture is not the mereological part
relation but the “constitutes” relation discussed in Chap. 3. I have no qualms about
the mereological criterion of identity, but items of furniture are to be distinguished
from their constitutive wood, not to mention the changing moisture content, which
varies as the wood dries out or absorbs water according to the ambient circumstances
of the furniture in any possible world sufﬁciently like the actual world to be of
interest.
It would be less confusing if superﬁcial grammatical criteria were said to
delimit a class of non-count predicates. But “mass predicate” and cognate terms are
sometimes used in this broader sense and will for dialectical purposes be difﬁcult
to avoid in the following sections. At the end of the day, however, it is predicates
describing matter as a substance, a phase or a mixture that are of interest here.
Although I try on the whole to avoid it, where the dialectical context doesn’t dictate
otherwise the term “mass predicate” is used in the general metaphysical sense ﬁrst
outlined above of referring to the non-particular, formless character of matter rather
than to refer to all and sundry non-count predicates.
Two general features of mass predicates (in the metaphysical sense of the term)
arising from the mereological structure of what they apply to are of interest.
A distributive and a cumulative condition have been suggested as jointly providing
an analysis of the non-particulate, formless character ascribed by mass predicates.

4.2
The Distributive and Cumulative Conditions
77
Although upholding the cumulative condition, however, Quine has argued that the
distributive condition is incompatible with modern views of matter and hinted
at a restriction. But this restriction is inadequate and the feasibility of dropping
the distributive condition whilst retaining only the cumulative condition can be
questioned in the light of an adequate generalisation to accommodate polyadic
predicates. These issues are discussed in this chapter together with the formulation
of a restriction on both conditions to spatial parts. The applicability to these and
related conditions to matter as understood on older and more modern views of matter
is taken up in the following chapters.
4.2
The Distributive and Cumulative Conditions
Substance predicates, describing matter as of a particular kind of substance, would
seem to share the general feature of applying to all of what they apply to. The idea
goes back to Aristotle, who says, “any part of water is water” (De Generatione et
Corruptione I.10, 328a10f.)—a quantity which is water is all water. Formally, a
predicate './ is distributive if
'./ ^    : './:
A phase predicate like “liquid”, apparently describing a condition of matter
without individuating what it applies to, might also seem to comply with this
condition. The word does take the indeﬁnite article and have a plural form, but when
speaking of a liquid or two liquids we are speaking of one or two kinds. Considered
as a phase predicate, “is liquid” would seem, on the face of it, to be just as much
a mass predicate as substance predicates like “is water”, so that a quantity which
is liquid is all liquid. As has already been suggested in Chap. 2 and will be taken
up later, things are not what they seem. But we assume for the present that they
do apply to ﬁxed quantities of matter for some interval of time and conform to the
distributive condition.
There is an objection to the distributive condition as applied to substance
predicates. As Quine puts it, “In general, a mass term in predicative position may
be viewed as a general term which is true of each portion of the stuff in question,
excluding only the parts too small to count. Thus, ‘water’ and ‘sugar’ . . . are true of
each part of the world’s water or sugar, down to single molecules but not to atoms”
(1960, p. 98). There seems to be a suggestion here of a restriction on the distributive
condition, excluding only the parts too small to count. But this won’t work. There
are mereological sums of “parts too small to count”, such as the hydrogen and the
oxygen in a quantity of water, which are not water but may well be larger than
some things which are water. The suggestion might be appropriate for substances
that are elemental, but compounds and solutions (homogeneous mixtures—the salt
in the sea is not seawater) don’t have the same kind of uniformity. An alternative
suggestion addressing this latter problem would be to consider speciﬁcally spatial

78
4
Distributivity and Cumulativity
parts. Although that wouldn’t meet the “parts too small to count” problem, it is of
some interest. But ﬁrst a related problem in connection with what Quine says about
mass predicates must be considered.
In recent philosophy, the distributive condition has been supplemented with
what Goodman called the collective condition but is more generally known as the
cumulative condition. Quine says that “mass terms like ‘water’, ‘footwear’, and
‘red’ have the semantical property of referring cumulatively: any sum of parts which
are water is water” (1960, p. 91). In terms of the dyadic sum operation, a predicate
'./ is cumulative if
'./ ^ './ : '. [ /:
More generally, a predicate, './, is cumulative iff
9 ./ ^ 8 . ./  '.// : '.†  .//:
(4.1)
(The existential clause is necessary to ensure the existence of the sum.) Like
substance and mixture predicates such as “carbon dioxide” and “aqua regia”, phase
predicates such as “liquid” and “gas” apparently comply with the condition.
Space and time are sometimes thought to be paradigm examples of mass terms—
not, of course, because they are quantities of matter but because they have a
non-particulate, formless character that is well characterised by the distributive and
cumulative conditions. Only the binary sum and not the general sum is deﬁned for
times and spatial regions as introduced in Sects. 1.3 and 1.4. The property of being a
spatial region is both distributive—there are no parts of regions other than regions—
and cumulative in the sense that the sum of any two regions is a region. Similarly,
there are no parts of times (temporal intervals) other than times, and so the property
of being a time is distributive. But the question of existence arises for cumulativity
for times since sums of arbitrary pairs of times don’t exist. With the additional
precondition that it applies to times that are connected, ensuring the existence of
their sum by MT3 of Sect. 1.3, however, the cumulative condition in terms of the
binary sum operation does hold for the property of being a time.
Quantities present a problem for the distributive condition. Quine seems to be
suggesting that this be tackled on the basis that the distributive and cumulative
conditions are independent, allowing the distributive condition to be denied, and
perhaps replaced by some restricted version, while retaining the cumulative condi-
tion. But the issue is not so straightforward.
4.3
Relational Predicates
Many predicates of quantities are relational. The sameness of substance predicate
“is the same kind of substance”, for example, stands between two quantities. Any
of the white solid covering much of Greenland is the same substance as the liquid,
or rather what constitutes much of the liquid, in the Atlantic. Again, “The water in

4.3
Relational Predicates
79
the kettle is warmer than the surrounding air” ascribes the “warmer than” relation to
two quantities. Similarly, we have “weighs more than”, “is as massive as”, “is more
abrasive than”, “is harder than”, “is more brittle than”, “is denser than”, “is more
opaque than”, “has greater reﬂectance than”, “is more rigid than”, “is more viscous
than”, “is more elastic than”, and so forth.
In particular, the substance and phase predicates ﬁguring in the last section are in
fact dyadic. Substances are ﬂeeting properties of persisting matter. Water is created
in the combustion of hydrogen and of hydrocarbons, the metabolism of sugars,
what are called condensation reactions in organic chemistry, the neutralisation of
acids by alkalis, etc. Water is destroyed by electrolysis, the action of sodium, in
photosynthesis, and so forth. And as already mentioned in Sect. 3.1, the picturesque
language of coming to be and passing away concerns the possession of properties
rather than the existence of their subjects in accordance with Lavoisier’s principle
of the preservation of mass and the persistence of matter in chemical reactions.
Accordingly, the “water” predicate holds of a quantity of matter at one time and
perhaps not at another. The predicate “is water” is a two-place relational predicate
of the form “ is water at time t”. Treated as intervals, times stand, like quantities
of matter, in mereological relations of parthood, overlapping and separation, and
are subject to the binary mereological operations of sum and product. So the
paradigm mass predicates describing substances are not correctly treated as monadic
predicates but are relational. Phase predicates are similarly time dependent. Water
in a kettle which is boiled becomes steam (gas), and later condenses to liquid again.
The sameness of substance relation is, accordingly, not merely a dyadic predicate
“ is the same kind of substance ”, but a four-place relation with two places for
times. Any of the white solid covering much of Greenland is the same substance
as the liquid, or rather what constitutes much of the liquid, in the Atlantic. But
this holds for quantities of the white solid and the liquid only while they remain
water. A quantity which is part of the white solid covering much of Greenland is
the same substance now as a quantity which was liquid in the Atlantic last week
was then. In the meantime, the liquid evaporated, made its way over the amazon
and was incorporated in photosynthesis. So although the former quantity is now the
same substance as the latter quantity was, it is no longer the same substance as the
latter quantity is. Two quantities of the same kind are not in general indeﬁnitely
of the same kind, and the relation to time must be incorporated into a complete
representation of the same kind relation, which is a four-place relation “ is the
same kind of substance at time t as  is at t0”. Similar comments apply to other
relations mentioned at the beginning of this section. After cooling, a quantity which
was warmer than another (was) is no longer warmer than the other quantity was,
and so on.
Whilst a quantity of matter may weigh more than another but a part of that ﬁrst
quantity does not, it would seem that any part of a quantity is as warm as another if
that ﬁrst quantity is. Something like the distributive condition might therefore well
be applicable to some, if not all, relational predicates relating several entities with
a mereological structure. What about the cumulative condition? In order to pursue
the issue, the question arises ﬁrst of how the distributive and cumulative conditions

80
4
Distributivity and Cumulativity
should be generalised to apply to relational predicates. The distributive condition is
straightforward. For a dyadic predicate '.; t/ applying to a quantity and a time, it
generalises to
'.; t/ ^    ^ t0  t : '.; t0/;
and predicates of higher arity applying to all kinds of entities with a mereological
structure follow the same pattern. But the cumulative condition poses a problem.
Ignoring for simplicity the time-dependency of the “same kind” predicate, a
straightforward ﬁrst shot at generalising the cumulative condition for the dyadic
sum operation applied to this predicate reads
(*)
If  is the same substance as  and 0 is the same substance as 0, then  [ 0
is the same substance as  [ 0.
But the antecedent would be true if  and  were each water and 0 and 0 each
carbon dioxide, whereas the consequent would then be false. Here all  is the same
substance as all , and all 0 is the same substance as all 0, but it is clearly not the
case that all  [ 0 is the same substance as all  [ 0. A similar counterexample is
obtained by substituting “same phase” for “same substance” in (*):  and  might
each be solid and 0 and 0 each gas, but then  [ 0 and  [ 0 wouldn’t be of the
same phase.
Putting it like this may seem to make an appeal to the distributive condition that
is questionable at this stage of the argument in view of Quine’s objection. But his
objection is directed at micro-constituents below the molecular level. These are not
at issue in this counterexample because  is a quantity of macroscopic proportions
and obviously a part of  [ 0, and 0 is similarly a macro-quantity and a part of
[0, but water is not the same substance as carbon dioxide and so  is not the same
substance as 0. Consequently, it is not the case that all  [0 is the same substance
as all [0, and a restriction meeting Quine’s objection would not save the suggested
generalisation of the cumulative condition. In any case, were the consequent true,
then reapplying (*) to it together with another same substance claim would entail
that ever larger and more disparate sums were of the same substance, and eventually
all distinctions of substance would be eliminated. The same goes for phase.
It should now be clear that the same substance predicate doesn’t relate mixtures
of several substances, but has the sense of “same single substance”. This is the
same substance relation at issue in the proposal that the extension of a substance
predicate is determined by what stands in the same substance relation to a paradigm
sample of the particular substance found in Putnam (1975, p. 231), except that he
imposes a restriction to the same phase. A more general “same stuff”, or “same
substances”, predicate would include the relation of being the same mixture, and
perhaps (if some philosophers’ usage is to be followed) be restricted to certain
phases. But that is not at issue here.
Making the time-dependency of substance predicates explicit yields a similar
counterexample. Thus,

4.4
Generalising the Cumulative Condition
81
(
)
Water.; t/ ^ Water.; t0/ ^ C t t0 : Water. [ ; t [ t0/,
is not true in general. The clause C t t0, stating that t and t0 are connected (abut
or overlap), is necessary to ensure the existence of their sum and thus that the
consequent doesn’t fail for want of a second term. Suppose that  is a quantity
of water at t, and subjected to electrolysis during t0, later than but abutting t, when
it gradually dissociates into hydrogen and oxygen. Then the sum,  [ , wouldn’t
be water at t [ t0, even if  is water during t0. If the consequent of (
) were true,
then reapplying (
) to it together with a further claim of a new quantity being water
at a time connected with t [ t0, and so on, would entail that ever larger quantities
of shifting composition are water for ever larger intervals. Further counterexamples
are to be had with “is as warm as”, “is warmer than”, “has the same pressure as”,
and the time-dependent phase properties of being solid, liquid and gas.
4.4
Generalising the Cumulative Condition
A satisfactory formulation of the cumulative condition must reduce to the general
formulation (4.1) in the special case of monadic predicates and be generalisable in
an acceptable way. A solution has been put forward by Roeper (1983) to the effect
that (4.1) is equivalent with
80   900  0 '.00/  './:
(4.2)
Formula (4.2) can be generalised into a suitable cumulative condition for relational
predicates which is not subject to the counterexamples which tell against the likes
of (*). For a dyadic substance predicate like “water”, for example, we have
80   8t0  t 900  0 9t00  t0 Water.00; t00/  Water.; t/:
That is,  is water throughout t if some of any part of  during some part of
any subinterval of t is all water. This is, perhaps, easier to understand in the
contrapositive form: if  is not water throughout t then there is some part 0 of
 all of whose parts are not water for all subintervals of some part t0 of t. Again
for the “same substance” predicate, ignoring the time dependence for simplicity as
before, we have
80   80   900  0 900  0 SameSubst.00; 00/  SameSubst.; /:
If  is not the same substance as  then there are parts 0 of  and 0 of  none of
either of which is the same substance as any of the other. With the complete four-
place relation,  at t is not the same substance as  at t implies that there is a part
0 of  none of which is ever during some subinterval t0 of t the same substance as
any part of a part 0 of  for any time during some subinterval t00 of t.

82
4
Distributivity and Cumulativity
The quantiﬁcation over all parts in (4.2) and the generalised cumulative condition
illustrated in these examples smacks very clearly of the distributive condition. In
fact, the proof of that part of the equivalence of (4.1) and (4.2) comprising the
implication of (4.1) by (4.2), showing that the new condition (4.2) encompasses
the cumulative condition, relies on the unrestricted distributive condition. But the
proof that the original condition (4.1) implies the new condition (4.2) doesn’t. This
implication holds simply in virtue of general features of mereology, as shown in the
following deduction.
To show that the original cumulative condition implies the new condition, assume
the antecedent,
(i) 80   900  0 '.00/,
of (4.2). Instantiating, 90 .0   ^ '.0//, which together with the tautology
80..0   ^ '.0/  .0   ^ '.0// and the original cumulative condition
(4.1) implies '.†0.0   ^'.0///. It remains to show that  D †0.0   ^
'.0//, so that './, whence (4.2) follows by the deduction theorem. For reductio,
then, assume  ¤ †0.0   ^ '.0//. There are two alternatives. First, suppose
 ª †0.0   ^ '.0//. By the strong supplementation principle, there is a 
such that
(ii)    ^  j †0.0   ^ '.0/.
The ﬁrst conjunct here together with (i) implies that there is a 00 such that
(iii) 00   ^ '.00/.
Then clearly by (ii), 00 j †0.0   ^ '.0//. But by the transitivity of the part
relation, the ﬁrst conjunct of (ii) together with (iii) yield 00   ^ '.00/. Now
if this is true of 00, then clearly 00 is part of the sum of things of which this is
true—00  †0.0   ^ '.0//—contradicting 00 j †0.0   ^ '.0//.
As for the second case, †0.0   ^ '.0// ª , this implies by the strong
supplementation principle that for some 00, 00  †0.0   ^ '.0// ^ 00 j .
Clearly, the ﬁrst conjunct implies 00  , contradicting the second conjunct. Both
alternatives are contradictory and  D †0.0   ^ '.0//, so that './. Q.E.D.
To demonstrate the converse, the consequent of (4.1), '.†  .//, is deduced
from its antecedents and (4.2) with the help of the distributive condition. Assume
(i) 9  ./
(ii) 8 . ./  './/
and put  D †0  .0/, which exists since by (i) there are  -ers. Now by general
mereology, anything which is a part of the sum of  -ers overlaps some  -er; i.e.
(iii) 80   9  0 . ./ ^ 0 ı /.
But by the deﬁnition of overlap, the conjunct 0 ı  here implies that there is a part,
00, common to 0 and , and by the distributive condition (4.1), the ﬁrst conjunct
then implies  .00/. Accordingly,

4.5
Spatial Parts
83
(iv) 80   900  0  .00/.
And so by (ii),
(v) 80   900  0 '.00/,
and then by (4.2)
(vi) './,
which is just '.†  .//, as required. The unrestricted distributive condition was
called upon when moving from (iii) to (iv) in this straightforward argument.
Thus the cumulative condition in the form (4.2) is not independent of the
distributive condition, which therefore cannot be simply denied while maintaining
the cumulative condition in this form for monadic predicates. Clearly, someone
who questions the distributive condition for a monadic predicate might question the
equivalence. But there is no denying (4.2), which is implied by (4.1) on the strength
of purely mereological principles, while accepting cumulativity in its original form.
And if Quine’s comments on water are to have any bearing, they would have to
concern the distributive and cumulative conditions for the dyadic water predicate.
The cumulative condition for relational predicates doesn’t rely on a corresponding
proof of equivalence calling on a relational distributive condition, but it does involve
quantiﬁcation over all parts just as the distributive condition does. In that case, the
antecedent of the cumulative condition for “water” is false on Quine’s view for
any quantity  because it is either some other substance(s) or some parts of it at
some time have parts which are all not water throughout some part of this time.
The cumulative condition would then be trivially true, and not the substantive truth
Quine presumably took it to be. It would seem that the conception of continuous
matter expressed by the use of mass predicates implicitly presupposes that they
apply to a domain of macroscopic entities none of whose parts are too small to
count. Although in the case of times the assumption of inﬁnite divisibility, axiom
MT10 of Sect. 1.3, would take us beyond any lower limit of macroscopic duration, it
is not easy to see how the assumption itself can be faulted. But quantities, for which
neither inﬁnite divisibility nor mereological atomism are assumed, present more of
a problem. This is taken up in Chap. 7.
4.5
Spatial Parts
Aristotle rejected atomism, but that is not itself sufﬁcient to save the distributive
condition. He did develop a conception of mixts (with no distinction corresponding
to that between compounds and solutions) based on the distributive condition,
however, with the feature that the original substances from which new mixts are
generated are not actually present in these mixts. In particular, the elements are not
present in their compounds. Although modern macroscopic theory doesn’t follow
this analysis, but allows that several independent substances occur in a mixture—

84
4
Distributivity and Cumulativity
even in the homogenous phases of a mixture that might itself be heterogeneous,
the relation between elements in the isolated and combined state retains something
of an Aristotelian perplexity. The Stoic view, or at least that aspect of it allowing
that several substances are jointly present in a homogenous mixture, may seem
more familiar. Spatial parts, on this view, are distinguished from the more general
notion of a part, and homogeneity is deﬁned as uniformity over the spatial parts,
allowing distinct substances to be distinct proper parts occupying the same place.
These ancient theories of substance and mixture are discussed in more detail in
the next chapter. But the formulation of distributive and cumulative conditions by
restricting reference to parts to spatial part is conveniently developed in this chapter.
Spatial parts of a quantity are not merely parts occupying a part of the region
occupied by that quantity. Once cooccupancy is allowed, there is the possibility
that there are several distinct parts of the original quantity each occupying a given
subregion. It will be possible to talk about parts of spatial parts which are not
necessarily spatial parts. But spatial parts are speciﬁcally understood to be those
exhausting the matter in a subregion of that region occupied by the whole quantity.
To express this, a predicate, Exh.; t/, to the effect that  exhausts all the matter in
the region it occupies at t and more brieﬂy read “ is exhaustive at t”, is introduced
in accordance with
Exh.; t/   D † .Occ.; t/ D Occ.; t//:
(The occupies relation Occ.; p; t/ is interpreted so that the region, p, occupied by
any quantity, , at a time t is unique, being the sum of all the regions occupied by
 at subintervals of t in accordance with the accumulative interpretation discussed
earlier, Sect. 2.4.) A dyadic predicate '.; t/ is then said to be spatially distributive
iff
'.; t/ ^ t0  t ^ Occ.; t0/  Occ.; t/ ^
Exh.; t/ ^ Exh.; t0/ : '.; t0/:
This cannot be directly compared with the unrestricted distributivity condition. But
under the following assumption of conformity between space, time and matter:
t0  t ^ Exh.; t/ ^ Exh.; t0/ :: Occ.; t0/  Occ.; t/    ;
the spatial distributivity condition simpliﬁes to:
'.; t/ ^ t0  t ^    ^ Exh.; t/ ^ Exh.; t0/ : '.; t0/:
Now it is clear that the antecedent of this condition is stronger than that of the
unrestricted distributivity condition for a dyadic predicate '.; t/ given in the
last section with the additional conjunct Exh.; t/ ^ Exh.; t0/. It is, perhaps, to
be expected that unrestricted distributivity entails but is not entailed by spatial
distributivity. This depends, however, on the uniformity assumption.

4.5
Spatial Parts
85
Spatial parthood between quantities is not simply a matter of parthood between
regions because the occupies relation that ﬁxes the regions occupied by the
quantities brings in the temporal factor. A spatio-temporal parthood relation of 
being a part at a subinterval t0 of a quantity  at an interval of time t, written
.; t0/ v .; t/, is naturally deﬁned by
.; t0/ v .; t/ : t0  t ^ Exh.; t/ ^ Exh.; t0/ ^ Occ.; t0/  Occ.; t/:
By the conformity condition, the right-hand side, and so the ostensively time-
dependent spatio-temporal parthood relation, implies 
 . But this is an
implication and not an equivalence, so the time dependence has not dropped out
of account. With this relation, the spatial distributivity condition can be more
compactly expressed as
'.; t/ ^ .; t0/ v .; t/ : '.; t0/:
In order to compare a corresponding spatial cumulative condition with an
analogous restriction to spatial parts, the unrestricted cumulative condition for a
dyadic predicate '.; t/ is written out explicitly without the restricted quantiﬁers:
80 8t0 .0   ^ t0  t :
900 9t00 .00  0 ^ t00  t0 ^ '.00; t00///  '.; t/:
Introducing restrictions for the purpose of formulating a spatial cumulative condi-
tion analogous to the way the distributive condition was restricted to spatial parts
would take the form
80 8t0 .Occ.0; t0/  Occ.; t/ ^ t0  t ^ Exh.; t/ ^ Exh.0; t0/ :
900 9t00 .Occ.00; t00/  Occ.0; t0/ ^ t00  t0 ^ Exh.00; t00/ ^ '.00; t00///
 '.; t/:
Compared with the unrestricted cumulative condition, additional conditions have
been introduced both in the antecedent’s antecedent and its consequent, and neither
the unrestricted cumulative condition nor its spatial-parts variant is stronger than
the other. Perhaps a more straightforward entailment, as with the distributivity
condition, might have been expected, but this is not to be. With the notion of spatio-
temporal parthood in conjunction with the conformity condition, the restricted
cumulative condition can be somewhat more compactly expressed by
80 8t0 ..0; t0/ v .; t/ 
900 9t00 ..00; t00/ v .0; t0/ ^ '.00; t00///  '.; t/:

86
4
Distributivity and Cumulativity
4.6
Is Cooccupancy Really Possible?
It was suggested that the Stoic view is more in line with modern views of compounds
and solutions than the Aristotelian view. But is the fundamental presupposition
of the Stoic view, that matter can occupy the same place at the same time, really
feasible? Note that what is at issue is the cooccupancy of quantities. Coincidence
was taken to be a criterion of identity for individuals in Sect. 3.4. Philosophers
have certainly taken sides with Aristotle and balked at the idea of cooccupancy,
although without necessarily attending to the distinction between quantities and
individuals. It is claimed, for example, that “impenetrability . . . implicitly deﬁned
by the principle that no two things can be in the same place at the same time . . . is
entailed by the occupancy of space” (Quinton 1964, pp. 342–3). Aristotle evidently
regarded cooccupancy as so self-evidently impossible that reduction to which was
sufﬁcient to conclude a reductio ad adsurdum argument. Arguments backing up this
stance are thin on the ground. Wiggins (1968, p. 94) claims that distinct objects of
the same general kind in the same place cannot be distinguished because “no volume
or area of space can be qualiﬁed simultaneously by distinct predicates in any range
(color, shape, texture and so forth)”. But a gaseous solution such as the air exhibits
the different partial pressures of each component substance. The various component
substance in a mixture may well have different concentrations (mole fractions)
and degrees of ionisation, and thermodynamics ascribes to each substance its own
chemical potential. An unusual case, by contrast, is the simultaneous exhibition of
both a positive and a negative absolute temperature by one and the same lithium
ﬂuoride crystal (Zemansky and Dittman 1981, pp. 505–14).
What does science have to say on the subject? In thermodynamics, the energy
of a multi-component system subject to work in the form of change in volume is
speciﬁed as a function U.S; V; N1; : : : ; Nr/ of the entropy, S, the relative amount
of each component substance, Ni, and the volume, V. Although the amounts of
the several kinds of component substances are speciﬁed, only one term for the
volume, that of the whole system, appears. This looks very much like cooccupancy.
It was certainly the view of Duhem, who studied the matter in detail (Needham
2002, pp. 705–7). Tisza (1977, p. 128) comments that the unusual systems involved
in Ramsey’s discussion of negative absolute temperature comprise a collection
of nuclear spins thermally isolated from the lattice “occupying the same region
of space”. Remarking that “two isolated systems (spin and lattice) occupying the
same region of space is in conﬂict with [a deﬁnition of his theory of macroscopic
thermodynamic equilibrium]”, he acknowledges that “our basic theory is restricted
to a narrower class of systems, in order to yield a larger number of theorems.
However, the procedure is consistent with the use of different deﬁnitions to suit
specialized situations”. And modern textbook writers ﬁnd it natural to speak of
“subsystems which occupy the same region of space” (Bowley and Sánchez 1999,
p. 189) .

4.6
Is Cooccupancy Really Possible?
87
It may seem natural to construe the region occupied by a macroscopic quantity
as the sum of the regions occupied by its microconstituents. But we should be wary
of imposing conceptions appropriate at the macroscopic level on the microlevel,
where matter might well have entirely different kinds of properties. This was clearly
appreciated by Maxwell in his speculations about the microrealm. Although taking
a view of the macroscopic level at odds with that just outlined, he saw no necessity
in applying it at the microlevel: “The doctrines that all matter is extended, and that
no two portions of matter can coincide in the same place, being deductions from
our experiments with bodies sensible to us, have no application to the theory of
molecules” (1867, p. 55). The principles that matter is extended and that quantities
of matter with no parts in common occupy regions with no parts in common
would each seem to imply that such quantities occupy ﬁnite regions. But as already
noted these principles don’t, on the modern view, apply at the microlevel where
there is no clear boundary conﬁning a molecule’s electrons. Envelopes conﬁning
molecules are conveniently drawn so as to enclose regions where electrons have a
95% probability of being localised. As the electrons move about, on one view of the
matter, creating momentary London forces between nearby molecules, simultaneous
overlap is precluded by the Pauli exclusion principle. Suppose, for the sake of
argument, that molecules are considered to be conﬁned by an envelope. Even
if such individual molecules are, for whatever reason, held to be momentarily
impenetrable, they will sweep out regions of space in any interval of time due to their
considerable translational, rotational and (if sufﬁciently warm) vibrational motion.
For any sufﬁciently short time when two particular neighbouring molecules don’t
spatially overlap, it is unlikely that no other neighbouring pairs happen similarly not
to overlap. And for intervals of macroscopic order—say of at least one millionth of
a second—regions swept out will overlap with many other regions similarly swept
out. Accordingly, even if cooccupancy is a problem for localised microparticles
with well-deﬁned boundaries at extremely short times, this doesn’t translate into
a problem for macroscopic times.

Chapter 5
The Ancients’ Ideas of Substance
5.1
Doing Without Atoms
Do the distributive and cumulative conditions or their variants restricted to spatial
parts reﬂect important features of signiﬁcant properties of matter? We will see how
they bear on a major division in the physically signiﬁcant properties of matter
between those describing phase and those describing substance. The importance
of this distinction became evident in the course of the nineteenth century and it
was clearly formulated in the early development of physical chemistry towards
the end of the century in the wake of Willard Gibbs’ groundbreaking work in the
application of thermodynamics to chemistry. Something of the historical origins
of these notions and the reasons for their development are traced in this and
the next chapter, beginning with two important lines of thought that go back to
ancient theories of mixture, namely Aristotle’s and the Stoics’. The bearing of more
modern understanding of atomic and molecular structure on the main threads of this
discussion are taken up in Chap. 9.
The ancients disputed whether matter comprises a single or several substances,
but by Aristotle’s time several different substances were distinguished and the
distinctions of substance were recognised as a major division of kinds of matter.
This raised questions about how to determine whether a given quantity of matter
comprises a single or several substances, and how different instances of a substance
can be recognised as being of the same substance when we come across them on
different occasions. Aristotle’s own contributions to the subject have sometimes
been belittled as more of a hindrance than a help along the road to modern
conceptions of chemical substances, largely because he was averse to atomism.
Because of the importance of atomism in modern chemistry, the thought seems
to be, such antiatomistic theory construction might have something to say about
“common sense, or the untutored opinion of children”, but must surely be irrelevant
to science. As Williams would have it,
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P. Needham, Macroscopic Metaphysics, Synthese Library 390,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4_5
89

90
5
The Ancients’ Ideas of Substance
the modern theory is alien to Aristotle’s thinking on the subject; for in chemical combination
the atoms of the combining substances remain intact and change only in respect of their
relation to each other. (Williams 2000, p. 142)
But this Democratian vision of atoms certainly isn’t the basis of modern chemical
theories of combination, which accords better with Aristotle’s critical stance. As we
will see, he couldn’t understand how there could be unchanging atoms unsusceptible
to the inﬂuence of other matter, and certainly not how combination to form new
substances could be explained in terms of such things. Aristotle’s positive theory
stands more closely to modern macroscopic conceptions of substance than such
ancient ideas of what atoms are do to modern microscopic theories of matter. It is
true that Aristotelian ideas about the concept of substance had to be overcome in
the development of the modern conception of chemical substance. But they played
a role in the empirically signiﬁcant development of chemistry, and were ideas of
which even Lavoisier, as we will see, couldn’t entirely divest himself.
Lavoisier, one of the founding fathers of modern chemistry, also had no time
for atomic speculations, and well-informed scepticism about the value of atomic
speculations continued throughout the nineteenth century (Needham 2004a,b;
Chalmers 2009). Aristotle seems to have been the ﬁrst to make a clear distinction
between elements and compounds capturing something of the modern conception,
evidently anticipating Lavoisier’s notion of an element, and there are echoes of his
quandary about the fate of elements in compounds that linger on in recent thought
(e.g. Paneth 1931), as we will see in Chap. 9.
Duhem (1902), who was in a better position to appreciate the bearing of
Aristotelian ideas on modern conceptions of matter than many contemporary
commentators, distinguished two main lines of thought about the nature of matter,
the atomic and peripatetic traditions. Strangely, there is no mention of the Stoics in
this book, although they do appear later in his writings where the distinctive feature
of their view of mixture, the cooccupancy of the region occupied by a blend by
its component substances, is incorporated into his version of the Peripatetic view of
mixts (Needham 2002). Here, the Aristotelian and Stoic conceptions of mixture will
be distinguished as two traditions which have severe limitations but have contributed
important ideas to the modern conception of substance.
Atomism hasn’t made any essential contribution to science much before the
turn of the twentieth century. Whilst there has been a longstanding tradition of
speculation about the atomic constitution of matter, its contribution to empirical
science has been negligible until the time of Perrin’s investigations of Brownian
motion. Moreover, the best of the traditional arguments against atomism were
concerned with the incoherence of the notion, and these were overcome with
the realisation that a non-classical theory was required to capture the systematic
properties and behaviour of microsystems. The classical conceptions of the atom
are paradoxical and beyond redemption. There is an atomic tradition going back
to antiquity, but unlike the Peripatetic and Stoic traditions, it is completely severed
from the new atomic tradition established in the twentieth century. Chalmers (2009)
offers an account and evaluation of the historical tradition of atomism that is not
pursued here.

5.2
Aristotle’s Conception of Substances as Homogeneous
91
5.2
Aristotle’s Conception of Substances as Homogeneous
After a review of earlier work, the development of Aristotle’s own view in De
Generatione et Corruptione (henceforth DG) proceeds by ﬁrst introducing the
notion of mixture and with that, the general notion of substance, in book I. His
word for what is often translated as “compound”1 describes the result of a mixing
process. But he made no distinction between what, on the basis of the criterion
provided by the law of deﬁnite proportions early in the nineteenth century, came to
be called compounds and solutions. I follow Duhem’s use of the antiquated medieval
term “mixt” as a technical device for referring to the Aristotelian notion without
misleading suggestions for the modern reader.2
Aristotle distinguished elements and mixts, but he doesn’t assume the distinction
from the outset. The concept of an elementary substance is introduced as his
discussion develops and is not presupposed in his notion of a mixt. Elements are
understood on the basis of the requirements laid down for mixt formation, and
deﬁned in terms of characteristics conferring certain powers and distinguished
as element-deﬁning characteristics in virtue of being extreme degrees of certain
determinables, limiting the number of elements to four. It is a straightforward
consequence of the discussion up to this point that no part of a mixture exhibits
element-deﬁning characteristics, and thus that there are no elements in mixtures.
Aristotle insists that they are potentially recoverable from a mixture, but that is a
different matter. It comes as quite a surprise towards the end of book II to see the
elements referred to as simple and to be told that each mixt contains all four. The
exposition here follows the order of presentation of ideas in DG.
His starting point is the observation that there are many substances which are
transformed into other substances as they interact. The general problem Aristotle
addressed ﬁrst was how to determine whether a given quantity of matter comprises
one substance or many. The key to the question, he thought, was homogeneity,
which he formulates in terms of the relation of parthood, the relata of which I
call quantities. Aristotle clearly states that all substances (elements and mixts)
are homogeneous, or as he puts it, homoeomerous—comprise like parts: “if
combination has taken place, the compound must be uniform—any part of such
a compound is the same as the whole, just as any part of water is water” (DG I.10,
328a10f.). This is just homogeneity because Aristotle simply took it to be evident
that parthood is spatial parthood—a point the Stoics were to dispute.
1As it is in the Barnes complete edition of Aristotle’s works, from which all translations are taken
unless otherwise indicated.
2Williams speaks of “the modern distinction between chemical combination and mechanical
mixture” (2000, p. 142). Although Dalton seems to have had some such notion of a mechanical
mixture in mind when contrasting the air as a homogeneous solution with a genuine compound
such as water or cupric oxide, the contrast is too stark. Later in the same century the idea of a purely
mechanical mixture, termed an ideal solution, was characterised as a mixture arising entirely due to
the entropy of mixing. But it is an idealisation, with very few mixtures approaching ideal solution
behaviour.

92
5
The Ancients’ Ideas of Substance
He doesn’t give such a nice crisp statement of the converse claim, that homoge-
neous matter comprises a single substance. But he seems to take it for granted that
what he evidently took to be a quantity of homogeneous matter, e.g. a quantity of
bone, is a single substance, and the different homogeneous parts of a heterogeneous
quantity of matter, e.g. the ﬂesh, blood and bone in an animal body, are different
substances. Thus, when encountering diamond in rock, oil in water and smoke or
clouds in air, in each of these cases the ﬁrst claim tells us that there is more than one
substance and the second that there are two. Even when an oil and water mixture is
shaken and the oil doesn’t form a connected body, the oil droplets naturally coalesce
when they come into contact, and when left would eventually form a single uniform
layer. Proper mixing or mixt formation, then, is a process involving two or more
substances being brought together and resulting in homogeneous matter, which by
his criterion is a single substance—a new substance arising from the reaction of the
initial ingredients, different in kind from either of them.
The idea that heterogeneity marks a distinction of substance also ﬁnds expression
in his introduction of a special kind of “mixing” process to account for changes like
that of water from the liquid to the gas. This kind of mixing is an “overwhelming”
process in which one ingredient is present in such a large excess that it isn’t itself
changed, but completely converts the other ingredient into the same kind as itself.
It is introduced in DG I.10 alongside proper mixing (described below), and is
later applied in DG II.4 (after the notion of an element had been introduced) as
the mechanism for what he regards as the transmutation of elements, when, for
example, water evaporates and becomes what he regarded as the distinct substance,
air. So changes known to modern science as phase changes are treated by Aristotle
as transmutations of substance. Something like the Aristotelian conception of
substances remains in modern chemistry in the use of kind terms like “quartz”,
which describes the substance silicon dioxide in a particular solid phase, or
“diamond”, which describes the substance carbon in a particular solid phase, distinct
from that exhibited by graphite. The term “water” is still often used in this phase-
bound sense, which is deﬁned in the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary as “the
liquid . . . which forms the main constituent of seas, lakes, rivers and rain . . . ”. In
this sense, the content of lakes changes to a different substance, ice, when they
freeze, and it is not true that all H2O is water.
Aristotle broaches the notion of an element in the preliminary discussion of
his predecessors, when he criticises Anaxagoras for taking homogeneity to be a
criterion characterising elements rather than substances in general because this
“misapprehends the meaning of element” and leaves no room for the distinction
between element and mixt:
We begin with the view of Anaxagoras that all the homoeomerous bodies are elements. Any
one who adopts this view misapprehends the meaning of element. Observation shows that
even mixed bodies are often divisible into homoeomerous parts; examples are ﬂesh, bone,
wood, and stone. Since then the composite cannot be an element, not every homoeomerous
body can be an element; only, as we said before, that which is not divisible into bodies
different in form. But even taking ‘element’ as they do, they need not assert an inﬁnity of
elements, since the hypothesis of a ﬁnite number will give identical results. Indeed even

5.3
Two Kinds of Mixing Process
93
two or three such bodies serve the purpose as well, as Empedocles’ attempt shows. ...it
would be better to assume a ﬁnite number of principles. They should, in fact, be as few as
possible, consistently with proving what has to be proved. ...Again, if body is distinguished
from body by the appropriate qualitative difference, and there is a limit to the number of
differences (for the difference lies in qualities apprehended by sense, which are in fact ﬁnite
in number, though this requires proof), then manifestly there is necessarily a limit to the
number of elements. (De Caelo, III.4, 302b12–303a3)
Aristotle wants a distinction between elements and substances resulting from
the combination of elements when they are brought together in a mixt. This
would give point to the notion of elements, which should certainly be ﬁnite in
number and preferably few. Compounds or mixts, as the names suggest, should be
understood as formed from the elements.
The atomists thought that a mixt is just a juxtaposition of the original ingredients,
which whether observable or not would persist with their original properties.
Aristotle thought this made it a mystery how genuinely new substances with new
properties could result from mixing. On his view the original ingredients don’t
persist in a genuine, homogeneous, mixt. Recovery of the original ingredients entails
losing the properties of the mixt.
Aristotle’s requirements impose two conditions on elements: they are the things
of which non-elemental substances must be considered to be ultimately made, and
they are things which have the powers to interact and undergo the changes resulting
in mixts with new properties. These conditions are explicated in different places
in Aristotle’s texts, and both receive formulations which have the appearance of
deﬁnitions. But whatever position is taken on what Aristotle intended as deﬁnitions,
there is a substantial problem that was addressed by Lavoisier, who offered a
deﬁnition of element much like one of the two at issue here and criticised Aristotle
for imposing constraints on the nature of elements by the other condition which
should rather be open to empirical investigation. Although this criticism was
important in the development of science, it isn’t an obstacle to giving an exposition
of Aristotle’s views which highlights the general features that have been important
in the development of the concept of chemical substance.
5.3
Two Kinds of Mixing Process
The conception of the elements presented in the ﬁrst chapters of book II of DG
is developed in response to the requirements imposed by the understanding of
mixing processes and the notion of mixt developed in book I. Quantities of different
substances brought into contact will affect one another in accordance with their
capacities and susceptibilities. The atomists apparently denied this, but Aristotle
couldn’t see how atoms could be coherently described without ascribing to them
properties which would prevent them persisting unchanged:
it is impossible that they [the indivisibles] should not be affected by one another: the slightly
hot indivisible, e.g., will suffer action from one which far exceeds it in heat. Again, if any

94
5
The Ancients’ Ideas of Substance
indivisible is hard, there must also be one which is soft; but the soft derives its very name
from the fact that it suffers a certain action—for soft is that which yields to pressure. (DG
I.8, 326a11–15)
At all events, matter which does enter into mixing processes does so in virtue of
capacities and susceptibilities for interaction with other matter, and for Aristotle
this comes down to the interplay of contraries. Contrary properties correspond to
different degrees over a range of some determinable, and two quantities of matter
bearing contrary properties might be expected to interact with the net result that
some intermediate degree of the same determinable is realised by the entire matter
comprising the mereological sum of the two quantities. If all such contrary pairs of
the two initial quantities are similarly neutralised, perhaps all qualitative differences
between the two are obliterated with the result that the mereological sum of the two
quantities will be a homogeneous quantity in which the original two quantities are
not marked off from one another by any physical discontinuity. Where this happens,
and the result is a homogeneous mixt, we have mixing of the ﬁrst kind.
Mixt formation is not the only possible result of the interplay of contraries
that Aristotle envisages. It requires that the quantities of interacting matter are of
“comparable” amounts, and is contrasted with another kind of mixing process that
occurs when one of the interacting quantities is of an overwhelmingly larger amount
than the other. When mixing of this second kind occurs, the contraries of the larger
quantity so overwhelm those of the other that the result is a mereological sum of the
two quantities all of which bears the contraries initially born by the larger quantity
without any remission of degree. This is the kind of mixing process that Aristotle
later appeals to in chapter 4 of book II of DG to explain what he regards as processes
involving the transmutation of the elements. Although this is central to Aristotle’s
conception of the elements, it has no direct bearing on the issues which are taken up
in the following discussion. It will therefore not be necessary to dwell on the obvious
problems about which measurable magnitude determines the amounts at issue and
how to draw a boundary between “comparable” and “overwhelming” amounts.
The discussion proceeds in book II by considering the interaction of contraries
in more detail and advancing the claim that all the causally effective features of
substances bearing on how they interact are reducible to degrees of the primary
determinables warmth and humidity. This, at any rate, is fairly clearly the conclusion
of the discussion in chapter 2 of book II, although the argument is very sketchy and
leaves it unclear by what criterion all relevant properties are deemed to have been
taken into account. But heaviness and lightness—notions which play a role in other
aspects of Aristotle’s physics—are excluded from these reductionist considerations
since “Things are not called heavy and light because they act upon, or suffer
action from, other things” (DG II.2, 329b22f.). It is also clear that these primary
determinables are taken to be closely associated with phase properties, so that
being wet is associated with being ﬂuid (liquid or gas, in virtue of which a body
adopts the shape of a container) and dry with solid (having a shape of its own).
Having a volume of its own, which distinguishes liquids from gases, calls for some
distinguishing feature other than wetness which they share. Aristotle’s view, then,

5.3
Two Kinds of Mixing Process
95
has it that degrees of warmth and humidity are primary in the sense of not being
reducible to any other determinables, whilst other determinables are reducible to
them. It is not difﬁcult to understand that bodies with different degrees of warmth
should affect one another when brought into contact, the warmer one becoming
cooler whilst the cooler becomes warmer until a uniform state of equilibrium is
reached, and a wetter and a dryer body interact analogously to attain a shared
intermediate degree of humidity.
Aristotle goes beyond the assumption of the existence of mixed substances,
characterised by degrees of the primary determinables, by making the further
assumption that the primary determinables of warmth and humidity are bounded
above and below, i.e. that there are maximal and minimal degrees of these primary
determinables, what he later calls “contrary extremes” (DG II.8, 335a8) of warmth
and humidity. A quantity of matter is said to be cold if it has the minimal degree
of warmth, hot if it has the maximal degree, dry if it has the minimal degree of
humidity and wet if it has the maximal degree. This postulate complements the
postulation of mixts, generated by mixing some other substances, by ensuring that
there are substances from which all mixts can be considered to have been made.
(The existential quantiﬁer here stands outside the scope of the universal quantiﬁer.)
There are no degrees of the primary determinables outside these limits which could
characterise substances which would generate these ingredients from which all
other substances are in fact made upon mixing. Aristotle is then in a position to
introduce elements as substances characterised by extreme degrees of the primary
determinables (what I will call the ﬁrst deﬁnition of “element”). On the assumption
that warmth and humidity are the only primary determinables, and since the extreme
degrees of a given primary determinable are clearly mutually exclusive, it follows
that there are just four elements corresponding to the four compatible combinations
of the extremes. Aristotle deems water to be what is cold and wet, earth to be what
is cold an dry, air to be what is hot and wet and ﬁre to be what is hot and dry (DG
II.3, 330a30–330b5).
It is natural to understand these primary determinables and the corresponding
extremes as distributive, as this term is understood in the general theory of mass
predicates. Thus, if a quantity of matter has one of the features in question, so does
every part of that quantity. Parts of a quantity of different degrees of warmth, for
example, would naturally come to equilibrium at an intermediate degree if the parts
were in contact. A quantity might be disconnected, of course. But if the parts of a
quantity are not of the same degree of warmth, it is natural to say that the quantity
doesn’t have a degree of warmth, just as with the modern notion of temperature,
a body whose parts are not at the same temperature doesn’t have a temperature.
This would accord, in view of the deﬁnitions of each of the elements just given,
with what Aristotle says about a mixt being uniform in the sense that the parts are
like the whole in the passage quoted from DG I.10 at the beginning of Sect. 5.2.
And among the properties uniformly distributed over a mixt will be the determinate
degree of the determinable corresponding to the contraries which attain a common
intermediate degree in the mixt.

96
5
The Ancients’ Ideas of Substance
It follows that there are no elements in mixts. When elements come together
and form a mixt as a result of a mixing process of the ﬁrst kind, the quantities
of matter which are of these element kinds lose the features which characterise
elements. There is an interaction of contraries, and intermediate degrees of the
primary determinables are attained, distinct from any extreme degrees. Since a mixt
is, as Aristotle says, uniform, so that all the parts have the same characteristic
features as the whole, then all the parts have these intermediate degrees of the
primary determinables. There are no parts with the extreme degrees, and thus no
parts which are elements.
5.4
Simplicity, Actuality and Potentiality
Elements are not distinguished from mixts in virtue of all their parts being of the
same kind, i.e. in terms of actual composition. All substances are uniform in this
sense, and mixts are not distinguished as substances containing other substances
which don’t in turn contain any other substances. This would seem to preclude
the notion of an element as a distinctively simple substance, at least on one
contemporary understanding of the notion. But when Aristotle goes on in DG II.3
to agree with “all who make the simple bodies elements” (330b7), he has in effect
given “simple” the sense of “not generated by a process of mixing other substances”.
This is presumably how his speaking of elements as simple later on in DG II.8, with
the claim that “All the compound bodies . . . are composed of all the simple bodies”
(334b31), is to be understood. It gives what might be called the synthetic sense of
simplicity.
Distinct mixts must be characterised by distinct degrees of either warmth or
humidity. If they are all to be conceived as being derived from mixing all four
elements, it might seem natural to consider the differences in characteristic degrees
of either warmth and humidity to derive from different proportions of the elements.
There are occasional references to elemental ratios, but this is problematic. Propor-
tions of elements in compounds have been understood since Lavoisier on the basis
of the concept of mass. But this wasn’t available to Aristotle, whose conception
of proportion must have some other basis. A line of speculation on this issue is
developed in Needham (2009a) but not pursued here.
Aristotle addresses the notion of simplicity differently in De caelo. How the
account he offers in terms of possessing “a principle of movement in their own
nature” (268b28) squares with views offered elsewhere is not clear. But later in De
caelo he presents what, at least on the face of it, seems to be yet another conception
of simplicity, although more clearly related to the considerations central to the DG
discussion and might be called an analytic conception (the second deﬁnition) of
elements.

5.4
Simplicity, Actuality and Potentiality
97
An element, we take it, is a body into which other bodies may be analysed, present in them
potentially or in actuality (which of these is still disputable), and not itself divisible into
bodies different in form. That, or something like it, is what all men in every case mean by
element. (De Caelo III.3, 302a15ff.)
For consistency, the actuality option is clearly excluded by the considerations
at the end of the last section, and the analytic notion of simplicity is a modal
concept, whether or not this is what everyone always means by element. This move
is anticipated in the discussion of mixing in DG I.10, where Aristotle introduces the
distinction between actual and potential, albeit with some ambiguity:
Since, however, some things are potentially while others are actually, the constituents can be
in a sense and yet not-be. The compound may be actually other than the constituents from
which it has resulted; nevertheless each of them may still be potentially what it was before
they were combined, and both of them may survive undestroyed. (DG I.10, 327b23ff.)
Saying that the elements “survive undestroyed” certainly seems to undermine the
potentiality claim, but that suggestion can’t be taken literally. Speaking of separation
of the elements also seems to imply a spatial separation of elements that have been
present all along. In the same vein the word “mixture”, as Aristotle points out at
the beginning of DG I.10, carries a suggestion of actual presence which I have tried
to counter by speaking of the mixing process and the result as a mixt. The Stoics
were not just making a trivial grammatical point when they claimed that separation
is only possible of the elements which are actually present in a mixt. They disputed
Aristotle’s substantial thesis that it is possible to subject a mixt to a separation
process resulting in the isolation of substances of the same kind as those from which
it was originally made by a mixing process. Nevertheless, it is convenient to speak
of separation of the original ingredients where the context makes it clear that it is
Aristotle’s understanding of this as the emergence of new substances that is at issue.
What does survive undestroyed is the matter which bears the different substance
properties at different times in the course of the mixing and separation processes,
and what are preserved are the modal or dispositional properties when in the state of
the mixt. Speaking of quantities of matter as the bearers of these varying properties
in this way accords with the conservation of matter interpretations of Weisheipl
(1963), Bostock (1995) and more recently Cooper (2004). Cooper opposes his
interpretation to that of a certain tradition among commentators going back to
Philoponus who interpret Aristotle’s claim in DG II.8, that “All the compound
bodies . . . are composed of all the simple bodies” (334b31), to imply a “total
interfusion” view according to which “the smallest bit of my ﬂesh is put together
from all the simple bodies” (Cooper 2004, p. 325). Against this, Cooper wants to
allow the possibility that a small bit of ﬂesh “did not derive from any water, but only
from some earth” (p. 325), which he maintains is consistent with the requirement
of total uniformity of mixts (the distributive condition). Cooper emphasises that
a mixt “results from the mutual interaction of ﬁnitely small bits of the separate
ingredients acting on one another” (p. 323), but nevertheless acquires the common
features characteristic of the mixt because “what was earth, say, now comes to have

98
5
The Ancients’ Ideas of Substance
just the same perceptible characteristics as the ﬁre, and/or the air or the water, that
it has been mixed with also come to have” (p. 322).
Cooper seeks to maintain the distinction between the Aristotelian and the Stoic
views which the Philoponus interpretation threatens to run together. I would put
his point as building on the distinction between a property and what it applies to.
The latter I call quantities of matter, which are treated as things bearing different
substance properties (being of different kinds of substance) at different times. This
provides for distinguishing between what is and isn’t preserved when Aristotle says
“The compound may be actually other than the constituents from which it has
resulted; nevertheless each of them may still be potentially what it was before they
were combined, and both of them may survive undestroyed” (DG I.10, 323b25–
27). What is not destroyed are the quantities of original ingredients which came
together to make the mixt, although the original substance kinds cease to apply to
these quantities when forming parts of the mixt. Thus, we can speak with Cooper of
what was earth and is now a mixt and may later again be an elemental kind, namely
a quantity of matter. The quantities of matter themselves are identiﬁable throughout
such transmutations, in accordance with the mereological criterion of identity, and
are not interpenetrable on the Aristotelian view.
What seems to me to be an outstanding difﬁculty with Aristotle’s view is his
claim that “The constituents, therefore, neither persist actually, as body and white
persist; nor are they destroyed (either one of them or both), for their potentiality
is preserved” (DG I.10, 323b29–31). What drives the process of decomposition in
which this potentiality is realised is not so readily understood as the neutralisation
of contraries drives mixing. It is unclear what should induce a particular part to
become, say, water even if that quantity was water before mixing since, if the mixt
is uniform, it is like all the other parts in respect of the relevant features of warmth
and humidity. In virtue of what, then, is the speciﬁc potentiality to become water
preserved? This problem is comparable to the chief difﬁculty facing the Stoic view,
of providing a characterisation of the nature of elements common to the isolated and
blended state (discussed in the next section). Elsewhere, however, Aristotle suggests
that it must be possible to derive the elements from “any and every part of ﬂesh”
(DG II.7, 334a34), so that the original quantities don’t preserve the potentiality to
become the same element, but each part of the mixt has the potentiality to become
any of the elements (under the constraint that decomposition of the entire mixt will
result in quantities of the four elements standing in the same proportion as did the
original ingredients). So speciﬁc quantities of elements don’t preserve a potentiality
to become the same element when in a mixt, just some element.
It does seem reasonable, then, to interpret the Aristotelian view as one based on
an assumption of the indestructibility of matter which is reﬂected in the treatment
of quantities in the mereological interpretation offered here and in Cooper’s use of
expressions like “what was earth . . . now comes to have the same . . .characteristics
as ﬁre”. Lavoisier was able to take advantage of Newton’s conception of mass
as a measure of the amount of matter, which wasn’t available to Aristotle, and
formulate this principle as the law of the conservation of mass. But the underlying
metaphysical principle is the same as Aristotle’s. They differed on the question of

5.5
The Stoic Alternative to Potential Presence
99
the permanence of the elements, which is not part of Aristotle’s scheme. The Stoics’
view was closer to Lavoisier’s. They entertained a conception of the permanence of
the elements involved in the formation of blends in order to explain the possibility
of separation (even if they also allowed for the destruction of elements in fusions).
5.5
The Stoic Alternative to Potential Presence
The elements are not actually present in mixts, according to Aristotle. Mixing
is driven by the powers to affect and susceptibilities to be affected of the initial
ingredients, which change when these powers have run their course and a new
substance is formed. In accordance with the homogeneity requirement, that “if
combination has taken place, the compound must be uniform—any part of such
a compound is the same as the whole, just as any part of water is water” (DG
I.10, 328a10f.), every part of a mixt has the same intermediate degrees of the
qualities characterising the initial ingredients. There are thus no parts with properties
characteristic of the elements, namely the extremes of warmth and humidity, and
elements are nowhere to be found in a mixt. But although not actually present,
Aristotle says that they are potentially present in the sense that they are potentially
recoverable.
As we saw, whereas the neutralisation of the characteristic elemental properties
when brought into contact by the attainment of intermediate degrees of warmth
and humidity is intuitively understandable, it is difﬁcult to understand what, on
Aristotle’s view, drives the generation of elements by decomposition of a mixt.
Perhaps the introduction of the second, overwhelming, kind of mixing was intended
to address this problem. But we might sympathise with the Stoics who sought a
view of mixts which made decomposition into elements more readily intelligible.
The Stoics distinguished two kinds of mixt. One results from a mixing process
that Chrysippus, according to Alexander of Aphrodisias, called “total fusion with
both the substances and their qualities being destroyed together”. This, Alexander
continues, he “says happens with medical drugs in the joint-destruction of the con-
stituents and the production of some other body from them” (216.14).3 Fusions are
homogeneous, like Aristotle’s mixts, but differ from them in being indecomposable.
Blends, on the other hand, are also like Aristotelian mixts in being homogeneous,
but unlike fusions, their original ingredients are separable because they are actually
present in the blend. Stobaeus gives the example of the separation of water from
wine: “That the qualities of blended constituents persist in such blendings is quite
evident from the fact that they are frequently separated from one another artiﬁcially.
If one dips an oiled sponge into the wine which has been blended with water, it will
separate the water from the wine since the water runs up into the sponge” (Long and
Sedley 1987, p. 291).
3References in this form are to Todd (1976), by the number of the ﬁrst line of the paragraph from
which the quotation is taken.

100
5
The Ancients’ Ideas of Substance
The apparent conﬂict between the requirements of homogeneity and actual
presence of the elements in a blend is avoided by rejecting Aristotle’s view that
two quantities of matter cannot occupy the same region of space at the same time.
The Stoics held that spatial uniformity is consistent with the elements composing
a compound occupying the same region as the compound and as one another.
Alexander tells us that Chrysippus held that “blending in the strict sense of the
term” results in “[t]he mutual coextension of some two or even more bodies in their
entirety with one another so that each of them preserves their own substance and its
qualities in such a mixture . . . ; for it is a peculiarity of bodies that have been blended
that they can be separated again from one another, and this only occurs through the
blended bodies preserving their own natures in the mixture” (216.14).
The Stoic view of blends would circumvent the Aristotelian conception of the
potential presence of elements in mixts based on the intuition that separation is only
possible of what is actually present in the mixt. This may sound quite promising, but
it faces the problem of characterising the elements in terms of properties exhibited
in both isolated and combined states, i.e. to describe their “natures” which are
preserved in blends. Aristotle deﬁned the elements by conditions they exhibit in
isolation—conditions which nothing in a mixt can satisfy. But this strategy is clearly
not available on the Stoic view. The Stoics don’t seem to have been able to meet this
challenge.
Alexander doesn’t say what the Stoic view on elements was. Bréhier (1951, Ch.
II, §2) says that Chrysippus subscribed to the common view of the four elements,
intertransmutable as for Aristotle, albeit by a different mechanism (pp. 138–9).
The Stoic view must differ from the Aristotelian view by requiring that features
characterising the elements are exhibited in the blended state—an impossibility on
the Aristotelian view in so far as blends are homogeneous—to account for the
possibility of separation. And this, as Alexander in effect points out, precludes
adopting the Aristotelian deﬁnitions of the elements on the Stoic view. For “how
could anyone say that there is something actually hot in what is cold?” (224.22).
Some ancient sources suggest each element was deﬁned by just one of the four
primary qualities Hot (ﬁre), Cold (air), etc. (Bréhier 1951, p. 136). But this doesn’t
avoid the problem of contraries in the same place. Hahm (1985, pp. 42ff.) suggests
that the elements were characterised by differences in density. But this would mean
that the elemental properties are not preserved in a blend, since a quantity would
occupy a greater volume when part of a blend compared with the isolated state.
Aristotle meets the problem of mixture in so far as he proposes that elements
have properties which explain how they interact (effect one another) and produce
something with different properties by the straightforward (if naive) device of saying
that the resultant matter has degrees of the determinables in question intermediate
between those of the interacting elements. Their not being present in the compound
doesn’t prevent them interacting to generate the compound in this way. But the
process of decomposition of a mixt into elements is not as readily understandable
as Aristotle’s account of mixt formation. And as empirical theories, neither kind
of process seems particularly well founded. But on the general issue of principle,

5.6
Formalisation
101
Aristotle has a coherent conception of elements and their relation to substances
formed from them, whereas the Stoic theory doesn’t seem to have a concept of
element appropriate to it.
5.6
Formalisation
The Aristotelian theory lends itself to a formalisation within a mereological
framework providing for the introduction of a number of substance properties,
S1; S2; : : : by a procedure described below. These are two-place relations, Si.; t/,
relating a quantity of matter and a time. The time dependence arises because
substances undergo change into other substances via mixing processes. This holds
as much for elementary substances as for mixts because on the Aristotelian theory,
even the elements undergo transmutation into other elements as well as into mixts.
They all satisfy the distributive condition of applying to all the parts of whatever
they apply to:
Si.; t/ ^    ^ t0  t : Si.; t0/:
(5.1)
All substances are characterised in terms of the two transitive and reﬂexive
relations, 
w, of being at least as warm as and 
h, of being at least as humid
as. These relations change from time to time, however, and should therefore be
expressed as three-place, time-dependent relations between two quantities and a
time, 
w .t/ and 
h .t/. Transitivity and reﬂexivity are accordingly understood to
hold for a ﬁxed time, and expressed as follows:
 
w .t/ ^  
w .t/ :  
w .t/:
(5.2)
 
w .t/   
w .t/
./
and similarly for 
h. Given that times are intervals, (5.2) can be extended to the
effect:
 
w .t/ ^  
w .t/ ^ t0  t :  
w .t0/:
(5.2a)
It is natural to assume that these warmth and humidity relations are distributive over
time, and also that they hold between all the parts of any quantities between which
they hold. In this respect they resemble the intensive character of temperature (and
the corresponding relation “at least as warm as”) in equilibrium thermodynamics.
Accordingly, any quantity as warm (humid) as itself is uniform in the sense of
being as warm (humid) as each of its parts, and so homogeneous (because Aristotle
thought phase properties somehow reducible to warmth and humidity). From the
modern point of view, equilibrium conditions don’t hold universally. But Aristotle
assumes that substance properties are distributive, and that being a particular kind

102
5
The Ancients’ Ideas of Substance
of substance corresponds to having particular degrees of warmth and humidity
uniformly. Perhaps material can be in such a condition that its parts are not of
deﬁnite substance kinds. But for simplicity I assume this is not the case on the
Aristotelian view and that the warmth and humidity relations are distributive, i.e.
 
w .t/ ^ 0   ^ 0   ^ t0  t : 0 
w .t0/0;
(5.3)
and similarly for 
h. In that case, the restriction of reﬂexivity can be dropped and
(*) replaced by
 
w .t/:
(5.4)
The relations w and h, of being as warm (humid) as, are equivalence relations
(for ﬁxed time) when deﬁned by
(D1)  w .t/ :  
w .t/ ^  w .t/
(D2)  h .t/ :  
h .t/ ^  h .t/,
where  w .t/ (for “ is at least as cold as ”) is just the converse,  
w .t/, of
“at least as warm as” and similarly h .t/ is the converse of 
h .t/. Aristotle’s view
that particular substances correspond to particular degrees of warmth and humidity
is captured by deﬁning the same substance relation SameSubst as follows:
(D3) SameSubst.; ; t/   E .t/,
where  E .t/, for “ is at equilibrium with  at t”, is deﬁned as  w
.t/ ^  h .t/. From the fact that w and h are distributive equivalence
relations it follows that for ﬁxed t, SameSubst is also a distributive equivalence
relation. Then the SingleSubst relation applies to a quantity of matter, , which
is a single substance throughout some time t, just in case its every part is the same
substance:
(D4) SingleSubst.; t/ : 8 8t0.   ^ t0  t : SameSubst.; ; t0//.
A two-place predicate, S1, can now be introduced to describe this substance, and this
predicate satisﬁes condition (5.1). A quantity which is not the same substance as a
given quantity but is nevertheless itself a single substance is a distinct substance:
(D5) DistSubst.; ; t/ : SameSubst.; ; t/ ^ SingleSubst.; t/ ^
SingleSubst.; t/.
With the aid of some additional principles introduced shortly it will be possible to
show that D5 implies that  and  are separate.
A two-place predicate, S2, can be introduced to describe a substance distinct
from substance S1, a further two-place predicate, S3, can be introduced to describe a
substance distinct from each substance S1 and S2, and so on for as many substances
as can be found, all these predicates satisfying condition (5.1). This procedure leaves
open the determination of characteristic properties, in addition to the fundamental

5.6
Formalisation
103
ones of degree of warmth and humidity, of each of these substances, which can be
assembled in lists amounting to an alternative means of establishing distinctness of
substance when direct mixing is (producing something with degrees of warmth or
humidity different from any of the initial ingredients) inconvenient. It is in this way
that the elements are distinguished from substances in general.
The elements are characterised by having extreme degrees of warmth and
humidity. To express this idea, we ﬁrst have to lay it down that warmth and humidity
are bounded above and below:
9 8 . 
w .t// ^ 9 8 . w .t//;
(5.5)
and similarly for 
h. (As it stands, this holds for all times, t. Modiﬁcations,
including the possibility of accommodating the principle in modal terms, will be
considered shortly.) The extremal property of being wet (W) can now be deﬁned as
being at least as humid as anything:
(D6) W.; t/  8 . 
h .t//,
and similarly, being dry (D) is deﬁned as everything being at least as humid, being
hot (H) as being at least as warm as anything and being cold (C) is deﬁned as
everything being at least as warm:
(D7) D.; t/  8 . 
h .t//,
(D8) H.; t/  8 . 
w .t//,
(D9) C.; t/  8 . 
w .t//.
The elemental substance property Water.; t/ can then be deﬁned as W.; t/ ^
C.; t/, and similarly for Earth.; t/, Air.; t/ and Fire.; t/ in accordance with
Aristotle’s deﬁnitions. A mixt is a non-elemental substance with non-extremal
degrees of warmth and humidity, i.e. a quantity which, at the time in question, is
either strictly warmer than something and strictly colder than something else, or
strictly more humid than something and strictly less humid than something else
(or both).
Further development is possible once variables p; q; r; : : : referring to spatial
regions and the predicates Occ.; p; t/ for “ occupies exactly the region p
throughout t” and Apq for “p abuts q” are brought into the picture. A principle
common to both Aristotelian and Stoic views is that spatial separation implies
separation:
Occ.; p; t/ ^ Occ.; q; t/ ^ p j q :  j :
(5.6)
So if  and  overlap, so do the regions they occupy at any time. The fundamental
Aristotelian principle of the impossibility of cooccupancy can be formulated for
stationary quantities as
Occ.; p; t/ ^ Occ.; q; t/ ^  j  : p j q:
(5.7a)

104
5
The Ancients’ Ideas of Substance
Allowing that  and  might move, sweeping out regions which overlap, a more
restricted principle along the lines of
Occ.; p; t/ ^ Occ.; q; t/ ^  j  :
(5.7b)
9p0  p 9q0  q 9t0  t .Occ.; p0; t0/ ^ Occ.; q0; t0/ ^ p0 j q0/
is required to cover the general case.
The question now is how to express Alexander’s general principle that different
degrees of the same primary determinable of warmth or humidity cannot be
instantiated by matter in the same place. A ﬁrst shot might be
(**) Occ.; p; t/ ^ Occ.; q; t/ ^ . w .t// : p j q,
and similarly for the h relation. But this is equivalent to saying that quantities
occupying overlapping regions have the same degree of warmth, which is too strong.
Even if the parts cooccupying the regions of overlap are as warm as each other, they
might have other parts not as warm as one another. A safer formulation would be:
Occ.; p; t/ ^ 80   8t0  t .0 E .t0// :
(5.8)
8 8q  p 8t0  t .Occ.; q; t0/   E .t0/:
With these postulates, DistSubst.; ; t/ implies  j  as the following argument
sketch shows. By D5, DistSubst.; ; t/ implies SameSubst.; ; t/, which in turn
implies that  and  differ either in warmth or humidity. But since DistSubst.; ; t/
also implies that  and  are each single substances, their warmth and humidity is
uniform, i.e. the same for all of their respective parts. Accordingly, each part of 
differs from each part of  either in warmth or humidity, and by (5.8), occupies
different spatial regions. Therefore,  and  occupy regions that are separate, and
so are themselves separate by (5.6).
With a view to expressing that the result of Aristotelian mixing is the attainment
of uniform degrees of warmth and humidity, recall (Sect. 1.4) that two regions are
connected if they either abut or overlap: Cpq  : Apq _ p ı q. Two quantities, 
and , are then said to be connected throughout t if they occupy connected regions
throughout t:
(D10) Conn.; ; t/  8t0  t 9p 9q .Occ.; p; t0/ ^ Occ.; q; t0/ ^ Cpq/.
Two quantities of matter, which might have had different degrees of warmth or
humidity before t, will in general come to have the same degrees of warmth and
humidity if they remain in contact for a sufﬁciently long time after coming together
at t. The present apparatus, which is not adequate to express this principle, limits us
to some such (unrealistic) condition as quantities in contact are at equilibrium:
Conn.; ; t/ :  w .t/ ^  h .t/:
(5.9)

5.6
Formalisation
105
The common degrees of warmth and humidity attained on contact could be
further speciﬁed to be intermediate between the original degrees. But note that this
latter comparison involves two times, to the general effect that the sum of  and  is
warmer than  at t than it was at t0, and the sum of  and  is colder than  at t than
it was at t0, and similarly for the humidity relation. These relations can be expressed
as  [  
w .t0; t/ ^ t0 < t, and  [  w .t0; t/ ^ t0 < t, where t0 < t stands
for “t0 is earlier than t”. The original three-place warmer than relation (expressed
with a single time variable) can be deﬁned in terms of the new four-place relation
by identifying the two times:
(D11)  w .t/ :  w .t0; t/ ^ t0 D t.
Now that it has been recognised that relational comparison can involve several
times, we can return to the question of how the upper and lower bounds of the as
warm as and as humid as relations, expressed above by (5.5), might be elaborated.
As it stands, (5.5) implies that there is always something at least as warm as anything
and there is always something as least as cold as anything. This allows that different
things exemplify these extremal properties at different times, which is not itself
problematic, but it leaves open the question of some sort of uniform standard over
time.4 This idea can be captured by modifying (5.5) to read
9 9t 8t0 8 . 
w .t0; t// ^ 9 9t 8t0 8 . w .t0; t//;
(5.10a)
to the effect that there is something which is at some time no warmer than (and no
colder than) anything ever is, and similarly for 
h.
It might be thought that the idea of extremal degrees of the primary determinables
is a modal notion—that they are never actually realised, but are only possibilities
(capturing, perhaps, the claim expressed by some commentators that the Aristotelian
elements are ideal notions, never in fact actually exempliﬁed by any matter). The
expression of this idea presents a problem, however. This idea is not captured by
merely weakening (5.10a) to
Þ 9 9t 8t0 8 . 
w .t0; t// ^ Þ 9 9t 8t0 8 . w .t0; t//:
(5.10b)
What we want to say is that there might be something which is at some time as
warm as anything ever actually is (or could be). But what (5.10b) in fact says is
that it is possible that there is something which is at some time as warm as anything
might ever be (as distinct from “as anything ever actually is”). This allows that there
isn’t actually any upper bound on the as warm as relation, just that there might be.
The problem might be approached by indexing occurrences of variables predicated
4In modern science, a calibration point on the absolute temperature scale is ﬁxed by reference
to a reproducible state of water, when gas, liquid and solid are jointly exhibited by a quantity of
the substance at its so called triple point. According to thermodynamics, this occurs at a deﬁnite
temperature and pressure.

106
5
The Ancients’ Ideas of Substance
by the “as warm as” predicate, say by attaching superscripts to the variables thus:
1 w .t; t0/2 and expressing the intended thought by
Þ1 9 9t 8t0 8 2 .1 
w .t0; t/2/ ^
Þ1 9 9t 8t0 8 2 .1 w .t0; t/2/;
(5.10c)
where i is an expression of actuality governing the ith position within its scope.
Alternatively, a stronger statement can be made by replacing 2 in (5.10c) with an
expression of necessity, i, deﬁned as  Þi . These expressions of modality are
not the usual operators, but predicate modiﬁers which cannot be iterated. It seems
that what is at issue here is what were called modal comparisons at the end of
Sect. 3.7, but which cannot be captured by resorting to rigid mereological relations
as was done there. The idea is pursued in Chap. 9.
The Stoics’ view was closer to Lavoisier’s. They entertained a conception of the
permanence of the elements involved in the formation of blends in order to explain
the possibility of separation (even if they also allowed for the destruction of elements
in fusions). The basic premise of the Stoic view is the possibility of cooccupancy,
deﬁnable as
(D12) Coocc.; ; t/  9p .Occ.; p; t/ ^ Occ.; p; t//.
This relation holds trivially where  D , but the contention is that it can hold for
distinct, indeed separate,  and . This could be used to deﬁne a blend along the
lines of
(D13) Blend.; ; t/  . j  ^ Coocc.; ; t/ ^ DistSubst.; ; t//.
if there were an account available (implying  j ) of the relation DistSubst.; ; t/
of  and  being distinct substances throughout t on the Stoic view. As we have seen,
however, it is unclear by what criterion this latter relationship is established on the
Stoic view. Heterogeneity was Aristotle’s criterion, but that clearly won’t do here
where it is envisaged that a blend is homogeneous. The elements cannot be deﬁned
as Aristotle deﬁned them in terms of contrary extremes of warmth and humidity if it
is possible for them to cooccupy a given region in view of Alexander’s principle
that contrary features cannot be exhibited in the same place at the same time.
The central idea of the Stoic view is saved in modern chemistry by following the
course provided for by thermodynamics: abandoning the Aristotelian homogeneity
criterion of sameness of substance and adopting alternative criteria of a quantity’s
comprising a single substance, which are discussed in the next chapter.
5.7
Potential Parts and Potential Qualities
It might be said that the present treatment embodies a doctrine of actual parts which
is at odds with a fundamental tenet of Aristotle’s thought, namely the doctrine
of potential parts. In Holden’s words, “it is, in fact, a particular application of

5.7
Potential Parts and Potential Qualities
107
his famous view that the parts of continua are posterior to the whole and require
some positive operation to actualize” (Holden 2004, p. 95). A viable account of
such a doctrine would pose a challenge not only to the present interpretation of
Aristotelian views and their rival Stoic conceptions, but to the way mereological
ideas are developed throughout this book.
A question immediately arises of what is meant by “operation”. Is it an operation
in the mathematical sense in which the term is used here, or a process of removing
parts? Ambiguities are compounded when Holden describes “the doctrine of
potential parts” as the theory
according to which the parts of bodies are merely possible or potential existents until
they are generated by division. They represent ways in which the whole could be broken
down, but do not exist other than as aspects of the whole until a positive act of division
actualizes them as so many independent entities. Here the whole is a metaphysically simple
(noncomposite) structure best described with mass terms: prior to division, it is not so many
distinct things, but rather just so much metaphysically undifferentiated material (Holden
2004, pp. 79–80).
Clearly, additional concepts over and above strictly mereological and modal notions
are involved here. The central idea of division would seem to be that of the process
of removing a part from what remains of a body. An advocate of the potential parts
doctrine might reject an analysis of removing a part of a body in terms of such
notions as occupying, abutment and being distant from along the lines suggested
in Sect. 2.3 above. But determining whether there is any genuine disagreement
between the positive aspects of the doctrine of potential parts (as opposed to the
blatant denial of actual parts) and the understanding of the mereology of bodies
advocated here would clearly require an account of the associated notions.
The potential parts doctrine immediately faces the intuitive difﬁculty that it is
strange to talk of parts after their removal. If a piece of matter is not part of
another before being broken off, it is distinctly odd to say that it has become a
part afterwards. A piece that is broken off is not something created by removal,
but something already there which was susceptible to detachment. What would
the removed pieces be parts of? If the whole is the scattered body resulting from
division, why should the removed part be thought to be created by the division rather
than the division being thought of merely as putting the parts at a spatial distance
from one another? Why, in other words, should the scattered object be thought to
be different, mereologically speaking, from the initially connected body? A similar
issue arises with the suggestion that prior to division, the whole is “best described
with mass terms . . . [as] metaphysically undifferentiated material”. Haven’t we
seen that Aristotle himself described undifferentiated material in DG I.10 in terms
of a distributive condition, as being like a compound “any part of [which] . . . is
the same as the whole, just as any part of water is water”? The proponent of the
potential parts doctrine cannot rest content with merely denying the actual existence
of parts, without which there would be no distributive condition giving a nontrivial
account of what it is for matter to be “undifferentiated” (whether metaphysically so,
whatever that means, or not). We are owed an account of what is “best described

108
5
The Ancients’ Ideas of Substance
with mass terms . . . [as] metaphysically undifferentiated material” if it doesn’t have
a mereological structure of parts.
The potential parts doctrine has been resisted by posing a challenge to articulate
a viable alternative rather than claiming to establish the actual parts doctrine on the
basis of additional or “deeper” premises. In his review of the classical enlightenment
arguments purporting to demonstrate the actual parts doctrine, Holden (2004, pp.
103–18) shows that they are all petitios, which wouldn’t convert the advocate of the
potential parts doctrine because the crucial assumption is exactly what they deny.
No claim is made here to demonstrate the mereological principles appealed to at
various places in the book on the basis of “deeper” premises. But the question arises
of whether what proponents of the potential parts doctrine seek to deny by denying
the actual parts doctrine is what is asserted here. One of the arguments Holden
examines, forcefully pressed by Pierre Bayle (1647–1706), seeks to demonstrate the
existence of parts on the basis of the principle that nothing can have incompatible
qualities at the same time. Holden maintains this involves an equivocation, sliding
from a sense of objects as subjects (which cannot sustain incompatible predicates),
to which the premise applies, to a conclusion about objects “in the sense of
independent beings” (p. 113). The “more felicitous version” of the principle about
incompatibility, from which Bayle’s version is ultimately derived, is found in Plato’s
Republic, and runs “the same thing will not be willing to do or undergo opposites
in the same part of itself, in relation to the same thing, at the same time” (Holden
2004, p. 114; his emphasis). In this form, the principle only rules out
the possibility that ‘one thing’ could have incompatible qualities at the same time, in the
same respect, and in the same part of itself. And this principle is clearly preferable to Bayle’s
... since it does not assume that if one thing supports incompatible qualities in different
parts, then those parts are necessarily ontologically independent of one another (loc. cit.)
If this is what the actual parts doctrine is supposed to involve, then it goes beyond
anything claimed here. What is claimed here is that macroscopic bodies have a
mereological structure of parts in just the sense that is expressed in the principle
of Plato just quoted. Like Aristotle’s notion of undifferentiated material, Plato’s
principle makes explicit reference to the parts of a body. Mereological structure
is not understood here to saddle its existential claims about the existence of parts
with conditions about not requiring anything else in order to exist. In the sense of
necessity of interest here, we have seen that quantities satisfy the Barcan principle
and its converse. There is no possibility of quantities, and so their parts, possibly
existing if they don’t or possibly not existing if they do. If the doctrine of actual
parts requires the parts to satisfy some such principle as continuing to exist when
other parts might, in some sense, not, then the existential claims of mereological
structure appealed to here do not involve the doctrine of actual parts. Perhaps it
might be better simply to speak of mereology and avoid reference to the doctrine
of actual parts. At all events, it is beginning to look as though not even the negative
thesis of the potential parts doctrine denies the mereological structure of bodies as
understood here, and doesn’t form the basis of a genuine alternative to that view.

5.7
Potential Parts and Potential Qualities
109
Holden (2004, pp. 118–27) goes on to discuss arguments purporting to demon-
strate the potential parts doctrine and concludes that these are equally petitios,
begging the question against the proponent of the actual parts doctrine. The most
revealing of these arguments claims that according to the ordinary understanding
of the notion, division creates several things from one, actualising parts rather
than merely unveiling pre-existing parts, and the proponent of the actual parts
doctrine misunderstands the concept of divisibility. There is, of course, something
in this point, even if it doesn’t make the case for the potential parts doctrine. It
has been repeatedly emphasised here that it is a mistake to read too much into
mereological concepts, and richer notions should be adequately developed on the
basis of additional vocabulary and associated principles. Division is a case in point.
In a particular context, it may be clear that a weaker notion abstracted from ordinary
usage is at issue (as, for example, when axiom MT10 was described in Sect. 1.3 as
expressing the inﬁnite divisibility of time). We might well expect that the actual
parts theorist should be understood in this way when speaking of the divisibility of
space and time. But there is no getting away from the fact that the potential parts
theorist is correct to point out that the ordinary notion of division is a richer notion
that has application when speaking of material objects, and the mereologist should
be aware that describing matter as inﬁnitely divisible is ambiguous. This is not to
grant the substantial claim of the doctrine of potential parts since the argument faces
the corresponding conceptual difﬁculty noted above that it is strange to talk of parts
after their removal and division can in any case be explicated as the removal of a
part to a distant region on the basis of the standard mereological understanding of
parts. There is no implication that the removed part is thereby created, although the
creation of a new individual might be involved.
Can Aristotle’s notion of the merely potential presence of elements in a mixt be
dealt with analogously without calling on the doctrine of potential parts? Taking an
anachronistic example involving just two elements, consider how water might be
understood as a compound in Aristotelian fashion as derived from the combination
of the elements hydrogen and oxygen. A ﬁrst shot at expressing the idea that a
quantity of water is potentially hydrogen and oxygen might run:
Water.; t/  Þ 9 9t0 .   ^ H.; t0/ ^ O.  ; t0//;
(5.11)
where H and O stand for hydrogen and oxygen, respectively. But in view of the
Barcan formula and mereological essentialism, this is equivalent to
Water.; t/  9 9t0 .   ^ Þ .H.; t0/ ^ O.  ; t0///;
(5.12)
to the effect that there is a deﬁnite part of the water, , that is possibly hydrogen and
the remainder is possibly oxygen. Although this may well be a plausible rendering of
the Stoic interpretation of water considered (anachronistically) as a blend and even
the modern view, it may seem at odds with the Aristotelian idea of homogeneity.
Why, on that view, should there be any particular part which is possibly hydrogen?
Why, in other words, should there be a particular mereological partition into what is

110
5
The Ancients’ Ideas of Substance
possibly hydrogen and oxygen? There would be no features in a homogeneous mixt
distinguishing one proper part as possibly hydrogen and the remainder as possibly
oxygen. Aristotle seems to have had some such thought in mind when he argued
against the idea of a compound held by those who “conceive it as composition—just
as a wall comes-to-be out of bricks and stones; and this mixture will be composed
of the elements, these being preserved in it unaltered but with their small particles
juxtaposed each to each”. He continues
That will be the manner, presumably, in which ﬂesh and every other compound results from
the elements. Consequently, it follows that Fire and Water do not come-to-be out of any and
every part of ﬂesh. For instance, although a sphere might come-to-be out of this part of a
lump of wax and a pyramid out of some other part, it was nevertheless possible for either
ﬁgure to have come-to-be out of either part indifferently: that is the manner of coming-to-be
when both come-to-be out of any and every part of ﬂesh. (DG II.7, 334a29ff.)
Just as a sphere and a pyramid can be obtained from any way of dividing a lump
of wax into two parts of given relative size, so it must be possible to derive the
elements from “any and every part of ﬂesh”. The Aristotelian conception of the
potential presence of elements in compounds is one in which a given division into
elements is possible, but doesn’t exhaust the possibilities.
The idea of potential parts is not the only idea that stands opposed to the idea
that deﬁnite parts are possibly this or that. There is also the idea that any part (of a
certain kind) might ﬁt the bill. The force of “any” is usually captured by a universal
quantiﬁer outside the scope of an appropriate operator. (“Any perception could be
deceptive” is true iff every perception is such that it is possible that it is deceptive,
in contrast to “every perception could be deceptive”, which is true iff it is possible
that every perception is such that it is deceptive.) But perhaps not literally any two-
part partition into possible hydrogen and oxygen is possible. Immediately preceding
the passage from DG I.10 quoted above where Aristotle says that a compound
must be uniform, he also requires that “the part exhibit the same ratio between its
constituents as the whole” (328a8–9). So a given partition is possible in which the
elements exhibit a certain ratio, and any other division preserving this ratio of the
elements is equally possible:
Water.; t/  9 9t0 .   ^ Þ .H.; t0/ ^ O.  ; t0// ^
(5.13)
8 .   ^ SameRatio.;   ; ;   / :
Þ .H.; t0/ ^ O.  ; t0///:
“SameRatio.; ; ; /” here abbreviates the relation of the ratio of the amount of
matter  to that of  being the same as that of  to . Note that mereological
essentialism for quantities allows the “same substance” relation to express a rigid
comparison between quantities which would not be possible otherwise. As for the
criterion of sameness of size, the interpretation of Aristotle’s few and unspeciﬁc
references to material proportions is something of a mystery, bearing in mind that
he had no notion of mass on the basis of which the law of constant proportions was
formulated at the beginning of the nineteenth century. But without some restriction

5.7
Potential Parts and Potential Qualities
111
on the universal quantiﬁer akin to that expressed by the “same ratio” clause here,
the Aristotelian view of potential presence would be distinctly less attractive.
The Stoic view would modally qualify (5.12) in a different way, asserting that
water is partly possibly hydrogen and partly possibly oxygen with a necessarily
unique partition:
Water.; t/  9 9t0 .   ^ Þ .H.; t0/ ^ O.  ; t0// ^
(5.14)
 8 .   ^ Þ .H.; t0/ ^ O.  ; t0// :  D //
where again, mereological essentialism plays a role in ensuring the rigid identity. In
theory, the Stoic view takes the possible hydrogen in water to be the same elemental
substance as hydrogen actually occurring in water, and similarly for the oxygen,
which might suggest simplifying (5.14) to
Water.; t/  9 9t0 .   ^ H.; t0/ ^ O.  ; t0/ ^
(5.15)
 8 .   ^ H.; t0/ ^ O.  ; t0/ :  D //:
But it remains, as we saw, a mystery how elements can be generally characterised on
the Stoic view as the same substance when combined as they are in the isolated state.
(5.14) allows for a more cautious reading in which the elements are characterised
by features exhibited in isolation, as Aristotle understood the characterisation of
elements.

Chapter 6
The Nature of Matter
6.1
The Scope of Metaphysics in the Enlightenment
Aprioristic metaphysical thinking continued and continues to temper how philoso-
phers think about the nature of matter after recognition of the contributions of
empirical study in the Enlightenment. This is well illustrated by what Holden calls
the argument from composition, which he discusses at length (Holden 2004, Ch. 4).
The argument, purporting to show that matter comprises a ground ﬂoor of ultimate
indivisible parts or atoms, was widely endorsed in the early modern period by
rationalist and empiricist schools alike. It runs as follows
Given the actual parts analysis of matter, material bodies are essentially composite or
compound structures. We then add the claim that such complex, composite entities are
ontologically derivative, depending for their existence on the prior existence of their parts.
And if the parts are themselves also composite, then they in turn depend for their existence
on the prior existence of their parts. But (according to the current argument) if the whole
original is to exist at all, this ontological regress cannot go on forever with no ground
ﬂoor. Given that the original composite whole exists, there must be an atomic base of
noncomposite ﬁrst parts whose own existence is not so derivative. (Holden 2004, pp. 170–1)
It is the pre-critical Kant’s version of this argument that Holden ﬁnds the clearest
and most telling. Kant’s thesis, which he takes to be self-evident, is that a body is
just a collection of distinct parts standing in a relation of composition which can be
considered to be withdrawn or cancelled without detriment to the existence of the
parts standing in that relation, leaving us with simple, uncompounded, bodies. “So
bodies must ultimately be concatenations of these ‘absolutely simple fundamental
parts’: metaphysical atoms” (Holden 2004, p. 174).
Holden discusses and dismisses several traditional objections to Kant’s argument,
which charge that it is a petitio, insisting that most of them evaporate once it is
realised that the central tenet is the contention that the instantiation of a relation
depends on the existence of the relata. This is why he could give the sense of
the composition relation by describing it as concatenation. The physical import of
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P. Needham, Macroscopic Metaphysics, Synthese Library 390,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4_6
113

114
6
The Nature of Matter
the composition relation holding the body together is irrelevant. All that matters
is that it is a contingent relation, which Kant can envisage as not holding. Holden
concedes that there is some force to the idea; “it is unsettling to think of this sort
of ontological dependence running on forever with no ultimate relata, relata that do
not themselves depend on further lower-level relations obtaining” (p. 184). But he
grants that rejecting it “is a logically respectable position, although it will induce an
unsettling metaphysical vertigo in many” (p. 205).
Another venerable tradition in philosophy has shown more interest in the nature
of the relation holding matter together. Freudenthal (1995), for example, sees the
quest for understanding the cohesion of matter to have been the fundamental
question pursued in ancient theories of matter, and this seems to have been the more
fruitful line of thought. Aristotle dismissed atomism because he took unchanging
ultimate particles as conceived by the atomists to be incapable of interacting and
we can certainly agree with this view without incurring metaphysical vertigo.
A proponent of the inﬁnite divisibility of matter (in the mereological sense, not
raising questions of removing parts) might adopt this attitude, as might the agnostic
who allows that further evidence could turn the scales either way. Attempting to
circumvent considerations about the actual nature of atoms and introduce them by
purely abstract, a priori reasoning raises questions about how such things could
be incorporated into a workable physical theory dealing with the properties of
matter. Like purely mathematical arguments, principles for which a priori argument
provides the only motivation are not informative about the physical nature of matter.
The Kant-Boscovich force-shell model of indivisible atoms as unextended points at
the centre of a force ﬁeld satisﬁes the principle. But it is not itself free from the
metaphysical problems of the sort it was primarily devised to address, and although
it might have been suggestive, it didn’t itself amount to the basis of a viable physical
theory of matter. The subsequent success of ﬁeld theories was not connected with
an atomic conception of matter.
Whilst philosophers debated the metaphysical status of atoms, others despaired
of making any headway in understanding the nature of matter by entering into such
considerations:
if, by the term elements, we mean to express those simple and indivisible atoms of which
matter is composed, it is extremely probable we know nothing at all about them; but if we
apply the term elements, or principles of bodies, to express our idea of the last point which
analysis is capable of reaching, we must admit, as elements, all the substances into which
we are capable, by any means, to reduce bodies by decomposition. (Lavoisier 1965, p. xxiv)
By “decomposition” Lavoisier didn’t mean a purely mental process of envisaging a
division into simpler substances, but the actual performance of a physical process.
Moreover, it was a search for elemental kinds of substance, not atomic individuals.
Theorising on the basis of empirically sound reasoning seems to have furnished
greater insight into the nature of macroscopic physical ontology of material bodies
and processes than resorting to speculative metaphysical principles. Theorising
of any kind involves conceptual structure with distinctive features, but these are
revisable rather than ﬁxed once and for all by a priori constraints, and leave

6.2
Phase-Bound Substances
115
questions open where the weight of evidence is inadequate or reason inconclusive.
The development of a general view of a macroscopic physical ontology is pursued
here in this spirit, guided more by general concepts and distinctions motivated by
empirical rather than a priori considerations.
6.2
Phase-Bound Substances
Modern physics got off the ground in the seventeenth century with Newtonian
mechanics, where matter is characterised with the universal property of mass.
Aristotelian physics related the way different bodies move to their different chemical
constitution, but Galileo and then Newton removed the distinctions of substance
from the mechanics of motion. There was therefore no role for chemistry, concerned
as it was with the distinction of kinds of substance, in the physics of the scientiﬁc
revolution. But after Lavoisier incorporated the notion of mass at the end of the
eighteenth century, chemistry ﬁnally became properly integrated with physics in the
second half of the nineteenth century with the development of thermodynamics,
which recognises a division of the mass into amounts of different substances.
By contrast with the Aristotelian conception of substance, thermodynamics treats
substance and phase independently, and it is interesting to note some points in the
development of the notion of chemical substance after the advent of Newtonian
mechanics leading up to the establishment of this distinction.
In 1761 Joseph Black discovered that heating a body doesn’t always raise its
temperature. In particular, he noticed that heating ice at 0 ıC converts it to liquid at
the same temperature. Similarly, there is a latent heat of vaporisation which must
be supplied for the conversion of the liquid into steam at the boiling point without
raising the temperature. Together with Black’s earlier account of speciﬁc heat, this
showed that heat must be distinguished from the state of warmth of a body and even
from the changes in that state. But it was some time before the modern interpretation
of Black’s ground-breaking discovery was fully developed. Theories of heat as a
substance in its own right were common at the time and Black was familiar with
them, although it was Lavoisier who was to coin the term “caloric” for the heat
substance. Black seems to have thought that what we would call the phase changes
when ice melts and liquid water boils involve a combination of one substance with
the heat substance. Thus, describing an experiment in which water is boiled, he says
The water that remained could not be hotter than the boiling-point, nor could the vessel be
hotter, otherwise it would have heated the water, and converted it into vapour. The heat,
therefore, did not escape along with the vapour [on opening a valve], but in it, probably
united to every particle, as one of the ingredients of its vaporous constitution. And as ice,
united with a certain quantity of heat, is water, so water, united with another quantity of
heat, is steam or vapour. (Quoted by McKie and Heathcote 1935, pp. 23–4)
Black evidently thought that supplying latent heat involved chemical reactions
which, using Lavoisier’s term “caloric”, might be represented by

116
6
The Nature of Matter
ice C caloric ! water;
water C caloric ! steam:
Only free caloric, uncombined with any other substance, leads to the increase in
a body’s degree of warmth as it accumulates. This shows that Black was still in
the grip of the Aristotelian conception of substance as necessarily connected with a
certain phase: to change the phase is to change the substance.
Lavoisier took over this understanding of substances lock, stock and barrel, his
reprimanding Aristotle’s doctrine of the four elements notwithstanding (Lavoisier
1965, p. xxiii). He even retains one of the Aristotelian elements, listing caloric
as the “element of heat or ﬁre” (Lavoisier 1965, p. 175). This element “becomes
ﬁxed in bodies . . . [and] acts upon them with a repulsive force, from which, or
from its accumulation in bodies to a greater or lesser degree, the transformation
of solids into ﬂuids, and of ﬂuids to aeriform elasticity, is entirely owing” (1965,
p. 183). He goes on to deﬁne gas as “this aeriform state of bodies produced by
a sufﬁcient accumulation of caloric”. Under the list of binary compounds formed
with hydrogen, caloric is said to yield hydrogen gas (1965, p. 198), and he says that
hydrogen is the base of hydrogen gas. Similarly, under the list of binary compounds
formed with oxygen, caloric yields oxygen gas (1965, p. 190), and with phosphorus
yields phosphorus gas (1965, p. 204).
In other respects, Lavoisier’s list of elements departs radically from the Aris-
totelian four. Lavoisier criticised his predecessors for adhering to Aristotelian
doctrine rather than leaving the number and nature of elements open to empirical
investigation.
the fondness for reducing all the bodies in nature to three or four elements, proceeds from a
prejudice which has descended to us from the Greek Philosophers. ... It is very remarkable,
that, notwithstanding of the number of philosophical chemists who have supported the
doctrine of the four elements, there is not one who has not been led by the evidence of
the facts to admit a greater number of elements into their theory (1965, pp. xxii–iii).
The criterion of an element as the last result of analysis (to which Aristotle also
subscribed; see the passage from De Caelo III.3, 302a15ff. quoted in Sect. 5.4)
leaves it open to empirical analysis to determine which substances are elements,
and precludes the determination of the number and nature the elements by any
independent route. Nevertheless, ﬁre, in the form of caloric, remained an element
in Lavoisier’s scheme, but air is analysed into components. During the calcination
of mercury, “air is decomposed, and the base of its respirable part is ﬁxed and
combined with the mercury . . . But . . . [a]s the calcination lasts during several days,
the disengagement of caloric and light . . . [is] not . . . perceptible” (1965, p. 38). The
base of the respirable part is called oxygen, that of the remainder azote or nitrogen
(1965, pp. 51–3). Thus, oxygen is the base of oxygen gas, and is what combines
with caloric to form the compound which is the gas.
Water was famously demonstrated to be a compound of hydrogen and oxygen
by an experiment of Cavendish’s, although ﬁrst published by Watt, in which it is
produced by combining hydrogen with oxygen by combustion. Interpretations of

6.2
Phase-Bound Substances
117
the experiment varied, Cavendish describing it as the burning of inﬂammable air in
dephlogisticated air and concluding that dephlogisticated air was dephlogisticated
water whilst hydrogen was either pure phlogiston or phlogisticated water. Lavoisier
opposed phlogiston theories on the basis of a series of experiments, involving both
analysis and synthesis, designed to justify his interpretation and rule out any others
(1965, pp. 83–96). The last of these is mentioned here, illustrating the crucial
principle involved in this interpretation of the experimental facts:
When 16 ounces of alcohol are burnt in an apparatus properly adapted for collecting all the
water disengaged during the combustion, we obtain from 17 to 18 ounces of water. As no
substance can furnish a product larger than its original bulk, it follows, that something else
has united with the alcohol during its combustion; and I have already shown that this must
be oxygen, or the base of air. Thus alcohol contains hydrogen, which is one of the elements
of water; and the atmospheric air contains oxygen, which is the other element necessary to
the composition of water. (1965, p. 96)
The metaphysical principle of the conservation of matter—that matter can be neither
created nor destroyed in chemical processes—called upon here is at least as old as
Aristotle. What the present passage illustrates is the employment of a criterion of
conservation—the preservation of mass. The total mass of the products must come
from the mass of the reactants, and if this is not to be found in the easily visible
ones, then there must be other, less readily visible reactants. This certainly wasn’t
the operational criterion it is often billed as being. Although the imponderable
caloric doesn’t conﬂict with the criterion, it is certainly not identiﬁed by virtue of
the criterion. Light also ﬁgures in his list of elements, being said “to have a great
afﬁnity with oxygen, . . . and contributes along with caloric to change it into the state
of gas” (1965, p. 185). Like caloric, it too is without weight, but Lavoisier saw no
obstacle in the criterion of decomposition to the introduction of elements which had
a role to play in his scheme.
Not only was the postulation of caloric not justiﬁed by the principle of the
preservation of mass. Lavoisier was also sensitive to a certain critique of the role
of caloric in his theory. The elastic property of caloric, arising from its resistance
to compression by the mutual repulsion of its parts, was supposed to explain the
“aeriform elasticity” of gases, i.e. the tendency to expand and increase in pressure
with temperature. But as he remarks,
It is by no means difﬁcult to perceive that this elasticity depends upon that of caloric, which
seems to be the most eminently elastic body in nature. Nothing is more readily conceived,
than that one body should become elastic by entering into combination with another body
possessed of that quality. We must allow that this is only an explanation of elasticity, by an
assumption of elasticity, and that we thus only remove the difﬁculty one step farther, and that
the nature of elasticity, and the reason for caloric being elastic, remains still unexplained.
(Lavoisier 1965, p. 22)
Duhem (1893a, p. 125) observed that the idea of a force is only delayed by the
introduction of a force-carrying medium. But this lesson hadn’t sunk in a century
or so earlier when Lavoisier’s contemporaries were grappling with the mysteries of
matter.

118
6
The Nature of Matter
6.3
Distinguishing Substance and Phase
According to Lavoisier’s analysis, then, water is a compound of two elements,
oxygen and hydrogen, which are the base of oxygen gas and base of hydrogen
gas, together with a third element, caloric, the amount of which varies between
solid, liquid and gaseous water. None of these elements did he claim to have
isolated. Oxygen gas and hydrogen gas, on the other hand, are not components
of water. This is very close to how the composition of water is understood today.
When combined in a compound, the elemental components cannot be described
as possessing a particular phase property of being solid, liquid or gas. Clearly,
water in the liquid state doesn’t consist of anything which is gaseous. Aristotle
accommodated the point with his doctrine that the elements are potentially but not
actually present in a compound. It is unclear what the Stoic view of the elements
was, but we saw that their view of blends requires that the component elements
don’t retain all the properties they exhibit in isolation, and this would include the
phase properties. Although Black still adhered to the Aristotelian conception of
substances as essentially possessing one speciﬁc phase property, Lavoisier took a
step away from this with his notion of an elemental component as something which
is common to the solid, liquid and gaseous states of the element. But because he
maintained Black’s caloric theory of latent heat, the elements were substances not
occurring in isolation; they are bound at least with more or less caloric in one or
other state of aggregation. A compound of elements, like water, forms a secondary
compound with caloric in the liquid and gaseous states.
Lavoisier understood water to be composed of deﬁnite proportions of hydrogen
and oxygen as a result of his analyses conducted in the 1770s. What was to become
formally named as the law of deﬁnite proportions in the ﬁrst decade of the nineteenth
century, after Proust was generally acknowledged to have won a protracted dispute
with Berthollet, was thus already widely accepted by leading chemists. Perhaps
it was Berthollet’s championing the contrary view, that the strength of chemical
afﬁnity between given elements varies according to circumstances, that forced
chemists to explicitly acknowledge and defend the principle of constant proportions.
At all events, the law was taught as part of chemical theory from the early nineteenth
century, and provided a criterion on the basis of which a deﬁnition of compounds
could be formulated. It decided the issue between Davy, who thought air to be a
compound, and Dalton, who took it to be a homogeneous mixture with variable
composition. It was supposed that whilst the component elements of compounds
were chemically combined, the component substances of homogeneous mixtures
(called solutions) were merely mechanically mixed. In both cases, the properties of
the original components are changed—the compound sodium chloride is neither
a soft grey metal like sodium nor a greenish-yellow gas like chlorine (at room
temperature and pressure), and brine is neither a white solid like sodium chloride nor
a tasteless liquid like water. But the law of constant proportions only gave a criterion
of chemical combination; it provided no explanation of what chemical combination
amounts to.

6.3
Distinguishing Substance and Phase
119
When the law was ﬁrst formulated, the caloric theory of heat still reigned.
But by mid century the basic tenet of the theory, that caloric is conserved in
all processes, was disproved with the realisation, embodied in the ﬁrst law of
thermodynamics, that heat is not preserved but is interconvertible into mechanical
work. Ontologically, the notion of caloric as a substance gave way to the existence of
processes—in particular, heating, which changes the state of warmth of a body—and
the new concept of energy, in terms of which an equivalence between heating and
mechanical working is determined as a measure of the amount of heating in principle
obtainable from a given amount of working. The Black-Lavoisier account of phase
change was no longer tenable and the distinction between, for example, base of
oxygen and oxygen was undermined. But Lavoisier’s insight that a compound like
water can’t be said to be composed of elements associated with particular phases
still held good: water is solid or liquid under conditions that hydrogen and oxygen
are gases. The statement of the law of deﬁnite proportions requires a concept of
substance which is independent of phase, and a substance, be it an element or a
compound, is not in general bound to a particular phase. Phase changes requiring
input of a certain latent heat are changes in one and the same substance from
one phase to another. (Some compound substances are not stable under phase
change; ammonium chloride, for example, decomposes on heating under normal
pressure rather than changing from solid to liquid or gaseous ammonium chloride,
and biologically important substances such as proteins typically decompose before
reaching a melting or boiling point.)
The ﬁrst law of thermodynamics places no restriction on the equivalent intercon-
version of states by heating and working beyond the principle that the amount of
energy, in terms of which each is measured, is conserved. But many states which
are possible as far as the ﬁrst law alone is concerned are precluded by a further
restriction imposed by the second law of thermodynamics, which forces change.
Just as a kettle of hot water cannot remain hot indeﬁnitely in a room at ordinary
temperature and pressure, so chemical substances such as metallic sodium and
water cannot remain as such when in contact. The hot water in the kettle cools
down to room temperature, and the sodium and water undergo a chemical reaction
generating sodium hydroxide and hydrogen. But these processes are not required by
the ﬁrst law. It is the second law, which provides the foundations for the concept
of entropy, that lays down the principle driving these processes. Developments in
thermodynamics culminating in Gibbs’ groundbreaking “On the Equilibrium of
Heterogeneous Substances” (1876–1878) provided a theory of stability which was
the ﬁrst workable general theory of chemical combination and remains a bulwark of
modern chemical theory.
Daltonian atomism promises an understanding of compounds which is more
easily grasped than the macroscopic theory of thermodynamics. But Dalton’s
conception of atoms of the same elemental kind which repelled one another in virtue
of a surrounding atmosphere of caloric became an embarrassment which chemists
soon gave up. Daltonian atomism came to be understood as an abstraction from what
Dalton actually said about the nature of atoms, which its nineteenth century critics
chided for not providing a positive account of what atoms were like which would

120
6
The Nature of Matter
indicate how they could combine to form molecules and crystalline structures.
Not until 1927 was there the remotest suggestion of how atoms can actually
combine. Lewis (1916) had criticised Bohr’s (1913) symmetric atom as offering no
foundation for molecules with atomic bonds oriented in various direction is space,
and suggested that bonding is a matter of electron pair sharing (covalent bonding)
or electron transfer in the formation of ions. But how like-charged electrons could
hold atoms together in chemical combination rather than making them repel one
another (as did Dalton’s atoms in virtue of their atmospheres of caloric) was
not answered before the application of quantum mechanics to the problem by
Heitler and London (1927). Molecules were a nineteenth century mystery. They are
completely impossible entities according to nineteenth-century physics. Whether
the mystery has been ﬁnally laid to rest with the advent of quantum mechanics
is still disputed (see Woolley 1988; Sutcliffe 1993). But it belittles the distinctive
achievement of quantum mechanics to suggest that there was a viable atomic theory
of chemical combination, or even a plausible hint of how atoms could combine,
before 1927.
6.4
Thermodynamics and the Phase Rule
It is remarkable that a theory devised for the purpose of ﬁnding the theoretical
principles on which steam engines operate should have a bearing on substances
and their transformations into other substances, let alone play a central role in
the determination of these concepts. But that is precisely what happened with
the developments in thermodynamics culminating in Gibbs’ work noted above.
Like Aristotle, Gibbs allowed that a quantity of matter might comprise different
homogeneous bodies, formed from different component substances, constituting a
heterogeneous mixture. But whereas Aristotle thought that each homogeneous body
in a heterogeneous mixture comprises a different substance, Gibbs allows that they
may themselves be mixtures composed of some or all of the substances present.
Gibbs therefore needed a basic distinction between substances and the different
homogeneous bodies constituting a heterogeneous mixture. He calls the different
homogenous bodies which “differ in composition or state[,] different phases of
the matter considered” (Gibbs 1948, p. 96). In general, a mixture comprises a
number coexisting phases over which several substances are distributed, and when
at equilibrium it is governed by a general law which has come to be known as Gibbs’
phase rule. This states that
Variance D c  f C 2 
 0;
where c is the number of substances or components in the mixture, f is the number
of phases, and the variance is the number of independently variable intensive
magnitudes characteristic of the state of the whole system.

6.4
Thermodynamics and the Phase Rule
121
To illustrate, a 2-phase system comprising a single substance is, according to this
law, univariant. Accordingly, the state of a system comprising water in the form of
liquid in contact with the vapour enclosed in a container ﬁtted with a piston allowing
change of volume is governed by just one independent variable. So at a given
temperature, the pressure is ﬁxed. Any attempt to vary it (whilst the temperature
is held ﬁxed), for example by reducing the volume by depressing the piston, will
only result in material being transferred from the vapour to the liquid, maintaining
the pressure—as long as two phases remain. Similarly, attempting to reduce the
pressure by withdrawing the piston and increasing the volume will only result in
material being transferred from the liquid to the vapour, again maintaining the
pressure. If the piston continues to be raised, assuming the container is sufﬁciently
large, all the liquid eventually becomes gas, leaving only a single phase and the
system becomes bivariant. Pressure and temperature can then vary independently,
as allowed by the familiar gas law. This behaviour is characteristic of a quantity of
matter comprising a single substance, and the speciﬁc data (the speciﬁc pressure as
a function of temperature whilst there are two phases) is characteristic of the speciﬁc
substance.
The phase rule allows another circumstance for a single-component system
(c = 1), namely that the number of phases, f, is 3. Then the variance is 0, and
heating will not alter the temperature or pressure until the solid disappears and there
are just two phases. This is called a triple point, and for copresent solid, liquid
and gas phases of water at equilibrium, the temperature is 0.01 ıC and the pressure
4.58 mmHg (0.0060373 atm). (The triple point state is used to calibrate the absolute
temperature scale, ﬁxing a temperature above zero Kelvin which is assigned the
value 273.16 K to bring the Kelvin scale into line with the Celsius scale.) This adds
to the general behaviour characteristic of matter comprising a single substance, and
again the speciﬁc data distinguishes the substance water from others.
Several factors bear on the interpretation of the phase rule, which can make its
application not entirely straightforward. Some further insight into the signiﬁcance
of “c” in the Gibbs phase rule can ﬁrst be got by noting how the law is derived. As
the terminology of independent variables in the concept of variance suggests, the
derivation of the phase rule is a matter of how many variables are determined by the
available relationships expressible as equations. Gibbs reasoned that at equilibrium,
the temperature and pressure have the same value at all points of the mixture (hence
the “2”), as does the intensive property of each of the c components called its
chemical potential. This determines the change in amounts of that substance, and
is deﬁned in thermodynamics analogously to the way temperature and pressure
are deﬁned.1 But equality of chemical potential across the phases doesn’t entail
equality of concentration from phase to phase. These cC2 intensive variables cannot
vary independently, however, because of a relation (which came to be called the
1In the so called energy representation, in which the internal energy is a primitive function,
U.S; V; N1; : : : ; Nr/, of the entropy, S, the volume, V, and the amount of the ith substance,
Ni; 1  i  r, the temperature is deﬁned as @U=@S, the pressure is deﬁned as @U=@V and
the chemical potential of the ith substance, i, is deﬁned as @U=@Ni.

122
6
The Nature of Matter
Gibbs-Duhem equation) holding for each of the f phases, providing connections
eliminating f variables. Clearly, there cannot be a negative number of variables
determining the state of a body, and the variance is always non-negative for a body
in a condition that can be sustained at equilibrium.
Another derivation is often given in textbooks (e.g. Denbigh 1981, pp. 184–5)
which doesn’t explicitly call upon the Gibbs-Duhem equation. The starting point
is that specifying the state of a mixture comprising several substances distributed
over a number of phases requires the composition, i.e. the concentration, xi˛, of
each substance i in each phase ˛, to be given in addition to the temperature and
pressure. These concentrations are expressed as proportions (mole fractions or
weight percentages) that each substance contributes to the matter comprising each
phase, so that †ixi˛ D 1 for each phase ˛, whose composition is therefore speciﬁed
by c  1 independent variables. Together with temperature and pressure, then, each
phase is speciﬁed by cC1 variables, given a total of f.cC1/ for the entire system. At
equilibrium, however, a number of equalities hold between the variables. There are
f 1 equalities between the temperature of each phase, and similarly f 1 equalities
between the pressure of each phase. Furthermore, the chemical potential of the ith
substance (itself a function of the temperature, pressure and c  1 independent
concentration variables for the phase) has the same value in each phase, so that
for the c substances there are c.f  1/ equalities i˛ D iˇ D : : : across the f
phases ˛; ˇ; : : : . The total number of independent variables is therefore reduced by
.c C 2/.f  1/ equalities. Now if some of the independent equations connecting a
set of variables are not to be incompatible, their number cannot exceed the number
of these variables. Accordingly,
f.c C 1/ 
 .c C 2/.f  1/;
or
c C 2  f 
 0:
There can therefore be at most two more phases than there are substances. A
single substance can exhibit a maximum of three phases, at its triple point. The
total number of independent variables is the difference between the total number of
variables and the number of equations:
Variance D f.c C 1/  .c C 2/.f  1/ D c C 2  f:
The phase rule as stated presupposes that no further constraints are acting on
the mixture which would further reduce the number of independent variables. But
if there are r reactions taking place between the substances, then at equilibrium
there will be an additional equation (†ii D 0, where i is the stoichiometric
coefﬁcient—either Cai or bi—of the ith substance in the reaction
a1A1 C 	 	 	 C amAm • bmC1BmC1 C 	 	 	 C bnBn

6.4
Thermodynamics and the Phase Rule
123
and i is its chemical potential) for each of the r independent reactions taking place.
These equations reduce the c  f C 2 variables by r, although this is normally put
by saying that it reduces the number of independent substances, c, by r. Moreover,
chemical reactions may take place in such a way as to render true further equations
governing the composition of a phase, yielding additional restrictions. Where there
are s stoichiometric constraints connecting the proportions of products of chemical
reactions in a particular phase or several phases (these conditions may be intraphase
relationships or interphase relationships), the variance = n  f C 2  r  s. The
number of independent substances, c, can be identiﬁed with n  r  s, but although
this number is unique, which they are is usually not, and there are frequently several
ways of selecting c independent substances from all those apparently present.
A good illustration is provided by heating the red oxide of mercury in a
previously emptied closed container (Duhem 1910, pp. 175–6), which dissociates
as follows:
2HgO • 2Hg C O2:
Two phases appear, a solid comprising HgO and a gaseous mixture of oxygen and
mercury vapour. There are three substances, but one equilibrium constraint and the
further constraint that the gas mixture contains equivalent proportions of mercury
and oxygen. So there is one independent substance, which means that the two-phase
system is univariant: at 520 ıC, for example, the pressure is ﬁxed at 4.176 mmHg.
Destroying the equivalent proportions by introducing either a little oxygen or a little
mercury removes a constraint and there are two independent substances, making
the system bivariant. Fixing the temperature no longer sufﬁces to ﬁx the pressure.
Adding sufﬁcient mercury to form a third, liquid, phase, however, returns the system
to univariant behaviour. But now the pressure determined by a temperature of 520 ıC
is 8.440 mmHg.
Another example Duhem discusses is the classic case of the equilibrium
CaCO3 • CaO C CO2
established when calcium carbonate is introduced into a closed and otherwise empty
container and heated. There are three substances and one equilibrium, and so just
two independent substances. The system seemed to comprise two phases, a white
solid and a colourless gas. But this couldn’t be reconciled with its variance, which
was determined to be one (there is a deﬁnite gas pressure for a given temperature).
Compliance with the phase rule led chemists to believe there must be three phases—
the gas phase, and two distinct solid phases, one comprising CaCO3 and the
other CaO. A single solid phase would be an intimately mixed solid solution of
CaCO3 and CaO, but they cannot form such an intimate mixture and there must be
distinct calcium carbonate and calcium oxide phases. Subsequently, new methods of
analysis of the crystal structure were able to show that the calcium oxide is conﬁned
to isolated “islands” within the surrounding calcium carbonate, much as oil forms
droplets in water when a vinaigrette dressing is shaken.

124
6
The Nature of Matter
Duhem (1898) pointed out that this is an example in which the assumption in
the above derivations of the phase rule, that all the substances in the system are
distributed over all the phases, doesn’t hold. The gas phase contains neither calcium
carbonate nor calcium oxide. But as he showed, a rigorous proof of the phase rule
can be given which doesn’t rely on this assumption.
The calcium carbonate system can be contrasted with that formed by mixing
potassium sulphate, ammonium sulphate and insufﬁcient water to dissolve them
completely, which is trivariant. Not only can the temperature and pressure vary
independently, but also the relative mass of one of the three substances. As might be
expected, increasing the mass of one of the salts without changing either temperature
or pressure changes the composition of the solution by increasing the concentration
of the added salt and decreasing the concentration of the other salt. Since there are no
chemical reactions the three substances are independent, and the number of phases,
f, given by 3 D 3f C2, is 2, so that apart from the liquid solution there is only one
solid phase, which, in contrast to the white solid in the previous case, is therefore
a homogeneous solid solution of the two salts. In the case of the calcium carbonate
system, the phase rule gives us that 1 D c  3 C 2, or c D 2. The terminology
might suggest that, since the one solid phase comprises calcium carbonate and
the other calcium oxide, we’ve necessarily used up our quota, leaving the gas
without a substance composing it! But a distinction must be maintained between
substance and phase. The calcium carbonate phase is not the same thing as the
calcium carbonate substance. Further, thermodynamics doesn’t select a speciﬁc pair
from the candidates as the two independent substances. An alternative description,
compatible with the phase rule, is that the two substances are CaO and CO2, and
the remaining substance is a combination of these two. Or again, CaCO3 and CO2
might be chosen, when the CaO must be understood, as Castellan (1964, p. 247)
puts it, as CaCO3 “minus” CO2. This raises questions about what the various phase
and substance predicates apply to, which are pursued in the next chapter.
A further example, studied by Zernike (1951, 1954), involves heating ammo-
nium bicarbonate, NH4HCO3, in an initially otherwise empty container, when a
dissociated vapour phase and a liquid phase appear in addition to solid ammonium
bicarbonate. There is an interphase stoichiometric condition at play in this case,
affecting the composition of several phases. The vapour phase contains ammonia,
carbon dioxide and water, each of which have different solubilities in liquid
ammonium bicarbonate. Consequently, neither the vapour phase (from which the
substances dissolved in the liquid derive) nor the liquid has a composition in
which the proportions are as represented by the formula NH4HCO3. The additional
condition giving the proportions of the products of dissociation in the liquid and gas
phases, which can be readily calculated, is counted as one of the conditions s that
has to be taken into account in applying the phase rule.
Application of the phase rule is not, in general, a straightforward matter. These
considerations suggest that even in apparently straightforward cases, it would be
necessary to ensure that there are no complicating factors lurking behind the
scenes. For example, enantiomorphs, i.e. isomers (different compounds with the
same composition) whose molecules are mirror images of one another, are usually

6.4
Thermodynamics and the Phase Rule
125
counted different substances. But they have the same values for their intensive
properties except for rotatory power (equal in magnitude but opposite in sign),
which may render some of the Gibbs-Duhem equations for different phases in a
system no longer independent and therefore affect the variance (Scott 1977; Wheeler
1980). And apart from theoretical complications of this sort, experimental work
always entails difﬁculties of its own. In this case,
independently variable components are often discovered even in very thoroughly investi-
gated substances, be it for the reason that single phases have been overlooked because of
their small quantity [i.e. size] or of their similarity with others, or that the observed number
of independent variations is too small. (Wald 1896, p. 26)
The dangers of systematic and experimental error are a fact of life for empirical
investigation, and use of the phase rule is not exceptional.
To round off with a couple more examples, at high temperatures, water begins
to dissociate. At around 2000 K (approximately 1700 ıC) it is about 1% dissociated
(Denbigh 1981, p. 153), and the equilibrium
2H2O • 2H2 C O2
is established. This is a gas phase reaction in which the number of substances present
apparently increases from one to three as the temperature rises. At the same time, the
number of constraints on the whole system increases by two (the equilibrium and
the equivalent proportions of H2 and O2). The system is bivariant, just like water
in a single phase described above, and the number of substances in the sense of the
phase rule remains one. A similar example is the dissociation of ammonia, where
the following equilibrium is established at high temperatures
2NH3 • N2 C 3H2
with the production of nitrogen and hydrogen. Again, what sense there is in saying
that there is just the one substance, water, present despite the dissociation will
become clearer in connection with the discussion of what the phase and substance
predicates apply to in the next chapter. We will see that these two examples are
formally like the dissociation of water into hydrogen and hydroxyl ions described in
the next chapter, although they involve the macroscopically recognisable substances
hydrogen and oxygen in addition to water in the one case, and ammonia, nitrogen
and hydrogen in the other, rather than microscopic species. There we will see that
the natural interpretation is that there is just one substance present, and the phase-
rule notion of an independent substance is identiﬁed with the unqualiﬁed notion of
substance. By parity of reasoning, there is a strong case for saying that the same
interpretation should apply here, and just one substance be deemed to be present
despite the dissociation.
Since these are equilibria, they could equally be established by starting with
equivalent proportions of hydrogen and oxygen, or of nitrogen and hydrogen, as
initial ingredients. This is then reminiscent of Aristotle’s conception of mixing.

126
6
The Nature of Matter
according to which when the original ingredients are mixed in “comparable
amounts”, a single substance results. As we saw, where “combination has taken
place, the compound must be uniform—any part of such a compound is the same
as the whole, just as any part of water is water” (DG I.10, 328a10f.). Homogeneous
matter resulting from mixing would comprise a single substance. Despite the fact
that Aristotle’s general view of mixture clearly stands corrected by Gibbs’ view,
Duhem thought that thermodynamics showed how “chemistry [had] recover[ed] . . .
the peripatetic notion of a mixt” (1902, p. 183). The antiquated term “mixt” that
Duhem uses for the Aristotelian conception of a uniform body resulting from a
process of mixing avoids any suggestion that Aristotle recognised the distinction
between a compound and a solution—a homogeneous (single-phase) quantity
containing several substances. A solution is what we would have in our two cases
at lower temperatures in the absence of a catalyst, when eons could pass before
equilibrium is established after mixing equivalent proportions of hydrogen and
oxygen, or of nitrogen and hydrogen. For appreciably shorter times of macroscopic
order, the mixture can be treated as a homogeneous gas comprising two substances.
Aristotle’s notion of a mixt seems closer to the idea of a compound, for which it
provides a simple model that serves as a foil illuminating more complex cases.
Elemental names are used in these cases with some ambiguity. Oxygen may
occur as free oxygen or dioxygen, O2, and as ozone, O3. A mixture of the two
sufﬁciently cooled and compressed that it becomes a heterogeneous, two-phase
quantity is bivariant (Ricci 1951, p. 10). Unlike the univariance exhibited by a two-
phase mixture of pure water, the phase rule indicates that two substances are to be
distinguished, for which we need two names. Water is composed of hydrogen and
oxygen, but not of the substances whose formulas are H2 and O2, appropriately
named dihydrogen and dioxygen. And as we have just seen, the phase rule would
suggest that dihydrogen and dioxygen are not substances occurring for ordinary
macroscopic lengths of time in a quantity of water raised to 2000 K either. The
situation is different for the low-temperature solution, which can be partitioned into
dihydrogen molecules and dioxygen molecules.
These examples illustrate the interplay between substances and phases. They
are cases where a quantity of matter exhibits the two kinds of properties, of
a certain number of independent substance properties and a certain number of
phase properties. In general, where there are several substances, the corresponding
substance predicates are instantiated by proper parts of the entire quantity, but the
same cannot be so straightforwardly said of the phase properties. A more careful
statement calls for a more detailed discussion of phase and substance predicates.

Chapter 7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description
to Microstructure
7.1
Water is H2O
Matter changes with respect to the substance and phase properties that it bears.
Water, as we have seen, is created and destroyed in various chemical processes.
It is produced in what organic chemists call condensation reactions and in the
combustion of hydrocarbons such as methane. It can even be directly generated
from its constituent elements by burning, or mixing in the presence of a suitable
catalyst. Water is destroyed when sodium reacts with it to produce sodium hydroxide
and hydrogen at the expense of the corresponding (in accordance with the laws of
chemical proportions) amount of water, and it is directly decomposed into its con-
stitutive elements by electrolysis. A literal interpretation of creation and destruction
of quantities of water might seem to accord with ordinary ways of speaking about
chemical processes. But an interpretation more in line with Lavoisier’s fundamental
principle of the indestructibility of matter would naturally have it that quantities
of matter may bear features of being such-and-such a compound substance for one
time and not for another. Because processes proceed more or less gradually over
a period of time, a quantity won’t be all the initial substance after commencement
of the transformation, and so won’t be the initial substance. It will be partly the
initial substance, in the sense that part of it will be the initial substance, and so
the process continues until none of the quantity in question is the initial substance.
Whereas substance properties typically hold temporarily, the quantities of matter
that bear them exist permanently, sustaining the standard mereological relations
and operations and making no call on time-dependent variants in the manner of
Thomson (1983). Time-dependence is incorporated in the substance predicate.
Phase properties, the more common ones expressing the conditions of being
solid, liquid or gas, are also time-dependent, and expressed by dyadic predicates
applying to a quantity and a time. An ordinary phase change, occurring, for example,
when an ice cube in a gin and tonic melts, might again seem to call upon the literal
creation and destruction interpretation. But as with chemical transformations, the
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P. Needham, Macroscopic Metaphysics, Synthese Library 390,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4_7
127

128
7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description to Microstructure
quantity initially all ice is after some time only partly ice, the remainder being
liquid. In this case, according to standard chemical theory, the quantity preserves
the substance property; both ice and the liquid formed by melting are water. Some
philosophers follow Putnam (1975, p. 225) in restricting being the same substance
water to being the same liquid, but here we follow elementary scientiﬁc practice
which teaches that water melts at 0 ıC. In contrast to the phase-dependent sense of
“water” implying that whatever it is true of is liquid, this is the sense of “water”
in which H2O is water. Looking more deeply into this connection provides some
insight into how the quantity to which the “water” predicate applies for macroscopic
times should be understood.
Since “water” is a dyadic predicate of a quantity and a time, so too is the “H2O”
predicate and “All water is H2O” means that the two predicates apply to the same
things at the same time:
8 8t .Water.; t/  H2O.; t//:
“Is H2O” cannot apply to a single, isolated water molecule because “is water”
applies to matter that freezes at 0 ıC and boils at 100 ıC, which it doesn’t make
sense to say of an isolated water molecule. Does it apply to some collection
of appropriately related water molecules of sufﬁcient size, leaving aside how
“appropriately related” and “sufﬁcient size” are to be spelt out so as to cover solid,
liquid and gas phases and presence of other substances in solution? In the absence
of a special context justifying the use of this short expression as a convenient
abbreviation, this is a far-fetched suggestion, all the more so since there is a much
more plausible interpretation. The expression “H2O” is used as a compositional
formula, which merely expresses the proportion of the constituent elements in a
compound. In this sense, its signiﬁcance is entirely macroscopic. The gravimetric
ratio of hydrogen to oxygen of 1:8 is converted into a different scale, reﬂecting
combining power, which can be understood as saying that there is twice as much
hydrogen as there is oxygen in water. The analogous compositional formula CO2
for carbon dioxide expresses on the same scale that there is twice as much oxygen
in carbon dioxide as there is in water, despite the gravimetric carbon-to-oxygen ratio
of 3:8, but just as much oxygen in water as there is carbon in carbon dioxide.
Compositional formulas were elaborated by the development of structural
formulas in the course of the nineteenth century with the discovery of isomers,
which are distinct substances with the same composition. Structural formulas
accommodate several kinds of isomerism without making any direct commitment to
microstructure,1 and could be understood to represent the chemical properties of a
substance, i.e. the general lines along which it will react with other substances. This
serves to emphasise the point that in order to speak of microstructure, it is necessary
to go beyond this and offer more speciﬁc descriptions of the microparticles
constituting a substance if that is that we are interested in. These particles are
1As Duhem carefully explained in Duhem (1892, 1902); see Needham (1996, 2008a).

7.2
What Do Substance Predicates Apply To?
129
entities distinguished by internal bonds holding the parts together signiﬁcantly
more strongly than these parts adhere to adjacent material for an interval of time
during which the particle exists.2 The late nineteenth-century understanding of the
molecular constitution of substances is still proffered as typical of many organic
substances such as hydrocarbons. According to this conception, there is a single
species of particle, the individual molecule, which the structural formula of the
substance is held to represent, and the substance can be thought of as a collection
of molecules. Although there may be intermolecular interactions, keeping the
molecules at a distance and determining the overall macroscopic density, these
modify the molecules rather than forming different kinds of particles from them.
Further description would enter into the geometric features of the molecules, the
bond strengths, and so forth. But as inorganic chemists in particular point out,
what is typical for organic substances is not typical for substances in general.
The principle of ﬁxed valency governing the construction of structural formulas
for organic substances does not hold in general. Moreover, if the microstructure is
primarily a collection of particles, these particles are not always molecules in the
sense of what a structural formula might be considered to represent, and may well
not be all of the same kind or stable over macroscopic intervals of time. Water, in
particular, is one of the substances which doesn’t ﬁt the organic substance paradigm
at all.
7.2
What Do Substance Predicates Apply To?
Although the present concern is with macroscopic concepts, consideration of the
microrealm has a bearing on what substance and phase predicates apply to. This is
not simply a matter of a correlation of changes at the two levels: there is always
change at the microlevel, which may involve more than translational, rotational
and vibrational motion mentioned earlier, whether or not there is any change in
macrofeatures. Although change at the macrolevel is matched by change at the
microlevel, the same goes for stable equilibrium at the macrolevel, which doesn’t
correspond to a static state of affairs at the microlevel but rather continual ﬂuctuation
and change in which certain processes are countered by others in a dynamic
equilibrium in which an overall balance obtains over sufﬁciently long times. The
steady temperature of an ideal gas, for example, governs a given distribution of the
energy over the gas molecules, so that a ﬁxed number have energy within a given
range as energy is continually exchanged between molecules. Even at the absolute
zero of temperature, the indeterminacy principle of quantum mechanics requires
a “zero-point” vibration. But as noted, the changes may well involve more than
translational, rotational and vibrational motion.
2“A molecule may ...be deﬁned as a small mass of matter the parts of which do not part company
during the excursions which the molecule makes when the body to which it belongs is hot”
(Maxwell 2001, p. 305).

130
7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description to Microstructure
Since substance and phase predicates are dyadic, applying to a quantity at a
time, the question arises of what the nature of the quantity at issue is for the
time in question considered in the light of the underlying dynamic situation at
the microlevel. But macro- and microlevel descriptions differ in general terms
not only in the contrast between an apparently static equilibrium or a stately rate
of change at the macroscopic level and a considerably more dynamic microlevel.
Microentities are not simply smaller versions of macroentities following essentially
the same laws with essentially the same kind of features such as occupying deﬁnite
regions for deﬁnite intervals of time. The quantum realm is populated by entities of
a radically different kind, subject to ever greater indeterminacy in energy for ever
shorter times when not in a stationary state. The import of the distributivity condition
introduced in Chap. 4 as proper parts are pursued ever closer to the quantum domain
is anything but straightforward. The discussion in Chap. 4 led to the suggestion that
the variables to which substance, phase and related predicates apply range over a
domain of macroscopic entities. Two lines of defence of the distributivity condition
for substance predicates will be explored here. In a later section, the typically
quantum mechanical feature of indistinguishability is used to restrict the parts of
macroscopic quantities so as not to include entities of the quantum domain. But
ﬁrst, the import of the dynamic situation at the microlevel for what substance and
phase predicates apply to is discussed without considering the quantum character of
microentities.
If microscopic considerations are to throw any light on the issue of what
substance and phase predicates apply to at macroscopically signiﬁcant intervals,
it must be appreciated that it is not, in general, true that quantities of matter
are just collections of molecules in the sense of mereological sums which can
be partitioned into molecules (when the molecules would be mutually separate
parts whose sum exhausts the quantity) that are preserved over macroscopic times.
Substances which can be so partitioned are called molecular. Although there are
substances, like methane, which are molecular substances, many substances are
not molecular and water is a notorious example of one which isn’t. Understanding
how these mereological sums are taken over time provides some insight into how
the continuous, macroscopic conception of matter (“gunk”?) is reconciled with the
discrete microscopic conception.
Variation in microstructure is postulated in the ﬁrst instance to explain variation
in macroscopic features such as melting and boiling points and heat capacities. The
molecular substance methane, with formula CH4, is a typical organic hydrocarbon,
comprising molecular species in which a carbon atom is strongly bonded to four
hydrogen atoms. Weak, so-called van der Waals, cohesive forces act between the
molecules and these forces are easily disrupted by thermal motions at relatively
low temperatures. Such molecules form solids which are soft with low melting
points that increase with molecular weight. The methane molecule is light and
methane is not even a liquid at normal temperature and pressure, but a gas boiling at
161.5 ıC. Normal-pentane, a hydrocarbon of essentially the same kind (an alkane)
with compositional formula C5H12, is liquid at room temperature boiling at 36.1 ıC,
and n-eicosane, with compositional formula C20H42, is solid at room temperature

7.2
What Do Substance Predicates Apply To?
131
melting at 37 ıC. These stand in contrast to substances like common salt (NaCl) and
silicon dioxide (SiO2), which form indeﬁnitely repeating arrays in the solid phase
held in place by considerably stronger forces than the van der Waals forces. In these
substances, no particular pairs, in the case of NaCl, or triples, in the case of SiO2,
of atoms can be distinguished from their neighbours by virtue of stronger internal
bonding between the atoms in putative molecules than between adjacent atoms. A
lump of salt consists of an ionically bonded array in which each sodium cation (i.e. a
positively charged ion) is surrounded by six chloride anions (i.e. negatively charged
ions), and each chloride anion is surrounded by six sodium cations, in a structure
which is repeated throughout the whole macroscopic crystal. No particular pairing
of a sodium cation with one of its six coordinated chloride anions presents itself
as more natural than a pairing with any of the remaining ﬁve anions.3 The formula
“NaCl” simply represents that there are as many equivalents of sodium as there
are of chlorine in any sample of salt. Given the additional information about the
microstructure that it is an ionic compound, the formula translates into microscopic
terms as equal numbers of sodium and chlorine ions. Taking the formula to cover salt
dissolved in the sea would entail the same equality of numbers of ions although there
would be nothing corresponding to the microstructure of the solid crystal. Solid
silicon dioxide also takes the form of an array extending over the entire macroscopic
crystal in which each Si atom is bonded to four oxygen atoms (covalently, but with
considerable ionic character) and each oxygen atom to two silicon atoms. Structures
of these kinds are typically hard (solids at normal temperatures and pressures) with
high melting points.
Water falls squarely between these two categories, with molecular units distin-
guished by internal bonding between a single oxygen atom and two hydrogens
which is stronger than intermolecular attraction, but where the intermolecular
attraction between two water molecules is midway in strength between a van
der Waals interaction and an ionic bond. This explains water’s unexpectedly high
melting and boiling points compared with other substances of comparable molecular
weight. Methane, for example, melts at 183 ıC and boils, as we saw, at 161 ıC,
which gives some indication of the strength of the intermolecular force in water.
The intermolecular forces give rise to an indeﬁnitely repeating crystalline
structure in ice analogous to that described for common salt and silicon dioxide.
Water has a surprisingly low latent heat of fusion (heat required to change the solid
to liquid at the melting point) compared with the latent heat of evaporation (only
15% of the latter), suggesting that much of the intermolecular structure in the solid
is in some sense retained in the liquid and not ﬁnally lost until in the gas phase.
On the other hand, liquid water has a large heat capacity—nearly twice that of ice
(at the melting point), and more than twice that of steam (at the boiling point)—
3Armstrong (1927, p. 478), then a retired professor of chemistry, became something of a
laughing stock when he repudiated Bragg’s claim that in sodium chloride there are “no molecules
represented by NaCl. The equality in number of sodium and chlorine atoms is arrived at by a chess-
board pattern of these atoms; it is a result of geometry and not of a pairing-off of the atoms” as
“repugnant to common sense” and “not chemical cricket”.

132
7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description to Microstructure
enabling the Gulf Stream to convey an enormous amount of energy from the tropics
to Northern Europe and keeping the temperature of the seas around Cape Horn low,
even in summer.4 Increasing the motion of the molecules accounts for only half of
the liquid’s heat capacity; there must be a structure in the liquid which the rest is
utilised in deforming.
Intermolecular bonding of this sort occurs in compounds where hydrogen can
lie between two highly electronegative ﬂuorine, oxygen or nitrogen atoms. The
character of this hydrogen bonding remains somewhat obscure. Traditionally,
writers have been reluctant to question a ﬁxed valency of one and ascribe hydrogen
two covalent bonds. It remains controversial whether it is a purely electrostatic
interaction due to a build up of positive charge on the hydrogens and negative
charge on the electronegative element (oxygen in water), or has a signiﬁcant
covalent contribution. But it is important to understand that hydrogen-bonded water
constitutes a cooperative interaction, in which the interaction of a given water
molecule with an already existing cluster of hydrogen-bonded molecules is more
favourable, and therefore more probable, than the interaction with another single
molecule to form a dimer (Franks 2000, p. 14; Needham 2013, p. 59). Hydrogen
bonding therefore disposes water molecules to amalgamate in very large structures,
discouraging the existence of even dimers (i.e. pairs of molecules), and certainly
monomers (single, uncombined molecules).
Water molecules aggregate in inter-molecular species which might be repre-
sented by (H2O)2, (H2O)3, . . . , (H2O)n, . . . . But these are not permanent species,
nor even stable over nanoseconds (109 s). The situation is a dynamic one, in which
clusters are continually being formed and broken, reaching equilibrium under stable
conditions in the sense that their concentrations remain constant because the rates
of formation and destruction are equal. The dynamic equilibria can be represented
as follows:
2H2O • (H2O)2;
H2O C (H2O)2 • (H2O)3;
: : :
H2O C (H2O)n • (H2O)nC1;
The double arrows indicate a state of equilibrium in which the concentrations of
the species on each side of the “equation” remain constant. It should be stressed,
however, that there is great uncertainty about how many such species there are and
what their actual structure is. Much of the present view is derived by inference from
macrofeatures along the lines indicated above. Even so, enough is known to motivate
a modiﬁcation of this scheme.
4Latent heats of vaporisation are often higher than latent heats of fusion, and heat capacities of the
liquid are often greater than those of the solid and gaseous phases of the same substance. But in
the case of water the differences are more marked.

7.2
What Do Substance Predicates Apply To?
133
A second series of equilibria is established arising from the disruption of the
intermolecular covalent bonding with dissociation of water into ions—positively
charged hydrogen cations and negatively charged hydroxyl anions:
H2O • HC C OH:
These ions are not free particles but attach to the hydrogen-bonded clusters,
producing equilibria of the following kinds:
3H2O • H3OC C (H2O)OH;
: : :
.2n C 1/H2O • .H2O/nHC C (H2O)nOH:
In pure water the hydrogen and hydroxyl ion concentrations5 are each very small,
107 g ions per litre. It might be thought that such tiny amounts could be ignored.
But the dielectric constant of water depends on the existence of these ions and how
they are hydrated by attaching to clusters. This concentration determines the neutral
pH value (deﬁned as the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration)
of 7. Acidity is the phenomenon of the pH value decreasing (i.e. hydrogen
ion concentration increasing) in an aqueous solution (homogeneous mixture of
one or more substances with water). These ionic species, although in very low
concentrations, account for some of water’s distinctive properties. The pH of the
ambient medium controls whether haemoglobin holds onto or releases oxygen, for
example, and so is a matter of life and death for us. If microscopic species determine
the characteristic features of a substance, then they can’t be ignored just because
there are, on average, relatively few of them.
Although this discussion has concentrated on water in view of its prominence
in philosophers’ discussions of chemical substances, it should be borne in mind
that there are many substances which exhibit non-molecularity in one way or
another. Alcohols, for example, are like water in their association and disassociation
behaviour, and carbon tetrachloride comprises temporary clusters in the liquid state.
See Needham (2013) for an overview of the various guises in which hydrogen
bonding appears and how it is distinguished from related forms of intermolecular
attraction.
Derivations of the phase rule such as those given in Sect. 6.4 take no account of
the various microparticles present in the components. It is a theorem of classical
thermodynamics, which is a purely macroscopic theory, neutral with respect to
microscopic interpretations. In order to relate macro- and microdescriptions, a
standard move in chemical theorising is to consider thermodynamic equilibria,
representing stable and macroscopically unchanging states of affairs, to correspond
to dynamic equilibria on the micro-scale. On the latter conception, there is a
5Including all the hydrated hydrogen ion species in the hydrogen ion concentration, and similarly
for the hydroxyl ion concentration.

134
7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description to Microstructure
continual removal of reactants as they combine to yield products, whilst at the
same time reactants are continually replenished as the products re-combine, and a
dynamic equilibrium is established when the rate of the forward reaction is the same
as the rate of the reverse reaction. Thus, the dissociation of water into hydrogen
ions and hydroxyl ions proceeds, whilst the recombination of these ions occurs,
removing ions after they have been created. If the forward reaction were allowed
to proceed alone, by somehow removing the ions when they are formed, then the
reaction would proceed until all the water is dissociated. But this doesn’t happen and
a balance is reached in which the rate of dissociation equals the rate of association,
when the concentration of undissociated species remains constant, despite the
continual dissociation, because dissociated species are continually replaced. The
concentration of dissociated species remains constant for the same reason.
The word “species” is often used in discussions of the phase rule to indicate
kinds whose number exceeds c, the number of independent components, and this
includes microscopic species. From the point of view of the phase rule, then, the
dynamic equilibria between the various cluster species H2O, (H2O)2, (H2O)3, . . . ,
(H2O)n, . . . in liquid water involving association by hydrogen bonding are chemical
reactions at equilibrium. Accordingly, if there are n species, whatever n might be,
there are n1 equilibria, and therefore just one independent substance. So although
chemists are still pursuing unanswered questions about these clusters, they are sure
that they are in dynamic equilibrium with one another, and the exact number is
immaterial to the question of how many substances are present. Water is a single
substance. The dissociation into ions may seem to present a different case in so far
as the equilibrium H2O • HC C OH involves 3 species. But this one reaction
yields the further constraint that the concentrations of hydrogen and hydroxyl ions
are equal (in molar units), maintaining electrical neutrality. So the three species are
matched by two constraints, which brings the number of substances back to one.
And as before, the ionic cluster complexes introduce 2n C 1 species along with 2n
constraints, which again fails to raise the number of independent substances above
one. This explains the insensitivity of the thermodynamic criterion of purity based
on the phase rule to the variety of particles in water.
What appears macroscopically as an unchanging state of affairs is thus the scene
of rapid change at the microlevel. Although the changes balance to maintain steady
concentrations when dynamic equilibrium is established, the ﬁxed concentrations
are not constituted by ﬁxed quantities of matter. The half-life of the dissociation
of water (time for half of a given amount of water to decompose) is about
20 ms (20  106 s). So after a very short time on the human scale, say half a
second, an appreciable proportion of the water molecules in any given quantity of
water will have been dissociated and the ions from any particular molecule will
have recombined, though not necessarily with one another. Similarly, each of the
steps in the formation and dissociation of polymeric clusters of water species is
established in water in the liquid state within intervals of time not exceeding 1011 s.
Accordingly, the quantity of matter which is such a polymeric species is in general
so for a time of this order of magnitude and no longer. For a signiﬁcantly longer
time, say of the order of a microsecond (106 s), this quantity may well not be such

7.2
What Do Substance Predicates Apply To?
135
a cluster, but a sum whose parts form parts of various such clusters for different
subintervals of the time in question. Similarly, a part of such a cluster which is a
water molecule at some time will not be an H2O molecule for very long. Given
what was said about the dissociation half-life of H2O, the probability of a quantity
of matter being an H2O molecule for times of macroscopic orders of magnitude
becomes quite small. Accordingly, a quantity which is an H2O molecule for an
appropriately short time will often be a sum of disparate and dispersed parts which
don’t constitute an H2O molecule for times some factors of 10 longer.
How does all this bear on the question of whether the distributive condition
applies? Quine’s original objection was that “water” is not distributive because it
doesn’t apply to parts too small to count. It applies “down to single molecules but
not to atoms” (Quine 1960, p. 98). But the issue is not quite so cut and dried. Taking
the dyadic character of the “water” predicate into account, suppose “Water.; t/” is
true, where  is a macroscopic quantity and t a macroscopic time. Considering ever
smaller subintervals of t, some subinterval t0 is the lifetime of a particular H2O
molecule. It doesn’t follow that the remainder of  is susceptible to a partition
into H2O molecules at t0, and it is unlikely in the extreme that the  for which
Water.; t0/ is true can be resolved into a mereological partition of molecules at t0.
All the molecules do not dissociate into ions in step, as this would require. While
some molecules survive intact throughout the period, others will dissociate, and ions
will associate to form new molecules during the same period. This remains true for
a t0 which is the shortest lifetime of all the molecules appearing in  during t.
A molecule in the liquid isn’t like a water molecule in isolation (in the gas phase
at very low pressure), but will be subject to all the stresses imposed by the ambient
medium. In fact, even very much larger parts of water, although small enough
to be at the nano scale, behave differently when isolated from when part of bulk
water. According to recent investigations into the process of ice crystallisation, the
frequency of ice nucleation varies with the volume of water, raising the question
of whether water at the nanoscale can still be regarded as equivalent to bulk water.
Li et al. (2013) show that the ice nucleation rate at the nanoscale can be several
orders of magnitude smaller than that of bulk water, suggesting that water at this
scale can no longer be considered bulk water and that the boundary for such
deviant behaviour (size of the droplet where the difference vanishes) varies with
temperature. These experiments were conducted on very small drops of water,
isolated from bulkier quantities of water, as distinct from examinations of the
behaviour of very small parts immersed in bulkier quantities of water. It raises the
issue of the difference between parts in contact with the whole and parts removed
from the remainder of the whole familiar from the discussion of what Holden
says about the potential parts doctrine (Sect. 5.7). Isolated nano-sized quantities of
water might well behave differently from larger isolated quantities, just as water
in brine does. The observations of Li et al. therefore don’t necessarily provide any
insight into how the line should be drawn between the micro-composition and the
macroscopic parts of a connected quantity of matter.
It might well be said that some such considerations bear on Quine’s claim that
a quantity is water “down to single molecules”. Even for a molecular substance

136
7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description to Microstructure
like methane, the molecules are said not to display characteristic properties of
methane such as its melting and boiling point, which call for macroscopic-sized
quantities. But although it is true that isolated methane molecules don’t have
melting and boiling points, it is not so clear that methane molecules immersed in
a substantial quantity of methane, whose properties are generally dependent on
the surrounding medium, don’t. And in the absence of reasons for disregarding
properties such as these that are normally regarded as characteristic of the substance,
the molecules must surely be regarded as being of the substance kind when making
their contribution to the exhibition of macroscopic properties in the context of
the bulk material during the time in question. (N.B. the distributive condition
speaks of parts of a whole quantity during the time when the whole possesses the
substance property in question.) Molecules of a different substance dissolved in
methane wouldn’t contribute in the same way, but lower the melting point—i.e., the
temperature at which macroscopic quantities would transform from solid to liquid at
normal pressure—in relation to the melting point of pure methane. So in specifying
the dispositional property of melting at 183 ıC, to the effect that a quantity of
methane would be liquid if brought to this temperature at standard pressure and
supplied with the latent heat of fusion, we must add “in the absence of any other
dissolved substance”. Why shouldn’t it also be understood to include the condition
“when immersed in a sufﬁciently large connected quantity of methane”?
A similar point applies to the atoms Quine suggests are parts of water molecules
that are not water. The modern idiom speaks of hydrogen and oxygen in water
and of hydrogen and oxygen atoms in water molecules. But just as there is no
inﬂammable gas in water, there are no hydrogen atoms with electronic conﬁguration
1s1 characteristic of isolated hydrogen atoms or oxygen atoms with electronic
conﬁguration 1s22s22p4 characteristic of isolated oxygen atoms. (Likewise, in
methane molecules there are no carbon atoms with the electronic conﬁguration
1s22s22p2 characteristic of isolated carbon atoms in the ground state.) There are
hydrogen and oxygen nuclei in water molecules. Hydrogen nuclei (protons) might
be likened to hydrogen ions, which are just as much particles constituting water
as are water molecules, constituting, like water molecules, transient components of
larger polymeric species. But there is more to an atom than its nucleus. Although
the electrons do not contribute much to the mass of the atom, they are essential to
its overall electrical neutrality and the chemical bonds which it forms. Electrons
are present in the water molecules in numbers corresponding to those in two
isolated hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. But even on the Lewis theory
of the pairing of electrons in covalent bonds, there is no assigning some of the
electrons in the water bonds to a unit comprising just an oxygen atom and others
to units each comprising just hydrogen atoms. The quantum mechanical feature
of the indiscernibility of electrons drives the point home, in view of which we
have to rest content with the statement that there are no entities like the isolated
atoms just described in water. Whatever else is entailed by the claim that there
are hydrogen and oxygen atoms in water molecules, the mereological claim that
there are atoms forming parts of water molecules is not true. There are at best sums
of eight neutrons, eight protons and eight electrons which are parts of (what are

7.2
What Do Substance Predicates Apply To?
137
sometime) water molecules, but none of them is, or constitutes, an oxygen atom
while the quantity they are part of is a water molecule. There are neither hydrogen
nor oxygen atoms in water molecules.
So what of submolecular parts of sometime molecules of water? Do they provide
counterexamples to the distributivity of the “water” predicate? For any macroscopic
quantity  and macroscopic time t for which “Water.; t/” is true,  is a sum of
ﬂeeting components of larger molecular and polymeric species which lacks the
structure of a molecular partition and doesn’t freeze into such a partition for shorter
intervals. It is the same  that Water.; t0/ is true of, however small the subinterval
t0 of t. If nano-scale parts of water are water even though they might be considered
not to be when isolated from bulk water, as I think it reasonable to claim, is it not
also reasonable to claim that all parts of , no matter how small, are water for all
parts of the time when  is water? At all events, the picture Quine paints to motivate
denying the claim is not applicable.
The situation is similar to the case described in the last chapter where water is
heated to 2000 K. In the gas phase, water dimers, not to mention larger clusters,
rapidly become more of a rarity as the temperature rises, so that at normal pressure,
water is to all intents and purposes molecular for temperatures ranging from a little
above the boiling point until it starts to dissociate around 500 ıC. But at higher
temperatures, because of the dynamic equilibrium at the microlevel, a quantity
which is all water under such conditions for macroscopic lengths of time will
not be partitioned into water molecules. It will be a sum of sometime parts of
water molecules, sometime parts of dihydrogen molecules and sometime parts of
dioxygen molecules. Parity of reasoning would suggest that the two situations
should be treated in the same way: if liquid water is a single substance despite
the heterogeneous microstructure, then the gas at high temperatures is also a single
substance despite the dissociation. Ammonia at high temperatures will similarly
be a sum of sometime parts of ammonia molecules, sometime parts of dinitrogen
molecules and sometime parts of dihydrogen molecules. Liquid ammonia also
exhibits hydrogen bonding promoting the association of molecules, although it
cannot form the extensive cross-linked network that is found in water because each
molecule cannot be simultaneously linked to others by so many hydrogen bonds. It
also dissociates into positive ammonium and negative amide ions:
2NH3 • NHC
4 C NH
2 :
Summarising, if macroscopic criteria based on the phase rule determine the
applicability of the substance predicate “water”, then it holds of sufﬁciently large
quantities for sufﬁciently long times over which the microscopic ﬂuctuations
are smoothed out. It doesn’t apply to what microdescriptions are true of when
considered in isolation from the macroscopic bulk, for much shorter times. There
are no such parts of macroscopic quantities of water. For these macroscopic times, a
macroscopic quantity of water will be a sum of scattered fragments of microparticles
which cannot be partitioned into particles such as molecules. Even where the time
for which “water” applies to a macroscopic quantity is short enough for descriptions

138
7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description to Microstructure
of microscopic particles to apply, the quantity won’t in general be partitioned into
particles because the dissociations and associations won’t be in step. Arguably,
microscopic parts of water are water. Their features will vary considerably over
macroscopic times as they interact in the course of dissociations and associations
of molecular species. But even for much shorter times of the order of lifetimes of
molecular species in liquid water, these microparts don’t display properties they
would if isolated. Their properties are characteristic of being part of what deﬁnitely
is water and might therefore reasonably be regarded as water for the times in
question.
In general, then, larger macroscopic quantities of matter sustain macroscopic
substance properties for sufﬁciently long times, and very small parts of macroscopic
quantities of matter sustain structural properties of microscopic entities present in
bulk matter for times of a microscopic order of magnitude, but not longer. This
is not independent of the prevailing conditions and the kind of substance at issue,
however. The molecules in a quantity of water conﬁned entirely to the gas phase
under conditions approaching those of an ideal gas (obeying the Charles-Boyle gas
law to a very good approximation, requiring an appropriate temperature and low
pressure) are so thinly distributed that they hardly interact. Under such conditions
the molecules have a considerably greater longevity than molecules in the liquid
phase. But as we will see in the next section, this is not so if the gas is in contact
and at equilibrium with the liquid (in a multiphase system).
7.3
What Do Phase Predicates Apply To?
How do the general considerations raised in the previous section apply to the other
broad category of macroscopic kinds, namely phases? A dynamic balance between
rates of opposing processes is also at work in the equilibria between phases in a
complex mixture, which undergo exchange of material. The equilibrium between
liquid and vapour, for example, involves particles leaving the liquid surface and
entering the vapour whilst being replaced by other particles from the vapour entering
the liquid. Again, in the space of what, on the human time scale is an exceedingly
short interval of a fraction of a second, substantial parts of the matter in the liquid
will have gone into the vapour phase to be replaced by different matter coming in
from the vapour phase. There is a continual interchange of material between the two
phases. This is often put by saying that water molecules in the vapour phase will
enter the liquid phase, be subject to the interactions and become integrated into the
microstructure of the liquid. The thought here would be less ambiguously expressed,
however, by saying that what are water molecules in the vapour phase will become
integrated into the microstructure of the liquid, dropping any suggestion that the
molecular units remain intact throughout the course of this process.
On a macroscopic time scale, what is at one time, say, liquid in a liquid-vapour
system, or solid water at the triple point where solid, liquid and gas are all at
equilibrium, is in general not all liquid (solid) at another. This raises the question of

7.3
What Do Phase Predicates Apply To?
139
what it means to say that some quantity is in some particular phase, say liquid, for
some time (at some interval). It can’t be given the same mereological interpretation
suggested above for the macroscopic substance predicate “water”. If “is liquid”
were distributive, i.e. any part of a quantity which is liquid at a time is liquid at
any subinterval of that time, then for liquid at equilibrium with another phase, the
longer the time, the smaller would be the quantity counted as liquid. In the long run,
nothing would be liquid for a time during which all liquid is exchanged with the
other phase. But even before reaching this extreme, imposition of the distributive
condition would mean that whatever chunk of matter satisﬁes the condition for a
given time is not discernible by perception, being some quantity occupying a proper
part of the region apparently occupied by liquid. This raises the question of what, if
anything, is discerned by perception for a given time and apparently referred to as
“the liquid”.
Alternatively, “is liquid” might be interpreted accumulatively, by analogy with
the way the region occupied by a body (quantity or individual) at a time is
understood to be the region it sweeps out during that time (Sects. 2.3 and 2.4)
and with the accumulative interpretation of the material constitution of individuals
(Sect. 3.2). Here the understanding is that, just as some part of the region swept out
during t might not be occupied for some subinterval of t, so some part of the quantity
which is liquid for t would not be liquid for some subinterval of t. The longer the
time, the greater would be the quantity counted as liquid. As for the formulation
of the summation principle, it would be incorrect to say simply that a quantity of
which “is liquid” is true for time t is the sum of quantities which are liquid for some
subinterval of that time because this sum would exceed  and include all the world’s
liquid at some subinterval of t. Accordingly, the sum is restricted to parts of :
Liquid.; t/   D ˙ 0   9t0  t Liquid.0; t0/:
A quantity is always the sum of its parts, but this is not that trivial theorem because it
says that the sum of only some of ’s parts, namely those liquid at some subinterval
of t, is in fact identical with . It is not true that every part of  is liquid for some
subinterval of t since some parts of what is liquid at time t are sums of two or more
parts that are liquid at disconnected times, in which case there is no (connected)
time when the sum is liquid.
The ﬁrst proposal, based on the distributive condition, would count as liquid
a quantity of less mass than what apparently is the mass of the liquid from the
purely macroscopic perspective, and the longer the time, the smaller the quantity
counted liquid. For a sufﬁciently long time, there would be no liquid in a closed
system. The second proposal, based on the accumulation condition, would count
as liquid a quantity of greater mass than the apparent mass of the liquid from the
purely macroscopic perspective, and the longer the time, the greater the quantity
counted liquid. For a sufﬁciently long time, all the water in a closed system would be
liquid. But then none of the water would be any other phase, say gas, for this time.
For a closed system with a single substance exhibiting several phases, one phase
might be interpreted accumulatively and the others distributively. They couldn’t all
be interpreted accumulatively.

140
7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description to Microstructure
There may well be a certain ﬁxed volume of liquid in a closed container enclosing
a single substance exhibiting liquid and gas phases at equilibrium over a certain
period. From the macroscopic perspective, it seems natural to take it that one and
the same thing makes up this volume throughout the period in question. But the
above considerations show that there is no such thing. Deﬁnite quantities are deﬁned
by the distributive condition and by the accumulation condition, either of which
might serve as a referent of the liquid, but the ﬁxed volume cannot be attributed
to either of these. A third course of delimiting a deﬁnite quantity by reducing
the time interval to an instant might suggest itself. But this would take us further
than the limit imposed by statistical ﬂuctuations, beyond the limit set by the time-
energy uncertainty principle, and into a realm where scientists hardly dare speculate.
This might not deter the metaphysician content to imagine water at the microlevel
arranged “waterwise”, but others might be sceptical of attempts to construe this as
anything more than an empty gesture. In any case, the issue would still arise of
what is the liquid for ﬁnite times, calling for some integrating construction over the
different instantaneous objects.
There always being something that bears the phase predicate, no matter how
long the time at issue, counts perhaps in favour of the accumulative interpretation
for one phase. Whereas the distributive interpretation implies that every part of what
is liquid at time t is liquid for every subinterval of t, the accumulative interpretation
doesn’t even require that every such part is liquid for some subinterval of t. As noted
above, some parts of what is liquid at time t might be sums of two or more parts that
are liquid at disconnected times, in which case there is no (connected) time when the
sum is liquid. This suggests that, on the accumulative interpretation, the antecedent
of the cumulative condition,
80   8t0  t 900  0 9t00  t0 Liquid.00; t00/  Liquid.; t/;
is not fulﬁlled. It is not the case that every part of what is liquid at time t always has
some part that is liquid for some subinterval. Part of the liquid that goes into the gas
phase sometime during the time t at issue may well never go back into the liquid
phase during t.
Consider a somewhat more complicated case with several substances present,
the calcium carbonate equilibrium described in Sect. 6.4. In a standard monograph
on the phase rule, Ricci (1951, p. 10) says of this case, “With CaO and CO2 [as
independent components], the phase CaCO3 consists of CaO + CO2, with CaCO3
and CaO [as independent components], the phase CO2 = CaCO3  CaO.” Although
he leaves the reader to infer the signiﬁcance of the equations, it is surely natural to
interpret “C” and “” as mereological operations on quantities, and thus to see the
chemical formulas as predicates expressing properties borne by these quantities. But
there is clearly some ambiguity about whether substance or phase properties are at
issue, which needs to be resolved if the algebraic interpretation is to be at all clear.
It would seem that the solid is separate from the gas (CO2) phase, and the
description of the calcium oxide phase as conﬁned to isolated “islands” would
seem to suggest that it is mereologically separate from the calcium carbonate phase.

7.3
What Do Phase Predicates Apply To?
141
But how, then, is Ricci’s statement that “the phase CO2 = CaCO3  CaO” to be
understood? If the calcium carbonate and oxide phases are mereologically separate,
then the mereological difference of the calcium carbonate phase less the calcium
oxide phase is just the calcium carbonate phase. Similarly, if the CO2 phase is
separate from the CaCO3 phase, the mereological difference of CaCO3 less CO2
is just CaCO3. So if the operations are applied to the phases, as Ricci clearly
suggests, it seems there is no matter constituting the gas phase! Similarly, the CaCO3
phase will not consist of the CaO phase C the CO2 phase if “C” is mereological
summation. How should we get a viable interpretation out of this?
If the calcium carbonate equilibrium involves two independent substances, and
these may be chosen in different ways, then the alternative choices must divide
the total quantity of matter into substances in essentially the same way. All three
substances stand in certain mereological relations to one another, and any two can
be related to a third in terms of their relationship to one another. On the choice of
calcium carbonate and calcium oxide as independent substances, the suggestion was
that carbon dioxide can be taken as the calcium carbonate less the calcium oxide.
If “less” is to be understood as mereological difference, and the carbon dioxide is
not a null entity but some deﬁnite quantity of matter distinct from both the calcium
carbonate and the calcium oxide, we are naturally led to the following interpretation.
The entire quantity of matter in the equilibrium is all calcium carbonate, and the
calcium oxide is a proper part of this. The mereological difference between the
calcium carbonate and the calcium oxide is then deﬁned, and is another proper part
of the calcium carbonate separate from the calcium oxide which we may call carbon
dioxide.
An alternative choice of independent substances would be calcium carbonate
and carbon dioxide, taking the calcium oxide to be the calcium carbonate less the
carbon dioxide and recovering the same overall mereological structure as before.
The calcium oxide, like the carbon dioxide, is a proper part of the calcium carbonate,
which is the entire quantity of matter in the system. A third choice of independent
substances makes a mereological partition of the entire quantity of matter, the
calcium oxide and the carbon dioxide being separate and their sum is the entire
quantity. In this case, the calcium carbonate is the mereological sum of the calcium
oxide and the carbon dioxide, which gives us a mereological interpretation of the
“C” in the above quotation from Ricci. But for the reasons just explained, it is
not, as Ricci says, the calcium carbonate phase which is this sum, but the calcium
carbonate substance.
Phases can’t be interpreted in the same way as substances. The two predicates
“calcium carbonate substance” and “calcium carbonate phase” are not coextensive.
Whereas the predicate “calcium carbonate substance” applies to the entire quantity
of matter, the phase predicate “calcium carbonate phase” apparently doesn’t. As we
saw above, what it applies to is apparently separate from both the calcium oxide
phase and the carbon dioxide phase. But on the van’t Hoff principle connecting
macro- and microphenomena, according to which a static equilibrium at the
macrolevel corresponds to a dynamic equilibrium at the microlevel in which a
balance obtains between the rates of counteracting processes, matter moves between

142
7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description to Microstructure
the phases. In the present case, that occurs at the same time as equilibrium
reigns between dissociation and association reactions. But like the two-phase water
case, the phase predicates describing the situation don’t apply to a ﬁxed quantity
throughout an interval. Matter is constantly exchanged between the phases, so
that whilst some of the calcium carbonate phase matter becomes calcium oxide
phase and gas (carbon dioxide) phase, other matter that is calcium oxide and gas
phase becomes calcium carbonate phase. Parts of each of the substances combine
to temporarily form one of the solid phases, whilst parts of this solid phase
dissociate and become part of the gas phase and part of the other solid phase. The
partitioning of the original quantity into calcium oxide and carbon dioxide substance
is permanent (for the duration of the equilibrium), but it doesn’t coincide with the
division into what the calcium oxide and carbon dioxide phase predicates apply
to for a given time. This latter division is neither exhaustive, mutually exclusive
nor ﬁxed for the duration of the equilibrium. This accommodates the fact that the
substance predicates “calcium carbonate substance”, “calcium oxide substance” and
“carbon dioxide substance” are related to the number c in the phase rule, whereas
the phase predicates “calcium carbonate phase”, “calcium oxide phase” and “carbon
dioxide phase” are counted by the number f in the phase rule.
7.4
Indiscernible Particles
Time, at least when considered in abstraction, would seem to be inﬁnitely divisible:
as expressed by axiom MT10 of Sect. 1.3, every time has a proper part. It was
suggested in the last section but one that restrictions on the distributivity condition
applied to substance predicates are not so obviously true as has seemed to some
authors: parts of a macroscopic quantity of water such as water molecules and their
submolecular parts at short subintervals of the time when the quantity is water
might reasonably be considered water too. This is to consider all such putative
parts as entities of essentially the same kind as the macroscopic quantities which
uncontroversially do bear the property of being water at some time, i.e. as being
macroscopic quantities themselves. But the suggestion was raised at the beginning
of that section that microentities might be ruled out as parts of macroscopic
quantities in virtue of belonging to the quantum domain. I return to that suggestion
now.
Can a dichotomy be drawn between macroscopic entities (quantities) and
microscopic entities by distinguishing microscopic entities on the basis of some
characteristic feature and excluding them from the domain of parts of quantities?
Indistinguishability is a characteristic feature universally ascribed to quantum
mechanical particles that distinguishes them from macroscopic entities. Messiah and
Greenberg (1964) give the classical formulation of the indistinguishability postulate
as the unobservability of any difference between a wave function describing a state

7.4
Indiscernible Particles
143
and the wave function resulting from the permutation of particle coordinates. The
following passage of Penrose’s gives a sense of what is involved:
According to quantum mechanics, any two electrons must necessarily be completely
identical, and the same holds for any two protons and for any two particles whatever, of any
particular kind. This is not merely to say that there is no way of telling the particles apart;
the statement is considerably stronger than that. If an electron in a person’s brain were to
be exchanged with an electron in a brick, then the state of the system would be exactly
the same state as it was before, not merely indistinguishable from it! The same holds for
protons and for any other kind of particle, and for the whole atoms, molecules, etc. If the
entire material content of a person were to be exchanged with the corresponding particles
in the bricks of his house then, in a strong sense, nothing would have happened whatsoever.
What distinguishes the person from his house is the pattern of how his constituents are
arranged, not the individuality of the constituents themselves. (Penrose 1989, p. 32, quoted
by French and Krause 2006, p. 263)
The spirit, but not the terminology, of this passage is followed here. Microentities
are said here to be indiscernible, and “identity” is reserved for a relation between
macroscopic entities. An idea inspired by Newton da Costa and developed by French
and Krause (2006) is to treat the two kinds of entity on the basis of a so-called
Schrödinger logic, which treats identity statements between variables ranging over
microscopic entities as not well formed and therefore meaningless.6
The basic ﬁrst-order theory of mereology, formulated in terms of variables
; ; ; : : : understood to range speciﬁcally over macroscopic quantities (Sect. 1.2),
is expanded into a two-sorted system as a “Schrödinger” logic with identity state-
ments deﬁned (well-formed) only for macroscopic variables. Microscopic variables
m; n; o; : : : ranging speciﬁcally over microentities are added, for which identity
statements are ill formed. General metalinguistic variables u; v; w; : : : , taking the
place of either micro- or macroscopic variables, are used in the formulation of
schemas. A primitive relation of indiscernibility, , forming well formed sentences
with both kinds of variable, satisﬁes axioms making it an equivalence relation.
Quantities are said to be composed of microentities, expressed with a new dyadic
relation Cuv, read “u composes v”, satisfying a fundamental principle:
NoMacmic
8 Cv
restricting the relation C to a relation standing between microentities on the one
hand, and either micro- or macroscopic entities on the other. Quantities don’t
compose anything. A molecule, let us suppose, is a microentity that is composed
of other microentities, and composes quantities, but no quantity composes any
microentity.
6An alternative interpretation of the insensitivity of quantum mechanics to the permutability
of particle has it that, although these particles are not discernible by their properties, they are
discernible by certain relations holding between them, in view ow which there is an irreﬂexive and
symmetric relation of weak discernibility standing between them (Saunders 2006), The intention
here is not to adjudicate between this and French and Krause’s interpretation. That would involved
too large a digression in a book primarily concerned with macroscopic objects. The purpose is
simply to explore one interesting possibility of restricting the scope of the part relation.

144
7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description to Microstructure
It would seem that the principle of the insensitivity to permutations expressed by
Penrose in the above passage could be captured in mereological terms by a thesis
along the following lines7:
n  o ^
Cnm ^
Com :  .m  n/ [ o  m:
A quasi-mereology for microentities with the composed relation and operations of
difference and sum is outlined in this section, allowing for the formulation and
adoption of such a principle of the insensitivity to permutations.
The point of the present exercise is to ensure that, although microentities
compose quantities, they are not parts. A similar policy has already been instigated
in the present many-sorted framework where mereological features are laid down
separately for each of the categories of times, regions and quantities with no cross-
category relations or operations. Expression such as t j , p j  and t j p have been
implicitly regarded as ill formed, without any import on the mereological principles
governing the entities in these categories. This strategy is naturally extended to the
new category of microscopic entities by not allowing expressions of the kind m j ,
 j m, t j m, m j t, p j m or m j p, involving microscopic variables in the standard
relations of mereology, as well formed. An alternative strategy would be to allow
expressions of the kind m j  and  j m to be well formed and to lay down a
general axiom that microentities are always separate from entities of any kind. But
this course is not followed here.
Composition and parthood are related by the principle
micMac
Cm ^    : Cm,
which is a natural extension of transitivity of parthood linking the micro and macro
realms. This includes the special case
Cm ^  D  : Cm.
Although lack of the usual identity criterion may discount composition from
being a proper mereological relation, a quasi-mereology can be developed for
microentities with a view to expanding on the principles governing the composition
relation by analogy with parthood. To facilitate comparison with standard mereol-
ogy as developed here, the quasi-mereological primitive is chosen to be micro- or
quasi-separation, o, alongside the new primitive , and composition, C, is deﬁned
by
Df C
Cvw  8o .o o w  o o v/.
Instead of the antisymmetry property as it applies to parthood, the following
analogue is laid down as an axiom
IndistAx
Cmn ^ Cnm : m  n.
7Cf. Theorem 26 of French and Krause (2006, p. 296).

7.4
Indiscernible Particles
145
IndistAx serves as a criterion of indistinguishability, much like the mereological
criterion of identity MQ1. Reﬂexivity and transitivity of composition,
Creﬂ
Cmm
Ctrans
Cmn ^ Cno : Cmo,
follow directly from Df C. Cmm is a theorem of predicate logic when written out in
accordance with Df C. For transitivity,
Cmn ^ Cno :: 8o0 .o0 o n  o0 o m/ ^ 8o0 .o0 o o  o0 o n/
: 8o0 ..o0 o o  o0 o n/ ^ .o0 o n  o0 o m//
: 8o0 .o0 o o  o0 o m/;
which is Cmo as required.
The analogue of overlap, ˇ, is deﬁned by the existence of a common microcom-
ponent:
Df ˇ
m ˇ n  9o .Com ^ Con/,
which entails the symmetry and reﬂexivity of ˇ. The relation is governed by the
following analogue of the axiom MQ2 of standard mereology,
SepAx
m ˇ n  .m o n/,
which in turn entails the symmetry and irreﬂexivity of o. Two quantities, or a
quantity and a microentity, might microoverlap (be microseparate) in virtue of
a common (no common) microcomponent. Composition and quasi-separation are
simply related by the theorem
T1
u o v ^ Cmv :  u o m.
For suppose not, i.e. u o v; Cmv and u ˇ m. Then there is a microentity which
composes both u and m, and so both u and v by Ctrans, contradicting u o v.
Proper composition, C, is deﬁned by the schema
Df C
Cvw : Cvw ^ Cwv.
This deﬁnition avoids the use of identity as it featured in the deﬁnition of proper
parthood. But the deﬁnition clearly entails that proper composition is irreﬂexive (on
pain of contradiction) and asymmetric, and by IndistAx and Df. C,
T2
Cmn : Cmn _ m  n.
Transitivity is established by a straightforward argument. Assume Cmn ^ Cno.
Then clearly Cmo, and it remains to show  Com. Assume not, i.e. Com. Then
Cnm (given Cno by Ctrans), contradicting Cmn which implies Cnm.
Proper composition should naturally entail distinguishibility (the negation of
indistinguishability). Composite microentities such as sodium atoms, for example,
though indistinguishable from one another, are distinguishable from their micro-
components. This entailment would follow from Df. C and the converse of IndistAx.

146
7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description to Microstructure
IndistAx is the analogue of the mereological criterion of identity, MQ1, the converse
of which follows from the laws of identity. No such principles are available to
demonstrate the converse of IndistAx, and this seems an unwarrantedly strong
principle to accept in justiﬁcation of this criterion of distinguishability. The criterion
of distinguishibility is therefore taken as axiomatic:
DistAx
Cmn  .m  n/.
In view of the NoMacMic principle, Cm  Cm and Cm are theses.
The litmus test of the strength of the analogy with mereology is whether com-
position, as interpreted here, sustains the analogue of the strong supplementation
principle (cf. Simons 1987, p. 29):
CSS
Cmn  9o .Com ^ o o n/.
A photon, n, is not composed of an electron, m, for example. This principle would
suggest that there must be some microentity, o, of which the electron is composed
that is microseparate from the photon (with apologies for the misplaced deﬁnite
articles). This wouldn’t be the case if the relation in the ﬁrst existentially quantiﬁed
conjunct were proper composition. But as it stands, the relation is composition,
which is reﬂexive, so the consequent is satisﬁed by the electron itself, which is
microseparate from the photon. CSS can be demonstrated as follows:
Cmn  8o .o o n  o o m/
ŒDf C
 9o .o o n ^ o o m/
 9o .o o n ^ 9o0 .Co0o ^ Co0n// ŒSepAx, Df ˇ
 9o 9o0 .o o n ^ Co0o ^ Co0n/
 9o0 .n o o0 ^ Co0n/
Œsymm of o; T1;
as required. CSS holds when the variable “n” is replaced by a macroscopic, quantity
variable, but not when the variable “m” is so replaced.
The converse of CSS follows from earlier principles. For suppose not, and there
is an o for which Com^oon but Cmn. Then by Ctrans, Con, which implies oˇn by
Creﬂand Df. ˇ, and this in turn implies  .o o n/ by SepAx, in contradiction with
the assumption o o n. So the strong supplementation principle can be strengthened
to an equivalence.
The strong supplementation principle of standard mereology (together with the
properties of parthood) entails the weak supplementation principle, the analogue of
which is
CWS
Cmn  9o .Con ^ o o m/.
This follows here since Cmn is just Cmn and Cnm by Df. C, and the latter implies
9o .Con ^ o o m/ by CSS.
The analogy with mereology can be pursued further with the introduction of an
axiom schema supporting the existence of micro- or quasi-sums. A direct analogue
of schema MQ3 (Sect. 1.2) is not appropriate here, however, where there is no

7.4
Indiscernible Particles
147
question of proving uniqueness. The quasi-operation would generate a microentity
from microentities satisfying the condition '.m/, and a microentity is not involved
in meaningful identity statements. But the criterion of indistinguishability serves as
a basis for establishing the indistinguishability of quasi- or microsums. We proceed
by ﬁrst establishing an alternative formulation of IndistAx:
T3
8m .o o m  o o n/  m  n.
From SepAx and Df. ˇ we have
8o .o o m  o o n/  8o .9o0 .Co0o ^ Co0m/  9o0 .Co0o ^ Co0n//
 8o 8o0 .Co0m  Co0n/
 8o0 ..Co0m  Co0n/ ^ .Co0n  Co0m//
: 8o0 .Co0m  Co0n/ ^ 8o0 .Co0n  Co0m/
: .Cmm  Cmn/ ^ .Cnn  Cnm/
: Cmn ^ Cnm
ŒCreﬂ
which proves the theorem.
A microsum of '-ers is now introduced as a microentity quasi-separate from all
and only those things quasi-separate from each '-er. With no identities amongst
microentities, sums cannot be deﬁned as in ordinary mereology (Sect. 1.2). Instead,
the general microsummation operator †m '.m/ is introduced as a primitive concept
whose sense is determined by the axiom schema:
SumAx
9m '.m/  8m .m o †n '.n/  8n .'.n/  m o n//.
The same symbol, †, has been used as for classical mereological sums of quantities
and the ensuing variable is taken to distinguish the cases.
The indistinguishability of microsums is rather cumbersome to formulate but
easily proved on the basis of the criterion provided by T3. Abbreviating 8m .'.m/ 
o o m/ as  .o/, the theorem can be expressed as
T4
8n1 8n2 .8o .o o n1   .o// ^ 8o .o o n2   .o// 
n1  n2.
Consider, then, any n1; n2 such that 8o .o o n1   .o// ^ 8o .o o n2   .o//
 8o ..o o n1   .o// ^ .o o n2   .o//
 8o .o o n1  o o n2/;
which implies n1  n2 by T3.
Binary microsums, n [ o, are deﬁned by the condition m  n _ m  o of being
indistinguishable from either n or o. The existence prerequisite is automatically
fulﬁlled [n  n ) 9m.m  n/ ) 9m.m  n _ m  o/]. Clearly, n [ o  o [ n.
Further,
T5
n  o  m [ n  m [ o.

148
7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description to Microstructure
For given n  o, m [ n is †m0.m0  m _ m0  n/ [by deﬁnition]  †m0.m0 
m _ m0  o/ [since m0  o is equivalent with m0  n by transitivity and symmetry
of ]  m [ o. Also,
T6
o o m [ n : o o m ^ o o n.
For by the SumAx,
o o m [ n  8o0 .o0  m _ o0  n : o o o0/
: 8o0 .o0  m  o o o0/ ^ 8o0 .o0  n  o o o0/
: .m  m  o o m/ ^ .n  n  o o n/
: o o m ^ o o n
(The analogous proof in standard mereology with identity instead of indistinguisha-
bility maintains the equivalence.)
A special case of a microsum, called the quasi- or microproduct of '-ers and
written …m '.m/, is the sum of microentities satisfying the condition of composing
every '-er, i.e. †m 8n .'.n/  Cmn/. The corresponding existence condition is,
accordingly, 9m 8n .'.n/  Cmn/ and SumAx becomes in this special case
9m 8n .'.n/  Cmn/  8m .m o …n '.n/ 
8n .8o .'.o/  Cno/  m o n//.
Again, the same sign, …, is used for the microproduct as for its mereological ana-
logue, relying on the variable type to distinguish the cases. A binary microproduct,
n \ o, is deﬁned by the condition of being indistinguishable from either n or o.
A quasi- or microdifference, m  n, between two microentities is what is left
when n is taken away from m. This presupposes that there really is something left,
i.e. 9o .Com^oon/, and a difference is a microsum of all these left-overs, †o .Com^
o o n/. By the analogue of the strong supplementation principle, CSS, which we
saw could be strengthened to an equivalence, the presupposition is equivalent with
Cmn, and SumAx becomes in this special case
Coo0  8m .m o o  o0  8n .Cno ^ n o o0 : m o n//.
Note that Cmn allows that m ˇ n, and where the more speciﬁc case of n properly
compsing m is at issue the further prerequisite Cnm must be speciﬁed.
What of the seemingly obvious principle of reuniﬁcation
Cnm  .m  n/ [ n  m;
where n properly composes m? With T3 in mind, it has to be shown that the
indiscernibles here are quasi-separate from exactly the same things. Assume Cnm,
so that mn exists. What is quasi-separate from m has no composing microentity in
common with m, and so by T1, nothing in common with anything composing m. In

7.4
Indiscernible Particles
149
particular, it has nothing in common composing anything composing m and quasi-
separate from n. So what is quasi-separate from m is quasi-separate from m  n by
SumAx as well as being quasi-separate from n in virtue of Cnm and T1. But the
conclusion doesn’t follow in the absence of the converse of T6, which would seem
to be unobjectionable and could be adopted as an axiom.
The converse,
Cnm  8w .w o .m  n/ [ n  w o m/;
is taken as axiomatic, and the principle of reuniﬁcation is accepted.
A universe of microentities is a sum of everything satisfying a universal condition
satisﬁed by all and only microentities. Being indistinguishable from itself won’t
do as the condition since it is also satisﬁed by macroentities. But a universe of
microentities, Um, can be deﬁned as †m Cmm. (Present assumptions don’t allow a
meaningful formulation of a uniqueness claim.) A microcomplement, m, of m is a
difference with respect to a microuniverse, Um  m, provided .m  Um/.
The principle of insensitivity to permutations mentioned at the beginning of the
section can now be formulated, adding the proviso needed to guarantee the existence
of a difference, Cmn, which is tantamount to strengthening Cnm to Cnm:
n  o ^
Cnm ^
Com :  .m  n/ [ o  m:
In view of T5, it follows that
n  o  .m  n/ [ o  .m  n/ [ n:
The reuniﬁcation principle Cnm  .m  n/ [ n  n then gives us, allbeit somewhat
clumsily, the principle of insensitivity to permutations.
7.4.1
Discussion
The quasi-mereology of indiscernible particles is, perhaps, too unlike mereology to
be of interest. But what led to this investigation was the idea that parts at issue in
distributivity properties that are a feature of the macroscopic behaviour of matter are
themselves macroscopic entities. Microscopic constituents are not counterexamples
because they are not parts of quantities. On this account, microentities are not parts
because they don’t respect the identity of parts which is the basis of mereology.
There is the question of what lies at the border between micro- and macroentities.
Penrose gives the impression in the passage quoted above that the domain of
microentities encompases ever larger compound microentities—the “etc.” in “for
the whole atoms, molecules, etc.”. But at some point, in some way, the familiar
rules of identity come into play. How this accommodation between the realms of the

150
7
The Relation of Macroscopic Description to Microstructure
microscopic and the macroscopic comes about is an issue that lies beyond the scope
of this book, however. At all events, no postulate is introduced to the effect that
every quantity is a sum of mereological atoms, composed of microentities but with
no proper parts. Still less are such mereological atoms identiﬁed with molecules or
any kind of microentity.
Some understanding of this unhappy state of affairs might be gleaned from
the standard approach to molecular structure in quantum chemistry. Electrons
in molecules are treated as indistinguishable particles in the sense of quantum
mechanics in modern theories of molecular structure. Nuclei are taken to form the
framework—giving the molecule a shape—with reference to which the electronic
structures are calculated. As such, nuclei are not treated as indistinguishable
particles in molecular orbital theory, on the strength of what is variously referred
to as the Born-Oppenheimer approximation or assumption. It is a contentious issue
whether this can be justiﬁed in quantum-mechanical terms as an approximation or is
more appropriately regarded as an independent assumption (Sutcliffe and Woolley
2012). The ﬁrst accurate treatment of the isolated hydrogen molecule allowed
permutation of the nuclei (James and Coolidge 1933), and Woolley (1988) points
out that isolated molecules in gases at low pressure can be successfully treated
(e.g. in mass spectrometry) without appeal to the Born-Oppenheimer assumption.
The characteristic structure endowed by “clamped nuclei” commonly referred to
as molecular shape is, it seems, a special feature of a molecule endowed by other
molecules in close vicinity.

Chapter 8
Longish Processes
8.1
Occurrents
Three of Aristotle’s elements, water, air and earth, leave some vestige in modern
thought as kinds of matter: a particular phase of a compound (water), a solution of
gases (air) and a very complex mixture of substances. It remains to come to terms
with the fourth Aristotelian element, ﬁre. As with the other Aristotelian elements,
there is something in the idea. But it is not a kind of quantity of matter. It is a
process.
Processes have temporal (and other) parts and do not endure over time like
continuants. They are what Johnson called occurrents. As mentioned at the begin-
ning of Chap. 1, they ﬁgure in reductionist theses, some philosophers suggesting
that they are reducible to continuants and others suggesting that continuants are
reducible to them. Neither thesis is advanced here, and processes are included
in the basic ontology as a separate domain over which range a distinct style
of variables, e; f; g; : : : of the many-sorted regimentation. Whether some deep
argument establishing the reduction of one category of entity to another may yet
be forthcoming cannot, of course, be ruled out. In the present case, the interesting
candidate seems to be the reduction of thermodynamics, which provides much of
the motivation here for the introduction of processes, to statistical mechanics. But
even if macrotheory were reducible to microtheory, that would not eliminate the
ontological claims of existence of macroentities nor show that their properties were
somehow not features of the world. As things stand, however, in the absence of
any such argument,1 the presumption is that processes constitute an autonomous
category.
1Even friends of reduction feel bound to admit “the jury is still out concerning the reduction of
thermodynamics to SM [statistical mechanics]” (Callender 1999, p. 352).
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P. Needham, Macroscopic Metaphysics, Synthese Library 390,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4_8
151

152
8
Longish Processes
Philosophers writing about occurrents often speak of events and their examples
are often human actions or occurrences suffered by humans, with descriptions
couched in terms that focus on their human interest. Speaking of processes is a more
natural way of describing what, from the macroscopic perspective, are continuously
developing progressions and examples involving human agents are avoided in order
not to obscure the physical aspects of processes. This in no way prejudges the issue
of an identity thesis along the lines Davidson has proposed, taking actions to be
processes as understood here, but that is not the present concern. Nor should it
obscure the fact that one and the same general thesis about the nature of occurrents
may be at issue whether formulated in terms of events or by speaking of processes.
One such issue is the reductionist strategy that events are but changes in continuants.
This is not a deep theoretical argument like that alluded to in the previous paragraph,
but a way of essentially trivialising the notion of an occurrent. As an analysis it fails
because, whilst a process may determine a change, a change does not determine a
speciﬁc process. This conception is taken up and the criticism elaborated in the next
section. It is followed in Sect. 8.3 by an account of how the notion of a process was
encapsulated right from the ﬁrst stages of the development of thermodynamics as
it dispensed with caloric in dealing with the distinctions of warmth and heating. A
process cannot, on this account, be adequately characterised solely by conditions at
its beginning and end, which is how those who deﬁne occurrents as changes would
have it. Some indication is given of how the conception is developed in the extension
of the theory to irreversible thermodynamics, which is applicable under conditions
not too far from equilibrium, with the notion of entropy production.
Since the action of the entropy-producing forces driving processes is naturally
described in causal terms, the relation of processes to causation is taken up in
Sect. 8.4. There is no claim to give an analysis of causation, however. The aim
of the account of processes presented here is therefore to be sharply distinguished
from that of another conception of processes initially developed by Reichenbach
and Salmon from a very different point of departure, which is widely held to
have failed as an analysis of the concept of causation (Psillos 2002, pp. 110–27).
Reichenbach and Salmon’s concern with world lines is not an issue here, where
the mere endurance of a continuant is not regarded as a process. Nor is the mere
conservation of energy, incorporated into latter-day modiﬁcations of such theories,
regarded as sufﬁcient to merit speaking of a process. The mere conservation of
energy in accordance with the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics is compatible with
the persistence of temperature gradients, the uneven distribution of a substance
and the persistence of iron in the presence of oxygen2 despite iron oxide having
proportionately less energy. Only the second law provides anything like the basis for
an explanation of why processes of heating, diffusion and chemical transformation
occur.
2To take the example Atkins (1994, pp. 111–4) uses to illustrate the way in which entropy drives
chemical reactions in general.

8.2
Change
153
In his review of causal process theories, Dowe (2009, p. 223) takes up the claim
he and Salmon made about their Conserved Quantity theory providing an empirical
analysis (“it concerns an objective feature of the actual world . . . draw[ing] its
primary justiﬁcation from our best scientiﬁc theories”), which they contrast with a
conceptual analysis, tied to uneducated folk intuition and serving a different aim.
A conceptual analysis of change and event found in the philosophical literature
is challenged in the following pages by an empirically justiﬁed conception of
processes based on ideas developed by the proponents of thermodynamics. This
calls for broad conceptual strokes rather than quantitative detail, so does not
raise detailed questions of empirical justiﬁcation. But the conception avoids the
ﬁxation on mechanical collisions typiﬁed by the kinds of process theory Salmon
has inspired, which involves a restriction on the claim of empirical adequacy that
Dowe radically underestimates when he goes on to say that “the conserved quantity
theory . . . requires commitment to a fairly thoroughgoing reductionism” (2009,
p. 224). It is not just economics and psychology, as he seems to suggest, that would
have to be reduced, but also vast tracts of natural science. The theory doesn’t touch
chemical reactions (and therefore subjects such as biology or mineralogy), chemical
change resulting from the deformation of materials (Bayly 1992), phase change and
much else. In fact, nearly all of the macroscopic realm investigated by the physical
sciences would have to fall to the as yet unproven reductionist thesis if the claim of
empirical justiﬁcation were to be borne out.
Davidson’s strategy of introducing processes as variables of quantiﬁcation about
which several things can be said in defence of the relational view of causation
as a dyadic relation between events offers something more useful to the present
project. The general strategy itself is not tied to the relational view of causation,
from which it is severed in Sect. 8.4, freeing it for use as a vehicle for describing
how processes are related to continuants, space and time in Sect. 8.5 without
the Davidsonian trappings. The mereological structure of parts—temporal and
otherwise—of processes is taken up in Sect. 8.6, after which examples illustrating
the relational character of processes are discussed in Sect. 8.7 both for their intrinsic
interest and by way of putting the ﬁnal nail in the cofﬁn of the idea underlying some
philosophical treatments of events that they involve a single continuant.
8.2
Change
Philosophers seeking to deﬁne occurrents as changes ﬁnd fault with Russell’s view
that a change can be fully characterised as “the difference, in respect of truth
and falsehood, between a proposition concerning an entity and a time T and a
proposition concerning the same entity and another time T0, provided that the two
propositions differ only by the fact that T occurs in one where T0 occurs in the other”
(1972, p. 469) because it fails to distinguish “real” changes from “Cambridge”
changes. The leading idea in Lombard (1986), for example, is that real changes
involve non-relational changes in objects, whereas the proposition in Russell’s

154
8
Longish Processes
deﬁnition may well involve other entities than the one mentioned. Cleland (1991)
thinks it a mistake to invariably ascribe change to physical objects, and considers it
a problem for Kim’s (1976) analysis of events as property exempliﬁcations that
some events can be identiﬁed without reference to any physical object (e.g. that shriek, this
ﬂash, that desire), which suggests that some events may not be individuated in terms of
physical objects. (1991, p. 230)
Her leading idea is a reﬁnement of Bennett’s (1988) theory of events as tropes
(instantiations of properties), which is itself a reﬁnement of Kim’s theory. An event
is a pair of exempliﬁcations of distinct states at distinct times by a kind of trope she
calls a concrete phase (a particularised determinable, of which temperature is taken
to be an example).
Lombard argues that events are non-relational Russellian changes on the basis of
examples such as Socrates dying, which entails that his wife, Xanthippe, becomes
a widow, or that while Theaetetus grows, Socrates, who was taller than Theaetetus
becomes shorter. Unlike Xanthippe’s becoming a widow and Socrates’ becoming
shorter than Theaetetus, which involve changes in the relation of Xanthippe to
Socrates, and of Socrates to Theaetetus, Socrates’ dying and Theaetetus’ growing
are said to be genuine changes—things that happen or occur—because they are
non-relational. But it seems that Lombard is too hasty in generalising from these
cases. Many processes are naturally regarded as relational. There are processes of
mutual attraction and repulsion of electrically charged and magnetised objects, and
of Newtonian gravitational attraction involving massive bodies such as the earth and
the moon, the sun and the planets, and so forth. The collision of two billiard balls
involves the impressing on and thrusting away of one by the other. There is heating
of a colder body by a warmer body and the diffusing of a quantity of a substance
through another, as well as the chemical reaction of several substances yielding
others. In each of these cases, some feature of the states of the bodies involved
(electric charge, magnetic pole, mass, uniform velocity, temperature, concentration,
chemical potential) gives rise, in the circumstances, to the processes.
Despite the prevalence of such examples, philosophers have been reluctant to
take them at face value and adopt a relational view of processes. Traditionally, they
have imposed a different view on examples of the kind just mentioned according
to which there are several changings, and so events, each involving a change in a
single body rather than relations between several bodies. It is said, for example,
that there are changings in position of the billiard balls, or of the temperatures of
the warmer and the colder bodies in the heating case, and the relational aspect is a
matter of these changings standing to one another as cause and effect. The general
strategy of construing events in whatever way is deemed necessary in order to save
the relational view of causation as a dyadic relation between events will not go
unquestioned here. But sufﬁce it for the moment to mention two examples indicating
some limitations on the workability of this idea. First, in the paradigm example of
one billiard ball striking another, it is unclear how the approach is to be generalised
to cover three-body collisions. No change in any single body can be identiﬁed with
the cause on any view of the matter.

8.2
Change
155
In the second case, the temperature difference between the bodies involved in a
heating might be maintained by thermostatically controlling each body, and yet a
heating continues to take place. Duhem describes such a case:
Let us imagine a metal bar whose surfaces are surrounded by a non-conducting substance
which doesn’t allow any exchange of heat between the bar’s surface and the external
environment. One end of the bar is at a base temperature #, the other is submitted to the
action of a source of heat with a temperature #0, higher than #. After a certain time, a
permanent regime is established. The temperature of each point in the bar and the state of
each element of volume of the bar then remain invariable. If, therefore, starting from the
moment that the permanent regime is established, the bar is observed for a certain time, its
internal energy will not vary, the external forces acting on it will do no work, its kinetic
energy will remain equal to 0. At the same time, the bar will have absorbed heat at its
hot end and released heat at its cold end. This is the simple observation that Clausius has
generalised in such a way as to give ... [his] fundamental postulate (Duhem 1887, p. 126).
So a change in temperature is by no means essential to the occurrence of the heating
process. Thermodynamics suggests that change is involved in the environment of
the bar. But this sounds like the sort of Cambridge change that was to be avoided.
In any case, it is not at all obvious how this insight can be harnessed in deﬁning the
heating process as a change in an object. Which object would that be? Neither the
bar nor its parts, since their temperatures are not changed, although the bar and its
parts are what, if anything, is heated.
The view of occurrences as non-relational changes faces many apparent coun-
terexamples, and is not at all adequately motivated by the usual scare stories about
Cambridge changes. I turn to consider Cleland’s view of occurrents in more detail.
The counterexamples Cleland adduces against the thesis that events involve
physical objects do not clearly bear out her claim. It may not be apparent to
an observer what it is that shrieks or ﬂashes, but they might nevertheless be
compression waves or ionisation effects imparted to the air, or dispersion of light
by smoke. And it begs a large question to assume that desires are not features of
material. Still, there might be processes which can’t be interpreted as going on in
material. Radiation phenomena, for example, might simply be borne by regions of
space at a time.3 Even so, there are problems with her deﬁnition of occurrents.
The properties whose gain and loss determine what counts as a change Lombard
qualiﬁes as static. Cleland calls them states, and deﬁnes a change in terms of an
initial and ﬁnal state. She claims to be following standard scientiﬁc practice by
appealing to the notion of states and their relation to changes as characterised in
science. Simons (2003, p. 369) agrees that “her account accords closely with the way
physicists specify the states of physical systems in terms of the values of variable
quantities”, which he counts as a point in its favour (without committing himself
3“... the empirical equations of state of ... an electromagnetic cavity are the ‘Stefan-Boltzmann
Law’ U D bVT4 and P D U=3V where b is a particular constant .... It will be noted that these
empirical equations of state are functions of U and V, but not of N. This observation calls our
attention to the fact that in the ‘empty’ cavity there exist no conserved particles to be counted by
a parameter N” (Callen 1985, pp. 78–9). Cf. what Lieb and Yngvason (1999, pp. 20–1) say about
the thermodynamic treatment of electromagnetic phenomena.

156
8
Longish Processes
to it). At one point, Cleland says that “[C]hange is commonly described in science
[by being] represented in a state space . . . as a ‘trajectory’ (time-ordered curve)
connecting different states” (1991, p. 242). This comment reﬂects an important
insight, but it is not captured by her deﬁnition. A concrete change (which an event
is subsequently deﬁned to be), she says,
is a pair fx; yg such that x is the exempliﬁcation of a state s by a concrete phase
CP [determinable of which the state is a determinate feature] at a time t and y is the
exempliﬁcation of a state s0 by concrete phase CP0 at a time t0, where (i) t is earlier than
t0; (ii) CP is the same concrete phase as CP0, and (iii) s is not the same state as s0. (Cleland
1991, p. 238)
Condition (i) precludes instantaneous changes, which I take to be a condition of
adequacy of any acceptable notion of process. But this is not enough to capture
the idea of a “trajectory”. Condition (iii) excludes the important case of cyclic
transformations, which follow a closed trajectory, i.e. one returning a system to
its initial state. A good indication that the import of processes taking time is not
properly captured is that the deﬁnition fails to allow for the distinction between
processes where the initial state is merely recovered and reversible processes
(discussed further in the next section), which speciﬁcally involve retracing the
trajectory in recovering the initial state. Carnot cycles are processes combining
both these features, i.e. processes following closed, reversible trajectories. Cyclic
and reversible processes are special cases of processes with duration which are
represented by time-ordered curves connecting speciﬁc states.
In general, two states might be connected by any number of trajectories, each
corresponding to a possible happening, no one of which can therefore be identiﬁed
merely by reference to its endpoints. A mountaineer might be at a certain height
at one time and another at a later time, but this tells us little about the precise
route traversed during the intervening period and the particular activities involved
in it, notably the smaller ascents and descents which sum to give the total change
in height. It doesn’t even distinguish the honest toils of a mountaineer from the
cheat who ascends from the lower height in a balloon and later descends to the
higher point. Of course, a particular change of state from some given state of
a body to another is the result of some actual process, which can therefore be
correctly described as the process leading from such-and-such a state at a particular
time to such-and-such a state at another time (the times must be speciﬁed since
states are repeatable). But whatever matters of reference this strategy addresses, it
doesn’t yield general features specifying a process as being of some kind or other
which would facilitate scientiﬁc theorising about processes, contrary to Simons’
assessment. Moreover, it cannot be used to specify a possible process. Given the
fact that formal treatments of thermodynamics deal with a relation of adiabatic
accessibility on a set of all possible states, this problem is not lightly dismissed.
A description in terms of process kinds must involve a predication of the entire
period and can’t in general be characterised by simply specifying the states obtain-
ing at its endpoints. This is the ﬁrst problem with Cleland’s deﬁnition. The second is
that, although she happens to have chosen an example of a state determinable when
illustrating her deﬁnition with temperature, being a state determinable imposes

8.2
Change
157
special conditions. A general metaphysical theory which simply treats them as any
old determinable (what Cleland would call a phase), such as heat and work, doesn’t
ﬁt the bill.
I don’t want to go into the general metaphysical theory of tropes on which
Cleland builds her conception of processes as changes. But there is one aspect of
the motivation she gives for this approach to the problem which is relevant to this
second line of criticism. Cleland says
Remember that old puzzle about change: in order for something to change there must be
a sense in which it remains the same (otherwise it simply ceases to exist) and a sense in
which it becomes different (changes). There is a sense in which a concrete phase can be
said to remain the same while becoming different. It can be said to remain the same in the
sense that the instance of the determinable property which constitutes it does not go into
and out of existence during the time in which the instances of the associated determinate
properties (states) are going into and out of existence, e.g., a liquid whose temperature
is changing does not, at any time during the change, cease to have temperature .... it
can also be said to become different in the sense that it takes on different determinate
values (e.g. of temperature) during the change. More speciﬁcally, if one takes determinate
properties (states) to be contingent properties of instances of the determinable they fall
under (of concrete phases), then it seems that one can make good metaphysical sense of the
Aristotelian claim that the proper subjects of change are conditions, viz., concrete phases,
as opposed to physical objects. (Cleland 1991, pp. 237–8)
Temperature is an intensive property, its application requiring that all spatial parts
of whatever bears a temperature have the same temperature as the whole. In
order to have a temperature a body must therefore be at thermal equilibrium. If
a body is to have a temperature at any time during a change this condition must
be maintained during the change. The conditions of so-called quasi-static change
when this constraint is satisﬁed represent an ideal which can only be approached
in practice, and ordinary, everyday changes in temperature are not quasi-static. This
means they are not even representable by paths through state space, the intermediate
conditions not being equilibrium states. Again, there are any number of irreversible
processes with the same initial and the same ﬁnal states, and distinguishing any
one of them from the rest must take account of what happens throughout the entire
period. Experimentally, raising the temperature of a liquid would require waiting
at the end of the process for the liquid to settle down to equilibrium and acquire a
deﬁnite temperature. So it is not clear that it is true to say of any proper subintervals
of this period that it is “a liquid whose temperature is changing” when it doesn’t
have a temperature at the start and end of the subinterval in question. The process
nevertheless involves something which “remains the same”, but the only serious
candidate in the ofﬁng is the quantity of liquid, i.e. the physical continuant.
What Lombard offers is no improvement on Cleland’s notion of states. He
distinguishes what he calls static properties as those whose being instantiated
at an instant does not imply the object in question is changing. Instantaneous
dynamic properties, by contrast, entail the existence of an interval including the
instant in question during which the object has and then lacks some static property.
Acceleration during a period which is part of a longer period of acceleration—for
example, the moon’s revolving around the earth all day yesterday—does not involve
a dynamic property by this criterion since there is no static property acquired and
then lost.

158
8
Longish Processes
I have not pursued how the issue might be affected by any speciﬁc account of
the general import of predicates, such as trope theories. But I will mention that in
a recent review of attempts at drawing a useful distinction between intrinsic and
extrinsic properties, Weatherson (2006, p. 6) observes that distinguishing a suitable
notion of non-relational property falls back on a theory of identity conditions for
states and events. The policy here will be to introduce processes outright, rather
than attempting to deﬁne processes as some kind of change, and seek a better
characterisation of their central features than is accomplished by these strategies of
deﬁnition, again without controversial assumptions about the import of predicates.
8.3
Distinguishing Processes from States
Heating is the paradigm case of a kind of process. We saw in Sect. 6.2 something
of how the idea of heat as a substance was introduced in the latter part of the
eighteenth century, described by Lavoisier as the “element of heat or ﬁre” (1965,
p. 175) for which he introduced the name “caloric”. Thermodynamics developed in
the mid-nineteenth century by incorporating the insight that the deﬁning condition
of caloric, that heat is conserved, is not true. The ﬁrst law of thermodynamics
introduced the concept of energy as a conserved magnitude, but instead of regarding
energy as a kind of substance transferred from one body to another, treated it as
measurable property characterising the state of a body (the retention of textbook
talk of transferring energy notwithstanding). Heating was treated on a par with
mechanical working, as a feature of the processes by which a body is changed
from one state to another. A given state may result from any number of different
processes, and the given state of a body contains no trace of which particular process
brought it to that state. In fact, a body at equilibrium (and so in a deﬁnite state)
contains no trace of its history, not even how long it has been in the given state.
So it is already becoming clear that an end state is in no way characteristic of a
process. The original distinction that ﬁrst motivated the caloric theory, the need to
clearly distinguish the notions of warmth and heat, remains in thermodynamics but
is incorporated into a general theory in a different way—one which remains the
basis of our understanding of temperature and heating today. These developments
are reviewed in this section with a view to showing how ontological commitment
to processes arose as a result of distinguishing the way processes and states are
described.
The early designers of thermometers were aware that these instruments measure
the degree of warmth of a body without providing any way of answering the further
question of whether or not the same amount of heat is required to raise a given body
through a given interval of temperature, say one degree, in different regions of the
temperature scale, or whether the same amount of heat is required to raise different
bodies through the same degrees, say from 0 to 10 ıC. Such questions were dimly
understood at ﬁrst. But the introduction of the concept of speciﬁc heat, and above all
Joseph Black’s discovery of latent heat, established beyond doubt that a distinction

8.3
Distinguishing Processes from States
159
of some sort is needed between the degree of warmth of a body, recorded by a
thermometer, and what was described as the transfer of heat to a body. This latter
idiom persists in modern textbooks, although usually accompanied by a word of
caution about the unwanted suggestion of the movement of some caloriﬁc substance
from one body to another or the conservation of some feature of the motion of
microscopic parts. The downfall of the caloric theory was not so much due to the
ethereal qualities of the imponderable substance, as to a failing it shared with the
competing theory at the beginning of the 19th century according to which heat is a
movement of the constituent particles of a body. As Duhem put it,
if ... physicists were divided regarding the nature of heat, they were unanimous in
recognising that the heat absorbed by a body during a transformation depends only on the
state from which the body departed and that to which it arrived. They were unanimous in
proclaiming that during the traversing of a closed cycle [in which] a body [returns to the
same state, it] releases as much heat as it absorbs. (Duhem 1895, p. 403)
But this proved inadequate; “it is necessary”, Duhem continues, “to recount . . . the
history of the body from the start of the change until the end”, and
It is no longer possible to speak simply of a body, taken in a given state, containing a
determinate quantity of heat; for, if it is brought back to this state after having undergone a
series of changes, it will in general have absorbed more heat than it has released, or released
more heat than it has absorbed. It is still possible to speak of the quantity of heat absorbed
or released by a body while it is undergoing a determinate transformation. But it is not any
longer possible to speak of the quantity of heat enclosed in a body taken in a given state
(Duhem 1895, p. 404).
There is a kind of process, appropriately called heating, which is not a state or a
function of the state of a body like its degree of warmth. But there is no such thing
as the state of a body known as its heat or the heat content of a body, and thus no
such thing as the transfer of heat from one body to another.
The ﬁrst law of thermodynamics overturned theories ascribing bodies an amount
of heat on the basis of a general distinction between features of state, which won’t
do to characterise processes, and features of processes, which cannot be used to
characterise states. The mathematical form of the argument establishes that the sum
of the inﬁnitesimal amount of heating and the amount of working in an inﬁnitesimal
process has the properties of an exact differential—whose line integral over a closed
path is zero, or equivalently, whose integral along a path depends only on the end-
points of the path—from which it follows that there exists a function, called the
energy, characterising a state. This is what the energy conservation thesis amounts
to: there are reproducible conditions of bodies called states, and returning to a given
state means returning to the same amount of energy. The energy difference between
two states therefore imposes a constraint on any process in which a body changes
from one of these states to the other: the sum of the amounts of heating and of
mechanical working involved equals this difference in energy between the states.
But these amounts of heating and of mechanical working may vary from one such
process to another, increases in the one being compensated by decreases in the other
in order that their sum always equals this difference in energy between the states.
Accordingly, the change in energy (or any other feature of state) is not sufﬁcient to

160
8
Longish Processes
distinguish any one of an inﬁnite number of different possible processes carrying the
body between these states from any other, and the state of a body bears no trace of
how it got into that state.4 Equally, characteristic properties of processes such as the
amount of heating involved won’t do to characterise a change of state because they
say nothing of how much of some other feature of the process such as mechanical
working is necessary to offset the heating and yield a given change of energy. This is
the interpretation of the mathematical feature that functions tracking the changes in
features, such as in the amount of heating, or the amount of working, characteristic
of processes carrying a body from one state to another are inexact differentials,
whose integrals between two limits (states) are dependent on the path taken.
Thermodynamic data are exclusively concerned with equilibrium states, and used
to lay down necessary conditions for the spontaneous occurrence of processes,
which cannot transform material to a less stable condition. But although primarily
concerned with states of bodies, it is clear from the foregoing that classical
thermodynamics prepares the ground for a more explicit treatment of processes by
the way it distinguishes properties of state from those of processes. Without full-
blown recognition of processes as things taking place in time, however, it raises a
ticklish problem in connection with its core notion of a reversible process, which
is central to classical arguments based on Carnot cycles and the establishment of
properties of state. The notion was in general usage before being carefully deﬁned,
apparently for the ﬁrst time by Duhem (1887, pp. 132–4; 1893a, pp. 305–9). Rechel
(1947, p. 301) drew attention to the nice point involved when he bemoaned the
fact that the standard English term “reversible process” “contains a contradiction
within itself . . . which text book writers are prone to ignore”, although he exonerates
Duhem from the charge.
Duhem notes, by way of a preliminary to his deﬁnition, that
When a system is at equilibrium in a certain state it persists indeﬁnitely in that state, and
is not transformed. It therefore seems not possible to speak without contradiction of a real
change constituted by a sequence of equilibrium states. But it is, in fact, possible to give
these words a logical meaning. (Duhem 1893a, p. 302)
The process of allowing a gas to expand by reducing the pressure on a piston to a
value below that of the internal pressure of the gas is irreversible, giving rise to non-
uniformities depriving the gas as a whole of well-deﬁned pressure and temperature.
By successively reducing the difference between the external pressure and the
opposing internal forces, the gas expands more slowly and less chaotically. The
amount of work done by the gas increases to a limit in the case where the external
and internal pressures are equal. But in this limiting case, the gas is at equilibrium,
4On this basis, the distinction between liquid and gas phases is argued to be unclear, at least as a
characterisation of the state of a body, and no ﬁner description of state than “ﬂuid” is really justiﬁed.
Isothermal compression of a gas below its critical point leads to drops of liquid appearing as the gas
condenses, and eventually the last trace of gas disappears. But the same highly compressed state
may be reached via an alternative route (a different kind of process)—increasing the temperature to
above the critical point at constant volume, then cooling at constant pressure, followed by cooling
at constant volume—in which no condensation occurs (Castellan 1964, p. 36).

8.3
Distinguishing Processes from States
161
and will remain in this state until such time as the equilibrium is disturbed. Real
processes only occur as a result of an imbalance of forces between a system and its
environment. Duhem suggested that in the limit, now called a quasi-static process
after Carathéodory (1909 [1976] p. 238), in which the imbalance is successively
reduced, each step is an equilibrium state. A reversible process is one in which the
quasi-static limit of successively reducing the imbalance of internal and external
forces in taking the system from the ﬁnal state to the initial state is the same set of
equilibrium states, but traversed in reverse order. Accordingly, a quasi-static process
is not necessarily reversible, as Duhem illustrates: “cycles of magnetic hysteresis,
for example, are irreversible changes although they are continuous sequences of
equilibrium states” (1893a, p. 307).
Duhem speaks of a reversible change (modiﬁcation réversible) in the 1893a
article, and suggests that, although not a real process, a sequence of equilibrium
states can be regarded as a virtual change, which doesn’t occur in time with the
independent variables on which the state of the system depends being functions of
time and having determinate rates of change. But this reversible “change” may be
cyclic, and is thus not a change as Russell deﬁned it. The standard English term
“reversible process” is applied because any continuous path connecting one state
with another is called a process, and implies a special kind of process. But the
contradiction Rechel points to arises because of an equivocation between this use
of the term “process” and the ordinary usage in which it cannot be applied to a
sequence of equilibrium states because no system would move spontaneously from
the one to another. The term “process” is understood here in this latter sense, to
apply to something that can actually occur in time. In the absence of any suitable
alternative to “change” and “process”, I suggest that the terms “reversible process”’
and “quasi-static process” be understood like the term “broken glass”: just as a
broken glass is not a glass, so a reversible process is not a process. Accordingly,
since the state space of thermodynamics is a space of equilibrium states, a trajectory
may be a quasi-static process, but it is not a process.
This calls for some qualiﬁcation on what was said about trajectories in the
previous section. It was argued there that Cleland’s deﬁnition didn’t realise one
of its declared aims of representing a change as a trajectory in state space. Now
we have seen that tracking the development in time throughout the course of a real
process cannot be done by following a path in state space.5 It is assumed in classical
thermodynamics that any change in state of a body resulting from a real process
can be reproduced by a reversible process for the purposes of calculating properties
of state, but this is, as Duhem puts it, a virtual process which doesn’t reproduce
the process itself. The emphasis on equilibrium, which came with Gibbs’s famous
paper from 1876–8, was not always how the creators of thermodynamics thought
5The fact that (real) processes are not quasi-static, and so don’t trace a path in the space of
equilibrium states, doesn’t redeem the failure of the attempt to deﬁne occurrents as changes.
Changes still don’t determine processes. A non-equilibriium condition of a body may be the result
of any number of irreversible processes, as may an equilibrium state, which may also result from
any number of quasi-static processes.

162
8
Longish Processes
of their subject. Although entropy is only deﬁned in equilibrium thermodynamics
for systems at equilibrium, when Clausius ﬁrst introduced the term he considered it
to concern irreversible processes. The Clausius inequality, that entropy changes of
closed systems are always greater than or equal to
R
dQ=T, he put in the form
of an equality in which what he called the uncompensated transformation (he
coined the term “entropy” from the Greek word for transformation) in a change
from one state to another is the entropy, S, of the ﬁnal state less the entropy, S0,
of the initial state less
R
dQ=T. The latter term,
R
dQ=T, is the entropy due to
heating of or by the environment, which equals the difference between initial and
ﬁnal entropies in reversible processes but falls short of this in real processes. The
Clausius inequality,
R
dQ=T 
 0, implies that the shortfall, or uncompensated
transformation, is always positive for irreversible processes (Duhem 1887, p. 146).
But he developed no theory for determining the magnitude of the uncompensated
transformation associated with any irreversible processes. Duhem seems to be the
ﬁrst to have explicitly developed accounts of the entropy produced by processes
involving heat conductivity and viscosity (Miller 1960; Brouzeng 1991; Bordoni
2012). Since then, a theory of irreversible or nonequilibrium thermodynamics has
been developed which relates the change of entropy to variables that characterise
irreversible processes, such as the rates of chemical reactions.
Nonequilibrium thermodynamics, which we have already brieﬂy encountered
in Sect. 3.5, builds on the ground prepared by equilibrium thermodynamics by
treating intensive thermodynamic properties and the corresponding densities for
the extensive properties such as entropy as varying with position and time on the
assumption that local equilibrium always reigns at each point and varies smoothly
from one to another. The assumptions of irreversible thermodynamics are not
reasonable under conditions of turbulence, but are applicable under conditions not
too far from equilibrium which are realised in many real situations. The theory deals
with rates of change (in time) by considering the entropy change as the sum of the
entropy of a reversible change taking the system at issue from the initial to the ﬁnal
state in question and the entropy created internally within the system, i.e. Clausius’
uncompensated transformation. It strengthens the statement of the second law in
equilibrium thermodynamics to encompass the parts of a system: not only is the
total internal entropy production nonzero, but so too is that of each part (Kondepudi
and Prigogine 1998, p. 90). It provides a general law giving the entropy production,
—the rate of change of the entropy density (the internal entropy per unit volume)—
as a sum of terms involving the product of a generalised force or afﬁnity and a
corresponding ﬂow (Callen 1985, p. 308)6:
 D †Ji Fi:
6Differentiating the entropy, S.X0; X1; : : : /, expressed as a function of the extensive variables
X0; X1; : : : , which vary with time, we have dS=dt D †k @S=@Xk dXk=dt, where the dXk=dt are the
ﬂuxes of Xk and the entropy-representation intensive magnitudes @S=@Xk are the corresponding
generalised forces or afﬁnities. Omitting the volume from the list X0; X1; : : : , this gives the
rate of change of the entropy density, s, in terms of the extensive magnitude densities, xk, as
 D ds=dt D †k @s=@xk dxk=dt.

8.3
Distinguishing Processes from States
163
A ﬂow, Ji, is a time rate of change which might be of the movement of matter
or electricity, or of “heat” (i.e., a rate of heating), or rate of a chemical reaction
converting some kinds of matter into others. The generalised forces, Fi, usually
take the form of gradients of thermodynamic state variables such as the chemical
potential, the electrical potential and temperature (usually expressed as a gradient
of the inverse of the temperature, 1=T). These gradients express in analytic terms
the way the respective thermodynamic features vary over space. In the case of
chemical reactions, the ﬂow is the velocity of the reaction and the force is given
by the chemical afﬁnity of the reaction, which is not a gradient over space but
deﬁned essentially as the difference between the sum of the chemical potentials
of the reactants and that of the products. For a reaction
a1A1 C 	 	 	 C amAm ! bmC1BmC1 C 	 	 	 C bnBn;
the chemical afﬁnity or force is †kk, where k is deﬁned in terms of the
stoichiometric coefﬁcients as ak for a reactant, Ak, or Cbk for a product Bk, and
k is the chemical potential of the kth substance.
Understanding each distinct ﬂow, Ji, to represent the rate of occurrence of a
distinct process, several processes may well occur in the same region during the
same time. In that case, not only is each ﬂow, Ji, linearly related to its conjugate
force, Fi, but is also linearly related to all the other forces determining the entropy
production, , although each ﬂow depends most strongly on its “own” force. Thus,
Ji D †jLij Fj;
where Lij is the general linear coefﬁcient. Many of these cross-effects have been
known as isolated phenomena since the early nineteenth century, but were ﬁrst given
a uniﬁed treatment when the theory was formulated in the 1930s on the basis of a
certain kind of symmetry expressed by the Onsager relations.7 An example of a
cross-effect is the Seebeck effect, discovered in 1821, in which heating, driven by
its own force of a temperature gradient, gives rise to an electric current. Thus, if the
junctions at the ends of a copper wire inserted into a circuit otherwise comprising
aluminium wire are maintained at different temperatures by heat reservoirs, a current
ﬂows under an electromotive force, generally of the order of 105 volts per Kelvin
of temperature difference. Conversely, in the Peltier effect, discovered in 1834, the
same circuit is used except that the potentiometer measuring the electric potential
difference for the Seebeck effect is replaced by a battery. The two junctions are now
maintained at the same temperature, and a current is passed through the system.
Here, the current drives a heat ﬂow from one junction to the other, generally of the
order of 105 Joule per second per amp. Thus, although often the source of heating,
a temperature gradient is not the only cause of heating.
7According to which, if the Ji and Xi in the expression for  are independent, the linear coefﬁcients
satisfy Lij D Lji, for all i and j.

164
8
Longish Processes
8.4
Causings
Writers expounding the principles of irreversible thermodynamics fall naturally into
the causal idiom. In their introduction to irreversible thermodynamics, for example,
Kondepudi and Prigogine (1998) say that “a concentration difference between
adjacent parts of a system is the thermodynamic force that causes the ﬂow of matter”
(p. 88) and “a nonvanishing gradient of (1=T) causes the ﬂow of heat” (p. 351). In
general the ﬂows are caused by the conjunction of all the circumstances on which
they depend. “For example, in thermoelectricity”, as Miller (1960, p. 17) puts it, “the
ﬂow of current is caused by the temperature gradient as well as the usual electric
potential gradient”. These claims are not accommodated on the relational view of
causation since a state and not an event or process is said to cause the process.
This challenge to the view that causation is always to be construed as a dyadic
relation between events won’t impress anyone indifferent to the distinction between
process and state, or who understands the distinction on the basis of certain criteria
proposed in the philosophical literature which are not up to the task. Davidson’s
(1980, pp. 105–22) adverbial modiﬁcation argument, for example, supposedly
motivating ontological commitment to events, works just as well on sitting still,
moving with a uniform velocity in a straight line, rotating uniformly about an axis,
remaining totally immobile, lying in the morgue, etc., which would ordinarily be
regarded as states, as it does on his example of an event, Jones’ buttering the toast.
Again, sentences can be nominalised in two ways. The sentence “Quisling betrays
Norway” becomes what Bennett (1988, p. 5) calls the perfect nominal, “Quisling’s
betrayal of Norway”, and what he calls the imperfect nominal, “Quisling’s betraying
Norway”. It has been suggested that whereas the imperfect nominals stand for
propositions, the perfect nominals refer to processes. But perfect nominals include
expressions such as “the body’s uniform motion in a straight line” and “the body’s
warmth”, which are treated by the appropriate scientiﬁc theories as states. Whatever
the distinction drawn by linguistic features such as these may amount to, there is no
reason to think they capture the substantial distinction marked by scientiﬁc criteria.
A diffusion process, involving the ﬂow of matter of some kind of substance k
through another substance, is driven by the negative gradient (across space) of the
chemical potential of substance k. If the process is allowed to go to equilibrium,
the differences in chemical potential at different places are ironed out, in which
case the gradient diminishes and the diffusion eventually peters out. But it is not
the diminishing of the gradient that causes the diffusion at any moment. On the
contrary, the gradient diminishes because of the diffusion. Similarly, the gradient of
the inverse of the temperature is a measure of the increase in 1=T (decrease in T) at a
point in each spatial direction (a vector). In Duhem’s example described in Sect. 8.2
of the bar whose ends are maintained at constant temperature, the gradient is held
constant and causes the heating to continue indeﬁnitely. Usually, heating caused by
a temperature gradient reduces the gradient until it disappears and heating ceases.
Where the temperature gradient does vary with time, the gradient of (1=T), and
not the rate of change of the gradient of (1=T) over time, remains the cause of the

8.4
Causings
165
heating. What causes a process—whose rate of progress is measured by a ﬂow—is
not a change, but a state of a body, even when this is changing.
When left to proceed to equilibrium, processes eventually peter out and establish
a stationary equilibrium state. Prior to the establishment of equilibrium, a ﬂeeting
state of reduced temperature gradient, partial combustion of the materials involved
in a chemical reaction, and so forth, results. Processes are themselves causings—
the continuous transforming of a condition in a body to another. Such conditions
are idealised as states of the body, but are more realistically treated as patterns of
states of small parts of the body, continuously varying over space, which adjust
as the process proceeds unhindered until a uniform state of equilibrium under the
prevailing constraints is attained. This is at odds with Davidson’s view. He has
argued that “it must in general be a mistake to suppose that whenever an event
is caused there must be something called a causing”. As he puts it, “[i]f such a third
event were required to relate the original cause and effect, two more events would
presumably be needed to relate the original cause and effect with the causing”. If not
vicious, he thinks this is at least uncomfortable with its unnecessary multiplication
of entities, and concludes that “ ‘caused’ relates events, as do the words ‘before’
and ‘after’; it does not introduce an event itself” (Davidson 2004, pp. 102–3).
But the argument is not, as he seems to realise, quite so cut and dried. The
multiplication of entities is engendered by the view that causal scenarios should be
uniformly analysed on the model of two events standing in a dyadic causal relation,
which requires a corresponding reduction of causings. Davidson’s argument merely
shows that an adherent of this model, like himself, will have difﬁculty in accepting
causings. It provides no motivation for the model itself, and is not the independent
argument that would be needed to dissuade the friend of causings with no allegiance
to the relational theory of causation.
Nor is the argument bolstered by other Davidsonian strategies. LePore has sought
to combine Davidson’s intuitions about causation with the adverbial modiﬁcation
argument, which he takes to be among the “strongest arguments for the existence of
events” (LePore 1985, p. 153), by analysing “A shortcircuit caused a ﬁre at 6 p.m.
in the bedroom” in the form
9e 9f .shortcircuit.e/ ^ ﬁre.f/ ^ at.e; 6 p.m./ ^
in.e; the bedroom/ ^ caused.e; f//.
But whilst this may point to the existence of processes, the Davidsonian strategy can
equally well be applied by analysing the sentence along the lines of
9e .causing of a ﬁre by a shortcircuit.e/ ^ at.e; 6 p.m./ ^
in.e; the bedroom//.
The general idea that the same thing might be the subject of different predications
doesn’t itself eliminate differences of view on the nature of occurrents.8
8The ﬁrst predicate, “causing of a ﬁre by a shortcircuit(e)”, would be better formulated as “causing
of a ﬁre by an appreciable potential difference across a path of low resistance(e)”, or “combusting
caused by an appreciable potential difference across a path of low resistancee”.

166
8
Longish Processes
The construal of processes as causings complements the criticism of the rela-
tional analysis of the standard billiard ball case mentioned in Sect. 8.2. The state of
the balls prior to collision caused the state of the balls after collision, and the event
is surely the collision, involving the process of compression and relaxation of the
impacting balls. Anscombe (1993, pp. 92–3) observed that we come by our principal
knowledge of causality in learning to use causal concepts, many represented by
transitive and other verbs of action like “scrape”, “push”, “wet”, “burn”, “knock
over”, “squeeze”, etc., to which we could well add “collide”, “gravitate” and “heat”.
This observation is naturally accommodated in the spirit of the preceding remarks
by regarding such verbs as predicates of causings.
8.5
Relating Processes to Quantities, Regions and Times
Having disentangled Davidson’s general strategy of redescription from some of
his more speciﬁc views about occurrents, we can go on to use it as a vehicle for
describing some of the general features borne by processes as conceived here. One
aspect of this strategy that will guide us here is emphasised by Davidson when he
says
a sentence like “John struck the blow” is about two particulars, John and the blow. ...
striking is predicated alike of John and the blow[, and t]his symmetry in the treatment
of substances and their changes reﬂects, I think, an underlying conceptual dependence.
Substances owe their special importance in the enterprise of identiﬁcation to the fact that
they survive through time. But the idea of survival is inseparable from the idea of surviving
certain sorts of change ... [E]vents often play an essential role in identifying a substance.
... (Davidson 1980, p. 175)
Something can be said about the character of both processes and what Davidson
calls substances (i.e. continuants in the terminology used here, where “substance” is
reserved for chemical substance) by saying how they are related. The mereological
structure of processes can be elaborated by considering the mereological structure
of the entities to which processes are related, and the discussion will lead to a
deepening of the relational character of processes broached in Sect. 8.2 in opposition
to Lombard’s non-relational view.
Using letters e; f; g; h; : : : to range over processes, relational predicates can
be used to describe processes as being interactions of certain kinds between
continuants. The heating of a gas by a hot water bath, for example, involves a
process, f, of heating the gas, , by a quantity of water, , all of which can be
put in the form H.f; ; /. Once a variable is available to refer to a process, we can
go on to say how it is related to time, to material objects, how they are related to
space and time when involved in the process, how their parts are related to parts of
the process, and so on. A convenient starting point is the fact that a process takes
place at (during) a certain time:
H.e; ; / ^ TP.e; t/;

8.5
Relating Processes to Quantities, Regions and Times
167
where TP.e; t/ is read “e takes place at t” and the variable t is understood as before
to range over intervals of time with a mereological structure of parts.
The literal reading of the “takes place” locution suggests that there is a place
where a process occurs. But whereas continuants occupy a region for a time in virtue
of having a certain volume (although it may vary with temperature and pressure),
processes are not ascribed volumes and it is difﬁcult to see what to make of the
notion of a place of occurrence. The regularity theory of causation needs some such
notion in order to pair off concomitant events with one another without circularity,
requiring events (relata of the causal relation) to occupy deﬁnite regions in order
that they can stand in the contiguity relation. In the paradigm case, it takes the cause
(and effect) to be an event constituted by the motion of one billiard ball, and the
region occupied by this one continuant during the time at issue is taken to deﬁne
the location of the event. But the temporal contiguity of the events at issue, which
precludes their occurring simultaneously, would seem to be incompatible with the
requirement of spatial contiguity. How can the two balls abut if not by occupying
abutting regions at the same time? But even if the idea can be made intelligible in
the simple case of a two-body billiard ball collision, it is not easily generalised to
events involving several continuants, such as three-body collisions, while retaining
the force of the contiguity condition.
Other theories of causation, such as the transmission theory of Kistler (1998) and
the theories of Salmon and Dowe that he criticises, impose similar tight uniform
spatio-temporal constraints on events. This seems to be at variance with how events
are ordinarily understood. Referents of expressions such as the “solar eclipse in
1918”, “Quisling’s betrayal of Norway” or “the marriage” might be said to occur in
certain vaguely drawn regions (the solar system, Norway, the church), but there is no
commitment to speciﬁc boundaries. (Quinton 1979 wonders how far the coronation
of Queen Elisabeth II extended into the roof of Westminster Abbey.) On the other
hand, if there is nothing more to the notion of event location than the locations
of the continuants involved in it, these can be speciﬁed directly by adding further
conjuncts:
H.e; ; / ^ TP.e; t/ ^ Occ.; p; t/ ^ Occ.; q; t/;
where Occ.; p; t/ is read as before (Sect. 3.2) as “ occupies (exactly) the region p
at t”. It is possible to further specify how regions occupied by the several continuants
involved are related. In the case of heating a gas by a large water bath, the regions
are mereologically separate:
H.e; ; / ^ TP.e; t/ ^ Occ.; p; t/ ^ Occ.; q; t/ ^ p j q:
The separate regions might abut, but this isn’t required for radiant heating, and
bodies heat themselves by internal processes such as metabolic reactions and
internal friction. Contiguity is not a necessary condition of the occurrence of
heating. In the case of the diffusion of one quantity through another, the diffusing

168
8
Longish Processes
quantity occupies part of the region occupied by the matter through which it
diffuses:
D.e; ; / ^ TP.e; t/ ^ Occ.; p; t/ ^ Occ.; q; t/ ^ p  q;
where D.e; ; / is read “e is a diffusing of  through ” and “” is the mere-
ological part relation. But the spatial relations of quantities involved in processes
are typically far more complicated than in these cases; consider, for example, the
regions occupied by the quantities combusted in a Bunsen burner ﬂame during the
course of some interval.
The argument here, then, is that besides being unclear what spatial region a
process might be said to take place in, there is no need for the notion (no need
to make the takes place predicate into a three-place relation with a further place
for a region of space) because the only deﬁnite occupiers of spatial regions are the
continuants involved in the process, and which regions they occupy can be clearly
speciﬁed. Doubts about putative locations of processes always seem to turn on
unclarities about the continuants involved. Such cases may arise where descriptions
of processes are too vague to precisely delimit the quantities involved and for this
reason fail to uniquely specify a particular process, as seems to be the case with two
examples mentioned by Johanna Seibt in the following passage:
This move [of identifying the extension of an entity with the geometric region occupied
by that entity] loses its plausibility once we turn away from substances [i.e. continuants]
and consider activities, such as the snowing in Aarhus on February 2nd, 2014 or the Royal
Orchestras playing on the Queen’s 70th birthday, i.e. entities that are spatially uniquely
located but whose identity is not deﬁned in terms of their location (for instance, because
they are spatially superposable). These activities occupy (at each time t in the temporal
interval T) a geometric region R, where R can be understood either as the collection of
scattered regions that each are continuous and simply connected (the collection of regions
occupied by each snow ﬂake or each musician); alternatively, R can be understood as one
multiply connected continuous region (the entire region with spatial holes where at t no
snow ﬂake or musician is positioned). (Seibt 2014, p. 176)
Is there a deﬁnite spatial location of the snowing? The snowing occurs because of
certain conditions of temperature and pressure that drive the water out of the air,
forcing it to precipitate as snow. These conditions of temperature and pressure are
supported by the ambient air, which is also the source of the water constituting
the snow ﬂakes, and so is as much involved in the process as the water of the
snow ﬂakes. The quantities involved in the process are therefore not limited to the
material of the snowﬂakes, and jointly occupy a connected region during the course
of the snowing. But the description given hardly delimits a deﬁnite quantity of air
involved in the process, and accordingly fails to delimit a deﬁnite region occupied
by the continuants involved during the course of the process. Although it may be
adequate for certain purposes, for example in directing the immediate course of
action of certain agents, a description as vague as this falls short of a description
of a deﬁnite process. Which processes in the atmosphere around the outskirts of
Aarhus are parts of the snowing in Aarhus is unclear and the description fails for

8.6
The Mereological Structure of Processes
169
this reason to identify a deﬁnite process. The criterion of process identity at issue
is the mereological one elaborated in the next section, not one based on the idea of
spatial location.
The same might be said of the Royal Orchestra’s playing on the Queen’s 70th
birthday. Although the orchestra occupies an unconnected region comprising the
sum of the regions occupied by each of the musicians, the playing involves the air,
without which there would be no sound. But again, the description goes no way
to delimiting a deﬁnite quantity of air occupying a region within which the sound
waves propagate and outside which they don’t. On the other hand, putting aside the
question of a spatial location, which is not needed for identiﬁcation, the description
could be regarded as referring to a deﬁnite process but without specifying exactly
which quantities are involved and for this reason not specifying a region within
which the sound waves propagate and outside which they don’t. As we will see
in Sect. 8.7, processes are often described in ways which fail to mention all the
quantities involved.
8.6
The Mereological Structure of Processes
Relating processes to spaces and times in this way raises the question of their
mereological structure. Proceeding as before, two mereological postulates,
MP1
8e 8f .e  f ^ f  e . e D f/
MP2
8e 8f .e ı f
  .e j f//;
stipulating an identity criterion and governing mereological relations are laid
down for processes, with part, overlapping and proper part deﬁned as usual. The
mereological relations of parthood, overlapping, and so forth, sustained by regions
of space, times and quantities of matter impart corresponding mereological relations
among processes. To illustrate, note ﬁrst that the takes place relation TP.e; t/ is
understood to mean that “e takes place at exactly the time t”, and can be written
in functional form as TP.e/ D t. Processes have temporal parts, the mereological
structures of times and processes being related by the principle
t  TP.e/  9f .f  e ^ TP.f/ D t/;
But parts of processes are not conﬁned to temporal parts; they are also generated by
spatial parts of the participating continuants. Thus, if e is a diffusing of  through
, then the diffusing of any proper spatial part 0 of  through a part of  during
the same time interval will be a proper part of e but not a temporal part. Similarly,
in all the spatial parts of a region throughout which there is a temperature gradient,
there will be heatings of the matter occupying those parts. If these spatial parts form
a partition (of mutually separate parts jointly summing to the whole region), the
magnitude of the total heating will be the sum of the magnitudes of the heatings of
the matter in each region of the partition.

170
8
Longish Processes
Non-temporal parts also arise because the sum of any processes taking place at a
given time is a process taking place at that time, so that each of the original processes
is a part of the sum and takes place at the same time as the sum. Combining
processes to form a more complex process in this way is a standard move in
thermodynamic reasoning,9 the naturalness of which is proof against intuitions to
the contrary. Processes are often analysed by viewing them as sums, products or
differences of other processes. For example, the motion of a mixture of substances
is considered to comprise a motion of the solvent relative to the apparatus, and a
motion of each of the other substances relative to the solvent for the purposes of
obtaining independent ﬂows to which the Onsager relations apply (Miller 1960,
pp. 23, 26). The cross-effects dealt with by irreversible thermodynamics are cases
where a single cause, such as a temperature gradient in the Seebeck effect, gives rise
to what is naturally described as a process with parts consisting of a heating and a
ﬂow of current.
Consecutive sequences of processes are naturally summed to yield an overall
process. For example, the route to a highly compressed state of a ﬂuid reached via
states above the critical point is an alternative process to the route via condensation
(ﬁrst fn. in Sect. 8.3). A simple Carnot cycle, which is described in textbooks as
a sum of four processes in sequence, two isothermal processes separated by two
adiabatic processes, is another example. A restriction on such summation is needed,
however, given the general principle that
8e 9t TP.e; t/;
i.e. every process takes place at some time, since mereological sums of intervals
are restricted (Sect. 1.3) to exclude times with gaps. In that case, there can be no
processes with temporal gaps. To this end, sums of processes are restricted to binary
sums (and their binary sums, and so on) by an existence axiom along the lines of:
C.TP.e/; TP.f//  9g .8h .h j g : h j e ^ h j f/ ^
TP.g; TP.e/ [ TP.f///,
where two times are connected, abbreviated C, if they abut or overlap (Sect. 1.3),
and “[” is the binary sum operation. A particular consequence of not introducing
processes as sums of processes satisfying an arbitrary predicate is that there is no
universal process including all the processes that there are. Moreover, a least upper
bound of two processes (a process having as parts the two processes in question
but no other process containing these two) may exist but their sum may not, and so
cannot in general be identiﬁed with their sum.
Just as processes may have non-temporal parts, so they may be sums of processes
taking place at the same time as well as of consecutive processes. A familiar
distinction in organic chemistry is that between concerted and non-concerted
9As when an ensemble of processes called Carnot cycles is itself taken to be a Carnot cycle; see.
e.g., Duhem (1893a, pp. 300–1).

8.6
The Mereological Structure of Processes
171
reactions. Concerted reactions are chemical reactions involving both the breaking
and formation of bonds that proceed in a single stage, without the creation of
intermediates (which is not to say that a transition state is not involved). Examples
are nucleophilic aliphatic substitution reactions proceeding by an SN2 mechanism,
such as the substitution of bromine in methylbromide by reaction with sodium
cyanide,
CH3Br C NaCN ! CH3CN C NaBr:
Pericyclic reactions (involving a transition state with a greater number of closed
rings than the total number in the reactants) provide further examples. Diels-Alder
reactions are pericyclic reactions, the simplest example of which is the reaction of
1,3-butadiene with ethene to form cyclohexene. The Cope rearrangement of octa
2,6-diene at high temperatures to 3,4-dimethylhexa 1,5-diene is another kind of
pericyclic reaction. Although these processes involve parts of the initial reactants
successively undergoing the reaction, they are, in a sense, simple processes in so far
as the same kind of process is taking place throughout. Non-concerted reactions, by
contrast, proceed in several stages.
Unlike concerted reactions, the breaking of bonds in the reactants and formation
of bonds in the products takes place at different times in non-concerted reactions,
which proceed in several stages with the production of an intermediate. Substitution
via an SN1 mechanism, for example, involves the formation of an intermediate
carbocation by the severing of a bond and the subsequent formation of the product
by formation of a new bond. The hydrolysis of tertiary butyl bromide, .CH3/3CBr,
in water, for example, proceeds via a ﬁrst, relatively slow, stage in which the reactant
dissociates into a cation and a bromide anion, followed by a rapid stage in which the
carbocation is neutralised by reaction with water to form an alcohol and a hydrogen
cation:
.CH3/3CBr ! .CH3/3CC C Br
.CH3/3CC C H2O ! .CH3/3COH C HC:
Chemical reactions are often complex in this sense, proceeding via a number of
elementary processes that can be summed to yield the complex chemical reaction.
Chemical kinetics is concerned with the study of how the rates of chemical reactions
are affected by various factors with a view to arriving at a reaction mechanism
elucidating the various stages by which the reaction proceeds. The overall reaction
taking reactants to products is decomposed into a number of elementary reactions
involving intermediates—species not appearing amongst the reactants or products,
but created and destroyed in the elementary reactions. An apparently simple reaction
such as the combustion of hydrogen in oxygen, represented by the overall reaction
2H2 C O2 ! H2O;

172
8
Longish Processes
proceeds, over a limited range of temperature and pressure, by the following
elementary steps:
H2 C O2 ! 2OH;
OH C H2 ! H2O C H;
H C O2 ! OH C O;
O C H2 ! OH C H;
H !
1
2H2
The overall process, which is the sum of elementary reactions of these kinds,
involves the production of hydrogen atoms as intermediates. There are competing
processes which, on the one hand, lead to an exponential increase in the hydrogen
atom concentration and an ignition, and on the other, reduce the hydrogen atom
concentration and tend to terminate the overall process. (Under certain conditions,
these terminating reactions can involve ternary collisions between a hydrogen atom,
an oxygen molecule and a third body, which might be a hydrogen molecule, an
oxygen molecule, a water molecule or molecules of a diluting substance; see Scott
1994, pp. 70–2.) In a closed reactor, changes in temperature and pressure affect the
balance of these processes in different ways over a range of these two variables,
but ignition leads to an explosion. In a constant ﬂow reactor, where reactants
are continually replenished and products removed, a steady ﬂame is supported at
appropriate pressures (Scott 1994, pp. 67–73).
The elementary reactions making up an overall reaction illustrate one of several
facets to the complexity of processes. Chemical reactions may involve other
processes apart from transformations of chemical substances. Turing’s suggestion
that chemical reactions and diffusion can work together to produce stable stationary
patterns of concentrations has been extensively investigated, for example by allow-
ing different reactants to diffuse from different sides of a gel strip. A substance
diffusing from a location in a heterogeneous mixture may start to react chemically
with the ambient substances in an exothermic reaction which warms the material in
the reaction zone, enhancing the local rate of reaction. Such interactions and cross-
interactions between continuants leads to a complexity in the idea of which objects
might be said to be involved in a given process, suggesting a further difﬁculty with
the idea of deﬁning a process as a change in objects, as discussed in the following
section.
8.7
The Relational Character of Processes
The examples of heating and diffusion in Sect. 8.5 illustrate what might be called the
relational character of processes (by contrast with Lombard’s non-relational view),
involving just two quantities of matter. These are simple cases. There is no general
restriction on how many bodies might be involved in a process. Only in artiﬁcially

8.7
The Relational Character of Processes
173
constructed circumstances, for example, would heating involve just two bodies.
A body may be just one among several heating a given object, and except under
carefully controlled experimental conditions, any given object would be heating
several objects if it heats one. This might suggest that relational predicates like H
describing interactions between continuants are multigrade relations. On the other
hand, the total heating by a given source might be regarded as the heating of the sum
of all the bodies it heats, and this heating might itself be the sum of the heatings by
this source of each of the bodies it heats—building, in other words, on the principle
H.e; ; / ^ TP.e; t/ ^ H.f; 0; 0/ ^ TP.f; t/ ::
H.e [ f;  [ ; 0 [ 0/ ^ TP.e [ f; t/:
Further mereological summation would take into account all the sources heating any
of these bodies, and a new mereological sum of these processes is a heating by the
sum of the sources of the sum of the sinks.
Even if this approach works for heating it may not be appropriate for processes
of other kinds involving many continuants. A multigrade relation seems necessary
to accommodate multi-body collisions unless collections in the sense of plural
quantiﬁcation are introduced.
The relational character of processes also ﬁnds expression in other ways, which
can be illustrated by a consideration of some examples. This will take us a long way
from the view of processes as bound up with single continuants in the way suggested
by the approach which would deﬁne them as changes in speciﬁc objects.
Consider the heating of a quantity of water in a beaker by the ﬂame of a Bunsen
burner. Here the heating is generated by a chemical reaction consisting in the
burning of a gas mixture in air. Natural gas is a mixture of several substances in
proportions which vary with the source of the natural gas, but usually comprises
mainly methane with small proportions of ethane, propane and higher hydrocarbons,
hydrogen and non-combustible substances such as carbon dioxide and helium. The
combustion reactions are described by chemical “equations” such as
CH4 C 2O2 ! CO2 C 2H2O;
the single arrow indicating that the reaction goes to completion (as opposed to
reaching equilibrium with the products). Different equations are written for the
combustion of the different combustible substances. A chemical reaction involving
an interaction of n reacting substances,
a1A1 C 	 	 	 C anAn ! b1B1 C 	 	 	 C bmBm;
where ai; bj are the stoichiometric coefﬁcients representing the combining propor-
tions, is described by an n+m+1-place predicate, R.e; 1; : : : ; n; 1; : : : ; m/, to
the effect that e is an instance of the appropriate kind, where i is a quantity
of the ith reactant substance kind Ai, and j is a quantity of the jth product
substance kind Bj. Chemical equations are so called because the reactions they
describe conform to the Lavoisian principle of the indestructibility of matter, so

174
8
Longish Processes
that R.e; 1; : : : ; n; 1; : : : ; m/ implies that the mereological sum, Sn
iD1 i, of the
reactants is identical with the mereological sum, Sm
iD1 i, of the products. In the case
in hand, each combustion reaction is described by predicates like “is a combustion
of such-and-such a quantity of methane and such-and-such a quantity of oxygen to
produce such-and-such a quantity of carbon dioxide and such-and-such a quantity
of water”. (As we have seen in the previous section, many kinds of reaction have
standard names, such as the Diels-Alder reaction, or they may be described as of a
general kind, such as a condensation reaction or a pericyclic reaction, which covers
many more speciﬁc kinds of reaction all sharing some common feature such as water
being one of the products or the intermediate having more rings than the reactants.
There is an extensive taxonomy covering many interrelations which a formalisation
should seek to capture.) The combustion in the Bunsen burner is a mereological sum
of several such combustions of the quantities of each of the combustible substances
going through the burner during the time in question.
The combustions comprising the burning are each strongly exothermic, which is
why they contribute to the heating of the quantity of water. Here, in contrast to the
case of heating by a large hot water bath which doesn’t change in temperature, there
is clearly much changing as quantities of the various kinds of gas are converted
from reactants to products of the various chemical reactions. Because different
continuants are involved in the combustion and the heating, it might be tempting to
say that there are two processes here, the burning and the heating. This is what the
idea that processes are deﬁned as particular changings would suggest. Or it might be
suggested that the combustion caused the heating. But the combustion is (identical
with) the chemical reaction, and the chemical reaction is (i.e. has the property of
being) exothermic. The reaction doesn’t induce a distinct process involving the
“transfer” of energy which takes the form of heating; nor is the heating a part of the
chemical reaction as elementary steps are part of the overall reaction. The heating
is one of the features of the chemical process which is described by calling it an
exothermic process. Ideas inspiring suggestions to the contrary have been criticised
earlier, and this example is further grist to the mill. What we have is a situation that
can be described along the lines of a simpliﬁed conjunction
B.e; 1; : : : ; n; 1; : : : ; m/ ^ H.e;
n[
iD1
i; /;
ﬁguring just one kind of chemical process of burning described by an n+m+1-
place predicate B.e; 1; : : : ; n; 1; : : : ; m/ in accordance with the conventions
mentioned above. H describes the very same process as a heating of some third
quantity, , (the water in the beaker) distinct from the material, Sn
iD1 i, involved
in the chemical transformation. Of course, this simple conjunction doesn’t capture
all that is going on. Much else in addition to the water is heated, and the heating is
really the sum of all the combustion processes going on in the ﬂame, itself a complex
phenomenon the details of which have not been pursued here. But the simpliﬁed
formulation emphasises the point, which would still hold for a more complete

8.7
The Relational Character of Processes
175
formulation, that one and the same process is both a chemical reaction involving
reactants and products and, in addition, a heating involving bodies completely
separate from these which undergo no transformation of substance kind.
The relational character of processes, which stands in opposition to the idea
that they involve single objects, thus goes beyond what is captured by using a
single many-place predicate to describe them. Chemical reactions can, in general,
be harnessed in various ways by the imposition of appropriate constraints to heat
or perform work, useful or otherwise. An exothermic reaction in the gas phase,
conducted in an apparatus allowing a resulting change of volume by a movable
piston to maintain atmospheric pressure, will do work against the atmosphere as
well as heating something which might be distinct from the atmosphere. Then we
would have a situation described by a conjunction of the kind
R.e; 1; : : : ; n; 1; : : : ; m/ ^ H.e;
n[
iD1
i; / ^ W.e;
n[
iD1
i; /;
where R.e; 1; : : : ; n; 1; : : : ; m/ describes e as a chemical reaction involving the
material Sn
iD1 i, and W.e; Sn
iD1 i; / describes e as a working by this material on
. Some reactions involving electron transfer can be so arranged that the only way
the transfer can occur is through a conducting wire in what is called a galvanic cell.
These reactions can thus be made to deliver electrical work. The arrangement is
reversed in an electrolytic cell, in which electric work by an external electromotive
force drives a chemical reaction.
Examples like these suggest that the fact that a process e involves an interaction
between  and  doesn’t exclude the possibility of e also being an interaction,
perhaps of a different kind, between  and , where  is distinct, and perhaps
even separate, from . Such considerations may involve the environment of what
are the objects of primary interest in the description of a process. Chemical
reactions conducted in the gas phase are often not straightforwardly reproducible
in solution in the liquid phase because of interaction with the solvent. Unimolecular
nucleophilic substitution reactions proceeding via an SN1 mechanism (in which
the rate of reaction depends on the concentration of the substrate but not the
nucleophile), for example, are sensitive to the nature of the solvent. A case in point
is the reaction of tertiary butylchloride with sodium azide, in which the chloride
group is replaced by the azide group:
.CH3/3CCl C NaN3 ! .CH3/3CN3 C NaCl:
The reaction proceeds in two stages, the slower, rate-determining step being the
formation of a t-butyl cation, (CH3)3CC, which is highly reactive and quickly
neutralised by an azide anion. Solvents with a high dielectric constant favour the
reaction by making it easier to separate oppositely charged ions (the force between
charged particles depending inversely on the dielectric constant of the medium).
Solvents that solvate an ion by restructuring so as to associate with it by for example

176
8
Longish Processes
hydrogen bonding also favour the reaction by stabilising the intermediate cation.
Solvents like water are conducive to the reaction on both counts. “In cases like
these”, as Steve Weininger puts it, “the distinction between reaction and context
is rather artiﬁcial” (2015, p. 233). The medium in which tertiary butylchloride
reacts with sodium azide is just as much an interaction involving the medium
as one involving tertiary butylchloride and sodium azide. This is reﬂected in the
thermodynamic principles governing the process, which proceeds on the condition
that the overall Gibbs free energy is reduced. This has energy (enthalpy) and entropy
contributions the relative weights of which vary with temperature, and the entropy
contribution depends in large part on changes within the solvent.
8.8
Modality
There is no evident principle of conservation of processes analogous to the
conservation of quantities. But like spaces and times, the fact that they evidently
don’t gain or lose parts over time has a modal analogue that they can’t possibly
gain new parts or lose those they have. Accordingly, the mereological essentialism
applying to spaces, times and quantities (Sect. 3.6) carries over to processes:
MEss
(i) e  f   .e  f/
and
(ii) e ª f   .e ª f/.
A particular burning of a bunsen burner, for example, which didn’t contain a
combustion of hexane, couldn’t have comprised a burning of hexane, even one that
replaces a burning of as many moles of methane (or as many grammes, or of that
amount whose combustion generates the same amount of heating in the time of
the burning, or of any other comparable amount by whatever criterion). A bunsen-
burner burning which differs by having a part which is a combustion of hexane
replacing a burning of methane is a different process—one that might possibly have
occurred when the actual one did, with the hexane possibly occupying the same
place as the methane actually did. This seems to me to be the most reasonable,
least arbitrary thing to say even on the supposition that the actual combustion of the
methane proceeds independently of the other parts of the overall burning process.
In actual fact, the ﬁner details of how one chemical reaction proceeds together with
others involving substances occupying the same place as the reactants of the ﬁrst
depends to some extent on those accompanying reactions—according to how much
heat they impart to the reactants, to what extent the motions of the one interfere with
those of the other, perhaps with a dampening, perhaps with a catalytic effect, etc.—
so the import of conceptual replacements of this sort is not to be thought of against
the background of a stable remainder. This makes it difﬁcult to understand what
process identity would consist in if possible replacement were thought to engender
a possible variation rather than a possible variant. With mereological essentialism,
on the other hand, the rigidity principles for processes,

8.8
Modality
177
R1
e D f   e D f
R2
e ¤ f   e ¤ f,
follow given MP1, the ordinary principles for identity and elementary normal modal
logic.
Processes have temporal parts, and it might be thought that a process might, for
example, be shorter than it is, possibly losing a temporal part. Whatever plausibility
there is in this suggestion seems to derive from taking a certain manner of describing
occurrents literally and thinking of processes as continuants. Some philosophers
have defended this way of viewing occurrents, speaking of the party moving from
the garden into the house, the bush ﬁre encroaching on the town, and so forth.
Understood in this way, occurrents might be thought capable of possibly losing a
part (being shorter) just as individuals might have a shorter lifetime or lose some of
their constitutive matter or even a component. What is possibly lost, on this view, is
nevertheless a process in the present sense. The conception seems to be analogous to
the way individuals have been construed as being constituted of matter: continuant
events are thought of as being constituted of processes at a particular time. There
will be some maximal process, the sum of all those processes constituting the
continuant event at some time, which constitutes the continuant event for its lifetime.
A continuant event might then possibly have endured for a shorter time than it
actually did by possibly lacking a ﬁnal part of its constitutive maximal process—
not, be it noted, a part of itself but a part of its constituent process. The party might
never have gone on into the chilly evening that enticed the guests to move into the
house, the bush ﬁre might have burnt out or been extinguished following a change
in wind direction before reaching the town, etc. A criterion of identity in terms of
sameness of constitutive processes suggests itself, where, as with the corresponding
feature for individuals, the processes constituting a continuant event are not in
general a necessary feature of the continuant event, and more speciﬁc features must
determine possible identity. None of this detracts from the mereological essentialism
for processes discussed in the preceding paragraph.
Another distinction that might be mentioned in this context is that between
processes and accomplishments or achievements, which distinguish themselves by
talking place in exactly the time during which they take place:
Acc.e/  9t .TP.e; t/ ^ 8t0 .t0 ¤ t  TP.e; t0//:
An example might concern a reaction going to completion, say the (speciﬁc quan-
tity) of hydrochloric acid neutralised the (speciﬁc quantity) of calcium carbonate, or
it might concern the establishing of an equilibrium, say the (speciﬁc quantity) of hot
water came to equilibrium with the (speciﬁc quantity) of ice. The ongoing processes
involved in these accomplishments are activities of reacting and heating which are
distributive and cumulative in the time argument, so that in the case of heating,

178
8
Longish Processes
H.e; ; / ^ TP.e; t/ : 8t0  t 9f  e .H.f; ; / ^ TP.f; t0//
H.e; ; / ^ TP.e; t/ ^ H.f; ; / ^ TP.f; t0/ ^ Ctt0 ::
H.e [ f; ; / ^ TP.e [ f; t [ t0/.
The sense of involvement in which an accomplishment involves an activity is
mereological parthood. Unlike constitution relationships, which stand between
entities of different categories, relations between accomplishments and activities
involve processes. Accordingly, the principle of mereological essentialism applies
and there is no possibility that an accomplishment should have an activity for part of
its duration which it doesn’t actually have. Neutralisation of part of the hydrochloric
acid with zinc instead of the equivalent proportion of calcium carbonate would be
a distinct process, and so a distinct accomplishment. Similarly, an accomplishment
involving the same quantities of hydrochloric acid and calcium carbonate but taking
place at a lower temperature and therefore taking a longer time would again be a
different process. There is no possibility of that particular process taking longer
than it did.

Chapter 9
Modal Properties of Quantities
9.1
Introduction
Modal issues have been taken up somewhat sporadically in earlier chapters, without
the development of any systematic interpretation. There has been much talk of
metaphysical necessity in the contemporary literature, but I have shied away from
the talk of essences often associated with this. Hale (2013) proposes an essentialist
theory of necessity, seeking the essences or natures of things—essential truths which
are held to determine the broader class of necessary truths about these things.
Knowledge of such things is held to follow Kripke’s scheme, whereby necessary
truths follow from the bare truths together with the claim, known a priori by
philosophical analysis, that the truth implies the necessary truth. Hale maintains
that “while the consequents of conditionals of the form p  p do not necessarily
and always state facts about essence, they do so when the conditionals themselves
are consequences of the right sort of general principles” (Hale 2013, p. 268).
Such general principles concern the general kinds to which objects belong, and in
particular for substances,
There is ... no mystery about how we know, a priori, the general principle needed for the
application of Kripke’s inferential model to substance. Our knowledge that gold is a certain
element—the element with atomic number 79, and that water is a certain compound—the
compound composed of molecules in which two hydrogen atoms covalently bond with an
oxygen atom—is of course a posteriori, but we know, courtesy of the very meaning of the
term, that if a substance has a certain chemical composition, it necessarily does so. ... so
if a quantity of matter instantiates a certain substance-kind, it is essential to it that [it] does
so. (pp. 280–1)
Quantities were said in Sect. 3.6 to be necessarily ponderable, but as claimed there,
what is water is not necessarily, let alone essentially, water. This state of affairs is
reviewed in Sect. 9.3 below.
Elements are special kinds of substances. A conception of the elements to which
many chemists subscribed for a certain phase in the history of the subject has it
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P. Needham, Macroscopic Metaphysics, Synthese Library 390,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4_9
179

180
9
Modal Properties of Quantities
that elements endure in their compounds and are indestructible in the isolated state.
On this view, it seems plausible that what is a particular element is necessarily
that element, perhaps essentially so if like Hale we mean something more speciﬁc.
Several elements are now known to spontaneously transmute to others in a series of
natural radioactive decay processes, whilst others may be artiﬁcially induced to do
so. Transmutation also occurs as a result of fusion in younger stars and disintegration
in older stars. But restricting ourselves to the stable, non-radioactive isotopes and
constraining possibilities within a realm of physical conditions in which chemical
substances feature (not, e.g., on the surface of a neutron star), the conception at
issue would seem to be in accord with the second of the two alternatives described
by Hooykaas in the following passage:
If an alchemist wished to remain faithful to scholastic philosophy and had to interpret the
transmutation of copper into copper vitriol, he might choose between two opinions.
1. Copper is destroyed and a new substance is generated, namely, vitriol, which is as
homogeneous as copper itself. Vitriol is not hidden in copper and copper is not hidden
in vitriol.
2. He could say that the properties of copper disappear but its substantial form, its essence,
remains. The change was only accidental, and vitriol is only altered copper. (Hooykaas
1949, p. 72)
Copper is a reddish-brown, glistening metal, which properties are not exhibited
by copper vitriol (copper sulphate), a white, crystalline solid turning blue when
hydrated by contact with water. Whether elements disappear or merely take on
another appearance in their compounds was, as we saw in Chap. 5, debated by
the ancients. The second option seems closer to the modern view, which might be
thought to offer atomic number as the common essence of elements in isolation and
combination. But this is not quite so clear if essence is that which determines that
what is a particular element is necessarily that element, because a problem arises
about identifying one and the same quantity in the compound as that in the isolated
state said to bear the essential property. This is discussed in the next section.
Since the discussion of these examples by the proponents of essences is
unsatisfactory I see no reason to strive after the distinction they seek to make, and
“essentially” and “necessarily” are used interchangeably here when modal claims
about water are taken up in Sect. 9.3. Some of these claims prove difﬁcult to capture
with the conventional sentential operators for necessity and possibility, leading to
a discussion of the use of the notion of possible states to achieve the appropriate
expressive power in Sect. 9.4. Incorporating possible processes into this scheme is a
natural development, pursued in Sect. 9.5.
9.2
Elements and Compounds
The controversy between the ancients over the issue of whether elements are actu-
ally present in their compounds continues to haunt modern views about elements
and compounds. The Stoic challenge to the Aristotelian conception of compounds

9.2
Elements and Compounds
181
as homeomeric mixts might seem to agree better with modern views in as much as
it claims that elements are actually present in compounds. But we saw that this calls
for a characterisation of elements which the available texts do not, it seems, provide.
Aristotle gave a characterisation of the elements that was, in principle, adequate for
his theory of chemical combination, namely by specifying distinguishing features of
his four elements as they occur in isolation. Of course, for Aristotle, it goes without
saying that the elements occur only in isolation. But proponents of the Stoic view
must recognise that the Aristotelian characterisation of the elements only holds good
for elements in isolation and is not suited for their purpose, which would allow
the elements to occur together in compounds. The proponent of the Stoic idea that
elements actually occur in compounds owes us an account of what distinguishes
the elements in compounds as well as what distinguishes them in isolation. If these
accounts differ, as it seems they must, an account should be forthcoming of what is
and isn’t the same in the isolated and combined states. The Stoic conception hasn’t
eliminated all traces of the Aristotelian notion of potential presence.
In a philosophical reﬂection on the notion of an element, the German physical
chemist Friedrich Paneth alluded to much the same issue when he wondered in
what sense the elements persist in compounds (Paneth 1931). He distinguished
between an element in isolation (what he called a simple substance) and an element
in a state of chemical combination (a basic substance). We might see here an
allusion to Lavoisier’s speaking of the base of oxygen, the base of hydrogen, and
so forth, in recognition of the fact, as he saw it, that naturally occurring oxygen
gas is a compound of caloric and the element base of oxygen, and that water is
a compound of base of hydrogen and base of oxygen (and caloric in liquid and
gas states). (Lavoisier thus envisioned these “bases” as part both of what we would
regard as the elements in isolation and their compounds, echoing the Stoic view.)
Although Lavoisier’s view was deﬁnitely corrected in the course of the nineteenth
century in as much as oxygen gas came to be regarded as an element and not a
compound, Paneth recognised that the standard properties of the elements tabulated
by chemists were properties exhibited in isolation, and these were not exhibited by
compounds, or any parts of compounds, formed from those elements. Oxygen, for
example, has characteristic properties such as melting point 218:3 ıC and boiling
point 182:9 ıC, which aren’t exhibited by any part of a quantity of water (i.e.
solid oxygen would melt if simply heated to 218:3 ıC, whereas none of a quantity
of solid water at the same initial temperature and pressure would), and similarly
for anything that might be thought to count as the hydrogen in water. At normal
temperature and pressure, water is a liquid whereas hydrogen and oxygen are gases.
Moreover, water at temperatures and pressures when it is a gas, and of the same
mass as a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen in the proportion of two moles to one,
occupies only two thirds the volume of the mixture. Hydrogen and oxygen are no
longer isolated in the mixture, but there clearly remains a difference between the
way the elements occupy space in the mixture and in the compound. Paneth certainly
draws attention to an important issue, but the question will be What bears the basic
substance predicate?

182
9
Modal Properties of Quantities
Paneth was instrumental in the adoption by the IUPAC of atomic number instead
of atomic weight as deﬁning characteristic of an element in 1923. The discovery
of isotopes at the turn of the century threatened the systematisation afforded by
the periodic table, and Paneth argued against Fajans that the varying properties
of isotopes of the same element were not reasonably counted as chemical(ly
signiﬁcant) differences. Whether it can still be maintained that isotopic variants
of the elements are the same substance, especially in the light of more recent
advances in precision in chemical kinetics, is another matter (van der Vet 1987;
Needham 2008a). But ﬁner distinctions of substance within elements as delimited
by atomic number don’t affect the present point. Atomic number is envisaged by
Kripke (1980) as providing the “microstructural essence” of an element, although
what he says about his example, gold, is conﬁned to the isolated element. Does
atomic number provide the “nature” that was lacking in the Stoic account and make
clear how elements can persist in a compound? That depends on how “persist” is
construed. The fact that there are atomic nuclei in water which are either of atomic
number one or of atomic number eight (i.e. with either one proton or eight) may
be taken to justify the familiar idiom that water contains hydrogen and oxygen, or
that there is hydrogen and oxygen in water. But then this latter claim should not be
interpreted to mean that a quantity of water can be mereologically partitioned into
hydrogen and oxygen, i.e. that there are mutually separate parts, the one comprising
all and only hydrogen, the other oxygen, which are jointly exhaustive—their sum
is identical with the quantity of water. This mereological claim is not justiﬁed by
merely speaking of atomic nuclei, which don’t exhaust the material in a compound.
Electrons must also be taken into account, raising the question of what it is that is
supposed to bear the property of having such-and-such an atomic number.
Consider oxygen, with atomic number eight. According to the modern atomic
theory in terms of which the periodic table is interpreted, this means that the oxygen
nucleus has eight protons. The oxygen nucleus is not an oxygen atom, however,
and deﬁnitely not oxygen. At the very least, electrons must also be brought into
the picture. But how? An isolated oxygen atom is electrically neutral in virtue
of possessing eight electrons which are ascribed a structure (in the ground state)
denoted by the electronic conﬁguration 1s22s22p4. Here the abstraction to a single
isolated atom is even greater than that involved in abstracting from mixtures and
compounds when considering an element such as oxygen in isolation. But the
conﬁguration underlies explanations of oxygen’s chemical properties such as its
formation of compounds in which oxygen exhibits a valency of two.
There are no particles with the electronic conﬁguration 1s22s22p4 in water,
which is a covalent molecular compound in the gas state at normal pressure below
500 ıC. Water has a considerably more complex microstructure, as we have seen,
under other conditions, but it is not necessary to pursue the intricate details in
these cases for the purposes of the present discussion. In the molecular state the
molecules, as originally described by G. N. Lewis, comprise two nuclei each
associated with hydrogen covalently bonded to an oxygen nucleus. Each bond
involves a shared pair of electrons, the isolated oxygen atom being considered to
contribute one electron to each of these two bonds and an isolated hydrogen atom

9.2
Elements and Compounds
183
contributing the other. Distinct bonds are less easily recognised in a more modern
molecular orbital account, which construes all the electrons as being involved
in the molecular orbitals of the molecule, each with at most two electrons in
conformity with the Pauli exclusion principle. On all these accounts, there is simply
no question of distinguishing one of the two electrons involved in a covalent bond
or relevant molecular orbital as being derived from and belonging to oxygen and
the other as deriving from and belonging to hydrogen. (This would be so even
on the classical picture envisaged by Lewis. The molecular orbital theory counts
the electrons indistinguishable in the quantum mechanical sense.) If oxygen and
hydrogen particles can’t be disentangled in water in the molecular state, however,
then exclusive extensions can’t be assigned, alluding to Paneth’s terminology, to the
“is basic oxygen” and “is basic hydrogen” predicates.
The problem is even more pronounced in aromatic compounds such as benzene
and species like the carbonate ion, CO2
3 , with delocalised bonding not conﬁned to
particular pairs of nuclei. Classical Lewis covalent bonding together with carbon’s
valency of four would suggest alternating single and double carbon-carbon bonding
in benzene and two single C—O bonds, each with a negative charge on the oxygen,
together with one double C—O bond in CO2
3 . But spectroscopic studies show no
difference in internuclear distance that would correspond to a difference in single
and double bonding in either species. The bonding electrons are delocalised, and
associated with the molecule or ion as a whole rather than a particular pair of nuclei.
Theoretical chemists have been far more radical in their criticism of the idea of
atoms in molecules after the ﬁrst attempts to save the idea by Heitler and London
in the early days of quantum chemistry. Mulliken (1931) promoted the “molecular”
view of the molecular orbital approach according to which the molecule is thought
of “as a distinct individual built up of nuclei and electrons”, by contrast with
“the usual atomic point of view” according to which “the molecule is regarded as
composed of atoms or of ions held together by valence bonds” (p. 369). James and
Coolidge (1933) thought “the implied persistence of the identity of the individual
atoms [in the Heitler and London scheme] quite unjustiﬁed, and the resulting wave
function is a very poor approximation”, and subsequent improvements “by grafting
upon it the variation principle do not escape the essential shortcomings of the
original method—the implication of atomic individuality, and the omission of an
essential coordinate” (p. 825).
Covalent bonding is classically contrasted with ionic bonding, illustrated by
common salt. This is a compound of sodium and chlorine that is white, with a
crystalline structure at ordinary temperature and pressure with a high melting point
and with no trace of the soft, greyish metallic lustre of solid sodium or the green-
yellow colour and pungent smell of gaseous chlorine at ordinary temperature and
pressure. Sodium, with atomic number eleven, has nuclei with eleven protons.
But again the sodium nucleus is not a sodium atom, and deﬁnitely not sodium.
Isolated sodium atoms have an electronic conﬁguration [Ne]3s1, but there are no
particles with this conﬁguration in salt, which is an ionic compound containing
sodium cations, i.e. positive ions with one less electron than this conﬁguration
attributes. So if sodium atoms and sodium cations are the same kind of thing—

184
9
Modal Properties of Quantities
let us call them sodium particles—it is not in virtue of a shared property described
by the conﬁguration [Ne]3s1. But not even the isolated solid conforms, comprising
as it does a close-packed lattice in which individual “atoms” are combined in
a metallic structure where the single valence electron contributes to delocalised
bands making for weak binding energies and consequently a soft solid with low
melting point. Similarly for the chlorine anion, Cl. The electronic conﬁguration
describes an ideal condition of a single isolated atom (“inﬁnitely separated” from its
closest neighbour), thought to be approximated in the gas state at sufﬁciently high
temperature when the covalently bonded diatomic molecules Na2 and Cl2 present
at lower temperatures are dissociated. Nevertheless, the electronic conﬁguration is
listed as a characteristic property alongside melting and boiling points, implying
that what these properties are each characteristic of is a substance which is found in
solid and liquid phases as well as the gas phase.
On Lewis’s classical picture, the anions and cations of an ionic compound are
clearly distinguished as separate entities jointly exhausting the material of the
compound. The basic predicates “is basic sodium” and “is basic chlorine” can be
understood as “is a collection of sodium cations” and “is a collection of chlorine
anions”, respectively, applying to quantities that do constitute a mereological
partition of what “is sodium chloride” applies to. In reality, however, purely ionic
structure is an idealisation that is not realised, and even the most typical ionic
structures have some covalent character (e.g. Vanquickenborne 1991, pp. 44–6)
with a corresponding entangling of the electrons. But even on Lewis’s picture, the
partition cannot be construed as a partition into simple sodium and simple chlorine,
as a straightforward interpretation of the preservation of sodium and chlorine in
sodium chloride would suggest.
Sodium is a simple case in so far as its chemistry is uniformly based on the
formation of ionic compounds and a universal valency of one. A transition element
such as chromium displays many valencies in its various compounds. Cotton et al.
(1999, p. 737) illustrate oxidation states (number of electrons transferred to the more
electronegative element in the compound if the bonding were ionic) ranging from
IV to VI. For each oxidation state Z, we need a predicate “is basic chromium
Z”, which would have different extensions for different Z, each of which would be
different from that of “is simple chromium”. Again, the idealisation underlying the
notion of an oxidation state may suggest that Panethian basic predicates describing
the parts of a quantity of a transition metal compound make a mereological partition
of the quantity, but in reality the electrons are not so readily disentangled.
Faced with this difﬁculty in delimiting the elemental components in ionic and
covalent compounds, it would seem that the straightforward realisation of the Stoic
conception has not proved possible, and something remains of the Aristotelian idea
that the original ingredients are not present in a mix.
To emphasise what this means for quantities and their properties, I take it that
a straightforward realisation of the Stoic conception would entail that one and the
same thing that is isolated sodium at one time might become part of a quantity of
sodium chloride at another and yet still be sodium. But even on the simple Lewis
model of ionic bonding, Paneth’s distinction between simple and basic sodium has

9.3
Water is H2O Again
185
to be recognised. Thus, the claim that some sodium might combine with chlorine to
form sodium chloride might be formulated:
9 .Na.; t/ ^ 9 9t0 Þ .NaCl.; t0/ ^   //;
where Na.; t/ says that  is sodium. But although the quantity, whether simple
sodium or part of some sodium chloride, remains the same, it isn’t the case that
9 .Na.; t/ ^ 9 9t0 Þ .NaCl.; t0/ ^    ^ Na.; t0///;
where the Na predicate is interpreted uniformly—be it as plain “sodium” or the
Paneth notions “simple sodium” or “basic sodium”. Nor is this formulation made
correct by modifying it so that the ﬁrst occurrence of Na is more precisely speciﬁed
as NaS—simple sodium—and the second as NaB—basic sodium, thus:
9 .NaS.; t/ ^ 9 9t0 Þ .NaCl.; t0/ ^    ^ NaB.; t0///:
The reason, as we have seen, is that it is not true on the Lewis model that the same
quantity can be both simple sodium and basic sodium. There is no sodium such that
it might be combined (basic) sodium, and no combined (basic) sodium such that it
might be isolated (simple) sodium. For the same reason, the uniform interpretation
of Na.; t/ as NaS.; t/ _ NaB.; t/ doesn’t apply to any single thing throughout a
time in the middle of which sodium is converted to sodium chloride. We have simply
9 9 .Na.; t/ ^ Cl.; t/ ^ 9t0 Þ NaCl. [ ; t0//;
which captures the potentiality to become (part of) some sodium chloride on the
part of some simple sodium as the possibility of being part of some sodium chloride
though not as sodium, simple sodium or basic sodium. However, it is not the case
that “any and every part” of some sodium chloride might be simple sodium and
“any and every part” chlorine, along the lines of Aristotle’s claim in DG II.7 (see
Sect. 5.7).
9.3
Water is H2O Again
The often-repeated claim that water is necessarily H2O is usually taken to concern
water as an essentially isolated substance (ignoring the presence of dissolved
substances in low concentration). Understood in this way, water is necessarily H2O
in the sense that the universal equivalence noted in the ﬁrst section of Chap. 7 can
be strengthened to
 8 8t .Water.; t/  H2O.; t//;

186
9
Modal Properties of Quantities
with the predicates interpreted as described there. The Barcan formula and its
converse for quantity and time variables allows the quantiﬁers to be equivalently
shifted outside the scope of the modal operator.
It seems reasonable to suppose that there is a certain analogy between modality
and time. Substance and phase predicates are time-dependent because some quanti-
ties possessing them at one time do not do so at another, and it is natural to generalise
this by saying that quantities possessing such properties at one time may well not do
so at another. So this manner of speaking, which has in fact been adopted already,
is to be taken literally. Accordingly, any quantity that happens to be water at some
time is not necessarily water at that time (or any other) and, in view of the necessary
equivalence of being water and being H2O, water is not necessarily H2O in the
sense that
8 8t .Water.; t/   H2O.; t//:
Water is essentially H2O but nothing is essentially water (H2O).1
Pursuing the temporal/modal analogy, we might distinguish the cases in which
the time at issue is the same and in which it is entirely separate in making positive
statements about what might have been otherwise:
(1)
Water.; t/  ÞWater.; t/.
(2)
Water.; t/ ^ t j t0 : ÞWater.; t0/.
At ﬁrst sight it may seem that the ﬁrst case concerns a more formal sense of what
might have been whereas the second concerns what might be brought about by a
possible chemical process. But what is now water might not now be water because of
a possible chemical process that might have occurred. Different senses of possibility
cannot be discerned merely on the basis of such distinctions of the times at issue in
the predication.
Problems of expressibility can arise with more complex predicates which we
have seen can have greater arity than two and apply to several quantities and several
times. The “same substance” relation, for example, is expressed by a four-place
predicate applying to two quantities and two time variables, SameSubst.; t1; ; t2/.
Thus, just as some quantity that was part of the matter constituting the Atlantic
Ocean last week was the same substance as the matter presently constituting the
Arctic Ice Sheet but no longer is (because it evaporated and was subsequently
chemically transformed in photosynthesis), so a similar fate might have befallen
another part of the water in the Atlantic last week although it in fact did not. This is
not captured by the conjunction
SameSubst.; t1; ; t2/ ^ ÞSameSubst.; t2; ; t2/;
1For a more general discussion motivating the rejection of natural kind essentialism, see Leslie
(2013) .

9.3
Water is H2O Again
187
which doesn’t distinguish between the three cases:  is a different substance at t2
from what it was at t1 whilst  remains the same,  remains the same whilst 
changes, and they both change. The problem is to speciﬁcally capture the sense of
it being possible for  to be a different substance at t2 from  at t2 although it was
in fact the same at t1.
Predicates giving rise to such problems are not to be ignored. Consider
No liquid water could ever be colder than ice ever could be (under normal pressure).
It is difﬁcult to see how this can be expressed in terms of the usual sentential modal
operators. It is not captured by, for example,
 8 8t1 8 8t2 .LiquidWater.; t1/ ^ Þ Ice.; t2/ : C.; t1; ; t2//;
where C expresses the colder than relation. A quantity that might be ice at t2 might
not be (at t2), but the comparison is between a quantity as it would be when liquid
water and a quantity as it would be when ice. The claim is not the false one that a
quantity cannot be colder at one time than another at another time.
Again,
Liquid water under pressure might be warmer than liquid water ever could be
under normal conditions,
which is not captured by
8 8t1 8t2 .LiquidWaterHighPress.; t2/ ^
LiquidWaterNorPress.; t1/  Þ W.; t2; ; t1//,
where W expresses the warmer than relation. This doesn’t capture the modal aspect
of how liquid water under normal conditions ever could be. Moreover, as it stands
the formalised sentence is true simply because a quantity might well be warmer at
one time than it is at the same or a different time. But the warmer than relation is
said in the present example to stand between a quantity speciﬁcally as it would be
when it is liquid water under normal pressure and that quantity as it might be when
it is liquid water under high pressure. A quantity that is liquid water under normal
pressure at t1 might not be at t1, but the comparison is with the quantity as it might
have been at t1 when it is liquid water under normal pressure.
Attempting to analyse the same substance, cooler than and warmer than pred-
icates in terms of predicates with lower arity is not particularly plausible. Ther-
mometer readings at different times give a reliable comparison of degrees of warmth
only if there is reason to believe that the same reading corresponds to the same
degree of warmth. A body is as warm at one time as it is at another if it neither
heats nor is heated by anything (maintains a state of thermodynamic equilibrium)
during the intervening period. It is possible that thermodynamic equilibrium is
not thus maintained but the body is nevertheless as warm at the one time as it
is at the other. Ensuring that circumstance, however, calls for a standard of being
as warm as at different times. The absolute Kelvin scale might provide such a
(highly impractical) standard. But even this requires criteria for when a body heats

188
9
Modal Properties of Quantities
another, which again falls back on the notion of thermodynamic equilibrium over
time. Similar considerations apply to the same substance relation. A sketch of the
Aristotelian procedure for introducing substance predicates on the basis of the same
substance relation was given in Sect. 5.6, and later developments have not led to
the abandonment of this basic idea. But even if cross-temporal comparisons could
be reduced to comparisons of numbers or some such, this would not eliminate the
modal aspect of comparisons. Some examples of modal comparisons were given at
the end of Sect. 3.6 that could be formulated in terms of rigid mereological relations.
But the examples just considered call for other resources.
9.4
Possible States
Some philosophers suggest, in the wake of Arthur Prior’s creation of tense logic,
that introducing time variables imposes an unnatural construal of what appear to
be n-place predicates as n+1-place predicates with something not explicit in natural
language. But intuitions about what is a “natural” analysis diverge considerably. The
operators “it was the case that” and “it will be the case that” introduced to express
simple past and future tense inﬂections are clumsy devices which can hardly be
said to provide a natural analysis. The justiﬁcation of any approach must hang on
systematic considerations, which I would submit includes the fact that indexical
expressions cannot be iterated (as the expression of tenses by sentential operators
would have it), the fact that explicit reference to times and their relation to tense
inﬂections is an integral part of temporal discourse and the fact that we naturally
make claims in the form of cross-temporal comparisons. But this dispute cannot be
pursued here and I merely note that making reference to time explicit by introducing
time variables is standard scientiﬁc practice. Purely temporal comparisons, then,
are straightforwardly dealt in terms of relational predicates of several times. What
should be said about modal comparisons?
Standard modal logic provides for a formal interpretation of sentential modal
operators in terms of an extensional model theory in which truth is relativised
to possible worlds. Necessity and possibility could be treated directly in terms of
universal and existential quantiﬁcation over possible worlds. But in the absence of
an understanding comparable to that of time in everyday and scientiﬁc concerns, the
natural resistance to ontological commitment to possible worlds speaks in favour
of the standard approach in terms of modal sentential operators. Perhaps modal
comparisons give us reason to reconsider this position, however.
The notion of a state might be easier to swallow than a possible world as an entity
calling for recognition in our ontology. It was natural to use a vocabulary of states
when explaining the import of the examples of modal comparisons, and states are a
natural part of scientiﬁc discourse. Speaking of the possible state of a body seems
less extravagant than of the whole universe (or whatever possible things possible
worlds are supposed to be). Once states are introduced as objects, several of them
might be amalgamated by suitable algebraic operations, but that is a question for
later.

9.4
Possible States
189
Let us suppose, then, that the warmer than relation is properly expressed by a
six-place predicate W.; t1; s1; ; t2; s2/ read “ at t1 in state s1 is warmer than 
at t2 in state s2”. The sentence “Liquid water under pressure might be warmer than
liquid water ever could be under normal conditions” could then be formalised as
8 8t1 8s1 8t2 .LiquidWaterNorPress.; t1; s1/ 
9s2 .LiquidWaterHighPress.; t2; s2/ ^ W.; t2; s2; ; t1; s1///,
where “LiquidWaterHighPress.; t2; s2/” can be understood as an abbreviation of
“Water.; t2; s2/ ^ Liquid.; t2; s2/ ^ HighPress.; t2; s2/”, but the warmer than
relation cannot be broken down in this way. Introducing a notation more suggestive
of the traditional symbolism for modal sentences, this might be reformulated as
1 8 8t1 8t2 .LiquidWaterNorPress.1; t1/
 Þ2 .LiquidWaterHighPress.2; t2/ ^ W.2; t2;1; t1///,
where the state variables have been partly suppressed and the quantiﬁers that
bind them replaced with corresponding modal expressions 1 and Þ2 binding the
superscripts attached to quantity variables. More formally, we write “i '” where
' results from some well-formed formula 8si  by removing 8si and replacing
every occurrence of a triple ; tk; si, comprising a quantity variable immediately
followed by a time variable immediately followed by a state variable, by a pair
comprising a quantity variable immediately preceded by the superscript i, identical
with the subscript previously on the state variable, immediately followed by the
time variable, thus: i; tk. “Þi '” is written where ' results from some well-formed
formula 9si  by removing 9si and making the same kind of replacement. The
expressions i and Þi serve to convey what is necessary or possible for a quantity
 when binding an index i attached as a superscripted sufﬁx to an occurrence of 
in a formula.
The device of indexing quantity variables has been alluded to already (Sect. 5.6)
in trying to capture the Aristotelian idea of possible extremal degrees of the primary
determinables of warmth and humidity, and in particular of the claim that there
might be something which is at some time as warm as anything ever actually is (or
could be).
These new modal expressions are not sentential operators but predicate modiﬁers,
distinguished from the familiar operators by the notable feature that they cannot be
iterated. An expression of the kind 1 1 ' might be syntactically well formed, but
the ﬁrst modal expression is redundant, like the ﬁrst quantiﬁer in the expression
8x 8x '. Indeed, where ' contains no free occurrence of the index “1” (the variable
s1), then it is generally true that 1 '  '. This can hardly be interpreted as the
analogue of the characteristic axiom for the modal system T because 1 ' doesn’t
say that ' is necessary where the index doesn’t bind. Moreover, where the index
doesn’t bind it is also generally true that '  1 ', the import of which is certainly
not analogous to that of the schema '   '. The latter is generally known as
“trivial” because it collapses modal distinctions, whereas the non-binding schema
has no such effect and would be appropriately dubbed “harmless”.

190
9
Modal Properties of Quantities
Expressed in the same abbreviated notation, another problem case considered
above, “No liquid water could ever be colder than ice ever could be (under normal
pressure)”, is captured by
1 2 8 8t1 8 8t2 .LiquidWater.1; t1/ ^ Ice.2; t2/ : C.1; t1;2; t2//:
In this example and the last the assumption is that the warmth relations hold between
quantities at times when they are in deﬁnite states, i.e. states of equilibrium. In
that case, each part of any of the quantities is as warm as any other of its parts
at one of the times in question, and each part of the one quantity is warmer than
any part of the other quantity if the ﬁrst quantity is warmer than the second. The
distributive condition has a modal analogue in which the parts sustain the same
modal comparison as the quantities themselves.
How are the states and times involved in predications like W.; t2; s2; ; t1; s1/
related? A state of a quantity is maintained for some time but is not in general
a permanent feature of the body. A quantity comes to be in a given state and is
eventually converted into another. It would seem natural to assign states a duration
with a function T.s/, and to understand the states and times involved in a predication
like W.; t2; s2; ; t1; s1/ to comply with the condition:
W.; t2; s2; ; t1; s1/  : t2  T.s2/ ^ t1  T.s1/:
Perhaps this should be generalised so that any predication '.; ti; sj/ of a triple of
consecutive variables of the kind ; ti; sj should comply with the schema
'.; ti; sj/  ti  T.sj/:
We will see how this idea can be brought to bear once possible processes are
introduced into the development of these modal ideas in the next section.
9.5
Possible Processes
Boyling (1972) presents a formalisation of classical equilibrium thermodynamics in
terms of a set of states of a thermodynamic system some of which are adiabatically
accessible from others by virtue of possible adiabatic transitions. Taking the liberty
of a certain amount of speculative license inspired by Boyling’s theory, suppose we
can speak of a set of possible states of a quantity of matter over which processes
are possible transforming certain states into others. A predicate Tr.e; s1; s2/ reads
“process e makes a transition from state s1 to state s2” and each process transforms
one state into another. There might be a particular process e effecting such a
transition which is, for example, a heating of a quantity  by some quantity ,
9e .H.e; ; / ^ Tr.e; s1; s2//;

9.5
Possible Processes
191
which transforms  [  from state s1 to state s2. The existence claim says that such
a transition is possible and 9e Tr.e; s1; s2/ might be construed as saying that s2 is
accessible from s1. An adiabatic process is one which is not a heating.
Suppose a primitive predicate “Real.e/” distinguishes certain processes as real
from the merely possible processes, those processes e such that  Real.e/. Real
processes actually take place, and the TP predicate introduced in Sect. 8.5 will be
taken to specify when possible processes are conceived as taking place as well as
when actual ones do (see below). Real processes may be considered to confer reality
on states that are transformed by the process into or from another state. Accordingly,
a real state can then be deﬁned by
Real.s/  9e 9s0 .Real.e/ ^ .Tr.e; s; s0/ _ Tr.e; s0; s///:
It is assumed that there are real processes, and since each process transforms some
state into another, there are real states.
(An alternative course would have been to take the distinction between real and
merely possible states as primitive and deﬁne a real process as one effecting a
transformation from one real state to another real state. Both states must be real,
since a merely possible process might transform a real state to a merely possible
one.)
The expression Þi '.i/ for ' being possible for  might then be redeﬁned in
more elaborate fashion than was done in the previous section by
Þi '.i/  9e 9si 9sj .Real.sj/ ^ Tr.e; sj; si/ ^ '.i//;
where '.i/ is understood as before. The assumption underlying the deﬁnition of
what it is for a state to be real doesn’t preclude a real state being transformed into a
possible, perhaps a merely possible, state if the process is not real. As will transpire,
however, the simpler and more general original notion Þi '.i/ as introduced in the
last section has its uses. So rather than redeﬁning it as just suggested, a new notion
iÞj of relative possibility is introduced by deﬁning
iÞj '.j/  9e 9sj .Tr.e; si; sj/ ^ '.j//;
where the state variable si is free and the relative possibility is not necessarily tied
to a real state. But it can be bound by a quantiﬁer introducing a speciﬁc condition
to that effect. Expressing the idea that  is actually ' by 4i '.i/, which conﬁnes
 to a real state and is deﬁned by
4i '.i/  9si .Real.si/ ^ '.i//;
the unbound index in the expression of relative possibility might then be bound by an
existential quantiﬁer conﬁning it to a real state in a formula such as 4i iÞj W.j; t1;
i; t2/. Alternatively, an initial index of relative possibility might not be necessarily
real, but bound by another expression of relative possibility in a construction of the
kind 4i iÞj jÞk '.k/.

192
9
Modal Properties of Quantities
Note that the circumstance expressed by 4i iÞj W.j; t1;i; t2/ is a special case
of that expressed by 4k 4i iÞj W.j; t1;k; t2/. Many states may be actual and the
expression of actuality doesn’t select a unique one.
A corresponding expression of relative necessity deﬁned by
ij '
 8e 8sj .Tr.e; si; sj/  '/
renders ij ' equivalent with  iÞj ', and thus iÞj ' with  ij '. Since ij '
doesn’t imply that there actually is a real process e which transforms some state si
into a state sj, it is not a general principle that ij '  4i '. Nor does it even hold
that 4i ij '  4j ' since processes are not in general cyclic, transforming a state
into itself.
Analogues of principles of the modal system K are forthcoming with the
tautology Tr.e; si; sj/ : '   W  W Tr.e; si; sj/  ' :: Tr.e; si; sj/   , from
which it follows that ij .'   /  : ij '  ij  . This in turn quickly yields
ij .' _  / : iÞj ' _ ij  . Moreover, from ` ' it follows that ` ij '.
Further analogues of principles of the modal system K are readily forthcoming.
Since the expression for relative possibility binds a state variable, indicated in the
deﬁnition above by the index j, this deﬁnition can be more generally written as
iÞj '.j1; : : : ;jn/  9e 9sj .Tr.e; si; sj/ ^ '.j1; : : : ; jn//:
When '.j1; : : : ;jn/ takes the form of a conjunction, '.j/ ^  .j/, the formula
iÞj .'.j/ ^  .j// is equivalent with
9e 9sj .Tr.e; si; sj/ ^ '.j/ ^  .j//;
which implies
9e 9sj .Tr.e; si; sj/ ^ '.j// ^ 9e 9sj .Tr.e; si; sj/ ^  .j//:
Accordingly, iÞj .'.j/ ^  .j// implies iÞj '.j/ ^ iÞj  .j/, but not conversely.
Similarly, iÞj .'.j/ _  .j// is equivalent with
9e 9sj .Tr.e; si; sj/ ^ .'.j/ _  .j///;
which is equivalent with
9e 9sj .Tr.e; si; sj/ ^ '.j// _ 9e 9sj .Tr.e; si; sj/ ^  .j//;
and so with iÞj '.j/ _ iÞj  .j/. Substitution in and contraposition of these results
yields the corresponding results, ij '.j/ _ ij  .j/ : ij .'.j/ _  .j// and
ij '.j/ ^ ij  .j/ : ij .'.j/ ^  .j//, for relative necessity.
Processes were assigned a time when taking place by a function TP.e/ in
Sect. 8.5. This idea can reasonably be retained even for the possible processes
considered here since these transform states into others which may be merely

9.5
Possible Processes
193
possible and these have been assigned times when they obtain by a function
T.s/. A minimal requirement on the relation between these times is then that the
transformation predicate Tr.e; si; sj/ implies that the states obtain at times that are
connected with (overlap or abut) the time when the process takes place:
Tr.e; si; sj/ : C T.si/TP.e/ ^ C TP.e/T.sj/;
where C is the relation of being connected (i.e. overlapping or abutting) amongst
times introduced in Sect. 1.3 where it was symbolised as C. (The script style is used
here to facilitate reading of the formulas.) Furthermore, the times when the states
obtain should be separate. More speciﬁcally, T.si/ j T.sj/ would be a consequence
of a condition to the effect that it takes time to change one state to another. This
might be formulated by: if Tr.e; si; sj/ then 9e0 .e0  e ^ BA T.si/TP.e0/T.sj//,
where BA is the relation of “abutting betweenness” deﬁned by
BA t1t2t3 : Bt1t2t3 ^ A t1t2 ^ A t2t3;
and B and A are the relations of betweenness and abutment deﬁned in Sect. 1.3
and written here in script style. But perhaps allowance should also be made for the
case where the states are contiguous stages of a continuous process and the one
transforms into the other without an intervening time.
This section began with the image of a space of states as envisaged in classical
equilibrium thermodynamics over which a relation of adiabatic accessibility is
deﬁned. Processes connecting two equilibrium states by paths in the space are
idealised “quasistatic”, indeﬁnitely slow processes which never carry the system of
bodies out of equilibrium. Such processes are useful for calculating the properties of
states, but do not trace the course of processes occurring in the world, which proceed
at ﬁnite rates, carrying the system out of equilibrium and consequently not tracing
paths in the space of equilibrium states. A real-world process, which may well be a
merely possible process in the sense introduced above, may carry one equilibrium
state to another, but shorter parts of it will transform states of affairs themselves not
at equilibrium and undergoing change. Suppose such states of affairs were counted
as states in the present speculative extension of the equilibrium space. Any proper
temporal part of the process could be considered to transform one such dynamic
state into another, the states obtaining at abutting times.
With this extension, the special case of a continuous process transforming
contiguous states would involve the states obtaining at times that abut and are each
part of the time when the process takes place. Adding this alternative to the one
already mentioned, we have
Tr.e; si; sj/ : Ae T.si/T.sj/ _ 9e0 .e0  e ^ BA T.si/TP.e0/T.sj//;
where the abbreviated expression Ae T.si/T.sj/ in the ﬁrst disjunct is deﬁned by
Ae T.si/T.sj/ : A T.si/T.sj/ ^ T.si/  TP.e/ ^ T.sj/  TP.e/:

194
9
Modal Properties of Quantities
This disjunct would come into play with a continuous process such as the objects in
a room uniformly undergoing a change in temperature gradient leading to a state in
which the objects have the same degree of warmth. The transitional states of some
temporal duration are non-equilibrium states undergoing continuous change. The
second disjunct would come into play in a longer view of the situation, concerning
non-contiguous states arising in the course of the overall transitional process or over
a time during which the temperature gradient had evened out.
Finally, the transforms relation is naturally understood to be related to the
direction of time, so that where SD is the four-place relation of having the same
direction deﬁned in Sect. 1.3.1,
If T.s1/; T.s2/; T.s3/; T.s4/ are four pairwise distinct times and 9e Tr.e; s1; s2/
^
9e Tr.e; s3; s4/, then SD.T.s1/; T.s2/; T.s3/; T.s4//.
The earlier than relation, <, is then deﬁned by
ti < tj
: ti j tj ^ 9e 9sk 9sl .Tr.e; sk; sl/ ^ SD.ti; tj; T.sk/; T.sl//;
and we can say that a state that is transformed into another is earlier than that state:
Tr.e; si; sj/  T.si/ < T.sj/:
Taken in conjunction with what was said about the relation between states and times
at the end of the last section, the claim 4i iÞj W.j; t1; i; t2/ that  might be warmer
than  would imply that t1 is later than t2. 4i iÞj 4k W.j; t1;k; t2/, on the other
hand, would allow that some state earlier than sk might have been transformed into
sj, allowing in turn that t1 and t2 are the same time.
Something of the interplay between temporal and modal aspects of the features of
matter that have been of interest here can be raised by ﬁrst considering the sentence
Some of any water might be an inﬂammable gas.
This sentence is naturally construed by taking “might be” as making a reference to
a later time in the sense of the following formulation:
4i 8t 8 9 .Water.i; t/ ^    ^ 9t0 .t < t0 ^ iÞj IG.j; t0///;
where the predicate IG.j; t0/ stands for “ is an inﬂammable gas at t0”. In the special
case
Some of what is water might be an inﬂammable gas,
the ﬁrst verb has a present tense reading rendered by introducing a constant “n”
for now (the indexical aspect of which is understood to require a change in the
interpretation of the constant with the speaker’s changing temporal perspective):
4i 8 9 .Water.i; n/ ^    ^ 9t0 .n < t0 ^ iÞj IG.j; t0///:

9.5
Possible Processes
195
Compare this with
Some of what is water might have been an inﬂammable gas,
which can be interpreted in at least two ways. On one account, “might have been” is
interpreted as “might have become”, when some process might have led to the part
of what is in fact water having become an inﬂammable gas along the lines of:
4i 8 9 .Water.i; n/ ^    ^ 9t1 9t2 .t1 < t2 < n ^
t1 4j jÞk IG.k; t2///,
where the expression t14j ﬁxes the time of the real state sj as t1 in accordance with
the following elaborated deﬁnition of the triangle:
t4i '
 9si .Real.si/ ^ T.si/ D t ^ '/:
This provides for a determination of the time at which a modality arises, as
expressed by phrases of the kind “It was/has been/is/will be possible/necessary for
. . . ”. In the present example, if the time t1 of sj is ﬁxed in this way then the relative
possibility entails that t2 is in fact later than t1, and it might well be thought that
a better interpretation would not necessarily restrict t2 to being earlier than now.
Accordingly, the ﬁrst account becomes more simply:
4i 8 9 .Water.i; n/ ^    ^ 9t1 9t2 .t1 < n ^ t1 4j jÞk IG.k; t2///:
An alternative account would not construe the part of what is in fact water as
necessarily having been transformed into an inﬂammable gas, but without any such
commitment, as simply possibly having been an inﬂammable gas. For this purpose,
the more general expression of possibility introduced in the last section, making
no reference to a state from which the possible one is transformed (although not
excluding such a state) is appropriate:
4i 8 9 .Water.i; n/ ^    ^ 9t1 .t1 < n ^ Þj IG.j; t1///:
The corresponding expression for necessity, i', simply means that ' holds for all
si, and since there are real states, i'  4i'.
Indexical reference is not at issue in more general claims such as the following
Liquid water can never be warmer than steam ever could be at the same
pressure,
which is captured by the formula
4i 8 8 8t 8t0  iÞj .LiquidWater.j; t/ ^ iÞk .Steam.k; t0/ ^
SamePress.j; t;k; t0/ ^ W.j; t;k; t0///.
Bringing mereological principles into play, when the times of taking place of
two processes are connected, the sum of the processes exists and the successive
transformation of states is naturally governed by the principle

196
9
Modal Properties of Quantities
Tr.e; s1; s2/ ^ Tr.e0; s2; s3/ ^ C TP.e/TP.e0/ : Tr.e [ e0; s1; s3/:
This might be expected to effect a reduction in the modal expressions of possibility.
Something more speciﬁc is required to reduce the expression iÞj jÞk '.k/ to
iÞk '.k/, however. The former implies
9e 9sj 9e0 9sk .Tr.e; si; sj/ ^ Tr.e0; sj; sk/ ^ '.k//:
But this doesn’t sufﬁce to establish the existence of the sum, e [ e0, of the two
processes involved because it doesn’t follow that (the times of taking place of)
these two processes are temporally connected. The general principle Tr.e; si; sj/
 : C T.si/TP.e/ ^ C TP.e/T.sj/ stated above will not provide the link. What
is needed is
Tr.e; si; sj/ : T.si/  TP.e/ ^ T.sj/  TP.e/:
Then Tr.e; si; sj/ ^ Tr.e0; sj; sk/ would entail that TP.e/ and TP.e0/ overlap in view
of a common part T.sj/, establishing the temporal connectedness of e and e0 and so
the existence of their sum. The required condition is entailed by the ﬁrst disjunct in
the consequent of the more speciﬁc principle governing the temporal implications
of the transforms relation, introduced in conjunction with a relaxation in the notion
of a state. This can’t hold in general since a state may well obtain for some time
before a process is induced to bring about a change. But it does hold where the
states involved are contiguous stages undergoing a continuous process of change.
A notation for the special case of a relative possibility involving a continuously
developing process is provided by an expression of the kind i
_
Þ j '.j/ for conti-
nuous relative possibility deﬁned by
i
_
Þ j '.j/  9e 9sj .Tr.e; si; sj/ ^ A T.si/T.sj/ ^
T.si/  TP.e/ ^ T.sj/  TP.e/ ^ '.j//,
or, using the abbreviation Ae T.si/T.sj/ introduced above,
i _
Þ j '.j/  9e 9sj .Tr.e; si; sj/ ^ Ae T.si/T.sj/ ^ '.j//:
Now the expression i
_
Þ j jÞk '.k/ reduces to iÞk '.k/ (and i
_
Þ j j
_
Þ k '.k/ to
i
_
Þ k '.k/). The corresponding continuous relative necessity equivalent to  i
_
Þ j 
'.j/, with i
_
Þ j'.j/ equivalent to  i _
 j '.j/, is deﬁned by
i _
 j '.j/  8e 8sj .Tr.e; si; sj/ ^ Ae T.si/T.sj/ : '.j//:
The
corresponding
echo
of
the
S4
reduction
principle
ik '.k/

i _
 j jk'.k/ follows by substitution and contraposition from that for possibility.

9.5
Possible Processes
197
Bringing the mereological principles into play in this way calls for some
clariﬁcation of what counts as a real process. The natural course to adopt is that
a real process is real through and through: there are no merely possible parts of a
real process and only real processes sum to generate real processes. The monadic
predicate Real.e/ is, in other words, distributive and cumulative in the sense
Real.e/ ^ Real.f/ ^ C TP.e/TP.f/ : Real.e [ f/;
where the third conjunct might be directly replaced by 9g .g D e [ f/.
Do states have a mereological structure? Parthood between states would seem
to naturally follow parthood between quantities in the corresponding states in the
sense that, where ' is a substance or phase property,
'.i; t/ ^ '.j; t0/ ^    ^ t  t0 : sj  si:
Further, the connectivity condition for the existence of sums of processes laid down
by the mereological principles in Sect. 8.6 allows for the summation of parallel
processes, i.e. processes taking place at the same time. This might be taken to
suggest that there should be a corresponding principle for the summation of states
transformed and transforming into others by parallel processes for which
Tr.e1; si; sj/ ^ Tr.e2; sk; sl/ ^ TP.e1/ D TP.e2/
:: Tr.e1 [ e2; si [ sj; sk [ sl/:
However, whilst there might be some plausibility in the principle where the states are
real, it is not so obviously true, or at any rate lends itself to misleading interpretation,
otherwise. With real states, a picture naturally arises of a ﬁnite summation of states
generating a partial “state of the universe” for a given time, which might even be
likened to a partial possible world, namely a partial actual world. Being the sum of
actual states, which are all necessarily compatible, the ﬁnite sum of real states is a
coherent entity which is reasonably regarded as real. But whilst one possible process
might transform a state in which a quantity has a certain degree of warmth to one in
which it is warmer, another possible process might transform the same state to one
in which the quantity is colder. An existential axiom laying down the existence of
binary sums of states according as they occur at connected times,
C T.si/T.sj/  9sk .8sl .sl j sk : sl j si ^ sl j sj/ ^
T.sk/ D T.si/ [ T.sj//;
would generate sums such as that of the warmer and colder states of the quantity
just considered. This sum of possible states would not itself be a possible state in
anything like the sense of a partial possible world. And it would seem that from
the possibility of  becoming warmer than it is and the possibility of  becoming
colder than it is,
4i .iÞj W.j; t0;i; t/ ^ iÞk C.k; t0;i; t//;

198
9
Modal Properties of Quantities
the existence of the binary sums would imply, in accordance with the principles
given,
4i iÞj[k .W.j[k; t0;i; t/ ^ C.j[k; t0;i; t//
to the effect that  might at the same time possibly be both warmer and colder than
it actually is (where the index “j [ k” stands for the sum “sj [ sk”). Perhaps this
unwanted outcome could be avoided with a more restricted principle of summation,
including only one state transformed by any given possible process and one resulting
state for that process. But the details are not pursued here.
How does the kind of processes involved in a transition of states come into play?
Consider how the warmer than relation is related to the process of heating. If the
times are the same, a body  is warmer than a body  if it would heat it were
they in diathermic contact (i.e. not insulated from one another by an adiabatic wall
impervious to heat). Suppose a relation A.; ; t/ of spatial abutment is deﬁned
for quantities analogously to the way spatial abutment was deﬁned for individuals
in Sect. 2.3. If each of the quantities is connected, this precludes there being any
intervening body which could act as an adiabatic (insulating) wall, and so expresses
a condition sufﬁcient for being in diathermic contact. (Heating of particular bodies
by others might be possible by other means, for example by radiation or an
intervening medium facilitating convection.) The heating would transform the state
of  in virtue of which  is warmer than  into some different state. Thus, being
warmer than is related to heating along the lines
W.j; t;i; t/ ^ A.; ; t/ : 9e 9t0 9sk .H.e; ; / ^ Ae T.si/T.sk/
^ Tr.e; si; sk/ ^ W.k; t0;i; t/ ^ W.j; t;k; t0//.
This contains the expression 9e 9sk .Tr.e; si; sk/ ^ Ae T.si/T.sk/ ^ : : : / indicating
a continuous possibility (of  attaining an intermediate degree of warmth compared
with ’s and ’s original states) in accordance with the deﬁnition of continuous
relative possibility above. The remaining information characterises the possible
process as a possible heating. Being warmer than gives rise to a possibility of
continuous heating in propitious circumstances.
Where W.j; t00;i; t/ rather than W.j; t;i; t/, and the times are different,
essentially the same condition holds under the assumption that  is as warm (EW)
at t as it is at t00:
W.j; t00;i; t/  W EW.j; t00;i; t/ ^ A.; ; t/ : 9e 9t0 9sk .H.e; ; /
^ Ae T.si/T.sk/ ^ Tr.e; si; sk/ ^ W.k; t0;i; t/ ^ W.j; t;k; t00//.
A sufﬁcient condition for a body being as warm at one time as at another is that
the body neither heats nor is heated by any body at any time within these times or
during the intervening period.
Processes standing in contrast to heatings—adiabatic processes—are rare, calling
for special circumstances (contrived by human hand) in which the bodies undergo
the processes within perfectly insulated walls. Processes are typically heatings, but
usually much more besides. The explosive combination of hydrogen and oxygen to

9.5
Possible Processes
199
form water, for example, is a process of composition which, like many chemical
reactions, is exothermic and might also involve mechanical work, for example in
breaking a glass bottle containing the original mixture. Such a process will be one
of composition of the hydrogen and oxygen which also involves the heating by the
sum of this material of the surroundings and the shattering by this material of the
glass of the container. As we saw in the last chapter, these are several descriptions
of one and the same process, not proper parts of a process of composition. What
do constitute proper parts of this process are its temporal parts and the elementary
processes by which the overall process of conversion of the two elements to a single
compound transpires, as outlined in Sect. 8.6.
This account of the formation of water is still a description of a process
taking place in a laboratory with all the attendant simpliﬁcations. More realistic
descriptions of processes such as a volcanic eruption, stormy weather, the daily
goings on in a human digestive system, and so on, would give a better account of
what might lead to states of affairs of the kind actually encountered in the world, but
may well be beyond our ken. Nevertheless, we might be conﬁdent that it is possible
for me to have a headache or for snow on Mont Blanc to start moving and create
an avalanche although we can’t really specify the kind of process that would be
involved. But for the world’s matter to assemble in such a way as to create a golden
mountain or for Descartes’ left leg (or what constitutes it for some period) to be
annihilated is to stretch the notion of possibility beyond such limits of plausibility.
These are not circumstances realisable in any physical state, but call for possible
worlds, accessible from one to another by something more closely resembling a
leap of faith than a physical process.

Appendix
Summary of Some Main Principles
Some of the more important principles adopted in the body of the book are
summarised here. Page references to deﬁnitions are given in the Glossary.
Mereological Axioms for Quantities
With separation, j, as the primitive relation and the usual deﬁnitions for part, overlap,
etc (see glossary for page references), the mereological axioms are
MQ1 8 8 .   ^    .  D /,
MQ2 8 8 . ı    . j //;
MQ3 9 '  9 8 . j   8.'   j //:
Uniqueness is easily established and a general sum operation can be deﬁned.
Mereological axioms for other kinds of entities are similar, except where there is
no general sum and binary sum and product operations are deﬁned instead. In the
case of regions, these axioms are
MS3
9p3 8p4 .p4 j p3
. p4 j p1 ^ p4 j p2/;
MS4
p1 ı p2
 9p3 8p4 .p4 j p3
. p4 j p1 _ p4 j p2/:
In the case of times, there is a restriction on the existence of binary sums to
connected (abutting or overlapping) intervals, and the axioms for binary sums and
products are
MT3
Ct1t2  9t3 8t4 .t4 j t3 . t4 j t1 ^ t4 j t2/,
MT4
t1 ı t2  9t3 8t4 .t4 j t3 . t4 j t2 _ t4 j t2/.
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P. Needham, Macroscopic Metaphysics, Synthese Library 390,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4
201

202
Appendix
Summary of Some Main Principles
Abutment
For times,
Df. A At1t2 . t1 j t2 ^ 9t3 .t3 ı t1 ^ t3 ı t2 ^ 8t4 .t4 ı t3 :
t4 ı t1 _ t4 ı t2//:
Two intervals are connected if they either abut or overlap:
Df. C Ct1t2 . At1t2 _ t1 ı t2:
For regions of space,
Df. A
Apq . p j q ^ 9r .Box.r/ ^ r ı p ^ r ı q ^
8s .s ı r . s ı p _ s ı q//;
where “Box” is deﬁned by:
Df. BoxBox.s/  9p 9q 9r .p#q ^ q#r ^ p#r ^
8u .u  s  u  p; q; r//:
This allows that either of two regions connected with one another may be scattered,
understanding “connected” as a 2-place predicate analogous to the relation of being
connected deﬁned, like the analogous relation on times, as abutting or ovelapping.
In particular, every region is connected with itself. The 1-place predicate being a
connected region (not being scattered) is deﬁned as one that can’t be exhaustively
partitioned into non-abutting regions:
Df. Conn Conn.p/  8q 8r .q j r ^ p D q [ r . Aqr/.
Occupancy
The occupies relation is interpreted to mean that the continuant in question occupies
exactly the region in question for the time in question (Sects. 2.4 and 2.3):
Occ.; p; t/ ^ p ¤ q : Occ.; q; t/;
Occ.x; p; t/ ^ p ¤ q : Occ.x; q; t/:
The principle of accumulation is expressed by:
Occ.; p; t/  8q .9t0  t Occ.; q; t0/  q  p/;
Occ.x; p; t/  8q .9t0  t Occ.x; q; t0/  q  p/:

Appendix
Summary of Some Main Principles
203
The continuity condition is to the effect that
Occ.x; q1; t1/ ^ Occ.x; q2; t2/ ^ At1t2 : Cq1q2;
The region p occupied for a time by a quantity is a sum of its subregions occupied
by the quantity during subintervals in the sense that
Occ.; p; t/  8t1 8t2 .t D t1 [ t2 
9q1 9q2 .Occ.; q1; t1/ ^ Occ.; q2; t2/ ^ p D q1 [ q2//:
Similarly for individuals,
Occ.x; p; t/  8t1 8t2 .t D t1 [ t2 
9q1 9q2 .Occ.x; q1; t1/ ^ Occ.x; q2; t2/ ^ p D q1 [ q2//:
Sums of regions are related to sums of quantities via the further principle that the
region occupied by a sum of quantities is the sum of the regions occupied by these
quantities. Capitalising on the functional form of the occupies relation, Occ.; t/ D
p, this principle can be neatly expressed in terms of the binary sum as follows:
Occ. [ ; t/ D Occ.; t/ [ Occ.; t/:
Static Abutment
For two quantities:
SA.; ; t/  9p 9q 8t0  t .Occ.; p; t0/ ^ Occ.; q; t0/ ^ Apq/;
For two individuals:
SA.x; y; t/  9p 9q 8t0  t .Occ.x; p; t0/ ^ Occ.y; q; t0/ ^ Apq/:
Abutment on the Move
A.x; y; t/  8t0  t .bA.x; y; t0/ _ eA.x; y; t0//;
where
bA.x; y; t/  8t0  t 9p 9q .Occ.x; p; t0/ ^ Occ.y; q; t0/ ^ Apq/
and
eA.x; y; t/ : Occ.x; t/ ı Occ.y; t/ ^ .x ˚t y/ ^

204
Appendix
Summary of Some Main Principles
8p; q .9t0; t00  t .p D Occ.x; t0/ \ Occ.y; t0/ ^
q D Occ.x; t00/ \ Occ.y; t00/ ^ t0  t00/  p  q/.
Similarly for quantities,
A.; y; t/  8t0  t .bA.; y; t0/ _ eA.; y; t0//:
Constitution
There is a principle of accumulation, analogous to the principle of accumulation for
occupation formulated above, expressed by:
Const.x; ; t/   D †  9t0  t Const.x; ; t0/:
The criterion of identity is ever having the same constitution, i.e.
(CI)
SameConst.x; y; t/  x D y.
An individual’s lifetime is deﬁned as the maximal period the individual is
constituted of something:
L.t; x/  : E.x; t/ ^ 9t0 .t  t0 ^ E.x; t0//;
where the existence predicate, E.x; t/, means being constituted of some quantity
for time t. This deﬁnition presupposes a principle of restricted lifetime, that any
individual is constituted of some matter for some time but not for any other times:
9t .9 Const.x; ; t/ ^ 8t0 .t j t0  9Const.x; ; t0///:
When individuals x and y occupy the same place, they are constituted of the same
matter, and conversely:
(EP)
9p .Occ.x; p; t/ ^ Occ.y; p; t//  9 .Const.x; ; t/ ^ Const.y; ; t//.
It follows from this that the principle of restricted lifetime can be equivalently
formulated as
9t .9p Occ.; p; t/ ^ 8t0 .t j t0  9pOcc.; p; t0///:
This stands in contrast with what holds for quantities, which always occupy
somewhere:
9p Occ.; p; t/:
The equivalence principle naturally yields an equivalent formulation of the identity
criterion for individuals in terms of the notion of cooccupancy, deﬁned by

Appendix
Summary of Some Main Principles
205
Coin.x; y; t/  8t0  t 9p .Occ.x; p; t0/ ^ Occ.y; p; t0//;
where the order of the quantiﬁers is important. The notion of having the same con-
stitution throughout some time is equivalent, in view of the equivalence principle, to
that of coinciding throughout this same time, and the above criterion of identity is
therefore equivalent to one based on individuals coinciding throughout some time:
Coin.x; y; t/  x D y:
There is no time throughout which distinct individuals coincide: at any time, either
they don’t exist (don’t occupy any region) at that time or they don’t occupy the same
region throughout that time.
“x is a proper spatial part of y at t”, symbolised x @t y and also understood as the
relation of being a proper component part, is deﬁned as “for all subintervals t0 of t,
the region occupied by x at t0 is a proper part of the region occupied by y at t0”:
x @t y  8t0  t 9p 9q .Occ.x; p; t0/ ^ Occ.y; q; t0/ ^ p  q/:
A more general reﬂexive and transitive relation of component parthood, x vt y and
read “x is a component (spatial) part y at t”, can be deﬁned as “x is either a proper
spatial part of or coincident with y at t”:
x vt y  : x @t y _ Coin.x; y; t/:
The symmetric relation, ˚t, of spatial overlapping can then be deﬁned by analogy
with mereological overlapping as the existence of a common component:
x ˚t y  9z .z vt x ^ z vt y/:
Lavoisier’s Principle of the Indestructibility of Matter
MEss
(i)      .  /
and
(ii)  ª    . ª /.
This modal essentialism means that quantities comply with what is called the single
domain interpretation of quantiﬁed modal logic, and satisfy the Barcan formula,
BF
8  '   8 ',
equivalently, Þ 9 '  9 Þ ',
and its converse,
CBF
 8 '  8  ',
equivalently, 9 Þ '  Þ 9 '.
Likewise, times and regions of space are permanent objects which are never created
or destroyed. The Barcan formula and its converse therefore holds for entities
of these kinds too, along with the principles of mereological essentialism. But

206
Appendix
Summary of Some Main Principles
Kripke’s variable domain interpretation is applied to individuals, invalidating the
Barcan formula and its converse, and formulated by adapting the principles of free
logic:1
Q1
8x ' . Ey  .y=x/'
Q2
'  8x ',
provided x is not free in '
Q3
8x .'   / : 8x '  8x  
Q4
8x Ex
Q5
Þ Ex
together with the ridigity principles
R1
x D y   x D y
R2
x ¤ y   x ¤ y.
Distributivity and Cumulativity
The distributive condition for a dyadic predicate '.; t/ applying to a quantity and
a time is
'.; t/ ^    ^ t0  t : '.; t0/;
and predicates of higher arity applying to all kinds of entities with a mereological
structure follow the same pattern. The cumulative condition for '.; t/ is
80   8t0  t 900  0 9t00  t0 '.00; t00/  '.; t/:
A dyadic predicate '.; t/ is spatially distributive iff
'.; t/ ^ t0  t ^ Occ.; t0/  Occ.; t/ ^
Exh.; t/ ^ Exh.; t0/ : '.; t0/:
where the predicate, Exh.; t/, to the effect that  exhausts all the matter in the
region it occupies at t and more brieﬂy read “ is exhaustive at t”, is deﬁned by
Exh.; t/   D † .Occ.; t/ D Occ.; t//:
The spatial distributive condition cannot be directly compared with the unre-
stricted distributivity condition. But under the following assumption of conformity
between space, time and matter:
1For completeness of the basic system of quantiﬁed normal modal logic (Garson 1984), a “mixing”
rule must be added in addition to the sentential modal principles of system K, namely
If ` 	 _ . . Ey  .y=x/'/ then ` 	 _ .  8x'/, provided x is not free in  .

Appendix
Summary of Some Main Principles
207
t0  t ^ Exh.; t/ ^ Exh.; t0/ :: Occ.; t0/  Occ.; t/    ;
the spatial distributivity condition simpliﬁes to:
'.; t/ ^ t0  t ^    ^ Exh.; t/ ^ Exh.; t0/ : '.; t0/:
A spatio-temporal parthood relation of  being a part at a subinterval t0 of a
quantity  at an interval of time t, written .; t0/ v .; t/, is naturally deﬁned by
.; t0/ v .; t/ : t0  t ^ Exh.; t/ ^ Exh.; t0/ ^ Occ.; t0/  Occ.; t/:
By the conformity condition, the right-hand side, and so the ostensively time-
dependent spatio-temporal parthood relation, implies 
 . But this is an
implication and not an equivalence, so the time dependence has not dropped out
of account. With this relation, the spatial distributivity condition can be more
compactly expressed as
'.; t/ ^ .; t0/ v .; t/ : '.; t0/:
A spatial cumulative condition formulated analogously to the way the distributive
condition was restricted to spatial parts takes the form
80 8t0 .Occ.0; t0/  Occ.; t/ ^ t0  t ^ Exh.; t/ ^ Exh.0; t0/ :
900 9t00 .Occ.00; t00/  Occ.0; t0/ ^ t00  t0 ^ Exh.00; t00/ ^ '.00; t00///
 '.; t/:
Neither the unrestricted cumulative condition nor its spatial-parts variant is stronger
than the other. With the notion of spatio-temporal parthood in conjunction with the
conformity condition, the restricted cumulative condition can be somewhat more
compactly expressed by
80 8t0 ..0; t0/ v .; t/ 
900 9t00 ..00; t00/ v .0; t0/ ^ '.00; t00///  '.; t/:
Processes
Two mereological postulates governing identity conditions for and mereological
relations between process are
MP1
8e 8f .e  f ^ f  e . e D f/
MP2
8e 8f .e ı f
  .e j f//:
The mereological structures of times and processes are related by the principle
t  TP.e/  9f .f  e ^ TP.f/ D t/:

208
Appendix
Summary of Some Main Principles
A restriction on the summation of processes is needed in view of the general
principle that every process takes place at some time, i.e.
8e 9t TP.e; t/;
To this end, sums of processes are restricted to binary sums (and their binary sums,
and so on) by an existence axiom along the lines of:
C.TP.e/; TP.f//  9g .8h .h j g : h j e ^ h j f/ ^
TP.g; TP.e/ [ TP.f///,
where two times are connected, abbreviated C.
Modal Properties of Quantities
That it is possible for  to ' is expressed by 4i iÞj '.j/, where the actuality and
possibility terms are deﬁned, respectively, by
4i '.i/  9si .Real.si/ ^ '.i//;
iÞj '.j/  9e 9sj .Tr.e; si; sj/ ^ '.j//:
A corresponding expression of relative necessity deﬁned by
ij '
 8e 8sj .Tr.e; si; sj/  '/
renders ij ' equivalent with  iÞj ', and thus iÞj ' with  ij '.
Determination of the time at which a modality arises, as expressed by phrases of
the kind “It was/has been/is/will be possible/necessary for . . . ”, is provided for by
introducing a temporal modiﬁcation of the actuality modiﬁer along the following
lines:
t4i '
 9si .Real.si/ ^ T.si/ D t ^ '/:
The earlier than relation, <, is deﬁned by
ti < tj
: ti j tj ^ 9e 9sk 9sl .Tr.e; sk; sl/ ^ SD.ti; tj; T.sk/; T.sl//;
and we can say that a state that is transformed into another is earlier than that state:
Tr.e; si; sj/  T.si/ < T.sj/:

Glossary
A
the abutment relation. 12, 21, 34
SA
the static abutment relation. 35, 38
Ae
the abutting sub-period relation. 193
4i
actually. 191
t14j
actually when. 195
B
the betweenness relation. 14, 19
BA
the abutting betweenness relation. 193
B
the betweenness relation (alternative notation). 193
Box
the property of being a box. 21
Coin
the coincide relation. 58
C
the composes relation. 144
C
the proper composition relation. 145
Conn
the property of being connected. 21
C
the connected relation. 13, 21
C
the connected relation (alternative notation). 193
Const
the constitutes relation. 52

the difference operation. 11, 13, 148

the complement operation. 11
E
the interior end part relation. 13
Exh
the exhausts relation. 84
E
the existence relation. 54

h
the at least as humid as relation. 101
h
the as humid as relation. 102
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P. Needham, Macroscopic Metaphysics, Synthese Library 390,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4
209

210
Glossary

the indistinguishability relation. 143
I
the internal abutment relation. 13
ƒ
the least upper bound operation. 10
L
the lifetime relation. 54
i
necessary for. 195
ij
necessary (relatively) for. 192
Occ
the occupies relation. 31, 37
#
the orthogonal relation. 20
ı
the overlap relation. 9
˚t
the component overlap relation. 61
ˇ
the micro-overlap relation. 145
k
the parallel relation. 20

the part relation. 9

the proper part relation. 9
ª
the not a part relation. 10
@t
the proper component part relation. 60
vt
the component part relation. 61
v
the spatio-temporal part relation. 85
Þi
possible for. 189
iÞj
possible (relatively) for. 191
…
the general product operation. 10, 148
\
the binary product operation. 10, 13, 19, 148
Real
the property of being real. 191
SameConst
the same constitution relation. 53
SD
the same direction relation. 16
SameSubst
the same substance relation. 102, 186
j
the separation relation. 9
o
the micro-separation relation. 144
S
the property of being a stratum. 19
Si
the ith substance property. 101
SingleSubst
the single substance relation. 102
†
the general sum operation. 10, 147
[
the binary sum operation. 10, 13, 19, 147
TP
the takes place relation. 167
T
the state duration function. 190
Tr
the transition relation. 190
Uq
the universe of quantities. 11
w
the as warm as relation. 102

w
the at least as warm as relation. 101

Bibliography
Almotahari, M. (2013). The identity of a material thing and its matter. Philosophical Quarterly,
64, 387–406.
Anscombe, G. E. M. (1993). Causality and determinism. In E. Sosa & M. Tooley (Eds.), Causation
(pp. 88–104). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Aristotle. (1984). In J. Barnes (Ed.), The complete works of Aristotle (Vol. 1). Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Armstrong, H. E. (1927). Poor common salt!. Nature, 120(3022), 478.
Atkins, P. W. (1994). The second law. New York: W.H. Freeman.
Ayers, M. (1991). Substance: Prolegomena to a realist theory. Journal of Philosophy, 88, 69–90.
Baker, L. R. (1997). Why constitution is not identity. Journal of Philosophy, 94, 599–621.
Baker, L. R. (2000). Persons and bodies: A constitution view. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Bayly, B. (1992). Chemical change in deforming materials. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bell, J. L. (2008). A primer of inﬁnitesimal analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bennett, J. (1988). Events and their names. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bohr, N. (1913). On the constitution of atoms and molecules [Part I]. Philosophical Magazine, 26,
1–25.
Bordoni, S. (2012). Taming complexity: Duhem’s third pathway to thermodynamcis. Urbino:
Editrice Montefeltro.
Bostock, D. (1995). Aristotle on the transmutation of the elements in De Generatione et
Corruptione 1.1–4. In C. C. W. Taylor (Ed.), Oxford studies in ancient philosophy (Vol. XIII).
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Bowley, R., & Mariana S. (1999). Introductory statistical mechanics. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Boyling, J. B. (1972). An axiomatic approach to classical thermodynamics. Proceedings of the
Royal Society A, 329, 35–70.
Bréhier, É. (1951). Chrysippe et l’ancien stoïcisme (2nd ed.). Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France.
Brouzeng, P. (1991). Duhem’s contribution to the development of modern thermodynamics. In K.
Marinás, L. Ropolyi, & P. Szegedi (Eds.), Thermodynamics: History and philosophy (pp. 72–
87). London: World Scientiﬁc.
Callen, H. B. (1985). Thermodynamics and an introduction to thermostatistics. New York: John
Wiley.
Callender, C. (1999). Reducing thermodynamics to statistical mechanics: The case of entropy.
Journal of Philosophy, 94, 348–73.
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P. Needham, Macroscopic Metaphysics, Synthese Library 390,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4
211

212
Bibliography
Carathéodory, C. (1909 [1976]). Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Thermodynamik.
Mathematische Annalen, 67, 355–386. Translated as Investigations into the Foundations of
Thermodynamics, by J. Kestin in Kestin (Ed.), The second law of thermodynamics (pp. 229–
256). Stroudsburg: Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross.
Casati, R., & Achille C. V. (1999). Parts and places: The structures of spatial representation.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Castellan, G. W. (1964). Physical chemistry. Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Chalmers, A. (2009). The scientist’s atom and the philosopher’s stone: How science succeeded
and philosophy failed to gain knowledge of atoms. Dordrecht: Springer.
Chauvier, S. (2017). Individuality and aggregativity. Philosophy, Theory and Practice in Biology,
9(11), 1–14.
Clarke, B. L. (1981). A calculus of individuals based on ‘Connection’. Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic, 22, 204–218.
Clarke, B. L. (1985). Individuals and points. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 26, 204–218.
Clarke, E. (2010). The problem of biological individuality. Biological Theory, 5(4), 312–325.
Cleland, C. (1991). On the individuation of events. Synthese, 86, 229–254.
Chappell, V. (1973). Matter. Journal of Philosophy, 70, 679–696.
Cooper, J. (2004). A note on aristotle on mixture. In F. de Haas, & J. Mansfeld (Eds.), Aristotle:
On generation and corruption book I, symposium aristotelicum (pp. 315–26). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Cotton, F. A., Wilkinson, G., Murillo, C. A., & Bochmann, M. (1999). Advanced inorganic
chemistry (6th ed.). New York: John Wiley.
Davidson, D. (1980). Essays on actions and events. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Davidson, D. (2004). Problems of rationality. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Denbigh, K. (1981). The principles of chemical equilibrium (4th ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Denbigh, K. G., & Denbigh, J. S. (1985). Entropy in relation to incomplete knowledge. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Dowe, P. (2009). Causal process theories. In H. Beebee, C. Hitchcock, & P. Menzies (Eds.), The
Oxford handbook of causation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dretske, F. (1967). Can events move? Mind, 76, 479–492.
Duhem, P. (1887). Étude sur les travaux thermodynamiqes de M. J. Willard Gibbs. Bulletin des
Sciences Mathématiques, 11, 122–148 and 159–176. Translated (with original pagination) in
Duhem (2011).
Duhem, P. (1892). Notation atomique et hypothèses atomistiques. Revue des questions sci-
entiﬁques, 31, 391–457. Translated by Paul Needham as Atomic notation and atomistic
hypotheses. Foundations of Chemistry, 2(2000), 127–180.
Duhem, P. (1893a). Commentaire aux principes de la Thermodynamique. Deuxiéme Partie: Le
principe de Sadi Carnot et de R. Clausius. Journal de Mathématiques Pure et Appliquées, 9,
293–359. Translated (with original pagination) in Duhem (2011).
Duhem, P. (1893b). Une Nouvelle Théorie du Monde Inorganique. Revue des Questions scien-
tiﬁques, 33, 90–133.
Duhem, P. (1895). Les Théories de la Chaleur. Revue des Deux Mondes, 129, 869–901; 130, 380–
415, 851–868. Translated as Theories of heat in Duhem (2002).
Duhem, P. (1898). On the general problem of chemical statics. Journal of Physical Chemistry, 2,
1–42; 91–115
Duhem, P. (1902). Le mixte et la combinaison chimique: Essai sur l’évolution d’une idée. Paris: C.
Naud; Reprinted Fayard, Paris, 1985. Translated in Duhem (2002).
Duhem, P. (1910). Thermodynamique et chimie: Leçons élémentaires (2nd ed.). Paris: Hermann et
ﬁls.
Duhem, P. (1954). The aim and structure of physical theories. Translated by Philip Wiener of La
théorie physique: son objet – Sa structure (Paris, 1914). Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Duhem, P. (2002). Mixture and chemical combination, and related essays. Translated and ed. by
Paul Needham. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Bibliography
213
Duhem, P. (2011). Commentary on the principles of thermodynamics. Translated and ed. by Paul
Needham. Dordrecht: Springer.
Dupré, J., & O’Malley M. (2009). Varieties of living things: Life at the intersection of lineage and
metabolism. Philosophy and Theory in Biology, 1, 1–25.
Faye, J. (1997). Is the mark method time dependent? In J. Fay, U. Schefﬂer, & M. Urchs (Eds.),
Perspectives on time (pp. 215–236). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Field, H. H. (1980). Science without numbers: A defence of nominalism. Oxford: Blackwell.
Franks, F. (2000). Water: A matrix of life (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Royal Society of Chemistry.
Frege, G. (1895). Kritische Beleuchtung einiger Punkter in E. Schröders Vorlesungen über die
Algebra der Logik. Archiv für systematische Philosophie, 1, 433–456. Translated in P. Geach,
& M. Black (1966). Translations from the philosophical writings of gottlob frege. Oxford:
Blackwell.
French, S. (2014). The structure of the world: Metaphysics and representation. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
French, S., & Krause, D. (2006). Identity in physics: A historical, philosophical and formal
analysis. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Freudenthal, G. (1995). Aristotle’s theory of material substance: Heat and pneuma, form and soul.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Frigg, R. (2008). A ﬁeld guide to recent work on the foundations of statistical mechanics. In
D. Rickles (Ed.), The Ashgate companion to contemporary philosophy of physics. London:
Ashgate.
Garson, J. W. (1984). Quantiﬁcation in modal logic. In D. Gabbay, & F. Guenthner (Eds.),
Handbook of philosophical logic (Vol. II, pp. 249–307). Dordrecht: Reidel.
Gibbs, J. W. ([1876] 1948). On the equilibrium of heterogeneous substances. Transactions of the
Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences, 3, pt. 1 (1876), 108–248; 3, pt. 2 (1878), 343–520.
Reprinted in The collected works of J. Willard Gibbs (Vol. I). New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Gillon, B. S. (1992). Towards a common semantics for English count and mass nouns. Linguistics
and Philosophy, 15, 597–639.
Hahm, D. E. (1985). The Stoic theory of change. Southern Journal of Philosophy, 13(Suppl.),
39–56.
Hale, B. (2013). Necessary beings: An essay on ontology, modality and the relations between them.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hamblin, C. L. (1969). Starting and stopping. The Monist, 53, 410–425.
Hamblin, C. L. (1971). Instants and intervals. Studium Generale, 24, 127–134.
Hawley, K. (2002). How things persist. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hawley, K. (2004). Temporal parts. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2004 Edition),
ed. E. N. Zalta. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/temporal-parts.
Heitler, W., & London F. (1927). Wechselwirkung neutraler Atome und homöopolare Bindung
nach der Quantenmechanik. Zeitschrift für Physik, 44, 455–472. Translated in Hettema, H.
(2000) Quantum chemistry: Classic scientiﬁc papers (pp. 140–55), Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Heller, M. (1990). The ontology of physical objects: Four-dimensional hunks of matter. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hilgevoord, J. (2002). Time in quantum mechanics. American Journal of Physics, 70, 301–306.
Holden, T. (2004). The architecture of matter: Galileo to Kant. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hooykaas, R. (1949). The experimental origin of chemical atomic and molecular theory before
Boyle. Chymia, 2, 65–80.
Huntington, E. V. (1904). Sets of independent postulates for the algebra of logic. Transactions of
the American Mathematical Society, 5, 288–309.
Huntington, E. V. (1913). A set of postulates for abstract geometry, expressed in terms of the simple
relation of inclusion. Mathematische Annalen, 73, 522–559.
James, H. M., & Coolidge A. S. (1933). The ground state of the hydrogen molecule. Journal of
Chemical Physics, 1, 825–834.
Jespersen, O. (1924). The philosophy of grammar. London: George, Allen and Unwin.

214
Bibliography
Johnson, W. E. (1921). Logic (Vol. I). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kim, J. (1976). Events as property exempliﬁcations. In M. Brand, & D. Walton (Eds.), Action
theory (pp. 159–77). Dordrecht: Reidel.
Kistler, M. (1998). Reducing causality to transmission. Erkenntnis, 48, 1–24.
Kondepudi, D., & Prigogine, I. (1998). Modern thermodynamics: From heat engines to dissipative
structures. London: John Wiley.
Kripke, S. A. (1980). Naming and necessity. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lang, S. (1969). Analysis I. Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Lavoisier, A. -L. (1965). Elements of chemistry in a new systematic order, containing all the
modern discoveries. Translated by R. Kerr of Traité élémentaire de Chimie (Paris, 1789),
reprinted. New York: Dover.
Laycock, H. (2006). Words without objects: Semantics, ontology, and logic for non-singularity.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Leonard, H., & Goodman, N. (1940). The calculus of individuals and its uses. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 5, 45–55.
Leonardo da Vinci (1938). The notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci, Selected English translation by
E. MacCurdy, Reynal and Hitchock, London.
LePore, E. (1985). The semantics of action, event, and singular causal sentences. In E. LePore, &
B. McLaughlin (Eds.), Actions and events: Perspectives on the philosophy of Donald Davidson
(pp. 151–61). Oxford: Blackwell.
Leslie, S. -J. (2013). Essence and natural kinds: When science meets preschooler intuition. In T.
Szabo-Gendler, & J. Hawthorne (Eds.), Oxford studies in epistemology (Vol. 4, pp. 108–165).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lesniewski, S. (1916 [1992]). Foundations of the general theory of sets. I. Translated by D. I.
Barnett in S. Lesniewski, Collected works (Vol. 1, pp. 129–73). S. J. Surma, J. Srzednicki, D.
I. Barnett, & F. V. Rickey (Eds.). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Lewis, G. N. (1916). The atom and the molecule. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 38,
762–785.
Li, T., Donadio, D. & Galli, G. (2013). Ice nucleation at the nanoscale probes no man’s land of
water. Nature Communications, 4 (article number 1887).
Lieb, E. H., & Yngvason, J. (1999). The physics and mathematics of the second law of
thermodynamics. Physics Reports, 310, 1–96. Erratum 314, 669.
Lombard, B. (1986). Events: A metaphysical study. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Long, A. A., & Sedley, D. N. (1987). The hellenistic philosophers (Vol. 1). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Lowe, E. J. (1998). The possibility of metaphysics. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Lowe, E. J. (2006). The four-category ontology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Maxwell, J. C. (1867). On the dynamical theory of gases. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London, 157, 49–88.
Maxwell, J. C. (2001). Theory of heat. New York: Dover.
McKie, D., & Heathcote, N. H. de V. (1935). The discovery of speciﬁc and latent heats. London:
Edward Arnold. Reprinted by Arno Press, New York, 1975.
Messiah, A. M. L., & Greenberg, O. W. (1964). Symmetrization postulate and its experimental
foundation. Physical Review, 136B, 248–267.
Miller, D. G. (1960). Thermodynamics of irreversible processes. Chemical Reviews, 60, 15–37.
Mulliken, R. S. (1931). Bonding power of electrons and theory of valence. Chemical Reviews, 9,
347–388.
Needham, P. (1981). Temporal intervals and temporal order. Logique et Analyse, 24, 49–61.
Needham, P. (1985). Would cause. Acta Philosophica Fennica, 38, 156–182.
Needham, P. (1996). Substitution: Duhem’s explication of a chemical paradigm. Perspectives on
Science, 4, 408–433.
Needham, P. (2002). Duhem’s theory of mixture in the light of the Stoic challenge to the aristotelian
conception. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 33, 685–708.

Bibliography
215
Needham, P. (2004a). Has Daltonian atomism provided chemistry with any explanations? Philos-
ophy of Science, 71, 1038–1047.
Needham, P. (2004b). When did atoms begin to do any explanatory work in chemistry? Interna-
tional Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 8, 199–219.
Needham, P. (2008a). Is water a mixture?—Bridging the distinction between physical and chemical
properties. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 39, 66–77.
Needham, P. (2008b). Resisting chemical atomism: Duhem’s argument. Philosophy of Science, 75,
921–931.
Needham, P. (2009a). An Aristotelian theory of chemical substance. Logical Analysis and History
of Philosophy, 12, 149–164.
Needham, P. (2009b). Reduction and emergence: A critique of Kim. Philosophical Studies, 146,
93–116.
Needham, P. (2010). Nagel’s analysis of reduction: Comments in defence as well as critique.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 41, 163–170.
Needham, P. (2013). Hydrogen bonding: Homing in on a tricky chemical concept. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science, 44, 51–66.
Nicholson, D. (2014). The return of the organism as a fundamental explanatory concept in biology.
Philosophy Compass, 9, 347–359.
Noonan, H. (1993). Constitution is identity. Mind, 102, 133–146.
Paneth, F. A. (1931 [1962]). Über die erkenntnistheoretische Stellung des chemischen Element-
begriffs. Schriften der Königsberger Gelehrten Gesellschaft, Naturwissenschaftliche Klasse,
8(Heft 4), 101–125. Translated by Heinz. Post as The epistemological status of the chemical
concept of element. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 13, 1–14 and 144–160.
Parsons, T. (1970). An analysis of mass terms and amount terms. Foundations of Language, 6,
363–388.
Penrose, R. (1989). The Emperor’s new mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pickel, B. (2010). There is no ‘Is’ of constitution. Philosophical Studies, 147, 193–211.
Poincaré, H. (1913). Les conceptions nouvelles de la matière. In H. Bergson, et al. (Eds.), Le
matérialisme actuel (pp. 49–67). Paris: Flammarion.
Potter, M. (2004). Set theory and its philosophy. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Prior, A. (1967). Past, present and future. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Psillos, S. (2002). Causation and explanation. Chesham: Acumen.
Purcell, E. M., & Pound, R. V. (1951). A nuclear spin system at negative temperature. Physical
Review, 81(2), 279–280.
Putnam, H. (1975). Philosophical papers (Vol. 2). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Quine, W. V. (1960). Word and object. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Quinton, A. (1964). Matter and space. Mind, 73, 332–352.
Quinton, A. (1979). Objects and events. Mind, 88, 197–214.
Randlee, D. A., Cui, Z., Cohn, A. G. (1992). A spatial logic based on regions and connection. In
B. Nebel, et al. (Eds.), Principles of knowledge representation and reasoning, proceedings of
the third international conference (pp. 165–176). Los Altos: Morgan Kaufmann.
Rechel, E. E. (1947). The reversible process in thermodynamics. Journal of Chemical Education,
24(6), 298–301.
Rescher, N. (1955). Axioms for the part relation. Philosophical Studies, 6, 8–11.
Ricci, J. E. (1951). The phase rule and heterogeneous equilibrium. Toronto: Van Nostrand.
Robinson, H. (2004). Substance. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2004 Edition), ed.
Edward N. Zalta. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/substance.
Roeper, P. (1983). Semantics for mass terms with quantiﬁers. Noûs, 17, 251–265.
Ruben, D. -H. (1983). Social parts and wholes. Mind, 92, 219–238.
Russell, B. (1972). Principles of mathematics. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Saunders, S. (2006). Are quantum particles objects? Analysis, 66, 52–63.
Scott, R. L. (1977). Modiﬁcation of the phase rule for optical enantiomers and other symmetric
systems. Journal of the Chemical Society, Faraday Transactions, 73(11), 356–360.

216
Bibliography
Scott, S. K. (1994). Oscillations, waves and chaos in chemical kinetics. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Sedley, D. (1982). The Stoic criterion of identity. Phronesis, 27, 255–275.
Seibt, J. (2000). The dynamic constitution of things. In J. Faye, U. Schefﬂer, & M. Urchs (Eds.),
Facts, things, events (Poznan studies in the philosophy of the sciences and the humanities,
Vol. 76, pp. 241–78). Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Seibt, J. (2014). Non-transitive parthood, leveled mereology, and the representation of emergent
parts of processes. Grazer Philosophische Studien, 91, 165–190.
Sider, T. (2001). Four-dimensionalism: An ontology of persistence and time. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Simons, P. (1987). Parts: A study in ontology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Simons, P. (2003). Events. In M. J. Loux, & D. W. Zimmerman (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of
metaphysics (pp. 357–385). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Simons, P. (2006). Real wholes, real parts: Mereology without algebra. Journal of Philosophy, 103,
597–613.
Sklar, L. (1993). Physics and chance: Philosophical issues in the foundations of statistical
mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, B., & Varzi, A. C. (2000). Fiat and bona ﬁde boundaries. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 60, 401–420.
Stout, R. (1997). Processes. Philosophy, 72, 19–27.
Sutcliffe, B. T. (1993). The coupling of nuclear and electronic motions in molecules. Journal of
the Chemical Society, Faraday Transactions, 89, 2321–2335.
Sutcliffe, B., & Woolley, R. G. (2012). Atoms and molecules in classical chemistry and quantum
mechanics. In R. F. Hendry, P. Needham, & A. J. Woody (Eds.), Handbook of the philosophy
of science (Philosophy of chemistry, Vol. 6, pp. 387–426). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Tarski, A. (1926) [1983]. Foundations of the geometry of solids. Translated of original 1926 article
in Logic, semantics and metamathematics. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company.
Thomson, J. J. (1983). Parthood and identity across time. Journal of Philosophy, 80, 201–221.
Tisza, L. (1977). Generalized thermodynamics. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Todd, R. B. (1976). Alexander of aphrodisias on Stoic physics. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
van der Vet, P. (1987). The aborted takeover of chemistry by physics: A study of the relations
between chemistry and physics in the present century. Doctoral dissertation, University of
Amsterdam.
van Inwagen, P. (1981). The doctrine of arbitrary undetached parts. Paciﬁc Philosophical Quar-
terly, 62, 123–137.
van Inwagen, P. (1987). When are objects parts? Philosophical Perspectives, 1(Metaphysics), 21–
47.
van Inwagen, P. (1994). Composition as identity. Philosophical Perspectives, 8(Logic and Lan-
guage), 207–220.
van Inwagen, P. (2006). Can mereological sums change their parts? Journal of Philosophy, 103,
614–630.
Vanquickenborne, L. G. (1991). Quantum chemistry of the hydrogen bond. In P. L. Huyskens, W.
A. P. Luck, & Th. Zeegers-Huyskens (Eds.), Intermolecular forces: An introduction to modern
methods and results (pp. 31–53). Heidelberg: Springer.
Varzi, A. (2013). Boundary. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2013 Edition), E.
N. Zalta (Ed.), forthcoming http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2013/entries/boundary
Vendler, Z. (1967). Verbs and times. In Linguistics and philosophy. Ithica: Cornell University
Press.
Wald, F. (1896). Chemistry and its laws. Journal of Physical Chemistry, 1, 21–33.
Weatherson, B. (2006). Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic properties. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/intrinsic-extrinsic/
Weisheipl, J. A. (1963). The concept of matter in fourteenth century science. In E. McMullin
(Ed.), The concept of matter in Greek and medieval philosophy. Notre Dame: University of
Notre Dame Press.

Bibliography
217
Wheeler, J. C. (1980). On Gibbs phase rule for optical enantiomers. Journal of Chemical Physics,
73, 5771–5777.
Wiggins, D. (1968). On being in the same place at the same time. Philosophical Review, 77, 90–95.
Wiggins, D. (1976). The De Re ‘Must’: A note on the logical form of essentialist claims. In G.
Evans, & J. McDowell (Eds.), Truth and meaning (pp. 285–312). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Wiggins, D. (2004). Sameness and substance renewed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Williams, C. J. F. (2000). Aristotle’s De Generatione et Corruptione. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Weininger, S. J. (2014). Reactivity and its contexts. In U. Klein, & C. Reinhardt (Eds.), Objects
of chemical inquiry (pp. 203–236). Science History Publications (div of Watson Publishing
International).
Woolley, R. G. (1988). Must a molecule have a shape? New Scientist, 120(22 Oct.), 53–57.
Zemansky, M. W., & Dittman, R. H. (1981). Heat and thermodynamics: An intermediate textbook.
London: McGraw-Hill.
Zernike, J. (1951). Vapour pressures of saturated ammonium bicarbonate solutions. Recueil des
travaux chimiques des Pays-Bas, 70, 711–719.
Zernike, J. (1954). Three-phase curve of ammonium bicarbonate. Recueil des travaux chimiques
des Pays-Bas, 73, 95–101.

Index
A
abstract objects, 24
abutment, 12–13, 21, 33–38, 167, 193
on the move, 34
static, 34, 38
accumulation condition, 33, 36, 38, 139–140
(AO), 57
(PA), 52
activities & accomplishments, 12, 177
air, 36
Alexander of Aphrodisias, 99–100
exclusion principle, 100, 104
Almotahari, 48
Anaxagoras, 92
Anscombe, 166
Aristotle, 11, 29, 77, 83, 86, 89–111,
184–185
elements, 91–99, 103
actual & potential, 97
ﬁrst deﬁnition (by characteristics), 95
just four, 95
second (analytic) deﬁnition, 96
transmutation, 92
equilibrium, 95
homogeneity, 109–111
mixt, 91–94
overwhelming, 94, 125
primary determinables, 94–96
bounded, 95, 105–106, 189
proportions, 96, 110
spatial parts, 91
water, 95
Armstrong, 131
artifacts, 51, 53, 55
atmosphere, 36, 48
atomism, 83, 89, 93
Daltonian, 119
atoms, 136–137, 182, 183
atomic number, 182
in molecules, 183
Ayers, 55
B
Barcan formula, 67, 108
converse, 67
Bayle, 108
Bennett, 154, 164
Berthollet, 118
betweenness, 14, 19
abutting, 193
Black, 115, 158
Bohr, 120
Boscovich, 27, 114
Bostock, 97
boundaries, 29–30
bona ﬁde boundary, 30
ﬁat boundary, 30, 32
Bowley & Sánchez, 86
Boyling, 190
Bréhier, 100
Brentano, 29
C
calcium carbonate equilibrium, 123–124,
140–142
Callen, 39
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P. Needham, Macroscopic Metaphysics, Synthese Library 390,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70999-4
219

220
Index
caloric, 115
free, 116
Casati & Varzi, 30
Castellan, 124
Cauchy sequence, 41
causal priority, 17
causation, 152
process theories, 153
regularity theory, 167
relational view, 153, 164–166
Cavendish, 116
change, 129, 152–157
Cambridge/real, 153
Russellian, 153, 161
Chappell, 2
chemical potential, 121
Chrysippus, 99–100
Clarke, 12
Clausius, 162
Cleland, 154–157
cohesion, 114
hydrogen bonding, 132–134
cooperative, 132
intermolecular interactions, 129, 131
van der Waals forces, 130
coincidence, 56, 58, 86
combination, 118–120, 181
bonding, 131
covalent, 182
delocalised, 183
ionic, 183
law of deﬁnite proportions, 118
valency, 129, 182
complete ﬁrst-order theory, 15
@0-categoricity, 21
composes, C, 143
constitution, 7, 36, 48–71
modal argument, 51
unique, 51–52
continuant events, 177
continuants, 1, 29, 31
changes in, 152
involvement in processes, 167,
172–176
continuity condition, 33
cooccupancy, see coincidence, 86–87, 90
Cooper, 97–98
count nouns, 75
cover, 32
cumulative condition, 78, 177, 197
generalised, 81–83
spatial, 85
D
Davidson, 2, 152, 166
adverbial modiﬁcation argument,
164–165
causal relation, 165
Dedekind, 5
Denbigh, 122
Denbigh & Denbigh, 18
descriptive metaphysics, v
difference
existential prerequisite of, 11
distant from, 31
distributive condition, 77–78, 95, 97, 101, 107,
130–138, 177, 190, 197
restrictions, 142
spatial, 84
Dowe, 153
conserved quantity theory, 153
Duhem, 3, 43, 86, 90, 117, 123, 124, 126, 128,
155, 159–162
E
endurance, 2
entropy, 18, 39, 119, 162
equilibrium, 101, 129, 138, 161
calcium carbonate, 123–124, 140–142
dynamic, 129, 132–134
equivalence principle (EP), 57
essence, 179–180
Euclid’s second postulate, 14
Euclidean geometry, 5
exhaustive, 84
existence predicate, 54, 67
extensive variables, 39
F
Fajans, 182
Faye, 17
Fine, 48
formula
compositional, 128
structural, 128
four-dimensionalists, 2, 50
free logic, 67
Frege, 5
French, 4
French & Krause, 143
Freudenthal, 114
Frigg, 4
fusion, see sum

Index
221
G
Gibbs, 119
Gillon, 76
gunk, 130
H
Hahm, 100
Hale, 179
Hamblin, 12
Hawley, 2, 51, 66
Heitler & London, 120
Heller, 2
Holden, 27, 31, 75, 106–109, 135
argument from composition,
113–114
Hooykaas, 180
Huntington, 5
I
impenetrability, 50, 56, 86, 98, 103
Daltonian atoms, 28
indeterminacy relations, 28, 129
indiscernibility, , 143
indistinguishability, 130, 142–150
individuals, 36, 47–74
coincidence, 58
common component part, ˚t, 34, 61
components, 59–65
countable things, 48
cover, 32
criterion of identity
coincidence, 58
same constitution, 53–56
equivalence principle (EP), 57
existence predicate, 54
ﬁxed constitution, 51
interchange of matter, 53
lifetime, 54
modal properties, 66–71
non-connected, 65
occupying, 31
inﬁnitesimals, 45
intensive properties, 39, 121, 125
intervals, 11–15, 27, 32, 53, 57, 58, 60
abutment, 12
betweenness, 14–15
connected, 13, 81, 193
earlier than, 194
inﬁnite divisibility, 15
sum of, 13
unity of time, 14
intrinsic properties, 158
J
James & Coolidge, 183
Jespersen, 75
Johnson, 1
K
Kant, 113
Kim, 154
Kondepudi & Prigogine, 42–43
Kripke, 179
microstructural essence, 182
necessity of origin, 69–70
variable domains, 67–69
L
latent heat, 115
water, 131–132
Lavoisier, 49, 79, 90, 98, 106
base of, 116, 181
caloric’s elasticity, 117
decomposition, 114
elements, 115–118
indestructibility of matter, 71, 173
Leonard & Goodman, 9
Leonardo da Vinci, 29, 35
LePore, 165
Leslie, 186
Lesniewski, 5
Lewis, 120, 182
Lombard, 2, 153, 155, 157
Lowe, 2, 24
M
macroscopic, 75, 87, 108, 114, 119, 128
concept, 44
matter, 135, 138
continuous, 27, 130
ontological claims, 151
many-sorted language, 9
mass predicates, 75–77
grammatical criteria, 75
relational, 78
material objects, 24, 25, 38
abutment, 35
distant from another, 31
divisibility, 109
homogeneous, 120
individuals & quantities, 36, 48
modal argument, 51
mobility, 31
removed from another, 31

222
Index
mathematical analysis, 38–43
smooth function, 39
Maxwell, 87, 129
mechanics, 115
mereology, vi, 6, 7, 23–24, 26, 47, 61,
74
classical axioms, 9, 24
criterion of identity, 6, 50, 98
least upper bound, 10
mereological essentialism, 67, 109
mereological partition, 130, 142, 182
principle of extensionality, 6
principle of transitivity, 6–7
quasi-, 144–149
rigid relations, 71
spatial parts, 84
spatio-temporal parthood, 85
triadic relations, 47
mesoscopic scale, 28
microrealm, 4, 42–43, 87, 129
mixture, see Aristotle, mixt
mechanical, 91
solution, 126
modal comparison, 106, 188
molecules, 120, 129, 130, 138
in liquid, 135
isolated, 135, 150
Mulliken, 183
N
nanoscale, 135
necessity
essentialist theory of, 179
for, 189
when, 195
metaphysical, 179
relative, 192
continuous, 196
nominalism, 39
Field’s, 41
Goodman’s, 5
Noonan, 2
O
occupying, 31–33, 130
exactly, 33, 37, 38, 44–45
occurrents, 1, 151
ontological commitment, 41, 188
operation, 8, 47, 63, 107
organism, 63, 66
P
Paneth, 90, 181–182
basic oxygen, 183
simple/basic substance, 181
Parsons, 76
Pauli exclusion principle, 87, 183
Penrose, 143
perdurance, 2
phase, 35, 50, 118, 138–142
calcium carbonate, 141
change, 92, 115, 119, 127, 153
latent heat, 119
equilibrium, 138
mereological interpretation, 139–142
predicates, dyadic, 79
rule, 120–126, 134, 137, 140–142
constraints, 122
Philoponus, 97
phlogiston, 117
planets, 70
Plato, 108
plurality, 65
Poincaré, 49
possible for, 187, 189, 191
when arising, 195
possible worlds, 188
potential/actual parts doctrines, 106–109
Potter, 5
pressure, 39
Prior, 24, 48, 60
tense logic, 188
processes, 119, 151–178
as continuants, 177
burning, 173
chemical reactions, 173–176
diffusing, 168
endpoints, 156
entropy, 119
events, 152
heating, 119, 158, 166–167, 173
making a transition, 190
mereological essentialism, 176
mereological structure, 169–172
multigrade relations, 173
radiation, 155
real, 161
real/possible, 191
relation to space, 167
relational, 154–155, 172–176
reversible, 156, 160–161
rigidity principles, 176
taking place, TP, 169, 191

Index
223
temporal parts, 177
three-body collision, 154
trajectory, 156
product
existential prerequisite of, 10
Proust, 118
puddles, 55
Putnam, 80, 128
Q
quantities
always somewhere, 57
connected, 107, 135
connected with, 104
cooccupying, 86–87
identity conditions, 9, 49
indestructible, 49
mereological essentialism, 67
mereological structure, 9–11,
75–87
no null quantity, 10, 36, 52, 54
spatial parts, 84
three-dimensional continuants, 47
quantum mechanics, 120
zero-point vibration, 129
Quine, 68, 76–78, 80, 83, 135–137
indispensability argument, 43
Quinton, 86, 167
R
rational numbers, 41
real numbers, 41
order-complete, 41
reduction, 2, 4, 43, 151, 165
regions, 5, 18–23
abutment, 21
betweenness, 19
boundaries, 29–30
box, 21
connected, 21, 33
connected with, 21
orthogonal strata, 20
parallel strata, 20
stratum, 19
Reichenbach’s mark method, 16–18
relativity, v
removed from, 31, 107
Rescher, 6
Ricci, 140
ridigity principles, 68
rigid relation, 71
Robinson, 50
Roeper, 81
Ruben, 6
S
Salmon, 152
Schrödinger logic, 143
science, v, 25, 86, 153, 155, 164, 188
limits of error, 3, 43
sea, 36
Seibt, 6, 168
separation closure, 14
ship of Theseus, 53, 54
Sider, 2, 47, 50, 56
Simons, 10, 54, 146, 155
Sklar, 4
Smith & Varzi, 29, 36
space, see regions, 78
boundaries, 29–30
immobility, 31
spatial parts, 84
exhaustive, 84
spatio-temporal parthood, 85
state, 121, 158, 164, 188
possible, 190–199
real, 191
statistical ﬂuctuations, 42
Stobaeus, 99
Stoic conception of blend, 84, 86, 97, 99–101,
106, 111, 184
blend, 99
fusion, 99
problem of characterising elements, 100
separation, 97, 99
stoichiometric coefﬁcient, 122, 173
stratum, 19
strong supplementation principle, 10, 146
substance, 26, 49, 127–138
& law of deﬁnite proportions, 119
Aristotelian, 101
caloric, 115
characteristic features, 121, 133, 136
distinctions of, 115
element, 126, 179
actually/potentially present, 180–185
isotope, 182
transmutation, 180
independent, 123, 134, 140–141
isomers, 128
enantiomorphs, 124
molecular, 130, 136, 137

224
Index
substance (cont.)
predicates, 77–78
dyadic, 79
time-dependency, 80
same, 78–81, 89, 102, 186
time-dependency, 79
simple, 96
single, 91, 92, 102, 121, 126, 134, 139
thermodynamic criterion of purity, 134
time-dependence, 127
sum
binary, 10
deﬁnition of, 10
existence of, 10, 51
existential prerequisite of, 10
fusion, 5
operation, 8, 25
region-quantity relation, 37
restricted, 13
unique, 10, 47
universal, 11
unrestricted, 8, 10
Sutcliffe, 120
T
Tarski, 6
temperature, 4, 40–43, 95, 101, 115, 155–157
Kelvin scale, 121
negative absolute, 39
temporal parts, 1
thermodynamics, 39, 56, 86, 89, 115, 120,
159–162
ﬁrst law, 119, 159
non-equilibrium, 39–41
second law, 119
Thomson, 72, 127
three-dimensionalists, 1, 50
time, see intervals, 74, 78
direction of, 15–18, 194
earlier than, 194
existing in, 24
inﬁnite divisibility of, 15
modal analogy, 176, 186
-modal interplay, 194
temporal comparison, 79, 105, 188
unity of, 14
Tisza, 86
triple point, 121
U
universe of discourse, 8
V
van Inwagen
arbitrary undetached parts, 63–65
Special Composition Question, 25–26
sums can change their parts, 71–74
variance, 120
Varzi, 29
Vasa, 55
Vendler, 12
W
water, 35–36, 49, 69, 77, 79, 92, 116, 118,
127–129, 131–138, 179, 182
“H2O” predicate, 128
bulk, 135
dissociation of, 125, 133, 134
liquid-vapour equilibrium, 138
necessarily H2O, 185–186
phase-dependent sense, 128
Weininger, 176
Weisheipl, 97
Wheeler, 125
Whitehead, 2
Wiggins, 86
“is” of constitution, 48
necessity, 68
Williams, 89
Woolley, 120, 150
Z
Zernike, 124

