See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/304835052
Circuitscape: modeling landscape connectivity to promote conservation and
human health
Technical Report · May 2016
DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.4265.1126
CITATIONS
25
READS
3,845
3 authors, including:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Julia - A fresh approach to numerical computing View project
Brad McRae
The Nature Conservancy
71 PUBLICATIONS   4,843 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Viral B. Shah
Julia Computing
39 PUBLICATIONS   3,833 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Brad McRae on 05 July 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Circuitscape: modeling landscape connectivity to promote conservation and 
human health  
 
Brad McRae1, Viral Shah2, Alan Edelman2,3 
1The Nature Conservancy 
2Julia Computing Inc. 
3Massachussetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 
 
Summary 
Circuitscape is an award-winning connectivity analysis software package designed to model 
species movement and gene flow across fragmented landscapes, and to identify areas important 
for connectivity conservation. It uses algorithms from electrical circuit theory to model 
connectivity, taking advantage of links between circuit and random walk theories. Its ability to 
incorporate all possible pathways across a landscape simultaneously has made Circuitscape 
particularly useful for connectivity analysis. 
 
 
  
The rapid adoption of Circuitscape by conservation scientists, conservation practitioners, and 
landscape geneticists has exceeded our expectations. Moreover, Circuitscape is making inroads 
into new scientific disciplines including wildland fire management, epidemiology, and 
archaeology. 
 
In response to increasing demand, we are seeking to greatly enhance Circuitscape’s capabilities 
and accessibility. We plan to  
 increase computational power to handle larger datasets; 
 add a new, innovative connectivity modeling algorithm; 
 add functionality and improve ease of use; and 
 integrate with cloud computing infrastructure, such as Google Earth Engine. 
 
 
Background 
Landscape connectivity 
Landscape connectivity is the degree to which the landscape facilitates or impedes movement.  

Over the past two decades, researchers have increasing recognized that connectivity is crucial for 
many ecological and evolutionary processes, including dispersal, gene flow, seasonal migrations, 
and colonization of vacant habitat. Understanding how landscapes facilitate or impede movement 
for different kinds of species or processes is also important for understanding and managing the 
spread of infectious disease, wildfire, and invasive species. 
 
Wildlife corridors and conservation 
Maintaining well-connected landscapes has become a key conservation strategy, because 
increasing connectivity—for example, by establishing wildlife corridors—can mitigate the 
effects of habitat loss and fragmentation and allow species to persist in human-modified 
landscapes. 
 
Connectivity will also be critical for natural systems to adapt to a changing climate, e.g., by 
facilitating range shifts in response to warming temperatures. As a result, maintaining and 
restoring connectivity is the most recommended strategy for conserving biodiversity under 
climate change (Heller and Zavaleta 2009). 
 
Understanding and predicting the effects of landscape structure on movement and gene flow, and 
identifying areas important to conserve, requires models that relate landscape structure to 
movement processes. That’s where Circuitscape comes in. 
 
Circuitscape 
We initially developed Circuitscape to take advantage of links between circuit theory and gene 
flow, but it has since been applied to many other types of connectivity. The model was created to 
describe links with population genetics; in a nutshell, gene flow among plant and animal 
populations increases when there are more pathways connecting them, just as current flow in 
electrical networks (or water flow in networks of pipes) increases when there are more pathways 
(McRae 2006). These links mean that algorithms developed over the last 150 years to model 
connectivity across electrical networks could be readily adapted to model genetic connectivity 
across landscapes.  
 
Further research showed how electrical networks can serve as models for animal movement and 
wildlife corridor conservation (McRae et al. 2008). Studies using genetic and movement data 
(e.g. from radio collared animals) have confirmed the power of circuit theory to predict 
ecological and genetic connectivity, and to identify important movement routes (particularly 
pinch points or bottlenecks, where the loss of a small amount of habitat can sever linkages). 
 
As a result, Circuitscape has rapidly become the most widely used connectivity analysis package 
in the world. It is taught in GIS and landscape ecology labs at dozens of universities such as 
Yale, the University of Washington, and the University of California Santa Barbara. It is also 
used for planning by numerous state, federal, and local agencies in the USA, and used by 
government ministries and NGOs for conservation planning on six continents. 
 
Circuitscape appears in high-tier journals like PNAS, Ecology, Ecological Applications, Ecology 
Letters, Landscape Ecology, Evolution, Heredity, Bioscience, Molecular Ecology, Conservation 

Biology, and many others. In 2015 alone, it appeared in 80 peer-reviewed journal articles—a 
40% increase from 2014—plus dozens of dissertations, reports, and book chapters.  
 
 
Example applications 
Below is a sampling of Circuitscape applications from around the world. We’ve broken these 
into rough categories, but there is considerable overlap between them. 
 
Wildlife corridor design 
Within the Nature Conservancy, connectivity analyses using Circuitscape are being used in 
planning exercises affecting tens of millions of dollars for land acquisition, restoration, and 
management. Other NGOs, whether small ones like the Snow Leopard Conservancy or large 
ones like the Wildlife Conservation Society, are using Circuitscape to set conservation priorities. 
Here are some recent examples of research in this area. 
 Multispecies connectivity planning in Borneo (Brodie et al. 2015). 
 Connectivity for pumas in Arizona and New Mexico (Dickson et al. 2013). 
 Large landscape planning across Ontario, Canada (Bowman and Cordes 2015). 
 Connectivity prioritization for gibbons (Vasudev and Fletcher 2015). 
 Corridors for tigers in India (Joshi et al. 2013, Dutta et al. 2015). 
 Connectivity for Amur leopards in China (Jiang et al. 2015). 
 Trans-boundary conservation of Persian leopards in Iran, Turkey, Armenia, and 
Azerbaijan (Farhadinia et al. 2015). 
 Multi-scale connectivity planning in Australia (Lechner et al. 2015). 
 ‘Wall-to-wall’ methods that don’t require core areas to connect (Anderson et al. 2012, 
2014, Pelletier et al. 2014). 
 
 
 
Dutta et al. (2015) 
combined Circuitscape 
with least-cost corridor 
methods to map pinch 
points within corridors 
connecting protected 
areas for tigers in 
central India. Areas 
with high current flow 
are most important for 
tiger movements and 
keeping the network 
connected. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protected Areas 

Landscape genetics 
Landscape genetics is the study of how landscape pattern (the distribution of suitable habitat, 
barriers, etc.) affects gene flow and genetic differentiation among plant and animal populations. 
Circuitscape is widely used in this field, and has been combined with genetic data to show 
 the resilience of montane rainforest lizards to past climate change in the Australian 
tropics (Bell et al. 2010); 
 how oil palm plantations isolate squirrel monkeys in Costa Rica, and where corridors of 
native trees could reconnect populations (Blair et al. 2012); 
 how the pattern of climatically stable habitat structures genetics of canyon live oaks 
(Ortego et al. 2014);  
 how genetics and connectivity models can be combined to design Indian tiger corridors 
(Yumnam et al. 2014) ; 
 how urban trees facilitate animal gene flow (Munshi-South 2012) ;  
 how climate change and montane refugia have structured salamander populations in 
southern California (Devitt et al. 2013); 
 the effects of landscape change on movement among prairie dog colonies (Sackett et al. 
2012); and 
 how landscape features influence genetic connectivity for dozens of species, from 
songbirds in British Columbia (Adams et al. 2016) to army ants in Panama (Pérez-Espona 
et al. 2012).  
 
Movement ecology  
Circuit theory can also be used to predict movements of animals and how these affect overall 
population connectivity. As with landscape genetics, this application is tightly tied to 
conservation planning. Examples include 
 movements of African wild dogs and cheetahs in South Africa (Jackson et al. 2016); 
 wolverine dispersal in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem (McClure et al. 2016); 
 how periodic flooding affects connectivity for amphibians in Australia (Bishop-Taylor et 
al. 2015);  
 predicting where mitigating road impacts on connectivity would reduce wildlife mortality 
in France (Girardet et al. 2015) and Canada (Koen et al. 2014); 
 movement and gap crossing behavior of forest interior songbirds (St. Louis et al. 2014); 
and 
 how local abundance and dispersal scale up to affect metapopulation persistence and 
community stability (Brodie et al. 2016).  
  
 

 
Circuit theory is being used to mitigate road impacts on wildlife and improve driver safety in at 
least six countries. (a) Circuit theory (implemented using Graphab) outperformed other 
connectivity models for predicting vehicle collisions with roe deer in France (Girardet et al. 
2015). (b) A wall-to-wall connectivity map created using Circuitscape was highly correlated 
with road mortality for amphibians and reptiles and habitat use by fishers in eastern Ontario, 
Canada (from Koen et al. 2014). Similar methods are now being used across Ontario and in 
many other parts of Canada.  
 
 
Connectivity for climate change 
Predicting important areas for range shifts under climate change is an exciting new application of 
Circuitscape. One of the most important ways species have responded to past climatic changes 
has been to shift their ranges to track suitable climates. Rapid warming projected for the next 
century means many species and populations will need to move even faster than in the past or 
face extinction. Many species are already moving in response to rapid warming, but they are 
encountering barriers—like roads, agricultural areas, and cities—that weren’t present in the past. 
In order for species to maintain population connectivity and the ability to adapt to climate 
change, we need to identify and conserve important movement routes.  Here are some ways 
Circuitscape can be used to address this need. 
 Hodgson et al. (2012) showed how circuit theory can be used to design landscapes that 
promote rapid range shifts. 
 Lawler et al. (2013) used Circuitscape to project movements of nearly 3000 species in 
response to climate change across the Western Hemisphere. 
(a) 
(b) 
ONTARIO 

 Razgour (2015) combined species distributions, climate projections, genetic data, and 
Circuitscape to predict range shift pathways for bats in Iberia. 
 New methods connecting natural lands to those that have similar projected future 
climates (Littlefield et al. in prep) and connecting across climate gradients (McRae et al. 
in prep) are in active development. 
 
 
 
Projected climate-
driven range shifts of 
2903 species in 
response to climate 
change using 
Circuitscape. Arrows 
represent the direction 
of modelled movements 
from unsuitable 
climates to suitable 
climates via routes that 
avoid human land uses. 
From Lawler et al. 
(2013). See an 
animation of these 
results here. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New applications: infectious disease, fire, and agriculture 
Circuitscape is breaking into new areas like epidemiology, invasive species spread, archaeology, 
and fire management. Examples include 
 how road networks drive HIV spread in Africa (Tatem et al. 2012); 
 spread of invasive insects, including disease-carrying mosquitos (Cowley et al. 2015, 
Andraca- Gómez et al. 2015, Medley et al. 2014); 
 understanding why species reintroductions succeed or fail (Ziółkowska et al. 2016); 
 spread of a disease that is threatening rice production in Africa (Trovão et al. 2015); 
 spread of rabies (Barton et al. 2010, Rioux Paquette et al. 2014); 
 how climate and habitat fragmentation drive Lyme disease at its range limit (Simon et al. 
2014). 
 fuel connectivity and wildfire risk (Gray and Dickson 2015, 2016); and 
 strategic fuel breaks to protect sage-grouse habitat from wildfire (Welch et al. 2015). 
 
 

Fire likelihood across Arizona’s lower 
Sonoran Desert, using Circuitscape to model 
fuel connectivity. Areas with high predicted 
fire risk corresponded with burned area data 
showing where wildfires occurred from 2000 
to 2012 (Gray and Dickson 2015). This 
method has been extended to evaluate fuel 
treatments where invasive cheatgrass is 
increasing fire (Gray and Dickson 2016). 
 
Welch et al. (2015) used a similar analysis to 
identify strategic areas for fuel breaks to 
protect greater sage-grouse habitat. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How Circuitscape complements other models 
Circuitscape isn’t the right modeling method for every connectivity application, but it is strongly 
complementary to others, and often works well in conjunction with other methods. For example, 
McClure et al. (2016) compared least-cost paths and Circuitscape for predicting elk and 
wolverine movements using GPS-collared animals. They found that Circuitscape outperformed 
least-cost paths for predicting wolverine dispersal, but slightly underperformed them for elk. 
This makes sense, because circuit models reflect random exploration of the landscape, and 
dispersing juvenile wolverines are making exploratory movements since they do not have perfect 
knowledge. Elk, on the other hand, are following routes established over generations, and have 
much better knowledge of the best pathways. 
 
Hybrid approaches 
New hybrid methods are taking advantage of both circuit and least-cost methods. In their tiger 
study, Dutta et al. (2015) combined least-cost corridors and Circuitscape to map the most 
important and vulnerable connectivity areas connecting tiger reserves. And in their work on 
invasive mosquitoes, Medley et al. (2014) found that circuit and least-cost-based analyses 
complemented each other, with differing strengths at different movement scales and in different 
contexts. Using the two models in concert gave the most insight into mosquito movement and 
spread. Other papers that combine methods, taking advantage of different strengths for different 
processes and scales, include Rayfield et al. (2015), Lechner et al. (2015), Fagan et al. (2016), 
and Ziółkowska et al. (2016). 
 

An especially exciting new development is a related algorithm that can predict connectivity on a 
continuum between circuit theory and least-cost paths. We describe plans to incorporate this 
algorithm into Circuitscape below.  
 
 
Opportunities for improvement 
Computational capacity 
Circuitscape is powerful enough to process GIS datasets with millions of grid cells on standard 
desktop computers. Yet applications to larger datasets (e.g, across large areas and with high-
resolution satellite data) have been hampered by memory- and CPU-intensive processes. 
Datasets with more than ~20 million grid cells typically require workstations or cloud computing 
resources. 
 
Authors using Circuitscape often state that their input data needed to be coarsened to achieve 
reasonable run times, compromising the ability to discern the effects of fine-scaled landscape 
features. An example is Lawler et al.’s analysis of climate-driven movements for 2903 species in 
the Western Hemisphere described above.  They coarsened their human impact data to 50 km x 
50 km grid cells, because their analysis required running Circuitscape thousands of times.  
 
Such limitations are due to Circuitscape’s reliance on standard linear solvers; these are the 
mathematical algorithms that calculate resistances and current flow across landscapes, solving 
millions of equations simultaneously. Circuitscape uses off-the-shelf solvers, rather than solvers 
that have been developed to handle extremely large problems.  New algorithms tailored to the 
kinds of problems Circuitscape solves are needed.  
 
The best of both worlds: combining circuit and least-cost methods  
A promising new development in connectivity modeling is an algorithm that strikes a balance 
between circuit and least-cost path approaches. Developed by Saerens et al. (2009) and 
Kivimäkia et al. 2014, the randomized shortest path (RSP) algorithm was first applied to 
ecological connectivity by Panzacchi et al. (2015). The algorithm is similar to that used in 
Circuitscape, but includes an additional tuning parameter. When the parameter is at one extreme, 
the model is equivalent to circuit theory (i.e., predicting behavior of organisms with no 
knowledge of the landscape); at the other extreme, the model is equivalent to least-cost path 
models (i.e., predicting movements assuming perfect knowledge). Intermediate cases may be 
particularly useful for movement ecology and conservation; Panzacchi et al. found that an 
intermediate value gave the best predictions for reindeer movement in Norway.  
  
 

 
Three predictions along a continuum between least-cost and circuit models for predicting 
reindeer spring migrations using a tuning parameter (θ). Left-hand panel approximates least-
cost paths, and middle shows circuit predictions. Right-hand panel illustrates the best fitting 
model, which is intermediate between the two. A road intersecting migration routes is outlined in 
yellow. From Panzacchi et al. (2015). 
 
Building this algorithm into Circuitscape would give users a much wider range of choices from a 
single modeling platform. The value of having least-cost and circuit-based algorithms—and a 
range of choices in between—would be a boon to connectivity modeling. 
 
 
Taking Circuitscape to the next level 
We are seeking support to significantly enhance Circuitscape to make it more powerful, 
functional, and user friendly. First, we will work with MIT mathematicians and computer 
scientists at Julia Computing to redesign the linear solvers at the heart of Circuitscape. We 
believe we can achieve substantial memory efficiency and speed improvements, and build in 
parallel processing to take advantage of multi-core computers and servers. This will allow users 
to analyze connectivity across larger areas, use increasingly fine-scaled satellite data, and solve 
problems much more quickly. 
 
We hope to integrate Circuitscape with Google Earth Engine to allow users to easily access 
public datasets and take advantage of a promising and powerful spatial analysis platform. 
 
We will also make significant functional improvements to Circuitscape. The most important of 
these will be to incorporate the new RSP algorithm described above, expanding the modeling 
choices available to users. Circuitscape is an ideal platform for implementing the new algorithm, 
because of its close similarity to those used in Circuitscape (e.g., using similar data structures 
and graph operations).  
 
Second, we will add enhancements to make Circuitscape easier to use, such as the ability to read 
and write popular GIS formats. Currently, users must export GIS datasets to ASCII format, and 
re-import the results, a cumbersome process. Although we have released an ArcGIS extension 
that does this automatically, many users cannot use this extension because they use open source 

GIS software or call Circuitscape from Python or R scripts. Overhauling our code base will allow 
us to make numerous other enhancements and bug fixes as well. 
 
This project would result in a modeling platform with immediate applications for government 
agencies, academic institutions, and NGOs. The increased computing capacity would allow users 
to process larger datasets more quickly, facilitating analyses of larger areas and at finer scales, 
ensemble modeling, use with multiple climate and land use scenarios, and uncertainty analysis. 
New functionality would increase the impact of Circuitscape and facilitate its use by 
practitioners. We will continue to make Circuitscape freely available, and support its user base. 
 
 
Our team 
We are a consortium of conservation practitioners, mathematicians, and computer programmers 
working with NGOs, private industry, and academia. Viral Shah and Brad McRae created 
Circuitscape, and support a large user community. Shah is also co-creator of the Julia scientific 
computing language, which is ideally suited to implementing the proposed algorithms. Alan 
Edelman is a mathematician and applied computer scientist, and will be assisting with the 
redesign of Circuitscape’s solvers.  
 
 
References 
Adams, R.V., Lazerte, S.E., Otter, K.A. and Burg, T.M., 2016. Influence of landscape features 
on the microgeographic genetic structure of a resident songbird. Heredity. 
 
Anderson, M.G., A. Barnett, M. Clark, C. Ferree, A. Olivero Sheldon, and J. Prince. 2014. 
Resilient Sites for Terrestrial Conservation in the Southeast Region. The Nature 
Conservancy, Eastern Conservation Science. 127 pp. 
 
Anderson, M.G., M. Clark, and A. Olivero Sheldon. 2012 Resilient Sites for Terrestrial 
Conservation in the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic Region. The Nature Conservancy, Eastern 
Conservation Science. 168 pp 
 
Andraca-Gómez, G., Ordano, M., Boege, K., Domínguez, C.A., Piñero, D., Pérez-Ishiwara, R., 
Pérez-Camacho, J., Cañizares, M. and Fornoni, J., 2015. A potential invasion route of 
Cactoblastis cactorum within the Caribbean region matches historical hurricane trajectories. 
Biological Invasions, 17(5), pp.1397-1406. 
 
Barton, H.D., Gregory, A.J., Davis, R., Hanlon, C.A. and Wisely, S.M., 2010. Contrasting 
landscape epidemiology of two sympatric rabies virus strains. Molecular ecology, 19(13), 
pp.2725-2738. 
 
Bell, R.C., Parra, J.L., Tonione, M., Hoskin, C.J., Mackenzie, J.B., Williams, S.E. and Moritz, 
C., 2010. Patterns of persistence and isolation indicate resilience to climate change in montane 
rainforest lizards. Molecular Ecology, 19(12), pp.2531-2544. 
 

Bishop-Taylor, R., Tulbure, M.G. and Broich, M., 2015. Surface water network structure, 
landscape resistance to movement and flooding vital for maintaining ecological connectivity 
across Australia’s largest river basin.Landscape Ecology, 30(10), pp.2045-2065. 
 
Blair, M.E. and Melnick, D.J., 2012. Scale-dependent effects of a heterogeneous landscape on 
genetic differentiation in the Central American squirrel monkey (Saimiri oerstedii). PloS one, 
7(8), p.e43027. 
 
Bowman, J. and C. Cordes. 2015. Landscape connectivity in the Great Lakes Basin. Figshare 
http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1471658. (Also see this presentation.) 
 
Brodie, J.F., Giordano, A.J., Dickson, B., Hebblewhite, M., Bernard, H., Mohd‐Azlan, J., 
Anderson, J. and Ambu, L., 2015. Evaluating multispecies landscape connectivity in a threatened 
tropical mammal community. Conservation Biology, 29(1), pp.122-132. 
 
Brodie, J.F., Mohd‐Azlan, J. and Schnell, J.K., 2016. How individual links affect network 
stability in a large‐scale, heterogeneous metacommunity. Ecology. 
 
Cowley, D.J., Johnson, O. and Pocock, M.J., 2015. Using electric network theory to model the 
spread of oak processionary moth, Thaumetopoea processionea, in urban woodland patches. 
Landscape Ecology, 30(5), pp.905-918. 
 
Devitt, T.J., Devitt, S.E.C., Hollingsworth, B.D., McGuire, J.A. and Moritz, C., 2013. Montane 
refugia predict population genetic structure in the Large‐blotched Ensatina salamander. 
Molecular ecology, 22(6), pp.1650-1665. 
 
Dickson, B.G., Roemer, G.W., McRae, B.H. and Rundall, J.M., 2013. Models of regional habitat 
quality and connectivity for pumas (Puma concolor) in the southwestern United States. PloS one, 
8(12), p.e81898. 
 
Dutta, T., Sharma, S., McRae, B.H., Roy, P.S. and DeFries, R., 2015. Connecting the dots: 
mapping habitat connectivity for tigers in central India. Regional Environmental Change, pp.1-
15. 
 
Fagan, M.E., DeFries, R.S., Sesnie, S.E., Arroyo, J.P. and Chazdon, R.L., 2016. Targeted 
reforestation could reverse declines in connectivity for understory birds in a tropical habitat 
corridor. Ecological Applications. 
 
Farhadinia, M.S., Ahmadi, M., Sharbafi, E., Khosravi, S., Alinezhad, H. and Macdonald, D.W., 
2015. Leveraging trans-boundary conservation partnerships: Persistence of Persian leopard 
(Panthera pardus saxicolor) in the Iranian Caucasus. Biological Conservation, 191, pp.770-778. 
 
Girardet, X., Conruyt-Rogeon, G. and Foltête, J.C., 2015. Does regional landscape connectivity 
influence the location of roe deer roadkill hotspots? European Journal of Wildlife Research, 
61(5), pp.731-742. 
 

Gray, M.E. and Dickson, B.G., 2015. A new model of landscape‐scale fire connectivity applied 
to resource and fire management in the Sonoran Desert, USA. Ecological applications, 25(4), 
pp.1099-1113. 
 
Gray, M.E. and Dickson, B.G., 2016. Applying fire connectivity and centrality measures to 
mitigate the cheatgrass-fire cycle in the arid West, USA. Landscape Ecology DOI 
10.1007/s10980-016-0353-2 
 
Heller, N.E. and Zavaleta, E.S., 2009. Biodiversity management in the face of climate change: a 
review of 22 years of recommendations. Biological conservation, 142(1), pp.14-32. 
 
Hodgson, J.A., Thomas, C.D., Dytham, C., Travis, J.M. and Cornell, S.J., 2012. The speed of 
range shifts in fragmented landscapes. PLoS One, 7(10), p.e47141. 
 
Howey, M.C., 2011. Multiple pathways across past landscapes: circuit theory as a 
complementary geospatial method to least cost path for modeling past movement. Journal of 
Archaeological Science, 38(10), pp.2523-2535. 
 
Jackson, C.R., Marnewick, K., Lindsey, P.A., Røskaft, E. and Robertson, M.P., Evaluating 
habitat connectivity methodologies: a case study with endangered African wild dogs in South 
Africa. Landscape Ecology, pp.1-15. 
 
Jiang, G., Qi, J., Wang, G., Shi, Q., Darman, Y., Hebblewhite, M., Miquelle, D.G., Li, Z., Zhang, 
X., Gu, J. and Chang, Y., 2015. New hope for the survival of the Amur leopard in China. 
Scientific reports, 5. 
 
Joshi, A., Vaidyanathan, S., Mondol, S., Edgaonkar, A. and Ramakrishnan, U., 2013. 
Connectivity of tiger (Panthera tigris) populations in the human-influenced forest mosaic of 
Central India. PloS one, 8(11), p.e77980. 
 
Kivimäki, I., Shimbo, M. and Saerens, M., 2014. Developments in the theory of randomized 
shortest paths with a comparison of graph node distances. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and 
its Applications, 393, pp.600-616. 
 
Koen, E.L., Bowman, J., Sadowski, C. and Walpole, A.A., 2014. Landscape connectivity for 
wildlife: development and validation of multispecies linkage maps. Methods in Ecology and 
Evolution, 5(7), pp.626-633. 
 
Lawler, J.J., Ruesch, A.S., Olden, J.D. and McRae, B.H., 2013. Projected climate‐driven faunal 
movement routes. Ecology letters, 16(8), pp.1014-1022.  
 
Lechner, A.M., Doerr, V., Harris, R.M., Doerr, E. and Lefroy, E.C., 2015. A framework for 
incorporating fine-scale dispersal behaviour into biodiversity conservation planning. Landscape 
and Urban Planning, 141, pp.11-23. 
 

McClure, M.L., Hansen, A.J. and Inman, R.M., Connecting models to movements: testing 
connectivity model predictions against empirical migration and dispersal data. Landscape 
Ecology, pp.1-14. 
 
McRae, B. H. (2006). Isolation by resistance. Evolution, 60(8), 1551-1561. 
 
McRae, B.H., Dickson, B.G., Keitt, T.H. and Shah, V.B., 2008. Using circuit theory to model 
connectivity in ecology, evolution, and conservation.Ecology, 89(10), pp.2712-2724. 
 
Medley, K.A., Jenkins, D.G. and Hoffman, E.A., 2015. Human‐aided and natural dispersal drive 
gene flow across the range of an invasive mosquito. Molecular ecology, 24(2), pp.284-295. 
 
Munshi‐South, J., 2012. Urban landscape genetics: canopy cover predicts gene flow between 
white‐footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus) populations in New York City. Molecular Ecology, 
21(6), pp.1360-1378. 
 
Ortego, J., Gugger, P.F. and Sork, V.L., 2015. Climatically stable landscapes predict patterns of 
genetic structure and admixture in the Californian canyon live oak. Journal of Biogeography, 
42(2), pp.328-338. 
 
Panzacchi, M., Van Moorter, B., Strand, O., Saerens, M., Kivimäki, I., St Clair, C. C., Herfindal, 
I., and Boitani, L. (2016). Predicting the continuum between corridors and barriers to animal 
movements using Step Selection Functions and Randomized Shortest Paths. Journal of Animal 
Ecology, 85(1), 32-42. 
 
Pelletier, D., Clark, M., Anderson, M.G., Rayfield, B., Wulder, M.A. and Cardille, J.A., 2014. 
Applying circuit theory for corridor expansion and management at regional scales: tiling, pinch 
points, and omnidirectional connectivity. PloS one, 9(1), p.e84135. 
 
Pérez‐Espona, S., McLeod, J.E. and Franks, N.R., 2012. Landscape genetics of a top neotropical 
predator. Molecular Ecology, 21(24), pp.5969-5985. 
 
Rayfield, B., Pelletier, D., Dumitru, M., Cardille, J.A. and Gonzalez, A., 2015. Multipurpose 
habitat networks for short‐range and long‐range connectivity: a new method combining graph 
and circuit connectivity. Methods in Ecology and Evolution. 
 
Razgour, O., 2015. Beyond species distribution modeling: A landscape genetics approach to 
investigating range shifts under future climate change. Ecological Informatics, 30, pp.250-256. 
 
Rioux Paquette, S., Talbot, B., Garant, D., Mainguy, J. and Pelletier, F., 2014. Modelling the 
dispersal of the two main hosts of the raccoon rabies variant in heterogeneous environments with 
landscape genetics. Evolutionary applications, 7(7), pp.734-749. 
 
Sackett, L.C., Cross, T.B., Jones, R.T., Johnson, W.C., Ballare, K., Ray, C., Collinge, S.K. and 
Martin, A.P., 2012. Connectivity of prairie dog colonies in an altered landscape: inferences from 
analysis of microsatellite DNA variation. Conservation Genetics, 13(2), pp.407-418. 

 
Saerens, M., Achbany, Y., Fouss, F. and Yen, L., 2009. Randomized shortest-path problems: 
Two related models. Neural Computation, 21(8), pp.2363-2404. 
 
Sexton, J.P., Strauss, S.Y. and Rice, K.J., 2011. Gene flow increases fitness at the warm edge of 
a species’ range. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(28), pp.11704-11709. 
 
Simon, J.A., Marrotte, R.R., Desrosiers, N., Fiset, J., Gaitan, J., Gonzalez, A., Koffi, J.K., 
Lapointe, F.J., Leighton, P.A., Lindsay, L.R. and Logan, T., 2014. Climate change and habitat 
fragmentation drive the occurrence of Borrelia burgdorferi, the agent of Lyme disease, at the 
northeastern limit of its distribution. Evolutionary Applications, 7(7), pp.750-764. 
 
St-Louis, V., J. D. Forester, D. Pelletier, M. Bélisle, A. Desrochers, B. Rayfield, M. A. Wulder, 
and J. A. Cardille. (2014). Circuit theory emphasizes the importance of edge-crossing decisions 
in dispersal-scale movements of a forest passerine. Landscape ecology, 29(5), 831-841. 
 
Tatem, A.J., Hemelaar, J., Gray, R.R. and Salemi, M., 2012. Spatial accessibility and the spread 
of HIV-1 subtypes and recombinants. AIDS, 26(18), pp.2351-2360. 
 
Trovão, N.S., Baele, G., Vrancken, B., Bielejec, F., Suchard, M.A., Fargette, D. and Lemey, P., 
2015. Host ecology determines the dispersal patterns of a plant virus. Virus Evolution, 1(1), 
p.vev016. 
 
Vasudev, D. and Fletcher, R.J., 2015. Incorporating movement behavior into conservation 
prioritization in fragmented landscapes: An example of western hoolock gibbons in Garo Hills, 
India. Biological Conservation, 181, pp.124-132. 
 
Welch, N., Provencher, L., Unnasch, R.S., Anderson, T., McRae, B.H. 2015. Designing regional 
fuel breaks to protect large remnant tracts of Greater Sage‐Grouse habitat in parts of Idaho, 
Nevada, Oregon, and Utah. Final Report to the Western Association of Fish & Wildlife 
Agencies, Contract Number SG‐C‐13‐02. The Nature Conservancy, Reno, NV. 
 
Yumnam, B., Jhala, Y.V., Qureshi, Q., Maldonado, J.E., Gopal, R., Saini, S., Srinivas, Y. and 
Fleischer, R.C., 2014. Prioritizing tiger conservation through landscape genetics and habitat 
linkages. PloS one, 9(11), p.e111207. 
 
Ziółkowska, E., Perzanowski, K., Bleyhl, B., Ostapowicz, K. and Kuemmerle, T., 2016. 
Understanding unexpected reintroduction outcomes: Why aren't European bison colonizing 
suitable habitat in the Carpathians? Biological Conservation, 195, pp.106-117. 
View publication stats
View publication stats

