 
 
 
MEDICAL TERMS IN MY SISTER’S KEEPER MOVIE 
AND THEIR TRANSLATION IN THE INDONESIAN 
SUBTITLE TEXT 
 
A THESIS 
 
Presented as Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements to Acquire a  
Sarjana Sastra Degree in English Language and Literature 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by: 
Oktafiani Prima Sari 
11211141029 
 
 
 
ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE STUDY PROGRAM 
ENGLISH EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
LANGUAGES AND ARTS FACULTY 
YOGYAKARTA STATE UNIVERSITY 
2015 

 
i 
 
MEDICAL TERMS IN MY SISTER’S KEEPER MOVIE 
AND THEIR TRANSLATION IN THE INDONESIAN 
SUBTITLE TEXT 
 
A THESIS 
 
Presented as Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements to Acquire a  
Sarjana Sastra Degree in English Language and Literature 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by: 
Oktafiani Prima Sari 
11211141029 
 
 
ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE STUDY PROGRAM 
ENGLISH EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
LANGUAGES AND ARTS FACULTY 
YOGYAKARTA STATE UNIVERSITY 
2015 

 
ii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
iv 
 
PERNYATAAN 
 
 
Yang bertanda tangan di bawah ini saya, 
Nama  
 
: Oktafiani Prima Sari 
NIM 
 
 
: 11211141029 
Program Studi  
: Bahasa dan Sastra Inggris 
Fakultas 
 
: Bahasa dan Seni 
 
menyatakan bahwa karya ilmiah ini merupakan hasil pekerjaan saya sendiri. 
Sepanjang pengetahuan saya, karya ilmiah ini tidak berisi materi yang ditulis oleh 
orang lain, kecuali bagian-bagian tertentu yang saya ambil sebagai acuan dengan 
mengikuti tata cara dan etika penulisan karya ilmiah yang lazim. 
Apabila ternyata terbukti bahwa pernyataan ini tidak benar, sepenuhnya 
menjadi tanggung jawab saya. 
 
 
 
 
Yogyakarta, 31 Juli 2015 
Penulis, 
 
 
 
Oktafiani Prima Sari 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
v 
 
MOTTOS 
 
 
“You only live once, but if you do it right, once is enough” (Mae West) 
 
 
“Ini hidupku. Aku penentu kebebasan hidupku” (Anonymous) 
 
 
“Memayu hayuning pribadi; 
Memayu hayuning kulawarga; 
Memayu hayuning sesama; 
Memayu hayuning bawana.” 
(Javanese proverb) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
vi 
 
DEDICATIONS 
 
 
This thesis is lovingly dedicated to: 
 
  My beloved parents 
  My sister 
  All Families and friends who always 
support me 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
vii 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
Alhamdulillahirobbil‟alamin, I could finally finish this thesis. The highest 
praise and gratitude be only to Allah SWT for His blessing given to me to 
accomplish this thesis without any serious obstacle. I would also like to express 
my deepest gratitude and appreciation to the following people: 
1. my beloved parents (Teguh Setyo Handoyo and Diana Rahayu H.T.), my 
sister, and all families who always give me tremendous love, support, and 
prayers to finish this thesis; 
2. my first and second supervisors, Andy Bayu Nugroho, S.S., M.Hum. and 
Rachmat Nurcahyo, M.A. who have guided me during the process of writing 
this thesis and given me valuable time for help, advice, corrections, and 
willingness; 
3. my academic consultant, Paulus Kurnianta, M.Hum. who always gives advice 
and guidance for academic matters; 
4. all of the lecturers of English Language and Literature Study Program of 
Yogyakarta State University for their knowledge and assistance in this past 
four years of study; 
5. all of my friends in English Language and Literature of 2011 who have given 
me the best memory and joy, especially my classmates in B Class and my 
classmates in Translation concentration; 
6. the three respondents: Dio Rizky Wuryanto (English Language and Literature 
of Yogyakarta State University), Herlambang Fadlan Sejati (Administrative 
Law of Gadjah Mada University), and Yulia Dwi Marwidita (Guidance and 
Counseling of Ahmad Dahlan University) for determining the clarity level of 
the translated medical terms in My Sister‟s Keeper movie; 
7. the three triangulators: Dewi Suryandari (Medical Education of Yogyakarta 
Muhammadiyah University), Difara Uswatun Khasanah (English Language 
and Literature of Yogyakarta State University), and Aan Mulyana (English 

 
viii 
 
Language and Literature of Yogyakarta State University) for checking and 
verify the data findings; and 
8. the peer reviewers: Ika Wahyu Maylani and Aniendya Prasetyaningtyas who 
have given their time and opinions in checking and correcting this thesis. 
Finally, I have tried my very best, however, I realize that this thesis is far 
from being perfect. I hope this work will be beneficial for those who are interested 
in this topic. Criticisms and suggestions are welcomed and expected from the 
readers.    
 
 
Yogyakarta, July 31th, 2015 
 
 
Oktafiani Prima Sari 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ix 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
page 
TITLE PAGE …………………………………...……………………….. 
i 
APPROVAL SHEET ……………………………………...…………….. 
ii 
RATIFICATION ………………………………………………………… 
iii 
PERNYATAAN ……………..……………………………………………. 
iv 
MOTTOS ………..……………………………………………………….. 
v 
DEDICATIONS ……………….………………………………………… 
vi 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS …………………………….………………. 
vii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ……………………………………………….. 
ix 
LIST OF TABLES ………………………………………………………. 
xiii 
LIST OF FIGURES ……………………………………………………... 
xiv 
LIST OF APENDICES ………………………………………………….. 
xv 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ………………………………..…………. 
xvi 
ABSTRACT ……………………………………………………………… 
xviii 
 
 
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION ……………………………………….. 
1 
A. Background of the Problems ………………………………..………... 
1 
B. Identification of the Problems ……………………………..…………. 
3 
C. Limitation of the Problems ………………………………..…………. 
6 
D. Formulation of the Problems ………………………..……………….. 
7 
E. Objectives of the Study ………………………………………….…… 
7 
F. Significance of the Study …………………………………………….. 
8 
 
 
CHAPTER II LITERATURE REVIEW AND CONCEPTUAL 
FRAMEWORK …………………………………………………………. 
9 
A. Literature Review …………………………………………………..… 
9 
1. Translation ………….…….………………………………………. 
9 

 
x 
 
2. Subtitling ……………. …………………………………………… 
15 
3. Medical Terms ……………………………………………………. 
19 
a. Clinical Finding ………………………………………………. 
24 
b. Procedure …………………………………………………….. 
24 
c. Observable Entity ……………………………………………. 
24 
d. Body Structure ………………………………………………. 
25 
e. Organism ……………………………………………………... 
25 
f. Substance …………………………………………………….. 
25 
g. Specimen ……………………………………………………... 
25 
h. Pharmaceutical/Biologic Product ……………………………. 
25 
i. Physical Object ………………………………………………. 
26 
j. Physical Force ……………………………………………….. 
26 
k. Events ………………………………………………………… 
26 
l. Environmental/Geographical Location ………………………. 
26 
m. Social Context ……………………………………………….. 
26 
n. Situation with Explicit Context ………………………………. 
27 
o. Staging and Scales …………………………………………… 
27 
p. Linkage Concept …………………………………………….. 
27 
q. Qualifier Value ………………………………………………. 
27 
r. Record Artifact ………………………………………………. 
27 
s. Special Concept ……………………………………………… 
27 
4. Translation Techniques ……………………….………………….. 
28 
a. Adaptation …………………………………………………… 
29 
b. Amplification ………………………………………………… 
30 
c. Borrowing ……………………………………………………. 
30 
d. Calque ………………………………………………………... 
31 
e. Compensation ………………………………………………… 
31 
f. Description …………………………………………………… 
31 
g. Discursive Creation ………………………………………….. 
32 
h. Established Equivalent ………………………………………. 
32 
i. Generalization ……………………………………………….. 
32 

 
xi 
 
j. Linguistic Amplification …………………………………….. 
33 
k. Linguistic Compression ……………………………………… 
33 
l. Literal Translation …………………………………………… 
33 
m. Modulation ………………………...………………………… 
33 
n. Particularization ……………………………………………… 
34 
o. Reduction ……………………………………………………. 
34 
p. Substitution ………………………………………………….. 
35 
q. Transposition ………………………………………………… 
35 
r. Variation ……………………………………………………... 
36 
5. Translation Quality Assessment (TQA) .…………………………. 
36 
6. Related Studies …………………………………….…………….. 
39 
7. My Sister‟s Keeper Movie ……………………………………….. 
40 
B. Conceptual Framework ………………………………………………. 
42 
C. Analytical Construct …………………………………………………. 
45 
 
 
CHAPTER III RESEARCH METHOD ………………………………. 
47 
A. Research Type ………………………………………………………... 
47 
B. Data and Data Sources ……………………………………………….. 
48 
C. Research Instruments ………………………………………………… 
49 
D. Data Collection …………………..…………………………………… 
52 
E. Data Analysis ……………….………………………………………… 
52 
F. Trustworthiness ………………………………………………………. 
55 
 
 
CHAPTER IV FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION ……………………… 
57 
A. Research Findings ……………….…………………………………… 
57 
1. Types of Medical Terms in My Sister‟s Keeper Movie ………….. 
57 
2. Translation Techniques of Medical Terms in My Sister‟s Keeper 
Movie …………………………………………………………….. 
58 
3. Clarity Level of Medical Terms in the Indonesian Subtitle Texts of 
My Sister‟s Keeper Movie ……………………………………….. 
60 
4. The Relation of the Types, Translation Techniques, and Clarity 
60 

 
xii 
 
Level of Medical Terms in My Sister‟s Keeper Movie …………. 
B. Discussion ………………………..…………………………………… 
63 
1. Types of Medical Terms …………………………………………. 
63 
2. Translation Techniques ………………………………………….. 
76 
3. Clarity Level ……………………………………………………… 
95 
 
 
CHAPTER V CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS …………….... 
102 
A. Conclusions …………..………………………………………………. 
102 
B. Suggestions …………………………………………………………… 
103 
 
 
REFERENCES …………………………..……………………………… 
105 
APPENDICES …………………………………………………..………. 
108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
xiii 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
 
 
 
 
Page 
Table 1 
:   The Formulation of Medical Terms ………………………… 
21 
Table 2 
:   The Clarity Assessment Scale by Arnold et al …...…….…… 
38 
Table 3 
:   The Clarity Assessment Level ..…………….………………. 
39 
Table 4 
:   The Examples of Data ………………………………………. 
48 
Table 5 
:   The Form of Data Sheet ……………………..……………… 
50 
Table 6 
:   The Form of Data Questionnaire ………………………...…. 
51 
Table 7  
:   Types of Medical Terms Found in My Sister‟s Keeper 
   Movie ………………………………………….……….…… 
58 
Table 8 
:   Translation Techniques Employed in Translating Medical 
Terms in My Sister‟s Keeper Movie ……………………….. 
59 
Table 9 
:   Clarity Level of Medical Terms in the Indonesian Subtitle 
Texts of My Sister‟s Keeper Movie ……….…….…………. 
60 
Table 10 :   The Relation of the Types, Translation Techniques, and 
Clarity Level of Medical Terms in My Sister‟s Keeper 
Movie ………………………………………………………. 
61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
xiv 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
 
 
 
Page 
Figure 1 :   Translation Process by Nida and Taber ……..………………. 
11 
Figure 2 :   Analytical Construct …………………………………………. 
46 
Figure 3 :   The Data Code ……………………………………………….. 
54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
xv 
 
LIST OF APPENDICES 
 
 
 
 
Page 
Appendix 1 
:   Data Analysis ………………………..…………………. 
109 
Appendix 2 
:   Questionnaire Form and Data Tabulation ………………. 
134 
Appendix 3 
:   Surat Pernyataan Responden …………………………… 
144 
Appendix 4 
:   Surat Pernyataan Triangulasi …..……………………….. 
147 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
xvi 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 
Adp  
Amp 
AV     
Bor    
BS    
C 
Cal    
CF   
Com  
Des    
Dis    
EGL  
Est     
Ev     
Gen   
LC    
LCo   
LiA   
LiC 
Lit      
Mod   
OE   
Or     
Par     
PBP  
PF    
PO  
:   Adaptation 
:   Amplification 
:   Average 
:   Borrowing 
:   Body Structure 
:   Clear 
:   Calque 
:   Clinical Finding 
:   Compensation 
:   Description 
:   Discursive Creation 
:   Environment/Geographical Location 
:   Established Equivalent 
:   Events 
:   Generalization 
:   Less Clear 
:   Linkage Concept 
:   Linguistic Amplification 
:   Linguistic Compression 
:   Literal Translation 
:   Modulation 
:   Observable Entity 
:   Organism 
:   Particularization 
:   Pharmaceutical/Biologic Product 
:   Physical Force 
:   Physical Object 

 
xvii 
 
Pr     
QV  
R1 
R2 
R3  
RA    
Red    
SC     
SE 
SEC   
SL 
Sp  
SpC   
ST 
St      
Su     
Sub    
TE 
TL 
Tra    
TT 
UC 
Var    
:   Procedure 
:   Qualifier Value 
:   Respondent 1 
:   Respondent 2 
:   Respondent 3 
:   Record Artifact 
:   Reduction 
:   Social Context 
:   Source Expression 
:   Situation with Explicit Context 
:   Source Language 
:   Specimen 
:   Special Concept 
:   Source Text 
:   Staging and Scales 
:   Substance 
:   Substitution 
:   Target Expression 
:   Target Language 
:   Transposition 
:   Target Text 
:   Unclear 
:   Variation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
xviii 
 
MEDICAL TERMS IN MY SISTER’S KEEPER MOVIE 
AND THEIR TRANSLATION IN THE INDONESIAN SUBTITLE TEXT 
 
By: 
Oktafiani Prima Sari 
11211141029 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This research aims 1) to describe the types of medical terms in My Sister‟s 
Keeper movie, 2) to describe the techniques in translating the English medical 
terms into Bahasa Indonesia in the subtitle of My Sister‟s Keeper, and 3) to 
describe the clarity level of the translated medical terms in My Sister‟s Keeper 
Movie. 
This research used mixed method, a combination of qualitative and 
quantitative method. The data were collected from the original VCD of My 
Sister‟s Keeper movie in the form of words, phrases, or even sentences containing 
medical terms. There are three theoretical frameworks in this research: types of 
medical terms in SNOMED-CT, the translation techniques proposed by Molina 
and Albir (2002), and Arnold‟s clarity assessment scale (1994). The instruments 
in this research are the researcher, the data sheet, and an open-closed 
questionnaire. 
There are 127 expressions in My Sister‟s Keeper movie containing medical 
terms. The result shows that 1) there are thirteen types of medical terms appearing 
in the movie; the most frequent types are clinical finding (42 or 33.07 %) and 
procedure (28 or 22.05 %) that give specific meanings in certain conditions 
related to the purposeful activities in providing healthcare that are clinical 
disorder, clinical examination, and medical treatment, 2) there are twelve 
translation techniques employed by the translator; the most dominant techniques 
are borrowing (27 or 21.26 %), calque (27 or 21.26 %), and established equivalent 
(21 or 16.54 %) that indicates the translator‟s attempt to maintain the same 
information and understanding as provoked in the source language, and 3) from 
all data it is considered that 84 data (66.14 %) are clear, 24 data (18.90 %) are less 
clear, and 19 data (14.96 %) are unclear. 
 
Keywords: medical terms, subtitling, My Sister‟s Keeper movie, types of medical 
terms, translating techniques, clarity level 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
A. Background of the Problems 
Movie, also called as film and motion picture, is considered as a 
combination of literature, art, and industry. Movie is a form of literary adaptation 
in which a literary source (e.g. novel, short story and poem) is adapted to another 
medium. It includes a story which is represented by actors to the audience in 
words and action. Movie as a form of visual art is a cultural artifact that reflects 
specific cultures and affects them in turn. It has roles as a source of entertainment 
and a powerful medium in educating or indoctrinating audience. In addition, the 
film industry has become one of the biggest businesses in the world that pose the 
possibilities of huge financial gains. Until today, some movies have spread 
worldwide and become popular because of translation. 
Translation has an important role as a bridge between the language barrier 
and communication. Translators transfer the message from the source language 
into the target language by preserving equivalence of the message itself. 
Translation in movie deals with audiovisual translation branch which has three 
forms: dubbing, voice-over and subtitling. In dubbing, the original voice of a 
speaker is replaced by the voice of a speaker in the target language. Voice-over is 
similar to dubbing, but the original voice of a speaker is preserved. Subtitling, 
however, consists of a written text on the screen which is a condensed version in 
the target text of what can be heard. 

2 
 
 
 
In Indonesia, subtitling is often used to translate movie. The reasons are 
that it is the easiest procedure, inexpensive, and does not take a long process. At 
least, a company that runs this business needs a translator and an editor in 
transferring the message from oral form into written form with some specific 
rules. Watching movie with its subtitle, on the other hand, also gives advantages 
for the audience. They can still hear the original voice of the actors and actresses, 
who are maybe their favorite idols; and learn the vocabularies from the source 
language at the same time. Indeed, the movie genres and themes are just few 
things that determine the kinds of vocabulary used. 
There are several themes of foreign movies that have been subtitled into 
Bahasa Indonesia such as love story, family life, politics, revenge, etc. It is 
considered that different theme contains different difficulties in the subtitling 
process. Medical-themed movie has been proven to be one of the most difficult 
movie themes to be translated. In fact, there are many specific terms used in this 
movie theme which are known as medical terminology. 
Medical terminology is used to accurately describe the human body and 
associated components, conditions, and processes in a science-based manner. It 
includes the name of body organs, diseases, diagnoses, medicines, and medical 
procedures. These terms have many advantages in medical context such as being 
precise, short, neutral, and international. Since the terms are basically used by 
specific group of people, there is a challenge in translating them for a movie 
subtitle. 

3 
 
 
 
The translators need to have wide knowledge and high qualified skill in 
producing a subtitle for medical-themed movie in which medical terms occur. 
They need to choose the best technique to transfer the term in the target language. 
In addition, they should account for the quality of the translation product, which 
can be seen from several measurements such as equivalence, accuracy, 
naturalness, clarity, etc. 
My Sister's Keeper is one of foreign medical-themed movies that had been 
made its Indonesian subtitles. It was released in theaters on June 26, 2009. The 
movie, which is based on a novel by Jodi Picoult, was directed by Nick 
Cassavetes. It won Teen Choice Award for Choice Summer Movie Drama 
category in 2009 and other prestigious awards thereafter. It is narrated that there is 
a family with a kid who suffers from leukemia and another younger kid is 
designed as a savior sibling or donor child. The sisters endure various medical 
procedures and there are many science background talks to explain certain 
conditions.  
Based on the situation and phenomena that have been explained above, in 
this research the writer analyzes the translation of medical term in a medical-
themed movie entitled My Sister‟s Keeper.  
 
B. Identification of the Problems 
Producing movie subtitles, especially the one with medical-themed is not 
an easy job. There are various problems that might be faced by translators during 
the process. In the Indonesian subtitle of My Sister‟s Keeper, there are several 

4 
 
 
 
problems found related to the occurrence of medical term in the movie. The 
problems arrive from several aspects: linguistic aspect, cultural aspect, subtitling 
aspect, and audience aspect. 
The first problem arises from linguistic aspect. Medical term is a specific 
terminology that is used in medical world. There are strict rules in the use of 
medical terminology to mention certain condition. Basically, medical terms are 
established in international standard, so they can be used in all around the world. 
However, there are many terms used to make a medical term become more 
general and closer in certain languages. It becomes the translators‟ choice whether 
they will preserve the international standard of medical term or use more general 
term in the target language. Apart from those facts, translators should be able to 
produce an equivalent translation in the target language. This is an example that 
shows the translation of a dialog that contains medical term: 
Source Expression 
So I took a look at Kate's CBC. 
Target Expression 
Jadi aku sudah lihat hasil tes Kate. 
CBC is an abbreviation for Complete Blood Count that explains a set of 
values of the cellular component of blood. In this case, translator chooses to use 
more general word „hasil tes‟ that means test result. Looking at the quality of the 
translation product, it can be said that the example above has a good quality. The 
translator has succeeded to produce an equivalent and acceptable translation.  As a 

5 
 
 
 
result, the audience can understand the terms although hear difficult and strange 
vocabularies from the screen. 
The second problem is cultural aspect. The use of medical term is also 
related to cultural aspect. Translators need to keep the meaning which is culturally 
acceptable for target audience. In fact, the development of medical world in each 
location is different. The more developed a country, the more available medical 
terms to mention certain conditions. 
Before 2013, for instance, methylone was never heard in Indonesia until an 
Indonesian actor was arrested using this drug. That was a problem in which the 
translator cannot find an equivalent and acceptable translation in Bahasa 
Indonesia for methylone at that time. Another example is the use of slang for 
medical term. In the US, molly is slang for methylone in black market. Thus, it is 
the translators‟ decision to preserve the slang expression in the target language or 
use the standard terminology. 
The third problem is from the subtitle aspect as there are strict rules in the 
process of subtitling. Briefly, subtitles consist of written texts on the screen which 
are the condensed version of what can be heard in the target language. Translators 
need to maintain the message with all of the limitation in the subtitling process, so 
that they should wisely decide the best strategies in translating text. 
Furthermore, My Sister‟s Keeper movie is targeted for the general public. 
Consequently, since business of movie subtitling is rapidly developed, especially 
in Indonesia, phenomena of „amateur subtitler‟ appear. Nowadays, everyone can 
create a movie subtitle although that person is not a translator who has ability in 

6 
 
 
 
this field. This is why another problem about the clarity of medical terms for 
layperson audience arises. Apart from it, translators should consider various 
conditions of target audience – education, age, profession, social class, etc. – so 
that they can produce an acceptable translation in the target language. That is why 
translators should have a skill dealing with the word choice to make acceptable 
translation products. 
 
C. Limitation of the Problems 
It is interesting to analyze the translation of medical terms found in My 
Sister‟s Keeper movie. Since there are so many problems appearing when dealing 
with the translation of medical terms, the researcher delimits the problems 
considering the limitation of time and fund. From the problems that have been 
stated previously, the researcher decides to focus on three problems in this 
research. The first problem is the types of medical terms found in My Sister‟s 
Keeper movie. The classifications of medical terms determine their function in 
medical context. In addition, it is assumed that the uses of medical terms in the 
movie are tend to be more general since they are used in real life setting by 
characters with different background. 
The second problem is the techniques employed in translating medical 
terms in the movie. It is a hard work for translators to achieve the translation that 
not only accurate but also understandable for audience. The techniques used by 
the translator reflect the way they solve various problems in translating process.  

7 
 
 
 
Finally, the last problem is the clarity of the translation of medical terms. 
Medical term is a specialized word used in medical context so that it cannot be 
easily understood by audience. Thus, clarity becomes one of many criteria in 
measuring the quality of translation product. If the audience can easily understand 
the target text then it can be said that the translator has been successful to produce 
translation with good quality. 
 
D. Formulation of the Problems 
Based on the problems described above this research is aimed to find the 
answers to the problems below. 
1. What are the types of medical terms which are found in My Sister‟s Keeper 
movie? 
2. What are the techniques to translate the English medical terms into Bahasa 
Indonesia in My Sister‟s Keeper movie? 
3. How is the clarity of the translated medical terms in the Indonesian subtitle 
text of My Sister‟s Keeper movie? 
 
E. Objectives of the Study 
Based on the problem formulation, the objectives of this research are: 
1. to describe the types of medical terms in My Sister‟s Keeper movie, 
2. to describe the techniques in translating the English medical terms into Bahasa 
Indonesia in My Sister‟s Keeper movie,  and 

8 
 
 
 
3. to describe the clarity level of the translated medical terms in the Indonesian 
subtitle text of My Sister‟s Keeper movie. 
 
F. Significance of the Study 
This research has both theoretical and practical significance either in 
academic or real life usage. The theoretical significance of this research is: 
1. to give description about the translation of medical terms in Indonesian, 
2. to add knowledge for those who are interested in English-Indonesian 
translation in various media, especially movie, and 
3. to give reference about Translation Studies, in particular Audio Visual 
Translation, and how it is applied. 
The practical significance is described below. 
1. Generally, this research can be used as additional source of medical terms. 
2. For translators, it consists of guideline to produce good translation, associated 
with the examples found in the research data. 
3. For teachers, it can be used as reference in teaching translation. 
4. For students, it can be used as reference to arrange other similar research or, as 
subject of discussion. 
5. For audience, it can be used as source or guidance to understand more about 
medical terms found in movie. 
 
 
 
 

 
9 
 
CHAPTER II 
LITERATURE REVIEW AND CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
 
 
 
 
A. Literature Review 
There are various theories, issues, discussion, and finding used as 
references in this research. Those components are presented to support the 
research and guide the researcher‟s attitude in conducting the research. There will 
be several topics discussed in this part related to the research such as translation, 
medical terms, overview of My Sister‟s Keeper movie as the research object, and 
related studies that inspire this research. 
  
1. Translation 
a. Notions of Translation 
Basically, translation can be defined as a process of changing material. 
According to Oxford Advanced Learner‟s Dictionary, translation is: 1) the process 
changing form that is written or spoken into other language, 2) a text or work that 
has been changed from one language into another, and 3) a process of changing 
into different form. 
Like other disciplines, translation has many definitions stated by many 
experts. According to Newmark (1988: 5) translation is a process rendering the 
meaning of the text into another language in the way the author intended the text. 
Meanwhile, Catford (1965: 20) conveys that translation is “the replacement of 
textual material in one language (SL) by equivalent textual material in another 

10 
 
 
 
language (TL)”. Nida (in Venuti 2000: 163) also similarly states that translating 
consists of reproducing the receptor language to the closest natural equivalent of 
the source language message, first in the term of meaning and secondly in the 
term of style. 
On the other hand, according to one of the important translation scientists, 
James S. Holmes (1988) who laid the foundations for the new translation-studies 
discipline, translation is not all about the process but also the product: 
True, it is very useful to make a distinction between the product-oriented 
study of translations and the process-oriented study of translating. But this 
distinction cannot leave to scholar leave to ignore the self-evident fact that 
the one is the result of the other, and that the nature of the product 
cannot be understood without a comprehension of the nature of the 
process. 
 
Similarly, Newmark (1981: 7) also defines translation as “a craft consisting in the 
attempt to replace a written message and/or statement in one language by the 
same message and/or statement in another language”. 
It can be concluded, therefore, that there are two concepts in translation; 
translation can be seen as a process (the act of producing translation) and also as a 
product (the translated text) (Munday, 2001: 5). It is important to pay attention to 
translation both as a process and a product in order to develop better view of 
translation in a broad sense. Translation process is not as something 
complementary to the translation product; the translation process is seen as an 
interrelation between the original and the translated text. Thus, a translator needs 
not only translating skills but also understanding about the material, in particularly 
with everything that is related to the two languages. 

11 
 
 
 
b. Process of Translation 
A translator should understand all aspects related to the translation process 
of a text. Translation process is the whole activity done by the translator during 
transferring the message from source language into target language. According to 
Nida and Taber (1982: 33), there are three steps of translation process: analyzing, 
transferring, and restructuring. The translation process can be illustrated in a 
figure below. 
A 
(Source Language) 
 
B 
(Receptor Language) 
 
 
 
Analyzing 
 
Restructuring 
 
 
 
X 
(Meaning in Source Language) 
Transferring 
Y 
(Meaning in Target Language) 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Translation Process by Nida and Taber (1982: 33) 
 
The first step is analyzing; the translator reads the whole source text in 
order to understand the material and then analyzes the structure in source 
language in terms of grammatical relationship, and meaning and combination of 
the words. The second step is transferring the analyzed material from source 
language into receptor language. Finally, the last step is restructuring the 
transferred material in order to make the message acceptable in the receptor 
language. 
Moreover, the application of the translation process above, especially in 
translating specific terminology, involves several stages, among them: the 

12 
 
 
 
analysis of the terminology contained in the source text, the comparison of that 
source language terminology to the corresponding target language terminology, 
and the target text production including the selection of appropriate terms 
according to the prospective communicative purposes of the target text –culture, 
scope, target reader, etc. 
c. Types of Translation 
Some experts also have different works in classifying the types of 
translation. Jakobson in Venuti (2000: 139) divides translation into three types as 
described below. 
1) Intralingual Translation or Rewording 
It is defined as an interpretation of verbal signs by means of other signs of 
the same language. Intralingual translation is seen as a rewording within the same 
language; in other words, there is only one language involved in intralingual 
translation. It could be paraphrasing message between two dialects within a 
language, with accentuating characteristics of each of them. Although written in 
English, for instance, Harry Potter by J.K. Rowling was published in the USA 
with some alterations. In the case of intralingual translation, the translator makes 
the usage of synonyms in order to get the ST message across. 
2) Interlingual Translation or Translation Proper 
It is an interpretation of verbal signs by means of some other language. 
Interlingual translation is a translation from one language to another; there are two 
or more languages involved. The translator transfers the message from SL into TL 
by preserving its meaning equivalence, encompassing not only linguistic aspect 

13 
 
 
 
but also cultural aspect, geographical aspect and other aspects from both 
languages. For example, an English novel My Sister‟s Keeper is translated into 
Penyelamat Kakakku in Bahasa Indonesia.  
3) Intersemiotic Translation or Transmutation 
It is an interpretation of verbal signs by means of other signs of nonverbal 
sign system. Different from interlingual and intralingual translation, the message 
in intersemiotic translation is transferred from one symbol system or sign system 
into a language or another form. An interesting example for this type of 
translation is the use of sign language for the Deaf in communication, in which 
hand movements and gestures are interpreted into utterances or vice versa.  
In addition, translation can also be classified from its media which are 
written translation, oral translation, computer/machine translation, and audiovisual 
translation. 
1) Written Translation 
It is a translation performed in writing of the form of text-source. The key 
skills that the translators needed are the ability to understand both source language 
and target language including their linguistic and cultural aspects, and also writing 
skill to produce such clearly and accurately translation. 
2) Oral Translation 
It is a type of translation conducted in spoken language. The interpreters 
orally perform it either consecutively or simultaneously. Interpreters use 
themselves as dictionary and reference material. They need to have an 

14 
 
 
 
extraordinary listening ability to memorize and process the message, and then 
express it with an excellent public speaking skill. 
3) Computer/Machine Translation 
This type of translation is known as computer-assisted translation (CAT) 
or machine-aided human translation (MAHT). It is a form of translation whereas a 
human translator creates a target text with the aid of a computer program. A 
computer program will analyze a source text and produce a target text without 
further human interference – human interference only in the form of pre-editing 
and post-editing. 
4) Audiovisual Translation (AVT) 
Referring back to Jakobson‟s theory about the types of translation, it is 
considered that translation is applied not only in books, other written text, or 
expression but also used in film industry. Translation is needed here to make the 
audience know the message or the meaning of the speech which is said in foreign 
language. This kind of translation is known as Audiovisual Translation (AVT), a 
relatively new branch in Translation Studies. Nowadays, AVT is one of the most 
vibrant and vigorous field within Translation Studies (Cintas and Anderman 2009: 
8). 
Audiovisual translation is a term used to refer to the transfer from one 
language to another of the verbal components contained in audiovisual works and 
products. The products contain a series of verbal messages that will be perceived 
both acoustically and visually. Movies, television programs, theatre, Web pages, 
and video games are just some examples of audiovisual products available and 

15 
 
 
 
that require translation. They are basically created with the aid of technological 
equipment and system, so that those tools are also used in the translation process. 
In other words, AVT covers the interlingual transfer of verbal language when it is 
transmitted and accessed both visually and acoustically through some kinds of 
electronic device (Chiaro, 2008: 141). 
There are three forms of AVT that can be chosen to function as a means of 
information transfer: dubbing, voice-over translation and subtitling (Gottlieb in 
Baker, 2001: 244).  
a) Dubbing is a process that requires “the replacement of the original speech by a 
voice track which attempts to follow as closely as possible the timing, 
phrasing and lip-movements of the original dialog” (Luyken quoted in 
Wibisono, 2014: 32). 
b) Voice-over is “a technique in which a disembodied voice can be heard over 
the original soundtrack, which remains audible but indecipherable to 
audiences” (Chiaro, 2008: 152). 
c) Subtitling is a process of “rendering in a different language of verbal messages 
in filmic media, in the shape of one or more lines of written text presented on 
the screen sync with the original written message” (Gottlieb in Baker, 2001: 
87). 
 
2. Subtitling 
Briefly, subtitling is a process of translating or transferring information 
from one language to others through audiovisual media. Subtitling has a relation 

16 
 
 
 
with screen translation (Kuhiwczak and Littau, 2007: 126). Screen translation is a 
term used for translation of a wide variety of audiovisual texts displayed on one 
kind of screen or another. 
Moreover, Gottlieb (in Baker, 2001: 244) states that subtitles are product 
of subtitling or screen translation in which the videos or dialogs of the screen are 
translated and changed into texts then put on the screen back. Similarly, 
Spanakaki (2007: 9) also states subtitle as “textual versions of the dialogs in a film 
and in television programs and are usually displayed at the bottom of the screen”. 
In other words, subtitle text is the words that translate what is said in a film into a 
different language and appear at the bottom of the screen. 
Becoming a translator for audiovisual products is different from those who 
deal with textual works. According to Ivarsson, a subtitler is in a much more 
vulnerable position than a translator since the original work in subtitling – dialogs 
of the screen – is available for all to see and hear so that they can check the 
existence of faulty translation (cited in Hosseinnia, 2014). 
a. Types of Subtitling 
There are several types of subtitling based on the different viewpoints. 
Gottlieb (in Baker 2001: 247) divides subtitling based on linguistics viewpoint as 
follows. 
1) Intralingual subtitling: It can be found in the original language domestic 
programs for the Deaf and hard of hearing and foreign language programs for 
learners. It involves taking speech down in writing, changing mode but not for 
language. 

17 
 
 
 
2) Interlingual subtitling: It is a type of subtitle in another language. 
According to Kuhiwczak and Littau (2007: 129), meanwhile, there are two 
forms of subtitle which are closed and open.  
1) Closed subtitle: It is used in DVD. The watcher can choose which language 
that they want to use or even when they do not want to show the subtitles. 
2) Open subtitle: It cannot be removed from the video or the screen. It is usually 
used at the cinema or on television. 
b. Processes of Subtitling 
Translation for subtitles in films and television programs involves very 
unique and interesting procedure which does not exist in other works of 
translation (Matsumoto, 2003: 100). Matsumoto describes two stages in subtitling 
process. 
1) Translating materials (from SL to TL) 
It includes translating the sentence literally, rewriting which is considering 
to the cultural differences in order to make the same sense in other language and 
making the sound of the sentences better and more effective. 
2) Making subtitles from the translated materials 
It consists of measuring the duration for applied subtitle texts, calculating 
number of pages that can be fit in the duration, checking edited images and 
numbers of shots used, dividing translated sentences into the numbers of pages 
and see if all can be fit, adjusting numbers of letters and lines according to the 
basic rules by trimming the sentences and choosing the most suitable words, 
typing up sentences using a special system in computer and add them to the edited 

18 
 
 
 
sequences, checking if the meaning in the original language is not lose and revise 
sentence, considering if the meaning in languages and expressions in different 
culture, history and customs are suitable and comprehensible, and making all 
sentences even better. 
 
In addition, Matsumoto (2003: 100) also states seven rules in subtitling as 
follows. 
1) Subtitle consists of 2 lines every time it appears. 
2) Subtitle appears at the bottom of the screen and in the middle position of the 
screen. 
3) If there is another text at the bottom of the screen, such as: credit title, 
people‟s name, name of place, or subtitle in another language, the position of 
the subtitle should be higher. 
4) A line of subtitle consists of 40 characters maximum, including space and 
punctuation mark. 
5) When 2 lines of subtitle appear together, the second line should be shorter 
than the first line. 
6) The duration of displaying one subtitle is 3-5 seconds, meanwhile the duration 
of displaying 2 lines of subtitle is 7-8 seconds. In the displaying of subtitles, 
the translator has to consider the synchronization between the picture and the 
voice. 
7) If the subtitle has to be separated, the translator has to consider that the viewer 
can understand the subtitle itself although it stands alone. So, the viewer can 
understand the meaning of the subtitle. 

19 
 
 
 
c. Constraints of Subtitling 
Subtitling as a specific translation manner is different from translation in 
general. In fact, subtitling posses some constrains that common translation may do 
not. Hatim and Mason in Venuti (2000 : 430-1) states four kinds of constraints in 
subtitling. 
1) The shift of mode from speech to writing. This has the result that certain 
features of speech (non-standard dialect, emphatic devices such as intonator, 
code switching, and style-shifting, turn-taking) will not automatically 
represented in the written form of the target text. 
2) Factors which govern the medium or channel in which meaning is to be 
conveyed. There are physical constrains of available space (35/40 keyboard 
characters per line) and the pace of the soundtrack dialog. 
3) The reduction of the source text as a consequence of above. 
4) The requirements of matching the visual image.  
 
3. Medical Terms 
a. Notions of Terminology 
Terminology is a word that can either begin with an upper or lower-case 
letter. When „Terminology‟ begins with a large T, it refers to the study of 
specialized language; when „terminology‟ begins with a small t, it refers to the 
units in any specialized knowledge field (Faber, 2012: 16). 
Terminology as a discipline of study is considered as a newcomer. Until 
now it is still strive to survive for its existence to develop. According to Cabre (in 

20 
 
 
 
Abigail, 2005: 9), terminology is defined as the principal and conceptual base, and 
also the guideline that governs the study of set terms of special study or special 
topic. Another similar definition is that of Sager (in Abigail, 2005: 10) that 
terminology is the study and activity involved with the creation, collection, 
description, processing and presenting of terms appertaining to a specialized area 
used in one or more languages. 
Meanwhile, according to Cambridge Advanced Learner‟s Dictionary, 
terminology means special words or expressions used in relation to a particular 
subject or activity. Terminology is generally formed by a collection of words, 
compound words or multi-word expressions within a particular domain. It is 
always linked into specific subject fields, such as scientific or technical field, and 
has meanings specific to the fields. In addition, to distinguish the usage of 
terminology as a field of study, „term‟ is used to mention terminology as a unit of 
expression. 
Acceptance and standardization is the main concern of terminology. Both 
are urgently needed not only in the old field, where language has grown but also 
in the new field, where language consists of many new and complicated words 
used in the community. Thus, language committee and language board were 
established to work in standardization processes in order to produce such 
acceptable terms in specific fields or certain group of people. 
In conclusion, terminology can be defined either the study of set terms in 
specific fields or the unit of the term itself. For the purpose of this research, 
however, „terminology‟ or ‟term‟ refers to a set of words or expressions that gives 

21 
 
 
 
meaning in specific contexts, in which in this case it is related to the usage in 
medical field. 
b. Concepts of Medical Terms 
Simply, medical terms are used for describing diagnoses, body organs, and 
diseases (Fogelberg and Petersson in Rask, 2008: 7). Medical terms provide given 
meaning to properly describe components, conditions, procedures, and processes 
involving in medical world. 
The systematic approach to word building and term comprehension of 
medical terms is based on the concept of word roots, prefixes, and suffixes. The 
word root is a term derived from a source language such as Greek or Latin and 
usually describes a body part. Prefix is an element at the beginning of a medical 
term, before the root element, which changes in some manner the meaning of the 
medical term or makes it more specific; it can refer to location, time, number or 
status. Meanwhile, suffix is an element at the end of a medical term, after the root 
element, which frequently describes a condition of a body part or an action to a 
body part; it can also refer to a procedure, condition, disorder or disease. Hence, 
the example of word formulation is presented in the figure below. 
Table 1. The Formulation of Medical Terms 
Medical Terms 
Prefix 
Root 
Suffix 
Meaning 
Psychology 
- 
psycho 
(mind) + 
combining 
vowel „o‟ 
logy (study 
of) 
study of mind 
Electrocardiogram - 
1. electro 
(electricity) 
2. cardi 
gram (test) 
a test to measure the 
electrical impulses of 
the heart  

22 
 
 
 
Medical Terms 
Prefix 
Root 
Suffix 
Meaning 
(heart) + 
„o‟ 
Antibiotic 
anti 
(against) 
biot (life) 
ic 
(pertaining 
to) 
pertaining to 
destruction/against life – 
it is an agent that kills 
other microorganisms 
 
c. Types of Medical Terms 
Some experts use several methods in order to classify medical terms. 
Primarily, there are three categories of medical terms, each used within its specific 
group of people for communication, information and documentation (Fogelberg & 
Petersson quoted in Rask 2008: 7). They are: 
1) scientific medical terms used among professional medical staff, 
2) general medical terms used between medical staff and patients, and 
3) medical terms used among medical staff (often jargon). 
Meanwhile, by assessing the translation work of English–Swedish medical 
terms, Jansson and Almberg (2002) and Basun (1999) quoted in Rask (2008: 9-
14) divided medical terms based on their origin as follows. 
1) Graceo-Latin Terms 
The classical medical terms are originated in Graceo-Latin which have 
characteristics such as being precise, short, neutral, and international. These terms 
usually borrowed in most of languages but are sometimes modified in spelling. 
For instance, „apathy‟ is transferred from Greek by borrowing into Swedish 
„apati‟. 
 

23 
 
 
 
2) Synonyms 
Some terms have two or more possible equivalents in other languages, 
although they are different in stylistic value. When the term „faeces‟ is translated 
into Swedish, for example, there are two choices between „feces‟ (the Swedish 
spelling) and „avföring‟ (Swedish term). In fact, avföring is more common used in 
the society although this synonym seems to be of lower stylistic value in formal, 
medical text compared to feces. 
3) Eponyms 
Newmark defines „eponym‟ as “any word that is identical with or derived 
from a proper name which gives it a related sense” (1981: 198). Moreover, he 
states that there are three categories of eponym, which are derived from persons, 
objects, and places. In Swedish, Alzheimers sjukdom refers to the discoverer and 
the disease, while alzheimer refers to only the disease.  
4) English Terms 
Many discoveries are not available in several languages and consequently 
many expressions of new phenomena come from more dominant certain 
languages, mostly English. Still, scholars have named English as the world‟s 
“most influential language” due to the number of speakers (360 million) and the 
number of countries in which it is spoken. The process to solve this problem, thus, 
is named neology where the English term is kept, adapted into the target language, 
and coined as a new term in the target language.  
Another work in classifying medical terms is done by committee and 
board of medical world. SNOMED-CT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine-

24 
 
 
 
Clinical Terms) consists of standardized collection of medical terms owned by the 
International 
Health 
Terminology 
Standards 
Development 
Organization 
(IHTSDO). SNOMED-CT is considered as the most comprehensive healthcare 
terminology in the world which is organized based on computer processes. The 
concepts in SNOMED-CT are systematically organized in hierarchies; there are 
19 hierarchies in it. 
1) Clinical Finding 
This hierarchy is important for documenting clinical disorders and 
examination findings. The terms can describe illness caused by a failure of health 
rather that by an accident. For instance, there are fever (as finding) and 
pneumonia (as disorder). 
2) Procedure 
The terms used consist of word to mention medical treatment. It contains 
concepts that represent the purposeful activities performed in the provision of 
healthcare, for example, splinting of fracture, diagnostic endoscopy, foot 
manipulation, etc. 
3) Observable Entity 
The concepts represent a question/procedure which, when combined with 
a result, constitute a finding. The examples are: gender, tumor size, ability to 
balance, etc. 
 
 
 

25 
 
 
 
4) Body Structure 
This hierarchy has concepts that include both normal and abnormal 
anatomical structures. Here are the examples: entire lever (body structure) and 
neoplasm (morphologic abnormality). 
5) Organism 
This hierarchy coverage includes animals, fungi, bacteria, and plants 
necessary for public health reporting and used in evidence based infectious 
disease protocol. The examples are: Hepatitis C virus, streptococcus pyogenes, 
Acer rubrum (red maple), Felis silvestris (cat), etc. 
6) Substance 
The terms cover range of biological and chemical substances; includes 
foods, nutrients, allergens, and materials. It is also used to record the active 
chemical constituents of all drug products. Here are the examples: dust, 
oestrogen, haemoglobin antibody, walnut, codeine phosphate, etc. 
7) Specimen 
It contains concepts representing entities that are obtained for examination 
or analysis, usually from a patient. For instance, they are: nail specimen, pus 
specimen, urine specimen obtained by catch procedure, specimen from 
patient, blood specimen, etc. 
8) Pharmaceutical/Biologic Product 
Briefly, the terms involved are linked to the production of medicine. This 
hierarchy is used to distinguish drug products from the chemical constituents of 

26 
 
 
 
drug products. For instance, there are co-codomol, mineralocorticold 
preparation, ethyl alcohol, etc. 
9) Physical Object 
The concepts include natural and man-made objects which focus for 
medical injuries. The examples are: prosthesis, artificial organ, vena cava filter, 
walking stick, etc. 
10) Physical Force 
The terms include motion, friction, electricity, sound, radiation, thermal 
forces and air pressure, such as fire, gravity and electricity. 
11) Events 
It represents occurrences that result in injury, exclude all procedures and 
interventions. Flash flood and motor vehicle accident are two of the examples. 
12) Environment/Geographical Location 
The medical terms included in this hierarchy are all types of environment 
as well as named locations such as countries, states, and region. Here are the 
examples: day care centre, intensive care unit (UCI), operating theatre, etc. 
13) Social Context 
This hierarchy contains social condition and circumstances significant to 
healthcare. It also includes family and economy status, ethnic and religious 
heritage, and life style and occupations. The examples are: nurse (for occupation), 
Asian race (for racial group), live donor (for person), vegetarian (for life style), 
etc. 
 

27 
 
 
 
14) Situation with Explicit Context 
It is used to represent medical information completely; it sometimes 
necessary to attach additional information to a given concept. For instance, there 
are: family history of glaucoma (situation) and on examination-no nasal 
discharge (situation). 
15) Staging and Scales 
It contains concepts naming assessment scales and tumor staging systems, 
such as Glasgow coma scale (assessment scale), Alcohol use inventory 
(assessment scale), and Dukes staging system (tumor staging). 
16) Linkage Concept 
It consists of attributes and other concepts used to link concepts with other 
concepts, for instance severity (attribute), method (attribute), is manifestation of 
(link assertion) and has reason (link assertion). 
17) Qualifier Value 
It contains values for SNOMED-CT attributes, such as right and left, 
open approach-access, removal-action, and BMI (body mass index). 
18) Record Artifact 
The concept contains reports and forms associated with the delivery of 
healthcare, for instance, jury exemption form and forensic autopsy report.  
19) Special Concept 
This concept has three sub-hierarchies containing concept which have 
been set aside from the logical hierarchy of semantic subtypes: inactive concept 

28 
 
 
 
(ambiguous concept), navigational concept (e.g. abnormal immunology finding) 
and namespace concept (core namespace). 
 
4. Translation Techniques 
In a translation process, translators need to wisely choose the most 
appropriate way to transfer the message from the source language into the target 
language. Many scholars propose different terms refer to this, such as „method‟, 
„strategy‟, „technique‟, „procedure‟, etc. and consequently it creates confusion 
both theoretically and practically. Meanwhile, Molina and Albir (2002: 507) 
convey that “translation method, strategies and techniques are essentially different 
categories” which is described below. 
Translation method refers to the way a particular translation process is 
carried out in terms of the translator‟s objective. It is a respond to the global 
option that affects the whole text and depends on the aim of the translation.  
Translation strategies take place as part of the process in problem solving. 
“Strategies are the procedures (conscious or unconscious, verbal or nonverbal) 
used by the translator to solve problems that emerge when carrying out the 
translation process with a particular objective in mind. Strategies open the way to 
finding a suitable solution, which will be materialized by using a particular 
technique, for a translation unit. 
Molina and Albir then convey translation techniques as “procedures to 
analyze and classify how translation equivalence works”. A technique is the result 

29 
 
 
 
of a choice made by a translator that affects microunits of the text. Moreover, 
techniques can be used to classify different types of translation solutions.  
In this research, the concept of „translation technique‟ is employed as a 
type of solution chosen by the translator in transferring the English medical terms 
in the Indonesian subtitle texts. The concept is chosen as it affects the micro-unit 
of a text, considering that medical terms are commonly presented in the form of 
word or words, and can be in the form of phrase, clause, and even sentence. This 
research employs Molina and Albir‟s theory of translation techniques, with the 
affirmation compared to other scholars‟ theories, who propose 18 techniques 
(2002: 509-511). 
a. Adaptation 
It is a technique to replace a ST cultural element with one from the target 
culture. It is the same concept with Baker‟s „cultural substitution‟ and Newmark‟s 
„cultural equivalent‟. The sentence below is the example. 
SE : Fifteen, she's about 90 pounds, she's allergic to penicillin. 
TE : Lima belas, beratnya 40,8 kg dan ia alergi pada penisilin. 
 
The expression ‟90 pound‟ is translated into ‟40,8 kg‟. The translator 
adapts the concept of weight measurement in the target language and target 
culture. Indonesia uses the concept kilogram, so that the translator needs to 
convert the content. 
 
 
 

30 
 
 
 
b. Amplification 
It is a technique to introduce details that are not formulated in the ST: 
information, explicative paraphrasing. In the example below, the translator gives 
additional information in order to explain more detail about the term „Cytoxan‟.  
SE : I can taste your Cytoxan. 
TE : Aku bisa merasakan Cytoxan – obat kemoterapi kanker – mu. 
c. Borrowing 
It is a technique to take a word or expression straight from another 
language. It can be pure borrowing (without any change) or naturalized borrowing 
(to fit the spelling rules in the target language). Pure borrowing is also known as 
„transference‟ (Newmark, 1988: 81) and „loan word‟ (Baker, 1992: 36). The 
following sentence is the example for pure borrowing. 
SE : My sister has a leukemia. 
TE : Kakakku mengidap leukemia. 
„Leukemia‟ is known as a serious disease in which the body produces too 
many white blood cells. It can be translated into „leukemia‟ or „kanker darah‟ in 
the TL. Meanwhile, the translator chooses to use „leukemia‟ since the word has 
been absorbed in the TL as a standard term in medical context and is more 
common used in the society. 
Moreover, the example below refers to naturalized borrowing. The word 
„cancer‟ in the SL, which is pronounced /‟kænt.sə/ is adapted into „kanker‟ in the 
TL. Both languages have the same orthographic and spelling features, but the 
orthographic of the recipient is adapted from the sound of donor.  

31 
 
 
 
SE : No. I'm a Leo. But I have cancer. 
TE : Aku Leo. Tapi aku mengidap kanker. 
d. Calque 
It is a technique of literal translation for a foreign word or phrase; it can be 
lexical or structural. The following expression is an example. 
SE : She's been in renal failure for months now. 
TE : Dia mengalami gagal ginjal selama sebulan. 
Although having different phonological features, the expression „renal 
failure‟ in English is the same with „gagal ginjal‟ in Indonesia.  
e. Compensation 
It is a technique to introduce a ST element of information or stylistic effect 
in another place in the TT because it cannot be reflected in the same place as in 
the ST. 
SE : Never did she visit her niece. 
TE : Wanita itu benar-benar tega tidak menemui keponakannya.  
f. Description 
It is a technique to replace a term or expression with a description of its 
form or/and function. This technique includes the concept of Newmark‟s 
procedure „descriptive equivalent‟ and „functional equivalent‟ (1988: 83). The 
example of translation with description is presented below, when the abbreviation 
„AML‟ (Acute Myelogenous Leukemia) is translated in the TL with its 
description. 
 

32 
 
 
 
SE : Taylor, AML. 
TE : Aku Taylor. Kanker leukimia myelogenous akut. 
g. Discursive Creation 
It is a technique to establish a temporary equivalence that is totally 
unpredictable out of context. It is often used to translate title, for example, Si 
Malinkundang is translated into The Betrayed Son si Malinkundang. 
h. Established Equivalent 
It is a technique to use a term or expression recognized (by dictionaries or 
language in use) as an equivalent in the TL.  It is also known as „recognized 
translation‟ proposed by Newmark (1988: 89). For example, the word „efektif’ is 
more common use in Bahasa Indonesia instead of the word „sangkil‟ and 
„mangkus‟. 
i. Generalization 
It is a technique to use more general or neutral term. It is the same concept 
with Newmark‟s „neutralization‟ and Baker‟s „translation using more general 
word‟. The example is presented below. 
SE : They‟re trying to force me to give my organs. 
TE : Mereka memaksaku memberikan bagian tubuhku. 
The word „organ‟ is considered as one of four main parts of human body –
others are cell, tissue, and organ system. When the word is translated in the TL 
into „bagian tubuhku‟, which equivalent with „body part‟ in the SL, it becomes 
more general. 
 

33 
 
 
 
j. Linguistic Amplification 
It is a technique to add linguistic element; often used in consecutive 
interpreting and dubbing. For instance, „I get it‟ is translated into „Biar aku yang 
mengantar Kate ke rumah sakit‟. 
k. Linguistic Compression 
It is a technique to synthesize linguistic elements in the TT. This is often 
used in simultaneous interpreting and in subtitling. For instance, the expression 
„You must find out!‟ is translated into „Carilah!‟ 
l. Literal Translation 
It is a technique to translate a word or an expression word for word 
(Molina & Albir, 2002: 509-510). This literal translation corresponds to Nida‟s 
formal equivalent; when form coincides with function and meaning. For example, 
the expression „fractures of the skull‟ is translated into „fraktur pada 
tengkorak‟. 
m. Modulation 
Modulation is a technique to change the point of view, focus or cognitive 
category in relation to the ST; it can be lexical or structural. Modulation can be 
the form of: 1) part for the whole, 2) abstract for concrete, 3) cause for effect, 4) 
one part for another, 5) reversal of terms, 6) active for passive, 7) intervals and 
limits, and 8) change of symbols (Newmark, 1981: 89). The following sentence is 
an example. 
SE : While everyone was so worry about my blood counts, they barely even 
noticed that Jesse was dyslexic. 

34 
 
 
 
TE : Sementara semua orang mencemaskan jumlah sel darah putihku, mereka tak 
menyadari bahwa Jesse menderita disleksia. 
The word „dyslexic‟ in the SL means someone having dyslexia so that it is 
equivalent to „penderita disleksia‟ in the TL. Meanwhile, the translator translated 
into „disleksia‟ which refers to disease in order to explain the preceded verb 
„menderita‟ that is used by the translator. 
n. Particularization 
It is a technique to use a more precise or concrete term. For example, the 
expression „smear‟ is translated into „darah‟. In fact, „smear‟ means a sample of 
soft tissue or material including blood.  
o. Reduction 
It is a technique to suppress a ST information item in the TT. It is the same 
concept of Newmark‟s „reduction‟ (1988: 90) and Baker‟s „omission‟ (1992: 36). 
The example is presented below. 
SE : Drugs for nausea, opiates for pain, ambien for sleep. Not exactly proper 
medication for a preteen. 
TE : Obat mual, pereda sakit, ambien untuk tidur. Bukan jenis tepat bagi anak di 
bawah usia puber. 
From the example above, the term „medication‟ in the TL should be 
translated into „obat‟ or „pengobatan‟. However, the translator omits the term to 
make the expression being short and dense, in consequence of subtitling rules. 
 
 

35 
 
 
 
p. Substitution 
It is a technique to change linguistic elements for paralinguistic elements 
(intonation, gesture) or vice versa. For example, to translate the Arab gesture of 
putting your hand on your heart as „Thank You‟. It is used in interpreting, thus it 
is assumed that this technique is not found in the data finding of this research. 
q. Transposition 
Transposition or shift is a technique to change a grammatical category, 
including the shift of category, structure, and unit (Molina & Albir, 2002: 509-
510). It is “probably the most common structural change undertaken by 
translators” (Vinay and Darbelnet in Venuti, 2000: 88). 
According to Newmark (1988: 85-87), there are different categories of 
shift: the first type is the change from singular to plural –e.g. „a pair of shorts‟ is 
translated into „sebuah celana pendek‟; the second type is when the grammatical 
structure in the SL does not exist in the TL –e.g. „Obat itu harus kau minum.‟ is 
translated into „You should take that medicine.‟; the third type is when literal 
translation is grammatically possible but may not accord with natural usage in the 
TL –e.g. verb in SL, adverb in TL; and the fourth type is the replacement of a 
virtual lexical gap by a grammatical structure. The following expression is an 
example. 
TE : I was engineered. 
SE : Aku produk rekayasa. 
Shift in the translation above occurs when the structural change is 
undertaken by the translator. The expression „was engineered‟, which is verb can 

36 
 
 
 
be translated as „direkayasa„. However, the translator chooses to use „produk 
rekayasa‟ which is categorized as noun. 
r. Variation 
It is a technique to change linguistic or paralinguistic elements (intonation, 
gestures) that affect aspects of linguistic variation: changes of textual tone, style, 
social dialect, geographical dialect, etc. For instance, change or introduce dialectal 
indicators for characters when translating for the theater. 
 
5. Translation Quality Assessment (TQA) 
The evaluation of translation products is always been regarded interesting 
to discuss and becomes a part of theory in translation studies called Translation 
Quality Assessment (TQA). Sseveral scholars state various concepts in evaluating 
and assessing the quality of translation product. 
Williams (2001: 327) states that TQA is an evaluation of translation 
product including model to evaluate the source texts whether is accurately 
rendered in the target texts or not. To be in line with Williams, Scriven defines 
what kind of evaluation in TQA as follows: “‟Evaluation‟ is taken to mean the 
determination of merit, worth, or significance” (in Williams, 2009: 2). 
Accordingly, in evaluating translation products, researchers try to find error based 
on certain requirements in order to judge the quality of translation products. 
It is suggested that translation with good quality is compulsory to 
completely deliver the ST message to the TT. The TT, thus, should acquire similar 

37 
 
 
 
response from the TT readers as well as the ST does. Tytler in Pradana (2013: 21), 
then propose the three laws of „good translation‟ as follows. 
a. The translation should give a complete transcript of the ideas of the original 
work. 
b. The style and manner of writing should be of the same character with that of 
the original. 
c. The translation should have all the ease of original composition.  
In this research, the researcher evaluates the translation quality in terms of 
clarity of medical terms found in the Indonesian subtitle text of My Sister‟s 
Keeper movie. According to Cambridge Advanced Learner‟s Dictionary, clarity 
is defined as 1) the quality of being clear and easy to understand, 2) the quality of 
being easy to see or hear, and 3) the ability to think clearly and not be confused. 
Larson (in Fadaee, 2011: 200) defines clarity as follows: "clearness in 
translation means that the translated piece can communicate to the people (target 
audience) who are to use it". He also states that the translator should consider 
about the form of the language used in order to make the message of the source 
text understandable. Meanwhile, Rahimi (in Fadaee, 2009: 200) states that the 
translation lacks clarity if: 1) it does not communicate the people who are to use 
it, and 2) it does not use the form of language understandable for language 
speakers.  
TQA can be either quantitative or qualitative. In quantitative assessment, a 
mark which is based on mathematical or statistical measurement is given to 
describe the quality of translation. In qualitative assessment, meanwhile, there 

38 
 
 
 
will be description toward the quality of translation which is expressed by using 
impressionistic terms such as excellent, very good, good, or poor. In addition, 
Toulmin (in Williams, 2001: 338) stresses the importance of those qualifying 
statements is to indicate the kind of rational strength in argument.  
Arnold et al (1994: 170) propose a four-point scale of clarity assessment. 
It is an instrument to measure the value that arrange on statement form to get 
assessment and the result on the range of values as specification criteria. 
Table 2. The Clarity Assessment Scale by Arnold et al 
Assessment Scale 
Criteria 
4 
Fully understandable 
3 
Mostly understandable 
2 
Only small part understandable 
1 
Not understandable 
 
Based on the theories of translation quality assessment above, the 
researcher makes some modifications for the assessment technique. This research 
uses impressionistic terms as clarity levels that refer to the scale. There are four 
clarity levels namely clear, average, less clear, and unclear. The researcher also 
gives detailed descriptions for each level that compatible with the research object 
as stated by Kusfajarini (2013: 26-7). Those ways are chosen to ease the 
respondents in determining the meaning clarity of the translated medical terms 
and to help the researcher in analyzing and interpreting the data. 
 
 
 

39 
 
 
 
Table 3. The Clarity Assessment Level 
Clarity Level 
Description 
Clear 
Fully Understandable. TE can be easily understood by the 
target audience since it uses the form of understandable 
language in TL. 
Average 
Mostly Understandable. TE is understandable enough. Target 
audience require little interpretations but they can still 
conclude the meaning. 
Less Clear 
Only small part understandable. TE is less understandable. 
Target audience require frequent interpretations since it does 
not use the form of difficult-to-understand language in TL. 
Unclear 
TE is difficult to understand. The audience require attempts 
(find out from other sources, e.g. internet browsing) to make 
interpretation and understand TE since it uses the form of 
difficult-to-understand language or does not communicate with 
the target audience. 
 
6. Related Studies 
There are two earlier researches used as references in conducting this 
research. The first study has done by Mabasa Tirhani Abigail in 2006 from 
University of Pretoria entitled Translation Equivalent for Health/Medical 
Terminology in Xitsonga. It was based on the comparative analysis of purposely 
selected terms from the DSAC Multilingual Glossary of Medical/Health and the 
terms furnished by health/medical specialist for these selected terms. The result 
shows that the most frequently strategies are translation with a more general word 
(40%) and translation using paraphrase (32,5%). 
The second study has done by Asri Handayani in 2009 from Pascasarjana 
Universitas Sebelas Maret entitled Analisis Ideologi Penerjemahan dan Penilaian 
Kualitas Terjemahan Istilah Kedokteran dalam Buku “Lecture Notes on Clinical 
Medicine”. She found 643 data of medical terminologies. The most dominant 

40 
 
 
 
technique employed is calque 233 (36,2%), followed by transposition 122 (19%) 
and borrowing 155 (17,9%). The accuracy of the whole techniques were 80,6%, 
acceptability 90,2% and readability: very easy 39,2%, easy 53,2%, and only 4,5% 
which was difficult. 
 
7. My Sister’s Keeper Movie 
My Sister‟s Keeper is an American medical-themed movie which was released on 
June 26, 2009 by New Line Cinema. The movie is based on Jodi Picoult‟s novel of the 
same name. It is directed by Nick Cassavetes and produced by Curmudgeon Films. It is 
starring Cameron Diaz as Sara Fitzgerald, Abigail Breslin as Anna Fitzgerald, Sofia 
Vassilieva as Kate Fitzgerald, and many more. 
The movie received mixed reviews from the audience that made it estimable. It 
won Teen Choice Award in 2009 for Choice Summer Movie Drama category, Alma 
Awards in 2009 for Outstanding Actress in Motion Picture category (Cameron Diaz), 
Young Artist Award in 2010 for Best Performance in a Feature Film category – Leading 
Artist (Abigail Breslin) and Supporting Actress (Sofia Vassilieva), and other prestigious 
awards thereafter. 
This movie is targeted to the general public. It has an interesting story and 
can be more appropriate to watch during the quality time with family. It is 
narrated that Sara and Brian Fitzgerald have just been informed that their young 
daughter Kate has leukemia, and that she only has a few years to live. The doctor 
tells a controversial suggestion to the parents that they might try a medical 
procedure of producing another child in a test-tube that would be a perfect match 

41 
 
 
 
as a donor for Kate. Later, they have a new baby Anna, in which during her life 
she has to let her organs taken for Kate. 
At the age of 11, Anna decides to sue her parents for the right to decide 
how her body will be used; Anna says she wants to be like a normal girl. The 
whole family is being torn apart by Anna's decision because everyone knows what 
will happen to Kate if she does not get a donor. Later, Jesse confesses that it is 
Kate who instructed the lawsuit over Anna‟s medical emancipation; Kate is no 
longer able to fight and wants everyone to let her go. Eventually, Kate dies, Anna 
wins the case, and the family moves on with their lives. 
The audience can easily find medical terms involved in this movie. There 
are many medical terms that appear in the dialogs related to Kate‟s condition and 
healthcare treatment carried out for her that are delivered by professionals, 
medical staffs, patients and patients‟ family. Those medical terms are used to refer 
to specific meanings in the medical world such as body part, disease, medical 
procedure, etc, needed for the sake of the movie storyline. 
 
B. Conceptual Framework 
There are some theories employed as the framework in this research. 
Those theories are used to analyze and explain what the formulated problems of 
the research are and also to set up a standard in giving judgment toward the data 
finding.  
The first framework in this research is types of medical terms. This 
research uses SNOMED-CT classification to distinguish types of medical terms. 

42 
 
 
 
1. Clinical finding: this type describes illness by failure of health and result of 
observation. 
2. Procedures: this type includes the terms which consist of word to mention 
medical treatment. 
3. Observable entity: this type includes terms as question of a finding. 
4. Body structures: this type includes both normal and abnormal anatomical 
structures. 
5. Organism: this type includes a single living plant, animal, virus related to 
disease infection.  
6. Substance: this type covers range of biological and chemical substances. 
7. Specimen: this type represents entity from patient for analysis. 
8. Pharmaceutical/biologic product: the terms involved in this type are linked 
to the production of medicine. 
9. Physical object: this type includes natural and non-natural objects. 
10. Physical force: this type includes motion, friction, electricity, sound, 
radiation, thermal forces and air pressure. 
11. Events: this type consists of condition that results in injury.   
12. Environment/geographical location: this type includes all types of 
environment as well as named locations such as countries, states, and region. 
13. Social context: this type contains social condition and circumstances 
significant to healthcare. 
14. Situation with explicit context: this type represents medical information 
completely. 

43 
 
 
 
15. Staging and scales: this type represents the name of assessment scales and 
staging system. 
16. Linkage concept: this type consists of attributes to link concepts.  
17. Qualifier value: this type contains value for SNOMED-CT attributes. 
18. Record artifact: this type contains reports and forms of healthcare. 
19. Special concept: this type consists of inactive concept, navigational concept 
and namespace concept. 
The second framework is the translation techniques of medical terms 
found in the subtitle text. Translation technique is a choice of procedures to 
analyze and classify how translation equivalence works. There are 18 techniques 
employed in this research adopted from Molina and Albir (2002: 509-511). 
1. Adaptation: to replace a ST cultural element with TT cultural element. 
2. Amplification: to introduce details with information and paraphrasing. 
3. Borrowing: to take an expression straight from the ST. 
4. Calque: to literally translate a ST expression (lexical/structural).  
5. Compensation: to put a ST element of information/stylistic effect in the TT. 
6. Description: to replace an expression with a description/form of function. 
7. Discursive creation: to use temporary equivalence which out of context. 
8. Established equivalent: to use recognized translation. 
9. Generalization: to use more general/neutral term. 
10. Linguistic amplification: to add linguistic elements. 
11. Linguistic compression: to synthesize linguistic elements. 
12. Literal translation: to translate word-for-word. 

44 
 
 
 
13. Modulation: to change point of view (lexical/structural). 
14. Particularization: to use more precise/concrete term. 
15. Reduction: to suppress information in the TT. 
16. Substitution: to change linguistic element for paralinguistic element or vice 
versa. 
17. Transposition: to change grammatical category. 
18. Variation: to change linguistic/paralinguistic elements that affect aspect of 
linguistic variation. 
The third framework explains about the clarity of the translation of 
medical terms. Clarity refers to the quality of the translation products that is being 
clear and understandable for target audience. This research adopts and modifies 
the clarity assessment scale by Arnold et al (1994: 170). There are four levels that 
explain certain conditions related to the evaluation of clarity as follows. 
1. Clear: fully understand, TE can be easily understood by the target audience 
since it uses the form of understandable language in TL. 
2. Average: mostly understandable, TE is understandable enough. Target 
audience require little interpretations but they can still conclude the meaning. 
3. Less Clear: only small part understandable, TE is less understandable. Target 
audience require frequent interpretations since it does not use the form of 
easy-to-understand language in TL. 
4. Unclear: not understandable, TE is difficult to understand. The audience 
require attempts (find out from other sources, e.g. internet browsing) to make 

45 
 
 
 
interpretation and understand TE since it uses the form of difficult-to-
understand language or does not communicate with the target audience. 
 
C. Analytical Construct 
This research aims to describe how medical terms are translated in the 
movie subtitle text of My Sister‟s Keeper. It can be drawn a common thread from 
three purposes of the research. The types of medical terms appear can explain how 
those specialized terms describe specific meaning related medical context in the 
movie. The identification of medical terms can help to trace out the technique –the 
most commonly used- employed by the translator in transferring the terms and 
lead to the clarity of the translation product. Moreover, in reference to the 
conceptual framework above, the outline of this research is presented in the 
following diagram.  

46 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Analytical Construct 
TRANSLATION 
Audiovisual 
Translation 
Dubbing 
Voice Over 
Subtitling 
Intralingual 
Interlingual 
(SL) 
My Sister's Keeper Movie 
Medical Terms 
(TL) 
Indonesian Subtitle Texts 
Subtitle of 
Medical Terms 
-Analysis 
-Transfer 
-Restructuring 
Types of Medical Terms 
 
1.   Clinical Finding 
2.   Procedure 
3.   Observable Entity 
4.   Body Structure 
5.   Organism 
6.   Substance 
7.   Specimen 
8.   Pharmaceutical/Biologic 
Product 
9.   Physical Object 
10. Physical Force 
11. Events 
12. Environment/ 
Geographical Location 
13. Social Context 
14. Situation with Explicit 
Context 
15. Staging and Scales 
16. Linkage Concept 
17. Qualifier Value 
18. Record Artifact 
19. Special Concept 
Clarity 
 
1. Clear 
2. Average 
3.  Less 
Clear 
3. Unclear 
Translation Techniques 
 
1.  Adaptation 
2.  Amplification 
3.  Borrowing 
4.  Calque 
5.  Compensation 
6.  Description 
7.  Discursive Creation  
8.  Established Equivalent 
9.  Generalization 
10. Linguistic 
Amplification 
11. Linguistic 
Compression 
12. Literal Translation 
13. Modulation 
14. Particularization 
15. Reduction 
16. Substitution 
17. Transposition 
18. Variation 

 
47 
 
CHAPTER III 
RESEARCH METHOD 
 
 
 
 
A. Research Type 
This research was conducted in mixed method, a combination of 
qualitative and quantitative method.  The researcher basically applied descriptive-
qualitative approach. Cresswell states, “Qualitative research is descriptive in that 
the researcher is interested in process, meaning and understanding gained through 
words or picture” (1994: 145). It is considered that this type is relevant to this 
research due to the fact that qualitative research concerns with providing the 
description of the phenomena in certain field without any interventions of an 
experiment treatment. Dornyei (quoted in Pradana 2013: 42) supports it by stating 
that the characteristic of qualitative objective is to describe social phenomena as 
they occur naturally without any attempts to manipulate the situation under study. 
Three main purposes of a descriptive-qualitative research are to describe, 
to explain, and to validate findings. This research aims to describe the translation 
of medical term in medical-themed movie entitled My Sister‟s Keeper where the 
data are collected and analyzed to draw conclusion. The conclusion was traced 
through the types of medical terms, the translation techniques used by the 
translator, and the clarity level of the translated medical terms. 
However, it cannot be denied that the researcher also applied quantitative 
approach to process the data. The researcher only used numbers and measures to 

48 
 
 
 
state the percentages and to strengthen the interpretation and judgment toward the 
data.   
 
B. Data and Data Sources 
According to Lofland (in Moleong 2010: 157), data sources in a 
qualitative research is words and actions, the rest is additional data. There are two 
categories of data gathered in this research; they are objective data and affective 
data. The objective data is the main data for this research; this research only 
focuses on the word, words, phrase, or sentence containing medical terms that are 
found in the dialogs or scenes of the movie and also in its Indonesian subtitle 
texts. They were collected manually from the original VCD of medical-themed 
movie My Sister‟s Keeper with its serial number: 1731/VCD/R/PA/2.2011/2010. 
Table 4. The Examples of Data 
Data Forms 
Example 
Word 
Sara: Kids her age don't get mono, do they? 
Phrase 
Campbell: Cord blood as an infant, white-cells transfusion, bone marrow, 
lymphocytes, injections to add more stem cells, and then they took them too. 
Sentence 
Brian: A donor child? 
 
The other data were derived from respondents by collecting information 
using questionnaires. The questionnaires presented the comparison between the 
source expressions and the target expressions and the respondents assessed the 
clarity of the translation of the medical terms in the movie. The respondents were 
purposively chosen from undergraduate students from different majors of study in 
Yogyakarta. They should be having hobby to watch foreign movie, especially 

49 
 
 
 
those that use English, and have watched My Sister‟s Keeper movie. Those 
characteristics reflect the natural condition of audience as they have different 
background (e.g. ages, education, culture, etc). 
 
C. Research Instruments 
Concerning to the method of collecting data, there were three main 
instruments in this research. The three instruments are explained below. 
1. The Researcher  
 
In descriptive – qualitative research, the researcher plays the role as the 
designer, the data collector, the analyst, the data interpreter, and the reporter of the 
research findings (Moleong, 2010: 9). Therefore, the researcher is the key 
instrument for collecting, measuring, and analyzing the data in this research. 
2. The Data Sheet 
The secondary instrument is the data sheet which is used to record and 
classify the data. The translated expressions contain medical terms were written 
down to be analyzed further based on three aspects: types of medical term, 
translation techniques, and clarity level.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
50 
 
Table 5. The Form of Data Sheet 
Code 
Source Expression 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expression 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
001/Pr/
Gen/C 
Anna: ...most babies are products of 
drunken evening and lack of birth 
control. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Anna: ...kebanyakan bayi adalah 
produk malam mereka mabuk dan 
kurangnya program KB. 
 
List of Abbreviations 
In terms of the types of medical terms: 
In terms of the translation technique: 
In terms of the clarity level: 
(CF)   
(Pr)     
(OE)   
(BS)    
(Or)     
(Su)     
(Sp)     
(PBP)  
(PO)    
(PF)    
(Ev)     
(EGL) 
(SC)     
(SEC)   
(St)      
(LCo)    
(QV)    
(RA)    
(SpC)   
Clinical Finding 
Procedure 
Observable Entity 
Body Structure 
Organism 
Substance 
Specimen 
Pharmaceutical/ Biologic Product 
Physical Object 
Physical Force 
Events 
Environment / Geographical Location 
Social Context 
Situation with Explicit Context 
Staging and Scales 
Linkage Concept 
Qualifier Value 
Record Artifact 
Special Context 
(Adp)   
(Amp)  
(Bor)    
(Cal)    
(Com)  
(Des)    
(Dis)    
(Est)     
(Gen)   
(LiA)   
(LiC)    
(Lit)      
(Mod)   
(Par)     
(Red)    
(Sub)    
(Tra)    
(Var)    
 
Adaptation 
Amplification 
Borrowing 
Calque 
Compensation 
Description 
Discursive Creation 
Established Equivalent 
Generalization 
Linguistic Amplification 
Linguistic Compression 
Literal Translation 
Modulation 
Particularization 
Reduction 
Substitution 
Transposition 
Variation 
(C)     
(AV) 
(LC)   
(UC)  
 
 
Clear 
Average 
Less Clear 
Unclear 

51 
 
 
 
3. The Questionnaire 
Questionnaire was also used to gain information from three respondents 
about translation quality assessment in term of clarity. Below is the table in the 
questionnaire that is used to determine the clarity level of the translation of 
medical terms in the Indonesian subtitle texts of My Sister‟s Keeper movie. 
Table 6. The Form of Data Questionnaire 
No 
SE  
(English) 
TE 
(Indonesia) 
Clarity Level 
Comments 
C 
AV LC UC 
1 
Dr. Ileana: So I 
took a look at 
Kate's CBC. 
Dr. Ileana: Aku 
sudah menerima 
CBC Kate. 
 
 
 
√ 
Belum pernah 
mendengar istilah 
tersebut 
 
Each respondent was asked to determine the clarity level of the translated 
medical terms based on their understanding. They needed to give a checklist (√) in 
the column „Clarity Level‟ to choose clear (C), average (AV), less clear (LC), or 
unclear (UC). They are also given an opportunity to give comments or 
suggestions that can support their answer. If there is a case when the three 
respondents have different answers and opinions, the researcher makes conclusion 
based on the comments and suggestions, and conducts discussion with each 
respondent. 
4. Additional Instruments 
The additional instruments are books, laptop, internet and other devices to 
collect information and finish the research. Books and internet provides theories 
which are used in this research. Meanwhile, laptop and other devices function in 
compiling a complete research. 
 

52 
 
 
 
D. Data Collection 
In collecting the data, the researcher conducted some techniques as 
follows. 
1. Observation 
The researcher observed the source of data by comparing the movie and its 
subtitle texts. It was started by watching carefully My Sister‟s Keeper movie, at 
least three times, by using a laptop and then selecting data from dialogs or scenes 
employing medical terms. 
2. Records 
Record here is implemented with the note-taking technique. The 
researcher recorded the data from the movie and its subtitle. The data were 
transcribed and fixed in the form of dialog so that it was much easier to formulate 
the analysis. 
 
E. Data Analysis 
Bogdan and Biklen (1982: 145) define qualitative data analysis as 
“working with data, organizing it, breaking it into manageable units, synthesizing 
it, searching for patterns, discovering what is important and what is to be learned, 
and decoding what you will tell others.” Qualitative research tends to use 
inductive analysis of data, meaning that the critical themes emerge out of the data 
(Patton, 1990: 14). 

53 
 
 
 
The data analysis is the process of systematically searching and arranging 
the collected data. The techniques of analyzing data were carried out in a constant 
comparative method as follows. 
1. Data Reduction 
The data gathered were sorted out to find those that were compatible with 
the criteria established. It included selecting and classifying the valid and relevant 
data based on the types of medical terms and the translation techniques that are 
used. 
2. Data Organization 
The reduced and fixed data were organized in three phases as well. The 
first step was descriptively analyzing the first formulated problem, the types of 
medical terms. The researcher compared the data of the source language and the 
target language. The types of medical terms were determined by what type the 
researcher found in the source language was. 
The second step was identifying the techniques employed by the translator 
to translate medical terms into Bahasa Indonesia, as it is the second formulated 
problem. The classification was in accordance with the theory used in this 
research. The findings were used to reveal the dominant translation techniques 
used by the translator in the translation process.  
The third step was identifying the clarity of the translated medical terms. 
The analysis was carried out by the researcher and three respondents by using 
open-closed questionnaire. Since the result will be subjective, each category was 

54 
 
 
 
concluded by the researcher based on the comments of respondents and also the 
result from the discussion session with each of them. 
3. Data transferring 
In analyzing the data, the researcher transferred the data into the data table 
and interpreting the data in some classifications in order to make the analysis 
easier. 
4. Coding 
According to Taylor (2010), coding is the process of combing the data for 
themes, ideas and categories and then marking similar passages of text with a 
code label so that they can be retrieved easily at a later stage for further 
comparison and analysis. Coding the data makes it easier to search the data, to 
make comparisons and to identify any patterns that require further investigation.  
In this research, the code explains four elements: the sequence of the 
datum, the type of medical terms, the translation technique, and the clarity level. 
The following figure illustrates the example of the coding. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The Data Code 
5. Description 
The presented data are discussed further in order to explain the correlation 
between either data or categories of analysis. In this research, the researcher used 
the data findings and discussion to draw the common thread from three purposes 
Code: 001/PO/Ada/C 
 
 
Number of datum 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Technique 
Clarity Level 

55 
 
 
 
of the research, which are the types of medical terms, translation techniques 
employed, and the quality of translation in terms of clarity. 
F. Trustworthiness 
In order to achieve data trustworthiness, the data in this research were 
repeatedly checked by the researcher and some peers, and the results were 
discussed with the supervisors. There are four criteria to check the trustworthiness 
of the data states four criteria: credibility, dependability, conformability, and 
transferability (Moleong, 2010: 324-6). In this research, the trustworthiness of the 
data was gained by using credibility, dependability, and conformability. 
The first criterion is achieving the credibility, which relates to the accuracy 
of the data (Moleong, 2010: 325). The researcher performed deep and detail 
observation of the data, and applied theories from experts of translation to confirm 
the research data. The data were re-read carefully and completely, and then they 
were checked in accordance to the classification based on the research objectives. 
In addition, this research employed Dictionary of Medical Terms, Oxford 
Advanced Learner‟s Dictionary, Cambridge Advanced Learner‟s Dictionary, 
Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia (KBBI), and Echols‟ Kamus Inggris-
Indonesia/Indonesia Inggris as well to validate and confirm the data. 
Dependability refers to stability and track ability of the changes in data 
over time and conditions (Moleong, 2010: 325). To gain the degree of 
dependability, the researcher examined both the process and the product of the 
research for consistency. Moreover, a triangulation technique was employed to 
verify the data: by sources, by methods, by researchers and by theories. From 

56 
 
 
 
those types there were only sources and theories employed in this research. In 
triangulation by source, some peers examined the research data. Meanwhile, the 
researcher also checked the information related to this research from books, paper, 
thesis, journal, and other sources from various media. 
Conformability aims at measuring how far the finding and interpretation of 
the data are truly based on the theory (Moleong, 2010: 325). To set the degree of 
conformability, the peers and respondents were asked to review the data including 
suggestion and opinion about the analysis. Furthermore, the data were also 
examined from the point of view of the first and the second supervisors. 

 
 
57 
 
CHAPTER IV 
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION 
 
 
 
 
A. Research Findings 
The research findings present the data findings of the analysis. This 
research discovers 127 expressions in My Sister‟s Keeper movie that contain 
medical terms. The data are served as tables based on three research objectives 
which are types of medical terms in the movie, techniques in translating medical 
terms, and clarity level of the translated medical terms. Moreover, another table is 
presented to find out the common thread of those research objectives. 
1. Types of Medical Terms in My Sister’s Keeper Movie 
This research finds that from nineteen hierarchies of medical terms 
proposed in SNOMED-CT, there are thirteen types appear in the movie. They are 
clinical finding, procedure, observable entity, body structure, organism, substance, 
specimen, 
pharmaceutical/biologic 
product, 
physical 
object, 
events, 
environment/geographical 
location, 
social 
context, 
and 
record 
artifact. 
Meanwhile, the other types are not found in the movie namely physical force, 
situation with explicit context, staging and scales, linkage concept, qualifier value, 
and special concept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

58 
 
 
 
 
Table 7. Types of Medical Terms Found in My Sister’s Keeper Movie 
 
No 
Types of Medical Terms 
Frequency 
Percentage 
(%) 
1 
Clinical finding 
42 
33.07 
2 
Procedure 
28 
22.05 
3 
Body Structure 
14 
11.02 
4 
Social context 
14 
11.02 
5 
Pharmaceutical/biologic product 
8 
6.30 
6 
Physical object 
6 
4.72 
7 
Substance 
4 
3.15 
8 
Environment/geographical location 
3 
2.36 
9 
Observable entity 
2 
1.57 
10 Specimen 
2 
1.57 
11 Record artifact 
2 
1.57 
12 Organism 
1 
0.80 
13 Events 
1 
0.80 
Total 
127 
   100.00  
 
From Table 7, it can be seen that clinical finding (42 or 33.07 %) appears 
most often in the movie. It is followed by procedure (28 or 22.05 %), body 
structure (14 or 11.02 %), social context (14 or 11.02 %), pharmaceutical/biologic 
product (8 or 6.30 %), physical object (6 or 4.72 %), substance (4 or 3.15 %), 
environment/geographical location (3 or 2.36 %), observable entity (2 or 1.57 %), 
specimen (2 or 1.57 %), record artifact (2 or 1.57 %), organism (1 or 0.80 %), and 
events (1 or 0.80 %). 
2. Translation Techniques of Medical Terms in My Sister’s Keeper Movie 
The research findings show that the translator applies twelve out of 
eighteen techniques proposed by Molina and Albir (2002: 509-511). They are 
adaptation, amplification, borrowing, calque, description, established equivalent, 
generalization, literal, modulation, particularization, reduction, and transposition. 

59 
 
 
 
Meanwhile, six techniques are not found in the translation of medical terms 
namely compensation, discursive creation, linguistic amplification, linguistic 
compression, substitution, and variation. 
Table 8. Translation Techniques Employed in Translating Medical Terms in 
My Sister’s Keeper Movie 
No 
Translation 
Techniques 
Frequency 
Percentage 
(%) 
1 
Borrowing 
27 
21.26 
2 
Calque 
27 
21.26 
3 
Established Equivalent 
21 
16.54 
4 
Literal Translation 
11 
8.65 
5 
Particularization 
9 
7.09 
6 
Reduction 
8 
6.30 
7 
Description 
5 
3.94 
8 
Generalization 
5 
3.94 
9 
Amplification 
4 
3.15 
10 Transposition 
4 
3.15 
11 Adaptation 
3 
2.36 
12 Modulation 
3 
2.36 
Total 
127 
100.00 
 
Table 8 shows that borrowing and calque are the most frequent techniques 
used by the translator (27 or 21.26 %). It is followed by established equivalent (21 
or 16.54 %), literal translation (11 or 8.65 %), particularization (9 or 7.09 %), 
reduction (7 or 5.51 %), description (5 or 3.94 %), generalization (5 or 3.94 %), 
amplification (4 or 3.15 %), transposition (4 or 3.15 %), adaptation (3 or 2.36 %), 
and modulation (3 or 2.36 %). 
 
 

60 
 
 
 
3. Clarity Level of Medical Terms in the Indonesian Subtitle Texts of My 
Sister’s Keeper Movie 
This part shows the result of an open-closed questionnaire which is done 
by three respondents to measure the clarity assessment of medical terms in the 
Indonesian subtitle of My Sister‟s Keeper movie. The clarity assessment is the 
modification of Arnold‟s (1994: 170). From four levels, the respondents identified 
three clarity levels for those translated medical terms namely clear, less clear, and 
unclear. 
Table 9. Clarity Level of Medical Terms in the Indonesian Subtitle Texts of 
My Sister’s Keeper Movie 
No 
Clarity Level 
Frequency 
Percentage 
(%) 
1 
Clear 
84 
66.14 
2 
Less Clear 
24 
18.90 
3 
Unclear 
19 
14.96 
Total 
127 
 100.00 
 
Table 9 shows that the translations of medical terms in the subtitle texts 
are considered 84 clear (66.14 %), 24 less clear (18.90 %), and 19 not clear (14. 
96 %). Most of the translated medical terms are resulting in clear translation. 
4. The Relation of the Types, Translation Techniques, and Clarity Level of 
Medical Terms in My Sister’s Keeper Movie 
This part shows the findings based on the relation of the three formulated 
objectives of this research which are types of medical terms, translation 
techniques employed, and clarity level of medical terms in the Indonesian subtitle 
text. Furthermore, the findings can be used to drawn a common thread from those 
three objectives. 

 
 
 
 
Table 10. The Relation of the Types, Translation Techniques, and Clarity Level of Medical Terms in My Sister’s Keeper Movie 
 
Types of 
Medical      
Terms 
Clinical             
Finding 
Procedure 
Observable 
Entity 
Body Structure 
Organism 
Substance 
Specimen 
Pharmaceutical 
/ Biological 
Product 
Physical Object 
Events 
Environment / 
Geographical 
Location 
Social Context 
Record Artifact 
Total 
Translation 
Technique 
Adaptation 
C 
2   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1   
  
3 
3 
LC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0 
UC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0 
Amplification 
C 
1   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1   
  
  
2 
4 
LC 
1   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1 
UC 
1   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1 
Borrowing 
C 
5 
5 
1 
1 
1   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
13 
27 
LC 
1 
1   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2 
UC 
5 
2   
3   
  
  
2   
  
  
  
  
12 
Calque 
C 
5 
2   
  
  
1 
1 
1   
1 
4   
15 
27 
LC 
1 
2   
1   
2   
1 
1   
  
2   
10 
UC 
1 
1   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2 
Description 
C 
  
2   
  
  
  
  
1   
  
  
1 
1 
5 
5 
LC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0 
UC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0 
Established 
Equivalent 
C 
11 
2   
4   
1   
1 
1   
  
1   
21 
20 
LC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0 
UC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0 

 
61 
 
Generalization 
C 
  
2   
  
  
  
  
1 
1   
  
  
  
4 
5 
LC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1   
1 
UC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0 
Literal 
C 
3 
3 
1   
  
  
  
  
1 
  
8 
11 
LC   
  
  
1   
  
  
1   
  
  
1   
3 
UC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0 
Modulation 
C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1   
1   
  
2 
3 
LC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0 
UC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1   
1 
Particularization 
C 
1   
  
4   
  
1   
1   
  
  
  
7 
9 
LC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2   
2 
UC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0 
Reduction 
C 
1 
1   
  
  
  
  
1   
  
  
1   
4 
8 
LC 
1 
2   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
3 
UC   
1   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1 
Transposition 
C 
1 
2   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
3 
4 
LC   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0 
UC 
1   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1 
Total 
42 
28 
2 
14 
1 
4 
2 
8 
6 
1 
4 
14 
1 
127 
127 
 

62 
 
 
 
From Table 10, the following phenomena can be seen as follows. 
a. Clinical finding is the most frequent type of medical term that appears in the 
movie. There are three most dominant techniques to translate it. They are 
borrowing, established equivalent, and calque. 
b. Borrowing and calque are the most dominant technique used in translating all 
types of medical terms. They are often used in translating clinical finding and 
procedure. Translating using borrowing results 13 clear translations, 2 less 
clear translations, and 12 unclear translations. Translating using calque results 
15 clear translations, 10 less clear translations, and 2 unclear translations. 
c. Adaptation and modulation are the fewest techniques used in translating 
medical terms. Adaptation is applied in translating 2 clinical finding and 1 
environment/geographical location. Modulation is applied in translating 1 
physical object, 1 environment/geographical location, and 1 social context. 
d. The most frequent data with clear translation level are found in 20 data which 
are translated by using established equivalent, in which 10 of them appear in 
the cases of translation of clinical finding. In addition, 15 data are clear in the 
cases of translation with calque and 13 data are clear in the cases of the 
translation with borrowing.  
e. The most frequent data with less clear translation level are found in 10 data in 
the cases of translation with calque. 
f. The most frequent data with unclear translation level are found in 12 data in 
the cases of translation with borrowing which are identified that 5 data are 

63 
 
 
 
clinical finding, 3 data are body structure, 2 data are procedure, and 2 data are 
pharmaceutical/biological product. 
g. There are no data identified as less clear and unclear which are found in the 
cases of translation with adaptation, description, and established equivalent. In 
other words, those techniques produce clear translation. 
 
B. Discussion 
The discussion presents the detail explanation of data findings to clarify 
the three research problems formulated which are types of medical terms, 
translation techniques, and clarity level of medical terms in the Indonesian subtitle 
texts of My Sister‟s Keeper movie. 
1. Types of Medical Terms 
This part aims to analyze types of medical terms which are found in My 
Sister‟s Keeper movie based on the nineteen hierarchies provided in SNOMED-
CT. The medical terms in the movie are considered as general medical terms 
which are used between medical staff and patients, and jargon used among 
medical staff, for communication, information, and documentation related to 
medical and clinical health care. 
From the research findings, it can be seen that clinical finding and 
procedure are the two most frequent types of medical terms which appear in the 
movie. This finding is relevant to the setting and storyline of the movie which is 
mostly taken place in hospital for leukemia health care. Meanwhile, several types 
of medical terms which are not found in the movie are considered as scientific 

64 
 
 
 
medical terms that are used among the professional medical staffs for the sake of 
observation. In addition, below is the further explanation of each type of medical 
term found in My Sister‟s Keeper movie completed with the examples taken from 
the research data. 
a. Clinical Finding 
Clinical finding is the most dominant type of medical terms in My Sister‟s 
Keeper movie which appears 42 times or 33.07 % of the total data. This type is 
important for documenting clinical disorders and examination findings. In the 
movie, clinical finding appears in the form of clinical examination and both 
common and technical name of disease. Some examples are presented below.  
(SE) Sara: She's been up all night with a fever. 
(TE) Sara: Ia tak bisa tidur semalaman karena demam.         
(Datum 017/CF/Est/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), „fever‟ (n) is 
defined as 1) a rise in body temperature and 2) a condition when the body 
temperature is higher than usual. In other words, the medical term can be either 
the process when the human body is rising or the condition when someone gets 
fever. From the expression above, it can be concluded that fever as clinical finding 
refer to the condition of a person, Kate, when her body temperature is higher than 
usual for all night. The term is translated using established equivalent and 
resulting in clear translation. 
(SE) Kate: He has scars on his hands from graft-versus-host. 
(TE) Kate: Ia punya bekas luka di tangannya dari penyakit graft-versus-host. 
(Datum 114/CF/Bor/UC) 
 

65 
 
 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), the term „graft-
versus-host‟ (n) is a condition which develops when cells from the grafted tissue 
react against the person‟s own tissue, causing skin disorders. It is usually used 
with its abbreviation GVHD (Graft Versus Host Disease). From the expression 
above, it can be seen that the disease causes scars on someone‟s hands, Taylor, as 
skin disorder. Thus, the term is classified as clinical finding because it refers to 
the name of disease or clinical disorder. The term „graft-versus-host‟, which is not 
familiar in its source language, is borrowed in the Indonesian subtitle texts and 
causing confusion so that it is identified as unclear translation. 
(SE) Dr. Ileana: Her white blood count is very low. She's also presenting with 12 
% promyelocytes and 5% blast which does indicate a leukemic 
syndrome. 
(TE) Dr. Ileana: Jumlah sel darah putihnya sangat rendah. Darahnya juga 
mengandung 12% promylocytes dan 5% sel blast yang 
mengindikasikan sindroma leukemia. 
(Datum 041/CF/Bor/UC) 
 
The term above shows the result of a clinical procedure taken from a 
patient. Based on the white blood cell count test, the finding presents that the 
patient has 12 % promyelocytes in her blood. According to the Dictionary of 
Medical Terms (4th Ed), „promyelocyte‟ (n), also called granula leukoblast or 
progranulocyte, is a cell containing a few granules formed in the transition from 
myeloblast to myelocyte during the development of a granulocyte; it is the 
predominant cell type seen in granulocytic leukemia. The term is translated with 
borrowing technique in order to preserve its accuracy both in meaning and 
function. However, the term is not familiar in the target language especially for 
layperson so that it results unclear for its clarity level. 

66 
 
 
 
b. Procedure 
Procedure is the second most dominant type of medical terms in My 
Sister‟s Keeper movie which appears 28 times or 22.05 % of the total data. 
Procedure represents the purposeful activities in providing health care. The 
examples are presented below. 
(SE) Dr. Ileana: So I took a look at Kate's CBC. 
(TE) Dr. Ileana: Aku sudah menerima CBC Kate. 
(Datum 040/Pr/Bor/UC) 
 
CBC is an abbreviation of Complete Blood Count, which means a test to 
find the exact numbers of each type of blood cell in a sample of blood. It measures 
the number of red blood cells, the number of white blood cells, the total amount of 
hemoglobin in the blood, the fraction of the blood composed of red blood cell, etc. 
This procedure is used to detect or monitor many different health conditions such 
as diagnosing infections or allergies, detecting blood disorders, and evaluating 
blood cells production or destruction. The term is in a form of abbreviation and 
translated by using borrowing technique. It is identified as unclear since there is 
no further explanation added of the term. 
(SE) Uncle Tommy: What about chemo? 
(TE) Paman Tommy: Bagaimana dengan kemoterapi? 
(Datum 055/Pr/Bor/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Terminology (4th Ed), chemo 
(informal) or chemotherapy (formal), a noun, is a treatment with the use of drugs 
such as antibiotics, painkillers or antiseptic lotions to fight a disease, especially 
using toxic chemicals to destroy rapidly developing cancer cells. The term is 

67 
 
 
 
translated by using borrowing technique; it is also familiar in the target language 
so that it is identified as clear. 
c. Body Structure 
Body structure appears 14 times or 11.02 % of the total data in this 
research. Human body structure consists of four main parts namely cells, tissues, 
organs, and system organs, which includes the concepts of anatomical structures 
both normal and abnormal. The examples are presented below. 
(SE) Anna: A scientist hooked up my mother's eggs and my father's sperm to 
make a specific combination of genes. 
(TE) Anna: Seorang ilmuwan memepertemukan sel telur ibuku dan sperma 
ayahku untuk membuat sebuah kombinasi gen tertentu. 
(Datum 007/BS/Est/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Terms (4th Ed), „egg‟ (n), based on 
the context in the expression above, is a reproductive cell produced in the female 
body by an ovary, and which, if fertilized by the male sperm, becomes an embryo. 
The term „eggs‟ is translated by using established equivalent technique into „sel 
telur‟ in the target language and resulting in clear translation. 
(SE) Sara: So you need more bone marrow? 
(TE) Sara: Jadi kau perlu sel tulang belakang lagi? 
(Datum 056/BS/Par/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), „bone marrow‟ (n) 
is a flexible tissue in the interior of bones. There are two types of bone marrow 
named red bone marrow and yellow bone marrow. The red bone marrow or 
myeloid tissue forms red blood cells and is found in the flat bones such as the hip 
bone, the sternum or breastbone, skulls, ribs, backbone, the scapula or shoulder 
blade, etc. Meanwhile, the yellow bone marrow develops in the central cavity of 

68 
 
 
 
long bones as a person gets older. The term is translated by using more specific 
term in the target language into „sel tulang belakang‟ which means marrow in the 
backbone. It is easy to understand in the target language so that the term results in 
clear translation. 
d. Social Context 
Social context appears 14 times or 11.02 % of the total data in this 
research. The concepts of this type contain social condition and circumstances 
significant to healthcare. Social context in My Sister‟s Keeper movie appears in 
the form of social concept, occupation, person, and life style. The examples are 
presented below. 
(SE) Dr. Chance: Sara, this is Miss Swearingen our home health aide. 
(TE) Dr: Chance: Sara, ini Nn. Swearingen, penasihat perawat di rumah. 
(Datum 103/SC/Par/LC) 
 
Medical term from the expression above has a function to represent an 
occupation in medical world. Home Health Aide (HHA) is a trained and certified 
health-care worker who provides assistance to a patient in the home with personal 
care (as hygiene and exercise) and light household duties (as meal preparation) 
and who monitors the patient's condition. The term is translated by using 
particularization technique. It is resulting in less clear translation since the more 
specific term in the target language sounds less familiar in the society. 
(SE) Dr. Chance: The insurance company will definitely not approve this, so 
we'lI have to re-admit through emergency. 
(TE) Dr. Chance: Perusahaan asuransi tak akan menyetujuinya jadi kita harus 
memasukkannya kembali lewat UGD. 
(Datum 116/SC/Cal/C) 
 

69 
 
 
 
The insurance company is a company that offers insurance policies to the 
public, either by selling directly to an individual or through another source as an 
employee‟s benefit plan. The company calculates the risk of occurrence and 
determines the cost to replace (pay for) the loss to determine the premium amount. 
An insurance company can specialize in one type of insurance, such as life 
insurance, health insurance, or auto insurance, or offer multiple types of 
insurance. The term is commonly used both in the source and target language so 
that when it is translated by using calque technique it results clear translation. 
e. Pharmaceutical/Biologic Product 
Based on the data findings, there are 8 data or 6.30 % of the total data in 
this research that can be classified as pharmaceutical/biologic product. The 
concept of this type clearly refers to drug products. In this research, this type 
appears in the form of the name of drugs or brands. The examples are presented 
below. 
(SE) Campbell: Drugs for nausea, opiates for pain, ambien for sleep. Not 
exactly proper medication for a preteen. 
(TE) Campbell: Obat mual, pereda sakit, ambien untuk tidur. Bukan jenis tepat 
bagi anak di bawah usia puber. 
(Datum 089/PBP/Lit/LC) 
 
Ambien is a brand name of a generic drug 'zolpidem' which comes as 
tablets or pills. Ambien is a sedative, also called a hypnotic. It affects chemicals in 
human brain that may become unbalanced and cause sleep problems (insomnia). 
The term is literally translated in the target language but is identified as less clear 
translation because the word „ambien‟ creates many interpretations in the target 
audience‟s mind. 

70 
 
 
 
(SE) Kate: I can taste your Cytoxan. 
(TE) Kate: Aku bisa merasakan Cytoxan-mu. 
(Datum 110/PBP/Bor/UC) 
 
Cytoxan is anti-cancer chemotherapy drug and this term is commonly 
known by specific group of people who consist of doctors, medical staffs, cancer 
patients and their surroundings. This is why when the term is borrowed in the 
target language it results unclear translation. 
f. Physical Object 
Physical object appears six times or 4.72 % of the total data in this 
research. The concepts of this type include both natural and man-made objects 
required for medical injuries. Physical objects in My Sister‟s Keeper movie appear 
in the form of devices related to medical procedure or treatment performed in the 
hospital. The examples are presented below. 
(SE) Champbell: I have an iron lung and Judge help me steer clear of magnets. 
(TE) Champbell: Aku punya paru-paru besi dan Judge membantuku menjauhi 
magnet. 
(Datum 018/PO/Cal/LC) 
 
Iron lung is the colloquial name for a negative pressure ventilator; it is a 
form of medical ventilator that enables a person to breathe when normal muscle 
control has been lost or the work of breathing exceeds the person's ability. The 
person using the iron lung is placed into the central chamber, a cylindrical steel 
drum. The term is translated by using calque technique in the target language. 
However, it results less clear translation because the translated term „paru-paru 
besi‟ is less used and less known by the general public in the target society so that 
it creates many interpretation among them. 
 

71 
 
 
 
(SE) Campbell: Into the bone? Big needles? 
(TE) Campbell: Sampai ke tulang? Jarum besar? 
(Datum 122/PO/Cal/C) 
 
Needle is a very thin hollow pointed piece of metal which is connected to 
a syringe and used to take blood from the body or to put drugs or medicine. The 
term above refers to needles that have big size. It is translated by using calque 
technique and resulting in clear translation since the term is one of the most 
common medical tools used in health care. 
g. Substance 
This type appears four times or 3.15 % of the total data in this research. 
Substance covers both biological and chemical substance includes foods, 
nutrients, allergens, and materials. The following data consist of medical term 
which is identified as substance. 
(SE) Dr. Chance: Everyone inherits two sets of chromosomes containing HLA 
genes. 
(TE) Dr. Chance: Semua mewarisi dua pasang kromosom yang mengandung gen 
HLA. 
(Datum 061/Su/Cal/UC) 
 
HLA is an abbreviation of Human Leucocyte Antigen, a protein – or 
marker – found on most cells in your body, which is a personal immunogenetic 
that has a role in immune response as especially on intra cellular infection. HLA is 
inherited as heterozygote and has character of co-dominant and follow main 
pattern ethnic group. As a consequence, certain ethnic groups have a risk suffering 
from certain disease. The term is translated by using calque technique which is 
special borrowing of its both lexical and grammatical form. However, the term is 
considered unclear in the target language since it is less known by layperson. 

72 
 
 
 
(SE) Campbell: Filgrastim shot. Those are growth hormones, am I correct? 
(TE) Campbell: Suntikan filgrastim. Itu hormon pertumbuhan, bukan?  
(Datum 086/Su/Cal/C) 
 
GH (Growth Hormone) or HGH (Human Growth Hormone) is a substance 
secreted by the pituitary gland during deep sleep, which stimulates growth of the 
long bones and protein synthesis. The term „growth hormone‟ is translated by 
using calque technique into „hormon pertumbuhan‟ in the target language. It is 
acceptable and quite familiar in the target language usage so that the translated 
term is identified clear. 
h. Environment/Geographical Location 
Based on the data findings, there are three data which are identified as 
environment/geographical location or 2.36 % of the total data in this research. In 
My Sister‟s Keeper movie, this type appears to represent the name of location or 
room required for medical treatment. The examples are presented below. 
(SE) Dr. Chance: The insurance company will definitely not approve this, so 
we'lI have to re-admit through emergency. 
(TE) Dr. Chance: Perusahaan asuransi tak akan menyetujuinya jadi kita harus 
memasukkannya kembali lewat UGD. 
(Datum 117/EGL/Adp/C) 
 
The term „emergency‟ above also called emergency room and the same as 
Accident and Emergency department (A & E). According to the Dictionary of 
Medical Terms (4th Ed), this term means the part of a hospital where people who 
need urgent immediate treatment are dealt with. They are patients who have had 
accidents or in sudden serious pain. The term is translated by using adaptation 
technique to make the term closer and more natural in the target language usage 
so that it results clear translation. 

73 
 
 
 
(SE) Radiology therapist to room 231. 
(TE) Ahli terapi radiologi ke Ruang 231. 
(Datum No 126: 126/EGL/Lit/C) 
 
The term „room 231‟ is patient room number 231. It refers to a location in 
a hospital where the patient stays for medical treatment, called hospitalization, 
given by the doctors and other medical staffs. The term is translated by using 
literal translation technique and resulting in clear translation since it is familiar in 
the target language. 
i. Observable Entity 
Observable entity appears in the movie 2 times or 1.57 % of the total data. 
The concepts of this type represent a question or assessment which can produce an 
answer or result. The following example consists of observable entity. 
(SE) Dr. Chance: Allright, Kate. 1 to 10, how is your pain? 
(TE) Dr. Chance: Baiklah. Satu sampai 10, bagaimana rasa sakitmu? 
(Datum 099/OE/Lit/C) 
 
The expression contains numbers as scale to represent the degree of pain 
which is felt by a patient. This is a way to measure how a patient feels the pain so 
that the doctor and other medical staffs can take medical treatment required for the 
patient. The term is translated by using literal translation and resulting in clear 
translation for the audience. 
j. Specimen 
Specimen appears in this research two times or 1.57 % of the total data. 
This type represents entities from a patient that are obtained for examination or 
analysis. The example is presented below. 
 

74 
 
 
 
(SE) Nurse: I need the urine sample. 
(TE) Perawat: Aku perlu sampel urin. 
(Datum 098/Sp/Cal/C) 
 
The term from the expression above refers to urine that is purposely 
collected from a patient‟s body into a sterile container for a test. Urine contains 
waste products that are filtered out of the body. If it contains anything unusual, 
this may indicates an underlying health problem. A urine test is considered as the 
best way to know about what is going on inside the human body. It can be used to 
test for drugs, pregnancy, or diseases (e.g. diabetes, liver) and conditions (e.g. 
urinary tract infection). The term is translated by using calque technique and 
resulting in clear translation since it is often used in the target society. 
k. Record Artifact 
Record artifact appears two times or 1.57 % of the total data in this 
research. The concepts of this type contain reports and forms associated with the 
delivery of healthcare. An example containing record artifact is presented below. 
(SE) Judge De Salvo: I don't see the point. Court's well aware of the family's 
medical history. 
(TE) Hakim De Salvo: Aku tak mengerti. Sidang sudah tahu sejarah penyakit 
keluarganya. 
(Datum 123/RA/Cal/C) 
 
A family medical history is a record of health information about a person 
and his or her close relatives. This record can identify people with specific 
conditions of certain disorders which are influenced by genetic factors, 
environmental condition, and lifestyle choice. It includes information from three 
generations of relatives, including children, brothers and sisters, parents, aunts and 
uncles, nieces and nephews, grandparents, and cousins. Therefore, knowing one‟s 

75 
 
 
 
family medical history allows a person to take steps to reduce his or her health 
risks. The term is translated by using literal translation and resulting in clear 
translation since it is commonly used by the target society. 
l. Organism 
There is only one data appears (0.80 %) that is identified as organism in 
this research. Organism includes animals, fungi, bacteria, and plants necessary for 
public health reporting and used in evidence based infectious protocol. The 
following datum is the example. 
(SE) Dr. Mark: Could be a virus. 
(TE) Dr. Mark: Mungkin serangan virus. 
(Datum 034/Or/Bor/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Terms (4th Ed), „virus‟ (n) is a 
parasite consisting of a nucleic acid surrounded by a protein coat that can only 
develop in other cells. Viruses cause many diseases including the common cold, 
AIDS, herpes and polio. In other words, virus is an extremely small organism 
which causes disease in humans, animals and plants. The term „virus‟ has been 
adopted and it is available in the target language usage both in medical context 
and society. As a result it is identified as a clear translation when it is translated by 
using borrowing technique. 
m. Events 
Events appear only one time or 0.80 % of the total data in this research. 
This type represents occurrences that results in injury or needs medical treatment. 
The following datum is the example. 
 

76 
 
 
 
(SE) Anna: They are accidents. 
(TE) Anna: Mereka produk kecelakaan. 
(Datum 002/Ev/Amp/LC) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Terms (4th Ed), „accident‟ (n) is 1) 
an unpleasant event which happens suddenly and harms someone‟s health, and 2) 
chance, or something which happens by chance. The expression above means 
something bad happens that is not expected or intended.  Relating to the context 
of previous dialogs in the movie, it refers to the phenomena of having baby 
without planning because of carelessness in having sexual intercourse, e.g. casual 
sex, lack of birth control, etc. The term is translated by adding more information 
„produk‟ referring to word „babies‟ that have been explained in the previous 
expressions. However, the term is identified as less clear translation since it 
contains connotative meaning. 
2. Translation Techniques 
This part aims to analyze the translation techniques based on Molina and 
Albir‟s theory which are applied by the translator to translate medical terms in My 
Sister‟s Keeper movie. From the research findings, it can be seen that borrowing, 
calque, and established equivalent are the three most frequent techniques used in 
the movie subtitle.  
Considering that medical terms are standardized for international usage, 
borrowing and calque are used to keep the terms accurate in the target language. 
In addition, established equivalent presents translation products which are 
recognized by dictionaries and commonly used in the target culture. Those facts 
indicate that the translator attempts to maintain the same information and 

77 
 
 
 
understanding as provoked in the source text and to present such acceptable and 
understandable translation for the target audience. Below is the further 
explanation of each translation technique that is used to translate medical terms in 
the movie completed with the examples taken from the research data. 
a. Borrowing 
Borrowing appears 27 times or 21.26 % of the total data in this research. 
Borrowing is a technique to take an expression straight from the source language. 
It can be seen that 10 data are identified as pure borrowing and 17 data are 
identified as naturalized borrowing. Based on the data findings, borrowing is 
applied in the translation of clinical finding, procedure, observable entity, body 
structure, organism, and pharmaceutical/biologic product. 
(SE) Sara: Anemia, right? 
(TE) Sara: Anemia 'kan? 
(Datum 032/CF/Bor/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), the term „anemia‟ 
(n) is a condition in which the level of red blood cells is less than usual or where 
the hemoglobin is less, making it more difficult for the blood to carry oxygen. The 
symptoms are tiredness and pale color, especially pale lips, nails and the inside of 
the eyelids. The condition can be fatal if not treated. In short, anemia is a medical 
condition in which there are not enough red blood cells in the blood. 
The term „anemia‟ has been adopted in the target language and becomes a 
standard usage in the medical world of the target society. Moreover, the term can 
also be translated by using other technique, such as description so that people in 
the target society can call it „kekurangan darah merah‟. The translator chooses 

78 
 
 
 
using the standard term in the subtitle text so that it can be identified as pure 
borrowing. It is orthographically unassimilated and identical in form and meaning. 
The term in the subtitle text results clear translation because it is familiar in the 
target society. 
(SE) Sara: Fifteen, she's about 90 pounds, she's allergic to penicillin. 
(TE) Sara: Lima belas, beratnya 40,8 kg dan ia alergi pada penisilin. 
(Datum 051/PBP/Bor/NC) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), the term „penicillin‟ 
(n) is a common antibiotic originally produced from a fungus which kills bacteria. 
The term has been borrowed in the target language to be „penisilin‟. In other 
words, the translated term is partially assimilated in which it shows evidence of 
morphemic shape of the original language with some degree of orthographic 
adaptation. The translation can be seen as quite successful since it accurately 
mentions the same meaning of the original text and sounds natural in the target 
language. However, it results less clear translation because it less familiar for the 
general public in the target culture, especially for layperson. 
b. Calque 
Calque appears 27 times or 21.26 % of the total data in this research. 
Calque is a technique to literally translate a ST expression lexical or structural. 
Based on the data findings, calque is applied in the translation of clinical finding, 
procedure, body structure, substance, specimen, pharmaceutical/biologic product, 
physical object, environment/geographical location, and social context. The 
examples are presented below. 
 

79 
 
 
 
(SE) Dr. Mark: She may have an autoimmune deficiency. 
(TE) Dr. Mark: Mungkin dia mengalami defisiensi otoimun. 
(Datum 037/CF/Cal/UC) 
 
The term „autoimmune deficiency‟ in datum 037/CF/Cal/UC is also 
known as immunodeficiency or immune deficiency. According to the Dictionary 
of Medical Term (4th Ed), the term „immunodeficiency‟ (n) is a lack of immunity 
to a disease. The concept presents a state in which the immune system's ability to 
fight infectious disease is compromised or entirely absent; it may also decrease 
cancer of immune system. The word „autoimmune‟ is the modifier for word 
„deficiency‟. The term is translated literally of each element and results a calque 
of expression, which preserves the syntactic structure of the source language 
while introducing phrases of fixed expression in target language. It is tolerated by 
the target language society but results less clear translation. 
(SE) Dr. Chance: Not to be forward but, umbilical blood can be incredibely 
effective tool in treating leukemic patient. 
(TE) Dr. Chance: Aku tak bermaksud menyinggung tapi darah tali pusar sangat 
efektif mengobati pasien leukemia. 
(Datum 069/SC/Cal/C) 
 
The medical term in datum 069/SC/Cal/C has a concept that is a patient 
who suffers from leukemia. Calque technique which is applied in translating the 
datum respects the syntactic structure of Bahasa Indonesia Noun Phrase. The 
word „pasien‟ is the head and it is modified by the word „leukemia‟. The 
translation is considered accurate and acceptable in the target language; it also 
results clear translation for the target audience since it is familiar for wider 
society. 
 

80 
 
 
 
c. Established Equivalent 
Established equivalent appears 21 times or 16.54 % of the total data in this 
research. It is a technique to use recognized translation in the target language 
which is available in dictionary or is used for daily life. Based on the data 
findings, established equivalent is applied in the translation of clinical finding, 
procedure, body structure, substance, pharmaceutical/biological product, physical 
object, and social context. The examples are presented below. 
(SE) Sara: Your sister's sick.  
(TE) Sara: Kakakmu sakit. 
(Datum 016/CF/Est/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), „sick‟ (adj) is 
having an illness. It can be physically or mentally ill so that makes someone feels 
not well or not healthy. The term „sick‟ is equal with the term „sakit‟ which is 
available in Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia (KBBI). Since the translated term is 
natural in the target language, it results clear translation for target audience. 
(SE) Kate: He has scars on hhis hands from graft-versus-host. 
(TE) Kate: Ia punya bekas luka di tangannya dari penyakit graft-versus-host. 
(Datum 113/CF/Est/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), „scar‟ (n) is the 
mark left on the skin after a wound or surgical incision has healed. It has literal 
meaning „bekas luka‟ in Bahasa Indonesia, as presented in Echols‟ Kamus 
Inggris-Indonesia. The translated term is equivalent and results clear translation 
since it is natural in the target language. 
 
 

81 
 
 
 
d. Literal Translation 
Literal translation appears 11 times or 8.65 % of the total data in this 
research. Literal translation is a technique to translate word-for-word. Based on 
the data findings, literal translation is applied in the translation of clinical finding, 
procedure, observable entity, body structure, pharmaceutical/biological product, 
environment/geographical location, and social context. The examples are 
presented below. 
(SE) Sara: They put needles into Anna's hips. 
(TE) Sara: Mereka menyuntik pinggul Anna. 
(Datum 120/Pr/Lit/C) 
 
Basically, the term „put the needles into Anna‟s hip‟ is translated literally 
into „meletakkan jarum ke dalam pinggul Anna‟. However, the translator takes an 
attempt to directly transfer the term in source language into a grammatically and 
idiomatically appropriate in the target language. The word „put‟ in the dialog 
consists of deeper concept than its literal meaning „meletakkan‟. Considering the 
context from the surrounding dialogs which represents a medical procedure, it is 
the best choice to use term „menyuntik‟ in the target language which means to use 
a medical stuff consists of a needle and syringe to put a liquid such as a drug into 
a person's body. This is why the translated term is considered clear since it sounds 
natural and familiar in the target language for the general public. 
(SE) Brian: A donor child? 
(TE) Brian: Donor anak? 
(Datum 072/SC/Cal/LC) 
 
The term „donor child‟ in English has a concept that it is a donor who is a 
young person or still a child. In other words, „donor‟, as a head, is modified by 

82 
 
 
 
„child‟. There is normally no such Head + Modifier construction in English Noun 
Phrase but it is found and accepted in Bahasa Indonesia Noun Phrase. The 
translation presents a good accuracy toward the original text but it causes 
ambiguity in understanding the correct meaning. It may be interpreted as a donor 
who is a young person or a donor for young patient, etc. Thus, it is suggested that 
the translator uses description technique to translate the text in order to produce 
clear translation. 
e. Particularization 
Particularization appears 9 times or 7.09 % of the total data in this 
research. Particularization is a technique to use more concrete or precise term in 
the target text. Based on the data findings, particularization is applied in the 
translation of clinical finding, procedure, body structure, specimen, physical 
object, and social context. The examples are presented below. 
(SE) Anna: They're trying to force me to give my body part. 
(TE) Anna: Mereka memaksa memberikan organku padanya. 
(Datum 020/BS/Par/C) 
 
Body part is the whole physical structure and substance of a living thing, 
especially human, as opposed to the mind. Human body consists of four main 
parts, from the smallest to the biggest part, namely cells, tissues, organs, system 
organs. The expression above informs that Anna, as a donor child has a role to 
give her body parts to save Kate. In fact, she has donated her umbilical cord 
blood, bone marrow, and many more. 
The term „body part‟ is translated into „organ‟ in Bahasa Indonesia. The 
word „organ‟ is borrowed from the source language which means a part of the 

83 
 
 
 
body which is distinct from other parts and has a particular function, e.g. the liver, 
an eye or ovaries. In other words, the translator uses particularization technique in 
translating the term since organ is the part of human body. 
The translation is identified clear because the term has been borrowed and 
adopted in the target language. However, it is not accurate because the term in the 
target language does not explain the original meaning which refers to the whole 
parts of human body. It is suggested that the translator use calque technique to 
translate „body part‟ into „bagian tubuh‟ in the target language in order to preserve 
the original meaning of the term as provoked in the source expression and to 
produce clear translation for the audience. 
(SE) Sara: Oncology? But that's cancer. 
(TE) Sara: Dokter onkologi? Tapi itu bidang kanker. 
(Datum 039/SC/Par/LC) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), the term „oncology‟ 
(n) is a scientific study of new growths, especially cancers. The expression is 
presented in a scene when Sara is looking at a name card given by Dr. Mark as 
recommendation for Kate‟s further medical check-up. It is written Dr. Ileana 
Farquad who is a Pediatric Hematology/Oncology. The word „oncology‟ which is 
said by Sara refers to the study or field where Dr. Ileana has a specialty. 
The term „oncology‟ is translated into „dokter onkologi‟ in Bahasa 
Indonesia. The translated term is equivalent with the term „oncologist‟ in the 
source language which means a doctor who specializes in oncology, especially 
cancer. Furthermore, the term „oncologist‟ can be translated into several terms in 
the target language such as „onkolog‟ which is translated by borrowing technique, 

84 
 
 
 
and „dokter onkologi‟ which is translated by description technique. The fact that 
„oncology‟ is translated into „dokter onkologi‟ is identified by using 
particularization technique. 
The translation is considered equivalent since it can express the same 
concept as the term in the source language does. The term refers to the field of 
study named oncology meanwhile the target text refers to a job as a part in the 
field of it. The translation results in less clear because it less familiar for the target 
society. The word „dokter‟ can be a little help to produce many interpretations for 
the word „onkologi‟ when the audience are trying to figure out the meaning of the 
translated medical term.   
f. Reduction 
Reduction appears 8 times or 6.30 % of the total data in this research. 
Reduction is a technique to suppress information in the target text. Theoretically, 
reduction is a common technique that can be found in the translation for movie 
subtitle in order to produce a condense version of dialogs. Based on the data 
findings, reduction is applied in the translation of clinical finding, procedure, 
pharmaceutical/geographical location, and social context. The examples are 
presented below.  
(SE) Paramedic: BP is 100 over 68. 
(TE) Paramedis: Seratus per 68. 
(Datum 052/CF/Red/LC) 
 
BP is an abbreviation for blood pressure which means the pressure, 
measured in millimetres of mercury, at which the blood is pumped round the body 
by the heart. 100 is the measurement of systolic pressure, when the heart is 

85 
 
 
 
contracting and pumping blood and 68 is the measurement of diastolic pressure, 
when the heart relaxes. The dialog is taken place when Kate suffers a relapse of 
leukemia and paramedics come to help providing first aid. 
The translator omits BP or blood pressure, which has a function as an 
observable entity in medical context and translates only the finding of the 
measurement into „seratus per 68‟. It can be identified that the translation is not 
good in terms of accuracy since one part of the term is reduced so that it decreases 
the clarity level into less clear. The audience confuse to relating the clinical 
finding in the dialog to what measurement is done. In addition, the scene is not 
really presenting what have done by the paramedics to handle Kate; it is Sara and 
one of the paramedics who are talking. It is suggested that the translator translate 
the whole part of the expression so that the result will be both accurate and clear. 
(SE) Campbell: Drugs for nausea, opiates for pain, ambien for sleep. Not exactly 
proper medication for a preteen. 
(TE) Campbell: Obat mual, pereda sakit, ambien untuk tidur. Bukan jenis tepat 
bagi anak di bawah usia puber. 
(Datum 090/Pr/Red/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), the term 
„medication‟ (n) is defined: (1) the treatment of illnesses by giving people drugs 
(premedication), (2) a drug used to treat a particular illness. The context of the 
term above refers to the second definition as can be seen that in the previous 
sentence where Champbell mentions several kinds of medicine that are given for 
Anna. 
The term „medication‟ is not translated in Bahasa Indonesia so that it can 
be said that the translator uses reduction technique. In terms of accuracy the 

86 
 
 
 
translation is considered for not having good quality due to the omission one part 
of the expression. Although one part of the dialog is deleted, it is not affect the 
whole context of the expression. Instead, the word „medication‟ is redundant. The 
audience can still understand the expression by relating the previous dialogs that 
mention several types of drugs. As a result, the translator presents a more effective 
expression and the translation results clear. 
g. Description 
Description appears five times or 3.94 % of the total data in this research. 
It is a technique to use a description of a term or expression in the target language. 
Based on the data findings, adaptation is applied in the translation of procedure, 
pharmaceutical/biological product, social context, and record artifact. The 
examples are presented below. 
(SE) Campbell: Eight hospitalizations in 11 years, six catheterizations, two 
bone marrow aspiration, two stem-cell purges. 
(TE) Campbell: Delapan kali dirawat di rumah sakit dalam 11 tahun, enam kali 
mengalami kateterisasi, 2 aspirasi sumsum tulang, dua kali 
pembersihan sel stem. 
(Datum 078/Pr/Des/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), „hospitalization‟ (n) 
is the act of sending someone to hospital. It is literally means „rawat inap‟ in  
Bahasa Indonesia. The translator describes the term in the target language based 
on its function into „dirawat di rumah sakit‟ that include the explanation of the 
location, hospital, where the health care is taken place. 
(SE) Anna: It wasn't for the notoriety. Ηe was an epileptic. 
(TE) Anna: Bukan demi reputasinya, karena ia ternyata pengidap eplilepsi.  
(Datum 124/SC/Des/C) 
 

87 
 
 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), „epileptic‟ (n) is a 
person with epilepsy. The term has been borrowed in Bahasa Indonesia into 
„epileptik‟ and has the same meaning. However, the translator decides to describe 
the term in the target language into „pengidap epilepsi‟ in order to deliver the term 
clearer so that the audience can understand the meaning of the term. 
h. Generalization 
Generalization appears five times or 3.94 % of the total data in this 
research. Generalization is a technique to use more general or neutral term in the 
target language. Based on the data findings, generalization is applied in the 
translation of procedure, pharmaceutical/biological product, physical object, and 
social context. The examples are presented below. 
(SE) Dr. Chance: The fever Kate's been getting, it's infection from the dyalisis. 
(TE) Dr. Chance: Deman yang dialami Kate adalah infeksi dari cuci darahnya. 
(Datum 102/Pr/Gen/LC) 
 
Basically, dialysis is a process for removing waste and excess water from 
the blood, and is used primarily as an artificial replacement for lost kidney 
function in people with kidney failure. According to the Dictionary of Medical 
Term (4th Ed), „dyalisis‟ (n) or usually called renal dialysis is a procedure in which 
a membrane is used as a filter to separate soluble waste substances from the blood. 
The term is absorbed and borrowed in the target language into „dialisis‟ or 
„hemodialisis‟ to be used in the medical world of the target society. However, the 
term „cuci darah‟ is more commonly used in the society so that the translator 
chooses to use the term that is acceptable and clear for the target audience. 
 

88 
 
 
 
(SE) Campbell: Drugs for nausea, opiates for pain, ambien for sleep. Not 
exactly proper medication for a preteen. 
(TE) Campbell: Obat mual, pereda sakit, ambien untuk tidur. Bukan jenis tepat 
bagi anak di bawah usia puber. 
(Datum 088/PBP/Gen/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), „opiate‟ (n) is a 
sedative which is prepared from opium, a substance made from poppies which is 
used in the preparation of codeine and heroin. It is a kind of drug that helps to 
ease the pain and causes sleep. Basically, the medical term in the expression 
above can be translated into several ways. Literally it can be translated into 
„opium untuk rasa sakit‟ in Bahasa Indonesia. It can also be translated by 
describing its function into „opium untuk menghilangkan rasa sakit‟. 
The translator decides to generalize the term in the target language and 
chooses the term „pereda sakit‟, and it results in clear translation. The term 
„pereda sakit‟ has a wider definition that refers to many kinds of drugs for pain 
that can be classified based on their function (e.g. drug for headache, 
stomachache, toothache, etc). It is the best choice to apply generalization 
technique since the target audience can easily understand the term with the 
concept of its function as pain reliever instead of its substance named opiate. 
i. Amplification 
Amplification appears four times or 3.15 % of the total data in this 
research. Amplification is a technique of adding information or paraphrase to 
introduce details that are not formulated in the ST. Based on the data findings, 
amplification is applied in the translation of clinical finding and events. The 
examples are presented below. 

89 
 
 
 
(SE) Anna: Sometimes I wonder what would have happened if Kate had been 
healthy. 
(TE) Anna: Kadang aku berpikir apa yang terjadi jika Kate anak yang sehat. 
(Datum 010/CF/Amp/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), „healthy‟ (adj) 
means in good physical condition. Healthy in the expression above refer to Kate‟s 
condition if she is not sick or suffering from leukemia. Basically, the term can be 
translated literally into „sehat‟ in Bahasa Indonesia and is assumed acceptable and 
clear for the target audience. In spite of that, the translator decides to paraphrase 
the term into „anak yang sehat‟. 
(SE) Anna: They are accidents. 
(TE) Anna: Mereka produk kecelakaan. 
(Datum 002/Ev/Amp/LC) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Terms (4th Ed), „accident‟ (n) is 1) 
an unpleasant event which happens suddenly and harms someone‟s health, and 2) 
chance, or something which happens by chance. The term of the expression above 
refers to the phenomena of having baby that are not expected or intended because 
of the carelessness in having sexual intercourse. The word „produk‟ in the target 
language has a role as additional information to explain babies as accidents so that 
it results clear translation for a connotative expression. 
j. Transposition 
Transposition appears four times or 3.15 % of the total data in this 
research. Transposition is a technique to change grammatical category. In this 
research it is generally found in the changing of the part of speech when literal 
translation is grammatically possible but may not accord with natural usage in the 

90 
 
 
 
target language. Based on the data findings, transposition is applied in the 
translation of clinical finding and procedure. The examples are presented below. 
(SE) Anna: I was engineered. 
(TE) Anna: Aku produk rekayasa. 
(Datum 004/Pr/Tra/C) 
 
The expression above tells the audience that Anna was born for a 
particular purpose to save Kate; it takes a laboratory procedure to set Anna‟s 
genetic condition that will be a perfect match for Kate. The term „was 
engineered‟, which originates from „engineer‟, consist of verb which means to 
design and build something using scientific principles. In this context, the term 
refers to the process to design Anna as a donor for Kate. 
The term in the source language can be translated literally into Bahasa 
Indonesia „direkayasa‟. However, the translator translates it into „produk 
rekayasa‟, a noun, which refers to genetically engineered babies as the products 
from a specific medical procedure. In other words, there is a change of category 
from verb in the source language into noun in the target language. 
The surrounding dialogs of the term explain babies who are born because 
of many reasons. Consequently, the translator can change the grammatical 
category of the original term by using pronoun „produk rekayasa‟ that refers to a 
kind of baby, in this case Anna as a designer baby. As a result, the translation can 
be identified clear because it is presented in a more natural way so that it is easy to 
understand by the audience. 
(SE) Campbell: No one can force you to donate if you don't want to, can they? 
(TE) Campbell: Tak ada yang bisa memaksamu jadi donor kalau kau tak mau, 
bukan? 
(Datum 022/Pr/Tra/C) 

91 
 
 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), the term „donate‟, a 
verb, means to agree to give blood, tissue, organs, or reproductive material to be 
used to treat another person. In other words, the term above refers to a procedure 
to voluntarily give someone‟s body part for another person. The context of the 
expression above is that Anna has a right to decide by herself whether she wants 
to donate her body part for Kate or not.  
Although the term „donate‟ can be translated literally into „mendonorkan‟ 
(v) in Bahasa Indonesia, the translator chooses „donor‟ (n) which means a person 
who gives blood, tissue, organs or reproductive material to be used to treat another 
person. In other words, the translator changes the part of speech from verb in the 
source language into noun in the target language. The translation sounds natural in 
the target language and results clear translation for the audience. 
k. Adaptation 
Adaptation appears three times or 2.36 % of the total data in this research. 
Adaptation is a technique to replace a ST cultural element with TT cultural 
element. Based on the data findings, adaptation is applied in the translation of 
several medical terms which are clinical finding and environmental/geographical 
location. The examples are presented below. 
(SE) Sara: Fifteen, she's about 90 pounds, she's allergic to penicillin. 
(TE) Sara: Lima belas, beratnya 40,8 kg dan ia alergi pada penisilin. 
(Datum 049/CF/Adp/C) 
 
From the data above it can be seen that the translator adapts the term based 
on the standard usage of mass measurement in the target culture. The pound or 
pound-mass is a unit of mass which is legally defined as exactly 0. 453 kilograms. 

92 
 
 
 
It is considered as the most common international avoirdupois used today, 
including in the USA. Meanwhile, kilogram is the base unit of mass in the 
International System Units (SI). The kilogram is almost exactly equal to the mass 
of one liter of water. Indonesia is one of countries that use the term kilogram for 
its system of measurement. 
The translator decides to leave the term „pound‟ and adapt the term 
„kilogram‟ as the standard concept of mass measurement used in the target 
culture; and it is followed by an attempt to convert the finding of the measurement 
from pound into kilogram. In other words, the translator adapts both the unit of 
measurement and its finding into the target culture. Consequently, the term can 
still present the same finding and thus it is more understandable for the target 
audience in Indonesia since the term kilogram is more common use in the country.       
(SE) Dr. Chance: The insurance company will definitely not approve this, so 
we'lI have to re-admit through emergency. 
(TE) Dr. Chance: Perusahaan asuransi tak akan menyetujuinya jadi kita harus 
memasukkannya kembali lewat UGD. 
(Datum 117/EGL/Adp/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Terms (4th Ed), the term 
„emergency‟ refers to the part of a hospital where people who need urgent 
immediate treatment are dealt with. It is usually called as emergency room in the 
UK and Accident and Emergency Department (A & E) in the US.  
Meanwhile, UGD in the target language is the abbreviation of Unit Gawat 
Darurat which has the same concept and meaning with the term „emergency‟ or A 
& E Department in the source language. UGD is the standardized term in the 
Indonesian medical world for „ruang emergency‟ (emergency room). In other 

93 
 
 
 
words, the translator transfers the term accurately and equally, which is more 
general in the source language, but adapts the standardized term in the target 
language. 
l. Modulation 
Modulation appears three times or 2.36 % of the total data in this research. 
Modulation is a technique to change point of view, lexical or structural. In this 
research, this technique is used to change the concept of medical terms so that it 
will more acceptable and understandable in the target language. Based on the data 
findings, modulation is applied in the translation of physical object, 
environment/geographical location, and social context. The examples are 
presented below. 
(SE) Brian: In a test tube? 
(TE) Brian: Dengan bayi tabung? 
(Datum 070/PO/Mod/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), the term „test tube‟ 
is a small glass tube with a rounded bottom, used in laboratories to hold samples 
of liquids. It refers to a physical object in medical world which is usually used as 
a container for samples in an experiment. Furthermore, the context of „test tube‟ in 
the expression above is related to the previous dialogs in the movie in which Brian 
and Dr. Chance are discussing about how to have another child who has a 
chromosomal match to help Kate. Although „test tube‟ in the expression defines 
its actual meaning, it contains further purpose that represents a procedure to 
design a baby with specific criteria through an experiment. 

94 
 
 
 
Meanwhile, the term „bayi tabung‟ in the target language can refer to 
either the baby or the procedure to have baby. The term in the expression above 
refers to the second meaning, a procedure of having baby which is controlled by 
an experiment called in vitro fertilization (IVF). IVF is a technique of fertilization 
by manually joining the woman‟s eggs and the man‟s sperm in a laboratory dish 
or test tube, and then transferring the embryo to the uterus. IVF can be translated 
in Bahasa Indonesia into „pembuahan in vitro‟ but the term „bayi tabung‟ is more 
often used in the target culture. 
When the translator translates the term „test tube‟ into „bayi tabung‟, 
he/she changes the point of view of the term. The term „test tube‟ as a medical 
object represents the part for the whole of the concept „bayi tabung‟ as a medical 
procedure. The translator can produce an equivalent translation although he/she 
changes the concept of the term. In addition, it results clear translation since the 
term is more familiar in the target culture and the related dialogs assist the 
audience by implicitly provide explanation of the term that refer to its function in 
medical context. 
(SE) Sara: No hospices. 
(TE) Sara: Aku tak perlu berobat jalan. 
(Datum 104/EGL/Mod/C) 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), „hospice‟ is a 
hospital which offers palliative care for terminally ill people. Hospice in the 
expression above refers to a wider concept which is hospice care, a type of care 
that focuses in providing medical services, emotional supports and spiritual 
resources for people who are in the last stages of terminally ill. The dialog above 

95 
 
 
 
tells that Sara refuses the doctor‟s recommendation to move Kate in hospice and 
insists that her daughter still has a chance to live. 
The term „hospice‟ is translated into „berobat jalan‟ in the target language. 
„Berobat jalan‟, which is equal with the term „outpatients care‟ in the source 
language is a medical procedure in which people go for treatment but do not stay 
the night. The outpatients still stay at home but are required to visit the hospital on 
their treatment schedule. 
It can be said that the translator translates the term by using modulation 
technique. Although it results clear translation because of the using of familiar 
term „berobat jalan‟, it produces non-equivalent translation. The translator 
changes not only the point of view but also the concept of the original term. In 
fact, the term „hospice‟ has been adopted in Bahasa Indonesia into „hospice care‟ 
or „perawatan hospis‟. To produce a translation with better quality, the translator 
is suggested to use „perawatan hospis‟ and give additional information about it so 
that it will results both clear and equivalent translation.  
3. Clarity Level 
Clarity deals with the translation quality that affects the audience‟s ability 
to understand the translation produced by the translator. A translation can be said 
successful, at least, if it can be easily understood by the target reader. This part 
aims to analyze the quality of the translation of medical terms in terms of clarity 
by adopting and modifying the clarity assessment by Kusfajarini (2013: 24-7) 
which is based on the standard assessment taken from Christine Tagliante.  

96 
 
 
 
Three respondents were asked to determine the clarity of the translation 
with an open-close form questionnaire. They are Dio Rizky Wuryanto (R1), 
Herlambang Fadlan Sejati (R2), and Yulia Dwi Marwidita (R3). From the four 
clarity levels, there are three levels which appear in the identification namely 
clear, less clear, and unclear. 
a. Clear Translation 
The translations of medical terms which are identified as clear are found in 
84 data or 66.14 % of the total data in this research. An expression is categorized 
as clear translation if the audience can fully understand the translated medical 
term since it uses easy and acceptable language in the target society. Medical 
terms with clear translation are most frequently found in the translation with 
literal translation, borrowing, and calque. The examples are presented below. 
(SE) Anna: ...most babies are products of drunken evening and lack of birth 
control. 
(TE) Anna: ...kebanyakan bayi adalah produk malam mereka mabuk dan 
kurangnya program KB. 
(Datum 001/Pr/Gen/C) 
 
Datum 001/Pr/Gen/C belongs to clear translation. The three respondents 
choose clear level and can correctly explain a brief definition of the term.  The 
concept of the term „program KB‟ or Keluarga Berencana is about the 
government program for family planning which consists of planning, provision, 
and the using of birth control. The translated term is acceptable in the target 
language and familiar in wider society usage so that it is easy to understand. 
(SE) Brian: I don't know when it started but probably around 11, it was 103. 
(TE) Brian: Aku tak tahu kapan, tapi mungkin sekitar pukul 11.00, suhunya 
sekitar 39,4. 
(Datum 015/CF/Adp/C) 

97 
 
 
 
Datum 015/CF/Adp/C belongs to clear translation. The three respondents 
choose clear level. They understand that the concept of the term refers to the result 
of a person‟s body temperature. The term is adapted in the target culture usage so 
that it is acceptable by the target audience. The two respondents (R1 and R2) 
know that the result refers to body temperature; meanwhile the other respondent 
(R3) can explain the unit of temperature measurement which is in Celcius. 
(SE) Dr. Chance: Allright, Kate. 1 to 10, how is your pain? 
(TE) Dr. Chance: Baiklah. Satu sampai 10, bagaimana rasa sakitmu? 
(Datum 099/OE/Lit/C) 
 
The expression above is considered as clear translation. The three 
respondents choose clear level and understand the concept of the term which is the 
scale of the pain. R3 comments that the term uses numbers as scale to represent 
the degree of pain which is felt by a patient. Meanwhile, R2 says that the bigger 
the number indicates the more pain. In addition, R1 explains that the scale is 
useful for the doctor and other medical staffs to undertake medical treatment 
required for the patient.  
b. Less Clear Translation 
The translations of medical terms which are identified as less clear are 
found in 24 data or 18.90 % of the total data in this research. If the audience find 
many interpretations of a translated medical term and unable to conclude the 
meaning although it is natural and acceptable in the target language, it means that 
the translation is identified as less clear. In this research, medical terms which are 
identified less clear are commonly found in the translation with calque. Below are 
the examples of medical terms that belong to less clear translation. 

98 
 
 
 
(SE) Sara: Oncology? But that's cancer. 
(TE) Sara: Dokter onkologi? Tapi itu bidang kanker. 
(Datum 039/SC/Par/LC) 
 
Datum 039/SC/Par/LC is considered as less clear translation. The three 
respondents choose less clear level. They can understand the term „dokter‟ since it 
sounds natural in the target language and is familiar for the general public. 
Meanwhile, the term „onkologi‟ is borrowed from „oncology‟ in the source 
language so that they are unfamiliar with it and cannot guess the meaning. 
Consequently, the audience may interpret the term that is doctor in specific field. 
One of the respondents, R2 delivers his guess that „dokter onkologi‟ is a person 
whose job as a doctor who specializes in oncology branch. 
(SE) Paramedic: BP is 100 over 68. 
(TE) Paramedis: Seratus per 68. 
(Datum 052/CF/Red/LC) 
 
Datum 052/CF/Red/LC is considered as less clear. The two respondents, 
R1 and R2 choose less clear level; although the translated term is natural in 
Bahasa Indonesia, they confuse to relate the concept of clinical finding to what 
measurement. Differently, R3 chooses clear level and can explain clearly that the 
concept of the term is about the result of blood pressure measurement. Based on 
the comments of the respondents and discussions with each of them, it is decided 
that the datum is consider less clear. 
(SE) Brian: I thought you said that getting transplant from an unrelated donor 
is dangerous.  
(TE) Brian: Tadi bukan kau bilang bahwa cangkok dari donor asing akan 
berbahaya? 
(Datum 066/SC/Gen/LC) 
 

99 
 
 
 
Datum 066/SC/Gen/LC is considered as less clear translation. The three 
respondents choose less clear level. Although the term is presented naturally in the 
target language and acceptable by the target audience, it causes many 
interpretations so that the respondents confuse to understand the meaning. 
Generally, they confuse to interpret the term „asing‟. The concept of the term 
„donor asing‟ is a donor who does not have family ties with the patient. R2 can 
guess that the term means a donor who is not recommended by the doctor. 
Meanwhile, R3 thinks maybe it relates to donor from foreign countries. 
c. Unclear Translation 
The translations of medical terms which are identified as not clear are 
found in 19 data or 14.96 % of the total data in this research. If the audience do 
not know the term and need other sources to understand it, it means that the 
translated medical term is identified as unclear translation. In this research, 
medical terms which are identified as unclear are most frequently found in the 
translation with borrowing. The standard medical terms are adopted into the target 
language for medical context usage but not familiar for the general public or 
laypersons. On the other hand, unclear translation is not found in the translation 
with 
adaptation, 
description, 
generalization, 
literal 
translation, 
and 
particularization. Below are the examples of medical terms that belong to unclear 
translation. 
(SE) Sara: Kids her age don't get mono, do they? 
(TE) Sara: Seusia itu mustahil terserang mono. 
(Datum 033/CF/Bor/UC) 
 

100 
 
 
 
According to the Dictionary of Medical Term (4th Ed), the term „mono‟ or 
„mononucleosis‟ (n) is a common illness caused by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) 
that can leave people feeling tired and weak for weeks or months. Mono can be 
spread through contact with saliva, mucus from the nose and throat, and 
sometimes tears. It is most often seen in teens and young adults; people call it 
kissing disease. In Bahasa Indonesia, the term is known as „mono‟ or 
„mononukleosis‟, so that the translator borrows the standard term. 
The expression above is considered as unclear translation. The three 
respondents choose unclear level which means it is uneasy to understand. They 
have the same comments that they have never heard the term so that they can 
guess nothing from it. In other words, the term is commonly used by specific 
group of people in medical context but unfamiliar for the general public. One of 
the respondents, R1 comments that the audience need to do an effort by searching 
the term in internet to get a better understanding. He also suggests that the 
translator might give additional information about the term to help the audience 
understand it. 
(SE) Kate: I can taste your Cytoxan. 
(TE) Kate: Aku bisa merasakan Cytoxan-mu. 
(Datum 110/PBP/Bor/UC) 
 
The expression above consists of medical term with the concept of 
medicine product. Cytoxan is a kind of anti-cancer chemotherapy drug. It is 
translated by using borrowing technique to preserve the original trade name of the 
drug which is also used in the medical world of the target culture. Thus, using 

101 
 
 
 
borrowing technique to translate the term is seen as the best way taken by the 
translator. 
However, the datum is considered as unclear translation. The three 
respondents choose unclear level because they have never heard the term. They 
cannot understand the term and it is difficult to guess it. It is because the term is 
used in certain condition and is known by specific group of people such as 
medical staffs, cancer patients and their families. Consequently, the audience 
should search the term from other sources to understand it. 
(SE) Dr. Mark: She may have an autoimmune deficiency. 
(TE) Dr. Mark: Mungkin dia mengalami defisiensi otoimun. 
(Datum 037/CF/Cal/UC) 
 
The concept of term „autoimmune deficiency‟ refers to a state in which the 
immune system's ability to fight infectious disease is compromised or entirely 
absent. The term is available in the target language which is translated by using 
calque technique. 
Datum 037/CF/Cal/UC is considered as unclear translation. The two 
respondents, R1 and R3 choose unclear level while the other one chooses clear 
level. R2 chooses clear level and can clearly describe the definition of the term. 
The researcher then undertakes a discussion with each respondent and it can be 
decided that the translation is unclear.  

 
 
102 
 
CHAPTER V 
CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS 
 
 
 
 
A. Conclusions 
Based on the data findings and discussion, the conclusions can be 
formulated as following. 
1. Concerning the first objective of the study which is to describe the types of 
medical terms in My Sister‟s Keeper movie, it is concluded that out of 
nineteen hierarchies from SNOMED-CT there are thirteen types which are 
found in the movie. Clinical finding appears 42 times or 33.07 % of the total 
data. It is followed by procedure (28 or 22.05 %), body structure (14 or 11.02 
%), social context (14 or 11.02 %), pharmaceutical/biologic product (8 or 6.30 
%), physical object (6 or 4.72 %), substance (4 or 3.15 %), 
environment/geographical location (3 or 2.36 %), observable entity (2 or 1.57 
%), specimen (2 or 1.57 %), record artifact (2 or 1.57 %), organism (1 or 0.80 
%), and events (1 or 0.80 %). Considering that clinical finding and procedure 
are the two most frequent types of medical terms in the movie, it is relevant to 
the setting and storyline of the movie which is mostly taken place in hospital 
for leukemia health care. Those terms function to describe specific meanings 
in certain conditions related to the purposeful activities in providing healthcare 
that are clinical disorder, clinical examination, and medical treatment. 
2. Answering the second research objective which is to describe the techniques 
in translating the English medical terms into Bahasa Indonesia in My Sister‟s 

103 
 
 
 
Keeper movie, it is revealed that out of eighteen translation techniques 
proposed by Molina and Albir there are twelve techniques applied by the 
translator. They are borrowing (27 or 21.26 %), calque (27 or 21.26 %), 
established equivalent (21 or 16.54 %), literal translation (11 or 8.65 %), 
particularization (9 or 7.09 %), reduction (7 or 5.51 %), description (5 or 3.94 
%), generalization (5 or 3.94 %), amplification (4 or 3.15 %), transposition (4 
or 3.15 %), adaptation (3 or 2.36 %), and modulation (3 or 2.36 %). 
Considering that borrowing, calque, and established equivalent are the three 
most frequent techniques found in the data, it indicates that the translator 
attempts to maintain the same information and understanding as provoked in 
the source text and to present acceptable and understandable translation for the 
target audience. 
3. In relation to the third research objective which is to describe the clarity of the 
translation of medical terms in My Sister‟s Keeper movie, it comes out that the 
translation are 84 clear (66.14 %), 24 less clear (18.90 %), and 19 not clear 
(14.96 %). 
 
B. Suggestions 
1. For Translators 
It is suggested that translators, especially in movie subtitling, employ the 
rules in subtitling which consist of subtitling strategies and deal with constraints 
in subtitling. It becomes a challenge for every subtitler to deliver the meaning 
completely, accurately, acceptable, and clearly for the target audience. The 

104 
 
 
 
subtitler also needs to have wide knowledge and to go deep into particular fields 
from many sources considering so many movie genres and themes that have 
special characteristic and resulting specific problems in the translating process.  
2. For Students of the English Language and Literature Study Program 
Majoring in Translation 
It is suggested that students of the English Language and Literature study 
program majoring in Translation that it is a chance for them to conduct such 
research due to the scarcity of this theme. Audiovisual Translation becomes an 
interesting issue to analyze. In addition, they may choose other specific fields 
such as economy, law, politics, etc. in which technical terms appear. 
3. For other Researchers 
Weaknesses unavoidably appear in this research due to the limited theories 
and knowledge of the researcher. It is suggested that if other researchers want to 
conduct a research with the same topic, they can find another source of data which 
has many examples to be analyzed and employ the more appropriate theoretical 
framework for the research. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
105 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
 
 
A. Printed Sources 
Abigail, M. T. 2005. Translation Equivalents for Health/Medical Terminology in 
Xitsonga. Pro Gradu Thesis. Pretoria: University of Pretoria. 
Arnold, et al. 1994. Machine Translation: An Introductory Guide. Oxford: NCC 
Blackwell. 
Baker, M. 1992. In Other Words: A Coursebook on Translation. London: 
Routledge. 
_____. 2001. Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation Studies. New York: 
Routledge. 
Bateman, H. et al. 2005. Dictionary of Medical Terms (4th Ed). London: A & C 
Black Publisher. 
Bogdan, R. C & Biklen, S. K. 1982. Qualitative Research for Education: An 
introduction to Theories and Methods. New York: Pearson Education 
group. 
Catford, J. C. 1965. A Linguistic Theory of Translation. London: Oxford 
University Press. 
Chiaro, D., Heiss, C. and Bucaria, C. 2008. Between Text and Image:Updating 
Research in Screen Translation. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing 
Company. 
Cintas, J. D. and Anderman, G. 2009. Audiovisual Translation: Language 
Transfer on Screen. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Cresswell, J. W. 1994. Research Design: Qualitative and Quantitative 
Approaches. California: Sage Publications Inc. 
Faber, P. (ed.). 2012. A Cognitive Linguistics View of Terminology and 
Specialized Language. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. 
Handayani, A. 2009. Analisis Ideologi Penerjemahan dan Penilaian Kualitas 
Terjemahan Istilah Kedokteran dalam Buku “Lecture Notes on Clinical 
Medicine”. Pro Gradu Thesis. Surakarta: Universitas Sebelas Maret. 
Holmes, J. S. 1988. Translated! Papers on Literary Translation and Translation 
Studies. Amsterdam: Rodopi.  

106 
 
 
 
Kuhiwczak, P. and Littau, K. 2007. A Companion to Translation Studies. New 
York: Multilingual Matters Ltd. 
Kusfajarini, R. 2013. An Analysis of Students‟ Ability on Applying Transposition 
and Modulation Procedure in Translation: (The Study of the Sixth 
Semester Students of English Department in STAIN Salatiga 2012/2013). 
Undergraduate Thesis. Salatiga: State Institute for Islamic Studies. 
Machali, R. 2000. Pedoman Bagi Penerjemah. Jakarta: Grasindo. 
Moleong, L. J. 2010. Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif. Bandung: PT. Remaja 
Rosdakarya. 
Munday, J. 2001. Introducing Translation Studies–Theories and Applications. 
London: Routledge. 
Newmark, P. 1981. Approaches to Translation. Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
_____. 1988. A Textbook of Translation. London: Prentice Hall International. 
Nida & Taber. 1982. The Theory and Practice of Translation. Leiden: Brill 
Nida, E. A. 1964. Towards a Science of Translation, with Special Reference to 
Principles and Procedures Involved in Bible Translating. Leiden: Brill. 
Patton, M. Q. 1990. Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods. Beverly Hills, 
CA: Sage. 
Pradana, Y. W. 2013. Domestication and Foreignization Ideologies in the 
Translations of Culture-Spesific Collocations of Fuadi‟s “Negeri 5 
Menara” into Kilbane‟s “The Land Of Five Towers”. Undergraduate 
Thesis. Yogyakarta: Yogyakarta State University. 
Rask, N. 2008. Analysis of a Medical Translation: Terminology and Cultural 
Aspect. Pro Gradu Thesis. Växjö: Växjö University. 
Venuti, L. 1998. The Scandals of Translation: Towards an Ethics of üifference, 
London: Routledge. 
_____. 2000. The Translation Studies Reader (2nd Ed). Toronto: TJ Interna Ltd, 
Padstow, Cornwall. 
Wibisono, S. 2014. Wordplay in Shrek Movies and Its Bahasa Indonesia Subtitle 
Text. Undergraduate Thesis. Yogyakarta: Yogyakarta State University. 
 
 

107 
 
 
 
B. Electronic Sources 
Hosseinnia, M. 2014. “Omission as a Strategy in Subtitling”. Translation Journal. 
http://translationjournal.net/October-2014/omission-as-a-strategy-in-
subtitling.html. Retrieved on March 20, 2015. 
Fadaee, E. 2011. “Translation Naturalness in Literary Works : English to Persian”. 
Internal Journal of English and Literature Vol. 2(9), pp. 200-205. 
http://www.academicjournals.org/article/article1379429037_Fadaee.pdf. 
Retrieved on March 20, 2015. 
Koolstra, C. M. et al. 2002. “The Pros and Cons of Dubbing and Subtitling.” 
European 
Journal 
of 
Communication 
Vol. 
17 
Page 
325-354. 
http://academic.csuohio.edu/kneuendorf/frames/subtitling/Koolstra.etal.20
02.pdf. Retrieved on March 20, 2015. 
Molina & Albir. 2002. "Translation Techniques Revisited: A Dynamic and 
Functionalist Approach". Meta: Translators' Journal, vol. 47, n° 4, 2002, 
p. 498-512. http://id.erudit.org/iderudit/008033ar. Retrieved on March 20, 
2015. 
Spanakaki, K. 2007. “Translating Humor for Subtitling”. Translation Journal. 
http://www.bokorlang.com/journal/40humor.htm/. Retrieved on March 20, 
2015. 
Taylor, C. and Gibbs, G. R. 2010. "How and what to code". Online QDA Web 
Site. 
http://onlineqda.hud.ac.uk/Intro_QDA/how_what_to_code.php. 
Retrieved on March 30, 2015. 
Williams, M. 2001. “The Application of Argumentation Theory to Translation 
Quality Assessment”. Meta: Translators' Journal Vol. 46 No. 2. 
http://id.erudit.org/iderudit/004605ar. Retrieved on March 20, 2015. 
_____. 2009. “Translation Quality Assessment”. Journal in Mutatis Mutandis Vol 
2,No 1 page 3-23. 
http://aprendeenlinea.udea.edu.co/revistas/index.php/mutatismutandis/artic
le/viewFile. Retrieved on March 20, 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
108 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
 

 
 
109 
 
Appendix 1. Data Analysis 
 
List of Abbreviations 
In terms of the types of medical terms: 
In terms of the translation technique: 
In terms of the clarity level: 
(CF)   
(Pr)     
(OE)   
(BS)    
(Or)     
(Su)     
(Sp)     
(PBP)  
(PO)    
(PF)    
(Ev)     
(EGL) 
(SC)     
(SEC)   
(St)      
(LCo)   
(QV)    
(RA)    
(SpC)   
Clinical Finding 
Procedure 
Observable Entity 
Body Structure 
Organism 
Substance 
Specimen 
Pharmaceutical/Biologic Product 
Physical Object 
Physical Force 
Events 
Environment/Geographical Location 
Social Context 
Situation with Explicit Context 
Staging and Scales 
Linkage Concept 
Qualifier Value 
Record Artifact 
Special Context 
(Adp)   
(Amp)  
(Bor)    
(Cal)    
(Com)  
(Des)    
(Dis)    
(Est)     
(Gen)   
(LiA)   
(LiC)    
(Lit)      
(Mod)   
(Par)     
(Red)    
(Sub)    
(Tra)    
(Var)    
 
Adaptation 
Amplification 
Borrowing 
Calque 
Compensation 
Description 
Discursive Creation 
Established Equivalent 
Generalization 
Linguistic Amplification 
Linguistic Compression 
Literal Translation 
Modulation 
Particularization 
Reduction 
Substitution 
Transposition 
Variation 
(C)     
(AV) 
(LC)   
(UC)  
 
 
Clear 
Average 
Less Clear 
Unclear 
 

 
 
110 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
001/Pr/Gen/C 
Anna: ...most babies are products of 
drunken evening and lack of birth 
control. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: ...kebanyakan bayi adalah 
produk malam mereka mabuk dan 
kurangnya program KB. 
002/Ev/Amp/
LC 
Anna: They are accidents. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
    
Anna: Mereka produk kecelakaan. 
003/CF/Par/C 
Anna: Only people who have 
trouble making babies actually 
plan for them. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Hanya yang punya masalah 
hamil yang merencanakan anak. 
004/Pr/Tra/C 
Anna: I was engineered. 
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Aku produk rekayasa. 
005/Pr/Lit/C 
Anna: Born for a particular reason. 
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Dilahirkan atas suatu sebab. 
006/SC/Est/C 
Anna: A scientist hooked up my 
mother's eggs and my father's sperm 
to make a specific combination of 
genes. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Seorang ilmuwan 
memeprtemukan sel telur ibuku dan 
sperma ayahku untuk membuat 
sebuah kombinasi gen tertentu. 
007/BS/Est/C 
Anna: A scientist hooked up my 
mother's eggs and my father's sperm 
to make a specific combination of 
genes. 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  

 
 
111 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
Anna: Seorang ilmuwan 
memepertemukan sel telur ibuku 
dan sperma ayahku untuk membuat 
sebuah kombinasi gen tertentu. 
008/BS/Bor/
C 
Anna: A scientist hooked up my 
mother's eggs and my father's 
sperm to make a specific 
combination of genes. 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Seorang ilmuwan 
memeprtemukan sel telur ibuku dan 
sperma ayahku untuk membuat 
sebuah kombinasi gen tertentu. 
009/Su/Cal/C 
Anna: A scientist hooked up my 
mother's eggs and my father's sperm 
to make a specific combination of 
genes. 
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Seorang ilmuwan 
memeprtemukan sel telur ibuku dan 
sperma ayahku untuk membuat 
sebuah kombinasi gen tertentu. 
010/CF/Amp/
C 
Anna: Sometimes I wonder what 
would have happened if Kate had 
been healthy. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Kadang aku berpikir apa 
yang terjadi jika Kate anak yang 
sehat. 
011/CF/Est/C 
Anna: That's my sister, Kate. She's 
dying. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Itu kakakku, Kate. Dia 
sekarat. 
  
  
  
  

 
 
112 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
012/Pr/Bor/C 
Anna: Everything steamed, organic 
and germ-free.  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Semua makanan dikukus, 
organik dan bebas kuman. 
013/Pr/Cal/C 
Anna: Everything steamed, organic 
and germ-free.  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Semua makanan dikukus, 
organik dan bebas kuman. 
014/CF/Bor/
C 
Kate: No. I'm a Leo… but I have 
cancer. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Kate: Bukan, aku Leo… tapi aku 
mengidap kanker. 
015/CF/Adp/
C 
Brian: I don't know when it started 
but probably around 11, it was 103. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Brian: Aku tak tahu kapan, tapi 
mungkin sekitar pukul 11.00, 
suhunya sekitar 39,4. 
016/CF/Est/C 
Sara: Your sister's sick. 
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Sara: Kakakmu sakit.  
017/CF/Est/C 
Sara: She's been up all night with a 
fever.  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Sara: Ia tak bisa tidur semalaman 
karena demam. 
018/PO/Cal/L
C 
Champbell: I have an iron lung and 
Judge help me steer clear of 
magnets.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
    
Champbell: Aku punya paru-paru 
besi dan Judge membantuku 
menjauhi magnet. 

 
 
113 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
019/CF/Bor/
C 
Anna: My sister has a leukemia. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Kakakku mengidap 
leukemia. 
020/BS/Par/C 
Anna: They're trying to force me to 
give my body part. 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Mereka memaksa 
memberikan organku padanya. 
021/CF/Cal/C 
Anna: She's been in a renal failure 
for months now. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Ia mengalami gagal ginjal 
sudah beberapa bulan ini. 
022/Pr/Tra/C 
Campbell: No one can force you to 
donate if you don't want to, can 
they? 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
√
  
  
  
  
Campbell: Tak ada yang bisa 
memaksamu jadi donor kalau kau 
tak mau, bukan? 
023/Pr/Cal/L
C 
Anna: I'm a designer baby. 
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
Anna: Aku bayi rancangan. 
024/PO/Par/L
C 
Anna: I was made in a dish to be 
spare parts of Kate. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
    
Anna: Aku dirancang di sebuah 
tabung reaksi untuk jadi suku 
cadang bagi Kate. 
025/Sp/Par/C 
Campbell: The doctors started 
taking things from the moment she 
was born. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Campbell: Dokter mulai mengambil 
berbagai sampel semenjak ia 

 
 
114 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
dilahirkan. 
026/BS/Est/C 
Campbell: Cord blood as an 
infant, white-cells transfusion, bone 
marrow, ly mphocytes, injections to 
add more stem cells, and then they 
took them too.  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Campbell: Darah tali pusarnya 
saat bayi, transfusi darah putih, 
sumsum tulang belakang, limposit, 
berbagai suntikan menambah sel 
stem, dan pengangkatannya juga. 
 
027/Pr/Cal/C 
Campbell: Cord blood as an infant, 
white-cells transfusion, bone 
marrow, ly mphocytes, injections to 
add more stem cells, and then they 
took them too.  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Campbell: Darah tali pusarnya saat 
bayi, transfusi darah putih, 
sumsum tulang belakang, limposit, 
berbagai suntikan menambah sel 
stem, dan pengangkatannya juga. 
028/BS/Par/C 
Campbell: Cord blood as an infant, 
white-cells transfusion, bone 
marrow, lymphocytes, injections to 
add more stem cells, and then they 
took them too.  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  

 
 
115 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
Campbell: Darah tali pusarnya saat 
bayi, transfusi darah putih, sumsum 
tulang belakang, limposit, berbagai 
suntikan menambah sel stem, dan 
pengangkatannya juga. 
029/BS/Bor/
UC 
Campbell: Cord blood as an infant, 
white-cells transfusion, bone 
marrow, lymphocytes, injections to 
add more stem cells, and then they 
took them too.  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
Campbell: Darah tali pusarnya saat 
bayi, transfusi darah putih, sumsum 
tulang belakang, limposit, berbagai 
suntikan menambah sel stem, dan 
pengangkatannya juga. 
030/Pr/Red/L
C 
Campbell: Cord blood as an infant, 
white-cells transfusion, bone 
marrow, lymphocytes, injections to 
add more stem cells, and then they 
took them too.  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
√
    
Campbell: Darah tali pusarnya saat 
bayi, transfusi darah putih, sumsum 
tulang belakang, limposit, berbagai 
suntikan menambah sel stem, dan 
pengangkatannya juga. 
031/CF/Lit/C 
Anna: Yeah, she'll die. 
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Anna: Ya, dia akan mati. 
032/CF/Bor/
C 
Sara: Anemia, right? 
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Sara: Anemia 'kan? 

 
 
116 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
033/CF/Bor/
UC 
Sara: Kids her age don't get mono, 
do they? 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
Sara: Seusia itu mustahil terserang 
mono. 
034/Or/Bor/C 
Dr. Mark: Could be a virus. 
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Dr. Mark: Mungkin serangan virus. 
035/Pr/Bor/C 
Dr. Mark: I'll have to draw some 
bloods and run a few test. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Dr. Mark: Aku harus mengambil 
darahnya dan melakukan beberapa 
tes. 
036/Pr/Est/C 
Dr. Mark: Kate's white cells count 
is much lower than normal. 
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Dr. Mark: Jumlah sel darah putih 
Kate jauh di bawah normal. 
037/CF/Cal/U
C 
Dr. Mark: She may have an 
autoimmune deficiency. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
Dr. Mark: Mungkin dia mengalami 
defisiensi otoimun. 
038/RA/Des/
C 
Dr. Mark: Could just be a lab 
error. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  
Dr. Mark: Mungkin juga hasil 
labnya salah. 
039/SC/Par/L
C 
Sara: Oncology? But that's cancer. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
    
Sara: Dokter onkologi? Tapi itu 
bidang kanker. 
040/Pr/Bor/U
C 
Dr. Ileana: So I took a look at 
Kate's CBC. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
Dr. Ileana: Aku sudah menerima 

 
 
117 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
CBC Kate. 
041/CF/Bor/
UC 
Dr. Ileana: Her white blood count is 
very low. She's also presenting with 
12% promyelocytes and 5% blast 
which does indicate a leukemic 
syndrome.  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
Dr. Ileana: Jumlah sel darah 
putihnya sangat rendah. Darahnya 
juga mengandung 12% 
promylocytes dan 5% sel blast 
yang mengindikasikan sindroma 
leukemia. 
042/CF/Amp/
UC 
Dr. Ileana: Her white blood count is 
very low. She's also presenting with 
12% promyelocytes and 5% blast 
which does indicate a leukemic 
syndrome.  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
Dr. Ileana: Jumlah sel darah 
putihnya sangat rendah. Darahnya 
juga mengandung 12% 
promylocytes dan 5% sel blast 
yang mengindikasikan sindroma 
leukemia. 
043/CF/Cal/L
C 
Dr. Ileana: Her white blood count is 
very low. She's also presenting with 
12% promyelocytes and 5% blast 
which does indicate a leukemic 
syndrome.  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
    

 
 
118 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
Dr. Ileana: Jumlah sel darah 
putihnya sangat rendah. Darahnya 
juga mengandung 12% 
promylocytes dan 5% sel blast yang 
mengindikasikan sindroma 
leukemia. 
044/Pr/Red/L
C 
Dr. Ileana: I'll need a bone marrow 
aspiration to confirm, but it seems 
that Kate could have what is called 
acute promyelocytic leukemia. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
√
    
Dr. Ileana: Aku butuh aspirasi 
tulang belakang untuk 
memastikannya tapi tampaknya 
Kate mengidap kanker leukemia 
promyelositis akut.  
045/CF/Amp/
LC 
Dr. Ileana: I'll need a bone marrow 
aspiration to confirm, but it seems 
that Kate could have what is called 
acute promyelocytic leukemia. 
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
    
Dr. Ileana: Aku butuh aspirasi 
tulang belakang untuk 
memastikannya tapi tampaknya 
Kate mengidap kanker leukemia 
promyelositis akut.  
046/CF/Tra/C 
Aunt Kelly: We heard her 
coughing, but she wouldn't open the 
door. Your mom kicked it in. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
√ 
  
  
  
Bibi Kelly: Kami dengar ia batuk, 
tapi tak mau buka pintu, ibumu 
harus mendobrak. 

 
 
119 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
047/BS/Bor/
UC 
Sara: We need to get platelet and 
fluids into her right away. 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
Sara: Kita harus memberikan 
platelet atau cairan padanya. 
048/Su/Est/C 
Sara: We need to get platelet and 
fluids into her right away. 
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Sara: Kita harus memberikan 
platelet atau cairan padanya. 
049/CF/Adp/
C 
Sara: Fifteen, she's about 90 
pounds, she's allergic to penicillin. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Sara: Lima belas, beratnya 40,8 kg 
dan ia alergi pada penisilin. 
050/CF/Bor/
C 
Sara: Fifteen, she's about 90 pounds, 
she's allergic to penicillin. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Sara: Lima belas, beratnya 40,8 kg 
dan ia alergi pada penisilin. 
051/PBP/Bor/
UC 
Sara: Fifteen, she's about 90 pounds, 
she's allergic to penicillin. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
Sara: Lima belas, beratnya 40,8 kg 
dan ia alergi pada penisilin. 
052/CF/Red/
LC 
Paramedic: BP is 100 over 68. 
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
√   
Paramedis: Seratus per 68. 
053/BS/Par/C 
Dr. Chance: We've looked at her 
smear, and her leucemic cell 
showing at 23%. 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr. Chance: Kami sudah memeriksa 
darahnya dan jumlah sel 
leukemianya 23%. 

 
 
120 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
054/CF/Red/
C 
Dr. Chance: We've looked at her 
smear, and her leucemic cell 
showing at 23%. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr. Chance: Kami sudah memeriksa 
darahnya dan jumlah sel 
leukemianya 23%. 
055/Pr/Bor/C 
Uncle Tommy: What about chemo? 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Paman Tommy: Bagaimana dengan 
kemoterapi? 
056/BS/Par/C 
Sara: So you need more bone 
marrow? 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Sara: Jadi kau perlu sel tulang 
belakang lagi? 
057/CF/Est/C 
Dr. Chance: Yes, but leukemia isn't 
Kate's biggest problem now. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr. Chance: Ya, tapi leukemia 
bukan masalah terbesar Kate saat 
ini.  
058/CF/Lit/C 
Dr. Chance: She lost the function 
of her kidney. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr. Chance: Ia sudah kehilangan 
fungsi ginjalnya. 
059/CF/Lit/C 
Sara: Not a match? 
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Sara: Tidak cocok? 
060/BS/Lit/L
C 
Dr. Chance: Everyone inherits two 
sets of chromosomes containing 
HLA genes.  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   

 
 
121 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
Dr. Chance: Semua mewarisi dua 
pasang kromosom yang 
mengandung gen HLA. 
061/Su/Cal/U
C 
Dr. Chance: Everyone inherits two 
sets of chromosomes containing 
HLA genes.  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
Dr. Chance: Semua mewarisi dua 
pasang kromosom yang 
mengandung gen HLA. 
062/CF/Tra/U
C 
Dr. Chance: Unfortunately, there's 
only 1 and 200 chances that parents 
and their children will be perfect to 
compatible HLA matches. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
√ 
Dr. Chance: Sayangnya, hanya ada 
1 dari 200 peluang orang tua dan 
anaknya memiliki 
histokompabilitas HLA yang 
sama. 
063/SC/Red/
C 
Dr. Chance: It's possible that donor 
marrow will crop up on the 
national bone marrow registry. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr. Chance: Ada kemungkinan 
donor bisa diambil dari daftar 
tulang sumsum nasional. 
064SC/Cal/L
C 
Dr. Chance: It's possible that donor 
marrow will crop up on the 
national bone marrow registry. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
Dr. Chance: Ada kemungkinan 
donor bisa diambil dari daftar 
tulang sumsum nasional. 

 
 
122 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
065/PO/Est/C 
Brian: I thought you said that 
getting transplant from an 
unrelated donor is dangerous.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Brian: Tadi bukan kau bilang bahwa 
cangkok dari donor asing akan 
berbahaya? 
066/SC/Gen/
LC 
Brian: I thought you said that 
getting transplant from an 
unrelated donor is dangerous.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
Brian: Tadi bukan kau bilang bahwa 
cangkok dari donor asing akan 
berbahaya? 
067/BS/Est/C 
Dr. Chance: Not to be forward but, 
umbilical blood can be incredibely 
effective tool in treating leukemic 
patient. 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr. Chance: Aku tak bermaksud 
menyinggung tapi darah tali pusar 
sangat efektif mengobati pasien 
leukemia. 
068/Pr/Est/C 
Dr. Chance: Not to be forward but, 
umbilical blood can be incredibely 
effective tool in treating leukemic 
patient. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr. Chance: Aku tak bermaksud 
menyinggung tapi darah tali pusar 
sangat efektif mengobati pasien 
leukemia. 

 
 
123 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
069/SC/Cal/C 
Dr. Chance: Not to be forward but, 
umbilical blood can be incredibely 
effective tool in treating leukemic 
patient. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr. Chance: Aku tak bermaksud 
menyinggung tapi darah tali pusar 
sangat efektif mengobati pasien 
leukemia. 
070/PO/Mod/
C 
Brian: In a test tube? 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Brian: Dengan bayi tabung? 
071/Pr/Red/U
C 
Dr. Chance: Yes. With pre 
implantation genetic diagnostic it 
woulb be a 100 percent match. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
Dr. Chance: Ya, dengan diagnosa 
pra implantasi, akan cocok 100 
persen. 
072/SC/Lit/L
C 
Brian: A donor child? 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
Brian: Donor anak? 
073/PO/Gen/
C 
Jesse: That was it. Grown in a dish 
they would have an in vitro child. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Jesse: Begitulah. Ditumbuhkan di 
tabung reaksi, mereka mendapatkan 
bayi tabung. 
074/BS/Cal/L
C 
Jesse: A perfect chromosomal 
match who would be Kate's genetic 
saviour. 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
Jesse: Kromosom yang sama 
persis akan menjadi penyelamat 
gen Kate. 

 
 
124 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
075/SC/Cal/C 
Jesse: A perfect chromosomal 
match who would be Kate's genetic 
saviour. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Jesse: Kromosom yang sama persis 
akan menjadi penyelamat gen 
Kate. 
076/Pr/Cal/U
C 
Sara: "Petition for medical 
emancipation by.." 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
Sara: "Petisi emansipasi medis 
oleh…" 
077/Pr/Bor/C 
Anna: Forget about the fact that the 
operation is dangerous, or that it 
would hurt, or I might just not want 
to have something cut out of me. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Anna: Alasannya bukan operasi itu 
berbahaya, atau akan menyakitiku, 
atau aku tak mau organku diambil. 
078/Pr/Des/C 
Campbell: Eight hospitalizations in 
11 years, six catheterizations, two 
bone marrow aspiration, two stem-
cell purges. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Campbell: Delapan kali dirawat di 
rumah sakit dalam 11 tahun, enam 
kali mengalami kateterisasi, 2 
aspirasi sumsum tulang, dua kali 
pembersihan sel stem. 
079/Pr/Bor/U
C 
Campbell: Eight hospitalizations in 
11 years, six catheterizations, two 
bone marrow aspiration, two stem-
cell purges. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 

 
 
125 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
Campbell: Delapan kali dirawat di 
rumah sakit dalam 11 tahun, enam 
kali mengalami kateterisasi, 2 
aspirasi sumsum tulang, dua kali 
pembersihan sel stem. 
080/Pr/Cal/L
C 
Campbell: Eight hospitalizations in 
11 years, six catheterizations, two 
bone marrow aspiration, two stem-
cell purges. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
Campbell: Delapan kali dirawat di 
rumah sakit dalam 11 tahun, enam 
kali mengalami kateterisasi, 2 
aspirasi sumsum tulang, dua kali 
pembersihan sel stem. 
081/CF/Cal/C 
Campbell: Not to mention the side 
effects including bleeding, 
infection, bruising. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Campbell: Belum lagi efek 
sampingnya, termasuk pendarahan, 
infeksi, lebam. 
082/CF/Est/C 
Campbell: Not to mention the side 
effects including bleeding, 
infection, bruising. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Campbell: Belum lagi efek 
sampingnya, termasuk 
pendarahan, infeksi, lebam. 
083/CF/Bor/
C 
Campbell: Not to mention the side 
effects including bleeding, 
infection, bruising. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  

 
 
126 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
Campbell: Belum lagi efek 
sampingnya, termasuk pendarahan, 
infeksi, lebam. 
084/CF/Est/C 
Campbell: Not to mention the side 
effects including bleeding, 
infection, bruising. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Campbell: Belum lagi efek 
sampingnya, termasuk pendarahan, 
infeksi, lebam. 
085/PBP/Cal/
LC 
Campbell: Filgrastim shot. Those 
are growth hormones, am I correct? 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
Campbell: Suntikan filgrastim. Itu 
hormon pertumbuhan, bukan?  
086/Su/Cal/L
C 
Campbell: Filgrastim shot. Those 
are growth hormones, am I 
correct? 
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
Campbell: Suntikan filgrastim. Itu 
hormon pertumbuhan, bukan?  
087/PBP/Red
/C 
Campbell: Drugs for nausea, 
opiates for pain, ambien for sleep. 
Not exactly proper medication for a 
preteen. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Campbell: Obat mual, pereda sakit, 
ambien untuk tidur. Bukan jenis 
tepat bagi anak di bawah usia puber. 
088/PBP/Gen
/C 
Campbell: Drugs for nausea, 
opiates for pain, ambien for sleep. 
Not exactly proper medication for a 
preteen. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√
  
  
  
  

 
 
127 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
Campbell: Obat mual, pereda sakit, 
ambien untuk tidur. Bukan jenis 
tepat bagi anak di bawah usia puber. 
089/PBP/Lit/
LC 
Campbell: Drugs for nausea, opiates 
for pain, ambien for sleep. Not 
exactly proper medication for a 
preteen. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
Campbell: Obat mual, pereda sakit, 
ambien untuk tidur. Bukan jenis 
tepat bagi anak di bawah usia puber. 
090/Pr/Red/C 
Campbell: Drugs for nausea, opiates 
for pain, ambien for sleep. Not 
exactly proper medication for a 
preteen. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Campbell: Obat mual, pereda sakit, 
ambien untuk tidur. Bukan jenis 
tepat bagi anak di bawah usia puber. 
091/CF/Bor/L
C 
Sara: Every procedure had its risks 
and complications. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
Sara: Setiap prosedur ada resiko dan 
komplikasinya. 
092/CF/Est/C 
Sara: You're reactively depressed. 
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Sara: Kau hanya tertekan. 
093/PBP/Des/
C 
Sara: And I'm not gonna feed you 
any antidepressants because 
they're gonna just making you more 
numb then you are. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Sara: Aku tak akan memberimu 
obat anti depresi karena hanya 
akan membuatmu makin mati rasa. 

 
 
128 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
094/CF/Est/C 
Sara: And I'm not gonna feed you 
any antidepressants because they're 
gonna just making you more numb 
then you are. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Aku tak akan memberimu obat anti 
depresi karena hanya akan 
membuatmu makin mati rasa. 
095/SC/Mod/
UC 
Kate: While everyone was so worry 
about my blood counts, they barely 
even noticed that Jesse was 
dyslexic. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
Kate: Sementara semua orang 
mencemaskan jumlah sel darah 
putihku, mereka tak menyadari 
bahwa Jesse menderita disleksia. 
096/CF/Cal/C 
Campbell: Judge De Salvo had a 
very public nervous breakdown 
after her 12-yer-old daughter was 
killed by a drunk driver. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Campbell: Hakim De Salvo 
mengalami gangguan jiwa yang 
diketahui umum, setelah putrinya, 
12 tahun, tewas tertabrak 
pengemudi mabuk. 
097/SC/Cal/C 
Campbell: Judge De Salvo had a 
very public nervous breakdown 
after her 12-yer-old daughter was 
killed by a drunk driver. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  

 
 
129 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
Campbell: Hakim De Salvo 
mengalami gangguan jiwa yang 
diketahui umum, setelah putrinya, 
12 tahun, tewas tertabrak 
pengemudi mabuk. 
098/Sp/Cal/C 
Nurse: I need the urine sample. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Perawat: Aku perlu sampel urin. 
099/OE/Lit/C 
Dr. Chance: Allright, Kate. 1 to 10, 
how is your pain? 
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr. Chance: Baiklah. Satu sampai 
10, bagaimana rasa sakitmu? 
100/CF/Cal/C 
Dr. Chance: Kate's in system 
failure now. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr. Chance: Kate mengalami 
kegagalan sistem.  
101/CF/Lit/C 
Dr. Chance: Body defenses are at 
zero. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr. Chance: Kekebalan tubuhnya 
nol. 
102/Pr/Gen/L
C 
Dr. Chance: The fever Kate's been 
getting, it's infection from the 
dialysis. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
Dr. Chance: Deman yang dialami 
Kate adalah infeksi dari cuci 
darahnya. 
103/SC/Par/L
C 
Dr. Chance: Sara, this is Miss 
Swearingen our home health aide. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
Dr: Chance: Sara, ini Nn. 
Swearingen, penasihat perawat di 
rumah. 

 
 
130 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
104/EGL/Mo
d/C 
Sara: No hospices. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Sara: Aku tak perlu berobat jalan.  
105/CF/Bor/
UC 
Taylor: I'm Taylor. AML. 
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
Taylor: Aku Taylor. AML. 
106/CF/Bor/
UC 
Kate: Kate. APL. 
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
Kate: Kate. APL. 
107/Pr/Des/C 
Taylor: You're in remission? 
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Taylor: Kau sudah boleh pulang? 
108/Pr/Bor/L
C 
Sara: The radiation, which 
ultimately put Kate into remission, 
worked its magic by wearing her 
down. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
Sara: Radiasinya, yang akhirnya 
membuat Kate diijinkan pulang, 
bekerja dengan baik dengan 
membuatnya lemah. 
109/PBP/Est/
C 
Taylor Ambrose, a drug of an 
entirely different sort, worked his 
magic by building her up. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Taylor Ambrose, obat dengan jenis 
yang sangat berbeda, bekerja 
dengan baik dengan membangun 
kepercayaan dirinya. 
110/PBP/Bor/
UC 
Kate: I can taste your Cytoxan. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
Kate: Aku bisa merasakan Cytoxan-
mu. 
111/CF/Est/C 
Kate: Besides, they told me 
yesterday I'm relapsing. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Kate: Lagipula, mereka bilang 

 
 
131 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
kemarin aku kambuh. 
112/OE/Bor/
C 
Kate: Maybe it 'll save me a dose. 
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Kate: Mungkin obat itu bisa 
mengurangi dosisku. 
113/CF/Est/C 
Kate: He has scars on hhis hands 
from graft-versus-host. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Kate: Ia punya bekas luka di 
tangannya dari penyakit graft-
versus-host. 
114/CF/Bor/
UC 
Kate: He has scars on his hands 
from graft-versus-host. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
Kate: Ia punya bekas luka di 
tangannya dari penyakit graft-
versus-host. 
115/Pr/Lit/C 
Dr. Chance: She was dialyzed 
yesterday and she has no schedule 
treatments until Friday. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr.Chance: Dia cuci darah kemarin 
dan tak ada jadwal berobat sampai 
Jumat nanti. 
116/SC/Cal/C 
Dr. Chance: The insurance 
company will definitely not 
approve this, so we'lI have to re-
admit through emergency. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr. Chance: Perusahaan asuransi 
tak akan menyetujuinya jadi kita 
harus memasukkannya kembali 
lewat UGD. 

 
 
132 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
117/EGL/Ad
p/C 
Dr. Chance: The insurance company 
will definitely not approve this, so 
we'll have to re-admit through 
emergency. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Dr. Chance: Perusahaan asuransi tak 
akan menyetujuinya jadi kita harus 
memasukkannya kembali lewat 
UGD. 
118/CF/Cal/C 
Anna: They talked about the 
psychologicaI benefits of donation 
and how losing my kidney would 
affect the quallty of my life. 
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Anna: Mereka membicarakan 
keuntungan psikologis dari donasi 
dan pengaruh kehilangan ginjalku 
pada mutu hidupku. 
119/BS/Bor/
UC 
Sara: She donated granulocytes. 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
Sara: Ia mendonorkan 
granulositnya. 
120/Pr/Lit/C 
Sara: They put needles into Anna's 
hips. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Sara: Mereka menyuntik pinggul 
Anna. 
121/BS/Est/C 
Campbell: Into the bone? Big 
needles? 
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Campbell: Sampai ke tulang? 
Jarum besar? 
122/PO/Cal/C 
Campbell: Into the bone? Big 
needles? 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  

 
 
133 
 
Code 
Source Expressions 
(My Sister's Keeper Movie) 
Types of Medical Terms 
Translation Techniques 
Clarity 
Level 
Target Expressions 
(Indonesian Subtitle Text) 
CF 
Pr 
OE 
BS 
Or 
Su 
Sp 
PBP 
PO 
PF 
Ev 
EGL 
SC 
SE 
St 
LCo 
QV 
RA 
SpC 
Adp 
Amp 
Bor 
Cal 
Com 
Des 
Dis 
Est 
Gen 
LiA 
LiC 
Lit 
Mod 
Par 
Red 
Sub 
Tra 
Var 
C 
AV 
LC 
UC 
Campbell: Sampai ke tulang? 
Jarum besar? 
123/RA/Cal/
C 
Judge De Salvo : I don't see the 
point. Court's well aware of the 
family's medical history. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Hakim De Salvo: Aku tak mengerti. 
Sidang sudah tahu sejarah 
penyakit keluarganya. 
124/SC/Des/
C 
Anna: It wasn't for the notoriety. Ηe 
was an epileptic. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Anna: Bukan demi reputasinya, 
karena ia ternyata pengidap 
eplilepsi. 
125/EGL/Cal/
LC 
Radiology therapist to room 231. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
Ahli terapi radiologi ke Ruang 
231. 
126/EGL/Lit/
C 
Radiology therapist to room 231. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√   
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Ahli terapi radiologi ke Ruang 231. 
127/Pr/Bor/C 
Aunt: Look, I got you this book, 
okay? It's full of guided 
meditations, visualizations, healing 
stuff. 
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
√ 
  
  
  
Aunt: Dengar, aku belikan kau buku 
ini. Isinya penuh instruksi meditasi, 
visualisasi dan semua pengobatan. 
Total 
42 
28 
2 
14 
1 
4 
2 
8 
6 
0 
1 
3 
14 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
0 
3 
4 
27 
26 
0 
5 
0 
21 
5 
0 
0 
12 
3 
9 
8 
0 
4 
0 
84 
0 
24 
19 
 

 
 
134 
 
Appendix 2. Questionnaire Form and Data Tabulation 
 
KUESIONER UNTUK MENENTUKAN TINGKAT KEJELASAN (CLARITY) 
PADA TERJEMAHAN ISTILAH MEDIS DALAM FILM 
MY SISTER’S KEEPER 
 
Kuesioner ini digunakan sebagai instrumen pengumpulan data mengenai 
tingkat kejelasan terjemahan istilah medis pada penelitian berikut ini. 
Judul Penelitian 
: Medical Terms In My Sister‟s Keeper Movie And Their 
Translation In The Indonesian Subtitle Text  
Nama Peneliti 
:  Oktafiani Prima Sari 
Perguruan Tinggi 
:  Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta 
Jurusan/Prodi 
:  Pendidikan Bahasa Inggris/Bahasa dan Sastra Inggris 
NIM 
:  11211141029 
Pada kuesioner ini responden diminta untuk menentukan tingkat kejelasan 
terjemahan istilah medis (teks terlampir) sesuai dengan pemahaman masing-masing. 
Anda cukup memberi tanda (√) pada kolom “Tingkat Kejelasan” dengan pilihan: 
Jelas (C)/Cukup Jelas (AV)/Kurang Jelas (LC)/Tidak Jelas (UC). Adapun deskripsi 
dari tingkat kejelasan tersebut dijelaskan sebagai berikut. 
Tabel Pengukuran Tigkat Kejelasan 
Tingkat 
Kejelasan 
Deskripsi 
Jelas 
(C) 
Ungkapan sasaran jelas bagi audiens karena 
menggunakan istilah yang mudah dipahami. 
Cukup Jelas 
(AV) 
Ungkapan sasaran cukup mudah dipahami. Audiens 
menjumpai sedikit interpretasi namun dapat 
menyimpulkannya dengan benar. 
Kurang Jelas 
(LC) 
Ungkapan sasaran kurang dapat dipahami. Audiens 
menjumpai beragam interpretasi atas penggunaan istilah 
tersebut yang tidak mudah dipahami. 
Tidak Jelas 
(UC) 
Ungkapan sasaran sulit dipahami. Audiens perlu 
melakukan usaha (mencari sumber lain, misal. browsing 
internet) untuk menginterpretasikan dan memahami 
karena penggunaan istilah yang sulit dipahami atau tidak 
dikomunikasikan dengan baik. 
 
 

 
 
135 
 
Anda juga diminta untuk menuliskan alasan/komentar atas pemilihan tingkat 
kejelasan tersebut di kolom “Komentar”. Berikut ini adalah penjelasannya. 
Jelas 
 : Menjelaskan secara singkat definisi istilah medis. 
Cukup Jelas  : Menjelaskan secara singkat kesimpulan definisi istilah medis.  
Kurang Jelas : Menjelaskan secara singkat interpretasi yang Anda jumpai pada 
istilah medis dan membetulkan/menuliskan alternatif terjemahan 
yang menurut Anda lebih tepat. 
Tidak Jelas 
: Menjelaskan secara singkat kesulitan dalam memahami istilah 
medis. 
Semua informasi dalam kuesioner ini sangat penting bagi penelitian. 
Diharapkan responden dapat mengisi kuesioner ini dengan sungguh-sungguh dan 
teliti. Atas kesediaan dan kerjasama Anda, peneliti mengucapkan terima kasih.  
Identitas Responden 1 (R1) 
Nama  
:  Dio Rizky Wuryanto 
Usia 
 
:  24 Tahun 
Pekerjaan 
: Mahasiswa Program Studi Bahasa dan Sastra Inggris Universitas 
Negeri Yogyakarta 
Alamat  
:  Perumahan Griya Ananda A3/ Jl. Imogiri Barat Km. 5 
No. Telp/HP :  087838671023 
Identitas Responden 2 (R2) 
Nama  
:  Herlambang Fadlan Sejati 
Usia 
 
:  22 tahun  
Pekerjaan 
:  Mahasiswa Jurusan Ilmu Hukum Universitas Gadjah Mada 
Alamat 
: Blimbingsari CT IV Blok D No. 41 RT 04 RW 016, Caturtunggal, 
Depok, Sleman 
No. Telp/HP :  085729363468 
Identitas Responden 3 (R3) 
Nama  
:  Yulia Dwi Marwidita 
Usia 
 
:  19 Tahun 
Pekerjaan 
: Mahasiswa Jurusan Bimbingan Konseling Universitas Ahmad 
Dahlan 
Alamat  
:  Perumahan Nogotirto 3 Jl.Jawa B.20 
No. Telp/HP :  083840705274 

 
 
136 
 
No 
Ungkapan Sumber             
(Film My Sister's Keeper) 
Ungkapan Sasaran            
(Teks Subtitle Bahasa 
Indonesia) 
R1 
R2 
R3 
Result 
1 
Anna: ...most babies are 
products of drunken evening and 
lack of birth control. 
Anna: ...kebanyakan bayi adalah 
produk malam mereka mabuk 
dan kurangnya program KB. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
2 
Anna: They are accidents. 
Anna: Mereka produk 
kecelakaan. 
LC 
AV 
LC 
LC 
3 
Anna: Only people who have 
trouble making babies actually 
plan for them. 
Anna: Hanya yang punya 
masalah hamil yang 
merencanakan anak. 
C 
AV 
C 
C 
4 
Anna: I was engineered. 
Anna: Aku produk rekayasa. 
C 
C 
AV 
C 
5 
Anna: Born for a particular 
reason. 
Anna: Dilahirkan atas suatu 
sebab. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
6 
Anna: A scientist hooked up my 
mother's eggs and my father's 
sperm to make a spesific 
combination of genes. 
Anna: Seorang ilmuwan 
memeprtemukan sel telur ibuku 
dan sperma ayahku untuk 
membuat sebuah kombinasi gen 
tertentu. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
7 
Anna: A scientist hooked up my 
mother's eggs and my father's 
sperm to make a spesific 
combination of genes. 
Anna: Seorang ilmuwan 
memepertemukan sel telur 
ibuku dan sperma ayahku untuk 
membuat sebuah kombinasi gen 
tertentu. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
8 
Anna: A scientist hooked up my 
mother's eggs and my father's 
sperm to make a spesific 
combination of genes. 
Anna: Seorang ilmuwan 
memeprtemukan sel telur ibuku 
dan sperma ayahku untuk 
membuat sebuah kombinasi gen 
tertentu. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
9 
Anna: A scientist hooked up my 
mother's eggs and my father's 
sperm to make a spesific 
combination of genes. 
Anna: Seorang ilmuwan 
memeprtemukan sel telur ibuku 
dan sperma ayahku untuk 
membuat sebuah kombinasi 
gen tertentu. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
10 
Anna: Sometimes I wonder what 
would have happened if Kate 
had been healthy. 
Anna: Kadang aku berpikir apa 
yang terjadi jika Kate anak 
yang sehat. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
11 
Anna: That's my sister, Kate. 
She's dying. 
Anna: Itu kakakku, Kate. Dia 
sekarat. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
12 
Anna: Everything steamed, 
organic and germ-free.  
Anna: Semua makanan dikukus, 
organik dan bebas kuman. 
C 
AV 
C 
C 
13 
Anna: Everything steamed, 
organic and germ-free.  
Anna: Semua makanan dikukus, 
organik dan bebas kuman. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
14 
Kate: No. I'm a Leo… but I have 
cancer. 
Kate: Bukan, aku Leo… tapi aku 
mengidap kanker. 
C 
AV 
C 
C 
15 
Brian: I don't know when it 
started but probably around 11, 
it was 103. 
Brian: Aku tak tahu kapan, tapi 
mungkin sekitar pukul 11.00, 
suhunya sekitar 39,4. 
AV 
C 
C 
C 
16 
Sara: Your sister's sick.  
Sara: Kakakmu sakit.  
C 
C 
C 
C 
17 
Sara: She's been up all night 
with a fever.  
Ia tak bisa tidur semalaman 
karena demam. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
18 
Champbell: I have an iron lung 
and Judge help me steer clear of 
magnets.  
Champbell: Aku punya paru-
paru besi dan Judge 
membantuku menjauhi magnet. 
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 
19 
Anna: My sister has a leukemia. 
Anna: Kakakku mengidap 
leukemia. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
20 
Anna: They're trying to force me 
to give my body part. 
Anna: Mereka memaksa 
memberikan organku padanya. 
C 
C 
C 
C 

 
 
137 
 
No 
Ungkapan Sumber             
(Film My Sister's Keeper) 
Ungkapan Sasaran            
(Teks Subtitle Bahasa 
Indonesia) 
R1 
R2 
R3 
Result 
21 
Anna: She's been in a renal 
failure for months now. 
Anna: Ia mengalami gagal 
ginjal sudah beberapa bulan ini. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
22 
Campbell: No one can force you 
to donate if you don't want to, 
can they? 
Campbell: Tak ada yang bisa 
memaksamu jadi donor kalau 
kau tak mau, bukan? 
C 
C 
C 
C 
23 
Anna: I'm a designer baby. 
Anna: Aku bayi rancangan. 
LC 
C 
LC 
LC 
24 
Anna: I was made in a dish to 
be spare parts of Kate. 
Anna: Aku dirancang di sebuah 
tabung reaksi untuk jadi suku 
cadang bagi Kate. 
LC 
C 
LC 
LC 
25 
Campbell: The doctors started 
taking things from the moment 
she was born. 
Campbell: Dokter mulai 
mengambil berbagai sampel 
semenjak ia dilahirkan. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
26 
Campbell: Cord blood as an 
infant, white-cells transfusion, 
bone marrow, ly mphocytes, 
injections to add more stem 
cells, and then they took them 
too.  
Campbell: Darah tali pusarnya 
saat bayi, transfusi darah putih, 
sumsum tulang belakang, 
limposit, berbagai suntikan 
menambah sel stem, dan 
pengangkatannya juga. 
AV 
C 
C 
C 
27 
Campbell: Cord blood as an 
infant, white-cells transfusion, 
bone marrow, ly mphocytes, 
injections to add more stem 
cells, and then they took them 
too.  
Campbell: Darah tali pusarnya 
saat bayi, transfusi darah 
putih, sumsum tulang belakang, 
limposit, berbagai suntikan 
menambah sel stem, dan 
pengangkatannya juga. 
C 
LC 
C 
C 
28 
Campbell: Cord blood as an 
infant, white-cells transfusion, 
bone marrow, ly mphocytes, 
injections to add more stem 
cells, and then they took them 
too.  
Campbell: Darah tali pusarnya 
saat bayi, transfusi darah putih, 
sumsum tulang belakang, 
limposit, berbagai suntikan 
menambah sel stem, dan 
pengangkatannya juga. 
C 
AV 
C 
C 
29 
Campbell: Cord blood as an 
infant, white-cells transfusion, 
bone marrow, lymphocytes, 
injections to add more stem 
cells, and then they took them 
too.  
Campbell: Darah tali pusarnya 
saat bayi, transfusi darah putih, 
sumsum tulang belakang, 
limposit, berbagai suntikan 
menambah sel stem, dan 
pengangkatannya juga. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
30 
Campbell: Cord blood as an 
infant, white-cells transfusion, 
bone marrow, lymphocytes, 
injections to add more stem 
cells, and then they took them 
too.  
Campbell: Darah tali pusarnya 
saat bayi, transfusi darah putih, 
sumsum tulang belakang, 
limposit, berbagai suntikan 
menambah sel stem, dan 
pengangkatannya juga. 
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 
31 
Anna: Yeah, she'll die. 
Anna: Ya, dia akan mati. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
32 
Sara: Anemia, right? 
Sara: Anemia 'kan? 
C 
C 
C 
C 
33 
Sara: Kids her age don't get 
mono, do they? 
Sara: Seusia itu mustahil 
terserang mono. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
34 
Dr. Mark: Could be a virus. 
Dr. Mark: Mungkin serangan 
virus. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
35 
Dr. Mark: I'll have to draw some 
bloods and run a few test. 
Dr. Mark: Aku harus mengambil 
darahnya dan melakukan 
beberapa tes. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
36 
Dr. Mark: Kate's white cells 
count is much lower than 
normal. 
Dr. Mark: Jumlah sel darah 
putih Kate jauh di bawah 
normal. 
C 
C 
C 
C 

 
 
138 
 
No 
Ungkapan Sumber             
(Film My Sister's Keeper) 
Ungkapan Sasaran            
(Teks Subtitle Bahasa 
Indonesia) 
R1 
R2 
R3 
Result 
37 
Dr. Mark: She may have an 
autoimmune deficiency. 
Dr. Mark: Mungkin dia 
mengalami defisiensi otoimun. 
UC 
AV 
UC 
UC 
38 
Dr. Mark: Could just be a lab 
error. 
Dr. Mark: Mungkin juga hasil 
labnya salah. 
C 
AV 
C 
C 
39 
Sara: Oncology? But that's 
cancer. 
Sara: Dokter onkologi? Tapi itu 
bidang kanker. 
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 
40 
Dr. Ileana: So I took a look at 
Kate's CBC. 
Dr. Ileana: Aku sudah menerima 
CBC Kate. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
41 
Dr. Ileana: Her white blood 
count is very low. She's also 
presenting with 12% 
promylocytes and 5% blast 
wgich does indicate a leukemic 
syndrome.  
Dr. Ileana: Jumlah sel darah 
putihnya sangat rendah. 
Darahnya juga mengandung 
12% promylocytes dan 5% sel 
blast yang mengindikasikan 
sindroma leukemia. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
42 
Dr. Ileana: Her white blood 
count is very low. She's also 
presenting with 12% 
promylocytes and 5% blast 
which does indicate a leukemic 
syndrome.  
Dr. Ileana: Jumlah sel darah 
putihnya sangat rendah. 
Darahnya juga mengandung 
12% promylocytes dan 5% sel 
blast yang mengindikasikan 
sindroma leukemia. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
43 
Dr. Ileana: Her white blood 
count is very low. She's also 
presenting with 12% 
promylocytes and 5% blast 
wgich does indicate a leukemic 
syndrome.  
Dr. Ileana: Jumlah sel darah 
putihnya sangat rendah. 
Darahnya juga mengandung 
12% promylocytes dan 5% sel 
blast yang mengindikasikan 
sindroma leukemia. 
AV 
LC 
LC 
LC 
44 
Dr. Ileana: I'll need a bone 
marrow aspiration to confirm, 
but it seems that Kate could 
have what is called acute 
promyelocytic leukemia. 
Dr. Ileana: Aku butuh aspirasi 
tulang belakang untuk 
memastikannya tapi tampaknya 
Kate mengidap kanker leukemia 
promyelositis akut.  
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 
45 
Dr. Ileana: I'll need a bone 
marrow aspiration to confirm, 
but it seems that Kate could 
have what is called acute 
promyelocytic leukemia. 
Dr. Ileana: Aku butuh aspirasi 
tulang belakang untuk 
memastikannya tapi tampaknya 
Kate mengidap kanker 
leukemia promyelositis akut.  
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 
46 
Aunt Kelly: We heard her 
coughing, but she wouldn't open 
the door. Your mom kicked it in. 
Bibi Kelly: Kami dengar ia 
batuk, tapi tak mau buka pintu, 
ibumu harus mendobrak. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
47 
Sara: We need to get platelet 
and fluids into her right away. 
Sara: Kita harus memberikan 
platelet atau cairan padanya. 
C 
UC 
UC 
UC 
48 
Sara: We need to get platelet and 
fluids into her right away. 
Sara: Kita harus memberikan 
platelet atau cairan padanya. 
C 
AV 
C 
C 
49 
Sara: Fifteen, she's about 90 
pounds, she's allergic to 
penicillin. 
Sara: Lima belas, beratnya 40,8 
kg dan ia alergi pada penisilin. 
AV 
C 
C 
C 
50 
Sara: Fifteen, she's about 90 
pounds, she's allergic to 
penicillin. 
Sara: Lima belas, beratnya 40,8 
kg dan ia alergi pada penisilin. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
51 
Sara: Fifteen, she's about 90 
pounds, she's allergic to 
penicillin. 
Sara: Lima belas, beratnya 40,8 
kg dan ia alergi pada penisilin. 
C 
UC 
UC 
UC 
52 
Paramedic: BP is 100 over 68. 
Paramedis: Seratus per 68. 
LC 
LC 
AV 
LC 

 
 
139 
 
No 
Ungkapan Sumber             
(Film My Sister's Keeper) 
Ungkapan Sasaran            
(Teks Subtitle Bahasa 
Indonesia) 
R1 
R2 
R3 
Result 
53 
Dr. Chance: We've looked at her 
smear, and her leucemic cell 
showing at 23%. 
Dr. Chance: Kami sudah 
memeriksa darahnya dan 
jumlah sel leukemianya 23%. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
54 
Dr. Chance: We've looked at her 
smear, and her leucemic cell 
showing at 23%. 
Dr. Chance: Kami sudah 
memeriksa darahnya dan 
jumlah sel leukemianya 23%. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
55 
Uncle Tommy: What about 
chemo? 
Paman Tommy: Bagaimana 
dengan kemoterapi? 
C 
C 
C 
C 
56 
Sara: So you need more bone 
marrow? 
Sara: Jadi kau perlu sel tulang 
belakang lagi? 
C 
LC 
C 
C 
57 
Dr. Chance: Yes, but leukemia 
isn't Kate's biggest problem 
now. 
Dr. Chance: Ya, tapi leukemia 
bukan masalah terbesar Kate 
saat ini.  
C 
C 
C 
C 
58 
Dr. Chance: She lost the 
function of her kidney. 
Dr. Chance: Ia sudah 
kehilangan fungsi ginjalnya. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
59 
Sara: Not a match? 
Sara: Tidak cocok? 
AV 
C 
C 
C 
60 
Dr. Chance: Everyone inherits 
two sets of chromosomes 
containing HLA genes.  
Dr. Chance: Semua mewarisi 
dua pasang kromosom yang 
mengandung gen HLA. 
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 
61 
Dr. Chance: Everyone inherits 
two sets of chromosomes 
containing HLA genes.  
Dr. Chance: Semua mewarisi 
dua pasang kromosom yang 
mengandung gen HLA. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
62 
Dr. Chance: Unfortunately, 
there's only 1 and 200 chances 
that parents and their children 
will be perfect to compatible 
HLA matches. 
Dr. Chance: Sayangnya, hanya 
ada 1 dari 200 peluang orang tua 
dan anaknya memiliki 
histokompabilitas HLA yang 
sama. 
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 
63 
Dr. Chance: It's possible that 
donor marrow will crop up on 
the national bone marrow 
registry. 
Dr. Chance: Ada kemungkinan 
donor bisa diambil dari daftar 
tulang sumsum nasional. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
64 
Dr. Chance: It's possible that 
donor marrow will crop up on 
the national bone marrow 
registry. 
Dr. Chance: Ada kemungkinan 
donor bisa diambil dari daftar 
tulang sumsum nasional. 
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 
65 
Brian: I thought you said that 
getting transplant from an 
unrelated donor is dangerous.  
Brian: Tadi bukan kau bilang 
bahwa cangkok dari donor asing 
akan berbahaya? 
C 
C 
C 
C 
66 
Brian: I thought you said that 
getting transplant from an 
unrelated donor is dangerous.  
Brian: Tadi bukan kau bilang 
bahwa cangkok dari donor 
asing akan berbahaya? 
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 
67 
Dr. Chance: Not to be forward 
but, umbilical blood can be 
incredibely effective tool in 
treating leukemic patient. 
Dr. Chance: Aku tak bermaksud 
menyinggung tapi darah tali 
pusar sangat efektif mengobati 
pasien leukemia. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
68 
Dr. Chance: Not to be forward 
but, umbilical blood can be 
incredibely effective tool in 
treating leukemic patient. 
Dr. Chance: Aku tak bermaksud 
menyinggung tapi darah tali 
pusar sangat efektif mengobati 
pasien leukemia. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
69 
Dr. Chance: Not to be forward 
but, umbilical blood can be 
incredibely effective tool in 
treating leukemic patient. 
Dr. Chance: Aku tak bermaksud 
menyinggung tapi darah tali 
pusar sangat efektif mengobati 
pasien leukemia. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
70 
Brian: In a test tube? 
Brian: Dengan bayi tabung? 
C 
C 
C 
C 

 
 
140 
 
No 
Ungkapan Sumber             
(Film My Sister's Keeper) 
Ungkapan Sasaran            
(Teks Subtitle Bahasa 
Indonesia) 
R1 
R2 
R3 
Result 
71 
Dr. Chance: Yes. With pre 
implantation genetic 
diagnostic it woulb be a 100 
percent match. 
Dr. Chance: Ya, dengan 
diagnosa pra implantasi, akan 
cocok 100 persen. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
72 
Brian: A donor child? 
Brian: Donor anak? 
LC 
LC 
UC 
LC 
73 
Jesse: That was it. Grown in a 
dish they would have an in vitro 
child. 
Jesse: Begitulah. Ditumbuhkan 
di tabung reaksi, mereka 
mendapatkan bayi tabung. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
74 
Jesse: A perfect chromosomal 
match who would be Kate's 
genetic saviour. 
Jesse: Kromosom yang sama 
persis akan menjadi penyelamat 
gen Kate. 
LC 
AV 
LC 
LC 
75 
Jesse: A perfect chromosomal 
match who would be Kate's 
genetic saviour. 
Jesse: Kromosom yang sama 
persis akan menjadi penyelamat 
gen Kate. 
C 
C 
LC 
C 
76 
Sara: "Petition for medical 
emancipation by.." 
Sara: "Petisi emansipasi medis 
oleh…" 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
77 
Anna: Forget about the fact that 
the operation is dangerous, or 
that it would hurt, or I might just 
not want to have something cut 
out of me. 
Anna: Alasannya bukan operasi 
itu berbahaya, atau akan 
menyakitiku, atau aku tak mau 
organku diambil. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
78 
Campbell: Eight 
hospitalizations in 11 years, six 
chatheterization, two bone 
marrow aspiration, two stem-cell 
purges. 
Campbell: Delapan kali dirawat 
di rumah sakit dalam 11 tahun, 
enam kali mengalami 
kateterisasi, 2 aspirasi sumsum 
tulang, dua kali pembersihan sel 
stem. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
79 
Campbell: Eight hospitalizations 
in 11 years, six catheterization, 
two bone marrow aspiration, 
two stem-cell purges. 
Campbell: Delapan kali dirawat 
di rumah sakit dalam 11 tahun, 
enam kali mengalami 
kateterisasi, 2 aspirasi sumsum 
tulang, dua kali pembersihan sel 
stem. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
80 
Campbell: Eight hospitalizations 
in 11 years, six chatheterization, 
two bone marrow aspiration, 
two stem-cell purges. 
Campbell: Delapan kali dirawat 
di rumah sakit dalam 11 tahun, 
enam kali mengalami 
kateterisasi, 2 aspirasi sumsum 
tulang, dua kali pembersihan 
sel stem. 
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 
81 
Campbell: Not to mention the 
side effects including bleeding, 
infection, bruising. 
Campbell: Belum lagi efek 
sampingnya, termasuk 
pendarahan, infeksi, lebam. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
82 
Campbell: Not to mention the 
side effects including bleeding, 
infection, bruising. 
Campbell: Belum lagi efek 
sampingnya, termasuk 
pendarahan, infeksi, lebam. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
83 
Campbell: Not to mention the 
side effects including bleeding, 
infection, bruising. 
Campbell: Belum lagi efek 
sampingnya, termasuk 
pendarahan, infeksi, lebam. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
84 
Campbell: Not to mention the 
side effects including bleeding, 
infection, bruising. 
Campbell: Belum lagi efek 
sampingnya, termasuk 
pendarahan, infeksi, lebam. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
85 
Campbell: Filgrastim shot. 
Those are growth hormones, am 
I correct? 
Campbell: Suntikan fulgrastim. 
Itu hormon pertumbuhan, 
bukan?  
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 

 
 
141 
 
No 
Ungkapan Sumber             
(Film My Sister's Keeper) 
Ungkapan Sasaran            
(Teks Subtitle Bahasa 
Indonesia) 
R1 
R2 
R3 
Result 
86 
Campbell: Filgrastim shot. 
Those are growth hormones, 
am I correct? 
Campbell: Suntikan fulgrastim. 
Itu hormon pertumbuhan, 
bukan?  
C 
LC 
LC 
LC 
87 
Campbell: Drugs for nausea, 
opiates for pain, ambien for 
sleep. Not exactly proper 
medication for a preteen. 
Campbell: Obat mual, pereda 
sakit, ambien untuk tidur. Bukan 
jenis tepat bagi anak di bawah 
usia puber. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
88 
Campbell: Drugs for nausea, 
opiates for pain, ambien for 
sleep. Not exactly proper 
medication for a preteen. 
Campbell: Obat mual, pereda 
sakit, ambien untuk tidur. 
Bukan jenis tepat bagi anak di 
bawah usia puber. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
89 
Campbell: Drugs for nausea, 
opiates for pain, ambien for 
sleep. Not exactly proper 
medication for a preteen. 
Campbell: Obat mual, pereda 
sakit, ambien untuk tidur. 
Bukan jenis tepat bagi anak di 
bawah usia puber. 
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 
90 
Campbell: Drugs for nausea, 
opiates for pain, ambien for 
sleep. Not exactly proper 
medication for a preteen. 
Campbell: Obat mual, pereda 
sakit, ambien untuk tidur. Bukan 
jenis tepat bagi anak di bawah 
usia puber. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
91 
Sara: Every procedure had its 
risks and complications. 
Sara: Setiap prosedur ada resiko 
dan komplikasinya. 
LC 
C 
LC 
LC 
92 
Sara: You're reactively 
depressed. 
Sara: Kau hanya tertekan. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
93 
Sara: And I'm not gonna feed 
you any antidepressants 
because they're gonna just 
making you more numb then 
you are. 
Sara: Aku tak akan memberimu 
obat anti depresi karena hanya 
akan membuatmu makin mati 
rasa. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
94 
Sara: And I'm not gonna feed 
you any antidepressants because 
they're gonna just making you 
more numb then you are. 
Aku tak akan memberimu obat 
anti depresi karena hanya akan 
membuatmu makin mati rasa. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
95 
Kate: While everyone was so 
worry about my blood counts, 
they barely even noticed that 
Jesse was dyslexic. 
Kate: Sementara semua orang 
mencemaskan jumlah sel darah 
putihku, mereka tak menyadari 
bahwa Jesse menderita 
disleksia. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
96 
Campbell: Judge De Salvo had a 
very public nervous 
breakdown after her 12-yer-old 
daughter was killed by a drunk 
driver. 
Campbell: Hakim De Salvo 
mengalami gangguan jiwa yang 
diketahui umum, setelah 
putrinya, 12 tahun, tewas 
tertabrak pengemudi mabuk. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
97 
Campbell: Judge De Salvo had a 
very public nervous breakdown 
after her 12-yer-old daughter 
was killed by a drunk driver. 
Campbell: Hakim De Salvo 
mengalami gangguan jiwa yang 
diketahui umum, setelah 
putrinya, 12 tahun, tewas 
tertabrak pengemudi mabuk. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
98 
Nurse: I need the urine sample. 
Perawat: Aku perlu sampel 
urin. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
99 
Dr. Chance: Allright, Kate. 1 to 
10, how is your pain? 
Dr. Chance: Baiklah. Satu 
sampai 10, bagaimana rasa 
sakitmu? 
C 
C 
C 
C 
100 
Dr. Chance: Kate's in system 
failure now. 
Dr. Chance: Kate mengalami 
kegagalan sistem.  
C 
C 
AV 
C 

 
 
142 
 
No 
Ungkapan Sumber             
(Film My Sister's Keeper) 
Ungkapan Sasaran            
(Teks Subtitle Bahasa 
Indonesia) 
R1 
R2 
R3 
Result 
101 
Dr. Chance: Body defenses are 
at zero. 
Dr. Chance: Kekebalan 
tubuhnya nol. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
102 
Dr. Chance: The fever Kate's 
been getting, it's infection from 
the dyalisis. 
Dr. Chance: Deman yang 
dialami Kate adalah infeksi dari 
cuci darahnya. 
LC 
LC 
UC 
LC 
103 
Dr. Chance: Sara, this is Miss 
Swearingen our home health 
aide. 
Dr: Chance: Sara, ini Nn. 
Swearingen, penasihat perawat 
di rumah. 
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 
104 
Sara: No hospices. 
Sara: Aku tak perlu berobat 
jalan.  
C 
C 
C 
C 
105 
Taylor: I'm Taylor. AML. 
Taylor: Aku Taylor. AML. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
106 
Kate: Kate. APL. 
Kate: Kate. APL. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
107 
Taylor: You're in remission? 
Taylor: Kau sudah boleh 
pulang? 
C 
C 
C 
C 
108 
Sara: The radiation, which 
ultimately put Kate into 
remission, worked its magic by 
wearing her down. 
Sara: Radiasinya, yang 
akhirnya membuat Kate 
diijinkan pulang, bekerja dengan 
baik dengan membuatnya lemah. 
LC 
AV 
LC 
LC 
109 
Taylor Ambrose, a drug of an 
entirely different sort, worked 
his magic by building her up. 
Taylor Ambrose, obat dengan 
jenis yang sangat berbeda, 
bekerja dengan baik dengan 
membangun kepercayaan 
dirinya. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
110 
Kate: I can taste your Cytoxan. 
Kate: Aku bisa merasakan 
Cytoxan-mu. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
111 
Kate: Besides, they told me 
yesterday I'm relapsing. 
Kate: Lagipula, mereka bilang 
kemarin aku kambuh. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
112 
Kate: Maybe it 'll save me a 
dose. 
Kate: Mungkin obat itu bisa 
mengurangi dosisku. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
113 
Kate: He has scars on hhis 
hands from graft-versus-host. 
Kate: Ia punya bekas luka di 
tangannya dari penyakit graft-
versus-host. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
114 
Kate: He has scars on hhis hands 
from graft-versus-host. 
Kate: Ia punya bekas luka di 
tangannya dari penyakit graft-
versus-host. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 
115 
Dr. Chance: She was dialyzed 
yesterday and she has no 
schedule treatments until 
Friday.  
Dr.Chance: Dia cuci darah 
kemarin dan tak ada jadwal 
berobat sampai Jumat nanti. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
116 
Dr. Chance: The insurance 
company will definitely not 
approve this, so we'lI have to re-
admit through emergency. 
Dr. Chance: Perusahaan 
asuransi tak akan 
menyetujuinya jadi kita harus 
memasukkannya kembali lewat 
UGD. 
C 
C 
AV 
C 
117 
Dr. Chance: The insurance 
company will definitely not 
approve this, so we'lI have to re-
admit through emergency. 
Dr. Chance: Perusahaan asuransi 
tak akan menyetujuinya jadi kita 
harus memasukkannya kembali 
lewat UGD. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
118 
They talked about the 
psychologicaI benefits of 
donation and how losing my 
kidney would affect the quallty 
of my life. 
Mereka membicarakan 
keuntungan psikologis dari 
donasi dan pengaruh kehilangan 
ginjalku pada mutu hidupku. 
AV 
C 
C 
C 
119 
Sara: She donated granulocytes. 
Sara: Ia mendonorkan 
granulositnya. 
UC 
UC 
UC 
UC 

 
 
143 
 
No 
Ungkapan Sumber             
(Film My Sister's Keeper) 
Ungkapan Sasaran            
(Teks Subtitle Bahasa 
Indonesia) 
R1 
R2 
R3 
Result 
120 
Sara: They put needles into 
Anna's hips. 
Sara: Mereka menyuntik 
pinggul Anna. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
121 
Campbell: Into the bone? Big 
needles? 
Campbell: Sampai ke tulang? 
Jarum besar? 
C 
C 
C 
C 
122 
Campbell: Into the bone? Big 
needles? 
Campbell: Sampai ke tulang? 
Jarum besar? 
C 
C 
C 
C 
123 
Judge De Salvo : I don't see the 
point. Court's well aware of the 
family's medical history. 
Hakim De Salvo: Aku tak 
mengerti. Sidang sudah tahu 
sejarah penyakit keluarganya. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
124 
Anna: It wasn't for the notoriety. 
Ηe was an epileptic. 
Anna: Bukan demi reputasinya, 
karena ia ternyata pengidap 
eplilepsi.  
C 
C 
LC 
C 
125 
Radiology therapist to room 
231. 
Ahli terapi radiologi ke Ruang 
231. 
LC 
LC 
LC 
LC 
126 
Radiology therapist to room 
231. 
Ahli terapi radiologi ke Ruang 
231. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
127 
Aunt: Look, I got you this book, 
okay? It's full of guided 
meditations, visualizations, 
healing stuff. 
Aunt: Dengar, aku belikan kau 
buku ini. Isinya penuh instruksi 
meditasi, visualisasi dan semua 
pengobatan. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
144 
 
Appendix 3. Surat Pernyataan Responden 
SURAT PERNYATAAN RESPONDEN 
 
 
 
Yang bertanda tangan di bawah ini saya: 
Nama 
: Dio Rizky Wuryanto  
Usia 
: 24 tahun 
Pekerjaan 
: Mahasiswa Program Studi Bahasa dan Sastra Inggris 
Universitas Yogyakarta 
Alamat 
: Perumahan Griya Ananda A3/ Jl. Imogiri Barat Km. 5 
 
menyatakan bahwa dengan sesungguhnya saya telah mengisi kuesioner sehubungan 
dengan 
karya 
tulis 
(skripsi) 
yang 
telah 
dilakukan 
oleh 
mahasiswa: 
Nama  
 
:  Oktafiani Prima Sari 
Perguruan Tinggi 
:  Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta 
Jurusan/Prodi  
:  Pendidikan Bahasa Inggris/Bahasa dan Sastra Inggris 
NIM 
 
 
:  11211141029 
Judul Skripsi 
:  Medical Terms In My Sister‟s Keeper Movie And Their 
Translation In The Indonesian Subtitle Text 
 
Demikian surat pernyataan ini saya buat dengan sebenarnya untuk dapat 
digunakan sesuai keperluan. 
 
 
Yogyakarta, 20 Agustus 2015 
Yang membuat pernyataan, 
 
 
 
Dio Rizky Wuryanto 
 
 
 

 
 
145 
 
SURAT PERNYATAAN RESPONDEN 
 
 
 
 
Yang bertanda tangan di bawah ini saya: 
Nama 
: Herlambang Fadlan Sejati  
Usia 
: 22 tahun 
Pekerjaan 
: Mahasiswa Jurusan Ilmu Hukum Universitas Gadjah Mada  
Alamat 
: Blimbingsari CT IV Blok D No. 41 RT 04 RW 016, 
Caturtunggal, Depok, Sleman 
 
menyatakan bahwa dengan sesungguhnya saya telah mengisi kuesioner sehubungan 
dengan 
karya 
tulis 
(skripsi) 
yang 
telah 
dilakukan 
oleh 
mahasiswa: 
Nama  
 
:  Oktafiani Prima Sari 
Perguruan Tinggi 
:  Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta 
Jurusan/Prodi  
:  Pendidikan Bahasa Inggris/Bahasa dan Sastra Inggris 
NIM 
 
 
:  11211141029 
Judul Skripsi 
:  Medical Terms In My Sister‟s Keeper Movie And Their 
Translation In The Indonesian Subtitle Text 
 
Demikian surat pernyataan ini saya buat dengan sebenarnya untuk dapat 
digunakan sesuai keperluan. 
 
 
Yogyakarta, 20 Agustus 2015 
Yang membuat pernyataan, 
 
 
 
Herlambang Fadlan Sejati 
 
 
 

 
 
146 
 
SURAT PERNYATAAN RESPONDEN 
 
 
 
 
Yang bertanda tangan di bawah ini saya: 
Nama 
: Yulia Dwi Marwidita 
Usia 
: 19 tahun 
Pekerjaan 
: Mahasiswa Jurusan Bimbingan Konseling Universitas 
Ahmad Dahlan  
Alamat 
: Perumahan Nogotirto 3 Jl.Jawa B.20  
 
menyatakan bahwa dengan sesungguhnya saya telah mengisi kuesioner sehubungan 
dengan 
karya 
tulis 
(skripsi) 
yang 
telah 
dilakukan 
oleh 
mahasiswa: 
Nama  
 
:  Oktafiani Prima Sari 
Perguruan Tinggi 
:  Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta 
Jurusan/Prodi  
:  Pendidikan Bahasa Inggris/Bahasa dan Sastra Inggris 
NIM 
 
 
:  11211141029 
Judul Skripsi 
:  Medical Terms In My Sister‟s Keeper Movie And Their 
Translation In The Indonesian Subtitle Text 
 
Demikian surat pernyataan ini saya buat dengan sebenarnya untuk dapat 
digunakan sesuai keperluan. 
 
 
Yogyakarta, 20 Agustus 2015 
Yang membuat pernyataan, 
 
 
 
Yulia Dwi Marwidita 
 
 
 

 
 
147 
 
Appendix 3. Surat Pernyataan Triangulasi 
SURAT PERNYATAAN TRIANGULASI 
 
 
 
Yang bertanda tangan di bawah ini saya: 
Nama  
 
:  Dewi Suryandari 
Perguruan Tinggi 
:  Universitas Muhammadiyah Yogyakarta 
Jurusan/Prodi  
:  Pendidikan Dokter 
NIM 
 
 
:  20110310026 
menyatakan bahwa dengan sesungguhnya saya telah melakukan triangulasi data 
sehubungan dengan karya tulis (skripsi) yang telah dilakukan oleh mahasiswa: 
Nama  
 
:  Oktafiani Prima Sari 
Perguruan Tinggi 
:  Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta 
Jurusan/Prodi  
:  Pendidikan Bahasa Inggris/Bahasa dan Sastra Inggris 
NIM 
 
 
:  11211141029 
Judul Skripsi 
:  The Translation of Medical Terms in the Indonesian Subtitle 
of My Sister‟s Keeper Movie 
 
Demikian surat pernyataan ini saya buat dengan sebenarnya untuk dapat 
digunakan sesuai keperluan. 
 
 
 
Yogyakarta, 1 Juni 2015 
Yang membuat pernyataan, 
 
 
 
Dewi Suryandari 
 
 

 
 
148 
 
 
SURAT PERNYATAAN TRIANGULASI 
 
 
 
Yang bertanda tangan di bawah ini saya: 
Nama  
 
:  Difara Uswatun Khasanah 
Perguruan Tinggi 
:  Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta 
Jurusan/Prodi  
:  Pendidikan Bahasa Inggris/Bahasa dan Sastra Inggris 
NIM 
 
 
:  11211144020 
menyatakan bahwa dengan sesungguhnya saya telah melakukan triangulasi data 
sehubungan dengan karya tulis (skripsi) yang telah dilakukan oleh mahasiswa: 
Nama  
 
:  Oktafiani Prima Sari 
Perguruan Tinggi 
:  Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta 
Jurusan/Prodi  
:  Pendidikan Bahasa Inggris/Bahasa dan Sastra Inggris 
NIM 
 
 
:  11211141029 
Judul Skripsi 
:  The Translation of Medical Terms in the Indonesian Subtitle 
of My Sister‟s Keeper Movie 
 
Demikian surat pernyataan ini saya buat dengan sebenarnya untuk dapat 
digunakan sesuai keperluan. 
 
 
 
Yogyakarta, 1 Juni 2015 
Yang membuat pernyataan, 
 
 
 
Difara Uswatun Khasanah  
 
 

 
 
149 
 
 
SURAT PERNYATAAN TRIANGULASI 
 
 
 
Yang bertanda tangan di bawah ini saya: 
Nama  
 
:  Aan Mulyana 
Perguruan Tinggi 
:  Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta 
Jurusan/Prodi  
:  Pendidikan Bahasa Inggris/Bahasa dan Sastra Inggris 
NIM 
 
 
:  11211141001 
menyatakan bahwa dengan sesungguhnya saya telah melakukan triangulasi data 
sehubungan dengan karya tulis (skripsi) yang telah dilakukan oleh mahasiswa: 
Nama  
 
:  Oktafiani Prima Sari 
Perguruan Tinggi 
:  Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta 
Jurusan/Prodi  
:  Pendidikan Bahasa Inggris/Bahasa dan Sastra Inggris 
NIM 
 
 
:  11211141029 
Judul Skripsi 
:  The Translation of Medical Terms in the Indonesian Subtitle 
of My Sister‟s Keeper Movie 
 
Demikian surat pernyataan ini saya buat dengan sebenarnya untuk dapat 
digunakan sesuai keperluan. 
 
 
 
Yogyakarta, 1 Juni 2015 
Yang membuat pernyataan, 
 
 
 
Aan Mulyana 
 
 

