


MEMORY IMPROVEMENT:
How To Improve Your Memory
In Just 30 Days
 
Ron White

Published by:
Laurenzana Press
PO Box 1220
Melrose, FL 32666 USA
www.LaurenzanaPress.com
Copyright © 2010-2011 by Ron White
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
reproduced in any form or by any means without the prior
written permission of the Publisher.
Attention All Eagle Eyes: We’ve had a number of people
proof this book before we released it to you, but there is a
chance you might spot something that was missed. If you
find a typo or other obvious error please send it to us. And
if you’re the first one to report it, we’ll send you a free gift!
Send to: corrections@laurenzanapress.com

Table of Contents
 
Day 1 Intro to Memory Training
Day 2 Basic Association
Day 3 Chain of Visualization
Day 4 A 2000 Year Old Memory Method
Day 5 Skeleton Files
Day 6 Pencil List Practice
Day 7 Counting in Japanese
Day 8 Memorizing Math Formulas
Day 9 Creating Your House Files
Day 10 Poems and Quotes
Day 11 Memorizing Sales Presentations
Day 12 Uses For Files
Day 13 Giving Speeches Without Notes
Day 14 Foreign Languages
Day 15 Intro to Number Memory
Day 16 How to Memorize Numbers
Day 17 Pictures for Numbers to 1000
Day 18 Memorizing the Presidents
Day 19 Names and Faces
Day 20 Names and Faces
Day 21 Names and Faces

Day 22 Fun Memory Demonstrations
Day 23 Memorizing a Deck of Cards
Day 24 Memorizing Scripture
Day 25 Working on Speed Memory
Day 26 Things To Do, Directions, Names
Day 27 Things To Do, Directions, Names
Day 28 Alphabet Files
Day 29 Keep Your Motivation Up!
Day 30 Review and a New Beginning
Get Your Bonus Video
Author’s Biography


Day 1
Intro to Memory Training
Hello, and welcome to our How to Memorize EVERYTHING
program! Psychologists tell us that if we do anything for 21
or more days, it will become a habit. This program is
carefully designed to help you make instant recall memory
a habit. What you have in your hands is what I believe to be
the most comprehensive program of its nature. Enjoy it.
This program is divided into 30 sections to be completed in
thirty days , however you may progress at your own pace. It
should take you about ten minutes a day. If you get excited
and want to do more than one lesson in a day there is
certainly no harm in that!
We will start out very basic. Don’t get bored during the
simple stuff. Believe it or not, the simple basics are going
to be the foundation for the advanced techniques. By the
time you finish this program, you will have a Ph.D in
memory training.
I want to begin this program with a challenge for you. Over
the past few years, I have made some observations of
people after they purchased a book or invested in a
workshop. The average investment for our live workshop is
over $250 per person, and what is unbelievable to me, is
that one in five of the people who enroll never attend the
class after making the investment. They invest over $250
and then never attend. As incredible as that may sound, I
know that the average person that invests in a program of
any nature, whether it be memory training, sales, public
speaking, or something else, never completes the
program. I know countless individuals whose libraries are
filled with courses never completed. My challenge to you is
this: Complete this course! When you do, you will have
learned an invaluable training. Over the past several years,
I’ve used this training to give speeches or presentations
that lasted several hours and never accessed a single note.
I’ve been in an elevator and recalled the name of a man I
met a year and a half before for five minutes in a business
environment. That simple act of recalling his name made
him feel significant, and turned into a great business

contact for me. It is not exciting that I have done these
things. What is exciting, however, is that anyone who
completes this course can do these things.
Are you ready to begin? Are you excited? I know I am. It is
an important that you are willing to accept change.
The stages a person goes through when they encounter a
positive change are:
 
1. The first stage is typically rejection. We are creatures
of habit, and anything new is often scoffed at.
 
2. The next stage is when a person may see how others
can use it. You might say, “Well, Ronnie, I can see
how this program has worked for you, and I can see
how my kids and especially my spouse could use it,
but it’s not for me.”
 
3. Then as the walls of resistance begin to crumble, you
say, “I think I’ll try it on a limited basis.”
 
4. The final stage is, “How did I ever get along without
it?”
Do you remember going through these stages with the
microwave oven? I do. At first you thought, “No way. Why
would I use that? What is the purpose? The good old oven
was good enough for my parents, and it’s good enough for
me. If it doesn’t say ‘‘simmer’’, then we’re not going to use
it.” At the next stage, you will say, “Well, I can see how my
kids might use it for a quick snack,” then gradually you’ll
say, “Maybe I can use it every now and then to warm up
leftovers.” Finally, what happens, “How did I get along
without it?” What percentages of meals do you at least use
a microwave for a couple of things? I bet a lot. That is the
fourth level of change. We accept change slowly. That is not
always a bad thing. It is good to be cautious and ease into
new things. However, too cautious and too slow is
dangerous.
If you decide to fish, fine. If you decide to cut bait, fine. But if
you do nothing, nobody eats. I ran into a woman at the
Dallas/Fort Worth Airport who had attended my seminar. I

said, “Colleen, how are you?” She jumped and she was so
impressed that I remembered her name. I said, “Why are
you impressed? You came to the workshop. You know what
I’m doing. Sure it’s been eight months since I met you along
with a hundred other people, but you can do that, too,
Colleen, you know the system.” She said, “Yes,” she knows
the system, and she thinks it’s great, but she hasn’t used it
to the extent she should have.
Every single person who takes this course will fall into one
of two categories.
 
1. They see value in the system and implement it into
their daily lives whether it is slowly or all at once.
 
2. They see value in the system, but because of the
change that is required, fall back on the old method of
no memory system.
Right now, I want you to decide which category that you are
going to be in. Give the system the benefit of the doubt right
now since you haven’t actually learned the techniques. Tell
yourself that you are not going to oppose this change and
see yourself recalling names, faces, numbers, and giving
speeches without notes. In every aspect of life, not just
memory training, there are comfort zones. It is hard to
perform outside of the comfort zones. We get used to a
way of doing things and it is hard to change. A headline out
of a local Seattle paper a few years ago, read, “Justice
Grinds Slow, Man Wants Back In Jail”. He was released
from a penitentiary and found his eight weeks of freedom to
be terrifying, according to the newspaper. Most of us would
find eight weeks in a penitentiary terrifying. Why would eight
weeks on the streets be terrifying to this man? It was
terrifying because he was outside of his self-image comfort
zone.
What happens when we are out of our comfort zone? We
have a tendency to get back where we belong, don’t we?
Even though that is far short of what our potential could be.
This man robbed a bank in Portland, Oregon and waited to
be caught. He appeared before the judge without any legal
counsel. He said, “Why do I need counsel? I’m a 10-time

looser”. He said, “I would appreciate it if you forgo the pre-
sentence investigation so that I could get back home
tomorrow.” Home, in the article, he says, “I want to go
home.”
Where is that in your life? What is the imaginary ceiling in
your life? Folks, change is tough. Hopefully, no one reading
this book will ever experience this situation. However, I see
people do this to different degrees every day. They are
comfortable with the way they are doing things and the
change is scary, even if it is best for them. It could be a diet,
exercise, learning a foreign language, moving to a new
town, going to a new school or learning a method to recall
information. Don’t sell yourself short. Give yourself some
credit. You have taken the action step to obtain this
information and now you are reading it. Don’t stop here. Let
me repeat that, don’t stop here.
What you are about to learn is over 2,500 years old. Can
you believe that? These techniques have been around that
long! In 477 BC, a Greek poet amazed everyone with his
great memory. The story goes that he was at a banquet
when the roof of a building fell in and killed many of those
attending. The bodies had to be identified, but they were
crushed beyond recognition. Simonedes came to the
rescue. He was able to recall the names of everyone and
where they sat. Simonedes claimed he did this by
imagining the people in their places at the table during the
banquet. Subsequently, a method of recalling information
was derived in part from this experience.
The Greeks developed a form of memory training called
Loci. It is a Latin word and it means “places”. We will go
into more detail on specifically how this method works and
how it can work for you today. In 1959, there was another
breakthrough in the area of memory. A brain surgeon,
Wilder Penfield, conducted some remarkable experiments
on epileptic patients. Penfield found that when he touched
parts of the patient’s brain with the weak electronic
stimulation, the fully-conscious patient would begin talking,
shouting and would begin describing memories from years
past, as if reliving the experience all over again. This
demonstration proved that individual memories take up
residence in different parts of the brain. Similarly, different

portions of the brain form different functions. For example,
the left side of your brain handles language skills. People
who have suffered brain damage in a particular area might
have great difficulty learning abstract concepts, but can play
the piano or hit a baseball as well as they ever did. The
tissues of your brain share something with the rest of the
body. The better you treat it through nutrition, avoiding
substance abuse, and maintaining a good physical
condition, the better it will work for you. Your brain is so
wonderful and complex that no accident could have been its
origin. It has been said that if your mind were simple
enough to understand, you would be so simple that you
couldn’t understand it. So enjoy the 2,500 year old
techniques that you are about to learn and remember, you
are the greatest computer ever created.


Day 2
Basic Association
Let’s progress together to the next level of memory skills. I
want to begin with some mental gymnastics to get your
mind stimulated. Clear your mind of everything. Ok. Now,
pick a number between one and ten. You got it? (Any
number between one and ten). Now, multiply that number by
nine. You should have a new number now. Now take the
digits in the new number and add them together. For
example, if your new number is 12, add one plus two and
you get three. So pick a number between one and ten,
multiply it by nine, and add the digits together. Now, take
that new number and subtract five from it. Got it? If not,
back up and get it. Now assign that number a letter of the
alphabet. For example, if it’s one, it is A, two is B, three is
C, four is D, five is E, six is F, seven is G, eight is H, nine is
I, and so on.
Now think of a country that starts with that letter. Think of a
country that starts with the letter you just picked. Now go to
the second letter in the name of that country and think of an
animal that starts with that letter. Pick a normal color for that
animal. Now, how many of you in here are thinking of a gray
elephant from Denmark? Wow, huh? Can I read your mind?
Hardly, I just played a simple game with you and regardless
of the number chosen, 90% will end up with Denmark. It’s a
fun game that you can play with your friends. I wanted to do
that demonstration for two reasons. Number one, I wanted
to get your mind stimulated before we dive right in. Number
two, I wanted to illustrate a point. What I just did was a
game that you can play with your friends. That is the extent
of the application of that brain teaser. What you are going
to learn in this system is just as fun to do with your friends
as a game. However, please do not see that as the
application for this system.
Recently, I ran into a guy who had taken our live training
while I was out to dinner. I said, “Hey, Ken, have you used
the memory system? “ He said, “Yeah, I won $100 off a
friend of mine who didn’t believe that I could memorize a list
of 40 items after hearing it once, forwards, backwards, and
by number. “ We both laughed. However, I hope Ken

understands the application for this system is to recall
product knowledge, give speeches without notes, and
remember customer names, remembering to call important
clients, recalling key points to a selling presentation or
helping students study. Please practice by doing
demonstrations with your friends. It is fun and good
practice. But, don’t see this system as simply a game. If
you do, you are cheating yourself. And, I wouldn’t bet your
friends $100 either. They probably won’t be your friends
much longer. Come to think of it, when I ran into Ken, he
was eating alone. So, let’s have some fun. Let’s learn and
remember that this system is going to help us in every
aspect of our life.
When you decided to take action and invest in this training,
you probably had just heard me on the radio or TV doing a
memory demonstration. Or perhaps, this training was given
to you by a close friend or business associate who told you
about the demonstration that I did. Maybe, I had someone
call off 15 or 20 items rapid fire, and then I repeated the list
forwards and backwards. I’m going to do that same activity
right now, only I am going to give YOU a list of 20 items and
YOU are going to recall them. Use whatever memory
system that you normally use. This is just simply a test to
give us a starting point. So sit back, relax, clear your mind
of all thoughts, and remember, don’t write this information
down. This is a memory test. I’m going to give you 20
items. Focus and get ready. I want you to memorize this list
in this EXACT order. The rules are only go through this list
ONCE and spend no more than five to seven seconds on
each item.
 
1. Pencil
 
2. Sink
 
3. Circus
 
4. Track
 
5. Star
 
6. Buller

 
7. Dice
 
8. Hourglass
 
9. Baseball
 
10. Fingers
 
11. Goal Post
 
12. Eggs
 
13. Flag
 
14. Necklace
 
15. Paycheck
 
16. Car
 
17. Magazine
 
18. Soldier
 
19. Golf Clubs
 
20. Shot Gun
Now, get a sheet of paper and write down how many that
you recall. And, yes, they do have to be with the right
number and in the correct order. For instance, if I knew all
seven digits in a phone number, but in the wrong order, I’d
be at the phone awhile. Stop now and see how many you
get.
So, how did you do? Did you get all 20? Probably not, most
people get anywhere between three and five. If you got six
or more, that is great! More than ten items, is definitely
above average.
Now, everything done is this program is done for a
purpose. We will never complete an exercise that does not
have at least one application. This exercise has three
applications! The first was exactly what I stated before we
began. It is simply a memory test to give us a starting point,

to give us a reference. In other words, I wanted you to find
out what your memory capabilities were before you learn
this system. So, write down how many you got correct and
circle it. Did you notice anything different about this system
that starts with a pencil? You may have noticed that some
of the items related to the numbers. For example, number
16 was a car and you get a driver’s license when you are
16. Number three was a circus, and we have all heard of a
3-ring circus. Every item on this list could actually have
been associated with a number in some way. Now, I know
what you’re thinking. Ron, you said this system was not
basic association. It’s not. However, you need to have an
understanding of what basic association is before we can
elevate you to higher forms in memory training.
So, we are going to start with association which is first
grade in terms of memory training. This pencil list, called
because it starts with a pencil, is a basic association list.
Let me show you what I mean.
 
Number one is a pencil. The association is that the
number one looks like a pencil.
 
Number two is a sink. The association for 2 and sink
is that it has 2 knobs, 2 options on and off, hot and
cold. Someone in a workshop once said that if you
look at the pipes under a sink, they kind of look like a
number 2 the way they twist and bend. Now that’s an
imagination, but that is exactly what it takes to recall.
 
Number three is a circus. The association is a 3-ring
circus.
 
Number four, the association is there are four lanes in
a track, four times around is a mile. Remember the 4-
minute mile?
 
Number five is a star. What would star and number
five be? If you said a star has five points, that’s a
good association. So, a star has five points.
 
Number six is a bullet. What about this one? If you get
shot by a bullet, you’re six feet under, right? There are

six bullets in a chamber. Six shooter.
 
Number seven is dice. Seven come 11, lucky seven.
Do you know that opposite sides of dice always add
up to seven? Now, what was number five? Star, right,
because it has five points. What about two, sink, two
knobs. How about seven, dice, right? Seven come
11, opposite sides always equal seven. If there is a
two on the top, the five will be on the bottom. What
about number four, track, right? Four lanes, four-
minute mile, four laps is one mile. Remember, this is
what is called basic association. It is very basic, and
all it requires is that you visualize and associate.
 
Number eight is hourglass, and eight looks like an
hourglass because of its shape.
 
Number nine, baseball. There are nine innings, nine
players on a team. Last year the Rangers blew a
nine-run lead in the ninth. Now, what was two? Think
about it. Sink, right? Number three, circus, right? How
about seven? Dice. Seven come 11.
 
Number ten is fingers. I would be willing to say that
most of you have ten fingers and ten toes, so ten is
fingers.
 
Number 11 is a goal post. There are 11 players on
each football team. When a field goal is kicked, the
referee makes his arms go up like an 11. What about
five? Star, right? Five points on a star. What was
nine? Baseball, right? Nine innings, nine players.
How about six? It was bullet. Six feet under.
 
Number 12, 12 is eggs. A dozen eggs, that one is
pretty easy.
 
Number 13. Thirteen is a flag. What do you think the
associations for 13 and flag are? Do you think of the
original 13 colonies? Did you know that there are 13
stripes on our current flag? What was ten? Finger,
right? Ten fingers and toes. Hold out your hands and
say ten. If someone gives you five on both hands,
that’s ten! If you have a ten dollar bill, you wrap your

fingers around it so you don’t lose it.
 
Number 14 is a necklace. Fourteen karat gold,
Valentine’s Day is February 14th. A necklace could
be a Valentine’s Day gift.
 
Number 15 is paycheck. When do a lot of people get
paid? The first and the 15th, right? Now, what if you
don’t get paid on the 15th? What if I told you that on
the 15th of every month, I had a check for $15,000
waiting for you in my office? Would you ever forget to
come by my office on the 15th? So, 15 is what,
paycheck, right?
 
Number 16 is a car. When do you get a driver’s
license? Sixteen, right?
 
Number 17 is a magazine. Now, some of you men
may not know that there is a magazine for teenage
girls called Seventeen. So what was 17? Magazine,
right? Remember, it is a magazine. How about
number 14? Remember, it was necklace, 14 karat
gold, Valentine’s Day.
 
Number 18 is a soldier. When is someone eligible for
the draft? Eighteen, right?
 
Nineteen is golf clubs. How many holes are on a golf
course? No, not 19, there are eighteen. You golfers
know that the 19th hole is where you go after the
eighteenth hole to relax and have something to eat or
drink.
 
Number 20. Twenty is a shotgun. Twenty and shotgun.
Ever heard of a 20-gauge shotgun?
Remember that this list was created using the first
generation, the first level of memory training called
association. It works, but very seldom. In other words, we
associated nine with baseball with nine innings and nine
players. If number three was baseball, that wouldn’t work,
would it? We couldn’t use basic association because three
and baseball have nothing in common. However, basic
association does play a significant role in memory training

and it is important to understand. What was number two?
Think about it. Two knobs, the pipes look like a two, hot and
cold. Sink, right?
Now I want you to get a very vivid picture in your mind of
sink. Perhaps, it could be the sink in your kitchen or
bathroom, that’s not important. What is important is to get a
clear picture in your mind. Your mind thinks in pictures. For
example, clear your mind of every thought. Now, I want you
to think of anything but not a dog. Don’t see a dog. What
happened? You thought of a dog, didn’t you? What that
illustrates is your mind thinks in pictures. You don’t see the
word, dog spelled out, you actually see a dog. Your eye is
the strongest part of the memory. That is why when you see
a person, you say, I recognize the face, but what is their
name? That is because you saw their face. You never saw
their name.
Since we know that, we recall what we see longer than what
we simply hear, remember to actually visualize these items,
and the bigger, the better. Make the pictures larger than
life. What was seven? Seven come 11. It was dice. So, see
a huge furry man-eating dice. The dice are so big that you
can’t even see over them. Remember, visualize huge dice.
Next, what was 12? ........Eggs. A dozen eggs. Visualize 12
eggs. Maybe they are on the floor, and you’re breaking
them. Next, what was five?..... It has five points. Star. Good.
Get a clear picture of a star with five points. What was
ten?..... Fingers. Ten fingers, ten toes, holding onto a ten
dollar bill. What was 14?..... Fourteen karat gold,
Valentine’s Day. Get a good picture of necklace in your
mind. What was 17?..... Magazine. What was eight?
Hourglass. What was 11?.... Goal posts. How about
track?..... That was four. Four lanes, four laps. Do you
remember 13? Thirteen stars, 13 stripes?
What about 15?..... Paycheck. The first and the 15th? I
know that you won’t forget that one.
What was number one? ......Pencil. A pencil is a straight
line like a number one. Remember that this is called the
pencil list because it starts with pencil.
What about number 18? Soldier. Eighteen to join the

military. What about 20?... Shotgun. Twenty-gauge shotgun.
What about 19?... That’s golf clubs. Remember the 19th
hole? What about 16?... That’s car. At 16, you get your
driver’s license. What was number two? ...... It was sink.
Number four, track, number six, bullet, number nine,
baseball, number 13, flag, number 17, magazine, number
18, soldier. Remember, that this is what is called basic
association. It does have its applications; however, if you
try to use it for everything, you’re going to be up the creek in
a wire boat without a paddle.
It is time to stop and let’s write down this list one more time.
If you get stuck on one, skip it and go to the next one, it
might come to you. Ask yourself, what was the association?
Don’t spend more than four or five minutes on this exercise.
Ok, how did you do? Probably a lot better than the first time
for sure. Let’s see, just follow along and put a check mark
on the ones you got correct. Remember, they do have to be
in the correct order and by the correct number.
 
1. Pencil
 
2. Sink
 
3. Circus
 
4. Track
 
5. Star
 
6. Buller
 
7. Dice
 
8. Hourglass
 
9. Baseball
 
10. Fingers
 
11. GoalPost
 

12. Eggs
 
13. Flag
 
14. Necklace
 
15. Paycheck
 
16. Car
 
17. Magazine
 
18. Soldier
 
19. Golf Clubs
 
20. Shot Gun
Did you get a better score this time? I bet you did! What we
just did was an exercise in basic association. Did you get
all 20? If you did, that’s great! Most everyone should get at
least 15 or more. If you got less than 15, the reason is that
when you created the associations, the pictures were not
vivid enough. Remember that your mind thinks in pictures
and remembers pictures, not words or abstract thoughts.
So make an effort to actually visualize everything you are
attempting to recall using this system. Make your pictures
huge and larger than life, the bigger the better. Don’t see
number seven as small dice in a Monopoly game, visualize
seven-foot tall man-eating dice. I promise you that if you
saw that, you would never forget it. So, see it.
You have just completed our first lesson. I know it was
basic; however, you must crawl before you walk. This
course will slowly elevate you through the levels of memory
training until eventually you will have a Masters Degree in
memory training. This is what is called basic association.
When I meet people and I tell them that I teach memory
training, they say, “Oh, association, I know all about that.”
Perhaps they do. However, memory training goes much
deeper than that. Association is the first level. You have just
completed Day two. I know right now you’re thinking that
this is too basic, and you’re right, we’re at a very basic
stage. Association can’t be used for everything. However,
you must understand it before we progress to the next level.

Trust me; we are starting at the first grade level. Remember
when you learned how to read, you had to learn the
alphabet first. Then when you got to high school, you read
Shakespeare. Day two is learning the alphabet. By the time
we get to Day 30, you are going to have a PHD in memory
training.


Day 3
Chain of Visualization
The next level of association includes elements of memory
training, such as acronyms. Have you heard of acronyms?
An acronym is a series of letters created using the first
letter of each word. IBM is an acronym for International
Business Machines. AT&T is an acronym for American
Telephone and Telegraph. These are used by companies
because they are easier to remember. When I was in high
school, my science teacher told me that I could learn the
colors of the rainbow in the correct order by remembering
the name Roy G Biv.
R for red, O for orange, y for yellow, G for green, B for blue,
I for indigo, and V for violet. Another acronym I learned in
school was an easy way to remember the Great Lakes. It is
called homes. H.O.M.E.S. H for Huron, O for Ontario, M for
Michigan, E for Erie and S for Superior. That is an easy
way to learn the Great Lakes.
Can acronyms be used for everything? No. Are there more
advanced ways to retain information? Yes. However, every
level of memory training is important, and you never know
when a good old fashioned acronym is what you need to
use to recall some vital information. Remember, this course
is meant to be learned in levels. I’m sure that right now at
this point you would love to know how to memorize a 100
digit number after only hearing it once. Believe me, we will
get there. Patience is the key. You can’t skip any steps.
Believe it or not, we are going to use the pencil list later to
learn how to count in Japanese. I know you find that hard to
believe right now, but just watch. You’re going to be
amazed.
Have you ever heard how a bamboo tree grows? You’ll
water it every day for five years and see nothing. And one
day in the fifth year, it will grow from several feet in a period
of a few weeks. Did it grow in a few weeks or five years? It
obviously grew in five years. But, the results were seen in
the few weeks because of the work put in before. Your
memory is the same way. Right now, we are watering it, but
by the end of this program, it is going to grow very large,

very quickly.
Acronyms and links are in this ‘‘watering’’ stage. A link is a
method of recalling information by telling a story. Many
ancient books, such as the Bible, were passed down from
one generation to the next this way. I bet you can sing many
of your favorite tunes on the radio and not miss a beat. The
reason is that you have, number one, incorporated the link
method of memorizing by linking one thought to the next,
songs also incorporate rhythm which helps your memory. A
link is simply linking one thought to the next. For example,
here is a list of 19 items. If I ask you to memorize them
using basic association, it would not work. For example,
number one is Mount Rainier, number two is ice, number
three is trees, number four is bicycle. What do these items
have in common with the number they are with? Nothing
that I am aware of. So, in this case, basic association
would not work. The next level is the chain of association or
the link. Sit back, relax and enjoy this story. I want you to
focus on seeing the images in this story very clearly, vividly
and powerfully. Here is the story:
Mount Rainier has ice on the top and trees on the side.
Coming down the mountain is a bicycle ridden by a
German shepherd. He has a glass of water in one hand
and a shoe in the other. At the bottom of the mountain, he
crashes into a TV set and lands on a pillow. He bounces off
the pillow onto a trampoline, and bounces off the trampoline
into an airplane. The airplane lands in Dallas and Richard
Nixon is waiting for him. He has on a brown hat, black
boots; he hands him a check for $50,000 and the keys to a
brand new Corvette. He then drives the Corvette back to
Mount Rainier.
Now, we’re going to do this one more time. The difference
is I want you to repeat the items out loud. By the way, if you
move your hands and use body language, you’ll have
reinforced the pictures in your mind. So, here we go. Sit
back and read this story. Mount Rainier has ice on the top
and trees on the side. Repeat with me. Mount Rainier has
ice on the top and trees on the side. Coming down the
mountain is a bicycle ridden by a German Shepherd.
Repeat with me, coming down the mountain is a bicycle
ridden by a German Shepherd. He has a glass of water in

one hand and a shoe in the other. Repeat with me, he has a
glass of water in one hand and a shoe in the other. At the
bottom of the mountain, he crashes into a TV set. Repeat
with me, at the bottom of the mountain, he crashes into a
TV set. He lands on a pillow, bounces on a trampoline, and
bounces off the trampoline into an airplane. Repeat with
me, he lands on a pillow, bounces on a trampoline, and
bounces off the trampoline into an airplane. The airplane
lands in Dallas and Richard Nixon is waiting for him.
Repeat with me, the airplane lands in Dallas and Richard
Nixon is waiting for him. He has on a brown hat and black
boots. Repeat with me, he has a brown hat and black
boots. He hands him a check for $50,000 and the keys to a
brand new Corvette. Repeat with me, he hands him a
check for $50,000 and the keys to a brand new Corvette.
He then drives the Corvette back to Mount Rainier. Repeat
with me, he then drives the Corvette back to Mount Rainier.
Did you use body language with it? I always do. I hold out
my hands like I’m holding a glass of water and a shoe. I
bounce like I’m on the trampoline and I act like I’m Richard
Nixon, and I stick out my hands like they have keys and
$50,000 in them.
Let’s do this one more time. Here we go. Focus on the
story:
Mount Rainier has ice on the top and trees on the side.
Repeat with me. Mount Rainier has ice on the top and trees
on the side. Coming down the mountain is a bicycle ridden
by a German Shepherd. Repeat with me. Coming down the
mountain is a bicycle ridden by a German Shepherd. He
has a glass of water in one hand and a shoe in the other.
Repeat with me, he has a glass of water in one hand and a
shoe in the other. At the bottom of the mountain, he crashes
into a TV set. Repeat with me, at the bottom of the
mountain, he crashes into a TV set. He lands on a pillow,
bounces to a trampoline, and bounces off the trampoline
into an airplane. Repeat with me, he lands on a pillow,
bounces to a trampoline, and then bounces off the
trampoline into an airplane. The airplane lands in Dallas
and Richard Nixon is waiting for him. Repeat with me, the
airplane lands in Dallas and Richard Nixon is waiting for
him. He has a brown hat and black boots. Repeat with me,

he has a brown hat and black boots. He hands him a check
for $50,000 and the keys to a brand new Corvette. Repeat
with me, he hands him a check for $50,000 and the keys to
a brand new Corvette. He then drives the Corvette back to
Mount Rainier. Repeat with me, he then drives the Corvette
back to Mount Rainier.
Now it is time to see how many that you recalled. Now, on a
sheet of paper write down all the items in this list. Don’t
write out the story, instead, simply write each noun in the
story. For example, Mount Rainer will be the first item on
the list.
Set the book aside now and write down the items there are
16 items. Do not spend more than four to five minutes on
this exercise. After you done come back and check your
answers. Answers below:
 
1. Mount Rainier
 
2. Bicycle
 
3. German Shepherd
 
4. Glass of water
 
5. Shoe
 
6. TV set
 
7. Pillow
 
8. Trampoline
 
9. Airplane
 
10. Dallas
 
11. Richard Nixon
 
12. Brown hat
 
13. Black boots
 
14. Check for $50,000

 
15. Keys to a brand new Corvette
 
16. Mount Rainier
Well, how did you do? Did the link method work for you? I
bet you did pretty well. Our minds are truly the greatest
computers ever created, and I mean that. Don’t get caught
up in being perfect right now. Just make sure that you
understand the concepts before we progress to the next
level. Remember that this course is a building block
process. Make sure you understand basic association,
acronyms, and the link method before you move on.


Day 4
A 2000 Year Old Memory Method
Radio certainly has entertained millions over the years and
the great radio programs of the 30’s, 40’s and 50’s are
classics. What an experience that must have been, sitting
by the radio creating your own pictures of the stories that
were being told. I bet everyone listening had different
images of the characters. What they looked like, what they
wore, what their families looked like. That is the beauty of
the imagination and the power of the mind. I am a huge
Texas Rangers baseball fan. I can remember listening to
the Ranger games on the radio late at night when I was 12
and 13. I can remember the pictures I created in my head. I
remember visualizing the baseball and the sounds of the
crowd that evoked the pictures and emotions that I felt when
I was actually there.
Imagine this: A huge lemon is sitting on the table in front of
you. Can you see it? It is the size of a grapefruit. Take your
right hand and visualize yourself cutting down the middle of
that lemon. See the juices oozing all over the tablecloth.
Sitting on the table is two halves of the lemon. Pick up one
of the lemons and hold that half up to your nose. Do you
smell the lemon? Is the moisture from the lemon getting
your nose wet? Now, with the hand holding the lemon
against your mouth, open your mouth as wide as you can,
and think of the meat of that lemon in your mouth. Bite down
on the lemon and let the juices drip down your face.
Did you salivate? Did your face squish up into a bitter
expression? The next question you should be asking
yourself is why did I make those expressions? What
provoked them? Your mind thinks in pictures and often it
cannot tell the difference between an actual picture or a
picture that exists in your mind only. Your mind truly is
incredible. That is why athletes visualize their successes or
their golf swings, or batting swings, catching footballs long
before they actually do those things, because their minds
believe that it is real. If the visualization is strong enough,
then you are actually conditioning your mind for success
with pictures. Your mind utilizes pictures to retain
information and we are going to use that knowledge to our

benefit. Pay close attention to next few thoughts. They are
going to be the nuts and bolts of this program. Everything
will build on them, so this is very important. What we are
about to learn is actually the system that the Romans
developed 2,500 years ago.
Remember the Loci we talked about, that is the Latin word
for places? The Romans actually developed places in their
minds where they would store information. They discovered
that your mind actually works like a filing system. Here’s a
modern day example. Most of us use computers in some
fashion. It is hard to get by without one. When you have
information you wish to keep, what do you do? You store it
on a disk, a CD, print it and file it. Let me create a picture
that might be a horror story for some of you who work with
computers.
Let’s say a hacker got into your computer and deleted all
the directories, files and program titles. Everything was still
in your computer hard drive, but it was no longer labeled.
Wouldn’t that be a mess? The information would still be in
there, but finding it would be a big problem. The analogy is
this: everything you have ever seen, heard, or done is still in
your memory. Accessing and retrieving it is the difficulty.
Many students have told me that when they are taking a
test, they know the information but they don’t remember it
until the test is over a few hours later. They knew it; they just
couldn’t get the information out of their memories when they
needed it. This will happen with business professionals
when they leave out a part of their presentation and then
recall it when the meeting is over. The stress is off and your
mind throws it up. However, it is obviously too late then. So,
just like the computer, the information is in there. Finding it
when you need it is the difficulty. The system the Romans
developed, allows you to create files and directories in your
mind and store information in those files. Sounds pretty
cool, doesn’t it? Well, guess what? It is........it’s very cool. It
has transformed my life.
Remember, I told you to listen closely, because the next
part will be the nuts and bolts of memory training. Well, here
it is. The Romans discovered that you need five things to
recall anything...... numbers, poems, scripture, dates,
presentations or names. The items are the same your

computer uses.
 
1. Focus
 
2. Location
 
3. Code
 
4. Action
 
5. Review
The first item of business is focus. You must consciously
focus your memory. There are many supplements that you
can take to focus your memory and one of my favorites is
Omega-3 Fish Oil pills. In addition to this, supplement that
includes ingredients is going to be great for your memory
and ability to focus. You will be able to find this naturally in
some foods such spinach and blueberries as well.
Next, when you store information on your computer, where
do you put it? You put it in a file or directory to retrieve it
later. Your mind works the same way. The code your
memory recognizes is pictures, so we turn everything we
want to recall into a picture. That is the code our mind
thinks in. Number four, that item is action. What holds the
code in the file on the computer? The circuits hold the
information in a storage unit until it is deleted. Action is the
circuit for our memories. That may not make sense right
now, but it will as we progress. So you may be saying to
yourself, “Great, Ron, but what is a place where I can
mentally store information?” I don’t have circuits in my head.

Believe it or not, you do.
As Wilder Penfield discovered in 1959, you actually have
items in your mind right now that are files, and you don’t
even know it. Can you believe that? It’s true. Here are some
questions about the town that you live in. Can you visualize
the school? What about the fire department, your home, the
police station, maybe a public swimming pool, a river, the
park, a hotel, a car dealership or a restaurant. Could you
visualize those things? I bet you could. They are there. They
exist. These are what the Romans called files. What the
Romans would do is start at the north end of their town and
then chose an item like a park, or a river, or a stadium, or a
tree, or an object that stood out, and that would be their first
file. As they moved south through the town, they would
choose items in a very systematic north to south method
until they had maybe 25 or 30 files. Some probably had
many more files. Your town could actually be a file system.
I had the good fortune to live in downtown Seattle in my
twenties and I took a job as a waiter. On one of my first
days there, I was asked to learn the food menu. Did I use
this opportunity to spotlight my memory? Sure I did. A little
showing off is good every now and then.
What I did was pick buildings around Seattle as my files.
The space needle was my number one file. The King Dome
was number two. Safeco Field was number three, and
other restaurants and buildings were my files until I had
about 20. I even used the bay and some of the piers.
Remember, the next step in recalling information is to turn it
into a code that your mind remembers, and that code is
what? The code our minds remember with is pictures. So, I
turned the menu items into pictures and filed them with
action. What is action, you ask? Good question, but wait
just a minute before we get to that part. Remember, you are
a bamboo tree. I impressed everyone with how easy I was
able to do this using my newly created city files. I started
conversations and I even taught people I worked with how
to do it. It even helped me make friends. You didn’t know
this course could do that, did you? Pretty cool, huh? So
right now you should be getting a general idea how this
system works, but not exactly. Right now you may be
thinking, “This sounds fascinating!” But perhaps you don’t

see exactly how it works so the application. If that is how
you are thinking, then good. That’s exactly where you
should be. If you were supposed to understand everything
right now, we would stop the program here. We aren’t
going to do that.
In a moment you are going to draw out your own ‘‘City
Files’’. What you need to do is visualize your town from a
bird’s eye view. The top of the page is the North, and pick
ten items that you can use as files. Remember, good files
are buildings, restaurants, schools, houses or even a gas
station. Now, do this in a systematic way. Work north to
south or east to west, or even clockwise, just make it
logical. As you draw a box or diagram to denote the file,
place a number beside it, one through ten.
Here is an example of what your city files might look like:
Once again, pick ten files in your city; write them down and
memorize them!
How did you do? Did you zip right through it? You have just
created your first ten files. It should be kind of exciting. Now,
let’s not beat around the bush any longer, let’s use them. I’m
going to give you ten pictures, and we are going to file them
to you ten city files. Again, what are the five things you need
to recall anything?
 
1. Focus

 
2. Location
 
3. Code
 
4. Action
 
5. Review
Before we dive right in, let me ask you a few questions.
Can you remember every time you’ve gotten in a car and
driven somewhere? Most of us can’t. But I bet you can tell
me the time you were driving and someone pulled out in
front of you and your cars collided. You could probably tell
me the time of day, where you were going, what you were
driving, and what they were driving. Now, the question is,
why? What is the difference? That picture was vivid and it
had emotions tied to it. I bet you can’t tell me every time you
have gone to see a movie or had dinner with someone, but
what about that first date or the first break up? Those are
things that have emotion tied to them and are stronger in
our memories. So, the number four in our system is the
action, and that is what we use to create the vivid picture
with the emotion tied to it. The more vivid and emotional the
action is, the better you will recall it. Just like the lemon
analogy. It has to be vivid.
By now your city files need to be driven into your memory
and you need to know them forwards and backwards.
Below you will find a list of ten words. Using the city files
that you created place each of these objects mentally on
your location and visualize it with action. If the first word you
want to memorize is water then see a giant glass of water
pouring out onto your location. Remember the more vivid
and larger than life your image the better chance that you
will recall it.
So here is the list. Scan through it as quickly as possible
and use your locations on your city files, imagine larger than
life images and here we go:
 
1. Photo Album
 
2. Igloo

 
3. Cactus
 
4. Noah’s Ark
 
5. Gold bars
 
6. The color red
 
7. Doctor stitching a cut
 
8. Clothes made of dollar bills
 
9. Oranges
 
10. Peaches
Now write down the ten pictures to test your recall. Don’t
write the file or the action down, just the picture. For
example, number one, just write photo album. If you get
stuck on one, don’t worry about it. Don’t get bogged down
on one item. You can always come back to it later. Ask
yourself, what was your file and then the picture should
come to you. When you complete this test, come back to
the program.
So, how did you do? Did you get all ten of them? If you did,
pat yourself on the back. That is a great accomplishment.
Remember, when you heard about this memory system,
and you heard that I was able to hear items once and then
recall them forwards, backwards, or by number, you were
impressed. You were not impressed with the process; you
were impressed with the results. Once, a lady who attended
one of our live classes in Dallas was disappointed because
our system was so simple. I explained to her that’s not a
drawback. That is the beauty of this system. I have read
every study and program done on memory training. I could
make this course difficult and cumbersome. But why would I
want to do that when you can get phenomenal results with
such a simple process?
First 10 States in Alphabetical Order:
 
1. Alabama

 
2. Alaska
 
3. Arizona
 
4. Arkansas
 
5. California
 
6. Colorado
 
7. Connecticut
 
8. Delaware
 
9. Georgia
 
10. Florida
Now, how many did you get right? If you got nine or ten, pat
yourself on the back. If you got eight or less, ask yourself
why. It can only be one of two reasons. Either, number one
you did not know your file, or number two your picture
wasn’t vivid enough. If you knew your file, but you missed it,
it’s because the picture wasn’t strong enough. Make sure
that you know your files by heart and that the pictures that
you create are vivid. By the way, did you know that I just
taught you a list that actually means something and you
didn’t even know it? Often times to recall something, we are
going to have to turn an abstract into a picture. That is
exactly what we just did. We turned ten abstract words into
pictures, and I filed them to our files. Would you believe me
that if I just told you just learned the first ten states of the
United States in alphabetical order? Well, guess what? You
did. Remember, each state is an abstract word. We used a
picture or something we could represent to see it. Let’s see
what I mean. What was number one? ........ Photo album.
The first state in alphabetical order is Alabama. A photo
album for Alabama. Number two is igloo. What do you think
that represents? Alaska, right? Number three, cactus. Did
you guess Arizona? If you did you’re right. Number four,
Noah’s Ark. Almost too easy. Arkansas. Number five, gold
bars. Where was the gold rush in 1849? California, of
course. Number six, the color red. How about Colorado?
Number seven, stitching a cut? What are you doing? You

are connecting a cut....... Connecticut. Connecting-a-cut.
Number eight, dollar bill wear. Delaware. Dollar bill wear,
Delaware. Number nine, oranges. What state is known for
oranges? Florida, of course. Number ten, peaches. How
about Georgia? There you have it! The first ten states in
alphabetical order. Did you think it was going to be that
easy? You have learned quite a bit today. Stop and pick up
tomorrow on Day five.


Day 5
Skeleton Files
Are you ready to dig in and expand your memory? Let’s
review what we have learned on Day four. To recall
something, you must have five things. They are focus, a
location, a code, an action and review. A location or a file is
simply a place to store information. It could be anything at
all. For example, the first building in your city files is your
number one file. All ten of the files work together in this filing
system. Anything can be a file system as long as it goes in
a logical order and you can see or visualize each item. For
example, your car could be a file system with ten files.
These could be your car files. Number one is your front
bumper, number two is your hood or engine, number three
is your front windshield, number four is your steering wheel,
number five is your gear shift, number six could be your
glove box, seven could be your passenger seat, eight could
be the back seat, nine could be the trunk and number ten is
your license plate. Remember, you don’t have to use these
as one of your filing systems, but you certainly can. They
are wonderful to use.
The reason, however, I wanted to bring them up is to
illustrate that anything can be a file system. Your favorite
golf course could be an 18-file system. Maybe one of those
holes has a sand trap or water hazard next to it. Well, that
would be your file for that one. The Ballpark in Arlington
where the Texas Rangers play is a file system for me.
Number one is the pitcher’s mound, number two is home
plate, number three is first base, number four is second and
so on. Ok, do you get the idea? We are going to create a
file system that I think you’re going to like. It’s kind of fun.
There are ten files in this system, and it is called our
skeleton files. Why? Because the files are you! You are a
file system. I bet you can visualize this. It is important to
verbalize and touch your files. These are going to be
permanent files for you, and you must call them what I call
them. The reason will make sense later. This may be the
most important file system you have learned up to this
point. So, are you ready for your next ten files? Here we go!
Number one is the top of your head. We are going to call it

top. So, say top and touch the top of your head. I know that
you may feel silly. You may say, “Ron, this is silly.” Do you
think so? Well, I will tell you what is silly, forgetting to call a
client because you fail to remember, or giving a speech
and forgetting what you are supposed to say. That, my
friends, is silly.
This system is a little different, but have fun with it. So
again, what was number one? It was the top of your head.
So, say top and pat the top of your head. Your number two
file is going to be your nose, so pat your nose and say
number two. What was your one? One was top. What was
number two? Two is nose. Your number three file is your
mouth. Say mouth and then touch your mouth. What was
one? Top. Two was nose, and three is mouth. Notice we’re
just moving from top to bottom. Your number four file is your
ribs. So, grab your ribs and hold onto them and say number
four is my ribs. What is number four? It is your ribs. Your fifth
file is your liver. It is right in the lower half of your torso. We
are halfway through.
Number six is going to be your hip joint. We are going to
call it joint. So, touch your number six file and say number
six is my joint. What is four? Ribs, right? What about
number one? Top. What about four? Ribs. What was
number six? Joint. Ok, our number seven file is going to be
your knee cap. We are just going to call it cap.
So, seven is cap. What is seven? Cap. Pat it and say
number seven is cap. What about five? How about liver?
What was three? Mouth. What about number one? It was
top.
Our number eight file is going to be a bone in our lower leg.
There are two bones in your lower leg between your knee
cap and ankle. One of them is your fibula. So, repeat after
me. Number eight is fibula. Touch your leg and repeat.
Number eight is fibula. Number nine is on the very bottom. It
is the ball of your foot. We are going to call it ball. So, what
is number nine? It is ball. Number seven, it is cap. Number
five, liver. Number four, ribs, number six, joint. And number
ten is not on your skeleton. It is actually the ground. We are
going to call it the sand. So, point to the ground or the floor
and say number ten is the sand.

Let’s review real quick. Number one is top, two is nose,
three is mouth, four is ribs, five is liver, six is joint, seven is
cap, eight is fibula, nine is ball and ten is sand. These are
your ten skeleton files, and it is very important that you know
them. Stop and repeat each file. Here is a diagram now
memorize it!
So how did you do? Pretty simple, right? You betcha! That
is the beauty of this system. Later, believe it or not, the
skeleton files are going to be instrumental in learning how
to recall long digit numbers or phone numbers. Now, we are
going to go through the same process as we did the city
files. I am going to give you a list of words and you are
going to memorize them using your body as the location
storage. If you need to stop and make sure that you know
your skeleton files then do that before proceeding. Are you
ready? Clear your mind of all distractions.
Here is a list of ten items and file the first one to your first
skeleton file and the second one to your second file and so
on. Move as fast as you can through this list. Don’t wait until
you are 100% certain that you have the image mentally
glued. Force yourself to go faster than you think is doable
and you will be amazed with your recall. However, keep it in
perspective the speed is not the crucial ingredient at this
stage......understanding the system is the focus.

 
1. Speaker
 
2. Gun
 
3. Soldier
 
4. Spotlight
 
5. A picture of you
 
6. Judge riding a fast motorcycle
 
7. Jury
 
8. Excessive amount of money
 
9. Making a right turn with your hand over your mouth
 
10. State Capitol building
Review all ten very quickly and attach them to your files as
rapidly as you can. Do not take more than one minute on
this at most. Now, write down the ten pictures we just filed.
Rejoin the program when you complete this process.
So, how did you do? Did you get all ten? If not, ask yourself
why. It is for one of two reasons. Either number one, you
didn’t know your file, or number two, your picture wasn’t
vivid enough. There is no other option. Remember, in order
to recall something, you must turn an abstract into a picture.
We just filed the first ten amendments to the Constitution,
the Bill of Rights, to our skeleton files. Did you believe that
we could do that? We did. Many students spend all day
saying the Bill of Rights over and over. You just learned it
forwards, backwards, and by number in less than five
minutes. You don’t believe me? Let’s see.
Bill of Rights
 
1. Freedom of speech
 
2. Right to Bear Arms

3. Protection From Quartering Troops
 
4. Freedom from Unreasonable Search and Seizure
 
5. Right to not self-incriminate
 
6. Right to Speedy Trial
 
7. Right to Trial by Jury
 
8. Prohibition of excessive bail
 
9. Protection of Rights Not Enumerated
 
10. Protection of State’s Rights
Number one was speaker. Well, speaker stands for
freedom of speech. Number two, what did we file to the
nose? A gun, right? That amendment says we have the
right to bear arms. Number three. What was three? Soldier.
No soldier shall be quartered in a house without the
consent of the owner. Number four, a search light. You had
a search light on your ribs. Freedom from unreasonable
search and seizure. Number five, you had a picture of
yourself in your liver, didn’t you? No one will be called to
testify against themselves. Number six, was a judge riding
a fast motorcycle. Remember, right there on your joint, you
had a judge riding a fast motorcycle? That was an abstract
to a speedy trial. Number seven. What was it? A jury of 12.
That picture representative of the right to a trial by jury.
Number eight is an excessive amount of money.
Remember, we had an excessive amount of money coming
out of our fibula? That amendment is that there shall be no
excessive bail. Number nine. What did we file to the ball of
our foot? We filed you making a right hand turn with your
hand over your mouth. This amendment says that person’s
may have rights even if they are not mentioned in the
constitution (hand over mouth for not mentioned) and these
rights can still be violated. Number ten is a state capitol,
right? We had a state capitol on the sand? That
amendment talked about state’s rights.
Now, I think that you will agree that these pictures were
somewhat unusual. When you are doing this on your own,
you’re going to have the freedom to make your own

pictures. If you are a student, this example in application
should be very obvious to you. If you’re a business
professional, I hope you can also see the application. The
skeleton file could be used to recall a “things to do list,”
steps in a presentation, procedures, organization mission
statements or to give a speech. The applications are
endless. Each day, I am going to use generic examples,
but please be creative. This system can truly change the
way you go about your daily life if you let it. I encourage you
to do that.


Day 6
Pencil List Practice
Welcome back. It’s now Day six. Can you feel your memory
expanding? I hope that this process is exciting for you. The
system you are learning is just that. This is a very specific
system that business professionals and students from
around the country, and for that matter, the world, are using
to impact their lives. Now, let’s review. What are the five
things you need to memorize anything? Number one focus,
next a location or a file, number three is a code, which is
the picture and number four is action and five is review.
And, remember, a file can be anything. It is simply a place
in your mind that you can see or visualize.
 
1. Focus
 
2. Location
 
3. Code
 
4. Action
 
5. Review
A file is a building in your city or your nose, your mouth or
even a hole on your favorite golf course. It is also important
to recall that each file system has more than one file. For
example, your skeleton files, you have top, nose, mouth,
and so on. Each one of them is a file. However, when
placed together, they are a file system. As long as there is
more than one of them, they go in a logical order, and you
can see them, they can be used as a file system.
Remember, the only limit is your imagination. The code, as
you recall, is the picture.
Computers translate everything they store to a code so they
can recall it later. The computer between your ears works
exactly the same way, and the code that your mind recalls
is pictures. Your mind remembers pictures that are unusual
and have emotion tied to them. And if you are missing
some items when we go back and review our list, it is for
one of two reasons. Either you did not know your file, or if

you knew your file but did not know your information, the
reason is the picture you created was not vivid enough. The
circuit board in your memory is the glue that you create.
You have ten skeleton files and ten city files. We learned
the pencil list and we learned how to use acronyms and link
method. These are all valid forms of memory training. We
are going to cover giving speeches without notes, learning
poems or scripture, product knowledge, things to do list,
math formulas, foreign languages and much more. Let’s
review our pencil list:
 
1. Pencil
 
2. Sink
 
3. Circus
 
4. Track
 
5. Star
 
6. Bullet
 
7. Dice
 
8. Hour Glass
 
9. Baseball
 
10. Fingers
 
11. Goal Post
 
12. Eggs
 
13. Flag
 
14. Ring
 
15. Paycheck
 
16. Car
 
17. Magazine

 
18. Soldier
 
19. Golf Clubs
 
20. Shot Gun
These are files, places where we store information.
Knowing these are going to be crucial for recalling
numbers. Perhaps you have heard or seen me do the
demonstration where someone will give me a 100 digit
number, and I will recall it forwards, backwards, and by the
number it was call out at. I did this, believe it or not, building
up on the concepts we learned in the skeleton files. So
everything we have learned up to this point is crucial and
has a purpose.
The activities for today are simply to go back and read the
activities we have completed each day and make sure you
understand the lessons in each.


Day 7
Counting in Japanese
You have learned a lot so far, but the fun is just beginning.
As you will recall, anything can be a file system as long as
there is more than one and it goes in a logical order, and it
is something that you can use. Since these are the
qualifications, our pencil list is actually going to be a file
system for you just like the skeleton files and the city files
are. So, let’s review the first ten files on our pencil list. I
chose to use the word file because that is exactly what they
are going to be. Places where we can store information. It
could be lines of a poem or scripture, or as you will see
later, we are going to learn a quote by Teddy Roosevelt
very soon. Remember, that your mind thinks in pictures,
and you must see these files in order to recall them.
Don’t get bored that we are reviewing this file system
again. I know that it may seem redundant, and at this point,
I’ll grant you, it is, but please take my word for it, that at this
point is very necessary. We will get less and less redundant
as we go and you become more comfortable with this
system. But, don’t give up now. You’ve invested too much
time and this is going to pay off in a big way for you. You
will see what I mean as we go.
Number one, what is our file? It is a pencil. So get a clear
picture in your mind of a pencil. Perhaps, it is a pencil
holder on your desk, or a pencil sharpener, or a giant man-
eating pencil with arms and legs. It doesn’t matter what you
see. The only stipulation is that you see a clear picture of a
pencil and it always is the same image that you are going
to use for this file. For example, my number one file is a
pencil holder on my desk.
Number two, what is your file? It’s a sink. Get a very clear
picture in your mind of a sink. It could be a kitchen sink, or a
bathroom sink or a sink at your office. It doesn’t matter, just
see it, and just make sure you always use the same one.
Number three, what is your file? It’s circus. Get an image of
a circus in your mind. What do you think of when you think
of circus? Is it the tent, the elephants, the trapeze artists?

Just see a circus and always use that image as your file.
Number four, what’s your file? It’s track.. It could be a
professional track at the Olympics, or a high school, or a
college track or even a track for race cars. Just make sure
every time you use the same track. Number five, what is our
file? It’s star. What do you think of when I say star? Is it the
star on a flag, or maybe a night sky with the stars in the
sky? Just see it.
Number six, what is your file? It’s bullet. Visualize the Lone
Ranger’s silver mullet or an M16 it doesn’t matter. Just
have a clear bullet in your mind’s eye.
Number seven, what is your file? It is dice. Get an image of
dice. Maybe it is a Monopoly board, or a craps table or
another game. Just make sure it is always the same picture
for dice.
Number eight, what is your file? It’s an hourglass. Get an
image in your head. Maybe you have an hourglass on your
table or desk. Once a man said he sees his wife, because
she has an hourglass figure. Whatever you see, it doesn’t
matter, just be consistent.
Number nine, what is your file? It is baseball. It could be a
baseball player, a bat, a ball, a glove, a stadium......it
doesn’t matter. Just make it a clear picture and always use
that image for your file.
Number ten, what is your file? It’s fingers, Now, this one will
be pretty easy. It’s familiar for all of us. Get an image of a
hand in your mind.
We’re going to stop there, but go back and review 11
through 20 when we wrap up for today and make sure you
have pictures for all those numbers. Now, I am going to give
you ten pictures, and you are going to file these ten pictures
to your first ten pencil list files. The files will be the pencil list
and below are the ten words. Remember move as fast as
possible and test how fast you can memorize this list in the
correct order.
 
1. Itching

 
2. Knee
 
3. Sun
 
4. Girl
 
5. Green traffic light
 
6. Fonzi (from ‘‘Happy Days’’) in a row boat
 
7. The Sea and cheese (two word on this one)
 
8. Queso dip (hot melted cheese)
 
9. Fonzi
 
10. Chew
Okay, now write down these ten words in this exact order.
So, how did you do? Did you get a perfect score? If you
did, give yourself a pat on the back. Now, if you didn’t, ask
yourself why? Did you know your file for each one? If you
knew your file, and you were still unable to recall the
information, it is because your picture was not vivid enough.
Create a very strong image in your mind. If you see it, you
will most likely not forget it. Now, before we wrap up our
lesson for the day, what do you think that we just learned?
We just learned to count to ten in Japanese!


 
1. Itching = Ichi
 
2. Knee = Ni
 
3. Sun = San
 
4. Girl = Shi (the pronoun she)
 
5. Green Traffic Light = Go
 
6. Fonzi in a row boat = Roku (ku is pronounced like
cool and no one is cooler than Fonzi!)
 
7. Sea and cheese = Shichi
 
8. Hot cheese = Hachi
 
9. Fonzi = Ku (cool)
 
10. Chew = Ju
You can now count in Japanese! You may think that well,
big deal, that was easy to learn! And you’re right, it was.
However, it was easy because we approached it from the
correct angle the first time.
If you are a student who had to learn how to count in
Japanese in less than seven minutes, forwards and
backwards, and by number, and you didn’t have a memory
system, I think that you would find it a daunting task. It was
simple because of the system we used. However, as
simple as it is, it is effective. Today, you learned a lot. It was
a full lesson. So, take it in and pat yourself on the back for
completing the lesson!


Day 8
Memorizing Math Formulas
We’re almost done building files. We are not going to
review our skeleton files anymore. You have them at this
point. If you don’t, stop and make sure that you do. Before
we begin filing anything to our body files, let me tell you two
quick stories. Don’t file these stories to files, just visualize
them.
This is your first story: You have a huge globe in front of you.
It is a 6-foot tall globe. As you stand in front of the globe,
notice that there are seven continents, and some overlap
into the northern and southern hemisphere, but the majority
of them are in the north. There are four in the northern
hemisphere and three in the southern hemisphere. So, let’s
review. What is in front of you? A globe. How many
continents in the north? Four. In the south? Three. Now, you
notice a piece of a pie on top of the globe and you reach up
to grab a piece of the pie, but just as soon as you do, you
see a rat has been eating the pie, and you don’t want to eat
after a rat. He’s at the North Pole, so he’s frozen or an ice
cube. Right? Now, what was our picture? We had a globe,
and how many continents in the north? Four. And what
about the south? Three. What was on top of the globe? Pie.
What was then next to the pie? A rat, and he was an ice
cube. Now, move the picture off the screen of your mind. I’m
going to give you a new picture.
Here is the second story : I want to introduce you to a friend
of mine. He is a giant man-eating bumble bee from Texas.
He is from Texas, so he is wearing a giant cowboy hat.
Picture some parallel bars in your mind. This bee walks out
with the hat and hops on the parallel bars and starts doing
gymnastics. Now, if you saw that, you would never forget it.
No. So, see it. Ok. Now, you have two stories in your mind
that are actually pictures. What we did was take some
abstract thoughts, and actually they were calculus formulas
and we turned them into pictures and we filed them to our
files. Let me show you what I mean.
A stockbroker once attended my course in Austin, Texas.
He was studying for his Series seven test. He brought a

book full of formulas. He had a lot of anxiety for the test. He
was afraid he was not going to be able to recall the
formulas. We approached them the exact way we
approached these calculus formulas. What was the first
story? It was about a globe, right? A globe is actually a
sphere. So, the formula was to learn to volume formula for a
sphere. That formula is sphere = 4/3Õr2. Each one of these
items is an abstract thought, so we had to turn it into a
picture. A globe for sphere, four continents in the north and
three in the south, for 4/3. And a pie for the math symbol
representing 3.14, and a rat to represent r, and he is an ice
cube to represent cubed. That’s pretty easy. Each item
simply has to be turned into a picture to recall it, and then
we created a story just like the Mount Rainier story.
The stockbroker thought he was going to have to turn
pictures for each formula and that seemed like a daunting
task for him. He didn’t think there was any way. However,
after looking at the formulas, he realized that the same
symbols appeared in each formula over and over again.
So, yes, he did have to turn each symbol into a picture, but
he had to do it once. The next time he saw that symbol in an
equation, he already had a picture for it. In calculus, r is a
symbol that appears in a lot of formulas and stands for
radius. So, if you are dealing with formulas, you only have to
turn the variables into a picture once, the first time. Let’s
review the second formula real quick. It was the area
formula for a parallelogram. The formula is written this way,
parallelogram = bh, which means base times height. So,
we had parallel bars for parallelogram, and a bee for b, and
a cowboy hat for h. Pretty simple. Parallelogram = bh.
If you are a student, the applications are obvious. If you are
a business professional, a concept is actually more
important than the formulas. So, make sure you understand
the concept. You just learned two calculus formulas whether
you wanted to or not. And, remember it didn’t seem like a
challenge because we approached it from the correct angle
the first time. If you are a student struggling to learn 4/3Õr2,
and then you were given this memory system, I think you
would appreciate it much more. So, be thankful that you
didn’t have to go through that to get the information.
Volume Formula

Sphere = 4/3 π R3
Area
Parallelogram = BH 
Circular Ring = 2 π PW
When recalling formulas, you must substitute a picture for
the symbol or variable.
 
Math Symbol Picture
 
Sphere=Globe
 
π (pi)=Piece of Pie
 
R (radius)=Rat
 
Parallelogram=Parallel Bars
 
B (base)=Bumble Bee
 
H (height)=Hat
 
Circular Ring=Ring
 
P (perimeter)=Pirate
 
W (width)=Window


Day 9
Creating Your House Files
What we are about to do is create some new files. These
are my favorite files, and this is my favorite filing system. I
love them. I use this file system 90% of the time. So, what is
it? It’s called house files. We’re going to use our homes as
filing systems. It is very similar to the city files, the only
difference that instead of landmarks around our city, we are
using rooms or areas of our house. This system will give us
25 files. After you complete this, you are going to have 10
skeleton files, 20 pencil list files, ten city files, and 25 house
files. That is 65 files. Sixty-five files will get most students
through tests and most business professionals through
product knowledge information, training manuals, and other
related items. On Day 15, we are actually going to learn
how to build as many as 1,000 files. Can you believe that? I
personally have about 2900 files. You are going to astound
yourself at what your memory is capable of. Now, let’s build
those files!!
You’re going to select five rooms or five sections in your
house, and then in each of these five rooms, you’re going to
have five files. For example, your first room could be a
bedroom, and you pick five pieces of furniture. The next
room is the kitchen, and you pick five appliances. The next
room is the bathroom, and you use five files. Maybe the tub,
or toilet or sink. If you live in a small apartment, you still
have five sections. A bathroom, a kitchen, a living room, a
hall and a bedroom. If you need to use the front yard,
parking lot, or driveway, do that. Just choose five sections.
After you have selected the five rooms or sections, then
select 5 files in each room. Visualize yourself standing in
the doorway of your first room. Then start at the right or the
left, it doesn’t matter, just so you’re consistent. Then going
clockwise or counter-clockwise, choose five files. Pick big
items over small items and spread them out across the
room. In other words, don’t cram all of your files on one side
of the room. Spread them out evenly and avoid using the
same items in each room. For example, if you select a
chair in one room, don’t use a chair in the next. So, in
review, select five rooms and five files in each room. If you

use your front yard, then make one of the files a pole,
another could be the grass, the mailbox and so forth. Right
now, make sure you have five rooms (or areas) and five
files in each room. Later, if you have more room, feel free to
add more files. Right now, keep it at five and five. Don’t put
six files in one room and four in the next. The reason for that
will make sense later.
Here is an example of what one of the rooms might look
like.
This is where you are going to store information. I just met a
lady this week with an ERA real estate office. She took this
course a few years ago. She was telling me how much she
enjoyed the class and she even took her son to the course.
She said that when they moved her son said that they were
not done packing. She looked at him like he was crazy.
She said, “Of course we are!” He said, “No, Mom. I’ve still
got my pictures hanging all over the files in the kitchen. I
can’t get them off. Every time I look in there, I see them.”
Now, that’s a good imagination, and the kind we all need to
have to make this system work. But don’t worry, you can
move and even rearrange your furniture because in your
mind is where the files exist and they stay the same in
there.
I have created these mental journeys in every home I have
ever lived in. I have also created journeys through my
friend’s homes. This will be a great exercise for you too.
After you create your own house files I strongly encourage
you to create a map like this of your family member’s and
friend’s homes. You could easily create 200-300 files in just
a few hours doing this.
Now for the instruction on how to do this: The first room is

going to be one through five, the second room is going to
be six through ten, the third room is going to be 11 through
15, the fourth room is 16 through 20, and the fifth room is
21 through 25. The best thing that you can do right now is
make sure you have these 25 files created and review them
until you know them cold without hesitation the number and
the file.


Day 10
Poems and Quotes
Welcome to Day ten. Did you enjoy building your house
files yesterday? I hope so. I can’t stress enough how much I
like the house files and how often I use them. As a matter of
fact, we’re going to use our house files right now! We are
going to memorize a 20-line poem. That’s right. We are
going to learn a 20-line poem forwards, backwards and by
number. Are you ready? First of all I would like you to read
this poem through once or twice just to get a feel for it.
Don’t try to memorize it just now, simply read it and get a
feel for it.
The Man in the Glass
By Dale Wimbrow
When you get what you want in your struggle for self
And the world makes you king for a day.
Just go to a mirror and look at yourself
And see what that man has to say.
For it is not your father, your mother or your wife
Whose judgment upon you must pass.
But the fellow’s verdict who counts most in your life is the
man looking back from the glass.
Some people may say you are a square shooting chum
And call you a wonderful guy.
But the man in the glass says you’re only a bum,
If you can’t look him straight in the eye.
He is the one to please, never mind the rest,
For he’s with you clear up until the end.
And you will pass your most dangerous and difficult test
If the man in the glass is your friend.
You may fool the whole world down the pathway of years
And get pats on your back as you pass.
But your final reward will be heartache and tears
If you’ve cheated the man in the glass
That is a pretty powerful poem, isn’t it? Every time I use it in
a seminar, I always get quite a reaction. When memorizing
a poem (or quotes, scripture, etc.) we never turn every word
into a picture. Instead, after reading each line or verse, we
create a picture that will be a brain trigger for that line. I’m

going to give you 20 pictures that you are going to file to
your first 20 files. As we do this, look at each line of the
poem that corresponds with the number. If you prefer to use
your own pictures, then by all means, do that. Mine are just
suggestions, but use what works for you. We are going to
use our house files.
 
1. File two people who look exactly like you and they are
struggling or wrestling with each other.
 
2. Sitting on top of a globe with a king’s crown on.
 
3. You looking in a mirror
 
4. A man talking
 
5. Your mother, your father and your wife (or spouse or
what you would imagine they looked ike if you had
one!)
 
6. Judge in a car and you are passing him
 
7. Jury foreman standing up and giving a verdict on your
life.
 
8. A man in a mirror looking back at you.
 
9. Gun that shoots square gum.
 
10. File Jimmy Stewart from It’s A Wonderful Life.
 
11. A mirror with a reflection what you consider a bum to
be. (For me, it is the 1954 Dodgers. hey were
referred to them as bums.)
 
12. A huge eyeball that you can’t stand to look at
 
13. Someone begging you please, maybe there’s a lot of
people behind him and you pay no attention to the
rest
 
14. A man running a race and he is crossing the finish
line
 
15. Student passing a test

 
16. Your best friend in a glass
 
17. An old fool walking down a pathway
 
18. Someone patting you on the back as you pass them
 
19. Someone handing you a trophy and you start crying
and your heart breaks
 
20. Stealing from the man in the glass
Now write down these 20 lines. Don’t write the story
necessarily or the file, just the picture you saw. If you got
stuck on one, don’t worry about it. Move on to the next. We
are not concerned with perfect scores. We are in the
learning stage. So, stop now and fill in one through 20.
DON’’T try and write down the poem word for word just the
images that you saw. Later you can make sure the images
are brain triggers for you for the poem.
Well, how did you do? Did you get 17 or more? If you did,
that is very good. If you got a perfect score, that’s even
better! Now, remember, when you memorize scripture or
lines of a poem, you don’t turn every single word into a
picture. You simply use brain triggers are going to be cues
for you. Remember that your mind works like a computer
and the glue must be strong for you. That is what holds the
picture or data in place. The glue is the circuit board of your
memory. Before we wrap up the lesson for the day, let’s go
through and review the poem just so you are clear what the
pictures represent.
Number one, two people struggling. The line of poetry is,
when you get what you want in your struggle for self.
Number two, a man sitting on top of a globe wearing a
king’s crown, and the world makes you king for a day.
Number three, looking at your reflection in the mirror, just go
to a mirror and look at yourself. Number four, a man talking,
and see what that man has to say. Number five, your father,
your mother, and your wife, the poetry says, for it is not your
father, or your mother or your wife. Number six, a judge
passing you in a car. The poem says, whose judgment
upon you must pass. Number seven, a jury for man giving a

verdict in your life. The poem says, but the fellow’s verdict
who counts most in your life. Number eight, a man’s
reflection in the mirror. The poem says, is the man looking
back from the glass. Number nine, a gun that shoots square
gum, some people may call you a square shooting chum.
Number ten, Jimmy Stewart in It’s A Wonderful Life, and
call you a wonderful guy.
Number 11, a mirror and your idea of what a bum looks
like. The poetry says, but the man in the glass says you’re
only a bum. Number 12, a huge eye that you can’t look
straight at. The poetry says, if you can’t look him straight in
the eye. Number 13, someone with their hands folded
begging you please with the rest of the people behind him.
The poetry says, for he is the one to please, never mind the
rest. Number 14, a runner crossing a finish line. The poetry
says, for he is with you clear up till the end. Number 15, a
student passing a test. The poem says, you will pass your
most dangerous and difficult test. Number 16, your best
friend in a glass. The poetry says, if the man in the glass is
your friend. Number 17, an old fool walking down a
pathway. The poetry says, you may fool the whole world
down the pathway of years. Number 18, someone patting
you on the back as you pass. The poem says, and get pats
on your back as you pass. Number 19, someone handing
you a trophy and it breaks your heart and you start to cry.
The poetry says, your final reward will be heartache and
tears. And, finally, number 20, someone stealing from the
man in the glass. The poem says, if you have cheated the
man in the glass. Wow! Do you realize what you just did?
You just memorized a twenty line poem forwards,
backwards, and by number.
You might have to read the poem once or twice to fill in the
blanks if the pictures don’t make one hundred per cent
sense to you. But give yourself some credit. I know that if
you would have seen me looking at a poem for five minutes
and then have been able to say the poem forwards,
backwards, and by number, you would probably have been
incredibly impressed with my memory. So, give yourself the
same amount of credit that you would give me. You just
accomplished something very remarkable. Soon, you will
learn how to give speeches without notes and retain

product knowledge. The skill you just learned is tremendous
for lines of poetry, scriptures or quotations.


Day 11
Memorizing Sales Presentations
Welcome back. It’s Day 11. Have you been reciting The
Man in the Glass? It is a great poem. It is extremely
powerful. I conclude our workshop with it and it is a powerful
way to end this seminar. It really strikes a chord with some
people. If you are a public speaker, this system will allow
you to incorporate poems and quotations that draw your
audience in. Also, I think it’s a good point to remind you not
to get caught up in being perfect.
Perhaps you have heard the story of Thomas Edison when
he was constructing the light bulb. It took him over 1,000
attempts. After he successfully completed the light bulb, he
held a press conference and a brash reporter asked him,
“Mr. Edison, how does it make you feel to have failed over
1,000 times?” Mr. Edison without missing a beat, promptly
responded, “You misunderstand. I did not fail over 1,000
times. I successfully found 1,000 ways the light bulb will not
work.” Now, that’s a positive attitude. And it is an attitude
that we can learn from for sure.
If you don’t get a perfect score, do what Mr. Edison did.
Ask yourself why. Learn something from the failure.
Remember it was for one of two reasons. It was either
number one, you didn’t know your file, or number two, your
circuit board or your action was not strong enough. Those
are the only two reasons. So learn a lesson from Mr.
Edison. The skill that I want to teach you next is how to give
a sales presentation or, for that matter, any presentation
without using notes. This is a money making skill.
The file system I use to give my presentation is my skeleton
files. What are the skeleton files? Remember, they are top,
nose, mouth, ribs, liver, joint, cap, fibula, ball and sand. That
is where we are going to store a generic sales
presentation. Let’s say that you are a new salesperson or a
veteran salesperson who would like to nail your
presentation down a little better. What do you do? You
break it down into separate thoughts, then turn those
thoughts into pictures and file them to your files. So, I’m
going to give you ten items and you need to scan through

these very quickly. These items are going to represent the
steps in a sales presentation. Most companies have a
presentation that at the end has a call for action, and the
presentation is designed in a very specific manner. There,
most likely, is psychology behind the presentation, and all
too often, a salesperson will get caught up in the moment
and forget the steps in his presentation which weaken it.
So, your presentation may or may not be similar to the one
we’re about to learn. However, after you do this exercise,
you should have a very good understanding of a very
practical business application to this system that we are
learning.
File these pictures to your files as fast as you can. Make
the pictures vivid and KEEP MOVING!!
 
1. Handshake for the introduction.
 
2. Statistics (to back up the value of your product)
 
3. Professional giving an opinion
 
4. Asking questions
 
5. Filling a need (what your product accomplishes)
 
6. Demonstration
 
7. Features and benefits
 
8. Testimonials or third party references
 
9. Investment
 
10. Call to action
Okay, scan through it one more time if you have to and then
stop and write these ten items down.
How did you do? If you got all ten, give yourself a pat on the
back for a job well done. If you missed one, be sure to ask
yourself why. Did you know your file and was your picture
vivid enough? Give yourself some credit if you scored well.
Remember, that if you would have given me ten pictures

rapidly and then I recited them back forwards, backwards,
and by number, you would be very impressed. Well, guess
what? That is what you just did. Now, for the practical
application, this is what I use when I give my sales
presentation. I file it to my skeleton files. If you were just
learning a presentation or if you were a veteran, this will
help you. You could even help a co-worker learn this
presentation.
Remember that not everyone has benefited from our
training, and when you see a young salesperson struggling
to learn the steps of the presentation, tell him to build files in
his office and then use pictures as brain triggers. By the
way, some of you may say, “Well, Ronnie, what if I file the
ten major points of my presentation but there are details
under each one that I can’t recall? In this situation, what you
would do is file the ten major points, then if there is more
information that you want to file, file that on top. Go back
and layer them on. Remember, the Mount Rainier story
taught us that we could link items together and file them
together. For example, we could file Mount
Rainier to the top of your head right now and we would
actually have 19 items on that file. So, the principle is the
same if you have more than one item to file to each file. Go
back and layer them on top of one another. That is what I
did for my sales presentation. After I was sure I had the ten
major points, I went back and filed minor points on top of
the major ones. There you have it a sales presentation
without notes!


Day 12
Uses For Files
Now, let’s learn a little bit about learning product
knowledge. If you are a student, this will still apply to you
because you can see how this will help you study for a test. I
will show you as we go. We are going to use our house files
for product knowledge. We have five rooms and five files in
each room. In this scenario, we are going to be an
automobile salesperson. However, this would work
effectively if you sold copiers, homes, mortgages,
insurance or something else. As a salesperson, you not
only want to know the features and benefits of your product,
you also want to know the benefits of similar models
competitors may have. This is the way to handle that. You
dedicate your first room to the product knowledge about
your product.
Pick five key selling features of your product and file them
to your files. Remember, we are going to use the example
of being an automobile sales professional for this one. So,
let’s say you are focusing on sports utility vehicles and you
are a Toyota salesman. What you do is take the five selling
features and file them to your first room. Perhaps it is leg
room to one file, financing to another, sunroof to another.
Whatever the five key selling features are, file them to your
first five files. Now, you ask, “What are the next four rooms
for?” Good question. I’m glad that you asked. Each one of
these rooms is dedicated to your competition. That’s right,
you are going to dedicate a room of your house to your
competition. So, you make room number two, your Mazda
room, room three, your Jeep room, room four, your Chevy
room, room five, your Lincoln Mercury room. Then in each
one of these rooms, you list the five benefits over theirs. Be
creative and use your own imagination. If you’re a copy
machine sales professional, one room could be your Xerox
room, one your Panasonic and so on.
If you so desired, you could fill up all 25 files with
information on your product. The reason I throw in
competition information is that people are comfortable
doing business with the salesperson who knows a lot about
the sales industry. That includes how their product

measures up to the competition. If you are a student, you
can use this same concept in studying for a test. Let’s say
you are taking a history test and you need to learn to major
causes of the Civil War. You make one room your Civil War
room, and you file the causes for the Civil War to that room.
The next thing you might need to know are the major battles
of the Civil War, so you file those in that room. The third
room may be some important dates in the Civil War, and
so on. This is just an example. However, you use the same
concept as product knowledge. You can dedicate each
room to a particular theme and then file information to that
room. I recall studying for a psychology test one day, and
the first room, I filed five major psychologists. The second
room I used to file theories. The third room was to
experiments, and I continued until I had all my notes on my
files. For students, I would also encourage that you file
rooms in your class. I remember when I was in school
looking out the window and the teacher would say, “Ronnie,
the answer isn’t on the window.” Well, guess what? It might
just be in this case. If you are a student or a business
professional, room files are a great way to group thoughts
or ideas by room. It helps to organize them in your mind.
The activity today is going to be a little different. You know
what situation you’re in. Perhaps you need to recall product
knowledge or perhaps test information is more important to
you. Use your house files if you are a salesperson who
needs to file product knowledge to your files just like we
talked about. It may take a moment to sit down and actually
do, however, even if you are a veteran sales professional, I
think you will be astounded at the new information that you
can store even if it is about your competitors. If you are in
the business arena, but not as a salesperson, then file
information pertinent to your job. Perhaps it could be
procedures or new training you are learning. If you are a
student, this should be a “gimme”. Get out you notes for
your next test and file them to your 25 house files.
Remember that you can group them by room. Do it! And do
not continue to the next lesson until you have done so.
Remember that your final reward will be heartache and
tears if you’ve cheated the man in the glass. So, don’t cheat
the man in the glass. Fill up your 25 files with something
that is going to be a benefit to you and we will talk again

tomorrow. Have a great day and get going!


Day 13
Giving Speeches Without Notes
Welcome to Day 13. How did your exercises go yesterday?
That was your first real test of something that you have to
memorize every day. I’m confident that you found the room
files very easy to use and extremely helpful. So far, we have
filed information to our skeleton files, our house files, city
files and the pencil list. That is all the files we are going to
create together. So, at this point in the program, you have
all the files that you are going to need to get through most
everything. On Day 15, I will cover how to build up to 1,000
files. Yes, you heard that right, 1,000. Today, we are going
to learn how to give speeches without the use of notes.
According to a survey that came out a few years ago, the
number one fear in America is the fear of public speaking.
The number two fear on that survey was the fear of death.
Can you believe that? People are terrified of giving a
speech. However, when you can give a speech without
notes, it builds your credibility, your self-esteem, you are
able to maintain eye contact and the people you are talking
to are impressed with your subject matter. They will notice
when you aren’t using notes. I instruct our live two-day
seminars and I never access a single note. That is seven
hours each day and 14 hours total, and I never use a single
note. Well, actually I’m using notes. I’m just the only one that
can see my notes. To instruct our seminars, I take my notes
and then file them to my house files. I do not memorize my
speech word for word. Imagine how boring that would be to
listen to a speech that had been memorized word for word.
Instead, I just file the major thoughts to my files and then
jump from one file to the next in my mind. If you are called
upon to give a speech, it will be most likely on a subject that
you’re familiar with. So you will not need to recall it word for
word. Instead, you will use brain triggers to move from one
file to the next. Let me show you what I mean.
I’m going to give you ten pictures and then file these
pictures to your house files. You are only going to use your
first two rooms because I am going to give you ten pictures.
These ten pictures are actually ten items from a speech
given on time management. Remember, we are going to

use our house files. So sit back, relax, close your eyes, and
think house files.
Here are the items. Memorize these as rapidly as you can!
Try to just go through each word once and only a few
seconds per word.
 
1. Clock
 
2. Organizer or day planner
 
3. ”things to do” list
 
4. Goal post to number 4
 
5. Cargo ship importing ants
 
6. Black jack dealer standing behind a gate
 
7. Fun
 
8. Calendar
 
9. Work room
 
10. Blueprints with glue
You know the drill, write these down and see how many that
you get. Remember that you only need to write the picture
down. Not the action or the files.
How did you do? Did you get all of them? If you didn’t, it’s
for only one of two reasons. Either number one, you didn’t
know your file or number two, your picture wasn’t vivid
enough. There is no other possible reason. When you give
a speech without notes, you never memorize it word for
word. Instead you have brain triggers to keep you moving
from one thought to the next. So, what we have here is ten
brain triggers that will get us talking about ten major points.
Follow along as I show you what I mean. This is a speech
on time management.
The first thing that you open your speech with is time
management. That is why we filed the clock to the number

one file. Remember that the code our mind uses to recall
information is pictures, so we used a clock to represent
time management. You used this brain trigger to introduce
the subject of your speech to your audience.
The next thing that you talk about was filed to your number
two file. What did we file to your number two file? It was an
organizer. The word we want to talk about is being
organized. After you see this prompt on your file, you can
go into more depth with your audience and perhaps talk
with them about using a day timer or a Franklin planner or
getting organized using a program where there are
computers or simply a filing system at their office.
Number three, what is your file? What did you file to it? A
“things to do list”, right? Talk to your group about the
importance of writing out a “things to do list” every day. That
way, you have a plan for the day and they day does not
simply happen around you.
Number four, what is your file? What did you file to it? A
goal post, right? This represents that you must set and
establish goals to be organized. At this point you may
mention the importance of setting goals with a deadline
and clearly define objectives.
Now, number five. What did we file to number five? Ants.
Being imported, right? This represents the word
importance. You are importing ants. This is a mental cue to
remind you that you need to select an importance on each
item on your things to do list and make certain items a
priority. Notice we are not memorizing every single word.
Just key words that are going to become brain triggers.
Number six, what did we file to number six? A black jack
dealer behind a gate. The word we wanted to recall is
delegate. We used a dealer for del and gate for gate. So,
we have delegate for number six. This is important to
mention when you are assigning tasks for individuals and
not trying to tackle the project on your own.
Number seven, what is your file? What did we file to it? We
filed fun to that file. When you see this, remind your
audience that it’s important to set time aside for fun. All

work and no play is not good. You must allocate time to let
your mind relax and have some fun. Number eight, what is
your file? What did we file to it? You filed a schedule. When
you see the schedule, you’ll remember that this is a brain
trigger to talk about keeping a regular schedule and getting
up the same time every day and make a routine. This will
help you to use your time more wisely.
Number nine, you are going to talk about setting up a
special room to work in. This is a place where you can go
and get away from all distractions and just focus on work.
Number ten, we filed a blueprint with glue on it. That means
that as you review your speech and recap the highlights,
reinforce your audience the importance of having a plan
and sticking to it. That is what the glue symbolizes. Sticking
to it.
Now, you understand the concept of how to give a speech
without notes. It is not important to memorize every word.
Just make brain triggers and then file them to your files.
Giving speeches without notes is an exclusive skill, and one
that will increase your confidence when you master it. I
encourage you to concentrate on this skill. It is a powerful
one.


Day 14
Foreign Languages
Welcome back. It’s Day 14. How did you like learning how
to give speeches without notes yesterday? That is a useful
skill for business professionals as well as students who are
called on to give speeches in their class. I encourage you to
go back and use this skill if you have to. A lot of people
want to learn foreign languages but don’t know where to
start. They will get on the treadmill and put on the foreign
language tapes. Now this is better than nothing, but let’s
remind ourselves that our minds work like a computer and
we can use this to our benefit when we want to recall
something. On Day seven, we learned how to count in
Japanese. We did this by turning the first ten numbers of
Japanese into English pictures and then filed them to our
pencil list. You could have just as easily turned French
numbers, German, Hebrew or even Latin into pictures and
then file them to your files. Counting in a foreign language is
not that hard at all when you approach it from the correct
angle. And that angle would be to use our system. Focus,
location, code, action and review
Here are some words that you don’t see often:
Sire
Nosh
Morangu
Pesagu
Bosa
Jontar
Pie
Puegas
Payne
Pastage
These are ten words that are definitely not English.
However, using the concept that our minds use the code of
pictures to recall, we can very easily file these away. We
are not going to actually stick these pictures on any of our
organized file lists. Instead, we are going to file these
pictures to their definitions. Follow along and you’ll see
what I mean.

The first word is sire. This is the Portuguese word for a
woman’s skirt. Visualize a woman’s skirt sighing. It is a sire
(sigh-er). You’ll never forget that. The word is sire and the
definition is a woman’s skirt.
The next word is the Portuguese word, nosh, meaning
walnut. Visualize yourself eating a giant walnut and it
makes you nauseous. The word is nosh and it means
walnut.
The next word is morangu and it means strawberry in
Portuguese. See a gigantic strawberry eating a meringue
pie. The word is morangu and the definition is strawberry.
The next word is pesagu. This is Portuguese for peach.
See a giant peach asking you to pass the goo. That’s right.
A giant peach asking you to, ‘‘Pass the goo.’’ The word is
pesagu and the definition is peach. The next word is bosa,
and it’s Portuguese for a woman’s purse. See a large
piece of balsa wood carrying a woman’s purse. You look
out your window and you see a large piece of balsa wood
carrying a woman’s purse, that would be a picture that
sticks in your mind. The word is bosa and the Portuguese
definition is purse.
The next word is jontar and it is Portuguese for dinner. Now,
file a man named John and he is eating tar for dinner. A
man named John and he is eating tar for dinner. The word
is jontar and the definition is dinner.
The next word is pie and it is Portuguese for father. See
yourself throwing a pie in your father’s face. Hit your father
in the face with a pie. The word is pie and the definition is
father.
The next word is puegas and it is Portuguese for socks.
Visualize some socks that have a really bad odor and you
say, “Piew, that smells like gas!” The word puegas and the
definition is gas.
The next word is pan, and it is French for bread. See a pan
and the handle is made of bread. The word is pan and the
definition is bread. The final word is pastake. Pastake, and
it is French for watermelon. See a watermelon passing a

deck of cards to you. The word is pastake and the
definition is watermelon.
Now, as you can see, learning a foreign language is very
simple. You must turn it into a picture and then file it to its
definition. Any word can be turned into a picture or
something can be substituted for it. You have just learned a
little bit of French and Portuguese! Can you believe that? It
was pretty painless, wasn’t it?
Let’s see how many definitions that you can recall now. Fill
in the blanks below with the definitions:
 
1. Saia______________________
 
2. Noz______________________
 
3. Morangoo_________________
 
4. Passego___________________
 
5. Bolsa_____________________
 
6. Jantar_____________________
 
7. Pai_______________________
 
8. Peugas____________________
 
9. Pain______________________
 
10. Pasteque__________________
So, how did you do? Did you get all of them? If you didn’t,
ask yourself why. Was your picture vivid enough? The code
your mind thinks in is pictures and you must make the
pictures very strong. Now, I want you to understand that this
concept we just learned for foreign language can also be
used for English words. Have you ever learned words that
are new to you? Sure you have. Even in English, I would
dare say there are many words that in some fashion or form
are foreign to you. Use the same concept that we used for
foreign languages. For example, take the word neophyte.
It’s an English word. It means beginner. What if you saw a

boxing match or a fight and the boxers were on their knees.
They would be a knee fight, wouldn’t it? So, we turn the
word into a picture and the word is beginner. So, we have
the audience as a bunch of bees and they’re drinking gin.
It’s a knee fight with bees drinking gin. That is a picture that
you wouldn’t forget even if you tried. Make it a goal of yours
to learn a foreign language or expand upon the one you
already know. Purchase an audio program or a book and
learn a few words a day or a week with this method. At the
end of the year, I think you’ll be impressed with your
vocabulary. And remember this quote that I live by, “A year
from now you will have wished you started today.” So, seize
the day with your new found skills.


Day 15
Intro to Number Memory
Welcome back. It’s Day 15. Are you bilingual yet? Well,
you’ll get there if it is a goal of yours and put this system
into practice. You will amaze yourself if you do everything
your mind is capable of doing. What we are about to learn
is a very useful skill. I find that it is so useful that I’m going to
spend three days on it. I hope you are ready to really
expand your memory capabilities. This is going to be a skill
that if you master it, you will astound people with your
memory.
I’m going to show you how to memorize a 100 digit number
after just hearing it once! March 7th, 2009 I actually
memorized a 167 digit number in five minutes to set a new
USA record. When my friends get bored, they will write out
a series of numbers and I will do this demonstration. It
never fails to get quite a reaction. However, it is very simple
and it is also very useful. I use this skill to memorize phone
numbers. When I was a student, I used to recall dates and
other important numbers. This is somewhat an advanced
skill, so don’t worry if it doesn’t make 100% sense the first
time. This is something that you may have to review three
or four times to understand the concept.
What are the five things that you need to memorize
something or anything? They are focus, location, code,
action and review. When recalling a number, the location is
no problem. We could use our house files, skeleton files,
city files or even the pencil list. The challenge is the code or
the pictures. Numbers are abstract and must be turned into
a picture before we can recall them. We turned one through
20 into pictures using basic association on the pencil list.
However, it is sometimes hard to think of an association for
every number. For example, what is an association for 86?
That would be a challenge and most likely require some
thought. What if I told you that there’s a system to turning
numbers into pictures. That’s right! There is a system. This
is not a new system at all. It has been around for quite
some time.
This system was actually introduced more than 300 years

ago by Stonsen Mink Vonwesenhein. Vonwesenhein’s
basic construction was modified by Dr. Richard Gray, an
Englishman. The major system was devised to allow the
master memorizers of the time to break the bonds of the
previously excellent but more limited systems. This system
was developed to memorize long digit numbers.
For every number from zero to nine, a consonant sound is
assigned to that letter. The sounds have been assigned to
these numbers for hundreds of years since Dr. Richard
Gray. Here they are:
0 = Suh
1 = Tuh
2 = Nuh
3 = Muh
4 = Ruh
5 = Luh
6 = Juh
7 = Kuh
8 = Fuh
9 = Buh
All you have to do is memorize these. Does that sound like
a challenge?
What if I told you that I bet you could learn these in less than
a minute? What if I told you already memorized them.
That’s right, you’ve already memorized these. I already
taught them to you. Remember when I told you that
everything in this course is done for a reason and I’m
actually going to teach you things that you are not even
using yet? Well, here’s an example of that. Remember
when we learned our skeleton files? Let’s review what our
files were. Top, nose, mouth, ribs, liver, joint, cap, fibula,
ball and sand. Now, let’s review the phonic sounds. They

are tuh, nuh, muh, ruh, luh, shuh, juh, cuh, fuh, puh or buh
and suh. Did you catch that? Let’s go slow this time. The
consonant sound assigned to number one is tuh, and the
first skeleton file is top. So number one is t that has the tuh
sound. The letter assigned to number two is n because it
has the nuh sound and the second skeleton file is nose. So
number two is n for nuh. The letter assigned to the number
three is m and our third skeleton file is mouth. Number three
is m. The letter assigned to four is ruh. The fourth skeleton
file is ribs. Number four is ruh, or r. Four is represented by r
or ruh. The fifth skeleton file is liver, and the letter assigned
to number five is l. Five is l or luh. That is easy enough, isn’t
it?
However, once you get this down, it’s going to catapult your
memory to the expert memory level. The letter assigned to
six is juh or shuh and the sixth skeleton file is joint. Joint
represents the j or juh. The letter assigned to your seventh
file is a hard c sound or k. Kuh. And the seventh skeleton
file is cap. Seven is a hard c or a k. The letter assigned to
the number eight is f or v. Your eighth skeleton file is f or v.
Your eighth skeleton file is your fibula. Number eight is f or
v, or fuh or vuh. The letter assigned to your number nine is
puh or buh, p and b. And your ninth skeleton file is ball. So,
number nine is p or b. And finally, the last skeleton file is
actually number ten, but for the purposes of this system, this
will represent the number zero. Zero is assigned to a soft c
or s. Zero is the suh sound.
The ten primary phonetic sounds are tuh, nuh, muh, ruh, luh,
shuh, juh, kuh, fuh, puh or buh and suh. Stop now and
review your skeleton files and make sure that you know the
sounds one through ten where ten is actually representing
zero. Make sure that you know them.
Here are a few examples of how you would use this system
to turn numbers into pictures. Remember we only add
vowels.
NumberPhonetic SoundPicture

Now you try:

So, how did you do? Does this take some getting used to?
You better believe it! Have you ever turned numbers into
pictures this way before? I bet not. So, if it seems a little bit
unusual to you, don’t worry about it! However, you most
likely never have attempted before to memorize a 100-digit
number. To do something you have never done before, you
must learn things that you have never learned before. Here
are my pictures for numbers 1-100.
1: Hat
2: Hen

3: Ham
4: Hair
5: Hail
6: Hash
7: Hook
8: Ivy
9: Hoop
10: Ties
11: Dot
12: Tin (can)
13: Dime
14: Tire
15: Tile
16: Dish
17: Tack
18: Dove
19: Top
20: Nose
21: Net
22: Nun
23: Name
24: Nero
25: Nail

26: Notch
27: Neck
28: Knife
29: Nap
30: Mice
31: Mat
32: Moon
33: Mom
34: Mare
35: Mall
36: Match
37: Mug
38: Muff
39: Mop
40: Rice
41: Rat
42: Rain
43: Ram
44: Rear
45: Roll
46: Rash
47: Rock
48: Roof
49: Rope

50: Lice
51: Light
52: Lane
53: Lame
54: Lure
55: Lily
56: Leash
57: Lock
58: Leaf
59: Lap
60: Juice
61: Jet
62: Shin
63: Gym
64: Jar
65: Jail
66: Judge
67: Shack
68: Chef
69: Ship
70: Case
71: Cat
72: Can

73: Comb
74: Car
75: Coal
76: Cash
77: Kicking
78: Cough
79: Cap
80: Face
81: Fat
82: Fan
83: Foam
84: Fire
85: File
86: Fish
87: Fog
88: Fife (Barney)
89: Fob
90: Bus
91: Pot
92: Pan
93: Bum
94: Pour
95: Pool
96: Bush

97: Pack
98: Puff
99: Pipe
100: Doses
One through nine I use the letter ‘‘H’’ because it is a silent
consonant sound and it helps if you have more than one
consonant when creating a word so the letter ‘‘H’’ helps us
out here. Also it is important to note that the following
phonetic sounds share a number:
1 = tuh or duh
6 = shuh or juh
7 = kuh or guh
8 = fuh or vuh
9 = puh or buh
If you move your mouth to make the sounds puh and buh
you will see that your mouth moves in the same way. These
are phonetically the same. The same is true with the other
sounds listed above. This give you more options when
creating pictures for numbers.
There is also another method for creating pictures for
numbers 
and 
this 
method 
is 
referred 
to 
as
‘‘Character/Action’’. The idea or concept behind this
method is that you use a person or character for each
number. My character for 88 is Michael Irvin the former
wide receiver for the Dallas Cowboys because 88 was his
number. The action for 88 for me is receiving a pass.
The challenge with this is that simply looking at each
number it can be difficult to think of a person or character
that this number reminds you of. That is where the method
above for having letters for numbers actually helps. Let’s
take 77. That is Kuh Kuh. So my character for 77 is ‘‘King
Kong’’ and the action is climbing a building.

Let’s do one more, the number 24 is Nuh and Ruh. So my
person for 24 is Norris (Chuck) and the action is a karate
kick. You can create your own rules here for this method.
You can use the letters ‘‘N’’ and ‘‘R’’ as initials or sounds of
the last name. It is your system so make your own rules!
With this character/action method you can actually recall
four digits at a time. Let’s take the number 7724. For the
first pair of digits use the character and for the second pair
of digits you use the action. So 77 would be King Kong and
24 would be a karate kick. You have King Kong delivering
a karate kick!
The number 2488 would be Chuck Norris for 24 and
receiving a pass for 88. The first set of numbers is the
person and the second the action. If you wanted to take it
one step further you could develop an object to go with the
character/action. The object for 24 could be a board
(karate kicking a board), the object for 88 could be a
football (catching a football). If you did this you could
memorize six digits at a time! This is the method I used
when I set the USA record for most numbers memorized in
five minutes (167 consecutive digits)
Make sure that you understand Day 15 100% before
moving on to Day 16.


Day 16
How to Memorize Numbers
We are going to go a little more in depth with phonics
today. The best way to practice phonics is every time you
hear a number, turn it into a picture. You are going to
encounter numbers tomorrow anyway, so you might as well
turn them into a picture. When you are driving today, you
are going to see an exit sign that will say Exit 56. Turn that
into a picture. Say to yourself, five is luh, and six is shuh, so
luh and shuh, it’s a leash! Whammo, you have just turned 56
into a picture! You may say, “Ronnie, that’s a lot of work,
and I’m going to have to do that every time I want to
remember a number?” Absolutely not. You are going to
have to do that the first time only. The next time you run
across 56, you’ve already turned it into a picture.
Initially, you are going to have to go through the steps when
you want to turn 56 into a picture. However, the next time
the work is already done. When I hear numbers today, I am
no longer turning them into a picture. I already have the
pictures.
I’m going to give you 35 pictures and you are going to file
them to your house files for 1-25 and your skeleton files for
26-35. Each one of these pictures is representative of a
number.
I am going to encourage you to set a timer for 5 minutes for
this next exercise. If you finish before the five minutes is up
GREAT, if not do your best to finish in five minutes. You will
have memorized a 70 digit number in five minutes if you do
this. Currently the United States record is 160 digits in five
minutes and 70 digits is VERY respectable. Don’t beat
yourself up if you don’t get them all but let’s shoot for it.
Here are the words. Place 1-25 on your house files and 26-
35 on your skeleton files.
 
1. Nail
 
2. Can
 

3. Juice
 
4. Moon
 
5. Mall
 
6. Match
 
7. Bus
 
8. Tin
 
9. Fire
 
10. Chef
 
11. Mop
 
12. Pool
 
13. Ship
 
14. Dove
 
15. Cat
 
16. Pipe
 
17. Dish
 
18. Shin
 
19. Tire
 
20. Fish
 
21. Jet
 
22. Rat
 
23. Mom
 
24. Foam
 
25. Case
 
26. Rat

 
27. Pan
 
28. Pack
 
29. Nap
 
30. Leash
 
31. Mall
 
32. Jar
 
33. File
 
34. Leaf
 
35. Shack
Now, stop and write these words out 1-35.
You just memorized a 70 digit number! Here it is:
 
1. Nail = 25
 
2. Can = 72
 
3. Juice = 60
 
4. Moon = 32
 
5. Mall =35
 
6. Match =36
 
7. Bus = 90
 
8. Tin = 12
 
9. Fire = 84
 
10. Chef = 68
 
11. Mop = 39
 
12. Pool = 95

 
13. Ship = 69
 
14. Dove = 18
 
15. Cat = 71
 
16. Pipe = 99
 
17. Dish = 16
 
18. Shin = 62
 
19. Tire = 14
 
20. Fish = 86
 
21. Jet = 61
 
22. Rat = 41
 
23. Mom = 33
 
24. Foam = 83
 
25. Case = 70
 
26. Rat = 41
 
27. Pan = 92
 
28. Pack = 97
 
29. Nap = 29
 
30. Leash = 56
 
31. Mall = 35
 
32. Jar = 64
 
33. File = 85
 
34. Leaf = 58
 
35. Shack = 67

How did you do? Perfect score? Did you get close? This is
fun, isn’t it?
One important note is for numbers starting with zero. We
don’t have images for 09, 08, 07, etc. Remember zero is
the ‘‘suh’’ sound. So for 07 it is suh and kuh. My picture for
07 is sack. Go ahead and create your own images for the
digits starting with zero and enjoy!


Day 17
Pictures for Numbers to 1000
Turning numbers into pictures has many practical
applications. It is great for remembering phone numbers,
product knowledge, technical data, product codes and
more. Personally I have used this method to turn every
number between one and 1000 into a picture. The sounds
for 127 are ‘‘tuh’’, ‘‘nuh’’ and ‘‘kuh’’. Therefore my picture
for 127 is a tank. Here are my pictures for every number up
to 1000!
101: Toast
102: Dozen
103: Decimal
104: Dessert
105: Diesel
106: Dosage
107: Desk
108: Adhesive (tape)
109: Teaspoon
110: Tights
111: Dotted
112: Titanic
113: Totem (pole)
114: Theater
115: State line
116: Hot dish
117: Tie tack

118: Tooth filling
119: Tadpole
120: Tennis
121: Tent
122: Tenant
123: Dynamite
124: Diner
125: Tunnel
126: Dungeon
127: Tank
128: Tinfoil
129: Tin pan
130: Damsel,
131: Tomato
132: Diamond
133: Teammate
134: Timer
135: Oatmeal
136: Time sheet
137: Tomahawk
138: Steam fitter
139: Dimple
140: Trees,

141: Turtle
142: Train
143: Trampoline
144: Dryer
145: Drill
146: Trash
147: Truck
148: Trophy
149: Tripod
150: Tails
151: Toilet
152: Talon
153: Toll man
154: Tailor
155: Taillight,
156: Tool shed
157: Telegram
158: Telephone
159: Tulip
160: Dishes
161: Touchdown
162: Station
163: Taj Mahal
164: T-shirt

165: Dash light
166: Head judge
167: Stagecoach
168: Dish full
169: Tissue paper
170: Taxi
171: Ticket
172: Token
173: Document
174: Tiger
175: Tackle
176: Dictionary
177: Digging
178: Takeoff (airplane)
179: Teacup
180: Thieves
181: Divot
182: Typhoon
183: TV man
184: Diver
185: Devil
186: Hot fudge
187: Stuffing

188: Dive off
189: Stove pipe
190: Tubes, tubs
191: Teapot
192: Headband
193: Topmast
194: Typewriter
195: Table
196: Top shelf
197: Top Coat
198: Deep Freeze
199: Hot pepper
200: Noses
201: Nest
202: Ensign
203: Newsman
204: Newsreel
205: Nozzle
206: Incision
207: Unicycle
208: News vendor
209: Newspaper
210: Nudist
211: Handout

212: Antenna
213: Ointment
214: Internet
215: Noodle
216: Nutshell
217: Nightgown
218: Native
219: Notebook
220: Onions
221: Noontime (face of Clock)
222: Neon nest
223: Onion meal
224: Onion ring
225: Union hall
226: Union Jack (Flag)
227: Nanny goat
228: Neon foot
229: Neon pins
230: Gnomes
231: Inmate
232: Honeymoon (Niagara Fall)
233: New member (club)
234: Numeral

235: Animal
236: Animation (cartoon)
237: New microphone
238: Nymph
239: Nameplate
240: Nurse
241: Narrator
242: No running (sign)
243: Unarmed
244: Honorary (degree)
245: one-reel
246: Nourishment (food)
247: New York
248: Nerve
249: Unwrap (sandwich)
250: Nails
251: Unload
252: Nylon
253: Newly made (Fresh Bread)
254: Inhaler
255: Nail hole
256: Unleash (dog)
257: Nail cup
258: Nail file

259: Nail polish
260: Notches
261: Unshod
262: Engine
263: in gym
264: Insurance (policy)
265: Enchilada
266: Hinge joint
267: Inject (needle)
268: Unshaven
269: Hunchback
270: Yankees
271: Nugget
272: Noggin (head)
273: Honeycomb
274: Anchor
275: Nickel
276: Engagement (ring)
277: Necking
278: New calf
279: Innkeeper
280: Knives
281: Nevada (Las Vegas)

282: Infantry
283: Navy man
284: University
285: Navel
286: Navy ship
287: Navigator
288: Knife fight
289: Navy Pier
290: Knobs
291: Neptune
292: Knee band
293: Napalm (bomb)
294: Neighbor
295: Napoleon
296: Nuptials (marriage Ceremony)
297: Napkin
298: Unpaved
299: Nabob
300: Moses
301: Moustache
302: Messenger
303: Museum
304: Masseur
305: Missile

306: Massage
307: Musket
308: Mice food
309: Misprint
310: Maids
311: Matador
312: Mitten
313: Madam
314: Mtere
315: Motel
316: Midshipman (at Annapolis)
317: Medical (student)
318: Mid-field (50-yard line)
319: Meatball
320: Mayonnaise
321: Mint
322: Manhunt
323: Monument
324: Miner
325: Moonlight
326: Manager
327: Mannequin
328 – Manifold (engine)

329: Money bags
330: Mummies
331: Mammoth
332: Memento
333: Mamma Mia
334: Mom reads
335: Mammal
336: Mom shouts
337: M&M Candy
338 – Home movie
339: Mumps
340: Mare saddled
341: Martini
342: Marine
343: Mermaid
344: Mirror
345: Mural
346: Martian
347: Marker
348: Moor fight
349: Marble
350: Mills (fabric mills)
351: Mullet
352: Melon

353: Mailman
354: Molar (tooth)
355: Molehill
356: Mulch
357: Milk
358: Mile face
359: Mailbag, mailbox
360: Matches
361: Machete
362: Mission
363: Matchmaker
364: Mushroom
365: Match holder
366: Magician
367: Mashing
368: Home chef
369: Matchbook
370: Hammocks
371: Macadamia (nut)
372: Mechanic
373: Homecoming
374: Microscope
375: Mogul (skiing)

376: Mug shot
377: Home cooking
378: Megaphone
379: Makeup
380: Movies
381: Amphitheater
382: Muffin
383: Movie maker
384: Mover
385: Mayflower (pilgrims), Muffler
386: Movie show
387: Movie camera
388: Mafia family
389: Movie pilot
390: Embassy
391: Amputee
392: Embankment
393: Map maker
394: Umpire
395: Maple (syrup)
396: Ambush
397: Hymnbook
398: Mop face
399: Humpback (whale)

400: Roses
401: Roast
402: Raisin
403: Horseman
404: Razor
405: Wrestle
406: Horseshoe
407: Race course
408: Receiver
409: Raspberry
410: Roadster
411: Redhead
412: Red nose
413: Radioman
414: Radar
415: Radial
416: Radish
417: Red coat
418: Artifact (fossil)
419: Redbreast (Robin)
420: Rhinoceros
421: Hornet
422: Reunion (class)

423: Rain Main (movie)
424: Runner
425: Rain, hail
426: Ranch
427: Rank
428: Rainforest
429: Rainbow
430: Arms
431: Hermit
432: Roman
433: Roommate
434: Armory
435: Airmail
436: Armchair
437: Arm guard
438: Earmuff
439: Ramp
440: Errors (baseball)
441: Reward (sign)
442: Warranty
443: Re-warm
444: Rear horse (race)
445: Rear alley
446: Worship (church)

447: Rear-guard
448: Rear view (mirror)
449: Hair rope
450: Rails
451: Roulette
452: Airline
453: Heirloom
454: Roller
455: Whale Oil
456: Relish
457: Relic
458: Airlift
459: Earlobe
460: Ridges
461: Ratchet
462: Russian
463: Rushmore (Mount)
464: Rush hour
465: Ritual
466: Rush job
467: Reject
468: Hair shave
469: Airship

470: Rugs
471: Rocket
472: Reagan (Ronald)
473: Rug man
474: Rocker
475: Regular
476: Air gauge
477: Rock cliff
478: Rock fall
479: Rugby
480: Harvest
481: Raft
482: Orphan
483: Roof man
484: Roofer
485: Rifle
486: Refugee
487: Ref Call
488: Revival
489: Wave Pool
490: Ribs
491: Robot
492: Ribbon
493: Air bomb

494: Robber
495: Ripple
496: Rubbish
497: Reebok (Shoe)
498: Repave
499: Rope Bull
500: Lazy Susan
501: Holster
502: Lozenge
503: Wholesome
504: Lizard
505: Lysol
506: Yellow sachet
507: Alaska (baked)
508: Lucifer (devil)
509: Lace pajamas
510: Lighthouse
511: Low tide
512: Lightning
513: Altimeter
514: Ladder
515: Ladle
516: Late show

517: Lithograph
518: lead-off (baseball)
519: Ladybug
520: Aliens
521: Island
522: Linen
523: Lineman
524: Liner (baseball)
525: Linoleum
526: Lingerie
527: Lincoln (Abe)
528: Lion family
529: Line-up
530: Limousine
531: Helmet
532: Lemon
533: Alma mater
534: Hallmark
535: Oil hill
536: Limejuice
537: Lamb kills
538: Lamb face
539: Lamp
540: Lawyers

541: Lard
542: Lure net
543: Alarm
544: Lure watch
545: Laurel (wreath)
546: Allergy (sneezing)
547: Lark (bird) 548: Larva
549: Lure bag
550: Lilies
551: Hall Light
552: Lowland
553: Oil lamp
554: Lily wedding
555: Low lily
556: Low latch
557: Lilac
558: Yellow liver
559: Lollipop
560: Latches, lodges
561: Lodged
562: Lotion
563: Hall chime
564: Ledger

565: Oil shale
566: Ill judge
567: Latchkey
568: Low shaft
569: Oil ship
570: Legs
571: Locket
572: Lagoon
573: Locomotive
574: Locker
575: Legal
576: Luggage
577: Leggings
578: Lake front, alcove
579: Helicopter
580: Leaves, loaves, olives
581: Lift
582: Elephant
583: Leaf man
584: Lever
585: Level
586: Live Show
587: Lifeguard
588: Laughing

589: Lifeboat
590: Lips
591: Halibut
592: Albino
593: Album
594: Librarian
595: Label
596: Hill Bush
597: Law book
598: Leapfrog
599: Oil pipe
600: Cheeses
601: Chest
602: Chasing
603: Chessman
604: Juicer
605: Chisel
606: Cheese shop
607: Cheesecake
608: Juice vat
609: Cheeseburger
610: Shades
611: Shaded

612: Shut-in
613: Showtime
614: Ashtray
615: Shuttle
616: Judiciary (Supreme Court)
617: Shotgun
618: Shut off (water)
619: Shot put
620: Oceans
621: Giant
622: Chain noose
623: Chain male
624: Shiner
625: Channel
626: Chinchilla
627: Junk
628: Ocean front
629: Chin up, shin bone
630: Gems
631: Gummed
632: Chimney
633: Jam maker
634: Shamrock
635: Gemologist

636: Gym shoe
637: Shoemaker
638: Jam full
639: Chimp
640: Cherries
641: Chariot
642: Journal
643: German
644: Juror
645: Cheerleader
646: Charge
647: Shark
648: Giraffe
649: Cherry pie
650: Jailhouse
651: Gelatin
652: Chow line
653: Jail man
654: Jewelry
655: Shell hole
656: Jail shade
657: Chalk
658: Jellyfish

659: Jailbird
660: Judges
661: Judged (condemned Man)
662: Shoe shine
663: Judgment (day)
664: Cheshire cat
665: Judge lawyers
666: Judge showdown
667: Judge kids
668: Shoe shuffling
669: Shoe shop
670: Cheeks
671: Jacket
672: Chicken
673: Jackhammer
674: Joker
675: Chocolate
676: Ejection
677: Jockey kick
678: Chock-full (of nuts)
679: Checkbook
680: Chefs
681: Shaft
682: Chiffon

683: chief-mate (Navy)
684: Chauffeur
685: Javelin
686: Chef show
687: Chef cake
688: Shave off (a beard)
689: Chef bakes
690: Chaps
691: Chapter (book)
692: Jawbone
693: Chipmunk
694: Shipwreck
695: Shoplifter
696: Egyptian
697: Shopkeeper
698: Shop Lifter
699: Ship builder
700: Kisses
701: Cassette
702: Cousin
703: Casement
704: Geyser
705: Gasoline

706: Quiz show
707: Casket
708: Goose foot
709: Gazebo
710: Kites
711: Cathedral
712: Cotton
713: Catamaran
714: Guitar
715: Cattle
716: Cottage
717: Catacomb
718: Catfish
719: Octopus
720: Gunnysack
721: Candle
722: Cannon
723: Gunman
724: Canary
725: Kennel
726: Gunshot (wound)
727: Eggnog
728: Convict
729: Canopy

730: Chemist
731: Comet
732: Commander
733: Comb, men
734: Camera
735: Camel
736: Gumshoe
737: Kamikaze
738: Camouflage
739: Camp
740: Corsage
741: Cardinal
742: Carnation
743: Aquarium
744: Courier
745: Corral
746: Crutch
747: Cork
748: Graffiti
749: Crab
750: Gallows
751: Kilt
752: Gallon

753: Column
754: Caller
755: Galley
756: College
757: Calk
758: Cauliflower
759: Caliper
760: Coaches
761: Caged
762: Cushion
763: Cashmere
764: Catcher
765: Eggshell
766: Cash, shoe
767: Cash Cow
768: Cash fire
769: Ketchup
770: Quicksand
771: Cactus
772: Coconut
773: Cucumber
774: Cockroach
775: Google
776: Cowcatcher

777: Cake, cover
778: Kickoff (Football)
779: Cookbook
780: Caves
781: Cavity
782: Coffin
783: Cave man
784: Gopher
785: Gavel
786: Coffee shop
787: Coffee cup
788: Coffee field
789: Coffee pot
790: Cowboys
791: Cupid
792: Cabin
793: Cab man
794: Copper
795: Cable
796: Cabbage
797: Cupcake, hockey puck
798: Cupful
799: Copyboy, kabob (shish)

800: Faces, fuses, vases
801: Faucet
802: Pheasant
803: Face Make up
804: Officer
805: Vaseline
806: Physician
807: Physique (body builder)
808: Face-off (hockey)
809: Vice President, Office boy
810: Fights, foot-stool, vats
811: Faded (blue jeans)
812: Footnote, evidence (Trial)
813: Fat man, vitamin
814: Father, feather, Veterinarian
815: Fiddle, foot- locker
816: Food show
817: Vodka, photograph
818: Photo finish
819: Football, footpath, Footprint
820: Fence, fins, vines
821: Fountain
822: Phone Nokia
823: Venom

824: Vineyard
825: Funnel
826: Finish (line)
827: Vinegar
828: Fanfare
829: Fan Belt
830: Foams
831: Foam hat
832: Half-moon
833: Foam mouth
834: Femur
835: Family
836: Famished
837: Fumigate
838: Family Fun
839: Fumble
840: Firehouse
841: Fruit
842: France
843: Fireman
844: Forearm
845: Overalls
846: Fresh

847: Frog
848: Forefinger
849: Fireplace
850: Fleece (sheep)
851: Flood
852: Flannel
853: Flamingo
854: Flare
855: Fuel oil
856: Flesh
857: Volcano
858: velvet
859: Flap
860: Fishes, vichyssoise
861: Fishtail
862: Fashion (show)
863: Fish mouth
864: Voucher
865: Fish oil
866: Fish jaw
867: Fishhook
868: half-shaved
869: Fishbowl
870: Figs,

871: Factory, avocado
872: Afghan
873: Vacuum
874: Foghorn
875: Focal
876: Vacation
877: Half-cocked (gun)
878: Ivy-covered
879: Fig bowl
880: Fives (High Fives)
881: Five toes
882: View finder
883: Five men
884: Favor (party)
885: half-oval
886: Five shoes
887: Five Kids
888: Five fingers
889: Five pins (bowling)
890: Fobs (watch)
891: Half a bat (baseball)
892: half pint (ice cream)
893: Fob maker (Watch maker)

894: Fabric
895: Feeble (old man)
896: Ivy bush
897: Halfback (football)
898: half-paved
899: Half bib
900: Buses, bosses
901: Pastor
902: Bison
903: Pacemaker
904: Pacer
905: Pussy willow
906: Pasture
907: Bicycle
908: Pacifier
909 -Baseball
910: Beads
911: Potato
912: Baton
913: Badminton
914: Battery
915: Pedal
916: Beautician
917: Bodyguard

918: Boat Full
919: Bat boy,
920: Pencil
921: Bayonet
922: Banana
923: Panama (Canal or hat)
924: Pioneer
925: Panel
926: Pawnshop, poncho, Banjo
927: Pancake, pin cushion, Bank
928: Pinfish, bonfire, Bowie Knife
929: Pinball
930: Beams
931: Beamed (ceiling)
932: Pimento
933: Boom man (crane Operator)
934: Boomerang
935: Palm oil
936: Bombshell
937: Pomegranate
938: Pamphlet
939: Bambi
940: Purse

941: Pirate
942: Piranha
943: Barmaid
944: Prayer
945: Pearl
946: Brush
947 -Brick
948: Perfume
949: Barbecue
950: Pills
951: Bullet
952: Balloon
953: Palomino
954: Polar (bear)
955: Pool hall
956: Blue Jay
957: Pelican
958: Billfold
959: Pallbearer
960: Badges,
961: Poached (Eggs)
962: Pageant
963: Pajamas
964: Pusher (drugs)

965: Pugilist
966: Beach shoe (sandals)
967: Paycheck
968: Pitchfork
969: Bishop
970: Pigskin
971: Picket
972: Bacon
973: Pac-Man
974: Packer
975: Pickle
976: Bookshelf
977: Peacock
978: pick-off (baseball)
979: Bagpipe
980: Beehives
981: Beef tongue
982: Bouffant (hair style)
983: Pavement
984: Beaver
985: Buffalo
986: Beef Jerky
987: Bifocals

988: Beef feeder
989: Beef burger
990: Bobsled
991: Puppet
992: Baboon
993: Pipe man
994: Pepper
995: Bible
996: pea patch
997: Popcorn
998: baby face
999: Baby bib
1,000: Diseases
This list is more for reference. I have been teaching
memory seminars for two decades now and I am one of
only a handful of people that I know who has memorized
this list. If you chose to do so......Good on you! On the other
hand, pictures for numbers 1-100 will be great for most
applications.


Day 18
Memorizing the Presidents
Welcome back to Day 18. How are you? Are you
memorizing a 100-digit number yet? Well, probably not. Not
right now, but I’m sure you are well on your way.
Remember, you will just need 50 files to accomplish this
feat. We are going to spend the next few days working on
names and faces. Names and faces are probably one of
the most rewarding aspects of memory training. Dale
Carnegie’s book, How To Win Friends And Influence
People is one of the bestselling books of all time. In that
book, Dale Carnegie discovered two important facts. But
the first fact that Dale Carnegie discovered is that
everyone’s favorite subject is actually themselves. The
second fact that Dale Carnegie discovered is that the
sweetest sound to a person’s ear, universally, in any
language is the sound of their own name.
Now, be honest with me. Knowing that everybody’s favorite
subject is themselves and the sweetest sound to the ear is
a person’s own name, how many times have you been
introduced to someone and as soon as that handshake
breaks, boom, the name drops to the floor. It happens to
everyone. It is very embarrassing. However, it happens to
all of us. When you recall someone’s name, you have just
set yourself apart from the rest of the group in their mind.
You have made a distinction between you and the others.
The next question is, well, great, Ronnie, but how do you do
it? Good question. I’m glad that you asked.
What are the five things that we need to recall anything?
Focus, Location, code, action and Review. We utilize this
knowledge to recall names, also. People’s faces are
actually the file. The code we use is the picture, and that
picture is determined by the name.
We are going to have a memory test and this actually will
help us with name memory. Your goal is to memorize this
list of words below. Don’t spend more than ten minutes
memorizing it and see if you can memorize it faster than
that. There are 44 words so you decide BEFORE you start
which 44 files you are going to use.

 
1. Washing Machine
 
2. A Dam
 
3. Chef cooking the sun
 
4. Medicine
 
5. Man in a row boat
 
6. A Dam and Cue Balls
 
7. Car jack
 
8. Van on fire
 
9. Hair
 
10. Tie
 
11. Polka dots
 
12. Tailor
 
13. Filling up a glass more
 
14. Ear ring
 
15. Blue Cannon
 
16. Beard
 
17. Ants drawing
 
18. College Campus
 
19. Fog, mist or Haze
 
20. Garfield the cat
 
21. Author
 
22. City of Cleveland
 
23. Benji the Walt Disney Dog

 
24. City of Cleveland
 
25. Mount McKinnely (in Alaska)
 
26. Roses
 
27. Raft
 
28. Wilson tennis ball
 
29. Hard surface
 
30. Cooler
 
31. Vacuum cleaner
 
32. Roses
 
33. Man telling truth
 
34. Eyeball
 
35. Ken doll (Barbie and Barbie)
 
36. Airplane ‘‘landing’’
 
37. Gate with water rushing through it
 
38. Ford truck
 
39. Peanut Butter
 
40. Jelly Beans
 
41. Bushes
 
42. Lint
 
43. Bushes
 
44. Bahamas
There you have it. Now number 1-44 and see how many
words that you recall. Remember the answer doesn’t come
to mind right away skip it and continue. Don’t get slowed
down with the ones that you don’t recall. Finish the ones

that you do know and then return to the ones that you initially
missed.
So what do you think we just memorized? Well, we were
talking about names so if you guessed 44 names then you
are correct! But let’s take it one step further, these are
important names! They are the names of the 44 Presidents
of The United States! Many students will spend days or
weeks memorizing the presidents of the United States and
you did it in only MINUTES!
Here are the answers:
 
1. Washing Machine = Washington
 
2. A Dam = Adams
 
3. Chef cooking the sun = Jefferson (Chef Sun)
 
4. Medicine = Madison
 
5. Man in a row boat = Monroe
 
6. A Dam and Cue Balls = Q. Adams
 
7. Car jack = Jackson
 
8. Van on fire = Van Buren (Van burning)
 
9. Hair = Harrison
 
10. Tie = Tyler
 
11. Polka dots = Polk
 
12. Tailor = Taylor
 
13. Filling up a glass more = Fillmore
 
14. Ear ring = Pierce (ear pierced to get an ear ring)
 
15. Blue Cannon = Buchanan
 
16. Beard = Abe Lincoln
 

17. Ants drawing = Andrew (Johnson)
 
18. College Campus = Grant (college grant)
 
19. Fog, mist or Haze = Hayes
 
20. Garfield the cat = Garfield
 
21. Author = Arthur
 
22. City of Cleveland = Cleveland
 
23. Benji the Walt Disney Dog = Benjamin (Harrison)
 
24. City of Cleveland = Cleveland
 
25. Mount McKinely (in Alaska) = McKinley
 
26. Roses = Roosevelt
 
27. Raft = Taft
 
28. Wilson tennis ball = Wilson
 
29. Hard surface = Harding
 
30. Cooler = Coolidge
 
31. Vacuum cleaner = Hoover
 
32. Roses = Franklin Roosevelt
 
33. Man telling truth = Truman
 
34. Eyeball = Eisenhower
 
35. Ken doll (Barbie and Barbie) = Kennedy
 
36. Airplane ‘‘landing’’ = Lyndon (landing) Johnson
 
37. Gate with water rushing through it = Nixon (Water
Gate)
 
38. Ford truck = Ford
 
39. Peanut Butter = Jimmy Carter (His family was in the
peanut business)

 
40. Jelly Beans = Reagan (his favorite candy)
 
41. Bushes = Bush
 
42. Lint = Clinton
 
43. Bushes = Bush
 
44. Bahamas = Obama
There you have it! The 44 presidents!
Now, let’s go back to names and faces. The five things that
you need to recall a name is focus, location, a code, action
and review. All we are going to focus on today is the code
or turning names into pictures. We will concentrate on the
others tomorrow and the next day. So, knowing that every
name must be a picture to recall it, let’s see what we have.
And, yes, everyone I meet, I have a picture for their name. I
met a gentleman today. He said, “Ronnie, I never forget a
face, but I’m terrible with names.” The reason for that is you
see the face but you don’t see the name. It is abstract to
you. In order to recall a name, you have to see it, just like
you saw the face.
How many times have you been out and you see someone
you know but you don’t know where you know them from?
Then they walk up to you and they say, “Hey, Ronnie, how
are you?” And you say, “Good!” and you wish you could
recall their name. Then two hours later, when you’re driving
home, the name pops up in your head. What does that
prove? Well, actually it proves a couple of things. Number
one, we recall faces better than names because we see the
face and not the name. The second thing that it teaches us
is that our mind never actually forgets a name. Accessing
and retrieving the name is the difficulty. The name is up
there, but getting to it when we need it is the problem. So,
let’s use this knowledge to our benefit.
Now, at this point, people always say to me, wait a minute,
Ronnie. Are you telling me that every time I meet someone,
I’m going to have to go through this whole process and turn
their name into a picture? My answer to that is, ‘‘no.’’ Then
they get a confused look on their face. The first time that

you meet someone, the first time you meet a Ronnie, a
Michelle, an Eric, an Allen, or a Debbie, you’ll have to turn
the name into a picture. However, the next time you meet
Ronnie, Michelle, Eric, or Allen, the work is already done.
You will have the picture already made. You have already
done it, because you did it the first time. So, in review of
today’s lesson, let’s focus on what we just did. We took 44
names and turned them into pictures. Today, when I meet
people, I am not turning their names into pictures. For the
most part, I already have the names. I’m just sticking their
names on the locations or files that I have established.


Day 19
Names and Faces
Hey, it’s Day 19. Are you ready to advance to the next level
of names memory? At this point, you understand that to
recall someone’s name, you have to see their name just as
you see their face. Your mind remembers pictures. You
have heard the saying that the picture is worth a thousand
words? In this case, it is just worth one word. But that word
is the sweetest sound to a person’s ear.
Now that we have worked on turning names into pictures,
let’s focus on where we are going to store the code or
where we are going to store the person’s name. The
location, of course, is the person’s face. When you meet
someone whether you are doing this consciously or
subconsciously, you are doing it. When you meet someone,
you look at their face and you notice certain features. For
example, if you met
Jay Leno, you would notice his outstanding facial feature.
What would it be? Perhaps the chin. What about David
Letterman? Maybe the gap in his teeth. What about Telly
Savalas? Well, his head is bald. If you meet Abraham
Lincoln, his beard would be his outstanding feature. Most
everyone has something on their face that draws your
attention. Even the most beautiful person has beautiful eyes
that draw your attention, or perhaps their lip, or mouth, or
nose or eye brows. Next you will see 15 faces and on each
one of these faces, we are going to choose an outstanding
feature.

Let’s look at number one face together. We will pretend that
we are meeting this individual for the first time. The
outstanding feature we are going to choose on this face is
the bushy eye brows. So, picture number one as Mr.
Eyebrows. Now, don’t write the name in the guidebook just
yet. We are going to do that later. Just concentrate on the
faces for now. Say hello to Mr. Eyebrows. Now, on to face
number two. On this lady’s face, make the file her
cheekbones. Say hello to Miss Cheekbones. Go back and
review Mr. Eyebrows, now say hello to Miss Cheekbones.
Number three, let’s call this gentleman Mr. Beard, because
he has a beard and that is our file. Look at him and say,
“Hello, Mr. Beard.” Face number four, let’s call this face
Miss Eyes because of her large eyes. Number four is Miss
Eyes because of her large eyes. Say hello to Miss Eyes.
Number five is mustache. Number five is Mr. Mustache. Go

back and review one through five. Review one through five.
What was one, number two, number three, number four and
five?
Now we are on number six. This call this guy Mr. Forehead
because of his high forehead. Number seven, let’s call this
face Mr. Ears because of his large ears. Number seven is
Mr. Ears because of his large ears. Real quick, go back
and review number six, number five, number four, number
three, number two, and one. Now we are on number eight.
Let’s make number eight Miss Lips because of her full lips.
Number eight is Miss Lips because of her full lips. Look at
number four. What was this person’s name? Number nine,
what do you think we will call this person? How about Miss
Mole for the mole on her face. Miss mole is our ninth face.
Here, we are on number ten. Look at this face. Let’s call
this face Mr. Glasses because of his glasses. Now, it is
important not to use sunglasses or reading glasses
because they may not have them on the next time you see
them. However, if they look to be permanent and glasses
are terrific, they definitely distinguish a face. Remember the
ones before. Review the ones before. Look at face number
one. Look at face number two, number three, number four
and number five.
How about number six, number seven, number eight,
number nine and ten? Ok, let’s look at the next face and
let’s call this face Mr. Scar for the scar on his cheek. Mr.
Scar. Say hello to Mr. Scar. Number 12, look at the face
and call her Miss Teeth. Look at her pretty teeth and smile.
Number 13, let’s call this face Mr. Wrinkle for the wrinkles
on his face. Number 14, call this face Mr. Dimple for the
dimple on his chin. Dimples on the chin are safe to use.
Sometimes, dimples on a face can only be seen when a
person smiles and those are dangerous because they may
not be smiling when you see them the next time. The last
one, number 15, let’s call this face Mr. Nose for his large
nose. Mr. Nose is number 15. Look back real quick and
review the ones before. What we are going to do right now
is going to go back and write the names we have just given
the people in the space provided below their picture. So
write the names.
How did you do? Did you get all the new names? I think that

you will find this pretty successful. Now you say, “Sure,
Ronnie, I was able to do that, but the problem is that this is
not the person’s real name.” You’re right. If you can do this,
then you are not going to have any problem recalling their
name. So far, you understand to recall a person’s name,
you must turn their name into a picture which is actually
what we covered yesterday. The second thing you need to
do is observe the face and pick a distinguishing feature.
These two ingredients are going to work in tandem when
you recall a name. We will work tomorrow on how to put
these two items together. However, do not move to Day 20
unless you understand everything we have talked about
today. So, we have come to a conclusion here on Day 19.


Day 20
Names and Faces
The ability to recall a person’s name will light up their eyes.
It makes people feel so important! I can’t tell you how many
times I’ve been tapped on the shoulder in line for a movie in
Dallas and someone will say, “Ok, Mr. Memory, what’s my
name now?” About 70% of the time I can recall their name.
What’s more important, about 70% of the time, they will
recall my name. Why? I’m nothing different or special over
anyone else. The only thing that I did was when I left, I called
them by their name. That is what differentiated me in their
mind. It obligates people to recall you when you recall them.
We have already established the location is the person’s
face, and that is why we chose a facial feature. The next
thing that we established was that the code was the name
turned into a picture. And now, we’re up to the next step -
the action where we put the two together. Do you recall on
Day 18 when we turned names into pictures and then filed
them to our house files? Recalling a name works the same
way; except that the difference is instead of filing the name
to a piece of furniture, we’re filing it to a face. There is
absolutely no difference.
Looking at these faces we are now going to memorize the
names with the face:

I’m going to give you two pictures to file to each person’s
face. Take these pictures and then file them to the entire
face. However, the action should be centered around or
focused on the person’s outstanding feature. That was the
purpose of picking it out. Let’s look at the face for number
one. Now, do not write anything down until you are
instructed to do so. Remember this is a memory program.
Here we go! This person’s name is John Webster. First
turn this name into a picture. The picture for John is a toilet
and Webster is from Webster’s Dictionary. Looking at a
picture, number one, we are going to file a toilet and a
dictionary to his eye brows. This is just like we did to our
house files, the only difference is that we filed it to
someone’s face.
Now, the second face. This person’s name is Debbie

Wayne. The picture for Debbie is dead bee and the picture
for Wayne is rain. Every time you meet a Debbie, the
picture is a dead bee, and the picture for Wayne is always
rain. Now, let’s focus on her facial file. We see that it was
her cheekbones. As you look at her picture, begin to notice
that there is a dead bee on each of her cheekbones and is
being showered by rain. Perhaps you just met this woman
in a social situation and you see this dead bee and rain on
her face. Remember to focus the action around her
cheekbones. The next time you see her cheekbones, there
will be the brain trigger. Review number one. What was his
name? Review the picture. Her name? Debbie Wayne.
Number three. This gentleman’s name is Paul Russ. Every
Paul is a basketball and every Russ is rust. As we decided
yesterday, our file for this gentleman is his beard. So, as
you look at this man’s face, visualize yourself dribbling a
basketball made out of rust on his beard. Again, look at the
beard and visualize a basketball made out of rust being
dribbled on his beard. Use all your senses. Imagine the
taste, the smell, and feel the basketball made out of rust.
His name is Paul Russ.
Number four. This lady’s name is Ann Green. The picture
for Ann is ants and the picture for green is green! The file
for this woman is her eyes, so we are going to file ants in
her eyes and they are all green. Now, remember that your
pictures for these things need to be larger than life. Make
the ants huge, and they are crawling around in her eyes and
they’re green. Maybe they’re crawling out of her eyes, and
they come out and they come to get you. Now, that would
be somewhat of a gross picture, but guess what? You won’t
soon forget it. So file ants and green to your file, and it’s
Ann Green. Review the ones before.
Number five. What is your file? That’s right, your file is the
mustache. This gentleman’s file is a mustache and his
name is Chris Gordon. The picture for Chris is a cross and
the picture for Gordon is a garden. So look at this man. You
notice that his mustache is really a garden and it is growing
nothing but crosses! That is a picture! A garden that is
growing nothing but crosses. Again, his name is Chris
Gordon. Cross for Chris and garden for Gordon.

Number six, his file is the high forehead. His name is Mark
Reeves. Every Mark is a marker, like the one you write with,
and Reeves is a reef, like the Great Barrier Reef or a coral
reef. On this gentleman’s forehead, visualize a marker
drawing a reef on his forehead. Again, draw a coral reef on
this gentleman’s head with a marker. This gentleman’s
name is Mark Reeves. Mark Reeves. Look at his picture
and visualize the image that we just described.
Number seven. What was the file? It was ears. This
gentleman’s name is Steve Light. Every Steve is a stove
and every Light is a light bulb. We said that his ears are the
file, so we are going to put his large ears in the stove. We
are cooking his ears and then the light bulb goes off and
tells us that the cooking is done. Remember, don’t just say
it, see it. Saying it does little, but seeing it does everything.
Number eight, what is the file? The file for this one is full
lips. The lady’s name is Margaret and her last name is
Sanders. The picture for Margaret is a margarita and the
picture for Sanders is a sander. As you observe this
woman’s face, you notice she is drinking a margarita that is
nothing but sand. Perhaps the sand is all over her lips and
her teeth, and she smiles and she drinks the sand
margarita.
Number nine. This lady’s name is Elizabeth Smith. The
picture for Elizabeth is a lizard with bad breath, and the
picture for Smith is always a blacksmith iron. As you look at
the picture of this lady, a lizard with really bad breath comes
to sit on her mole. You, not liking lizards, decide to kill it with
a blacksmith’s iron. So, look at her picture and see yourself
branding this lizard with a blacksmith’s branding iron.
Number ten. We have decided that on his face the file was
going to be his glasses, right? His name is Al Cash. Every
Al, an owl, and a Cash is, of course, money. So, the
pictures that we are going to put on his face are an owl and
money. Look at this picture and see an owl in his glasses,
and the owl is made out of money. Every time he opens his
mouth to hoot, a quarter comes out! Look at the picture and
visualize this taking place on his glasses. Now, owl is for
the name, Al. And money is for the last name, Cash. Say
hello to Al Cash. Go back and review the ones from before.

See the picture and then recall what the name stood for.
Number one, number two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight,
nine and number ten. Review them all.
This is how you memorize names. Go back now and see
how many of the names that you can recall.
So, how did you do? Did you get all of them? I bet you did
pretty well. If you were able to see these pictures, then it
wasn’t difficult at all. If you didn’t see the picture, then that
was a challenge. If you were able to recall the picture but
not the name, don’t worry. These pictures were mine. In real
life, you will be creating the pictures that will be
representing the names, so you are not going to have a
problem recalling what the picture stood for. It will be
obvious to you because it was your picture.
Let’s grade your test real quick before we wrap it up for
today. Number one was John Webster. Number two was
Debbie Wayne. Three was Paul Russ. Four is Ann Green.
Five is Chris Gordon. Six is Mark Reeves. Seven is Steve
Light. Eight is Margaret Sanders. Nine is Elizabeth Smith.
And ten was, of course, Al Cash. There you have it. Ten
names and ten pictures and ten faces.
In real life, it’s no different than this process. Always repeat
the person’s name in the conversation. When I’m going
home after a meeting with someone, I’ll review their name
in their facial files, and then I will even review it a few days
later. It is a little bit of work, you better believe it! However,
is it worth it? When you see a person six months after you
have met them and you recall their name, then you have just
placed yourself in a very select category. You have made
them feel good about themselves, and you have just gone
from the level of acquaintance to friend. And, believe me,
it’s worth every ounce of effort, and keep this in mind. When
I’m meeting people today, I’m not having to ask myself,
“What is the picture for this person’s name?” You already
are going to have the pictures for every Robert. Once you
do it, it’s done. For every Lisa, you do it once. For every
John, once, and so on. Initially, this system will take a little
bit of work to build up the Encyclopedia of names.
However, once the Encyclopedia of Names is built up, this
is as easy as one, two, three.

The challenge that I lay down for you is this. Every time you
meet a person over the next three to four weeks turn their
name into a picture. If you are at the movie theatre, bank,
ATM machine, grocery store, church, school, gas station or
at an office turn the name of the person that you meet into a
picture. When you meet a Steve ask yourself, ‘‘What is a
picture for Steve?’’ Once you determine what it is then use
that picture for every Steve. My picture for Steve is a stove.
So EVERYTIME I meet a Steve I see a stove. Do not and I
repeat DO NOT use Stove one day and then the next time
you meet a Steve create a different picture for Steve. This
will only complicate the process. Here are a few examples:
Karen = Carrot
Michelle = Missle
Wendi = Wind
Kyle = Tile
Hilary = Hill of Trees
Lisa = Mona Lisa
Rick = Brick
Don = Sunrise
Dave = Cave
David = Divot
Tom = Tomcat
Abby = A bee
Paul = Ball
Crystal = Crystal
Nancy = Nun eating seeds
Candy = Candy
Dan = Pan
Linda = Window


Day 21
Names and Faces
The keys to remember when meeting someone are focus
on their face and distinguishing features. Then take their
name and turn it into a picture. Then with action, tie that
picture to the face. We are going to go through the same
drill as we did on Day 20. This time, we are just going to
meet 5 people. Actually, you have already met these
people before. They are left over from Day 19. You have
their outstanding facial features, now you just need their
name. Remember that their whole face is actually where
you store the name. The outstanding facial feature is where
you put the picture on where it’s focused.
This is Miss Teeth, remember her? Her name is Judy
Rose. The picture for Judy is chewing tea and the picture
for Rose is a rose. So, look at the picture and at her teeth.
The picture is her chewing tea bags for Judy. Remember to
incorporate all your senses. See it, hear it, taste it. You
have chewing tea for Judy, now maybe a rose in her hair or

in her mouth. After she chews the tea, she chews the rose
to get the taste out of her mouth.
Number two. This is Mr. Scar. His name is Brian Nichols.
The picture for Brian is a brain and the picture for Nichols is
nickels, money, like nickels you spend. So, let’s look at the
picture and specifically the scar. Act as if this is a real
person you are meeting for the first time. As you are
looking at the scar, you see a brain poking out of the scar.
You grab some nickels and you cover up the exposed
brain. Wow! You’re covering up his exposed brain with
nickels!
The next face is Mr. Wrinkle. His name is Dan Frog. Every
Dan is a pan, like a pan you cook with and, of course, Frog
is a frog. Look at Mr. Wrinkle and on his face is a pan and
cooking in the pan is a frog. His face is actually a stove that
is cooking frogs. As you are talking to him, maybe you
reach down in the pan and you decide to have some frog
legs.
The next one is Mr. Dimple because of the dimple in his
chin. His name is Craig Robbins. For every Craig is a keg
and every Robbins is the bird, a robin. So, let’s look at this
gentleman and resting on his chin is a keg and several
robins have gathered around and are drinking out of the
keg. This gentleman is actually a walking bird feeder. Every
time you saw him, he had a swarm of robins around him
feeding off the keg on his chin, you’d never forget it! You’d
tell everybody about it.
The last gentleman is Mr. Nose. And his name is Tom
Lewis. Every Tom is a tom cat and every Lewis is a loose
s. Moving all around the gentleman’s nose is a loose s. It’s
running around like crazy! Can you guess what’s chasing
the s? Sure, I bet you can, a cat, a tom cat to be precise.
This should be getting a little bit clearer and easier. I hope
that you are following along just fine. Is this process that
you’re going through whenever you meet a person? The
answer to that question is absolutely yes. Don’t let that
discourage you. This is an aspect of memory training that
requires a little bit of effort. However, if it didn’t require
effort, it wouldn’t be worth it. Also, remember that the effort

is at the beginning. The work is going to be building up an
Encyclopedia of names. The first time ever that I spoke to a
company as a memory training speaker, I only called on
three people because I only wanted to be responsible to
retain three names. As I got more confident in the system, I
slowly worked my way up. Today, it is no big deal for me to
meet fifty people in thirty minutes and recall their names.
However, I did not start there and you will not either. Don’t
get discouraged because you can’t recall five people right
now. You are going to meet people today and tomorrow
anyway. So turn their name into a picture. If you have to
meet them anyway, then turn their name into a picture. Just
give it a try. I think you’ll be impressed, and remember, I
review the name on the way home after I meet someone
and even a few days later. You have to if you want to
cement it in.


Day 22
Fun Memory Demonstrations
Today is going to be a fun day. I’m going to teach you some
memory games or stunts you can play with your friends.
These are neat demonstrations of a trained memory. There
are several purposes that these games have. Number one,
you get to have some fun. Number two, you get to practice
the system. And number 3, people will get to ask you how
you did it! And you will get the privilege of teaching them
the system.
The first demonstration is actually one I saw a memory
expert demonstrate on the Tonight Show with Johnny
Carson. It got quite a reaction. However, it was actually very
simple. For this demonstration, the memory expert used 50
files. Johnny handed him a magazine and gave him a few
minutes to look at it while Johnny went on with the show.
When they came back to the memory expert, Johnny took
the magazine back and said, “What did page 23 talk
about?” The expert said, “The article was talking about
motorcycles.” Everyone applauded. He said, “Ok, Mr.
Bigshot, what about page 47?” He said, “That was the ad
about the trip to Hawaii.” This blew everyone away.
However, with a little bit of understanding in memory
training, we could figure out what he was doing. He glanced
at every page, got the general idea, turned it into a picture,
then filed that to his file. He did this with 50 files and that
was pretty easy, actually. However, it got quite a reaction
and it should get a reaction if you do it as a demonstration.
That is a fun one.
Another fun memory stunt is to memorize the serial
numbers on dollar bills. Have everyone hand you a dollar
bill. To do this, you must understand phonics and have
pictures for two digit numbers. Look at the serial numbers
and then file them to your house files. You must also turn the
letters into pictures. A is ax, b is a bicycle, c is a computer,
d is a drum and so on. You have five rooms in your files.
Make each room dedicated to a bill. File the pictures to
your files and you should amaze everyone. Now, don’t bet
money when you do these stunts because your friends
probably won’t be your friends for long if you take money

from them.
Here’s another neat stunt. Write out 50 to 100 numbers on
a sheet of paper. Give the paper to a friend and have them
circle five numbers. Then, tell him to call out all the numbers
that he has on his paper except the ones he circled. Tell
him to do this in random order. As he is doing this, you are
mutilating the file he is calling out. Maybe you are
destroying it or throwing water on it or setting it on fire. It
really doesn’t matter what you do, just change it up
somehow. Then, when he gets done, go through your files
and the five that you have done nothing to are the ones that
he circled. This makes the hair stand up on the back of
people’s neck. Quite a feat!
Here’s another fun one. Have you ever wanted to learn the
calendar for an entire year? Well, it’s actually easier than
you think. It is going to take just 12 files and each file
represents a month of the year. For example, January is
represented by a baby. February is represented by Cupid.
March is soldiers marching. April is an umbrella. May is
flowers. June is a June bug. July is fire crackers. August is
the sun. September is a school. October is a pumpkin.
November is a turkey. And December is a Christmas tree.
The next item of business is to determine the first Sunday
of every month. For example, if the first Sunday in January
is the fifth, you will file a star to baby. You use the pencil list
and the picture from their file to your 12 month files. Then
when someone asks you, “What day of the week is the 23rd
of January?” You say, well, that’s a Thursday. All you have
to do is count from the first Sunday by sevens until you get
to the week which the day in question falls on. If it is one
number away, you know it is Monday. Two days away, it is
Tuesday, three days away it is Wednesday, four is
Thursday, five is Friday and six is Saturday. All you have to
do is learn the first Sunday of all 12 months and you have a
neat little demonstration that you can do. This one is more
than just a memory stunt. You will actually be able to use
this to help you in your life.
When you’re sitting in a board meeting and someone says,
“Let’s meet again on the 18th of June,” you can say, “That is
no good because that’s a Sunday.” Everyone thinks, did he
memorize the whole calendar? No. But they never pass up

an opportunity to demonstrate the system.
Other memory games can be just as fun. Have someone
give you items and file them to your files. People love this! I
encourage you to teach the system after you do this demo.
Don’t hog the spotlight. People will appreciate your
willingness to share. These are just some games. There
are many more. If you think of some on your own, send me
a letter or email. I always like to have fun with this system.


Day 23
Memorizing a Deck of Cards
This is one of my favorite memory demonstrations! I love to
get a deck of cards and shuffle them up and then race
through them in a little over a minute and hand the deck to
someone and I will call off the cards in order as they flip
them over! POWERFUL and FUN!
There are many systems out there to memorize a deck of
cards but the one I am going to describe below is incredibly
powerful and is used by memory experts all over the world
to memorize a deck of cards in under 27 seconds! Yes, you
read that right! Ben Pridmore of the United Kingdom has
memorized a deck of cards in 26.2 seconds! Dominic
O’Brien has memorized 54 decks (2808 cards) and David
Farrow 59 decks (3068)! There systems may not be exactly
like the one I will describe below but it is pretty close.
When I memorize a deck of cards I am memorizing 3 cards
at a time. Remember earlier when we talked about
character/action/object for numbers. Well, I also have
character/action/object for every card. There are many
ways that you can do this. Personally this is how I have
done it.
I assigned a number to every card:
 
Spades are represented by the numbers 2-14. The
two of spades equals the number two in my mind. The
ten of spades equals the number ten in my mind.
Jack = 11, Queen = 12, King = 13 and Ace = 14
 
Hearts are represented by the numbers 22-34. The
two of hearts equals number 22 in my mind. The ten
of hearts equals number 30. Jack = 31, Queen = 32,
King = 33 and Ace = 34
 
Diamonds are represented by the numbers 42-54.
The two of diamonds equals the number 42 in my
mind. The ten of diamonds equals the number 50.
Jack = 51, Queen = 52, King = 53 and Ace = 54.

 
Clubs are represented by the numbers 60-74 in my
mind. The two of clubs equals the number 62. The ten
of clubs equals the number 70. Jack = 71, Queen =
72, King = 73 and Ace = 74
The next step is to think of a person that goes with each
number. 33 could be your mom because using the phonics
we discovered before three is ‘‘muh’’. 33 = mom. What
does your mom like to do? Maybe cook? So the action
would be cooking and the object would be a frying pan. The
character/action/object for you would be mom cooking in a
pan. This all represents the number 33 for you and more
importantly the King of Hearts.
You can create the characters (people) this way using
numbers and phonics. I like this method because it kills two
birds with one stone. You are also creating pictures for
numbers this way! You can create your own rules. I have a
friend named Kristen Payne and she represents the
number 79 for me because 79 is ‘‘Kuh’’ and ‘‘Puh’’. Thus
we have the initials K.P. But I don’t always use the initials,
my picture for 65 is a friend of mine named Ashley.
Because six is ‘‘shuh’’ and five is ‘‘luh’’. So 65 is Ashley for
me. You are going to have to develop your own method.
Another way to create the character/action/object is you
could create pictures based on something like this:
 
Every card in the hearts suit is someone that you love
 
Every card in the club suit is someone that is famous
 
Every card in the spades suit is someone you work
with
 
Every card in the diamond suit is someone rich.
Then after you have created the person/character for each
card then you create an action and object that would go
with that card. For example if Albert Einstein becomes one
of your characters then your action might be experimenting
and the object might be a test tube.

Now, hopefully this makes sense and you are able to create
a character/action/object for each card.
Then you start memorizing!
You take the first three cards and they are King of Hearts,
Ace of Spades and Jack of Diamonds. You create a quick
story using the character for the first card, the action for the
second card and the object for the third card. You then file
this to your first file. You do this with 17 files and then on the
18th file you just put one character. After you have done this
you mentally go back through your files and on each file you
should have a character/action/object. The character is the
first card, the action is the second card and the object is the
third card. There you have it! You now know how the
memory experts memorize a deck of cards in less than a
minute. Practice this method until you get really good and
then I hope to see you at a championship soon!


Day 24
Memorizing Scripture
Do you recall the pencil list? Let’s review it together.
Number one is a pencil because it looks like a number one.
Number two is a sink because it has two options, on and
off. Number three is a ring for three-ring circus. Number four
is a track, four times around is a mile. Number five is a star
because it has five points. Number six is a bullet, a six
shooter, six feet under. Number seven is dice, lucky seven,
opposite sides always equal seven. Number eight is an
hourglass shaped like an eight. Number nine is a baseball,
nine players, nine innings. Number ten is fingers, ten
fingers, ten toes.
Number 11 is a goal post, 11 players on a team, shaped
like an 11. Number 12 is eggs, a dozen eggs. Number 13,
well that was flag, 13 stars, 13 stripes, 13original colonies.
Number 14, what was that? Necklace, 14 karat gold, 14
Valentine’s Day, February 14. How about 15, remember
that one? It was paycheck, the first and the 15th you get
paid. Number 16, what was it? You got car, right? Sixteen,
you get your driver’s license. Number 17, what is it?
Magazine. There’s a magazine called Seventeen. Number
18, what was it? Soldier, remember 18, you register for the
draft? Number 19, what was that? Golf clubs, you better
believe it. The 19th hole. And number 20 is a shotgun.
Why? Twenty gauge shotgun. Remember this list was
created by using basic association, however, this is also a
file system because there is more than one of them and
they go in a logical order.
There are 20 files. It also demonstrated to us what basic
association is. This is a list that could be used to file
anything, and remember that whatever you want to recall,
you have to turn into a picture. That is the code, the hard
drive that your mind thinks in. If you want to recall lines of
poetry or a quote, remember all you have to do is get a
general idea and turn it into a picture, and then file that file
to your pencil list. There are 20 files that had unlimited
possibilities. Now we may have another file system that we
want to keep fresh in your minds, and that is our skeleton
files. This is a ten-file file system and works great for a lot of

different possibilities.
I taught a seminar in New Orleans last year. Before it was
my turn to speak, the company offered $50 to anyone who
could say the mission statement. One gentleman out of the
whole company could say it. I stood up and I said, “How
many of you think I could teach you the mission statement
forwards, backwards, in and out of order, or by number in
less than seven minutes?” No one believed me. However,
they were all eager with anticipation. Everyone wanted to
be able to do it. We broke their mission statement down
into ten lines and each one of those lines we turned into a
picture and then simply filed those to our skeleton files. In
just a few short minutes, we had memorized their mission
statement and everyone was amazed. I bring up this story
for this reason.
Sometimes when you are memorizing information using
this system, you may think to yourself, “This is no big deal.
This isn’t that hard.” If that is what you are thinking, then
you’re right. It isn’t hard because we are approaching it
from the correct angle the first time. If we are using rote
memorization first and then this system as the company in
New Orleans, you would see the difference. So, keep in
mind that when someone gives me a list of 15 to 25 words
and I memorize it forwards and backwards, and by number,
it blows them away. You have seen that demo and that is
why you taking this program most likely. If that is true,
remember this. You were impressed with the results, not
the process. Just because you know the process, do not let
that change the fact that this is a very impressive
demonstration.
Now, let’s review our skeleton files. They are number one is
top, two is nose, three is nose, four is ribs, five is liver, six is
joint, seven is cap, eight is fibula, nine is ball and ten is
sand. Now, these are our files. I recently did a program in
Norfolk, Virginia where I was asked to teach a group the
Ten Commandments, and they wanted to know them
forwards and backwards, and by number. I taught them the
skeleton files and then we learned the Ten Commandments
using the skeleton files.
Let’s do this together. What is your file? It is top. The First

Commandment is to have no other gods. We must turn that
phrase into a picture. Make a picture in your mind of what
have no other gods before represents to you. Some people
it may be money, power, fame, or something that they put
as the ultimate in their life that is their god. When you hear
the verse, have no other gods before me, file that picture to
your top.
Number two, what is your file? It is nose. The Second
Commandment says you shall not make a graven image.
Let’s focus on two words, graven and image and file a
tombstone to your nose. Do you see the correlation?
Tombstone marks a grave? Touch your nose right now with
your finger and imagine a tombstone crushing your finger
and your nose.
Number three is your mouth, and the Third Commandment
is not take the name of the Lord in vain. Your file is mouth.
Open your mouth really wide and imagine you are writing
with a marker your name all over your teeth. Every time you
smile, you have your name written all over your teeth. For
example, my teeth say Ronnie all over them.
Now, what is your number four file? It’s your ribs. The Fourth
Commandment is to keep the Sabbath holy. The substitute
picture for Sabbath is a bath. Sabbath is a bath. File your
ribs getting a bath.
The next file is your liver. The Fifth Commandment is honor
your father and mother. Close your eyes and see a picture
of your mother and father in your mind. Now take that
picture and with action, file it to your liver. Maybe you see
your mom and your dad standing on your liver, or they are
on the inside and they are trying to get out.
Number six, what is your file? It is your joint. The Sixth
Commandment is you shall not murder. Have someone
sticking a knife into your hip joint. This is the verse, thou
shall not murder.
Number seven, what is your file? It’s your cap, right? The
number Seven Commandment is thou shall not commit
adultery. File a tree growing out of your kneecap and a doll
is hanging on the tree. A doll on a tree, adultery.

Number eight, what is your file? It is the fibula. The Eighth
Commandment is you shall not steal. What do you think of
when I say steal? Is it the act of stealing something or a
steel bar, or is it Superman because he’s the man of steel.
For the purposes of this, let’s use Superman. Look down at
your fibula, and Superman lands there and is standing on
your leg. You reach down and pat him on the head. You tell
everyone, “Hey, look! It’s the man of steel!
Number nine, what is it? It is a ball, as in the ball of your
foot. This commandment says do not bear false witness.
So, let’s just get a brain trigger for false. Let’s file a red light
bulb for false. File a red light bulb for false. Can you see a
red light bulb and it’s flashing, perhaps the light breaks and
cuts your foot?
Number ten is sand. I want you to file a Corvette. What color
do you like the best? Does it have leather seats? See it so
you won’t forget it. File it to sand. What does a Corvette
have to do with the Tenth Commandment? Number ten
says, thou shalt not covet. Covet is an abstract, but you can
see Corvette. So, number ten is thou shall not covet.
Review and see how many that you recall.
How did you do? Did you get all ten? If you didn’t get a
perfect score, remember, and I’ve said this a million times,
it is but of two reasons. Number one, is you didn’t know
your file, or number two, your action wasn’t vivid enough.
Most the time you will not recall an item because it is not
vivid enough. That is the key to this whole system. Let’s go
through them one through ten and see how you did.
 
1. Something that you worship
 
2. Grave
 
3. Writing a name
 
4. Taking a bath
 
5. Mother and father
 

6. Knife
 
7. Doll in a tree
 
8. Superman
 
9. Light bulb
 
10. Corvette
Now, if you’re saying, “Ronnie, this is good because I can
remember the picture, but I’m having a hard time recalling
what these items stood for.” That is not a problem, not at all.
The reason for that is because these are my pictures and
this information is just for practice. If this was information
that was important to you, and you were turning the
abstracts into pictures, then you would know what the
pictures stood for when the time comes. Practice these
techniques with your friends. Have them give you 15 or 20,
or even 30 or 50 items. File them to your files and
encourage them to give them to you quickly. However,
speed is not the main concern in this situation. The main
concern is making sure that you understand the concepts.


Day 25
Working on Speed Memory
If there is one thing that I have done that has impacted my
memory more than anything in the last year it is that I have
pushed my mind on the issue of speed. As I type this, just
ten short months ago it took me over six minutes to
memorize a deck of 52 shuffled cards! About two months
ago I was down to three minutes! I was excited and I
emailed my memory coach (yes I have a memory coach!).
His name is David Thomas. He is a man who has had a
Guinness World Record by memorizing pie to over 20,000
digits and has won the USA Memory Championship (2007)
and placed very well at the World Memory Championship
level (which is VERY hard to do). At any rate, I emailed him
and shared my excitement of being able to memorize a
deck of cards in three minutes. He commended my speed
but then urged me to be able to do it in two minutes! I
thought, ‘‘Wow! He doesn’t understand how I never thought I
would get to three minutes!’’ However, I pressed on.
Ben Pridmore who is the current record holder for
memorizing a deck of cards in 26.2 seconds gave me
similar advice. He said, ‘‘Don’t wait until you are 100% sure
that the image is in your memory. Instead, move to the next
file and keep going. You will be surprised when you return
to the file to discover that information is still in your
memory.’’ Benn’s philosophy was to move rapidly and trust
your memory that is will store the data at a higher rate of
speed.
Both Ben and David were correct. It took me eight months
to go from six minutes to three minutes and then in only four
weeks I was able to memorize a deck of cards in less than
two minutes! Before you knew it I set a record for the
fastest to memorize a deck of cards in one minute and 27
seconds on March 7th 2009!!
Learn to trust your memory more, don’t feel like you make
sure the image is 100% cemented in before you move on
to the next item. You will be surprised at how much your
memory really does recall.

A great way to work on speed memory is to get a computer
program that generate random words or random numbers. I
have 
programs 
such 
as 
this 
on 
my 
website
www.ronwhitetraining.com. You can calibrate the speed for
your purposes and then speed it up as you get better and
better.
The average mind can read 250 words per minute and with
speed reading can reach levels of 1000 words per minute
or more. My good friend Howard Berg who is in the
Guinness Book of World Record as the World’s Fastest
Reader says that the #1 thing that slows him down when
reading is turning the pages!!
Train for accuracy but also remember to train for speed!
Your mind will operate at incredibly fast and efficient levels
if you push it!


Day 26
Things To Do, Directions, Names
Once again, it is very simple, to remember anything all you
need is:
 
1. Focus
 
2. Location
 
3. Code
 
4. Action
 
5. Review
I want you to file your things to do list to your skeleton files
today. Start with your top, always start with number one.
When I’m ending each day, I will lay in my bed and I’ll ask
myself, “What do I have to do tomorrow?” I will then file that
to my skeleton files. Whenever you go through the process
in your day, use your skeleton files. Let’s say you have five
things to do, and someone calls you through the day and
says, “Don’t forget to call Tom!” Your picture for Tom is a
tom cat. So, you immediately file that to your next open file.
That way, throughout the day, you are always adding on.
When you complete a task on your files, change the picture
somehow. Set it on fire or throw water on it visualize a big
red checkmark, but always use your skeleton files for a
things to do list for the day. This is great to make things get
done.
Now, how about directions? Have you ever been stopped
and you ask somebody for directions and then you don’t
remember what the guy said? They’ll say, “Go down to
Maple Street and take a left and go two stop signs and
take a right. Go to King Street and take a left and you’re
there.” You drive away thinking, “Great!” And no sooner are
you gone you can’t recall what they just told you. It happens
all the time. This is because right and lefts are abstract.
Here is something you can do to recall directions.
Make every right, rain and every left a lamb. So when

someone says, “Go down to Maple Street and take a left”,
file maple syrup and a lamb to your first file. Then they say,
“Go two stop signs and make a right.” File two stop signs
and rain to your next file. Then when they say, “Go to King
Street and take a left”, file king’s crown and a lamb to your
number three file. What you’re doing is simply turning
abstracts into pictures. Remember that your mind thinks in
pictures. That is the code your mind needs to recall. So
what you are filing is pictures for abstracts.
How about this one? You go to a friend’s house and you
can’t recall where you put your keys. You know, I do this all
the time. Every time I place my keys, where I set them is my
file and the picture, of course, is my keys, and the action is
an explosion whenever I set my keys down. My friends don’t
know it, but when I go to their house, I’m exploding all of
their furniture. You have a great system in your hands. You
can use it to do anything as long as you put your mind to it. I
want to conclude today’s program by practicing some
numbers and how to turn them into pictures using phonics.
Let’s do ten numbers, 11 through 20. Eleven would be tuh
and tuh, so that is tot. Twelve would be tuh and nuh, so that
is like a tin can. Number 13 would be tuh and muh, so that
is time. See a clock. Number 14 is tuh and ruh, so that
would be a tire. Number 15 is tuh and luh, so that would be
tile. Sixteen is duh and shuh, so that is dish. Seventeen is
tuh and cuh, so that is tack. Eighteen is duh and vuh, so that
is dove. Nineteen is tuh and puh, so that is tap. Twenty is
nuh and suh, so that is nose.
Phonics is a skill that if you master, you are going to find
yourself with an unstoppable memory. When I get a phone
number, I use phonics to file it to my skeleton files. Do I
have a day timer for my phone numbers? Absolutely!
However, I’m not in a rush to put the numbers in there.
When I get a phone number, I use phonics to turn it into a
picture, and then I file it away.
Here is a memory test for today. Turn the following names
into picture:
Frank
Harold
Tommy

George
Blaine
Sally
Sarah
Natalie
Daniel
Rebecca
Heidi
Judy
Melissa
Missy
William
Davey
Barney
Jacob
Burt


Day 27
Things To Do, Directions, Names
Well, it’s Day 27. We’re getting closer and closer to making
sure you have an instant recall memory. Are you excited? I
know I am! You have learned a lot. Feel free to go back and
review any portion of this program at any time. There are
many sections like the phonics and names that you need to
review. Stick to the basics at first. Master them, then try the
advanced stuff.
Today I want to give you some ideas for your files. Your
house files can be used for product knowledge and I want
to make sure you see that. You have five rooms and five
files in each room. If you were an automobile sales
professional, you can dedicate each room to one type of
car. If you’re a real estate agent, you get listings. Make
each room represent an area of town and then always have
five listings in each room. That way, when someone says
they want a house in a specific area, and you have five
listings at your mental fingertips, about that area. That is a
great tool. If you are in any other kind of business, you can
file procedures, or sales presentations, or steps to
overcoming objections.
My family is in the furniture refinishing business, marketing
to hotels and refinishing their furniture. And occasionally if I
am in a town where they have a hotel they are trying to get
work at, I will stop by and give a sales presentation. I don’t
know much about refinishing furniture, but I’ll talk to the crew
leader back home about what he wants me to say. I will
then file that to my skeleton files, whether it be specific
steps in restoring the furniture they use in their process or
names of other hotels they have done in the area. I will file
the information to my skeleton files and I sound extremely
knowledgeable.
If you’re a student, you are going to have to take notes the
exact same way you have always done, I hate to break the
news to you, but it’s true. You still read the chapters the
exact same way that you’ve always done. The difference is
when you study, you only have to study once. You know
people will always find time to do something over again, but

they can never find time to do it right the first time. As a
student, that is exactly what you are going to be doing with
this system. Doing it right the first time.
Let’s say you are studying for a history test in your first
room. You could make that room the causes of the Civil
War. The next room could be the key leaders or battles.
Maybe the next room, some of the changes the war brought
about. Perhaps you are studying for a psychology test and
you make the first room their theories and ideas or
Sigmund Freud. The second room could be theories and
ideas of Carl Young. The third room could be five theories
or ideas of B. F. Skinner. Or perhaps you could simply have
a room that lists all the major psychologists. You have a lot
of different options with this method, but it all comes down
to location, code and action. You must be able to see what
you want to recall and see it with a lot of action. That is the
key to this whole system.
Now, for our activities, do you remember your city files?
Review them real quick. Stop the program if you have to.
Mentally file the following ten items to your city files and
remember to move quickly and see creative items with a lot
of action!
 
1. Sun
 
2. Mercury
 
3. Venus
 
4. Earth
 
5. Mars
 
6. Jupiter
 
7. Saturn
 
8. Uranus
 
9. Neptune
 
10. Pluto

You just memorized the planets in order from the sun! If you
wanted you could go back and add an item to each picture.
For example you could turn the miles from the sun into a
picture and place that picture on top of each file as well.
Then you would have two items on each file and so on. If
you want to memorize sub points for something you do it
using the system that we learned with the Mount Rainer
story. Remember when you created that story? What if you
filed Mount Rainer to your number one file? Well you would
actually be filing much more than Mount Rainer to that #1
file; you would be filing almost 20 items. So, if you want to
recall sub points to something you will file the initial item or
word and then go back and create layers. File the second
‘‘layer’’ then the third and fourth and so on. This is how you
memorize sub-points!


Day 28
Alphabet Files
Welcome, my friend! It is Day 28. The most important part
of the program is going to be to implement it. You have 25
house files, ten skeleton files, 20 pencil files and ten city
files. That is 65 items. There is no doubt in my mind that I
could give you 65 words and right now you could get at
least 55 of them. That is very impressive, guys. What you
have is a valuable opportunity. Remember to get the best
benefit from the gym, you have to go work out.
Yesterday, I met four people. Today as I was driving, I was
reviewing their pictures and the names of their pictures. I
met an Andrew with a goatee and I had ants drawing on a
goatee. I met an Elizabeth with glasses. I had a lizard with
bad breath on her glasses. I met a Paul with sideburns. He
had a basketball bouncing on his sideburns. Then finally, I
met a Tim with bushy eyebrows. He had a tin can on his
eye brows. Did that require a little bit of thought? Yes a little
bit. However, is it going to be worth it? You better believe it.
Few things are more rewarding than making another
person feel special and important, and that is exactly what
you do when you recall their name. The same effort you put
into names, you will have to consciously put into other areas
of this system.
I want to show you another filing system that I have seen
used before. Actually, kids really like this one. Not only is it
good to use as files, but when you need to recall letters
such as the letters in product codes or sequences, this
system works great, and it works on the concept that you
must see something to recall it. Here are 26 Alphabet files.
A = Ax
B = Bicycle
C = Computer
D = Drum
E = Ear
F = Fire
G = Grass
H = House
I = Igloo

J = Jet
K = Knight
L = Light
M = Moon
N = Net
O = Octopus
P = Pen
Q = Quilt
R = River
S = Sign
T = Tent
U = Umbrella
V = Vase
W = Wine
X = X Ray
Y = Yo Yo
Z = Zipper
Now, what are these 26 items? Good question. And the
answer is, they’re whatever you want them to be! If you find
yourself in a situation where you see a math formula and
there are letters that keep repeating, well, these 26 items
give you pictures for those letters. They also give you 26
files if you choose to use them for that. This system is
meant to give you a system that you can change to your
own needs. Review it a couple of times, if you want, or
whenever you encounter something that you feel these
could be of use, come back to them. It could be great for
memorizing product codes with letters in them, serial
numbers that have letters in them or license plates. These
items all contain letters and now you have pictures for
letters!


Day 29
Keep Your Motivation Up!
Welcome back! Today is Day 29. How did you like your
alphabet picture? It was kind of interesting. Today I want to
review with you what we have learned. You have learned a
system developed by the Romans over 2,000 years ago,
almost 2,500 years ago, to give speeches and
presentations without notes. The Romans called this
method Losa which is the Latin word for places. Guys, what
we have done is establish places in your memory where we
are going to store information. Remember they are places
that you can see.
The pencil list has 20 files on it. Review them in your mind
and in your guidebook if you have to. The skeleton file has
ten files on it. They are top, nose, mouth, ribs, liver, joint,
cap, fibula, ball and sand. Remember that not only are
these files, but they also represent the ten primary phonetic
sounds of tuh, nuh, muh, luh, juh, cuh, fuh, puh and suh.
Remember using phonics we can create new word-pictures
that can be used as files to help us recall something.
Our city files and our house files give us 25 plus ten files for
35 total files. You have 65 files. That should get you through
most anything you need to retain. If you are a student, you
are still going to have to take your notes just like you always
did. You’re still going to have to read the chapter and
highlight the key information just like you always did. The
difference will come when you go to retain it, and you now
have a system and you are going to have to study once and
then you’ll be done! You will get it right the first time. I find it
odd that people can always find something to do over, but
they can rarely find time to do right the first time. This
system enables you to do that. When someone gives you
their phone number, immediately turn it into a picture and
file it to your files. Or, if you want, use their house or their
office and file a picture to that file whether it be their house
or their office.
I recently had a student ask me if I could teach them to
recall all 213 counties in his state. I said, “Yes!” Now that
sounds somewhat overwhelming, but this is what you do

when you encounter a situation like this. When you have an
overwhelming amount of information to recall, look at it on
paper. Most likely you will have to get it on paper anyway.
Get it on paper and then decide how many files you’re
going to use. If you need more files, add some house or city
or even phonics files. Once you have enough files, then
break the task down into easy manageable steps.
Deadlines for each goals. Once you do that, you will not be
attempting a huge memory feat, you will be attempting
several small feats and that is what this course if full of. You
should be very well equipped right now to handle just about
every situation that you encounter.
I would like to tell you the story of a west Texas rancher
millionaire. He had a party to attract all the suitable
bachelors around for his daughter. This is what we call in
sales as group prospecting. The night was full of food and
music and dancing. After everyone had fun, the west Texas
rancher asked everyone to gather around an Olympic-size
swimming pool that he had out back. He had the foresight
to stock this pool with alligators and water moccasins, not
very pleasant. He stood at the end of the pool and he said,
“I will make an offer to the first man to dive into this pool and
swim the length of it.” He said. “I will offer him the choice of
3 things. Number one, he can have one million dollars in
cold, hard cash, or number two, he can have 5,000 acres of
my best land and number three, you could have my beautiful
daughter in marriage, and gentlemen, obviously, if you take
the hand of my daughter, one day all of this will be yours
because one day this all will be hers.” Well, no sooner had
the words left his mouth, there was a splash at one end of
the pool and a young man emerged at the other end and he
had just set a world’s record that will never be eclipsed. The
rancher was so excited, he ran over and he said, “Son, I
guess you want something!” He said, “Yes, sir.” The
rancher said, “Well, tell me, son, what is it that you want?
Do you want the million dollars in cold, hard cash?” The
young man said, “No, sir.” He said, “Well, son, do you want
the 5,000 acres of my best land?” And the young man said,
“No, sir.” The west Texas rancher said, “Well then, son, I’m
assuming that you want the hand of my beautiful daughter in
marriage.” The young man said, “No, sir.” The rancher was
shocked! He said, “Son, if you don’t want the hand of my

beautiful daughter in marriage, you don’t want the cash, you
don’t want the land, son, tell me what it is you want. What do
you want?” The young man said, “I want to know the name
of that dude who pushed me into the end of the swimming
pool.”
Now, I think you’ll agree that this man was highly motivated.
Once he hit the water, he had a goal to get out and he did.
In life, you are going to be thrown out there for the water
moccasins and the alligators, but I want to encourage you
to keep your eyes on the goal. This system is worth more
than any reward you can imagine. It will increase your self-
esteem, it will increase your confidence, your knowledge,
and your ability to build relationships recalling a person’s
name.
Stay motivated to practice this system even if you have to
imagine alligators chasing you!
My challenge to you is to create more mental journeys like
the ones we did with your city and your house. Select
different areas of town and memorize 20-30 files on each
journey. Perhaps you select five areas of town and 30 files
on each journey that will give you 150 files right there!
After this, select five to ten of your family member’s homes,
friends’ homes or favorite hang-out spots and build 20-30
files in each of these. Upon completion of these activities
you could literally have 300-500 files in a week or so! At the
publishing of this book I have around 2900 files!


Day 30
Review and a New Beginning
Welcome to the final day! It’s Day 30! How are you today?
My friend, I have enjoyed this journey. I hope that you have
as well. This has been a journey that is not coming to an
end; you are now simply taking a fork in the road. This is
the beginning of the road, actually. Now is the time that you
take what you have learned and you apply it to your life. You
are like a bird flying out of the nest. Right now, you should
have some motivation to apply this system. If that
motivation ever wanes, I encourage you to come back to
this course and remind yourself of why you got so excited in
the first place. Motivation is an important part of any
learning process and I encourage you not to let the learning
process end here. And I am not specifically talking about
memory training. Although there are some very interesting
books and recorded programs on memory training, there is
a tremendous amount of knowledge out there at your
fingertips.
You could listen to Napoleon Hill’s book, Think and Grow
Rich or Og Mandino’s The Greatest Salesman In The
World, or my fellow Texan’s book, Zig Ziglar’s See You At
The Top. And do you know what the exciting thing is? Of the
ability to file knowledge shared with you in these trainings
to your files and retain the information for as long as you
like! That is exciting!
A University of California study reveals that a person living
in Los Angeles could acquire the equivalent of a two-year
college degree in three years of normal driving time by
listening to recorded programs. The total amount of time
that you invest if you do it while driving would almost be
zero! Imagine that! I have never seen a disc jockey jump out
of a radio and cut you a check for listening while you are
driving, however, every time you listen to a train or an
educational program, you get better and better. Now the
people who listen to the right recorded programs are the
happiest and most well-adjusted, excited people I know.
Now combine that with a solid reading program and you
are really in business. The rule is this. While you are riding,
listen and while you are sitting, read.

I recently heard a man I respect very much say that many
men desire peace yet few men desire the things that lead
to peace. We all want the prize at the end of the tunnel yet
few men desire the things that lead to the prize. To get the
prize in your life, you must pay the price. The people who
listen to the motivational programs, read positive
educational books are often the ones who need it the least.
They’re already successful. When I go to the gym, the
people I see there are in such great shape, I wonder why
they’re in the gym! The ones that are successful in life didn’t
all of a sudden adopt their reading habits when they were
already successful. They are there because of their habits.
Good habits are difficult to acquire, but very easy to live
with. I encourage you to develop good habits in this
educational arena. Constantly challenge your memory with
knowledge.
You have a tremendous skill. Very few people have the
ability to meet a roomful of people and recall their names,
or give a seven hour talk and never access a note, or
memorize a chapter of a book, or obtain a list of 65 items
after hearing them once. Guys, you have that ability. It is in
this system. Whether you know it or not, you have just
placed yourself in a very select group. I encourage you to
take advantage of this tremendous opportunity. I look
forward to meeting you one day and hearing your personal
success stories. I enjoyed our journey together and I hope
that you did as well.
I will leave you with this thought. It is not what you eat, but
what you digest that makes you healthy. It is not what you
earn, but what you invest that makes you wealthy. And it is
not what you learn but what you remember that makes you
wise. My friends, John F. Kennedy paraphrased a verse out
of Luke in the New Testament that said, “To those who
much is given, much is expected.” My friends, you have
been given much, now much is expected.


Get Your Bonus Video of USA Memory
Champion Ron White teaching you:
 
How to Give Speeches Without Notes
 
How to Memorize Poems, Quotes and Scriptures
 
How To Memorize Math and Chemistry Formulas
 
How To Easily Memorize 6 and 7 Digit Numbers
 
How to Memorize a Deck of Playing Cards
http://www.increase-your-memory.com


AUTHOR’S BIOGRAPHY
Ron White is without question the nation’s number one
memory expert and one of the tops in the world. He is the
two time national memory champion (2009 and 2010) and
holds the record for the fastest to memorize a deck of
cards in the USA. He has spoken around the world on
memory skills in countries such as Puerto Rico, Canada,
The Bahamas, Singapore, Malaysia, Bangkok, Spain,
Belgium, Australia and even Nebraska.
He has been speaking on memory to business
professionals and students since 1991. His talks include,
‘Triple Your Memory and Triple Your Business’ and
‘Memory Power = Student Power’. He has appeared on
FOX and Friends, Good Morning America, CBS EARLY
Show, ABC World News Tonight, the Martha Stewart
Show, CBS Evening News, the Discovery Channel and
hundreds of other radio and print media sources.
Ron is also a veteran of the US Navy and served a tour in
Afghanistan in 2007. Get a FREE video of Ron teaching
advanced memory techniques:
http://www.increase-your-memory.com

