MEREOLOGY 
& LOCATION 
edited by 
SHIEVA KLEINSCHMIDT 
' 


 MEREOLOGY AND LOCATION  



 Mereology and 
Location 
 edited by  
 Shieva  Kleinschmidt  

 Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, ox2 6dp, 
 United Kingdom 
 Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
 It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
 and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of 
 Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries 
 © The several contributors 2014 
 The moral rights of the authors have been asserted 
 First Edition published in 2014 
 Impression: 1 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
 a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the 
 prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted 
 by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics 
 rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the 
 above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the 
 address above 
 You must not circulate this work in any other form 
 and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer 
 Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press 
 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America 
 British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
 Data available 
 Library of Congress Control Number: 2013941634 
 ISBN 978–0–19–959382–8 
 Printed and bound in Great Britain by 
 CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, cr0 4yy 
 Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and 
 for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials 
 contained in any third party website referenced in this work. 


 For  Geord and Marzette 


 Acknowledgements   
 This volume was inspired by a conference on Mereology, Topology, and 
Location, that took place at Rutgers University in October 2006. I  am 
grateful to the Rutgers Philosophy Department for sponsoring this confer-
ence, and especially to Dean Zimmerman for his help with the conference 
and for his subsequent suggestion to create this volume. 
 I owe a debt to the universities that have supported me during the pro-
duction of this volume—Rutgers University, New  York University, and 
the University of Southern California—as well as to the members of the 
Philosophy departments at these universities. 
 I am very thankful to the members of Oxford University Press who have 
done a signifi cant amount of work on this volume. I am especially grateful 
to Peter Momtchiloff  for all of his work and for his invaluable guidance and 
extraordinary patience. I am also thankful to the anonymous reviewers who 
provided us with feedback on the papers. 
 My greatest debt is to the incredible group of authors who have con-
tributed to this volume and who have been tremendously patient with me 
during my fi rst editing attempt. It has been a delight to work with them, 
and I’m very excited about the resultant volume. 


 Contents     
 Notes on Contributors  
 xi 
 Introduction 
  xiii 
 Shieva  Kleinschmidt 
 Part I .  Mereology 
 1.  The Many Primitives of Mereology  
  3 
 Josh  Parsons 
 2.  Parthood is Identity 
  13 
 Kris  McDaniel 
 3.   Mereology and Modality  
  33 
 Gabriel  Uzquiano 
 Part II .  Mereology and Location 
 4.  Where It’s At: Modes of Occupation and Kinds of Occupant  
 59 
 Peter   Simons 
 5.   A Spatial Approach to Mereology  
  69 
 Ned  Markosian 
 6.  Balls and All  
  91 
 Daniel   Nolan 
 7.  Confl icting Intuitions about Space  
  117 
 Peter  Forrest 
 Part III .  Interaction with Other Topics 
 8.  Transhypertime Identity  
  135  
 Hud   Hudson 

x contents
 9.  Parts of Propositions  
  156  
 Cody  Gilmore 
 10.  Mereological Sums and Singular Terms  
  209 
 Kathrin  Koslicki 
 Bibliography  
  237 
 Index 
  249 

 Notes on Contributors   
 Peter   Forrest    is Professor Emeritus of Philosophy at the University of New 
England in Australia. He has doctorates in mathematics and philosophy and his chief 
interests are in metaphysics and philosophy of religion. These interests are illustrated 
by his fi ve books:  The Dynamics of Belief  (Blackwell, 1986),  Quantum Metaphys ics 
(Blackwell, 1988),  God without the Supernatural  (Cornell University Press, 1996), 
 Developmental Theism  (Oxford University Press, 2007), and  The Necessary Structure of 
the All-pervading Aether (Ontos Verlag, 2013). 
 Cody    Gilmore   is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of California, 
Davis. His interests include questions about the nature of universals, time travel, 
the metaphysics of death, and the bearing of relativity theory on debates about 
persistence. He has published papers on these topics in such journals and vol-
umes as  Oxford Studies in Metaphysics ,  Philosophical Perspectives ,  Philosophical Studies , 
 Australasian Journal of Philosophy ,  Philosophy Compass , and the  Oxford Handbook of 
Philosophy of Death . He is the author of the entry “Location and Mereology” in the 
 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 
 Hud   Hudson   is Professor of Philosophy at Western Washington University. He 
works primarily in the areas of metaphysics and philosophy of religion, and has 
published numerous articles in a variety of journals including  Noûs ,  Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research ,  Philosophical Studies , and  The Journal of Philosophy . He 
is the author of  The Metaphysics of Hyperspace  (Oxford University Press, 2006),  A 
Materialist Metaphysics of the Human Person  (Cornell University Press, 2001), and 
 Kant’s Compatibilism (Cornell University Press, 1994). 
 Shieva   Kleinschmidt    is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at the University of 
Southern California. She works primarily in Metaphysics. She has published articles 
in  Philosophical Perspectives ,  Oxford Studies in Philosophy of Religion , and  Philosophical 
Studies .  
 Kathrin    Koslicki    is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of 
Colorado-Boulder. She works primarily in metaphysics and ancient Greek phi-
losophy, especially Aristotle. Her monograph,  The Structure of Objects , in which 
she defends a structure-based theory of parts and wholes, appeared in 2008 with 
Oxford University Press. 
 Kris    McDaniel    is Associate Professor of Philosophy at Syracuse University. 
He works primarily in metaphysics but has research interests in the history of 

xii notes on contributors
philosophy and ethics. He has published in  Nous ,  Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research ,  Philosophical Quarterly ,  Philosophical Studies ,  Synthese , and  Analytic Philosophy . 
 Ned   Markosian    is Professor in the Department of Philosophy at Western 
Washington University, and specializes in metaphysics. He has published in 
 Australasian Journal of Philosophy ,  Philosophy and Phenomenological Research , and 
 Philosophical Studies , among other places. 
 Daniel     Nolan   is Professor of Philosophy in the School of Philosophy at the 
Australian National University. He is interested in many areas of philosophy, but 
particularly metaphysics, philosophy of science, philosophy of logic and language, 
and metaethics. He is the author of  David Lewis  (Acumen, 2005) and  Topics in the 
Philosophy of Possible Worlds (Routledge, 2002). 
 Josh   Parsons    is Lecturer at Oxford University. He works in metaphysics, phi-
losophy of language, logic, metaethics, and ethics. He has published in  Analysis , 
 Australasian Journal of Philosophy ,  Oxford Studies in Metaphysics ,  Pacifi c Philosophical 
Quarterly ,  Philosophical Studies ,  Philosophy and Phenomenological Research ,  The Monist , 
and  The Philosophical Quarterly . 
 Peter   Simons   FBA holds the Chair of Moral Philosophy (1837) at Trinity College 
Dublin. His interests centre on metaphysics, both pure and applied, the philoso-
phy of logic and mathematics, and the history of philosophy in the nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries, with special emphasis on philosophy and logic in Austria, 
Poland, and early analytic philosophy. He is the author of  Parts (1987) and  Philosophy 
and Logic in Central Europe from Bolzano to Tarski (1992 ) , and over 200 articles. 
 Gabriel   Uzquiano   is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Southern 
California. He works in philosophical logic and metaphysics, and has published in 
 Analysis ,  Mind ,  Noûs ,  Oxford Studies in Metaphysics ,  The Journal of Philosophical Logic , 
 Bulletin of Symbolic Logic ,  Review of Symbolic Logic , and  Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society . 

 Introduction  
 SHIEVA  KLEINSCHMIDT 
 We think and talk about parts and locations all the time. We add new 
parts to our houses, we wonder about the locations of our cars. We even 
consider parts and locations  qua parts and locations. For instance, when 
holding a puzzle piece, we think of it as part of the puzzle. And when 
wondering how many books can fi t into a particular suitcase, we think of 
the space in the suitcase  qua potential receptacle for books. And we often 
talk about parts and locations as well.  E.g., from Woody Allen: “Man con-
sists of two parts, his mind and his body, only the body has more fun.” And 
Peter Sellers, about locations: “There's a time and a place for everything… 
and this is it!” 
 However, as familiar as the topics are, there are many questions to answer 
about parthood and location. For instance, we might wonder whether loca-
tions really exist at all. Is there  really something that exists that is the space 
inside my suitcase? Or when I  put books inside, rather than occupying 
some location, do they merely stand in some relation to the suitcase itself? 
If there is a location that the books occupy, what sort of location is it? Are 
all locations spatial, or are some spatiotemporal? Is the way in which things 
are present in time diff erent from how they are present in space? What are 
the rules governing how the books can be located? For instance, if every 
part of each of the books is inside the suitcase, does that guarantee that no 
part of any of the books is outside the suitcase? We can also ask about part-
hood: If a door is part of a house, but the door isn’t identical to the house, 
does this imply that there’s more than the door that makes up the house? 
How general is such an implication? 
 These questions all have to do with Mereological (i.e.,  part/whole ) rela-
tions and Location relations. Giving comprehensive and systematic answers 

xiv shieva kleinschmidt
to these questions will involve giving a theory of mereology and loca-
tion. We will now look at what is involved in giving a complete picture of 
Mereology and Location. 
 1.  Basic Questions about Mereology and Location  
 In producing a theory of Mereology and Location, we fi rst need to fi gure 
out what the relevant relations involved are. We need a listing of all of 
the mereological and locative relations required to completely capture all 
of the mereological and locative features of any possible case. (We might 
also include some other common mereological and locative relations.) 
For each relation, we need to know (i) its  domain , (ii) its adicity, and (iii) 
its analysis (if it has one). In determining the domain, we’ll know which 
entities (or sorts of entities) the relation relates. (For instance, does part-
hood relate only material objects, or can it apply to abstracta as well? 
What about spacetime regions?) Determining the adicity of a relation 
involves answering questions such as: How many entities does any given 
instance of the relation relate? (For instance,  being taller than  is a two-place 
relation,  being between  is a three-place relation.) Does the relation always 
relate a single entity to another single entity? Can it relate one entity to a 
plurality of entities (perhaps without relating that entity to any member 
of that plurality), or even a plurality to a plurality? And is the relation’s 
adicity fi xed, or can it vary? Questions about adicity will be answered in 
giving the analysis of any relation, but because some relations will not 
have analyses, the issue of adicity must sometimes be addressed separately. 
Finally, in giving analyses of the relations that have them, we will also 
learn about the structure of these groups of relations. We will learn how 
the relations relate to one another, at least insofar as some can be analyzed  
in terms of others. 
 We also need to determine: (iv) Which axioms should we accept about 
our relation? That is, which formal properties does it have? Is it transitive, 
symmetric, refl exive, etc.? Does any collection of entities have a fusion? Is 
every entity located in exactly one place? And (v) what is the modal force 
of each statement given in answer to (iv)? That is, which of the statements 
are analytic, which are merely metaphysically necessary, etc.? 
 Next, we must fi gure out (vi) what the connections are between mereo-
logical facts and locative ones. We may learn some of this from our analyses, 
but there may also be some non-analytic connections between mereological 

introduction xv
features and locative ones. For instance, perhaps only mereologically simple 
objects can occupy mereologically simple regions. We must also indicate (vii) 
what the modal force is of these connections, and which domains they apply to. 
 Lastly, we must ask: (viii) What work do we want to be done by our theories 
of Mereology, of Location, and of Mereology and Location? Are we simply 
looking for extensionally (or intensionally) correct statements? Or do we want 
our theories to be explanatory in some way? If so, what are they to explain? 
 In addition to answering the above questions to give a complete theory of 
Mereology and Location, we can also examine the interactions our theory has 
with other topics. In fact, examining potential places of interaction can help 
guide us in determining which theory of Mereology and Location to endorse. 
 The chapters of this volume have been divided into three groups, 
(I)  Mereology, (II) Mereology and Location, and (III) Interaction with 
Other Topics. In what follows, I will provide a brief overview of some of 
the most infl uential theories of Mereology and Location, and I will indicate 
how the chapters of this volume relate. This introduction is intended to be 
helpful but not necessary for understanding of the content of this volume’s 
chapters. Further, each chapter can stand alone from the others (resulting in 
a small amount of overlap between the chapters), so you needn’t read them 
in order. 
 2.  A Classic Example of a Mereology 1 
 The fi rst step in providing a mereological theory is listing some rela-
tions. They’re easy enough to fi nd. We can start with what seems to be 
the star:  parthood . My hand is a part of me. This minute is part of this day. 
Mereology is part of Metaphysics. And you are part of yourself. This last case 
is a bit odd; arguably, as the word ‘part’ is typically used, something is a part 
of something else iff  the fi rst thing is some but not all of the second thing 
(and this is how Kris McDaniel uses the word in Chapter 2). But mereolo-
gists typically use the phrase ‘proper parthood’ to pick out this restricted, 
more ordinary, relation. They use ‘parthood’ as a technical term, meaning 
 1  The presentation of Minimal Mereology and Classical Extensional Mereology that I  give here is 
largely taken from Casati and Varzi (1999) and Simons (1987). Those texts were drawing from the for-
mal theories presented in papers by Stanisaw Leśniewski beginning in 1916 (collected and translated in 
Leśniewski (1992) (reference from Varzi 2009)) and from Henry Leonard and Nelson Goodman’s (1940).  

xvi shieva kleinschmidt
roughly ‘proper parthood or identity’. That is, we fi nd ourselves with two 
relations, each of which can be defi ned in terms of the other. We can defi ne 
 parthood in terms of  proper parthood as follows: 
  •  ‘ x is a  part of  y ’ =df  x is a proper part of  y , or  x is identical to  y 
 Alternatively, we can defi ne  proper parthood in terms of  parthood : 
  •  ‘ x is a  proper part of  y ’ =df  x is part of  y and  x is not identical to  y 2 
 Typically, either  parthood or  proper parthood  is taken to be unanalyzable. 
However, this needn’t be so. Both relations can be defi ned in terms of some 
other mereological primitive, or they can be defi ned in terms of a diff erent 
sort of relation altogether. 
 In  Chapter 2: Parthood is Identity , Kris McDaniel will argue that part-
hood is analyzable in terms of identity, and that any fusion is numerically identi-
cal to  each of its parts. Parthood, McDaniel thinks, is an instance of  region-relative 
identity . Your hand is part of you just in case, where your hand is located,  that’s 
what you are. McDaniel argues that this view is able to capture the intimacy of 
the  parthood  relation at least as well as the view that  composition  is a (sometimes 
many–one) identity relation, but without raising that view’s problems. 
 There are also other ways in which mereological relations might be analyzed 
in terms of non-mereological ones. For instance, in  Chapter 5: A Spatial 
Approach to Mereology , Ned Markosian off ers an analysis of parthood in 
terms of  containment . That is, Markosian proposes that one thing is a part of 
another just in case the region occupied by the fi rst is a sub-region of the region 
occupied by the second. And in  Chapter 6: Balls and All , Daniel Nolan off ers 
a supersubstantivalist-friendly reduction of  parthood  to (roughly) the  sub-region 
relation. I will return to discussion of these views later in this introduction. 
 One may wonder the extent to which, in giving a theory of  parthood , we 
must fi nd something non-mereological to analyze it in terms of. After all, 
in trying to give an informative theory, wouldn’t it be unfortunate if one of 
the fi rst things we did was to take one of the central relations as primitive, 
and then use that primitive in building the rest of our theory? 
 2  See Cotnoir’s very interesting (2010) for a defense of a defi nition of proper parthood that is more 
friendly to non-extensional mereology, namely: ‘ x is a  proper part  of  y ’ =df  x is a part of  y and  y is not 
part of  x ’. In  Chapter 1: The Many Primitives of Mereology , Josh Parsons points out that if we 
think that  proper parthood  is primitive and we don’t ensure anti-symmetry of proper parthood, then we 
will be vulnerable to losing axioms like Transitivity and Weak Supplementation. 

introduction xvii
 There are two points that ought to make this seem vastly more accept-
able. First, we  do seem to have an independent grasp of part/whole rela-
tions. That is exactly why we want a mereological theory in the fi rst place. 
We’ve noticed these important relations in the world, and we want to know 
things about them. Second, even if we cannot give illuminating analyses 
of  parthood  and  proper parthood , there are still a lot of things that our theory 
can tell us about them. It might, for instance, tell us some necessary and 
suffi  cient conditions for things standing in these relations. It will tell us 
how the relations interact with other mereological relations. And we might 
even uncover some analytic truths; even though we cannot give a complete 
analysis of whichever relation we take to be primitive, there may be some 
things that are true in virtue of what it means for one thing to stand in the 
relation to another. (Just as we cannot give an analysis of  knowledge , but take 
it to be analytic that, if something is known, then it is true.) 
 Once we have a grasp on  parthood and  proper parthood , other mereological 
relations quickly become salient. For instance, things can share parts: the 
right two-thirds of a table share parts with the left two-thirds of the table, 
namely, the middle third and all of its parts. This is mereological  overlap . 
  •  ‘ x overlaps y ’ =df there exists a  z such that  z is a part of  x and  z is a 
part of  y . 
 And for entities to be  disjoint is simply for them to fail to overlap. Another 
obvious concept is that of  fusion , which is one thing’s being made of some 
other things (and of no things completely separate from those things). This 
can be defi ned as:  
  •  ‘ x fuses  the  y s’ =df each of the  y s is a part of  x , and  x has no part disjoint 
from each of the  y s. 
 The reader will note that each of the relations above has been presented 
as relating two entities (or, in the case of fusion, an entity and a plurality). 
This is the standard view of mereological relations.  Parthood  is taken to be a 
two-place relation, with predications of parthood having the form  x is part 
of  y . But this is not uncontroversial. For instance, we might think, in light of 
the Problem of Temporary Intrinsics, that  parthood  (as well as any other fea-
ture entities can diff er with respect to over time) is a relation to times, with 

xviii shieva kleinschmidt
the form  x is part of  y at  t . And Hud Hudson (2001) has claimed that part-
hood is a three-place relation, between two objects and a location (which 
is a sub-region of a region the whole is located at, and a super-region of a 
region the part is located at). Thus, predications of parthood will have the 
form  x is part of  y at  r . Gilmore (2009) and I (2011) have each raised wor-
ries about two- and three-place parthood, and have presented four-place 
parthood as an alternative. Four-place parthood statements have the form 
 x is at  r a part at  r′ of  y (where  r is a region at which  x is located, and  r′ is a 
region at which  y is located). Gilmore argued in favor of four-place part-
hood, whereas I argued against it and in favor of rejecting the claims (like 
the possibility of multilocation) that led us to it. 
 In  Chapter 9: Parts of Propositions , Cody Gilmore presents us with 
an additional piece of support for four-place  parthood . He invokes four-place 
 parthood  in responding to the worries for a Russellian view of propositions, 
on which propositions have their constituents as parts (and have no parts 
disjoint from those constituents). On this view, the proposition  Etna is higher 
than Vesuvius  will have Etna, Vesuvius, and  is higher than  as parts. Worries 
have been raised about the compatibility of this view with some axioms 
we would like to endorse (like transitivity, discussed below). Gilmore argues 
that if we take  parthood to be doubly-relativized, to the “location” of the 
part and to the “location” of the whole (which in this case will be places 
within propositions), we can resolve these worries. Thus, if we fi nd this 
view of propositions appealing, we have reason to amend our mereology by 
adopting four-place  parthood and revising our axioms accordingly. For now, 
though, I will set aside views like this one, and proceed on the assumption 
that  parthood is a two-place relation. 
 Once we have settled on our relations, the next step is to fi gure out 
which rules they follow. It is widely accepted that  proper parthood  is a strict 
partial ordering, meaning it is Irrefl exive, Asymmetric, and Transitive : 3 
  •    Irrefl exivity of Proper-Parthood :  Necessarily, for any objects,  x and  y , if 
 x is a proper part of  y , then  x is distinct from  y . 
  •    Asymmetry of Proper-Parthood :  For any objects,  x and  y , if  x is a proper 
part of  y , then it’s not the case that  y is a proper part of  x . 
 3  Simons (1987, p. 26). 

introduction xix
  •    Transitivity of Proper Parthood :  For any objects,  x ,  y , and  z , if  x has  y as 
a proper part and  y has  z as a proper part, then  x has z as a proper part.  
 That is: nothing is a proper part of itself, no two objects are proper parts of 
one another, and if one object is a proper part of a second, and the second 
is a proper part of a third, then the fi rst is a proper part of the third. There 
are no loops in the proper-parthood chain, and if two things are connected 
by the chain (e.g., by one being a proper part of a proper part of a proper 
part of something else), then one of those two things is a proper part of 
the other. 
 These principles are some of the most widely agreed upon claims in all 
of philosophy. 4 Some philosophers even take them to be analytic: though 
either  parthood  or  proper parthood  are primitive (or at least, not defi nable 
merely with other mereological terms), there are still things we can tell 
about these relations simply in virtue of what it means to stand in them. 
Achille Varzi (2009)  5 and Peter Simons (1987) believe the three principles 
above fall into this category. This tells us something about the domain of 
Mereology: these axioms, at least, are taken to apply to all of the analytically 
possible worlds. 
 One fi nal axiom can be added to the above three to produce Minimal 
Mereology : 6 
  •    Weak Supplementation :  For any objects,  x and  y , if  y is a proper part of 
 x , then there exists a  z such that  z is a proper part of  x and  z is disjoint 
from  y . 
 That is: if we have just some of an object, then there must be some more 
of it which is completely separate from the fi rst bit. Like the previous three 
axioms, Simons takes this to be analytic. He says , “How could an individual 
have a  single proper part? That goes against what we mean by ‘part’.” 7 
 4  There are, of course, some philosophers who reject them. For instance, in Rescher (1955), worries 
are raised about the transitivity axiom. (Examples like this are given: people are parts of small military 
units, which are parts of larger ones, without people being parts of the larger military units; and parts 
of cells can fail to be parts of the organs the cells are parts of.) I believe, however, that these worries are 
adequately addressed in Johansson (2004) and Varzi (2006), so I will set them aside here.  
 5  Varzi calls these axioms the ‘lexical’[I really do need double quotes here.] characterization of ‘part’.  
 6  I’m borrowing this name from Varzi (2009). 
 7  Simons (1987, p. 26). 

xx shieva kleinschmidt
 Nonetheless, there have been worries raised against Weak Supplementation. 
For instance, Nikk Effi  ngham and Jon Robson (2007), Cody Gilmore 
(2007), and I (2011) have each discussed problems that multilocation causes 
for Weak Supplementation. And I have argued against the combination of 
Presentism (the view that only present things exist), four-dimensionally 
persisting entities like events, and Weak Supplementation. 8   
 In  Chapter  7:  Confl icting Intuitions about Space , Peter Forrest 
presents an argument which may also be taken to push against Weak 
Supplementation. He argues for the inconsistency of the following com-
bination of claims: (a) regions of zero volume have a sum of zero volume; 
(b) some region,  r , of fi nite positive volume has a  supersponge , a region with 
less volume than  r , but which is not disjoint from any connected part of  r ; 
(c) given any positive integer,  m , there is a positive integer  n such that for 
any region,  r′ , of diameter less than 1/ n , there is a region with a volume less 
than 1/ m which  r′ is a part of; and (d) if  x is part of  y , and the volume of 
 x is less than the volume of  y , then  y has a part that is disjoint from  x and 
has positive volume. This last principle, Forrest claims, is the principle from 
which Weak Supplementation derives its intuitive force. If he is correct 
about this, and if we respond to his argument by rejecting claim (d), we will 
lose much of our motivation for endorsing Weak Supplementation. 
 Even if we endorse Weak Supplementation, we may also want to ensure 
Uniqueness, the claim that for any objects, if they have a fusion then they 
have exactly one fusion. One way to do so is to use this supplementation 
principle: 
  •    Strong Supplementation :  For any objects,  x and  y , if y isn’t a part of x, 
then there’s a part of y that doesn’t overlap x. 
 This says that, for any pair of objects, if one isn’t a part of the other, then 
that object has at least one part that’s completely separate from the other 
object. If one object isn’t entirely taken up in making some other object, 
then there must be some bit that is making it up which isn’t also making up 
the second object. Here’s why that entails extensionality: if extensionality 
were violated, then there would be some pair of objects such that neither 
was part of the other, even though everything that made up one also made 
 8  See Kleinschmidt, unpublished b. 

introduction xxi
up the other. For instance, a statue and a lump of clay might each fail to 
be part of one another, but both be made up of exactly the same atoms. 
Strong Supplementation tells us that this can’t happen: if the lump isn’t part 
of the statue, then there must be more to it than what makes up the statue. 
Once we endorse this principle and add it to the others, we have Minimal 
Extensional Mereology. 9 
 Recall that earlier, in presenting the mereological relations, one of our 
projects was to select which (if any) ought to be taken to be primitive. In 
 Chapter 1: The Many Primitives of Mereology , Josh Parsons argues 
that whether we endorse  Strong Supplementation  is relevant to how we should 
answer this question. Parsons points out that with some mereologies, the 
relations of  parthood ,  proper parthood , and  overlap  are all interdefi nable, and so 
if we take one of the relations to be unanalyzable, it will not matter which. 
But, he shows, with minor assumptions about the basic requirements for 
being a mereology (such as including the axiom that two objects overlap iff  
there is a part that they have in common), if we reject  Strong Supplementation 
then we will not be able to take  overlap  as our only primitive mereological 
relation. So, insofar as we care about being able to reduce all other mereo-
logical relations to  overlap , we have an additional piece of support for  Strong 
Supplementation . 
 Finally, there are axioms about when composition occurs. Though there 
are many such candidate axioms, I’ll look at only the most liberal: 
  •    Unrestricted Composition :  For any  x s, there exists a  y such that  y fuses 
the  x s. 
 That is, for any objects, there is another object that is made of all and only 
their parts. So there is a fusion of me and the book you’re reading now, as well 
as a fusion of you and the number seven (if numbers exist, and Mereology 
includes them in its domain). If we combine this with a liberal decomposi-
tion principle (i.e., we posit many diff erent kinds of proper parts of objects), 
we can also say there’s a fusion of you and the top half of every peony in 
the world. Positing such objects seems strange, but it’s not clear whether it 
is costly; David Lewis,  10 and Roberto Casati and Achille Varzi have claimed 
 9  Though Achille Varzi (2008) also gives an argument for extensionality from Weak Supplementation, 
so it, together with the partial ordering axioms, may already give us Minimal Extensional Mereology.  
 10  Lewis (1991, pp. 74 and 81). 

xxii shieva kleinschmidt
that composition is ontologically innocent, at least in an important sense. We 
already have the plurality of these objects in our ontology, and they’re all we 
need to make up the fusions anyway. It does not seem that we’re positing 
any extra matter in the world when we posit fusions, and we certainly aren’t 
positing anything in any new kind of category (unlike, say, positing sets of 
these items, or even groups of them). However, this innocence claim is wor-
risome; in spite of not requiring certain kinds of ontological extravagance, 
the existence of fusions is not trivial. Lewis himself agrees with this, rejecting 
composition as identity (again: the view that any time one object is made 
of others, the object is identical to the plurality of the objects it has as parts). 
Lewis notes, “What’s true of the many is not exactly what’s true of the one. 
After all they are many and it is one.”   11 Once we reject an identity relation 
between pluralities and the wholes they compose, it’s not clear what sort of 
innocence we can posit that ought to make us completely unworried about 
any costs of positing fusions.  12 However, if we do endorse Unrestricted 
Composition, we will be left with Classical Extensional Mereology (CEM). 
 Though CEM is controversial, it is widely assumed that, whatever the 
axioms of mereology are, they hold necessarily and of all material objects.  13 
CEM is typically not taken to be analytic, however. Even if we were to take 
composition to be a kind of identity relation (and so think that in any world 
where some  x s compose some  y ,  y stands in the identity relation to the  x s 
collectively), it will not follow that every plurality has a fusion; for instance, a 
nihilist, who says that nothing has proper parts, could endorse composition as 
identity.  14 Further, there are questions about the absolute universality of CEM 
even within the actual world: in his 2006 “The Price of Universality,” Gabriel 
Uzquiano raises worries for the combination of CEM with set theory, which 
has caused some philosophers to restrict unrestricted composition to the 
domain of concrete objects (or, for those who worry about the abstract/
concrete distinction, to the domain of material entities and their locations). 
 In addition to the axioms just covered (and those entailed by them), there may 
be additional axioms we want to endorse as well. In  Chapter 3: Mereology 
and Modality , Uzquiano argues that, if we think that  parthood  is importantly 
 11  Lewis (1991, p. 87). 
 12  I discuss this further in Kleinschmidt (2012). 
 13  For an interesting paper challenging this widespread assumption, see Cameron (2007).  
 14  For a further defense of the claim that Composition as Identity does not entail Unrestricted 
Compositoin, see Cameron (2007). 

introduction xxiii
similar to  identity , and we think that  identity  is necessary, then we ought to 
add an extra axiom to Classical Mereology which will allow us to derive 
Mereological Essentialism. That is, suppose we think that, if  x is identical to  y , 
then in any world where  x exists,  x is identical to  y . If we think that  parthood 
and  identity are importantly similar, we may want to endorse a similar prin-
ciple about parthood, such as: if the  x s compose  y , then in any world where 
the  x s exist or where  y exists,  y is a fusion of the  x s. 
 In  Chapter 10: Mereological Sums and Singular Terms , Kathrin 
Koslicki also discusses the connections between Classical Mereology 
and something like Mereological Essentialism. Koslicki notes that 
Unrestricted Composition and Uniqueness jointly entail that, for any 
plurality of objects, there is exactly one fusion of those objects. But this 
indicates that each fusion’s existence depends on nothing but the exist-
ence of its parts, so for any fusions,  x and  y ,  x is identical to  y (at a time 
or across time) iff   x and  y have all of the same proper parts. Thus, our 
ontology will be populated by entities with very diff erent persistence 
conditions than those we often take them to have. In particular, the way 
in which we use singular terms to refer to some objects over time shows 
that we frequently take there to be further requirements, like structural 
similarity, for the persistence of those objects. Koslicki tells us that some 
additional semantic claims must be made to explain this mismatch. She 
rejects Lewis popular proposal that  naturalness  can be invoked to do the 
explanatory work, showing that it leaves us unable to make accurate 
predictions about behavior of actual speakers. Instead, she says, it may be 
preferable to adopt an ontology that is more restrictive than the one that 
Classical Mereology provides us with.  
 3.  On Location 
 In giving a theory of Mereology and Location, we must answer many of the 
same questions for locative relations that we have just raised for mereologi-
cal relations. First, we must determine which locative relations there are, and 
how to characterize them. 
 There are many ways to be at a region; something might be completely 
there, partly there, exactly there, nowhere else, etc. Roberto Casati and 
Achille Varzi (1999), Josh Parsons (2007), and Hud Hudson (2006b)  each 
provide us with defi nitions that reduce all of the ways of occupying a region 

xxiv shieva kleinschmidt
to just one primitive location relation, and make use of Mereology in defi n-
ing other location relations in terms of the primitive. 
 For Casati and Varzi, the primitive is  exact location : intuitively, the relation 
a thing bears to the region shaped just like it, the same size as it, and which 
the thing completely fi lls and does not spill out of. For instance, imagine a 
beach ball. The region it exactly occupies will also be sphere-shaped;  15 it’ll 
be fi lled by the ball, and the ball won’t be found anywhere outside of it. The 
other location relations are then defi ned:  
  •  ‘ x is generically located at  r ’ =df there exists a  y and  r′ , such that  y is a 
part of  x ,  r′ is a sub-region of  r , and  y is exactly located at  r′ . 
  •  ‘ x is wholly located at  r ’ =df there exists a  r′  such that  r′  is a sub-region 
of  r , and  x is exactly located at  r′ . 
  •  ‘ x is partly located at  r ’ =df there exists a  y such that  y is a part of  x , and 
 y is exactly located at  r . 16 
 As the authors point out, compared to the region required for exact loca-
tion, whole location allows the occupied region to be larger, partial location 
allows the occupied region to be smaller, and generic location allows for 
either. Exact occupation  17 of a region entails both partial and whole occu-
pation of that region, and any of these entails generic occupation of it, but 
an object can generically occupy a region without bearing any of the other 
relations to it.  18 Supplementing this groundwork, Casati and Varzi present 
the following to be axioms for exact location: 
  •    Functionality:  For all  x ,  r and  r′ , if  x exactly occupies  r and exactly 
occupies  r′ , then  r is identical to  r′ . 
  •    Conditional Refl exivity:  For all  x and  r , if  x is exactly located at  r , then 
 r is exactly located at  r . 19 
 These axioms preclude multiple location of objects or regions (this is 
because, given their framework, multiple location will be understood as an 
 15  If you think the beach ball is extended in time as well as in space, then the region it exactly occupies 
will be temporally extended as well. 
 16  Casati and Varzi (1999, p. 120). 
 17  In this chapter, I’ll use ‘occupies’ and ‘is located at’ as synonymous. 
 18  Casati and Varzi (1999, pp. 120–121). 
 19  Casati and Varzi (1999, p. 121). 

introduction xxv
entity’s being exactly located at more than one region). Further, the axioms 
entail that exact location is anti-symmetric and transitive. Casati and Varzi 
then proceed to build a system to ensure a systematic link between the 
mereotopological features of objects, and those of the regions they exactly 
occupy. 
 Josh Parsons (2007) gives us a similar system of basic defi nitions, and 
remaining neutral on which relation should be primitive. Parsons begins 
with the following informal accounts of various location relations: 
  •  For all  x and  r, x is  weakly located at  r iff   r is not completely free of  x . 
  •  For all  x ,  r, x is  entirely located  at  r iff   r is not completely free of  x , and every 
region that does not overlap any sub-region of  r is entirely free of  x .  
  •  For all  x ,  r, x is  wholly located  at  r iff  for all  y , if  y is part of  x , then  y is 
weakly located at  r . 
  •  For all  x ,  r, x is  pervasively located  at  r iff  there is no sub-region of  r that 
is completely free of  x . 
  •  For all  x ,  r, x is  exactly located  at  r iff   x is pervasively located at  r and  x is 
entirely located at  r . 20 
 Parsons demonstrates that beginning with just one of the above relations as 
primitive, we can defi ne each of the others. For instance, he says that start-
ing with exact location as primitive, we can characterize the other relations 
as follows: “An object is entirely located in every super-region of its exact 
location; it pervades every sub-region of its exact location; and it is weakly 
located at every region overlapping its exact location.” Similarly, he dem-
onstrates that starting with weak location as primitive, we can defi ne the 
other relations in terms of it: an object is entirely located at  r iff  it is weakly 
located at  r , and for any region at which it is weakly located, that region 
overlaps  r ; an object is pervasively located at  r iff  it is weakly located at every 
region that overlaps  r ; and an object is exactly located at  r iff  a region over-
laps  r iff   x is weakly located at that region. 21 
 If we take exact location as primitive, Parsons’s defi nitions will resemble 
Casati and Varzi’s. Parsons’s defi nition of ‘pervasively located’ corresponds 
 20  All of these defi nitions are from Parsons (2007).  
 21  Parsons (2007). It’s worth noting that there are some weighty assumptions about composition and 
decomposition of regions that are required for Parsons’s defi nitions to be plausible accounts of the 
meanings of these terms (assuming we’re trying to capture something intuitive).  

xxvi shieva kleinschmidt
to Casati and Varzi’s ‘partly located’; Parsons’ ‘weakly located’ corresponds 
to Casati and Varzi’s ‘generically located’; and Casati and Varzi’s ‘wholly 
located’ corresponds to either Parsons’ ‘entirely located’, or ‘wholly located’ 
(depending on whether Casati and Varzi think something with an immate-
rial part can be exactly located anywhere 22 ). 
 However, even starting with the same primitive, the two systems rely 
on very diff erent mereological assumptions about objects and regions. For 
instance, Casati and Varzi endorse the following as an axiom: 
  •    Arbitrary Partition:  for any  x ,  r , and  r′ , if  r is a sub-region of  r′  and  x is 
exactly located at  r′ , then there exists a  y such that  y is part of  x , and  y 
is exactly located at  r . 23 
 Parsons says: “Without Arbitrary Partition, the defi nitions of [‘partial loca-
tion’ and ‘generic location’] would be too strong to capture the intuitive 
meaning that Casati and Varzi’s glosses make it clear that they are supposed 
to have.”  24 Remember, for Casati and Varzi, being partly located at a region 
requires having a part exactly located there, and being generically located 
at a region requires having a part exactly located at some sub-region of that 
region. If things aren’t decomposable into undetatched parts fi nely enough 
to at least correspond to the decomposition of regions, Casati and Varzi’s 
system will not give us intuitive results. 
 A further way in which Parsons’s picture diff ers is that functionality (as 
formulated above) follows from Parsons’s system; it is not required as a fur-
ther axiom. Similarly for: 
  •    Exactness:  for all  x , if there exists a  r such that x is weakly located at  r , 
then there exists an  r′ such that  x is exactly located at  r′ . 25 
 22  It’s worth pointing out that if Casati and Varzi think that, for instance, the fusion of me and the num-
ber 7 (assuming the number 7 is immaterial) can have exact location, then they, with Parsons, will be 
committed to there potentially (i.e., if we unrestrict composition enough and have both material and 
immaterial entities in our ontology) being colocation of lots of entities; the fusion of me and the number 
7 would be coincident with the fusion of me and the number 8, and. . . 
 23  Casati and Varzi (1999, p. 122). 
 24  Parsons (2007). 
 25  Parsons (2007). I should note: I do not intend my reporting how Parsons’s theory diff ers from 
Casati and Varzi’s to be an endorsement of these diff erences as constituting reasons to prefer Parsons’s 
account.  

introduction xxvii
 So, on Parsons’s system, everything present in space or time has a location, 
and nothing gets more than one location. 26   
 Hud Hudson presents us with an alternative theory of location with 
the aim of allowing for the multilocation that Casati, Varzi, and Parsons 
precluded. In Hudson’s system, ‘located at’ is taken to be primitive, and 
similar to, but also importantly diff erent from, the previous notions of exact 
location; any object that is  located at  a region completely fi lls that region, 
and is the same size as the region. To help us think about the right relation, 
Hudson uses examples: I am not located at my offi  ce, or at this universe, 
even though I am in my offi  ce, and in this universe. Rather, I’m located 
at the me-shaped, me-sized region that’s right  here , where I’m at. (Though if 
we’re four-dimensional entities, our locations will be four-dimensional as well.) 
Finally, I’m not, strictly speaking, located at the region my hand is located at; 
when speaking loosely we may say I’m located at that region, but really, any 
location relation I bear to the region is derivative, instantiated in virtue of my 
having a proper part that is genuinely located at the region.  27 With this primi-
tive, Hudson defi nes other ways to occupy regions:  
  •  ‘ x is partly located at  r ’ =df there exists a  y such that  y is a proper part 
of  x , and  y is entirely located at  r . 
  •  ‘ x is entirely located at  r ’ =df  x is located at  r , and for any region,  r′ , if 
 r′ is disjoint from  r then it’s not the case that  x is located at  r′ . 
  •  ‘ x is wholly located at  r ’ =df  x is located at  r , and there is no proper part 
of  x not located at  r . 28 
 As Hudson notes, these defi nitions borrow largely from Parsons’s, but dif-
fer in their content, using a primitive that is not in Parsons’s system. And 
Hudson’s defi nitions cover entirely diff erent territory from the ones pre-
sented by Casati and Varzi, with the exception of the defi nition of ‘partly 
located at’. The defi nition diff ers from Casati and Varzi’s defi nition of the 
same term, due to Hudson’s requirement that the entity located at a region, 
 26  Parsons believes he can still capture  multiple location , via appeal to entities being wholly and pervasively 
present in multiple regions. However, there are problems with this attempt to capture multi-location that 
I will omit here due to space constraints. To read more, see my “Mereology, Ontology, and Location,” 
ch. 2 (Kleinschmidt unpublished a). 
 27  Hudson (2006b, pp. 98–99). The claims about merely derivative location were presented by Hudson 
in conversation. 
 28  Hudson (2006b, p. 99). 

xxviii shieva kleinschmidt
 r , is a  proper  part of any objects partly located at  r . Beyond that, how similar 
the defi nitions are depends on how similar Hudson’s primitive is to Casati 
and Varzi’s. We know of at least this substantial diff erence: Casati and Varzi’s 
primitive,  exactly located at , is functional, and Hudson’s primitive  located at 
is not. 
 Hudson appeals to the above location relations in defi ning the following:  
  •  ‘ x pertends’ =df  x is a material object, and  x is entirely located at a 
non-point-sized region,  r , and for each proper sub-region of  r ,  r ∗,  x has 
a proper part entirely located at  r∗ . 
  •  ‘ x entends’ =df  x is a material object, and  x is wholly and entirely 
located at a non-point-sized region,  r and for each proper sub-region 
of  r ,  r∗ ,  x is wholly located at  r∗ . 
  •  ‘ x spans’  =df  x is a material object, and  x is wholly and entirely 
located at exactly one non-point-sized region,  r , and there is no proper 
sub-region of  r ,  r∗ , such that any part of  x is located at  r∗ . 29 
  •  ‘ x multiply locates’ =df (i)  x is a material object and is located at more 
than one region, and (ii)  x is not located at the fusion of the regions at 
which  x is located. 30 
 Thus, Hudson is able to capture  multiple location , and to distinguish it from 
three other ways of being extended.  31  This is particularly relevant to debates 
between Three- and Four-Dimensionalists about how we persist through 
time, with pretension being a candidate for four-dimensional persistence 
(perdurance), and entension being a candidate for three-dimensional per-
sistence (endurance). 
 Of course, we needn’t think that all extended entities persist in the 
same way. Just as we might think that persistence across time diff ers from 
persistence across space, we might think that there are diff erent ways in 
which entities actually persist across time (and diff erent ways in which 
they actually persist across space). As Peter Simons elegantly puts it in 
 Chapter  4:  Where It’s At:  Modes of Occupation and Kinds of 
 29  As Hudson acknowledges, the term ‘spanner’ was coined by Kris McDaniel (unpublished), and 
describes a phenomenon that Cody Gilmore fi rst presented to the literature.  
 30  All of these defi nitions are in Hudson (2006b, pp. 99–103).  
 31  I use ‘extended’ where Hudson used ‘non-point-sized’, but with the intention that ‘extended’ in this 
context is interpreted as meaning simply ‘non-point-sized’. 

introduction xxix
Occupant , we can regard these diff erent kinds of persistence “not as 
competitors but as coexistents.” Simons distinguishes between  continuants 
(entities like books, atoms, and people),  occurrents  (entities like events and 
processes),  universals (entities like  happiness and  parthood ), and  situations  (like 
the Enlightenment). Simons claims that occurrents are spread through 
both time and space extensively (i.e., they  perdure ), types and universals are 
spread through both time and space intensively (they  endure ), continuants 
are spread across space extensively but time intensively, and situations are 
spread through space intensively and time extensively.  32  With this as his 
starting point, Simons argues that the best way to capture the varieties of 
intensive and extensive occupation is to take occurrents as basic, and derive 
everything else. Thus, Simons tells us, we ought to think that occurrents are 
the basic constituents of reality. 
 In  Chapter 8: Transhypertime Identity , Hudson also discusses persis-
tence. In particular, he examines how human persons may be said to persist 
across  hypertime , which is time with more than one dimension. Hudson for-
mulates hypertime-involving versions of Perdurantism, Endurantism, Stage 
Theory (the view that, strictly speaking, entities don’t persist, but instead 
have counterparts at diff erent times), and Regionalism (the view that an 
entity’s persistence across φ is grounded in its being located at a φ-extended 
region). He shows problems these views face when paired with popular 
views about personal identity. Hudson ultimately endorses and argues for a 
view he calls ManyBlock Theory, on which entities like persisting human 
persons are diachronically composite but not hypertemporally composite 
(just as, according to Endurantism, entities like people are spatially compos-
ite but not diachronically composite). 33    
 4.  How Mereology and Location Relate 
 We’ve already been discussing Mereology and Location in relation to 
one another, but we can also ask: what are the general ways in which 
mereological relations and locative relations are related? And what is the 
 32  In his (2006), Kit Fine defends a similar division of entities and kinds of persistence.  
 33  I believe the worries raised by Effi  ngham and Robson (2007) and me (Kleinschmidt 2011) will apply 
here as well. 

xxx shieva kleinschmidt
modal strength of each of these connections between mereological and 
locative features? In what follows I will discuss just a few of the many 
ways in which Mereology and Location can be taken to relate to one 
another. 
 In his 2010  “Parthood and Location,” Raul Saucedo presents several 
principles about part/place relations, and argues for the possibility of viola-
tions of those principles. He distinguishes between: 
 Internal Disparities , which are violations of principles like the following: 
  (1)   x is mereologically simple iff   x ’s location is mereologically simple. 
  (2)   x is mereologically complex iff   x ’s location is mereologically complex.  
  (3)   x has exactly  n parts iff   x ’s location has exactly  n subregions. 
  (4)   x is gunky (i.e., has no simple parts) iff   x ’s location is gunky (i.e., has 
no subregions which lack proper sub-regions). 
 and 
 External Disparities , which are violations of principles like: 
  (5)   x is part of  y iff   x ’s location is a subregion of  y ’s location. 
  (6)   x is a proper part of  y iff   x ’s location is a proper subregion of  y ’s 
location. 
  (7)   x and  y overlap iff   x ’s location and  y ’s location overlap. 
  (8)   the  x s compose  y iff  the locations of the  x s compose  y ’s location. 34 
 These principles preclude the possibility of some strange cases. For instance, 
the fi rst three principles each disallow extended simple objects located in 
pointy space (that is, space that is made up completely of point-sized regions; 
typically, it is claimed there are uncountably many points making up any 
extended region), and composite objects located in extended simple regions. 
The second group of principles ensure against cases of multilocation. For 
 34  The distinction Saucedo draws between the two groups of principles, he says, is this: internal dispari-
ties involve misalignment of the mereological structure of a thing and the mereological structure of the 
thing’s location, whereas external disparities involve mismatches of the mereological relations between 
some things, and the relations between the locations of those things. 
 Saucedo thinks each of the two kinds of disparity can fail independently of the other. Notice, 
though, that if we add an extra principle to the external disparities, that says “No vacuous quantifi cation 
in (5)–(8)”, then any violations of the internal principles will also be violations of the external principles. 
The case that brings this to light: consider an object, O1, located at L1. L1 has a proper subregion, L2. 
And O1 has a proper part, O2. But O2 isn’t located at L2; this is in virtue of O2 having no location 
whatsoever. (We might get a result like this in some weird measure-theory cases. O2’s compliment 
might have a location.) We will have a violation of internal principles, but not external ones. Unless the 
external ones have existential import. 

introduction xxxi
instance, if multilocation were to occur, then any object located at each of 
two disjoint regions would fail to be a part of itself, according to (5). They 
also ensure against colocation (distinct objects being located at exactly the 
same region, as a statue and a lump of clay might be taken to be), or at least, 
colocation of distinct entities that fail to be parts of one another. Other, 
stranger situations are precluded as well. 
 Raul Saucedo (2010) and Kris McDaniel (2007) present similar arguments 
against the necessary versions of these principles. I’ll focus on McDaniel’s 
argument (against (1), (2), and (3)), simply because it is the simpler of the 
two. 35  The basic idea is this: features involving how many and what sorts of 
parts an object or region has are intrinsic features of that object or region. 
The necessary versions of the above principles each claim there is a nec-
essary connection between the mereological features of objects and the 
mereological features of their locations. That is, there is a (assumed for the 
purposes of this argument) fundamental locative relation, and there is a nec-
essary correlation between the intrinsic mereological features of any relata 
standing in that relation. According to a plausible Humean principle, there 
must be an explanation for any such necessary correlation. But if objects and 
regions are ontologically independent, we cannot explain this via property 
inheritance. And if entities can change with respect to their mereological 
features, then we cannot explain the necessary connection by claiming that 
neither entity could have been otherwise. Saucedo and McDaniel conclude 
that we should reject the relevant necessary connection. 
 There are many ways to respond to these arguments,  36  but one particu-
larly natural response is to explain the necessary correlations via appeal to 
analytic connections between mereological and locative relations. One way 
to do this is to say that there is a reduction of mereological properties and 
relations to locative ones, or the reverse. 
 This has been proposed by various philosophers,  37 and in 
 Chapter  5:  A  Spatial Approach to Mereology , Ned Markosian 
 35  For a more thorough discussion of these arguments, see Chapter 1 of my “Mereology, Ontology, and 
Location” (Kleinschmidt unpublished a). 
 36  For my own responses, see my “Mereology, Ontology, and Location,” Chapter  1 (Kleinschmidt 
unpublished a). And for responses to a similar Humean argument applied to shape (which involves 
the denial of any necessary correllations between intrinsic shape properties of regions and their occu-
pants), see my “Shaping up  Location : Against the Humean Argument for the Extrinsicality of Shape” 
(Kleinschmidt unpublished c). 
 37  See Oppenheim and Putnam (1958) and Mellor (2008). 

xxxii shieva kleinschmidt
off ers a clear presentation of what he calls ‘Spatial Mereology’. Following 
Oppenheim and Putnam (1958), Markosian suggests that we take  x is part of 
y to be reducible to  x is located at a subregion of the region y is located at . If all 
of the other mereological properties and relations are defi nable in terms of 
parthood, then all of Mereology will be reducible to location relations and 
subregionhood. 
 Casati and Varzi (1999) worry that this sort of account seems to require 
the impossibility of colocation. If two objects are located at the same region, 
they will be parts of one another (and also parts of any larger object that 
also fi lls their region). Markosian addresses this worry, saying that he believes 
there is independent reason to reject the possibility of colocation, but also 
noting that his Mereology can allow for colocation (though only with the 
denial of the asymmetry of proper parthood, which will result in a far less 
ordinary Mereology). 38   
 In  Chapter 6: Balls and All , Daniel Nolan presents a similar strategy 
for giving a reduction of mereological relations to non-mereological ones. 
Nolan is presenting an alternative for the Supersubstantivalist (who believes 
all material objects are identical to regions) which involves parthood that 
is restricted to material objects. Nolan uses an ontology inhabited only by 
non-pointy regions (none of which are mereologically simple), and invokes 
just one primitive relation,  is a subregion of , and one primitive property,  is 
a four-dimensional hyperball . He says, ‘ x to be a part of  y ’ =df  x and  y are 
material objects, and  x is a subregion of  y . Among other things, Nolan’s 
view allows for restricted decomposition, endurance rather than perdur-
ance through time, and vagueness about parthood (due to vagueness about 
which regions are material objects). 
 Of course, a supersubstantivalist needn’t accept an approach like Nolan’s. 
Instead, they might choose to ground connections between mereological 
facts and locative facts in matters of defi nition by defi ning locative relations 
 38  It is worth noting, Casati and Varzi have pointed out that even if colocation is plausibly impossible 
for ordinary material objects, ordinary objects aren’t the only potential colocators. For instance, events 
are excellent candidates for things that colocate with ordinary objects. The event of my life, it can plau-
sibly be said, is exactly where I am (that is, fi lling up exactly the same region of spacetime that I do). 
Markosian’s account implies that, if events can colocate with objects, then in addition to the objects 
being parts of those events (which is a fairly standard view to hold), the events will also be parts of the 
objects. If we posit immanent universals we will get a similar result: ordinary objects will have properties 
as parts, in addition to being parts of properties. And of course, if we think that locations are located at 
themselves, we’ll have the result that locations colocate with anything distinct from them that occupies 
them, and so are parts of those objects and also have those objects as parts. 

introduction xxxiii
in terms of mereological ones. For instance, supersubstantivalists may think 
that for something to occupy a region is just for that thing to be identical 
to the region. However, if they take this to be an absolutely general prin-
ciple, they will be committed to the problematic, colocation-precluding 
consequences mentioned above. If, for instance, they think that events can 
occupy regions, they will have to take events to be identical to the regions 
(and identical to whatever ordinary objects we take to occupy the regions), 
or deny asymmetry of proper parthood. Though a supersubstantivalist could 
claim that entities like properties and events are unlike ordinary objects in 
that they can occupy regions without being identical to or part of them, this 
would cost them a reduction (or elimination) of location relations. 
 Suppose we reject all of these views, and deny that there is any reduc-
tion between mereological and locative properties and relations.  39 We 
might nonetheless take mereological relations and locative ones to stand 
in analytic relations. Saucedo and McDaniel’s arguments depend on tak-
ing mereological and locative relations to be  entirely independent of one 
another. Unfortunately, it is not clear that the invoking of analytic con-
nections between Mereology and Location guarantees an escape from the 
requirement of explanation. Here’s why. The accounts we’re giving are not 
merely stipulative. They’re intended to capture ordinary notions we have, 
and these particular notions are typically taken to correspond to something 
in reality. If relations of these two kinds are closely related, and our notions 
correspond to the world in this respect, then there is a real, close connec-
tion between mereological and locative properties and relations. And that 
connection requires some explanation. If we had been able to endorse some 
sort of reduction between them, we would have been able to explain the 
close connection. Perhaps there is a non-reduction-involving explanation 
for this connection, but I have not come across one nor thought of one. 
 These issues are, of course, not the only ones that arise when examining 
the connections between Mereology and Location. However, I hope that 
this introduction has served to provide you with a picture of some of what 
is at stake in these debates, and an interest in learning more. 40   
 39  They, of course, off er further argument for this in their (1999).  
 40  I am grateful to Kit Fine, Hud Hudson, Mark Schroeder, Ted Sider, and Dean Zimmerman for helpful 
feedback on much of the content of this introduction. 


 PART I 
Mereology 


 1 
 The Many Primitives of Mereology  
 JOSH  PARSONS 
 1.  Introduction 
 Classical Extensional Mereology (CEM) has an interesting feature: it admits 
of various diff erent axiomatizations in terms of various diff erent primitives. 
Some, like Eberle, treat the “is a (proper or improper) part of” predicate as 
the primitive; some, like Simons, treat the “is a proper part of” as the primi-
tive; some, like Goodman, treat the “overlaps” predicate (or its negation, “is 
disjoint from”) as the primitive. 1   
 This seems to me to be a metaphysically signifi cant feature of CEM. 
If CEM is correct—if all its theorems are true, then metaphysicians have 
a choice to make in how we understand the mereological nature of the 
world. We may think of the mereological relation either as a relation of part 
to whole, or as a relation of overlap; for if we give a metaphysical theory 
about one, we thereby give a metaphysical theory about the other. We may 
choose which we think of as more metaphysically fundamental, for they 
are interdefi nable. However, if CEM is not correct, then perhaps we do not 
have this choice. Perhaps part–whole cannot be defi ned in terms of overlap; 
in which case we must choose part–whole as the metaphysical fundamental 
mereological relation (if any relation is). 
 It would be nice to know, given a mereological theory, which styles of 
axiomatization are possible for it. That way, if CEM is not correct, but some 
 1  For Eberle, see the discussion in Simons (1987, pp. 50–52); for Simons, see his (1987, pp. 25–41); for 
Goodman, see his (1951, pp. 42–51) and the discussion in Simons (1987, pp. 48–50). It should be noted 
that axiomatizations may also diff er on what axioms are used, as well as on what the primitive is. For 
recent work on alternative axiomatizations of CEM of this kind, see Hovda (2009). 

4 josh parsons
weaker mereology is, we could know whether that mereology would let us 
regard overlap, or part–whole, or proper part, as the fundamental mereo-
logical relation. 
 In this chapter, I explore which mereologies are axiomatizable in which 
of the three styles—Eberle, Simons, and Goodman—described above. 
I claim that all mereologies must have an Eberle style axiomatization: if a 
theory does not permit the defi nition of its vocabulary in terms of “is part 
of,” it is not a mereology! I then prove that all and only those mereologies 
that feature the strong supplementation principle have an axiomatization in 
Goodman’s style; and that (with some caveats) all mereologies have an axi-
omatization in Simons’s style. 
 The formal notation used in this chapter is intended to promote read-
ability and avoid distracting logical issues. The logic is classical fi rst-order 
predicate calculus with identity. Open sentences should be understood as 
implicitly universally quantifi ed (unless otherwise stated). Where scope is 
left ambiguous, negation takes narrow scope; conditionals and bicondition-
als take wide scope. Detailed proofs of some classical sequents are set out in 
the appendix—where the text asserts that some principle is a logical conse-
quence of some others, the proof may be found there. 
 2.  Goodman-axiomatization and (SSP) 
 Goodman’s axiomatization of CEM treats overlap (◦) as primitive, and 
defi nes “is a (proper or improper) part of” (<) in the following way: 
 
 x < y ≡ d  f  (∀z)(z ◦ x → z ◦ y)  
 (Def<) 
 Let us say that a theory is Goodman-axiomatizable iff  it has an axiom-
atization treating ◦ as primitive, and defi ning < using (Def<). A theory 
is Goodman-axiomatizable iff  (Def<) is an admissible rule in it—iff  all 
instances of (Def<) are provable in the theory. In classical fi rst-order logic, a 
defi nition like (Def<) is admissible in a theory iff  the corresponding bicon-
ditional is a theorem of that theory. So, a theory is Goodman-axiomatizable 
iff  the principle (GA) is a theorem of it: 
 
 x < y ↔ (∀z)(z ◦ x → z ◦ y)  
 (GA) 
 Eberle’s axiomatization of CEM, in contrast, treats < as primitive, and 
defi nes 

the many primitives of mereology 5
 ◦ as follows: 
 
 x ◦ y ≡ d  f  (∃z)(z < x ∧ z < y)  
 (Def ◦) 
 We may say that a theory is Eberle-axiomatizable iff  (Def◦) is admissible in 
it; that is, iff  the principle (EA) is a theorem of it. 
 
 x ◦ y ↔ (∃z)(z < x ∧ z < y)  
 (EA) 
 Every mereology whatever should be Eberle-axiomatizable. If a mereologi-
cal theory is already axiomatized in Eberle’s way, then of course it is. If a 
theory is axiomatized in any other way, then if (EA) is not a theorem, then 
something is very wrong with it: ◦ does not mean “overlap” in the sense in 
which mereological overlap is normally informally explained. 
 Not every mereology whatever is Goodman-axiomatizable, how-
ever—for some weak mereological-looking theories do not have (GA) as 
a theorem.  2 More, however, can be said. I will show that a mereology is 
Goodman-axiomatizable iff  it has as a theorem a principle called the strong 
supplementation principle, or (SSP): 
 
 ¬x < y → (∃z)(z < x ∧ ¬z ◦ y)  
 (SSP) 
 (SSP) is a much-discussed and controversial theorem of classical mereology. 
Non-classical mereologies often explicitly affi  rm or reject it. That makes it 
easy to tell which non-classical mereologies are Goodman-axiomatizable. 
Those mereologies that reject (SSP) are not presented using a Goodman-style 
axiomatization—my argument shows that they cannot be. 
 Obviously there are formal systems with symbols that look like < and ◦ of 
which (SSP) is not a theorem and of which ◦ is the primitive. Those systems, 
I would claim, are not mereological—in them, ◦ doesn’t have the right for-
mal characteristics to be capable of meaning “mereological overlap.” Since it 
is a controversial matter just what a theory must do to count as a mereology, 
I defi ne a class of theories, the pre-mereologies, of which the mereolo-
gies are, uncontroversially, a subclass. My claim is that all and only those 
pre-mereologies that have (SSP) as a theorem are Goodman-axiomatizable. 
Since the mereologies are among the pre-mereologies, all and only those 
mereologies that have (SSP) as a theorem are Goodman-axiomatizable. 
 2  For example, the system Simons describes as SA0-3 (1987, p. 28) is, perhaps, a kind of non-extensional 
mereology, but is not Goodman-axiomatizable. The four-element model shown on p. 28 of Simons’s 
book is a countermodel to (GA). 

6 josh parsons
 Let a pre-mereology be any fi rst-order theory with at least two dyadic 
predicates, < and ◦, and at least the following theorems: 
 
 x < y ∧ y < z → x < z 
 (Trans)
 
x < x 
 (Refl )
 
x ◦ y ↔ (∃z)(z < x ∧ z < y)  
 (EA) 
 To be a pre-mereology, that is, a theory must treat < as a pre-ordering, 
and must be Eberle-axiomatizable. It’s reasonable, I think, to expect that all 
mereologies will have these features. So every mereology is a pre-mereology; 
whatever holds true of all pre-mereologies holds true of all mereologies. 
 If a pre-mereology is Goodman-axiomatizable, then it has (SSP) as a 
theorem. Proof: if a pre-mereology is Goodman-axiomatizable, then it has 
(GA) as a theorem. But (SSP) is a consequence of (GA), (Refl ), and (EA) 
(this, and other, fi rst-order proofs are set out in the appendix). (Refl ) and 
(EA) are theorems of every pre-mereology, so (SSP) is a theorem of every 
Goodman-axiomatizable pre-mereology. 
 If a pre-mereology has (SSP) as a theorem, then it is Goodman-axiomatizable. 
Proof: (GA) is a consequence of (SSP), (Trans), (Refl ), and (EA). (Trans), (Refl ), 
and (EA) are theorems of every pre-mereology, so every pre-mereology that 
has (SSP) as a theorem also has (GA). If a pre-mereology has (GA) as a theo-
rem, then it is Goodman-axiomatizable, so every pre-mereology that has 
(SSP) is Goodman-axiomatizable. 
 So, a pre-mereology has (SSP) iff  it is Goodman-axiomatizable; all mere-
ologies are pre-mereologies; therefore, all and only mereologies with (SSP) 
are Goodman-axiomatizable. This sheds useful light on the signifi cance of 
(SSP):  it can thought of as a kind of supervenience principle—no two 
things can diff er as regards what parts they have (or what they are parts of) 
without diff ering as regards what they overlap.  
 3.  Simons-Axiomatization 
 A third style of axiomatization of classical mereology is used by Simons. He 
takes “is a proper part of” as his primitive, and defi nes “is part of” as “is a 
proper part of or identical to.” Before I introduce any notation here, I would 
like to clear up some terminological problems. “Proper part” appears to be 
used in two senses in the literature. The fi rst sense is the one suggested by 
Simons’s defi nition, that “proper part” means “part of but not identical to”; 

the many primitives of mereology 7
so that “part of” may be adequately defi ned in Simons’s way. I call this rela-
tion “non-identical part,” and use the symbol ⪇ for it. In a theory in which 
it is not a primitive, ⪇ may be defi ned thus: 
 
 x ⪇ y ≡ d  f  x < y ∧ y = x 
(Def ⪇) 
 The second sense of “proper part” may be glossed as follows. Some weak mere-
ologies allow the part–whole relation to fail to be anti-symmetric—allowing 
two things to be parts of each other. Let us say that x and y are mutual parts 
iff  x is part of y and y is part of x.  3 Note that each thing is mutually part of 
itself (even if part–whole is anti-symmetric); so another way of defi ning “proper 
part” in such a way that nothing ever counts as a proper part of itself is to say that 
“proper part” means “part of but not mutually part of.” I will call this relation 
“non-mutual part,” and use the symbol ≪ for it. Assuming (Refl ) and (Trans), 
x and y have all and only the same parts iff  they are parts of each other. So in a 
mereology in which it is not a primitive, ≪ may be defi ned thus: 
 
 x ≪ y ≡ d  f  x < y ∧ ¬y < x 
(Def ≪) 
 How are we to tell, given a mereology in which some symbol is identifi ed as 
“proper part,” which of these two relations is meant? It’s easy if “proper part” 
is a defi ned relation, for then we can look at which of the two defi nitions 
above introduced it. But what if we are looking at a Simons-style axiom sys-
tem where “proper part” is the primitive? Then I suggest we should look at 
whether the biconditionals corresponding to the defi nitions above are theo-
rems of the system. If the biconditional x ∗ y ↔ x < y ∧ x = y is a theorem, 
then the relation written ∗ is non-identical part. If the biconditional x ∗ y ↔ 
x < y ∧ ¬y < x is a theorem, then the relation written ∗ is non-mutual part.  4    
 A characteristic of the extensional theories that Simons describes in this way 
is that both of the biconditionals above are theorems. Theories like that are in 
eff ect saying that x is a non-mutual part of y iff  x is a non-identical part of y; 
 3  I tread carefully here, as there are two unexploded philosophical disputes in the vicinity. First, there is 
a well-known dispute about whether it can happen that two things coincide, or are “made of the same 
stuff ,” in some sense. Second, there is a dispute about whether coincidence is properly understood as 
mutual parthood, or in some other way. I wish to take sides on neither of these issues: that is why I have 
used the term “mutual parthood” here, to mean “being part of each other,” whether or not that is the 
right way to think about coincidence. 
 4  What if a theory describes a relation as “proper part” but has neither of the biconditionals as theorems? 
Then the theorist has made a mistake, for the relation they are describing does not correspond to either 
of the senses “proper part” could have. 

8 josh parsons
which is to say that x and y are mutual parts iff  x and y are identical. In these 
systems it doesn’t matter how we interpret their “proper part” relation—the 
two available senses of “proper part” would be equivalent in those systems. 
 Now that we have distinguished the two possible meanings of “proper 
part,” let us extend the concept of a pre-mereology to include them. Let a 
pre-mereology be a fi rst-order theory with at least four dyadic predicates <, 
∘, ⪇, and ≪ and at least the following theorems: 
 
 x < y ∧ y < z → x < z 
 (Trans) 
 
 x < x 
 (Refl ) 
 
 x ◦ y ↔ (∃z)(z < x ∧ z < y)  
 (EA) 
 
 x ⪇ y ↔ x < y ∧ x = y 
 (NIPP) 
 
 x ≪ y ↔ x < y ∧ ¬y < x  
 (NMPP) 
 The simplest way to understand Simons’s axiomatization is by taking 
his primitive to be ⪇. Let us say that a theory is Simons-axiomatizable 
iff  it has an axiomatization treating ⪇ as primitive, and defi ning < in the 
following way: 
 
 x < y ≡ d  f  x ⪇ y ∨ x = y 
 Every pre-mereology (and thus every mereology) is Simons-axiomatizable. 
Proof: for the same reasons given in the case of Goodman-axiomatizability 
in the previous section, a theory is Simons-axiomatizable if the bicondi-
tional corresponding to Simons’s defi nition of < is a theorem. The bicon-
ditional corresponding to the defi nition above is a consequence of (Refl ) 
and (NIPP) (this proof is left to the reader). So every pre-mereology is 
Simons-axiomatizable. 
 Simons-style axiomatizations of mereologies in which the part–whole rela-
tion fails to be anti-symmetric are, however, likely to be ugly. If mutual parthood 
is allowed, ⪇ fails to satisfy most of the familiar characteristics of relations that 
are used as axioms by Simons. Suppose x and y are mutual parts but not identi-
cal: then x ⪇ y and y ⪇ x but not x ⪇ x; ⪇ is not transitive. Similarly, if mutual 
parthood is allowed, ⪇ fails to satisfy Simons’s weak supplementation principle 
(Cotnoir 2010, p. 399). There may be elegant Simons-style axiomatizations of 
mutual parthood mereologies, but there have never been any presented in the 
literature, and I doubt that there ever will be. 
 What about axiomatizations of mereologies taking ≪ as the primitive? 
To determine under what circumstances this is possible, we fi rst have to 

the many primitives of mereology 9
determine what the defi nition of < in terms of ≪ would be. Suppose we 
used Simons’s defi nition, substituting ≪ for ⪇: 
 
 x < y ≡ d  f  x ≪ y ∨ x = y 
 There is something wrong with this defi nition, however. The diff erence 
between ⪇ and ≪ is that if x and y are mutually part of each other, and are 
distinct, then x ⪇ y but not x ≪ y. If there were two such things, then this 
defi nition would wrongly count them not as mutual parts. What’s needed is 
something more like this: 
 
 x < y ≡ d  f  x ≪ y ∨ x is mutually part of y 
 But that is no good for we have no way of defi ning “is mutually part of” 
in terms of ≪. 5 Suppose we set aside these qualms, and used the Simons 
defi nition of < in terms of ≪ shown above. A theory is axiomatizable in this 
way iff  it has the following biconditional as a theorem: 
 
 x < y ↔ x ≪ y ∨ x = y  
 (NMPA) 
 All and only those pre-mereologies in which (NMPA) is a theorem also 
have this theorem—anti-symmetry: 
 
 x < y ∧ y < x → x = y  
 (ASym) 
 Proof: (ASym) is a consequence of (NMPA) and (NMPP). (NMPA) is a 
consequence of (NMPP), (ASym), and (Refl ). (NMPP) and (Refl ) are theo-
rems of every pre-mereology. So if a pre-mereology has (NMPA) as a theo-
rem, then it has (ASym), and vice versa. 
 All and only those pre-mereologies in which (ASym) is a theorem also 
have this theorem: 
 
 x ≪ y ↔ x ⪇ y 
 (PPEq) 
 Proof: (PPEq) is a consequence of (ASym), (NMPP), and (NIPP). (ASym) is 
a consequence of (PPEq), (NMPP), and (NIPP). (NIPP) and (NMPP) are 
 5  It won’t do to say that two things are mutual parts iff  they have all and only the same non-mutual 
parts and are non-mutually part of all and only the same—that would count all mereological atoms as 
mutually parts of each other. Nor will it help to say that two things are mutual parts iff  they have all 
and only the same non-mutual parts and are non-mutually part of all and only the same and have some 
non-mutual part—that would make it impossible for two mereological atoms to be mutual parts of one 
another, which situation is intended to be possible in the types of non-extensional mereology we are 
dealing with here. 

10 josh parsons
theorems of every pre-mereology. So if a pre-mereology has (ASym), then 
it has (PPEq), and vice versa. 
 So axiomatizations in terms of ≪ are only possible for mereologies in 
which the part–whole relation is anti-symmetric; those theories are pre-
cisely the ones in which the diff erence between ⪇ and ≪ doesn’t matter. 
 Appendix: First-Order Proofs 
 I here set out proofs of the sequents of fi rst-order classical logic I relied on 
in the body of the chapter. The proofs are in an abbreviated natural deduc-
tion notation, with some of the more tedious steps elided. I also use | to 
mean “disjoint”: x|y is an abbreviation for ¬x ◦ y. 
 In the proofs below, unbound letters x, y, z, w, v are to be understood as 
names of individuals, making it easier to follow the quantifi er elimination 
and introduction steps. Note that this policy diff ers from the generality 
interpretation of open formulae used in the body of the chapter.    
 A.1  (SSP) is a consequence of (GA), (Trans), and (EA) 
 (1)    ¬x < y 
 assumption for conditional proof 
 1 
 (2)    (∃z)(z ◦ x ∧ z|y) 
 from (GA), 1 
 1 
 (3)    z ◦ x ∧ z|y 
 ∃ elimination, 2 
 1 
 (4)    (∃w)(w < z ∧ w < x) 
 from (EA), 3 
 1 
 (5)    w < z ∧ w < x 
 ∃ elimination, 4 
 1 
 (6)    v < w 
 assumption for conditional proof 
 1, 6 
 (7)     v < z 
 from (Trans), 6 
 1, 6 
 (8)     ¬v < y 
 from (EA), 7, 3 
 1 
 (9)    v < w → ¬v < y 
 conditional proof, 8, discharging 6 
 1 
  (10)    (∀v)(v < w → ¬v < y) 
 ∀ introduction, from 9 
 1 
  (11)    ¬(∃v)(v < w ∧ v < y) 
 from 10 
 1 
  (12)    w|y 
 from (EA), 11 
 1 
  (13)    w < x ∧ w|y 
 from 5, 12 
 1 
  (14)    (∃z)(z < x ∧ z|y) 
 ∃ introduction, 13 
 (15)     ¬x < y → (∃z)(z < x ∧ z|y) 
 conditional proof, 14, discharging 1 

the many primitives of mereology 11
 A.2  (GA) is a consequence of (SSP), (Trans), (Refl ), and (EA)  
 (1)     x < y 
 assumption for conditional proof 
 1 
  (2)    z ◦ x 
 assumption for conditional proof 
 1, 2 
 (3)    (∃w)(w < z ∧ w < x) 
 from (EA), 2 
 1, 2 
 (4)    w < z ∧ w < x 
 ∃ elimination, 3 
 1, 2 
 (5)    w < y 
 from (Trans), 4 
 1, 2 
 (6)    (∃w)(w < z ∧ w < y) 
 ∃ introduction, 4, 5 
 1, 2 
 (7)    z ◦ y 
 from (EA), 6 
 1 
 (8)    z ◦ x → z ◦ y 
 conditional proof, 7, discharging 2 
 1 
 (9)    (∀z)(z ◦ x → z ◦ y) 
 ∀ introduction, 8 
 (10)    x < y → (∀z)(z ◦ x → z ◦ y) 
 conditional proof, 9, discharging 1 
 (11)    ¬x < y 
 assumption for conditional proof 
 11 
 (12)    (∃z)(z < x ∧ z|y) 
 from (SSP), 11 
 11 
  (13)    z < x ∧ z|y 
 ∃ elimination, 12 
 11 
 (14)    z ◦ x 
 from (EA), (Refl ), 13 
 11 
  (15)     (∃z)(z ◦ x ∧ z|y) 
 ∃ introduction, 13, 14 
 (16)    ¬x < y → (∃z)(z ◦ x ∧ z|y) 
 conditional proof, 15, discharging 
11 
 (17)    (∀z)(z ◦ x → z ◦ y) → x < y 
 contraposing 16 
 (18)    x < y ↔ (∀z)(z ◦ x → z ◦ y) 
 from 10, 17 
 A.3  (ASym) is a consequence of (NMPP) and (NMPA) 
 (1)    x < y ∧ y < x 
 assumption for conditional proof 
 1   (2)     ¬x ≪ y 
 from (NMPP), 1 
 1   (3)     x ≪ y ∨ x = y 
 from (NMPA), 1 
 1   (4)     x = y 
 disjunctive syllogism, 2, 3 
 (5)     (x < y ∧ y < x) → x = y 
 conditional proof, 4, discharging 1 

12 josh parsons
 A.4  (NMPA) is a consequence of (NMPP), (Refl ), and (ASym) 
 (1)     x < y 
 assumption for conditional proof 
 1   (2)    ¬y < x ∨ x = y 
 from (ASym),1 
 1   (3)    (x < y ∧ ¬y < x) ∨ x = y 
 from 1, 2 
 1   (4)     x ≪ y ∨ x = y 
 from (NMPP), 3 
 (5)     x < y → (x ≪ y ∨ x = y) 
 conditional proof, 4, discharging 1 
 (6)    x = y → x < y 
 from (Refl ) 
 (7)     x ≪ y → x < y 
 from (NMPP) 
 (8)     (x ≪ y ∧ x = y) → x < y 
 from 6, 7 
 (9)    x < y ↔ (x ≪ y ∨ x = y) 
 from 5, 8 
 A.5  (PPEq) is a consequence of (NIPP), (NMPP), and (ASym) 
 (1)   x ⪇ y 
 assumption for conditional proof 
 1 
 (2)    x < y ∧ y = x 
 from (NIPP), 1 
 1 
 (3)    ¬y < x 
 from (ASym), 2 
 1 
 (4)    x < y ∧ ¬y < x 
 from 2, 3 
 1 
 (5)    x ≪ y 
 from (NMPP), 4 
 (6)    x ⪇ y → x ≪ y 
 conditional proof, 5, discharging 1 
 (7)    x ≪ y 
 assumption for conditional proof 
 7 
 (8)    x < y ∧ ¬y < x 
 from (NMPP), 7 
 7 
 (9)    x = y 
 Leibniz’s law, 8 
 7 
  (10)     x < y ∧ x = y 
 from 8, 9 
 7 
  (11)   x ⪇ y 
 from (NIPP), 10 
 (12)    x ≪ y → x ⪇ y 
 conditional proof, 11, discharging 7 
 (13)   x ≪ y ↔ x ⪇ y 
 from 6, 12 

 2 
 Parthood is Identity 1  
 KRIS  MCDANIEL 
 1.  Motivation and Initial Formulation 
 There is a strange feature of contemporary philosophical discourse and 
practice, one that is especially prominent in metaphysics. Contemporary 
philosophical inquiry is by and large driven by intuitions, and moreover 
(and obviously so) by the intuitions of those privy to the current conver-
sation. Perhaps these intuitions are converging on the truth, but one can’t 
help but worry, at least a little, that we live in a degenerate age in which the 
intuitions of the select few are either on non-convergent trajectories or are 
converging towards the False. A study of the history of philosophy can make 
very vivid the possibility of a philosophical community converging towards 
a set of views that many now fi nd indefensible. 
 A related point is that philosophy is as subject to fads as anything else. 
When I was an undergraduate, one of the hottest topics in contemporary 
m&e—it has become customary, for reasons obscure to me, to lump meta-
physics and epistemology under the heading ‘m&e’—was vagueness. People 
lived and breathed vagueness. Nowadays, not as much, but almost certainly 
this is not because all the problems involved with vagueness have been 
solved. People by and large have just moved on. Part of the explanation for 
the ‘moving on’ is that, as problems receive more attention, the literature 
on the problem necessarily becomes more intricate, detailed, and compli-
cated, and so more diffi  cult to follow, let alone evaluate. And so the pool of 
people attending to a topic will shrink over time. I will confess to having 
 1  Thanks to Andre Gallois, Cody Gilmore, and Joshua Spencer and audiences at the University of 
Auburn and the University of Geneva for extremely helpful comments on earlier drafts.  

14 kris mcdaniel
long given up trying to follow the literature on the metaphysics of causa-
tion for just this reason. This is by no means a disparaging remark about the 
metaphysics of causation; I merely cite myself as an example of someone 
susceptible to this ‘philosophical drift’. 
 As the pool of people addressing a set of issues thereby contracts over 
time, the odds increase that some views will fall out of favor due to lack of 
consideration rather than compelling refutation. For these reasons, I think 
metaphysicians have an intellectual duty to periodically reconsider unfash-
ionable theories to see if they have applications in new contexts. Views that 
are out of fashion might be merely out of fashion, and might surprise us 
with their hidden resources once they are brought back to contend with 
the puzzles of the day. My project here is to examine an older, currently 
unfashionable view—the view that the relation of numerical identity always 
obtains relative to some index, such as a time or a region of spacetime—and 
see whether it has the resources to solve some current extant issues in the 
metaphysics of material objects. 
 Let  strong composition as identity  be the view that (i) numerical identity 
is a non-distributive relation that can relate one thing to many things and 
(ii) a whole is numerically identical to its parts.  2 (A one–many relation is 
non-distributive just in case it is not distributive; a one–many relation R 
is distributive just in case whenever one thing bears R to some things, it 
bears R to each of those things.) In what follows, I will make a case for a 
stronger view than strong composition as identity: the slogan of this view is 
that  parthood is identity . Informally, the view I will defend is that (i) a whole 
is numerically identical to  each of its parts considered  individually  rather than 
collectively and (ii) parthood can be analyzed in terms of identity. Since a 
view like this seems initially highly implausible, to say the least, it is surpris-
ing that a case can be made for it, provided that certain reasonable to believe 
background assumptions are granted. 
 I will assume without argument the following theses. I do not regard 
these assumptions as eliminable; in fact, I don’t see how the view that part-
hood is identity can be defended without them. (Perhaps this fact will pro-
vide comfort to the foes of these theses.) Most of these theses I not only 
assume but think more likely to be true than not. The thesis that identity 
 2  See Baxter (1988a) for a defense of strong composition as identity, and Lewis (1991) and Sider (2007) 
for defenses of a “moderate” form of composition as identity. 

parthood is identity 15
is relative to an index is the thesis that I am off ering up for consideration, 
both my own and yours. 
 First, I assume that objects persist through time by enduring rather than 
perduring: things lack temporal parts, but rather enjoy full bodily presence 
at each moment they occupy. I assume that enduring objects can survive 
changes in both their parts and their properties. 
 Second, I assume a spacetime framework according to which the notion 
of a time is not fundamental, but rather is to be defi ned in terms of the 
notion of a region of spacetime. Given that spacetime regions are ontologi-
cally prior to times, the endurantist should claim that, strictly speaking, an 
enduring object is wholly present at diff erent regions of spacetime.  3   
 Third, I assume that enduring objects undergo change by having diff erent 
properties at diff erent regions of spacetime. Here I plump for an ‘adverbial-
ist’ version of endurantism, according to which the relation of instantiation 
that links an object to a property, or some objects to a relation, is always 
relative to some region or other: an object instantiates-at-R a property F.  4 
Every property or relation instantiated by some enduring object is instan-
tiated relative to some region or other. That said, it may be that for some 
object O and property F, O instantiates F relative to each region that O 
occupies. In these situations, we will call F a  permanent  property of O. If it is 
the case that all objects that have F at some region have F permanently, then 
call F a  permanent property simpliciter. 
 Similarly, there might be some objects O1 and O2 and some relation H 
such that, O1 and O2 instantiate H relative to some region, and moreover 
there is no region at which O1 and O2 instantiate some relation without 
instantiating H. In these situations, say that H is a  transported  relation of O1 
and O2. If for every pair of objects that bear H at some region, H is a trans-
ported relation of those pair, then call H a  transported  relation simpliciter.  
(I hope it is clear how the notion of a transported relation can be general-
ized to cover relations of adicity greater than two. However, since we won’t 
need the more general notion here, we won’t pause to formulate it.) 
 3  The view that enduring objects endure across regions of spacetime is briefl y defended in van Inwagen 
(1990b, p. 4) and McDaniel (2004); it is extensively explored in Gilmore (2006). 
 4  See Haslanger (2003) and (1989) for a discussion of the adverbialist view. Note that on her formulation 
of adverbialism, the adverbialist is neutral on whether there is a relation of instantiation. I would prefer 
to be neutral as well, but for the purposes of this chapter, I will speak more committedly. However, this 
commitment is eliminable. 

16 kris mcdaniel
 These three assumptions are shared by many endurantists. The fourth 
assumption is less widely shared: I will provisionally assume a version of the 
thesis that identities can be ‘temporary’.  5  Every  property or relation enjoyed 
by enduring objects is had relative to a region. It is consistent with this 
claim that identity is a transported relation simpliciter, and perhaps this is 
the default position. I assume, however, that identity can fail to be a trans-
ported relation: x and y might be identical relative to some region R but 
not identical relative to some other region R′. (And at R′ they will instanti-
ate some relation other than identity.) 6   
 One reason to embrace ‘temporary’ identity is that it solves puzzles aris-
ing from fi ssion and fusion.  7 The left half of a worm is crushed by a boot. 
The worm is mutilated but endures. So a worm can survive the loss of 
half of its body. What if it had been the right half that had been crushed? 
The worm would have been mutilated but would have endured. Again, the 
worm can survive the loss of half of its body. Suppose we bisect a worm 
with a surgical knife. Two non-identical worms, Lefty and Righty, are the 
result. Which is the original worm? Let t′ be the time of bisection, and t some 
time shortly prior. It seems that, at t, Lefty is identical with the original worm, 
but so is Righty. And so at t, Lefty is identical with Righty. But it seems that at 
t′, Lefty is not identical with Righty. According to the doctrine of temporary 
identity, things are exactly as they seem. (It is worthwhile to remember that 
many of our students fi nd this response initially very attractive when they fi rst 
consider the puzzle of fi ssion.) Similar remarks apply to puzzles in which two 
things fuse into one. Since we have adopted the spacetime framework, strictly 
the thing to say is that things that are not identical at one region can be identi-
cal at another region. 
 Does this version of temporary identity confl ict with the principle that 
identity is transitive? Not if this principle is properly formulated! Since iden-
tity is relative to a region, the proper formulation of the transitivity of identity 
 5  The classic defenses of temporary identity are Gallois (1998) and Myro (1997).  
 6  The question of what we should say about the numerical identity and distinctness of 
non-spatiotemporally located objects, such as platonic numbers or pure sets, is an interesting and press-
ing question. Perhaps such entities are self-identical at every region; or perhaps they are self-identical at 
some other, non-spatiotemporal, index; or, more radically still, perhaps the way in which they exemplify 
properties and relations is not the same way that material objects exemplify properties or relations. 
Each of these options is worthy of serious consideration. Unfortunately, I lack the space to tackle these 
questions here. 
 7  See Gallois (2005). 

parthood is identity 17
is this: if x = y relative to R, and y = z relative to R, then x = z relative to 
R. Note also that the doctrine of temporary identity is consistent with the fact 
that the property of being self-identical is permanent simpliciter. 
 Anyone who says something non-standard about identity needs to say 
something non-standard about the law of the indiscernibility of identicals. As 
standardly formulated, the law states that if x = y, then every property of x 
is a property of y (and vice versa). But, as is well known, this simple for-
mulation leads to trouble very quickly if we allow temporary identity. A nat-
ural reformulation of this law is the following. We will need to distinguish 
between what I will call  region-encoding  and  region-free  properties and relations. 
A region-encoding property is one that has information about either particu-
lar regions or regions in general built into the property. Some examples of 
region-encoding properties include  being an occupant of region R ,  being tall relative 
to R ,  being red at some region ,  being identical to x at R , etc. Although all properties 
and relations are instantiated relative to a region, not all properties and relations 
are region-encoding. Some region-encoding relations are relations to regions. 
It is one thing to instantiate a property or a relation relative to that region; it 
is another altogether diff erent thing to participate in a relation, one of whose 
relata is itself a region. Some examples of region-free properties include  being 
tall ,  being identical to x , and  being red . We will now formulate this law of the indis-
cernibility of identicals as follows: If x is identical to y at R, then x has some 
region-free property at R if and only if y has that region-free property at R.  8    
 We’ve noted that there is something to be said for the doctrine of tempo-
rary identity. We should think even more favorably of this doctrine if it plays 
an unexpected role in solving extant philosophical problems, resolves thorny 
questions, or provides new and intriguing analyses of familiar notions. 
 It is clear that there is some intimate relation between a whole and its 
parts that is not exemplifi ed by distinct objects. Consider a now stock exam-
ple. 9 The farmer owns a farm composed of six plots of land, each of which 
he sells to diff erent individuals. It would not be reasonable for the farmer to 
then sell the farm to a seventh individual. In some sense, the farm is noth-
ing over and above its six plots. For this reason, some philosophers have 
embraced the slogan that composition just is identity: the intimate relation 
 8  This way of ‘restricting’ Leibniz’s Law is inspired by Myro’s (1997) proposal. Koslicki (2008, pp. 47–69), 
argues that restricting Leibniz’s Law in this fashion is a ‘suspect strategy’. I don’t have space to respond 
to Koslicki’s interesting argument here. 
 9  We owe this example to Baxter (1988a, p. 579); it is further discussed by Lewis (1991, pp. 83–84).  

18 kris mcdaniel
between a whole and its parts is the relation of many–one identity. You can’t 
get more intimate than identity. 
 There are two worries about the view that composition is identity. The 
fi rst worry is conceptual or semantical: isn’t the relation of identity obvi-
ously one–one rather than one–many? Don’t attempts to express the doc-
trine fail to even be grammatically well formed? (“They are it” is arguably 
not a grammatical English sentence.)  10 The second worry is metaphysical. If 
composition is identity, then in some sense the whole must be a duplicate of 
its parts (since it is the parts). So fi x the properties and relations of the parts, 
and you thereby fi x the properties of the whole. In short, if composition is 
identity, then the properties of a whole supervene on the properties of its 
parts. But some have alleged that ‘emergent properties’, i.e., properties that 
do not supervene on the properties and relations of their parts, are possible 
and perhaps even actual. 11   
 Although these worries are decisive neither individually nor collectively, 
they do provide a motivation to search for an alternate explanation of the 
intimacy of the relation of part-to-whole. The view that parthood is iden-
tity is such an explanation. On this view, a whole is identical to each of its 
parts. (It is better to say that, for each part, the whole is identical to that 
part at some region. Which region? More on that momentarily.) This view 
is not committed to the claim that identity is fundamentally a many–one 
relation: the only primitive notions it employs are the ordinary notions of 
identity, parthood, and relative-to-a-region-instantiation. These notions are 
ones that the endurantist arguably needs anyway. Moreover, as well we see 
in section 2, one of these notions, specifi cally parthood, can be analyzed in 
terms of identity given this theory. 
 Additionally, that parthood is identity is consistent with the claim that 
a whole has features that do not supervene on the properties and relations 
of its parts. In general, the endurantist does not believe that the properties 
an object has at one region are metaphysically determined by the proper-
ties that an object has at diff erent regions. (The properties that I have after 
changing from one state to another may well be  causally determined by the 
properties I had at earlier states, but they are not  metaphysically  determined 
 10  This worry is pushed by van Inwagen (1994). I’m not sure how much weight should be put on 
the alleged ungrammaticality of sentences like “They are it; it is them.” But I doubt it is very much. 
However, the intuition that identity is a one–one relation deserves to be taken into consideration.  
 11  This worry is pushed in McDaniel (2008). 

parthood is identity 19
by them.) The phenomenon here is in principle no diff erent:  although 
I might be (at some region or regions) identical to my parts (considered 
individually) it does not follow that the properties my parts have at some 
region are determined by the properties they have at other regions. 
 Finally, one might worry that composition is identity is inconsistent with 
the conjunction of endurantism and the obvious fact that objects gain and 
lose parts as they persist through time. Probably this worry is why friends 
of composition of identity tend to also be foes of endurantism. But there 
is an obvious way for the friend of composition as identity to endorse 
endurantism: hold that some identities are temporary.  12 Although I am these 
things  herenow , I am not them  therethen . On pain of embracing absurdity, the 
endurantist who embraces the view that composition is identity is com-
mitted to temporary identities just as much as the friend of the view that 
parthood is identity. 
 The view that parthood is identity captures the intuition that the relation 
between part and whole is especially intimate at least as well as the view that 
composition is identity, and yet it does not face the worries noted above that 
face the view that composition is identity. (It might face its own worries, and 
whether this is so will be explored in section 4.) Let us explore it further.  
 2.  Formal Reformulation 
 I informally characterized the view that parthood is identity as the conjunction 
of two theses: (i) a whole is numerically identical to  each  of its parts considered 
 individually rather than collectively and (ii) parthood can be analyzed in terms of 
identity. We will now replace this informal characterization with a formal one. 
There are two tasks to complete. Given the assumptions elaborated in section 1, 
(i) needs to be understood as saying that, for each part of a whole, there is some 
region at which the whole is that part. The fi rst task is to determine which 
region that is. Once we have completed this task, we will be able to provide a 
formal analysis of parthood in terms of identity. 
 All relations are instantiated relative to some region. We will proceed by 
in general identifying which kinds of regions are suitable to serve as the 
locus for the instantiation of a two-place relation. 
 12  See Merricks (1999). 

20 kris mcdaniel
 Think for a minute as an endurantist who has not yet embraced the 
spacetime picture and so who continues to think of instantiation as rela-
tive to a time. At t1, an object O1 in spatial region SR1 stands in relation 
H to an object in spatial region SR2. At t2, H does not relate these two 
objects. Switch now to the spacetime picture. Since we are endurantists, we 
hold that an object can be wholly present at diff erent regions of spacetime. 
So although O1 occupies R1 (a spacetime region roughly corresponding 
to how we conceived of t1 and SR1), there are other regions besides R1 
occupied by O1. Similarly, although O2 occupies R2 (a spacetime region 
roughly corresponding to how we conceived of t1 and SR2), there are 
other regions besides R2 occupied by O2. But let’s set these other regions 
aside, and consider which region H is instantiated relative to. The obvious 
candidates are (i) R1, (ii) R2, (iii) both R1 and R2, (iv) the intersection of 
R1 and R2 (if it exists), (v) the union of R1 and R2, (vi) some other region 
that overlaps neither R1 nor R2, (vii) some region that merely overlaps 
each of R1 and R2. Possibilities (i) and (ii) strike me as unduly arbitrary, and 
of course for that reason possibilities (vi) and (vii) should also be set aside. 
Many occupied regions do not overlap, and for that reason, it is not true in 
general that dyadic relations are instantiated relative to the intersection of 
some regions occupied by the relata of the relation. So set aside (iv). There 
is no arbitrariness in holding that a dyadic relation is instantiated relative to 
two diff erent locations, but this option does seem to me to involve a curi-
ous duplication of facts, and this tells against option (iii). (On option (iii), 
O1 and O2 instantiate H relative to R1 and they instantiate H relative to 
R2.) So although none of these considerations is conclusive, they do make 
possibility (v) the most plausible answer. 
 Some interesting consequences follow from (v). Suppose there is some 
region R at which O1 is a part of O2. Given (v), R is occupied by O2. 
Suppose the relation H alluded to above is the relation of parthood. In this 
case, intuitively R1 must be a subregion of R2. (Recall the slogan that ‘the 
part is smaller than the whole’, which is perhaps dubious when considering 
set-theoretic oddities, but is eminently plausible when restricted to endur-
ing physical objects.) If R1 is a subregion of R2, then the union of R1 and 
R2 just is R2. The union of R1 and R2 is the region at which parthood is 
instantiated, and so R2 is the region at which parthood is instantiated and 
R2 is occupied by O2. In general, every region at which something is a 
part of a whole is a region occupied by that whole. A similar and shorter 

parthood is identity 21
argument can be given for the claim that, if O1 is identical with O2 at R, 
then both O1 and O2 occupy R. 
 Consider some regions R1 and R2 that correspond roughly to, respec-
tively, a region of space occupied by your left hand and a region of space 
occupied by yourself, at a time in which your left hand is a part of you. 
Revert now to the spacetime picture: I say that your left hand is a part of 
you at R2. (There are other regions presumably at which it is a part of you, 
since you have hopefully managed to persist through time while keeping 
track of your left hand.) On the view that parthood is identity, something 
stronger is true: you are identical to your left hand at R2. More generally, 
whenever O1 is a part of O2 at some R, O1 is identical with O2 at R. Note 
that it does not follow from this claim that you are identical with your hand 
at R1. (In fact, your hand is not even a part of you at R1.) Recall that identi-
ties can be ‘temporary’. 
 We have now completed the fi rst task involved in explaining the view 
that parthood is identity. Let us turn to the second task, that of providing 
an analysis of parthood in terms of identity. Let’s start by noting that the 
following analysis won’t do:
 PI-1: x is a part of y at R =df. x and y are identical at R. 
 Although PI-1 is the analysis that most fi ts the slogan ‘parthood is iden-
tity’, it won’t fl y. For although my hand is part of me at R (a region that 
I occupy), I am not a part of my hand at R, despite the fact that I am my 
hand at R. We need a more sophisticated analysis, one that breaks the sym-
metry of identity. 
 Fortunately, we have already noted an interesting asymmetry. Although 
my hand might be a part of me at a region occupied by me, my hand is not a 
part of me at a region occupied by my hand. The following proposal makes 
use of that asymmetry:
 PI-2: x is, at R, a part of y =df. x is, at R, identical with y; there is some region 
R′ such that (i) x is, at R′, identical with x; (ii) x is not, at R′, identical with y, 
and (iii) R′ is a proper subregion of R. 
 PI-2, unlike PI-1, does not imply that I am a part of my hand at a region 
I occupy. This is the result that we wanted. That PI-2 lacks this implication, 

22 kris mcdaniel
however, is not immediately obvious. In fact, it might seem that the follow-
ing argument shows that PI-2 does imply that I am a part of my hand at 
some region that I occupy: Consider some x and y such that x is a part of 
y at R. Given PI-2, x is identical with y at R. And since x is identical with 
y at R, every feature that x has at R, y has at R, and vice versa. Y has the 
feature  having x as a part at  R . So x has this feature as well. So x is a part of 
x at R. For the same reasons, y is a part of y at R. And since y = x at R, y 
is a part of x at R. So I am a part of my hand at R. Absurd! 
 Although this argument looks initially compelling, it is actually an invalid 
argument. Because ‘identity can be temporary’, we endorsed a version of 
Leibniz’s Law that licenses one to move from (i) x is y at R and (ii) x is F at 
R to the conclusion that (iii) y is F at R  only if  F is a region-free property. 
(Recall that a region-free property is one that does not encode information 
about either particular regions or regions-in-general.) But having x as a part 
is not a region-free property given PI-2, for PI-2 partly analyzes facts about 
parthood in terms of facts about identity at regions. And so the argument is 
invalid. We are not entitled to infer either that x is a part of x at R or that 
y is a part of y at R. 
 Note that this argument is in fact an instance of the same kind of 
attempted reductio against temporary identity: assume that x is y at R1 but 
not at R2. x at R1 has the property of being identical with x at R2. So y 
at R1 has the property of being identical with x at R2. Contradiction! Any 
friend of temporary identity must reject any indiscernibility principle that 
implies that this is a valid argument. 13   
 Some metaphysicians might wonder what notion of parthood is being 
defi ned by PI-2. For reasons of technical convenience, some metaphysicians 
work with a conception of parthood according to which everything is a 
part of itself. They therefore distinguish between what they call ‘proper’ and 
‘improper’ parts of a whole: the whole is an improper part of itself. They 
might ask: is PI-2 meant to be an analysis of proper or improper parthood? 
 The conception these metaphysicians operate with strikes me as highly 
artifi cial, and I see no reason to ape it by defi ning parthood in such a way as 
to distinguish between ‘improper’ and ‘proper’ parthood. I am talking about 
parthood. That said, it will emerge that PI-2 implies that parthood has many 
logical features in common with how these metaphysicians have conceived 
 13  Gallois (1998) proposes a diff erent way of confronting arguments of this sort.  

parthood is identity 23
of proper parthood. (For example, given PI-2, parthood is transitive and 
irrefl exive.) 
 How signifi cant is it that we can provide an  analysis of parthood? A theory 
is made more elegant when some subset of the concepts that were previously 
taken as unanalyzed are successfully analyzed via some of the remaining mem-
bers of that set. And the analysis itself might make surprising predictions or help 
settle extant disputes. Does PI-2 do either of these things?  
 3.  Further Motivations 
 Yes. First, if PI-2 is true, then there is a straightforward explanation why 
the relation of parthood is transitive. Although a few metaphysicians have 
denied that parthood is transitive, the vast majority of metaphysicians accept 
that it is transitive, and some have even claimed that it is constitutive of the 
concept of parthood that it is transitive.  14 An analysis of parthood that can 
show that parthood is transitive is thereby worthy of some respect. 
 In short, given PI-2, the transitivity of the parthood relation falls out 
of the transitivity of identity. Given the spacetime framework, the proper 
way to formulate the transitivity of parthood is this: For all regions R and 
objects x, y, and z, if x is a part of y at R, and y is a part of z at R, then x 
is a part of z at R. We will prove the transitivity of parthood via reductio: 
  1.  x is a part of y at R, y is a part of z at R, but ~(x is a part of z at R) 
[assumption] 
  2.  x is identical to y at R and there is some region R∗ such that (i) x = x 
at R∗, (ii) ~(x = y at R∗), and (iii) R∗ is a subregion of R. [from PI-2, 
premise 1] 
  3.  y is identical to z at R and there is some region R∗∗ such that (i) y = y 
at R∗∗, (ii) ~x = y at R∗∗, and (iii) R∗∗ is a subregion of R. [from 
PI-2, premise 1] 
  4.  Either x is not identical to z at R or ~ (there is some region R∗∗∗ 
such that (i) z = z at R∗∗∗, (ii) ~x = z at R∗∗∗, and (iii) and R∗∗∗ is 
a subregion of R) [from PI-2, premise 1] 
 14  For example, Koslicki (2008, p. 257) suggests that were one to give up the transitivity of a putative 
parthood relation, one would thereby raise serious doubts about whether that relation is a parthood rela-
tion. See Varzi (2006) and Simons (1987) for a defense of the claim that parthood is transitive; Rescher 
(1955) contains the classic complaint against the transitivity of parthood. 

24 kris mcdaniel
  5.  It is not the case that x is not identical to z at R. [transitivity of identity, 
premises 2 and 3] 
  6.  So there is no region R∗∗∗ such that (x = x at R∗∗∗, ~x = z at R∗∗∗ 
and R∗∗∗ is a subregion of R). 
  7.  But there is a region R∗∗∗ such that (x = x at R∗∗∗, ~x = z at R∗∗∗ 
and R∗∗∗ is a subregion of R). [see below] 
  8.  So parthood is transitive. [premises 1, 6, 7] 
 The only undefended premise is 7. 7 is supported by the following line of 
reasoning. First, since z is a composite object at R, R must have at least one 
proper subregion. I assume here that occupying a point-sized region suffi  ces 
for being simple at that region. This is a contentious assumption, but one 
that arguably follows from PI-2 as well. (More on this in section 4.) 
 One of these proper subregions is a region at which x is located. A neces-
sary condition on y’s being a part of z is that y occupy a proper subregion of 
R. One of the subregions of R occupied by y is also a subregion at which x 
is part of y. Call this subregion T. A necessary condition on x’s being a part 
of y at T is that x occupies a subregion of T. 
 Call this proper subregion S. S is a subregion of R, since  being a subregion 
of is a transitive relation. x is identical with itself at every region that it occu-
pies, and so x is identical with itself at S. However, z does not occupy S. (A 
putative part of z (at R) occupies S, but z is not identical with that part at 
S.) Since z does not occupy S, z is not identical with anything at S. (Recall 
the result shown earlier, that an object is identical with something at a 
region only if that object occupies that region.) So z is not identical with x 
at S. So there is a region R′′′ (namely S) such that (i) x = x at R′′′ (aka S), 
(ii) ~x = z at R′′′ (S again), and (iii) R′′′ (still S) is a subregion of R. This 
is premise 7. Reductio complete. Given PI-2, we can give an explicit proof 
the transitivity of parthood that explains  why parthood is transitive. This is 
an extraordinary explanatory gain. 
 Given PI-2, further interesting logical properties of parthood can be 
determined. Parthood is provably irrefl exive. To say that parthood is irre-
fl exive is to say that there is no R and x such that x is a part of x at R. Proof 
via reductio: suppose at some R, x is a part of x. Then there is some subre-
gion R′ of R such that ~x = x at R′. This is absurd in itself, but we are also 
entitled to infer that at R′, x = x. Reductio complete. 

parthood is identity 25
 Parthood is provably anti-symmetric. (The proof is easy.) Parthood is 
anti-symmetric just in case, for any R, x, and y, if x is a part of y at R and y 
is a part of x at R, then x = y at R. A direct proof: suppose x is a part of y 
at R and y is a part of x at R. Then, given PI-2, x is identical with y at R. 
 Interestingly, although parthood is provably irrefl exive and anti-symmetric, 
that parthood is asymmetric does not directly follow from PI-2 alone. 
This is a surprising result, and it is worthwhile to see why this is the case. 
Consider the following attempt to prove asymmetry. Suppose for reductio 
that at some region R, x is a part of y at R and y is a part of x at R. Then 
by anti-symmetry x = y at R. Since x = y at R and x = x at R, and x is a 
part of y at R, by Leibniz’s Law, x is a part of x at R. But, by irrefl exivity, x 
is not a part of x at R. So there is no region R and objects x and y such that 
x is a part of y at R and y is a part of x at R. So parthood is asymmetric. 
 The problem with this argument is that the restricted version of Leibniz’s 
Law does not license the move from x’s being a part of y at R to x’s being 
a part of x at R, despite the fact that x = y at R. We’ve already seen an 
instance of this same mistake: since parthood is a region-encoding property, 
one is not entitled to employ Leibniz’s Law in this fashion. 
 I fi nd this result a little disquieting. Fortunately, Cody Gilmore has sug-
gested to me the following modifi cation to PI-2, which does imply that 
parthood is asymmetric. 
 PI-3: x at R is a part of y =df. (a) x is identical with y at R; (b) there is some region 
R∗ such that (i) x is identical with x at R∗, (ii) x is not identical with y at R∗, and 
(iii) R∗ is a proper subregion of R; and (c) it is not the case that there is a region 
R∗∗ such that (i) y is identical with y at R∗∗, (ii) y is not identical with x at R∗∗, 
and R∗∗ is a proper subregion of R.  
 The intuitive idea behind PI-3 is that, while PI-2 leaves it open that each of 
x and y could have a proper subregion of R at which it is identical with itself 
but not the other, PI-3 closes this possibility off . Given PI-3, parthood is still 
irrefl exive. However, I have to confess that the argument for the transitivity 
of parthood is much harder to see. If as a matter of necessity an object never 
occupies a proper subregion of a region it occupies, we can prove that part-
hood is transitive given PI-3. But although this claim seems very reasonable, 
I do not have a proof for it. 

26 kris mcdaniel
 Here is why this claim would give us a proof of transitivity. If we accept PI-3, 
then there are three rather than two conditions that must be met for x to be a 
part of y at a region. If condition (iii) is not met, then there is a region, R∗∗, 
such that z = z at R∗∗; but this region is a proper subregion of R, a region 
z also occupies. So a necessary condition on clause (iii) not being met is that 
an object never occupies a proper subregion of a region it occupies. Sanford 
(1993, p. 222) cites a literary example from Borges, in which a character reports 
that, “I saw the earth in the Aleph and in the earth the Aleph once more and 
the earth in the Aleph . . . .” For what it is worth, on PI-2, Borge’s Aleph is 
metaphysically possible, but on PI-3 it is not. I do not regard this as a serious 
advantage of PI-2 over PI-3. Question: if Borge’s Aleph example is metaphysi-
cally possible, should we give up the transitivity of parthood? 
 Some philosophers deny that the parthood relation is asymmetric, 
because of the particular solution to the puzzle of material constitution 
they prefer. (This puzzle will be discussed momentarily.) However, these 
philosophers are not happy with the claim that parthood is anti-symmetric 
either! Frankly, I would rather have it fall out of an analysis of parthood that 
parthood is transitive than that it is asymmetric, especially when it already 
falls out of the analysis that it is anti-symmetric and irrefl exive. In what fol-
lows, I will take PI-2 as the analysis of parthood, but keep in mind that PI-3 
will do much of the same work. 15   
 PI-2 (and PI-3) implies that parthood is extensional. The way to formu-
late extensionality given that parthood is identity is this: for all x and y and 
R, if x and y have the same parts at R, then x = y at R. We will also prove 
extensionality via reductio. 
  1.  Let R be a region such that x and y have the same parts at R but x is 
not y. (assumption) 
  2.  x is not identical with y at R. (simplifi cation, premise 1)  
  3.  Let z be a part of x and y at R. (universal instantiation, premise 1) 
  4.  z is identical with x at R. (PI-2, premise 2) 
  5.  z is identical with y at R. (PI-2, premise 2) 
  6.  So x is identical with y at R. (transitivity of identity, premises 3 and 4)  
  7.  So parthood is extensional. [premises 1, 5, 6] 
 15  Thomson (1998) rejects both asymmetry and anti-symmetry. 

parthood is identity 27
 Unlike transitivity, extensionality is fairly controversial. Many philosophers 
believe that the so-called puzzle of material constitution shows that part-
hood must not be extensional. At t-, a lump of clay is on a desk. At t, an 
artist manipulates the lump thereby creating a statue we will call ‘Sam’. The 
lump still exists at t, but is not Sam, since the lump existed at a time during 
which Sam did not. Yet they have the same parts, and so extensionality must 
be false. 
 It is clear what the friend of PI-2 or PI-3 should say. She is already com-
mitted to some identities being ‘temporary’. The example of the statue and 
the clay is another example of a temporary identity. In general, the puzzle 
of material constitution provides just another set of examples of temporary 
identities beyond the standard fi ssion and fusion cases. Interestingly, most 
friends of temporary identity have embraced the extensionality of parthood. 
But why? Initially it looks like the two doctrines are logically independent 
of each of each other, so why do they form such a nice package of views? 
The friend of parthood as identity has an explanation for this: both the 
extensionality of parthood and the temporary identity of entities in material 
constitution cases stem from the same source, namely the view of parthood 
as identity. 
 Given PI-2 or PI-3, parthood is extensional. The uniqueness of compo-
sition—x and y are, at R, identical if they are composed, at R, of the same 
xs—follows immediately as well. 
 The three axioms of classical mereology (as formulated by David Lewis (1991, 
p. 74)) are the transitivity of parthood, the uniqueness of composition, and unre-
stricted composition. Composition is unrestricted just in case, whenever there 
are some things x1 . . . xn at r1 . . . rn, there is a whole made out of those things at 
the union of r1 . . . rn. Unlike transitivity and extensionality, I do not think that 
unrestricted composition follows from PI-2, although it is consistent with PI-2. 
Suppose there are objects O1 at R1 and O2 at R2. Why would it follow from 
this fact that there is an object that (i) occupies the union of R1 and R2 and 
(ii) is identical with each of O1 and O2 at the union of R1 and R2? Perhaps 
there is some interesting metaphysical argument for unrestricted composition 
in which PI-2 plays an ineliminable role. But I wager that no such argument 
will be anywhere near as straightforward as the arguments for transitivity and 
extensionality. (I also do not think that compositional universalism follows from 
the doctrine that composition is identity, and so the two views are alike in this 
respect as well.) 

28 kris mcdaniel
 In fact, as far as I can tell, PI-2 is consistent with every extant account 
of when composition occurs. This is a good thing. Transitivity, irrefl exivity, 
anti-symmetry, and extensionality have a far better claim to being ‘concep-
tually’ true than any theory of when composition occurs, and PI-2 explains 
why this is the case. 
 4.  Problems 
 We have discussed several nice features of the view that parthood is identity. 
But we would be remiss if we did not also discuss possible objections to the 
view. In what follows, I will not discuss objections to the  presuppositions  of 
the view, such as objections to endurantism, the spacetime framework, or 
temporary identity. There is a large literature on each of these topics and 
accordingly I will focus on objections to the view parthood is identity. 
 Objection 1: My parts are not identical with each other! 
 Here is one hand, and here is another. Given PI-2, both hands are me (at 
some region that I occupy). And so both hands are identical with each other 
(at some region that I occupy). But they are obviously distinct. And so PI-2 
is false. 
 This argument is hard to defuse, since the intuition driving it is very 
powerful. The intuition pushes us to hold that there is no region at which 
my hands are identical with each other. PI-2 implies that there is such a 
region, and for this reason, it is a counter-intuitive view. Were there not 
things to be said in favor of the view, this objection would be decisive. 
 But there are things to be said in favor of the view. And, moreover, we 
can point out several facts that are consistent with PI-2 that may soothe 
the intuition. Let R be the region that I occupy. First, consider a proper 
subregion R1 of R that, informally, plays a role in making it true that my 
left hand is a part of me at R. Similarly, consider a proper subregion R2 
of R that, informally, plays a role in making it true that my right hand 
is a part of me at R. PI-2 emphatically does  not  imply that my left hand 
is identical to my right  at either of R1 or R2 . Nor does PI-2 imply that 
my left hand is identical to my right hand at the union of R1 and R2. 
So there are at least three cognitively salient regions at which my right 
hand and my left hand are numerically distinct. There is no region other 
than the region occupied by the whole at which the parts become one. 

parthood is identity 29
It seems to me that these facts soothe the intuition that my hands are 
distinct suffi  ciently for that intuition to be trumped by the theoretical 
benefi ts the view brings to the table.  
 Objection 2: PI-2 Implies a Bizarre Form of Existence Monism 16  
 Existence monism is the doctrine that there is exactly one concrete object, 
that everything concrete is one.  17 Let the Universe be that concrete object 
that has all other objects as parts. Let R be the region occupied by the 
Universe. Given PI-2, all concrete things are, at R, one. 
 Let’s fi rst note that strictly PI-2 does not imply this kind of existence 
monism, although it is consistent with it. This is because PI-2 is consistent 
with the non-existence of the Universe. Recall that PI-2 is neutral with 
respect to most theories of composition, and many of these theories will 
imply that there is no entity that is the Universe. 
 However, let us set this response aside, and grant that the Universe 
exists. Then there is some region at which everything is one. We are in 
eff ect revisiting objection 1, this time writ large. It is a counter-intuitive 
consequence of PI-2 that there is some region at which my parts are 
identical. It is a counter-intuitive consequence of PI-2 that there is some 
region at which the parts of the universe are identical. But just as there 
are many regions at which my parts are not identical, there are a tre-
mendous number of regions at which the parts of the universe are not 
identical. You are not me at any region that is the union of some regions 
that we respectively occupy.  
 Objection 3: PI-2 Helps Itself to the Notion of a Proper  
Subregion and so is Circular 
 Consider the following objection. PI-2 (and PI-3) analyzes parthood not 
only in terms of identity at a region, but in terms of one region being a 
proper subregion of another. And to say that one region is a proper subre-
gion of another is just to say that both are regions and that one is a proper 
part of the other. So far from providing an analysis of the parthood relation, 
PI-2 (and PI-3) presupposes the notion of parthood. 
 16  Thanks to Joshua Spencer for discussion here. 
 17  See Schaff er (2007) for a discussion of existence monism.  

30 kris mcdaniel
 One way to respond to this objection is to argue that the parthood rela-
tion exemplifi ed by material objects is not the same relation as the one 
exemplifi ed by regions. If this is right, PI-2 would not be circular, although 
it would defi ne one parthood relation partly in terms of the other. However, 
we need to be careful here. One reason one might have for denying that 
the two parthood relations are identical is that the two parthood relations 
have diff erent logical forms: the one exemplifi ed by material objects is a 
three-place relation one of whose relata is always a region, whereas the one 
enjoyed by regions is a two-place relation.  18 But this reason is not a reason 
available to the endurantist who accepts adverbialism, for the part relation 
enjoyed by material objects is a two-place relation, albeit one that is always 
had-at-a-region. 
 There are two other strategies that are promising: provide an analysis 
of proper subregionhood that does not appeal to any notion of parthood 
or provide a reductive analysis of the parthood relation obtaining between 
regions. The extent to which these are two strategies or merely one strategy 
with a diff erent point of emphasis is not clear to me. 
 One analysis of proper subregionhood that might not appeal to a notion 
of parthood is the analysis that takes regions to be sets of spacetime points 
and the subregion relation to the subset relation defi ned on sets of spa-
cetime points.  19 (That regions are sets of spacetime points is defended by 
Cartwright (1975); for criticism see Fowler (2009,  chapter  1).) A  more 
extreme response is to hold that spacetime regions are not singular unities, 
but rather are mere pluralities of spacetime points. On this view, ‘one’ region 
is a subregion of another just in case every point among the fi rst plurality 
is among the second. 
 Alternatively, one might try to analyze the relation of subregionhood 
by appealing to the various geometrical relations obtaining between 
regions. I can think of no reason why the mereological properties of 
regions might fail to supervene on their geometrical ones. Here is one 
possible analysis:  R1 is a proper subregion of R2 just in case R1 is 
zero-distance from R2 and there is some region R3 such that (i) R3 
is zero distance from R2 and R3 is some greater than zero distance 
from R1.  
 18  See McDaniel (2004) for an example of this argument. 
 19  I hedge somewhat here because David Lewis (1991) argues that sets have their subsets as parts.  

parthood is identity 31
 Objection 4: PI-2 is Inconsistent with the Claim that ‘Once a Simple, 
Always a Simple’ 20  
 Aren’t things without parts always things without parts? How could some-
thing that once had parts come to be something that has many parts? Put 
formally (and non-rhetorically), the following principle is necessarily 
true: for any thing x and regions R and R∗, if x occupies R and x is simple 
at R and x occupies R∗, then x is simple at R∗. Yet it seems that PI-2 is 
inconsistent with this claim. Let R∗ be the region I occupy, and let R be a 
region occupied by one of my simple parts. Since this simple = me at R∗, 
and I have proper parts at R∗, the simple has proper parts at R∗. 
 Since the principle that ‘once a simple, always a simple’ is somewhat 
attractive, it is fortunate that it is consistent with PI-2. The objection goes 
awry in exactly the place that previous objections have gone awry: it makes 
an illicit appeal to Leibniz’s Law. True, the simple is me at R∗, and I do have 
the property  has proper parts  at R∗, but this property is a region-encoding 
property, and hence the inference from these truths to the claim that the 
simple has proper parts at R∗ is invalid. 
 Objection 5: PI-2 Rules Out the Possibility of Composite  
Point-Sized Objects 
 Consider an x that occupies a point-sized region of spacetime R. If PI-2 is 
true, then x is a composite object only if there is some proper subregion R 
at which something y is not identical with x. But R, since it is point-sized, 
has no proper subregions. So PI-2 rules out the possibility of point-sized 
composite objects. 
 I think this argument is sound. The question then is to what extent we 
should be troubled by it. PI-2 does not imply that an object is a simple 
at a region R only if R is a point-sized region. Occupying a point-sized 
region is a  suffi  cient  condition for being simple at that region, not a necessary 
condition. So PI-2 is consistent with, but does not imply, the possibility of 
extended simples, for whatever that is worth. 
 Moreover, PI-2 is consistent with the possibility of co-located but 
numerically distinct objects. Perhaps certain fundamental particles can ‘pass 
 20  Thanks to Cody Gilmore for pressing this worry. 

32 kris mcdaniel
through’ each other as they travel along opposite trajectories. In this respect, 
PI-2 is diff erent from an analysis of parthood according to which x is a part 
of y just in case x occupies a (proper or improper) subregion of a region 
occupied by y; this view does imply that co-located yet distinct objects are 
impossible. 
 If you believe that co-located yet distinct objects are possible, and you 
believe that composition is unrestricted (an assumption I will provision-
ally grant for the sake of argument), then there is pressure to believe that 
composite point-sized objects are possible. At t1, two particles of the sort 
capable of passing through each other approach via opposite trajectories. 
At t2, particles occupy the same space. At t3, the particles go their separate 
ways. At t2, given that composition is unrestricted, there is a composite 
point-sized object. 
 This sort of argument will be compelling to those who have a theory 
of composition which implies that, if there are two things co-located at t2, 
then there is a fusion of those things at t2. But there is a way out of the argu-
ment: deny that there are two things at t2. Perhaps the correct description 
of the case is that, at t2, the two particles are identical. Later, they are they 
are distinct once more. 
 Interestingly, PI-2 does not imply that in general there cannot be wholes 
made of co-located parts. The only kind of composite object ruled out is 
a point-sized one. I leave it to the reader to judge how serious a cost this. 
 Objection 6: This View is Crazy 
 Yeah, it is kind of weird. But if you don’t think temporary identity is so 
weird that it should be dismissed out of hand, I don’t get why you’d think 
this view should be. (If you think that temporary identity is demonstrably 
false, then clearly you ought to reject any view that presupposes it.) And 
there are many things to be said in favor of the view. It accounts for the 
intuition that there is an intimate connection between part and whole; it 
does not face the objections facing the alternative explanation, specifi cally, 
that composition is identity; it explains why parthood has the various logi-
cal properties that it has been thought to have; and other than its weirdness, 
it faces no devastating objections that are over and above the objections to 
its assumptions, most of which are staunchly defended in the literature.  

 3 
 Mereology and Modality  
 GABRIEL  UZQUIANO 
 Can mereological fusions change their parts? The axioms of classical mere-
ology do not speak directly to this question, and yet a great many philoso-
phers who take parthood to be governed by these axioms seem to assume 
they cannot change their parts.  1 Curiously, dissenters tend to depart from 
classical mereology at least when it comes to the uniqueness of compo-
sition:  no two mereological fusions ever fuse exactly the same objects.  2 
I would like to argue that this is more than a remarkable coincidence; there 
are reasons of principle why one’s adherence to classical mereology should 
exert some pull towards the hypothesis that fusions cannot change their 
parts. There is, however, no direct route from the combination of classical 
mereology and propositional modal logic to this hypothesis. 
 Why should anyone expect fusions to have their parts necessarily? One may 
perhaps be motivated by a suggestive model of the part–whole relation as par-
tial identity as intimated by authors such as D. M. Armstrong and D. Baxter.  3 
Identity is generally supposed not to be a source of contingency: identical 
objects are necessarily identical and distinct objects are necessarily distinct. 
Why would we expect parthood to be diff erent in this respect? 
 Let me explain. The necessity of identity is a consequence of Leibniz’s 
Law of indiscernibility of identicals and the further premise that every 
 1  One reason to think this is not merely a misimpression on my part is that van Inwagen (2010) appears 
to be motivated by a similar state of aff airs. He provides some evidence in the form of examples in 
footnote 1. 
 2  Two examples are Fine (1999) and Thomson (1998). 
 3  See Armstrong (1978, pp. 37–8) and Baxter (1988b). 

34 gabriel uzquiano
object is necessarily self-identical.  4 Suppose you think identical objects are 
necessarily identical. It is not then unnatural to think that two partially 
identical objects are necessarily partially identical. But if parthood is to be 
understood in terms of partial identity, then there is some reason to think 
fusions have their parts necessarily. 
 If, like others, you fi nd partial identity obscure, you may instead retreat to 
a more modest analogy between parthood and identity, which, admittedly, 
seem to be alike in certain key respects. No relation of course is more inti-
mate than identity—the relation an object bears to itself and nothing else—
but the part–whole relation is supposed to come close. It is diffi  cult to make 
this heuristic thought more precise but Sider (2007) has articulated a picture 
of parthood by means of a family of theses motivated by the thought that 
it is an intimate relation akin to identity.  Apart from distinctive mereologi-
cal principles such as unrestricted fusion or the uniqueness of composition, 
there is the thesis, for example, that parthood is topic-neutral: all objects 
without exception, regardless of what ontological category they may belong 
to, have parts. This is one respect in which parthood is analogous to identity. 
For another example, consider the thesis that parthood is a two-place rela-
tion not to be relativized to a time, a place, a world, or a sortal. Or consider, 
fi nally, the thesis that parthood is not a source of indeterminacy. 
 Now: suppose that unlike Sider (2007), you take at face value the thought 
that identity is not a source of contingency. If you think that identical objects 
are necessarily identical, if they exist, then it is not unnatural to think that 
the part–whole relation is not a source of contingency either: if one object 
is part of another, then the one is necessarily part of the other if they exist. 
 In the interest of disclosure, I fi nd the model of parthood as partial 
identity obscure, but I’m not persuaded that we should take the alleged 
intimacy of parthood at face value. I’m inclined to think that parthood 
should at the very least be relativized to a time and that it is indeed often 
a source of contingency. I prefer a pluralist view of parthood on which 
diff erent part–whole relations may be appropriate to distinct ontological 
categories: what it is for a set to be part of another need not coincide 
 4  You may perhaps object that even if identity is not a source of contingency, existence is. If objects are 
self-identical only if they exist, then the premise that every object is necessarily self-identical is false and 
the argument fails to establish the necessity of identity. Nevertheless, you may still rest content with the 
weaker hypothesis that identical objects are necessarily such that they remain identical, if they exist. The 
same comment applies to the part–whole relation. 

mereology and modality 35
with what it is for a material object to be part of another. In fact, I doubt 
that the axioms of classical mereology are a helpful guide to parthood 
across ontological categories. Nevertheless, I’m interested in the question 
of whether adherence to the axioms of classical mereology as the logic 
of parthood should by itself give one some reason to think that mereo-
logical fusions have their parts necessarily—or even essentially. To that 
purpose, I will look at formulations of classical mereology in the language 
of quantifi ed modal logic. While it is hopeless to expect a derivation of 
the necessity—or even the essentiality—of parthood from the axioms of 
modal classical mereology, I would like to suggest that the model of part-
hood as akin to identity calls for an expansion of its axioms to include one 
from which the necessity—and essentiality—of parthood will follow. The 
philosophical signifi cance of this fact is that the question of what modal 
profi le we should attribute to mereological fusions is intimately connected 
to the question of whether we should accept extensional mereological 
principles such as uniqueness of composition, as they will play a pivotal 
role in the arguments.  
 1.  Modal Classical Mereology 
 In order to look at the interaction of modality with classical mereology, we 
move to a fi rst-order modal language, whose vocabulary includes the usual 
propositional connectives such as ¬ , ∧, ∨, →, and ↔; quantifi ers ∀, ∃; 
and modal operators , ◊. Of these, ¬ , ∧, ∀ and  are treated as primi-
tive and the others are given the usual defi nitions. 
 There are two primitive two-place predicates: = for identity and Y  for 
 the part–whole relation. We now assume some of the usual defi nitions for 
other mereological relations:
 x
y
≺
, read “ x is a proper part of  y ,” abbreviates:  x
y
x
y
Y
∧¬
. 
 x
y

, read “ x overlaps  y ,” abbreviates:  ∃
∧
z
y
(
)
∧
z
y
∧
x
z
∧
. 
 Fu y( ,y [ ])
φ] , read “y  is a fusion of whatever objects satisfy condition φ”,  abbreviates:   
 ∀
→
∀
∃
∧x
∧
z
(
( )
z
)
φ
φ
→
∀
∃
y
y
( )
)
→x
y
(
(
→∃
y
z
→∃
∧∀x
)
y
(x

 . 
5   
 5  This is the defi nition of Type-2 Fusion in Hovda (2009).  

36 gabriel uzquiano
 The axioms of modal classical mereology will combine the axioms of clas-
sical mereology with the axioms of propositional modal logic. The axioms 
for modal classical mereology now fall under fi ve groups:  
 
  I.   Tautologies and modus ponens as a rule of inference. 
   II.   The classical theory of quantifi cation.  
   III.   Axioms for identity: 
 
 x
x  
Refl exivity  
 
x
y
x
z
y
z
=
→
y
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞)
y
(
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
φ
φ
x
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
x
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠→
 
 
Leibniz’s Law
 
   IV.  Axioms for classical mereology: 
 
 x
y
y
x
z
Y
Y
y
y
Y
→
z
Y
y
 
Transitivity  
 
 x
y
z
y
z
≺y →∃(
)
z
y
z x

z
y
z
 
Weak Supplementation  
 
 ∃
→∃y
y
φ
φ
→∃yFu y
φ
y
]
φ )  
Unrestricted Fusion 
 This succinct axiomatization of classical mereology demotes three familiar 
mereological principles from axioms to theorems. 6   
 
 x
x  
  Refl exivity  
 
 x
y
y
x
y
Y
Y
y
y
→
x
Y
y
 
  Anti-symmetry 
 
 Fu y
F
y
z
( ,y [
])
φ
φ
F
])
(
F
,[ ] →
])
φ
z
(
Fu
F
,[ ]
 
 Unique Fusion 
  V.  Axioms of the propositional modal logic KT: 
 
 


(
)
(
)

φ
ψ)
φ
ψ

)

→
)
 
 K 
 
  φ
φ  
  T 
 
If φ is a theorem, then  φ is a theorem. 
RN 
 The rule of necessitation and the axiom K are generally considered part 
of the minimal modal logic, but the axiom T is not. However, on the alethic 
 6  This and similar axiomatizations are discussed in Hovda (2009), where proofs for these facts are 
supplied. 

mereology and modality 37
interpretation of the box, T is the axiom that whatever is necessary is the 
case, which seems uncontroversial. 
 The interaction of the classical theory of quantifi cation with propo-
sitional modal logic is not without consequence. The Converse Barcan 
Formula quickly becomes a theorem. 7 


φ
φ

→
φ
( )
x
φ
 
 (CBF) 
 One problem is that the necessity of existence is not far behind one of its 
instances: 


∀∃
=
→∀
∃

x y
∃x
y
=
x
y
∃

x
y
=
 . 
8 
 This is refl ected in the simple fi xed-domain model theory for the language. 
A fi xed-domain model <
>
W D R I
,
,
,
 consists of a set of possible worlds  W , 
an accessibility relation on  W ,  R , a domain of individuals  D , and an interpre-
tation function  I for the non-logical vocabulary. I( ) is a function from  W 
into D
D  which assigns to each world  w a subset of D
D  as the exten-
sion of Y at  w . An assignment α  maps singular variables to members of 
D. The truth of a formula φ at a world  w relative to an assignment is defi ned 
recursively with respect to a model. x
y  is true at  w relative to an assign-
ment α  if and only if α  assigns the same object to  x and  y ; x
y
Y
 is true at 
w relative to an assignment α  if and only if < α( )
α
( )
(
> ∈
)
x
y
), (
α
Y . φ is true 
at  w relative to α  if and only if φ is not true at  w relative to α ; φ
ψ  is true 
at  w relative to α  if and only if φ and ψ  are true at  w relative to α ; ∀xφ  
is true at  w relative to α  if and only if  φ is true relative to every assignment 
β which diff ers from α  at most in what it assigns to  x . Finally, φ  is true 
at w relative to α  if and only if φ is true at every world w1  accessible from 
 w relative to α . 
 7  The argument relies on the interaction of standard axiom schemata for quantifi cation and K:  
 
 1.  ∀
→
φ
φ
→
φ
( )
x
φ
 
PL  
 
 2.   

∀
→
φ
φ
 
→
φ
( )
x
φ
 
RN, K, 1  
 
 3.  

∀
→∀
φ
φ

→∀x
φ
( )
x
φ
 
PL, 2 
 8  Here is the argument: 
 
 1.  ∀∃
x y
∃x
y
=
 
PL  
 
 2.  ∀∃
x y
∃x
y
=
 
RN, 1 
 
 3.   

∀∃
=
→∀
∃

=
x y
∃x
y
=
x
y x
y  
CBF 
 
 4.  ∀
∃
x
y
∃

x
y
=
 
PL, 2, 3  
 
 5.  
∃

x
y
∃

x
y
=
 
RN, 4  

38 gabriel uzquiano
 The defi nition of validity is as usual. A formula φ is valid in a model if 
and only if φ is true in every possible world in the model relative to every 
assignment. 9   
 Not only does the model theory validate the Converse Barcan Formula, 
it validates the Barcan Formula, which, in the absence of axiom B, is not a 
theorem of the system: 
 
 ∀
→
∀


φ
φ
→
∀x

φ
( )
x
φ
 
  (BF) 
 The validity of the Barcan Formula may strike one as uncomfortable. It 
tells us that if it is possible for a formula to be satisfi ed by some object, then 
there is some object, which possibly satisfi es the formula. If it is possible for 
there to be immaterial angels, then some object is possibly an immaterial 
angel. But even if the antecedent strikes you as true, the consequent appears 
incompatible with popular metaphysical assumptions. 
 To avoid the validity of BF and CBF, we could weaken the theory 
of quantifi cation and frame modal classical mereology against the back-
ground of a “free” quantifi ed modal logic. We will do this later, but in 
the meantime, we will disregard these concerns to focus on the more 
immediate question of whether it is possible to extend arguments for the 
necessity of identity to arguments for the necessity of parthood. It will 
be helpful to know whether parthood can ever be a source of contin-
gency, even if existence is not. If the answer is not, then we should be able 
to adapt the arguments to deal with the scenario in which existence is 
indeed a source of contingency. 
 Now, while the necessity of identity is a theorem of the present formu-
lation of modal classical mereology, it is trivial to provide fixed-domain 
models, which validate all the axioms above but not the necessity of 
parthood. To make sure the models do what we want them to do,  
we need to make sure that the interpretation of Y  satisfies the axi-
oms of classical mereology in every possible world in the model. To  
ensure that some mereological fusions have their parts only contin-
gently, we may simply exploit the flexibility in the interpretation  
of  Y . 
 9  Note that we allow an open formula to be valid if it is true relative to every assignment.  

mereology and modality 39
 
Consider a model <
>
W R D I
,
,
R
,
 in which: 
W = { , }
1,
R = <
> <
> <
>
{
,
,
>
,
,
,
> <
}
0 0
,
0 1,
1 1,
D
b c
{ ,a , }c
I
a a
a c
b b
b c
c c
( )
{
,
,
,
a
a
,
,
,
b b
,
,
,
c
c
}
> <
> <
>
I
a a
a b
c c
c b
b b
( )
{
,
,
,
a
a
,
,
,
c c
,
,
,
b
b
}
> <
> <
>
 The model invalidates the necessity of parthood: 
x
y
x
y
Y
Y
y
x

(
)

 The formula x
y
Y
 is true at 0 relative to an assignment α  on which 
α( )
α x
b
)
 and α( )
α y
c
)
. Yet, x
y
Y
 is false at 1 relative to the same assign-
ment. So, x
y
x
y
Y
Y
y
x

 fails at 0 relative to Y. Less formally, while  c is 
a fusion of  a and  b in 0, it is not a fusion of  a and  b in 1;  b is. Thus while  b is 
part of  c at 0,  b is not part of  c at 1; in fact,  c is part of  b at 1. 10
 It follows that the necessity of parthood is not a theorem of modal clas-
sical mereology. 
 2.  The Necessity of Identity 
 The necessity of parthood may not be a theorem of modal classical mereol-
ogy, but it comes close. The extensionality of overlap is a theorem of classical 
mereology: 
∀
↔
→
=
y
x
→
y
(
)
↔z
↔
y
↔z
↔
 Extensionality of overlap. 
 In combination to Leibniz’s Law of indiscernibility of identicals, we have: 
∀
↔
↔
=
y
x
↔
y
(
)
↔z
↔
y
↔z
↔
10  Two Hasse diagrams provide an illustration of the model in which we have omitted the accessibility 
relation: 
c            b 
a     b       a      c 
 We read the diagram as usual: a node stands in the relation to another iff  they are identical or the fi rst 
lies below the second in the diagram. 

40 gabriel uzquiano
 By necessitation, modal classical mereology proves: 
 
  ∀
↔
→
=
y
x
→
y
(
)
↔z
↔
y
↔z
↔
 
 
 Now, consider the necessity of identity: 
 
 x
y
x
y
=
→
y

 
 (=) 
 By a familiar proof, we know that this is a theorem of modal classical mere-
ology. 11 But the combination of the preceding two facts yields another the-
orem of modal classical mereology: 
 
 ∀
↔
→
∀
y
z
→
∀
y
(
)
↔z
↔
y
(
)
↔
z x
z y
↔z
↔
↔
x
z

   
 Modal classical mereology may allow for fusions to change their parts across 
worlds, but the changes are subject to stringent coordination constraints. 
The contrapositive of the preceding theorem tells us that two fusions  can 
overlap diff erent objects only if they already do. Modal classical mereol-
ogy allows for a statue to change its parts. However, we cannot distinguish 
the statue and a portion of clay that constitutes it merely on the grounds 
that they can overlap diff erent objects—namely, the statue can survive the 
replacement of some limbs and come to overlap diff erent portions of clay. 
For it is not genuinely possible for the statue and the portion of clay to 
overlap diff erent objects in other possible worlds. Since they overlap the 
same objects, they are, after all, one and the same object by the lights of 
classical mereology. 
 The necessity of distinctness follows from the necessity of identity in the 
presence of the Brouwerian principle (B) which tells us that whatever is the 
case is necessarily possibly the case: 
 
 x
y
x
y
≠
→
y
≠

 
 (
)

 
 It follows that diff erent fusions can never overlap exactly the same objects:  
 
 ¬∀
→
∀
z
y
z
→
¬∀
y
(
)
↔
z x ↔
y
(
)
↔
z x
z y
↔
x ↔
↔
x
z

 
 
 11  As usual: 
 
 1.  x
y
=
→
y
(
)
x =
→
x


y
=
 
Leibniz’s Law 
 
 2.  x
x
 
Refl exivity  
 
 3.   x
x  
RN, 2 
 
 4.  x
y
x
y
=
→
y

 
PL, 1, 3  

mereology and modality 41
 The statue and its torso are diff erent fusions—one is a proper part of the 
other. The preceding theorem tells us that it is not possible for them to 
overlap exactly the same objects, which you might have expected to happen 
if the statue happened to lose its head and limbs. 
 The last observation places stringent constraints on the modal vari-
ability of the part–whole relation but as we noted earlier, they cannot  
quite amount to the claim that it must obtain necessarily if at all. 
However,  the standard proof of the necessity of identity suggests 
another route to (
)

. First, some defi nitions in the context of classi-
cal mereology:  
Fu y x
( ,y
,
)
x
1
2
, x
 
  
 abbreviates: “Fu y
x
x
x
( ,y
)
<
=
x
∨
=
x
>
1
2
x
x
x
” 
x
x
1
2
x
+
 abbreviates: “ιyFu
ι
y x
( ,y
,
)
x
1
2
, x ” 
 Here is another theorem of classical mereology: 
x
y
z
z x y
y
Y
→∀(
(
Fu
F
, x
)
)
z
y
→
=
z
 . 12   
 In other words,  x is part of  y if and only if  y fuses  y and  x . Since x
y
+
 is 
defi ned as “ the  mereological fusion of the objects that satisfy the condition 
<
=
∨
=
>
u
x
=
u
y
=
,” or, more colloquially, the mereological fusion of  x and  y , 
we have the following theorem: 
x
y
y
x
y
Y
→
=
y
+
 . 
 We appear to have an argument for the necessity of parthood (
)

: 
  1.  x
y
y
x
y
Y
→
=
y
+
 
CM  
  2.  y
x
y
x
y
y
=
+
x
→(
)
y
x
y
x


y
x
x
+
y
→
 
Leibniz’s Law  
  3.  x
y
x
Y
+
 
CM  
  4.  x
y
x
Y
+
 
RN  
12  Let  z be a fusion of  x and  y , i.e., Fu
u
y
u
x
( ,z
)
<
=
u
∨
=
u
> . By defi nition of fusion, we have y
z
Y . Strong 
supplementation, ∀
y
y
z
(
)
→
y
)
Y
→y
→
)
→
y
x
→
z
, which is a theorem of classical mereology, allows us to 
infer that z
y
Y . By the defi nition of fusion, we have that u
z
Y  only if u
x
  or u
y. Since x
y
Y , we have 
that u
z
Y  only if u
y. By strong supplementation, z
y
Y
. By anti-symmetry, we have  y  =  z .  

42 gabriel uzquiano
5. y
x
y
x
y
=
+
x
→ Y
 
PL 2, 4  
6. x
y
x
y
Y
Y
y
x

 
PL 1, 5 
 We know that (
)

 is not a theorem of modal classical mereology, which 
means that the proof cannot be successful. The challenge is to identify the 
problem and check whether we could supplement the axioms of modal 
classical mereology to vindicate a closely related argument. 
 Never mind, for now, the concern that  x cannot necessarily be part of 
x
y
+
 unless it exists necessarily; we will deal with that concern separately. 
The argument outlined above suff ers from a much more serious problem.  13
It is well known that sound applications of Leibniz’s Law in modal con-
texts require the identity predicate to be fl anked by rigid designators whose 
value does not change from world to world. Even if we assume variables 
such as  x and  y are rigid designators, what reason is there to assume the 
complex term  x  +  y to be rigid as well? We introduced it by means of a 
defi nite description designed to refer to the fusion of  x and  y , but for all we 
know, diff erent objects can fuse  x and  y in diff erent possible worlds. If we 
allow for variation in the value of x
y
+
, then at fi rst glance, the argument 
given above is no better than the crude blunder made by someone who 
concludes that the number of planets is necessarily odd from the premises 
that nine is the number of planets and nine is necessarily odd. 
 We may codify the rigidity of the complex term x
y
+
 by means a for-
mula that states that some object which necessarily fuses  x  and  y : 
∃
=
+
z
z
x
y
+

 . 
 The problem is that nothing in the axioms of modal classical mereology 
allows us to derive the formula. All we should hope for is the much weaker:  
∃
=
+
z z
x
y
+  . 
 13  If you fi nd the argument attractive, then you will be similarly impressed by the argument for the 
determinacy of parthood that results from the substitution of Δ  for 
. If the argument for the neces-
sity of parthood relies on the necessity of identity, the argument for the determinacy of parthood is 
similarly supported by the determinacy of identity. The suggestion would be that the necessity and 
determinacy of parthood is inherited from the necessity and determinacy of identity, which, for present 
purposes, is beyond question. A variant of the suggested argument for the determinacy of parthood has 
been suggested by Weatherson (2003), and, to my mind, eff ectively criticized by Williams and Barnes 
(2009). 

mereology and modality 43
 This may tell us that there necessarily is a fusion of  x and  y , but diff er-
ent objects may play this role in diff erent worlds.  14 It is important to 
clarify at this point that the objection is not that there is no object that 
necessarily fuses  x and  y but rather that there is nothing in the axioms 
of modal classical mereology to guarantee this. But if composition is like 
identity in key respects, then it is not unnatural to think that whatever 
object fuses  x and  y , will do this across possible worlds. Friends of the 
necessity of parthood may at this point consider expanding the axioms 
of modal classical mereology in order to be able to derive the fi rst for-
mula as a theorem. 
 One option at this point is to supplement modal classical mereology with 
a single axiom: 
 
 ∃
=
+
z
z
x
y
+

 . 
 No matter what  x and  y are, there is an object  z , which not only fuses  x and 
 y but fuses them necessarily. This is a very natural thought, one which need 
not be exclusive to those proponents of classical mereology motivated by the 
analogy between parthood and identity. Leave aside the question of whether 
a fusion of  x and  y could fuse  x and  y necessarily unless  x ,  y , and  z are nec-
essary existents. Many philosophers who explicitly reject both the necessity 
and the essentiality of parthood would welcome (a suitably restricted ver-
sion of the) principle stated above; indeed, many of them appear to think 
that no matter what some objects are, they have a fusion which, necessarily, 
has them as parts if they exist. Thomson (1998), for example, uses the label 
“all-fusion” to refer to fusions with certain temporal and modal profi les: an 
all-fusion of a certain condition φ exists at all and only those times at 
which all objects that satisfy φ  exist; and necessarily, an object is part of it 
at a time if and only if it has no parts at the time that are discrete from all 
the objects that satisfy φ. 15 Likewise, consider the idea of a rigid embodi-
ment introduced by Fine (1999), where composition requires some objects 
to be bound by a certain relation. In the limiting case in which the relevant 
14  Remember that we have set aside the question of whether modal mereology needs to be qualifi ed in 
order to take seriously the contingency of existence; otherwise, you may think that the most we should 
expect is the claim that there is necessarily a fusion of  x and  y in every world in which  x and  y  exist. 
15  Thomson (1998) speaks of all-fusions of sets, but it is not diffi  cult to adapt the defi nition for the case 
of conditions. In addition, her defi nition is closer to what Hovda (2009) calls “type-1 fusions” than to 
our fusions. It is again not diffi  cult to alter the defi nition to have them be closer to “type-2 fusions.”  

44 gabriel uzquiano
relation requires nothing more than the existence of the parts, necessarily, 
the fusion will have them as parts if they exist. 
 What unites opponents of (modal) classical mereology, it seems to me,  
is not the thought that no fusion has its parts necessarily but rather the 
thought that diff erent fusions may overlap exactly the same objects because 
they may exemplify a variety of modal profi les:  some fusions necessar-
ily overlap exactly the same objects whenever they exist, but many other 
fusions need not. To the extent to which ordinary objects have parts, many 
of them are fusions that have their parts only contingently. Likewise, one of 
the lessons of the problem of material constitution, the suggestion contin-
ues, is that two fusions, e.g., the statue and the portion of clay of which it 
is made, can share all of their parts while diff ering in their modal profi les. 
While the portion of clay has many of its parts necessarily whenever they 
exist, some of them are not necessarily parts of the statue even when they 
all exist. 
 3.  How to Extend Modal Classical Mereology 
 You may object at this point that the principle that no matter what  x 
and  y are, there is an object  z , which necessarily fuses  x and  y looks ad 
hoc or perhaps insuffi  ciently general. Or, more to the point, you may 
think that the principle above ought to fall out as a consequence of a 
much more general principle of unrestricted fusion. The strategy now 
would be to extend the axiom of unrestricted fusion in order to make 
sure that no matter what  x and  y are, there is some object,  z , which 
necessarily fuses  x and  y . The problem with the suggestion is that it is 
not obvious how to implement it. It will not do merely to insert a box 
immediately after the second occurrence of an existential quantifi er in 
the axiom of Unrestricted Fusion:  
 
 ∃
→∃
φ
φ
→∃y
Fu y
F
φ
y
]
φ )

 
  (
)

 
 If a given condition, φ, is satisfi ed by diff erent objects in diff erent worlds, 
then the parts of the relevant fusion would have to track the extension of φ  
across possible worlds. Informally, if φ is   satisfi ed by Tom in one world, Dick 
in another world, and Harry in yet another world, then the axiom would 
require the existence of an object which necessarily fuses Tom in one world, 

mereology and modality 45
Dick in another world, and Harry in another world. But this is just what we 
would like to avoid. 
 One may rise to the challenge by adopting as axioms only instances of 
the modalized version of comprehension corresponding to certain select 
conditions. We stipulate that a formula φ( )
φ
 is  rigid only if the axioms listed 
under I–V above suffi  ce to prove the conditional: φ
φ( )
φ(

 . 
 The proposal would be to supplement modal classical mereology with 
instances of Fu  generated by rigid conditions. It turns out that this move 
will do for a derivation of (
)

. The reason for this is the observation 
that <
=
∨
=
>
x
y
=
y
=
1
2
∨x
y
 is  indeed a rigid condition. More generally, modal 
classical mereology proves: 
 
 1
1
≤
≤
k n
≤
k n
≤
k
x
y
=
∨
∨
=
→
k
x
y
=

 
 
 as a theorem.  16 On  the present proposal, we are entitled to all instances of 
the schema: 
 
 
∃
=
∃
≤
≤
x
y
k n
≤
k n
≤
k
1
1
≤k n
≤∨
∨
=
→∃
x
y
y
→∃
Fu y
k

y
]
=
x
yk
∨
)
 
  
 But all we need in order to vindicate the argument from the last section is 
one of the form: 
 
 ∃
=
∃
x
y
F
x
y
=
(
)
=
x
y
( [
)])
1
1
y
y
y
)
x
,y [
2
∨
→∃y
Fu
F
x
y
=
)
x
(y [
1
→∃y
Fu
F
x
y
)
x
,y [

 
  
 Once the suggested axiom is in place, (
)

 becomes provable and all 
fusions are required to have their parts necessarily. 
 Before we look at the demands imposed by the contingency of existence, 
let me note that the newly proposed axiom is not quite what is at stake  
in the debate over whether parthood is ever a source of contingency.  
Unless a philosopher has some specifi c concerns over the existence of 
fusions for rigid conditions—or is moved by the contingency of exist-
ence—the existence of fusions with the modal profi le indicated above is 
unlikely to raise a separate concern. In particular, the existence of such 
 16  Here is an argument sketch: 
 
 1.  1
≤
k n
k
k
∨1
∨≤
n
k
x
y
=

 
(
)

 
 
 2.  ∨
∨
1
≤
k n
k
k
∨1
∨≤
n
k
x
y
=


 
K 

46 gabriel uzquiano
fusions is perfectly consistent with the rejection of classical mereology on 
the grounds that two fusions may overlap exactly the same objects. 
 To allow for a fusion to have its parts necessarily, after all, is not to deny 
that a mereologically coincident fusion could not have its parts only contin-
gently. Quite generally, opponents of classical mereology will object to the 
necessity of parthood on the grounds that the relation may obtain contin-
gently, which means that there cannot, by their lights, be a sound argument 
for the necessity of parthood. 
 Indeed, opponents of classical mereology have no use for the master 
argument for the necessity of parthood we based on an application of 
Leibniz’s Law of indiscernibility of identicals. They will of course object 
to the introduction of a functional term x
y
+
 allegedly referring to a 
unique fusion of  x and  y . Absent a principle of uniqueness of composition, 
we are not entitled to assume that only one object will count as a fusion 
of any two given objects  x and  y . Nor will they think much better of the 
identifi cation of  y  +  x and  y on the grounds that they overlap exactly the 
same objects, which is what allows for the application of Leibniz’s Law in 
the second step of the argument. The step is available only to philosophers 
committed to the extensionality of overlap. 
 While classical mereology is commonly objected to on the grounds that 
it is too profl igate by positing all variety of fusions by means of the prin-
ciple of unrestricted fusion, there is another respect in which it is, in fact, 
very restrained. For given certain objects, there is one and only one fusion 
that has them as parts, and, consequently, there is one and only one modal 
profi le this fusion can exemplify. When we enrich the language of classical 
mereology to include modal operators, we must make a choice as to what 
the modal profi le of a fusion of the condition ∨1≤k n
≤
k
x
y
=
 should be. The 
proposed modal extension of unrestricted fusion makes such a choice, and 
it is diffi  cult to think of any other principled alternative choice. 
 4.  The Contingency of Existence 
 We have argued that it is not diffi  cult to extend modal classical mereol-
ogy with a reasonable further principle in order to obtain the necessity of 
parthood as a consequence. However, we have operated under the assump-
tion that modal classical mereology is suitably axiomatized by the axioms 
listed under I–V in section 1. The time has come to place this assumption 

mereology and modality 47
under closer scrutiny. Many philosophers are troubled by the combination 
of the classical theory of quantifi cation listed under II and propositional 
modal logic listed under V on the grounds that it does not do justice to 
the thought that existence is contingent. The derivability of the Converse 
Barcan Formula and the necessity of existence are cases in point. It turns 
out that the usual strategies to weaken the classical theory of quantifi ca-
tion in order to deal with these anomalies complicates the task of fi nding 
a principled extension of modal classical mereology from which to prove 
the essentiality of the part–whole relation. But let us begin with the usual 
response to the derivability of necessity of existence from the combination 
of propositional modal logic and the classical theory of quantifi cation. To 
the extent to which you want to make allowance for objects that might 
not exist, you should replace the classical theory of quantifi cation with a 
free version in which a predicate of existence is added to the language of 
two-sorted modal classical mereology. 17   
 The move is generally accompanied with a switch from a fi xed- to a 
variable-domain model theory.  A variable-domain model <
>
W D dom R I
,
,
,
,
R
 
consists of a set of possible worlds  W , an accessibility relation on  W ,  R , a 
domain of individuals  D , a function  dom  from possible worlds into sub-
sets of  D , and an interpretation function  I for the non-logical vocabulary. 
The main novelty with respect to fi xed-domain models is the availability 
of a distinction between the outer domain  D of individuals and the inner 
domain of quantifi cation  dom(W ) associated with each world  w . We may, if 
we wish, constrain the interpretation of the non-logical vocabulary to make 
sure an n-tuple falls under the extension of a non-logical predicate only 
if its components are members of the inner domain. Let us momentarily 
assume that 
I
d
dom
( )( )
w
( )
( )
w
⊆
×
dom( )
w
 . 
 The defi nition of validity remains unchanged as does the defi nition of an 
assignment. The truth of a formula φ at a world  w relative to an assignment 
 17  You might, for example, weaken the axiom of universal instantiation: 
 
 
∀
→
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
y
x
φ
φ
→
φ
→
)
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
y
φ
→
Ex
E
 , 
 provided  y is free in φ. Ex may be explicitly defi ned in terms of = as:  ∃
=
y x
y. This axiom schema tells 
us that if everything is φ , then  x is φ , provided that  x exists. 

48 gabriel uzquiano
is defi ned recursively with respect to a model: x
y
Y
 is true at  w relative to 
an assignment α  if and only if < α( )
α
( )
(
> ∈
)
x
y
), (
α
Y . φ  is true at  w rela-
tive to α  if and only if φ  is not true at w relative to α ; φ ψ  is  true at w 
relative to α  if and only if φ  and ψ  are true at  w relative to α ; ∀xφ  is 
true at  w relative to α  if and only if φ  is true relative to every assignment 
β  which diff ers from α  at most in what member of dom( )
w  it assigns to  x . 
Finally, φ is true at w relative to α  if and only if φ is true at every world 
w 1 accessible from  w relative to  α . 
 You will have noticed an omission. The adoption of a free theory of 
quantifi cation is still compatible with two broadly diff erent approaches to 
identity. One option is to allow for an atomic formula of the form x
y
to be true at a world relative to an assignment α  regardless of whether the 
values assigned to the variables lie in the inner domain of  w . In particular, 
a formula x
y  is true at  w relative to α  if and only if α  assigns the 
same member of  D to  x and  y ; the alternative is to insist that x
y  is true 
at  w relative to α  if and only if α  assigns the same member of dom( )
w
to  x and  y . On the fi rst approach (
)

 remains valid, which should not 
come as a surprise. Its derivation made no use of the Converse Barcan 
Formula; it relied on the axioms of identity in combination with the rule 
of necessitation. 
 Since we want to take seriously the contingency of existence, we may 
as well opt for the second approach and insist that x
y  is true at  w rela-
tive to α  if and only if α  assigns the same member of dom( )
w  to  x and  y . 
Since (
)

 is now invalid, we have to either renounce the rule of neces-
sitation or the axioms of identity if we want to block the familiar derivation 
of the necessity of identity. One familiar option at this point is to disallow 
open formulas as axioms and substitute them instead with their universal 
generalizations. 
 But we are still in a position to adapt the proof of the Converse Barcan 
Formula to a proof of a weaker principle: 


∀
→∀
x
φ
φ
→∀
→

φ
(φ
→φ
→
))
 
 (QCBF ) 
 In the presence of the weaker QCBF, we may still adapt the standard deri-
vation of (
)

 to a proof of what is commonly known as the essentiality 
of identity: 
∀∀
→
=
x y
∀
y
Ex
x
y
=
(
(
=
→
x
y
=
))

(
)

mereology and modality 49
 Here is the proof: 
  1.  ∀∀
→
→
=
x y
∀
y
Ex
x
y
=
(
(
=
→
x
y
=
(
)
→
=
Ex
x
=
(
)))


   
 
Leibniz’s Law  
  2.  ∀
=
x x
x
 
Refl exivity  
  3.  ∀
=
x x
x  
RN, 2 
  4.  ∀
→
(
)
→
=
x
→
x
 
QCBF, 3  
  5.  ∀∀
→
=
x y
∀
y
Ex
x
y
=
(
(
=
→
x
y
=
))

 
PL 1, 4  
 The essentiality of identity tells us that even if existence is contingent, iden-
tity is, by itself, never a source of contingency. The obvious strategy for 
parthood would now be to weaken the derivation of (
)

 to (
). In 
particular, once we assume (QCBF), we may argue: 
  1.  ∀∀
x y
∀
y
y
y
(
)
→
=
+
x
y
y
x
=
y
 
CM  
  2.  ∀∀
+
→
x y
∀
y
y
Ey
x
+
x
y
Ey
y
(
(
=
+
y
y
=
x →
(
)
(
)))


Y
Y
+
→
y
x
Ey
x
→
E
)
(
→
  
 
Leibniz’s Law  
  3.  ∀∀
+
x y
∀x
y
x
Y
 
CM  
  4.  ∀∀
+
x y
∀x
y
x
Y
 
RN, 3  
  5.  ∀∀
→
+
x y
∀
y
E
x
y
x
(
(
→
Ey
))
Y
 
QCBF, PL, 4  
  6.  ∀∀
∧
x y
∀
Ey
E
y
((
)
)
→
+
x
y
x
 
PL, 5 
  7.  ∀∀
x y
∀
y
y
(
)
+
→
+
Ey
x
→
y
x
+
 
CM, 6 18 
  8.  ∀∀
→
x y
∀
y
y
Ey
x
→
y
(
(
+
=
y
x
+
y →
))

Y
 
PL 2, 7 
  9.  ∀∀
x y
∀
y
E
x
y
(
(
x
y
))
Y
→
E
x
(
→
y

 
PL 1, 8  
 Unfortunately, this argument suff ers from the same problem as the argu-
ment from section 2. In this case, however, it would be too much to ask 
for some independent guarantee that some object necessarily fuses  y and 
 x ; it would suffi  ce to be able to guarantee that some object  z is such that 
necessarily, if  y  +  x exists, then  z is identical to  y  +  x . At the very least, 
we would like to satisfy ourselves that:  
 
 ∀∀∃
+
x y
∀
z
y
y
(
)
+
→
+
=
y
x
+
y
x
+
z  
  
 18  Note that the step from 5 to 6 assumes we are able to infer Ey
Ex
∧
 from Ey
x
+
, which modulo 
some of our defi nitions and axioms, is not diffi  cult to do when one explicitly defi nes  Et  as:  ∃
=
z z
t. 

50 gabriel uzquiano
 Thus far the situation seems analogous to the situation faced in section 
2. One solution at this point would be to add the sentence above as an 
axiom, which at least some friends of classical mereology will welcome 
as addition to the axioms of modal classical mereology in the present 
context. Much like before, opponents of classical mereology will still 
object to the assumption that there is a unique fusion of  x and  y —and 
if one doubts the extensionality of overlap, one will object to the use of 
a functional term such as  x  +  y — but not to the existence of an object, 
which is necessarily a fusion of  x  and  y . 
 However, proponents of classical mereology may still be bothered by 
the lack of generality of the axiom. It would be desirable to be able to 
derive the sentence above from a suitably modalized version of the prin-
ciple of unrestricted fusion. Unfortunately, some of the tools we used 
to a similar purpose in earlier sections are no longer available to us. In 
particular, notice that once we disallow an open formula such as x
x  
as an axiom and we weaken the classical theory of quantifi cation to avoid 
the necessity of existence, we are no longer able to derive the necessity 
of identity, which means that not even x
y  qualifi es as a rigid formula. 
It follows that the restriction of Fu to rigid conditions no longer has 
any bite. 
 What to do? The derivability of (
) suggests an obvious alternative. 
Call a formula φ   semi-rigid  if and only if the reformed axioms allow us to 
prove: ∀
→(
)
(
))
φ
→(
( ) →(
→
. The essentiality of identity tells us that a 
formula such as x
y  is semi-rigid, since ∀∀
→
=
x y
∀
y
Ex
x
y
=
(
(
=
→
x
y
=
))

 is a theorem of the system. 
 More generally, it is not diffi  cult to check that we have:  
 
 
∀∀
⋅⋅⋅∀
=
=
≤
≤
x y
∀
y
x
y
k
k n
≤
k n
≤
k
1
1
1
≤k n
≤
))
∨
∨
→
y
E →
k
(
=
x
y →
 
 
 This tells us that the formula ∨1≤k n
≤
k
x
y
=
 is semi-rigid. 19 
 One may hope to make do with a restriction of Fu to semi-rigid for-
mulas. Unfortunately, this will not do for present purposes. For consider 
what happens, for example, when three objects a ,  b , and  c exist in one world  
 19  As follows: 
 
1. ∨
∨
1
≤
k n
k
k
∨1
∨≤
n
k
(
)
→
=
k
→
Ex
y
=

 
(
) , PL 
 
2. ∨
∨
1
≤
∨
≤
k n
k
k
1
∨≤
∨1
∨≤
n
k
(
)
E
(
)
→
k
→
E
x
y
=


 
K, PL 

mereology and modality 51
0 but only  b exists in another accessible world 1. (Assume each world is 
accessible from the other.) Fix an interpretation of Y. on which neither a is 
part of  b nor vice versa and  c fuses them in 0.  20 Diff erent objects will satisfy 
the formula (
)
y1
2y  , which is semi-rigid, in diff erent worlds rela-
tive to an assignment α  where α(
)
α y
a
)
1
 and α(
α y
b
)
2
:  a and  b will do this 
in 0 but only  b will do this in 1. Even when restricted to semi-rigid condi-
tions,Fu will fail in both worlds. It will fail in 0 because while  c fuses the 
condition (
)
y1
2y
 in 0,  c is not available in 1 to fuse the condition 
there;  b itself fuses the condition (
)
y1
2y  in 1. But the restricted 
principle will fail in 1 as well. While  b fuses the condition (
)
y1
2y  
in 1, it clearly fails to do this in 0 since only  c does. 21   
 What we would like is a modalized version of unrestricted fusion, which 
for each condition, generates a fusion which, on the one hand, exists in all 
and only those worlds in which the objects which satisfy the condition 
(with respect to the world of evaluation) exist, and, on the other, such that 
it exists only as a fusion of the objects which satisfy the condition (in the 
world of evaluation). A natural suggestion at this point might be to state a 
principle which for each semi-rigid condition, manages to specify existence 
and identity conditions for the fusion in question. Unfortunately, it is not 
clear how to implement the suggestion. 
 The following will not do even if we restrict attention to semi-rigid 
conditions: 
 
 ∃
→∃
(
)
∀
→
(
)
(
→
φ
→∃
∀
y
(
φ
↔∀
↔∀
)
(
)
(
→
<
>

 
 
 One problem is that the quantifi ers succeeding the box range over the inner 
domain of worlds accessible from the world of evaluation. For example, in 
the model sketched above, the open formula ∀
=
=
x x
y
x
y
E
((
)
)
E
→
x
1
2
x
y
∨
 is satisfi ed in 1 with respect to an assignment α  on which α(
)
α y
a
)
1
 and
20  Here is an illustration of the model in which we have omitted the accessibility relation:  
c        b  
a    b      
0        1  
21  More formally, let <
>
W D dom R I
,
,
,
,
R
, where W = { , }
1, , D
b
{ ,a }, R =
<
><
> <
>
{
,
<
,
,
><
,
,
<
}
0
,
0 1,
1 0
,
1 1
 
dom
b c
( )
{ ,a , }c , and dom
b
( )
{ }
b . Moreover, let I
a a
a c
b b
b c
c c
( )( )
{
,
,
,
a
a
,
,
,
b b
,
,
,
c
c
}
> <
> <
>  
and 
I
b b
( )( )
{
,b
}
> . If α  is an assignment such that α(
)
α y
a
)
1
 and α(
α y
b
)
2
, then  
0, α ⊨ Fu(c, < x = y 1  ∨ x = y 2  >) but 0, α ⊭ Fu(c, < x = y 1  ∨ x = y 2  >) Moreover, 1, α ⊨ Fu(b,< x = 
y
y
1
2
x
y
∨
=
x
>) but 0, α ⊭ Fu(b, < x = y 1  ∨ x = y 2  >).  

52 gabriel uzquiano
α(
α y
b
)
2
 despite the fact that  a does not exist in 1. (The problem is that the 
quantifi er ∀x  does not range over  a in 1, since  a is not in  dom (1).) 
 But this is not the only problem. We do no better merely by resorting to 
outer quantifi cation in the formulation of the principle:  
∃
→∃
(
)
∀
→
(
→
φ
→∃
∀
y
(
↔< ∀>
↔< ∀
→
<
>

 The problem now is that not even the semi-rigidity of φ( ) is suffi  cient 
to guarantee that if an object satisfi es the formula in the world of evalua-
tion, then the object will continue to satisfy the formula in worlds that are 
accessible from the world of evaluation. To return to our example, the open 
formula < ∀>
=
=
x
x
>
y
x
y
E
((
)
)
E
→
x
1
2
x
y
∨
 is still satisfi ed in 1 with respect 
to an assignment α on which α(
)
α y
a
)
1
 and α(
α y
b
)
2
 despite the fact that 
a does not exist in 1. (The issue now is that  a , which is now in the range 
of the outer quantifi er, does not satisfy the open formula (
)
y1
2y
 in 1. We have after all, presupposed an existence-dependent approach to 
identity.) 
 This suggests we must respond to the problem in a diff erent fashion. One 
solution at this point is to expand the expressive resources of the language 
of modal classical mereology in order to allow us to rigidify the condition 
of the modalized principle of comprehension. One instance of this strat-
egy would be to enrich the language of modal classical mereology with a 
backspace operator, which liberates φ( ) from the scope of its immediately 
preceding modal operator. 22
∃
→∃
(
)
∀
↓
<↓
>
(
→
→
φ
→∃
∀> ↓
y (
↔< ∀>
↔< ∀

 An appropriate model theory for ↓ would tell us to evaluate ↓φ( )
φ
with respect to a world accessible from a given world of evaluation in 
terms of the evaluation of φ( ) in the world of evaluation. That solves 
the problem since relative to an evaluation of the principle with respect 
to 0, < ∀> ↓
=
=
x
x
>
y
x
y
E
( (
↓
)
)
E
→
x
E
1
2
x
y
∨
 is no longer satisfi ed in 1 with 
respect to an assignment α on which α(
)
α y
a
)
1
 and α(
α y
b
)
2
. For  a is 
both in the domain of the outer quantifi er, and the use of the backspace 
operator requires us to look at whether  a satisfi es (
)
y1
2y
 not 
 22  See for example Hodes (1984). 

mereology and modality 53
in 1 but rather in 0, which is the world of evaluation. In order to be able 
to prove the essentiality of parthood we would have to supplement the 
deductive system with appropriate axioms and rules to deal with the 
backspace operator. 
 Alternatively, we could resort to an actuality operator and off er the fol-
lowing version of the principle: 
∃
→∃
∀
→
(
y (
y
Ex
φ
φ
→∃
↔
∀
y (
y
ACT
↔< ∀>
y
x
↔< ∀
( )
φ
))

∧
(
( ,
))
y
y
A
,
(y,
)
φ
 
 The strategy in each case is to resort to additional expressive resources in 
order to liberate φ from the scope of the box in the evaluation of the for-
mula. The result is a principle that states the existence of a fusion, which 
exists in all and only worlds in which all actual satisfi ers of the formula do 
and overlaps all and only objects which overlap with them. The essentiality 
of parthood is only to be expected. 23   
 5.  Conclusion 
 It is time to take stock. I have suggested that although natural arguments 
for the necessity and essentiality of parthood suff er from a crucial fl aw, a 
friend of the partial identity model of parthood or the analogy between 
parthood and identity is in a position to improve on them by resorting 
to a further assumption, which would be unobjectionable even by the 
lights of those who regard parthood as a thoroughly contingent relation. 
Such theorists will instead object to the assumption that parthood is 
extensional in the way suggested by the axioms of classical mereology. 
In general, proponents of extensional mereological theories have reason 
to think that mereological fusions have their parts necessarily whenever 
they all exist. However, proponents of non-extensional approaches to 
mereology have no reason to accept even the essentiality of parthood 
for they leave room for mereologically coincident fusions with diff erent 
modal profi les. A statue and a portion of clay, for example, may share all 
of their parts and yet diff er with respect to what are possible parts for 
each of them. 
 23  Uzquiano (2011) explores a similar strategy for a modal theory of plural quantifi cation.  

54 gabriel uzquiano
 Let me conclude with two speculative comments. One concerns kindred 
relations such as the element–set relation or the relation one object bears 
to some objects if and only if it is one of them. Unlike the case of the part–
whole relation, there appears to be wide agreement that neither relation 
is ever a source of contingency. A derivation of the relevant claim in each 
case requires adjustments to the combination of set theory—or the theory 
of plural quantifi cation—and modality, for example, which are remarkably 
similar to the ones we need for the part–whole relation. However, it turns 
out some of the moves available for the part–whole relation—and the ele-
ment–set relation—are not available for the  one of relation. 24   
 No one appears to be tempted to take seriously the possibility that the 
element–set relation—or the  one of  relation, for that matter—may fail 
to be extensional. However, there may be non-extensional relations in 
the vicinity of the element–set relation. Consider the relation of mem-
bership to a group. It seems to me that the case for the non-identity of 
the Supreme Court with a set of Supreme Court Justices is no weaker 
than the case for the non-identity of a statue with a portion of clay 
that constitutes it.  25 But if we make a distinction between the Supreme 
Court and the set of Supreme Court Justices, then we should presum-
ably be able to make a broader distinction between membership of a 
group such as the Supreme Court and membership of a set such as the 
set of Supreme Court Justices. Once we do this, the question immedi-
ately arises of whether membership of a group is structurally analogous 
or diff erent from the element–set relation. If the Supreme Court is to 
be diff erent from the Special Committee on Judicial Ethics, then we 
had better allow membership of a group to be non-extensional. On this 
view, there would be no reason to expect membership to a group to 
never be a source of contingency. 
 Let me close with a second speculative comment concerning alternative 
interpretations of the box. Gareth Evans and Nathan Salmon thought that 
considerations similar to the Kripke–Marcus argument for the necessity of 
identity could help establish the determinacy of identity: 
 
 x
y
Det x
y
=
→
y
=
 
 (
)  
 24  I have recently looked at this question in Uzquiano (2011). 
 25  See Uzquiano (2004). 

mereology and modality 55
 It is only natural to ask whether the considerations we off er on behalf 
of friends of the analogy between identity and part–whole can now be 
extended to cover the determinacy of this relation:  
x
y
D
y
Y
Y
y
Det x
(
)
 It is not diffi  cult to rehearse an argument. First one could extend unre-
stricted fusion in the 
 following way: 
∃
<
>
y
et u y
( ,y
)
φ
Det
Fusion
 Given Tom, Dick, and Harry, it is not only determinately the case that they 
form a fusion; some fusion determinately fuses them. This would give one 
enough to argue for the determinacy of the part–whole relation. If  x is 
part of  y , then by Det
Fusio
F
n , there is a fusion  z , which is determinately 
a fusion of  x and  y .  x is therefore determinately part of  z . But on the other 
hand, if  x is part of  y , then an object  u will overlap  z if and only if  u over-
laps  y , which, by CM, means that  y and  z are one and the same fusion. By 
Leibniz’s Law, whatever is true of  z is true of  y . But since  x is determinately 
part of  z , if  x is part of  y , then  x is determinately part of  y . 
 This is admittedly an argument for something, but it is not entirely clear 
what. The problem is that the argument will only be compelling to the 
extent to which the logical principles on which we rely remain in place 
when we introduce a “determinately” operator into the language of classi-
cal mereology. Unfortunately, diff erent conceptions of indeterminacy will 
have a diff erent impact on the question of what logical principles to accept. 
One approach to indeterminacy rejects bivalence and assigns a further 
truth-value to indeterminate sentences. The logic of indeterminacy is then 
supposed to build on a many-valued logic in which truth and falsity no 
longer exhaust the range of truth-values we can assign to sentences. Some 
such logics can still assume the connectives to be truth-functional, that is, 
the truth-value of a conditional, conjunction, disjunction, or negation is a 
truth function of the truth-value of the component sentences. But if a com-
ponent sentence receives an intermediate truth-value, for example, then its 
negation could receive the same value.  26 Similarly for a conditional. If it is 
26  There are a variety of ways in which one could develop many-valued logic, and this is not the place 
to review them. 

56 gabriel uzquiano
indeterminate whether  x is part of  y , then the sentence  x is part of  y will 
receive an indeterminate truth value and the indeterminacy will probably 
extend to  x is identical to  z if  z is determinately a fusion of  y  and  x . 
 Perhaps there is a conception of indeterminacy that vindicates the classi-
cal, bivalent logical framework employed in the argument. Such a concep-
tion would be one on which parthood ought to come out as a relation that 
an object determinately bears to another if at all. But for now, it seems to 
me, we only have an argument in search of a conclusion. 27   
 Appendix:   A summary of the chapter in words 
of one syllable 
 Hud Hudson, who commented on an earlier version of this chapter, has 
kindly allowed me to include his summary of it in words of one syllable:
 If x is y, then it must be the case that x is y (or, at least, it must be if both x and y are 
things). And if x is in a set S, then it must be the case that x is in the set S (or, at least, 
it must be if both x and S are things). Now, let’s ask “Could parts be like that, too?” 
I mean, ‘to be a part of’ is so much like ‘to be the same as’ that you might think they will 
be like on this score, as well. That is, let’s ask “If x is a part of y, must it be the case that 
x is a part of y (or, at least, must it be if both x and y have being)?” Of course, you might 
have thought the old view of parts says “Yes,” but not so; you will need to use at least one 
more claim to yield that view. But all is well; the claim you need is the right view to hold, 
and folks on each side of the old view of parts (both pro and con) will take it to be true, as 
well. Still, if you think that at some times parts can be had but need not be had by what 
has them, then you would do best to get rid of the old view of parts, since if you keep it, 
you will have to give up on that thought of what could have been.  
 27  I’m grateful to audiences at an Oxford–Paris Workshop in the Philosophy of Language, a colloquium 
at the University of Bristol, a workshop on mereology at the University of St Andrews, a meeting of the 
Central APA, a metaphysics conference in Syracuse (SPAWN), a meeting of the Moral Sciences Club at 
the University of Cambridge, and colloquia at the University of Nevada at Las Vegas and the University 
of Wisconsin at Milwaukee, and the University of Geneva. I owe special thanks to Ali Kazmi and Hud 
Hudson, who acted as commentators at the Central APA and SPAWN, respectively. 

 PART II 
Mereology and Location 


 4 
 Where It’s At: Modes of Occupation  
and Kinds of Occupant  
 PETER   SIMONS 
 There is more than one way in which objects can occupy locations. Whether 
the locations in question are places, times, or spacetime regions obviously 
makes a diff erence, but even within a single type of location there are dif-
ferent modes of occupation. Whereas a continuant such as a chair occupies 
each time at which it exists  intensively , as a whole, an occurrent such as a 
football game occupies its time  extensively : it is spread out over the time at 
which it occurs, with diff erent temporal parts occurring at the diff erent 
times. Both continuants and occurrents occupy space extensively, but types 
or universals occupy space intensively. It is instructive to ring the changes. 
There may further be items which are extensive occupants, spread out, but 
not in virtue of their parts. Order may be brought into this apparent chaos 
by considering a number of equivalence relations and their invariants, over 
a basis of extensive occupants of spacetime regions. 
 1.  Preliminary Remarks 
 There are a couple of generic questions concerning the metaphysics of 
space and time that need to be mentioned before we launch into our sub-
ject proper. Firstly there is the opposition between substantivalist and rela-
tionist accounts of space and time. My sympathies have always been on the 
ontologically sparser relationist side of this dispute. The main diffi  culty for 
relationism has always been making sense of the notion of empty spaces 
and times. This problem is reduced if not eliminated completely, once we 
recognize that as a matter of fact there are no empty spaces and times: that 

60 peter simons
any location in space and time is the location of something, at least in the 
sense of there being physical fi elds of some sort (gravitational, electromag-
netic, Higgs, etc.) with non-null values. This apart, the forms of expression 
used throughout this chapter will be  prima facie substantivalist. This is to 
facilitate expression, and is in any case the main reason why we talk so read-
ily of places and times. Such talk is one of many areas where we fi ctionalize 
for the sake of simplicity and cognitive accessibility. It does not entail that 
the talk should be taken at face value, but equally it does not entail that we 
should be able to eliminate such talk by paraphrase. Ontology and intuitive 
semantics need not be in harmony, which is why the account to follow is 
neither purely descriptive nor merely revisionary metaphysics. The element 
of revision is muted however, since even a revisionary metaphysician has to 
account for appearances. 
 We avail of W.  E. Johnson’s terminology of  continuants  and  occurrents , 1 
which we prefer for its clarity to the potentially confusing modern terms 
‘endurants’ and ‘perdurants’, respectively. Continuants are objects like peo-
ple, buildings, mountains, and trees, which exist in time but while they have 
spatial parts do not have temporal parts. Rather, as the saying has it, they 
exist ‘as a whole’ at any time at which they exist and are strictly self-identical 
across those diff erent times. By contrast, occurrents are events, processes, and 
states, which do have temporal parts, and which exist at diff erent times in 
virtue of having distinct temporal parts or phases at those times. They are 
identical across times only in the cumulative sense that the phases exist-
ing at diff erent times are parts of a single whole. Part of the intent of this 
chapter is to elucidate what this distinction more exactly consists in. It is 
the diff erent ways in which continuants and occurrents occupy space and 
time that prompts the question we are trying to answer:  How, in what 
ways, are things in space and time? While the continuant/occurrent dual-
ity is both philosophically commonplace and strongly embedded in every-
day modes of thought, its ramifi cations with respect to space and time are 
less frequently studied. One of the fi rst studies along these lines, which is 
part of the inspiration here, is a 1970 paper by Eddy Zemach called ‘Four 
Ontologies’. Zemach regards the diff erent modes of occupation as yielding 
four distinct ontologies, each of which is singly adequate, though for practi-
cal reasons we normally make eclectic use of more than one. An alternative 
 1  Johnson (1924, pp. 78–101). 

modes of occupation and kinds of occupant 61
way of so regarding them is not as competitors but as coexistents. Zemach 
says ‘A spatiotemporal world can be “cut” into separate entities in several 
 radically  diff erent ways’,  2 and that is what we are exploring here, emphasiz-
ing the modes of occupation of space and time. 
 To continuants and occurrents we add universals, understood in the 
immanent, Aristotelian sense as being present wherever and whenever they 
are instantiated. So we have the following: 
 2.  Data 
 The following are taken as data to be explained and situated, not here 
questioned. 
  •  Continuants are spread out in space (have spatial parts) but not in time 
(have no temporal parts: are ‘present as a whole’ at any time at which 
they exist). 
  •  Occurrents are spread out in time (have temporal parts) as well as 
in space. 
  •  Universals are present as a whole at any region at which they are 
instantiated. 
 3.  Arrays 
 An  array  is any collection of items called  positions , with some structure 
(mereological at least, usually topological and perhaps metric as well, though 
we shall not consider these). The mereology involved is  minimal extensional 
mereology , based on the primitive of proper-or-improper part, symbolized 
‘<’ with the following defi nitions and axioms: 
 
 Def. << 
 
 h <<  k ↔  Df.  h <  k ∧ ¬  k  <  h 
 
 Def. | 
 
 h |  k ↔  Df. ¬∃ l ˹ l <  h ∧  l  <  k ˺ 
 Here ‘<<’ signifi es proper part, and ‘|’ signifi es disjointness or non-overlapping, 
that is, lacking a common part. The axioms are antisymmetry, transitivity, 
 2  Zemach (1970, p. 231). 

62 peter simons
and weak supplementation.  3 We apply the mereology to occupants as well 
as their positions. 
 antisym  
 h <  k ∧  k <  h →  h  =  l 
 trans  
 h <  k ∧  k <  l →  h  <  l 
 weak suppl 
 h <<  k → ∃ l ˹ l <  k ∧  l  |  h ˺ 
 As candidates for positions we will allow:  (1)  spatiotemporal  regions , 
(2) spatial regions, or  places , as we shall call them, and (3) temporal regions, 
or  times . By ‘place’ and ‘time’ we shall not necessarily understand spatial 
or temporal atoms or points, nor need places and times be connected. It 
is well established in relativity physics that the division of regions into 
places and times (‘simultaneity classes’) is frame-relative: what counts as 
the same time at diff erent places and the same place at diff erent times 
varies according to inertial frame and is not a physical invariant. We shall 
simply assume that a frame has been fi xed, so that the division is left 
tacit. For our purposes we do not need to go into the implications or 
ramifi cations of frame-relativity.  4  
 4.  Basic Occupation 
 The basic non-relativized occupation predicate may be variously read as ‘is 
(present) at’, ‘is located at’, ‘occupies’: we symbolize that  A occupies  h by ‘ A 
occ  h ’, and postulate the following axioms for it: 
 mon↓pos 
 A occ  h ∧  k <  h →  A  occ  k 
 An occupant occupies any subposition of a position it occupies. Where 
 k is a  proper part of  h we could also say that  A covers k (it may cover more 
than  k ). 
 mon↑occ  
 A occ  h ∧  A  <  B →  B  occ  h 
 An occupant occupies any position any of its parts occupies. 
 occpt 
 A occ  h ∧  B  <  A → ∃ k ˹ k <  h ∧  B  occ  k ˺ 
 3  For the terminology, see Simons (1987, ch. 1). 
 4  That the matter is  much more intricate than philosophers of physics usually take it to be is the gist of 
Brown (2005). 

modes of occupation and kinds of occupant 63
 A part of an occupant of a position occupies a subposition of that position. 
We can use this concept of occupation to defi ne some other closely related 
concepts. 
 Def. inhabits: 
 A inh  h ↔  Df. ∃ k ˹ k <  h ∧  A  occ  k ˺ 
 An occupant inhabits any superposition of a position it occupies (a super-
position is the converse of a subposition:  h is a superposition of  k iff   k is a 
subposition of  h ). 
 Def. exactly occupies: 
 A occ!  h ↔  Df. ∀ k ˹ k <  h ↔  A  occ  k ˺ 
 An occupant exactly occupies a position when it occupies it and all and 
only subpositions of it. 
 Def. Locus: 
 Loc( A ) ↔  Df. ℩ h ˹ A occ!  h ˺ 
 The locus of an object is the position it exactly occupies. 
 Def. be extended over its locus: 
 A ext  h ↔  Df .  A occ!  h ∧ ∀ k ˹ k <  h → ∃ B ˹ B <  A ∧  B occ!  k ˺˺ 
 An object is  extended  over its locus when every subposition of its locus is the 
locus of a part of it. We also say it occupies its locus  extensively . 
 Def. be present as a whole (intensively) at its locus: 
 A int  h ↔  Df .  A occ!  h ∧ ∀ k ˹ k <  h → ¬∃ B ˹ B <<  A ∧  B occ!  k ˺˺ 
 An occupant is present as a whole at its locus when no proper part of it is 
the locus of any subposition of its (the whole’s) locus. We also say it occupies 
its locus  intensively. 5 
 5.  Extended Simples 
 An extended simple  6 is an entity without proper parts (so a simple) whose 
locus  does have proper parts. 
 5  The terminology of extensive and intensive occupation is far preferable to Zemach’s terminology of 
being respectively continuous and bound in a dimension. 
 6  Cf. Simons (2004), mentioning the precedents of Kant and Whitehead. 

64 peter simons
 An extended simple is not extended over its locus since there are no 
proper parts of it to have proper parts of its locus as their loci. Therefore 
the only occupant of any subposition of an extended simple’s locus is the 
extended simple itself. It occupies its locus intensively. 
 It is a consequence of the notions of continuant and extended simple 
that continuants are all extended simples  in time . That we do not regard a 
continuant such as a chair as an extended simple, period, is because of its 
spatial parts. But suppose it were spatially atomic, i.e. had no proper parts at 
subpositions of its spatial locus. Then since it has by defi nition no temporal 
parts, there is nothing about it that could spread out across diff erent times, 
other than itself. Therefore 
  •  An extended simple continuant (e.g. an electron) is present as a whole 
at its spatial locus, for (at) any time at which it exists. 
 By contrast it is a much more stringent condition to be an extended simple 
occurrent, where we are assuming the extension is in time as well as space 
(i.e. the item in question is not merely instantaneous). Extended simple 
occurrents are not a widespread breakfast-table discussion topic, but there is 
a clear precedent in the philosophy literature, namely the actual occasions 
of Whitehead’s mature metaphysics, and a prospective instantiation in the 
physical world, namely boson interactions with other particles. So: 
  •  An extended simple occurrent (e.g. gluon exchange, photon propaga-
tion, a Whiteheadian actual occasion) is present as a whole at any spati-
otemporal region it occupies. 
 Parenthetically, note that we are not here considering any metrization of 
the formal relation of occupation. This may well be an oversimplifi cation 
relative to the way of the world. For example, while it might be the ultimate 
truth about quantum reality that all fundamental entities are ubiquitously 
present to some degree, the chequered nature of the world makes it appar-
ent that they are present to very diff erent degrees at diff erent locations. If 
I am spread across the universe, I am certainly much more thickly spread 
in what we loosely and popularly call my location than at distant times and 
places. We might ultimately need to consider degrees of occupation. If we 
allow that a fundamental entity like an electron or a photon is not precisely 

modes of occupation and kinds of occupant 65
localized we may still want to note that it is more present at some regions 
than at others. But this is an additional complication and left out here: we 
must walk before we can run. 
 6.  Abstraction, Abstracta, Invariants, Derivatives 
 To progress further we need to employ a conception of abstraction devel-
oped originally by Frege. Let  E be an equivalence relation on a class  C of 
objects. Defi ne derivative objects by a recarving biconditional:  7 
 a E b ↔ §  E  ( a ) = §  E  ( b ) 
 Here we introduce new abstract terms §  E  ( a ) and §  E  ( b ) after the fashion of 
the equivalences 
 a is parallel to  b ↔ the direction of  a  = the direction of  b 
 a is as massive as  b ↔ the mass of  a  = the mass of  b 
 there are as many  A as there are  B ↔ the number of  A  = the number of  B 
 We call the new complex terms on the right-hand side  abstract terms , and 
the objects they denote, or appear to denote,  abstracta  under the equivalence 
 E . This now enables us to use the notion of  E -invariant properties (with 
analogous defi nitions for relations):  
 Inv  E  ( P ) ↔ ∀ x ⌜  P(x ) ∧  x E y →  P(y ) ⌝  
 A property  P is  E -invariant if and only if any object equivalent under  E to 
an object having  P itself has  P . We may then introduce the  derivative  proper-
ties holding of the abstracta: 
 Inv  E  ( P ) →.  P(a ) ↔ ∗  E  ( P )(§  E  ( a )) 
 If  P is an invariant property holding of the objects in the fi eld of  E , then ∗  E  ( P ) 
is a property holding of the abstracta under  E : it is the invariance that allows 
∗  E  ( P ) to be applied consistently to the abstracta under  E . Mathematicians 
call such properties in such cases ‘well defi ned’. Again ∗  E  ( P )(§  E  ( a )) and ‘ P(a )’ 
are taken to be synonymous, so that the operations ∗  E  and §  E  cancel one 
 7  The diff erence between a recarving biconditional and an ordinary biconditional is that in the former 
case the two sides of the biconditional are intended to be synonymous as whole sentences. Frege spoke 
metaphorically in this context of ‘recarving the content’ (i.e. sense) of the sentence on the left to give 
the sentence on the right, with the same sense. See Simons (1990). 

66 peter simons
another out. For example if  E is ‘is as heavy as’ and  P is ‘weighs as much as 
a London bus’, then ∗  E  ( P ) is ‘the weight of a London bus’. With the same 
equivalence relation, the invariant relation ‘is three times as heavy as’ among 
concrete things yields the derived relation ‘is three times as much as’ among 
weights—these are subtly diff erent, but still diff erent.  8 
 Examples of Abstracta 
  •  If  E is exact similarity then the abstracta are universals 9 
  •  If  E is (physical) genidentity and  C are occurrents then the abstracta are 
physical continuants 10 
  •  If  E is the relation of being two maximal temporal parts of one occur-
rent then the abstracta are continuants 
 We are presupposing the notion of a temporal part here. 11 
 Any property of occurrents which is not time-invariant yields a deriva-
tive continuant property which, in order to be applied meaningfully, has 
to be relativized to time (e.g. a body’s shape and position, which as we say, 
changes over time). As a consequence of this understanding, temporal part-
hood makes no sense for continuants, but temporary parthood does. 
 Generalization: If  E does not respect diff erences of position in dimension 
 D then any  E -abstractum lacks  D -parts. 
 7.  Variation and Change 
 We standardly regard a continuant which has one property at one time 
and another property incompatible with the fi rst, at a later time, as  chang-
ing in this regard. We also standardly consider an occurrent which varies 
across its diff erent times as precisely  not  changing, because the variation 
attaches to diff erent (temporal) parts of the whole, not to the whole 
thing. So a party which starts quietly and gets louder does not change 
in the literal sense, whereas a person who is dark-haired at twenty and 
white-haired at seventy does literally change. Proponents of occurrents 
 8  For more on the theory of abstraction here used, see Simons (1981) and (1990). 
  9  Zemach (1970) calls entities which are intensive across both space and time  types . 
 10  Simons (2000). 
 11  For a defi nition see Simons (1987, p. 132).  

modes of occupation and kinds of occupant 67
as the sole inhabitants of spatiotemporal nature often try to hijack the 
term ‘change’ to cover variation, but I agree with Geach  12 and Dretske  13 
that we should resist such attempts. We do not say that the variation 
among the parts of a river which is fast-fl owing at its source and slug-
gish at its mouth constitutes a change, but a spatial or geographical 
variation. Zemach is right then to say that we can at best talk of change 
across a dimension with regard to which an entity occupies its positions 
intensively. In this extended sense we can say that the Waltz changes 
between Paris and Vienna, or that the pronunciation of English changes 
between Scotland and Ireland. But I  consider such uses of the term 
‘change’ adventurous and perhaps best avoided.  
 8.  Further Cases 
 Situations (e.g. the Enlightenment, Generalized Gloom, the French 
Revolution) extend over times but intend places. The term is not ideal, 
but better than Zemach’s name ‘processes’,  14 since processes often clearly 
have spatial as well as temporal parts. Another name (thinking of the second 
example) might be ‘moods’. 
 Zemach regards such things, under whatever name, as providing a decent 
ontology, and by parity with the dual case of continuants this might be 
conceded, but the fact remains that they are a theoretical possibility less 
clearly anchored in everyday thinking and speech than continuants are, and 
there are probably good Strawsonian reasons for that (we do after all take 
ourselves to be continuants). 
 Presences (e.g. God, spirits, evil) intend both times and places, but unlike 
universals are still particulars. Except for God, they are not generally sup-
posed to be omnipresent. In traditional theology God is not only omnipres-
ent, but simple: the ultimate extended simple, one could say. While such a 
concept appears to be metaphysically consistent I do not think there are 
such things. Perhaps a certain sort of mystic about laws of nature could hold 
in virtue of their holding ubiquitously and being  particular  laws that these 
were presences rather than universals, but I have nothing sensible to say 
about this idea. 
 12  Geach (1965).    13  Dretske (1967).    14  Zemach (1970, p. 236). 

68 peter simons
 9.  A Residual Problem 
 Pseudocontinuants are those which are derived from extended simple occur-
rents (e.g. force-mediating interaction events involving gluons and photons). 
The problem is that their carrier occurrents may well have no temporal 
parts, so we have nothing to abstract away from apart from the times them-
selves. I have no idea what to suggest in such cases: even physicists use 
continuant words like ‘carrier particle’ but that is probably just an expedi-
ent. It is probably best to consider that in such cases, as with point-events 
and instantaneous objects, the continuant/occurrent duality breaks down or 
lacks serious application. 
 10.  At Bottom 
 We can make sense of the varieties of intensive and extensive occupation 
most expediently and expeditiously by taking all except the wholly exten-
sive case of occurrents to be based on that case, and deriving the rest via 
abstraction over suitable equivalences. This strongly suggests—alongside 
other arguments—that it is occurrents that are the basic constituents of real-
ity. This does not mean that continuants, universals, and situations have to be 
condemned to non-existence, but that they are derivative. And apart from 
universals, which are bi-intensive in occupation, the semi-intensive catego-
ries of continuant and situation are hostage to questions about the relativity 
of the division of spacetime into space and time. While this relativity does 
not, I think, invalidate the distinctions, it does mean we should treat them 
with some reserve when moving from the small scales of everyday towards 
the large scales of cosmology.  

 5 
 A Spatial Approach to Mereology  
 NED  MARKOSIAN 
 1.  Introduction 
 Recent discussions of the mereology of physical objects have focused 
mainly on the question of when several objects compose a further object. 
According to the most popular view on the market, there is a physical 
object composed of your brain and Jeremy Bentham’s body. According to 
the second-most popular view on the market, there are no such objects as 
human brains or human bodies, and there are also no atoms, rocks, tables, 
or stars, either. And according to perhaps the third-ranked view, there are 
human bodies, but still no brains, atoms, rocks, tables, or stars. 
 Although it’s pleasant to have so many crazy-sounding views 
around, I think it would also be nice to have a commonsense option 
available. The aim of this chapter is to offer such an option. The 
approach I want to offer begins by considering a mereological ques-
tion other than the standard one that has been the focus of most 
discussions in the literature. I will try to show that the road to mere-
ological sanity begins with giving the most straightforward and com-
monsensical answer to this other question, and then extending that 
answer to further questions about the mereology of physical objects. 
On the approach I will be recommending, it turns out that all of the 
mereological properties and relations of physical objects are deter-
mined by their spatial properties and relations. 
 Before we get into all of that, here are two important preliminary mat-
ters. First, I will be talking in this chapter about the mereology of  physi-
cal objects, but will have little to say about the mereology of  non-physical 

70 ned markosian
objects. Second, I will assume without argument (here) that physical objects 
are objects with  spatial locations . 1 
 2.  Mereological Madness 
 It’s important to be clear about what all the diff erent crazy-sounding views 
are views about. They are all responses to a question that Peter van Inwagen 
raises in his book,  Material Beings . The question has to do with the notion of 
 composition , which van Inwagen defi nes as follows.  
 The  xs compose y  =df the  xs do not overlap and each one of the  xs  is a part of  y 
and every part of  y overlaps at least one of the  xs . 2 
 Then van Inwagen’s question can be put like this. 
 The Special Composition Question (SCQ):  Under what circumstances do 
several objects compose a further object? 3 
 On one level SCQ is merely asking for necessary and suffi  cient conditions 
under which composition occurs. But I think it’s clear that what we really 
want in an answer to SCQ is an account of what it is  in virtue of which 
composition occurs, and also clear that the various answers that have been 
proposed are meant to give such an account. 4 
 The view that I referred to above as the most popular one on the market, 
according to which there is an object composed of your brain and Jeremy 
Bentham’s body, is known as  Universalism . On this view, any time there is a 
group of objects, there is a further object composed of the members of that 
group. Here is a way to state the view. 
 1  I argue for this account of physical objects in “What Are Physical Objects?” 
 2  The defi nition above is a stylistic variant of van Inwagen’s defi nition from section 2 of  Material Beings . 
 3  My formulation of SCQ is also a stylistic variant of van Inwagen’s (which is also to be found in sec-
tion 2 of  Material Beings ). 
 4  It should be noted that most writers on SCQ do not explicitly take the same attitude. For most of 
them write as if the main project is merely to discover necessary and suffi  cient conditions for compo-
sition. Since my approach is somewhat non-standard in this way, and since my emphasis on trying to 
discover what it is in virtue of which instances of composition occur plays an important role in some of 
what follows, it is worth fl agging it at the outset. So please place a small fl ag here.  

a spatial approach to mereology 71
 Universalism:  Necessarily, for any  xs , there is a  y composed of those  xs  iff  the 
 xs do not overlap. 5 
 (The ‘do not overlap’ part is because of the defi nition of ‘the  xs compose 
 y ’.) The idea behind Universalism is that any (non-overlapping)  xs , just in 
virtue of existing, are such that they compose something. I hope it’s clear 
that this view has many bizarre-sounding consequences, including the one 
about your brain and Bentham’s body. 6 
 The second-most popular view on the market,  Nihilism , is the opposite 
extreme of Universalism. 
 Nihilism: Necessarily, for any  xs , there is a  y composed of those  xs  iff  there is 
only one of the  xs . 7 
 On this view there are only ‘mereological simples’—objects without any 
proper parts. Thus no brains, bodies, atoms, rocks, etc. 
 It is an interesting question what an object has to be like in order to be a 
mereological simple, but I won’t address that question here. 8 
 Van Inwagen’s own view is perhaps the third-ranked one on the mar-
ket. The basic idea behind van Inwagen’s thesis is that the only composite 
objects (objects made of two or more parts) are living organisms. 
 Van Inwagen’s Proposed Answer (VIPA): Necessarily, for any  xs , there is a 
 y composed of those  xs iff  either (a) there is only one of the  xs , or else (b) the 
activities of the  xs constitute a life. 9 
 (The fi rst condition of VIPA is to allow for the fact that each object auto-
matically composes itself.) The idea behind VIPA is that in every case of 
 5  For defenses of Universalism see Lewis,  On the Plurality of Worlds , esp. pp.  211–213; Sider, 
 Four-Dimensionalism , esp. pp.  120–139; and Van Cleve, “Mereological Essentialism, Mereological 
Conjunctivism, and Identity Through Time,” and “The Moon and Sixpence: A Defense of Mereological 
Universalism.” 
 6  For more objections to Universalism see van Inwagen,  Material Beings , section 8; and Markosian, 
“Restricted Composition.” 
 7  For defenses of Nihilism see Unger, “I Do Not Exist” and “There Are No Ordinary Things”; and 
Dorr, “What We Disagree About When We Disagree About Ontology.”  
 8  I do address this question in “Simples,” where I defend a view according to which (roughly) physical 
mereological simples are objects that are spatially continuous. 
 9  For an explanation and extended defense of this view see van Inwagen,  Material Beings . 

72 ned markosian
composition involving two or more parts, those parts compose something 
in virtue of being such that their activities constitute a life. So on this view 
there are only simples and living things. Hence no atoms, rocks, tables, or 
stars. (And maybe no brains, depending on whether brains count as living 
things.) 
 There are several other less popular views that have been discussed in the 
literature. But here is what probably deserves to be called the least popular 
one of all. (I think I’m the only one who ever endorsed it in print, and even 
I no longer think it’s true.)
 Brutal Composition:  (i) There is no true and informative answer to SCQ. (ii) 
Whenever some  xs compose something, it is just a brute fact that they do so. 10 
 I’ll return later to the question of why Brutal Composition is so unpopular, 
because I think it is important. But for now I’ll just note that many people 
apparently don’t like the claim that compositional facts are brute facts. 
 In any case, here is the important thing to notice from our quick survey 
of answers to SCQ: every one of the leading views on the market (counting 
Brutal Composition as not among the leading views) has wildly counter-
intuitive consequences. It’s mereological madness. So is there another way? 
 3.  Mereological Sanity 
 As I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, I think the road to mereo-
logical sanity begins with fi rst considering another mereological question 
that has not been discussed in the published literature on the mereology of 
physical objects. In a way this other question is simpler than SCQ, and more 
basic. Instead of asking about the multigrade relation of  composition , this 
other question asks about the two-place relation in terms of which com-
position is defi ned, namely,  parthood . Here is the question I have in mind. 
 A Question About Parthood (QAP):  Under what circumstances is one 
object a part of another object? 11 
 10  For a defense of Brutal Composition see Markosian, “Brutal Composition.” 
 11  QAP was one of the main topics of a paper called “Decomposition” that I presented at St Andrews 
University and Rutgers University in 2005. 

a spatial approach to mereology 73
 (Despite the way I have worded QAP, I think it’s clear that, just as with 
SCQ, what we really want in an answer to QAP is an account of what it is 
 in virtue of which one object is a part of another.) 
 The proponents of the various answers to SCQ will have their own ways 
of answering QAP, some of which we will get to shortly. But fi rst I want to 
discuss the answer to QAP that I think is the key to solving our mereologi-
cal problems. Here it is. 
 The Subregion Theory of Parthood (STP):  For any  x and for any  y ,  x is 
a part of  y iff  the region occupied by  x is a subregion of the region occupied 
by  y . 12 
 I would say that of all the main answers to all the various questions con-
cerning the mereology of physical objects, STP is probably the most intui-
tive. Only a complete mereological radical would deny that occupying a 
subregion of the region occupied by an object is a  necessary  condition for 
being a part of that object.  13 In fact, I would go so far as to suggest that the 
claim that a part must occupy a subregion of the region occupied by the 
whole is a non-negotiable feature of our everyday conception of a physical 
object. And the idea that occupying a subregion is a  suffi  cient  condition for 
being a part has a great deal of intuitive appeal (even if it is susceptible to a 
certain objection, to be discussed below). It is of course a further question 
whether every object that is a part of another object is a part of that second 
object  in virtue of  occupying a subregion of the region occupied by the 
second object. But I think that giving an affi  rmative answer to this further 
question is well-supported by commonsense intuitions (and is in fact more 
strongly supported by such intuitions than is any other view on the mereol-
ogy of physical objects). 
 Despite its intuitive appeal, there is likely to be one main objection to 
STP. The objection is based on the possibility of colocation. Suppose it 
turns out that, according to the best physical theory, there are two com-
pletely diff erent kinds of particle,  alpha particles  and  beta particles . Suppose 
 12  STP has been considered in one form or another by various philosophers. See for example Oppenheim 
and Putnam, “Unity of Science as a Working Hypothesis,” section 3.2; van Inwagen,  Material Beings , 
section 4; Casati and Varzi,  Parts and Places , Chapter 2; Mellor, “Micro-Composition,” section 2; and 
Williams, “Working Parts: Reply to Mellor,” section 2. 
 13  Raul Saucedo is such a radical. See his “Parthood and Location.” 

74 ned markosian
that alpha particles cannot interact causally in any way with beta particles. And 
suppose that both alpha and beta particles are unextended. Finally, suppose 
further that it is possible for an alpha particle and a beta particle to occupy the 
same point-sized region of space at the same time. 
 Now consider the following case. There are two point-sized simples, A and 
B, in the same (point-sized) region, R. A is an alpha particle, and B is a beta 
particle. There is also a composite object, C, that occupies a larger region, R∗, 
which contains R as a subregion. A is a part of C but B is not. (Perhaps C is 
a special kind of object that cannot have a beta particle as a part. Or perhaps 
the true answer to SCQ is some moderate answer, according to which there 
is a relation that some objects must stand in in order to compose a further 
object, and perhaps B does not stand in that relation to the objects that com-
pose C, or to any other objects. Alternatively, perhaps the true answer to SCQ 
is Universalism, which means that every collection of objects has a fusion, 
including numerous collections that include A but not B.) In any case, as far as 
C is concerned, B is ‘just passing through’—i.e., despite the fact that B occu-
pies a point that is a part of the region occupied by C, B itself is not a part of C. 
 Here’s why this case would be a counterexample to STP: the region 
occupied by B is a subregion of the region occupied by C (since the region 
occupied by B = the region occupied by A, which itself is a part of C), but, 
by hypothesis, B is not a part of C. 
 And here is my reply to the objection. There are independent reasons 
for claiming that it’s not possible for two physical objects to occupy the 
same place at the same time, and I am quite willing to make this claim.  14 So 
I deny that the scenario described is possible. 
 14  But it’s worth noting that the STPer does not have to say that colocation  per se  is impossible. For the 
view is consistent with there being two colocated objects, as long as the two objects in question stand in 
all the same mereological relations to other objects. So what the STPer has to deny is the possibility of 
colocation without (what we can call)  comereology . Since I happen to deny the possibility of colocation 
to begin with, I am also happy to deny the possibility of colocation without comereology; but other 
STPers may prefer to accept the possibility of colocation, while at the same time insisting that any two 
colocated objects must also be comereological. 
 Notice that the STPer who accepts the possibility of colocation, as long as the colocated objects are 
also comereologial, must reject the above example as impossible, since in the description of the example 
it was stipulated that A and B were colocated but not comereological. It is also worth pointing out that 
the STPer who accepts the possibility of colocation, as long as the relevant objects are also comereologi-
cal, must in addition accept the possibility of two distinct objects,  x and  y , such that  x is a part of  y and 
 y is a part of  x . This will cause problems for the STPer if she wants to endorse the standard defi nition of 
‘proper part’, according to which  x is a  proper part  of  y  =df  x is a part of  y and  x is not identical to  y . For 
in that case, the STPer will be forced to reject one of the most plausible principles of mereology, namely, 

a spatial approach to mereology 75
 Before proceeding, I want to raise a further question that, although it 
does not appear to be mereological, is closely related to our several mereo-
logical questions. The question concerns the relation between a physical 
object and the region of space it occupies. Take you for example. You right 
now occupy a particular spatial location. So it makes sense to ask,  In virtue 
of what do you occupy the region of space that you presently occupy?  Here is our 
offi  cial formulation of the generalized version of this question. 
 A Question About Spatial Locations (QASL):  In virtue of what does each 
physical object occupy the region of space that it occupies? 15 
 It seems to me that there are very few plausible answers to QASL. 
It will not do, for example, to say that an object’s spatial location is in 
virtue of its mass, or its color. What does seem plausible, however, is the 
idea that spatial location facts are all brute facts. Here is a formulation 
of this view.  
 Brutal Location (BL):  (i) There is no true and informative answer to QASL. 
(ii) For any object,  x , and region,  r , if  x occupies  r then it is a brute fact that  x 
occupies  r . 
 But I don’t think that Brutal Location is the only plausible response to 
QASL. There is another, slightly less brutal approach. We could say that 
spatial occupation facts for mereological simples are indeed brutal, but that 
composite objects inherit their locations from the simples that compose 
them. Here is a way of stating this view.  16 
 Moderately Brutal Location (MBL):  For any object,  x , and region,  r , if  x 
is a mereological simple that occupies  r , then it is a brute fact that  x occupies 
the transitivity of proper parthood. (Because if she accepts that principle, then she will get the result 
that in a case of two colocated objects,  x and  y , neither  x nor  y is identical to itself.) Thus the STPer 
who accepts the possibility of colocation (with comereology) should instead opt for some non-standard 
defi nition of ‘proper part’, such as one according to which  x is a  proper part  of  y  =df  x is a part of  y but  y 
is not a part of  x . (This happens to be the defi nition of ‘proper part’ that I off ered in “Simples.”)  
 15  This question was also a main topic of the paper, “Decomposition,” that I presented at St Andrews 
and Rutgers in 2005. 
 16  Moderately Brutal Location is the answer to QASL that I defended in “Decomposition,” but (as will 
be seen) I now endorse Brutal Location instead. 

76 ned markosian
 r ; and if  x is a composite object that occupies  r , then it does so in virtue of the 
fact that  r is the fusion of the regions occupied by the simples that compose  x . 17 
 As it happens, I can’t think of any other promising answers to QASL. 18 
 Meanwhile, here is one possible reason to prefer Brutal Location over 
Moderately Brutal Location:  Moderately Brutal Location is inconsistent 
with the possibility of an object made of atomless gunk, that is, an object 
with proper parts such that each of its proper parts itself has proper parts.  19 
For Moderately Brutal Location entails that each physical object is com-
posed of some simples. 20 
 And here is another reason to prefer Brutal Location over Moderately 
Brutal Location:  STP cannot be combined with Moderately Brutal 
Location, on pain of circularity. For suppose we say that some simple, A, 
is a part of some composite, B, in virtue of the fact that the region occu-
pied by A is a subregion of the region occupied by B. Then if we endorse 
Moderately Brutal Location, we must also say that B occupies the region it 
 17  I take it that the proponent of Moderately Brutal Location will want to say that, strictly speaking, 
whenever some composite object,  x , occupies some region,  r , then it does so in virtue of the fact that  r is 
the fusion of the regions occupied by the simples that compose  x ,  together with certain necessarily obtaining 
facts (such as the fact that Moderately Brutal Location is true). For I think we should say that, in general, 
it is often the case that the in-virtue-of basis for some derivative contingent fact involves not only the 
relevant contingent facts, but also certain necessarily obtaining facts that link those contingent facts with 
the derivative fact in question. But I also think that it’s customary, when answering an  In-virtue-of-what? 
question about a particular contingent fact, to let the relevant necessarily obtaining, linking facts remain 
implicit. For example, when we say that this shirt is red in virtue of being crimson, we typically have in 
mind that the shirt is red in virtue of the facts (a) that the shirt is crimson, and (b) that crimson is a shade 
of red. Similar remarks apply to Moderately Brutal Existence (see below). 
 18  Some philosophers will insist that Supersubstantivalism, according to which each object is identical to 
the region of space it occupies, provides a plausible answer to QASL, namely, that for any object,  x , and 
region,  r , such that  x occupies  r ,  x occupies  r in virtue of being identical to  r . For me, however, this view 
is not remotely plausible, on account of objections to Supersubstantivalism involving appeals to Leibniz’s 
Law. For each object, it seems to me, typically has many properties that its location lacks (including vari-
ous temporal and modal properties), and vice versa (including  being occupied by a physical object ,  being such 
that it could exist in a world without any physical objects , and  having its spatial location essentially ). 
 19  Not that I personally can place much weight on this reason, since I happen to endorse a view about 
simples that also rules out the possibility of atomless gunk. See Markosian, “Simples.”  
 20  There is a variation on Moderately Brutal Location that does not explicitly say that everything is 
composed of simples. According to this variation, if  x is a mereological simple that occupies  r , then it is 
a brute fact that  x occupies  r ; and if  x is a composite object that occupies region  r , then there are some 
 ys such that the  ys compose  x and  x occupies  r in virtue of the fact that  r is the fusion of the regions 
occupied by the  ys . But this view is also inconsistent with the possibility of atomless gunk, provided we 
assume (as I think we must) that there can be neither an infi nite series of facts such that each one obtains 
in virtue of its successor, nor a circular series of such facts. 

a spatial approach to mereology 77
does partly in virtue of having A as a part. So we will have to say that A is a 
part of B partly in virtue of the fact that A is a part of B. 
 What can the proponents of the diff erent answers to SCQ say in response 
to QAP? Let’s start with VIPA. Here is how I  think its defenders must 
answer QAP. 
 The VIPA Theory of Parthood (VTP):  For any objects,  x and  y ,  x is a part 
of  y iff  either (i)  x is identical to  y , or (ii) there is a life,  L , such that the activity 
of  y constitutes  L and  x is ‘caught up in’  L (i.e., there are some  zs such that the 
activities of the  zs also constitute  L and  x is among the  zs ). 
 I have just a quick comment on The VIPA Theory of Parthood. There are 
various well-known objections to VIPA (including, especially, the claims 
that it comes with an impoverished ontology and that it entails the possibil-
ity of ontological vagueness) and those objections will carry over to The 
VIPA Theory of Parthood. For most of us, this is reason enough to reject 
The VIPA Theory of Parthood. 
 What about Nihilists? Here is the answer to QAP that they must endorse.  
 The Nihilistic Theory of Parthood (NTP):  For any  x and for any  y ,  x is a 
part of  y iff   x is identical to  y . 
 Here’s my quick comment on this view: The Nihilistic Theory of Parthood 
is a fi ne theory of parthood for a Nihilist, but it will not do for anyone else. 
I won’t raise any objections against Nihilism here (apart from noting that 
the two main standard objections are that it comes with an impoverished 
ontology and that it seems to leave no room for conscious material beings 
like ourselves), but will instead just assume that it is not the correct answer 
to SCQ. And on this assumption, The Nihilistic Theory of Parthood is not 
the correct answer to QAP. 
 How about the advocate of Brutal Composition? Given that he thinks 
compositional facts are brutal, and given the way composition is defi ned 
in terms of parthood, I think the proponent of Brutal Composition has no 
choice but to endorse the following theory of parthood. 
 Brutal Parthood (BP):  (i) There is no true and informative answer to QAP. 
(ii) Whenever one object is a part of another object, this is just a brute fact about 
those two objects. 

78 ned markosian
 What about the Universalist and QAP? It looks like there are two main 
options. The fi rst is for the Universalist to endorse STP. If she does so, then 
she will maintain that every pair of non-overlapping objects (for example) 
composes a third object, and that each member of the pair is a part of the 
third object in virtue of occupying a subregion of the region occupied 
by the third object. Moreover, given that STP cannot be combined with 
Moderately Brutal Location, on pain of circularity, the Universalist who 
opts for this combination will also have to either endorse Brutal Location 
or else come up with some alternative answer to QASL. (I will return to 
this combination of views below.) 
 Meanwhile, the second main option for the Universalist is to eschew 
STP and instead answer QAP with Brutal Parthood. If she does so, then the 
Universalist will presumably want to accept Moderately Brutal Location as 
the answer to QASL. (More below on this combination too.) 
 Here is one last question we can ask our diff erent theorists.  
 A Question About Existence (QE):  In the case of each physical object,  x , 
that exists, in virtue of what is it the case that  x exists? 
 It seems to me that existence, like spatial location, has got to be either fun-
damental or else very close to being fundamental. That is, I take it that the 
following are the only two reasonable ways of answering QE. 
 Brutal Existence (BE): (i) There is no true and informative answer to QE. (ii) 
For any  x ,  x ’s instantiation of existence is a brute fact. 
 Moderately Brutal Existence (MBE):  For any  x , if  x is a mereological sim-
ple, then  x ’s instantiation of existence is a brute fact; and if  x is a composite, 
then  x ’s instantiation of existence obtains in virtue of (i) facts about the exist-
ence of the simples that compose  x , and (ii) facts about the way those simples 
are arranged. 21 
 Given that the Nihilist does not believe there are any composite objects, 
and assuming I am right about Brutal Existence and Moderately Brutal 
 21  Given what I said in footnote 17 above, the proponent of Moderately Brutal Existence will want to 
say that certain necessarily obtaining facts are also included in the fundamental basis for the existence 
of any composite object. These will presumably include a fact about what is the true answer to SCQ. 
Thus, e.g., a proponent of VIPA will say that the existence of a composite object obtains in virtue of the 
existence and arrangement of its simple parts, together with the fact that VIPA is true.  

a spatial approach to mereology 79
Existence being the only live options,  22 the Nihilist will naturally favor 
Brutal Existence. 
 The Universalist, on the other hand, will presumably opt for Moderately 
Brutal Existence, with the only relevant fact about how the  xs are arranged 
being that they do not overlap. That is, she will say that if  x is a simple, then 
its instantiation of existence is a brute fact, but that if  x is a composite, then 
its instantiation of existence is in virtue of the existence of all of  x ’s simple 
parts, together with their not overlapping. 
 Similarly for proponents of the various moderate answers to SCQ: They 
will presumably want to say that if  x is a simple, then its instantiation of 
existence is a brute fact, but that if  x is a composite, then its instantiation of 
existence is in virtue of the existence of all of its simple parts, together with 
their being arranged in the way that they are arranged (in such a way that 
their activities constitute a life, or whatever). 
 There is a general picture of the great chain of being that will be appeal-
ing to Universalists and those who endorse some moderate answer to SCQ 
(such as VIPA). On this picture, the facts that are most fundamental are facts 
about the existence and arrangement of the world’s simples; and various 
other facts, including existence facts about the world’s composites, will be 
derivative on those. 23 
 There are reasons to like this general picture of the great chain of being. 
But here is an argument against it, and in favor of Brutal Existence over 
Moderately Brutal Existence. I take facts to be instantiations of universals, 
and I think you should too. For example, the fact that you are human con-
sists in your instantiation of the property  humanity . 24 For every fact, there 
is a corresponding proposition. For example, for the above fact there is the 
proposition that you are human.  25 Both the fact and the proposition can 
 22  Actually, the assumption that Brutal Existence and Moderately Brutal Existence are the only live 
options is false. The other live option is the answer to QE that would be endorsed by a proponent of 
Jonathan Schaff er’s Priority Monism (see Schaff er, “Monism: The Priority of the Whole”), according to 
which (roughly) the most fundamental facts about the world are all facts about the single whole that is 
the cosmos. But I am ignoring Priority Monism in this chapter, for no particularly good reason.  
 23  This is in eff ect the opposite of Schaff er’s Priority Monism (see previous footnote).  
 24  It might be thought that we can do without instantiations. But a world without instantiations would 
be an impoverished world in which no object actually has any property. Such a world could have you, 
and humanity, and many other properties, like mallardicity. But you would not be related to any of the 
properties—not even humanity—in any special way. 
 25  Why not identify facts with true propositions, then? Because something has to make the true proposi-
tions true, and they cannot make themselves true. 

80 ned markosian
be modeled by an ordered set. (But neither the fact nor the proposition is 
identical to the ordered set.) 
 Now, here is what I take to be a true principle about the  in virtue of  rela-
tion. (Let ‘ p(F  n  ) ’ refer to the proposition that corresponds to fact  F  n  .)
 IVO Entailment:  For any facts,  F  1  and  F  2  –F  n  , if  F  1  obtains in virtue of  F  2  –F  n  , 
then the conjunction of  p(F  2  )—p(F  n   ) logically entails  p(F  1  ) . 
 For example, if I am in Washington in virtue of the facts that (i) I am in 
Bellingham, (ii) Bellingham is in Washington, and (iii) the located-in rela-
tion is transitive, then the conjunction of the propositions that I  am in 
Bellingham, that Bellingham is in Washington, and that the located-in rela-
tion is transitive entails the proposition that I am in Washington. 
 Now consider some composite individual—my son Zane, for example. 
He exemplifi es the property  existence . In virtue of what could that be the 
case? If it’s not brutal, then the most likely candidate is what Moderately 
Brutal Existence suggests: Zane exemplifi es existence in virtue of the fact 
that all of the relevant simples exist and are arranged a certain way (so that 
they don’t overlap, or are fastened together, or are such that their activities 
constitute a life, or whatever), together with the fact that such-and-such 
is the true answer to SCQ. But the conjunction of the proposition that 
those simples exist and are arranged the way they are with the proposition 
that the relevant answer to SCQ is true does not entail the  singular propo-
sition that  Zane  exists. (For one thing, you could have the same simples 
arranged in the same way without having Zane. And for another thing, 
no acceptable system of logic will contain a “name introduction” rule 
of inference.) The most that the relevant propositions about the simples 
and the answer to SCQ could entail with respect to Zane is the general 
proposition that  someone  with such-and-such properties exists. In other 
words, we cannot get any singular propositions about Zane from the rel-
evant propositions about his simples and SCQ. All we get are some general 
propositions about a thing with certain properties. More generally, I don’t 
see how we can get any  singular facts  about some object,  x , obtaining in 
virtue of a bunch of facts that are purely general with respect to  x . If this 
is right, and assuming that there are singular existence facts, I think it fol-
lows that singular existence facts, including ones about composite objects, 
must be brute facts. 

a spatial approach to mereology 81
 So that’s my argument—‘The Zane Argument’—for Brutal Existence 
over Moderately Brutal Existence. But I  want to emphasize that I  fi nd 
Brutal Existence to be independently very plausible, and would endorse 
it even in the absence of such an argument. Perhaps this is because I was 
brought up on the idea that the way to specify a possible world in model 
theory is fi rst to specify a domain of individuals that exist at the world, and 
then to specify a function telling us which individuals have which proper-
ties and which ones stand in which relations to one another. On this way 
of thinking, the domain—the entire domain, that is, not just the domain of 
simples, or some other subset of the entire domain—comes fi rst, and then 
the distribution of properties and relations comes after. Thus the picture of 
being that I like is very diff erent from the ‘simples up’ picture preferred by 
the Universalist and others. 
 Now I want to off er a heuristic device that I hope will make it easier to 
appreciate the answer to SCQ that I want to defend—the one that is based 
on STP, that is, and the one that will allow us to avoid the mereological 
madness we encountered above. 
 Suppose you get a new job, working for God. Your main responsibility 
is to write ‘composition reports’, each of which details, for a given possible 
world, all of the cases in that world in which some objects compose a fur-
ther object. You have an assistant—we’ll call him Bentley—who can give 
you any information you request about a given world, with the important 
exception that Bentley is not able to give you any mereological informa-
tion. (That’s above his pay grade.) 
 So you’re given your fi rst assignment: World 64. It’s pretty clear how you 
should proceed if Universalism is true: you should ask Bentley for a list of 
all the mereological simples in World 64 (hoping that this doesn’t count as 
mereological information), and then you should calculate all of the diff erent 
ways of combining those simples. You should do a similar thing if Nihilism 
is true, although in that case your job would be even easier, since only cases 
of a single simple would be cases in which composition occurs. It’s also 
pretty clear how you should proceed if VIPA is true, and similar remarks 
apply to most moderate answers to SCQ. 
 Here’s what you should do if Brutal Existence, Brutal Location, and STP 
are all true. Ask Bentley for a list of every single thing that exists, and request 
that the list show, for each existing object, the location of that object. Then 
ask Bentley, while he is at it, to check for every case in which a plurality 

82 ned markosian
of objects is such that the fusion of the regions occupied by those objects 
shows up itself as the region occupied by one of the individual objects on 
the list. That is, you will be asking Bentley to identify every case like that of 
the object x 4 in the following example. 
 Every such case will be a case of composition; and there will be no other 
cases of composition. You can write your composition report accordingly. 
 Here is an offi  cial formulation of the view suggested by these 
considerations. 
 Regionalism: Necessarily, for any  xs , there is a  y composed of those  xs  iff  there 
is a region,  r , and an object,  z , such that  r is the fusion of the regions occupied 
by the  xs and  z occupies  r . 26 
 I’d like to emphasize that, heuristic devices aside, Regionalism is a fairly 
straightforward consequence of the conjunction of Brutal Existence, Brutal 
Location, and STP. And STP is the key to this entailment. To see why, sup-
pose that Brutal Existence, Brutal Location, and STP are all true. Since we 
are trying to prove Regionalism, we need to show that two things are true 
of any  xs : (i) that if there is an object occupying the fusion of the regions 
occupied by the  xs , then there is an object composed of the  xs ; and (ii) that 
if there is an object composed of the  xs , then there is an object occupying 
the fusion of the regions occupied by the  xs . 
 The proof of (i) is simple, since it involves assuming not only Brutal Existence, 
Brutal Location, and STP but also that (regarding some randomly chosen  xs ) 
 Object  
  Location 
 x 1 
 R 1 
 x 2 
 R 2 
 x 3 
 R 3 
 x 4 
 R 4 (= the  fusion of R 1 and R 2 ) 
 26  Strictly speaking, in order to have a chance of being true Regionalism needs to be qualifi ed so that 
it says ‘for any  non-overlapping xs  . . . ’ (A similar remark applies to VIPA and to various other answers to 
SCQ.) This is an artifact of the standard defi nition of ‘the  xs compose  y ’. In what follows I will ignore 
this point. 

a spatial approach to mereology 83
there is an object occupying the fusion of the regions occupied by the  xs . Call 
this object A. Given STP, we know that each one of the  xs is a part of A (since 
from the fact that A occupies the fusion of the regions occupied by the  xs it fol-
lows that they all occupy subregions of the region occupied by A). And we also 
know that every part of A must overlap at least one of the  xs , since (a) every part 
of A must occupy a subregion of the region A occupies (this follows from STP) 
and (b) the region occupied by A is (by hypothesis) the fusion of the regions 
occupied by the  xs . Hence A is composed of the  xs . And so we know that there 
is an object composed of the  xs . 
 The proof of (ii) is even simpler. First we assume Brutal Existence, Brutal 
Location, and STP. Then we also assume of some randomly chosen  xs that 
there is an object composed of those  xs . And what we need to show from 
these assumptions is that there is an object occupying the fusion of the 
regions occupied by the  xs . Call the object composed of the  xs A. It follows 
immediately from STP plus the fact that A is composed of the  xs that every 
one of the  xs occupies a subregion of the region occupied by A. But from 
the fact that the  xs compose A we also know that there is no part of A that 
fails to overlap at least one of the  xs . So we know that the region occupied 
by A is the fusion of the regions occupied by the  xs , and hence that there is 
an object occupying the fusion of the regions occupied by the  xs . 
 It should be noted that this proof of Regionalism from Brutal 
Existence, Brutal Location, and STP is really only concerned with the 
‘necessary-and-suffi  cient-conditions’ versions of the four theses, and does 
not succeed in showing that the ‘in-virtue-of’ version of Regionalism must 
be true if the corresponding versions of the other three theses are true. 
(This is why, as astute readers will have noticed, the above argument for 
Regionalism from Brutal Existence, Brutal Location, and STP makes no 
appeal to either Brutal Existence or Brutal Location. But presumably the 
more complicated argument that is needed to prove the in-virtue-of ver-
sion of Regionalism would need to invoke Brutal Existence and Brutal 
Location.) I don’t know how to make up for this defi ciency in the proof, 
but I do not think it makes the proof uninteresting. For if we have suc-
cessfully shown that the ‘necessary-and-suffi  cient-conditions’ version of 
Regionalism must be true if the corresponding versions of the other three 
theses are true, then that is certainly an important result. 
 In any case, Regionalism has some important advantages over its rival 
answers to SCQ. One is that it is consistent with commonsense intuitions 

84 ned markosian
about when composition occurs. Another one is that it is not susceptible to 
counterexamples the way all the other answers to SCQ seem to be. A third 
advantage is that it does not go against the popular intuition that composi-
tional facts involving physical objects cannot themselves be brute facts. 
 And a fourth advantage of Regionalism is that it is part of a general 
approach to mereology that includes STP, and that reduces the mereology 
of physical objects to the mereology of the spatial regions that they occupy. 
This is what I call The Spatial Approach to Mereology. 
 The Spatial Approach to Mereology (SAM):  The mereological properties 
and relations of physical objects are determined by the mereological properties 
and relations of the spatial regions those objects occupy. 27 
 SAM gives us a neat, coherent, and highly intuitive account of the mereol-
ogy of physical objects. And, best of all, it rescues us from all the mereologi-
cal madness. 28 
 4.  Objections 
 Despite these important advantages of Regionalism as an answer to 
SCQ, there are likely to be some objections. One possible objection is 
that Regionalism does not really rescue us from the mereological mad-
ness, because it is merely consistent with commonsense intuitions about 
when composition occurs and when it doesn’t, but does not actually 
entail that those commonsense intuitions are correct. For Regionalism 
is also consistent with the possibility that our intuitions about specifi c 
cases of composition are even more radically mistaken than Universalism 
says they are. 
 My reply is that part of what the objection says is true and part of it is false. 
The true part is that Regionalism is merely consistent with commonsense 
 27  The kind of determination I have in mind is the kind that is associated with the  in virtue of relation. 
 28  Here is a potential added bonus of accepting SAM. The conjunction of STP, Brutal Existence, Brutal 
Location, and Regionalism seems to entail a particular answer to The General Composition Question 
(see van Inwagen,  Material Beings , section 4). For the relevant conjunction seems to entail that for any 
 xs and for any  y , the  xs compose  y iff  the  xs do not overlap and the fusion of the regions occupied by 
the  xs  = the region occupied by  y . (There is a corresponding in-virtue-of version that also seems to 
follow from—or at least fi t nicely with—the conjunction of STP and friends.) I am grateful to Joshua 
T. Spencer for making this point in correspondence. 

a spatial approach to mereology 85
intuitions about when composition occurs, but does not actually entail that 
those intuitions are correct. The false part is the claim that it follows from 
this that Regionalism does not really rescue us from the mereological mad-
ness. For the madness does not consist in the fact that the other responses to 
SCQ fail to entail the correctness of our intuitions about when composi-
tion occurs; the madness consists in the fact that the other responses (except 
for Brutal Composition, that is) entail that our intuitions are radically mis-
taken. And since Regionalism does not have this entailment, it does indeed 
rescue us from the madness. 
 A second possible objection says that there is really no diff erence 
between Regionalism and the widely detested Brutal Composition. For, 
the objection will go, anyone who did not like Brutal Composition 
is not going to like Brutal Existence, on account of its inconsistency 
with the appealing (to some people) picture of the great chain of being, 
according to which it is facts about the existence and arrangement of 
the world’s simples that are most fundamental, and not any facts about 
the existence of composites. 
 Here is my reply. Regionalism is clearly very diff erent from Brutal 
Composition. To see why, just notice that according to Regionalism, when-
ever some  xs compose something, it is not a brute fact that they do so. For 
according to Regionalism, whenever some  xs compose something, this is 
in virtue of some facts about the spatial locations of some of the world’s 
objects. Thus Brutal Composition says that composition is always brutal, 
and Regionalism says that it never is. 
 Perhaps the objection will now take a diff erent form. It might be said 
that Regionalism may be diff erent from Brutal Composition, but that it is 
nevertheless ‘just as bad’ as Brutal Composition. For it still has some myste-
rious and brutal facts that opponents of Brutal Composition will not like. 
It’s just that the brutality has been shifted over to the categories of existence 
and location. 
 My reply is that however good or bad Brutal Composition is as an answer 
to SCQ, the package I am off ering now, including Regionalism, is clearly 
superior. Here’s why. Given the way composition is defi ned, namely, in terms 
of parthood, the proponent of Brutal Composition must, as suggested above, 
endorse Brutal Parthood as the answer to our Question About Parthood. So 
Brutal Composition necessarily involves two crucial kinds of mereological 
brutality, whereas Regionalism is part of a package (SAM) that involves no 

86 ned markosian
mereological brutality at all, but, instead, off ers a very natural and intuitive 
picture according to which all the mereological relations among physical 
objects obtain in virtue of the spatial relations among those objects. 
 A fourth objection that is likely to be raised is that STP, the engine 
driving SAM, is circular. It attempts to defi ne parthood in terms of spa-
tial relations, but the crucial spatial relation involved is the subregion 
relation, which can only be understood as the parthood relation on 
regions of space. 
 Here’s the beginning of my reply. Neither STP nor Regionalism says 
anything about how to defi ne any mereological notion. They are all about 
the  in virtue of  relation, and which facts the mereological facts involving 
physical objects obtain in virtue of. 
 But if we started out wanting an account of what it is in virtue of which 
mereological relations among physical objects obtain, and we are told that they 
obtain in virtue of the mereological relations among regions of space, then 
we will naturally want to know what it is in virtue of which the mereological 
relations among those regions obtain. In other words, however plausible SAM 
might be as an account of the mereology of physical objects, it remains incom-
plete until we also have a theory about the mereology of spatial regions. 
 Here is my reply. It’s true that SAM invites questions about the mereol-
ogy of regions of space, and is in a sense incomplete without such a theory 
to accompany it. But luckily, such a theory is readily available. For we can 
very plausibly off er a ‘classical’ mereology for regions of space, according to 
which (i) simple regions of space are all point-sized, and (ii) every collection 
of (non-overlapping) regions is such that there is a region composed of the 
members of that collection. My proposal, then, is to begin by answering the 
various questions about what it is in virtue of which a given region has a 
certain mereological property, or stands in a certain mereological relation to 
another region, in accordance with the classical picture of mereology, and 
then to answer all of the  in-virtue-of-what?  questions regarding the mereol-
ogy of physical objects by appealing to spatial facts about those objects, as 
per SAM. 
 A further objection that is likely to be raised at this point is that there 
is something wrong with claiming (as I have now claimed) that one set of 
mereological principles governs one category of objects (physical objects), 
while another, completely diff erent set of mereological principles governs a 
second category of objects (regions of space). 

a spatial approach to mereology 87
 My reply is that there is nothing wrong with this, and that in fact there 
is something very right about it. For I would argue that one natural and 
fruitful way of thinking about the structure of the world is that mereology 
is part of what carves ontology, meaning that one crucial factor that can 
separate one ontological category from another is that the two categories 
are governed by diff erent sets of mereological principles.  29 
 Here is a fi nal objection to Regionalism. If objects can have indeter-
minate spatial locations (as certain theories in quantum physics seem to 
suggest), then, according to Regionalism, it can be indeterminate whether 
one object is a part of another. More generally, if there can be objects with 
indeterminate spatial locations, then there can be failures of determinate-
ness among mereological relations. 30 
 One possible reply is that there is nothing wrong with indeterminate 
parthood, and indeterminate mereological relations in general, if objects can 
have indeterminate locations. In fact, the Regionalist could say, once you 
appreciate that mereological relations among physical objects are all deter-
mined by the spatial relations among the relevant objects, as SAM says, then 
this is precisely the result you should want. That is, if there really are objects 
with indeterminate locations, then there must be some indeterminateness 
in mereological relations as well. 
 Here is a second reply open to the Regionalist. The Regionalist could 
maintain that although it is possible for an object to have an indeterminate 
spatial location, it is not possible for there to be two objects,  x and  y , such 
that it is indeterminate whether  x occupies a subregion of the region occu-
pied by  y . (And similarly with the other mereological relations.) 
 There is a third possible reply to the objects-with-indeterminate-  
spatial-locations objection (and it is the one that I personally happen to 
prefer). For those who are inclined toward Regionalism, but balk at the 
idea of indeterminate mereological relations, the third option is to say that it 
simply is not possible for an object to have an indeterminate spatial location. 
It may be diffi  cult or even theoretically impossible for anyone to determine 
the spatial locations of some objects, according to this line of thought, but it 
 29  Another component of the idea that mereology carves ontology is the thesis that mereological rela-
tions cannot obtain among objects from diff erent ontological categories. (So, for example, there cannot 
be a fusion of your body and the number 2.) The idea that mereology carves ontology is developed 
further in my unpublished work-in-progress,  Things and Stuff  . 
 30  Thanks to Ross Cameron for raising this objection in correspondence. 

88 ned markosian
remains necessarily true that every object must be such that it has a deter-
minate spatial location. And there may in fact be independent reasons for 
saying this. 
 5.  Taking Stock 
 Before concluding I would like to return to the question of why Brutal 
Composition is so unpopular. I think the main reason is that (as it turns out) 
it’s implausible to many philosophers to say that it is just a brute fact that 
some  xs compose something. We tend to want there to be some other fact 
or facts in virtue of which these  xs compose a further object. 
 But more generally, I think philosophers tend to balk at any claim about 
something’s being a brute fact. This means that any view that explicitly 
indicates where its bruteness is located is at a rhetorical disadvantage when 
competing with views that don’t do that. But it is worth remembering that 
you have to have brute facts somewhere in your theory. 31 
 Here, then, is a table summarizing some of the main packages of views 
we have surveyed that makes it clear, for each combination of views, where 
that package’s brutality is located. (In the table there are two versions of 
Universalism, corresponding to the above two options for the Universalist 
when it comes to answering QAP.) 
 A Table of Some of the Main Mereological Packages  
 31  I am assuming that neither (i) having an infi nite series of increasingly more fundamental facts, without 
a rock-bottom level, nor (ii) having circularity with respect to the  in virtue of  relation is a tenable option.  
 SCQ 
 QAP 
 QASL  
 Existence 
 Universalism  1  
 Universalism 
 BP 
 MBL 
 MBE 
 Universalism  2  
 Universalism 
 STP 
 BL 
 MBE 
 Nihilism  
 Nihilism 
 NTP 
 BL 
 BE 
 VIPA 
 VIPA 
 VTP 
 MBL 
 MBE 
 Brutal Composition  
 Brutal 
Composition 
 BP 
 MBL 
 MBE 
 SAM  
 Regionalism 
 STP 
 BL 
 BE 

a spatial approach to mereology 89
 I take it that Universalism 1 fi ts best with what real Universalists actually 
say. The standard Universalist will presumably want to endorse the picture 
of being according to which facts about the world’s simples are among the 
most fundamental, and this will commit her to Moderately Brutal Existence 
and Moderately Brutal Location. But as we saw above, there is a good argu-
ment (namely, The Zane Argument, about singular existence facts) in favor 
of Brutal Existence over Moderately Brutal Existence. Moreover, since most 
Universalists have a strongly negative reaction to Brutal Composition, it is 
likely that most of them will have a similar reaction to Brutal Parthood. 
For this reason I think there is a hidden but signifi cant tension in this fi rst 
Universalist package. 
 Here is another consideration that for me weighs heavily against the 
Universalism 1 package. According to this package, with its commitments 
to Moderately Brutal Existence and Moderately Brutal Location, some 
existence facts and some spatial location facts (namely, those involving sim-
ples) are brutal, while other existence facts and other spatial location facts 
(namely, those involving composites) are derivative. Meanwhile, according 
to this package, some mereological facts (namely, facts of the form ‘ x is a 
part of  y ’) are brutal, while other mereological facts (namely, those of the 
form ‘there is a  y composed of the  xs ’) are derivative. This strikes me as 
undesirably messy and inelegant. It is much better to say, with SAM, that 
when it comes to physical objects, all existence facts and all location facts 
are brutal, and also that all mereological facts are derivative. 
 Meanwhile, Universalism 2 has to include Moderately Brutal Existence 
rather than Brutal Existence because (as we have seen) the combination of 
Brutal Existence with STP and Brutal Location would entail Regionalism 
rather than Universalism. So the only diff erences between the Universalism 2 
package and SAM are (i) the extreme counterintuitiveness of Universalism, 
and (ii) the fact that Universalism 2 makes existence facts for composites 
derivative (so that Universalism 2 , like Universalism 1 , entails that some exist-
ence facts are brutal and others are not). Given this tradeoff , and taking into 
account The Zane Argument for Brutal Existence, it looks to me like SAM 
is a much better option than Universalism 2 . 
 In any case, the upshot is that there are pretty big problems with both 
Universalist packages. 
 Nihilism is the only other package in this table, aside from SAM, that 
includes Brutal Existence rather than Moderately Brutal Existence. So it 

90 ned markosian
is the only other package that does not run afoul of The Zane Argument. 
And it is no doubt a virtue of Nihilism that existence and location are the 
only things in this general vicinity that it takes to be brutal. But the Nihilist 
package of course requires Nihilism and The Nihilistic Theory of Parthood, 
both of which do violence to commonsense. 
 Meanwhile, VIPA is in a position almost as bad as Nihilism’s when it 
comes to commonsense, and the VIPA package also runs afoul of The Zane 
Argument from singular existence facts for Brutal Existence. 
 The Brutal Composition package has certain advantages with respect 
to commonsense intuitions about specifi c cases of composition, but it also 
contains its unpopular claim that composition facts are brutal, together with 
the necessary corollary about parthood facts being likewise brutal. In addi-
tion, it too ends up on the wrong side of The Zane Argument for Brutal 
Existence over Moderately Brutal Existence. 
 Meanwhile, it seems to me that SAM fares much better than any other 
view surveyed here. It has no implausible consequences regarding specifi c 
cases of composition (because, like Brutal Composition, it has no such 
consequences of any kind), and it is based on STP, the most intuitive and 
straightforward account of parthood on the market. In addition, SAM is the 
result of combining (a) this most natural thesis about parthood with (b) a 
view about existence that is supported by the argument from singular exist-
ence facts and (c) the corresponding view of spatial locations. Moreover, 
SAM is a much cleaner, more elegant package than, say, Universalism 1 , inso-
far as SAM allows us to say that all existence facts are uniformly brutal 
(rather than forcing us to say that some are brutal and some are not), and 
also that all mereological facts are uniformly derivative (rather than forcing 
us to say that mereological facts are a mixed bag of brutal and derivative 
facts). 32   
 32  I am grateful to Ross Cameron, Hud Hudson, Shieva Kleinschmidt, John Maier, Laurie Paul, Jonathan 
Schaff er, Theodore Sider, Joshua T.  Spencer, Gabriel Uzquiano, Ryan Wasserman, Tobias Wilsch, an 
anonymous referee, and audiences at Oxford University and The Australian National University for 
helpful comments on earlier versions of this chapter, and to audiences at St Andrews University, Rutgers 
University, and the 2008  eidos Metaphysics Conference for comments on more distant ancestors of this 
chapter. 

 6 
 Balls and All  
 DANIEL   NOLAN 
 This chapter describes a novel metaphysical view of spacetime, the part–
whole relation, and the relation between material objects and the space 
and time they occupy. I do not want to claim this view is correct about 
objects, spacetime, and mereology: but the view has several features that 
make it philosophically interesting whether or not it is in fact correct. It 
is a theory with very few metaphysical primitives that combines a number 
of unusual features: it does not take the part–whole relation as primitive; 
it embraces supersubstantivalism while being a non-perdurantist theory; 
and it is a straightforward example of a theory that should be counted 
as endurantist despite not meeting Lewis’s (1986b) characterization of 
endurantism. Furthermore, it allows for vagueness in what is part of what, 
and when physical objects begin and end in time, without entailing that 
there is any vagueness in existence or otherwise that there is metaphysical 
vagueness, despite the arguments of Lewis (1986b, pp. 211–213), Markosian 
(1998a, pp. 222–223), and, in eff ect, Sider (2001, pp. 125–132) that vague-
ness in the part–whole relationship must yield one or more of these radical 
consequences. 
 The coherence of this view thus makes it a useful counterexample to a 
number of metaphysical arguments at once. The view to be described also 
contributes to the debate about how material objects exist over time in a 
less technical way. The view outlined has some features that are thought to 
be advantages for perdurantism in the philosophy of time, despite not being 
a perdurantist theory, so a number of philosophical motivations for perdur-
antism may not be motivations for  perdurantism  rather than some broader 
class of options. 

92 daniel nolan
 The view to be outlined is of interest in another way, largely independent 
of the debate between four-dimensionalism and its rivals. Many contem-
porary metaphysicians take the part–whole relation to be a fundamental 
feature of reality—the relation of part-to-whole (or some related notion, 
like overlap or mereotopological connection  1 ) is taken to be a primitive 
theoretical postulate. The view described in this chapter does not—part–
whole for physical objects is not primitive, and arguably it is not primi-
tive for spatiotemporal regions either. It may be that part–whole, or some 
closely related mereological commitment, ought to be taken as primitive 
in the end. But it is important to have some conception of what alterna-
tives to taking mereology as primitive might look like, if we are to make an 
informed decision about the best theory. 
 This chapter consists of six sections. The fi rst outlines the core of the view. 
The second discusses the identifi cation of material objects with regions of 
spacetime. The third discusses whether the view described is “endurantist” 
or not. The fourth discusses the model we get of the part–whole relation 
being analyzable rather than primitive. The fi fth shows how this model of 
the part–whole relation displays why vagueness in the part–whole relation 
does not lead to vagueness in what exists, nor the necessity to postulate 
“metaphysical vagueness,” and demonstrates yet another way the arguments 
fail that are off ered by Lewis and Sider from considerations about vague-
ness and the part–whole relation to unrestricted mereological composition 
and perdurantism, respectively. Finally, in the conclusion, I will make some 
methodological remarks about the project attempted in this chapter, and 
recapitulate lessons learned. 
 1.  The Proposal 
 The primitive unit of spacetime is the region. The geometry to be adopted 
has only regions, and not points—there are regions of arbitrarily small 
(non-infi nitesimal) size, but there are no regions of zero size. Tarski (1929) 
describes and sets out an axiomatization of such a geometry—the only 
primitives in Tarski’s system are the two-place “part of” relation and the one 
place predicate “ Sx ”—whose meaning is translated as “x is a sphere.” This 
 1  See Casati and Varzi (1999) for a discussion of theories of this sort. 

balls and all 93
characterization of  Sx is imprecise, since the primary meaning of “sphere” 
in geometry is to describe a fi gure composed of points equidistant from 
a central point. Tarski intended the other meaning, according to which a 
sphere is a solid fi gure, bounded by a “sphere” in the fi rst sense. The techni-
cal term for this solid fi gure is “ball.” 
 Let me adapt Tarski’s primitives slightly. Instead of taking the relation 
of smaller spheres to larger spheres to be that of part to whole, let me 
instead take it to be primitive—this theory of spacetime thus has a primi-
tive “sub-region” relation, “ x  <  y. ” The axioms for sub-region are to be the 
same as for Tarski’s part-of relation. There is also a single place predicate of 
regions,  Bx , for ball. These primitives and Tarski’s postulates are suffi  cient to 
recover all of three-dimensional Euclidean geometry (Tarski 1929, drawing 
in part on Pieri 1908). If we want a geometry of spacetime, however, and not 
merely space, we will need to extend Tarski’s treatment to four dimensions. 
As far as I can tell, this is relatively straightforward, modifying Tarski’s axioms 
appropriately, and taking as a primitive the notion of a four-dimensional 
ball instead of a three-dimensional one. If we want something more like 
Minkowskian spacetime and not just Euclidean 4-space, a little extra work 
is required: we need to add something to provide temporal direction (a 
“before” relation on points is traditional, though I suspect a “wholly before” 
relation on privileged regions will suffi  ce), and it seems best to take “cone” 
to be the primitive to replace “hyperball.”   2 Let me, for simplicity then, 
consider a four-dimensional Euclidean “space,” using the primitive B to 
stand for “four dimensional hyper-ball,” rather than “ball.” I will thus be 
neglecting any accommodation of relativity or the non-Euclidean geom-
etries associated with it, though Peter Forrest does some of the extending of 
Tarski’s mereological geometry to handle non-Euclidean relativistic spaces, 
in unpublished work. 
 2  Thanks to Peter Forrest for very helpful discussion related to this paragraph, though any blunders that 
remain are my own. He pointed out to me that for uncurved Minkowski spacetime we can take over 
Robb’s (1914) technical work, once we have the primitives to defi ne the relevant cones in Minkowski 
space. Forrest also convinced me that accommodating curved relativistic spaces will require more geo-
metrical resources again, so exactly how straightforward it is to generalize Tarski’s approach remains to 
be seen. Arntzenius (2008, p. 234) seems to think the prospects for extending this sort of system in the 
right way are poor—at least his claim that “it seems preferable” to not start with this sort of system, if 
one wants to end up with the sort of spacetime dealt with in general relativity, is his justifi cation for not 
discussing this type of approach in any detail in his survey of options for theories of “gunky” spacetimes.  

94 daniel nolan
 One thing this system delivers, of course, is a common metric for meas-
ures of space and measures of time—since the “edges” of a ball must be 
equidistant from each other whether they are separated in time, or space, or 
both. Let us assume there is one—you may, if you like, take one second to 
have the magnitude of approximately 3 × 10 8 meters, as in Minkowski space. 
But we need not insist on any particular metric for our purposes, so long 
as the units for time and space are commensurable. If you are uncomfort-
able letting me extend Tarski’s system to four dimensions, you may instead 
wish to consider a simplifi ed world with two spatial dimensions and one 
temporal dimension, with a three-dimensional Euclidean geometry (albeit 
not the usual one people have in mind). I will talk about the case of four 
dimensions, but these technical details should not matter to the philosophi-
cal issues. 
 This picture of spacetime has a few interesting features. Since “sub-region” 
behaves like “part of” in classical extensional mereology, we have several prin-
ciples that obtain. Every region is a sub-region of itself (sub-regions other 
than the region itself are called “proper sub-regions”). There are never two 
distinct regions that have exactly the same sub-regions. Whenever we have 
a set of regions, we have another region (let me call it the “fusion-region”) 
that has all of the members of that set as sub-regions, and is such that all 
of its sub-regions have a sub-region in common with one of the members 
of that set. (Intuitively, the “fusion-region” is the region which covers just 
that spacetime that the initial set of regions jointly cover.) Likewise, let me 
talk of the “region-intersection” of two regions, when there is one, which is 
the largest region that is a sub-region of both of them. There is a maximal 
region, but no minimum regions—every region has “proper” sub-regions. 
It turns out that every region is a fusion-region of some set that contains 
only ball-regions (regions that satisfy  Bx ). All the regions of space can be 
broken down into ball-regions—there are just the balls and the regions that 
they are the sub-regions of. 
 The standard device for doing geometry with such a system is to take 
certain  sets  of regions to play some of the roles that points do in orthodox, 
point-based, geometry. In Tarski’s system, the entities that play the roles of 
points are infi nite sets of balls, each of which overlaps all the others: set up 
in the right way, the area of overlap is arbitrarily small (think of a “Russian 
doll” set of regions, with the ones in the middle getting and smaller and 
smaller all the way down). While it is convenient to use this construction 

balls and all 95
(and similar constructions of lines, planes, and so on) for geometrical pur-
poses, they need not play a very important role in the metaphysics of space-
time or of material objects. 
 Next, we identify some of these regions with physical objects. (This 
view is thus a variety of “supersubstantivalism,” according to which physical 
objects are identical to the regions they exactly occupy.) Physical objects 
will not, in general, be ball shaped (perhaps none are perfect balls), but they 
too will be fusion-regions of some set of balls. Physical objects will have the 
spacetime shapes one would expect. There are many ways one could decide 
which of the regions count as physical objects. It is tempting to think this 
will be determined by the pattern of instantiation of basic properties—dis-
tribute charge, mass, spin, etc. across a suitably sized region of spacetime, and 
the result will be a mountain or a human or a cricket ball or a city. (Or at 
least things which are intrinsically just like mountains, humans, cricket balls, 
or cities—if being any of these is partly a historical or environmental matter, 
we would need to distribute properties in the surrounding regions to satisfy 
all the conditions needed.) Or perhaps we will need to distribute many 
more properties than this—if some sorts of non-reductionism are true, we 
may need to separately specify the distribution of chemical, biological, psy-
chological, social, and other properties and relations before it was settled 
what regions were to be identifi ed as the mountains, humans, cricket balls, 
or cities. (And of course what the laws of nature are might be relevant as 
well.) The short story is that there is plenty of potential debate about which 
regions where properties are instantiated should get to count as physical 
objects—and there is no need for my present purposes to settle that debate. 
There is also a debate about whether fundamentally “distributional” prop-
erties are possible (Parsons 2004), or whether all fundamental properties 
need to be instantiated by things that are “homogeneous”: again, present 
purposes do not require settling this question, though it may become very 
important were the present framework to be developed in more detail. 
 We can use the materials already provided to specify what it is for one 
thing to be part of another. This theory says that one thing is part of another 
provided (1) that both are material objects, and (2) the part is a sub-region 
of the whole. (Since material objects are identifi ed with regions, they can 
literally be sub-regions of other material objects.) We will also allow that 
material objects are parts of themselves—their  proper  parts are their  proper 
sub-regions. Nothing else, according to this theory, is a part of anything, or 

96 daniel nolan
has anything as parts. Note that this is off ered not just as a theory of the 
extension of the part–whole relation: a specifi cation of which things are 
parts of which. It is also off ered as an account of  what it is  for one thing to 
be part of another. 
 If we identify objects with four-dimensional regions, it would be help-
ful to be able to say what it is for an object to be a certain way at a certain 
place, or at a certain time, or both. As a fi rst step towards that, I should 
specify what times and places are. It is traditional, in pointy frameworks, to 
identify (minimal) times with hyperplanes perpendicular to the time axis, 
and by analogy, in a pointy spacetime, we could identify (minimal) spaces 
with lines parallel with the time axis. In a system based on regions, we have 
two obvious options for adapting these moves. We could use the “lines” and 
“planes” constructed from sets of regions, or sets of sets of regions, to mimic 
the traditional defi nitions of times and minimal spaces. Or we could try to 
identify the times and places with certain regions (since Tuesday seems to 
be more like a location than a set): in which case we could take times to 
be those regions bounded by pairs of hyperplanes, more than zero distance 
apart, that are parallel to the time axis, and spaces as regions bounded by 
cylinders which have axes parallel to the time axis. At any rate, this gives 
continuous, fi nite times and spaces. Allowing fusion-regions of so-defi ned 
times to also be times gives us discontinuous times and infi nite times, if 
there are any, and likewise with spaces. This latter strategy will not get us 
 minimal  times and places, since in this framework for any time or space there 
will be another that is a proper sub-region of it, but it will get us stretches 
of time and regions of space. 3   
 Once we have the times and places, we can look at the region-intersection 
of a time and an object to fi nd the region that is relevant to discussing the 
object at that time. And we can look at the region-intersection of the object 
and the “space” cylinders to fi nd the region particularly relevant to the 
object at that spatial location. Finally, we can region-intersect times and 
places, or even times, places, and objects, to fi nd spacetime regions par-
ticularly relevant to how objects are at times and places together. Finding 
 3  Of course, more needs to be said once we introduce relativity and lose a privileged, once and for all, 
time axis. In Minkowski space, we can make what the times and spaces are relative to frames of reference 
and use the defi nitions above. Once we introduce curved spacetimes, the situation becomes more com-
plicated again. It should come as no surprise that our ordinary talk of spaces/places and times becomes 
harder to accommodate the more we make the picture consistent with general relativity.  

balls and all 97
objects at spaces and times is not yet to answer the question of what it 
takes for an object to be a certain way  at the relevant region. Perhaps it 
might partly be a matter of what properties are instantiated by the rel-
evant intersection-region, though for at least some predications, it will still 
depend on how the object is elsewhere—for an object to be ten years old 
on Tuesday does not just depend on how it is within Tuesday, but whether 
it extends ten years before. I will not choose, for present purposes, any spe-
cifi c option from the metaphysical smorgasbord of options for explaining 
an object’s satisfying a predicate at a time or place. 
 Defi ning spaces and times and their intersections with objects does allow 
us to see what it would be for an object to have a temporal part. It would be 
for the intersection-region of an object  O , and a time, to itself be an object 
that is part of  O . (Given this defi nition objects will trivially be temporal 
parts of themselves.) If perdurance requires that for every stretch of time 
that an object exists, it has a temporal part that exists only at that time, then 
this is the condition satisfi ed by a material object  O when every (non-null) 
region-intersection of  O and a time is itself a material object. The system so 
far outlined does not rule this out, but obviously it does not require it either. 
So there is no guarantee that objects will perdure. Even if we introduced 
some more generous condition for perdurance—only requiring every con-
tinuous time an object exists to contain a temporal part of that object, for 
example—such a condition will still not, in general, be met. In this chapter, 
I will be concerning myself with versions of this theory where material 
objects are  not such that all of their sub-regions are also material objects, and 
furthermore where they are not divided into temporal parts for each time 
they exist at, nor spatial parts for each space they exist at. 
 The picture of spatiotemporal regions outlined above has pleasingly few 
primitives, and makes it clear that regions are full fl edged entities that do 
not depend for their existence on points or on spatiotemporal relations. 
Hopefully it is also clear that mereological notions such as part–whole, 
or even borderline mereological notions like topological connection, are 
not primitives of the system. (I discuss further whether we are forced to 
treat “sub-region” as mereological below in section 4.) Still, a lot of the 
technical detail about this particular way of setting up a geometry with 
regions as primary and no spatial minima is not really important for what 
is to follow: which is one of the reasons I have allowed myself the luxury 
of handwaving about matters like extending Tarski’s (1929) system to four 

98 daniel nolan
dimensions, let alone models that might approximate relativistic spacetime. 
What is important is that regions are basic, material objects are identifi ed 
with some of these regions, and that the part–whole relation is only defi ned 
on material objects— b being a sub-region of  c does not automatically make 
 b a part of  c , even if  c is a material object:  b would need to be a material 
object as well. With the details of the construction out of the way, let me 
now turn to what philosophical lessons might be drawn. 4   
 2.  Supersubstantivalism 
 The doctrine that ordinary material objects are identical to regions of spa-
cetime is now standardly labeled “supersubstantivalism.” It seems to be a 
minority view in the philosophy of space and time, though it has a dis-
tinguished list of supporters and admirers (see Effi  ngham 2009, p. 42 for a 
roll-call). The main appeal for many is the simplicity it off ers: we do not 
need to postulate two quite diff erent kinds of things, spacetime regions 
and their occupants, but can make do with the spacetime regions alone.  5 
Published presentations of this argument tend not to spend too much time 
on explaining why this kind of parsimony is valuable, nor why it should 
count towards a theory’s epistemic credentials rather than just amounting to 
a postulate that is convenient. For all that, I think that this sort of parsimony 
 is an important theoretical virtue, and I hope to defend that view elsewhere. 
 The other main reason to be tempted by supersubstantivalism is that it 
explains the relationship between material objects and the spacetime they 
occupy (it is a special case of identity). The alternative is to postulate an 
“occupation” relation, and engage with a range of diffi  cult questions about 
it. What features does it have, and which, if any, of those does it have essen-
tially? Is it constrained by the intrinsic features of spacetime or its occupants 
(e.g. is there an intrinsic size of objects that constrains what regions it can fi t 
 4  As the astute reader will notice, the lessons below could have been drawn from a geometric system 
with points, or indeed spatial minima, and an inclusion relation, provided that inclusion relation was 
not mereological and, for some of the lessons about endurance, we refrained from identifying any of 
the points with material objects. I thought it better to stick with one example system than trying to say 
more general, but more disjunctive, things in the sections below. 
 5  This appeal is felt by Lewis (1986b, p. 76 n. 55) who calls the rival regions-plus-occupiers view “uneco-
nomical”; Sider (2001, p. 110) seems to be expressing this when he speaks against “gratuitously adding” 
a category to our ontology; and Schaff er (2009, p. 137) calls the “argument from parsimony,” which he 
also endorses, “far and away the most popular [argument] in the literature.” 

balls and all 99
into, or is the size of an object the matter of what prior occupation relations 
it stands in to regions)? How are the occupation relations an object stands 
in related to the occupation relations its parts stand in? Any useful gener-
alizations we can make about these questions themselves seem to require 
explanations. It would be more parsimonious not to have to postulate a 
special occupation relation (or special relations in terms of which it can be 
analyzed), but it would also be simpler not to need special,  sui generis  answers 
to the questions raised about such a special relation. (The advantage is only 
greater if only unappealing answers can be given to the questions that arise 
about the occupation relation, of course: but to work out how appealing 
those answers can be would be at least another paper in itself!) 
 Jonathan Schaff er (2009) off ers seven arguments in favor of a view that is, 
near enough, supersubstantivalism. The fi rst “argument from parsimony” is 
the familiar one about not multiplying categories of entities. As it happens 
I would not quite want to support any of the remaining six as presented 
(though others might fi nd them appealing motivations for supersubstan-
tivalism), but I would support what I think is the animating spirit of the 
second-through-fourth arguments: we need a theory of the relationships 
between objects and their locations, and why there seem to be necessary 
relationships between objects and their locations (hand-shaped objects are 
always found in hand-shaped regions, for example). The supersubstantival-
ist has a quick explanation for many of these connections (it is no surprise 
that everything hand-shaped is self-identical!), while one who postulates a 
distinctive “occupation” relation must look elsewhere to explain why the 
occupation relation has the features it does. 
 As we saw in the previous section, the view off ered in this chapter is 
supersubstantivalist even though it is not perdurantist about material objects 
nor about spacetime. One of the fi rst important philosophical lessons to be 
drawn from the view discussed is that this combination is a live theoretical 
option. This has not always been recognized in the literature. Indeed, Sider 
(2001 p. 110) off ers an argument that amounts to claiming perdurance is an 
entailment of supersubstantivalism. He does this in the course of an “argu-
ment from spacetime”: an argument that an eternalist (who believes the past 
and the future are as real as the present) who is also a substantivalist (who 
also believes in the reality of spacetime regions) ought to be a perdurantist 
(roughly, someone who believes that for every time an object exists, there is 
a part of that object that exists only at that time). Sider’s argument for this 

100 daniel nolan
view is that an eternalist substantivalist should be a supersubstantivalist, basi-
cally because of the fi rst argument from simplicity, above. Then the move 
to perdurantism is swift: “Given the identifi cation [of material objects with 
regions of spacetime], perdurance follows, since spacetime perdures.” That 
argument is entirely unconvincing in the current framework, of course, 
since spatiotemporal regions will not in general have any proper parts at all, 
let alone a proper part for every sub-region that has the same spatial extent 
but a shorter temporal extent. Sider seems to notice his argument is too 
quick, since he adds a footnote at this point: “What of a non-standard view 
of enduring spacetime? This would face the objections to the combination 
of relationalism and endurance discussed below” (Sider 2001, p. 110, n. 37). 
But the objections he raises to relationalism plus endurantism (Sider 2001, 
pp. 114–118) have no immediate purchase on the kind of system outlined in 
this chapter, since the objections presuppose a radically diff erent strategy for 
dealing with temporal distances: he supposes that a relationalist endurantist 
must be using a primitive of the form  ┌ x is F  n units of time after  y is G ┐ , or 
more complex variants along those lines. Clearly nothing like that is being 
employed in the system outlined in the previous section. 6   
 What is also interesting for my purposes is that Sider is so quick to 
assume that supersubstantivalism is only available to the perdurantist. Sider 
is not alone in this assumption: Effi  ngham (2009, p. 42 n. 7) claims that 
supersubstantivalism entails perdurantism; Schaff er (2009, p. 135) says that 
perdurantism is part of a “package deal” with identifying material objects 
with spacetime regions; and by far the standard supersubstantivalist position 
considered has been one where spacetime regions, and the material objects 
identical to them, perdure. As we have seen, the view discussed here both 
embraces supersubstantivalism and fails to be perdurantist (whether it is an 
“endurantist” view will be discussed below in section 3). Insofar as super-
substantivalism is an attractive feature of a theory, it is not only available to 
perdurantists: and it is not an argument for perdurantism, at least vis-à-vis 
this rival, that it allows for supersubstantivalism. 
 6  Some of what Sider says can be made the basis of an objection: some of his objections suppose that 
we want to allow for systems that have e.g. one time being later than another without there being any 
amount by which it is later (e.g. two infi nite stretches of time, the latter all after the former). I do not 
see how to do that in this system, since a single primitive does the work of ordering and also supplies a 
metric, so if A is later than B, it is some amount of time later than B. I think this sort of “argument from 
exotica” fails in general, but here is perhaps not the place to pursue that issue.  

balls and all 101
 3.  Endurantism 
 The view outlined in section 1 identifi es material objects with certain regions 
of spacetime, and does not insist that objects have “temporal parts”: that a 
“time slicing” of a region that is a material object yields regions that are 
all, themselves, material objects. So these objects exist at diff erent times, 
but do not “perdure.” I think this kind of existence across time, which does 
not require temporal parts to “anchor” the object to any particular time, 
should count as falling on the “endurance” side of the endurance/perdur-
ance dichotomy. But one might object that while this is a story about the 
existence of objects across time, it is not a picture where physical objects 
endure. For isn’t the endurance picture one where objects are “wholly 
located” at diff erent times? Lewis (1986b, p. 202), after all, defi nes what it 
is for an object to “endure” by saying that an enduring object “persists by 
being wholly present at more than one time.” However, it seems that the 
physical objects described in my system exist at exactly one time each—the 
time is a region rather than a point, but that region is the object’s primary 
location. Lewis suggests that the spatial analogue of endurantism would be 
existing in diff erent places in the way that bi-located saints were supposed 
to have been able to, or in the way that universals are supposed to be entirely 
in several locations at once (Lewis 2002, p. 3). Both of which sound like an 
object being in two entirely diff erent places at once, rather than an object 
being in only one place, but that place being larger than a point. So the 
objects described in section 1 do not seem to fi t what Lewis has in mind. 
 Of course, we can assign a meaning to “location” so that it turns out that 
an object is not only located at the region it is identifi ed with, but with all 
of its sub-regions as well—that would get us at least verbal agreement with 
the endurantist who insists objects are multiply located at diff erent times. 
But I suspect this verbal agreement would not be enough. After all, some-
one who thinks an object exists at diff erent times by having temporal parts 
wholly located at those times (and at no others) can secure verbal agreement 
with someone who takes objects to be “wholly located” at diff erent times—
if the perdurance theorist defi nes what it is for an object to be “located” at 
a time in such a way that an object is located at a region of spacetime pro-
vided that is a sub-region of the largest region the object occupies, then the 
object itself—the thing which is the whole spacetime worm—is “located” 
at every region within that worm—the whole is located at each region, so 

102 daniel nolan
the thing is wholly (and not just partially) located at each time. Such verbal 
agreement is too cheap to distinguish views. 7   
 If we adopt Lewis’s stipulative defi nition for endurantism, this view may 
not be an endurantist view. So much the worse for using that stipulative def-
inition to try to characterize the standard alternative to perdurantism, vari-
ously called endurantism, three-dimensionalism, or whatever. For the view 
that an object is in the fi rst instance associated with a stretch of time, rather 
than with many points (or slices) of time individually, seems to belong in 
spirit to the endurantist/three-dimensionalist camp. Indeed, several expres-
sions of views that have been taken to be endurantist in the literature do 
not seem to me to be “endurantist” in Lewis’s sense as opposed to being 
uncommitted between that and this view, that objects are in the fi rst instance 
located at long stretches, not slices or arbitrarily short stretches. For example, 
when David Wiggins says “proper three-dimensional continuants—things 
with spatial parts and no temporal parts, which are conceptualized in our 
experience as occupying space but not time, and as persisting whole  through 
time” (Wiggins 1980, p. 25), what he says seems neutral between the two, 
even though Sider (2001, p. 63) takes Wiggins to be expressing endurantism 
as Lewis characterizes it. 
 Existing at diff erent times by having proper parts which exist at only 
those times is one way to be found at diff erent times. Being entirely located 
at each of a number of times is another. (Call this “Lewis-type” endur-
ance.) A third way is to be entirely located only at one’s entire temporal 
duration—in systems with points of time, objects with an instantaneous 
duration do this, though there does not seem to be any conceptual problem 
with envisaging “extended” objects doing this for more than an instant. Of 
course, once we see these three options, we can see that we can get more 
options by mixing and matching—an object could perdure for a while, 
then endure, then have a part that exists through time in the third way, 
for example. Several philosophers have discussed this third way of existing 
through time in the past few years. Perhaps best known is Hudson (2005). 
 7  It may not be entirely worthless theoretically, though—if a perdurantist can argue that we talk in such 
a way that it comes out true that the whole worm counts as being “located” at any place within the area 
occupied by the worm, then the perdurantist can allow that it is true that objects are “wholly located” at 
diff erent times. The endurantist who claims to reject perdurance because it is incompatible with a brute 
intuition that objects are wholly located at diff erent times can be met with the response that the brute 
intuition is true all right, but it doesn’t mean what the endurantist assumed it meant.  

balls and all 103
Hud Hudson concentrates on the case of space, rather than that of time 
(or spacetime), though the distinctions he draws are obviously applicable 
to time as well. In the case of space, Hudson contrasts  pertending  objects, 
which exist at diff erent places by having parts exactly at those places, and 
 entending  objects which, in Hudson’s sense of “entend,” are wholly located at 
each region they are found in, with “spanners” and a fourth option he calls 
“multi-locaters.”  Spanners , in Hudson’s sense,  8 are fundamentally located at 
regions (they “span” regions, hence spanners), without having parts that are 
located at any of the sub-regions of their location (Hudson 2005, p. 101). 
(Hudson can allow, of course, that there is a derivative sense of “location” 
where even spanners and their parts are located at their sub-regions—but 
spanners are not located in their sub-regions in the “primary” sense of loca-
tion.) Hudson’s defi nition of spanners is in terms of the predicate “spans,” 
which he defi nes as follows:
 ‘x spans’ =df x is a material object that is wholly and entirely located at exactly 
one non-point-sized region, r, and there is no proper subregion of r, r∗, such 
that any part of x is located at r∗. (Hudson 2005, p. 101) 
 The way the objects I have described are located is like the way Hudson’s 
spanners are located. Indeed, material objects that lack proper parts will be 
“spanners” of their spacetime region, in Hudson’s sense.  9 Material objects 
with parts will not span their spacetime regions in Hudson’s sense, and so 
strictly speaking the option described in this chapter should go on Hudson’s 
menu along with the pertenders, entenders, spanners, and his multi-locaters. 
(Even this addition does not complete the menu, but here is not the place 
to try to draw up an exhaustive list of options.) 
 One question that remains to be answered is what to say about space, and 
time: do the objects of my theory span spaces or times? Given the conven-
tions outlined above, it seems reasonable to say that mereologically simple 
material objects span the regions of space and time that they are located 
in. Some complex material objects will span spaces, too: an object divided 
into two parts along the temporal axis will occupy the same place, at any 
 8  Hudson takes the term from Kris McDaniel’s doctoral thesis, but alters McDaniel’s defi nition.  
 9  I will help myself to a transitive use of “span,” in which objects span the relevant regions. This departs 
from Hudson’s offi  cial defi nition, but accords better with the use of “span” in English as a transitive verb.  

104 daniel nolan
given time, as either its fi rst or second part. Likewise with time: if a mate-
rial object’s parts all last as long as it (albeit that they occupy regions smaller 
in the spatial dimension), then none of its parts will occupy a shorter time 
than the whole thing. But some material objects in the system above do 
not span the spaces or times they occupy—a human body in such a world 
would have a head and hands that did not occupy the same space as the 
whole body, and if it had a fi nger destroyed during its existence that fi nger 
would exist for a proper sub-time of the time occupied by the whole body. 
 So there are diff erences between Hudson’s spanners and the objects I am 
interested in. (Perhaps we could call the objects I discuss “neo-spanners.”) 
But for the remainder of this section let me ignore this diff erence, and talk 
of my material objects as spanners across time. If we restrict our attention 
to material objects without proper parts, which do span spacetime regions 
(and by extension spaces and times, given the conventions set up), then 
these span in Hudson’s sense, provided we are allowed to substitute tempo-
ral regions into his defi nition. So a reader that objects to my extension of 
Hudson’s use may wish to focus on the example of simple material objects. 
 It is coherent to postulate spanners that exist in spatial and temporal 
structures that are built up from points, of course. But it seems particularly 
tempting to postulate spanners when space and time lack minima. There 
is a tempting way to think about how objects are connected to spaces and 
times, a way shared by many standard perdurantists and the Lewisian endur-
antist, that leaves no room for spanners: but once we move to gunky space 
and time we see that this normally tempting picture is much less tempting. 
 I am not saying that all perdurantists and Lewis-type endurantists hold 
the following view, explicitly or even implicitly. But here, it seems to me, is 
a tempting way to think if you believe space and time are ultimately made 
up of points. The basic relation between objects and spacetime is a relation 
between objects and  points . A standard perdurantist, in the case of time, for 
example, might think that minimal temporal parts are lined up on each of 
the points, and the “longer” objects are related to lots of points just because 
they have parts specially related to each point. (Likewise, when it comes 
to space, an object’s minimal parts-at-a-time are located at spatial points, 
and larger objects are in bigger regions of space because they have as parts 
those minima located at spatial points in the relevant region.) A Lewis-type 
endurantist, on the other hand, might think that the  entire entity  bears the 
basic relation to each of the temporal points. (Those who believe in spatially 

balls and all 105
extended simples on the same model might think the entire object, at a 
time, bears the basic relation to each spatial point it is found at.) A similarly 
tempting picture is also available if we believe in temporal minima bigger 
than points, of course—the basic relationships are the ones diff erent objects 
stand in to the minima, and the connections to larger stretches of time drop 
out of that. 
 Once there are no spatiotemporal minima, point sized or extended, 
then the tempting picture described in the previous paragraph needs to be 
rejected. We could try to salvage something along the same lines—perhaps 
there is no “most basic” location relation, but as we get smaller and smaller 
the objects are more directly connected to their regions, for example. But 
an attractive alternative is to get away from the above picture altogether—
region-sized objects could stand  directly  in relations to the regions they are 
found in, without needing to be located vicariously in their regions because 
their parts are located in smaller pieces of spacetime. A theory that treats the 
privileged location relation as  identity  makes one of the location relations 
metaphysically special in a particularly vivid way: things still bear interesting 
relations to the region of the room they are in, or the regions of their proper 
parts, but those location relations are not as intimate as numerical identity. 
 The point that we should distinguish spanners, and indeed neo-spanners, 
from Lewis-type endurers is not a new one. But I hope a specifi c example 
might help illuminate that distinction for those who do not yet see it (see 
Parsons 2008 for Parsons trying and failing to make out a sensible dis-
tinction, in the spatial case, between entending objects and spanners), and 
may provide an example of how spanners, rather than Lewis-type endurers, 
might be motivated, since the conceptual distinction without any embed-
ding in examples can look like arid hair-splitting. 
 4.  Derivative Parthood 
 Alternatives to taking mereology as primitive are few and far between. 
There is the Pythagorean reduction of part–whole (and everything else) to 
set-membership (Quine 1976), there is the attempt to construe part–whole 
as a plural restatement of identity (Baxter 1988a, 1988b, and Wallace unpub-
lished), and there are global reductionist projects that reduce part–whole 
along with everything else to some new primitive (Hazen 1996; Dipert 
1997). There is a proposal by Oppenheim and Putnam that one thing is a 

106 daniel nolan
part of another iff  the fi rst occupies a sub-region of the location of the other 
(Oppenheim and Putnam 1958), and Mellor (2008) might be suggesting 
an analysis of part–whole in terms of sub-region plus a causal condition  10 
(see Williams 2008 for discussion of this and other “locationist” alternatives 
defi ning part–whole in terms of location or location plus something else)—
but I know of no other kinds of proposed reductions. 
 The account outlined in section 1 is a “location plus something else” reduc-
tion. For X to be a part of Y, we require two things: that X is a sub-region of 
Y, and that X and Y be material objects. Sub-region is primitive, though I will 
leave unspecifi ed whether this is because there is a sub-region relation that is 
a primitive piece of ontology, or whether instead we treat “. . .  is a sub-region 
of . . .” as a primitive piece of ideology.  11 I have not off ered an analysis of “material 
object”: one could either take this as another primitive, or one could analyze 
it further in terms of what sorts of properties a region of spacetime possesses. 
Provided only that we do not analyze “material object” in mereological terms, 
or partially in mereological terms, we have here an analysis of “part–whole” in 
terms of other metaphysical resources. 
 Why is it worth having candidate theories around that off er analyses 
of “part–whole”? One reason is that it helps us resolve the question of 
whether we should, in the end, take part–whole to be a basic part of 
our metaphysical resources, or whether it is a less fundamental aspect of 
the world. We are unlikely to make much progress in deciding whether 
one or the other is a better option without a sense of what a rival 
option might be like. Another reason is that considering rivals may give 
us insight into what general principles seem plausible for determining 
which of our posits is basic and which to be further analyzed:  if the 
proposal in section 1 about part–whole seemed backwards, and it rather 
seemed better to analyze sub-region in terms of part–whole rather than 
vice versa,  why did it seem better? Thirdly, when we see what an analysis 
of part–whole explains and what it does not, we can get a clearer idea of 
what  should be explained about the part–whole relation. Which features 
of the part–whole relation that we accept seem to call for some further 
 10  The main reason I am unsure is that Mellor (2008) does not tell us how he understands the sub-region 
relation. If it is a part–whole relation, then he is just analyzing part–whole for material objects in terms 
of part–whole for regions, plus causal conditions. He would then need a reductive analysis of part–whole 
for regions before the theory as a whole reduced part–whole to something else. 
 11  “ideology” is an expression that is used in a variety of diff erent ways in contemporary metaphysics. For 
those interested in what I mean, see Nolan (2002, pp. 39–42). 

balls and all 107
story, and which are reasonable to take as not needing (or not being 
capable of) further explanation? 
 While I am setting out a theory that off ers an analysis of “part–whole” in 
this chapter, I will not be explicitly trying to resolve the question of whether it 
is superior to views according to which part–whole lacks an analysis. Likewise, 
I will not, here, be trying to formulate general principles to identify which 
metaphysical resources should be treated as basic and which require further 
analysis, nor even what “metaphysical analysis” is, in general. I  will discuss, 
immediately below, which of the usual axioms of part–whole drop out of the 
theory so far off ered, but that does not exhaust the explanatory questions that 
could be asked and answered about the part–whole relationship. 
 What standard axioms of part–whole are validated on this theory? It is 
false that every object is part of itself: some regions (and all non-regions) are 
not parts of anything. However, any object that is part of anything at all will 
be part of itself, since “sub-region” is refl exive. Part–whole is extensional, 
in at least one sense: no two objects that have parts at all have exactly the 
same parts. 
 Part–whole is anti-symmetric: if  a is part of  b and  b is part of  a , then  a  = 
 b . This last follows from the anti-symmetry of sub-region:  a being a part of 
 b and  b being a part of  a implies that  a and  b are sub-regions of each other, 
and so identical. It is also transitive because “sub-region” is transitive: if  a 
is a material object and a sub-region of  b , and  b is a material object and a 
sub-region of  c , and  c is a material object, then  a is a material object and a 
sub-region of  c , which is a material object. 
 Some usual mereological principles fail in this system.  Unrestricted composi-
tion fails. If we read unrestricted composition as the claim that for  any objects 
 X there is a  sum of those objects, i.e. an object S that has them all as parts, and 
such that every part of S shares a part with at least one of the  X s, then it obvi-
ously fails: many things are not part of anything. However, even if we restrict 
the quantifi ers to things that are parts of something (i.e. restrict them to the sorts 
of things that stand in part–whole relations) we still will not have unrestricted 
composition: just because two regions  a and  b are material objects, there is no 
general guarantee that their fusion-region will itself be a material object. 
 Other principles do not fall out of the theory described, but could be 
added in “by hand” if desired. The principles so far do not ensure that there 
is a universal object, in the sense of an object which has as parts anything 
which is a part at all. Neither do they ensure even  Weak Supplementation : for 

108 daniel nolan
all that is said so far, there could be a material object A which has as a 
proper sub-region a material object B, without having any other proper 
sub-regions which are material objects. Perhaps we should be suspicious of 
Weak Supplementation if we are thinking of parthood in the way suggested 
here, but I will remain neutral on this issue. 
 Likewise, we will have a failure of the “doctrine of arbitrary undetached 
parts,” or DAUP as it is usually known. One version of DAUP says that when 
an object  x exactly occupies a region, then every sub-region of that region is 
exactly occupied by a proper part of  x . 12 This can obviously fail in the current 
system, even for material objects: when a material object  x exactly occupies 
a region (i.e. is identical to that region), then every sub-region of that region 
will be a  sub-region  of  x : but it will not follow that it is, itself, a material object, 
unless we have “material objects all the way down.” So those sub-regions of  x 
need not be parts of it.  13 Again, DAUP could be added in “by hand” as an extra 
postulate about material objects, but in what follows I shall assume that we have 
not insisted on either Unrestricted Composition or DAUP. 
 Some will object that I have not, in fact, produced a novel account of “is 
a part of,” according to which it is not primitive, because they will claim my 
“sub-region” relation, despite my stipulation, just  is the part–whole relation 
on regions.  14 I may have explained the part–whole relation between physical 
objects in terms of the more general part–whole relation on regions, but this is 
not an alternative to taking mereology as primitive. Or so the objection might 
go. One point in this objector’s favor is that the “sub-region” relation so defi ned 
satisfi es the axioms of Classical Extensional Mereology (and not accidentally, 
since I am using Tarski’s geometry as my starting point, and Tarski does take the 
relation of sub-region to region to be the relation of part-to-whole). 
 There are several things to say in response to this objection. The fi rst and 
most obvious is that I told you the sub-region relation was primitive and 
non-mereological, and while perhaps such a stipulation fails to describe a 
 12  This is not quite the principle articulated by Peter van Inwagen (1981): I have suppressed the time 
parameters, for example, and implicitly made it about spacetime rather than space.  
 13  This might come as a surprise to readers of Parsons (2007, pp.  231–232), who claims to off er a 
proof that supersubstantivalism (the “identity theory” in his terminology) entails something close to 
DAUP, as I have formulated it. Parsons defi nes his crucial piece of terminology “<” twice over, once 
as “sub-region” (p. 204) and once as “part” (p. 221). The charitable way to read Parsons, I suspect, is to 
take him to be implicitly asserting that all sub-regions of something are parts of that thing. This is the 
assumption denied by my system. 
 14  Williams (2008, pp. 93–94) seems to be claiming that such a sub-region relation just will be a part–
whole relation. 

balls and all 109
metaphysical possibility, it is up to me what the primitives of the theory 
I propose are. In particular, if the theory explicitly says that the relation is 
primitive, then according to the theory the relation  is primitive, and that’s 
that. In response to this, the objector can say the problem is that sub-region 
meets all the constraints to be a part–whole relation, so there’s no room for 
it to fail to be. It is as if I had proposed a theory according to which Jim 
is a never-married eligible man, but the theory stipulates that he is not a 
bachelor. Perhaps it is true according to such a theory that Jim is not a bach-
elor—but if it says that he is a never-married eligible man, then either it is 
also true according to the theory that he  is a bachelor, or the theory is just 
conceptually incoherent. What could there be about the “sub-region” rela-
tion, in other words, that disqualifi es it from being a part–whole relation? 
 There are a few things to say in response to this more sophisticated ver-
sion of the objection. One is that it is not suffi  cient to be a part–whole 
relation in the full sense that a relation happens to obey the axioms of 
mereology. There are ever so many sets of ordered pairs that are models of 
the axioms of mereology, including ones which relate me to you—it does 
not follow that you are literally a part of me, and/or vice versa. Another 
is that while the relation of sub-region to region is formally analogous to 
the relation of part to whole, there are standard conceptions of this rela-
tion that take it to be quite diff erent. People often talk of regions as being 
sets of points, and that one region is a sub-region of another if the fi rst is 
a  subset  of the second. The relation of being a subset is not usually taken to 
be a matter of part to whole. Of course, there is a respectable theory which 
does take subset to be a special case of part-to-whole (see Lewis 1991 and 
1993b)—but while this is an interesting and attractive theory that perhaps 
best explains the mathematical phenomena, I  would be hard pressed to 
think that someone who disagreed with it had a defective concept of set 
or of part-to-whole.  15 (I do not know whether Lewis himself would have 
claimed this analytic status for his theory.) Perhaps it could be argued that 
we need not take the conception of regions as sets of points, and the relation 
 15  It may be worth pointing out that the subset relation arguably does not have the character of 
the part-to-whole relation in general in ZF, since it does not obey the equivalent of Unrestricted 
Composition. To have a subset relation that does obey Unrestricted Composition, one needs to take 
proper classes seriously: Lewis’s system, for example, is at least as powerful as Kelly-Morse class theory 
(Nolan 2002, appendix 1). So someone who does want to defend the view that subset is a part–whole 
relation should either defend non-classical mereology or an alternative to ZF set theory. It is hard to 
believe one must do this on pain of lacking competence with the concept of subsets.  

110 daniel nolan
of sub-region-to-region as the subset relation seriously—it is not always 
clear what is going on when people talk this way, and perhaps they do not 
intend it to be taken seriously. But I am not so sure—some are explicitly 
Pythagorean about regions (Quine 1976), and many others may well mean 
what they say, even if it is true that they would modify their view given 
enough philosophical argument. On the surface at least, they seem to be an 
example of people who accept that the sub-region relation has the formal 
properties of part–whole, without taking it to be mereological. 
 So the fact that my sub-region relation obeys the axioms of mereol-
ogy is weak evidence that it is an analytic truth that sub-region is a case 
of the part–whole relation. There are some other characteristics that this 
sub-region relation has that sit badly with the idea that it is a part–whole 
relation. One is its modal profi le—for all I have said, whether smaller regions 
necessarily bring along larger regions as well is completely up for grabs. To 
be sure, given the axioms that govern the case under discussion, whenever 
there are smaller regions there are larger, but for all I have said the axioms 
themselves are contingent (a description of the way space and time behave 
probably should be contingent, as I think we learned when we discovered 
that space was not Newtonian after all, though it could have been). I am 
inclined to think that a primitive sub-region relation would hold contin-
gently, and many would think how mereology behaves is not a contingent 
matter to the same extent. (This latter could be disputed, of course, so this 
is not conclusive.) 
 If the sub-region relation of this theory really was the part–whole rela-
tion, then given supersubstantivalism, physical objects would automatically 
be parts of various gerrymandered regions of spacetime. This is an intuitive 
cost, at least—pre-theoretically, we do not automatically assume that objects 
are literally parts of any arbitrary region that contains their location. Insofar 
as this theory does not say that, it fi ts a little better with our ordinary ideas 
of what should be part of what. This is perhaps the weakest consideration 
of all, since the oddity of saying I am part of some large scattered region of 
spacetime could be traced to many diff erent sources—saying I am identical 
to my location, saying there are scattered regions of spacetime, pragmatic 
infelicity, or many other things. 
 The responses given should be enough to make clear that according to 
the theory presented, “sub-region” is primitive and not analyzable mereo-
logically. It might still be, of course, that a theory which took sub-region to 

balls and all 111
be a case of part–whole, and was otherwise like the theory I have outlined, 
would be a better overall theory. Whether or not this is so depends on the 
value of various desiderata: whether it is best to think of spacetime in part–
whole relations in the fi rst place; how important to parsimony it is that we 
have many regions “not wholly distinct” from others in our ontology; how 
desirable it is to have the part–whole predicate turn out to be vague, and so 
on.  Note well  that the question of which alternative is better is  not  the same 
question as the question of whether the two alternatives can be coherently 
distinguished—it is not as if only the truth is coherent!  16 The charge that 
“sub-region” in the theory discussed in this chapter  just is  the subset rela-
tion has been rebutted if I show that a theory can coherently distinguish the 
two, and this theory has the features that allow it to be one that coherently 
distinguishes them, and that it is intended to do so. 
 5.  The Vagueness of “Is a Part Of” 
 On the picture outlined, for one thing to be part of another two conditions 
need to obtain: (1) both things are material objects, and (2) the fi rst is a 
sub-region of the second. (Notice that every material object will automati-
cally be a part of itself, since every region is a sub-region of itself. This is 
intentional—I am using the extended sense of “part” where it is standard 
for everything with parts to be part of itself, and the things we normally call 
parts are distinguished as  proper parts.) 
 Notice that if there is indeterminacy in which regions fall under the 
predicate “is a material object,” this can lead to there being indeterminacy 
in what is part of what. If region A is determinately a sub-region of region 
B, and B is determinately a material object though it is not determinate 
whether A is, then it will be indeterminate whether A is a part of B. But 
notice that this does not need to be because of “vague existence,” “vague 
identity,” or even anything particularly metaphysical about the indeter-
minacy here. It can be traced entirely back to the vagueness of “material 
object.” Nor does this vagueness in “material object” have to be a variety of 
 16  There are those who think that we cannot make coherent sense of metaphysical impossibilities, or 
metaphysical impossibilities that cannot be explained in terms of special sorts of the necessary  a posteriori . 
I take this to be a problem for their theories, not for the enterprise of comparing rival metaphysical 
views, since somehow we do make coherent sense of alternatives here (see Nolan 1997).  

112 daniel nolan
“metaphysical vagueness,” whatever that term means exactly: for all the the-
ory says, this vagueness could be a result, for example, of potential semantic 
decisions left unmade about exactly what the extension of “material object” 
is to be. 
 This is a specifi c model that illustrates how there could be semantic 
vagueness in “part,” and so useful in the light of the suggestion that seems 
to be made by Lewis (1986b) that we do not know how this could be. “But 
not all of language is vague. The truth-functional connectives aren’t, for 
instance. Nor are the words for identity and diff erence,  and for the partial 
identity of overlap  . . . . How could any of these be vague? What would be the 
alternatives between which we haven’t chosen?” (Lewis 1986b, p. 212, italics 
mine). Lewis means mereological overlap (i.e. part-sharing) by “the partial 
identity of overlap.” No doubt he is relying on a particular metaphysical 
understanding of the part–whole relationship as well in this passage, an 
understanding he expands further in Lewis (1993a). But to the extent he is 
complaining that we cannot see how there could be vagueness in mereo-
logical language, this view is an example of how that could happen. 
 Furthermore, this is a view where there is vagueness in “part,” “overlap,” 
and so on without vagueness in existence. It is thus an example of one way 
that Sider’s arguments “from vagueness” (Sider 2001, pp. 120–139) for unre-
stricted composition and perdurance fail.  17 In the case of unrestricted com-
position, Sider argues that if composition is restricted, there is (at least across 
worlds) a continuous series of cases from cases where composition occurs 
to cases where it does not. He argues that there could not be a sharp cutoff  
between the cases where it does and cases where it does not (that would be 
“metaphysically arbitrary” (p. 124)), and it could not be a vague cutoff , since 
that would require vagueness in mereological notions like composition, 
fusion, and parthood. In the case of temporal parts (pp. 132–139) (to sim-
plify, hopefully without distorting the main thrust), he argues that if there is 
not a temporal part at every time of an object’s existence, there would again 
be a continuous series of cases from an object having a part at a given time 
 17  There has been quite a cottage industry in pointing out ways Sider’s argument fails to convince. While 
I will not try to mention everything that has been written on this topic, I should point out a few relevant 
articles. I have set out what I take to be the main argument, and some reservations of a completely diff er-
ent kind, in Nolan (2006b). Gallois (2004) points out a way that part–whole could be vague without the 
number of objects existing suff ering from any possible indeterminacy that is an interesting alternative to 
sort set out here. Effi  ngham’s (2009) response to Sider is more closely related to the response I wish to 
pursue here: I discuss it further below. 

balls and all 113
it exists to the object not; there could not be a sharp cutoff  in that series 
on pain of it being “metaphysically arbitrary”; and there could not be a 
vague cutoff  without composition, fusion, and parthood being vague. Sider 
presumably thinks that if there is such a continuous series, it would have to 
either have a sharp cutoff  or a vague one: so there cannot be such a cutoff , 
so we have to accept that there  is a temporal part from an object for every 
time when that object exists. In both the case of unrestricted composition 
and the case of temporal parts, Sider requires an argument that there cannot 
be vagueness in the part–whole relation, and it is this argument of Sider’s 
that I will focus on, in the simpler case of when objects have a fusion. 
 An important part of Sider’s argument against vague parthood is that if there is 
vague parthood, it will, in some possible world, be vague when some objects have 
a fusion: and so vague how many objects there are. Sider does some maneuvering 
to try to avoid worries about infi nite cardinalities being unchanged by adding or 
subtracting one object, by assuming that if there can be vagueness in whether a 
precise class of objects has a fusion, that vagueness can crop up in a world with only 
fi nitely many concrete objects (Sider 2001, p. 127). Then, assuming that there can be 
no vagueness in sentences with only logical vocabulary, like quantifi ers and identity, 
he argues that if there is vagueness in whether objects have a fusion there will be 
vagueness in a “numerical” sentence using only quantifi ers, identity, variables, and 
connectives, and a “concreteness” predicate. 
 Those who can resist the possibility of only fi nitely many concrete 
objects can of course resist at least the letter of Sider’s argument. But the 
main reason Sider’s argument fails to convince, given the current setup, 
is that there can be vagueness in whether objects have a fusion without 
there being any vagueness “in existence” at all, whether or not it infects 
“numerical sentences” (as it often will in worlds with fi nitely many con-
crete objects but not necessarily in infi nite worlds). Let me follow Sider in 
talking as if vagueness is a matter of there being multiple “precisifi cations” 
which can disagree about the application of vague expressions: so that were 
e.g. “fusion” indeterminate, then diff erent precisifi cations would disagree 
on the extension of “fusion.” Sider seems to build this into his “linguistic 
theory of vagueness,” which is a premise of his argument—we can grant 
it to him here for the sake of the argument, though the reason vagueness 
in “part,” “fusion,” and other mereological expressions can happily coexist 
with no vagueness in existence survives translation into other frameworks 
for treating vagueness. 

114 daniel nolan
 Suppose A and B are the only determinately material objects, and on 
some precisifi cations of “material object” their fusion-region C is also a 
material object. On some precisifi cations of “material object” and “mereo-
logical fusion,” then, A and B have a mereological fusion, C, and on some 
precisifi cations they lack a mereological fusion altogether. How many things 
are there here? We do not get diff erent answers on diff erent precisifi ca-
tions: C determinately exists, whether it is the mereological fusion of A and 
B or not. And there is no thing that is said to exist on some precisifi cations 
but not on others—it is not as if any precisifi cations represent there being 
an  extra object, besides C, as the mereological fusion of A and B. 
 Sider’s argument from vagueness to show that it cannot be vague whether 
an object has a temporal part at a time also fails. It can be vague whether the 
intersection-region of a material object and a time is itself a material object, 
and so whether the material object has a temporal part at that time, but that 
does not mean that diff erent precisifi cations of “part” would yield diff erent 
counts of entities at a time: the relevant region determinately exists, even if 
it is a part on some precisifi cations and not on others. 
 Effi  ngham (2009) has also noticed a problem supersubstantivalism causes 
for Sider’s vagueness argument. Effi  ngham focuses on what a supersubstan-
tivalist should say about what the “concrete” objects are. If they are all the 
points and regions of spacetime, then Sider cannot have his fi nite world, at 
least unless it is contingent that there are infi nitely many spacetime regions 
in worlds where objects that are actually identical to spacetime regions exist. 
If the “concrete” objects are supposed to be the non-abstract objects distinct 
from spacetime, the supersubstantivalist need not accept that there are any, 
certainly not any relevant to the composition of ordinary objects (p. 38). If 
the supersubstantivalist says some, but only some, regions are concrete, then 
according to Effi  ngham (p. 41) an analogue of Sider’s vagueness argument 
can be used to show either that “concrete” is vague, or to demonstrate a 
reductio of the claim that some but only some regions are concrete. And 
if “concrete,” as used in Sider’s argument, is vague, then Sider’s argument 
that it cannot be indeterminate how many concrete objects there are fails. 
The supersubstantivalist should think Sider’s argument from vagueness 
fails through having a false premise. Which is especially ironic, since Sider 
endorses supersubstantivalism. 
 Effi  ngham is certainly right that the supersubstantivalist has a variety of 
options for resisting one or another of Sider’s own premises. The argument 

balls and all 115
I have off ered should convince you that even though Effi  ngham fi nds trou-
ble in Sider’s use of the predicate “concrete,” a more serious problem with 
Sider’s attempt to show that vagueness in composition (or vagueness in 
composition at a time) leads to vagueness in existence has nothing in par-
ticular to do with the fate of the predicate “concrete.” We can supply models 
where the extension of “exists” and the domains of the relevant quantifi er 
are entirely determinate even when it is indeterminate when some deter-
minately specifi ed objects have a fusion—the simple one of A, B, and C 
above will do. We can establish continuous series of cases from composition 
occurring to composition not occurring, without a sharp cutoff  between 
the cases, by letting it be indeterminate in the middle cases whether the 
fusion-region of a set of material objects is itself a material object, and so 
making it indeterminate whether the objects are parts of something larger 
and whether the objects have a mereological fusion. Sider will need to 
look elsewhere if he wants against part–whole being vague, and wants to 
resuscitate his arguments from vagueness for unrestricted composition and 
perdurance. 
 6.  Conclusion 
 One of the central tasks of the philosophy of space and time is, of course, 
to provide us with the theories of space and time that are best supported 
by evidence and argument (whatever the evidence and the premises of 
the relevant arguments should be). This chapter has only been an indirect 
contribution to that task: I have not argued that the picture of spacetime, 
objects, and mereology that has been provided here is particularly well sup-
ported, though I have pointed out that it has several features (e.g. super-
substantivalism, vague parthood without vague existence) that others have 
argued are desirable. I would be surprised, though pleasantly surprised, if 
anyone thought that the theory outlined in this chapter was ultimately cor-
rect about the nature of space, time, material objects, and the mereology of 
material objects. 
 The theory outlined is not my best stab at the truth of the matter. It does 
aim, however, to serve two of the other important tasks of the philosophy of 
space and time. One of these tasks is to give us a sense of kinds of theories 
of space, time, and objects which are coherent: and I hope I have provided a 
novel, yet coherent combination of views which helps to demonstrate that 

116 daniel nolan
views which theorists often argue should go together need not, and pro-
vides a particular model which can serve as an illustration e.g. of how one 
might motivate postulating objects which “span” spatio-temporal regions 
rather than occupy them in the multi-located fashion suggested by Lewis’s 
characterization of endurantism. 
 One reason why we want to be aware of a range of theoretical options, 
other than whichever theory we might happen to favor, is that it is virtu-
ally indispensable to compare theories if we are to discover the correct 
one: if the correct theory in a given area has not even  occurred  to any of the 
researchers in that fi eld, it is unlikely to be discovered to be correct anytime 
soon. Connected with this, we want to get a sense of which pieces of the 
theoretical puzzle fi t together and which do not: what sort of views tend 
to fi t with eternalist perdurantism, for example? Which with standard kinds 
of endurance theories? What diff erence does it make if we think that space 
and time are composed of points, or not? What is forced on us if we accept 
vagueness in the part–whole relation? The theory outlined in this chapter 
is useful on this front, I think, because it combines features of theories not 
usually found together, but in a reasonably natural way. It should under-
mine the common view that supersubstantivalism is only available for the 
perdurance theorist, for example, or that vagueness in part–whole should 
automatically go with metaphysical vagueness and vagueness in existence. 
 It only makes sense to write a chapter like this in the context of a contin-
uing discussion about a range of important metaphysical questions. We are 
very fortunate to be living at a time when this discussion is wide-ranging 
enough, and of a high enough standard, so that if this chapter achieves what 
it is designed for then our eventual understanding of ordinary objects, space 
and time, and the part–whole relationship can be enriched as a result. 18   
 18  Thanks to the audience at the Workshop in Metaphysics at ANU in September 2003 and the second 
Parts Workshop held at the University of St Andrews in 2004. Especial thanks to Peter Forrest and 
Katherine Hawley for feedback, and to Shieva Kleinschmidt for putting together the volume in which 
it appears. 

 7 
 Confl icting Intuitions about Space  
 PETER  FORREST 
 My purpose in this chapter is to argue that we have inconsistent intuitions 
about the structure of space (or spacetime, or some stuff , the aether, that fi lls 
space or spacetime). I obtain a contradiction from eleven premises, each of 
which is either directly intuitive or supported by intuitions. The use of so 
many premises results from the desire to exhibit as clearly as possible the 
places where readers might decide some intuition is to be undermined. 
Nonetheless the argument for inconsistency is, in outline, straightfor-
ward: our intuitions support the existence of a  supersponge , namely a region 
of less than the total volume but not disjoint from any connected part of 
space of positive diameter. But the complement of a supersponge is an 
intuitively impossible region. Yet, intuitively a region of less than maximal 
volume must have a complement. 
 Some have complained that the technical aspects of this chapter require 
more eff ort on the part of readers than the result warrants. I have three 
things to say about that complaint: 
 First, I am claiming that the eleven premises are literally jointly inconsist-
ent. If this is wrong I need correcting, but that I turn out to be wrong, if 
I am, will not be controversial. So the reader who does not want to invest 
much time on this project may simply leave the task of checking to others, 
and provisionally concede the inconsistency, pondering which are the less 
fi rm intuitions. 
 Second, the inconsistency result is not a mere curiosity, for we may gen-
erate a family of hypotheses by abandoning just one of the least fi rm intui-
tions. These hypotheses should be taken seriously in spite of the clash with 
the intuition in question. 

118 peter forrest
 Third, another reason why the inconsistency result is not a mere curiosity 
is that removing the inconsistency by abandoning the less fi rm intuitions 
is a preliminary required for any intuition-based argument against some 
hypothesis about the structure of space. 
 1.  Stipulations  
  1.  I shall concentrate on three-dimensional space. The parts of space 
are called  regions . Everything may be adapted to spacetime of four or 
more dimensions, or to some substance, the aether, that fi lls space or 
spacetime. 
  2.  If necessary I restrict attention to a local region r 0 , say within one light 
year of Earth. That is because I am concentrating on the local struc-
ture of space, not such global features as whether it has the shape of a 
three-dimensional spherical hypersurface. 
  3.  I assume that the part/whole relation (u ≤ v) is a partial ordering, that 
is (a) if u ≤ v and v ≤ w then u ≤ w, (b) u ≤ u, and (c) if u ≤ v and v ≤ 
u then u = v. If u ≤ v but u ≠ v then u is said to be a  proper  part of v  
(u < v). Regions u and v are said to  overlap  if there is some region w 
that is part of both u and v. 
  4.  I do not assume classical mereology holds for regions, that is, I do not 
assume that any regions have a  fusion , where the fusion (if it exists) 
of some regions, the Ws, is a region w that overlaps all and only the 
regions that overlap some W. 
  5.  I take the concept of a  sum  to be an intuitive one, of which the con-
cept of a  fusion is one explication. I do not here assume that the sum 
of regions is a fusion or that fusions are unique. But I do assume that 
if some regions, the Ws have a sum w then w is the  join (least upper 
bound) of the Ws. That is, every W is part of w and if every W is part 
of some region v, then v is itself part of w. 
  6.  I distinguish the  volume , abbreviated to vol, of a region of space from its 
standard mathematical representation, namely the  Lebesgue measure  of 
a set of coordinate triples. If we represent regions as sets of coordinate 
triples the volume should not diff er from the measure of the represent-
ing set except perhaps by a relatively small amount due, for instance, 
to the curvature of space. Note: If u and v are regions then we must 

conflicting intuitions about space 119
not confuse (a) vol(u) = vol(v), with (b) u = v, namely that u and v are 
identical. 
  7.  By a  point I mean any region of zero diameter, where diameter is a 
measure of extent and is subject to the following condition. If  x is a 
diameter or volume then either  x  = 0 or  x  = ∞ or there is some posi-
tive integer N such that 1/N <  x  < N. 
 This last stipulation is not intended to exclude fi ne-grained ways of measur-
ing extent and quantity, ones that allow infi nitesimal diff erences. It is merely 
a stipulation about when a measure of extent or quantity is to be called a 
diameter or volume respectively, namely that infi nitesimal diff erences are 
to be ignored. As a consequence, when I argue that the sum of regions of 
zero volume has zero volume I shall not rely on the, in any case dubious, 
principle that infi nity times zero is infi nity, for infi nity times an infi nitesimal 
could be anything from a smaller infi nity to a larger infi nitesimal, including 
all fi nite values in between. 
 The reason for the last stipulation is partly because it avoids unnecessary 
technicality. There is, in addition, a good technical reason for it. Intuitively, 
every region has a volume, although maybe it is 0 or ∞. But we might reject 
this intuition, in which case there could be regions that can be assigned a 
volume zero given my stipulation but could not be assigned a fi ner measure 
of quantity. To illustrate this, suppose classical mereology holds and so every 
set of regions has a unique sum. Suppose also that space is the sum of maxi-
mal points u that are in one to one correspondence with coordinate triples 
< x,y,z >. 1 These maximal points are, however, not simple regions, but each 
is a copy of the surface of a Euclidean sphere and hence the sum of simples 
in one to one correspondence with the members of K= {<  x ∗,  y ∗,  z ∗>:  x ∗ 2 
+  y ∗ 2 +  z ∗ 2  = 1}. Then we may assign an infi nitesimal measure of quan-
tity j to a maximal point u. There is a fi ne-grained assignment of quantity 
to any point v that is part of u, provided v corresponds to a  measurable  set  
K v ⊆ K. The fi ne-grained measure of the point v equals the measure (‘area’) 
of K v multiplied by the factor j/4π 2 . But there are many subsets of K that 
have no measure. (This a corollary of the magical Banach–Tarski theorem. 
See Forrest 2004a). Hence if some proper part v of u is a point represented 
by such a non-measurable set, v has zero or infi nitesimal extent but has no 
 1  A maximal point is a point that is not a proper part of any other point. 

120 peter forrest
fi ne-grained quantity. Therefore, the intuition that any region of zero diam-
eter has zero volume is not adequately expressed by saying that any region 
of zero or infi nitesimal extent is of zero or infi nitesimal quantity.  
 2.  An Intuition Underminer 
 One of the central ideas of metaphysics is that some things  ground  others, 
which are then said to exist  in virtue of  them or to  depend  on them. Kit Fine’s 
example is that the singleton {Socrates} exists in virtue of its member, 
Socrates, not vice versa (1995). Another example is the claim that surfaces 
of objects exist in virtue of objects. If we are considering regions of space 
we might well generalize this to the claim that all regions exist in virtue 
of three-dimensional regions. I am interested in this claim as an example 
that can be used to illustrate a way of undermining various initially intui-
tive claims about space. Let us examine, then, the claim that the Vs (e.g. all 
regions) exist  in virtue of  the Us (e.g. three-dimensional regions), or, equiva-
lently, that the Us  ground the Vs. A necessary condition is that the Vs super-
vene on the Us. That is, of metaphysical necessity there can be no diff erence 
in what Vs there are without some diff erence in what Us there are. This is 
equivalent to saying that the existence of the Us together with the fact that 
these are all the Us entails, of metaphysical necessity, the existence of the Vs. 
Metaphysical necessity is a concept in need of further explication but I am 
here assuming that we have a reasonable grasp of it. 
 In addition, for the Us to be  grounds of the Vs, there has to be a causal con-
nection. Or so I say. After Descartes philosophers have suff ered from scru-
ples and after Hume obsessively so. So to those who consider that the ‘glue’ 
joining eff ect to cause cannot be a matter of metaphysical necessity, I say 
that the grounds  quasi-cause  that which they ground, where quasi-causation 
is like ordinary causation but with metaphysical necessity replacing physical 
necessity. 
 Because of the quasi-causal character of the grounding, to discover or 
to hypothesize that the Vs exist in virtue of the Us provides an actual or 
hypothetical explanation of the Vs in terms of the Us. Now supervenience 
is a necessary part of a suffi  cient condition for explanation, but superveni-
ence by itself does not explain. If it did we could have a circular explanation 
whenever the Us and the Vs supervene on each other. Hence there is more 
to existing in virtue of than supervening upon. 

conflicting intuitions about space 121
 I am considering the initially intuitive thesis that the only regions are 
those of three dimensions. Hud Hudson seeks to  rebut  that thesis by appeal-
ing to the supposedly intuitive principle of Weak Supplementation, namely 
that if u is a proper part of w then there is some part v of w disjoint from 
u (Hudson 2005, pp. 54–55). This is precisely the sort of argument from 
intuitions to which the inconsistency result of this chapter is relevant. (See 
Point 3 of the Introduction.) But that is not my reason for considering it 
here, which is that the initial intuition that all regions are of three dimen-
sions may be  undermined , by diagnosing it as the misunderstanding of the 
intuition that all regions exist in virtue of those of three dimensions. When 
we say, if we do, that the surfaces of regions are not real that is equivocal 
between them not existing and their existing in virtue of something else. 
Once we grasp this, the intuition that there are no surfaces vanishes. 
 A corollary of the undermining of the initial intuition that all regions are 
three-dimensional is that points are not directly counter-intuitive. That is, if 
the existence of points clashes with intuitions that clash must be mediated 
by an argument from those intuitions. 
 The moral is to be careful to distinguish claims about grounding from 
existence claims when formulating intuitions. 
 3.  Intuitions about Connectedness 
 A region w is  connected  unless it is the sum of regions u and v that are  sepa-
rated  from each other. Separation may in turn be characterized metrically 
as follows. 
 Regions u and v are separated if there are real numbers  x and  y that are two of 
the values the diameter function  may take, and any region overlapping both u 
and v has diameter greater than  y , which is in turn greater than  x . 
 This defi nition is intended to cover not merely continuous space, where 
we may assume that there arbitrarily small positive possible values of the 
diameter, but the discrete case as well, where, for instance, we might restrict 
the possible values to the non-negative integers and + ∞. In the continuous 
case my defi nition amounts to the more familiar:
 Regions u and v are separated if there is a positive integer N such that any 
region overlapping both u and v has diameter greater than 1/N. 

122 peter forrest
 Mereological curmudgeons rely on the intuition that every region is con-
nected. Hence, they say, regions have a sum only if some connected region 
is their sum. If I attempt to exhibit a disconnected region, such as the USA, 
the response will be that I have not exhibited one but rather several regions 
(Alaska, the sum of the 48 contiguous states, etc.). This intuition is suffi  -
ciently signifi cant for me to off er both a rebuttal and an undermining. The 
rebuttal is based on the premise that in whatever sense the structure of space 
is  necessary  it is not necessary that an embodied person is or has ever been 
connected. This premise could be rejected by substance dualists, who might 
claim that no person is material. For substance dualists, I suggest an alterna-
tive premise, namely that it is not necessary that a living organism is or has 
ever been connected. The most direct way of arguing for these premises is 
to suppose that the forces between particles do not involve any contact, but 
we could give a more elaborate story of how some organisms result from 
an amalgam of two quite diff erent hollow animals one inside the other 
with only accidental physical contact between the two layers. I then rely 
upon the premise that an object must exactly occupy some region. Hence 
it is possible that there be a disconnected organism, an embodied person 
maybe, that occupies a region exactly, proving the possibility of discon-
nected regions. But since the structure of space is necessary then there exist 
disconnected regions even if there are no actual disconnected organisms or 
persons. 
 The undermining proceeds as in the previous section. We tend to con-
fl ate the stronger claim that all Vs are Us with the weaker claim that those Vs 
that are not Us exist in virtue of the Us, In this case we tend to confl ate the 
claim that all regions are connected with the weaker claim that all regions 
exist in virtue of connected ones. 
 The intuition that survives the undermining and rebuttal is that all 
regions are grounded by connected ones. This may be strengthened by con-
sidering the sort of grounding involved. Intuitively a region that is the sum 
of many separated regions is grounded in those regions by means of sum-
mation. The force of this intuition is shown by what it rejects, namely other 
suggested ways of grounding regions that are not connected. It is easy to 
fi nd two connected regions u and v whose maximal common part, their 
 meet , u∧v, is not connected. For instance if we consider parts of the Earth’s 
surface, the oceans form a connected region as do the tropics but their meet 
falls into two separated parts, one in the Atlantic and the other in the Indian 

conflicting intuitions about space 123
and Pacifi c oceans. Suppose, then, that u and v are connected but u∧v is not. 
Intuitively u∧v is grounded by its connected parts not by u and v. Likewise 
it is easy to fi nd connected regions u and v where u is a proper part of v and 
there is a diff erence, v—u, that is not connected. For instance the oceans 
are connected, the surface of the Earth is connected but the non-oceanic 
part of the surface of the Earth is not. In that case it is intuitive that v—u is 
grounded in its connected parts not in v and u. 
 The intuition that every region that is not connected is grounded in 
connected parts might perhaps be partially undermined by the suggestion 
that we have trouble distinguishing regions that diff er by zero volume. Even 
taking this suggestion into account we have intuitive support for the fi rst of 
my eleven premises:
 Premise One (Connected Parts) : Every region of positive volume has a connected part.  
 Next we have:
 Premise Two (Universal Summation) : Any regions have a sum. 
 My case against the curmudgeons removes the obstacles in the way of 
Universal Summation. On the other hand it is not directly intuitive. It may 
be supported in two ways. The fi rst, due to David Lewis (1991, p. 81) is to 
submit that there is no extravagance in positing sums along with their sum-
mands. For it is they and they are it. In addition it is extravagant to restrict 
rules capable of universal formulation. (Call this principle, ‘Frege’s Razor’, 
because Frege assumed that set-theoretic axioms were unrestricted until 
Russell derived his paradox.) Extravagance is not, however, the only fault an 
ontology can have and if Universal Summation turns out to be inconsistent 
with fi rmer intuitions then we may reject it without scruple. 
 Notice that I have stated Universal Summation regardless of whether 
the regions form a set or a proper class. Partly that is because I think that 
such considerations are intuitively irrelevant, but it is also in part because 
the structure that I am investigating is the local structure, say within some 
region r 0 of fi nite diameter, and so the only case that I need worry about is 
that in which the parts of r 0 form not a set but a proper class R 0 . But that 
would tend to undermine intuitions about sums only because of some sup-
posed intuition that every proper class X ⊆ R 0 , has too many members to 

124 peter forrest
have a join. If there is such an undermining intuition it is itself rebutted by 
the way the proper class R 0 has a join namely r 0 itself. 
 4.  Arbitrarily Small Regions 
 We have some intuitions concerning arbitrarily small regions. The follow-
ing is typical. 
 Premise Three (The Diameter Volume Nexus) : Given any positive integer M, how-
ever large, there is a positive integer N such that any region of diameter less than 
1/N  is part of a region of volume less than 1/M. 
 I am not assuming as a premise that every region has a volume so I can-
not yet exclude the case in which, however large N, is there are regions of 
diameter less than 1/N with no volume. 
 The restriction to regions of arbitrarily small diameter helps prevent 
scruples arising if we think of spacetime as curved. For even a curved space-
time is locally like Minkowski spacetime, where, with one proviso, we have 
no trouble with the idea of diameter. And the restriction to the arbitrarily 
small is equivalent to considering what happens locally. The proviso is that 
the diameter of a region is relative to the choice of a frame of reference.  2 
Fortunately if the Diameter Volume Nexus holds in one frame it holds in 
every other. 
 The next couple of intuitions are about suitably shaped arbitrarily small 
regions, which I shall call  globules.  Precision is not important here, but if 
readers want they may take the globules to be  convex  regions. The reason 
why precision is not important is that the term ‘globule’ functions like the 
variable X in a Ramsey sentence: there are some regions, call them the 
globules, such that all the premises hold. 
 Premise Four (Finite Globules) : There is a globule of fi nite positive diameter, and 
fi nite positive volume. 
 Premise Five (Arbitrarily Fine Covering) : If N is a positive integer and if u is a glob-
ule of fi nite diameter then u is part of the sum of at most a countable infi nity 
of  globules of diameter less than 1/N. 
 2  The diameter corresponds to a metric in which the norm (length) of a 4-vector with coordinates  
< t, x, y, z > is √( t 2  + x 2  + y 2   +z 2 ). 

conflicting intuitions about space 125
 On the highly plausible assumption that there are only fi nitely many dimen-
sions a fi nite number of globules would suffi  ce.  
 Premise Six (Arbitrarily Thin Boundaries) : If u is a globule of fi nite diameter, and 
N a positive integer, then there is a region v of volume less than 1/N such that 
any  connected region w that overlaps u, but is not part of u, overlaps v. 
 Given a representation of regions by means of coordinate triples this implies 
that the boundary of the representing set of a globule is of zero measure, and 
hence of lower dimensionality. Convex regions such as cubes or balls satisfy 
this principle as would regions whose boundaries are fractals, but a region 
represented by an open dense set of fi nite measure in the topological space 
of all triples of real numbers would not have an arbitrarily thin boundary. 
For the boundary of its representing set would be of infi nite measure. Such 
regions would not count as globules. 
 By Arbitrarily Fine Covering, any simple region must be a point, con-
trary to idea that there are extended simple regions. It might be objected 
that Greek atomists believed in extended simple objects, perhaps casting 
doubt on Arbitrarily Fine Covering. On the contrary, the intuition that 
any extended thing should have left and right halves, or more generally be 
divisible in each direction, was produced as an argument against the Greek 
atoms. If we are realists about space we can say that it is not the atom that 
has left and right halves but the region it occupies. This reply is not available 
if we are considering the regions of space themselves if space is a substance.  
 5.  Intuitions about Volume 
 It is true by defi nition that if u is part of v then the volume (and diameter) 
of u cannot exceed that of v. In addition, we have the following. 
 Premise Seven (The Mereology Volume Nexus) : (1) If u is part of v, which is part 
of w, if u and w have volumes, and if vol(u) = vol(w) then v has a volume and, 
hence  vol(u) = vol(w). (2) If v is part of w and w is of zero volume then v has 
a volume,  so v has zero volume. 
 From this and the Diameter Volume Nexus (Premise Three) it follows 
that any point has zero volume. Rather than think of this as derived 

126 peter forrest
from Premises Three and Seven I suggest that the intuition that every 
point is of zero volume is part of the intuitive basis for the Diameter 
Volume Nexus. 
 If we had initially assigned fi ner-grained volumes that made infi nitesimal 
distinctions, then the situation might arise in which a region to which no 
volume may be assigned is part of one of infi nitesimal volume. The Diameter 
Volume Nexus nonetheless assigns to such regions zero volume when we 
ignore infi nitesimals, in accordance with the stipulation made above. 
 Another premise relating mereology with volumes is:
 Premise Eight (Volume Supplementation) : If u is part of w and vol(w) > vol(u) then 
w has a part v disjoint from u and of positive volume. 
 This is a variant on the putative principle of Weak Supplementation, which 
is used along with the existence of sums of any regions to argue for clas-
sical mereology. Weak Supplementation states that if u is a proper part of 
w then there is some part v disjoint from u such that v is part of w. The 
idea behind this is that some of w is left over when u is removed. I submit 
that what is intuitive here is not Weak Supplementation but Premise Eight. 
For in the case in which vol(u) = vol(w) when you take u away there 
might well be nothing left. It would be a mistake, though, to say that Weak 
Supplementation is  counter-intuitive in the case in which vol(u) = vol(w). 
My claim is merely that it lacks an intuitive basis in this case. Suppose, for 
instance, we accepted the thesis that all and only three-dimensional sets of 
triples of real numbers represent regions of space. Then there would be both 
a ball represented by the closed set { <x, y, z >:  x  2   + y  2   + z  2  ≤ 1} and a proper 
part represented by the open set { <x, y, z> :  x  2   + y  2   + z  2  < 1}, but there is 
no surface, that is no region represented by the boundary {< x, y, z >:  x  2   + 
y  2   + z  2   = 1}, for that would be two-dimensional. So Weak Supplementation 
fails. We now ask what would be left over if we took the inner sphere away. 
There is nothing counter-intuitive if we said there is something left over, 
contradicting the assumptions made, but since there is no volume in addi-
tion to the inner region neither is it counter-intuitive to say instead that 
there is nothing left over. 
 Strictly speaking Premise Eight is intuitive only within the scope of the 
supposition of Premise Two. For otherwise the stuff  left over might be scat-
tered in an infi nity of regions of zero volume. 

conflicting intuitions about space 127
 It is intuitive that the whole is no greater than the sum of the parts. We 
have, then:
 Volume Subadditivity : If there are regions, the Us, each with volume, which have 
a sum w, then w has a volume and vol(w) does not exceed the sum of the vol-
umes of the  Us. 
 By Premise Two the sum w is guaranteed to exist. 
 Volume Subadditivity may conveniently be divided into two cases. The 
fi rst concerns the sum of two regions and is the following familiar principle.  
 Premise Nine (Finite Subadditivity) : If u and v have volumes and w is the sum of 
u and v, then vol(w) ≤ vol(u) + vol(v). 
 Next there is the transition from the fi nite to the infi nite case and, not 
quite as intuitive, the transition from the countable to the uncountable case. 
For this purpose I need the following. 
 Premise Ten (Limiting Volumes): Consider some totally ordered regions (i.e. given 
any two of them one is a part of the other), each of which has volume less than 
or  equal to  k . Then, if the regions have a sum the sum has volume less than or 
equal  to  k . 
 From Premises Two, Nine, and Ten we obtain:
 Countable Subadditivity : Consider a sequence of regions, u 1 , u 2, etc. such that, for 
all j, u j has volume. Then the volume of their sum is no greater than the sum of 
the  volumes of the u j . 
 Countable Subadditivity has intuitive support, illustrated by the following cau-
tionary tale against trying to get something for nothing. You think Countable 
Subadditivity is false and so fi ll up a sequence of regions with  twin gold , where 
in the world being considered twin gold has arbitrarily small parts that are still 
twin gold, but twin gold is as precious as gold is in our world. You have to fi ll the 
regions up more and more rapidly so as to fi ll them all up but this is no problem 
because they are smaller and smaller. (Worried by curmudgeons you are also 
careful to connect each of the globules to the next by a thin thread using a total 
of only 10cc). The sum of the volumes of the regions is 100cc, so at the end 

128 peter forrest
of the operation you have used only 110 cc of gold. You believe, though, that 
Countable Subadditivity fails and hope that as a result there is a region w full 
of gold, with volume 200cc of gold. But you got it wrong: it turns out that the 
regions in question do have a sum which is full of gold but it cannot be assigned 
any volume at all! Both your hope and the unfortunate outcome are absurd so 
this is not, it seems, a metaphysically possible world after all. 
 Premise Ten is intuitive, but may also be argued for by relying upon a princi-
ple that I have not taken as one of the eleven premises, namely that every region 
has a volume. Consider the sum of totally ordered regions each of volume no 
greater than  k , and assume it has a volume. If that volume is greater than  k 
we may ask, as we did when considering Volume Supplementation, where the 
extra stuff  comes from. It comes from nowhere, which is counter-intuitive. To 
appreciate the intuitive strength of the assumption that every region has a vol-
ume—perhaps zero, perhaps positive but fi nite, or perhaps infi nite—consider 
the idea of a liquid, it might as well be twin water or molten twin gold, which, 
unlike water has point parts that are made of the same stuff . Although contrary 
to science we can easily imagine that there is such stuff . (And by the principle 
that necessities are not to be multiplied more than is necessary, we should be 
reluctant to suppose that such stuff  is impossible.) Now consider a region with 
no volume but full of this liquid. Then pour it out into a beaker. Does it vanish? 
Are you drowned in an infi nity of the stuff , or what? The supposition is almost 
as absurd as the story about trying to increase the quantity of twin gold. And 
if further persuasion is required I ask why physicists—never backward about 
boggling—have not hypothesized  squarks , particles lacking volume and mass 
but three of which combine to produce an honest particle of positive mass and 
volume? The intuition here is that volume is the measure of the quantity of 
some stuff , in this case space. Because the measure is coarse-grained there may 
well be regions of zero volume but not ones without a volume at all.  
 6.  The Axiom of Choice  
 The Axiom of Choice is required for the following:
 Premise Eleven : If every  totally ordered set  of parts of u of zero volume has a join of  
zero volume then the join of  all  the parts of zero volume is itself of zero volume.  
 Although not intuitive it follows from Zorn’s Lemma, itself provable using 
the Axiom of Choice, together with Premise Nine. Rather than state the 

conflicting intuitions about space 129
Axiom of Choice in full generality as a premise I state just this one case of 
it. (Premise Nine implies that the sum of two regions of zero volume is itself 
of zero volume. Suppose that every totally ordered set of parts of u of zero 
volume has a join of zero volume then by Zorn’s Lemma there is a part v 
of u which is maximal among the parts of zero volume. This part v must be 
the join of all the parts of u that have zero volume. For if w is any such part 
v + w is of zero volume and has v as a part. But v is maximal so v + w = v, 
proving that w is part of v.) 
 7.  The Sum of All the Zeros 
 If a region u has a part of zero volume then, I shall argue, the sum of all 
its parts of zero volume is a part of zero volume. By the combination of 
the Mereology Volume Nexus (Premise Seven) and the Diameter Volume 
Nexus (Premise Three) any point is of zero volume. Hence this result 
excludes any theory of space that implies that every region is the sum of 
points, including the orthodoxy, namely that regions are represented by all 
the non-empty sets of coordinate triples. 
 First we show that u has a maximal part of zero volume, v. For given any 
totally ordered set W of zero-volume parts of u, by Premise Two W has a 
sum w and by Premise Ten w has zero volume. So by Premise Eleven u has 
a maximal part of zero volume, v. 
 Now consider any regions of volume zero. By Premise Two they have a 
sum u, which is therefore their join. We have just shown that u has a maxi-
mal part of zero volume that is the join of all the parts of zero volume and 
so is u itself. So u is of zero volume, establishing the result that any sum of 
regions of zero volume is itself of zero volume. 
 I anticipate the exasperated response that geometers have lived with this 
for two millennia and so we should reject any intuitions that might be 
deployed against point-based theories of space. I have three responses. First 
I am committed to abandoning one of the premises and the supporting 
intuitions so point-based theories are not excluded by my result. Second the 
intuitions are about space conceived of realistically. If the stuff  that is real is 
not point based maybe we should call it the aether and consider the loca-
tions of parts of aether to be regions of a fi ctional, ‘constructed’ space, which 
might well be as the orthodoxy proclaims. Finally, suppose an appeal is made 
to the tradition of Euclidean geometry, to the development of Cartesian 
coordinates, and to the nineteenth-century perfection of geometry, all in 

130 peter forrest
support of the orthodoxy. Then I reply that the Banach–Tarski theorem was 
a surprising discovery and that had it been discovered by, say, Archimedes, 
the orthodoxy would not have been so widely accepted. 
 This result that any sum of regions of zero volume is itself of zero volume 
excludes any point-based theory of spacetime, such as the orthodoxy that 
every set of coordinate triples represents a region. But that is not all. It also 
excludes the existence of  supersponges . 3 By a supersponge for a region u of 
strictly positive volume I mean some region v of strictly less volume than u 
such that there is no connected part of u of strictly positive volume disjoint 
from v. 
 The case against supersponges is by reductio ad absurdum. Suppose that v 
is a supersponge for u. Let w be the sum of all the parts of u of zero volume. 
Then w is itself of zero volume so v + w is of strictly less volume than u 
and so, by Volume Supplementation there is a part x of u of positive volume 
disjoint from v + w and hence disjoint from both v and w. It follows that x 
has no parts of zero volume. But x has no connected parts of strictly posi-
tive volume. Hence it has no connected parts, contradicting Premise One 
(Connected Parts). Therefore to complete the argument for the clash of 
intuitions I need only argue for the existence of supersponges from some 
of the eleven premises. 
 8.  Supersponges 
 First suppose that every region is represented by some set of coordinate 
triples. Call the set of all the coordinate triples  V . Now consider a region u 
of fi nite diameter and unit volume. That there is a supersponge v for u may 
be demonstrated as follows. 
 For any rational number  q consider the sets  X  q   = {< x, y, z> ∈  V :  x =q }, 
 Y  q   = {< x, y, z> ∈  V :  y =q } and  Z  q   = {< x, y, z> ∈  V :  z =q }. There are 
countably many such sets so they may be ordered by the integers as the sets 
 W  k  , k  = 1, 2, etc. Then there is a region v k whose representative includes  W k 
but such that vol(u∧v k ) ≤ (½) k+1 . The sum of all the u∧v k is a supersponge 
for u, with volume no greater than ½. Moreover if we could assume that 
 3  Of which the Menger-Sierpinski sponge might be familiar (Weisstein). 

conflicting intuitions about space 131
the set of coordinates within 1/N of a triple of rationals represents a region 
then we do not need the Axiom of Choice to show the supersponge exists. 
 More generally, we can show the existence of supersponges without 
assuming coordinate representation, by relying upon Premises Four, Five, 
Six, Nine, and Ten. First, by Premise Four (Finite Globules) we may suppose 
that u is a globule of fi nite volume and diameter. Let its volume be 1 unit. 
Then by Premise Five (Arbitrarily Fine Covering) for every positive integer 
N, u is part of the sum of at most a countable number of globules of diam-
eter less than 1/N. So we may consider a sequence of globules u j , j = 1, 2, 
etc. such that for any positive integer N, u is part of the sum of the members 
of the sequence of diameter less than 1/N. Then for every globule u j there 
is a region v j as in Premise Six (Arbitrarily Thin Boundaries) of volume 
no greater than (½)  j+1 . By Countable Subadditivity (which follows from 
Premises Nine and Ten) v, the sum of the v j , has volume no greater than ½. 
The region v is the required supersponge for u. 
 Summary 
 From the eleven premises we obtain two results (1) regions of zero volume 
have a sum of zero   volume; (2) there exists a supersponge for some region 
of fi nite positive volume. Now (1), (2), Premise Three (Diameter Volume 
Nexus), and Premise Eight (Volume Supplementation) form an inconsistent 
tetrad so one of the Premises One to Eleven must be false. But which one? 
I suspect most readers will consider the answer obvious. I also suspect they 
will disagree.  


 PART III 
Interaction with Other Topics 


 8 
 Transhypertime Identity  
 HUD   HUDSON 
 1.  Time and Hypertime 
 The Growing Block Theory opposes Presentism (a view according to 
which only present things exist) and opposes Eternalism (a view according 
to which past, present, and even future things exist), opting instead for a 
kind of compromise in which existence is accorded past and present items, 
but not recognized for the putative future items. The philosophical litera-
ture detailing the advantages and disadvantages of each of these three theo-
ries of time is rich, the arguments deep and diffi  cult, and the consequences 
for other areas of inquiry signifi cant. Although each theory would provide a 
backdrop for my theme, in the end, the Growing Block Theory will require 
the fewest qualifi cations, explanations, and apologies—and thus I propose 
to engage with it rather than with its more popular cousins in this chapter.  1   
 The Growing Block Theory off ers us a picture of the universe featur-
ing a spacetime volume that increases as time passes. At any given moment 
exactly one time is special—the time associated with the hyperplane on the 
surface of the block in the direction of its growth. The outermost surface, 
so to speak, is the new kid on the block; it didn’t exist moments before, and 
although it will continue to exist, it will not remain the outermost surface 
moments hence. During its brief instant in the spotlight—before becoming 
ever-more imprisoned in the block’s interior—its stock of facts and events 
are  present . Soon they will become forever past and take their eternal places 
 1  For formulations and discussions of the Growing Block Theory see C. D. Broad’s  Scientifi c Thought  and 
Michael Tooley’s  Time, Tense, and Causation . Hopefully, once it has been displayed in this context, the 
reader can reconstruct the primary puzzle below with his/her own preferred theory of time.  

136 hud hudson
frozen in the block, but for one shining moment they are privileged—bal-
anced on the very edge of Being. 
 On some scorecards, the Growing Block Theory is thought to com-
bine the best features of its primary rivals. Like Presentism, it proclaims the 
uniqueness of the present, recognizes objective and irreducible temporal 
properties, takes tense seriously, and countenances the genuine passage of 
time. Like Eternalism, it furnishes truth-makers for past truths, provides 
relata for cross-temporal relations, and acknowledges the existence of many 
objects that are not present. Of course, this very combination of commit-
ments is also alleged to be the source of its decisive refutation, with oppo-
nents complaining that if it were true, we (absurdly) could not know it 
is now now or else would risk living amongst zombies in the block (i.e. 
amongst non-present, sentient-like individuals with no consciousness). 2   
 Other critiques balk at a privileged present and allege incompatibility with 
Special and General Relativity or else target the endorsement of time’s passage, 
maintaining that the view must be supplemented by a hypertime in which 
the growing of the block occurs and against which its rate of passage can be 
measured. Whereas I judge this latter criticism to be in error, I am nevertheless 
intrigued by the combination of the Growing Block Theory and the Hypertime 
Hypothesis.  3 Even if not wedded by necessity, this conjunction of theses initially 
seems both intelligible and metaphysically possible, and (at least with respect to 
the Hypertime Hypothesis) for all we know, actual. 
 Let us, then, entertain our compossible combination of theses. We may 
maintain that the spacetime block grows by a certain number of standard 
events per second and that it (normally) hypergrows at a certain number 
of ticktocks per second (where a ticktock is an interval of hypertime as a 
second is an interval of time).  4 ‘Ticktock’ is a convenience; we are, of course, 
 2  On the alleged obstacle to knowing whether it is now now, see Craig Bourne (2002) and David 
Braddon-Mitchell (2004). For the zombie problem, see Peter Forrest’s (2004b) “The Real but Dead 
Past:  a Reply to Braddon-Mitchell,” and Chris Heathwood’s (2005) “The Real Price of the Dead 
Past: A Reply to Forrest and Braddon-Mitchell.” For an attempt to undermine the motivation for the 
Growing Block Theory, see Trenton Merricks’s (2006) “Goodbye Growing Block.” 
 3  J. J. C. Smart challenges the notion of temporal becoming and raises pointed questions about the 
need for a hypertime in his (1949) “The River of Time,” and in his (1963) “The Space-Time World: An 
Excerpt from  Philosophy and Scientifi c Realism .” Ned Markosian meets this challenge without resort to 
hypertime in his (1993) “How Fast Does Time Pass?” 
 4  In his (2010) “Changing the Past,” Peter van Inwagen adopts this strategy for measuring the growth of 
the block in time by letting a standard event be a single vibration of a cesium atom and by assuming the 
number of cesium atoms to remain constant. Other stand-ins for standard events are available.  

transhypertime identity 137
free to assign any hypertime interval we please to the term ‘ticktock’, and 
it will prove useful to let it be the interval that (normally) yields one sec-
ond of growth on the block. (The need for the qualifi cation ‘normally’ will 
emerge shortly.) Recent literature reveals that the intelligibility and meta-
physical possibility of this combination has also intrigued others, especially 
those who hope to exploit the resources of hypertime not to respond to a 
call for time’s rate of passage but rather to account (and in a very satisfying 
way) for backwards time travel and changing the past.  5 Others have seen in 
this combination a number of applications to philosophy of religion and a 
strategy for reconciling some of the outstanding confl icts in the dialogue 
between science and faith. 6   
 The absolutely crucial observation—in the discussions of time travel, in 
the skirmishes between religion and science, and in our present investiga-
tion—is quite simply that
 whereas for each instant of hypertime, the facts about what is past and present are deter-
mined by the features of the spacetime block in existence at that hypertime, the features of 
the block at one hypertime need not constrain its features at other hypertimes . 7   
 A growing, spacetime block, like each of its creaturely contents, is a 
contingent entity. At any given hypertime, there could have been no 
block at all, or the very same block with diff erent contents, or the very 
same contents in a diff erent block, or a diff erent block with diff erent 
contents, or a piece of the old block surrounded by bits of a new one, 
and so on. Moreover (barring inconsistencies with the divine nature, 
should God exist) there are no metaphysically necessary rules on how 
things look block-wise from one hypertime to the next. Whether the 
product of hypertime-designer or blind chance, the march of hypertime 
 5  See G. C. Goddu’s (2003) “Time Travel and Changing the Past: (Or How to Kill Yourself and Live 
to Tell the Tale),” and Peter van Inwagen’s “Changing the Past.” For a critical discussion and extension 
of the proposed model of time travel to Eternalist and Presentist theories of time, see Hud Hudson 
and Ryan Wasserman’s (2010) “van Inwagen on Time Travel and Changing the Past.” The Hudson/
Wasserman piece will also guide you in transferring the puzzles of the present chapter to an Eternalist 
or Presentist metaphysic. For initial worries about van Inwagen’s approach that will be directly addressed 
in the present chapter see Graeme A. Forbes’s (2010) review of  Oxford Studies in Metaphysics: V . 
 6  Others . . . well, me. See my (2010a) “An Essay on Eden.” In setting the stage for this chapter, I have bor-
rowed some of my earlier characterizations of the Growing Block Theory from that article.  
 7  Perhaps it is better to say “need not constrain the features of other blocks at other hypertimes” so 
as not to prejudge the issue of the persistence of a single spacetime block across a hypertime interval.  

138 hud hudson
may see one block seamlessly replaced with another, or the destruction 
of large portions of a block’s leading edge at a hypertime instant, or the 
alteration of large portions of everything but a block’s leading edge at a 
hypertime instant, or the sudden introduction of a cavity in the interior 
of a block at a hypertime instant, and so on.  
 2.  A Pair of Block-Stories 
 Consider a pair of block-stories (while forgiving what, at least initially, must 
seem a jarring inconstancy in tense): 
 Story 1 
 Once upon a hypertime (here named ‘Hypertime-0’), there hyperwere 
uncountably-many point-locations. The fusion of these locations—whose 
name is ‘OurBlock’—is a connected region. For an instant (and a hyperin-
stant), OurBlock is three-dimensional, but then standard events transpire, new 
hyperplanes chart OurBlock’s growth, time begins slipping into the future at 
a rate of  n standard events per second, the seconds shuffl  e by at a steady rate 
of one second per ticktock of hypertime, and OurBlock becomes extended in 
four dimensions—three of them spatial and one temporal. Hypereventually, a 
bewildering variety of events are to be found throughout this four-dimensional 
region. At one quite-small, three-dimensional cross-section of the region (cut-
ting it time-wise) there is a separation of fundamental forces, gravitation comes 
into its own, and things are cooling down. Interestingly, this hyperwas the lead-
ing face of the block just shortly hyperafter Hypertime-0, but the sturdy little 
block grew and hypergrew until, at a much later cross-section, a remote and 
lonely little world witnesses a transition from non-organic to organic matter, 
and prospects for something good are starting to look promising. And the sturdy 
little block grew and hypergrew until, at a somewhat later cross-section, rational 
beings race about fi ghting wars, reading poetry, having love aff airs, writing his-
tory, and predicting the future. And the sturdy little block grew and hypergrew 
until, at a much later cross-section, there is a failed interstellar voyage in which 
the descendants of these rational beings (in the attempt to escape the mess 
they’ve made of their planet) follow Captain Quag’s unhappy decision to head 
toward Alpha Centauri rather than Barnard’s Star. And the sturdy little block 
grew and hypergrew until, at a considerably later cross-section, there is a mas-
sive, sprawling, and worn-out universe, suff ering its fi nal thermodynamic state. 

transhypertime identity 139
These appalling moments of maximal entropy hyperwere on the leading face 
of the block at those fi nal hypertimes up to but not including Hypertime-100.   
 Story 2 
 Once upon a hypertime (Hypertime-100, in fact) the Spotlight of Being 
shines brightly hyperonce again upon a particular cross-section of OurBlock, 
a cross-section containing an anxious Captain Quag in the midst of making 
the most important decision of his life. To a hypertime observer (i.e. to one 
who could witness the progression of blocks across hypertime intervals) it 
would appear that a tremendous chunk of OurBlock has been suddenly and 
inexplicably cut away. Just hypermoments ago, this very surface is buried 
deep in the interior of OurBlock, but hypernow it is exposed hyperonce 
again and constitutes the outermost edge, since at Hypertime-100 a size-
able chunk of OurBlock has simply been annihilated. Captain Quag’s is not 
a deterministic world, and despite the fact that all the events that predate 
his decision are exactly the same hyperpresently as they just hyperwere, he 
now turns his ship toward Barnard’s Star rather than Alpha Centauri, where 
(after some further growing and hypergrowing of OurBlock) he teams up 
with the good people there to discover the secret to recollapsing the cos-
mos, thereby trading in heat-death for a big crunch at the end of times—a 
calamity which occurs at Hypertime-200.  
 Suppose we have been charged with the task of writing the biography of 
our intrepid Captain Quag. How shall we proceed? In response to this 
question, we would do well to focus on two diff erent issues, sharply sepa-
rating what is true about the past at any given hypertime from what is true 
about the hyperpast at any given hypertime. 
 At Hypertime-200, for example, it would appear that the following 
is an accurate historical report: On January 1st of the year 172117, just 
as the ship’s bells rang in the new year, Captain Quag issued the com-
mand to set course for Barnard’s Star, and thus unknowingly escaped 
the certain destruction that happened to be lying along the path to 
Alpha Centauri. At Hypertime-99, however, it would appear instead that 
the following is an accurate historical report:  On January 1st of the 
year 172117, just as the ship’s bells rang in the new year, Captain Quag 
issued the command to set course for Alpha Centauri, thus sealing the 
fate of his good crew and missing the only opportunity for contact 

140 hud hudson
with another rational species that had awaited him near Barnard’s Star. 
Moreover, at Hypertime-200 it would appear that the following report 
is true, as well: Whereas it hyperwas the case that Captain Quag issued 
a particular command at a certain time, it also hyperwas the case that 
Captain Quag refrained from issuing that very command at that very 
time. Also, again at Hypertime-200, it is now and has always been true 
that no one ever embarked on a journey to Alpha Centauri and nor was 
there ever any collision of a ship with the asteroids of that system, and 
yet it hyperwas the case that just such a collision occurred after just such 
a voyage. 
 Of course, these perplexing pronouncements can escape contradiction 
by being carefully sorted (i) into claims about what is true now and in the 
past at a hypertime— facts that are fi xed by how the block that is present at that 
hypertime is constituted —and (ii) into claims about what is true hypernow 
and hyperhistorically— facts that are fi xed by how the blocks that are present at 
successive hypertimes are constituted . 
 That’s all well and good . . . perhaps we can employ such caution and avoid 
contradicting ourselves. But to be fair, our charge wasn’t to show how care-
ful sorting can save us from asserting contradictions; rather it was to write 
the biography of our intrepid Captain Quag. And doing a proper job of that, 
I suspect, will require taking a stand on a number of further metaphysical 
commitments worth exposing and discussing. 
 3.  Human Persons and Persistence 
 Let’s start the research for our biography. Captain Quag is a human person, and 
since we would like to respond to our charge by giving an exhaustive rendering 
of his days and doings, perhaps we should begin with the question—“What is a 
human person?” Although it is not controversy-free, I favor a materialist meta-
physics of the human person, according to which a human person is identical to 
a certain, highly organized, material object.  8 Some variety or other of material-
ism is the dominant view these days (and in the 172110s, too), but just which 
material object we are to identify with a human person is hotly contested. 
The  Animalists  favor identifi cation with an entire human organism, while the 
 8  For an extended discussion of exactly this question and a defense of this reply, see my (2001)  A 
Materialist Metaphysics of the Human Person . 

transhypertime identity 141
 Minimalists select the least inclusive thing that houses the relevant psychology, 
say, a proper part of a human brain.  9 Let’s work with this pair as our representa-
tives of materialism for human persons. 
 Next, since Captain Quag has lived a long and illustrious life, let us ask the 
question—“How does a material object persist through time?” We have four 
views to sift through here; there are others, of course, but these are the views 
that strike me as the most promising and worthy of consideration.  Perdurantists 
take a persisting material object to be extended in four dimensions (three spatial 
and one temporal) and to be composed of temporal parts (as well as of spatial 
parts). Persistence across an interval of time is a matter of being partly present 
at the diff erent times in that interval (i.e. of having diff erent temporal parts 
located at the diff erent moments in that interval).  Endurantists take a persist-
ing material object to be an entity extended in three dimensions (all spatial). 
Persistence across an interval of time is a matter of being located at the diff erent 
times in that interval (i.e. of being multi-located at a series of non-simultaneous 
three-dimensional regions).  Stage-Theorists  take a persisting material object to be 
an entity extended in three dimensions (all spatial). Persistence across an interval 
of time is a matter of bearing certain counterpart relations to other (instantane-
ous) entities located at the diff erent times in that interval (i.e. of being relevantly 
similar to other momentary items distributed along that interval whose proper-
ties serve as the truth makers for  de re  temporal claims about its future states). 
 Regionalists take a persisting material object to be an entity extended in four 
dimensions (three spatial and one temporal), but who may remain neutral on 
whether or not this carries any commitment to proper parts (whether spatial or 
temporal). Persistence across an interval of time is a matter of bearing a location 
relation to a region that intersects more than one time (i.e. to a region contain-
ing points from more than one hyperplane of the block that hosts it).  10    
 9  There are many other fl avors of materialism, as well, but these two will do for now. For a representa-
tive defense of Animalism, see Eric Olson’s (1997)  The Human Animal . For a critique, see my (2007) 
“I am Not an Animal!” For a representative defense of Minimalism see my  A Materialist Metaphysics of 
the Human Person . In the present chapter I shall ignore one complication accommodated in the book, 
namely, I shall not consider the rewards or punishments of an afterlife; whether due to the truth of athe-
ism or to insuffi  cient virtue or vice, neither Heaven nor Hell awaits Captain Quag. 
 10  For representative defenses of both Perdurantism and Stage-Theory, see Ted Sider’s (2001) 
 Four-Dimensionalism . For a representative defense of Endurantism, see Peter van Inwagen’s (1990a) 
“Four-Dimensional Objects.” For a representative defense of Regionalism, see my (2010b) “Multiple 
Location and Single Location Resurrection.” Since human persons are extended in three spatial dimen-
sions, I am presenting our alternatives against that assumption, but (strictly speaking) each theorist can 
accommodate minima, too, and off er the very same explanations of the persistence of material objects 
extended in only two, or one, or zero dimensions. 

142 hud hudson
 Finally, we might ask the question—“Does our preferred answer to the 
previous two questions give us any guidance on selecting a criterion of 
persistence for the special kind of material object that counts as a human 
person, a theory that will allow us to determine the beginning and end-
ing of Captain Quag’s lifespan?” Animalism together with Endurantism, for 
example, may steer us in the direction of a  Biological Criterion  of persistence 
for human persons, a theory that will allow us to determine the contours of 
Captain Quag by locating the precise beginning and ending, shape and size 
of a certain organism. Alternatively, Minimalism together with Perdurantism 
may lead us to a  Psychological Criterion  of persistence for human persons, a 
theory that will tell us that to focus on Captain Quag is to trace out the his-
tory of a certain psychological profi le, whether it stays put in a single body, 
or transfers from one human animal to another, or jumps across a temporal 
gap, or shifts from an organic to inorganic host. Other combinations are 
worth exploring, as well, with Stage-Theory off ering multiple solutions and 
Regionalism the most liberal of them all. 11   
 Upon completing these preliminaries and making our selections, we 
might think we are ready to begin our biography. Confi ning our atten-
tion to Hypertime-200, for example, writing the story of Captain Quag 
would seem to be a matter of opting for a form of materialism for 
human persons, selecting a general theory of persistence for material 
objects, embracing an associated criterion of persistence for human per-
sons, using these tools to locate the best candidate for the offi  cial refer-
ent of ‘Captain Quag’ (from amongst all the objects in the spacetime 
block present at Hypertime-200), and sharpening our pencils for the 
long description to come. 
 But this won’t do. When we’re fi nished we won’t have said a thing about 
Captain Quag’s horrendous mistake in heading for Alpha Centauri and the 
tragic loss of his ship and crew in its treacherous asteroid belt—events which 
admittedly did not happen to him (since they are to be found nowhere in 
the block present at Hypertime-200) but which nevertheless most certainly 
did hyperhappen to him (since they are to be found in the block present at, 
say, Hypertime-99). 
 11  For the arguments from Animalism and Endurantism to the Biological Criterion and from Minimalism 
and Perdurantism to the Psychological Criterion, see Chapter 4 of my  A Materialist Metaphysics of the 
Human Person . For the surprising fl exibility of Stage-Theory, see Ted Sider’s  Four-Dimensionalism . 

transhypertime identity 143
 The proper and unexpurgated tale of Captain Quag cannot omit such 
momentous details, and thus it would appear that we have more work to 
do. Our present approach seems only to yield a strategy for giving a par-
tial biography. At any given hypertime, we can inspect the block that is 
featured there, use the philosophical tools above to locate a protagonist in 
its interior, and tell his story relative to that block. But shall we simply pile 
up our hypertime-relative biographies and declare that the stack of them 
taken together gives us the unabridged story of Captain Quag? Well, it 
depends on what justifi cation we might have for saying that the individual 
we have identifi ed and called by the name ‘Captain Quag’ in the block at 
Hypertime-99 is one and the same as the individual we have identifi ed 
and called by that name in the block at Hypertime-200. The question is 
signifi cant:
 Diachronic identity is one thing. Transhypertime identity another. 
 Our current metaphysics literature is chock full of discussion and debate 
about persistence across time. But if we are to take seriously the metaphysi-
cally possible combination of the Growing Block Theory and the Hypertime 
Hypothesis (as we have been invited to do in the recent discussions of time 
travel, past changing, and the applications to philosophy of religion noted 
above), we must also address questions of persistence across hypertime. So, 
under just what conditions would an entity that makes an appearance in a 
spacetime block at one hypertime be identical to an entity that makes an 
appearance in a spacetime block at another hypertime? Or, somewhat more 
manageably, under just what conditions are two hypertime-relative biogra-
phies partial biographies of one and the same human person? 
 4.  HyperPresentism, Growing Hypertime, 
HyperEternalism 
 Before we off er and critique answers, one last bit of stage setting is in 
order: As noted above, the Presentist says only present things have being 
or exist, while the Growing Block Theorist and Eternalist say that some 
non-present, merely past things have being or exist. The Actualist says only 
actual things have being or exist, while the Possibilist says some non-actual, 
merely possible things have being or exist. The Non-Meinongian says only 

144 hud hudson
existing things have being, while the Meinongian says some non-existing 
things nevertheless have being. 
 We have here uncovered a similar standoff . Whereas those who reject 
the Hypertime Hypothesis maintain that only temporal things have being 
or exist, proponents of the Hypertime Hypothesis maintain that some 
non-temporal, merely hypertemporal things have being or exist, as well. Just 
to be clear, this isn’t the familiar dispute over whether universals or numbers 
or God are literal subjects of temporal predication; rather it’s a dispute about 
whether there are some individuals, decked-out with all the temporal prop-
erties one could hope for, who inhabit a spacetime block at some hypertime 
or other, and yet are not to be found within the unique spacetime block 
that is hyperpresent. 
 For instance, the fi rst asteroid strike to breach the hull of Captain Quag’s 
ship is a  real event—one that even our Actualist can countenance; the tear-
ing of the metal is not some merely possible happening, but a component 
of actuality that happens to bear no temporal relation to any of the events 
located anywhere in the block hyperpresent at Hypertime-200. Any inhab-
itant of that particular block would speak truly in declaring that the event 
exists but is neither past nor present nor future. 
 That such a declaration is true is certainly odd, but (again) not incoherent. 
Its truth, however, does seem to complicate one view and to invite a choice 
between two others. Owing to our quantifi cation at Hypertime-200 over 
events that are not hyperpresent (such as the asteroid strike) a theory we 
may call ‘HyperPresentism’—that only hyperpresent things exist—would 
seem to be forfeited or to call for supplementation by way of hypertense 
operators. The other two analogues of our temporal theories remain, how-
ever. Growing Hypertime Theory countenances hyperpast and hyperpre-
sent objects, but denies the reality or existence of the putative hyperfuture 
items, whereas HyperEternalism recognizes them all. How to choose? 
 There is, of course, the distraction of inquiring into whether the 
Growing Hypertime Theory stands in need of a hyperhypertime in which 
the growth occurs and against which its rate of passage can be measured, 
but for reasons similar to those given in section 1 above, the union of the 
Growing Hypertime Theory and hyperhypertime is every bit as optional 
as the union of the Growing Block Theory and hypertime. Accordingly, 
in the remainder of the discussion, let us assume the Growing Hypertime 
Theory, let us remain neutral on (but postpone additional questions about) 

transhypertime identity 145
hyperhypertime, and let us (without further descriptions) simply borrow 
our general understanding of the Growing Hypertime Theory by way of 
adapting our description of the Growing Block Theory in section 1. 
 5.  Formulating Theories of Hypertime 
Persistence for Human Persons 
 So, back to our diffi  culty: When are two hypertime-relative biographies 
partial biographies of one and the same human person? Perhaps we should 
take a lesson from the previous sections and see which theories of dia-
chronic identity we might be able to adapt and propose as answers to our 
puzzle of transhypertime identity. In the sequel, let ‘H-persistence’ abbrevi-
ate persistence across hypertime. 
 H-Perdurantism : A human person is composed of hypertemporal parts, 
each of which is a four-dimensional object located within a spacetime 
block at a hypertime instant. On this metaphysics, H-persistence across a 
hypertime interval is a matter of having diff erent hypertemporal parts thus 
located at each of the hypermoments in that interval. 
 “Accordingly,” says our H-Perdurantist, “a hypertime-relative biography, 
exciting and complete as it seems, is merely a biography of a proper hyper-
temporal part of a person. But if you string the right ones together, from the 
right collection of hypertimes, you’ll succeed at generating the offi  cial and 
comprehensive biography of your Captain Quag.” 
 H-Endurantism :  A  human person is a three-dimensional object which 
sports neither temporal nor hypertemporal parts. On this metaphysics, 
H-persistence across a hypertime interval is a matter of being multiply-located 
at uncountably many of the non-simultaneous, three-dimensional regions 
to be found in each of the spacetime blocks distributed amongst the hyper-
moments in that interval. 
 “Accordingly,” says our H-Endurantist, “Hypertime-99, for example, fea-
tures a spacetime block in which your Captain Quag is located at some 
three-dimensional region or other at each of the moments in the temporal 
interval from his birth in the year 172067 to his death in the year 172137. 
And at Hypertime-200, that very same human person is located at some 
three-dimensional region or other at each of the moments in the temporal 
interval from his birth in the year 172067 to his death in the year 172157. Fail 

146 hud hudson
to satisfy this requirement and you merely have hypertime-relative biogra-
phies of two distinct, albeit similar, human persons.” 
 H-Stage-Theory : A human person, strictly speaking, is confi ned to a single 
block (i.e. is numerically identical either to a momentary item in a block—
as with orthodox stage-theory—or else to the very thing that the ordinary 
Perdurantist would have identifi ed with a human person). Nevertheless, 
a hypertemporal analogue of counterpart theory can be invoked to pro-
vide a theory of  de re  hypertemporal predication. On this metaphysics, 
H-persistence across a hypertime interval is a matter of bearing certain 
counterpart relations to other similarly confi ned entities located at each of 
the hypermoments of that interval. 
 “Accordingly,” says our H-Stage-Theorist, “two hypertime-relative biog-
raphies are partial biographies of one and the same human person when-
ever their protagonists stand in the appropriate hypertemporal counterpart 
relation.” 
 H-Regionalism : A human person may or may not have proper parts (spa-
tial, temporal, or hypertemporal) but such things are not what grounds its 
H-persistence. Rather, on this metaphysics, H-persistence across a hyper-
time interval is a matter of bearing a location relation to a region that inter-
sects a certain series of hypertimes (i.e. of occupying the fusion of several 
proper subregions of the several spacetime blocks distributed amongst the 
hypermoments in that interval). 
 “Accordingly,” says our H-Regionalist, “one and the same human per-
son must occupy a hyperextended region constructed from chunks of 
non-hypersimultaneous spacetime blocks. It’s not that there has to be a 
little of him hyperhere and a little of him hyperthere. Rather, he himself 
has to be located at the right hyperextended region. Otherwise, you merely 
have hypertime-relative biographies of two distinct, albeit similar, human 
persons.” 
 Four hopeful theories, four bits of clarifi cation. Are any of them 
serviceable? 
 6.  A First Pass at Evaluating the Proposals 
 Against H-Perdurantism :  H-Perdurantism takes a stand on the metaphys-
ics of composition and decomposition:  composition is not time (or 
spacetime-block) indexed, and objects such as human persons decompose 

transhypertime identity 147
into proper, hypertemporal parts. One could, then, object to the theory 
on mereological grounds. But I am a fan of unrestricted composition (of 
material objects, at least), and I have no complaint to lodge against those 
who would accept arbitrary cross-hypertemporal fusions.  12 Let us, then, 
acknowledge the objects to which the H-Perdurantist would direct our 
attention. The real question is not of their existence but of their suitability. 
 Suppose (as noted above) Perdurantism and Minimalism have led you 
into sympathy with a psychological criterion of personal identity for 
human persons. Your Perdurantism will tempt you to trade off  questions 
about the diachronic identity of a human person for questions about the 
gen-identity relation among proper, temporal parts of human persons (i.e. 
that relation that makes them parts of one and the same human person), and 
your Minimalism will incline you to believe that the gen-identity relation 
in question is bound to have something or other to do with psychological 
continuity and connectedness. Similarly, we may expect the H-Perdurantist 
to inquire after a gen-identity relation among proper, hypertemporal parts 
of human persons, and (should he still be attracted to Minimalism) to seek 
out the relevant psychological relations to bind the parts together. The prob-
lem, however, is that even if there are such cross-hypertemporal fusions, they 
do not seem to be connected by the right sort of psychological relations 
(such as memory or anticipation) at all. At Hypertime 200, history reveals 
Captain Quag on his 80th birthday with no memory whatsoever of the fatal 
collision in the Alpha Centauri system. Moreover, there isn’t any proper 
temporal part of that 80-year-old, four-dimensional creature that contains 
such a memory either, for those events simply never happened to him. 
 The problem runs deeper, though, and we can dispense with the 
carry-over commitments to Minimalism and the psychological criterion, 
if we like. Consider how the ordinary Perdurantist handles the following 
question: “You say that there is a single 80-year-old human person in this 
four-dimensional region, but why not say there are two? Perhaps one lives 
for 40 years and another seamlessly replaces the fi rst and lives for another 
40 years. It’s just that the second person comes into existence looking very 
much like the fi rst person looked as he went out of existence.” The standard 
 12  For an extended defense of unrestricted composition, see Chapter 3 of my  A Materialist Metaphysics 
of the Human Person . For reasons for the hedging “of material objects, at least” see my (2006) “Confi ning 
Composition.” 

148 hud hudson
Perdurantist blocks this redescription of his verdict that there is a single 
80-year-old human person in the four-dimensional region by insisting on 
a special relation between all the relevant human-person stages that fall 
within the region in question—namely, that they are  immanently causally 
interrelated to one another.  13 Such causal interrelatedness is what marks out 
proper continuants from mere, arbitrary cross-time fusions; it’s what makes 
for a genuine human person as opposed to a hybrid (say, half me / half you) 
that is merely human-person like at each moment it is present. The prob-
lem, once again, is that even if there are cross-hypertemporal fusions, they 
do not seem to be causally interrelated at all, for causation tracks time, not 
hypertime (i.e. causation is a relation that relates items within a block at a 
hypertime, not items across blocks at diff erent hypertimes). Accordingly, it is 
hard to see how the H-Perdurantist can eff ectively borrow the Perdurantist’s 
trick and block the redescription of the case. That is, it is hard to see why we 
should think we have one human person with hypertime parts, rather than 
a fusion of many human persons at diff erent hypertimes that all resemble 
one another in various ways. 
 Against H-Endurantism : H-Endurantism will not encourage us to coun-
tenance cross-hypertemporal fusions, arbitrary or otherwise. Instead, we are 
instructed to fi nd one and the same object reappearing many times within 
each block in which it makes an appearance at all. 
 Suppose (as noted above) Endurantism and Animalism have led you into 
sympathy with a biological criterion of personal identity for human per-
sons. Your Endurantism will require you to address straightforward ques-
tions about identity rather than gen-identity, and your Animalism will direct 
you to focus upon a biological organism. The problem, however, is that 
whether something is a biological organism depends on particular historical 
properties and certain developmental stages, and these biological processes 
of maintenance and growth are temporal, not hypertemporal. 
 As before, the problem runs deeper, and we can dispense with the 
carry-over commitments to Animalism and the biological criterion, if we 
like. Like his rival, the Endurantist must also face redescription-criticisms of 
his view: “You say that there is a single 80-year-old human person who has 
made uncountably-many three-dimensional appearances in this spacetime 
 13  For a discussion of this restriction, see Dean Zimmerman’s (1999) “The Compatibility of Materialism 
and Survival.” 

transhypertime identity 149
block, but why not say there are many diff erent human persons, each seam-
lessly replacing the last, each a psychological and physical duplicate of his 
predecessor?” Once again, the standard reply to this redescription will come 
by way of a certain causal-dependency requirement of the features of the 
person at later times upon the experiences of the person at earlier times. 
Stating this requirement precisely is a dicey aff air, but however it eventually 
emerges, it will block judgments of identity in cases of seamless replacement 
with no relevant causal connections, and it will bolster and make plausible 
verdicts of identity when satisfi ed. The problem, once again, is that causa-
tion tracks time, not hypertime, and whereas causal relations are to be found 
between one and the same item’s features at two diff erent times, they will 
not be found spanning spacetime blocks and relating items at two diff erent 
hypertimes. Accordingly, it is hard to see how the H-Endurantist will be 
able to avoid saying that we have many diff erent persons all named ‘Captain 
Quag’ rather than a single human person who experienced triumph at 
Barnard’s Star and who hyperexperienced tragedy at Alpha Centauri. 
 Perhaps that all seems too quick. Even if causation is blockbound and 
cannot span hypertimes, why can’t there be a relation much like causation, 
say  H-causation , which takes as its relata items present at diff erent hyper-
times? In fact, won’t there be special pressure to embrace some type of 
H-causation or other as a device for the ordering of hypertime moments 
within a hypertime interval? Well, it’s one thing to say what is wanted and 
another thing to discover and articulate it. We could make a start by saying 
something about counterfactual dependence—e.g. a hypertemporally-later 
item, HE, is H-caused by a hypertemporally-earlier item, HC, when if HC 
had not hyperoccurred, then HE would not have hyperoccurred either. But 
we would still lack recourse to those biological and psychological relations 
so intertwined with the common conception of personhood that would 
guide us in specifying just which H-causally related items were relevant to 
judgments of an H-persisting human person. 
 Perhaps, we may be able to dodge further discussion of H-causation 
at this juncture, however, for the H-Endurantist faces another and inde-
pendent problem, as well. Unlike his three competitors in this section, the 
H-Endurantist is committed to an Endurantist thesis of multi-location for a 
material object, according to which one and the same thing bears the per-
fectly natural and fundamental location relation to more than one region 
in the same block. The philosophical literature on location is blossoming, 

150 hud hudson
and merely hinting at the troubles facing Endurantists will have to suffi  ce 
for our purposes.  Hint 1 —Endurantists face  the problem of spatial intrinsics , a 
problem which can lead to treating apparent intrinsic properties as disguised 
relations.  Hint 2 –Endurantists face  the problem of shapes , the worry that such 
theorists will be caught out on a  reductio featuring objects that have incom-
patible shapes or no shape at all.  Hint 3 —Endurantists face  the problem of par-
simony , the worry that such theorists will be drawn into an extreme monism 
in which a single simple does the work of the whole world (provided it is 
properly located in enough regions).  Hint 4 —Endurantists face  the problem of 
diachoric identity , a problem that requires such theorists to provide a satisfac-
tory criterion of identity-across-space (as opposed to identity-across-time) 
or else to renounce the thesis that suggests such a criterion can be had.  14 
Insofar as they must incorporate the same-block, multi-location commit-
ments of the Endurantists, the H-Endurantists will be dogged by the same 
problems pressed against their predecessors. 
 Against H-Stage-Theory : Like the H-Endurantist, the H-Stage-Theorist 
does not identify a human person with a cross-hypertemporal fusion (even 
if he admits the existence of such monsters) and thus escapes worries about 
gen-identity relations on hypertemporal parts. Like the H-Perdurantist, 
the H-Stage-Theorist accords one region to each thing and thus escapes 
the problems that beset the multi-location theorist. Like the modal- and 
temporal-counterpart theorists, the H-Stage-Theorist enjoys tremendous 
fl exibility aff orded by similarity relations allowing him to successfully match 
judgments of H-persistence with intuitions about hypertime stories like 
those of section 2 above, and he can do it all without invoking any indefen-
sible claims of transhypertime causation. What’s not to like? 
 While I  think H-Stage-Theory does indeed have these advantages, 
I  think it has some considerable disadvantages, as well. The fl exibility 
noted above is bought at the price of a counterpart relation that is not an 
equivalence relation. Suppose, for example, the relation fails to be  transi-
tive : If I have a hyperfuture-oriented counterpart at Hypertime-80, who 
has a hyperfuture-oriented counterpart at Hypertime-100, while I have no 
hyperfuture-oriented counterpart at Hypertime-100, then—“while it is not 
 14  A full discussion of these four problems, their range of targets (i.e. the diff erent ways to construe the 
thesis of multi-location), and the costs of their alleged solutions can be found in Chapter 4 of my (2005) 
 The Metaphysics of Hyperspace . 

transhypertime identity 151
true that I hyperwill be present at Hypertime-100, I hyperwill be such that 
I hyperwill be present at Hypertime-100”—comes out true (as it probably 
shouldn’t). Alternatively, suppose the counterpart relation fails to be  symmet-
ric : If I have a hyperfuture-oriented counterpart who does not have me as 
a hyperpast-oriented counterpart, then—“although I am now sitting here 
typing, I hyperwill be such that it is not true that I hyperwas sitting here 
typing”—comes out true (as it probably shouldn’t). Alternatively, suppose 
the relation fails to be  unique : If I have a hyperfuture-oriented counterpart 
who has both you and me as hyperpast-oriented counterparts, then—“I 
hyperwill be such that I hyperonce was you”—comes out true (as it prob-
ably shouldn’t).  15 These are signifi cant costs, and I take them to remove the 
H-Stage-View from the short-list for the best account of H-persistence. 
 Against H-Regionalism : The H-Regionalist is neutral about hypertempo-
ral parts and thus sidesteps questions about gen-identity relations on such 
items. 16 He is yet another of the one-region-per-thing theorists and thus 
need not address problems of multi-location. He has no need to posit causal 
relations that span hypertimes or to carve out a look-alike causal relation 
that does so. And he need not draw his theory of hypertemporal predication 
from any similarity or counterpart relation that yields implausible conse-
quences about identity. Accordingly, he does not yet succumb to any of the 
objections that threaten his rivals in this section. I think that initial schedule 
of advantages puts our H-Regionalist in a pretty good starting position—
good enough to warrant saying some more about the Regionalist approach 
to persistence and H-persistence in general. 17   
 As indicated above, the standard debate over how things persist is usu-
ally carried out between the Perdurantist and the Endurantist (with the 
Stage-Theorist making a brief appearance here and there). Both parties 
agree that to persist is to be in some sense present at more than one time 
and then promptly disagree about just how an object manages to perform 
 15  For a discussion of the analogues of these objections (and some others) to orthodox stage-theory as 
an account of persistence, see my 2002 review of Ted Sider’s  Four-Dimensionalism . 
 16  Of course, this neutrality may be broken by the H-Regionalist’s other metaphysical commitments. 
Perhaps hypertemporal parts will be invoked on the grounds that they are a requirement of the best 
theory of hypertime change, or they may be rejected on parsimony grounds should they have no 
function to perform. Josh Parsons has taught us how such theorists can get along without recourse to 
mereological extravagance in his (2004) “Distributional Properties.” 
 17  The following characterization of Regionalism fi rst appeared in my “Multiple Location and Single 
Location Resurrection,” and portions of the next two paragraphs in the text are taken from that article.  

152 hud hudson
this trick, squaring off  in a debate about whether or not an object has a 
proper temporal part at each of the times in question or is instead wholly 
present at each of the times in question. And with the ubiquitous and com-
peting ‘temporal  parts ’ and ‘ wholly  present’ slogans, the focus on mereology 
has been absolutely central to this literature. 
 Still, I think we can see how the focus might easily have shifted elsewhere, 
how it might have centered instead on diff erences in the location relations 
things manifest rather than on diff erences in the distribution of their parts. 
That is, we can envision a debate regarding how things persist which is char-
acterized solely by diff erences in the number and types of regions occupied 
rather than by any appeal to mereological facts. Thus, whereas an object 
enjoying exactly one location relation (but to an extended four-dimensional 
spacetime region) would persist in one manner, an object enjoying exactly 
two location relations (to a pair of three-dimensional regions separated by a 
century) would persist in another. And once again, one could then remain 
absolutely neutral on whether the former, singly-located thing had any 
proper temporal parts at all, thus showing how questions about the mereo-
logical structure of a hosting region can come apart from questions about 
the mereological structure of its occupant. 
 Our Regionalist sees the Endurantist (once properly characterized) 
as taking one of these options and off ers himself as a proponent of the 
other according to which an object persists by occupying a single region 
with more than one temporal index. Accordingly, as introduced above, the 
H-Regionalist simply extends the maneuver so that an object is credited 
with H-persistence by bearing exactly one location relation to a region that 
intersects a series of hypertimes (i.e. to a hyperextended region constructed 
from chunks of non-hypersimultaneous spacetime blocks). 
 Drawbacks remain. As with our tentative characterizations of the notion 
of H-causation, this approach would seem to qualify our earlier assertions 
about the independence of the blocks and their contents from one hyper-
moment to the next (requiring, perhaps, hyper-nomologically necessary 
connections, if not metaphysically necessary connections, in the succes-
sion of spacetime blocks). That is—the H-Regionalist will be saddled with 
what we earlier called  HyperEternalism  out of the necessity of having at 
hand all the hyperextended regions required to host Captain Quag and 
his fellows, and thus some of our blocks will be bound together accord-
ingly. Consequently, we can fuss over the extent to which this provides 

transhypertime identity 153
new threats to the freedom of agents located and acting in both time and 
hypertime and over the extent to which this interferes with the various 
tasks assigned to the combination of the Growing Block Theory and the 
Hypertime Hypothesis (e.g. modeling time travel, accounting for changing 
the past, and reconciling certain quarrels between science and religion). But 
not everything can be taken up in one chapter; let’s (unsatisfyingly) end our 
suggestive list of drawbacks there. 
 Disappointingly, then, none of our four hopeful theories is trouble-free. 
Each is problematic in signifi cant ways.  
 7.  A Mashup 
 What lessons are we prepared to draw from the foregoing discussion as 
we begin our biography of Captain Quag? We could be  defeatist , rea-
soning that since there is no good account of H-persistence, we have 
learned that there are no hypertime intervals to persist across, and thus 
we have discovered recent appeals to the Growing Block Theory and 
the Hypertime Hypothesis to be without merit, after all. We could 
be  apologetic , acknowledging the defects of the theories in the pre-
ceding sections while attempting to repair and further motivate one 
of them. H-Regionalism appeared to be the best candidate for such 
second-chance consideration; perhaps it deserves another go. We could 
be  creative , combining the best elements of the failed proposals just can-
vassed while avoiding some but not all of their problematic features. I’d 
like to sketch a proposal along these fi nal lines. 
 Consider the traditional Endurantist who also accepts a doctrine of arbi-
trary undetached parts—in other words, the theorist who claims that an 
ordinary object persists by being multiply-located, and that for each time 
at which the enduring entity makes an appearance, it has a proper part 
located at each of the subregions of the region it then occupies. On this 
view, an object is synchronically composite but not diachronically compos-
ite. The theory I would like to introduce and motivate advocates a similar 
dual approach. According to ManyBlock Theory, an H-persisting human 
person is diachronically composite but not hypertemporally composite. 
Consequently, ManyBlock Theory is a kind of mashup of Perdurance and 
Endurance. 

154 hud hudson
 Let’s clarify the view by focusing on Hypertime-200. Like the 
Perdurantist (who is attracted to Minimalism and the psychological crite-
rion), the ManyBlockist identifi es Captain Quag with a four-dimensional 
fusion of momentary person-slices inhabiting the block there present, all 
immanently causally interrelated and manifesting psychological continuity 
and connectedness. However, like the Endurantist, the ManyBlockist main-
tains that a human person can be located at more than one region; it’s just 
that the multiple regions in question are distributed amongst blocks at dif-
ferent hypertimes, rather than amongst diff erent times that section a single 
block at a single hypertime. Moreover, at each of the blocks where Captain 
Quag puts in an appearance (such as the one at Hypertime-99), he is there 
hyperonce again a four-dimensional fusion of momentary person-slices, all 
immanently causally interrelated and manifesting psychological continuity 
and connectedness. Parthood is thus indexed to regions of a single block. 
Personhood is thus fi xed by facts about psychology. 
 So why doesn’t our combination of Perdurance and Endurance inherit 
the defects of both as well as those of their H-counterparts catalogued 
above? First, note that the ManyBlockist no longer faces any obstacle to 
retaining Minimalism or the psychological criterion of personal identity 
for human persons and that he can accommodate all of the relevant causal 
restrictions in whatever the genuine gen-identity relation on person-stages 
turns out to be. H-Perdurance ran into trouble only when it attempted to 
speak of further fusions of hypertemporal parts and of their interrelatedness, 
a conversation the ManyBlockist has no interest in joining. Second, note 
that unlike the H-Endurantist, the ManyBlockist adopts only inter-block 
multi-location and not also intra-block multi-location. But the quartet of 
problems identifi ed for multi-location theorists (in section 6) are problem-
atic only for the intra-block variety. The problems of spatial intrinsics and 
of shapes are handled by the ManyBlockist in two stages: intra-block cases 
are handled Perdurantist-style by appeal to spatial and temporal parts, and 
inter-block cases are handled by indexing (say, the four-dimensional shapes 
of human persons) to hypertimes or blocks. The problems of parsimony 
and of diachoric identity are similarly defused in intra-block cases by the 
Perdurantist-like element of ManyBlockism, and they do not arise at all for 
the inter-block cases. 
 That leaves only one remaining problem to confront—where, 
unfortunately, things haven’t much improved. Exactly how will the 

transhypertime identity 155
ManyBlockist be able to avoid saying that we have two diff erent persons 
both named ‘Captain Quag’ rather than a single human person who 
experienced triumph at Barnard’s Star and who hyperexperienced trag-
edy at Alpha Centauri? For reasons already noted, neither causation nor 
H-causation can be used as an unproblematic guide to reidentify human 
persons across hypertimes, and it is not clear what other device might 
be pressed into service to do so. Currently, then, I tentatively favor one 
of two responses: First, a kind of anti-criterialism, according to which 
there is no true and informative answer to our original question—
“Under what conditions are two hypertime-relative biographies partial 
biographies of one and the same human person?” Second, an appeal to 
certain intentions and activities of a Divine hypertime observer . . . but 
that is a longer story for another occasion. 
 We have made some progress, though:  First, we have uncovered a 
new puzzle that cannot be avoided by those who wish to exploit the 
resources aff orded by combining the Growing Block Theory with the 
Hypertime Hypothesis. Second, whatever might be the correct response 
to that puzzle, it certainly does not receive an obvious solution from 
H-Perdurantism, H-Endurantism, H-Stage-Theory, or H-Regionalism—
the most natural places to look for it. Third (given ManyBlockism) the 
Hypertime Hypothesis need not make the committed Perdurantist, 
Minimalist, and proponent of the Psychological Criterion renounce 
these views on persistence across time, on just which material items 
are the human persons, and on the relevance of mental properties over 
biological ones to these matters. 
 Largely on the strength of those advantages, I suspect that if the com-
bination of the Growing Block Theory and the Hypertime Hypothesis 
is metaphysically possible after all, a hypertime-relative biography would 
always be a biography of a four-dimensional fusion of appropriately 
interconnected person-stages, and sometimes (whether by hyperchance 
or God willing) one and the same multiply-located human person will 
enjoy transhypertime identity and will be the subject of many such 
biographies.  18    
 18  Thanks for conversation, comments, and criticism on an earlier draft to Ross Cameron and to gen-
erous audiences at the University of Colorado, Georgetown University, the University of Rochester, 
Western Washington University, and the University of Alabama. 

 9 
 Parts of Propositions  
 CODY  GILMORE 
 Introduction 
 Russellian propositions are said to have  constituents . An ‘atomic’ Russellian 
proposition has, as constituents, the objects the proposition is about and the 
property or relation it predicates of them. For example, the Russellian prop-
osition that Etna is higher than Vesuvius has, as constituents, Etna, Vesuvius, 
and the relation  being higher than . 
 Are the constituents of a Russellian proposition  parts  of it? There are 
respectable views that say ‘No’,  1 but I think the default answer should be 
‘Yes’. 2 If we can make this answer work without too much strain, we should. 
Can we? 
 Here is one reason for thinking that we can’t. If Russellian propositions 
have their constituents as parts, they generate apparent counterexamples 
to plausible and widely accepted mereological principles. As Frege noted 
(1980, p. 79), Russellian propositions would seem to violate the transitivity 
 1  It is hard to fi nd examples of those who explicitly endorse the negative answer, though I suspect that 
the view is widespread among contemporary friends of Russellian propositions. Crimmins (1992, p. 114, 
n. 2) distinguishes constituency from what he calls ‘physical parthood’. Grossmann (1992, p. 76) and 
Armstrong (1986) explicitly defend an analogous view: viz., that  facts  and/or  states of aff airs have (proper) 
constituents but not (proper) parts. See McDaniel (2009) for discussion and further references.  
 2  I say this mainly because I fi nd constituency hard to understand unless it’s identifi ed with parthood or 
analyzed as a restriction on it. Parthood, on the other hand, strikes me as well-understood and plausibly 
topic-neutral. Russell and Frege both seem to assume that Russellian propositions (if there were such 
things) would have their constituents as parts. (See section 4 of this chapter.) Others who endorse this 
view include Cappelen and Hawthorne (2009, p. 2, n. 4), and especially Tillman and Fowler (2012), who 
defend it at length. King (2007, p. 120, n. 42) endorses the view that propositions are certain kinds of 
facts that have their constituents as parts. Caplan, Tillman, and Reeder (2010) defend an analogous view 
about singleton sets: viz., that each of them has its member as a part. 

parts of propositions 157
of parthood. As William Bynoe (2010) has noted, they would seem to violate 
certain ‘supplementation’ principles. (Bynoe actually makes this point about 
facts, but it carries over in an obvious way.) 
 I off er a unifi ed solution to these problems. One key ingredient in 
the solution is the view, defended in Gilmore (2009), that parthood is a 
four-place relation.  3 Another key ingredient is the view that the semantic 
contents of predicates and sentential connectives have ‘slots’ or ‘argument 
positions’ in them. 
 The plan for the chapter is as follows. In sections 2 and 3, I set up a 
very simple formal language and state Russellianism as a thesis about the 
propositions expressed by the sentences of this language. In sections 4 and 5, 
I present the problems for Russellianism, and in sections 6 and 7, I propose 
a solution. Two appendices off er independent arguments for certain com-
ponents of that solution. 
 1.  Preliminaries 
 Three points are worth making before we get started. 
 (1) There is a dispute about how many (fundamental) parthood rela-
tions there are.  4  Compositional monists  (Lewis 1986a; Sider 2007) say that 
there is exactly one;  compositional pluralists  (Grossmann 1992; McDaniel 
2004) say that there are at least two, presumably associated with diff er-
ent ontological categories and perhaps governed by diff erent principles. 
I will assume that compositional monism is true, mainly for simplicity. 
This assumption does real work only in those parts of the chapter that deal 
with Frege’s worry about the transitivity of parthood, and it may be dis-
pensable even there. In the rest of the chapter I continue to operate under 
that assumption, but only for convenience. Thus, even if the Russellian is 
antecedently convinced that parthood for propositions (parthood p ) is dif-
ferent from parthood for material objects (parthood m ), he should still fi nd 
the chapter interesting.  
 3  Similar views are independently developed and discussed in Kleinschmidt (2011). 
 4  Following McDaniel (2009), say that a fundamental parthood relation is a parthood relation that is not 
analyzed in terms of some  more natural (roughly in the sense of Lewis 1986b) parthood relation. 

158 cody gilmore
 (2) Russellianism faces one obvious mereological problem that I  won’t 
discuss in this chapter: it’s in tension with the Uniqueness of Composition, 
the principle that no things compose more than one entity.  5 Russellians 
will say that 
   (i)  Etna, Vesuvius, and  being higher than  compose the proposition 
expressed by ‘Etna is higher than Vesuvius’, and those same three 
entities also compose the proposition expressed by ‘Vesuvius is 
higher than Etna’. 
 But everyone, Russellians and non-Russellians alike, will say that 
   (ii)  the proposition expressed by ‘Etna is higher than Vesuvius’ ≠ the 
proposition expressed by ‘Vesuvius is higher than Etna’. 
 Taken together, (i)  and (ii) entail that Uniqueness is false. Hence the 
tension. 
 I have three reasons for not wanting to discuss Uniqueness here. The 
fi rst reason is that it would make an already long chapter much longer. 
Given what I will end up saying about the transitivity and supplementa-
tion problems, I could say similar things in response to the problem about 
Uniqueness. But setting out all the details is a complicated aff air. The sec-
ond reason is that the problem about Uniqueness isn’t a special problem 
for Russellianism; it applies equally to Fregean accounts of propositions. 
(Fregeans will say that the two propositions mentioned above are both 
composed of the same three senses.) The third reason for not discussing 
Uniqueness is that the pay-off  would be limited. Uniqueness is, after all, 
extremely contentious as mereological principles go. A  great many phi-
losophers already reject it for independent reasons. (They say: the statue 
and the lump of clay are composed of the same particles but are not identi-
cal, given the diff erences in their modal properties.) True, there are com-
peting pressures in favor of Uniqueness, but on the whole, the principle 
is not sacrosanct. If Russellianism and Fregeanism both confl ict with it, a 
respectable reaction is ‘so much the worse for Uniqueness’. There are other 
mereological principles that are almost universally accepted and much less 
negotiable. If Russellianism confl icts with one of these, so much the worse 
 5  The expression ‘xx compose y’ is typically defi ned as ‘each of xx is a part of y, and each part of y over-
laps at least one of xx’, where ‘x overlaps y’ is defi ned as ‘some z is a part of both x and y’.  

parts of propositions 159
for Russellianism. I take the transitivity and supplementation principles to 
have this status. 
 (3) This chapter deals with  propositions . But a very similar chapter could 
have been written about  facts  or  states aff airs or even certain  complex universals . 
There are Russellian theories of facts (e.g.) that confront the same mereo-
logical problems that I discuss here, and the solution that I off er is equally 
applicable (with some minor and fairly obvious adjustments) in those cases. 
I focus on propositions rather than facts or states of aff airs partly because 
Frege’s transitivity objection was framed in terms of propositions. But oth-
erwise the decision was mostly arbitrary. In any event, it will be good to 
keep in mind that even if one’s favorite theory of propositions avoids the 
problems that I will discuss, one’s favorite theory of facts or states of aff airs 
might not, in which case there might still be some use for the solution that 
I off er. (See King 2007 for a package of views to which these remarks may 
be relevant.) 
 2.  A Formal Language 
 In this section I introduce a formal language, L R . The vocabulary of L R 
contains just 
  •  four predicates: 
   •  the monadic predicates: ‘ Tall ’ and ‘ Property ’ 
   •  the dyadic predicates: ‘ HigherThan ’, and ‘ IdenticalTo ’ 
  •  seven names: ‘ b ’, ‘ e ’, ‘ h ’, ‘ i ’, ‘ p1 ’, ‘ p2 ’, ‘ v ’ 
  •  brackets: ‘ ( ’ and ‘ ) ’ 
  •  the comma: ‘,’ 
  •  two sentential connectives: 
   •  the monadic connective, ‘ ¬ ’ 
   •  the dyadic connective ‘ & ’ 
 The language contains no quantifi ers, variables, or term-forming operators. 
The notion of a  sentence of L R is specifi ed by the following formation rules:  
   (1)   If τ 1 , . . ., τ n are names of L R and П is an n-adic predicate of L R , then  ⌜ П 
 ( τ 1 , . . ., τ n ) ⌝  is a sentence of L R . 

160 cody gilmore
   (2)  If φ 1 , . . ., and φ n are sentences of L R and K is an n-adic connective of 
L R then  ⌜ K ( φ 1 , . . ., φ n ) ⌝ is a sentence of L R . 
   (3)   Only those expressions formed by repeated application of (1)  and 
(2) are sentences of L R . 
 It will also be convenient to make some standard assumptions about the 
 interpretation  of L R : 
   (4)   Each sentence of L R expresses exactly one entity, a proposition. 
   (5)  Each n-adic predicate of L R expresses exactly one entity, an n-adic 
universal. 
   (6)   Each name of L R refers to exactly one entity. 
 Finally, some specifi c assumptions about the semantic contents of the 
predicates and names of the language:  
   (7)   ‘ Tall ’ expresses the property  being tall , ‘ HigherThan ’ expresses the 
relation  being higher than , ‘ IdenticalTo ’ expresses the relation of 
identity, and ‘ Property ’ expresses the property  being a property . 
   (8)   ‘ b ’ refers to the property  being a property , ‘ e ’ refers to Etna (the moun-
tain), ‘ h ’ refers to the relation  being higher than , ‘ i ’ refers to identity 
(the relation), ‘ v ’ refers to Vesuvius (the mountain), and ‘ p1 ’, and ‘ p2 ’ 
refer to certain propositions to be specifi ed later.  
 This is all we need to know about L R for now. 
 3.  Russellianism 
 Russellianism, as I  will understand it here, is a claim about the mereo-
logical structure of propositions. It will be important for our purposes that 
Russellianism not prejudge questions about the adicity of parthood. This 
constraint makes it hard to give a precise and simple statement of that view. 
So I will state it loosely, by analogy with a more precise and less neutral 
view, which I will call  Russellianism  2P  . I will state Russellianism 2P as the con-
junction of two theses. The fi rst is:
 2P   Parthood is a two-place relation that can be expressed by the predicate 
‘x is a part of y’. 

parts of propositions 161
 To state the second conjunct of Russellianism 2P , we need to defi ne ‘overlaps’ 
and ‘fuses’. We will do this in terms of set-membership and a primitive two-
place predicate for parthood:
 D1  x overlaps y =df. ∃z(z is a part of x & z is a part of y) 
 D2   x fuses s =df. ∃y y∈s & ∀y[y∈s → y is a part of x] & ∀y[y is a part of 
x → ∃z(z∈s & y overlaps z)] 
 Informally, to fuse a set is to be composed of that set’s members: a thing x 
fuses s iff  (i) s is non-empty, (ii) each member of s is a part of x, and (iii) each 
part of x overlaps at least one member of s. A thing can fuse a set without 
itself  being a set and without having any sets as  parts . 
 The second conjunct of Russellianism 2P can now be stated as a thesis 
about the mereological structure of the propositions expressed by atomic 
sentences of L R :
 Atomics 2P   If φ is a sentence of L R , if П is an n-adic predicate of L R , and 
if τ 1 , . . ., τ n are names of L R such that φ= ⌜ П ( τ 1 , . . ., τ n ) ⌝ , then the 
proposition expressed by φ fuses the set {x: either П expresses x 
or τ 1 refers to x, . . ., or τ n refers to x}. 
 Informally, this says that the proposition expressed by an atomic sentence of 
L R is composed of the universal expressed by the predicate of that sentence 
and the things referred to by the names in the sentence. Russellianism 2P , then, 
is the conjunction of 2P and Atomics 2P . Note that Russellianism 2P says noth-
ing about the mereological structure of propositions expressed by non-atomic 
sentences of L R . It wouldn’t be hard to extend Russellianism 2P in a fairly natu-
ral way to cover these other cases, but there is no need to do it here. 
 Russellianism 2P is a precise thesis, but it’s obviously not neutral on the 
question of the adicity of parthood. Here is a version of Russellianism that 
 is neutral on that question:
 Russellianism N   If parthood is two-place, then Atomics 2P is true, and if part-
hood   is n-place, where n≠2, then an ‘n-place analogue’ of 
Atomics 2P is true. 
 This is a loose, intuitive thesis. It relies on the notion of an ‘n-place ana-
logue’ of a given thesis, which is not precise. The idea is that if parthood is 

162 cody gilmore
n-place, where n≠2, then Atomics 2P (and the associated defi nitions) can be 
restated in terms of a primitive n-place parthood predicate, and the resulting 
thesis will come out true. 
 Despite its looseness, the notion of an n-place analogue of a given thesis 
is familiar and well enough understood for our purposes. Consider
 Transitivity 2P  ∀x∀y∀z[(x is a part of y & y is a part of z) → x is a part of z]  
 Philosophers disagree about the adicity of parthood. But virtually everyone 
agrees that it obeys Transitivity 2P  or some properly restated variant of that prin-
ciple . In particular, virtually everyone agrees that  if  parthood m is two-place, 
then it obeys Transitivity 2P , and  if parthood is a three-place relation that 
holds between objects and instants, then it obeys
 Transitivity 3P   ∀x∀y∀z∀w[(x is a part of y at z & y is a part of w at z) → x 
is a part of w at z]. 
 There are other principles framed in terms of a three-place parthood 
predicate that have some claim to being analogues of Transitivity 2P , but 
I take it that Transitivity 3P stands out as the most natural, given the relevant 
assumptions. 
 Thus, the thought behind Russellianism N is that just as Transitivity 2P has 
a clear ‘three-place analogue’, Atomics 2P will have a clear  n-place  analogue, 
for any n that might plausibly be thought to specify the adicity of parthood.  
 4.  The Transitivity Argument  
 The fi rst problem for Russellianism N comes from Frege. In the following 
passage, he discusses the proposition (thought) expressed by the sentence 
‘Etna is higher than Vesuvius’:
 Now that part [‘teil’] of the thought which corresponds to the name ‘Etna’ can-
not be Mount Etna itself; it cannot be the meaning of this name. For each indi-
vidual piece of frozen, solidifi ed lava which is part of Mount Etna would then 
also be part of the thought that Etna is higher than Vesuvius. But it seems to me 
absurd that pieces of lava, even pieces of which I had no knowledge, should be 
parts of my thought. (Undated letter to Jourdain, in Frege 1980, p. 79) 

parts of propositions 163
 Frege off ers a similar argument, this time in terms of facts, in a letter to 
Wittgenstein dated 28 June 1919:
 The part of a part is part of the whole . . . Then it appears that constituents of 
Vesuvius must also be constituents of this fact; the fact will therefore also consist 
of hardened lava. That does not seem right to me. (Dreben and Floyd 2011, p. 53)  
 Let o be a small rock deep in the interior of Etna, and suppose that Frege 
has no knowledge of or acquaintance with o. Further, let p e be the proposi-
tion expressed by the sentence of L R ‘ HigherThan(e, v) ’. Finally, suppose 
that parthood is a two-place relation. Then Frege’s argument can be recon-
structed as follows: 
 TA 
 T1  ∀x∀y∀z[(x is a part of y & y is a part of z) → x is a part  of z] 
 T2  o is a part of Etna 
 T3  o is not a part of p e 
 _________________________________ 
 T4  So, Etna is not a part of p e 
 T5  But if Russellianism 2P is true, then Etna is a part of p e . 
 _________________________________ 
 T6  So, Russellianism 2P is not true. 
 As it stands, the argument is no threat to versions of Russellianism that are 
formulated in terms of constituency rather than parthood. Those versions 
will not say that Etna is a  part of p e ; rather they will say that Etna is a  con-
stituent of p e . This latter claim is perfectly consistent with the conjunction 
of T1–T3. Likewise, the argument is no threat to versions of Russellianism 
that posit two diff erent parthood relations, one which (parthood m ) is taken 
to hold between o and Etna but not between Etna and p e , the other of 
which (parthood p ) is taken to hold between Etna and p e but not between o 
and Etna. Advocates of this form of Russellianism will see the argument as 
equivocating on ‘part of’ or as having a false premise. 
 I’m not hostile to these maneuvers, provided that they can be indepen-
dently motivated. What I will try to show here is that Russellians don’t  need 
these maneuvers to escape the argument. There is a diff erent escape route 
that, in my view, is independently motivated. 
 Moreover, as I point out at the end of Appendix II, it’s not at all clear 
that these maneuvers actually solve the basic problem. For it would seem 

164 cody gilmore
that constituency (or parthood p ) ought to be transitive as well, and yet there 
are structurally similar cases (involving singular propositions about other 
propositions) that seem to be counterexamples to such a principle. So even 
if one distinguishes between parthood and constituency, the underlying 
problem seems to remain. 
 Finally, it’s clear that Frege himself was presupposing that the very same 
relation held both between a proposition and its constituents (be they ordi-
nary objects or senses) and between a mountain and the chunks of rock 
within it.  6 Frege’s anti-Russellian conclusion would have been a complete 
 non sequitur  otherwise. So, for the purposes of this chapter, I will set aside the 
suggestion that we multiply parthood relations. 
 Let’s turn to the argument. In my view, if parthood is two-place, then the 
argument is probably sound. I’ll discuss the premises one by one, in order of 
decreasing obviousness-to-me. 
 T5 . Given the set-up of the case together with our statement of 
Russellianism 2P , it’s hard to see how this claim could fail to be true. The 
proposition p e is expressed by the sentence ‘ HigherThan(e, v) ’, and 
the name ‘ e ’, which occurs in that sentence, refers to Etna. According to 
Russellianism 2P , then, p e fuses a set of which Etna is a member and hence 
p e has Etna as a part. 7   
 T2 . This premise shouldn’t be controversial; volcanoes have rocks as 
parts. Of course, some philosophers have unorthodox views about part-
hood. Compositional nihilists say that, fundamentally speaking, nothing 
is a part of anything else (Dorr 2005). These philosophers lie beyond the 
reach of Frege’s argument. But presumably they would not have been 
tempted by Russellianism in the fi rst place. Others (van Inwagen 1990b) 
say that the only things that have proper parts  8 are  living organisms . In the 
context of that view, Frege’s argument should just be restated using a 
 6  Russell makes his own views on this topic less clear, but he gives no indication of wanting to dis-
tinguish between the relations in question. In a response to Frege’s claim that “Mont Blanc with all its 
snowfi elds is not itself a component part [‘Bestandtheil’] of the thought that Mont Blanc is more than 
4000 metres high” (letter to Russell, 13 November 1904 (Frege 1980, p. 163)), Russell writes, “I believe 
that in spite of all its snowfi elds Mont Blanc itself is a component part [‘Bestandtheil’] of what is actually 
asserted in the proposition ‘Mont Blanc is more than 4000 metres high’ ” (letter to Frege, 12 December 
1904 (Frege 1980, p. 169)). 
 7  Frege of course holds that the senses, not the referents, of the names ‘Etna’ and ‘Vesuvius’ are parts  
of p e . 
 8  ‘x is a proper part of y’ means ‘x is a part of y and x≠y’. 

parts of propositions 165
diff erent example. Those of us with more commonsense-friendly views 
about parthood   will think that this aspect of Frege’s argument is fi ne as 
it stands. 9    
 T1 . There is a controversy as to whether parthood obeys a uniqueness 
of composition principle. There is a separate controversy as to whether 
parthood obeys a principle of unrestricted composition. But virtually eve-
ryone on both sides of both of these disputes agrees that parthood obeys 
a  transitivity principle (or a properly restated variant). Indeed, many would 
endorse  
 Transitivity N   Each fundamental parthood relation is such that: (i) if it’s 
two-place, then it’s transitive, and (ii) if it’s not two-place, 
then it’s governed by some ‘adicity-appropriate analogue’ of 
a transitivity principle. 10   
  For present purposes, however, it suffi  ces to note that, given 2P, 
Transitivity 2P is highly plausible. 
 T3 . This says, of a certain smallish rock, o, that it is not a part of p e , the 
proposition that Etna is higher than Vesuvius. I fi nd this claim highly attrac-
tive on its own (as did Frege, apparently), but if an argument for it is wanted, 
it can be motivated in at least two ways. 11  
 First, one might endorse a principle of acquaintance according to which 
one can grasp a given proposition only if one is acquainted with each of 
its parts. (There are variants of this principle that do the same work while 
avoiding the notion of acquaintance. See note 12 below.) Given such a 
principle, T3 is inevitable. For surely one can grasp p e —the proposition 
that Etna is higher than Vesuvius—without being acquainted with every 
obscure little rock inside Etna. This was Frege’s situation; he grasped p e 
but had no acquaintance with o. Perhaps one needs to be acquainted with 
 Etna itself (and not just the sense of ‘Etna’) to grasp p e ; but regardless of 
 9  Even temporal parts theorists ought to grant that o is a part simpliciter of Etna. I assume that o lies 
within Etna throughout o’s entire career. 
 10  It is consistent with Transitivity N that there are non-fundamental, defi ned relations that count as part-
hood relations but that fail to be transitive. Perhaps  immediate proper parthood  is one such relation, where 
‘x is an immediate proper part of y’ is defi ned as ‘x is a proper part of y, and there is no z such that x is 
a proper part of z and z is a proper part of y’, and ‘x is a proper part of y’ is defi ned as ‘x is a part of y 
and x≠y’. It is also consistent with Transitivity N that there are multiple fundamental parthood relations, 
although for convenience I mostly ignore this possibility. See Varzi (2006) for a defense of Transitivity 2P . 
 11  King (2007, p. 120, n. 42) would reject T3. 

166 cody gilmore
what acquaintance amounts to, one needn’t be acquainted with  the rock o 
to grasp the given proposition. The proposition is, after all, about Etna and 
Vesuvius, and it predicates  being higher than  of them, in that order. This 
proposition has nothing to do with o! Call this the  acquaintance argument .   12 
(To be sure, it can be resisted by those who are willing to replace the prin-
ciple of acquaintance with something weaker. One might reject it in favor 
of the principle that one can grasp a proposition only if one is acquainted 
with each of its ‘immediate’ or ‘privileged’ parts, where Etna, Vesuvius, and 
 being higher than  are privileged parts of p e but o is not. But this strikes me 
as somewhat  ad hoc and artifi cial.) 
 Second, one might think that abstract entities such as propositions have 
their parts essentially. 13 This seems to be in the spirit of traditional Platonism, 
anyway. Suppose that this essentialist principle is true. Further, suppose that 
p e is abstract. Then, if o is a part of p e , it’s not possible that p e exist without 
having o as a part. But this clearly  is possible. After all, it’s possible that Etna 
and Vesuvius both exist though neither of them even overlaps o. (Maybe o 
could have been a part of Lassen Peak instead; maybe it could have failed to 
exist; maybe it could have existed and failed to be concrete.) But I take it 
that, necessarily, o is a part of p e only if o overlaps m either Etna or Vesuvius. 
When it comes to concrete objects like o, there are at most ‘three ways in’ 
to p e —via Etna, via Vesuvius, and  perhaps via some fusion of the two. So p e 
 could have  existed without having o as a part. Together with the essentialist 
 12  Here is a similar argument that avoids the notion of acquaintance: 
  (i)  If subject s grasps [entertains, believes, knows, desires, . . .] proposition p, then for any part p∗ of p, s 
either grasps p∗ or is engaged in  de re thought about p∗.  
  (ii)   Frege grasps p e . 
  (iii)   Frege neither grasps o nor is engaged in  de re thought about o. 
  (iv)  Therefore, o is not a part of p e . 
 I don’t know whether Frege himself would be willing to endorse this argument, but perhaps some 
contemporary friends of Russellian propositions would be. Thanks to Lucas Halpin for discussion here.  
 13  More carefully, one might think that if an entity e is not possibly concrete, and if e∗ is a part of e, then 
it’s necessary that if e exists, e∗ is a part of e. Even those (e.g., Linsky and Zalta 1996 and Williamson 
2002) who accept contingently non-concrete entities will presumably want to accept this principle. Let 
c be such an entity: c is abstract but is possibly such that it is concrete (and my younger brother, say). 
Were c concrete, it would presumably have parts that it does not actually have, but I doubt that there is 
any x such that: (i) x is actually a part of c but (ii) possibly, x is not a part of c. But nothing turns on this. 
Since propositions are abstract and non-contingently so, we could get by with a weaker principle—one 
according to which non-contingently abstract entities have their parts essentially. 
 A fi nal point. Fine (1994) draws attention to a notion of essence that plausibly cannot be reduced 
to modal notions. Although I am sympathetic to Fine’s notion of essence, I do not mean to appeal to 
it here. 

parts of propositions 167
principle, this will give us the result that p e in fact  doesn’t  have o as a part. 
Call this the  essentialism argument . 14   
 Would the Russellian’s prospects improve if he shifted from 2P to ‘3P’ 
and, in particular, if he adopted the view that parthood is a three-place rela-
tion that can hold between a part, a whole, and an instant of time?  15 They 
would not. For in that case, we could simply restate the argument accord-
ingly, 16 and it would remain forceful. Moreover, the shift to a three-place, 
time-relative parthood relation would generate new puzzles of its own. 17   
 This leaves us with a general problem about transitivity: How can the 
adicity-neutral version of Russellianism (Russellianism N ) be combined 
with the adicity-neutral version of transitivity (Transitivity N )? 
 14  On the assumption that facts and states of aff airs are abstract, a parallel argument can be used to sup-
port the claim that o is not a part of the  fact that Etna is higher than Vesuvius or the  state of aff airs of 
Etna’s being higher than Vesuvius. 
 15  Begin by defi ning ‘x overlaps y at z’ as ‘∃w[w is a part of x at z & w is a part of y at z]’ and ‘x fuses s 
at z’ as ‘∃yy∈s & ∀y[y∈s → y is a part of x at z] & ∀y[y is a part of x at z → ∃w(w∈s & w overlaps y at 
z)]’. This lets us state Atomics 3P : if φ is a sentence of L R , if П is an n-adic predicate of L R , and if τ 1 , . . ., τ n 
are names of L R such that φ= ⌜ П(τ 1 , . . ., τ n ) ⌝ , then the proposition p expressed by φ is such that: for any 
t, if t is an instant, then p fuses the set {x: either П expresses x or τ 1 refers to x, . . ., or τ n refers to x} at 
t. Russellianism 3P could then be identifi ed with the conjunction of 3P and Atomics 3P . 
 16  If we let t a be an instant at which the rock o is inside of Etna, we can say: (i) [Transitivity 3P ], (ii) o is a 
part of Etna at t a , and (iii) o is not a part of p e at t a , from which it follows that, contrary to Russellianism 3P , 
(iv) Etna is not a part of p e at t a . Premise (iii) can be motivated by analogues of the acquaintance 
and essentialism arguments discussed earlier. Acquaintance: one can grasp a proposition only if one is 
acquainted with everything that is ever a part of it. Frege grasps p e but is not acquainted with o. So o 
is never a part of p e . Essentialism: if an entity y is abstract, then for any x, if x is ever a part of y, then y 
is essentially such that x is always a part of y. The proposition p e is abstract, but it isn’t essentially such 
that o is always a part of it. Admittedly, it is not always clear how we should restate the given principles 
in 3P-appropriate terms. Perhaps the resulting arguments are  somewhat less decisive than the originals. 
But if so, surely this is because it’s diffi  cult to think of propositions or other essentially abstract entities as 
having their parts in a time-relative way. (See the next note.) So even if the case for (iii) is a bit muddy, 
this is hardly a reason for the Russellian to embrace time-relative parthood. On the contrary, it’s a reason 
to shy away from it. 
 17  One new puzzle arises from the following: 
 Indexing 
If Russellianism 3P is true, then ∃t[t is an instant & Etna is a part of p e  at t] 
 Presence 
∀x∀y∀z[x is a part of y at z → (x is present at z & y is present at z)] 
 Transience Etna 
∃t[t is an instant & Etna is not present at t] 
 Constancy pe  
¬∃t∃t∗∃x[t is an instant & t∗ is an instant & p e is present at t & p e is present at  
 
  
t∗ & x is a part of  p e at t & x is not a part of p e  at t∗] 
 ( Propositions do not ‘persist through mereological variation’. ) 
 Incorruptibility pe ¬∃t∃t∗[t is an instant & t∗ is an instant & p e is present at t & p e is not present at t∗] 
 ( Propositions are either atemporal or present at all times. ) 
 Given 3P, these claims are all highly plausible, but taken together, they entail that Russellianism 3P is 
not true. This argument deserves further exploration, but I lack the space for it here.  

168 cody gilmore
 5.  The Supplementation Argument 
 The  Weak Supplementation Principle  says that if a thing has a proper part (a 
part with which the thing is not identical), then that thing has a second 
proper part that doesn’t overlap the fi rst. In terms of the two-place predicate 
‘x is a part of y’, this comes to
 WSP 2P  ∀x∀y[(x is a part of y & x≠y) → ∃z(z is a part of y & ¬z overlaps x)]  
 WSP 2P (or some adicity-appropriate analogue) is common ground among 
those who disagree on much else.  18 It is endorsed by 2P-ers  19 and by 3P-ers,  20 
by compositional monists  21 and compositional pluralists,  22 by friends 23 and 
foes 24 of unrestricted composition, and by friends  25 and foes  26 of uniqueness. 
 But there is a problem. When Peter Simons originally introduced Weak 
Supplementation, he motivated it with the following remark: “surely if a 
universe is complex (i.e. has proper parts at all), then at least two of these 
parts will be disjoint” (1987, p. 27). I regard this as one of the least nego-
tiable claims in part–whole theory, at least when framed in adicity-neutral 
terms. But I deny that it is properly formalized as WSP 2P . Instead, the proper 
two-place formalization would seem to be  Quasi-Supplementation :
 QS2P   ∀x∀y[(x is a part   of y & x≠y) → ∃z∃w(z is a part of y & w is a part 
of y & ¬z overlaps w)] 
 In words, this says that if a thing has a proper part, then the thing has parts 
that are disjoint from (fail to overlap)  each other , though not necessarily from 
 the fi rst proper part . 
 18  Though its status as sacrosanct has been challenged (e.g., by Donnelly 2011), and the principle has 
been denied (e.g., by Smith 2009). 
 19  Lewis (1991), Sider (2007), Effi  ngham and Robson (2007), Eagle (2010). 
 20  Simons (1987), van Inwagen (1990b), Koslicki (2008). These philosophers all take parthood to be 
somehow ‘time-indexed’ or ‘spatiotemporally relativized’; they do not all accept 3P exactly as I’ve 
formulated it. 
 21  Examples here include Lewis (1991), Sider (2007), and Koslicki (2008). Van Inwagen accepts principles 
that entail a temporally relativized analogue of WSP 2P . 
 22  McDaniel (2009). 
 23  Lewis (1991), Sider (2007), Varzi (2009). 
 24  Simons (1987), van Inwagen (1990b). 
 25  Lewis (1991), Sider (2007), van Inwagen (1990b), Koslicki (2008), Varzi (2008).  
 26  Simons (1987), Lowe (2001, p. 140). The principle that Lowe dubs ‘Weak Supplementation’ is weaker 
than WSP 2P , but together with other principles that Lowe accepts, it entails WSP 2P . 

parts of propositions 169
 QS 2P is signifi cantly weaker than WSP 2P . To take just one case in which 
this diff erence makes a diff erence, consider Judith Jarvis Thomson’s (1998) 
views about the case of the clay statue, Goliath, and the lump of clay, Lump1, 
that ‘constitutes’ Goliath. Thomson rejects Uniqueness. She holds that there 
is a set s of particles such that:  27   
   (i)  Lumpl fuses s 
   (ii)  Goliath fuses s 
   (iii)  Lumpl≠Goliath, 
   (iv)  Lumpl is a part of Goliath, and 
   (v)  Goliath is a part of Lump1. 
 WSP 2P is inconsistent with (i)–(iv) together with the claim that parthood 
is transitive.  28 QS 2P avoids this inconsistency, as can be seen by considering 
the directed graph below.  29 (Arrows represent immediate proper parthood. 
So, e.g., a is a proper part of Lumpl. We assume that x is a part of y iff  either 
x = y or x bears the transitive closure of immediate proper parthood to y, so 
parthood is guaranteed to be refl exive and transitive.)
Lu
a
b
G
 
 27  In fact Thomson takes parthood to be a three-place, time-relative relation and accepts time-indexed 
analogues of (i)–(v). Since nothing turns on this, for simplicity I’ll ignore it. See also Thomson (1983).  
 28  To see this, suppose that (i)–(iv) and WSP 2P are all true. From the conjunction of (iii), (iv), and WSP 2P 
it follows that (vi) Goliath has a part, call it  GP , that is not identical to Goliath and that doesn’t overlap 
Lumpl. Given (vi) and the defi nition of ‘fuses’, we can conclude that (vii) some member of s, call it m, 
 overlaps GP, i.e. (given the defi nition of ‘overlap’), that there is some object, call it o, that is a common 
part of both m and GP. Now since o is a part of m (by (vii)), since m is a part of Lumpl (by (vii), (i), and 
the defi nition of ‘fuses’), and since parthood is transitive, we can conclude that (viii) o is a part   of Lumpl. 
But now we have the result that (ix) o is a part both of Lumpl and of GP, hence (given the defi nition 
of ‘overlap’) that (x) Lumpl and GP overlap. This contradicts a claim that follows from (vi), namely that 
(xi) GP does not overlap Lumpl. 
 We can avoid this problem by replacing WSP 2P with QS 2P . The latter entails not that Goliath has a 
part that doesn’t overlap Lumpl, but merely that Goliath has a pair of parts (e.g., its foot and its head) 
that don’t overlap each other. 
 29  See Cotnoir (2010, p. 399) on the use of directed graphs (as opposed to Hasse diagrams) to specify 
models of the parthood relation in which parthood fails to be anti-symmetric. 

170 cody gilmore
 In this model, Lump1 and Goliath are non-identical, so (iii) is satisfi ed. 
It’s easy to verify that they each fuse the set {a, b}, so (i) and (ii) are satis-
fi ed. And they’re parts of each other, so (iv) and (v) are satisfi ed. Finally, the 
model satisfi es QS 2P : the only things that have proper parts are Lumpl and 
Goliath, and each of them has parts (namely, a and b) that are disjoint from 
each other. 
 I don’t see anything obviously problematic about Thomson’s package of 
views; I am not entirely comfortable rejecting the package. This makes me 
hesitant to endorse WSP 2P . I have no corresponding doubts about QS 2P . 
More generally, I can see no reason to doubt
 QS N   Each fundamental parthood relation is such that: (i) if it’s two-place, 
then it’s ‘quasi-supplementive’, and (ii) if it’s not two-place, then it’s 
governed by an adicity-appropriate analogue of QS 2P . 
 In my view, QS N is comparable in plausibility to Transitivity N . If 
Russellianism N confl icts with either of them, it emerges the loser.  30 (For 
more on quasi-supplementation, see my 2009 and forthcoming a.) 
 Here is an argument from QS 2P to the denial of Russellianism 2P . Let p i be 
the proposition expressed by ‘ IdenticalTo(i, i) ’, and assume that parthood is 
two-place. Then the premises of the following argument should be plausible:  
 SA 
 S1   If Russellianism 2P is true, then:  (i)  identity is a part of p i , and  
(ii) ∀x[x is a part of p i → overlaps identity] 
 S2  Identity ≠ p i 
 S3  ¬∃x[x is a part of identity & x≠identity] 
 S4   ∀x∀y[(x is a part of y & x≠y) → ∃z∃w(z is a part of y & w is a part  
 of y & ¬z  overlaps w)] 
 _________________________________ 
 S5 
So,   31 Russellianism 2P is not true. 
 30  Donnelly (2011) objects to such uses of supplementation principles. Responding to her interesting 
arguments would require a separate paper. 
 31  To see that the argument is valid, assume for  reductio that the premises are all true but that, contrary to 
the conclusion, Russellianism 2P is true as well. Then, given Russellianism 2P and S1, we have: (i) identity is 
a part of p i , and (ii) ∀x[x is a part of p i → x overlaps identity], i.e.,  each part of p  i   overlaps identity . Together 
with S2 and S4, (i) entails that (iii) ∃z∃w[(z is a part of p i & w is a part of p i & ¬z overlaps w)], i.e.,  p  i   has 
parts that are disjoint from each other . But (iii) is inconsistent with the conjunction of (ii) and S3. To see this, 
suppose that all three are true. In accordance with (iii), suppose that: (iv) a is a part of p i , (v) b is a part of 

parts of propositions 171
 As I noted earlier, one response to the Transitivity Argument is to distinguish 
between two diff erent fundamental parthood relations—one for material 
objects and their parts, another for propositions and their parts—and to for-
mulate Russellianism in terms of the latter. It is worth pointing out that this 
response off ers no help at all with the Supplementation Argument. Even if 
there were two fundamental parthood relations, there would be no tempta-
tion to say that the Supplementation Argument equivocates between them. 
Rather, it is clearly concerned with just one relation throughout—viz., the 
one that holds between propositions and their parts. None of its premises 
becomes more plausible when given a diff erent reading. So let’s consider 
those premises, again in order of decreasing obviousness-to-me. 
 S2 . I expect no resistance here. Identity is a two-place relation, not a 
proposition. It is neither true nor false. By contrast, p i is a proposition 
and is true; it is not a two-place relation. (Maybe it’s a  zero -place rela-
tion.) So, by the diversity of discernibles, we can conclude that p i and 
identity are diverse: they are two, not one. 
 S4 . This is just QS 2P , the 2P-appropriate quasi-supplementation principle; 
I will say no more about it here. 
 S3 . This premise says that identity does not have any proper parts, i.e., 
that it is  simple . One might think that  analyzable  universals— being a 
sister of , perhaps, or  being a bachelor —have proper parts. Specifi cally, 
one might think their proper parts are the entities that fi gure into their 
analyses. But identity is unanalyzable and hence plausibly simple. What 
would its proper parts be? (I assume that if identity  is analyzable, the 
whole argument can easily be restated in terms of some universal that 
is not analyzable.) 
 S1 . Recall that p i is the proposition expressed by ‘ IdenticalTo(i, i) ’. 
According to Russellianism 2P , therefore, p i fuses the set {x: ‘ IdenticalTo ’ 
p i , and (vi) a is disjoint from b. Together, (iv) and (ii) entail that (vii) a overlaps identity, and (v) and (ii) 
likewise entail that (viii) b overlaps identity. So, given the defi nition of ‘overlaps’, we can conclude that 
there are things, call them  a∗ and  b∗ , such that: (ix) a∗ is a part both of a and of identity (from (vii)), and 
(x) b∗ is a part both of b and of identity (from (viii)). But recall S3. It says that identity is  simple , that it 
has no parts aside from itself. Given (ix) and (x), respectively, this means that: (xi) a∗ = identity, and (xii) 
b∗ = identity. Now, since identity = a∗ and since a∗ is a part of a (from (ix)), we get the result that (xiii) 
identity is a part of a. Likewise, since identity = b∗ and since b∗ is a part of b (from (x)), we get the result 
that (xiv) identity is a part of b. Together, these last two claims entail that a overlaps—and hence is not 
disjoint from—b. This contradicts (vi). 

172 cody gilmore
expresses x or ‘ i ’ refers to x or ‘ i ’ refers to x}.  32 Since the only entity 
that is expressed by ‘ IdenticalTo ’ or referred to by ‘ i ’ is the relation of 
identity, Russellianism 2P tells us that p i fuses the singleton set {identity} 
and hence, by the defi nition of ‘fuses’, that (i) identity is a part of p i and 
that (ii) each part of p i overlaps identity. This gives us S1 2P . 33  
 It is worth noting here that there is something unusual about the proposition 
in question, p i : it predicates a relation of that very relation. The proposition says, 
concerning the relation of identity, that it is identical to it. Russellians might 
be tempted deny the existence of such propositions, perhaps by appeal to type 
restrictions of some kind. The idea would be to concede that Russellianism 2P is 
false as stated, since it incurs a commitment to propositions that are banned by 
the relevant type restrictions, but to insist that (i) these restrictions are indepen-
dently motivated 34 and that (ii) a properly restated,  typed version of Russellianism 
avoids any confl ict with quasi-supplementation. 
 I don’t deny (i) or (ii). But I still think that type restrictions are artifi cial 
and should be accepted only under duress. Identity is one of those many 
universals that can be univocally predicated of entities of all sorts. It seems 
perfectly intelligible, and indeed obviously true, to say that  all  entities, uni-
versals and particulars alike, are identical to themselves. Type theories appar-
ently have to say that there is something defective about such a claim. 35   
 I cannot do justice to these issues here. So for the rest of the chapter 
I will set type theories aside and just take it for granted that there are atomic 
propositions that predicate a universal of itself. If one likes, one can read the 
argument as a  reductio of that assumption. 
 One fi nal point before we move on. Suppose that Russellians formulated 
their view in terms of a three-place, time-relative parthood relation. Would this 
help them with supplementation problem? It would not. As in the case of the 
 32  According to Frege, p i is composed of the sense of the predicate ‘ IdenticalTo ’ and the sense (not 
the referent) of the name ‘ i ’. It is therefore open to Frege to say that these are non-identical—indeed, 
mereologically disjoint—senses. In that case, there would be no tension between what we might call 
‘Fregeanism 2P ’ on the one hand and QS 2P on the other. 
 33  Bynoe (2010) argues that, given there is such a thing as  the fact that being a property is a property , the 
‘compositional view of facts’ is in tension with certain supplementation principles. He does not discuss 
QS 2P in particular, nor does he consider any solution to the given problem along the lines of the one 
that I advocate. 
 34  E.g., by the need to avoid the ‘property version’ of Russell’s paradox. 
 35  See Menzel (1993) for a criticism of type theories and for a type-free approach to properties, relations, 
and propositions. 

parts of propositions 173
Transitivity Argument, we could simply restate the Supplementation Argument 
in 3P-appropriate terms,  36 and it would remain forceful. So again we have a 
general problem: How can Russellianism N be combined with QS N ? 
 6.  Parthood as a four-place relation 
 Elsewhere I have argued that if that material objects are multi-located in 
spacetime (of which more later), then we should reject 2P and 3P in favor of
 4P   Parthood is a four-place relation, one that can be expressed by ‘x at y is 
a part of z at w’. 
 I won’t repeat that argument here. But I will do two related things. First, 
I will put more fl esh on the doctrine that material objects are multi-located 
in spacetime, and I will try to give the reader an intuitive sense of how 
a four-place relation might hold between multi-located objects and their 
locations in spacetime. Second, I will address the question of how to for-
mulate 4P-appropriate analogues of (i) the refl exivity of parthood, (ii) the 
transitivity of parthood, (iii) and quasi-supplementation. In addressing that 
question, my strategy will divide into three main steps. 
 First, I will suggest that questions about how to formulate 4P-appropriate 
analogues of the refl exivity and transitivity of parthood have relatively straight-
forward answers. Second, I will note that the analogues of these two principles 
conform to a quite salient pattern. Third, I will suggest that we should make the 
4P-appropriate analogue of quasi-supplementation conform to that pattern as 
well. In tackling the hard case, we should look to the easy cases for guidance. 
 6.1   Exact Occupation, Multi-Location, and Four-Place Parthood 
 Assume that we inhabit a four-dimensional spacetime and suppose that we 
know what it means to say that a given material object O  exactly occupies  (hence-
forth just  occupies ) a given region R. Roughly, this means that O has (or has-at-
R) exactly the same size and shape as R and stands (or stands-at-R) in exactly 
 36  We could say: (i) if Russellianism 3P is true, then: (a) identity is a part of p i at t a , and (b) ∀x[x is a part p i 
at t a → x overlaps identity at t a ]; (ii) identity ≠ p i , (iii) ¬∃x[x is a part of identity at t a & x≠identity]; and 
(iv) ∀x∀y∀z[(x is a part of y at z & x≠y) → ∃w∃w∗(w is a part of y at z & w∗ is a part of y at z & ¬w 
overlaps w∗ at z)]; from which it follows that (v) Russellianism 3P is not true. I omit the proof. 

174 cody gilmore
the same spatiotemporal relations to other things as does R. I will say that R is 
a  location  of O just in case O occupies R. A thing is  multi-located just in case it 
has more than one location, i.e., just in case there is more than one entity that it 
occupies. With the notion of occupation in hand, we can defi ne the notion of a 
 path : say that a region R is the path of an object O just in case R is the sum or 
union of the region(s) that O occupies. 
 Philosophers will disagree about which regions a given material object 
occupies, but they will largely agree as to which region is the object’s path. 
For example, virtually everyone will agree that a certain four-dimensional, 
93-year-long region is Gerald Ford’s path. But they will disagree about 
which region or regions he  occupies . ‘Locational perdurantists’ will say 
that Ford occupies exactly one region—his path. ‘Locational endurantists’ 
will say that he occupies a great many regions, each of which is a tem-
porally unextended ‘slice’ of that path.  37 This is the most popular form of 
multi-locationism, but not the only one 38  . 
 Multi-locationists should endorse 4P: they should say that parthood is a 
four-place relation that can be expressed by the predicate ‘x at y is a part of 
z at w’. As proponents of 4P, they will fi nd it natural to accept the following 
principle, which connects  parthood with  occupation :
 The Location Principle (LP)   If x at y is a part of z at w then: x occupies y 
and z occupies w. 
 
 ∀x∀y∀z∀w[P(x, y, z, w) → [OCC(x, y) &
OCC(z, w)]] 
According to LP, parthood has one slot for a part, a second slot for a  loca-
tion of that part, a third slot for a  whole , and a fourth slot for a  location  of 
that whole. 
 Admittedly, if parthood is a four-place relation, then it will lack the famil-
iar formal properties—such as refl exivity and transitivity—that are often 
attributed to it. But this is unlikely to be seen as a decisive objection to 
 37  These terms are from Gilmore (2008). See Balashov (2010) for further discussion and for arguments 
against locational endurantism. 
 38  Hudson (2001) argues that ordinary objects are ‘worms’ each of which occupies many largely over-
lapping four-dimensional spacetime regions. McDaniel (2004) explores a form of ‘modal realism with 
overlap’ according to which at least some material objects are wholly present in many diff erent concrete 
possible worlds. Such an object exactly occupies at least one diff erent spacetime region in each diff erent 
world at which it exists (but the regions themselves are ‘worldbound’). 

parts of propositions 175
the four-place view, since exactly the same complaint can be made against 
3P, and it remains very popular. In both cases, the force of the objection is 
mitigated by the fact that even if parthood lacks the properties of refl exiv-
ity, transitivity, and so on, it might still possess natural adicity-appropriate 
 analogues of those properties. 
 6.2  Refl exivity and Transitivity  
 So let us ask: what  are the most natural 4P-appropriate analogues of refl ex-
ivity and transitivity? We can start with the former. I suggest
 Refl exivity4P  If x occupies y, then x at y is a part of x at y. 
 
 ∀x∀y[OCC(x, y) → P(x, y, x, y)] 
 Loosely put, this says that each thing is a part of itself at each of its loca-
tions. I occupy a certain human-shaped region, R. So I, at R, am a part of 
myself, at R. Initially one might be tempted by a stronger refl exivity-like 
principle: ∀x∀yP(x, y, x, y). In words, this says that for any x and any y, x at 
y is a part of x at y. Together with LP, though, the stronger principle yields 
the absurd result that everything occupies everything. 
 Next consider transitivity. If parthood is a four-place relation governed 
by LP, then it is naturally taken to obey
 Transitivity4P   If x at x∗ is a part of y at y∗, and y at y∗ is a part of z at z∗, 
then x at x∗ is a part of z at z∗. 
 
 ∀x∀x∗∀y∀y∗∀z∀z∗[[P(x, x∗, y, y∗) & P(y, y∗, z, z∗)] → 
 
 P(x, x∗, z, z∗)] 
 My left hand, at a certain hand-shaped region R h , is a part of my left arm, at 
a certain arm-shaped region R a , and my left arm, at that same arm-shaped 
region R a , is a part of me, at the aforementioned human-shaped region 
R. So, given Transitivity 4P , my left hand, at R h , is a part of me, at R. This 
argument is formally valid; we have 
   (i)  [Transitivity 4P ] 
   (ii)  P(my left hand, R h , my left arm, R a ) 
   (iii)  P(my left arm, R a , me, R) 
   (iv)   So, P(my left hand, R h , me, R) 

176 cody gilmore
 This is a welcome result. We expect a transitivity-like principle that governs 
a fundamental parthood relation to combine with claims like (ii) and (iii) 
to yield a formally valid argument for a conclusion like (iv). If the principle 
 couldn’t do this, that would speak forcefully against its status as an analogue 
of Transivity 2P . 
 6.3  Fusion and Quasi-Supplementation 
 So far we have confi ned our mereological vocabulary to a primitive predi-
cate for  parthood . But the 4P-er will also fi nd it convenient to use a variety 
of other mereological expressions, including a defi ned predicate for  overlap-
ping . For example, in the cased depicted below, he will want to say that c at 
r c overlaps d at r d : 
 
ra
rb
a
b
c
rc
b*
rb*
d
 rd
 
 We can defi ne this predicate via
 D3  O(x, x∗, y, y∗) =df. ∃z∃z∗[P(z, z∗, x, x∗) & P(z, z∗, y, y∗)] 
 According to D3, x at x∗ overlaps y at y∗ just in case some z, at some z∗, 
is a part  both of x at x∗  and of y at y∗. Thus, in the case depicted above, the 
reason why it’s true that
 (9)  O(c, r c , d, r d ) 
 is that both of the following are also true:
 (10)   P(b, r b , c, r c ) 
 (11)   P(b, r b , d, r d ) 
 In other words, b, at r b , is a part  both of c at r c  and of d at r d . 

parts of propositions 177
 The 4P-er will also want to defi ne a predicate for fusion. To do this, we 
can think of fusion as a three-place relation that holds between a  thing , a 
 set , and a  location of the thing, where the set in question is a set of ordered 
〈thing, location of that thing〉 pairs:
 D4 F(y, s, y∗) =df. ∃z(z∈s) & ∀z[z∈s → ∃w∃w∗[z=〈w, w∗〉 & P(w, w∗, y, y∗)]] & 
 
 ∀z∀z∗[P(z, z∗, y, y∗) → ∃u∃w∃w∗[u∈s & u=〈w, w∗〉 & O(w, w∗, z, z∗)]]  
 In words, y fuses s at y∗ just in case: (i) s is a non-empty set, (ii) each mem-
ber of s is an ordered pair whose fi rst member at its second member is a part 
of y at y∗, and (iii) for any z and any z∗, if z at z∗ is a part of y at y∗, then 
there is some ordered pair in s whose fi rst member at its second member 
overlaps z at z∗. 
 To illustrate, let m be a composite object that occupies two diff erent 
regions: rm 1 and rm 2 . Further, suppose that m has diff erent parts at dif-
ferent locations. Finally, suppose that, at each of its locations, it is entirely 
composed of simples. Informally speaking, we can specify the situation as 
follows: at rm 1 , m’s simple parts are a, b, and c, whereas at rm 2 , its simple 
parts are b, c, and d. 
 
ra1
rc1
rb1
rm1
a
b
c
m
               
rd2
rc2
rb2
rm2
d
b
c
m
 
 In terms of our fusion predicate, we can say:
 (12)   F(m, {〈a, ra 1 〉, 〈b, rb 1 〉, 〈c, rc 1 〉}, rm 1 ) 
 (13)   F(m, {〈d, rd 2 〉, 〈b, rb 2 〉, 〈c, rc 2 〉}, rm 2 ) 
 Crucially, (12) and (13) do  not say that m is a set or that it has sets or ordered 
pairs as  parts . These sentences are all consistent with the claim that the only 
entities that are (anywhere) parts of m (anywhere) are  concrete material objects . 
What (12) and (13) say is that m  fuses certain sets at certain locations, where 

178 cody gilmore
‘fuses’ is a technical term defi ned by D4. Informally, (12) says that m, at rm 1 , 
is composed of a at ra 1 , b at rb 1 , and c at rc 1 . 
 So far I have suggested that the most natural 4P-appropriate analogues of 
Refl exivity 2P and Transitivity 2P are Refl exivity 4P and Transitivity 4P , respec-
tively. I take this suggestion to be relatively uncontroversial. 
 My next task is harder: it is to fi nd the most natural 4P-appropriate ana-
logue of QS 2P . My fi rst step will be to identify a pattern in the conclusions 
that I’ve already reached regarding the refl exivity and transitivity principles. 
Consider the following defi nitions:
 D5  x is an occupation pair =df. ∃y∃z[OCC(y, z) & x = 〈y, z〉] 
 D6   x is a pair-part of y = df. ∃z∃z∗∃w∃w∗[P(z, z∗, w, w∗) & x = 〈z, z∗〉 &  
y = 〈w, w∗〉] 
 In words: an  occupation pair  is an ordered pair whose fi rst member occupies 
its second member; and one thing is a  pair-part  of another just in case they 
are both ordered pairs, and the fi rst member of the fi rst pair, at the second 
member of the fi rst pair, is a part of the fi rst member of the second pair, at 
the second member of the second pair. Given LP, we can conclude that if x 
is a pair-part of y, then x and y are both  occupation pairs . 
 Now, to see the pattern, notice two facts. First, Transitivity 4P is equivalent to 
the claim that pair-parthood is transitive in the strict sense. Second, Refl exivity 4P 
is equivalent to the claim that pair-parthood is refl exive over the domain of 
occupation pairs. I suggest that we can extend this pattern by formulating QS 4P 
in such a way that it ends up being equivalent to the claim that pair-parthood is 
‘quasi-supplementive’, at least over the domain of occupation pairs. 
 More generally, I suggest that the most salient pattern that emerges from 
Refl exivity 4P and Transitivity 4P is this: if a 2P-appropriate principle attrib-
utes formal property F to parthood, then the most natural 4P-appropriate 
analogue of that principle will be one that is equivalent to the claim that 
 pair -parthood has property F, at least over the domain of occupation pairs. 
Here is a 4P-appropriate analogue of QS 2P that conforms to this guideline:
 QS 4P   ∀x∀x∗∀y∀y∗[[P(x, x∗, y, y∗) & [x ≠ y ∨ x∗ ≠ y∗]]→ ∃z∃z∗∃w∃w∗[P(z, 
z∗, y, y∗) &  P(w, w∗, y, y∗) & ¬O(z, z∗, w, w∗)]] 39   
 39  To see that QS 4P is equivalent to the principle, QS pp , that pair-parthood is ‘quasi-supplementive’, 
let 〈a, a∗〉 and 〈b, b∗〉 be arbitrarily chosen ordered pairs, and suppose that (i) 〈a, a∗〉 is a pair-part of  
〈b, b∗〉 and 〈a, a∗〉≠〈b, b∗〉. This is equivalent to the claim that (ii) P(a, a∗, b, b∗) and [a≠b v a∗≠b∗], given 

parts of propositions 179
 To illustrate, QS 4P rules out the ‘David/Lumpy’ case
Lumpy
(simple at rL)
David 
rL
The David/Lumpy Case
(i)
David fuses {໭Lumpy, rL໮} at rL
(ii)
David ≠ Lumpy
(iii) Lumpy is simple at rL
 
 but not the ‘Brick/Wall’ case. 40 
 
rbr1
rbr2
Brick
Brick
Wall
rwall
The Brick/Wall Case
A simple brick travels backward in time and is placed 
next to itself. It occupies two different regions and 
composes a wall that occupies the union of those regions. 
Thus we have:
(i)
Wall fuses {໭Brick, rbr1໮, ໭Brick, rbr2໮}at rwall 
(ii)
Wall≠Brick
(iii) Brick is simple at rbr1 and at rbr2
 
 To see why, start with 4P-appropriate defi nitions of ‘simple’, ‘proper part’, and 
‘disjoint’:
 D7   x is simple at x∗ =df. P(x, x∗, x, x∗) &  
∀y∀y∗[P(y, y∗, x, x∗) → (y = x & y∗ = x∗)] 
 D8  PP(x, x∗, y, y∗) =df. P(x, x∗, y, y∗) & [x ≠ y ∨ x∗ ≠ y∗] 
 D9  D(x, x∗, y, y∗) =df. ¬O(x, x∗, y, y∗) 
the defi nition of ‘pair-part’ and the identity conditions for ordered pairs. (Also, I assume that, necessar-
ily, entities x and x∗ exist iff  〈x, x∗〉 exists.) Together with QS 4P , (ii) entails that (iii) ∃z∃z∗∃w∃w∗[P(z, 
z∗, b, b∗) & P(w, w∗, b, b∗) & ¬O(z, z∗, w, w∗)]. And (iii) is equivalent to the claim that (iv) 〈b, b∗〉 has 
pair-parts 〈z, z∗〉, 〈w, w∗〉 that are ‘pair-disjoint’, i.e., that do not pair-overlap each other, i.e., that do not 
have a common pair-part. So QS 4P entails QS pp . In the other direction, for arbitrary a, a∗, b, b∗, suppose 
that (ii) is true. Then so is (i), given their equivalence. Together with QS pp , (i) entails (iv) and hence the 
equivalent claim (iii). This shows that QS pp entails QS 4P . 
 40  The case is adapted from Effi  ngham and Robson (2007), who use it to argue against endurantism. 
Donald Smith (2009) replies, and Effi  ngham (2010) replies to Smith. For a diff erent response to the 
original paper, see Gilmore (2009, pp. 122–125). 

180 cody gilmore
 In words: a thing x is  simple  at a location y just in case (i) x at y is a part of 
x at y and (ii) the only 〈thing z, location z∗〉 pair such that z at z∗ is part 
of x at y is 〈x, y〉; x at x∗ is a  proper part  of y at y∗ just in case x at x∗ is a 
part of y at y∗ but either x is distinct from y or x∗ is distinct from y∗; and 
x at x∗ is  disjoint  from y at y∗ just in case x at x∗ does not overlap y at y∗. 
With these notions in hand, we can off er the following rough paraphrase 
of QS 4P : if a thing has a proper part at a region, then the thing must have 
disjoint proper parts at that region. 
 In both of the cases above, the antecedent of QS 4P is satisfi ed: roughly, 
David has Lumpy as a proper part, and Wall has Brick as a proper part. So, 
in both cases, QS 4P yields the result that the complex object in question 
must have ‘disjoint proper parts’ (in the 4P-appropriate sense). But while 
Wall does have such parts (namely, Brick at rbr 1 and Brick at rbr 2 ), David 
does not. Wall is composed of a single simple thing, Brick,  at two diff erent 
locations of that thing , and Brick at the fi rst location does not overlap itself at 
the second location. This keeps the case in compliance with QS 4P . David, by 
contrast, is composed of a distinct simple thing, Lumpy,  at just one location of 
that thing , and this violates QS 4P .  41   
 (This is a very loose explanation of how QS 4P applies to the two cases 
above. When we turn to the question of how QS 4P applies to proposi-
tions, I will proceed more slowly and carefully. But to give a formal, 
full-dress discussion of the present case would be tedious and not espe-
cially useful.) 
 This completes my discussion of four-place parthood as it holds ‘within 
the spatiotemporal realm’. In the next section I consider the role that this 
relation might play in a theory of Russellian propositions. 
 41  To see this that the David/Lumpy case violates QS 4P , suppose for  reductio  that (i)–(iii) from the speci-
fi cation of that case are all true, and that QS 4P is true too. Then, from the defi nition of ‘fuses’, we can 
conclude that (iv) P(Lumpy, r L , David, r L ). Together with QS 4P , (iv) and (ii) entail that 
 (v)   ∃w∃w∗∃z∃z∗[P(w, w∗, David, r L ) & P(z, z∗, David, r L ) & ¬O(w, w∗, z, z∗)] 
 Suppose that a, r a , b, and r b are such a foursome, hence that: (vi) P(a, r a , David, r L ), (vii) P(b, r b , David, r L ), 
and (viii) ¬O(a, r a , b, r b ). Given (vi) and the defi nition of ‘fuses’, we can conclude that (ix) O(a, r a , Lumpy, 
r L ). Similarly, given (vii) and the defi nition of ‘fuses’, we can conclude that (x) O(b, r b , Lumpy, r L ). Since 
Lumpy is  simple at r L , the only way for a at r a to  overlap Lumpy at r L is for Lumpy at r L to be a  part  of a at 
r a . (To see this, note that (ix) entails that there is a thing, call it  c , and location, call it  r  c  , such that: (xi) P(c, 
r c , a, r a ) and (xii) P(c, r c , Lumpy, r L ). And (xii) and (iii) entail that c=Lumpy and r c =r L .)   Parallel remarks 
go for b at r b . Thus, given (iii), (ix) yields (xiii) P(Lumpy, r L , a, r a ) and (x) yields (xiv) P(Lumpy, r L , b, r b ). 
But (xiii) and (xiv) entail that (xv) O(a, r a , b, r b ), which contradicts (viii). 

parts of propositions 181
 7.  Applying Four-Place Parthood to Propositions 
 How might a four-place parthood relation hold between propositions and 
their constituents? Roughly put, 4P says that in order for a thing x to be a 
part of a thing y, there must be some location x∗ of x, and some location y∗ 
of y, such that x  at x∗ is a part of y  at y∗ . When the x and the y in question 
are two diff erent material objects, the locations are easy to identify: they are 
just spacetime regions. 
 But in the case of propositions and their constituents, it isn’t obvious 
what the locations might be. Spacetime regions are out of the running, since 
propositions and universals are abstract entities, or so I assume. What other 
locations might there be? 
 My answer is: the non-spatiotemporal ‘slots’ or ‘argument positions’ in 
the abstract entities expressed by predicates and connectives. Jeff rey King 
attributes a similar picture to Frege: 42 
 In the case of sentences like 
 3. Carl loves Rebecca 
 4. Rebecca loves Carl 
 we have a doubly incomplete sense expressed by ‘loves’. The two names 
express complete senses. The thoughts expressed by 3 and 4 diff er in that 
in one case (i.e., 3), the sense expressed by ‘Carl’ saturates the ‘fi rst position’ 
in the unsaturated sense expressed by ‘loves’ and the sense expressed by 
‘Rebecca’ saturates the second; in the other case (i.e. 4) the reverse is true. 
So the unsaturated sense here both binds together the three constituents 
in virtue of the complete senses completing its unsaturated positions and 
it determines the structure of the resulting thought by having diff erent 
positions that can be completed by the diff erent complete senses. This is 
how the unsaturated sense both holds the thought together and allows two 
diff erent thoughts to have the same constituents. Again, it should be clear 
how the structures of the thoughts expressed mirror the structures of the 
sentences. Next consider a sentence like: 
 5. Rebecca is strong and Lucy is shy. 
 Here the senses of the two conjuncts are like that expressed by 2 [the sentence 
‘Gödel is smart’] in terms of their structures and types of constituents. The sense 
 42  For a more detailed look at Frege’s views on these matters, see Heck and May (2011).  

182 cody gilmore
of ‘and’ is doubly unsaturated, and is doubly completed by the complete senses 
of the two conjuncts, yielding a complete sense:  the ‘conjunctive thought’ 
expressed by the whole. I assume it is easy to imagine how this account extends 
to other truth functional sentential connectives, including a one-place connec-
tive like ‘not’. (2007, p. 13) 
 There are four ideas in this passage that will be important in what fol-
lows. As far as I can tell, all four can be combined with either Fregean or 
Russellian views about the basic ingredients of propositions. 
 First idea . Both predicates and sentential connectives express 
non-set-theoretical, mind-independent, language-independent abstract 
entities that can be parts of propositions. I will assume (with Russell) that 
predicates express  universals . As for the entities expressed by connectives, 
I will call them  connectants . Developed in this broadly Russellian way, the 
fi rst idea can be dubbed  realism about universals and connectants . 
 Second idea . If a predicate or connective is n-adic, then the entity that 
it expresses has exactly n slots in it. In the hands of the Russellian, this 
second idea takes the form of realism about  slots  in universals and  slots 
in connectants.  43 According to this view, there really are such entities 
as slots: talk of slots is not to be paraphrased away. Slots are presumably 
abstract, and they may be ontologically dependent on the universals or 
connectants that host them, but it hardly follows that they don’t exist or 
that they’re unreal. 
 As I see it, the best way to think of slots is by analogy with holes in material 
objects. Just as the holes in a piece of cheese are not parts of the piece of cheese 
(Casati and Varzi 1994), the slots in a universal are (typically) not parts of that 
 43  Many philosophers seem to be realists about slots in universals. See Gilmore (forthcoming b), King 
(2007, p. 41), McKay (2006, p. 13), Newman (2002, p. 148), Yi (1999, pp. 168ff .), Swoyer (1998, p. 302), 
Armstrong (1997, p. 121), Menzel (1993, p. 82), Zalta (1988, p. 52), Williamson (1985, p. 257), Grossmann 
(1983, p. 200), (1992, p. 57), and especially Crimmins (1992, pp. 99–140), who appeals to slots in the 
context of a detailed theory of structured Russellian propositions. Crimmins distinguishes between slots 
(which he calls  arguments ) in universals and certain associated entities that he dubs  roles . Both do impor-
tant work in his theory. I became aware of Crimmins’s theory only after this chapter was complete, and 
I hope to discuss it in future work. 
 Russell speaks of ‘positions’ in facts (1956, p. 286); see note 48 for more on this. Horwich (1998, p. 91) 
speaks of ‘positions’ in  propositional structures  (which he apparently takes to be  sui generis  abstract entities) 
rather than in universals. Wetzel (2009, p. 134) accepts even such  sui generis  abstract entities as  places in fl ag 
types (e.g., the position in the fl ag type Old Glory occupied by the third red stripe from the bottom) so 
I suspect that she would be sympathetic to slots in universals. See also Koslicki (2008) and Harte (2002) 
for discussion of a range of ideas in this neighborhood and further references.  

parts of propositions 183
universal. 44 Universals and connectants  host  their slots; they typically do not 
have their slots as parts. And just as the holes in a piece of cheese are not parts 
of the sandwich that has the piece of cheese as a part, the slots in a universal are 
(typically) not parts of propositions that have that universal as a part.  45    
 Third idea . This can be expressed as two claims about the relation of occu-
pation. First, the semantic content of a name—its  sense  for Frege, its  referent 
for Russell—occupies slots in the semantic contents of predicates. In the 
hands of the Russellian, this yields the slogan ‘referents occupy slots in uni-
versals’. Second, the semantic contents of sentences (thoughts, a.k.a., propo-
sitions) occupy slots in the semantic contents of connectives (connectants). 
In slogan form: ‘propositions occupy slots in connectants’. 46   
 Fourth idea . This is looser and more general: other things being equal, 
the structure of propositions should be taken to mirror the structure of the 
sentences that express them. Call this the  Mirroring Principle . 47   
 I will take these four ideas as guides in developing Russellianism 4P . As 
we’ll see, they leave a number of important questions unanswered. In the 
next section I address some of these questions. 
 44  Here is a possible exception. If the relation of identity has two slots in it,  s.i and  s.ii , perhaps there is a 
haecceitistic property  being identical with s.i . One might wish to say that s.i is both a  part of  this property 
(just as Obama is a part of  being identical with Obama ) and a  slot in  this property (just as s.i is a slot in 
the dyadic relation of identity from which the haecceitistic property is built up).  
 45  The potential exceptions here involve those odd propositions that are ‘directly about’ slots: e.g., the 
proposition that s.i is identical to s.i. (See the previous note.) 
 46  Some may object that there is no fundamental occupation relation that holds both between material 
objects and spacetime regions (on the one hand) and between things and slots (on the other). I have 
two replies. 
 First, if occupation were an ordinary spatiotemporal relation, such as spatiotemporal coincidence, 
this objection would be quite plausible:  presumably nothing  spatiotemporally coincides  with a slot or 
indeed with any non-spatiotemporal entity. But most of us have independent reason for denying that 
occupation = spatiotemporal coincidence. After all, spatiotemporal coincidence is symmetric but occu-
pation is not. (I occupy regions; they don’t occupy me.) It seems to me that occupation is plausibly a 
‘topic-neutral’ relation, much like identity and, perhaps, parthood. Surely if one is attracted the idea 
that the very same parthood relation can hold both between material objects and their constituents and 
between propositions and their constituents, one should not immediately dismiss the parallel suggestion 
about occupation as too bizarre to take seriously. 
 Second, and more tentatively, one might simply defi ne ‘OCC(x, y) as ‘∃z∃wP(x, y, z, w)’. (This idea 
was suggested to me by Kris McDaniel.) Given that some things are parts of themselves at regions and 
that some things are parts of themselves at slots, this defi nition would give us the result that regions and 
slots are both occupied in the same sense. 
 47  Admittedly, we will often need to depart from it. For example, it seems that the sentence ‘ Property(b) ’ 
is built up from at least two distinct proper parts (a predicate and a name, not to mention the brackets), 
but the Russellian will presumably want to say that the proposition that the sentence expresses has just 
one proper part ( being a property ), which is referred to by ‘ b ’ and expressed by the predicate. 

184 cody gilmore
 7.1  Examples 
 Formulating Russellianism 4P in a rigorous and general way is a compli-
cated aff air. Rather than lay it out all at once, we should ease our way 
into it by considering a series of examples, from which we can then 
extrapolate. 
 Let’s focus on p e , the proposition that Etna is higher than Vesuvius. The 
Russellian wants to say that, in some sense, Etna, Vesuvius, and the relation 
 being higher than  are all parts of p e . How should this rough idea be regi-
mented in terms of a four-place parthood relation? 
 Consider Etna and p e . The Russellian wants to say that Etna is, somehow 
or other, a part of p e . If our only parthood relation were a two-place rela-
tion of parthood  simpliciter , the Russellian’s only option would be to say that 
Etna is a part of p e  simpliciter . As we’ve seen, that leads to problems. If our 
only parthood relation were a three-place, time-relative parthood relation, 
the Russellian would apparently be forced to say that Etna is a part of p e  at 
the particular instant t  a  , or  at some time , or  at all times . This also leads to prob-
lems. But now that we have a four-place parthood relation and an ontology 
of slots at our disposal, we can try something diff erent. We can judiciously 
choose certain slots, x and y, and say that Etna,  at Etna’s location x , is a part of 
the proposition p e ,  at p  e  ’s location y . With any luck, this will help us avoid the 
problems mentioned earlier. 
 So let us ask:  Which locations of Etna and p e are the relevant ones? 
That is:
 Q e   Which 〈slot x, slot y〉 pairs are such that Etna,  at slot x , is a part of p e , 
 at slot y ? 
 Parallel questions can be asked about Vesuvius and about  being higher than :
 Q v   Which 〈slot x, slot y〉 pairs are such that Vesuvius,  at slot x , is a part of p e ,  at 
slot y ? 
 Q b   Which 〈slot x, slot y〉 pairs are such that  being higher than ,  at slot x , is a  
part of p e ,  at slot y ? 
 The passage from King, adapted to our Russellian assumptions, suggests a 
picture that will be useful in thinking about these questions. 

parts of propositions 185
 
pe
______
Etna__BEING HIGHER THAN___Vesuvius
s1
s2
CONJ
. . . .  
s3
 
 Like any proposition, p e has a great many locations. It occupies (inter alia, 
perhaps) each slot in each connectant. The diagram above shows p e as it is 
at just  one of these slots: s3, which happens to be a slot in CONJ, the con-
nectant expressed by ‘ & ’. But this choice is completely arbitrary. We could 
just as easily have depicted p e as it is at any slot in any connectant: p e would 
‘look the same’ at each of those slots. (More on this later.) 
 Likewise, the referents of the names ‘ e ’ and ‘ v ’ each have a great many 
locations. Each of them occupies (inter alia) each slot in each universal. But 
again, the diagram represents each of these referents as it is at just one such 
location. In this case, however, the choice is not arbitrary. We are interested 
in p e , the proposition expressed by ‘ HigherThan(e, v) ’. In that sentence, 
the name ‘ e ’, which refers to Etna, occupies the fi rst argument place in the 
predicate ‘ HigherThan ’. So the fact that Etna is shown as it is at slot s1 in 
 being higher than is no accident. 
 What about  being higher than ? More generally, what about the 
semantic contents of predicates? What do they occupy? Interestingly, 
this question is not addressed in the King passage. As I see it, however, 
the natural thing to say here is that, like propositions, universals occupy 
(inter alia) slots in connectants. Just as an  open sentence  can be ‘inserted’ 
into the ‘slot’ of a one-place  connective  to form a new open sentence, the 
semantic content of that open sentence, a  universal , is plausibly regarded 
as occupying a slot in the semantic content of the connective, a  con-
nectant . This picture should appeal to those who see the category of 
propositions and the category of universals as species of a more natural 
category—the category of  predicables  or  assertibles . Propositions, on this 
view, are saturated or 0-adic predicables, properties are singly unsatu-
rated or monadic predicables, dyadic relations are doubly unsaturated 
predicables, and so on (van Inwagen 2006b). It is in the spirit of this 
view to think of the slots in connectants as being occupied by predi-
cables quite generally, regardless of their ‘degree of unsaturatedness’ or 
adicity. Specifi cally, it is natural to assume that  every  predicable occupies 

186 cody gilmore
 every slot in  every connectant. With that assumption in place, we get the 
result that  being higher than  occupies the slot s3 in CONJ. (More on 
this later, too.) 
 Finally, what about CONJ and its brethren? What do connectants occupy? 
I will assume that connectants, like propositions and universals, occupy slots 
in connectants. It is tempting to read Frege as embracing a similar view in 
the following passage from ‘Compound Thoughts’:
 The ‘connective’ in a compound thought of the fi fth kind is the doubly incom-
plete sense of the doubly incomplete expression 
 ‘(not     ) and (  ).’ 
 Here the compound thoughts are not interchangeable, for 
 ‘(not B) and A’ 
 does not express the same as 
 ‘(not A) and B’. 
 . . . Since I hesitate to coin a new word, I am obliged to use the word ‘position’ 
with a transferred meaning. In speaking of written expressions of thoughts, 
‘position’ may be taken to have its ordinary spatial connotation. But a posi-
tion in the expression of a thought must correspond to something in the 
thought itself, and for this I shall retain the word ‘position’. In the present 
case we cannot simply allow the two thoughts to exchange their ‘positions’, 
but we can set the negation of the second thought in the ‘position’ of the 
fi rst, and at the same time the negation of the fi rst in the ‘position’ of the 
second. (Klemke 1968, p. 548)  
 In my terminology, we might say that ‘(not     ) and (  )’ expresses a 
compound, dyadic connectant that results from putting NEG into the fi rst 
slot in CONJ: 
 
NEG-CONJ
sN
CONJ
s3
s4
NEG
 
 In any event, the operative assumption strikes me as natural and as har-
monizing with the other views that I have set out so far. 
 With all of these locational assumptions in hand, we can return to ques-
tions Q e , Q v , and Q b . First, Q e : which 〈slot x, slot y〉 pairs are such that 

parts of propositions 187
Etna at x is a part of p e at y? Without giving a full answer yet, we can at 
least give  one example of a such a pair: 〈s1, s3〉, where s1 is a slot, the ‘upper’ 
slot, in  being higher than  and s3 is a slot in CONJ. For it should now be 
plausible that
 (14)   Etna at s1 is a part of p e at s3; that is, P(Etna, s1, p e , s3). 
 Parallel remarks apply to question Q v : Which 〈slot x, slot y〉 pairs are such 
that Vesuvius at x is a part of p e at y? One example is: 〈s2, s3〉, where s2 
is the  other slot, the ‘lower’ slot, in  being higher than . For it should also be 
plausible that
 (15)   Vesuvius at s2 is a part of p e at s3; that is, P(Vesuvius, s2, p e , s3). 
 Similarly for Q b : Which 〈slot x, slot y〉 pairs are such that  being higher than  
at x is a part of p e at y? One example is 〈s3, s3〉, for
 (16)  being higher than  at s3 is a part of p e at s3: P( loving , s3, p e , s3). 
 Informally put, (14)–(16) say that Etna at s1, Vesuvius at s2, and  being higher 
than at s3 are all parts of p e at s3. So far, so good. But the Russellian will 
want to make a stronger claim. Intuitively, he will want to say not merely 
that these three things are parts of p e , but also that they ‘exhaust’ p e : there is 
‘no more’ to p e at s3 than the parts just specifi ed. 
 More precisely, he will want to say that p e  fuses the set {〈Etna, s1〉, 
〈Vesuvius, s2〉, 〈 being higher than , s3〉} at the slot s3:
 (17)   F(p e , {〈Etna, s1〉, 〈Vesuvius, s2〉, 〈 being higher than , s3〉}, s3) 
 Put a bit diff erently, (17) says that p e , at its location s3, is composed of Etna 
at its location s1, Vesuvius at its location s2, and  being higher than  at its 
location s3. 
 Crucially, (17) does not say that p e is itself a set or an ordered sequence of 
some kind. Nor does it say that p e has sets or ordered pairs as parts. Further, 
(17) does not say that p e has any slots as parts. (17) is consistent with the view 
that p e is a  sui generis  abstract entity whose only parts are Etna, Vesuvius, and 
 being higher than . 

188 cody gilmore
 So far we have merely considered p e ‘as it is at s3’. On the current view, 
p e occupies other slots in other connectants and has, at those other slots, 
the very same semantic contents as parts. Thus, a parallel series of remarks 
would apply to p e as it is at each of these other slots. 
 For purposes of comparison, it may help to consider another example of 
a proposition expressed by an atomic sentence. Let p v be the (false) proposi-
tion expressed by the sentence ‘ HigherThan(v, e) ’. The following diagram 
represents p v as it is at the slot s3: 
 
pv
_________
Vesuvius _BEING HIGHER THAN_______
Etna
s1
s2
CONJ__ . . . .  
s3
 
 In light of our treatment of p e , the diagram above makes it natural to hold 
that p v , at slot s3, is composed of Vesuvius at s1, Etna at s2, and  being higher 
than at s3. Or, more formally,
 (18)  F(p v , {〈Vesuvius, s1〉, 〈Etna, s2〉, 〈 being higher than , s3〉}, s3) 
 Very loosely put, p v and p e are both composed at s3 of the  same things  but at 
 diff erent locations of those things. 
 In discussions structured propositions, facts, states of aff airs, and struc-
tural universals, one often encounters similar claims. One sometimes 
encounters a claim to the eff ect that two propositions, or two states of 
aff airs, or two structural universals, can be made up of the same constitu-
ents ‘in diff erent arrangements’. 48 One way to make precise sense out of 
 48  In ‘On propositions: what they are and how they mean’ (published in 1919), Russell writes that 
 every constituent of a fact has a position (or several positions) in the fact. For example, ‘Socrates 
loves Plato and ‘Plato loves Socrates’ have the same constituents, but are diff erent facts, because the 
constituents do not have the same positions in the two facts. ‘Socrates loves Socrates’ (if it is a fact) 
contains Socrates in two positions (1956, p. 286). 
 In a similar vein, Reinhardt Grossmann writes: 
 Every relation comes with distinct (non-identical) places. Consider a two-place relation like the 
relation of being larger than between natural numbers. This relation, R, has two distinct places, 
which we can indicate by writing ‘R’ with two slots like this: @ R #. Since the slots, the places, are 
diff erent, the results will be diff erent if the places are fi lled with diff erent things: the state of aff airs 
aRb is diff erent from bRa. (1992: 57)  
 David Armstrong (1986, p. 85; 1997, p. 121) follows Grossmann in appealing to slots in the individu-
ation of states of aff airs.  

parts of propositions 189
such a claim is in terms of a four-place parthood relation, together with 
an ontology of slots.  49    
 So far the only propositions that we have considered are those expressed 
by atomic sentences. Let’s now turn to a proposition expressed by a  com-
pound sentence of L R :  ‘ &(HigherThan(e, v), HigherThan(v, e)) ’. In 
English, this would be rendered ‘Etna is higher than Vesuvius and Vesuvius is 
higher than Etna’. Let p c be the proposition expressed by the given sentence 
of L R . As with the previous cases, I’ll depict p c as it occurs at just one of its 
many locations. The location that I’ll arbitrarily choose is s5, a slot in NEG. 
Any slot in any connectant would serve just as well. 
 
pc
pe
pv
__Etna___BEING HIGHER THAN__Vesuvius
_Vesuvius__BEING HIGHER THAN_Etna_
s1
s2
s6
s7
___________________________________________CONJ__________________________________________
s3
s4
NEG___________________________________________________________________________________________
s5
 
 This diagram raises a hard question about slot identity. Are s1 and s2 the same 
slots as s6 and s7? Nothing in this chapter depends on the answer, but the ques-
tion is interesting and has ramifi cations elsewhere, so I will touch upon it again 
later. (Crimmins’s 1992 distinction between  slots (which he calls  arguments ) and 
 roles is relevant here. He would say that there are only two slots in  being higher 
than , but that in p c , each of these slots is associated with two diff erent roles.) 
 Right now, however, I want to comment on the mereological structure 
of p c . Given what we’ve said about p e and p v , the natural thing to say about 
p c is that, at s5, it is composed of p e at s3, p v at s4, and CONJ at s5. In terms 
of our fusion predicate, this comes to
 (19)  F(p c , {〈p e , s3〉, 〈p v , s4〉, 〈CONJ, s5〉}, s5) 
 49  In my terminology, something of the neighborhood of the Russell-Grossmann principle can be 
formalized as: 
 U G  ∀x∀x∗∀y∀z[[F(x, y, z) & F(x∗, y, z)] → x=x∗] 
 This says that it never happens that two diff erent things fuse the same set (of ordered 〈thing, location〉 
pairs) at the same location. Since p e and p v presumably do not fuse the same set at s3, they apparently 
respect U G , despite the fact that they are distinct propositions that in some sense are ‘composed of the 
same parts’. It turns out, however, that there are more complicated examples that violate U G unless we 
accept certain potentially controversial assumptions about slot identity. (In particular, we need to reject 
the view that I dub  Slot Constancy , presumably in favor of the view I dub  Slot Variance . See section 7.3.1 
for these views.) It does not pay to go into the details here. 

190 cody gilmore
 Taken together, (18) and (19) have an interesting and welcome feature. 
Given the defi nition of our fusion predicate, (18) entails
 (20)  Etna at s1 is a part of p e at s3; i.e., P(Etna, s1, p e , s3) 
 and (19) entails
 (21)  p e at s3 is a part of p c at s5; i.e, P(p e , s3, p c , s5)` 
 Together with Transitivity 4P , (20) and (21) yield a formally valid argument for
 (22)  Etna at s1 is a part of p c at s5; i.e., P(Etna, s1, p c , s5). 
 This is exactly the sort of conclusion we expect a transitivity-like principle 
to generate. Indeed, if Transitivity 4P didn’t generate such a conclusion, this 
would speak against its status as a natural analogue of Transitivity 2P . 
 7.2  A General Formulation of Russellianism 4P 
 By now, I hope, the reader will have a rough sense of how to generalize on 
the foregoing examples. My goal in this section is to be explicit about how 
the generalization should go. 
 7.2.1 Five theses about slots   I will start with fi ve theses about universals, 
connectants, and slots. My offi  cial statement of Russellianism 4P will have 
each thesis as a conjunct. The fi rst thesis says that slots come in at least two 
incompatible kinds:
 Two Kinds    There are  objectual  slots, there are  predicative slots, and no slot is 
both objectual and predicative. 
 The idea will be that the slots in connectants are predicative slots and are 
occupied by things like universals, connectants, and propositions, whereas 
the slots in universals are objectual slots and are occupied by anything and 
everything whatsoever. 
 The next three theses make explicit the link between the adicity of a uni-
versal or connectant and the number of slots in it. They employ a primitive 
four-place predicate ‘x is an n th slot in y at (y’s location) z’. They also employ 

parts of propositions 191
the three-place predicate ‘x is a slot in y at z’ defi ned as ‘for some n, x is an 
n th slot in y at z’. I start with a claim about universals:
 Slots in Universals    If a universal u is n-adic, then for each predicative slot 
s pr , u has exactly n slots in it at s pr , each of these slots is 
objectual, and, for any positive integer m less than or 
equal to n: (i) there is exactly one m th slot in u at s pr 
and (ii) for any j, if j≠m, then nothing is both an m th 
slot in u at s pr and a j th slot in u at s pr . 
 In other words, an n-adic universal has n objectual slots in it (and no other 
slots) at each predicative slot, and there are facts about how these slots are 
ordered: one is fi rst, another one is second, . . . , and yet another one is n th . 50 
Next comes a parallel claim about connectants:
 Slots in Connectants    If a connectant c is n-adic, then for each predicative 
slot s pr , c has exactly n slots in it at s pr , each of these 
slots is predicative, and, for any positive integer m 
less than or equal to n: (i) there is exactly one m th 
slot in c at s pr and (ii) for any j, if j≠m, then nothing 
is both an m th slot in c at s pr and a j th slot in c at s pr . 51 
 50  Even among those who are realists about slots in universals, this thesis will be controversial. Timothy 
Williamson (1985), e.g., is a realist about slots, but he holds that, at least in some cases, a given relation is 
identical to its converse. In particular, he holds that  being before  =  being after . According to Williamson, 
this relation has two slots in it: a slot for the thing said to be earlier, call it  s  E  , and a slot for the thing said 
to be later, call it  s  L  . When we think of the relation as  being before , it will be natural to treat s E as 1 st and 
s L as 2 nd ; but when we think of the relation as  being after , it will be natural to treat s L as 1 st and s E as 2 nd . 
But on the assumption that neither of these ‘perspectives’ on the relation is objectively privileged, the 
natural thing to say is that the slots are not ordered in the relevant way, and hence there is no fact of the 
matter as to which of the slots is the 1 st slot and which is the 2 nd . (See Crimmins 1992, pp. 166ff ., Fine 
2000, Fine 2007, and MacBride 2007 for discussion of related issues.) 
 I suspect that it’s possible to state a version of Russellianism 4P that (i) is consistent with the claim 
that the slots in a universal lack any objective order and that (ii) still retains the virtues of the present 
account. The crucial maneuver, I think, is to replace our four-place predicate ‘x is the nth slot in y at z’ 
with the fi ve-place predicate ‘relative to predicate П, x is the nth slot in y at z’, and to restate the certain 
components of Russellianism 4P accordingly. This predicate allows us to say, e.g., that  relative to the predicate 
‘is before’ , s E is the 1 st slot in  being before  at location s3, whereas  relative to the predicate ‘is after’  s E is the 2 nd 
slot in  being before at location s3. 
 51  For reasons parallel to those given in the previous note, this thesis will be controversial even among 
those who are initially sympathetic to realism about slots in connectants. As before, I suspect that I could 
state a version of Russsellianism 4P that avoids the controversial claims about order while retaining the 
advantages of the present account. 

192 cody gilmore
 Neither Slots in Universals nor Slots in Connectants takes a stand on the 
following question: do n-adic universals and n-adic connectants carry the 
same n slots around with them wherever they go? (Call the view that they 
do  Slot Constancy . 52 ) Or do they grow a new crop of slots at each new 
location? (Call this rival view  Slot Variance . 53 ) As I mentioned earlier, in 
connection with the ‘hard question about slot identity’, all the main points 
in this chapter can be consistently combined with either answer (as far as 
I can tell). I think there are several considerations that make Slot Variance 
the more plausible view, but I don’t have the space to go into this here. So 
I’ll remain neutral for the rest of the chapter. 
 Our fourth and fi fth theses impose constraints on the behavior of slots. 
The fourth thesis says, in eff ect, that while universals and connectants may 
 occupy objectual slots, they do not  have slots in them at objectual slots:
 Objectual Saturation  If x is a slot in y at z, then z is a predicative slot. 
 According to Objectual Saturation, universals and connectants have slots 
in them  only at predicative slots . Thus, if an n-adic universal occupies both 
objectual slots and predicative slots, then it has diff erent numbers of 
slots in it at diff erent locations: it has n slots in it at each of its predica-
tive locations, and it has 0 slots in it at each of its objectual locations. In 
that case, a universal would be analogous to an enduring, multi-located 
piece of clay that has diff erent numbers of holes in it at diff erent loca-
tions. Such a piece of clay might have, say, one hole in it at one region 
(early in its career, when it is shaped like a doughnut) while having no 
holes in it at another region (later in its career, when it is shaped like a 
lump). I off er some considerations in support of Objectual Saturation 
in Appendix I. 
 52  More carefully formulated: for any s, any s∗, any x, any y, and any y∗ if s is a slot in x at y and s∗ is a 
slot in x at y∗, then s is a slot in x at y∗. This says that a universal or connectant has exactly the same slots 
in it at each location at which it has any slots in it at all. 
 53  More carefully formulated: for any s, any s∗, any x, any y, and any y∗, if s is a slot in x at y and s∗ is a 
slot in x at y∗ and y≠y∗ then s≠s∗. This says that nothing is a slot in a given universal or connectant at 
two diff erent locations of that universal/connectant. As I discovered after completing this chapter, basi-
cally the same considerations that motivate slot variance can also be accommodated in the manner of 
Crimmins (1992, pp. 99–140), who distinguishes between  slots  (‘arguments’) and  roles . Roughly put, he 
takes the latter to be more ‘fi ne-grained’ than the former.  

parts of propositions 193
 The  fi fth  thesis about slots is parallel to Objectual Saturation. Just as 
Objectual Saturation says that nothing has  slots  at objectual slots, the fi fth 
thesis says that nothing has  proper parts at objectual slots:
 Objectual Simplicity    If x at y is a part of z at w and w is an objectual slot,  
then: x = z and y = w. 
 According to Objectual Simplicity, each entity is simple at each objectual 
slot that it occupies. Thus, while propositions (e.g.) are presumably complex 
at predicative slots, they are simple at any objectual slots that they occupy; 
and while concrete particulars are often complex at spacetime regions, they 
too are simple at any objectual slots that they may occupy. Motivations for 
Objectual Simplicity are given in Appendix II. 
 7.2.2 Atomics4P and Compounds4P  I am now in a position to state the 
two core components of Russellianism 4P . The fi rst is
 Atomics  4P     If φ is a sentence of L R , if П is an n-adic predicate of L R , and if 
τ 1 , . . ., τ n are names of L R such that φ= ⌜ П ( τ 1 , . . ., τ n ) ⌝ , then: 
 there is a proposition p, there is a n-adic universal u, there is an 
entity o 1 , . . ., and there is an entity o n such that: p is the proposi-
tion expressed by φ, П expresses u, τ 1 refers to o 1 , . . ., τ n refers to 
o n , and for  any predicative slot s pr : 
 F(p, {x: either x=〈u, s pr 〉 or x=〈o 1 , the 1st slot in u at s pr 〉, . . ., or 
x=〈o n , the n th slot in u at s pr 〉}, s pr ) 54  
 To illustrate, let φ be ‘ HigherThan(e, v) ’, let П be ‘ HigherThan ’, let τ 1 be 
‘ e ’, let τ 2 be ‘ v ’, and let s3 be a predicative slot. Then, since ‘ HigherThan ’ is 
dyadic and expresses  being higher than , since ‘ e ’ refers to Etna, since ‘ v ’ refers to 
Vesuvius, and since p e is the unique proposition expressed by ‘ HigherThan(e, 
v) ’, Atomics 4P lets us conclude that
 (23)    F(p e , {〈 being higher than , s3〉, 〈Etna, the 1st slot in  being higher than  at 
s3〉, 〈Vesuvius, the 2nd slot in  being higher than at s3〉}, s3)  
 54  In accordance with the suggestion in note 50, phrases like ‘the 1 st slot in u at s pr ’ could be replaced 
with phrases like ‘the 1 st slot in u at s pr , relative to П’. This would accommodate Williamson’s view that 
the slots in a universal lack the relevant sort of ‘perspective independent’ ordering.  

194 cody gilmore
 Morever, since s1=(the fi rst slot in  being higher than  at s3), and since s2=(the 
second slot in  being higher than  at s3), (23) amounts to the claim that p e , at s3, 
is composed of  being higher than at s3, Etna at s1, and Vesuvius at s2. 
 My diagrams typically show a proposition as it is at just one of its loca-
tions. For example, in the diagram of p e , that proposition is shown as it 
is at s3. I have emphasized that each proposition occupies multiple slots 
in multiple connectants, and I have said, rather loosely, that each propo-
sition ‘looks the same’ or ‘has a similar structure’ at each such location. 
Atomics 4P makes this precise, and it does so without taking a stand on the 
Slot Constancy vs. Slot Variance dispute. 
 So much for Atomics 4P . Here is the second core component of 
Russellianism 4P :
 Compounds  4P    If φ, ψ 1 , . . ., and ψ n are sentences of L R , if K is an n-adic 
sentential connective of L R , and if φ= ⌜ K ( ψ 1 , . . ., ψ n ) ⌝  then: 
 there is a proposition pφ, there is an n-adic connectant c, 
there is a proposition pψ1, . . . , and there is a proposition pψn, 
such that: pφ is the proposition expressed by φ, K expresses 
c, ψ1 expresses pψ1, . . . , and ψn expresses pψn, and for any 
predicative slot spr: 
 F(pφ, {x: either x=〈c, spr〉 or x=〈pψ1, the 1st slot in c at 
spr〉, . . ., or x=〈pψn, the n th slot in c at spr〉}, spr) 55   
 Compounds 4P handles sentences of arbitrary complexity, not merely sen-
tences that contain just a single connective. 
 Now, since L R contains connectives of just two adicities (monadic and 
dyadic), Compounds 4P is more general than it needs to be. But this is a 
virtue; it makes it clear how Compounds 4P could be adapted to languages 
with a larger range of connectives, some of them non-truth-functional. 
(Atomics 4P is also more general than it needs to be in this respect.) 
 This completes my presentation of Russellianism 4P . It is the conjunc-
tion of 4P, Two Kinds, Slots in Universals, Slots in Connectants, Objectual 
Saturation, Objectual Simplicity, Atomics 4P , and Compounds 4P . 
 55  Those who deny that the slots in a connectant exhibit the relevant sort of perspective-independent 
ordering can replace phrases like ‘the 1 st slot in c at s pr ’ with those like ‘the 1 st slot in c at s pr , relative to 
K’. See notes 50 and 51. 

parts of propositions 195
 7.3  Russellianism 4P and the Supplementation Argument 
 We’re now in a position to see how Russellianism 4P solves the problem 
about quasi-supplementation. Recall that p i is the proposition expressed 
by ‘ IdenticalTo(i, i) ’; it is the proposition that says, of identity, that it is 
identical to it. Earlier in the chapter, I argued that if Russellianism 2P is true, 
then p i generates a counterexample to QS 2P , and that if Russellianism 3P 
is true, then p i generates a counterexample to QS 3P . The question before 
us now is: if Russellianism 4P is true, does p i generate a counterexample 
to QS 4P ? 
 I will argue that it doesn’t, or at least that we have no reason to think that 
it does. According to Russellianism 4P , there are predicative slots, and each 
predicative slot s pr is such that:
 (24)    F(p i , {〈identity, s pr 〉, 〈identity, the 1st slot in identity at s pr 〉, 〈identity, the 
2 nd slot in identity at s pr 〉}, s pr ) 
 Let’s consider p i as it is at one arbitrarily chosen predicative slot, s5 (a slot 
in NEG). Since s5 is a predicative slot, and since identity is a dyadic univer-
sal, Slots in Universals lets us conclude that identity has exactly two slots in 
it at s5–a unique  fi rst  slot there, and a unique  second  slot there. Let s8 be the 
fi rst slot in identity at s5, and let s9 be the second slot in identity at s5. All 
this is captured in the diagram below: 
 
pi
Being identical to
Being identical to
______________________________BEING IDENTICAL TO________________________________
s9
s8
NEG______________________________________________________________________________________
s5
 
 As the reader will already have guessed, QS 4P tolerates this case for the 
same reason that it tolerates the Brick/Wall case. My discussion of the 
present case will therefore run parallel to my discussion of the Brick/
Wall case. 
 In both cases, we have a composite object that, at a given location, is 
composed of a distinct simple object, at multiple locations. (This is a rough 

196 cody gilmore
way of putting it.) In both cases, the antecedent of QS 4P is satisfi ed. In the 
present case, we have, e.g., 56 
 (25)   P(identity, s8, p i , s5), and 
 (26)   identity≠p i ∨ s8≠s5. 
 In fact, both disjuncts in (26) are true. Together with QS 4P , (25) and (26) entail
 (27)   ∃z∃z∗∃w∃w∗[P(z, z∗, p i , s5) & P(w, w∗, p i , s5) & ¬O(z, z∗, w, w∗)] 
 In order for (27) to be true, p i needs to have, at s5, parts that are disjoint from 
each other ‘in the 4P way’. More precisely, there needs to be a quadruple  
〈z, z∗, w, w∗〉 such that
  (i)   P(z, z∗, p i , s5) 
 (ii)   P(w, w∗, p i , s5) 
 (iii)   ¬∃x∃x∗[P(x, x∗, z, z∗) & P(x, x∗, w, w∗)], that is, ¬O(z, z∗, w, w∗) 
 But it should be clear that there is such a quadruple; indeed, there are several 
of them. One of them is 〈identity, s8, identity, s9〉. 57 To see that this quadru-
ple satisfi es the four clauses above, let’s consider them in turn. As for (i) and 
(ii), Atomics 4P assures us that we have:
 (i∗)  P(identity, s8, p i , s5), and 
 (ii∗)  P(identity, s9, p i , s5). 
 Finally, consider (iii). Is there an 〈x, x∗〉 pair such that x, at x∗, is a part  both 
of identity at s8  and of identity at s9? Clearly there is no intuitive pressure 
to say there is such a pair. What would it be? This is the crucial point; this is 
what gives Russellianism 4P its advantage over Russellianism 2P vis-à-vis the 
supplementation problem. 
 However, we can go further if we like. Given our assumption that iden-
tity is simple at each of its locations (which gave rise to the puzzle in the 
 56  I say ‘e.g.’ because 〈identity, s8, p i , s5〉 is not the only quadruple that satisfi es the antecedent of QS 4P . It 
is also satisfi ed by the following quadruples: 〈identity, s5, p i , s5〉 and 〈identity, s9, p i , s5〉. 
 57  Here are some others: 〈identity, s5, identity, s8〉, 〈identity, s8, identity, s5〉, and 〈identity, s5, identity, s9〉.  

parts of propositions 197
fi rst place), we can  argue that there is  no pair of the type mentioned in the 
previous paragraph. The simplicity assumption gives us
 (28)   ∀x∀x∗[P(x, x∗, identity, s8) → [x=identity & x∗=s8]], and 
 (29)   ∀x∀x∗[P(x, x∗, identity, s9) → [x=identity & x∗=s9]]. 
 According to (28), the only 〈x, x∗〉 pair such that P(x, x∗, identity, s8) is 
〈identity, s8〉; and according to (29), the only 〈x, x∗〉 pair such that P(x, x∗, 
identity, s9) is 〈identity, s9〉. But since s8≠s9, it follows that there is no single 
〈x, x∗〉 pair such that x, at x∗, is a part  both  of identity at s8  and of identity 
at s9. Thus we have
 (iv∗)  ¬∃x∃x∗[P(x, x∗, identity, s8) & P(x, x∗, identity, s9)] 
 In other words, identity at s8 is disjoint from identity at s9. The proposition 
p i does have, at s5, a proper part. So the antecedent of QS 4P is satisfi ed. But 
p i also has, at s5, parts that are disjoint from each other ‘in the 4P way’. So 
the consequent of QS 4P is satisfi ed as well. 
 As it is at s5, the proposition p i is composed of a simple thing (identity), 
at three of its locations (s5, s8, and s9). For any two of these locations, iden-
tity at the fi rst location is disjoint from identity at the second. Moreover, as 
Atomics 4P indicates, parallel remarks would apply to p i as it is  at every other 
predicative slot as well . Given Russellianism 4P , therefore, the proposition p i 
doesn’t seem to pose any threat to QS 4P . 
 Accordingly, there appears to be no sound 4P-appropriate analogue of the 
supplementation argument. As I see it, this gives the friend of Russellianism N 
a reason to embrace four-place parthood and an ontology of slots. 
 7.4  Russellianism 4P and the Transitivity Argument 
 Recall that p e is the proposition expressed by ‘ HigherThan(e, v) ’. Earlier 
in the chapter I argued that if Russellianism 2P is true, then p e gives rise to an 
apparent counterexample to Transitivity 2P , for in that case it appears that the 
rock o is a part of Etna, that Etna is a part of p e but that o is not a part of p e . 
I also argued that if Russellianism 3P is true, p e gives rise to a parallel problem 
for Transitivity 3P . Now we should ask: if Russellianism 4P is true, does p e give 
rise to an apparent counterexample to Transitivity 4P ? In this section, I argue 
that it does not. 

198 cody gilmore
 7.4.1 A Solution  To get the relevant sort of counterexample to Transitivity 4P 
involving o, Etna, and p e , we would need to have an ordered 〈location x, 
location y, location z〉 triple such that: 
  (i)    o at x is a part of Etna at y; i.e., P(o, x, Etna, y), and 
 (ii)    Etna at y is a part of p e at z; i.e., P(Etna, y, p e , z). 
 In particular, there would need to be a location y of Etna such that o, at 
some location of o, is a part of Etna at y, and Etna,  at that very same location y , 
is a part of p e at some location of p e . But there is no intuitive pressure to say 
that there is such a location of Etna; indeed, the existence of such a location 
is highly implausible. To see this, note three points. 
 First, given 4P, it  is plausible that there are ordered 〈location x, location y〉 
pairs such that o at x is a part of Etna at y. But since o and Etna are distinct 
material objects, I take it that the only ordered pairs that satisfy the given 
description are pairs of  spacetime regions . More generally, I assume that if m 
and m∗ are non-identical material objects, and if m at x is a part of m∗ at y, 
then x and y are both spacetime regions. In slogan form:  material objects are 
parts of other material objects only at spacetime regions . 
 Second, given Russellianism 4P , it is plausible that there are ordered 〈loca-
tion y, location z〉 pairs such that Etna at y is a part of p e at z. But since p e 
is a proposition, I take it that the only ordered pairs that satisfy the given 
description are pairs of  slots . More generally, I assume that if p is a proposi-
tion, and if e at x is a part of p at y, then x and y are both slots. As a slo-
gan:  things are parts of propositions only at slots . 
 Third, nothing is both a slot and a spacetime region. Slots, like the uni-
versals and connectants that host them, are non-spatiotemporal entities. 
Spacetime regions are spatiotemporal entities. 
 Taken together, these three points entail that there is no 〈x, y, z〉 triple 
such that: (i) o at x is a part of Etna at y, and (ii) Etna, at that very same loca-
tion y, is a part of p e at z. Hence Transitivity 4P never ‘kicks in’ and yields the 
absurd conclusion that the rock o, at some location, is a part of the proposi-
tion p e , at some location. So it appears that there is no sound 4P-appropriate 
analogue of Frege’s transitivity argument. 
 7.4.2 A Loose End   One crucial component of Frege’s transitivity argu-
ment was the claim that the rock o is not a part of the proposition that 

parts of propositions 199
Etna is higher than Vesuvius. I noted that this claim could be motivated in 
at least two ways: by appeal to the acquaintance argument (or some variant 
thereof), or by appeal to the essentialism argument. But those arguments 
relied on principles that were formulated in terms of a two-place part-
hood relation. Do those principles have suffi  ciently close 4P-appropriate 
counterparts? If not, we may seem to have thrown the baby out with the 
bathwater. For in that case, we would not have shown that a version of 
Russellianism harmonizes with the intuitive data driving Frege’s argument. 
Fortunately, the principles do have very close 4P-appropriate counterparts. 
 First, consider the original acquaintance principle: one can grasp a given 
proposition only if one is acquainted with each of its parts.  58 A  natural 
four-place analogue of this is:
 Acquaintance 4P  For any s and any p, if s grasps p and p is a proposition, then 
 
 ∀x∀y∀z[P(x, y, p, z) → s is acquainted with x] 
 In other words, one grasps a given proposition only if one is acquainted with 
each entity that is, anywhere, a part of that proposition, anywhere. Together 
with the fact that Frege grasps the proposition p e but is not acquainted with the 
rock o, this principle entails that o is not, anywhere, a part of p e , anywhere. And 
friends of Russellianism 4P , of course, face no pressure to deny this, even with the 
appropriate transitivity-like principle in place. They say that ‘o is a part of Etna 
but only at spacetime regions’, whereas ‘Etna is a part of p e but only at slots’. 
 Next consider the original essentialist principle: abstract entities have all 
of their parts essentially. A natural four-place analogue is
 MEA 4P  ∀x[(¬x is concrete) → ∀y[∃x∗∃y∗ P(y, y∗, x, x∗) → 
 ⃞  (x exists → ∃x∗∃y∗P(y, y∗, x, x∗))]] 59   
 58  Or consider the original principle about de re thought: If subject s entertains proposition p, then 
for any part p∗ of p, s either grasps p∗ or is engaged in  de re  thought about p∗. A natural four-place 
analogue is: 
 For any s, any p, and any p∗, if p is a proposition and ∃x∃yP(p∗, x, p, y), then either (i) s grasps p∗ 
or (ii) s is engaged in de re thought about p∗.  
 Together with the claim that p e is a proposition and that Frege entertains p e but neither grasps nor is 
engaged in de re thought about o, this entails that o is not, anywhere, a part of p e , anywhere. 
 59  Stronger principles are also available. One is: 
 ∀x[(¬x is concrete) → ∀x∗∀y∀y∗[P(y, y∗, x, x∗) → □(x exists → P(y, y∗, x, x∗))]]. 
 It is not clear to me which is the closer analogue of the original principle. But since the friend of 
Russellianism 4P can apparently accept either principle without getting into any trouble, we need not 
take a stand on this question. 

200 cody gilmore
 In other words, if a thing x is abstract, then if a thing y, somewhere, is a part 
of x, somewhere, then x is necessarily such that if it exists, that same thing y is, 
somewhere, a part of x, somewhere. Together with the plausible claim that p e is 
not concrete and is not necessarily such that if it exists, then o is, somewhere, 
a part of it, somewhere, MEA 4P yields the result that o is not, anywhere, a part 
of p e , anywhere. Again, friends of Russellianism 4P face no pressure to deny this.  
 7.4.3 An Objection and a Reply: Slots and Three-Place Parthood?  Objection . As 
soon as we help ourselves to slots, we can block Frege’s transitivity argument 
even without appealing to four-place parthood. For suppose that parthood is a 
three-place relation that can hold between a part, a whole, and a  location (per-
haps a location of the part, perhaps a location of the whole). Then one might 
argue that there is no location L such that: (i) o is a part of Etna at L and (ii) Etna 
is a part of p e at L. (Presumably o is a part of Etna only at spacetime regions, 
and Etna is a part of p e only at slots.) But if there is no such location, then 
the relevant transitivity-like principle, Transitivity 3P , never ‘kicks in’ and yields 
the absurd conclusion that o is a part of p e at some location. Thus it appears 
that, with slots in hand, 4P becomes unnecessary, so far as transitivity-based 
considerations go. 
 Reply . I concede that Frege’s argument can be blocked without 4P. But 
4P is still needed to give a satisfying account of certain ‘transitivity phe-
nomena’ associated with propositions and their parts. Three-place parthood 
is not up to the task. 
 To respond to Frege’s argument, we wanted a transitivity-like principle that 
 wouldn’t  kick in as applied to the case Frege considered. Both the 4P-er and the 
3P-er can manage this, given an ontology of slots together with the assump-
tion that parthood is somehow ‘location relative’. But there are further cases 
in which, intuitively, we want a transitivity-like principle that  does  kick in to 
secure certain expected results. It turns out the 4P-er can manage this but that 
the 3P-er cannot. 
 Recall the point I made about the compound proposition p c . (I won’t 
reproduce the diagram here.) I noted a welcome fact—namely, that the fol-
lowing argument is formally valid and has highly plausible premises, given 
the relevant background assumptions: 
 (i)    P(Etna, s1, p e , s3) 
 (ii)    P(p e , s3, p c , s5) 

parts of propositions 201
 (iii)    [Transitivity 4P ] 
 (iv)   So, P(Etna, s1, p c , s5) 
 Moreover, I suggested that if one’s chosen transitivity-like principle didn’t 
yield a similar argument for a similar conclusion, this would cast doubt on 
its status as an appropriate analogue of Transitivity 2P . 
 Now I want to argue that this point constitutes a problem for the pro-
posal that Russellians can take parthood to be a three-place relation that 
holds between a part, a whole, and a location. For suppose that this view 
about parthood is correct. Then it appears that we will be unable to use the 
relevant transitivity-like principle (Transitivity 3P ) to show that Etna is a part 
of p c at some location. 
 To see why, note that if parthood is three-place and ‘location relative’, 
then at least one of the following principles will be true:
 LP 3Pa  ∀x∀y∀z[x is a part of y at z → x occupies z] 
 LP 3Pb  ∀x∀y∀z[x is a part of y at z → y occupies z] 
 According to the fi rst, parthood holds between a part, a whole, and a loca-
tion of the part. According to the second, parthood holds between a part, a 
whole, and a location of the whole. They both prevent us from constructing 
the desired sort of argument. Let me explain. 
 What we want is a formally valid argument whose fi rst premise says 
that Etna (at some location, perhaps) is a part of p e (at some location, 
perhaps), whose second premise says that p e (at some location, perhaps) 
is a part of p c (at some location, perhaps), whose third premise is the 
relevant transitivity-like principle, and whose conclusion says that Etna 
(at some location, perhaps) is a part of p c (at some location, perhaps). 
 Initially, friends of LP 3Pa of LP 3Pb might be tempted to off er the following 
arguments, respectively:
 Argument 1a 
Argument 1b 
  (a.i) Etna is a part of p e at s1 
  (b.i) Etna is a part of p e  at s3 
 (a.ii) p e is a part of p c at s3 
 (b.ii) p e is a part of p c  at s5 
 (a.iii) [Transitivity 3P ] 
(b.iii) [Transitivity 3P ] 
 (a.iv) So, Etna is a part of p e at s1 
(b.iv) So, Etna is a part of p c  at s5 

202 cody gilmore
 The premises of these arguments are plausible (given their respective 
background assumptions), but both arguments are invalid. In order for 
Transitivity 3P to yield the relevant conclusion, the fi rst two premises need to 
specify a  common location  L such that Etna is a part of p e at L and p e is a part 
of p c at that very same location L. But in neither argument is such a com-
mon location specifi ed. To fi x this ‘common location problem’, the friend of 
three-place, location-relative parthood might propose either
 Argument 2 
or 
Argument 3 
  (2.i) Etna is a part of p e at s1 
 
  (3.i) Etna is a part of p e  at s3 
 (2.ii) p e is a part of p c at s1 
 
 (3.ii) p e is a part of p c  at s3 
 (2.iii) [Transitivity 3P ] 
 
(3.iii) [Transitivity 3P ] 
 (2.iv) So, Etna is a part of p c at s1 
 
(3.iv) So, Etna is a part of p c  at s3 
 These arguments are formally valid, but the friend of LP 3Pa and the friend of 
LP 3Pb will both say that each argument has at least one implausible premise. 
The friend of LP 3Pa will deny (2.ii) on the grounds that p e is a part of p c at 
the predicative location  s3 , not at s1;  60 and she will deny (3.i) on the grounds 
that Etna is a part of p e at  s1 , not s3. The friend of LP 3Pb will deny (2.i) on 
the grounds that Etna is a part of p e at  s3 , not s1; and she will deny (3.ii) on 
the grounds that p e is a part of p c at  s5 , not s3. 
 In light of all this, the 3P-er might propose replacing Transitivity 3P in 
Argument 1a or 1b with some stronger transitivity-like principle, such as
 Transitivity 3Pa   ∀x∀y∀z∀w∀w∗[(x is a part of y at w & y is a part of z at w∗) → 
x is a part of z at w], or 
 Transitivity 3Pb   ∀x∀y∀z∀w∀w∗[(x is a part of y at w & y is a part of z at w∗) → 
x is a part of z at w∗] 
 These substitutions would make Arguments 1a and 1b formally valid, 
respectively. But they are too strong to be plausible, and with them in place, 
 60  The point is not that LP 3Pa , together with our background locational assumptions,  entails the negation 
of (2.ii). After all, from a purely logical point of view, one can accept both (2.ii) and LP 3Pa , provided that 
one is willing to hold that p e occupies the objectual slot s1, which presumably it does. The point is that, 
although p e plausibly  occupies  s1, p e is not plausibly  a part of p  c  there, given LP 3Pa . If parthood is relativized 
to locations of the part, then p e is plausibly a part of p c only at  some  of p e ’s locations—more specifi cally, 
only at ‘1 st slots’ in CONJ. Parallel remarks apply to the LP 3Pa -er’s reason for denying (3.i) and to the 
LP 3Pb -er’s reasons for denying (2.i) and (3.ii). (Though in the case of the LP 3Pa -er’s reason for denying 
(3.i), it is somewhat doubtful that Etna, or indeed any concrete particular, even occupies s3 or any other 
predicative slot.) 

parts of propositions 203
Frege’s argument would be up and running again. According to the friend 
of LP 3Pa , o is a part of Etna at spacetime region r o , say; and Etna is a part of 
p e at s1. Together with Transitivity 3Pa , it follows that o is a part of p e at r o , 
which I take to be an undesirable outcome. A parallel problem arises for 
Transitivity 3Pb . 
 In sum, it looks as though the 3P-er will be unable to formulate a plau-
sible, reasonably natural transitivity-like principle that both  fails  to apply in 
Frege’s case and  successfully applies in the case I’ve just considered. The 4P-er 
has no trouble formulating such a principle. 
 8.  Conclusion 
 In sections 1–5, I noted that if parthood is two-place, then Russellianism N 
is in tension both with Transitivity N and with QS N . In sections 6–7, I argued 
that if parthood is four-place, this tension disappears. For in that context, 
one is apparently free to accept Russellianism 4P , Transitivity 4P , and QS 4P , in 
which case one will accept their ‘adicity-neutral’ counterparts as well. This 
gives friends of Russellianism N a reason to look favorably upon four-place 
parthood and the relevant doctrines about slots. 
 Of course, the formal language that I considered is extremely simple. In 
some respects, it is clear how Russellianism 4P could be extended to richer 
languages: the addition of further names, and of further predicates and sen-
tential connectives of fi xed adicity (including non-truth-functional connec-
tives), poses no apparent problem. But in other respects, it’s not at all obvious 
how the extension should go. What should the friend of Russellianism 4P say 
about languages that contain quantifi ers and variables? Term-forming oper-
ators? Multi-grade predicates? I don’t know whether any natural extension 
of the present approach can handle these phenomena. But given how well 
Russellianism 4P performs as a solution to the problems about transitivity and 
quasi-supplementation, I think it would be worthwhile to fi nd out whether 
it can be extended. Moreover, if Russellianism 4P is plausible as an account 
of the propositions expressed by the sentences of L R , perhaps that’s of some 
interest in its own right, whether or not the account can be extended. (One 
might think, e.g., that the only  facts  or  states of aff airs  that exist are ones that 
correspond to sentences in a language like L R , and one might think that 
 their mereological structure can be captured via something along the lines 
of Russellianism 4P .) 

204 cody gilmore
 Appendix I:   In Support of Objectual Saturation 
 To see the rationale for Objectual Saturation, recall that the language L R 
contains a name, ‘ h ’, for  being higher than . Further, suppose that p h is the 
proposition expressed by the sentence ‘ IdenticalTo(h, h) ’. Now consider 
the following diagrams:
INCORRECT
ph
_____BEING HIGHER THAN_____
_____BEING HIGHER THAN_____
s10
s11
s12
s13
_________________________________BEING IDENTICAL TO__________________________________
s8
s9
NEG___________________________________________________________________________________________
s5
CORRECT
ph
Being higher than
Being higher than
________________________________BEING IDENTICAL TO_________________________________ 
s8
s9
NEG_________________________________________________________________________________________
s5
 
 In the fi rst diagram,  being higher than  has slots in at s8 and at s9. In the 
second diagram, it doesn’t. Only the second diagram accords with Objectual 
Saturation. There are three closely related reasons for preferring the second 
diagram. 
 First, it seems to me that if the fi rst diagram were accurate, then the 
proposition p h would have objectual slots in it at s5  61 and hence it would 
be an unsaturated entity at that location.  62 But p h is a  proposition  and hence 
 61  In particular, s10, s11, s12, and s13 would each be a slot in p h at s5. If Slot Constancy is true, then 
s10=s12 and s11=13 (though s10≠s11 and s12≠s13), in which case p h would have exactly  two slots in it at 
s5. If Slot Variance is true, s10–s13 are all distinct, in which case p h has exactly  four slots in it at s5. 
 62  There is a general principle at work here, viz.: 
 Slot Inheritance   If e 1 at s 1 is a part of e at s, if s e1 is a slot in e 1 at s 1 , and if ¬∃xP(x, s e1 , e, s), then 
s e1 is a slot in e at s. 
 Consider an analogy. If a small block of wood, o, is a part of larger wooden structure, d, and if o has a 
hole, h, in it, then h will also be a hole in the larger structure d, unless d has another part (a round peg, 
say) that fi lls h.  

parts of propositions 205
plausibly doesn’t have slots in it at any of its locations; rather, it is  saturated  at 
each of its locations. Call this the  saturation argument . 
 Second, in Appendix II, below, I off er independent reasons for thinking 
that propositions, though complex at predicative slots, are simple at objec-
tual slots. This claim does not fi t well with the view that universals have 
slots in them at objectual slots. After all, if  being higher than  had slots in 
it at s8, wouldn’t these slots be occupied by things? In particular, wouldn’t 
s10 be occupied by Etna and wouldn’t s11 be occupied by Vesuvius? And 
if so, wouldn’t those things, at those slots, together with  being higher than  
at s8, compose p e at s8? But in that case p e would be complex at s8. And 
this would confl ict with my preferred view that propositions are simple at 
objectual slots. Call this the  simplicity argument . 
 Third, it seems to me that the second diagram conforms more closely to 
the Mirroring Principle mentioned earlier than does the fi rst diagram. In 
L R , the only linguistic entities that are permitted to occupy the argument 
places in a predicate are  names , which are ‘slot free’, i.e., devoid of argu-
ment places. And since the argument places in a predicate correspond to the 
(objectual) slots in the universal expressed by the predicate, the Mirroring 
Principle should lead us to expect that the  occupants  of objectual slots will 
be ‘slot free’ as well, at least  at the given objectual slots . But according the fi rst 
diagram,  being higher than  has slots in it at the objectual slots s8 and s8; it is 
not ‘slot free’ at those locations. Call this the  mirroring argument . 
 Appendix II:   In Defense of Objectual Simplicity 
 Objectual Simplicity can be motivated in two ways: fi rst, by appeal to the 
Mirroring Principle, and second, inductively. 
 Mirroring . In L R , the only linguistic entities that are permitted to 
occupy the argument places in a predicate are names, which are all syntacti-
cally simple. So, since the argument places in a predicate correspond to the 
(objectual) slots in the universal expressed by the predicate, the Mirroring 
Principle should lead us to expect that the occupants of objectual slots are 
also simple, at least  at those objectual locations . 
 Induction . One can argue that both  material objects  and  propositions  are 
simple at objectual slots. I take it that this provides some inductive evidence 
for the more general claim that  everything is simple at objectual slots. We can 
consider the two cases separately. 

206 cody gilmore
 Material objects . I assume that if any material objects have proper parts 
at objectual slots, at least some of these objects have  other material objects  as 
proper parts at objectual slots.  63 But if considerations about transitivity and 
acquaintance (or  de re  thought) can be used to motivate the view that the 
rock o is not (at any of its locations) a part of Etna at s1, these considerations 
should apply quite generally, so that for  any two material objects o1 and o2 
and  any objectual slot s, we have acquaintance-based reasons to say that o1 
is not (at any of its locations) a part of o2 at s. 64   
 Propositions . There are two main reasons for taking propositions to be 
simple at objectual slots. The fi rst arises from considerations about de re 
thought and transitivity, the second from QS 4P . 
 (1)  Transitivity . Consider the sentence of L R ‘ Tall(e) ’, and let p Te be the 
proposition that it expresses. Likewise, let p Tv be the proposition expressed 
by the sentence ‘ Tall(v) ’. These are diff erent propositions: p Te predicates 
 being tall  of Etna, not Vesuvius; p Tv predicates  being tall  of Vesuvius, not 
Etna. Let the name ‘ p1 ’ of L R refer to p Te , and let the name ‘ p2 ’ of L R refer 
to p Tv . Finally, consider the sentence of L R , ‘ IdenticalTo(p1, p2) ’, and let 
p EV  be the proposition it expresses. 
 I assume that if any propositions have proper parts at objectual slots, then 
p Te has proper parts at s8 (an objectual slot in identity), as follows:
pEV
pTe
pTv
BEING TALL__Etna_____   
BEING TALL__Vesuvius__
st1
st2
_______________________________BEING IDENTICAL TO_________________________________
s8
s9
NEG___________________________________________________________________________________________
s5
 
 63  One might maintain that material objects have only ‘formal components’ (e.g., universals) as proper 
parts at objectual slots; such a view might draw inspiration from bundle theories (Paul 2002) or, less 
obviously, from neo-Aristotelian views (Koslicki 2008). I do not have space to address such views here.  
 64  It might be argued that (i) Etna (e.g.) is a volcano, and that (ii) all volcanoes are essentially such that 
they have rocks as proper parts (at each of their locations). It follows that (iii) Etna cannot have, as a 
location, as slot at which Etna is simple. (Thanks to David Copp for this point.) In response, I deny (ii) 
but note that a very similar, slightly weaker principle can still be maintained—namely: (iv) each volcano 
v is essentially such that, for each spacetime region r that v occupies, v has, at r, rocks as proper parts, i.e., 
∃x∃x∗[PP(x, x∗, v, r) & Rock(x)]. 

parts of propositions 207
 In particular, I assume that if any propositions have proper parts at objectual 
slots, then
 (30)   Etna at s t1 is a part of p Te at s8; i.e., P(Etna, s t1 , p Te , s8). 
 But (30) leads to potentially objectionable conclusions. Together with 
Transitivity 4P and the claim that p Te at s8 is a part of p EV at s5 (which the 
friend of Russellianism 4P will endorse), (30) entails that
 (31)  Etna at s t1 is a part of p EV at s5, i.e., P(Etna, s t1 , p EV , s5). 
 And this claim can be attacked by appeal to considerations about acquaint-
ance or  de re  thought. For it seems to me that one could grasp [entertain, 
believe, . . .] p EV without being engaged in  de re  thought about either Etna or 
Vesuvius. 65 Consider the following case:
 John’s favorite proposition is p Te , and Bob’s favorite proposition is p Tv . Mary 
knows John and Bob but has no acquaintance with Etna or Vesuvius. She knows 
that John and Bob each have favorite propositions that they frequently enter-
tain, but, intuitively, she doesn’t know  which  propositions these are. Perhaps she 
knows that both John’s and Bob’s favorite propositions are geological in subject 
matter, but she doesn’t know much else about them. John and Bob introduce 
names for their favorite propositions—‘p1’ and ‘p2’, respectively—and share 
them with Mary. If she sees John with a dreamy look on his face, she might 
say, ‘Entertaining p1 again today, John?’ and get the reply, ‘Yes; I’m afraid so.’ 
After several years of this sort of thing, Mary comes to believe, concerning the 
propositions in question, that they’re identical. She still has never heard of Etna 
or Vesuvius.  
 In this case, it is plausible that Mary believes (and hence grasps) p EV 
but that she is not acquainted with, and is not engaged in  de re  thought 
about, Etna or Vesuvius. Given the principles appealed to earlier, then, 
we should conclude that (31) is false and hence that propositions are 
 65  Similar considerations are discussed by Jason Stanley and Joshua Armstrong (2011). They attribute the 
idea to Timothy Williamson.  

208 cody gilmore
simple at objectual slots. As a result, a less misleading diagram of p EV 
would be as follows:
pEV
pTe
pTv
________________________________BEING IDENTICAL TO_________________________________
s8
s9
NEG___________________________________________________________________________________________
s5
 
 It is worth noting that this case also shows that the problem underlying 
the Transitivity Argument, TA, from section 4, is not solved by distinguish-
ing between constituency and parthood (or between parthood p and part-
hood m ). It’s no less plausible that constituency is transitive than that parthood 
is transitive. And yet, on the assumption that constituency is two-place, we 
seem to have a counterexample here. For if constituency is two-place, then 
Etna is a constituent of p Te , and p Te is a constituent of p EV , but Etna is not 
a constituent of p EV (since Mary believes p EV but is not acquainted with or 
engaged in  de re thought about Etna). 
 (2)    Quasi-supplementation . As Dan Rabinoff  pointed out to me, the 
assumption that propositions are complex at objectual slots, when combined 
with Slot Constancy, gives rise to counterexamples to QS 4P . (I leave it as an 
exercise for the reader to describe these examples. Hint: let the name ‘ p ’ 
of L R refer to the proposition, p b , expressed by the sentence ‘ Property(b) ’ 
of L R , and consider the sentence ‘ Property(p) ’ of L R . Let p p be the (false) 
proposition that this latter sentence expresses. According to Russellianism 4P , 
there are slots s and s∗ such that p b at s is a part of p p at s∗. What happens if 
p b complex at a slot like s?) I want to retain QS 4P , of course, so this fact gives 
me a reason to reject either Slot Constancy or the assumption that proposi-
tions are complex at objectual slots. 66   
 66  Thanks to Brandon Biggerstaff , Ben Caplan, David Copp, Greg Damico, Scotty Dixon, Michael 
Glanzberg, Lucas Halpin, Robbie Hirsch, Mandy Kamangar, Seahwa Kim, Robert May, Dan Rabinoff , 
Adam Sennet, Ted Shear, and Chris Tillman, and to audiences at the University of Manitoba and 
UC Davis. 

 10 
 Mereological Sums and 
Singular Terms  
 KATHRIN  KOSLICKI 
 1.  Introduction 
 One prominent answer to the question of what the correct theory of part-
hood and composition is for material objects, which has been embraced by 
three-dimensionalists and four-dimensionalists alike,  1 is that these objects 
are best viewed as ‘mereological sums’, ‘fusions’, or ‘aggregates’, according 
to a particular, standard, conception of mereology, viz., the family of systems 
formally analogous to Henry Leonard’s and Nelson Goodman’s ‘Calculus of 
Individuals’ (Leonard and Goodman 1940) and referred to in Simons (1987) 
as ‘Classical Extensional Mereology’ or (CEM). (A brief synopsis of the basic 
principles of standard mereology is given in section 2.) Mereological sums, 
according to this standard conception, are like sets in that their existence 
and identity depend on nothing more than the existence and identity of the 
parts that compose them; no structural requirements are set on the manner 
in which these parts must be arranged. 
 1  Three-dimensionalism (also known as ‘endurantism’) and four-dimensionalism (also known as ‘per-
durantism’ or ‘the doctrine of temporal parts’) are competing theories concerning the persistence of 
ordinary material objects over time. According to the four-dimensionalist, objects persist over time by 
perduring, i.e., by having temporal parts, in addition to their ordinary spatial parts, at all those times 
at which they exist. The three-dimensionalist, on the other hand, holds that ordinary material objects 
persist by enduring, i.e., by being, as they say, ‘wholly present’ at each time at which the object exists. For 
detailed discussion and references, see Sider (2001). From a three-dimensionalist perspective, perhaps the 
most well-known defense of the thesis that material objects are standard mereological sums can be found 
in Thomson (1983); see also Thomson (1998). For prominent representatives of this approach within the 
four-dimensionalist tradition, see Lewis (1986b), (1991); Sider (2001). 

210 kathrin koslicki
 The relative merits of standard mereology in the context of giving an 
analysis of material objects have received quite a bit of attention from meta-
physicians in recent years.  2 A question that has not been pursued to the 
same degree, however, is what sort of  semantic  repercussions a commitment 
to mereological sums in the standard sense might have in particular on the 
predicted behavior of singular terms and our practices of using such terms to 
refer to objects. The basic problem in this connection for those who believe 
that standard mereology has a place in a metaphysical analysis of material 
objects, it seems to me, is that our practice of using singular terms to refer to 
objects, at least on the face of it, pretty obviously does not track mereologi-
cal sums: the objects we are interested in and care about, and hence which 
are represented in our discourse by means of singular terms, generally do 
not exhibit the sorts of persistence conditions we would expect them to 
have if these objects were in fact correctly analyzed as mereological sums in 
the standard sense. We are much more likely to talk about individual trouts 
and turkeys than we are to talk about trout-turkeys, to use David Lewis’s 
well-known example. 3 
 The apparent mismatch between our actual referential practices and the 
persistence conditions attributed to material objects by the supporters of 
standard mereology puts these philosophers, other things being equal, at 
a disadvantage compared to those whose ontology matches more closely 
the observed behavior of singular terms, as they are commonly used in 
ordinary discourse. In particular, as will become apparent below, the pro-
ponents of standard mereology suff er from self-imposed handicaps with 
respect to the sorts of constraints on reference to which they can appeal 
in the context of off ering an account of why our singular terms have the 
content-determining powers they appear to have. If they believe, as David 
Lewis does (see especially Lewis 1983, 1984), that some constraints on ref-
erence originate from the side of the  object  referred to (as opposed to the 
speaker or the speaker’s linguistic community) and that the constraints in 
question are not exclusively  causal  in nature, then additional machinery is 
needed to make up somehow for the fact that ordinary language-users speak 
as though there are trouts and turkeys but not trout-turkeys. To this end, 
 2  See for example Fine (1982), (1999); Harte (2002); Johnston (2002); Koslicki (2008); van Inwagen 
(1981), (1987), (1990a), (1990b), (1993), (1994), (2002). 
 3  A trout-turkey is a mereological sum consisting of, say, the still-attached upper half of a trout and the 
still-attached lower half of a turkey. 

mereological sums and singular terms 211
David Lewis leans heavily on his distinction between  natural  and  non-natural 
properties: a highly eligible referent, according to Lewis, tends to be one 
whose boundaries are well-demarcated with respect to the highly natural 
properties; the distinction between natural and non-natural properties, in 
his view, ultimately derives from fundamental physics. 
 While I am sympathetic to Lewis’s position that a credible account of 
reference will need to appeal to the presence of well-demarcated bounda-
ries among the objects referred to, I am skeptical that his already heavily 
burdened natural/non-natural distinction can bear the additional weight of 
drawing boundaries in the right places around the referents of our singular 
terms: for conglomerations of undetached rabbit-parts, for example, will in 
general contrast with their environment just as much as single rabbits do, 
when it comes to such considerations as, say, the density of matter, the rela-
tive abundance of chemical properties, favored loci of causal chains, and the 
like, in the relevant regions of spacetime. Thus, Lewis’s natural/non-natural 
distinction among properties, as I will argue below, is not suffi  cient to avoid 
Quinean indeterminacy for singular terms. Those who are in the business 
of giving an analysis of constructions involving full-fl edged predication, 
as opposed to constructions that presuppose merely spatial overlap among 
denotations (see Evans 1975), will thus want to go in for an ontology that 
places more stringent structural constraints on the referents of singular 
terms than are supplied by standard mereology. 
 2.  Standard Mereology 
 (CEM) is a very simple, elegant and surprisingly powerful theory.  4 
It requires only a single primitive notion in terms of which the 
remainder of the mereological concepts utilized by the theory can 
be defined. In its standard formulations, (CEM) consists of a mere 
three axioms; all other statements of the theory follow as theorems 
from the definitions and axioms of the system. The single primitive 
can be chosen to be proper parthood, proper-or-improper parthood, 
overlap, disjointness, or sum; the other notions are definable in terms 
 4  The fi rst formulation of (CEM) appears to have been given by Stanislaw Leśniewski, informally in 
Leśniewski (1916) and formally in Leśniewski (1927–1930). The classical statement of (CEM) in English 
is Henry Leonard and Nelson Goodman’s ‘Calculus of Individuals’ (Leonard and Goodman 1940).  

212 kathrin koslicki
of whichever one is taken as primitive. Identity is either assumed as 
given or (more controversially) as definable in terms of the primi-
tive mereological notion. Algebraically speaking, while parthood is a 
mere partial ordering, (CEM) has the strength of a complete Boolean 
algebra, with the zero element deleted. 
 In terms of parthood and overlap, the notion of a mereological sum 
(aggregate/fusion) for example can be defi ned as follows:
 Mereological Sum : S is a mereological sum of some objects, x 1 . . . x n , just in 
case S has all of x 1 . . . x n as parts and has no part that does not overlap any 
of x 1 . . . x n .  
 A very accessible formulation of (CEM), which is slightly diff erent from, 
but formally equivalent to, that of Leonard and Goodman (1940), is given in 
Lewis (1991), where the three basic axioms of standard mereology are stated 
informally as follows:
 Axiom 1  (Unrestricted Composition): Whenever there are some objects, then 
there exists a mereological sum of those objects. 
 Axiom 2  (Uniqueness of Composition): It never happens that the same objects 
have two diff erent mereological sums. 
 Axiom 3 (Transitivity): If x is part of some part of y, then x is part of y. 
 Given Unrestricted Composition and the Uniqueness of Composition, 
mereological sums can now be seen to be analogous to sets in certain 
respects: by Unrestricted Composition, there is a sum whenever there is a 
plurality of objects (any plurality), just as there is a set for any plurality of 
objects (modulo the paradoxes); and by the Uniqueness of Composition, 
the identity of a sum depends on nothing more than the identity of its parts, 
just as (by the Axiom of Extensionality) the identity of a set depends on 
nothing more than the identity of its members. In other respects, however, 
mereological sums and sets are not alike: in particular, standard mereol-
ogy makes no room for a distinction analogous to that between subset and 
membership. For given that all the entities quantifi ed over in standard mere-
ology are of the same ontological type, viz., the type, individual, standard 
mereology only recognizes a single sum that can be formed from any given 
plurality of individuals. 

mereological sums and singular terms 213
 3.  The Utility of Proper Names 
 If we take our common practice of using singular terms, in particular proper 
names, at face value, it would appear that such expressions often serve as 
names for certain commonly recognized kinds of things: among the proper 
names we typically employ, for example, are names for human beings, fi c-
tional or real (‘Hamlet’, ‘Bismarck’);  5 names for pets (‘Fido’); names for 
places (‘Paris’); names for signifi cant historical events (‘the Civil War’), 
periods (‘the Renaissance’), or important agents within history (‘the Holy 
Roman Empire’); 6 names for artistic creations (‘Star Wars’); brand names 
(‘Duracell’) or names for products (‘iPod’); and so on. 7 
 P. F. Strawson writes that a proper name is called for among a circle of 
language-users, when there is frequent need or occasion to refer to a par-
ticular; when there is interest in the continuing identity of the particular 
from occasion to occasion; and when there is no short description or title 
for that particular available to members of the linguistic circle in question 
(Strawson 1974, p. 42). In such a situation, Strawson remarks, the use of a 
proper name for the object in question is appropriate:
 So it is convenient to have in circulation in such groups a tag, a designation, 
which does not depend for its referential or identifying force upon any particu-
lar such position or relation, which preserves the same referential force through 
its object’s changes of position or relation and has the same referential force for 
communicators who know the object in diff erent connections and for whom 
quite diff erent descriptions would be uppermost. (Strawson 1974, pp. 45–46)  
 5  For the purposes of this discussion, I take names like ‘Hamlet’ or ‘Bismarck’ to be names of human 
beings, rather than persons, only in order to sidestep complicated issues concerning personal identity 
which are tangential to my main concerns. 
 6  I take it that such expressions as ‘the Civil War’, ‘the Renaissance’, or ‘the Holy Roman Empire’, are 
names, even though they are prefi xed by the defi nite article; this issue is, however, also not central to 
the current discussion. 
 7  By pointing out that names are typically used as names for certain kinds of objects, I do not intend to 
commit myself to a descriptive view of names, i.e., one according to which a designation of the kind of 
object referred to in some way becomes part of the meaning of a name (e.g., as though ‘human being’ 
somehow makes it into the semantic content of ‘Bismarck’). Speakers can, and certainly have been, 
wrong about what kind of object a given name refers to: witness, for example, ‘Venus’, ‘Hesperus’, and 
‘Phosphorus’, which were at fi rst intended to be used as names for a star; it was only found out later that 
these names were in fact names for a planet. In this way, the case of proper names is parallel to that of 
natural kind terms, as they were analyzed by Kripke (1971), (1980) and Putnam (1975): the extension of 
a term like ‘water’, on this approach, is determined by means of a same-kind relation of some sort which 
instances of the liquid bear to certain initial samples; but speakers can certainly be either ignorant or 
wrong about the nature of the same-kind relation which in fact determines the extension of their term.  

214 kathrin koslicki
 It is convenient in such situations to be able to take recourse to a proper name, 
Strawson proposes, because there is in such situations “no one particular fact 
about any member, no particular relationship in which [the object referred to] 
stands, such that it is on account of that fact or relationship that [it] is a standing 
object of reference for members of this group” (Strawson 1974, p. 46). Contrast 
a situation of this type, for example, with one in which it is suffi  cient to single 
out an object of interest by referring to it as ‘your cigar’ or ‘the yellow one in 
the middle’; clearly, designations of this sort, while they might be perfectly suf-
fi cient to achieve one’s communicative purposes at a particular moment, are 
of a much more fl eeting nature and would not be able to preserve continuity 
of reference through, say, changes of ownership, color, or position. Thus, the 
purpose of the availability of a proper name for a particular group of language-
users, if Strawson’s observations are correct, is typically to off er the members of 
a language-group a means of referring to a particular object of interest that is 
both (i)  stable and (ii)  shared : (i) it is stable in the sense that continuity of refer-
ence is preserved in the face of changes in the object referred to or among the 
members of the language-group; (ii) it is a shared means of referring to the 
object in question in the sense that the availability of the proper name may 
bridge diff erences in the information that the members of the group may pos-
sess regarding the object to which they are referring.  8  
 If a certain expression is commonly used as a name for a human being, pet, 
place, etc., then it may be employed as a means not only of communicating 
 8  A very diff erent, substitution-theoretic, account of what distinguishes singular terms from other types 
of expressions is given in Brandom (1994). In his account of the distinction between singular terms 
and general terms, Brandom focuses on a contrast he perceives between the inferential roles played 
by these two types of expressions. Singular terms, in Brandom’s view, give rise to  symmetric  substi-
tutional inferences: for example, from ‘Mark Twain authored  Huckleberry Finn ’ we may infer ‘Samuel 
Clemens authored  Huckleberry Finn ’; moreover, so Brandom notes, this inference is  reversible . In con-
trast, substitution-inferences which turn on the predicates contained in statements, in Brandom’s view, 
tend not to be symmetric in the same manner: thus, from ‘Benjamin Franklin walked’, we may infer 
‘Benjamin Franklin moved’; but this inference is not reversible. As it stands, however, the contrast in 
question is more of an artifact of how the particular examples Brandom considers are picked than an 
indication of any genuine semantic diff erence between singular terms and general terms. For the object 
referred to by ‘Mark Twain’ is numerically identical to the object referred to by ‘Samuel Clemens’, 
whereas the denotation of ‘moves’ neither coincides with nor is included in the denotation of ‘walks’; 
rather, the denotation of ‘walks’ is included in the denotation of ‘moves’. Inferences which turn on 
predicates whose denotations do coincide (e.g., perhaps ‘is a doctor’ and ‘is a physician’) will be similarly 
reversible. Of course, Brandom cannot help himself to this explanation of the contrast between the two 
inferences in question, since for him the metaphysical notion of an object is supposed to be derivative 
of the semantic distinction between singular terms and general terms. Thus, he cannot take for granted 
that identities among the denotations of terms are already given to us, as a datum to which the semantics 
may refer in order to draw a distinction between singular and general terms. 

mereological sums and singular terms 215
information of interest about the object in question at a single time (as 
when we say, for example, that Bismarck unifi ed Germany in 1871); it may 
also be used to track the same human being, pet, place, etc., over time (as 
when we say, for example, that Bismarck was Chancellor of Germany from 
1871 to 1890).  9 Taking our common practice of using proper names again 
at face value, these expressions certainly seem to preserve stability of refer-
ence, among other things, in the face of changes in the parts of the object 
referred to. Since we commonly regard human beings as the sorts of things 
that can persist through the gaining and losing of many of their parts, we 
similarly take the name, ‘Bismarck’, given that this expression is standardly 
employed as the name for a human being, to preserve its reference despite 
the fact that the object it refers to can be expected to undergo changes with 
respect to its parts. On the other hand, given that the parts of a human being 
must be arranged in a particular characteristic manner in order to result in 
a functioning specimen of its kind, there are other features about the parts 
of a human being, in particular their manner of arrangement, which we 
do expect to remain relatively constant in order for a single human being 
to persist from one time to another; this stability, again, transfers straight-
forwardly to names for human beings. Thus, it would seem to be a bit of a 
stretch for example to employ the name, ‘Bismarck’, to refer to the scattered 
bits of soil into which this man’s remains have decomposed after Bismarck’s 
death: since these scattered bits of soil currently fail to compose a human 
being, it would be decidedly odd to apply the same name to these scat-
tered bits of soil as to the human being from whose corpse they originated. 
A name like ‘Bismarck’, therefore, at least on the face of it, seems to refer 
to the sort of object that belongs to a commonly recognized kind (e.g., the 
kind,  human being ), that can survive gaining and losing parts over time, and 
whose parts at each time at which the object exists must be arranged in the 
particular manner characteristic of the kind of object at issue. 
 9  This point is often expressed by saying that proper names (or common nouns, for that matter) are 
associated not only with criteria of application, but also with criteria of identity. When an expression 
functions as a proper name, speakers who have mastered the use of this expression must be able to recog-
nize the object referred to by the name as the same again on diff erent occasions. According to Dummett 
(1973), this mastery on the part of the speaker also involves being able to group objects referred to by 
the use of names into  categories : for every proper name, he writes, must belong to some  range of names, 
all of which are associated with the  same criterion of identity, viz., the criteria of identity governing the 
particular category of object to which the referent of the name in question belongs; to recognize that the 
name in question belongs to this range is also, for Dummett, part of what must be mastered by a speaker 
in order to grasp the sense of a name (Dummett 1973, p. 76; see also Frege 1884, §62). 

216 kathrin koslicki
 If, on the other hand, material objects are construed as mereological sums 
and those singular terms that purport to refer to material objects are construed 
as referring to mereological sums, then we would expect the referents of these 
singular terms to have the persistence conditions associated with mereological 
sums. But the existence and identity of mereological sums, as we have seen in 
the previous section, depends on nothing more than the existence and identity 
of their parts: thus, a mereological sum, S1, and a mereological sum, S2, are 
numerically identical over time or at a time just in case the parts that compose 
S1 are numerically identical to the parts that compose S2; no requirements are 
set on the manner in which these parts are arranged. If the supporter of standard 
mereology takes the route, then, of viewing singular terms, as they are standardly 
employed in ordinary discourse, as referring to mereological sums, there appears 
to be, at least on the face of it, a clash between the persistence conditions that are 
attributed by the supporter of standard mereology to the objects referred to by 
our singular terms and the way in which speakers in fact employ these singular 
terms to track objects over time. 
 To be sure, this is not the end of the story and there is additional machin-
ery which the supporter of standard mereology can invoke to try to capture 
the behavior of singular terms, as they are commonly used in ordinary dis-
course. 10 However, when evaluating the relative merits of standard mereol-
ogy as the correct theory of parthood and composition for material objects, 
we should take note of the fact that there is at least a  prima facie  mismatch 
between the persistence conditions apparently exhibited by the referents 
of singular terms, as they are standardly used in ordinary discourse, and 
the persistence conditions we would expect these objects to have if ordi-
nary singular terms in fact referred to mereological sums. And this apparent 
mismatch requires the supporter of standard mereology to introduce some 
 10  For example, a natural way to go for the supporter of standard mereology would be to adopt the view 
that singular terms, as they are standardly employed in ordinary discourse, refer only to certain  phases  in 
the life of a mereological sum or to certain  collections  of mereological sums, diff erent ones at diff erent 
times. The fi rst line is congenial to four-dimensionalist supporters of standard mereology like Lewis 
and Sider; the second to three-dimensionalists like Thomson. According to the fi rst approach, a singular 
term like ‘Bismarck’ might be construed for example as referring only to those phases in the career of a 
particular four-dimensional space-time worm during which the ordinary spatial parts of each temporal 
slice of this worm are arranged in such a way that they sustain a living human organism. According 
to the second approach, a singular term like ‘Bismarck’ would be construed as referring to diff erent 
mereological sums at diff erent times (corresponding to the changes in parts which Bismarck undergoes 
during his lifetime), all of which are composed of parts arranged at those times in such a way that they 
can sustain a living human organism. 

mereological sums and singular terms 217
further  semantic machinery, in addition to the metaphysical apparatus to 
which he has already committed himself (e.g., counterpart theory) in order 
to overcome the apparent divergence in persistence conditions between 
mereological sums and material objects as we standardly conceive of them. 
 4.  Constraints on Reference 
 The solution to this apparent diffi  culty concerning the observed behav-
ior of our ordinary singular terms which is favored by David Lewis relies 
prominently on his distinction between natural and non-natural proper-
ties (see especially Lewis 1983, 1984).  11 Constraints on reference, in Lewis’s 
view, fall into two kinds: (i) those originating from facts about  use ; and 
(ii) and those originating from facts concerning the  intrinsic eligibility  of 
what is referred to. The fi rst constraint locates the source of at least some 
of the content-determining powers of the language in the speaker or the 
speaker’s linguistic community: this constraint holds that content is to be 
determined at least in part by maximizing fi t with how speakers or their lin-
guistic communities tend to use the expressions and statements they utter. 
The second, and more controversial, constraint on reference traces some of 
the content-determining powers of the language to the intrinsic nature of 
the referent itself. Following this constraint on reference, we are to choose 
among two diff erent rival interpretations of a language based on how well 
each does in connecting the content of what we say to a special group of 
elite properties, the natural properties. The distinction between natural and 
non-natural properties, in Lewis’s view, derives ultimately from fundamental 
physics, at least if the latter proves to be successful. 12 
 11  Page numbers from Lewis (1983) and (1984) in what follows come from the reprinted versions of 
these papers in Lewis (1999). 
 12  Lewis considers and rejects two other approaches to reference: global descriptivism and the causal 
theory of reference (see Lewis 1983, pp. 45–47; as well as Lewis 1984 for a more detailed discussion). 
According to global descriptivism, an intended interpretation of our language is one which satisfi es a 
certain purely descriptive condition, viz., it must be compatible with ideal theory (an idealized descend-
ant of our current body of theory). This sort of approach to reference, in Lewis’s view, feeds straight into 
Putnam’s model-theoretic argument (Putnam 1978, 1980) and hence leads to radical indeterminacy of 
reference, as the purely descriptive constraints imposed by this approach to reference are powerless to 
distinguish among the countless available candidate interpretations for a given language. Alternatively, a 
purely causal approach, in Lewis’s view, only raises the further question of what it is about the referent of 
an expression that selects it as the object that satisfi es the causal constraints in question. Lewis’s natural/
non-natural distinction and the concomitant notion of intrinsic eligibility is intended as a response to 
this latter question. 

218 kathrin koslicki
 Naturalness, as conceived of by Lewis, is a matter of degree. Thus, the 
perfectly natural properties are those singled out by fundamental physics; 
others, such as those which go into the primitive vocabulary of chemistry 
or biology, for example, are less than perfectly natural, but still quite a bit 
more natural than, say, blueness. Blueness in turn is quite a bit more natu-
ral than, say, grueness, the (alleged) property objects have if they are green, 
when examined before some fi xed time t, or blue, when not examined 
before t. 
 How do we compare the degree of naturalness exhibited by the less 
than perfectly natural properties? Here, Lewis appeals to two assump-
tions: (a) that the less than perfectly natural properties will be defi nable 
in terms of the perfectly natural properties; and (b) that we can measure a 
property’s degree of naturalness by means of the complexity of the defi ni-
tion that can be given of it in terms of the perfectly natural properties. Both 
(a) and (b) strike me as quite implausible; however, since the issue of defi n-
ability has already been extensively discussed by others, I will for present 
purposes bypass the question of how exactly degree of naturalness is to be 
measured. 13 
 Naturalness is initially conceived of by Lewis as fi rst and foremost rel-
evant to the determination of predicate-meaning. Thus, a set of objects 
from the domain is more or less eligible to count as the extension of a 
one-place predicate from the language under consideration depending on 
whether and to what degree its members share a natural property; similarly 
for many-place predicates and relations. An interpretation for the language 
consequently is eligible depending on whether and to what degree it assigns 
eligible extensions to the predicates of the language. 
 Even though naturalness and eligibility are conceived of by Lewis as 
applying most directly to properties and hence to the determination of 
predicate-meaning, he does suggest a way in which these notions tend to 
have a sort of ripple-eff ect that extends to singular terms and their referents 
as well:
 Naturalness of properties makes for diff erences of eligibility not only among 
the properties themselves, but also among things. Compare Bruce with the 
 13  For critical discussion of Lewis’s account of relative naturalness as ease of defi nability in perfectly 
natural terms, see for example Hawthorne (2006), (2007); Schaff er (2004); Sider (1995), (1996); Williams 
(2007). 

mereological sums and singular terms 219
cat-shaped chunk of miscellaneous and ever-changing matter that follows him 
around, always a few steps behind. The former is a highly eligible referent, the 
latter is not. (I haven’t succeeded in referring to it, for I didn’t say just which 
such chunk ‘it’ was to be.) That is because Bruce, unlike the cat-shaped chunk, 
has a boundary well demarcated by diff erences in highly natural properties. 
Where Bruce ends, there the density of matter, the relative abundance of the 
chemical elements, . . . abruptly change. Not so for the chunk. Bruce is also much 
more of a locus of causal chains than is the chunk; this too traces back to natural 
properties, by the considerations of the previous section [cf., the role of natural 
properties with respect to causation and laws]. Thus naturalness of properties 
sets up distinctions among things. The reverse happens also. Once we are away 
from the perfectly natural properties, one thing that makes for naturalness of a 
property is that it is a property belonging exclusively to well-demarcated things. 
(Lewis 1983, pp. 48–49) 
 Lewis suggests in this passage that highly eligible referents are those whose 
boundaries are well-demarcated with respect to highly natural properties and 
which act as the loci of causal chains more so than their more gerrymandered 
cousins. Thus, a highly eligible referent, such as Bruce the cat, in Lewis’s view, 
will distinguish itself from a less highly eligible referent, such as any one of the 
presumably indefi nitely many cat-shaped chunks of miscellaneous and ever-
changing matter that inhabit spacetime regions in the vicinity of Bruce the 
cat, with respect to for example the density of matter, the relative abundance 
of chemical elements, and the like, that can be found in these regions of spa-
cetime. Moreover, Bruce the cat will more often be identifi able as the locus of 
causal chains than the more gerrymandered cat-shaped chunks of matter in the 
vicinity. Lewis’s suggested extension of the notions of eligibility and natural-
ness from properties and predicates to objects and singular terms, if successful, 
is thus intended to yield a distinction between objects whose boundaries are 
well-demarcated with respect to natural properties and those whose boundaries 
are not well-demarcated in this way; the former tend to be more highly eligible 
referents than the latter.  
 5.  Evans on Predication 
 That the presence of objects with well-demarcated boundaries is vital to 
an analysis of the distinction between singular terms and general terms is 
also the upshot of an argument provided by Gareth Evans in a completely 

220 kathrin koslicki
diff erent setting (Evans 1975).  14 Evans’s main target in this context is Quine’s 
inscrutability of reference thesis:  Evans wants to establish, contrary to 
Quine, that only certain ones among the stimulus-synonymous hypotheses 
concerning the nature of the entities ranged over by the expressions of a 
particular language in fact do justice to the behavior of these expressions 
with respect to predication and negation. 15 
 Suppose for example that we are confronted with a language containing 
expressions, G 1 , G 2 , G 3 , . . . , G n , which, when presented as one-word ques-
tions, are assented to by speakers of this language when material objects of 
various sorts are present; these expressions are, when presented as one-word 
sentences, stimulus-synonymous with the English expressions ‘A rabbit!’, ‘A 
man!’, ‘A hut!’, and so on. In addition, this language contains expressions, F 1 , 
F 2 , F 3 , . . . , F n , which, when presented as one-word questions, are assented to 
when certain general features are present in the environment; these expres-
sions are, when presented as one-word sentences, stimulus-synonymous 
with the English expressions ‘White!’, ‘Warm!’, ‘Furry!’, ‘Bloodstained!’, 
and so on. 
 According to Quine’s inscrutability of reference thesis, the expressions 
of the G-type, in being stimulus-synonymous with English one-word 
sentences signifying the presence of material objects, as in ‘A rabbit!’, are 
equally stimulus-synonymous with English sentences signifying the pres-
ence of undetached parts of material objects, or temporal stages of material 
objects, as in ‘Undetached rabbit-parts!’ or ‘Rabbit-stages!’:
 For, consider ‘gavagai’. Who knows but what the objects to which this term 
applies are not rabbits after all, but mere stages, or brief temporal segments, of 
rabbits? In either event the stimulus situations that prompt assent to ‘Gavagai’ 
would be the same as for ‘Rabbit’. Or perhaps the objects to which ‘gava-
gai’ applies are all and sundry undetached parts of rabbits; again the stimulus 
 14  Page numbers from Evans (1975) in what follows are taken from the reprinted version of this paper in 
Evans (1985). Evans, of course, should not be read as agreeing with Lewis’s claim that the boundaries in 
question which are relevant to an analysis of the distinction between singular terms and general terms 
originate from the division between natural and non-natural properties; in fact, since he is sympathetic 
to an ontology consisting of enduring structured wholes, he believes that the requisite boundaries are 
drawn for him, so to speak, by the persistence conditions of the objects referred to by singular terms in 
ordinary discourse and the kinds to which these objects belong. 
 15  Expressions are stimulus-synonymous when they have the same stimulus-meaning; that is, when they 
coincide with respect to ‘the native’s total battery of present dispositions to be prompted to assent to or 
to dissent from’ the expressions, when presented as one-word sentences (Quine 1960, p. 39).  

mereological sums and singular terms 221
meaning would register no diff erence. When from the sameness of stimulus 
meanings of ‘Gavagai’ and ‘Rabbit’ the linguist leaps to the conclusion that a 
gavagai is a whole enduring rabbit, he is just taking for granted that the native 
is enough like us to have a brief general term for rabbits and no brief general 
term for rabbit stages or parts. (Quine 1960, pp. 51–52) 
 But suppose now that, in addition to single word sentences in which the 
expressions of the F-type and those of the G-type occur separately, the 
language under discussion also allows for complex expressions of the type, 
F G, i.e., expressions stimulus-synonymous with English sentences like ‘A 
white rabbit!’. Evans argues that a diff erence does now surface between the 
various interpretational hypotheses entertained by Quine. For suppose we 
interpret a particular expression of this foreign language, F 1 , as dividing its 
reference over all and only the world’s white things; and we interpret a par-
ticular expression, G 1 , as dividing its reference over all and only the world’s 
rabbits (undetached rabbit-parts, rabbit-stages, and so on). Then how are we 
to interpret the compound expression, F 1 G 1 , stimulus-synonymous with 
the English ‘A white rabbit!’, ‘White undetached rabbit-parts!’, ‘White rab-
bit-stages!’, and so on? In particular, how are we to read the semantic con-
tribution of F 1 as combining with that of G 1 , in order to predict correctly 
the assent- and dissent-behavior prompted by the compound expression, F 1 
G 1 , in speakers of this language? 
 In some cases, the semantics of compound expressions might be correctly 
captured by requiring nothing more than that there be (reasonably sized) 
spatial overlap between the denotations of the expressions of the F-type 
and those of the G-type. Take for example a complex expression of this 
language, F 2 G 2 , which, let’s say, is stimulus-synonymous with the English 
‘Red water!’ (‘Red undetached water-parts!’, ‘Red water-stages!’, etc.); sup-
pose moreover that the expression, F 2 G 2 , would be assented to by speakers of 
the language in a scenario in which a few drops of red ink are immersed into 
a swimming pool (Evans 1975, p. 32). A case of this sort, Evans argues, does not 
yet require the introduction of the machinery that is, in his view, involved in 
full-fl edged predication, namely that of objects and their boundaries as well as 
the idea that properties attributed to such objects must be distributed within 
their boundaries in a characteristic manner. Together, the apparatus of objects 
and their boundaries yields what is required for identity and individuation (or 
what Quine would call the ‘apparatus of divided reference’): what is needed 

222 kathrin koslicki
for saying when one object of a certain kind ends and another begins and 
when we encounter the same object again on a later occasion. 
 In the scenario just imagined, on the other hand, no single object seems to 
be clearly indicated whose instantiation of redness within its boundaries would 
account for the assent behavior prompted among the speakers of this language 
by an utterance of F 2  G 2 :
 ‘Red Water?’ Certainly. But which object is it, even roughly, whose satisfaction of 
the predicate ‘Red’ makes the remark true? Is it the whole pool, or just the water 
immediately diluting the ink, or one of the indefi nitely many intermediate alter-
natives? The language provides us with no way of answering these question, to 
which we must somehow fi nd an answer if the construction is predication. (Evans 
1975, p. 32)  
 I take it that what Evans means by saying that the construction at issue need 
not be interpreted as involving full-fl edged predication is that we could for 
example get by (i.e., capture the assent- and dissent-behavior generated by it 
in speakers of the language correctly) even if we interpreted the occurrences 
of the expressions, F 2 and G 2 , in the compound expression, F 2 G 2 , as both play-
ing the role of singular terms and the ‘tie’ between them as requiring merely 
that their denotations overlap spatially. There are various options as to what, 
under these circumstances, we might take these expressions to denote, if they 
are in fact construed as playing the role of singular terms in the compound 
expression, F 2 G 2 . We could for example go the Quinean route (Quine 1960, 
Ch. 3, §19ff .) and interpret F 2 and G 2 as denoting a particular scattered object 
or mereological sum, viz., the totality of the world’s red things and the totality 
of the world’s water, respectively.  16 In that case, we would predict that an utter-
ance of the expression, F 2 G 2 , will prompt assent-behavior among speakers of 
the language just in case the totality of the world’s red things and the totality 
of the world’s water share one or more parts in the region of spacetime with 
which the utterance in question is concerned. 
 If Evans is correct, however, this interpretational route will not succeed 
across the board. For in order for an utterance of F 1 G 1 (stimulus-synonymous 
with the English ‘A white rabbit!’, ‘White undetached rabbit-parts!’, ‘White 
 16  Evans (1975, p. 32, n. 8) indicates that he favors an analysis in terms of Hartry Field’s apparatus of 
‘partial denotation’ and ‘partial satisfaction’ (see, e.g., Field 1974), but does not expand on the details of 
this idea. 

mereological sums and singular terms 223
rabbit-stages!’, and so on) for example to prompt assent-behavior from 
speakers of this language, more may be required in certain circumstances 
than that the denotation of F 1 merely spatially overlap that of G 1 . To bring 
out this point, Evans quite ingeniously imagines a scenario in which several 
brown rabbits are so arranged that their white tails are contiguous (Evans 
1975, p. 34). Certainly, the condition that there be spatial overlap between 
the world’s white things and the world’s undetached rabbit-parts is satis-
fi ed in this scenario in the particular region of spacetime with which the 
utterance in question is concerned. In fact, the overlap in question between 
the totality of the world’s white things and the totality of the world’s unde-
tached rabbit-parts may even be large enough in size and appropriately 
shaped to compare with that of one or more single white rabbits. And yet 
speakers of this language may nevertheless on such occasions dissent from 
an utterance of F 1 G 1 , since the imagined scenario does not contain one or 
more single rabbits which have whiteness distributed within their bounda-
ries in a way characteristic of white rabbits: a brown rabbit with a white tail 
does not make a white rabbit; nor do several such brown rabbits with their 
white tails arranged contiguously. 
 Consider also the interaction between several expressions of the 
F-type and an expression of the G-type, as in F 3 F 1 G 1 , which, let’s say, 
is stimulus-synonymous with the English ‘A bloodstained white rab-
bit!’ (‘Bloodstained white undetached rabbit-parts!’, ‘Bloodstained white 
rabbit-stages!’, and so on). As Evans remarks, it is not suffi  cient for speakers 
to assent to F 3 F 1 G 1 , that they assent to both F 1 G 1 and F 3 G 1 separately, 
since F 3 F 1 G 1 may only hold in situations in which it is the very same rabbit 
within whose boundaries whiteness and bloodstainedness are distributed in 
a characteristic fashion. Moreover, what counts as a characteristic distribu-
tion of the property within the object’s boundaries is diff erent in the case 
of whiteness and bloodstainedness: in order for a rabbit to count as white, 
it must be (roughly) predominantly white; but in order for it to count as 
bloodstained, only very few of its parts need to be bloodstained. Finally, in 
order for a single rabbit to count as both white and bloodstained, it is not 
necessary that any of its white parts be bloodstained; thus, in order for F 3 F 1 
G 1 to prompt assent among the speakers of this language, it is not necessary 
that there be spatial overlap among the denotations of all three expressions, 
F 3 , F 1 and G 1 , since the compound expression does not require that there 
be any single undetached rabbit-part that is both white and bloodstained. 

224 kathrin koslicki
 The notion of a boundary drawn around single objects, as well as the 
characteristic distribution of a property within such a boundary, according 
to Evans, is necessary not only for a proper understanding of predication, 
but is also required to capture the semantics of negation in a language like 
ours (Evans 1975, pp. 35–36). For we may for example adopt a rule govern-
ing negation which would predict that an object satisfi es ‘not-white’ just in 
case the object in question does not satisfy ‘white’. However, in order for 
this rule to capture the force of negation in the language, it must be the 
case that when ‘white’ and ‘not-white’ are simultaneously applied to one 
and the same object, a contradiction results. And in order for this outcome 
to obtain, according to Evans, it is again necessary that we can tell the dif-
ference between where a single object of a certain kind in the domain 
stops, where another begins, and how we are supposed to fi nd the feature 
in question distributed with respect to the boundaries of this object. For 
a contradiction will only arise when it is said of one and the same object 
that a given property both is and is not distributed within its boundaries 
in a certain characteristic manner. In this way, Evans’s point concerning the 
characteristic distribution of a certain property within the boundaries of a 
single object applies not only to the proper analysis of constructions involv-
ing predication, but also to those involving negation. 
 6.  Objects and their Boundaries 
 Although Evans’s discussion is mostly focused on the role of general terms 
within the language, the lesson we learn from his arguments straightfor-
wardly extends to singular terms as well. For reference and predication 
are but two diff erent sides of a single semantic coin: whatever apparatus is 
required for a proper understanding of constructions involving full-fl edged 
predication will also be implicated in a genuine contrast between singular 
terms and general terms. Singular terms, after all, are just those expressions 
that are used to refer to the objects over which the general terms con-
tained in the language divide their reference. And general terms are ways 
of expressing the similarities and diff erences present among the referents of 
singular terms. Thus, if the presence of objects with genuinely demarcated 
boundaries is necessary for a proper understanding of predicative construc-
tions in a language like ours, then this same apparatus will carry over also 

mereological sums and singular terms 225
to what is required for an understanding of the referential properties of 
full-fl edged singular terms contained within such a language. 
 As was noted in section 3, our ordinary practice of using singular terms, 
in particular proper names, if taken at face value, leads us to believe that we 
typically employ such terms as names for commonly recognized kinds of 
things: names for human beings, fi ctional or real; names for places; names 
for signifi cant historical events, periods, or agents within history; names for 
artistic creations; brand names or names for products; and so on. Moreover, 
as Strawson remarks, proper names in particular appear to provide a com-
munity of language-users with a means of referring to an object that is both 
stable (in that it preserves sameness of reference in the face of various sorts 
of changes) and shared (in that it bridges diff erences in the informational 
background available to members of the group). 
 In one respect the conclusion reached by Evans in his discussion of 
Quinean indeterminacy, viz., that a proper semantic analysis of a language 
like ours requires a domain of objects with well-demarcated boundaries, 
accords well with the conclusion reached by David Lewis, as observed 
in section 4.  For Evans and Lewis both converge on the idea that our 
singular terms, somehow, successfully manage to refer to objects with 
well-demarcated boundaries. Thus, whatever one’s particular approach to 
reference, it should come out at the end of the day, in both Evans’s and 
Lewis’s view, that a particular cat, say, is a more highly eligible referent for 
the name, ‘Bruce’, when employed in its intended role as a name for a cat, 
than a cat-shaped chunk of miscellaneous and ever-changing matter that 
occupies a region of spacetime which only partially overlaps but does not 
coincide with that occupied by the cat in question. 
 The means, however, by which Evans and Lewis envision these bounda-
ries to be drawn are quite diff erent. For Lewis, highly eligible referents are 
those which are well-demarcated by highly natural properties. And while 
Lewis’s natural/non-natural distinction is intended to apply to objects and 
singular terms as well, it does so only derivatively: the distinction is formu-
lated in the fi rst place with properties and predicate-meanings in mind. For 
Evans, on the other hand, the domain itself, over which the singular and 
general terms of the language range, already comes pre-divided, so to speak, 
into highly eligible referents. That is, the boundaries of these objects are 
not drawn in a derivative manner by means of a distinction whose primary 
realm of application is something other than objects and singular terms; 

226 kathrin koslicki
rather, the idea of a single object with its boundaries, capable of enduring 
through space and time, is taken as fundamental. 17 
 But the question of how our singular terms successfully manage to pick 
out the highly eligible referents from among all the possible referents is not 
even worth asking unless the domain over which our singular terms and 
general terms range is construed in such a way that it contains ineligible or 
less highly eligible referents alongside the highly eligible ones. If such ger-
rymandered objects never make it into the domain over which our singular 
and general terms range to begin with (e.g., because a particular ontology 
does not count such ‘non-entities’ as lying within the realm of things that 
exist), then the need for a distinction between eligible and ineligible ref-
erents vanishes and, with it, the need to account for the observation that 
speakers tend to ignore the ineligible or less highly eligible referents in their 
ordinary discourse. We should thus count it as among the advantages of the 
type of approach to reference endorsed by Evans over that endorsed by 
Lewis that such an approach does not need to settle the question of how to 
distinguish the highly eligible from the less highly eligible referents. 
 Lewis is for independent reasons already committed to a domain of objects 
for singular terms and general terms which includes, in addition to cats and 
other such commonly recognized kinds of things, also all manner of more 
or less gerrymandered chunks of miscellaneous and ever-changing matter 
in the vicinity of these commonly recognized kinds of things. This com-
mitment follows from Lewis’s endorsement of the principle of unrestricted 
mereological composition, according to which for any plurality of objects, 
there exists a mereological sum of these objects (Lewis 1986b, pp. 211ff .). 
Recall from our earlier discussion (at the beginning of section 4) that Lewis 
identifi es two plausible sources towards which we should look in our search 
for constraints on reference: (i) use and (ii) intrinsic eligibility. The fi rst, 
which locates the source of at least some of the content-determining pow-
ers of our terms in the speaker or the speaker’s linguistic community, is not 
directly relevant to our current topic of discussion and hence has not played 
into the foregoing remarks. The second, intrinsic eligibility, is supposed 
to trace some of the content-determining powers of our language to the 
 17  An approach of this kind is also taken by Strawson; in  Individuals , for example, he remarks as fol-
lows: “Material bodies, in a broad sense of the word, secure to us one single common and continuously 
extendable framework of reference, any constituent of which can be identifyingly referred to without 
reference to any particular of any other type” (Strawson 1959, p. 54). 

mereological sums and singular terms 227
intrinsic nature of the referent itself. But now, given Lewis’s acceptance of 
standard mereology, we know that the referent itself, on Lewis’s conception, 
does not have the power to do this work on its own: rather, the work of 
providing highly eligible referents with well-demarcated boundaries must 
be accomplished by a diff erent piece of apparatus, the natural/non-natural 
distinction, whose primary target is properties and predicate-meanings and 
which, if successful, yields distinctions among objects and singular terms 
only derivatively. 
 One kind of handicap the Lewisian imposes upon himself, then, which 
others manage to avoid, is that he is on independent grounds committed 
to an ontology which creates a need for a distinction between more or less 
highly eligible referents. Those, on the other hand, who embrace a less pro-
miscuous ontology, into which the gerrymandered chunks never fi nd their 
way to begin with, have an easier time in at least this respect: they do not 
to the same extent face the need to distinguish the highly eligible referents 
from the less highly eligible ones. And, for this reason, foregoing a commit-
ment to standard mereology has the advantage, among other things, that the 
source for one kind of constraint on reference really can be located in the 
referent itself, genuinely and not merely in a derivative manner. 
 7.  Quinean Indeterminacy and the Natural/
Non-Natural Distinction 
 I began by noting that there seems to be a prima facie mismatch between 
the persistence conditions apparently exhibited by the referents of singular 
terms, as they are standardly used in ordinary discourse, and the persistence 
conditions we would expect these objects to have if our ordinary singu-
lar terms in fact referred to mereological sums. Lewis proposes to remedy 
this prima facie mismatch by means of his natural/non-natural distinction, 
which is formulated so as to apply directly to the extensions of predicates 
and only indirectly to the referents of singular terms. By appeal to the natu-
ral/non-natural distinction, Lewis hopes to be able to make out the diff er-
ence for example between a highly eligible referent for the name ‘Bruce’, 
when employed in its intended use as a name for a particular cat, and the 
many not-so-highly eligible chunks of miscellaneous and ever-changing 
matter in the vicinity of Bruce, the cat. Of course, given Lewis’s independent 

228 kathrin koslicki
commitment to standard mereology, Bruce, the cat, in Lewis’s view, is itself 
just a chunk of feline tissue.  18 Nevertheless, so the proposal goes, the bound-
ary between Bruce, the cat, and its surroundings is better demarcated by 
diff erences in the distribution of highly natural properties (such as density 
of matter, relative abundance of chemical elements, loci of causal chains, and 
so on) than the boundary between many of the other chunks of matter that 
are in the vicinity of Bruce, the cat, and their surroundings. 
 When I implied just now that there is just a single highly eligible referent 
for the name, ‘Bruce’, as it is employed on this particular occasion as a name 
for a specifi c cat, I was really oversimplifying. For, in addition to the com-
ponents of Lewis’s approach already mentioned, we must also add to the 
mix his ‘Many, But Almost One’ doctrine (Lewis 1993a). According to this 
doctrine, in any ordinary situation in which we may fi nd ourselves employ-
ing a name like ‘Bruce’, in its intended role as a name for a particular cat, we 
will really be faced with a plurality of ‘many-but-almost-one’ cat-candidates 
that are present in the vicinity of what we would normally think of as 
a single cat (e.g., aggregate C 1 of feline tissue minus one particular mol-
ecule; aggregate C 2 of feline tissue minus a diff erent molecule; and so on). 
Since these ‘many-but-almost-one’ cat-candidates, though strictly speaking 
numerically distinct, are mostly overlapping and overwhelmingly similar in 
all other respects relevant to our cat-related discourse, Lewis believes that 
our best strategy is simply to acknowledge a certain (moderate) degree 
of indeterminacy in our singular terms. Just as no semantic decision has 
been made or is called for concerning for example a term like ‘heap’, as to 
exactly how many grains constitute a heap, similarly no semantic decision 
has occurred, is likely to occur, or needs to occur, which would single out 
some particular one from among the many perfectly good cat-candidates 
in the vicinity of what we normally think of as a single cat. If we combine 
Lewis’s ‘Many, But Almost One’ doctrine with the other components of 
his approach already cited, we arrive at the conclusion that, according to 
Lewis’s view, while the natural/non-natural distinction may distinguish for 
us some of the roughly cat-shaped chunks of feline tissue in the vicinity of 
what we would normally consider to be a single cat, we will nevertheless 
 18  I am using the term ‘feline tissue’ in a way that presupposes that feline tissue is present only where 
(living) cats are present. Thus, given this use of the phrase, the presence of detached cat-parts, cat-corpses, 
and the like would not for present purposes be suffi  cient to ensure the presence of feline tissue. This 
assumption is of course benefi cial to the Lewisian.  

mereological sums and singular terms 229
be left with a plurality of equally eligible potential referents for the name, 
‘Bruce’, when employed on a particular occasion in its intended use as a 
name for a specifi c cat. 
 Earlier in this chapter, we discussed an argument mounted by Gareth 
Evans whose intended purpose was to show that in fact not all of the dif-
ferent interpretational hypotheses entertained by Quine do an equally good 
job in accounting for the assent- and dissent-behavior we would actually 
expect to observe on particular occasions in ordinary speakers of natural 
languages. In particular, Evans’s argument against Quine purports to show 
that we can in fact tell the diff erence between the following two com-
peting interpretational hypotheses:  the hypothesis according to which a 
term like ‘rabbit’ divides its reference over undetached rabbit-parts and the 
hypothesis according to which the term in question divides its reference 
over enduring rabbits. For, among other things, if Evans is right, then the 
former hypothesis cannot, while the latter hypothesis can, account for the 
fact that speakers would not assent to a compound expression of the form, 
‘White rabbit?’, when faced with several brown rabbits whose white tails 
are arranged contiguously. 
 Notice that Lewis’s metaphysical and semantic commitments precisely 
put him into the camp of those who are subject to Evans’s argument against 
Quine, since in Lewis’s view cats just are (certain) mereological sums of 
undetached cat-parts. These mereological sums therefore provide the availa-
ble choices of objects over which the general term, ‘cat’, can divide its refer-
ence and to which the singular term, ‘Bruce’, can refer, when it is employed 
in its intended use as a name for a particular cat. The main relevant diff er-
ence between the interpretational hypothesis considered by Quine and that 
endorsed by Lewis is that Lewis invokes one additional piece of apparatus not 
present in Quine’s account, viz., the natural/non-natural distinction. Our last 
remaining task at this point in the dialectic, then, is to see whether Lewis’s 
appeal to the natural/non-natural distinction can help him overcome Evans’s 
objection against Quine. Not surprisingly, my project in the remainder of this 
chapter will be to argue that Lewis’s invocation of the natural/non-natural 
distinction by itself is not suffi  cient to ward him off  against Evans’s objection 
to Quine. 
 For the purposes of establishing this conclusion, I will make several simpli-
fying assumptions, which I hope will not detract from the substantive issues 
at hand. Let’s suppose, fi rst, for the sake of simplicity, that our world is much 

230 kathrin koslicki
less complicated at the level of the perfectly natural properties than it in fact is. 
For example, we might imagine that the world at the most fundamental level 
is how the Presocratic philosopher, Empedocles, pictured it, with just four 
perfectly natural properties, viz., those corresponding to the general terms, 
‘earth’, ‘air’, ‘fi re’, and ‘water’. And let’s assume furthermore that all the other 
predicates in our language can be defi ned somehow (in more or less lengthy 
ways) in terms of these four predicates which denote the perfectly natural 
properties, together with numerical ratios which express the proportion of 
earth, air, fi re, and water that is present in a given object at its most fundamental 
level of composition. Given this picture, it might turn out to be the case for 
example that the extension of the predicate, ‘cat’, consists of mereological sums 
which exhibit the following ratio of elements: two-eighths earth, two-eighths 
fi re, three-eighths air, and one-eighth water. (We might think of this numerical 
ratio of elements as analogous for example to the chemical formula for water, 
viz., H 2 O, which tells us not only what sorts of elements constitute water but 
also in what proportion these elements are present in this substance.) Finally, 
let’s make a further simplifying assumption, which Empedocles did not make, 
namely that we can think of the four elements as occurring in the form of 
small indivisible particles or atoms, so that the world according to this fi ctional 
account consists at the most fundamental level of four diff erent kinds of atoms, 
viz., earth-, air-, fi re-, and water-atoms.  19  
 According to this fi ctional account, then, we have an item in the exten-
sion of the general term, ‘cat’, whenever we have earth-, air-, fi re-, and 
water-atoms present in the proportion of two parts earth, two parts air, 
three parts fi re, and one part water.  20 , 21 Suppose now that a given speaker 
is employing the name, ‘Bruce’, on a particular occasion as a name for a 
 19  Even according to this highly simplifi ed picture, there are many more possible dimensions along 
which entities at the most fundamental level could vary. For example, atoms could diff er from one 
another not only with respect to the kind to which they belong (earth, air, fi re, or water), but also along 
such dimensions as size, shape, weight, and so on. I will abstract away from these possible additional 
parameters of variation and assume, for the purposes of this argument, that all atoms belonging to a 
given kind are uniform with respect to these further parameters. 
 20  Perhaps, our atomistic Empedoclean version of Lewis would want to add to this formula determining 
the extension of the predicate, ‘cat’, that the atoms in question must also be in close spatial proximity to 
one another. Without explicitly mentioning this additional condition, I will assume that it is met by the 
mereological sums in question which qualify as possible cat-candidates. 
 21  Since our real-world knowledge tells us that cats can in practice diff er from one another, among other 
things, in terms of their size, it would not be plausible to assume (even within the confi nes of this highly 
simplifi ed fi ctional story) that we could give a defi nition of what belongs into the extension of the 
predicate, ‘cat’, not just in terms of numerical ratios of elements, but rather in terms of precise numbers 

mereological sums and singular terms 231
specifi c cat. Assuming that the speaker manages to carry out his referential 
intentions successfully on this particular occasion, then (given our current 
assumptions) we know that at least one mereological sum must be present 
in the vicinity of the speaker which consists of two parts earth, two parts air, 
three parts fi re, and one part water. In fact, in practice, whenever one such 
mereological sum is present in the vicinity of the speaker, there are many 
more such mereological sums which are present alongside the fi rst one and 
which also exhibit the right ratio of elements to qualify as cat-candidates.  22 
For example, suppose C 1 is the aggregate of feline tissue which is composed 
of the following earth-, air-, fi re-, and water-atoms: [(E 1 + E 2 ) + (A 1 + A 2 ) + 
(F 1 + F 2 + F 3 ) + W 1 ]. A diff erent aggregate of feline tissue, C 2 , also currently 
in the vicinity of the speaker, might consist of the following parts: [(E 2 + 
E 3 ) + (A 1 + A 2 ) + (F 1 + F 2 + F 3 ) + W 1 ]. C 1 and C 2 , though strictly speaking 
numerically distinct, diff er from one another only with respect to the pres-
ence or absence of a single atomic part: C 1 has E 1 among its proper atomic 
parts and lacks E 3 , while C 2 has E 3 among its proper atomic parts but lacks 
E 1 . Otherwise, they overlap with respect to all of their other proper atomic 
parts. It is therefore consistent with Lewis’s philosophical commitments to 
assume that, due to their largely overlapping nature, C 1 and C 2 would be 
equally highly eligible referents for the use of the name, ‘Bruce’, in its use 
on that particular occasion. Moreover, if this scenario is anything like how 
matters would stand in a comparable situation in the actual world, then, in 
addition to C 1 and C 2 , the speaker would fi nd himself on this particular 
occasion in the vicinity of many more such largely overlapping mereo-
logical sums, C 3 , C 4 , . . . , C n , many of which would qualify as equally highly 
eligible referents for the name, ‘Bruce’, in its use on that particular occasion. 
of atoms (e.g., along the lines of: a mereological sum, x, belongs into the extension of the predicate, 
‘cat’, just in case x has among its atomic proper parts k 1 earth-atoms, k 2 air-atoms, and so on, where ‘k 1 ’, 
‘k 2 ’, . . . , denote natural numbers).  
 22  What if the scenario we are imagining is diff erent from the actual world not only in that it is 
Empedoclean and atomistic at the most fundamental level, but also in the following respect: on most 
normal occasions, when speakers take themselves to be referring to a single cat, there is in fact only a 
single mereological sum present in their vicinity which exhibits the appropriate ratio of elements to 
be placed in the extension of the general term, ‘cat’? Given my assumptions, such a world would have 
to be one in which cats for example can never sit on mats; for if they did, then additional mereological 
sums composed of the four kinds of elements would be in the vicinity of what ordinary speakers in that 
world think of as a single cat. What matters for our present purposes, however, is that it is in no way part 
of Lewis’s account that the world in fact must be so highly austere as we just imagined it to be, in order 
for ordinary speakers to be frequently successful in their referential intentions.  

232 kathrin koslicki
 Given the identity conditions governing mereological sums, each of C 1 , 
C 2 , . . . , C n has its proper parts essentially. It is essential to the aggregate of 
feline tissue, C 1 , for example that its proper atomic parts are E 1 , E 2 , A 1 , A 2 , 
F 1 , F 2 , F 3 , W 1 . In the same way, the other mereological sums exhibiting the 
cat-ratio that are in the vicinity of the speaker on this particular occasion are 
also related essentially to their respective proper atomic parts. At the same 
time, given Lewis’s commitments, it cannot be essential to Bruce, the cat, 
that it have any of these atoms among its proper atomic parts. For any of 
C 1 , C 2 , . . . , C n , so we have assumed, are equally highly eligible referents for 
the name, ‘Bruce’, in its intended use on this particular occasion as a name 
for the specifi c cat in question; and C 1 , C 2 , . . . , C n , while largely overlapping, 
each diff er from one another at least with respect to the presence or absence 
of a single atomic proper part. Hence, it cannot be a requirement, in order 
for a given mereological sum to qualify as a potential referent for the name, 
‘Bruce’, in its intended use on this particular occasion, that any specifi c 
earth-, air-, fi re-, or water-atom present in the vicinity of the speaker, E 1 , . . . , 
E n , A 1 , . . . , A n , F 1 , . . . , F n , W 1 , . . . , W n , number among its proper atomic parts. 
All that is required of such sums is that they exhibit the ratio of elements 
characteristic of items in the extension of the general term, ‘cat’, viz., two 
parts earth, two parts air, three parts fi re, and one part water; but, for any 
specifi c atom present in the vicinity of the speaker on this occasion, there 
is no requirement that  it number among the proper atomic parts of the cat 
in question. 23, 24 
 23  Perhaps there are further requirements which a given mereological sum must satisfy in order for it 
to be selected as a potential highly eligible referent for the name, ‘Bruce’, in its intended use as a name 
for a particular cat. For example, such a candidate might have to bear certain cross-temporal relations 
to other cat-candidates which existed at earlier times and are connected to the speaker in specifi c 
ways. For example, events might have occurred prior to the present occasion which the speaker would 
describe in the following way, “A year ago, I adopted Bruce from the local animal shelter.” In that case, 
in order for a mereological sum which currently exhibits the cat-ratio and is present in the vicinity of 
the speaker to qualify as a highly eligible referent for the name, ‘Bruce’, this sum would have to bear 
certain cross-temporal relations to earlier mereological sums exhibiting the cat-ratio which were present 
in the vicinity of the speaker when the events he now describes as “A year ago, I adopted Bruce from 
the local animal shelter” occurred. But we can ignore these possible additional constraints on potential 
candidates for the reference of the name, ‘Bruce’, for the time being. For the purposes of my current 
argument, we can assume for example that the speaker has laid eyes on Bruce, the cat, for the very fi rst 
time just moments ago. 
 24  One might think that the situation in which the Lewisian currently fi nds himself can be improved if 
we permit him to require of the mereological sums in question that they satisfy additional  structural  (i.e., 
 confi gurational ) constraints in order for them to qualify as proper cat-candidates. For example, we might 

mereological sums and singular terms 233
 At this point, we are in a position to see why Lewis’s account, despite its 
appeal to the natural/non-natural distinction, is still susceptible to Evans’s 
argument against Quine. Given the semantic and metaphysical machinery 
at Lewis’s disposal, nothing prevents us from interpreting both an apparent 
singular term like ‘Bruce’, in its intended role as a name for a particular 
cat, and a general term like ‘cat’ as merely a marker indicating the presence 
of cathood in the environment of the speaker. Our discussion above has 
brought out that a speaker’s assent to an utterance of ‘Cat?’ or ‘Bruce?’, on 
the Lewisian picture, is not only compatible with, but also in practice a reli-
able indicator of, cathood being instantiated many times over, by the many 
numerically distinct but largely overlapping mereological sums exhibiting 
the cat-ratio that are present in the vicinity of the speaker on a particular 
occasion. What the Lewisian account has  not  told us (and, as far as I can see, 
lacks the resources to tell us) is how a term like ‘cat’ or ‘Bruce’ would man-
age to mark the boundary between a certain particular object satisfying the 
cat-ratio and some other such object or objects. 
 In this way, the Lewisian account wrongly assimilates the semantic behav-
ior of a general term such as ‘cat’ to that of a paradigmatic mass term like 
‘water’: for a mass term like ‘water’ precisely serves to indicate the presence 
of wateriness in the vicinity of the speaker, but without marking the bound-
ary between a single particular object that exhibits wateriness and another. 
Similarly, while an apparent singular term like ‘Bruce’, in its intended role 
as a name for a particular cat, on Lewis’s account, may serve to mark the 
presence of some specifi c mereological sums exhibiting the cat-ratio in the 
vicinity of the speaker, no one object in particular need be singled out by a 
felicitous use of the term in question. 25 
consider adding a condition of the following sort to the formula by means of which the extension of the 
predicate ‘cat’ is specifi ed: a mereological sum, x, belongs in the extension of the predicate, ‘cat’, iff  (i) the 
proper parts of x are atoms in the ratio two parts earth, two parts fi re, three parts air and one part water; 
and (ii) these atoms are arranged in  circular fashion. Still the situation will be unchanged: for whenever 
a speaker appears to be using a term like ‘Bruce’ successfully, as a name for (what the speaker thinks 
of as) a single cat, he will in fact be in the presence of a plurality of mereological sums whose proper 
parts satisfy the cat-ratio and exhibit a circular arrangement. (Or, at least, a successful use of a term like 
‘Bruce’, in its intended role, is compatible with the presence of a multiplicity of such circularly arranged 
cat-candidates in the vicinity of the speaker.) 
 25  What also comes to mind in this context is Strawson’s notion of a feature-placing expression, of which 
a paradigmatic example is ‘It is raining’ (see for example Strawson 1953). (Not surprisingly, the model of 
feature-placing expressions was used by Strawson and others as a potentially fruitful way of thinking of 
the semantic behavior of mass terms). While, as Strawson notes, a feature-placing construction, such as 

234 kathrin koslicki
 On this picture, then, we would wrongly expect a compound expres-
sion like ‘White cat?’ to behave semantically along the lines of Evans’s ‘Red 
water?’, i.e., as producing assent on the part of a speaker when whiteness 
is instantiated, cathood is instantiated, and their respective instantiations 
overlap spatially. But what is needed, so Evans’s argument against Quine 
indicated, in order to capture the assent- and dissent-behavior we would in 
fact expect to observe among speakers, is that we are given the resources to 
tell when whiteness is distributed in certain characteristic ways within the 
boundaries of one or more particular cats in the vicinity of a speaker on a 
particular occasion. 
 Lewis’s natural/non-natural distinction by itself, as I have tried to estab-
lish in this section, is not the right kind of tool to close the gap between 
the mere presence of mereological sums instantiating cathood and single 
enduring cats. After all, the discovery that the chemical formula correspond-
ing to water is ‘H 2 O’ did not suddenly transform the term, ‘water’, which 
up to that point had been used standardly as a mass term and continues to 
be used so today, into a singular count noun. In the same vein, the ability 
to state what the cat-ratio is in terms of the perfectly natural properties also 
would not by itself yield well-demarcated boundaries around individual 
cats. But such well-demarcated boundaries are precisely what is needed to 
account for the semantic behavior of singular count nouns like ‘cat’ and 
genuine singular terms, such as ‘Bruce’, which can be used to pick out such 
individual cats. 26 
‘It is raining’, marks the presence of a feature (viz., in this case, the occurrence of rain) in the environ-
ment of the speaker, its function is not to direct the discussion towards a particular object or objects 
in the vicinity of the speaker which are supposed to instantiate the feature in question. For example, it 
would sound rather strange to follow up someone else’s utterance of ‘It is raining’ with ‘What’s raining?’ 
or ‘Where is the thing that is raining?’ Rather, the use of ‘it’ in ‘It is raining’ is what is referred to by 
linguists as an “expletive ‘it’ ”: this kind of use of ‘it’ in a sentence does not play the role of a genuine 
subject term, indicating a particular object to which the predicate contained in the sentence ascribes a 
certain attribute. Rather, it is the whole sentence which marks the presence of a certain feature in the 
environment of the speaker, without containing a constituent whose purpose is to single out a particular 
object instantiating the feature in question. 
 26  It is also unlikely that an appeal to Ramsey sentences would be of any assistance to Lewis’s particular 
package of views, in helping him to overcome Evans’s objection against Quine (see for example Lewis 
1970, 1997). For Ramsey sentences take the form of existentially quantifi ed statements and hence would 
also not be suffi  cient to enforce singular reference in the face of multiple, equally eligible, candidates for 
the denotation of any particular expression. 

mereological sums and singular terms 235
 8.  Conclusion 
 In sum, while I am sympathetic to Lewis’s position that a credible account 
of reference and predication will need to appeal to the presence of 
well-demarcated boundaries among the objects referred to, I  have tried 
to bring out why I am skeptical that his already heavily burdened natu-
ral/non-natural distinction among properties (i.e., predicate-meanings) can 
bear the additional weight of drawing boundaries in the right places around 
highly eligible candidates for the reference of our singular terms and the 
denotations of our general terms. If my arguments in this chapter are on the 
right track, then Lewis’s natural/non-natural distinction among properties 
does not do the work required to avoid Quinean indeterminacy. But Evans’s 
argument against Quine shows us why this result is undesirable: for, unless 
we manage to rule out some of the Quinean interpretational hypotheses, 
we in eff ect fail to predict correctly how actual speakers would behave on 
particular occasions of utterance. 
 Those who are in the business of giving an analysis of constructions 
involving full-fl edged reference and predication, as contrasting with con-
structions which require merely spatial overlap among the denotations of 
expressions or the presence of a certain feature in the environment of the 
speaker, should thus feel tempted to go in for an ontology that places more 
stringent structural constraints than those that are supplied by standard 
mereology on the objects that are available as candidates for the denotations 
of our singular and general terms. When evaluating competing approaches 
to the metaphysics of material objects, we should also keep in mind that the 
choices we make on the metaphysical side may have unwanted semantic 
consequences.  


 Bibliography   
 Armstrong , 
 D. 
M  . 
 1978 . 
  Universals 
and 
Scientifi c 
Realism, Volume 
II  
( Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press ). 
 ——   1986 .  “In Defence of Structural Universals,”    Australasian Journal of Philosophy 
 64:   85–88 . 
 ——  1997 .  A World of States of Aff airs  ( Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press ). 
 Arntzenius ,  Frank .  2008 . “Gunk, Topology and Measure,” in   Dean  Zimmerman 
(ed.),   Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, Volume 4  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ), 
pp.  225–247 . 
 Balashov ,  Yuri  .  2010 .  Persistence and Spacetime  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ). 
 Baxter ,  Donald .  1988a .  “Identity in the Loose and Popular Sense,”    Mind  97:  575–582 . 
 ——  1988b .  “Many-One Identity,”  Philosophical Papers  17( 3):  193–216 . 
 Bourne ,  Craig .  2002 .  “When am I?,”  Australasian Journal of Philosophy  80:  359–371 . 
 Braddon-Mitchell ,  David .  2004 .  “How Do We Know it is Now Now?,”    Analysis 
 64:  199–203 . 
 Brandom ,  Robert .  1994 .   Making It Explicit: Reasoning, Representing, and Discursive 
Commitment  ( Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press ). 
 Broad ,  C. D .  1923 .  Scientifi c Thought  ( London :  Kegan Paul ). 
 Brown ,  H. R  .  2005 .   Physical Relativity:  Space-Time Structure from a Dynamical 
Perspective  ( Oxford :  Clarendon Press ). 
 Bynoe ,  William .  2010 .  “Against the Compositional View of Facts,”    Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy  89( 1):  91–100 . 
 Cameron ,  Ross .  2007 .  “The Contingency of Composition,”    Philosophical Studies 
 136 :  99–121 . 
 Caplan ,  Ben ,   Chris   Tillman , and   Patrick   Reeder .  2010 .  “Parts of Singletons,”    Journal 
of Philosophy  107( 10) :  501–533 . 
 Cappelen ,  Herman  and   John   Hawthorne  .  2009 .  Relativism and Monadic Truth  
( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ). 
 Cartwright ,  Richard .  1975 . “Scattered Objects,” in  Keith   Lehrer (ed.),   Analysis and 
Metaphysics ( Dordrecht :  Reidel ), pp. 153–171. 
 Casati ,  Roberto , and   Achille   Varzi .  1994 .   Holes and Other Superfi cialities  ( Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press ). 
 —— ——  1999 .  Parts and Places  ( Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ). 
 Cotnoir ,  Aaron .  2010 .  “Anti-Symmetry and Non-Extensional Mereology,”  
 Philosophical Quarterly  60 :  396–405 . 
 Crimmins ,  Mark .  1992 .  Talk about Belief  ( Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ). 

238 bibliography
 Dipert ,  Randall .  1997 .  “The Mathematical Structure of the World: The World as 
Graph,”  Journal of Philosophy  94( 7) :  329–358 . 
 Donnelly ,  Maureen .  2010 . “Parthood and Multi-location,” in   Dean  Zimmerman 
(ed.),   Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, Volume 5  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ), 
pp.  203–243 . 
 ——  2011 .  “Using Mereological Principles to Support Metaphysics,”    Philosophical 
Quarterly  61 :  225–246 . 
 Dorr ,  Cian .  2005 . “What We Disagree About When We Disagree About Ontology,” 
in   Mark  Kalderon  (ed.),   Fictionalist Approaches to Metaphysics  ( Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press ), pp.  234–286 . 
 Dreben ,  Burton  and   Juliet   Floyd .  2011 . Translation into English of “Gottlob 
Frege, Letters to Ludwig Wittgenstein,” in   E .  De Pellegrin  (ed.),   Interactive 
Wittgenstein: Essays in Memory of Georg Henrik von Wright  (Dordrecht:  Springer 
Verlag ,  Synthese Library vol. 349), pp.  15–73 . 
 Dretske ,  Fred .  1967 .  “Can Events Move?,”   Mind  76 :  479–492 . 
 Dummett ,  Michael .  1973 .   Frege: Philosophy of Language  ( Cambridge, MA :  Harvard 
University Press ). 
 Eagle ,  Antony .  2010 . “Location and Perdurance,” in   Dean  Zimmerman  (ed.),  
 Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, Volume 5  ( Oxford :   Oxford University Press ), 
pp.  53–94 . 
 Effi  ngham ,  Nikk .  2009 .  “Universalism, Vagueness and Supersubstantivalism,”  
 Australasian Journal of Philosophy  87( 1) :  35–42. 
 ——  2010 .  “Mereological Explanation and Time Travel,”   Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy  88 :  333–345 . 
 Effi  ngham ,  Nikk  and   Jon   Robson .  2007 .  “A Mereological Challenge to Endurantism,”  
 Australasian Journal of Philosophy  85 :  633–640 . 
 Evans ,  Gareth .  1975 .  “Identity and Predication,”    Journal of Philosophy   72( 13) :  343–
363 . Reprinted in Evans ( 1985 ), pp.  25–48 . 
 ——  1985 .  Collected Papers  ( Oxford :  Clarendon Press ). 
 Field ,  Hartry .  1974 .  “Quine and the Correspondence Theory,”   Philosophical Review 
 83( 2) :  200–228 . 
 Fine ,  Kit .  1982 . “Acts, Events and Things,” in   Language and Ontology, Proceedings of 
the 6th International Wittgenstein Symposium  ( Vienna :  Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky ), 
pp.  97–105 . 
 ——  1994 . “Essence and Modality,” in   James  Tomberlin  (ed.),   Philosophical 
Perspectives,  Volume 8 ( Logic and Language ), pp.  1–16 . 
 ——  1995 .  “The Logic of Essence,”  Journal of Philosophical Logic  24 :  241–273 . 
 ——  1999 .  “Things and Their Parts,”  Midwest Studies in Philosophy  23( 1) :  61–74 . 
 ——  2000 .  “Neutral Relations,”  Philosophical Review  109 :  1–33 . 

bibliography 239
 ——  2006 .  “In Defence of Three-Dimensionalism,”    Journal of Philosophy 
 103( 12) :  699–714 . 
 ——  2007 .  “Response to Fraser MacBride,”   Dialectica  61 :  57–62 . 
 Forbes ,  Graeme A  .  2010 .  “Review of  Oxford Studies in Metaphysics:  V ,”   Analysis 
 70 :  571–577 . 
 Forrest ,  Peter .  2004a .  “Grit or Gunk: Implications of the Banach-Tarski Paradox,”  
 The Monist  87:  351–370 . 
 ——  2004b .  “The Real but Dead Past: A Reply to Braddon-Mitchell,”    Analysis 
 64 :  358–362 . 
 Fowler ,  Gregory .  2009 . “The Structure of Space,” Ph.D.  dissertation,  Rochester 
University . 
 Frege ,  Gottlob .  1884 .   Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik:  eine logisch-mathematische 
Untersuchung über den Begriff  der Zahl  ( Breslau: Wilhelm Köbner). 
 ——  1980 .   Gottlob Frege: Philosophical and Mathematical Correspondence  , ed.   Gottfried 
 Gabriel ( Chicago :  University of Chicago Press ). 
 Gallois ,  André .  1998 .   Occasions of Identity: The Metaphysics of Persistence, Change, and 
Sameness  (Oxford:  Oxford University Press) . 
 ——  2004 .  “Comments on Ted Sider:  Four Dimensionalism,”    Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research  68( 3) :  648–657 . 
 ——  2005 .  “Identity Over Time,”    Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . < http://plato.
stanford.edu/entries/identity-time/#4.6>. 
 Geach ,  P. T  .  1965 .  “Some Problems about Time,”    Proceedings of the British Academy 
 51 :  321–336 . 
 Gilmore ,  Cody .  2006 .  “Where in the Relativistic World Are We?,”    Philosophical 
Perspectives  20 :  199–236 . 
 ——  2007 . “Time Travel, Coinciding Objects, and Persistence,” in   Dean  Zimmerman 
(ed.),   Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, Volume 3  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ), 
pp.  177–198 . 
 ——  2008 .  “Persistence and Location in Relativistic Spacetime,”    Philosophy Compass 
 3( 6) :  1224–1254 . 
 ——  2009 . “Why Parthood Might Be a Four-Place Relation, and How it Behaves 
If It Is,” in   Ludger   Honnefelder ,   Edmund  Runggaldier , and   Benedikt   Schick 
(eds.),   Unity and Time in Metaphysics  ( Berlin :  de Gruyter ), pp.  83–133 . 
 —— Forthcoming a.  “Quasi-Supplementation, Plenitudinous Coincidentalism, 
and Gunk,” in  Robert  Garcia (ed.),   Substance: New Essays ( Philosophia Verlag ). 
 —— Forthcoming b. “Slots in Universals,” in   Karen   Bennett  and   Dean  Zimmerman 
(eds.),   Oxford Studies in Metaphysics  ,  Volume 8 ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ). 
 Goddu ,  G. C  .  2003 .  “Time Travel and Changing the Past: (Or How to Kill Yourself 
and Live to Tell the Tale),”  Ratio  16 :  16–32 . 

240 bibliography
 Goodman ,  Nelson .  1951 .   The Structure of Appearance  ( Cambridge, MA :   Harvard 
University Press ). 
 Grossmann ,  Reinhardt .  1983 .   The Categorial Structure of the World  ( Bloomington : 
 Indiana University Press ). 
 ——  1992 .   The Existence of the World: An Introduction to Ontology  ( London :  Routledge ). 
 Harte ,  Verity .  2002 .   Plato on Parts and Wholes:  The Metaphysics of Structure  
( Oxford :  Clarendon Press ). 
 Haslanger ,  Sally .  1989 .  “Endurance and Temporary Intrinsics,”    Analysis  49( 3) :  119–125 . 
 ——  2003 . “Persistence Through Time,” in   Michael  Loux  and   Dean  Zimmerman 
(eds.),   The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics  ( Oxford :  Oxford University. Press ), 
pp.  315–354 . 
 Hawley ,  Katherine .  2004 .  How Things Persist ( Oxford: Oxford University Press ). 
 Hawthorne ,  John .  2006 . “Quantity in Lewisian Metaphysics,” in his   Metaphysical 
Essays   (New York :  Oxford University Press ), pp.  229–237 . 
 ——  2007 .  “Craziness and Metasemantics,”  Philosophical Review  116( 3) :  427–440 . 
 Hazen ,  Allen .  1996 .  “Reduction to a Dyadic Predicate Revisited,”  Melbourne 
University Preprints, Report No. 8/96:  1–17 . 
 Heathwood ,  Chris .  2005 .  “The Real Price of the Dead Past: A Reply to Forrest and 
Braddon-Mitchell,”  Analysis  65 :  249–251 . 
 Heck ,  Richard  and   Robert   May .  2011 .  “The Composition of Thoughts,”    Noûs 
 45 :  126–146 . 
 Hodes ,  Harold .  1984 .  “On Modal Logics Which Enrich First-Order S5,”    Journal of 
Philosophical Logic  13 :  423–454 . 
 Horwich ,  Paul .  1998 .  Truth  , 2nd edn. ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ). 
  Hovda ,  Paul .  2009 .  “What is Classical Mereology?”    Journal of Philosophical Logic 
 38 :  55–82 . 
 Hudson ,  Hud .  2001 .   A Materialist Metaphysics of the Human Person  ( Ithaca :  Cornell 
University Press ). 
 ——  2002 .  “Review of Ted Sider’s  Four-Dimensionalism ,”   Notre Dame Philosophical 
Reviews . <http://ndpr.nd.edu/news/23182-four-dimensionalism-an-ontology-
of-persistence-and-time/>. 
 ——  2005 .  The Metaphysics of Hyperspace  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ). 
 ——  2006 .  “Confi ning Composition,”   The Journal of Philosophy  103 :  631–651 . 
 ——  2007 . “I am Not an Animal!,” in   Peter   van Inwagen  and   Dean  Zimmerman 
(eds.),   Persons: Human and Divine  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ), pp. 216–234. 
 ——  2010a .  “An Essay on Eden,”  Faith and Philosophy  27 :  273–286 . 
 ——  2010b . “Multiple Location and Single Location Resurrection,” in   Georg 
 Gasser (ed.),   How Do We Survive Our Death? Personal Identity and Resurrection  
(Aldershot:  Ashgate Publishing ), pp.  87–101 . 

bibliography 241
 Hudson ,  Hud  and   Ryan   Wasserman .  2010 . “van Inwagen on Time Travel and 
Changing the Past,” in   Dean   Zimmerman (ed.),   Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, 
Volume 5 ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ), pp.  41–49 . 
 Johansson ,  Ingvar .  2004 . “On the Transitivity of the Parthood Relations,” in   H . 
 Hochberg and   K .  Mulligan  (eds.),   Relations and Predicates  ( Frankfurt :   Ontos 
Verlag ), pp.  161–181 . 
 Johnson,   William .  1924 .  Logic, Vol. III  ( Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press ). 
 Johnston ,  Mark .  2002 .  “Parts and Principles:  False Axioms in Mereology,”  
 Philosophical Topics  30( 1) :  129–166 . 
 King ,  Jeff rey .  2007 .   The Nature and Structure of Content  ( Oxford :  Oxford University 
Press ). 
 Kleinschmidt ,  Shieva .  2011 .  “Multilocation and Mereology,”    Philosophical Perspectives 
 25  (Metaphysics):  253–276 . 
 ——  2012 . “Many–One Identity and the Trinity,”in Jonathan L.  Kvanvig (ed.), 
 Oxford Studies in Philosophy of Religion  ,  Volume 4  ( Oxford :  Oxford University 
Press ), pp. 84–96. 
 —— Unpublished a.  “Mereology, Ontology, and Location,” dissertation manu-
script,  New York University . 
 —— Unpublished b. “Presentism, Perdurantism, and Weak Supplementation.” 
 —— Unpublished c. “Shaping up  Location : Against the Humean Argument for the 
Extrinsicality of Shape.” 
 Klemke, E. D. (ed.) 1968.  Essays on Frege , trans. R. H. Stoothoff  (Urbana: University 
of Illinois Press). 
 Koslicki ,  Kathrin .  2008 .  The Structure of Objects  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ). 
 Kripke ,  Saul .  1971 . “Identity and Necessity,” in   Milton  Munitz (ed.),   Identity and 
Individuation ( New York :  New York University Press ), pp.  135–164 . 
 ——  1980 .   Naming and Necessity  ( Cambridge, MA :   Harvard University Press ). 
Originally published in   Donald   Davidson  and   Gilbert  Harman (eds.),   Semantics 
of Natural Language ( Dordrecht :  Reidel, 1972), pp.  253–355 and  763–769 . 
 Leonard ,  Henry  and   Nelson   Goodman .  1940 .  “The Calculus of Individuals and Its 
Uses,”  Journal of Symbolic Logic  5 :  45–55 . 
 Leśniewski ,  Stanisław .  1916 . “Podstawy Ogólnej Teorii Mnogości I” [Foundations 
of a General Theory of Manifolds],   Prace Polskiego Ko̷la Naukowe w Moskwie, 
Sekcya matematyczno- przyrodnicza   2 ( Moscow ) . 
 ——  1927–1930 .  “O Podstawach Matematyki”  [On the Foundations of 
Mathematics],   Przeglad Filozofi czny   30 ( 1927 ): 164–206;   31 ( 1928 ):   261–291;   32 
( 1929 ):  60–101;   33 ( 1930 ):  75–105 and 142–170 
 ——  1992 .   Collected Works  , ed. and trans.   S. J .  Surma ,   J. T .  Srzednicki ,   D. I .  Barnett , 
and  V. F .  Rickey  ( Dordrecht :  Kluwer ). 

242 bibliography
 Lewis ,  David .  1970 .  “How to Defi ne the Theoretical Terms,”    Journal of Philosophy 
 67 :  427–446 . 
 ——  1983 .  “New Work for a Theory of Universals,”    Australasian Journal of Philosophy 
 61 :  343–377 . Reprinted in Lewis 1999, pp.  8–55 . 
 ——  1984 .  “Putnam’s Paradox,”    Australasian Journal of Philosophy   62 :   221–236 . 
Reprinted in Lewis 1999, pp.  56–77 . 
 ——  1986a .  “A Comment on Armstrong and Forrest,”    Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy  64 :  92–93 . 
 ——  1986b .  On the Plurality of Worlds  ( Oxford :  Basil Blackwell ). 
 ——  1991 .  Parts of Classes  ( Oxford :  Basil Blackwell ). 
 ——  1993a . “Many, but Almost One,” in   K.   Campbell ,   J.  Bacon , and   L.  Reinhardt 
(eds.),   Ontology, Causality and Mind: Essays on the Philosophy of D. M. Armstrong  
( Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press ), pp.  23–38 . 
 ——  1993b .  “Mathematics in Megethology,”  Philosophia Mathematica  3 :  3–23 . 
 ——  1997 .  “Naming the Colours,”  Australasian Journal of Philosophy  75 :  325–342 . 
 ——  1999 .   Papers in Metaphysics and Epistemology  ( Cambridge :   Cambridge 
University Press ). 
 ——  2002 .  “Tensing the Copula,”  Mind  111( 441) :  1–13 . 
 Linsky ,  Bernard  and   Edward  Zalta .  1996 .  “In Defense of the Contingently 
Non-Concrete,”  Philosophical Studies  84 :  283–294 . 
 Lowe ,  E. J  .  2001 . “Identity, Composition, and the Simplicity of the Self,” in   Kevin 
 Corcoran  (ed.),   Soul, Body, and Survival  ( Ithaca :  Cornell University Press ), pp. 
 139–158 . 
 MacBride ,  Fraser .  2007 .  “Neutral Relations Revisited,”  Dialectica  61 :  25–56 . 
 McDaniel ,  Kris .  2004 . “Modal Realism with Overlap,” in   Frank   Jackson  and   Graham 
 Priest (eds.),   Lewisian Themes (Oxford:  Oxford University Press), pp. 140–155 . 
 ——  2007 .  “Extended Simples,”  Philosophical Studies  133 :  131–141 . 
 ——  2008 .  “Against Composition as Identity,”  Analysis  68( 2) :  128–133 . 
 ——  2009 .  “Structure-Making,”  Australasian Journal of Philosophy  87 :  251–274 . 
 —— Unpublished. “A Defense of the Brutal View of Simples” (excerpt from an 
unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of Massachusetts at Amherst). 
 McKay ,  Tom .  2006 .  Plural Predication  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ). 
 Markosian ,  Ned .  1993 .  “How Fast Does Time Pass?,”    Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research  53 :  829–844. 
 ——  1998a .  “Brutal Composition,”  Philosophical Studies  92 :  211–249 . 
 ——  1998b .  “Simples,”  Australasian Journal of Philosophy  76 :  213–226 . 
 ——  2000 .  “What Are Physical Objects?,”    Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
 61 :  375–395 . 

bibliography 243
 ——  2008 . “Restricted Composition,” in   Ted  Sider ,  John   Hawthorne , and   Dean 
 Zimmerman  (eds.),   Contemporary Debates in Metaphysics  ( Oxford :   Blackwell 
Publishing ), pp.  341–364 . 
 Mellor ,  D. H .  2008 .  “Micro-Composition,”  Philosophy ,  83 :  65–80 . 
 Menzel ,  Christopher .  1993 .  “The Proper Treatment of Predication in Fine-Grained 
Intensional Logic,” in James E. Tomberlin (ed.),    Philosophical Perspectives,   Volume 
7 (Logic and Language) (Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview), pp.  61–87 . 
 Merricks ,  Trenton .  1999 .  “Composition as Identity, Mereological Essentialism, and 
Counterpart Theory,”   Australasian Journal of Philosophy  77 :  192–195 . 
 ——  2006 . “Goodbye Growing Block,” in   Dean  Zimmerman  (ed.),   Oxford Studies 
in Metaphysics, Volume 2  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ), pp.  103–110 . 
 Myro ,  George .  1997 . “Identity and Time,” in   Michael  Rea   (ed.),   Material Constitution  
( Lanham, MD :  Rowman and Littlefi eld ), pp. 148–172. 
 Newman ,  Andrew .  2002 .   The Correspondence Theory of Truth  ( Cambridge : 
 Cambridge University Press ). 
 Nolan ,  Daniel .  1997 .  “Impossible Worlds: A Modest Approach,”    Notre Dame Journal 
for Formal Logic  38( 4) :  535–572 . 
 ——  2002 .   Topics in the Philosophy of Possible Worlds  ( New York :  Routledge ). 
 ——  2006a .  “Stoic Gunk,”  Phronesis  51( 2) :  162–183 . 
 ——  2006b .  “Vagueness, Multiplicity and Parts,”  Noûs  40( 4) :  716–737 . 
 Olson ,  Eric .  1997 .  The Human Animal  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ). 
 Oppenheim ,  Paul and   Hilary   Putnam .  1958 . “Unity of Science as a Working 
Hypothesis,” in H. Feigl, M. Scriven, and G. Maxwell (eds.),   Concepts, Theories 
and the Mind–Body Problem, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Volume 
2 ( Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota Press ), pp.  3–36 . Reprinted in   Richard 
 Boyd ,   Philip  Gasper , and   J. D.   Trout  (eds.),   The Philosophy of Science  ( Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press, 1991 ), pp. 405–428. 
 Parsons ,  Josh .  2004 . “Distributional Properties,” in   F.  Jackson  and   G.  Priest  (eds.), 
 Lewisian Themes  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ), pp.  173–180 . 
 ——  2007 . “Theories of Location,” in   Dean   Zimmerman  (ed.),  Oxford Studies in 
Metaphysics, Volume 3 ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ), pp.  201–232 . 
 ——  2008 .  “Hudson on Location,”    Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
 76 :  427–435 . 
 Paul ,  Laurie .  2002 .  “Logical Parts,”  Noûs  36( 4) :  578–596 . 
 Pieri ,  Mario .  1908 . “La Geometria Elementare Instituita Sulle Nozione di ‘Puncto’ 
e ‘Sphera’,” in  Memorie di Matematica e di Fisica della Società Italiana delle Scienze  , 
Siere Terza 15, pp.  345–450 . English translation published in   E.  Marschisotto  and   J. 
 Smith ,   The Legacy of Mario Pieri in Geometry and Arithmetic  ( Dordrecht :  Birkhäuser/
Springer, 2007 ), pp.  157–269 . 

244 bibliography
 Putnam ,  Hilary .  1975 . “The Meaning of ‘Meaning’,” in K.  Gunderson (ed.), 
 Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Volume   7 ( Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press ), pp. 131–193. 
 ——  1978 . “Realism and Reason,” in his   Meaning and the Moral Sciences  
( London :  Routledge & Kegan Paul ), pp. 123–140 . 
 ——  1980 .  “Models and Reality,”  Journal of Symbolic Logic  45 :  421–444 . 
 Quine ,  W. V. O .  1960 .  Word and Object  ( Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ). 
 ——  1976 . “Whither Physical Objects,” in   R. S.   Cohen ,   P. K.   Feyerabend , and 
 M. W.   Wartofsky  (eds.),   Essays in Memory of Imre Lakatos  ( Dordrecht :  Reidel ), 
pp. 497–504. 
 Rescher ,  Nicholas .  1955 .  “Axioms for the Part Relation,”    Philosophical Studies   6 :  8–11 . 
 Robb ,  Alfred .  1914 .   The Absolute Relations of Time and Space  ( Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press ). 
 Russell ,  Bertrand .  1938 .   Principles of Mathematics  , 2nd edn. (1st edn. 
1903) ( New York :  Norton ). 
 ——  1956 .  Logic and Knowledge  ( London :  Routledge ). 
 Sanford ,  David .  1993 .  “The Problem of the Many, Many Composition Questions, 
and Naive Mereology,”  Noûs  27 :  219–228 . 
 Saucedo ,  Raul .  2010 . “Parthood and Location,” in   Dean  Zimmerman  (ed.),   Oxford 
Studies in Metaphysics  , Volume 6 ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ), pp. 225–284. 
 Schaff er ,  Jonathan .  2004 .  “Two Conceptions of Sparse Properties,”    Pacifi c Philosophical 
Quarterly  85 :  92–102 . 
 ——  2007 .  “Existence Monism,”    Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . < http://plato.
stanford.edu/entries/monism/>. 
 ——  2009 .  “Spacetime the One Substance,”  Philosophical Studies  145 :  131–148 . 
 ——  2010 .  “Monism:  The Priority of the Whole,”    The Philosophical Review 
 119( 1) :  31–76 . 
 Sider ,  Theodore .  1995 .  “Sparseness, Immanence, and Naturalness,”    Noûs 
 29( 3) :  360–377 . 
 ——  1996 .  “Naturalness and Arbitrariness,”  Philosophical Studies  81 :  283–301 . 
 ——  2001 .  Four-Dimensionalism  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ). 
 ——  2007 .  “Parthood,”  The Philosophical Review  116 :  51–91 . 
 Simons ,  Peter .  1981 . “Abstraction and Abstract Objects,” in   E .  Morscher ,   O . 
 Neumaier,  and   G .  Zecha  (eds.),   Philosophie als Wissesnchaft/Essays in Scientifi c 
Philosophy  ( Bad Reichenhall :  Comes ), pp.  355–370 . 
 ——  1987 .  Parts: A Study in Ontology  ( Oxford :  Clarendon Press ). 
 ——  1990 . “What is Abstraction and What is it Good For?,” in   A .  Irvine  (ed.), 
 Physicalism in Mathematics ( Dordrecht :  Kluwer ), pp.  17–40 . 

bibliography 245
 ——  2000 .  “Continuants and Occurrents,”    The Aristotelian Society ,   Supplementary 
Volume  74 :  78–101 . 
 ——  2004 .  “Extended Simples:  A  Third Way between Atoms and Gunk,”    The 
Monist  87 :  371–384 . 
 Smart ,  J. J. C .  1949 .  “The River of Time,”  Mind  58 :  483–494 . 
 ——  1963a . “The Space-Time World: An Excerpt from   Philosophy and Scientifi c 
Realism ,” reprinted in   Peter   van Inwagen  and   Dean  Zimmerman  (eds.), 
 Metaphysics: The Big Questions  ( Oxford :  Blackwell ,  1998 ), pp.  94–101 . 
 ——  1963b .  Philosophy and Scientifi c Realism  ( London :  Routledge & Kegan Paul ). 
 Smith ,  Donald .  2009 .  “Mereology without Weak Supplementation,”    Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy  87 :  505–511 . 
 Stanley ,  Jason and   Joshua   Armstrong .  2011 .  “Singular Thoughts and Singular 
Propositions,”  Philosophical Studies  154 :  205–222 . 
 Strawson ,  Peter .  1953 .  “Particular and General,”    Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 
 54 :  233–260 . 
 ——  1959 .  Individuals (London:  Methuen ). 
 ——  1974 .  Subject and Predicate in Logic and Grammar  ( London :  Methuen ). 
 Swoyer ,  Chris .  1998 .  “Complex Predicates and Logics for Properties and Relations,”  
 Journal of Philosophical Logic  27 :  295–325 . 
 Tarski ,  Alfred .  1929 . “Foundations of the Geometry of Solids,” a modifi ed transla-
tion of his 1929 “Les Fondemonts de la Géométrie des Corps,” in his   Logic, 
Semantics, Meta-Mathematics  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press, 1956 ). 
 Thomson ,  Judith Jarvis  .  1983 .  “Parthood and Identity Across Time,”    Journal of 
Philosophy  80 :  201–220 . 
 ——  1998 .  “The Statue and the Clay,”  Noûs   32 :  149–173 . 
 Tillman ,  Chris  and   Gregory   Fowler .  2012 .  “Propositions and Parthood:  The 
Universe and Antisymmetry,”  Australasian Journal of Philosophy  90 :  525–539 . 
 Tooley ,  Michael .  1997 .   Time, Tense and Causation  ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ). 
 Unger ,  Peter .  1979a . “I Do Not Exist,” in   G. F .  Macdonald  (ed.),  Perception and 
Identity: Essays Presented to A. J. Ayer with His Replies to Them  ( New York :  Macmillan ), 
pp.  235–251 . 
 ——  1979b .  “There Are No Ordinary Things,”  Synthese  41 :  117–154 . 
 Uzquiano ,  Gabriel .  2004 .  “The Supreme Court and the Supreme Court 
Justices: A Metaphysical Puzzle,”  Noûs  38( 1) :  135–153 . 
 ——  2006 .  “The Price of Universality,”  Philosophical Studies  129 :  137–169 . 
 ——  2011 .  “Plural Quantifi cation and Modality,”    Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 
 111( 2) , part 2:  219–250 . 
 Van Cleve ,  James .  1986 . “Mereological Essentialism, Mereological Conjunctivism, 
and Identity Through Time,” in   P. A .  French ,   T. E .  Uehling , Jr., and   H. K .  Wettstein 

246 bibliography
(eds.),   Midwest Studies in Philosophy, Volume XI  ( Minneapolis :   University of 
Minnesota Press ), pp.  141–156 . 
 ——  2008 . “The Moon and Sixpence: A Defense of Mereological Universalism,” in 
 Ted  Sider ,  John   Hawthorne , and  Dean   Zimmerman  (eds.),   Contemporary Debates 
in Metaphysics  ( Oxford :  Blackwell Publishing ), pp.  321–340 . 
 van Inwagen ,  Peter .  1981 .  “The Doctrine of Arbitrary Undetached Parts,”    Pacifi c 
Philosophical Quarterly  62 :  123–137 . 
 ——  1987 .  “When Are Objects Parts?,”    Philosophical Perspectives   1 (Metaphysics):  21–47 . 
 ——  1990a .  “Four-Dimensional Objects,”  Noûs  24 :  245–255 . 
 ——  1990b .  Material Beings  ( Ithaca :  Cornell University Press ). 
 ——  1993 .  “Naïve Mereology, Admissible Valuations and Other Matters,”    Noûs 
 27( 2) :  229–234 . 
 ——  1994 .  “Composition as Identity,”  Philosophical Perspectives  8 :  207–220 . 
 ——  2002 .  “The Number of Things,”    Philosophical Issues  ( Noûs  Supplement)  12 
(“Realism and Relativism”):  176–196 . 
 ——  2006a .  “Can Mereological Sums Change Their Parts?”    Journal of Philosophy 
 103( 12) :  614–630 . 
 ——  2006b . “Properties,” in   Thomas   Crisp ,   Matthew  Davidson , and   David 
Vander  Laan  (eds.),   Knowledge and Reality:  Essays in Honor of Alvin Plantinga  
( Dordrecht :  Springer ), pp. 15–34. 
 ——  2010 . “Changing the Past,” in   Dean  Zimmerman  (ed.),   Oxford Studies in 
Metaphysics, Volume 5 ( Oxford :  Oxford University Press ),pp.  3–28 . 
 Varzi ,  Achille .  2006 .  “A Note on the Transitivity of Parthood,”    Applied Ontology 
 1( 2) :  141–146 . 
 ——  2008 .  “The Extensionality of Parthood and Composition,”    The Philosophical 
Quarterly  58 :  108–133 . 
 ——  2009 .  “Universalism Entails Extensionalism,”  Analysis  69 :  599–604 . 
 Wallace ,  Megan . Unpublished.  “Composition as Identity.” 
 Weatherson ,  Brian .  2003 .  “Many Many Problems,”    Philosophical Quarterly   53 :  481–501 . 
 Weisstein ,  Eric W  . (n.d.)  “Menger Sponge,”    MathWorld—A Wolfram Web Resource . 
< http://mathworld.wolfram.com/MengerSponge.html>. 
 Wetzel ,  Linda .  2009 .   Types and Tokens: On Abstract Objects  ( Cambridge, MA :  MIT 
Press ). 
 Whitehead ,  Alfred .  1920 .   The Concept of Nature  ( Cambridge :  Cambridge University 
Press ). 
 Wiggins ,  David .  1980 .   Sameness and Substance  ( Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University 
Press ). 
 Williams ,  J. R.  G  .  2007 .  “Eligibility and Inscrutability,”    Philosophical Review 
 116( 3) :  361–399 . 

bibliography 247
 ——  2008 .  “Working Parts: Reply to Mellor,”  Philosophy  83 :  81–106 . 
 Williams ,  J. R. G  . and   Elizabeth   Barnes .  2009 .  “Vague Parts and Vague Identity,”  
 Pacifi c Philosophical Quarterly  90( 2) : 176–187 . 
 Williamson ,  Tim .  1985 .  “Converse Relations,”    The Philosophical Review   94 :  249–262 . 
 ——  2002 . “Necessary Existents,” in   A .  O’Hear (ed.),   Logic, Thought, and Language  
( Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press ), pp.  233–251 . 
 Zalta ,  Edward .  1988 .   Intensional Logic and the Metaphysics of Intensionality  
( Cambridge :  MIT Press ). 
 Zemach ,  Eddy M .  1970 .  “Four Ontologies,”  The Journal of Philosophy  67 :  231–247 . 
 Zimmerman ,  Dean .  1999 .  “The Compatibility of Materialism and Survival,”    Faith 
and Philosophy  16 :  194–212 . 


 Index  
 abstraction:   65 n 
 acquaintance / de re thought:  163 ,  165–6 , 
 166 n,  167 n,  199 ,  199 n,  206–8 
 adverbialism:   15  
 aether:   117 ,  129 
 algebra, Boolean:  212 
 Animalism:   140–1 ,  142 ,  148 
 Armstrong, David:  33 n,  156 n,  182 n,  188 n 
 Armstrong, Joshua:  207 n 
 Arntzenius, Frank:  93 n 
 array:   61 n 
 assertibles / predicables:  185 
 atomism:   see  decomposition 
 atomless gunk:  see  decomposition: gunk 
 Axiom of Choice:  128–31 
 Balashov, Yuri:   174 n 
 ball:   93  
 Banach-Tarski Theorem:   119 ,  130 
 Barcan Formula 
 Converse Barcan Formula 
(CBF):   37–8 ,  47–8 
 Qualifi ed Converse Barcan Formula 
(QCBF):  48–9 
 Barnes, Elizabeth:  42 n 
 Baxter, Donald:  14 n,  17 n,  33 n,  105 
 Bentham, Jeremy:  69 
 Biological Criterion of Human 
Personhood:   142 ,  148 
 Bourne, Craig:  136 n 
 Braddon-Mitchell, David:  136 n 
 Brandom, Robert:  214 n 
 Brick / Wall case:  179–80 ,  195  
 Broad, C. D.:  135 n 
 bruteness 
 Brutal Existence:  78–81 ,  84 ,  88 ,  89 ,  90  
 Brutal Location:  75 ,  84 ,  88  
 Moderately Brutal Existence:  78 , 
 88 ,  89 ,  90  
 Moderately Brutal 
Location:   75–6 ,  88 ,  89 
 bundle theory:  206 n 
 Bynoe, William:  157 ,  172 n 
 Calculus of Individuals:  209 ,  211 n 
 Cameron, Ross. XXII n,  87 ,  155 n 
 Capellen, Herman:  156 n 
 Caplan, Ben:  156 n,  208 
 Captain Quag 
 Intrepidness of:  138–9 
 Casati, Roberto:  xxii ,  xvn ,  xxiii ,  xxiv , 
 xxv–xxviii ,  xxxii ,  73 ,  92 n,  182 
 Classical Mereology:  see  Mereology, Classical 
 colocation:   xxxi ,  xxxii ,  xxxiii ,  32 ,  74  
 composition:   xvii ,  118 ,  161 ,  164 ,  166 ,  167 n, 
 169 ,  170 ,  171 ,  172 ,  176–80 ,  187 ,  188–9 , 
 189 n,  194–5 ,  197 ,  205 
 as identity:  xxii ,  14 ,  18  
 Brutal Composition:  72 ,  85 ,  88 ,  89 ,  90 
 compositional nihilism:  164  
 extensionality:   see  composition: uniqueness 
of composition 
 four-place version:  176–9 ,  187 , 
 189–90 ,  189 n 
 the General Composition Question:  84 
 innocence of:  xxii–xxiii 
 the Special Composition Question:  70 , 
 71 ,  78 ,  82 ,  84 ,  85  
 standard defi nition of:   158 n,  161  
 Uniqueness of Composition:  xx–xxi , 
 xxiii ,  26–7 ,  33 ,  34 ,  35 ,  46 ,  158 ,  158 n,  165 , 
 189 n,  212  
 Unrestricted Composition:  xxi–xxii , 
 xxiii ,  27 ,  29 ,  32 ,  34 ,  36 ,  44 ,  46 ,  50 ,  51 , 
 70–1 ,  84 ,  88 ,  89 ,  90 ,  107–8 ,  115 ,  165 , 
 168 ,  168 n,  212  
 composition as identity:  see  composition 
 compositional monism / compositional 
pluralism:  157 ,  168 ,  168 n 
 connectant:   182–3 ,  185–6 ,  189–192 ,  191 n, 
 192 n,  194 ,  194 n,  198 
 connected regions:  121–123 ,  130 
 connectives:   157 ,  159–60 ,  181–3 ,  185–6 , 
 194 ,  203 
 semantic contents of:  157 ,  181–3 ,  185–6 
 slots in semantic contents of:  157 ,  181–3 , 
 185–6 ,  194 
 constituency (contrasted with parthood):  
156 ,  163–4 ,  181 ,  183 n,  188 ,  188 n
 transitivity of:  208 
 Continuant:   60 n 
 convex regions:  124–5 

250 index
 Copp, David:  206 n,  208 
 Cotnoir, Aaron:   XVI n,  169 n 
 count noun:  234  
 Crimmins, Mark:  156 n,  182 n,  189 , 
 191 n,  192 n 
 criterion of application:  215 n 
 criterion of identity:  215 n 
 curmudgeon, mereological:  122–3 ,  127 
 decomposition 
 Greek atomism:  125 
 gunk:   76 
 denotation, partial:  222 n 
 dependence:   see  grounding 
 Dipert, Randall:  105  
 disconnected persons:  122 
 disjointness:   xvii ,  3 ,  168 ,  170 , 170 n,  172 n, 
 179–80 ,  196–7 ,  211 
 Doctrine of Arbitrary Undetached Parts 
(DAUP), The:   108 
 Donnelly, Maureen:  168 n,  170 n 
 Dorr, Cian:  71 ,  164  
 Dreben, Burton:  163 
 Dretske, Fred:  67  
 Dummett, Michael:  215 n 
 Eagle, Antony:   168 n 
 Ebrle, Rolf:  3 ,  4 ,  5 ,  6 
 Effi  ngham, Nikk:  xix ,  xxixn ,  98 ,  100 ,  112 n, 
 114–15 ,  268 n,  179 n 
 Endurantism:   see  persistence 
 essence:   166–7 ,  199 ,  206 n 
 Eternalism:   99–100 ,  116 ,  135–6 
 Euclidean geometry:  129 
 Evans, Gareth:  211 ,  219 ,  220 ,  221 ,  222 ,  223 , 
 224 ,  225 ,  226 ,  229 ,  233 ,  234 ,  235  
 exact location / exact occupation:  xxiv , 
 xxv ,  xxvi ,  xxviii ,  173–9 ,  182 n,  183 , 
 185–6 ,  188 ,  190 ,  192–4 ,  202 n,  205 ,  206 n
 Conditional Refl exivity:  xxiv 
 Exactness:  xxvi–xxvii 
 Functionality:  xxiv ,  xxvi ,  xxviii 
 fundamentality of:  xxiv ,  183 n 
 vs.  located at :  xxvii–xxviii 
 existence 
 A Question About Existence:  78 
 contingency of:  45–6 ,  48 ,  49  
 Existence Monism:  29 
 necessity of:  37 ,  47 
 expletive expression:  234 n 
 extended simples:  xxx ,  31 ,  63–5 ,  67 ,  68 , 
 105 ,  125  
 facts / states of aff airs:   156 n,  157 ,  159 ,  163 , 
 167 n,  172 n,  182 n. 43,  188 ,  188 n,  203 
 as instantiations of universals:  79 
 as true propositions:  79 
 feature-placing expression:  233 n 
 Field, Hartry:  222 n 
 Fine, Kit:  xxixn ,  33 n,  120 ,  166 n,  191 n,  210 n 
 fi ne-grainied measure:   see  infi nitesimals 
 fi ssion/fusion cases:   16  
 Floyd, Juliet:  163 
 Forbes, Greame A.:  137 n 
 formal components:  206 n 
 Forrest, Peter:  xx ,  93 ,  136 n 
 Fowler, Gregory:  156 n 
 Frege, Gottlob:  65 ,  156–9 ,  162–5 ,  164 n, 
 166 n,  167 n,  172 n,  181–6 ,  198–200 , 
 199 n,  203 ,  215 n
 Frege’s Razor:  123  
 fusion:   see  composition 
 Gallois, André:  16 n,  22 n,  112 n 
 Gavagai:   220 ,  221 
 Geach, Peter:  67  
 Gilmore, Cody:  xviii ,  xix ,  xxviiin ,  15 n,  157 , 
 174 n,  179 n,  182 n 
 globule:   124–5 ,  131 
 Goddu, G.C.:  137 n 
 Goodman, Nelson:  xvn ,  3 ,  4–6 ,  8 ,  209 , 
 211 n,  212  
 Grossmann, Reinhardt:  156 n,  157 ,  182 n, 
 188 n,  189 n 
 grounding:  120–3 
 Growing Block Theory:  135–6 
 Harte, Verity:   210 n 
 Haslanger, Sally:  15 n 
 Hawthorne, John:  156 n,  218 n 
 Hazen, Allen:   105  
 Heathwood, Chris:  136 n 
 Heck, Richard:  181 n 
 holes:   182–3 ,  192 ,  204 n 
 Horwich, Paul:  182 n 
 Hovda, Paul:  3 n,  35 n,  36 n,  43 n 
 Hudson, Hud:  xvii–xviii ,  xxiii ,  xxvii ,  xxix , 
 56 ,  90 ,  102–4 ,  121 ,  137 n,  140 n,  141 n, 
 142 n,  147 n,  150 n,  151 n,  174 n 
 Human Personhood:  140–3 
 hyperball:  93  
 hypertime 
 Hypothesis of:  136–40 
 Theories of:  143–5 
 see also  persistence, across hypertime 

index 251
 identity:  xxiii ,  160 ,  170–2 ,  173 n,  183 n,  195–7 
 axioms:  36 
 Composition as Identity:  see  composition 
 determinacy of:  34 n,  54 ,  55  
 essentiality of:  48–50 
 Indiscernibility of Identicals:  33 ,  36 ,  39 , 
 40 n,  41 ,  42 ,  46 ,  49 ,  55  
 necessity of:  33–5 ,  38–43 ,  48 ,  50 ,  53  
 numerical identity:  14  
 partial:   33–4 ,  53  
 refl exivity of:   36 ,  40 n,  49, 251  
 region-relative identity:  xvi ,  14 , 
 strong composition as 
identity:  14–17 ,  19–20 
 simplicity / unanalyzability 
of:  171 ,  196–197 
 temporary identity:  14 ,  22 ,  27 
 topic-neutralality of:  172 ,  183 n 
 Immanent Causation:  148–9 
 in virtue of  70 ,  76 ,  84 ,  86 ,  88 
 entailment:   80  
 see also  grounding 
 inferential role:  214 n 
 infi nitesimals:   119–20 
 invariant:   65 n 
 Johansson, Ingvar:  xix 
 Johnson, William:   60  
 Johnston, Mark:  210 n 
 join:   118 
 Jourdain, Philip:  162 
 Kelly-Morse class theory:  109 n 
 King, Jeff rey:   156 n,  159 ,  165 n,  181–5 ,  182 n 
 Kleinschmidt, Shieva:  xviii ,  xix ,  xx ,  xxiin , 
 xxviin ,  xxixn ,  xxxin ,  157 n 
 Koslicki, Kathrin:  17 n,  23 n,  168 n,  182 n, 
 206 n,  210 n 
 Kripke, Saul:  213 n 
 Lebesque measure:  118  
 Leibniz’s Law:  22 ,  25 
 Leonard, Henry:  xvn ,  209 ,  211 n,  212 
 Le ś niewski, Stanislaw:  xvn,  211 n 
 Lewis, David:  xxi–xxii ,  14 n,  17 n,  27 ,  30 ,  71 , 
 91 ,  98 n,  101–2 ,  104–5 ,  109 ,  116 ,  123 , 
 157 ,  168 n,  209 n,  210–12 ,  216 n,  217–19 , 
 220 n,  225–9 ,  230 n,  231–5 . 
 Linsky, Bernard:  166 n 
 location 
 A Question About Spatial Locations:  75 
 indeterminate spatial location:  87–8 
 see also  multilocation 
 locus:   63 
 Lowe, E. J.:   168 n 
 MacBride, Fraser:  191 n 
 Maier, John:  90 
 Many-But-Almost-One Doctrine:  228 
 ManyBlock Theory:   xxix ,  153–5 
 Markosian, Ned:  xvi ,  xxxi–xxxii ,  70 ,  71 ,  72 , 
 75 ,  76 ,  87 ,  91 ,  136 n 
 mass term:  233 ,  234  
 May, Robert:  181 n 
 McDaniel, Kris:  xv ,  xvi ,  xxviiin ,  xxxi , 
 xxxiii ,  15 n,  18 n,  30 n,  103 n,  156 n,  157 , 
 168 n,  174 n,  183 n 
 McKay, Thomas:  182 n 
 meaning, indeterminacy of:  211 ,  217 n,  225 , 
 227 ,  228 ,  235  
 Mellor, David:  xxxin ,  xxxii ,  73 ,  106 
 Menger-Sierpinski sponge:  130 n 
 Menzel, Christopher:  172 n,  182 n 
 Mereology 
 Classical:   xv–xxiii ,  3 ,  27 ,  33 ,  35–6 ,  38–47 , 
 52 ,  118 ,  209 ,  211 ,  212  
 Minimal:   xix–xxi 
 Modal Classical:  35–6 ,  38–40 , 
 42–7 ,  50 ,  52 
 standard:   209–12 ,  216 ,  227 ,  338 ,  235  
 Merricks, Trenton:   19 n,  136 n 
 Minimalism:   140–1 ,  142 ,  147 ,  154–5 
 modal realism with overlap:  174 n 
 model-theoretic argument:  217 n 
 multilocation:   xxiv–xxv ,  xxviii ,  xxx–xxxi , 
 173–4 ,  192 
 distinguished from spatiotemporal 
coincidence:   183 n 
 in hypertime:  153–5 
 problems of:  149–50 
 topic-neutrality of:  183 n 
 Myro, George:  16 n,  17 n 
 natural kind terms:  213 n 
 naturalness:   xxiii ,  157 n,  185  
 Necessitation, Rule of:  36 ,  40 ,  48 
 Newman, Andrew:   182 n 
 Nihilism:   71 ,  77 ,  88 ,  89 ,  90 
 The Nihilistic Theory of 
Parthood:   77 ,  88 ,  90 
 Nolan, Daniel:  xvi ,  xxxii ,  106 n,  109 n, 
 111 n,  112 n 

252 index
 occupation:   62 n
 occupation pairs:  178 
 occurrent:   xxix ,  60 n 
 Olson, Eric:  141 n 
 open sentences:  185 
 Oppenheim, Paul:  xxxin ,  xxxii ,  73 ,  105–6 
 overlap:   xvii ,  3–5 ,  6 ,  158 n,  161 ,  176 ,  211 ,  212 , 
 221–5 ,  228 ,  231–5 
 extensionality of:  39 ,  46 ,  50 
 primitive:  xxi ,  4 
 pair-parthood:  178 
 parsimony:  98–9 ,  111  
 Parsons, Josh:  xvin ,  xxiii ,  xxv–xxviii ,  95 , 
 105 ,  108 n,  151 n 
 part-whole primitivism:  92 ,  106 ,  107 ,  110  
 parthood:  
 A Question About Parthood:  72–3 ,  85  
 adicity of:  xiv ,  160–2 ,  165 ,  167–8 ,  170 , 
 175 ,  203 
 anti-symmetry of:  XVI ,  9 ,  25 ,  26 n,  28 ,  36 , 
 41 ,  169 n 
 as fundamental/natural:  157 ,  165 , 
 170–1 ,  176 
 Brutal Parthood:  77 ,  88 ,  89 
 essentiality of:  43 ,  47 ,  53 
 for material objects:  156 n,  157 ,  171 
 immediate proper parthood:  165 n, 
 166 ,  169 
 improper parthood:  22 
 necessity of:  39 ,  43 ,  46 
 part:   xv ,  209 ,  211 ,  212 ,  213 n,  215 ,  216 ,  220 , 
 221 ,  222 ,  223 ,  228 n,  229 ,  231 ,  232 ,  233 n 
 primitive:   xv–xvi ,  xxi ,  3 
 refl exivity of:   6 
 relative:  xvii–xviii ,  19–20 ,  173–80 
 Subregion Theory of Parthood:  73–5 ,  84 , 
 86 ,  89 ,  90  
 transitivity of:  6 ,  10 ,  11 ,  212 
 VIPA Theory of Parthood:  77 ,  88  
 path:   174 
 Paul, Laurie:  90 ,  206 n 
 persistence 
 across hypertime:  xxix ,  145–55 
 across time:  xxviii–xxix ,  140–3 ,  150–2 
 Four-Dimensionalism/
Perdurantism:  xxviii–xxix ,  92 ,  91 ,  92 , 
 99 ,  100 ,  116 ,  141 ,  142 ,  147 ,  154–5 ,  174 , 
 209 ,  216 n 
 H-Endurantism:  145 ,  148–50 ,  154 
 H-Perdurantism:  145 ,  146–8 ,  154 
 H-Regionalism:   146 ,  151–3 
 H-Stage-Theory:   146 ,  150–1 
 persistence conditions:  209 n,  210 ,  216 , 
 217 ,  220 n,  227 
 Stage Theory:   xxix ,  141  
 temporal parts:  97 ,  101 ,  209 n 
 Three-Dimensionalism/
Endurantism:   xxviii–xxix ,  15 ,  20 ,  28 , 
 91–2 , 100-2,  104–5 ,  141 ,  142 ,  148 ,  174 , 
 179 n,  192 ,  209 n,  216 n 
 personal identity 
 Substance Dualism:  122 
 Pieri, Mario:  93  
 plural quantifi cation:   53 n,  54 
 points:   see  regions 
 predicates:   156–7 ,  159–62 ,  168 ,  174 ,  181–3 , 
 185 ,  203 ,  205 
 Presentism:   xx ,  135–6 
 Priority Monism:  79 
 proper parthood:  xv ,  22–3 ,  74–5 ,  156 n,  164 , 
 168 ,  179–80 ,  193 ,  197 ,  206–7 
 and quasi-supplementation:  168 ,  170–3 , 
 176 ,  178 ,  195 ,  203 ,  208 
 asymmetry of:  xviii–xix ,  xxxii ,  xxxiii ,  8 , 
 9 ,  11 ,  12 ,  25–6 ,  28 
 competing defi nitions of:   xvin ,  6–7 ,  8 
 for propositions and their constitu-
ents:   156 n,  157 ,  164 ,  171  
 irrefl exivity of:   xviii–xix ,  24–8 ,  175  
 primitive:  xxi ,  3 ,  6 
 topic-neutrality of:  156 n,  183 n 
 transitivity of:  xviii–xix ,  23–6 ,  28 , 
 156–9 ,  162–7 ,  165 n,  169–76 ,  178 ,  190 , 
 197–203 ,  206–8 
 and weak supplementation:  157 ,  168–70 
 properties:   see  universals / properties / 
relations 
 Propositional Modal Logic:  33 ,  36 ,  47  
 propositions 
 Fregean:   158 ,  172 n,  181–2 
 Russellian:   xviii ,  156–208 
 as saturated assertibles:  186 
 as semantic contents of sentences:  160  
 as zero-place relations:  186 
 Psychological Criterion of Human 
Personhood:   142 ,  147 ,  154–5 
 Putnam, Hilary:  xxxin ,  xxxii ,  73 ,  105–6 , 
 213 n,  217 n 
 quantifi ers:   159 ,  203 
 quasi-cause:   120 

index 253
 Quine, William Van Orman:   105 ,  110 ,  211 , 
 220 ,  220 n,  221 ,  222 ,  225 ,  227 ,  229 ,  233 , 
 234 ,  235  
 Rabinoff , Dan:  208 
 Ramsey sentence ,  124 ,  234 n 
 Reeder, Patrick:  156 n 
 reference 
 apparatus of divided:  221 
 causal theory of:  217 n 
 constraints on:  210 ,  211 ,  217 ,  226 ,  232 n 
 descriptive theory of:  213 n,  217 n 
 eligibility for:  211 ,  218 ,  219 ,  225–9 , 231-2, 
 234 n,  235  
 inscrutability of:  220 
 Regionalism (about parthood):  82–8 ,  89 
 Regionalism (about persistence):  xxix ,  141 , 
 146 ,  151–3 
 regions 
 Arbitrary Partition:  xxvi 
 local regions:  118  
 maximal points:  119  
 points:  92–4 ,  96 ,  101–5 ,  114 ,  119  
 pythagoreanism about:  110  
 total ordering of:  127 
 Rescher, Nicholas:  xixn ,  23 n 
 Robb, Alfred:   93 n 
 Robson, Jon:  xix ,  xxixn ,  168 n,  179 n 
 Russell, Bertrand:  156 ,  164 n,  182–3 , 
 188 n,  189 n 
 satisfaction, partial:  222 
 saturation:   181–2 ,  185 ,  192 ,  204–5 
 Saucedo, Raul:  xxx–xxxi ,  xxxiii ,  73 
 Schaff er, Jonathan:   29 n,  79 ,  90 ,  98 n,  99 , 
 100 ,  218 n 
 senses:   158 ,  164–5 ,  172 n,  181–3 ,  186 
 separation:   121 
 sets / ordered sequences:  156 n,  161 ,  164 , 
 167 n,  169–72 ,  177 ,  182 ,  187 ,  189 n, 
 Sider, Theodore:   14 n,  71 ,  90 ,  91 ,  98 n, 
 99–100 ,  102 ,  112–15 ,  141 n,  142 n,  151 n, 
 157 ,  168 n,  209 n,  216 n,  218 n 
 Simons, Peter:  xvn ,  xviiin ,  xix ,  xxviii–xxix , 
 3 ,  4 ,  5 n,  6–9 ,  23 n,  168 ,  209 
 simplicity (mereological):  71 ,  75–6 ,  171 ,  177 , 
 179–80 ,  193–7 ,  205–6 ,  208 
 slots / argument positions 
 analogized with holes in material 
objects:   182–3 
 distinguished from parts:  183  
 in properties and relations:  157 , 
 181–208 
 in the semantic contents of 
connectives:   157 ,  181–208 
 Slot Constancy vs. Slot Variance:  189 , 
 192 ,  194 ,  204 n,  208 
 Smart, J.C.C.:  136 n 
 Smith, Donald:  168 n,  179 n 
 space 
 orthodoxy about:  129 
 space-time:   15 ,  173–81 ,  183 n,  192–3 , 
 198–203 ,  206 n
 Minkowski space-time:  93–4 ,  124 
 spanners:   xxviii ,  103–5 ,  116 
 Spatial Approach to Mereology, The:  84–6 , 
 88 ,  89 ,  90 
 Spencer, Joshua:  84 ,  90 
 Stanley, Jason:  207 n 
 Strawson, P. F.:  213–14 ,  225 ,  226 n,  233 n 
 Strong Supplementation:  xx–xxi ,  5 ,  11  
 Substantivalism:   99–100 
 substitution:   214 n 
 supersponge:   xx ,  117 ,  130–1 
 Supersubstantivalism:   xxxii ,  76 ,  91 ,  95 ,  98–9 , 
 100 ,  108 n,  114–16 
 Swoyer, Chris:   182 n 
 synonymy, stimulus:  220 ,  221 ,  222 ,  223 
 Tarski, Alfred:  92 ,  93 ,  97 ,  108 
 temporal parts:  see  persistence 
 temporary intrinsics:  xvii 
 term-forming operators:  159 ,  203 
 Thomson, Judith Jarvis:  26 n,  33 n,  43 n, 
 169–70 ,  209 n,  216 n 
 Tillman, Chris:  156 n,  208 
 time 
 parthood relativized to:  167 ,  168 n, 
 169 n 
 see also  hypertime 
 time travel:  179 
 Tooley, Michael:  135 n 
 Twin Earth 
 squarks:   128 
 twin gold:  127–8 
 type theory:  172  
 Unger, Peter:  71  
 Universal Summation (unrestricted 
composition for regions):  123  
 Universalism / Unrestricted 
Composition:   see  composition 

254 index
 universals / properties / relations:  xxix ,  15 , 
 17 ,  22 ,  25 ,  79 ,  95 ,  171 ,  182 ,  186 ,  188 ,  211 , 
 217 ,  218 ,  219 ,  220 n,  225 ,  227 ,  228 ,  229 , 
 230 ,  231 n,  233 ,  234 ,  235 
 analyzable vs. unanalyzable:  171 
 as parts or constituents of material 
objects:   206 n 
 as semantic contents of predicates:  182 
 as unsaturated assertibles:  186 
 fundamental:   95 
 instantiations of universals:  79 
 natural/non-natural:   211 ,  217 ,  218 ,  219 , 
 220 n,  225 ,  227 ,  228 ,  229 ,  230 ,  231 n,  233 , 
 234 ,  235  
 permanent properties:  15  
 realism about:  182 
 region-encoding:   17 ,  22 ,  25 
 region-free:  17 ,  22 ,  25  
 slots in  ( see  slots ) 
 structural:   188  
 transported relations:  15  
 Uzquiano, Gabriel:  xxii–xxiii ,  53 n,  54 n,  90  
 vagueness:   91–92 ,  111–16 
 argument from:  112–15 
 metaphysical:   111–12 
 Van Cleve, James:  71  
 van Inwagen, Peter:  18 n,  70 ,  71 ,  73 ,  84 ,  108 , 
 136 n,  137 n,  141 n,  164 ,  168 n,  185 ,  210 n 
 van Inwagen’s Proposed Answer:  71 ,  78 , 
 82 ,  88 ,  90 
 variables:   159 ,  203 
 Varzi, Achille:   xvn ,  xix ,  xxi ,  xxiii–xxviii , 
 xxxii ,  23 n,  73 n,  92 n,  165 n,  168 n,  182 
 Wallace, Megan:  105  
 Wasserman, Ryan:  90 ,  137 n 
 Weak Supplementation:  xix–xx ,  107–8 ,  121 , 
 126 ,  157 ,  168–70 
 Weatherson, Brian:  42 n 
 Wetzel, Linda:  182 n 
 Whitehead, Alfred:   63 n,  64  
 Wiggins, David:  102 
 Williams, J. R. G.:  42 n,  73 ,  106 ,  108 n,  218 n 
 Williamson, Timothy:   166 n,  182 n,  191 n, 
 193 n,  207 n 
 Wilsch, Tobias:   90 
 Wittgenstein, Ludwig:  163 
 Zalta, Edward:  166 n,  182 n 
 Zane Argument, The:   80–1 ,  89 ,  90 
 Zermelo-Fraenkel Set Theory:  109 n 
 Zimmerman, Dean:  148 n 
 Zorn’s Lemma:  128–9 

