
Mereology

Also available from Bloomsbury
The Bloomsbury Companion to Metaphysics, edited by Neil A. Manson  
and Robert W. Barnard
A Critical Introduction to Properties, Sophie R. Allen
Metaphysics, Jonathan Tallant
Ontology and Metaontology: A Contemporary Guide, Francesco Berto  
and Matteo Plebani

Mereology
A Philosophical Introduction
Giorgio Lando
LONDON • OXFORD • NEW YORK • NEW DELHI • SYDNEY
Bloomsbury Academic
An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc

Bloomsbury Academic
An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
50 Bedford Square 
London 
WC1B 3DP 
UK
1385 Broadway 
New York 
NY 10018 
USA
www.bloomsbury.com
BLOOMSBURY and the Diana logo are trademarks of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
First published 2017
© Giorgio Lando, 2017
Giorgio Lando has asserted his right under the Copyright, Designs and  
Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as the Author of this work.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in  
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,  
recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, without prior  
permission in writing from the publishers.
No responsibility for loss caused to any individual or organization acting on  
or refraining from action as a result of the material in this publication  
can be accepted by Bloomsbury or the author.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
	
	
	
ISBN:  HB: 978-1-4725-8366-6
	 	
ePDF: 978-1-4725-8368-0
	
	
	
 ePub: 978-1-4725-8367-3
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Lando, Giorgio, author.
Title: Mereology : a philosophical introduction / Giorgio Lando.
Description: New York : Bloomsbury Academic, 2017. | Includes bibliographical
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016058157| ISBN 9781472583666 (hb) | ISBN 9781472583680 (epdf)
Subjects:  LCSH: Whole and parts (Philosophy)
Classification: LCC BD396 .L36 2017 | DDC 111/.82–dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016058157
Typeset by Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
To find out more about our authors and books visit www.bloomsbury.com.  
Here you will find extracts, author interviews, details of forthcoming  
events and the option to sign up for our newsletters.

Contents
Acknowledgments	
ix
Introduction: What is Mereology?	
1
0.1	 A general, yet narrow, theory of parthood and composition	
1
0.2	 Mereology as a discipline, mereology as a theory, mereology 
as a philosophical thesis	
3
0.3	 Mereological monism and David Lewis: The reasons for this book	
5
0.4	 Mereology is not logic	
8
0.5	 Mereology is imperfectly understood, problematic, and dubious	
8
0.6	 Mereology and abstract entities	
9
0.7	 Mereological monism versus composition as identity	
11
0.8	 The plan of the book	
12
Part One	
The Methodology of Mereological Monism
Abstract	
15
1	
Natural Language, Literal Parthood, and Philosophical Mereology	
17
1.1	 Mereology and the lexical meaning of “part”	
17
1.2	 “Part” and cognate terms: Three distinctions	
18
1.3	 Literal parthood versus metaphorical parthood	
23
1.4	 Spatial parthood, paradigmatic parthood	
25
1.5	 Formal features and intuitive constraints	
27
1.6	 Mereology is about nonselective parthood	
29
2	
Mereological Monism: A Desirable Philosophical Thesis	
31
2.1	 How to maximize the discriminating power	
31
2.2	 Mereological monism as a refutation tool: An example	
33
2.3	 Classical Extensional Mereology: From above and from below	
35
3	
Is Mereology Formal?	
39
3.1	 Three senses of formality	
39
3.2	 How to show that mereology is formal	
42
3.3	 Formality, existence, identity	
44

Contents
vi
4	
Transitivity and Other Features	
47
4.1	 Is parthood transitive? Yes	
47
4.2	 Monism, pluralism, and Ad Hocness	
50
4.3	 Reflexivity	
52
4.4	 Antisymmetry	
55
4.5	 Overlap, Fusion	
59
Part Two  Extensionalism
Abstract	
65
5	
Hyperextensionality and Nominalism about Structure	
67
5.1	 Extensionalism at the origins of mereology	
67
5.2	 Mereological monism and nominalism	
69
5.3	 Goodman on hyperextensionality	
71
5.4	 Hyperextensionality, sets, wholes	
72
5.5	 Goodman’s approach, atomism, gunk	
73
5.6	 Is Goodman’s approach circular?	
77
5.7	 Fine’s principles of obliteration	
78
6	
What Extensionalism Says	
85
6.1	 Uniqueness of Composition and Extensionalism	
85
6.2	 Why Extensionalism is thus formulated	
88
6.3	 Extensionalism, atoms, and verbal tricks	
90
7	
Extensionalism and Concrete Entities	
93
7.1	 A multiplicity of extensional (non-fuzzy) mountains	
93
7.2	 A kind of duality	
96
7.3	 Modal properties and counterpart theory	
97
7.4	 Aesthetic properties and metalinguistic negation	
99
7.5	 Different things, with different parts: Extensionalism vindicated	
104
7.6	 A role for structures in Extensionalism	
109
7.7	 Extensionalism and time	
111
8	
Extensionalism and Abstract Entities	
117
8.1	 A different scenario	
117
8.2	 Facts and propositions	
118
8.3	 Extensionalism and stipulation	
121
8.4	 Extensionalism and language	
122
8.5	 A limitation for Extensionalism	
128
8.6	 Why it is reasonable to exclude abstract entities	
131

Contents
vii
9	
The Alternatives to Extensionalism	
135
9.1	 Motivations for a non-extensional mereology	
135
9.2	 Roles, forms, Extensionalism	
137
9.3	 Dropping Weak Supplementation	
139
9.4	 Reciprocal proper parts	
140
9.5	 Strong Supplementation and Extensionalism	
143
Part Three  Unrestricted Composition
	Abstract	
147
10	 Mereological Fusion and Plural Logic	
149
10.1	 Mereological monism and ontological economy	
149
10.2	 Plural quantification	
150
10.3	 Mereology is not logic	
152
10.4	 The alternatives to plural quantification: Sets	
155
10.5	 The alternatives to plural quantification: Schemas	
157
11	 The Definition of Fusion	
163
11.1	 What a fusion should be	
163
11.2	 Minimal upper bounds and fusions	
165
12	 Allegedly Counterintuitive Entities	
169
12.1	 These fusions do not exist	
169
12.2	 Negative existential intuitions	
170
12.3	 A variety of intuitions	
172
13	 The Argument from Vagueness	
175
13.1	 Quine, Williams, and the argument from vagueness	
175
13.2	 Lewis’s version of the argument	
180
13.3	 What cannot be vague	
183
13.4	 The Lewis-Sider argument versus intuitions	
185
13.5	 Unrestricted Composition and formal mereology	
187
13.6	 What about intuitions?	
190
14	 Unrestricted Composition and Metaontology	
193
14.1	 Unrestricted Composition, Meinongian existence, 
Williamson’s concreteness	
193
14.2	 Fine’s metaontology	
195
14.3	 Unrestricted Composition and the narrow 
understanding of mereology	
199

Contents
viii
Appendix: Mereological Monism, without Composition as Identity	
201
15.1	 Ontological innocence?	
201
15.2	 Is the whole nothing over and above its parts?	
203
15.3	 From Composition as Identity to mereological monism?	
207
15.4	 Why mereological monists should stay clear of Composition 
as Identity	
210
Notes
211
References
223
Index
231

Acknowledgments
I have presented early versions of some chapters of this book at various 
conferences and workshops in Geneva, Zagreb, Exeter, Madrid, and Milan. I 
would like to thank all the people who organized and/or attended these events, 
and in particular Aaron Cotnoir, Alessandro Giordani, Arianna Betti, Ciro De 
Florio, Claudio Calosi, Daniel Korman, Giuliano Torrengo, Kevin Mulligan, Kit 
Fine, Massimiliano Carrara, and Peter Simons. A draft of the book has also been 
used as a reference text for two graduate seminars on mereology at the Scuola 
Normale Superiore in Pisa (Italy) in 2015 and 2016. I would like to thank the 
entire audience of these seminars for their patience, and in particular Andrea 
Strollo, Lorenzo Azzano, and Martina Botti for raising insightful questions, 
and for shaking their heads to express disagreement. I would also like to thank 
Massimo Mugnai for organizing lots of interesting and motivating seminars 
and research events at the Scuola Normale Superiore in those same years, and 
for making me aware that Leibniz's mereology is so interesting and stunningly 
similar to the doctrine which is analyzed and defended in this book. Andrea 
Borghini, Martina Botti, and Massimiliano Carrara have shared with me some 
very significant aspects of my research work over the last years, and I would 
like to offer them a particularly warm thanks. Claudio Calosi, Massimiliano 
Carrara, Giulia Felappi, Simone Gozzano, and Andrea Strollo have read and 
commented the entire manuscript, and contributed to amending a lot of 
mistakes. Fabio Carestiato did not read the manuscript but encouraged me to 
write it. Sergio Knipe has been a sensible and meticulous proofreader. Carmel 
Isaac and all the staff at Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd. have followed the 
entire production process of the book with remarkable care. 
Finally, Diego Romei has proven a constant source of inspiration, warmth, 
and love during these years, and the book is dedicated to him.


Introduction: What is Mereology?
0.1 A general, yet narrow, theory of parthood and composition
My hands are parts of my body, countries are parts of continents, words can be 
seen as parts of sentences. Another relation is strictly connected to parthood: the 
relation that connects many things to a single thing that includes whatever is in 
the many things and nothing extraneous to them; this many-one relation can be 
dubbed composition. Four legs and a top compose the table in front of me, the 
Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg compose Benelux. Mereology is about 
these relations: parthood and composition.
The purpose of this book is to present, motivate, and defend a peculiar 
philosophical thesis about parthood and composition. This thesis has been 
influential—or even dominant—for much of the twentieth century, and has 
been endorsed by pivotal figures such as Goodman, Quine, and Lewis. However, 
no entire book has ever been devoted to its defense, and the thesis is nowadays 
rejected by many scholars.
The thesis is that there is a single, general, exhaustive theory of parthood and 
composition. This theory, usually called Classical Extensional Mereology, can be 
easily summed up. It claims that:
(a)	 parthood is transitive (if a first thing is part of a second thing, and this 
second thing is part of a third thing, then the first thing is part of the third 
as well);
(b)	 given some things, there is at most one thing composed by them;
(c)	 given some things, no matter how heterogeneous and disparate they are, 
there is at least one thing composed by them.
The adoption of the thesis that there is a unique, general, and exhaustive theory of 
parthood and composition is strictly connected to a rather narrow understanding 
of the explanatory scope of mereology as a philosophical discipline. This narrow 

Mereology
2
understanding will be adopted in this book, but is not always adopted when 
parthood and composition are discussed in philosophy. In some cases, the interest 
in the relations of parthood and composition is deeply entangled with problems 
that, according to the narrow understanding of mereology as a discipline which 
I am going to adopt, belong to other areas of metaphysics.
Consider, as a first example, the essential/accidental distinction. Is there a 
difference between a functional and pivotal part of my body, such as my brain 
or heart, and more peripheral parts, such as the nail on the last toe of my right 
foot? Are some parts of a whole such that their annihilation would annihilate the 
whole too? Another example: the supervenience or emergence of the properties of 
complex entities over the properties and relation of their parts. Do the properties 
and interrelation of the molecules composing my body determine the properties 
of my body?
According to the narrow understanding of mereology as a discipline I am 
going to adopt, essentiality, dependence, and supervenience lie beyond the 
explanatory scope of mereology. Mereology is only about the formal features of 
the relation of parthood, and about identity and existence conditions for wholes.
At a first glance, this restriction of the explanatory scope of mereology might 
seem unmotivated. Why should mereology be only about the formal features of 
parthood, and about existence and identity conditions for wholes? Is mereology 
not simply the theory of parthood, as the etymology of the word “mereology” 
(from the Greek méros, part) reveals? Then, why should the explanatory scope of 
mereology be narrowed down to such a degree? After all, the essential/accidental 
and dependent/independent divides can be applied to parts and wholes, and 
the philosophical debates about supervenience and emergence in many cases 
concern the macroscopic level of wholes on the one hand, and the level of their 
basic pieces or parts on the other.
This line of thought is not very compelling in itself. The mere fact that parts 
are pervasive does not prove that mereology should be integrated with any 
metaphysical theory. Consider the analogous cases of identity and existence. At 
least according to some influential philosophical stances, everything exists and is 
self-identical, so that there is a trivial sense in which existence and identity are 
related to any other philosophical topic. Obviously, whatever exists and whatever 
is self-identical instantiates properties, which can be accidental or essential; and 
the existence of some things can be thought to depend on the existence of other 
things. But this is not a good reason to embroil the theory of existence and the 
theory of identity with so many other—plausibly related, but still ­distinct—
metaphysical problems.

Introduction: What is Mereology?
3
In order to show that mereology should deal with essentialism, supervenience 
etc., it would be necessary to show that there is a substantial connection between 
what concerns parthood and composition and these other topics: that it is not 
possible to study parthood and composition in general, by themselves, without 
setting them in relation to other areas of metaphysics.
One purpose of this book is to show that this is not the case; that the 
philosophical thesis I wish to analyze and defend is right in restricting its attention 
to the formal features of parthood, and to identity and existence conditions for 
wholes. This does not mean that these are the only questions worth studying; 
but that the restriction applied isolates a legitimate, interesting and reasonably 
self-constrained philosophical topic.
0.2 Mereology as a discipline, mereology as a theory, 
mereology as a philosophical thesis
Some confusion about the explanatory scope of mereology can be attributed to 
the fact that, in the contemporary philosophical literature, the term “mereology” 
is used in different ways. We have already presented mereology from different 
perspectives in the previous section: it is a discipline that can be understood 
narrowly or more widely; it is also a theory, according to which parthood is 
transitive and, given some things, there is a single thing composed by them; 
and it is also the philosophical thesis (the thesis defended in this book) that this 
theory is the single, general theory of parthood and composition.
It is useful to explicitly distinguish these different perspectives. Throughout 
the book, at least when an equivocation could arise, we will distinguish between 
mereologydis (mereology as a discipline), mereologytheo (mereology as a theory), 
and mereologyphi (mereology as a philosophical thesis). Obviously, none of the 
three is the only right way to use the word “mereology.” It is also important to 
connect these three understandings of mereology to some alternative, more 
usual labels. Moreover, some finer distinctions can and should be drawn within 
the three understandings of mereology.
Mereologydis (mereology as a discipline) is simply the study of the relation 
of parthood and of strictly related topics. This study can be general, or focused 
on specific domains of parts and wholes (parts and wholes in language, in 
living organisms, in social entities, in mathematics, and so on). Also, when it is 
conceived in general—as is more common among philosophers—this study can 
vary greatly in terms of topics and conclusions. When mereologydis is general and 

Mereology
4
not focused on specific domains, we will also use the expression “philosophical 
mereology” for it.
Mereologytheo (mereology as a theory) is a theory that characterizes parthood 
and other connected relations (such as composition) in a certain way. This 
characterization is provided by some axioms, formulated within a given logical 
framework. These axioms imply some theorems: these theorems are the content 
of a certain mereologytheo. We can also identify a certain mereologytheo with a 
class of theorems, provable within a certain axiomatic system.
Within this understanding of mereology, sometimes a specific theory is 
indicated as the mereologytheo par excellence: this theory is the so-called Classical 
Extensional Mereology, and has been formulated—in different forms, with 
different purposes, and in different contexts—by logicians and philosophers 
such as Leśniewski, Tarski, and Goodman. The claims that parthood is transitive 
and that, given some things, there is at most and at least one (that is to say, 
exactly one) thing composed by them are axioms or theorems (depending on the 
specific axiomatization) of Classical Extensional Mereology, the mereologytheo 
par excellence.
Classical Extensional Mereology does not say of itself that it is the unique, 
general, and exhaustive theory of parthood and composition. Its theorems do 
not establish what is in the domain of their quantifiers. As a matter of fact, 
Classical Extensional Mereology has been thought by its creators to concern, in 
some cases, specific domains (such as geometry, in Tarski’s case), and in other 
cases reality as a whole (as in Goodman’s case), but the intended application or 
interpretation of mereologytheo does not belong to mereologytheo itself.
It is mereologyphi that has this role: mereologyphi (mereology as a philosophical 
thesis) is the philosophical thesis or contention that Classical Extensional 
Mereology (the mereologytheo par excellence) is the general and exhaustive 
theory of parthood and composition1. It is the philosophical thesis that, in a 
large and significant domain of things, parthood is transitive, and that, given 
some things, there is one and only one thing composed of them. In the most 
radical (perhaps too radical, as we will see) version of mereologyphi, this large 
and significant domain is actually the unrestricted domain: the level of generality 
and exhaustiveness of the theory is taken to be maximum.
Mereologyphi has also been dubbed mereological monism by Kit Fine2 (who is 
not a mereological monist himself, and uses the expression polemically), and we 
will switch between the expressions “mereologyphi” and “mereological monism” 
as mere stylistic variants. Mereological monism is mereological, insofar as it is a 
thesis about parthood and composition (that is, because it belongs to mereologydis 

Introduction: What is Mereology?
5
as a subject). And it is a kind of monism, insofar as it is the thesis that there 
is a single, correct theory of parthood and composition, which characterizes 
parthood and composition in a specific way.
This book is a presentation and defense of mereologyphi, also known as 
mereological monism. In order to present mereological monism, we need 
to present the mereologytheo that, according to mereological monism, is the 
unique, general, exhaustive theory of parthood and composition, namely 
Classical Extensional Mereology, the mereologytheo par excellence. Everything we 
are interested in discussing belongs to mereologydis, according to the narrow 
understanding of it as a discipline that only concerns the formal features of 
parthood and identity and existence conditions for wholes.
Thus, mereologyphi, mereologytheo, and mereologydis all have a role in the 
book. But since its main purpose is to present and defend mereologyphi, many 
aspects of mereologytheo and mereologydis are left aside. As regards mereologydis, 
any problem that does not concern either the formal features of parthood or 
identity and existence conditions for wholes (and, thus, belongs only to a wider 
understanding of mereologydis) will be discussed only when the risk arises of 
some interference between such problems and the proper, narrow subject matter 
of mereologydis.
As far as mereologytheo is concerned, in most cases we will focus on a single 
axiomatization of Classical Extensional Mereology. Nonclassical mereologies 
will be discussed only as terms of comparison: in some cases, we will show that 
the way in which Classical Extensional Mereology characterizes parthood and 
composition is preferable to the way in which the latter are characterized by 
nonclassical mereologies. But we will also contend that there is nothing technically 
wrong with nonclassical mereologies. The reasons to adopt mereological monism, 
and hence favor Classical Extensional Mereology over nonclassical alternatives, 
are not of a technical nature; they are philosophical reasons.
0.3 Mereological monism and David Lewis: 
The reasons for this book
The informed reader at this point may have gotten the impression that there 
is nothing really new in the philosophical thesis defended in this book: 
mereological monism looks extremely similar to the conception of mereology 
staunchly proposed by David Lewis, arguably the most influential analytic 
philosopher of the last forty years, and before him by Goodman and others. 

Mereology
6
Indeed, in analyzing and defending the various aspects of mereological 
monism throughout the book, we will make frequent references to Lewis’s 
and Goodman’s formulations and arguments and, in most cases, we will 
endorse them.
In spite of the closeness between Lewis’s viewpoint on parts and 
composition and my own, there are two broad reasons why I hope that my 
exposition and defense will not prove a useless repetition of what has already 
been stated by Lewis.
The first is that nobody—not even Lewis himself—has explicitly investigated 
in a book-length study (or any study of equivalent depth) the reasons for 
mereological monism from a sympathetic viewpoint. Most of the current 
literature on mereologydis opposes mereological monism, and takes Lewis’s 
declarations on parts and composition as its main critical target. But Lewis’s 
most systematic and extensive treatment of mereological monism consists of 
only sixteen (dense, beautiful, and rewarding) pages in his last book, Parts 
of Classes, whose main topic is not mereology but set theory.3 Mereology is 
introduced in Parts of Classes with the specific purpose of analyzing set theory, 
in the hope of making some of its philosophical mysteries less mysterious and 
more treatable.
A quick look at the rest of the contemporary literature on mereologydis 
might leave the casual reader perplexed as to why many authoritative 
analytic philosophers of the twentieth century endorsed mereologyphi, since 
mereologyphi is now treated as a deeply wrong thesis, which has been largely 
refuted by lots of counterexamples. The most extensive book on mereologydis 
is Peter Simons’s Parts4: an invaluable source of information about the history 
of mereology in the twentieth century, this work draws useful comparisons 
between various ways of axiomatizing Classical Extensional Mereology, as well 
as some nonclassical mereologies. However, Simons’s book is also dominated 
by the reiterated claim that Classical Extensional Mereology serves no real 
purpose in metaphysics, and that its alleged deficiencies derive precisely from 
attributing too narrow an explanatory scope to mereologydis. According to 
Simons, the theory of parthood and composition should be integrated with an 
adequate treatment of other metaphysical issues, mostly involving temporal 
change and modality.
The extremely accurate and extensive entry on mereology in the Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy by Achille Varzi5 (who, through some of his research 
papers, has greatly contributed to defend mereological monism and whose works 
will often be quoted in this book) is an extremely valuable resource, in particular 

Introduction: What is Mereology?
7
about the inferential relations between various mereological principles. ­But—
mainly due to its nature of reference text, and to the related need to countenance 
a variety of viewpoints about mereologydis and mereologytheo—Varzi’s entry does 
not really disclose or analyze the reasons for mereological monism.
Many other books discussing philosophical topics closely associated with 
the notions of parthood and composition (such as Koslicki’s The Structure of 
Objects and Sattig’s The Double Lives of Objects6) usually include a relatively 
succinct exposition of Classical Extensional Mereology, and then proceed 
to rapidly show why it would be too strong as a theory of parthood, or too 
poor as a theory of constitution. In order to find a sympathetic exposition of 
Classical Extensional Mereology, the reader is forced to go back to Eberle’s 
1970 Nominalistic Systems,7 which was a great study in its day, but was made 
largely obsolete by the later literature.
The present book does not aim to compete with Simons’s and Varzi’s 
works on their own terrain: both are much more complete as introductions to 
mereologytheo, and Simons’s book is also a great introduction to mereologydis, 
more broadly conceived—even if it is inevitably a bit dated, after thirty years of 
intense metaphysical research on the topic. However, if you wish to understand 
why it is at least reasonable and defensible to hold the metaphysical ­doctrines—
for example—that no two wholes have the same parts, and that, given some 
things—no matter how sparse—there is something they compose, then you 
are looking for a sympathetic introduction to mereologyphi, or mereological 
monism, and this book aims to satisfy your need.
The second reason why I hope that my work is not a mere, and simply more 
prolix, repetition of what Lewis thought about parthood and composition 
is that I disagree with some of Lewis’s views on parthood and composition, 
although I agree with the majority of them. To be more precise, I believe 
that while his synthetic defenses of the principles of Classical Extensional 
Mereology remain compelling and mostly undefeated to this day, some of his 
accompanying stances actually stand at the basis of the discredit into which 
mereological monism has fallen.
I will indicate in advance, in the following four Sections (0.4–0.7), my 
main disagreements with Lewis—the four aspects with respect to which 
the kind of mereological monism defended in this book differs from Lewis’s 
mereological monism. All the claims made below will be further discussed and 
refined throughout the book. My disagreement with Lewis inevitably depends 
on a certain interpretation of what he thought about mereology, and these 
interpretations too will be expounded later on in the book.

Mereology
8
0.4 Mereology is not logic
First, there is no interesting sense in which mereology is a logical doctrine. We will 
discuss (in Chapter  3) one sense in which Classical Extensional Mereology 
(mereologytheo) can be considered formal, but it is a sense of formality whereby 
formality only coincides with generality and topic-neutrality, and is a feature 
that can be instantiated to different degrees. By contrast, the formality of Classical 
Extensional Mereology does not consist in the fact that it is possible to assess 
its principles independently of the interpretation of its predicates, such as  
P (parthood). This is a significant difference between mereology and logic.
In general, the comparison between mereology and logic seems to me rather 
misleading. Obviously, mereologytheo can be axiomatized in a certain logic (in 
Part Three—and in particular in Chapter  10—we will discuss which logical 
framework is most suitable for this purpose). However, this does not make 
mereologytheo a logical theory in any interesting sense: mereologytheo can be 
expressed and axiomatized in a logical framework, but it is not logic in the sense 
in which this logical framework is logic (in the sense—say—in which first-order 
logic is logic).
While mereologytheo is logic only in the uninteresting sense that it can 
be expressed and axiomatized in a certain logic, mereologyphi is not logic at 
all. Mereologyphi is a metaphysical doctrine, deeply connected to a specific 
kind of nominalism that we will try to define in detail. Mereologyphi can be 
defended through a combination of a priori arguments in favor of the general 
truth of Classical Extensional Mereology, and of strategies to explain away 
alleged counterexamples to its principles. Neither a priori arguments nor the 
ways of disposing of counterexamples can fully prescind from quite general 
metaphysical, nominalistically inclined motivations. This procedure would be 
utterly unacceptable if mereologyphi were a logical doctrine.
The claim that mereology is not logic will be discussed in Chapters 3 and 10.
0.5 Mereology is imperfectly understood, 
problematic, and dubious
Second, mereology is not—in any of the ways of construing it—“perfectly 
understood, unproblematic, and certain,” as Lewis instead emphatically declared 
it to be.8 Lewis’s contention is deeply connected to his tendency to see mereology 
as a kind of logic: Lewis tends to consider mereology a sort of neutral tool (on 

Introduction: What is Mereology?
9
a par with logic9), to be applied to more controversial philosophical doctrines 
(such as modal realism, or the doctrine of natural properties), without being in 
itself the subject of interesting controversies. This is perhaps the reason why he 
did not feel the need to spend more than sixteen consecutive pages on mereology 
in all of his philosophical writings.
At a first glance, the three adjectives (“perfectly understood, unproblematic, 
and certain”) could be taken as an innocuous, subjective and emphatic declaration 
of mereological monism. When I am really convinced of the doctrine d, I can 
express my belief by saying that I feel to have “perfectly understood” d, and that 
d seems to me to be so “certain” that its alleged problems are not such to my 
mind (“unproblematic”).
Plausibly enough, however, Lewis—with the above words and his repeated 
claims that “non-mereological composition” would be an almost contradictory 
expression—was not simply emphasizing his own adherence to mereological 
monism, but was claiming that mereological monism should not be a topic 
of philosophical controversy. And this is wrong. There are lots of things that 
need to be explained, and lots of distinctions that need to be drawn, in order 
to make mereological monism—in many respects, a counterintuitive ­doctrine—
convincing.
As already noted, the acceptance of mereological monism is deeply bound up 
with the adoption of broad nominalistic presuppositions that are not everyone’s 
cup of tea. Thus, an in-depth analysis and balanced assessment of mereological 
monism is needed (the main purpose of this book is to provide this assessment), 
and there is no sensible way in which any serious mereological monist can avoid 
this requirement.
0.6 Mereology and abstract entities
Third, the application of mereological monism to abstract entities raises special 
concerns. Lewis (in his book on mereology and set theory, Parts of Classes), and 
other philosophers such as Goodman before him, identified abstract entities as 
a major field of application for mereology. However, as we will see (in particular 
in our discussion of Extensionalism in Part Two), it is much easier to defend 
the principles of Classical Extensional Mereology in the domain of concrete, 
spatiotemporal entities. By contrast, when abstract entities are at stake, it 
sometimes seems extremely easy to violate various mereological principles: 
it is enough to stipulate that some abstract entities violate them. Given that 

Mereology
10
mereology is not logic, these stipulations can be developed into solid, consistent, 
and even useful theories.
Mereological monism is not a constraint on what can be stipulated, 
but a controversial, contentful, interesting, and philosophically motivated 
metaphysical hypothesis about what is out there. Thus, it is possible to make 
stipulations that run afoul of mereological principles. However, this has not 
prevented mereological monists from attempting to reconcile recalcitrant 
abstract entities with their doctrines. After all, once the stipulations are made, 
they can in many cases be interpreted in several ways. And many mereological 
monists (such as Goodman and Lewis) have gone to great lengths to show that 
some abstract entities that would seem to violate mereological principles—most 
notably, sets—can be made to respect them.
Given the prominence of this topic in Goodman’s and Lewis’s works, 
the erroneous impression arises that a (or even the) primary challenge for 
mereologyphi is to cope with abstract entities, and with sets in particular. But I 
hope to show in this book that this is wrong: abstract entities are both the most 
difficult and the least important field of application of mereological monism, 
and there is nothing surprising in the fact that counterexamples to mereological 
principles can be found among abstract entities. Concrete entities are the decisive 
field of application for mereological monism.
In a sense, this means that I concede that mereological monism is not 
absolutely general and absolutely topic-neutral: the categorical divide between 
abstract and concrete entities makes a lot of difference for mereological monism. 
My defense of mereological monism is focused on concrete entities, and I will 
show how and why the prospects of mereological monism about abstract entities 
are much less rosy.
This is a restriction for mereological monism, but not a fatal one. Since it 
is not logic, mereology can be general, formal, or topic-neutral to a very high 
degree (as is definitely the case if it holds for the entire domain of concrete 
entities), without being absolutely general, formal, or topic-neutral.
It is possible to insist that, if there are exceptions to mereological monism 
(such as those in the realm of abstract entities), then mereological monism is 
refuted. Indeed, Classical Extensional Mereology would fail to be the absolutely 
general and perfectly exhaustive theory of parthood and composition, no matter 
how limited or self-constrained the counterexamples are; insofar as other theories 
are needed to cope with the counterexamples, a single theory is not enough. At 
most, a sort of quasi-monism could be defended, according to which Classical 
Extensional Mereology tells the truth about a very wide range of entities.

Introduction: What is Mereology?
11
However, throughout the book, the claim that Classical Extensional 
Mereology is the general and exhaustive theory of parthood and composition is 
not understood to imply absoluteness and perfection: generality, formality, and 
exhaustiveness—in the sense in which these concepts are here understood—
come in degrees, and the general thesis of the book is that Classical Extensional 
Mereology is a highly general theory of parthood and composition.10 Analogously, 
mereological monism is understood as the thesis that there is only one highly 
general theory of parthood and composition. Given these stipulations about 
terms such as “general” and “monism,” the difficulties of mereological monism 
in the realm of abstract entities do not refute it.
This difference with Lewis will be discussed in particular in Chapter 8, but it 
is also anticipated (through an analysis of Lewis’s view) in Chapter 5, and later 
applied to other topics in Chapters 12 and 13.
0.7 Mereological monism versus composition as identity
Fourth, the so-called thesis of Composition as Identity is not an integral part of 
mereological monism, and will not be defended in this book. According to Lewis, 
“composition […] is like identity.”11 As we have seen, according to mereological 
monism, given some things, there is a unique thing that they compose. By linking 
composition and identity, Lewis sets forth a further, distinct thesis, according 
to which the many-one relation between the parts and the unique thing they 
compose is analogous to identity. The intimacy of this many-one relation is often 
underlined by other identity-like expressions, such as “the whole is nothing over 
and above its parts” and “the whole and the parts are the same portion of reality.” 
Other philosophers, in more recent times,12 have radicalized Lewis’s stance, 
and claimed that composition works exactly like identity, in the sense that it is 
governed by the same principles that govern identity.
The thesis of Composition as Identity raises lots of problems, which are 
being discussed in an increasing literature.13 The most serious problem is that 
a whole and its parts are so different (so radically discernible) that there is no 
interesting content in the analogy between composition and identity. As we will 
see, composition has—according to mereological monism—some formal features 
(such as reflexivity) that suggest a superficial analogy with identity. But Leibniz’s 
Law (the principle of the Indiscernibility of Identicals) is a pivotal aspect of identity. 
And the sustained efforts, in the literature on Composition as Identity, to extend 
it to composition fail, while the contention (which Lewis himself makes) that 

Mereology
12
composition is analogous to identity, in spite of the fact that Leibniz’s Law fails for 
composition, is simply empty: there is no residual interesting analogy to be drawn 
with identity, once you exclude Leibniz’s Law from the domain of shared features.
It is not the main purpose of this book to refute the Composition as Identity 
thesis, but I aim to show that it is possible to present and defend mereological 
monism without endorsing Composition as Identity at all, and without using 
its typical, obscure, tendentiously circular jargon according to which a whole is 
“nothing over and above its parts,” or “a whole and its parts are the same portion of 
reality.” Composition as Identity is not a constitutive thesis of mereological monism, 
and I aim to show this by presenting mereological monism without any reference 
to such doctrine. To my mind, Composition as Identity is quite the opposite of 
a constitutive aspect of mereological monism: it is a severely unclear, implausible 
thesis that risks giving mereological monism a bad name by mere association.
Thus, the main role of Composition as Identity in the core of this book is 
to be absent: mereological monism is best defended without any reference to 
Composition as Identity. Composition as Identity is explicitly discussed only in 
the Appendix, where I show that the primary defect of Composition as Identity is 
to be in contrast with the narrow understanding of mereologydis, which is adopted 
in this book. Insofar as Leibniz’s Law is a constitutive principle of identity, to claim 
that a whole is identical to its parts is to claim either that they share all or some 
of their properties or that something similar is the case (e.g., that the features of 
a whole determine the features of its parts, and vice versa). This consequence has 
nothing to do with the formal features of parthood, and with the identity and 
existence conditions for wholes, which mereologydis is about.
Through Leibniz’s Law and the need to endow composition with a feature 
at least analogous to indiscernibility, mereology ends up being embroiled in 
problems about properties and supervenience. Our theory of parthood and 
composition—no matter how general and exhaustive it may be—should not 
imply controversial theses on these important, difficult, and quite separate areas 
of metaphysical research.
0.8 The plan of the book
I could sum up the differences between my own mereological monism and 
Lewis’s doctrine as follows: according to this book, mereology is not logic, but 
a problematic metaphysical doctrine; it fails to work for many abstract entities; 
and we should not say that a whole is identical to its parts. Still, mereological 

Introduction: What is Mereology?
13
monism is a defensible and promising metaphysical doctrine about concrete 
entities. This—I contend—is the interesting core of mereological monism.
These foretastes of the main theses of the book might seem to the casual 
reader to be rather abstract and intimidating. Hopefully, the rest of the book 
will show that mereological monism is quite a simple doctrine, which can be 
illustrated and defended even for the benefit of nonspecialist readers without 
excessive efforts, by relying in particular on examples from so-called ordinary 
objects and from other relatively familiar domains, such as language (in which 
letters, words, expressions, and sentences are very commonly thought to be 
part—or to be composed—of one another).
The book is divided into three parts and an Appendix. Each of the three parts 
is further articulated into chapters.
Part One explains what mereologyphi is about, and attributes some basic 
features to the parthood relation. These basic features and some potential 
counterexamples to them are illustrated with a constant attention to 
methodology, in order to make the reader progressively familiar with the kinds 
of theses, arguments, and methods that are at stake in this sector of metaphysics.
Part Two is about Uniqueness of Composition, that is, the principle that 
the same things do not compose more than one thing, and Extensionalism, 
the related principle that complex entities are identical if and only if they have 
the same proper parts (what “proper part” means will be explained in due 
course). I will distinguish between these and other principles, and discuss the 
connection between them and a certain kind of nominalism. Then, some alleged 
counterexamples to Extensionalism in the domain of concrete entities will be 
discussed and shown to be convincingly reconcilable with Extensionalism. 
Finally, I will explain why Extensionalism is a much more credible doctrine for 
concrete entities than it is for abstract ones.
Part Three is about Unrestricted Composition, that is, the principle that, given 
some things (no matter how heterogeneous and disparate they are), there is at 
least one thing they compose. The existing arguments in favor of this thesis are 
analyzed and shown to be compelling. The common idea that there is something 
outrageously counterintuitive in unrestricted composition is also analyzed.
Finally, in the Appendix, I show that—as already anticipated in the previous 
section—the so-called thesis of Composition as Identity, far from belonging 
to mereological monism, runs counter to the need to separate the explanatory 
scope of mereological monism from other areas of metaphysics.
The abstracts of Parts One, Two, and Three provide further details about the 
contents of each chapter, and can be used as a guide to navigate the entire book.


The Methodology of Mereological 
Monism
Abstract
This part of the book presents mereology as the formal study of the relation of 
parthood and of some cognate relations and operations. Chapter 1 shows that 
mereology selects and systematizes some prototypical instances of parthood 
from the spatial domain. The resulting characterization of parthood is then 
taken as a criterion for distinguishing in other domains literal parthood from 
merely metaphorical occurrences of “part” (and similar terms), as well as 
from other relations. Moreover, it is shown that the formal characterization of 
parthood is constrained by some intuitive expectations about what parthood 
is. Chapter 2 discusses the role of mereology in other philosophical debates, 
and in particular shows how mereology can help to refute certain philosophical 
theories, or to restrict the range of admissible solutions for a philosophical 
problem. Chapter  3 distinguishes several ways of construing formality, and 
discusses the links between mereology and the so-called formal ontology. 
According to some interpretations of formality, mereology is formal; according 
to others, it is not. The kind of formality enjoyed by mereology also explains 
the tight links between parthood, existence, and identity. Finally, in Chapter 4, 
the methodology of mereology sketched in the previous chapters is applied to 
a discussion of the transitivity, reflexivity, and antisymmetry of parthood. It is 
also shown how the methodology of mereological monism differs from that of 
mereological pluralism.
Part One


1.1 Mereology and the lexical meaning of “part”
My bed is part of the furniture in my room. My youth is part of my life. And gin 
is part of gin-tonic. Is there a single sense in which these disparate things are part 
of one another? This question could be generalized, and framed as a question 
about lexical meaning: is the term “part” univocal in English, or does it have 
different meanings in different contexts? If it is construed as a question about 
lexical meaning, the question is likely to elicit an immediate negative answer.
In this book, however, I am going to apply the concept of part to lots of 
things, and to argue in favor of the thesis that, at the end of the day, there is a 
single, exhaustive theory of parthood. The concept of part I will analyze is rather 
refined and specific, and is not meant to correspond strictly to the meaning 
of “part” in English. But it is still sufficiently entrenched within the standard 
meaning of “part” that it is not by sheer chance that we can still employ this term 
to designate what the book is about, instead of having to coin an exclusively 
philosophical word for it.
Moreover, in the course of the analysis, I will discuss alternative, pluralist 
approaches, according to which there is not a single, exhaustive theory of 
parthood, but there are many. However, in most cases, these pluralist approaches 
to parthood are not motivated by the need for the philosophical analysis to 
provide a perfect and exhaustive account of the lexical meaning of “part” (or 
of the equivalent terms in other languages). In other words—no matter if 
you are a mereological monist or not—the immediate negative answer to the 
question about the univocity or non-univocity of “part” in English is of limited 
importance for mereologydis.
However, it is interesting to analyze, in this initial chapter, the immediate 
propensity to deny the univocity of “part” in English. This is needed in order to 
1
Natural Language, Literal Parthood, 
and Philosophical Mereology

Mereology
18
prevent simplistic, broadly relativist objections to all the various claims we are 
going to discuss about the theory of parthood: the kind of objections that, given 
any claim whatsoever about parthood, simply contend that “it depends,” or ask 
for the confirmation of a complete survey on the usage of “part”—or of other 
terms within the same semantic area, such as “piece,” “portion,” “bit,” or even 
“component” and “constituent.”
Mereologydis is not about this kind of survey, and does not presuppose it. 
A usage of “part” or “bit” that does not respect the principle of a theory of 
parthood does not refute, by itself, that theory of parthood or its ambitions to 
be general and exhaustive. Nonetheless, considerations about natural language 
do play a role in mereology, because—again—it is not by sheer chance that we 
use the term “part” in the philosophical theory of parthood. As in the case of 
many other philosophical investigations, the philosophical theory in question is 
about something that also has a role outside of philosophy. Parts are everywhere. 
An atom of oxygen is said to be part of a molecule of water, my left elbow is 
said to be part of my left arm, and the word “Christmas” is said to be part of 
the sentence “I wish you a merry Christmas.” In a love affair between Jane and 
Harold, it may happen that Jane says to Harold: “I am part of you, and you are 
part of me.” Mereology is conceived as the theory of parts—also and mainly 
parts outside of philosophy.
This does not mean that mereology should take into account every single 
occurrence of “part” and cognate expressions in English and other languages (as 
we will see, Jane’s declaration to Harold should not worry us too much); but we 
should make sure that overrefinement does not turn our theory into the theory 
of something else altogether.
1.2 “Part” and cognate terms: Three distinctions
Let us consider the following English sentences (some of them have been already 
mentioned), in which either the term “part” or semantically cognate terms 
(namely “piece” and “component”) are employed in various syntactic positions:
(a)	 The Kemalists are part of the parliament.
(b)	 The leg is part of the table.
(c)	 I want to eat a piece of that cake.
(d)	 Luxembourg is part of the European Union.
(e)	 Many components of my car are expensive to replace.

Natural Language, Literal Parthood, and Philosophical Mereology
19
(f)	 The word “Christmas” is part of the sentence “I wish you a merry Christmas.”
(g)	 I am part of you, and you are part of me.
I am going to draw three rough but important distinctions between these 
sentences, in order to help clarify the relation between mereology and the lexical 
meaning of English terms such as “part.” The three distinctions concern spatial 
location, selectivity, and formality.
In considering these three distinctions, it is important to keep in mind that 
we are not inferring mereological principles from a quick, vague, and potentially 
arbitrary lexical analysis. By contrast, we aim to show that philosophical 
mereology (mereologydis) is not completely detached from the ordinary usages 
of “part” and of some cognate words. It is possible to select (on purpose and a 
posteriori) some occurrences of these terms and analyze them in order to give a 
preliminary idea of what philosophical mereology is about.
A first distinction concerns the relation between parthood and spatial location. 
In some cases (namely (b), (c), and (e)), it seems clear that space is involved:
(b)	 The leg is part of the table.
(c)	 I want to eat a piece of that cake.
(e)	 Many components of my car are expensive to replace.
The question here is not just that the things which are said to be part one of 
another have a location in space. After all, for example, also the Kemalists in 
(a) and the lovers in (g) have a spatial location. But in (b), (c), and (e) there is 
something more: it seems that a kind of spatial parthood is involved.
At a rough, provisional approximation, we could say that in these cases there 
is a sort of correspondence between the instance of parthood about which 
the sentences are and another instance of parthood that subsists between the 
corresponding regions of space. Given a thing x, let us call region (x) the region of 
space occupied by x. It seems, then, that my heart is part of my body if and only 
if region (heart) is part of region (body). This seems to be a constitutive feature 
of cases such as (b), (c), and (e). In other cases, a similar principle of harmony1 
between entities and the regions of space they occupy does not hold at all.
The Kemalist members of parliament (to which the referential expression 
“The Kemalists” in (a) refers to) are people occupying collectively a sparse and 
disconnected region of space. But it is not clear in what sense this sparse region 
of space is part of a region of space occupied by the parliament.
As far as (f) (“The word ‘Christmas’ is part of the sentence ‘I wish you a 
merry Christmas’”) is concerned, sentences and words are often understood as 

Mereology
20
abstract types having many concrete tokens. It is highly controversial whether 
such abstract linguistic types have any spatial location at all and, if they do, 
where they are located. In any case, the (eventual) inclusion of the region of 
space (eventually) occupied by the word in the region of space (eventually) 
occupied by the sentence is not constitutive of the parthood relation expressed 
in (f): this parthood relation can subsist independent of any controversial claim 
about linguistic types and their spatial locations.
In (g) (“I am part of you, and you are part of me.”), it seems that, whatever 
the claim actually means, there is no consequence for the spatial location of the 
lovers: there is no expectation that the region of space occupied by the former 
lover is part of the region occupied by the latter lover, or vice versa.
In the case of (d) (“Luxembourg is part of the European Union.”), it is not 
clear whether space plays a role, due to the fact that the referential expressions 
(“Luxembourg” and “The European Union”) are ambiguous. They could be 
interpreted as referring to physical geography, in which case the region occupied 
by Luxembourg would be part of the wider region occupied by the European 
Union; moreover, this mirroring between the entities at stake and the regions 
of space they occupy would play a constitutive role in the parthood claim. But 
the referential expressions “Luxembourg” and “The European Union” could also 
refer to institutions (a state and an international organization, respectively), and 
it is not clear whether institutions are in space at all.
A second distinction concerns selectivity. It seems that in some cases x qualifies 
as a part of y on the necessary condition that x has clear, sharp boundaries within 
y, and/or has a specific function in the workings of y. In other cases, there is no 
such requirement.
The term “component” employed in (e) (“Many components of my car are 
expensive to replace.”) is selective. The oil filter of the car has clear, visible 
boundaries, as well as a distinctive function; it qualifies as a component of the 
car. By contrast, the right half of the oil filter has neither a clear, visible boundary 
nor a distinctive function; thus, we would not classify it among the components 
of a car. The fact that it is not viable to replace it and that it has probably no 
defined price (so that it does not make much sense to ask if it is expensive or 
cheap to replace the right half of the oil filter) has no bearing on the truth-
conditions of (e): we simply do not include the right half of the oil filter among 
the things (e) is about. In (a) (“The Kemalists are part of the parliament.”), also 
“parts” is used in a selective way: no half-Kemalist, for example, would be said to 
be part of the parliament in the same sense; the same holds for recombinations 
of left legs of Kemalists.

Natural Language, Literal Parthood, and Philosophical Mereology
21
In (c) (“I want to eat a piece of that cake.”), by contrast, the expression “a 
piece” is typically nonselective: any portion of the cake counts as a piece. If I were 
given a minuscule crumb of cake, my desire for a piece of cake would probably 
remain unsatisfied, because what I actually wanted was a reasonably big piece. 
But this seems to depend on pragmatic elements concerning desire for food and 
its satisfaction. My protest against the offer of a minuscule crumb of cake would 
rest not on the fact that the crumb is not a piece, but on the fact that my desire 
has been interpreted too literally: the crumb is indeed a piece of the cake, but I 
wanted a reasonably big piece of it, not an arbitrarily small one.
In (b) (“The leg is part of the table.”), “part” is not selective either: it 
seems that half legs are as much part of the table as whole legs. If I add the 
indeterminate article “a” to “part” or replace “part” with “component,” then the 
degree of selectivity seems to increase. Only the top, each of the legs, and other 
significantly selected parts of a table can be sensibly said to be “a part” of it.
A third and last distinction concerns the formal features of parthood as 
a relation. Parthood is a binary relation: it is not a property had by a single 
thing. When I make a parthood claim, I indicate an x that is the part (the first 
relatum) and a y that is the whole (the second relatum). Relations, in general, 
are characterized by certain formal features. We will make frequent references 
to some of these formal features, so it is useful to introduce some of them from 
the beginning.
A relation R is reflexive if and only if, for every x, x is in the relation R with x 
(that is, with itself). R is symmetric if and only if, for every x and every y, if x is 
in the relation R with y, then y is in the relation R with x. R is antisymmetric if 
and only if, for every x and every y, if x is in the relation R with y and y is in the 
relation R with x, then x and y are identical (thus, x and y are actually only one 
thing). Finally, R is transitive if and only if, for every x, every y and every z, if x is 
in the relation R with y and y is in the relation R with z, then x is in the relation 
R with z.
Let us focus on transitivity and antisymmetry, and go back to our samples 
(a)–(g) of the usage of English terms in the lexical area of “part.” From most 
of the sentences, nothing about the formal features of the parthood relation 
involved can be immediately grasped. However, upon closer investigation we 
meet some interesting exceptions. As regards transitivity, it may be observed 
that it seems to interact with selectivity. When terms such as “component” (in e) 
and “parts” (in a) are used selectively, transitivity seems to be at risk.
In (a) (“The Kemalists are part of the parliament.”), consider the kidneys of a 
Kemalist MP: they are parts of the MP. The MP, as her colleagues, is part of the 

Mereology
22
parliament. However, it seems that the kidneys are not part of the parliament. 
In (e) (“Many components of my car are expensive to replace.”), consider the float 
chamber of a carburetor (the part of the carburetor where the fuel enters and is 
provisionally stored). It is a component of the carburetor, and the carburetor 
is a component of the car. But is the float chamber a component of the car? 
If we were asked to give a list of the components of the car, we would list the 
carburetor for sure, and, once we have listed it, we would not feel the need to list 
also the subparts, since that portion of the car has been already covered by the 
carburetor. Thus, transitivity can be at least doubted.
By contrast, the nonselective cases seem to favor transitivity. In (c) (“I want to 
eat a piece of that cake.”), a piece of a piece of a cake counts as a piece of the cake, 
no matter how small and unsatisfying it is. And what is part of part of the table 
counts as part of the table as well.
Antisymmetry is prima facie difficult to apply to parthood claims (a)–(f), but 
if we consider them more carefully, we find that antisymmetry would hold in a 
sort of limiting case, on which we do not often reflect. Antisymmetry concerns 
what happens when two things x and y are reciprocally part one of the other: in 
this case, if parthood is an antisymmetric relation, then x and y are identical.
In cases (a)–(f), no instance of reciprocal parthood emerges directly. Non-
reciprocity seems to be expected pragmatically. Consider (b) (“The leg is part of 
the table.”): if we claim that the leg is part of the table, this is because the table 
and the leg are different—albeit intimately connected—things. Suppose that a 
table is so broken or worn out that only one of its legs remains. In this scenario 
I would not claim that the leg is part of the table: it would be a misleading way 
of speaking. This is connected with another expectation: that the leg does not 
exhaust the table; in other words, that the table has other parts (such as its top). If 
there were no other parts, then I would not claim that the leg is part of the table. 
This claim might not be judged false, perhaps, but it would certainly be regarded 
as improper, and somewhat misleading.
The kind of antisymmetry that is presupposed by claims such as (a)–(f) 
relegates cases of reciprocal parthood to deviant exceptions in which it would be 
strange to make a parthood claim. In these deviant cases, the presupposition is 
that there is identity between the relata of the parthood relation. On the basis of 
case (c) (“I want to eat a piece of that cake.”), suppose that I am given a piece of a 
cake such that the cake itself is part of the piece. This is a deviant situation, and 
the only way to make sense of it is to imagine that I have been given the entire 
cake. In this limiting case, the piece of the cake is actually identical to the cake, 
in accordance with antisymmetry.

Natural Language, Literal Parthood, and Philosophical Mereology
23
Antisymmetry tends to be presupposed in all those cases where the connection 
with spatial location is at play and the above sketched harmony holds. (c) is one 
of these cases.
In general, suppose that the harmony holds, so that x is part of y, and y is part 
of x; then, region(x) is part of region(y), and region(y) is part of region(x). Thus, 
reciprocity also concerns the parthood relation between regions of space. Now, 
focus on the parthood between regions of space: if a region of space is part of 
another, this means that the latter comprises all the former, possibly in addition 
to something else. But if two regions are part of one another, then neither of 
them can comprise something else. The hypothesis of two regions of space that 
are part of one another, but are different nonetheless, does not make sense.
By contrast, (g) (“I am part of you, and you are part of me.”) does not 
presuppose antisymmetry. (g) is a claim of reciprocal parthood, and is not 
expected to imply the identity of its relata. Jane (the person who utters (g)) could 
complete her declaration to Harold as in (h) or as in (i), without incurring a 
contradiction in either case:
(h)	 I am part of you, you are part of me, and we are one and the same person.
(i)	 I am part of you, you are part of me, but we are different people.
Thus, if we were to take (i) seriously, we would have to conclude the two lovers 
can be part of one another, without thereby being identical. But should we?
1.3 Literal parthood versus metaphorical parthood
Should we take (g), as well as its completions (h) and (i), seriously? More 
generally, what is the bearing of the considerations and distinctions arising 
from the analysis of claims of parthood in natural language on that branch of 
metaphysics that studies the relation of parthood? We have anticipated that, on 
the one hand, the purpose of philosophical mereology is not to study the lexical 
semantics of “part” and cognate words in one or more natural languages, but 
also that, on the other hand, there is not sheer homonymy between parts in 
philosophical mereology and parts outside of it. How are we to reconcile these 
two claims?
Let us propose a provisional characterization of what philosophical mereology 
(or mereologydis, according to the disambiguation of “mereology” proposed in 
the Introduction, Section 0.2) does. This characterization will be further refined 
throughout this book.

Mereology
24
Mereologydis selects certain usages of the notion of part in philosophical and 
nonphilosophical contexts that are perceived to be more literal than others. 
The reason to select literal occurrences is the expectation that they are conceived 
as a description of parthood relations in reality, and not as a metaphor of some 
other feature of the world (such as the relation of love between Jane and Harold). 
These literal usages are not only to be found in a specific natural language such 
as English, or in other natural languages. They also occur in those sciences that 
are expressed in a formal language. This selection isolates the subject matter of 
mereologydis: the realm within which confirmations and counterexamples to its 
principles should be sought.
Obviously, the fact that some parthood claims are meant literally does not 
imply that they are true: a parthood claim (as a claim on many other subjects) 
can be literal and false at the same time. But the purpose of mereology is not 
to identify true parthood claims. And it is clearly not up to metaphysicians—
or philosophers in general—to identify the parts of molecules, biological 
organisms, or cars. Mereologydis is only expected to identify the formal 
features, such as the transitivity and antisymmetry mentioned earlier, of a 
relation of parthood—and of some other important relations and operations 
to be introduced later on—that can be seriously and literally applied to  
the world.
These formal features will not determine what is part of a car or of a molecule 
of water. At most, they will warrant the legitimacy of some inferences. For 
example, the thesis that parthood is transitive legitimates the following inference 
from two parthood claims to another parthood claim:
Sicily is part of Greece
Greece is part of Asia
therefore
Sicily is part of Asia
but does not tell us whether its premisses are true (in this case we know that they 
are false, but not because of our competence in mereologydis).
Thus, mereology privileges literal claims of parthood over metaphorical 
claims. But it can be far from easy to draw a sharp distinction between literal 
and metaphorical claims, in general. We might feel that there is something 
which is not purely descriptive and literal in (g), and that (b) and (c) are more 
concrete and down-to-earth examples. However, in many other cases, the brute 
appeal to the distinction between literal and metaphorical risks being a source 
of methodological arbitrariness.2

Natural Language, Literal Parthood, and Philosophical Mereology
25
Suppose that I am in the process of building a theory of parthood. Am I free 
to reject any counterexample (any failure of transitivity, such as those ensuing 
from the analysis of (a) and (e) discussed earlier) as metaphorical? Or to accept 
any confirmation as literal? Admittedly, some contextual elements could 
somewhat constrain this freedom: we may have general reasons to think that, 
in the context of love talk, metaphors are more abundant than in other fields. 
This might suggest that we keep (g), (h), and (i) out of the domain of eligible 
counterexamples or confirmations for the principles of philosophical mereology.
But some cases are more controversial, and pose a real risk of arbitrariness. 
Consider (a) and (f) in particular. As regards (a), are Kemalists literally parts of 
the parliament? Is the parliament (an institution, a social entity) something that 
has parts? Or is “parts” here a metaphor for a more articulate and substantial 
social relation, involving the right to enter a certain building and participate in 
certain discussions and decisions? Could the formal features of this substantial 
social relation be different from those of literal parthood?
In the case of (f), are abstract entities (such as types of sentences and words) 
literally involved in parthood relations? Perhaps our tendency to apply terms 
such as “part” to linguistic types is somewhat improper: a sort of metonymy to 
express that some concrete tokens of these types (some concrete “Christmas” 
inscriptions) are part of one another.3
1.4 Spatial parthood, paradigmatic parthood
Questions about the literal or metaphorical character of claims can be really 
difficult to resolve. But we can look back at two of the distinctions we drew 
earlier while discussing claims (a)–(g), in order to find some clues. First of all, 
space: spatial parthood often has the role of paradigmatic literal parthood. 
The circumstance that the harmony mentioned earlier holds is an indication 
that we purport to describe reality. When parthood is systematically paired 
with spatial containment (as the principle of harmony signals), there are good 
reasons to think that it is a case of literal parthood.
We should not mistake this heuristic test for a necessary and sufficient 
condition for being a case of literal parthood, which mereology aims to select 
and systematize. It is not a sufficient condition because metaphors are often 
elaborate, and may involve space itself: in these cases, we could try to further 
analyze our claims about the relations between regions of space, and look at 
their context or articulation. More importantly, it is not a necessary condition. 

Mereology
26
Spatial parts are a paradigm for mereology, but they are not its exclusive subject 
matter. Why, for example, should the temporal sense in which my youth is part 
of my life be excluded from the domain of mereology? It seems that the kind 
of involved containment is no less literal than in the spatial cases: one could 
even envisage a sort of harmony with the relations between time intervals. What 
would be metaphorical in it?
Similarly, on what basis should we assume that abstract entities—which are 
often thought to lack a spatial location by definition—are prevented qua abstract 
from playing the role of parts or wholes? Is there not a prima facie clear sense 
of containment whereby which the set of even numbers is in the set natural 
numbers? Even in the case of linguistic types, why should the above metonymical 
interpretation be the right one? It seems that letter types are in word types, and 
that word types are in sentence types; and the burden of proof would appear to 
fall upon those who argue that this containment is nonliteral.
We will come back to our examples later. In order to understand in what 
sense spatial parts are a paradigm for mereology, but are not its exclusive subject 
matter, we may turn to another of the distinctions drawn above (the third). 
Formal features of parthood (such as transitivity and antisymmetry) are very 
important in mereology. Spatial parthood is a paradigm. As such, it can help us 
to identify the formal features of parthood in general. As we will see over the 
course of the book, the formal features of parthood are also connected to the 
formal features of other relations and operations concerning parts and wholes 
(such as overlap and fusion).
Suppose that the analysis of spatial, paradigmatic instances of parthood 
relations is enough to obtain a relatively precise formal characterization of 
parthood as a relation. If so, we could have an important guideline in identifying 
other instances of genuine, literal parthood. Genuine, literal parthood would 
no longer be distinguished by the literalness or seriousness with which some 
claims are meant to concern reality: it would simply be the relation that 
works exactly like the paradigmatic cases. A sentence such as (g) would still 
be excluded from the scope of mereology, but not for the highly specific and 
rather elusive reason that love talk is often metaphorical, but because it violates 
antisymmetry, which—as we have seen—is a patent feature of paradigmatic 
spatial parthood.
Some doubts could be legitimately raised about this methodology. For 
example, one could observe that the method is not a perfectly reliable one for 
distinguishing between literal and metaphorical uses of “part” and related terms: 
after all, a metaphor could be so rigorous as to be formally indistinguishable 

Natural Language, Literal Parthood, and Philosophical Mereology
27
from its literal counterpart. The only difference between metaphorical and 
literal uses of “part” might be that metaphors are meant precisely as metaphors.
My reply to this objection is that the purpose of the method is not to distinguish 
between literal and metaphorical occurrences of “part”: its purpose is to replace 
this kind of distinction, which is shaky and difficult to draw. The main advantage 
of the method is that it identifies the subject matter of mereology in a principled 
and projectable way: principled, because the formal study of relations is a well-
developed theory, of which the above definitions of reflexivity, symmetry, and so 
on, are only elementary samples; projectable, because once the formal profile of 
parthood is defined on the basis of paradigmatic cases, new candidate instances 
of parthood can be evaluated. In particular, candidate instances can be discarded 
if they exhibit different formal features (as happens with the non-antisymmetric 
relation in (g)).
It is important to remark that this methodology for mereologydis does not 
lead unavoidably to the adoption of mereological monism or mereologyphi, 
that is, the thesis according to which a single theory exhaustively characterizes 
parthood and other cognate relations and operations. I will endorse and defend 
mereological monism in this book, but as a substantial metaphysical thesis, and 
not as a mere consequence of the provisional characterization of mereologydis 
just outlined. The characterization of mereologydis does not settle whether an 
investigation of paradigmatic, spatial instances of parthood reveals the existence 
of a single relation of parthood or of multiple relations of parthood, each with 
its specific formal features; nor does it suggest how many theories should study 
these relations.
1.5 Formal features and intuitive constraints
At this point, a different doubt could be raised. Once the formal features of 
parthood and other connected relations and operations are established on the 
basis of an analysis of paradigmatic cases of spatial parthood, we are allowed 
to discard other candidate instances if they work in a different way (i.e., they 
have different formal features). In other words, it is necessary for a relation to 
possess those formal features in order for it to qualify as a genuine parthood 
relation. But it is less clear whether the condition is also sufficient. Is it enough to 
share with paradigmatic, spatial parthood formal features such as antisymmetry 
(antisymmetry is here merely a basic example of a formal feature of paradigmatic 
parthood) in order to qualify as genuine parthood?

Mereology
28
Suppose that the relation between any grandmother and her favorite 
grandchild turns out to work, from a formal point of view, exactly like spatial, 
paradigmatic parthood. This is not a very realistic example (the relation at 
stake seems to be neither transitive nor antisymmetrical), but it is still useful to 
consider it: would the sharing of formal features be enough to classify as genuine 
parthood a relation that clearly does not amount to that at all?
This seems to be an instance of a more general problem: are formal features 
enough to isolate a subject matter? In the specific case of parthood, the answer 
seems to be: no, they are not enough. There are also intuitive constraints on 
what counts as parthood. Formal features allow for a discrimination within 
an already limited domain of relations that have something to do with 
containment and being in. No kind of containment or being in connects 
grandmothers and their favorite grandchildren. Thus, the formal features of 
the relation between each grandmother and her favorite grandchild do not 
matter from the viewpoint of mereology: no matter how this relation works, 
it is not a case of parthood.
I am not going to say anything more specific on these intuitive constraints. It is 
enough to note that the problem of a prior delimitation of a subject matter arises 
for any nonlogical relation. Nobody believes that formal features are sufficient 
to identify the relation of similarity, or of brotherhood, or of parallelism. In all 
these cases, as well as in the case of parthood, no serious, specific doubt arises 
about the prior, intuitive delimitation of the subject matter: only lines and curves 
can be parallel, only animals can be brothers, only when some properties are 
shared can there be similarity; and only when some kind of containment or 
being in is involved can there be parthood.
Basically, all the relations involved in sentences (a)–(g) in Section  1.1 
respect the intuitive constraints, including the love talk in (g): no matter how 
metaphorical and formally deviant, the love talk in (g) concerns a kind of 
mutual containment. Claim (g) belongs to the intuitively constrained domain of 
relations involving a kind of containment and being in. The formal constraints, 
inspired by prototypical, spatial cases of literal parthood, allow us to discriminate 
genuine relations of parthood within this intuitively constrained domain. These 
formal constraints will exclude (g) (due to the fact that (g) blatantly violates 
antisymmetry), in spite of the fact that (g) involves some kind of containment 
or being in.
No serious debate on mereology hinges on the intuitive constraint, because 
in each case it is clear what respects the constraint, and what does not. It 
can be difficult to characterize the intuitive constraint in an informative and 

Natural Language, Literal Parthood, and Philosophical Mereology
29
noncircular way, and the nature of intuition is obviously a huge philosophical 
problem. However, this should not worry us. The formal features of parthood 
and of other cognate relations and operations are what philosophical mereology 
is about. These formal features are necessary conditions for being a genuine 
parthood relation. They are not sufficient conditions, because the domain of 
eligible relations is constrained by an intuitive condition. But no serious doubt 
arises on this intuitive condition. We can therefore legitimately focus on the 
formal features of parthood and of other cognate relations and operations.
1.6 Mereology is about nonselective parthood
The second distinction we have drawn in Section  1.2 is also important for 
determining the scope of mereology. Mereology is about nonselective parthood; 
selective notions of parthood (often expressed by cognate terms such as 
“component” in (e)) are not its subject matter. This is a stipulation, yet not an 
unmotivated one.
First of all, the stipulation corresponds to the way in which mereology has 
been understood by most philosophers whose works we will be discussing in 
this book. Moreover, the stipulation is actually germane to the methodology of 
mereologydis we sketched earlier. We have claimed that mereologydis considers 
paradigmatic instances of parthood and systematizes their formal features; 
afterwards, the ensuing formal characterization also becomes a guideline for 
identifying other, less paradigmatic, genuine instances of parthood.
A formal, general characterization is hopeless in the case of selective parthood 
or componency. In the case of (e), selective componency needs to discriminate, 
within a car, between the oil filter and the right half of the oil filter: only the oil 
filter qualifies as a selected component of a car, for only the oil filter is clearly 
delimited, and has a specific function in the workings of the car. But there is 
nothing formal in this discrimination (we will consider what kind of formality is 
at stake here in Chapter 3): in order to draw this discrimination, we need quite 
specific information about how a car works.
This kind of information is not easily projectable onto other fields: the 
criterion for being clearly delimited and having a specific function within a car 
are arguably different from the criterion for being clearly delimited and having a 
specific function in a microphysical system, or in a living organism.
The reason why philosophical mereology focuses on nonselective parthood—
and not on selective parthood—is that selective parthood is specific to various 

Mereology
30
fields, and depends on highly local features of things (such as cars), about which 
philosophy has nothing to say.
Nonetheless, it is worth remarking that the analysis of nonselective parthood 
could be relevant to the investigation of a more subject-specific and selective 
kind of parthood. Privileged parts and components are nonetheless parts in the 
nonselective sense. There is a sense in which both the oil filter and the right half 
of the oil filter are parts of the car, and mereology is about that sense of “part.” It 
is up to domain-specific theories of components to discriminate between them.
We can now summarize the characterization of philosophical mereology 
(mereologydis) discussed in this chapter. Philosophical mereology is about the 
formal features of parthood and some cognate relations and operations. It 
assumes some paradigmatic, literal, spatial instances of parthood, and projects 
their features in order to identify other genuine instances of parthood. Moreover, 
it focuses on nonselective parthood, since selective parthood is too domain-
specific to be a plausible subject for metaphysics. Our upcoming presentation 
and defense of mereological monism (mereologyphi) will presuppose this 
characterization of mereologydis.

2.1 How to maximize the discriminating power
Mereologydis is expected to select and systematize paradigmatic cases of parthood. 
These cases will display some formal features. Once they have been systematized, 
we obtain a criterion to discriminate literal cases of parthood. I have claimed in 
Chapter 1, Section 1.4 that this approach does not make mereological monism 
trivial: the result of the selection and systematization might be that—contra 
mereological monism—there are several kinds of parthood relations, each with 
different formal features.
Nonetheless, this methodology contributes to making mereological monism 
a desirable philosophical thesis. If true, mereological monism would maximize 
the discriminating power of our methodology; a single theory would univocally 
characterize a single relation of parthood (as well as the other cognate relations 
we are going to introduce). We would have a simple and secure basis for 
concluding that a certain relation is not parthood.
By contrast, pluralism might prove to be an indefinite source of revisionism: 
given a potential case of non-parthood, the alternative of keeping it as a new 
variety of parthood would never be ruled out once and for all. Given a new case, 
we would always be in a sort of dilemma. Is this a case of non-parthood, or a 
formally different variety of parthood? It could prove difficult to choose one of 
the horns of this dilemma in a principled way.
As a matter of fact, mereological monism—which is rarely defended 
nowadays—was for a long time the dominant view. If we restrict our attention 
to the last thirty years, its most ardent and explicit advocate was Lewis. Lewis 
used mereological monism as a powerful discriminating tool. In particular, he 
conceived mereological monism as a way of refuting some philosophical claims: 
if a certain theory claims that x is part of y, but some formal principle governing 
2
Mereological Monism: A Desirable 
Philosophical Thesis

Mereology
32
parthood is therein violated, then this is enough to conclude that there is 
something false in that theory.
In his 1991 book Parts of Classes1 (which, while being mainly a book about 
sets, includes a sort of manifesto of mereological monism that we will often be 
referring to), Lewis argues against the claim that the elements of a set are parts of 
it,2 on the basis of the fact that set-theoretic membership works differently from 
parthood from a formal point of view. He writes:
Membership could not be (a special case of) the part-whole relation because of 
a difference in formal character. (Lewis 1991, p. 5)
The formal difference to which Lewis refers concerns transitivity. Let us see 
how Lewis’s reasoning can be made explicit. According to mereological monism 
(mereologyphi, the philosophical thesis Lewis endorses), Classical Extensional 
Mereology (CEM henceforth), a theory (a mereologytheo) elaborated in the 
first half of the twentieth century by logicians such as Leśniewski and Tarski 
and philosophers such as Goodman, is the general and exhaustive theory of 
parthood. According to this theory, the relation of parthood is transitive.
In our analysis of some occurrences of “part” and related terms in Chapter 1, 
we have observed that nonselective parthood (the variety of parthood such that 
every bit or piece—no matter how arbitrarily subdivided and devoid of a specific 
function—qualifies as part) seems to be transitive. And we have also observed 
that de facto (but for some good reasons, Chapter 1, Section 1.6) mereology 
focuses on nonselective parthood. Thus, as far as transitivity is concerned, the 
contention that CEM is the general, exhaustive theory of parthood confirms this 
impression.
Lewis uses transitivity to discriminate between genuine parthood (the 
relation which mereologydis is about, and which is exhaustively characterized by 
CEM according to mereologyphi) and set-theoretic membership.
Consider T, the set of all tabby cats. All the members of T are cats. Consider 
also B, the set of the sets each of which includes all the cats of a certain breed. 
All the members of B are sets of cats. Since tabby cats are a breed of cats, T is an 
element of B. Finally, consider Smudge, a tabby cat. If set-theoretic membership 
qualified as a parthood relation, we could take two of its instances and apply 
transitivity to them: Smudge is an element of T, and T is an element of B; by 
transitivity, it would follow that Smudge is an element of B. But Smudge is not an 
element of B: Smudge is a cat, and no element of B is a cat (the elements of B are 
sets of cats). Transitivity fails, and membership ends up being formally different 
from genuine parthood.

Mereological Monism: A Desirable Philosophical Thesis
33
2.2 Mereological monism as a refutation tool: An example
In order to better appreciate the epistemological advantage of mereological 
monism over mereological pluralism, let us focus on a slightly more elaborate 
example of its application to a philosophical debate, as a potential refutation 
tool. According to a noble tradition in philosophy—endorsed for example by 
many British empiricists, as well as many contemporary trope ­theorists3—
properties are parts of the individuals instantiating them. Suppose that, in 
the context of such a philosophical stance, the following claim is taken as an 
adequate characterization of instantiation itself:
Instantiation: An individual t instantiates a property P if and only if P is part 
of t.
Given a property and an individual, the subsistence of a relation of parthood 
between them would be, according to Instantiation, a necessary and sufficient 
condition for the subsistence of a relation of instantiation between them.
Now, consider a blue pen (it is full of blue ink and writes in blue) that 
happens to have a red cap. The cap is red. In other words, the cap instantiates 
redness. According to Instantiation, it follows that redness is part of the cap. 
But then there is also a prototypical, spatial instance of parthood at hand: 
the cap is part of the pen. By transitivity, if redness is part of the cap, and 
the cap is part of the pen, then redness is also part of the pen. According 
to Instantiation, parthood between a property and an individual is also a 
sufficient condition for instantiation. As a consequence, the pen instantiates 
redness. In other words, the pen is red. But the pen is not red (it is not full of 
red ink, it does not write in red).
Thus, we have an argument with a seemingly unacceptable conclusion.
1.	 The cap is red. (premiss)
2.	 Redness is part of the cap. (from 1, by the left-to-right direction of 
Instantiation)
3.	 The cap is part of the pen. (premiss)
4.	 Redness is part of the pen. (from 2 and 3, by transitivity)
5.	 The pen is red. (conclusion, from 4, by the right-to-left direction of 
Instantiation)
The premisses (1 and 3) are not controversial theses, but harmless local 
hypotheses. It would not make philosophical sense to reject them. Thus, we have 
three broad options:

Mereology
34
(a)	 to reject transitivity;
(b)	 to reject Instantiation;
(c)	 to accept conclusion 5 (by interpreting it in a way that makes it, contra 
appearances, acceptable).
At this point of the philosophical dialectics, mereological monism intervenes 
and tells us that (a) is not a viable option. Transitivity is dictated by the general, 
exhaustive theory of parthood (CEM). The selection and systematization of 
prototypical instances of parthood indicates transitivity as a feature of parthood. 
Thus, transitivity enjoys a privileged kind of solidity, and should prevail 
over Instantiation (thereby leading us to choose (b)), and over any doubtful 
interpretation of 5 (thereby leading us to choose (c)).
Of course, a mereological pluralist—as well as a mereological monist 
according to whom transitivity is not a feature of parthood—will disagree about 
the solidity of transitivity. But the example shows quite clearly the inferential 
advantage enjoyed by standard mereological monists over their opponents. 
When they are confronted with the above argument, the advantage is that 
mereological monists can toss (a) aside, thus restricting the domain of possible 
choices.
Option (b) is, in a sense, the most desirable outcome for the backers of 
mereological monism. If we opt for (b), mereological monism would lead us 
to refute a philosophical contention, namely a certain analysis of instantiation. 
Option (b) can be developed in various ways. For example, Instantiation could 
be weakened: parthood could be seen as a necessary but not sufficient condition 
for instantiation, and only the left-to-right direction of Instantiation would hold. 
This would be enough to block the inference from 4 to 5 in the argument. It is 
not a small concession though: parthood would cease to provide an adequate 
characterization of instantiation.
However, it is interesting to consider option (c) as well, in order to show that 
mereological monism is not all-powerful. In many cases, when mereological 
monism threatens to refute a contention, other surrounding claims can actually 
be adjusted, in order to avoid the refutation. Mereological monism still has 
the dialectical power to enforce these adjustments (when they are viable, and 
the theory at stake is not simply refuted); and these adjustments at times (as 
in the  present case) reveal something about the ties between parthood and 
other basic philosophical concepts.
The simplest way to adjust 5 and make it palatable (thereby embracing (c) 
and not having to reject any premiss or principle used in the argument) is to 

Mereological Monism: A Desirable Philosophical Thesis
35
admit that, after all, there is a sense in which the pen is red, insofar as it has a red 
part (namely, the cap).
This adjustment has a cost, because it forces us to repress our propensity to 
deny 5. This propensity is connected to our propensity to claim that the pen is 
blue, in the light of a seemingly plausible general principle about pens, according 
to which pens inherit their color from that of the ink inside them (that ink that 
is injected onto the paper when the pen is used); and to infer that it is not red 
from the fact that it is blue, in the light of the principle that nothing can be of two 
incompatible colors at the same time.
One could even claim that this adjustment amounts to renouncing the 
mereological characterization of instantiation, and as a result is not much 
different from (b): (5) is reinterpreted to mean that the pen is in part red, 
thus what parthood between a property and an individual warrants is that the 
individual instantiates the property at least in part. But the initial purpose of the 
theory was to characterize instantiation simpliciter, and not partial instantiation.
At this stage, the dialectics of the argument could continue in various 
directions. As far as we are concerned, we have given an example of how 
mereological monism can act as a refutation tool in a philosophical debate, 
and in what limited sense this makes mereological monism an epistemically 
desirable thesis.
2.3 Classical Extensional Mereology: 
From above and from below
Of course, the epistemic desirability of mereological monism does not imply 
that mereological monism is true. In order to evaluate mereological monism, we 
need to investigate its contents. Since mereological monism is the philosophical 
thesis according to which CEM is the general exhaustive theory of parthood 
and some other cognate relations and operations, to investigate the contents 
of mereological monism (mereologyphi) is to investigate the contents of CEM 
(mereologytheo).
CEM can be presented—and indeed is presented in the literature—from above 
or from below. A presentation from above typically consists of a compact list of 
axioms, which can be accepted or rejected as a single package. A presentation 
from below typically consists of a longer list of axioms of increasing force. It is 
possible to reject some of the stronger axioms in a presentation from below, 
while accepting the weaker ones. But in both cases, there are several alternative 

Mereology
36
axiomatizations. In this book CEM is presented from above, with a focus on 
a single axiomatization. Let us see what the distinction between presentations 
from above and presentations from below consists in, and why a presentation 
from above is preferable for our purposes.
In the presentation from above adopted in this book, CEM consists of 
three simple and inferentially strong principles: Transitivity; Uniqueness of 
Composition; Unrestricted Composition. The formulations of Uniqueness 
of Composition and Unrestricted Composition require some care (in particular in 
order to express the operation of composition, as we will see), and come in 
several variants. But in general the presentations of CEM from above have an 
easily graspable and patently controversial philosophical content.
In other words, the principles of CEM, when it is presented from above, 
are a perspicuous object of philosophical controversy. For analogous reasons, 
when applied to philosophical theories as in our previous example involving 
transitivity and instantiation, the principles of CEM in the presentations from 
above tend to make it quite evident whether the theory at stake is compatible 
with the contention that CEM is the general exhaustive theory of parthood (that 
is, with mereological monism), or not.
The main drawback of the presentations from above is that they are not very 
modular: if you doubt one or more of their principles, it is not easy to detach 
them from the others, because what remains risks being an unstable and not 
very interesting compound. The presentations from below are preferable from 
an analytic viewpoint: they present CEM as a series of principles of increasing 
force, and, if you doubt some principles, it is easier to limit your adoption of 
CEM to a certain point of the series. On the other hand, as we will see in relation 
to presentations from below in Part Two (in particular in Chapter 9), some of the 
levels at which you can stop do not offer clear reasons to stop there.
When you do not stop at a certain level (that is, when you do not reject some 
of the principles), the presentations of CEM from above and from below identify 
exactly the same class of theorems: if a theory is seen as a class of theorems, 
CEM is a single theory, which can be axiomatized in several ways. Presentations 
from above and presentations from below, by contrast, play different roles in the 
dialectics between mereological monism and its opponents.
The task for any champion of mereological monism (and one of my main 
aims in this book) is to defend CEM in its presentation from above, by arguing 
in favor of the three perspicuous and strong principles, as well as by explaining 
away or debunking alleged counterexamples to them. By contrast, the opponents 
of mereological monism should first of all show that one or more of the three 

Mereological Monism: A Desirable Philosophical Thesis
37
principles are wrong. After that, they can weaken, revise, enrich CEM, or 
integrate it with other theories of parthood. For the purpose of weakening and 
revising CEM, a modular version from below could prove to be more convenient.
These different roles correspond to the preferences displayed in the literature. 
Lewis and other philosophical upholders of mereological monism, such as 
Goodman,4 tend to present CEM from above. Scholars that actually wish to 
criticize its pretension to be a fully adequate and exhaustive theory of parthood—
such as Peter Simons—or wish to identify a less controversial core within it tend 
to present it from below.5
This book belongs to the former tradition. Therefore, in presenting and 
defending mereological monism, and in evaluating its claim of being a powerful 
philosophical tool (and in particular a refutation tool, as we have seen in 
Section 2.2), we will adopt a presentation of CEM from above. Thus, we will 
analyze Transitivity, Uniqueness of Composition, and Unrestricted Composition, 
and discuss potential counterexamples to them, along with arguments for and 
against.


3
Is Mereology Formal?
3.1 Three senses of formality
According to mereological monism, CEM is the single, exhaustive theory of 
parthood and cognate relations and operations. In CEM, there is substantially 
only a single relation of parthood.1 The idea is that one and the same relation of 
parthood applies across the board, no matter what entities are involved and how 
they are mutually related. This single relation would be topic-neutral: it does not 
matter to which category parts and wholes belong (i.e., whether they are abstract 
or concrete entities, universals or particulars, artifacts or living organisms).
Topic-neutrality is one of the ways in which the claim that mereology is formal 
can be understood.2 When it is understood in such terms, I believe that it is a 
true claim: mereology is formal. But it is important to make it as clear as possible 
what this means, and to differentiate it from other ways of construing formality, 
according to which it is false and misleading to claim that mereology is formal.
The debate about the concept of formality is very complex, in particular in the 
philosophy of logic, and this is not the place to retrace it.3 It is enough to say that 
logic is often said to be formal, and a kind of ontology (namely formal ontology) 
is often compared to the formality of logic. The label formal ontology comes from 
Husserl, who in his Logical Investigations also set forth a philosophical theory 
of parthood, and classified the theory of parthood as an instance of formal 
ontology. More recently, the concept of formal ontology has been taken up again 
and used to refer to those parts of philosophical ontology that do not concern 
specific categories (properties, sets, numbers, artifacts, etc.) but can be applied 
across the board. In this characterization of formal ontology, the investigation 
of parthood and other mereological relations is often understood to belong 
to formal ontology. Another candidate subject matter for formal ontology is 
identity, but it is a controversial candidate, because identity is often thought to 
be a logical notion. Other frequent examples are ontological dependence (that is, 

Mereology
40
the modal or explanatory connection between the existence of a certain entity 
and the existence of another one), and—more recently—grounding (the kind of 
metaphysical explanation that would be expressed by philosophical locutions 
such as in virtue of    ).
The comparison with logic is often thought to be clarifying. According to 
Barry Smith, for example, formal ontology would be for the world what formal 
logic is for theories about the world.4 However, the comparison with logic 
leaves the concept of formality largely underdetermined, and only some ways of 
construing it make sense for mereology.
Let us distinguish three senses of formality. Formality in the first sense 
consists in a kind of indifference to the semantic interpretation of the vocabulary. 
Formality in the second sense consists in topic-neutrality. Formality in the third 
sense consists in restraining from determining the extension of a certain relation, 
that is, what is actually connected by that relation. My thesis is that mereologytheo 
enjoys primarily formality in the second sense at a high degree, and also enjoys 
formality in the third sense.
By contrast, it does not enjoy formality in the first sense. Formality, when it is 
understood in this first sense, concerns primarily inferences in a certain field: if 
the validity of inferences in a certain field can be assessed without considering a 
certain interpretation of the vocabulary, then that field can be said to be formal 
in this sense. The idea is that it does not matter how the involved sentences 
(and their subsentential constituents) are interpreted (this would correspond 
to the content of the sentences involved): what matters is only the form of the 
sentences involved.
For example, in propositional logic, the inference from a conjunction to one 
of its conjuncts is valid quite independently of the semantic interpretation of the 
nonlogical vocabulary. From “Pegasus is a bear and Trump is a hero” it follows 
that “Trump is a hero,” as much as from “Oedipus is the son of Jocasta and 
Jocasta is the lover of Oedipus” it follows that “Jocasta is the lover of Oedipus.” 
It does not matter how the conjuncts and the terms within them are interpreted 
(nor does it matter if they are true or false).
Analogously, in the theory of identity, from “Cicero is Tully” and “Tully is 
the greatest Roman orator,” it follows that “Cicero is the greatest Roman orator,” 
as much as from “Pisa is Berlin” and “Berlin is the smallest village in Iceland” 
it follows that “Pisa is the smallest village in Iceland.” It does not matter how 
the terms are interpreted (nor does it matter if the sentences are true or false). 
The theory of identity—according to which identity is transitive—justifies the 
inferences, quite independently of any interpretation.

Is Mereology Formal?
41
In this sense, mereology is not formal. The predicate for parthood (as well 
as the other predicates defined on the basis of it, and which will be introduced 
later on) is interpreted in a certain way. This is connected to our remark in 
Chapter  1, Section  1.5 that the formal features that mereological monism 
attributes to parthood are not sufficient conditions for a parthood relation: there 
are some intuitive constraints about the domain of eligible relations. While these 
constraints—as we have seen—are never the subject of interesting controversies, 
they prevent mereology from being formal in this first sense.
An additional and connected reason why mereology does not enjoy this kind 
of formality is that this kind of formality cannot be instantiated in degrees. Either 
the validity of some inferences depends purely on the form of the premisses, or 
not; either it matters how the sentences and the terms in them are interpreted, 
or not. By contrast, the kind of formality to which mereology can aspire comes 
in degrees. Its topic-neutrality is not bound to be absolute. Perhaps the principles 
of CEM characterize exhaustively parthood and other cognate entities for all 
artifacts, but not for living organisms, perhaps for all concrete entities, but not 
for abstract entities. In Parts Two and Three of this book we suggest that this 
latter restriction (i.e., the exclusion of abstract entities) is actually plausible, or 
at least that abstract entities are a much more difficult domain of application for 
mereological monism than concrete ones.
This restriction does not nullify the formality of mereological monism: it is 
still a highly general metaphysical doctrine. It is still largely topic-neutral: the 
domain of concrete things is highly heterogeneous. Still, it is not possible to 
make sense of this kind of formality, if formality is understood in this first sense.
The second way of construing formality takes it merely as a kind of generality. 
In this sense, topic-neutrality does not consist in the fact that the semantic 
interpretation of predicates, constants, or sentences does not matter; rather, it 
simply consists in the high level of generality of the principles of mereology: 
these principles are simply true of a lot of things. We can include lots of 
heterogeneous, disparate things in the domain of their quantifiers. It is precisely 
in this sense that mereology can be said to be formal: it is expected to be general 
and topic-neutral at a very high degree.5
Finally, there is a third kind of formality, and in this sense too mereology is 
formal. This sense does not concern only mereologyphi, but also philosophical 
mereology (mereologydis) in general. It is a sense of formality that can be accepted 
also by mereological pluralists, in spite of the fact that, according to them, it is 
false that there is a single, highly general theory of parthood and cognate relations 
and operations. For a mereological pluralist, mereologytheo is not highly general 

Mereology
42
and topic-neutral; by contrast, according to mereological monism, it is. But 
still, there is a sense in which mereologydis is formal, quite independently of any 
disagreement about mereological principles and their generality. Philosophical 
mereology should not be expected to determine what is part of what: what parts 
a car, or a person, or a water molecule have. Philosophical mereology does not 
aim to define the extension of the parthood predicate. It concerns only questions 
such as: is parthood transitive or not? Given some things, is there a single thing 
composed by them?
When confronted with these questions, mereological monists and 
mereological pluralists will give different answers, and will disagree on the degree 
of generality to be expected from the answers. Nonetheless, they will agree that 
philosophy is not about establishing if specific instances of parthood hold or 
not. In this sense, mereologydis does not concern the content (the extension) of 
the parthood relation, but the way in which parthood works.
Thus, we have distinguished three senses of formality. In a first sense, 
formality is a feature of some inferences, whose validity can be established quite 
independently of the semantic interpretation of the premisses. In this first sense, 
mereology is not formal. In a second sense, formality is a feature of theories, and 
simply consists in generality: in holding true of a lot of disparate things. In this 
second sense, according to mereological monism (the philosophical thesis that 
this book aims to present and defend), mereology has a high degree of formality. 
In a third sense, formality is still a feature of theories, and consists in their 
abstaining from the pretension to determine what falls within the extension i.e., 
the content of some predicates and what does not. In this third sense, virtually 
every scholar of philosophical mereology agrees that philosophical mereology 
is formal.
3.2 How to show that mereology is formal
Let us focus on the second sense of formality, according to which formality is 
generality, and comes in degree. Mereological monism claims that CEM is a 
highly formal theory. But how is it possible to argue in favor of this claim? What 
kinds of reasons can be adduced in support of this claim? Mainly reasons of 
two kinds.
First, positive arguments in support of the principles of CEM. In most cases, 
these arguments are not purely deductive: they can be characterized as inferences 
to the best explanation. As is commonly the case with inferences to the best 

Is Mereology Formal?
43
explanation, the premisses of these arguments (the explananda) should be shown 
to be real evidence, worth of an explanation. Besides, it must be shown that the 
principle or principles of mereology at stake are really the best explanans at our 
disposal. They should be compared with other explanations, and shown to be 
preferable, for example, because they are simpler or because they are supported 
by some independent evidence. Inferences to the best explanation are known 
to be fallible inferences, and to raise lots of difficult methodological problems.
As in these other disciplines, deduction too may play a role within the 
inferences to the best explanations: in order to find their best explanation, it is 
important to scrutinize what the premisses entail; and in order to establish if a 
certain explanation is the best (for example, because it is simpler), it is pivotal to 
know what it entails. In the case of mereology for example, mereologytheo is not 
confined to its axioms, but extends to whatever is derivable within it, and any 
theorem of CEM has a role in the inferences to the best explanation in support 
of CEM.
In other cases, alleged counterexamples to the principles of CEM are shown 
to be ineffective. In pursuing this latter defensive strategy, it is important to 
weigh potential counterexamples, consistently with the methodology set forth 
in Chapter  1. Some potential counterexamples concern paradigmatic, literal, 
space involving cases that mereology aims to systematize and project, in order to 
obtain a reliable guideline for identifying other genuine instances of parthood. 
When potential counterexamples concern these cases, the only option for 
mereological monists is to show that they are not real counterexamples: either 
they are actually compatible with CEM or they do not obtain.
By contrast, when mereological principles are projected onto non-prototypical 
relations, the mereological monist can either show that they are not real 
counterexamples or claim that they are not real cases of parthood. In the second 
case, the mereological monist is actually applying her methodology: she is using 
CEM’s principles to distinguish parthood from non-parthood; and in particular, 
she is establishing that a certain relation is not an instance of parthood, just 
because it fails to obey CEM’s principles.
The first kind of strategy (the one that involves arguments in support of the 
CEM principles) is positive: if successful, it shows (albeit in the fallible way that 
is typical of inferences to the best explanation) that the principles of mereology 
are preferable to other competing principles about parthood and other cognate 
relations. By contrast, the second kind of strategy is defensive: it shows that it is 
possible to resist the attempts made by the adversaries of mereological monism 
to refute it (and in particular to refute the claim that CEM is formal or general).

Mereology
44
We have seen in the previous section that formality, in the sense at stake (that 
is, if it is simply equated to generality), can come in degrees. This means that, 
in some cases, the mereological monist can also surrender; she can concede 
that some counterexamples are indeed counterexamples, and genuine instances 
of parthood. In these cases, the degree of generality of mereological monism 
decreases: the entities at stake in the counterexample are conceded to be an 
exception to mereological monism. Still, if these counterexamples concern only 
some well-delimited categories of entities, mereological monism can continue to 
enjoy a relatively high degree of formality or generality.
3.3 Formality, existence, identity
It is important to remark that the kind of formality or generality ­which—
according to mereological monism—parthood enjoys makes it akin to existence 
and identity. Also in the case of existence and identity there is a sort of standard 
philosophical stance—sometimes dubbed Quinean orthodoxy, insofar as Quine 
was its most ardent proponent—according to which existence and identity are 
univocal, in the sense that there is only one way to exist that applies to any kind 
of entity.
Thus, Quinean orthodoxy also counts as a kind of monism about existence and 
identity. Actually, later we will see that mereology has a close link to existence and 
identity; and that probably the most substantial (and contentious) philosophical 
content of mereological monism consists in the identity and existence conditions 
it attributes to complex entities; and that these conditions are as formal—that is, 
as highly general—as mereology’s characterization of parthood. Thus, mereology 
is a formal theory that is largely about identity and existence.
What about the arguments in favor of these various kinds of monism? The 
arguments usually provided in favor of Quinean orthodoxy by philosophers 
such as Peter Van Inwagen6 concern, for example, the possibility of explaining 
any apparent difference between various ways of existing and being identical 
as differences between the heterogeneous things that exist and are involved 
in identity relations. These arguments may also point to the links between 
existence and identity and numerical predications, and exploit the apparent 
univocity of numerical predications as an argument in favor of the univocity of 
existence and identity.
These arguments cannot be directly exported to mereological monism, and 
prima facie look very different from the kinds of arguments for mereological 

Is Mereology Formal?
45
monism outlined in the previous section (inferences to the best explanation, 
strategies to show that the alleged counterexamples are not such). Nonetheless, 
the typical arguments in favor of Quinean orthodoxy about existence and 
identity play a role in the defense of mereological monism: namely, when 
the mereological pluralist claims that there are various relations of parthood, 
her monist opponent tends to reply that what vary are the natures of wholes 
and parts, and that parthood—inasmuch as it is highly formal or general—is 
expected to apply uniformly to heterogeneous entities of several categories: 
there is no need to make parthood itself non-univocal (just as there is no need to 
make existence or identity non-univocal).
Throughout the entire book, we will be discussing other deep and articulate 
links between mereology, existence, and identity.


4.1 Is parthood transitive? Yes
It is time to begin applying the methodology we outlined in Chapters 1–3 to 
the analysis and defense of mereological monism: identify some formal features 
of parthood and composition on the basis of a selection and systematization 
of their prototypical instances; use the resulting characterization as a guideline 
for identifying other literal instances of parthood; dispose of seeming 
counterexamples to the resulting principles, and discuss a priori arguments in 
favor of (or against) these principles.
As already noted in the Introduction, CEM consists of three principles 
(Transitivity, Uniqueness of Composition, and Unrestricted Composition) and 
of their logical consequences. Uniqueness of Composition and Unrestricted 
Composition are the philosophical, controversial core of mereological 
monism, and we will devote Parts Two and Three to them, respectively. Only 
in that context all the various aspects of the methodology we outlined will be 
instantiated.
However, it is advisable to begin our analysis and defense of mereologyphi 
from the simplest principle: Transitivity. Moreover, in this chapter, we will also 
discuss the claims made by CEM that parthood is reflexive and antisymmetric. 
While these latter claims do not figure as axioms in the presentation of CEM 
from above, they are nonetheless CEM theorems. Thus, mereological monism 
is committed to them.
We have already employed and partially discussed Transitivity, that is, the 
principle that if a thing x is part of a thing y that is part of a thing z, then x is 
part of z as well. In the language of first-order logic, Transitivity is expressed as 
follows (P is the predicate of parthood):

(Transitivity)
4
Transitivity and Other Features

Mereology
48
We have seen in Chapter 1 that, when we analyzed occurrences of terms like 
“part” in English, Transitivity tends to hold when these terms are understood in 
a nonselective way, while Transitivity tends to fail for selective parthood, which 
is not the subject matter of mereologydis.
The counterexamples to Transitivity in the literature also seems to actually 
concern selective parthood. In some examples, it seems that going nonselective 
helps. For example, according to Nicholas Rescher,1 the way in which biologists 
use the notion of part does not conform to CEM, and in particular does not 
respect Transitivity. A biologist will consider a mitochondrion to be a part of a 
cell, and the cell a part of a tissue, but would deny that the mitochondrion is a 
part of the tissue. In these cases, it seems clear that the biologist has no doubt 
that the mitochondrion is in the tissue in a spatial sense. Due to some features 
of English which we do not need to speculate about here, the indeterminate 
article (e.g., “a”) tends to elicit a selective reading of “part.” If we remove the 
indeterminate article, the answer of the biologist could change, and obey 
Transitivity: the mitochondrion is part of the tissue, just because it is in it in 
a spatial sense.
The spatial sense of parthood (assumed as prototypical) makes Transitivity 
quite a solid principle. If something is in something that is in turn in something 
else (where this being in is spatial), then it seems quite uncontroversial that 
the first thing is in the third. As Varzi has argued,2 the selective varieties of 
parthood can be seen as specializations of general, nonselective parthood. 
Given parthood, there will be various specialized φ-parthoods, where “φ” is 
a predicate that restricts the domains of parts (e.g., “direct,” “distinguished,” 
“functional”).
From the extensional viewpoint, these relations will be restrictions of parthood 
tout court. The extension of parthood (which is a binary relation) is a set of 
ordered couples, such that their first member is part of the second member. 
But only some of these ordered couples are such that their first member is a 
functional part of the second, or such that their first member is a direct part of 
the second.
The extensions of these specialized relations will be subclasses of the extension 
of parthood tout court: whatever is in the relation of functional, distinguished, 
direct parthood is also in the relation of parthood tout court, but not vice 
versa. We can say that specialized parthoods are subrelations of parthood tout 
court. And there is nothing surprising in the fact that a subrelation of a relation 
differs from the relation in terms of its formal features, as a very simple abstract 
reasoning reveals.

Transitivity and Other Features
49
Suppose that in its extension a relation R de facto includes three couple 
of objects <a, b>, <b, c>, and <a, c>. Patently these three couples are not 
counterexamples to Transitivity. Within this extension, it holds that:
But now consider S, a subrelation of R, such that it includes in its extension 
<a, b> and <b, c>, but not <a, c>. S is not transitive. It does not hold that:
Rescher’s biological examples seem to follow this pattern: nonselective 
parthood would include the ordered couple <mitochondrion, tissue>, and would 
therefore be a confirmation of Transitivity—not a counterexample to it. The kind 
of selective parthood elicited by the indeterminate article “a” would exclude the 
ordered couple <mitochondrion, tissue>.
However, in other cases, things are more complicated, and focusing on 
selectivity risks being insufficient. Let us go back to our example of Kemalists 
in Chapter 1. The left arm of a Kemalist MP is part of her; the Kemalist MP is 
part of the parliament. But it seems definitely wrong to claim that the arm is part 
of the parliament. Selectivity should not be blamed for the failure of Transitivity 
in this case. Sure, the arm is not a selected, privileged part of the parliament, 
for example, because it is not allowed to vote independently. However, nothing 
changes if we discard these restrictions, and turn to nonselective, pure parthood, 
as Varzi’s methodology suggests. No matter how pure parthood becomes, the 
arm is not part of the parliament.
But is this an instance of parthood at all? The fact that in English it is appropriate 
to say that an MP is part of the parliament does not prove that this is an instance 
of parthood. We could also say that a member of parliament is (unsurprisingly) 
member of the parliament, and membership is not a mereological notion (it is 
usually seen as a set-theoretic notion).
We can leave natural language aside and use our methodology. This does 
not seem to be a prototypical case of spatial parthood. By “parliament”—in this 
context—we do not mean the building where the MPs meet and deliberate, but 
an institution. While we are not going to delve into the difficult problems of 
what an institution is, it is perhaps safe to exclude that it has a spatial location, of 
which the spatial location of our MP is part.
Thus, in the case of the relation between the Kemalist and the parliament, we 
are outside the domain of prototypical, spatial cases of parthood. By contrast, 
the relation between the arm and the Kemalist seems spatial and quite standard. 

Mereology
50
Moreover, it seems that the relation between the Kemalist and the parliament 
can also be characterized as a set-theoretic notion.
In cases where Transitivity seems to fail, we can deny that at least one of the 
relations involved is parthood. The candidate to be ousted from the domain of 
mereology is the relation between the Kemalist and the parliament it is a member 
of. Yes: the Kemalist MP is a member of the parliament, and when we say that 
someone is part of the parliament, we are not saying anything different from 
when we say that she is a member of the parliament. Membership is a different 
kind of relation, and it is not expected to concatenate with the standard, spatial 
parthood relation between the right arm of the MP and its owner. Thus, there is 
not a single relation at play, for which we have identified a failure of Transitivity.
4.2 Monism, pluralism, and Ad Hocness
Someone unpersuaded by the methodology sketched out in the previous chapters 
could ask: is this move not patently ad hoc? It might seem that we have simply 
got rid of a counterexample by excluding it from the investigation domain. Given 
an alleged case of a relation X which works differently from our theory of the 
relation X, the mereological monist reacts by claiming that this is not actually a 
case of the relation X. This move—the objector could argue—is always possible, 
and too easy: the mereological monist is restricting the investigation domain to 
those cases which respect the principles of CEM.
There is certainly a real risk of ad hoc moves in these dialectical situations. 
However, ad hocness consists in making an assumption for the sole purpose of 
obtaining the result one is aiming for. If we have additional reasons to make that 
assumption, then the charge of ad hocness is ungrounded.
Indeed, in the specific case under discussion, we have at least one additional 
reason to argue that the relation between an MP and its parliament is not parthood, 
but set-theoretical membership. And the reason is that membership (the well-
known fundamental relation of set theory) seems to work exactly as the relation 
between an MP and its parliament. Set-theoretic membership is not transitive 
(given three sets such that the first is member of the second and the second is 
member of the third, it does not follow that the first is member of the third).
In general, the charge of ad hocness should be taken seriously. The mereological 
monist is not allowed to expel from the domain of CEM whatever violates its 
principles. This behavior would be admissible if CEM were considered with an 
instrumental attitude, as a theory that works where it works: a technical framework 

Transitivity and Other Features
51
that can be applied locally, and could be replaced by other frameworks where the 
relation at stake does not work in that way. But CEM is for the mereological 
monist (such as me) a true theory about reality as a whole, or at least about a 
large section of reality (given that formality/generality can come in degrees).
Thus, in order to avoid the charge of ad hocness, we need a good enough 
reason to deny that the same relation connects the arm and the MP in one case, 
and the MP and the parliament in the other. The legitimacy of rejecting the 
counterexample to Transitivity rests on the fact that the relation between the MP 
and the parliament works in another way on its own.
Consider the IPU (Inter-Parliamentary Union): it is a worldwide association 
of parliaments. Its members are parliaments, including the Turkish parliament 
of which our Kemalist is a member. Thus, the Kemalist is a member of the 
Turkish parliament, and the Turkish parliament is a member of the IPU. But 
the IPU is an association of parliaments only: no person (and thus no MP) can 
become a member of the IPU. Hence, the kind of membership in question is 
indeed found to bear a certain resemblance with set-theoretic membership: like 
the latter, it is a non-transitive relation. In any other similar case, it is upon the 
mereological monist to show that there are independent reasons to think that a 
certain relation is not parthood, thereby avoiding the charge of ad hocness.
At this point, it is interesting to see how a mereological pluralist could react. 
In his 2010 paper Towards a Theory of Part, Kit Fine presents a very refined form 
of mereological pluralism. According to him, there are many different relations 
of parthood, which works in different ways.
Fine presents a very general characterization of parthood, according 
to which x is part of y if and only if x is in y, and the replacement of x with 
another entity z in y changes what y is or how y is.3 The notion of being in is left 
intuitive, and is not further analyzed: Fine’s idea is that any intuitive judgment 
that something is in something else should be accepted as evidence, irrespective 
of its formal behavior.
In the specific case of the Kemalist, Fine would probably insist that the MP 
patently is in the parliament, and that, if the MP were replaced (by another 
MP), then obviously how the parliament is would change. Analogously, the 
parliament is in the IPU, and if Turkey were to become a non-parliamentary 
monarchy, how the IPU is would change. There are two instances of parthood, 
then, and Transitivity fails. The resulting evidence that the relation in question is 
non-transitive should lead us to study a non-transitive relation of parthood, and 
to place it and the transitive relation of parthood studied by CEM side by side 
within a pluralist mereological framework.

Mereology
52
By comparison, we can get an idea of how Lewis’s methodology differs: 
monism settles on a specific characterization of parthood, and offers a guideline 
for discriminating cases of parthood from other cases. Fine’s pluralism accepts 
any apparent case of parthood as it is: any possible deviance of its behavior 
is not evidence that the relation is not really parthood; it is evidence that we 
should enrich our theory of parthood, in order to make room for that variety of 
parthood as well.
4.3 Reflexivity
Among the formal features of parthood, only Transitivity is dictated by a specific 
axiom in CEM, when CEM is presented from above. But in CEM it is possible 
to prove that parthood is reflexive and antisymmetric. Thus, the following are 
theorems of CEM (in the case of Antisymmetry, the language of first-order logic 
needs to be integrated with the identity predicate):

(Reflexivity)

(Antisymmetry)
We have claimed that the presentation from above has the virtue of focusing 
on philosophically perspicuous, substantial principles. And we have seen that 
Transitivity is precisely such a principle, and provides a sample of the kind 
of methodology at play in mereological monism. By contrast, Reflexivity and 
(with some important provisos) Antisymmetry are not sensible topics for a 
philosophical debate.
Before explaining why this is the case, let us also introduce the relation of 
proper parthood. Something is a proper part of something else if and only if it is 
a part of it, but is not identical to it. In the following definition PP is the predicate 
for proper parthood:4

(Proper Parthood–Definition)
Proper parthood is a defined relation. Any occurrence of the predicate “PP” 
could be eliminated through its definition.
Let us see why it is not very interesting to ask if the relation of parthood is 
reflexive, that is, if it is such that everything is part of itself. The fact is that CEM 
actually distinguishes two relations, P and PP, one easily definable in terms of the 
other. And one of them is reflexive, while the other is not. The motivations for 

Transitivity and Other Features
53
thinking that parthood is reflexive and those for thinking that is it not reflexive 
are well served by focusing on one or on the other of the two relations.
The difference between these two relations concerns their extension. 
The extension of P includes any couple whose members are numerically identical. 
<Giorgio Lando, Giorgio Lando>, <Benny Hill, Benny Hill>, <Elizabeth Taylor, 
Elizabeth Taylor>, and all other analogously boring couples are among the couples 
in the extension of parthood. Identity is a relation too: its extension includes all 
and only those couples whose first member is identical to the second. Thus, we 
could say that the extension of identity is a subclass of the extension of parthood.
By contrast, the extension of PP does not include any couple of identical 
members. The extension of proper parthood has no member in common with 
the extension of identity. Indeed, quite the opposite holds: proper parthood does 
not include any couple of identical members.
We have seen above that PP can be easily defined in terms of P simpliciter. 
On the other hand, if PP were taken as a primitive instead of P, then parthood 
simpliciter could be defined with equal ease:
Thus, the reflexivity of the fundamental relation of mereology simply depends 
on the choice of P or of PP as the fundamental relation. Reflexive relations 
(in general) are those whose extension includes the extension of the identity 
relation: P includes it, as its above definition in terms of PP makes clear; PP does 
not include it, as its above definition in terms of P makes clear. The definition of 
PP makes it clear that its extension has actually no member in common with the 
extension of identity, and such relations are called antireflexive.
Once either P or PP is taken as primitive, the other is defined. We could even 
take both P and PP as primitives, with a negligible loss of economy. In our own 
exposition of CEM we would actually use both relations without quibbling about 
which is more fundamental.
Disputes about what is more fundamental are common, and often very 
interesting in philosophy. According to some philosophers, disputes of this kind 
are even the privileged subject matter of metaphysics, or perhaps of philosophy 
in general.5 But in this case it really seems that nothing profound is at stake. 
Proper parthood is obviously called what it is for a reason. There is a (proper, 
narrow) sense in which being a part of x is incompatible with being the whole x. 
As we have already noted in Chapter 1, if we desire a piece of the cake and we are 
given the entire cake, our desire can be considered to have been satisfied, but in 
an extreme, liminal, and improper way.

Mereology
54
On the one hand, we will see that PP figures prominently in CEM (in 
particular, in the characterization of Extensionalism, an important principle 
deeply connected to the principle of Uniqueness of Composition—it will be 
investigated in Part Two), and this could suggest one possible reason to deem 
it to be more fundamental than P. In Extensionalism (as everywhere else) it is 
obviously possible to replace any occurrence of PP with occurrences of P through 
the above definition, but this would increase the complexity of the formula.
On the other hand, one could argue that there is something less natural in 
PP than in P. What is arguably less natural is precisely the fact of excluding 
the extension of identity from that of parthood. Consider the case of the cake 
again, and of one of its crumbs. Imagine a series of increasingly large crumbs; 
in this series we go through crumbs of increasing size. At a certain point, the 
pieces are big enough that it would be awkward to call them “crumbs”: they are 
respectable pieces of cake. After that, the pieces of the cake begin to be really 
big; at a certain point, you obtain a piece of the cake that consists of the whole 
cake minus a crumb. We continue with our series, and at a certain point we find 
a piece of the cake that consists of the whole cake minus one glucose molecule. 
This is definitely a big piece of cake, but it is still both a part and a proper part of 
the cake. Up to this point, all the parts of the cake are both parts simpliciter and 
proper parts of the cake.
Then, not much later in the series, the piece of the cake ends up being the cake 
itself. You can go further in the series, and involve for example the whole cake 
plus the piece of paper in which the cake is wrapped (or plus a single molecule 
of this piece of paper). These further objects (you might wonder if they actually 
exist, but let us provisionally assume that they do) are obviously not parts of 
the cake; but still they are in a parthood relation with the cake, namely in an 
inverted relation. The cake is part of the cake plus the paper, and of the cake plus 
the molecule of paper.
Now, we have a series of entities of increasing size each of which (except the 
cake itself) is involved both in a proper parthood relation and in a parthood 
relation simpliciter with the cake. The cake itself is a part simpliciter—and 
not a proper part—of itself. Is it wise to consider as more fundamental the 
relation that excludes this case, thereby making a seemingly continuous series 
discontinuous?
Perhaps not. Obviously, the cake is a special, peculiar part of itself, and it 
is also special among the entities of which the cake itself is a part. But this 
peculiarity is already expressed by the fact that only the cake, and nothing 
else in the series, is identical to the cake. This does not make the cake—so 

Transitivity and Other Features
55
to say—mereologically heterogeneous with respect to the other entities in 
the series. Privileging PP over P risks cutting the series of parts off at an 
unnatural joint.
Thus, there are reasons to prefer P over PP, but also reasons to prefer PP over 
P as the fundamental relation in CEM, and no clear winner emerges. We will use 
both notions in our presentation of CEM, and underline the cases in which the 
distinction has some bearing. As a result, we will have both a reflexive relation 
and an antireflexive one at our disposal.
4.4 Antisymmetry
The case of Antisymmetry is analogous, but requires some additional care. 
According to CEM, P is an antisymmetric relation. The only case in which there 
is an x and there is a y such that x is part of y and y is part of x is the case in which 
x and y are one and the same thing.
PP is not merely antisymmetric, but asymmetric:6 this means that, according 
to CEM, there are never an x and a y such that one is proper part of the other.

(Asymmetry of Proper Parthood)
The Antisymmetry of P and the Asymmetry of PP are strictly connected. 
The only case in which x and y are admitted as mutual parts is the case in which 
they are the same thing. But if x is a proper part of y, then x is not identical to y, 
and mutual proper parthood is ruled out. Thus, insofar as there is no substantial 
reason to prefer P or PP as the fundamental relation of mereology or vice versa, 
there is also no reason to discuss if the fundamental relation of mereology is 
merely antisymmetric or asymmetric.
From one perspective, however, the case of Antisymmetry is trickier than 
that of Reflexivity, and in recent years many opponents of Lewis’s mereological 
monism have come to elaborate interesting debates on this. The point is 
that you could suspect that the fundamental relation of mereology is neither 
antisymmetric nor asymmetric, and that there are genuine cases of different 
things that are one part of the other. In the so-called theory of constitution, there 
would be cases—we will discuss them in Chapter 9—in which two numerically 
different things are mutual parts.
Thus, how does mereological monism treat these cases and how can it defend 
the claims that P is antisymmetric and PP is asymmetric? Let us focus on the 
realm of prototypical parthood, in which the mereological harmony sketched 

Mereology
56
out in Chapter 1, Section 1.2 holds. In these cases, the reasons to think that 
there cannot be two different things one of which is part of the other could seem 
rather clear. Suppose that x is part (part simpliciter, the relation expressed by P) 
of y and that y is part of x. Then, by mereological harmony, region(x) is part of 
region(y); and region(y) is part of region(x).
Now, I am being completely naive about spatial regions and the kind of 
parthood in which they are involved. I am not committed to any kind of realism 
about regions of space, or to any claim about the relation of parthood and 
containment between them. There is a huge variety of philosophical positions 
about space, which would deserve a book to themselves.7 My purpose is not to 
clarify the links between mereology and spatial location, but to illustrate the 
role of spatial parthood as prototypical literal parthood in the methodology of 
mereological monism.
At this naive level, region(x) and region(y)—mutually one in the other—cannot 
but be a single region of space. At this point, the denier of the Antisymmetry of 
P is asking us to believe that there are two different things, part of one another, 
that occupy the same region of space. Well, this is exactly what some deniers of 
Antisymmetry are willing to do, and it is perhaps even one of the main reasons 
why they are skeptical about Antisymmetry.
Consider a wood table and the portion of wood of which it is made. 
And suppose that these are two different entities (we will see in Chapter 7 that 
there are—highly controversial—reasons to think that they indeed are). Then it 
is very plausible to think that, at any time in which the table exists, they occupy 
the same region of space, and that this holds in general for every object and the 
portion of matter of which it is made.
The principle according to which it is not possible for two distinct individuals 
to occupy one and the same region of space at the same time is usually called 
Locke’s thesis.8 This principle is denied by the person who thinks that the table 
and the piece of wood are different and colocated.
Once this person denies Locke’s thesis, she might wonder if there is a 
mereological relation between the table and the piece of wood; and if she answers 
this question affirmatively, then she might wish to maintain that they are part of 
one another and yet different.9 This would mean that they are actually parts of 
one another, and violate the Antisymmetry of P.
When confronted with this line of opposition to the Antisymmetry of P, the 
mereological monist replies that this is a long and complex reasoning, and that, 
along it, in order to avoid a certain impression of arbitrariness and shallowness, 
some kind of methodology is needed. There are at least three promising ways to 

Transitivity and Other Features
57
avoid this outcome, and preserve the Antisymmetry of P and the Asymmetry 
of PP.
First, as we will see in our discussion of Extensionalism in Part Two, it is far 
from clear whether the table and the piece of wood are different.
Second, even if it is conceded that they are different, it is not clear why they 
should be in a mereological relation at all. The very circumstance that they 
(allegedly) occupy the same region of space, are distinct, but are not in one 
another could suggest that the table and the piece of wood belong to different 
kinds, and that in general pieces of material (such as the piece of wood) and 
artifacts (such as the table) belong to different kinds. Once their spatiotemporal 
coincidence is not taken as decisive evidence that they are identical, it is not 
clear either whether it serves as evidence that there is a mereological relation 
between them.
Third, even once it is conceded that there is a mereological relation between 
them, it is not clear why this mereological relation should be mutual parthood. 
The reason to distinguish between the table and the piece of wood (and to avoid 
taking the first way out) is presumably that the table is a richer entity, one that 
instantiates some further properties (for example, some stylistic features—it is 
in the Art Nouveau style) that the piece of wood lacks. Why should we attribute 
a reciprocal relation to them? We could claim instead that the piece of wood is 
a proper part of the table, but that the table is not a proper part of the wood.10
It is not clear which one of these three ways out the mereological monist 
should choose (we are going to deepen the analysis of them in our discussion 
of Extensionalism in Chapter  9). The mereological monist thinks that the 
Antisymmetry of P and the Asymmetry of PP are constitutive features of 
parthood in its most standard and less controversial cases. Given this datum, 
the mereological monist projects these features onto the less standard and 
more controversial cases, such as the relation between artifacts and portions 
of matter.
This projection offers some guidance. In the specific case under consideration, 
the projection precludes any possible outcome of the philosophical debate about 
material constitution that violates the Antisymmetry of P (or, equivalently, the 
Asymmetry of PP). Once this outcome is precluded, the three ways out just 
described remain open. All of them are compatible with mereological monism, 
and it is good for mereological monism to have several sensible options to 
choose from.
Since there are many ways of avoiding the violation of Antisymmetry, these 
alternatives should be preferred. To renounce the Antisymmetry of P or the 

Mereology
58
Asymmetry of PP is a sort of extrema ratio that should only be considered if all 
the other options have been ruled out (but they have not).
Thus, it is pivotal for mereological monism that the Antisymmetry of P 
and the Asymmetry of PP are solid principles that stem from the analysis of 
less controversial cases of parthood. This justifies their projection onto more 
controversial claims.
Something more can be said about why these are solid principles when less 
controversial cases are involved. The idea is that parthood, except for the limiting 
case of improper parthood (i.e., identity), is a relation in which the whole (the 
second term of the relation) has something more than the part, and the part 
has nothing more than the whole: nothing in the part lies outside the whole. 
The piece of the cake cannot include anything that is not in the cake, while the 
cake has to include something that is not in the piece (except in the improper case 
in which the piece at stake is the cake itself). This idea is more clearly expressed 
in two principles of mereology (two theorems, when CEM is presented from 
above), namely Weak Supplementation and Strong Supplementation. We will be 
formulating and analyzing these principles in Chapter 9.
Given this idea, the notion of mutual parthood without identity does not make 
sense. It is impossible for two different things t and u to be such that u includes 
everything that t includes, plus something more; and t includes everything that 
u includes, plus something more.
It is interesting to note that Kit Fine, perhaps the steadiest opponent of 
mereological monism in contemporary philosophy, while distinguishing several 
relations of part, takes Antisymmetry (and the ensuing lack of parthood loops) 
as a general test for his overall theory of parthood. Fine admits several, formally 
distinct parthood relations (the one characterized by CEM being only one of 
them). Given these specific parthood relations, it is possible to define a general 
relation of parthood, which holds between two things if and only if there is a 
chain of specific parthood relations that goes from one to the other. In order to 
check the coherence of the resulting overall theory, Fine takes the Antisymmetry 
of the relation of general parthood as a test.
Fine argues for the Antisymmetry of general parthood in the following way:
It seems clear […] that the general relation should be anti-symmetric […]. For 
suppose that x is a proper part of y. There would then appear to be a broad sense 
of “more” in which it is correct to say that there is more to y than x. Suppose 
now that x1 is a proper part of x2 in some specific way, x2 a proper part of x3 in 
some specific way,…, and xn - 1 a proper part of xn in some specific way. There 
should then be more to x2 than x1, more to x3 than x2,…, and more to xn than 

Transitivity and Other Features
59
xn - 1 and hence more to xn than x1. Hence x1 and xn in such a sequence cannot 
be the same—which is just what is required for the general relation to be anti-
symmetric. (Fine 2010, pp. 580–581)
Thus, even a pluralist is in a sense forced to invoke a basic intuition of what 
parthood is, presumably elaborated from basic cases of parthood. However, 
mereological monism makes much more of Antisymmetry, and of its status 
as a constitutive feature of the basic, prototypical instances of parthood. In the 
above sketch of a typical debate on the relation between an artifact and the piece 
of matter of which it is made, mereological monism places a constraint on the 
possible outcomes of the debate: the hypothesis of distinguishing two different 
things that are mutually part of the other is foreclosed.
As in the case of Transitivity, the method of selecting and systematizing 
prototypical cases of parthood offers some guidance in dubious cases of 
parthood. Even the most generous mereological pluralist (such as Fine) seems to 
need some guidance of this kind. But Fine seems to prefer minimal guidance, a 
sort of core that leaves open a wide space for maneuver: for him, Antisymmetry 
is the only requisite for a coherent general and pluralistic theory of parthood. By 
contrast, mereological monism uses Antisymmetry (as much as Transitivity, and 
other features of parthood and other cognate relations and operations we will 
be considering) as a powerful tool to discriminate genuine parthood, and refute 
philosophical theories.
4.5 Overlap, Fusion
In CEM, it is useful to introduce by definition other relations, and in particular 
Overlap and Fusion. Since they are introduced by definition, the symbols for 
Overlap and Fusion could always be eliminated from every formula in which 
they occur, in favor of the more fundamental symbols that are in their definientia 
(such as P and PP). However, the definitions (in particular in the case of Fusion) 
are not mere stipulative, notational shortcuts, but aim to capture intuitive, pre-
theoretical notions. The acceptability of the definitions is constrained by some 
pre-theoretical expectations.
Overlap and Fusion will be very important in the discussion of Uniqueness of 
Composition in Part Two and of Unrestricted Composition in Part Three. These 
two principles are actually about Fusion, and Fusion will be defined in terms of 
Overlap. Here, it is useful to anticipate the definition of Overlap and to outline 
the pre-theoretical expectations that Fusion should satisfy.

Mereology
60
Overlap is a relation that subsists between those things that have a part in 
common. It is easily defined from P and standard logical vocabulary. The symbol 
we will use for Overlap is °.

(Overlap–Definition)
It is a reflexive relation, since everything has with itself at least itself as 
a common (improper) part. Plausibly enough—we will explain why when 
discussing Extensionalism in Part Two—everything also has in common 
with itself all its proper parts, if it has any. It is also a symmetric relation, 
insofar as the conjunction in the definiens is symmetric. Overlap is not 
transitive: it can happen that t ° u and u ° v, but not t ° v. It can happen when 
none of the parts shared by t and u is also one of the parts shared by u and 
v: in this scenario, nothing warrants that t and v have a part in common. 
Overlap figures prominently in various definitions of mereological Fusion 
or sum. Perhaps for this reason, Overlap was also used in Nelson Goodman’s 
original presentations of mereology from above (under the label of calculus 
of individuals). Basically, that of Goodman was a different axiomatization of 
CEM from above. In it, parthood and proper parthood were defined in terms 
of Overlap.
This is relatively trivial. For example, one could say that x is a part (simpliciter) 
of y if and only if everything that overlaps with x overlaps with y as well:
In the improper case in which also the opposite holds—namely, everything that 
overlaps with y overlaps with x as well—x will be improperly part of y, that is, x 
will be identical to y.
This is quite an enlightening way of making explicit the idea that parthood 
is a matter of complete containment, by proceeding—so to say—by a sort of 
approximation from outside, from what surrounds them. Consider our example 
of the red cap of a blue pen (see Chapter 2). The cap overlaps with various things: 
with the entire pen itself; with the right half of the cap of the pen; with the right 
half of the entire pen; with the object composed of all the pens in the world; with 
the object composed of all the caps in the world; with the object composed of all 
the stationery items within 3 meters from it; with the object covering the entire 
region of space within a 4-meter radius from it.
It is legitimate to doubt the existence of some of these items (Unrestricted 
Composition—the principle of CEM we will be discussing in Part Three—
will warrant that they all exist). Nonetheless, it seems uncontroversial that, 

Transitivity and Other Features
61
if they do exist, then whatever overlaps with the cap of the pen overlaps with 
the pen too.
Obviously, if I took something not entirely contained in the pen (say, the 
object composed of the cap and of a cake crumb stuck between the cap and the 
body of the pen), then this object will overlap with other objects (such as the one 
composed by all the cake crumbs in the vicinity) that do not overlap with the pen. 
In order to pinpoint the various parts of the pen (the cap, for example, but not 
the cap plus the crumb) we need to eliminate anything that overlaps with things 
with which the pen does not overlap (and this is why the procedure can be 
characterized as an approximation from outside).
The definition of parthood in terms of Overlap does not only deliver the 
expected cases as instances of parthood; it also excludes those cases that we 
would expect to be excluded: for example, the pen is not part of the cap. 
Consistently with our definition of parthood in terms of Overlap, the pen 
overlaps with objects that do not overlap with its cap: the refill of the pen 
overlaps with the pen, but not with its cap; the object composed of all the pen 
refills within one mile from our pen overlaps with the pen, but not with the 
cap. Thus, we are allowed to say—consistently with the evidence—that the 
pen is not part of its cap.
We will not discuss any further the presentations of mereology that take 
Overlap as a primitive. The presentation that takes parthood or proper 
parthood as a primitive is more common, and is deemed more perspicuous, 
perhaps simply because the notion of part is more familiar than that of 
Overlap.
Indeed, there are not many cases, in the prototypical spatial domain, in which 
we might want to claim that two things have parts in common. As Achille Varzi 
has suggested,11 when we distinguish parts in something, it is more common 
and perhaps clearer to count only nonoverlapping parts (two things that do 
not overlap are also said to be disjoint). When we have to give some examples 
of overlapping entities, we are forced either to involve spatially scattered and 
conceptually united objects (such as the object composed of all the pens and 
the object composed of all the caps in a certain region of space) or relatively 
remote examples such as Siamese twins (whose shared organs would be the 
common parts).
In our above discussion of the definition of parthood in terms of Overlap, 
we have used expressions such as “the object composed of all the pen refills 
within one mile from our pen,” and we have said that it is legitimate to doubt 
the existence of items of this sort. Once their existence is conceded, it is also 

Mereology
62
unclear perhaps what these objects are. They are mereological fusions or sums 
(henceforth, we will prefer the term “fusion”).
This is a very important notion in mereology. We will defer the definition 
of Fusion to Chapter 11, but it is important to get an idea of what Fusion is 
expected to be. Fusion is a relation. If CEM is adopted, this relation is also an 
operation, and in particular an always defined operation.
Let us introduce the notion of operation as a particular kind of relation. 
A relation having n places is an operation when the first n − 1 relata determine 
the last relatum. For example, subtraction among natural numbers is a three-
place relation between the minuend, the subtrahend, and the difference. It is 
also an operation, and it is usually called an arithmetic operation, since calling it 
“operation” instead of “relation” is more informative. It is an operation inasmuch 
as, given two natural numbers in the roles of subtrahend and minuend, it can 
never happen that two different numbers play the role of difference: the first two 
relata determine the third relatum.
As we know, the extension of a 3-place relation is a class of ordered triples. 
In the extension of operations, there are never two triples with the same first 
two members. In the extension of subtraction, given two natural numbers (say, 
5 and 3), there are not two different triples having those two numbers as first 
and second element (the only triple in our specific case is <5,3,2>).
Some n-place relations are not merely operations, but always defined 
operations: this means that, given n − 1 elements in the domain (roughly, in 
what we are speaking about), we can be sure that there is an ordered n tuple 
in the domain of the relation, whose first n − 1 elements are those elements of 
the domain. Subtraction among natural numbers (the set of natural numbers 
is the domain) is not an always defined relation, because given 2 as a minuend 
and 5 as a subtrahend, there is not a natural number that is their difference. By 
contrast, addition among natural numbers is an always defined operation: given 
two natural numbers (say, 3 and 5) as addends, there is always a unique natural 
number that is their arithmetical sum (in this case, 8).
According to CEM, Fusion is an always defined operation. One could 
also legitimately ask what the domain of this operation is, and wonder if it is 
clearly defined as the domain of natural numbers for arithmetical addition and 
subtraction. We will come back to this problem in Part Three.
In the meantime, let us be content with a provisional characterization of 
Fusion in terms of our example of the cake. Fusion is a relation between many 
things and one thing that includes whatever is in these things, and nothing 
extraneous to them. Uniqueness of Composition (the principle to which Part 

Transitivity and Other Features
63
Two is devoted) makes Fusion an operation. Unrestricted Composition (the 
principle to which Part Three is devoted) warrants that this operation is always 
defined.
The labels for both these principles include the term “composition.” As it is 
used in this book,12 “composition” is coreferential with “fusion,” and designates 
the relation (a relation that, according to CEM, is an always defined operation) 
between some things and a thing that includes all of them, and nothing 
extraneous to them.13


Extensionalism
Abstract
The purpose of this part is to make explicit the role of Uniqueness of 
Composition and Extensionalism in the ideology of mereological monism, 
and to defend these principles against several alleged counterexamples, while 
conceding that other counterexamples indeed require mereological monism 
to restrict its ambitions of generality. In Chapter 5 we discuss the connection 
between Extensionalism and nominalism about structure, and explain what 
structure is in this area of metaphysics. In Chapter 6, we discuss the difference 
between Uniqueness of Composition and Extensionalism, and between 
various formulations of Extensionalism. In Chapter 7, we focus on the alleged 
counterexamples to Extensionalism, which involve a structured entity and 
the colocated portion of matter. We discuss the strategies to show that the 
structured entity and the colocated portion of matter are not really different, 
and the more compelling strategies to show that if they are different, then they 
have also different parts. In Chapter 8, we focus on the counterexamples in 
which an abstract entity or a theoretical entity postulated by a philosophical 
theory seems to violate Extensionalism. We show that in some cases there are 
promising strategies to make these scenarios compatible with Extensionalism. 
However, in other cases, these strategies risk distorting or misrepresenting 
abstract entities that are structured and non-extensional by nature. Finally, 
in Chapter 9 we investigate and compare some nonclassical, non-extensional 
mereologies, and we show that, in spite of being technically irreproachable 
and relatively conservative, these theories are affected by a lack of compelling 
metaphysical motivations.
Part Two


5.1 Extensionalism at the origins of mereology
The second principle of mereologytheo we aim to analyze and defend is Uniqueness 
of Composition. The idea is very simple: given some things, there is at most one 
thing they compose, or—equivalently (given the way in which we have decided 
to use “composition” and “fusion” in Chapter 4, Section 4.4)—they have no more 
than one fusion. Thus, given some things, there is at most one thing that includes 
them and does not include anything extraneous to them.
Let us use plural constants such as tt, uu, vv, … and plural variables such 
as xx, yy, zz, … in order to speak about the many things that are the inputs of 
the operation of Fusion. The resort to plural constants and variables will be 
discussed and justified in Part Three (Chapter 10 in particular). In Part Three 
(Chapter 11 in particular) we will also opt for a specific way of defining Fusion, 
that is, of capturing the idea of something that includes all the fused entities and 
nothing extraneous to them.
Uniqueness of Composition can be expressed in plural logic notation in the 
typical form of a uniqueness claim. For any x and for any yy, if x is the fusion of 
yy, then nothing else than x is the fusion of yy (we use Σ as a relational constant 
for Fusion):

 

(Uniqueness of Composition)
In order to understand and defend the principle, let us make explicit a 
deep philosophical idea strictly connected to Uniqueness of Composition: 
Extensionalism. The basic idea of Extensionalism is quite simple: there cannot be 
two distinct things with the same parts. Extensionalism is perhaps the core of the 
ideology of mereological monism. The philosophers who uphold mereological 
5
Hyperextensionality and Nominalism 
about Structure

Mereology
68
monism are deeply convinced that there is something metaphysically wrong in 
the idea of two distinct objects sharing all their parts.
The need to appreciate the importance of Extensionalism is also an occasion for 
making our picture of the motivations of mereological monism more historically 
compelling. The picture of the methodology of mereological monism I provided 
in the previous chapter was not meant as a historically credible reconstruction. I 
did not mean it as an account of how the idea that CEM is the general, exhaustive 
theory of parthood became so widespread in twentieth-century philosophy. If 
we look at the origins of mereology, we do not find philosophers analyzing and 
systematizing prototypical, spatial cases of parthood, and using the resulting 
theory as guidance in the application of parthood to other domains.
The methodological picture I provided in Part One is a way to make sense 
of contemporary mereology and of the way in which some philosophers—
among whom Lewis has had a decisive influence—have used it as a powerful 
discriminating tool, for discarding solutions to various philosophical problems. If 
we look at the origins of mereology in Polish logic or in American philosophy, we 
find that nothing of the sort occurred. In the case of an often-quoted but nowadays 
rarely read author such as Leśniewski, his purpose in developing a mereology 
was to provide an alternative to set theory for the foundations of mathematics. 
While Leśniewski’s foundational project is nowadays scarcely relevant, the 
relations between mereology and set theory are actually key in understanding the 
ideological importance of Extensionalism in mereological monism.1
The foundational role of mereology was later also investigated by Lewis, from 
a different perspective. In his book Parts of Classes, Lewis was moved by the idea 
that set theory, instead of being replaced by mereology as a foundational tool 
(as Leśniewski hoped), could be partially reduced to mereology, by considering 
the relation of subset as a case of mereological parthood. This would mean that 
any set of certain elements can be seen as the fusion of the sets that have only 
one of these elements as an element: in set-theoretic terminology, any set would 
be the fusion of the singletons of its elements. The reduction was only partial 
because Lewis found no way to reduce the relation between singletons and their 
only elements to mereology, and struggled to find a way of making sense of this 
relation in general.2
In this book, we are not going to discuss the prospect of reducing set theory 
to mereology. Nonetheless, it is important for us to take a closer look at the 
differences between mereology and set theory, because they help us to understand 
why Extensionalism is so important in the ideology of mereological monism.

Hyperextensionality and Nominalism about Structure
69
5.2 Mereological monism and nominalism
Extensionalism is so important for the ideology of mereological monism, 
because mereological monism is driven by certain nominalistic motivations, 
and in particular by nominalism about structure. Nominalism can be 
described, in general, as a family of philosophical claims that some things 
do not exist: nominalism about universals is the claim that universals do not 
exist; nominalism about abstract entities is the claim that abstract entities 
do not exist; nominalism about numbers is the claim that numbers do not 
exist. Unsurprisingly, nominalism about structure is the claim that structure 
does not exist. What is structure? Structure is construed by philosophers in 
several different ways, but, in a few pages (and in particular in Section 5.7), 
we are going to settle on a relatively precise characterization, inspired by Kit  
Fine’s work.
Before that, it behoves me to admit that the connection between mereology 
and nominalism is sometimes denied in the recent literature. Varzi, for example, 
writes that the connection between mereology and nominalism was important 
at the origins of mereology, but there is nothing in mereology that necessarily 
links it to nominalism:
while Leśniewski’s and Leonard and Goodman’s original formulations betray 
a nominalistic stand […], there is no necessary link between the analysis of 
parthood relations and the philosophical position of nominalism.3
However, it is far from clear that Varzi, in this very short declaration, disagrees 
with my account. As I made it clear in the Introduction, the term “mereology” is 
used in several ways, and, given that Varzi speaks in this passage of “the analysis 
of parthood relations,” it is likely that he is speaking of our mereologydis. If so, 
Varzi is obviously right: there are many ways of construing parthood that are 
distant and even incompatible with nominalism, and also with nominalism 
about structure.
Varzi might be wrong if he is thinking of our mereologyphi, or mereological 
monism. He might be right in any case, because there are many kinds of 
nominalism, and some of them are extraneous to mereological monism (while—I 
contend—nominalism about structure is deeply intertwined with mereological 
monism). As Lewis writes (and, when Lewis speaks of “mereology,” there are 
good chances that he is referring to mereological monism):
Mereology is silent about whether all things are spatio-temporal. (Lewis 1991, 
p. 76)

Mereology
70
Abstract entities are often meant as entities that are not in space-time. Thus, 
if mereological monism is silent as to whether all things are spatiotemporal, 
it is also silent as to whether abstract entities exist, and neutral about the 
corresponding variety of nominalism.
If Varzi means to claim that mereological monism and nominalism about 
structure are unrelated, then he is wrong. The link between mereological 
monism and nominalism about structure is limited only by the proper subject 
matter of mereologydis. Given that the exclusive subject matters of mereologydis 
are the formal features of the relation of parthood and the identity and existence 
conditions for wholes, mereologyphi is committed to the claim that there are 
no structures as far as these subject matters are concerned. Mereologyphi is not 
committed to the claim that structures do not exist in general, but only to the 
weaker claim that nothing, in the general theory of parthood and composition 
(mereologytheo), requires a commitment to structures. In particular, as we will 
see in this part of the book and in the next, mereological monism dictates that 
structure has no role in the conditions of identity and existence for complex 
entities.
In particular, identity conditions for complex entities (that is, entities that 
are the combination of simpler entities: that are fusions of proper parts, in the 
language of mereology) are a rather obvious terrain on which evidence in favor 
of structures could be expected. I can here anticipate how I understand structure: 
it is the way in which the pieces of something are arranged. The arrangement 
could consist in their having a certain order, being repeated, or being stratified.
These kinds of arrangements could be suspected of having some bearing on 
the identity conditions for complex entities: it could matter—the philosopher 
leaning in favor of structures would say—for the identity of some things how 
their pieces are arranged. The same three playing cards that are now piled on 
my table, and compose a pile of cards, could be arranged by wise hands to form 
the basis of a house of cards. If this happens—the friend of structures could 
continue—the cards compose something new; and a prima facie sensible 
account of this difference could be that the cards (the parts) are the same, while 
their arrangement (the structure of the complex entity) has changed.
Mereological monism can react in three broad ways when confronted with 
these allegedly explanatory appeals to structures. Against an alleged example of 
two different wholes sharing all their parts, it can try to show that the wholes are 
not really different, or that the parts are not really the same, or that parthood is not 
involved at all in the example. We will be discussing some instances of each of 
these reactions. Whichever of these strategies they choose, mereological monists 

Hyperextensionality and Nominalism about Structure
71
are anyway committed to denying that differences between complex items are 
compatible with them sharing all their parts.
5.3 Goodman on hyperextensionality
In order to better appreciate the link between Extensionalism and nominalism 
about structure, it is useful to go back to the motivations for mereological 
monism given by its American grandfather, Nelson Goodman. Like Leśniewski, 
Goodman saw in mereology an alternative to set theory. However, while for 
Leśniewski the main purpose of this alternative was to free mathematics from 
the burden of an ontological commitment to sets, Goodman was moved precisely 
by a kind of nominalism about structure, concerning not only mathematics but 
also reality in general. Set theory was the most popular framework at the time 
for representing some entity as including some others in some sense.4 However, 
sets were not extensional enough for Goodman’s taste: too much structure was 
relevant for the identity conditions of sets.
You may be surprised to read that Extensionalism differentiates mereology 
and set theory. After all, the classical Zermelo-Fraenkel axiomatization (as 
well as any other axiomatization of which I am aware) of set theory includes 
a principle known as the Axiom of Extensionality. This axiom fixes identity 
conditions for sets; namely, it says that two sets are identical if and only if they 
have the same elements (X and Y are variable for sets):

(Axiom of Extensionality)
However, according to Goodman this was not enough, and his calculus of 
individuals deserved to be called hyperextensional precisely in contrast with set 
theory. In his short 1956 essay A World of Individuals,5 Goodman presents the 
distinction between extensionality and hyperextensionality. His presentation 
is a clear and philosophically inspiring introduction to the motivations of 
mereological monism, but is not exempt from some deficiencies.
First of all, Goodman makes a declaration of nominalism: “For me, as a 
nominalist, the world is a world of individuals” (p. 197). But he clarifies in what 
follows that the content of his nominalism is not the denial of the existence 
of universals (as opposed to particulars), or numbers, or abstract entities. 
Nominalism is for him the contention that “whatever is admitted as an entity at 
all be construed as an individual” (p. 199). This kind of nominalism leads to the 
rejection of sets, because sets are not construed as individuals.

Mereology
72
What does it mean to be construed as an individual? It means to respect the 
principles of Goodman’s own calculus of individuals (equivalent to CEM), in 
particular as regards the identity conditions for complex entities. In the calculus 
of individuals there is no “distinction of entities without a distinction of content.”
Now, the entities at stake are complex entities, meant in the above specific 
sense, and Goodman is saying that nominalism consists in rejecting the existence 
of different complex entities with the same content. Content is what they are 
ultimately made of: the basic elements from which they are built.6
Set theory, in spite of the Axiom of Extensionality, would admit different 
entities (that is, different sets) with the same content. The Axiom of 
Extensionality excludes that there may be different sets with the same elements. 
But the elements of a set are not the ultimate basic elements from which it is 
made. Indeed, the elements of a set can in turn be sets, with elements of their 
own. And these elements can be other sets, with yet further elements.
Given some entities (say, a, b, and c) we can “build” several sets from them. 
The following four sets have the same content (in the sense in which Goodman 
understands the word “content”): {a, b, c}; {a, {b, c}}; {{a}, {b}, {c}}; {{{a}}, {b}, {c}}.
CEM does not admit of different entities with the same content: in this sense 
it construes everything as an individual. For Goodman, to be an individual 
means to have certain identity conditions: to be such that the identity of 
content (that is, having the same basic constituents) is necessary and sufficient 
for numerical identity. For this reason, set theory would be merely extensional, 
and not hyperextensional: it would admit different entities with the same 
content.
5.4 Hyperextensionality, sets, wholes
Three (mutually intertwined) features of sets seem to stand out as possible 
culprits for their lack of hyperextensionality. First, set-theoretic membership 
is not transitive: the members of a set a can fail to be members of another set 
b of which a is a member. a is not a member of the third and fourth sets in 
the above example ({{a}, {b}, {c}}; {{{a}}, {b}, {c}}), while it is a member of a 
member of the third set, and a member of a member of a member of the fourth 
one. This has some bearing on the lack of hyperextensionality, inasmuch as the 
ultimate constituents of sets (at the end of the chains of parthood relations) are 
not warranted to be among the elements of the set, in terms of which the Axiom 
of Extensionality fixes identity conditions for sets.

Hyperextensionality and Nominalism about Structure
73
Second, a set with a single member (usually called its singleton) is different 
from that member: {a} is different from a, and both of them are different from 
{{a}}. We can envisage an operation that, having a has an input, gives its singleton 
as an output.7 The iteration of this operation will give us an infinity of entities 
with the same content: their only ultimate piece is—in our example—a.
Third, it matters for the identity of a set how the ultimate constituents are 
grouped. The first two sets in the example ({a, b, c}; {a, {b, c}}) differ because in 
the second the basic constituents b and c are grouped together, while in the first 
set the members are not grouped at all. We could say that the structure of the first 
set is flatter than the structure of the second.
All these three non-hyperextensional features of sets have a connection 
with structure, and in particular with the fact that the link between the identity 
conditions for sets and their ultimate constituents is mediated by the way in 
which the ultimate constituents are stratified in a sort of hierarchy. It matters, 
for example, if the ultimate constituents are members of members, instead of 
members; it matters if they are encapsulated in singletons; it matters if they are 
members of sets together with other ultimate constituents.
Nothing of the sort is allowed in CEM. We already know that parthood is 
transitive according to CEM. The stratification of parts plays no role in the identity 
conditions for mereological wholes, thanks to Transitivity. As we will see in Part 
Three, the fusion of a single thing is always that thing itself, not another thing, as 
in the case of its singleton. Finally, no “grouping” of parts has any bearing on the 
identity conditions for wholes. Mereological monism is characterized by the idea 
that no stratification of parts has any bearing on the identity conditions for wholes.
5.5 Goodman’s approach, atomism, gunk
Goodman’s basic idea that mereological monism gives no role to structure in the 
identity conditions for complex entities is still central in the philosophical debate 
about mereological monism. However, there are some arbitrary assumptions in 
Goodman’s approach.
The first concerns ultimate constituents. Goodman’s idea is that both classes 
and mereological wholes are characterized by a basic relation: membership in 
the case of sets; parthood in the case of wholes. These relations can constitute 
chains: the members of sets happen to be sets and have members; parts happen 
to have parts. Thus we can also consider the relation that connects a set with 
the bottom ends of these chains.8 In the case of membership, there would be 

Mereology
74
at a certain point members of sets that have no further members (these would 
be either individuals or the so-called empty set: a special set with no elements). 
In the case of parthood, we would reach mereological atoms.
Mereological atoms are entities that have no proper part. Everything has an 
improper part (since everything is the improper part of itself), but atoms have 
only improper parts. We can define a predicate At for “being an atom” in the 
following way:

(Being an Atom–Definition)
The problem is that the application of Goodman’s conception of nominalism 
as hyperextensionality requires the existence of ultimate constituents. What is 
more, it requires that every entity is atomic, that is, it is entirely decomposable 
into ultimate constituents.9
Goodman’s nominalism does not consider the hypothesis that the chains of 
membership relations and the chains of parthood relations do not terminate. 
If in some cases they do not terminate, some sets and wholes do not have 
a definite domain of ultimate constituents. It would not be possible, then, 
to establish if two sets or two wholes have the same content, since their 
content—according to Goodman—consists in their ultimate constituents. 
On the contrary, it is controversial that sets and mereological wholes have 
ultimate constituents.
In standard theories of sets, at the bottom of the hierarchy there are either 
individuals (i.e., members of sets that are not sets themselves), or the empty 
set.10 However, there are also nonstandard set theories in which there is no 
warrant that the chains of membership relations terminate. The application 
of Goodman’s approach to sets requires that we leave these nonstandard set 
theories aside, but we are not going to assess the costs or the desirability of 
doing so.
As regards mereology, the problem is that hyperextensionality is difficult to 
apply to mereological wholes, because nothing in CEM warrants that everything 
is atomic, that is, that everything has a certain domain of ultimate constituents. 
CEM is compatible with the hypothesis that everything is atomic, but also 
with the hypothesis that nothing is atomic, and even with the hypothesis that 
something is atomic and something else is nonatomic.
The neutrality of CEM over atomism is not accidental. It is not a feature 
of CEM that could be changed (e.g., by adding an axiom according to which 
everything is decomposable in atoms) without interfering with the methodology 
of mereological monism. The neutrality of CEM over atomism is material to 

Hyperextensionality and Nominalism about Structure
75
the ambition of mereological monism—discussed in Part One11—to look at 
parthood and cognate notions from a formal point of view.
The general and exhaustive theory of parthood, which—according to 
mereological monism—exists and is identical to CEM, should never dictate 
that something has or lacks certain parts. It is not up to a formal theory—and, 
more in general, it is not up to philosophy—to establish which parts a car or a 
biological cell has. The identification of the parts of something requires topic-
specific competences and inquiries.
Obviously, the choice between atomism and nonatomism is a more general 
issue than the identification of the parts of a car, or of a cell. However, this higher 
level of generality is not sufficient to include atomism in the area of competence 
of philosophical mereology.
The hypothesis that something (or even everything) is such that all its parts 
have proper parts (so that the chains of parthood relations do not terminate) 
is considered by mereological monists—most prominently by Lewis—as a 
possibility. Lewis even created a label for it: gunk. The motivation for this slightly 
derogatory label is presumably that something whose parts all have further 
proper parts would not only be such that no structural consideration has any 
bearing on its identity conditions, but it would also be without any definite 
content in Goodman’s sense. This would make this kind of nonatomic stuff 
uninteresting and—so to say—amorphous.
The reasons that led Lewis to choose the term “gunk” should not influence us 
too much. Gunk needs not be something empty or devoid of interest. Actually, 
many others see gunk as a respectable scientific hypothesis. In the growing 
literature on it,12 there is no decisive argument in favor or against its actual 
existence, and this is a good reason to think that philosophical mereology, 
which aims to be a formal, topic-neutral doctrine, should avoid presupposing 
that everything is composed of atoms.
Let us dwell on Goodman’s atomistic presuppositions a little more, and explain 
why it is important to get rid of them in our presentation of mereological monism. 
One can see in Goodman’s way of presenting the nominalistic motivations 
of mereology, the influence of a sort of old-fashioned mechanistic scientific 
atomism. During the Scientific Revolution, the idea that any feature of the world 
can be explained by the features of some small pieces was very important. Forms 
and structures were seen as remnants of an obsolete metaphysics, broadly in 
the Aristotelian tradition. In contemporary philosophy, this idea is far from 
dead. Lewis himself saw in the so-called thesis of Humean supervenience a 
pivotal aspect of his own thought. According to Humean supervenience, every 

Mereology
76
contingent feature of the world supervenes on some intrinsic features of point-
sized entities (Lewis dubs these features “perfectly natural properties”), and on 
the spatiotemporal relations between them.
Supervenience is here understood as a connection between some features B, 
C, D (the supervenient features) and some other features E, F, G (the basis of the 
supervenience), such that it is not possible that there is any difference concerning 
B, C, D, without a concomitant difference concerning E, F, G. The supervenient 
features here are all the features of the world, while the basis of supervenience 
is given by the perfectly natural properties of point-sized entities and by the 
spatiotemporal relations between them.
In an often quoted passage from the “Introduction” to the second volume 
of his Philosophical Papers, Lewis presents Humean supervenience through a 
metaphorical mosaic:
All there is to the world is a vast mosaic of local matters of particular fact. […] 
We have geometry, a system of external relations of spatiotemporal distances 
between points. […] And at those points we have local qualities: perfectly 
natural intrinsic properties which need nothing bigger than a point at which to 
be instantiated. […] All else supervenes on that. (Lewis 1986c, pp. 9–10)
However, Lewis was the same philosopher who coined the expression “gunk” 
for the hypothesis that there is something whose parts have all further proper 
parts. This is because Humean supervenience has no direct connection with 
mereological monism: they simply happen to be two pivotal aspects of Lewis’s 
philosophy, but there is no inferential link between them.13
Indeed, there is a considerable distance between Humean supervenience 
and mereological monism. Humean supervenience for Lewis was not the 
content of a formal, general doctrine (while mereology was a formal, general 
doctrine according to him). He meant Humean supervenience as a hypothesis 
mainly concerning the actual world.14 As a matter of fact, many contemporary 
philosophers of science—such as Tim Maudlin15—think that Lewis’s Humean 
supervenience is false. In any case, even if it were true, there is no reason why it 
should influence our conception of mereology.
The kind of atomism involved in Humean supervenience is a controversial 
claim, exposed to the risk of being refuted by science, while mereological 
monism is a formal claim and is meant to offer some guidance in identifying 
cases of parthood and composition also outside the domain of prototypical 
spatial cases. As a result, it should also be compatible with the negation of 
Humean supervenience, and with the hypothesis that there is no bottom level of 
minimal entities.

Hyperextensionality and Nominalism about Structure
77
As a result, Goodman’s way of construing the nominalistic dictum according 
to which there is no distinction of entities without a distinction of their content 
is vitiated by the nonformal presupposition that everything is atomic.
5.6 Is Goodman’s approach circular?
Before looking for an alternative way of construing the nominalistic 
presuppositions of mereological monism, it is important to discuss a second 
shortcoming of Goodman’s approach.16 There is a risk of circularity in the 
comparison between mereological wholes and sets.
Why should we assume that the content of a set is given by its ultimate 
constituents? This assumption is not only a symptom of a sort of old-fashioned 
atomistic mentality. It also presupposes that the relation of parthood that 
really matters is transitive. Mereological parthood (the fundamental relation 
in mereology) is transitive, while set-theoretic membership is non-transitive. 
In order to compare their takes on Extensionalism, Goodman focuses not on 
these relations, but on the chains of membership relations and parthood relations 
(more technically, on their transitive closures).
However, what is the reason for focusing on their transitive closures? The 
suspicion could be raised that the only reason is the assumption that only 
transitive relations really matter; that, when we ask what the pieces of something 
are, a non-transitive relation such as set-theoretic membership cannot be the 
one we should look at.
This issue is connected with the unsupported atomistic presupposition, yet 
different from it. Suppose that atomism is granted. Then, Goodman could insist 
that nominalism is about the impossibility of having more than one complex 
entity with the same ultimate constituents; and that the set-theoretic Axiom of 
Extensionality focuses on non-ultimate, superficial constituents (the members 
of the set), without countenancing what is in these superficial constituents. 
The focus on the transitive closure would be simply motivated by the desire to 
go as deep as possible.
However, the need to go deep into the chains of set-theoretic membership 
presupposes Transitivity. Without the presupposition that the relation that 
matters must be transitive, considering the transitive closure would be to go 
wrong, more than to go deep: it would lead us to count as constituents of entities 
things that are not such.
In the case of the set {{a}, {b}, {c}} for example, it could be objected to Goodman 
that a, b, and c—far from being ultimate constituents—are not constituents at all. 

Mereology
78
In order to show that sets are unacceptable, Goodman would be applying to 
them a notion of ultimate constituent that is tailored for mereology.
Goodman’s circular assumption of Transitivity would be dictated by the 
circular assumption of mereological monism as a whole, that is, by the idea 
that parthood and related notions work as CEM (under the guise of Goodman’s 
calculus of individuals) prescribes. For example, the simple idea that the 
constituents of a set are its members would be ruled out for the only reason that 
membership is not transitive.
As we have already seen in Chapter 2, Section 2.1, Lewis in Parts of Classes 
adopts a somewhat similar stance, and holds that membership is not a relation 
of parthood “because of a difference in formal character” (p. 5). But the subtle 
difference is in the methodology. Lewis uses CEM as a guideline for identifying 
parthood relations: membership does not work as a parthood relation, and as 
a result does not qualify as a parthood relation. By contrast, Goodman argues 
that sets are unacceptable entities because they are not extensional enough, on 
the basis of the fact that they are allowed to be different without having different 
ultimate constituents, where these ultimate constituents are identified with a 
mereology-tailored method.
In spite of these two shortcomings (the assumption of atomism, and the risk of 
circularity in the opposition between mereological wholes and sets), Goodman’s 
ideological motivations for mereological monism in A World of Individuals 
are not far off target. As we will see, it is not difficult to amend Goodman’s 
approach, in order to draw a credible picture of the nominalistic motivations of 
mereological monism.
5.7 Fine’s principles of obliteration
Curiously enough, the best way to capture the peculiarities of CEM (and the 
nominalistic reasons for endorsing mereological monism) has been provided 
by Fine (he himself a passionate mereological pluralist) in Towards a Theory of 
Part.17 According to Fine, the peculiarity of mereology is its blindness to any kind 
of structure. The word “blindness” is negatively connoted in Fine’s mind: it is the 
inability of mereology to countenance a decisive aspect of reality. In contrast, 
a mereological monist could consider mereology’s blindness to structure as 
a virtue of economy and lucidity. If there are no structures, then blindness 
to structure is a virtue, as much as blindness to ghosts; mereology would not 
countenance what should not be countenanced.

Hyperextensionality and Nominalism about Structure
79
Fine explains what structure is. Perhaps his ontological pluralism helps 
here: insofar as, in his view, CEM is flanked by other theories of parthood 
that are not blind to structure, Fine is forced to provide a characterization of 
structure. This characterization ends up being also useful for understanding 
what CEM is blind to, or—equivalently—about what mereological monism is 
nominalistic.
Fine distinguishes four principles of obliteration. A certain theory of parthood 
is characterized by the fact that it countenances or disregards (obliterates) certain 
aspects of structure. If it disregards an aspect of structure, then it respects the 
corresponding principle of obliteration. If it countenances an aspect of structure, 
then it violates the corresponding principle of obliteration.
The principles are called Absorption, Collapse, Leveling, and Permutation, and 
Fine expresses them as follows (each principle will be analyzed and commented 
in the subsequent pages):

(Absorption)

(Collapse)

(Leveling)

(Permutation)
Whereas in a monistic environment Σ expresses mereological Fusion, in Fine’s 
pluralistic approach Σ is meant to express a generic operation that has some 
parts as inputs, and a whole as output.
In each principle of obliteration the same variables are found on both sides of 
the identity sign. The values of the variables correspond to Goodman’s content 
of a complex entity. However, they are not expected to be ultimate constituents. 
They can be at any level of application of Σ within the complex entity.
According to Fine, sets are wholes whose parts are their members. Indeed, 
as we know, Fine adopts a very broad characterization of parthood, according 
to which x is a part of y if and only if x is in y and the replacement of x in y with 
another entity z would change what y is or how y is. And it is uncontroversial 
that if we replace a member of a set with something else, we obtain  
another set.
Sets and mereological wholes are far from exhausting the variety of Fine’s 
pluralism. Actually, sets are less blind to structure than mereological wholes 
only from some points of view. Sets are stratified entities in which it matters how 

Mereology
80
many times an entity is encapsulated in a set (as a member of it, or as a member 
of a member of it), and how elements at a certain level are grouped together. By 
contrast, the order and the repetition of elements do not matter for the identity 
of a set.
Other wholes could instead be such that these kinds of arrangements bear 
on their identity conditions. For example, multisets are entities analogous to 
sets in which the multiple occurrences of members make a difference (but their 
order does not matter). Sequences could be seen as entities in which the order of 
entities in the sequences matters.
The four principles of obliteration allow us to distinguish various kinds of 
wholes in terms of their attitude toward various aspects of structure. It is not 
always a matter of listing various complex entities for which a formal framework 
is already available (as is the case with mereological wholes, sets, multisets, and 
sequences). We can even foresee unexpected combinations of attention and 
disregard for various aspects of structure.
CEM is blind to everything. It respects all the four principles of obliteration. 
In order to obtain an analysis of the radical kind of nominalism about structure 
that motivates mereological monism, it is important to be explicit about the 
aspect of structure of which each principle dictates the obliteration.
The principle of Absorption obliterates (i.e., sanctions the irrelevance of) the 
repetition of parts in the whole.

(Absorption)
It does not matter if something occurs two or more times in a whole. Mereological 
wholes and sets obey Absorption, while multisets violate it.
The principle of Collapse obliterates a kind of stratification: the kind that 
could obtain when we make a whole out of a single part.

(Collapse)
Sets (as well as multisets, but from now we will leave multisets aside) violate 
Collapse, because for every x the singleton of x ({x}) is different from x. As we 
will explain in Part Three, CEM respects Collapse, because for any x the fusion 
of x (Σ (x)) is identical to x.
The principle of Leveling obliterates another kind of stratification, which 
happens when some parts of the entities are grouped and encapsulated in a 
subwhole.

(Leveling)

Hyperextensionality and Nominalism about Structure
81
In Fine’s formulation of the principle above, this grouping is expressed by the 
two “internal” occurrences of Σ. Sets violate Leveling, which is why, for example, 
the set {{a, b}, {c, d}} is different from the set {{b, c}, {a, d}}. Mereological sums 
respect Leveling.
The fact that CEM respects Collapse and Leveling accounts for the common 
observation that mereology gives a flat picture of reality, in which no stratification 
of entities has an impact on the identity conditions of complex entities. Jointly, 
Collapse and Leveling embody the difference between mereological fusions 
and sets that was at the core of Goodman’s distinction between set-theoretical 
extensionality and mereological hyperextensionality. This distinction could 
be traced back to the transitivity of mereological parthood and to the non-
transitivity of set-theoretic membership. Fine frames the same distinction 
within a larger picture of what structure is.
Finally, the principle of Permutation sanctions that the order of the entities in 
the whole does not matter.

(Permutation)
Both mereological sums and sets respect Permutation. In the case of sets,  
{a, b, c, d} and {d, b, c, a} are the same set; “{a, b, c, d}” and “{d, b, c, a}” are 
referential expressions denoting the same set, to the point that they can be 
considered mere notational variants.
Goodman’s opposition between sets and mereological wholes failed to 
underline that both frameworks ignore the order of parts (as well as the repetition 
of parts). However, in the debate on mereological monism, the blindness of 
CEM to order is an important aspect. In particular, when mereology is applied 
to some philosophical debates, Permutation can be perceived as an especially 
heavy constraint by the enemies of mereological monism (or as a powerful 
principle by its friends).
Suppose, for example, that I wished to admit facts in my ontology, and that I 
expect facts to make true sentences and beliefs.18 Consider the sentence “Marseille 
is to the south of Paris.” What in the world makes it true, that is—at a very 
rough approximation—necessitates its truth? The sentence is not made true by 
Marseille and Paris collectively, since it seems possible that they exist, while being 
in a different geographical relation. Nor it is made true by Marseille, Paris, and the 
relation of being to the south of collectively, since the relation could exist19 and yet 
be instantiated only by other towns. In order to fill this role, some philosophers 
have introduced the category of facts. The sentence “Marseille is to the south of 
Paris” would be made true by the fact that Marseille is to the south of Paris.

Mereology
82
According to Armstrong (1989) (among others), facts are complex entities 
made of the individuals and the universal involved (Armstrong actually 
prefers to call facts “states of affairs”). In the example, its constituents are 
Marseille, Paris, and the relation of being to the south of. Facts seem to be 
the result of applying an operation to some individuals and one universal. 
What kind of operation? It seems that it is an operation that violates Fine’s 
Permutation, because the order of the constituents matters for the identity 
of a fact. We can suppose that the fact that Marseille is to the south of Paris 
results from Σ (Paris, at the south of, Marseille); in any case, it is different 
from the fact that Paris is to the south of Marseille, which could result from Σ 
(Marseille, at the south of, Paris).
Lewis, when reviewing Armstrong (1989) in Lewis (1992), assesses 
Arsmtrong’s theory of states of affairs from the viewpoint of mereological 
monism. From this viewpoint, CEM tells the entire truth about composition. 
Any violation of Permutation is a violation of CEM (more in particular, it 
runs counter to mereological Extensionalism). The circumstance that a theory 
contradicts a principle of CEM is a sufficient reason to reject that theory.
In his review, Lewis observes that Armstrong’s facts seem to violate also 
another principle of CEM, namely Unrestricted Composition (it will be 
discussed in Part Three). Indeed, two individuals and a binary relation may 
exist, yet fail to compose a fact. Consider David Cameron, Boris Johnson, and 
the relation of love: they do not compose any fact, inasmuch as Cameron does 
not love Johnson, and Johnson does not love Cameron.
Both the violation of Extensionalism and the violation of Unrestricted 
Composition are for Lewis two good, individually sufficient reasons to think 
that there is something wrong in Armstrong’s theory. He writes (remember that 
Armstrong’s “states of affairs” are what we have called “facts”):
To me, it is mysterious how a state of affairs is made out of its particular 
and universal constituents. We may not think of it as the composition of a 
whole out of its parts: first, because different states of affairs may have the 
very same constituents; and second, because the existence of the constituents 
by no means entails the existence of the state of affairs. It is some sort of 
unmereological composition, and to my mind, that is a contradiction in 
terms. (Lewis 1992, p. 216)
CEM—that is for Lewis the formal, general, exhaustive theory of 
composition—respects Permutation and has Unrestricted Composition as 
one of its principles. Armstrong’s theory of composition is incompatible with 

Hyperextensionality and Nominalism about Structure
83
mereological monism (that is, with the thesis that CEM is the general, exhaustive 
theory of composition).
The analysis of mereological Extensionalism provided by Fine’s principles of 
obliteration gives us a rather definite picture of what mereological monism is 
nominalistic about. Structure (to which mereological monism is proudly blind) 
is not (only) an opaque leftover of anti-materialistic strands in the history of 
philosophy, but is a collective label for the stratification, grouping, repetition, 
and order of constituents.
It is worth stressing that, as a result, the blindness to structure of mereological 
monism cannot be justified by pretending that structure is an intractable notion, 
for which we lack a formal tool. Set theory is a very well-developed tool, which 
is abundantly legitimized by its importance outside of philosophy, mainly in the 
foundations of mathematics; and, by violating Collapse and Leveling, it offers a 
very reliable way to make sense of stratification and grouping. Frankly, there is 
nothing opaque or flimsy in multisets and sequences either, for which repetitions 
and order make a difference in identity conditions.
Therefore, the reason for endorsing mereological monism and be blind 
to structure is not that structure is an obscure or unintelligible notion. 
The reason is that, even if structure is perfectly understandable, it does not play 
any role in the identity conditions for complexes. The epistemic desirability 
of mereological monism we discussed in Chapter 2 plays a role here: if there 
are no good counterexamples to Extensionalism, then Extensionalism is a 
desirable philosophical thesis, because it enables us to refute philosophical 
theories and narrow down the range of eligible solutions to some philosophical 
problems.
Thus, counterexamples are the crucial test bed, and Chapters 7 and 8 will 
be devoted to them. I will anticipate here that there are two main kinds of 
potential counterexamples. Some alleged counterexamples concern entities 
whose existence and involvement in parthood relations is not controversial; 
but, as we will see, it is far from clear that these cases set forth a real exception 
to Extensionalism. These cases will be discussed in Chapter 7. Some other 
alleged counterexamples concern entities whose existence and involvement 
in parthood relations is highly controversial. This is the case of facts, and 
of many abstract entities. Many contemporary philosophers think that there 
is no good reason to introduce in our ontology the category of facts, and 
the existence of abstract entities is the subject of persistent philosophical 
controversies. Moreover, for all these entities, the suspicion can be raised that 

Mereology
84
they have no parts, but are simple entities, so that CEM would have nothing 
to say about their identity conditions.
Nonetheless, we will see in Chapter  8 that this second group of 
counterexamples is actually more insidious for Extensionalism, and could even 
require mereological monism to restrict its ambitions of generality.

6.1 Uniqueness of Composition and Extensionalism
At this stage, we have acquired at least some idea of the ideological content 
of Extensionalism: it is a way of endowing complex entities with identity 
conditions such that only their parts matter; nothing else matters—in particular, 
the arrangement (stratification, grouping, repetition, order) does not matter. 
We have seen that it is misleading to focus on ultimate parts as Goodman did. It 
is misleading also because, according to mereological monism, the stratification 
of parts does not matter, and thus focusing on the lowest level of parts does not 
make much sense: the mereological picture of reality does not attach importance 
to the distinction between various levels of reality. Indeed, Extensionalism does 
not discriminate between different levels of parts. It simply says that complex 
entities (that is, entities with proper parts) are identical at the necessary and 
sufficient condition of having the same proper parts.
In the language of first-order logic, we can express Extensionalism as 
follows:
 (Extensionalism)
Also Uniqueness of Composition (the axiom of CEM directly connected with 
Extensionalism) does not discriminate. According to it, you can take any entities: 
no matter whether they are sparse, whether they overlap or not, or whether they 
have different or similar sizes, they can have one fusion at most.

(Uniqueness of Composition)
Uniqueness of Composition and Extensionalism do not intuitively say the same 
thing, and they are not equivalent. Extensionalism provides identity conditions 
for complex entities. Uniqueness of Composition is about Composition/Fusion, 
and warrants that it is an operation.
6
What Extensionalism Says

Mereology
86
As a matter of fact, Uniqueness of Composition is stronger than 
Extensionalism: Uniqueness of Composition implies Extensionalism, but not 
vice versa. Its major strength makes Uniqueness of Composition suitable for the 
simple axiomatization from above of CEM, which is the focus of this book (in 
which Transitivity, Uniqueness of Composition, and Unrestricted Composition 
are the only axioms). Extensionalism would not be strong enough.
However, it often happens in mereologytheo that the difference between 
non-equivalent principles is philosophically negligible, because the scenarios 
in which the weaker principle holds and the stronger does not are implausible 
and uninteresting. This is one of those cases. As Achille Varzi has shown,1 the 
scenarios in which Extensionalism holds but Uniqueness of Composition does 
not are quite deviant.
It is rather obvious why Uniqueness of Composition implies Extensionalism: 
any object with proper parts is the fusion of all its proper parts; it has each of 
its proper parts as parts, and it does not include anything extraneous to them 
(otherwise, it would have other proper parts). In the other direction, why does 
Extensionalism fail to imply Uniqueness of Composition? It is because there are 
fake ways of respecting Extensionalism, which consist in adding intermediate 
levels of proper parts. These ways violate Uniqueness of Composition.
It is useful to make these scenarios explicit, in order to leave them aside 
in what follows. Once this move is made, it will be clear that the main role of 
Uniqueness of Composition for mereological monism is to imply Extensionalism, 
thereby providing identity conditions for complex entities. Extensionalism will 
also be the crucial test bed for Uniqueness of Composition: any interesting 
counterexample to it is also a counterexample to Extensionalism, and in the rest 
of Part Two we will focus on counterexamples to Extensionalism.
In order to picture the deviant scenarios in which Uniqueness of Composition 
and Extensionalism diverge, let us introduce Hasse diagrams. These diagrams 
are often used to picture models for mereology. Each diagram consists of a 
tree, whose nodes represent entities in the domains of mereology, and upward 
segments represent parthood relations. The two important conventions about 
Hasse diagrams are that:
(a)	 each node represents a different entity;
(b)	 an entity x is part of another entity y if and only if the node representing x is 
connected to the node representing y through a series of upward segments.
As a consequence of convention (a), only proper parthood is explicitly 
represented in Hasse diagrams. As a consequence of convention (b), Hasse 

What Extensionalism Says
87
diagrams are suitable for representing only transitive relations (such as proper 
parthood is according to CEM): if x is connected to y by an upward segment, 
and y is connected to z by an upward segment, then x cannot fail to be connected 
to z by a series of upward segments.
The following is a Hasse diagram that violates Uniqueness of Composition 
while obeying Extensionalism:
a
b
d
g
f
e
c
Focus on a and b. These two different objects have different proper parts. 
Indeed, c is a proper part of a, but not of b; d is a proper part of b, but not 
of a. Thus, a and b obey Extensionalism. In contrast, a problem emerges for 
Uniqueness of Composition: for a is a fusion of e, f, and g, because it has them 
as proper parts (each of them is connected to a by a series of upward segments) 
and it does not include anything extraneous to them (c is not extraneous to 
them: it is simply the fusion of e and f); and, for analogous reasons, also b is a 
fusion of e, f, and g. Thus, e, f, and g have two fusions, and violate Uniqueness 
of Composition.
However, does this diagram illustrate a metaphysically interesting model? 
Not much. c has the exclusive role of isolating e and f from g, and d has the 
exclusive role of isolating f and g from e. Given that parthood is transitive, they 
do not play any real role, except for signaling that e and f (but not g) are grouped 
together within a (but not within b), while f and g (but not e) are grouped 
together within b (but not within a). These groupings are a kind of structure in 
Fine’s understanding of structures discussed in Chapter 5, Section 5.7, one of 
those things mereological monism is proudly blind to.
At this point, one might think that the distinction between Extensionalism 
and Uniqueness of Composition is actually important: only Uniqueness of 
Composition—and not Extensionalism—respects Fine’s Leveling, thereby 
obliterating a certain kind of structure. Fair enough.
However, it should be noted that the kind of structure at stake is not very 
interesting: if you have already conceded that proper parthood is transitive, 
why should you postulate entities such as c and d? What could motivate the 
ontological commitment to such intermediate “groups” of parts? It seems that if 
we already have e and f (or f and g) as parts of a (or of b, respectively), then there 
is no reason to include also c (d) among the parts of a (b).

Mereology
88
Thus, it seems that Uniqueness of Composition does actually express a 
stronger kind of nominalism about structure than Extensionalism. However, 
the kinds of structure that it obliterates in addition to Extensionalism are not 
very interesting. Indeed, the scenarios we are going to discuss in the rest of Part 
Two are potential counterexamples both to Extensionalism and to Uniqueness 
of Composition. No metaphysically promising scenario is a counterexample to 
Uniqueness of Composition only.
6.2 Why Extensionalism is thus formulated
The difference between Uniqueness of Composition and Extensionalism is 
rather dim. Moreover, the philosophical importance of both these principles 
lies in the fact that they provide identity conditions for complex entities, and 
Extensionalism does this more explicitly, as the proposed formulation makes 
clear:

(Extensionalism)
For these reasons, henceforth we will be focusing on Extensionalism.
Why is Extensionalism formulated exactly in this way? In particular, why 
does it involve proper parts instead of parts, and why is it restricted to entities 
with proper parts? Both these choices can be convincingly justified.
Suppose that we drop the restriction to entities with proper parts. If we simply 
removed the antecedent of Extensionalism, we would obtain the claim that two 
entities whatsoever (including mereological atoms) are identical if and only if 
they have the same proper parts. But then every two mereological atoms would 
be trivially identical: since, by definition of what an atom is, they have no proper 
parts at all, whatever is a proper part of an atom is also a proper part of any other 
atom. Thus, there would be at most one atom. This consequence is unintended 
and utterly undesirable.
One might wonder why Extensionalism cannot be formulated simply in 
terms of P, instead of PP, perhaps as follows:
This formulation could allow us to drop the restriction to non-atoms. Two 
atoms have trivially the same proper parts, but do not have the same parts tout 
court: given two atoms u and v, u is part of u (but not of v), and v is part of v (but 
not of u). The risk of unacceptably identifying all atoms would be avoided.

What Extensionalism Says
89
Actually, there is nothing wrong, from the point of view of CEM, in the above 
formulation of Extensionalism in terms of P, and without the restriction to non-
atoms. It is a theorem of CEM, and it follows from rather weak principles of 
CEM. However, this is exactly what makes it unsuitable to the role of substantial 
and philosophical principle expressing mereological monism’s take on the 
identity of wholes, a role which by contrast Extensionalism plays.
In particular, unrestricted Extensionalism in terms of P is a consequence of 
the Reflexivity and Antisymmetry of P. Suppose that two things t and u share 
all their parts. Given the reflexivity of P, t is a part of t and u is part of u. But t 
and u, by hypothesis, share all their parts, including their improper parts. As a 
consequence, t is part of u and u is part of t. P is antisymmetric: the only case 
of reciprocal parthood is the improper one, in which one and the same thing is 
part of itself. Thus, t = u. In brief, it is not surprising that it is sufficient for two 
things to have the same parts in order for them to be identical, if these parts 
include improper parts. To have the same improper parts is to be identical to the 
same things.
In Chapter 9, we will see that Antisymmetry can be targeted as the source of 
Extensionalism, and that it is possible to get rid of it if we are unconvinced by 
the nominalistic motivations and by the arguments in defense of Extensionalism 
we will be illustrating. However, this concerns only the alternatives to CEM. 
If you are a mereological monist, you want a formulation of Extensionalism 
that embodies its controversial, desirable content, and goes beyond the mere 
consequences of the Reflexivity and Antisymmetry of parthood. The formulation 
of Extensionalism I will focus on is not a mere consequence of Reflexivity and 
Antisymmetry. It provides controversial identity conditions for every complex 
entity.
However, what is controversial is not the entirety of its content. The consequent 
of the conditional in Extensionalism is a biconditional, according to which things 
have the same proper parts if and only if they are identical. This biconditional 
can be disassembled in its left-to-right direction, according to which if they have 
the same proper parts, then they are identical; and in its right-to-left direction, 
according to which, if they are identical, then they have the same proper parts.2 
The left-to-right direction provides a sufficient condition for identity, while the 
right-to-left direction provides a necessary condition for identity.
The left-to-right direction is a substantial and controversial claim. 
The opponents of mereological monism wish to deny it; they wish to show that 
two entities can share all their proper parts, and yet be different in virtue of their 
structure—that is, of the ways in which their parts are arranged. By contrast, 

Mereology
90
the right-to-left direction is hardly controversial: it is simply an instance of a 
basic principle in the logic of identity, namely the Indiscernibility of Identicals 
or Leibniz’s Law (but as several metaphysical principles have been dubbed 
“Leibniz’s Law,” we will prefer the former label).
The Indiscernibility of Identicals is a very solid principle. It claims that if two 
things x and y are identical, then it does not happen that one of them instantiates 
a property or a relation while the other fails to instantiate it. A standard view 
of identity (usually attributed to Quine) characterizes identity as that relation 
which anything has with itself and with nothing else. Equivalently, identity 
can be characterized as the smallest reflexive relation on the universal domain: 
everything is self-identical, and—obviously—nothing is identical with 
something else.
As a consequence, it would be hard for anyone to put forward a counterexample 
to the Indiscernibility of Identicals. It would amount to claim that x is identical to 
y, but instantiates a property or a relation which y does not instantiate (or that x 
does not instantiate a property or a relation that y instantiates). But this would be 
tantamount to saying that one and the same thing does and does not instantiate 
a property or a relation: a plain contradiction. Thus, at least if this standard view 
of identity is adopted,3 the Indiscernibility of Identicals is as solid as the Law of 
Non-Contradiction, and there is nothing surprising or controversial in the fact 
that identical things have the same parts, have the same proper parts (as the 
left-to-right direction of Extensionalism claims), overlap with the same things, 
and so on.
Thus, there is nothing controversial from a mereological viewpoint in the 
right-to-left direction of Extensionalism. I have taken up the whole formulation 
of Extensionalism as an object of discussion mainly because it makes it clear 
that CEM provides identity conditions for complex entities, but what is 
exposed to counterexamples is only the left-to-right direction. An additional 
reason for considering the entire formulation of Extensionalism is that, as we 
will see in Chapter 7, Section 7.7 in particular, some scenarios that could be 
mistaken for serious counterexamples to Extensionalism turn out to actually be 
counterexamples to its left-to-right direction, and thus can easily be disposed of.
6.3 Extensionalism, atoms, and verbal tricks
Before discussing the potential counterexamples to Extensionalism, it is 
useful to reflect on its expected generality. The external universal quantifiers 

What Extensionalism Says
91
in Extensionalism are expected by mereological monists to be unrestricted. 
However, the explicit limitation to entities with proper parts—a limitation 
which, as we have seen, is needed in order to avoid unintentional consequences 
about atoms—already sets an explicit limitation to the generality of the provided 
identity conditions.
Consider again facts: as we know, Armstrong’s facts seem to disobey 
Extensionalism. They fail to respect Fine’s Permutation (the order of their parts 
matters for their identity conditions). The fact that Romeo loves Juliet is different 
from the fact that Juliet loves Romeo, but seems to have the same proper parts. 
Lewis’s reaction is to say farewell to facts: nothing violates Extensionalism; 
thus, Armstrong’s facts do not exist. But a mereological monist might prefer a 
different reaction: she could deny that facts have proper parts at all. Facts could 
be mereological atoms.
This move does not amount to a restriction of the quantifiers of 
Extensionalism. Facts would continue to be in the domain of quantifiers, but, 
insofar as they have no proper parts, they would respect Extensionalism in a 
trivial way (the antecedent of Extensionalism would be false). Extensionalism 
would not provide identity conditions for them.
The exclusion of atoms from the range of what Extensionalism provides 
identity conditions for does not determine what is an atom, and what is not an 
atom. In order to avoid the ensuing aura of ad hocness and arbitrariness, the 
thesis that facts are mereological atoms should not be endorsed with the only 
purpose of ensuring compatibility with Extensionalism. It should be endorsed for 
independent reasons within the theory of facts: given the expected explanatory 
duties of facts, should we expect them to have proper parts, or not?
We are not going to answer this question in this book. It is enough to underline 
that it is important to bring into play independent motivations when taking 
these decisions. A general principle is that if you want to be really faithful to 
mereological monism, you are not entitled to verbal tricks. You should not insist 
that facts are atoms, while endowing them with pieces under another label. You 
should not say that facts are partless, but have bits, components, or constituents.
After Lewis’s criticism of Armstrong’s theory of facts, the latter went ahead to 
claim that the composition of facts is a kind of non-mereological composition.4 
As a result, Armstrong had the burden of showing how this kind of non-
mereological composition works, and, as a matter of fact, he has been rather 
elusive on this subject.
What matters for our characterization of mereological monism is that lexical 
prudence—that is, the mere avoidance of the word “part,” or the apposition of 

Mereology
92
“non-mereological” to “composition”—is not enough to reconcile mereological 
monism with an exception to Extensionalism. You need to be serious in arguing 
that facts—or propositions, or events, or any other entities that risk clashing 
with a principle of CEM—are partless. Your stance will forbid you to explain 
features of those entities in terms of the parts, pieces, bits, and so on, they have.
In other words, if you have good independent reasons, then you can elude 
Extensionalism for certain entities while continuing to be a mereological 
monist, by declaring that those entities are atoms. However, with this move, you 
are renouncing the explanatory power of parthood notions: you are denying 
yourself the opportunity to connect facts, propositions, events, and so on, 
with something simpler that could be in them, such as individuals, relations, 
concepts, and so on.
By contrast, if you shun CEM and deny mereological monism, then it 
is upon you to clarify in another way the varieties of parthood, overlap, and 
fusion you are employing: you have the burden of characterizing these relations 
in an alternative way, and also of explaining why precisely this alternative 
characterization of such relations fits facts, propositions, or events.

7.1 A multiplicity of extensional (non-fuzzy) mountains
Concrete entities are typically involved in prototypical, spatial parthood 
relations. Thus, in the light of the picture of the methodology of mereological 
monism we drew in Part One, the potential counterexamples from the realm of 
concrete entities are the most serious menace to Extensionalism—as well as the 
most widely discussed one in the literature.
The most common kind of counterexample to Extensionalism in this 
area involves an artifact (typically, a statue) and the colocated portion of 
matter (typically, a lump of clay or bronze). The literature on these examples 
is huge. In order to start relatively afresh, it is useful to discuss these kinds of 
counterexamples by changing some of their inessential features. In particular, I 
am going to replace the artifact made of a homogeneous material with a natural 
entity composed of heterogeneous materials. I am going to consider an entity 
which is more often discussed with reference to other philosophical problems 
(such as vagueness): a mountain.1
Consider a mountain in the Eastern Italian Prealps: Monte Grappa. 
The metaphysics of mountains is not simple: it is not easy to determine where 
mountains begin and end, and how they are separated from the other mountains, 
hills, and plains that surround them.
Some philosophers (e.g., Lewis 1993) would argue that there are many things 
that are candidate to be the referent of the referential expression “Monte Grappa.” 
There are many ways to delimit the portion of terrain that is that mountain, and 
each of these many ways determines a candidate to the role of referent of “Monte 
Grappa.” These many things are—as Lewis claims—“almost one,” and this is why 
nobody would say that there are many mountains there, in spite of the fact that 
there are many candidates to the role of referent of “Monte Grappa.” The difference 
between the various candidates does not matter in any ordinary circumstance.
7
Extensionalism and Concrete Entities

Mereology
94
Thus, the answer to the question “how many mountains are there?” is 
undoubtedly: “one.” By contrast, the answer to the much more philosophical 
questions “how many things are there?” or “how many entities are there?” 
(suppose that “there” is uttered while pointing out in a map an area that bears 
the name “Monte Grappa”) seems to depend on a specific theory.
Lewis’s above-mentioned solution—according to which there are as many 
things as ways of delimiting the mountain, but this plurality of things is irrelevant 
for most practical purposes and counting practices about mountains—is highly 
desirable for a mereological monist. Given a certain way of delimiting the 
mountain, some things are included in the mountain, while others are excluded: 
some fields, rocks, and snowy expanses are in, others are out; at a much more 
microscopic level, some microphysical particles are in, others are out. Once the 
limits are traced, the identity conditions for the mountain have to countenance 
only the proper parts that fall within the mountain (for the moment, let us 
leave aside the issue that the mountain changes over time, and focus on a single 
moment; we will come back to temporal change later).
Each of these objects (the candidates to be the referent of “Monte Grappa”) 
can be seen as a mereological whole, for which Extensionalism holds: they 
are identical if and only if they share all their proper parts. There are actually 
many mereological wholes, one for each way of delimiting the mountain from 
what surrounds it. The existence of these wholes is warranted by Unrestricted 
Composition (which we will discuss in Part Three): given any choice whatsoever 
of microphysical particles (as well as of fields, rocks, and snowy expanses), there 
is their fusion; some of these fusions are candidates to the role of referent of 
“Monte Grappa.” Thus, the identity and existence conditions for the things 
involved are perfectly in line with mereological monism.
A mereological monist is not forced to agree with Lewis’s claim that the 
many things are “almost one.” According to a position that can be attributed to 
Williamson (1994), there is a single mountain there, with precise limits, but we 
ignore its precise boundaries: we do not know which microparticles and more 
macroscopic parts are in it, and which are instead out of it, but there is a single 
thing, with definite boundaries, that is, the mountain. However, this does not 
rule out the existence of many other compounds, with different boundaries, that 
are not the mountain. Also from this perspective, for all the objects involved, 
the identity conditions can conform to Extensionalism, without any reason to 
deviate from it.
In the context of a Williamson-like solution to the metaphysics of mountains, 
one might wish to separate Unrestricted Composition from Extensionalism. 

Extensionalism and Concrete Entities
95
One could say that there is only that single mountain whose boundaries we do 
not know, while different choices of microparticles, fields, rocks, and snowy 
expanses have no fusion.
This would collide directly with Unrestricted Composition (composition 
would happen only in the case of the single mountain), but Extensionalism could 
be preserved: you can consistently continue to hold that the single mountain is 
such that its identity conditions do not need to consider any kind of structure, 
but only its proper parts. In Fine’s terms, every aspect of its structure can be 
safely obliterated, also if the composition of mountains is restricted.
Thus, Extensionalism is prima facie compatible with a certain variety of 
metaphysical views about mountains. Where does the menace to Extensionalism 
come from? The most serious problems for Extensionalism arise from a different 
kind of multiplicity: not from the abundance of candidates to the role of referent 
of “Monte Grappa” in Lewis’s theory; but from a kind of duality that can be 
spotted in Monte Grappa (as well as in many other concrete things).
However, before analyzing the potential problems arising from such duality, 
and seeing that also in that case there are several, promising, nominalistic 
strategies to defend Extensionalism, we should admit that a reason to doubt 
Extensionalism could come precisely from the difficulty of establishing the 
boundaries of the mountain.
Suppose that we agree with Williamson that there is a single referent for 
“Monte Grappa,” but disagree with him that this single reference is a well-defined 
object, having precise boundaries, about which we are epistemically ignorant.2 
Suppose that, according to us, the only thing at stake has imprecise boundaries. 
There are some microparticles and even some fields, rocks, and snowy expanses 
of which it is objectively, ontologically indeterminate whether they are in or out 
of the single mountain.
From within mereological monism as it is, it is difficult to account for this 
philosophical stance—whose other merits and difficulties cannot fully be 
assessed here. The imprecise, underdefined mountain does not have a definite 
domain of proper parts. More exactly, some proper parts will be perhaps 
definitely in the mountain (presumably, those in the vicinity of the summit), and 
other things will definitely be out of it; however, some other things still would be 
neither definitely in nor definitely out.
If we think that there are so-called fuzzy objects of this kind, mereological 
monism is not the way to go. As we will see in Part Three, a certain tension between 
mereological monism and certain approaches to vagueness is confirmed—and 
escalates—when Unrestricted Composition is at stake. It is important to note 

Mereology
96
that fuzzy objects raise lots of philosophical problems and that, while it is easy to 
say that their identity conditions cannot conform to Extensionalism inasmuch 
as they do not have a definite domain of proper parts, it is not at all easy to say 
which identity conditions they could have instead.
The problem with fuzzy objects is not that some aspects of structure should be 
countenanced: since they lack a domain of proper parts, any possible reference 
to the ways in which these parts are arranged is not going to help. One could 
even wonder if identity between fuzzy objects is definite or vague, and whether 
it makes any sense at all to apply identity to them.3 In any case, let us count the 
difficulty of dealing with fuzzy objects among the potential costs of mereological 
monism: if you are a mereological monist, you are better off renouncing the 
intrinsically controversial doctrine of fuzzy objects. This book does not aim to 
convince its readers that this doctrine is wrong, but simply concedes that this 
doctrine is incompatible with mereological monism and remarks that there 
are very attractive alternatives to it in the literature, such as Lewis’s contention 
that there are many things—but almost one—that are candidates to the role of 
referent of “Monte Grappa.”
7.2 A kind of duality
The most serious problems for Extensionalism do not stem from the intrinsically 
controversial hypothesis of fuzzy mountains, but from a kind of duality. What is 
in the spatial region which the maps label as “Monte Grappa” could be seen in 
two ways, quite independently of the way in which its boundaries are assessed. 
One of the ways to see what is there is to consider the mountain. Another is to 
look at it as a portion of matter. The matter in that spatial region is far from 
homogeneous: it includes rocks, soil, some vegetables, and occasionally some 
snow. At a more microscopic level a wide variety of chemical elements are to be 
found.
The kind of duality that is at stake here is between the mountain—Monte 
Grappa—and the total portion of heterogeneous matter colocated with the 
mountain. Let us call this portion of heterogeneous matter Mountmatter. Some 
philosophers think that Monte Grappa and Mountmatter violate Extensionalism; 
that they are two different complex entities, with the same proper parts. Both 
of them would be made of the same proper parts at any level of complexity: 
same fields, rocks, and snowy expanses; same molecules, and same physical 
microparticles. Still, they would be different.

Extensionalism and Concrete Entities
97
Their difference would be proved by the fact that they instantiate different 
properties. If they instantiate different properties, then a quite uncontroversial 
principle about identity, namely the Indiscernibility of Identicals, leads to the 
conclusion that they are different. Indeed, the principle, in its second-order 
formulation, says that identical things instantiate the same properties:

(Indiscernibility of Identicals)
To be more precise, the deniers of mereological monism invoke the converse 
of this principle:4
 

(Indiscernibility of Identicals–Converse)
They point to properties which would differentiate Monte Grappa from 
Mountmatter, and then apply the converse of the Indiscernibility of Identicals in 
order to conclude that they are not one and the same thing.
7.3 Modal properties and counterpart theory
The allegedly differentiating properties are basically of two kinds: (a) modal 
properties; and (b) aesthetic (and other kinds of axiological) properties. In this 
section we discuss the case of modal properties, while aesthetic properties 
will be discussed in the next section. The modal properties at stake have to do 
with the possibility of surviving a certain kind of change. Time and change are 
sometimes mentioned as a general source of skepticism about Extensionalism; 
but, as we will see later in the chapter (Section 7.7), this source of skepticism can 
be dealt with by adopting some general and independently motivated stances in 
the philosophy of time.
However, here the problem is the possibility of existing also after a concurrent 
change, and it can be made sense of without mentioning time at all. It is a matter 
of imagining a counterfactual scenario in which the situation would be different 
from the way it actually is.
Consider two plausible modal differences between Monte Grappa and 
Mountmatter.
(a1) Suppose that a single piece is lacking. We can imagine this single piece 
as a cubic meter of snow in the snow expanses on Monte Grappa’s slopes. Monte 
Grappa would survive this loss; Monte Grappa would be still Monte Grappa also 
without that cubic meter of snow. Please note that, in itself, this is no objection to 

Mereology
98
Extensionalism, inasmuch as Extensionalism does not say that things necessarily 
have the parts they have: thus, the fact that the mountain would be the same 
without a proper part (such as the cubic meter of snow) is not a problem for 
Extensionalism.
However—the opponents of Extensionalism would claim—Mountmatter 
would not survive the loss of any of its proper parts, and this is a problem for 
Extensionalism. The portion of matter, which is seen by these philosophers as 
being more indifferent to structural conditions than the coinciding mountain, 
would be a different portion of matter if some of its matter—namely, the snow 
in the cubic meter cube—were to disappear. The idea seems to be that a portion 
of matter, quite independently of Extensionalism and other CEM principles, has 
essentially the parts that it has.
Thus there would be two things which have the same proper parts, but a 
different modal property.
(a2) Now suppose that a falling meteorite hits that region, and that all the 
portions of rock, field, and snow are dissipated across a larger and discontinuous 
region in Northern Italy. Suppose that this disruptive event is, a bit paradoxically, 
rather conservative: that no piece of matter disappears due to it. All the pieces 
are simply taken apart.
The composite portion of matter would survive, would be itself, quite 
indifferently to the fact that the various sub-portions are not compact or 
cohesive anymore, but are widely disseminated. By contrast, Monte Grappa 
would be destroyed and cease to exist. Thus, Monte Grappa would disappear 
in these circumstances, while Mountmatter would not. Thus, again, these two 
things would have the same proper parts, but a different modal property.
Modal properties are a highly controversial topic in themselves, and an 
application of the Indiscernibility of Identicals to modal properties inherits 
these controversies. Moreover, there are independently motivated accounts 
of modal properties in which the apparent sources of discernibility between 
Monte Grappa and Mountmatter could be explained away. Suppose, for 
example, that we were to interpret modal ascriptions through Lewis’s 
counterpart theory.
A counterpart of x is—at a very rough approximation—a thing, typically 
in another possible world, that is sufficiently similar to x. Then, “Possibly Px” 
would be interpreted as “There is a y such that y is in a possible world w, y is a 
counterpart of x, and Py.” Then, to survive in a certain counterfactual scenario 
would be to have at least a counterpart in the possible worlds in which that 
counterfactual scenario comes true.

Extensionalism and Concrete Entities
99
Given counterpart theory, one can reconstruct (a1) and (a2) both from an 
anti-extensionalist perspective and from an extensionalist perspective. Let us 
begin with the anti-extensionalist perspective. One could claim that, as regards 
(a1), Monte Grappa has counterparts in possible worlds where the cubic meter 
of snow has no counterparts, whereas Mountmatter has no counterpart in such 
worlds. As regards (a2), the anti-extensionalist could claim that, in possible 
worlds in which the counterparts of the pieces of the mountain are disconnected 
and spread across a large region, Monte Grappa has no counterpart, while 
Mountmatter has counterparts. Then, these differences in counterparts make 
the mountain and the composite portion of matter discernible and, through the 
Indiscernibility of Identicals, different.
On the other hand, the extensionalist could reply that one of the major 
advantages of counterpart theory is a certain flexibility. The kind of similarity 
required by counterparthood is not written in stone, nor is the level of similarity 
required by counterparthood. One could say—and Lewis would have agreed5—
that these choices depend on the context or the viewpoint from which we look 
at a thing.
Thus—the extensionalist could say—there is actually a single thing (Monte 
Grappa is identical to Mountmatter), but we can look at it from different 
perspectives, and these different perspectives select different counterparts. These 
different counterparts correspond to a different modal profile: thus, according 
to the perspective from which we look at the mountain, we are inclined to claim 
that the single thing would survive the annihilation of a cubic meter of snow, 
or to deny that it would survive it (a1); and to claim that the single thing would 
disappear if its parts were scattered across a large region, or that it would survive 
(a2). There would be a single object to which we can attribute different modal 
profiles.
7.4 Aesthetic properties and metalinguistic negation
Given the controversies surrounding modal properties (with respect to which 
counterpart theory is neither the only nor the dominant approach), the 
opponents of Extensionalism often focus on different examples, which involve 
aesthetic—or in any case axiological—properties (b).
Monte Grappa is a relatively frequent and enjoyable subject for local 
photographers. We could plausibly claim that it is photogenic. But it seems 
strange, or far-fetched to claim that a composite portion of matter is photogenic. 

Mereology
100
Monte Grappa is also a challenging and desirable target for mountain climbers. 
We could say that it is a dream for many climbers. But—the anti-extensionalist 
argues—Mountmatter, the colocated composite portion of matter, is not a dream 
for any climber (or perhaps for anyone at all).
Photogenicity and the property of being a dream for many climbers do not 
look like modal properties, and counterpart theory or other approaches to 
modality are unlikely to be relevant there. The anti-extensionalist applies the 
converse of the Indiscernibility of Identicals to this property, and concludes that 
Monte Grappa and Mountmatter are a counterexample to Extensionalism.
However, the line of criticism to Extensionalism that stems from (b) is 
exposed to a general perplexity. It is a perplexity that is actually so general that it 
involves virtually any application of the principle of Indiscernibility of Identicals 
in metaphysics, as Benjamin Schnieder has clearly shown.6
First of all, one could suspect a certain circularity in the claims of 
discernibility. The anti-extensionalist propensity to claim that only Monte 
Grappa is photogenic and a dream for many climbers, while Mountmatter is 
not, depends on the propensity to distinguish these two entities. If the mountain 
and the portion of matter are two distinct things, then it is plausible to claim that 
it is the mountain—and not the portion of matter—that possesses aesthetic and 
other axiological properties.
By contrast, if you do not presuppose that there are two things there, you 
can simply insist that a single thing bears these properties. You do not need to 
deny that, when considering photogenicity and its role in the dreams of many 
climbers, it is more appropriate to refer to that single thing with the proper 
name “Monte Grappa” than with the proper name “Mountmatter,” or with 
a description such as “the composite portion of matter colocated with Monte 
Grappa.” These questions of appropriateness—Schnieder argues—should not 
lead to an application of the converse of the Indiscernibility of Identicals.
Schnieder points to other cases—quite independent of the debate on 
Extensionalism—in which a certain predication is most appropriately combined 
with a certain denomination of its subject. These cases should not commit 
us to a proliferation of entities through applications of the converse of the 
Indiscerniblity of Identicals.
Suppose that an assistant professor in Philosophy, whose name is “Petra 
Sambunjak,” is also a passionate mountain climber. Due to her professional 
activity, Petra spends most of her time reading and writing research papers; she 
performs these activities mostly indoors, at home or in her university room, 
in order to better concentrate and interact with students and colleagues. At 

Extensionalism and Concrete Entities
101
university, she is usually called “Professor Sambunjak.” In other contexts, given 
her agility on rocks, her friends and fellow mountaineers call her “Petra the 
chamois.”
Now, it is quite clear that only one woman is involved in this story. I might feel 
the need to distinguish various viewpoints in relation to her, and connect these 
viewpoints to her different appellations (“Professor Sambunjak” and “Petra the 
chamois”). For example, I might want to assess if she spends too much time 
indoors. I could say that, inasmuch as she is a university professor, she does 
not spend too much time indoors: the amount of time she spends indoors is 
perfectly adequate to the effort, concentration, and involvement required by 
academic research. In the context of this claim, it is natural to call her “Professor 
Sambunjak.” But I could also claim that, inasmuch as she is a talented and 
passionate mountain climber, she spends too much time indoors: if she went out 
in the mountains more often, she could develop her talent, and achieve greater 
results.
Thus, I could claim that Petra the chamois spends too much time indoors, 
and that Professor Sambunjak does not spend too much time indoors, without 
thereby incurring a contradiction. However, it would be unwise to infer that 
Professor Sambunjak is discernible from Petra the chamois, and to apply the 
converse of the Identity of Indiscernibles to the conclusion that there are actually 
two women involved: a scholar and a climber.7
The most obvious thing to do is to better specify the property that we were 
tempted to attribute and deny to one and the same person. We could say that a 
single woman, Petra, is a university professor and climber, and enjoys both the 
property of spending more time indoors than it is advisable for a climber and the 
property of not spending more time indoors than it is advisable for a university 
professor. These properties, once appropriately relativized to a role, are not 
incompatible.
One may insist to ask if Petra is or is not spending too much time indoors, 
absolutely, given that Petra is both a university professor and a talented climber. 
And the answer could balance the respective importance of Petra’s two roles, and 
perhaps reach the conclusion that she is not spending too much time indoors, 
because her profession (academic research) is more important than her passion 
(mountain climbing). Otherwise, one could also conclude that there is no 
definite answer to the question whether Petra spends too much time indoors 
tout court: the questions about spending too much time in some activity—one 
could argue—should always be evaluated with respect to a need or role. In any 
case, there is more than one reasonable way to avoid attributing to the professor 

Mereology
102
a property which the climber does not instantiate, and concluding that they are 
two different people.
It is well-known that negation in natural language is used in several ways, and 
does not always express the conviction that the content of the negated sentence 
is false. Some instances of negation are metalinguistic in character, and are 
used to express the fact that the negated sentence is a lexically or pragmatically 
inappropriate way of talking.
Schnieder makes the example of the following dialogue:
“What the heck is this cur doing?” speaker x barks. “This is not a cur, it is my 
dog,” speaker y replies. (Schnieder 2006, p. 45)
What speaker y wants to convey with the negation in “This is not a cur” is that 
it is inappropriate and impolite to call her lovely pet a “cur.”8 Something of the 
sort could be happening in our case. It is inappropriate or impolite to call Petra 
“Petra the chamois,” when you are claiming that she spends too much time 
indoors, because in such claim you are implicitly presenting a consequence of 
her academic job, with reference to which she should be referred to as “Professor 
Sambunjak,” and not “Petra the chamois.”
The extensionalist can argue that the case of Monte Grappa and Mountmatter 
is actually quite similar to that of Professor Sambunjak and Petra the chamois. 
Let us go back to (b), an alleged source of discernibility between Monte Grappa 
on the one hand, and Mountmatter on the other. It is not difficult to adapt 
Schnieder’s metalinguistic interpretation of negation to this case. When I use 
the name “Mountmatter”—which has been introduced to refer to the mountain, 
inasmuch as it consists of a portion of matter—it would be inappropriate to 
express features strictly connected to the morphology, aesthetic value, or 
cultural relevance of the mountain. It is much clearer to use its specific, widely 
known name “Monte Grappa.” It is so inappropriate to use “Mountmatter” that 
it is quite natural to signal the inappropriateness by saying “Mountmatter is not 
photogenic,” as well as “Mountmatter is not a dream for most climbers.”
In making this claim, I do not wish to argue that the thing in question (the 
referent of “Mountmatter”) lacks the features that would qualify it as photogenic 
and as a dream for most climbers. What I wish to claim is that, when attributing 
those features to it, it is inappropriate to call it “Mountmatter.”
Metalinguistic negation is a great tool at the disposal of mereological 
extensionalists, for the purpose of negating that Monte Grappa and 
Mountmatter are actually discernible, and of blocking the ensuing application 
of the converse of the Indiscernibility of Identicals. Nonetheless, it should be 

Extensionalism and Concrete Entities
103
conceded that the dialectical situation of (b) is not completely on a par with 
that of Petra Sambunjak’s case. In Petra’s case, it is basically undisputed from 
the start that only one person is at stake. Nobody in the discussion is seriously 
denying that only one person is a philosophy professor and a talented climber 
(since this example is fictional, we have actually assumed from the start that 
Petra is a single person). Given that it is undisputed that only one person is 
involved, the Indiscernibility of Identicals is invoked in its direct form: given 
that Petra the chamois is identical to Professor Sambunjak, she must be 
indiscernible from herself. We only need to decide how to dispel the wrong 
impression—given by certain pieces of natural language—that the two are 
discernible. Metalinguistic negation manages to dispel this patently wrong 
impression.
By contrast, in the case of Monte Grappa and Mountmatter, it would be 
illegitimate to presuppose uniqueness. What the extensionalist and the anti-
extensionalist disagree upon is precisely whether Monte Grappa is identical 
to Mountmatter, or not. In the philosophical dialectics, one side (the anti-
extensionalist side) wants to show that there are two things. In order to prove 
this thesis, this side of the dialectics accepts the apparent source of discernibility 
as such. Then, it applies the converse of the Indiscernibility of Identicals, and 
concludes that there are two things. At this point, the other side of the dialectics 
(the extensionalist side) needs to show that the alleged sources of discernibility 
are not such, and that there are good reasons to interpret them differently, 
perhaps as the effect of a metalinguistic kind of negation.
In this case, the extensionalist has the burden of showing that the best 
semantic analysis of the specific cases to which the anti-extensionalist applies 
the converse of the Indiscernibility of Identicals does not deliver any real case 
of indiscernibility. It would be unacceptably circular for the extensionalist to 
presuppose that Monte Grappa and Mountmatter are identical, and to apply the 
Indiscernibility of Identicals in its direct form. The same move, which is perfectly 
legitimate in Petra Sambunjak’s case, risks being inadmissible in this case.
Given this additional difficulty, the extensionalist could support his analysis 
of the aesthetic properties by means of an analogy. Just as it is strange to refer 
to a professor—attributing to her typically professorial features—as “Petra the 
chamois,” it is strange to refer to something endowed with a value (such as 
photogenicity and desirability for climbers) with a generic, aseptic, connotation-
free term such as “Mountmatter.”
However, this kind of debate is likely to end in a stalemate. What for the 
extensionalist is an improper—but ultimately true—sentence (“Mountmatter is 

Mereology
104
photogenic”) about the single thing at stake is for the antiextensionalist a false 
sentence about one of the two things at stake.
7.5 Different things, with different parts: 
Extensionalism vindicated
It is possible to sidestep this stalemate, and make some progress in the debate 
about Extensionalism, by paying attention to another aspect. The extensionalist 
could simply concede that no decisive reason is going to resolve the debate on the 
alleged modal and/or aesthetic discernibility of Monte Grappa and Mountmatter.
This leaves open the possibility that Monte Grappa and Mountmatter 
are discernible and, as a consequence, different. However, this amounts to a 
counterexample to Extensionalism only if the two allegedly different things are 
complex entities with the same proper parts.
Extensionalism claims that complex entities (i.e., entities with proper parts) 
are identical if and only if they have the same proper parts. Thus, given a 
potential counterexample that involves complex entities, one of the following 
four scenarios will apply:
(i)	 same proper parts, two different wholes;
(ii)	 same proper parts, a single whole;
(iii)	different proper parts, two different wholes;
(iv)	different proper parts, a single whole.
Only (i) is a counterexample to Extensionalism. (ii) is obviously a confirmation 
of Extensionalism. (iv) would be a counterexample to the uninteresting, right-
to-left direction of Extensionalism, and is ruled out by the Indiscernibility of 
Identicals itself, as we remarked in Chapter 6, Section 6.2: if two things have 
different proper parts, then they are discernible already for this reason, and this 
is enough to conclude that they are different; thus, scenarios of type (iv) are 
impossible.
What about (iii)? (iii) is not problematic for Extensionalism at all. It is the 
case in which Monte Grappa is different from Mountmatter, and the proper 
parts of Monte Grappa are also different from the proper parts of Mountmatter. 
As Varzi has shown,9 there are good reasons to think that the cases involving an 
entity and the colocated portion of matter (such as the case of Monte Grappa 
and Mountmatter) are scenarios of type (iii). These good reasons are provided—
quite surprisingly—by the anti-extensionalist herself.

Extensionalism and Concrete Entities
105
The anti-extensionalist indicates some modal and aesthetic sources of 
discernibility between Monte Grappa and Mountmatter. However, the reasons 
that lead the anti-extensionalist to accept these sources of discernibility for the 
wholes seem to apply to the parts as well. It would be arbitrary to limit these 
sources of discernibility to the wholes, because any reason you can provide for 
them at the level of the whole can be reiterated at the level of its proper parts.
Indeed, suppose that, as in (a1), actually only Monte Grappa—but not 
Mountmatter—would survive the annihilation of a cubic meter of its snow. 
And focus on one of the expanses of snow on Monte Grappa (one of the proper 
parts of Monte Grappa), which includes more than a cubic meter of snow. Would 
this expanse of snow survive the annihilation of a cubic meter of snow? If you 
believe that Monte Grappa would survive the annihilation of a cubic meter of 
snow, then you should extend this belief to the expanse of snow.
The same happens for the valleys, fields, and forests that are proper parts 
of Monte Grappa. For each of these proper parts of Monte Grappa one might 
want to distinguish it from a colocated portion of matter, insofar as they 
would be discernible. Focus on a forest: would it survive the annihilation of 
a cubic centimeter of wood in one of its trees? Sure. In contrast to the forest, 
the corresponding portion of matter would not survive the annihilation of that 
cubic centimeter of wood; “portions of matter” are, so to say, completely defined 
by the matter they include, so that the lack of any of it (and thus, in the specific 
case, the lack of the cubic centimeter of wood) would destroy it.
Obviously, you could also suspect that these different modal profiles depend 
on the flexibility of counterparthood. Or that it is lexically inappropriate to 
say that the portion of matter survives, because we are discussing a scenario 
in which the matter changes. In this scenario it would be more appropriate 
to call it “forest,” and it is possible to signal the inappropriateness with 
a metalinguistic negation: “the portion of matter would not survive the 
annihilation of that cubic centimetre of wood.” If these approaches are 
legitimate at the level of the forest, then they are equally legitimate at the 
level of the mountain. Thus, either there are two things whose forest parts are 
different or there is a single thing with the same forest parts. In both cases, 
Extensionalism is untroubled.
The anti-extensionalist might hope to block this outcome in the case of 
less natural parts, for which there is no so-called sortal term, such as “forest,” 
“mountain,” or “expanse of snow.” Focus on the composite of a half-wood with 
a half-field. Or focus on a cubic meter of snow in one of the expanses of snow. 
The anti-extensionalist could argue that her own anti-extensionalist argument 

Mereology
106
cannot be applied to these gerrymandered entities. She could argue that in these 
cases there is nothing more than a portion of matter.
Let us consider the two proposed cases.
1) In the case of the composite of a half-wood and a half-field, the anti-
extensionalist could try to argue that nothing located there would survive the 
annihilation of a cubic meter of snow. The anti-extensionalist is—au fond—a 
denier of Fine’s principles of obliteration of structure. Mountains and forests are 
structured entities for her, and their structure has an impact on their identity 
conditions, and also on their survival conditions. But when we move from 
the level of structured entities downwards to simpler things, at a certain point 
structure would not matter anymore. In particular, half-woods (in contrast to 
woods), half-fields (in contrast to fields), and their composites would be such 
that structure would not matter for them, and for their survival conditions.
However, this line of reasoning is not compelling. It assumes that there are 
some things for which structure matters, and for those things it postulates a 
distinction between them and their colocated portions of matter. After that, it 
excludes other things from this distinction: half-woods, half-fields, and their 
composites would be identical to portions of matter. This asymmetry is pivotal 
in delivering the violation of Extensionalism. Indeed, there is a violation of 
Extensionalism if and only if there are two complex things with the same proper 
parts. And we obtain this result if and only if both the following conditions hold: 
in some regions of space (those occupied by allegedly structured entities) there 
are two things (the structured entity and the colocated portion of matter); in 
some other regions of space (those occupied by allegedly unstructured entities) 
there is only one thing.
The problem is that the distinction between structured entities and 
unstructured entities is controversial and blurred. First of all, the entities we 
have discussed are all involved in the problem of vagueness we discussed in 
Section 7.1. It is far from clear that there is a single entity which is the mountain, 
and another single entity which is the forest. According to Lewis’s approach in 
“Many, But Almost One,” there are a lot of candidates to the role of referent of 
“Monte Grappa,” and the same for any name of the forest. This suggests that there 
is nothing special at the specific granularity level of mountains (or of forests), 
such that only at that level there are two colocated things. Also in a Williamson-
like solution, such that there is a unique thing that is the mountain but we are 
epistemically unable to pinpoint it, it is not clear that the metaphysical privilege 
attributed to this single thing could consist in the fact that it is the only one to be 
colocated with a portion of matter different from it.

Extensionalism and Concrete Entities
107
More generally, if you are convinced that structure matters for the identity 
conditions of things, there is no sensible reason to exclude half-forests, half-
fields, half-expanses of snow, and their composites from the scope of your 
conviction. From the physical point of view, a half-expanse of snow has all the 
chemical and physical complexity that an entire glacier has; and the biological 
and descriptive complexity of a half-forest is very similar to that of an entire 
forest. It seems that the distinction between two levels of things to which the 
anti-extensionalist is committed (on one level, two wholes; on the other, the 
same proper parts) is completely unsupported.
2) Consider the cubic meter of snow. Obviously, from the point of view of the 
specific property in (a1), it cannot be distinguished from the portion of matter 
colocated with it. Neither the cubic meter nor the portion of matter would 
survive the annihilation of a cubic meter of snow. If a cubic meter of snow were 
annihilated in a cubic meter of snow, nothing would remain.
However, this is not a good way to argue that the proper parts of Monte 
Grappa are identical to those of Mountmatter. First of all, the cubic meter of 
snow is only one of the proper parts at stake. For other proper parts (such as the 
forests), it seems that they should be distinguished from the colocated portions 
of matter for the same reasons why the whole mountain should be distinguished 
from the colocated portion of matter.
Moreover, the hypothesis of the annihilation of a cubic meter of snow is only 
one source of discernibility, where the entities at stake have a cubic meter of 
snow as a proper part of them: but—proper parthood being antireflexive—the 
cubic meter of snow is not a proper part of itself. Thus, in the case of the cubic 
meter of snow, we should identify a proper part of it and ask what would happen 
to the cubic meter of snow if this proper part were annihilated; for example, if a 
snowflake in the cubic meter were annihilated. Would that cubic meter of snow 
survive the annihilation of one of its snowflakes?
The answer to this question could be influenced by the referential expression 
“that cubic meter of snow.” We can argue that its reference would not survive the 
annihilation of one of its snowflakes: for the annihilation of any spatial part of 
it would change at least to some extent the volume of the amount of snow; and, 
if the volume of a cubic meter of snow decreases, obviously there is no longer a 
cubic meter of snow there. But this simply suggests that referential expressions 
that include a reference to dimensions (of the form “that cubic metre of,” or “that 
metre of”) usually refer—from an anti-extensionalist viewpoint—to the portion 
of matter, and not to the structured thing. But this does not mean that there is 
not also a colocated, structured thing there.

Mereology
108
Suppose that that cubic meter of snow is the subject of a scientific experiment: 
some chemical substance is injected in it, in order to assess if the chemical 
substance, when in contact with snow, generates enough heat to partially melt 
the snow. The snow that is involved in the experiment is called “Champion.” 
Suppose that the experiment fails: after the injection, the snow does not 
melt at all. But obviously this is metaphysically contingent, and in another, 
counterfactual scenario, some of the snow would melt. In this counterfactual 
scenario, we would not have a cubic meter of snow (the portion of snow would 
be smaller); but Champion would be still there, though partially molten. Thus, 
the anti-extensionalist, if coherent with her methodology, should conclude 
that Champion and the portion of snow colocated with Champion are modally 
discernible, since only Champion would survive the annihilation of one or more 
snowflakes.
Also in this case, if the anti-extensionalist wishes to distinguish two wholes, 
then for the sake of coherence she should distinguish its proper parts too. 
Conversely, if she does not wish to distinguish its parts, then she should not 
have distinguished the wholes in the first place.
The anti-extensionalist could perhaps try to focus on mereological atoms. 
She could concede that for mountains, forests, half-forests, quarters of fields, 
and every recombination of such parts, a sort of dualism holds: there is the 
structured entity and there is the colocated portion of matter. By contrast, at the 
level of atoms a kind of monism should be endorsed.
The anti-extensionalist could argue in favor of such a differential treatment 
of atoms in the following way. The ways in which proper parts are arranged 
matter—according to her—for the identity conditions of complex entities. They 
should not be obliterated, while extensional CEM obliterates them. By contrast, 
at the level of atoms, there is nothing that could be structured or arranged: no 
proper parts can be ordered, or repeated, or stratified, since the atoms have—by 
definition—no proper part.
One could even argue that, at the level of atoms, sources of discernibility 
such as (a1) and (a2) do not arise, because no proper part of an atom can be 
annihilated (an atom has no proper part at all) and it is not possible to spread 
the proper parts of an atom across a large region of space (for the same reason). 
Thus, the anti-extensionalist could hold that at every level—except for the level 
of atoms—there is a kind of dualism between entities and the portions of matter 
colocated with them.
As Varzi has shown,10 the resulting metaphysical picture is bizarre and 
arbitrary: at the level of atoms, a unique domain of atoms would be the basis 

Extensionalism and Concrete Entities
109
for both structured entities and for their colocated portions of matter; but from 
that level upwards, for any location, there would be two colocated things. The 
failure of Extensionalism would be quite local. First of all, failures could happen 
only in domains in which things are decomposable into atoms. In the case of 
so-called gunk (which, as we have seen in Chapter 5, Section 5.5, CEM does 
not rule out, and is considered by many as a respectable scientific hypothesis), 
everything is such that all its parts have still further proper parts, and these 
further parts could be arranged in some way, and these arrangements could 
be relevant for the identity conditions, according to the anti-extensionalist 
viewpoint.
Moreover, even if we forget gunk and concede that atomism holds, the only 
entities for which anti-extensionalism would fail would be the entities whose 
proper parts are all atoms. Consider any whole x with at least one proper part y 
that is not an atom. Both x and y would be different from their portions of matter 
m(x) and m(y), but then x and m(x) would not be a counterexample to anti-
extensionalism, because x would have y (but not m(y)) as a proper part, while 
m(x) would have m(y) (but not y) as a proper part.
Thus, the only things for which Extensionalism would fail would be—so to 
say—quasi-atoms, that is, things whose proper parts are all atoms. Not even the 
fusion of three atoms is a quasi-atom, because its proper parts are not only the 
three atoms, but also the three fusions of two of those three atoms. Ultimately, 
only the fusions of two atoms would be exceptions to anti-extensionalism. 
The resulting metaphysical picture attributes to atoms and quasi-atoms an 
exceptional status, for which—no matter how hard I try to put myself in the anti-
extensionalist’s shoes—I am unable to imagine independent justifications.
7.6 A role for structures in Extensionalism
The moral to be drawn from Varzi’s argument in defense of Extensionalism 
is that Extensionalism and mereological monism are not the real focus in the 
philosophical discussion on cases such as that of Monte Grappa and Mountmatter. 
In these discussions, the main philosophical debate is between a kind of 
monism—according to which there is a single entity in that region of space—
and a kind of dualism—according to which Monte Grappa and Mountmatter 
are two, genuinely different entities in that region of space. The kind of monism 
that is here at stake should not be confused with mereological monism: the kind 
of monism here at stake does not directly concern parthood and composition, 

Mereology
110
but rather the relation between structured entities and their colocated portions 
of matter.
As we have seen in Sections 7.3–7.4 the dialectics between monism and 
dualism risks ending in a stalemate. However, Extensionalism is not really put 
at risk by this stalemate. On the one hand, monism is the most obvious and 
common stance for extensionalists in these cases. On the other, as shown in the 
previous section, dualism, when consistently developed, is fully compatible with 
Extensionalism: portions of matter are parts of portions of matter, structured 
entities are parts of structured entities, and you never find two things with the 
same proper parts. Only the attribution of peculiarities to the level of atoms 
could lead to a failure of Extensionalism, but such attribution would be hard to 
justify.
This leads us to an important point: structured entities, that is, entities that 
are characterized by having their parts arranged in a certain way, are not as 
such a problem for Extensionalism. It is quite obvious that an entity, in order to 
qualify as a mountain (or as a forest, or as a field), needs to have its proper parts 
arranged in a certain way. It is not easy to say how they should be arranged, but it 
is quite obvious, for example, that if all the proper parts of a geographical entity x 
are coplanar (i.e., if they lie on the same plain), then x is not a mountain. But this 
obvious claim does not show that there are two complex things with the same 
proper parts, and does not falsify either Extensionalism or any other aspect of 
mereological monism.
As we have seen in considering Fine’s principles of obliteration of structure 
in Chapter 5, Section 5.7, Extensionalism obliterates structure only in the sense 
that it attributes to complex entities identity conditions in which structure 
plays no role. Extensionalism does not dictate that the parts of everything are 
like an amorphous amount of unmatched puzzle pieces. If it were to dictate 
such a claim, it would be inconsistent with the austere delimitation of the 
explanatory duties of mereologydis, according to which mereologydis is only 
about formal features of parthood, and about existence and identity conditions 
for wholes. Mereologydis—according to this austere understanding, endorsed 
by mereological monism—is not about the mutual relations between parts, or 
about the conditions at which a whole falls under certain predicates, such as 
“mountain” or “forest.” Extensionalism simply says that, as regards identity, only 
the pieces matter.
The distinction that the dualist wishes to draw between entities and their 
portion of matter may or may not be legitimate, and this should be decided 
by considering the methodological and substantial problems raised by the 

Extensionalism and Concrete Entities
111
application of the converse of the Indiscernibility of Identicals to these cases. 
But what consistent dualism points to is the idea that reality has two overall layers 
(the layer of structured entities and the layer of the portions of matter), and this 
is not a problem for Extensionalism at all.
This is perhaps made clearer by those theories which draw a sharp distinction 
between the level of entities and the level of matter, as is the case in so-called 
stuff ontologies, endorsed for example by Henry Laycock and Thomas McKay.11 
According to stuff ontologies, matter (also called “stuff”) is something radically 
uncountable, and is the typical referent of so-called mass terms, such as “water” 
or “snow.” It would be misleading to speak of stuff as a kind of entity, because 
“entity” is a countable term. Even more wrong would be our previous talk of 
“portions” of snow or other matter: when matter is divided into portions, it 
is turned into something countable, and this already brings us on the side of 
structured things. By contrast, matter/stuff would be so unstructured that it 
would not be possible to count it. The dualist approach of stuff ontology seems to 
make it clear from the start that there are two globally separate layers of reality.12
Finally, there is another sense in which dualism could be a problem for 
Extensionalism. When dualism is endorsed—and even if dualism is consistently 
developed and concerns any level of complexity—one needs to characterize 
the relation between the structured entity and the colocated matter or portion 
of matter in some way. What kind of relation connects x and m(x)? Is it a 
mereological relation, namely a relation of parthood? If so, further problems 
could arise for Extensionalism. It should be noted that, according to some 
philosophers, such as Judith Thomson and Aaron Cotnoir,13 the reason for 
deviating from Extensionalism lies in the study of this relation: the reason 
for abandoning Extensionalism would be not the admission of two colocated 
wholes with the same smaller proper parts, but the fact that colocated wholes are 
mutual parts of one another. We will come back to their proposals in Chapter 9, 
and show that, even from a dualist perspective, it is not clear that the study of 
the relation between a structured entity and the colocated matter or portion of 
matter is among the explanatory duties of mereologydis.
7.7 Extensionalism and time
In order to complete our analysis of Extensionalism in the realm of concrete 
entities, we need to consider what happens when we factor in time and change. 
Indeed, up to now we have treated Monte Grappa as a static entity that could 

Mereology
112
change, but does not actually change. Obviously, however, like virtually all other 
concrete entities, Monte Grappa does change over time. The snow melts away 
in spring and summer, the vegetation changes its shape and color from season 
to season, and long-term geological phenomena gradually—yet dramatically—
change the overall morphology of the mountain.
One could have the vague impression that extensional mereology is radically 
unfit to deal with time and change. The thesis that complex entities are identical 
at the condition of having the same proper parts does not look change-friendly: 
one of the most obvious cases of change over time is the change of parts.
The change of parts has been scrutinized several times in the history of 
philosophy: the problem of the Ship of Theseus is well-known from the times of 
Plutarch, and it is a case of change of parts. During a voyage all the parts of a ship 
are gradually replaced: is the ship at its arrival identical to the ship that departed? 
Given that Extensionalism connects identity with the sharing of every proper 
part, it might seem to dictate the conclusion that at every change of a single part 
the ship becomes a different one, so that the voyage would actually be made by a 
succession of several different ships.
Undeniably, the Ship of Theseus, together with many other ingenious thought 
experiments involving change and time, has been the object of many important 
philosophical reflections and controversies. However, the impression that these 
controversies primarily concern mereology, and in particular Extensionalism, 
is wrong.
First of all, as we have seen in Chapter 6, the controversial component of 
Extensionalism is its left-to-right direction, that is, the claim that the sharing 
of all proper parts is a sufficient identity condition for complex entities; or, 
equivalently, that if two complex entities share all their proper parts, then they 
are identical. By contrast, the right-to-left direction is much less controversial 
and is not specifically mereological: it is the claim that the sharing of proper parts 
is a necessary identity condition for complex entities; or, equivalently, that if two 
things are identical, then they share all their proper parts. This second claim 
is simply an instance of the Indiscernibility of Identicals in its direct form: in 
general, identical things have all their properties and relations in common.
The issue of change in parts, as presented in the Ship of Theseus problem, 
raises the question of whether one and the same thing can have different parts: 
it does not concern the controversial aspect of Extensionalism. When it is not 
integrated within a more complex framework, the simple claim that the Ship 
of Theseus is identical throughout its voyage would lead us to conclude that in 
order for two things to be identical, it is not necessary for them to share all their 

Extensionalism and Concrete Entities
113
parts. And this is simply a rejection of the Indiscernibility of Identicals, a move 
that—as we have seen—makes us slip into contradiction.
There is no specifically mereological problem here. We can imagine that the 
Ship of Theseus also undergoes non-mereological changes during its voyage: 
its color and shape could change, for example, because it gets repainted and 
renovated, or due to spontaneous corrosion. Let us suppose that it is brown 
when it departs, and gray when it arrives; thus, it is not gray when it departs, and 
it is not brown when it arrives. Now, if you claim that the ship at departure time 
is identical to the ship at arrival time, then you are saying that one and the same 
thing is and is not brown, and is and is not gray.
Obviously, the philosophy of time offers several ways to avoid the ensuing 
contradictions. The two most famous, broad solutions are the following, and can 
be applied to mereological change as well as to other kinds of change (such as the 
change of color and form).
The first, broad option is to deny that there is inter-temporal identity, and 
claim that at every stage of the voyage there is a different entity. The different 
stages have a sort of causal continuity, but are strictly speaking different. Then, 
it is possible to claim that the ship is the sum of these stages, or that each of the 
stages is the ship at a certain time. The resulting treatment of time and change is 
usually called perdurantism.14
As far as the issue of discernibility is concerned, the advantage of these 
approaches is that the properties of being brown and of not being gray are 
attributed to the ship at departure time, while the properties of being gray 
and of not being brown are attributed to the ship at arrival time. According to 
this approach, the ship at departure time is different from the ship at arrival 
time, thus the mentioned properties make different things discernible, and this 
is perfectly compatible with the Indiscernibility of Identicals. At any moment 
in its voyage, Theseus’s ship will have some properties, as well as some proper 
parts. At any moment, there is not a single ship with different properties, or with 
different proper parts. Thus, mereological change too will be reconciled with 
Extensionalism.
I could also direct my attention to temporally extended wholes. In other 
words, instead of limiting my attention to instantaneous entities, I could 
consider intertemporal mereological fusions of various stages of the ship. Also 
in this case, no problem ensues for Extensionalism. The resulting intertemporal 
fusions will have, as proper parts, the stages, the proper parts of the stages, and 
any recombination of these things. The various stages of the ship will be called 
temporal parts of the spatially extended ship.

Mereology
114
The notion of temporal part is highly interesting and problematic, but its 
problems concern the philosophy of time, not mereologydis, and in particular 
not Extensionalism. In the doctrine of temporal parts, there are no temporally 
extended objects with the same proper parts, nor can it ever be the case that—
in contrast with the Indiscernibility of Identicals—a single whole has different 
proper parts. The fact that temporal parts work as ordinary parts may be 
regarded as an advantage of the doctrine of temporal parts.
This is probably why many mereological monists, such as Goodman and 
Lewis, have endorsed a four-dimensionalist position and the doctrine of 
temporal parts: the doctrine of temporal parts is an application of mereology, 
an application that aims to solve the potential tension between temporal change 
and the Indiscernibility of Identicals. But the affinity between mereology and 
the doctrine of temporal parts does not imply that a mereological monist is forced 
to adopt perdurantism over its alternatives.
The second broad option is to insist that the ship is one and the same 
throughout its voyage, and reconcile change and inter-temporal identity with the 
Indiscernibility of Identicals in another way: namely, by relativizing properties, 
or the instantiation of properties, to times. Let us focus on the relativization of 
properties. One could call td the time at which the ship departs, and ta the time at 
which the ship arrives. The ship is brown at td, non-gray at td, gray at ta, and non-
brown at ta. But being gray at td and being gray at ta are two different properties. 
The ship is of a single color each time. Every color property should be relativized 
to a specific time, and thus there is no property that the ship instantiates and fails 
to instantiate.
Also in this case, this general approach to temporal change (usually dubbed 
endurantism) can be applied to mereological change as well: the relation 
of parthood (and, with it, proper parthood, overlap, and fusion) should be 
relativized to a time. Thus, at a certain tm, the Ship of Theseus will have some 
proper parts, and at a certain other time tn it will have some other proper parts. 
There is no discernibility stemming from having a certain proper part at tm and 
not having it at tn, because being proper part at tm and being proper part at tn are 
different relations.
Endurantism—in contrast with perdurantism, which leads to an application 
of mereologytheo to the temporal domain—could require some adjustment in 
mereologytheo itself. Indeed, the strategy for coping with the apparent violations 
of the Indiscernibility of Identicals consists in relativizing the mereological 
relations to times. But this relativization can be expected to be general. This 

Extensionalism and Concrete Entities
115
additional difficulty is perhaps an additional reason why mereological monism 
is more often conjoined with four-dimensionalism.
In this book, we will not discuss the ways in which mereologytheo can be 
relativized to times,15 but one can legitimately wonder if, in our formulation of 
Extensionalism, a three-dimensionalist should relativize the occurrences of the 
predicate PP. The most promising way to do so is to quantify universally over 
times: two things will be identical on the sufficient condition of having, at every 
time, the same proper parts.
It is a very conservative modification: every occurrence of PP is replaced by 
an occurrence of PPt
16; in the antecedent, there is an existential quantification 
over times, in order to limit the principle to entities that have proper parts at 
least at one time; in the consequent, the sufficient condition includes a universal 
quantification over times, so that entities with the same proper parts at every 
time are identical.
This principle would be disobeyed by two different complex things that 
share all their proper parts at every moment. Potential counterexamples of 
this kind would be similar to those in which an object is distinguished from 
its colocated matter or portion of matter due to modal or aesthetic properties. 
We have seen in Section 7.5 that the motivations for drawing these distinctions 
tend to propagate from wholes to parts, without ever determining a compelling 
exception to Extensionalism.
Thus, Extensionalism is perfectly compatible with four-dimensionalism. 
Three-dimensionalism could require a reformulation of CEM in which parthood 
and other mereological relations are relativized to times. In this reformulation 
also Extensionalism should be reformulated accordingly, but this in no way 
affects the reasons in favor or against Extensionalism: all the arguments in 
defense of Extensionalism we discussed in the previous chapters will still be 
available after a relativization to times. Time and change are not a matter of 
special concern for Extensionalism, and for mereological monism in general.


8.1 A different scenario
The abstract counterexamples to Extensionalism are less commonly discussed 
than concrete counterexamples. They deserve a separate discussion, since they 
raise different and interesting methodological concerns. In many cases, these 
counterexamples involve entities whose existence is controversial; and even 
when their existence is conceded, their nature is controversial.
Many of the abstract entities at stake are commitments of philosophical 
theories. Thus, it is not clear whether mereological monism can be used to 
rule them out, or whether they rule mereological monism (and, in particular, 
Extensionalism) out. We have real evidence against the absolute generality of 
mereological monism only if: (a) we have good reason to think that the abstract 
entities at stake exist; (b) independent reasons make it unavoidable or preferable 
to construe these abstract entities in such a way that two of them are allowed to 
share all their proper parts while being different.
At the opposite extreme, it should be noted that there is a trivial way to clash 
with Extensionalism. It is not difficult at all to imagine or to postulate that a 
kind of abstract entity violates Extensionalism, and is such that its identity 
conditions countenance structural aspects, thereby violating Fine’s principles of 
obliteration.
Some descriptions of CEM as the logic of parthood—sometimes provided 
by mereological monists themselves, in an effort to clarify the alleged formal, 
topic-neutral status of mereology, in analogy with the formal status of logic, 
as we have seen in Chapter  3—can be easily overrated: it is not logically 
deviant or difficult to set up a characterization of parthood that violates 
Extensionalism. The so-called nonclassical mereologies are relatively well-
developed frameworks that are not so called because they need to adopt a 
nonclassical logic.
8
Extensionalism and Abstract Entities

Mereology
118
They are called “nonclassical” simply because they deviate from CEM.1 While 
this book is a presentation and philosophical defense of mereological monism 
(that is, of the contention that CEM tells all the truth about parthood and 
cognate notions), we will occasionally take a look at nonclassical mereologies 
(in particular, at non-extensional mereologies in Chapter 9), and we will see 
that they do not present any special logical or technical difficulty. Their main 
deficiency—which for their supporters is probably a virtue—is that they are less 
powerful than CEM, and in particular do not provide identity conditions for the 
entities they are about.
This lack of power is not a technical difficulty in formulating them. For 
analogous reasons, when we look at non-strictly mereological theories—that 
is, at theories that are not about parthood and composition, but in which 
parthood and composition are or can be applied—it is very easy to meet theories 
that are incompatible with mereological monism, and with Extensionalism in 
particular.
However, it is at least dubious that they respect the two conditions (a) and 
(b) above. The options either to deny that the entities at stake exist (contra (a)), 
or to deny that they are involved in the parthood relations, or to revise the 
application of parthood to them in an extensionalist-friendly way (contra (b)) are 
in some cases attractive, and in others not definitely foreclosed. Let us discuss 
some examples before drawing a general conclusion about the two different 
ways in which mereological monism applies to concrete and abstract entities 
respectively.
8.2 Facts and propositions
Many theories of so-called facts and propositions seem to violate Extensionalism 
in a blatant way. We have already mentioned Armstrong’s facts. These are 
complex entities, expected to make sentences and beliefs true, and are composed 
of some individuals and a universal (either a property or a relation). In the case 
of asymmetric relations, there would be two facts with the same proper parts: 
the fact that Romeo loves Juliet and the fact that Juliet loves Romeo are different 
facts (they are the truth makers of different sentences), but Juliet, Romeo, and 
the relation of loving would be the only proper parts of both facts.
Propositions are often taken to be what sentences express and the object of 
so-called propositional attitudes, such as belief. They raise analogous problems, 
if they are meant as structured entities, in a tradition that dates back to Russell. 

Extensionalism and Abstract Entities
119
Suppose that Jim believes that Berlin is west of Paris. Then, we could think that 
the object of Jim’s belief is a structured entity whose parts are the city of Berlin, 
the city of Paris, and the relation of being west of. This structured entity is not a 
fact, since it is not a fact that Berlin is west of Paris (the sentence “Berlin is west 
of Paris” is false). The proposition that Berlin is west of Paris is also different 
from another structured proposition of the same category, namely the (true) 
proposition that Paris is west of Berlin. However, the two structured propositions 
that Berlin is west of Paris and that Paris is west of Berlin would share all their 
three proper parts. A counterexample to Extensionalism ensues.
Armstrong’s facts and Russellian propositions violate Extensionalism. But 
a quick look at the enormous and fractured literature on facts, truth-making, 
propositions, and attitudes reveals that tons of things could have gone wrong in 
the above train of thought that would lead one to reject Extensionalism.2
In the case of facts, the role of truth makers could be played by other entities, 
such as individuals, tropes, or relations. Alternatively, there could be no need for 
truth makers at all. Even if truth makers are needed and facts are assumed as the 
best candidates for this role, it is not clear that facts have parts, or that these parts 
should be a universal and some individuals for which order matters.
As far as propositions are concerned, it is controversial that belief and other 
so-called propositional attitudes have objects at all (for example, according to 
adverbialism, belief is not a relation, but a property of its subject3); and, assuming 
that something must indeed play the role of the object of belief, propositions 
compete with sentences, utterances, and mental contents as the best candidates 
for this role. Even if propositions turn out to be the best candidates, they are 
meant in a variety of ways. In the semantic proposals of Hintikka and Montague, 
propositions are actually sets of possible worlds, and it is far from clear—as we 
will see below—that sets violate Extensionalism.
All these controversies surrounding facts and propositions are largely beyond 
the scope of this book. Obviously, the mere observation that it is controversial to 
admit these kinds of entities and to construe them in an anti-extensionalist way 
is not an argument for Extensionalism: it leaves open the possibility that the right 
solution to these controversies is precisely to admit that in some cases the order 
of entities—or other structural features of wholes—should not be obliterated, 
and thus that the identity conditions provided by CEM are wrong.
Nonetheless, the existence of these controversies makes it clear that, when 
Extensionalism is confronted with these “philosophical” kinds of entities, its 
fortunes depend on other philosophical debates. The decisions as to whether 
facts and propositions exist and about their natures do not belong to mereologydis. 

Mereology
120
Still, mereologydis could and should interact with the different theories that are 
in charge of dealing with facts and propositions.
The ideal procedure should be roughly as follows. In semantics, philosophy of 
mind, and perhaps epistemology, some scholars propose facts or propositions as 
the best candidates for some roles to be filled. They characterize them through 
some principles. When the theories are developed formally, these principles 
might take the form of axioms, and provide an implicit definition of what a 
fact or a proposition is. The debate about the theories themselves is expected to 
determine whether these roles should really be filled, whether those candidates 
are really the fittest, and whether they should really be construed in a non-
extensional way.
If—in at least one case—a positive answer is given to all these scrutinies, then 
we have an argument for anti-extensionalism. Mereologydis does play a role in 
this procedure. It plays it as a matter of fact, since appeals to mereology are 
very frequent in the debates about the existence and the nature of these kinds of 
entities. According to Lewis—as we know—facts do not exist, insofar as, if they 
existed, they would instantiate a non-mereological kind of composition.
There are good reasons why mereologydis plays this role. In particular, the 
intrinsic theoretical desirability of the simple and clear-cut identity conditions 
provided by CEM, through Uniqueness of Composition and Extensionalism, has 
an important role in these debates. It is an intrinsic advantage to adopt a theory 
in which parts determine what is identical to what and—as a result—how many 
things there are. As we will see in Chapter 9, non-extensional mereologies—
while formally unproblematic and relatively well-developed—do not replace 
Extensionalism with different identity conditions for complex entities.
It is a great merit of Fine to have shown that identity conditions that 
are sensible to structure are not bound to be cans of worms. Structure is not 
a mysterious, intractable notion: we can have a sensible and manageable 
conception of structure, in which various kinds of arrangements of parts are 
classified and systematized.
Nonetheless, even the seemingly most innocent and desirable kind of 
structure—namely the order of the parts, as this is involved in structured facts 
and propositions—makes our theory significantly more complicated. Identity 
conditions will be topic-specific. Facts and propositions actually require us to 
countenance both the order and the repetition of parts. For example, the fact 
that Narcissus loves himself is expected to be composed by the binary relation of 
love and by Narcissus twice. This might lead us to think that parts fill slots in a 
structure, so that one and the same thing can fill two slots in a same structure.4 

Extensionalism and Abstract Entities
121
The idea that order matters is also connected with the idea that relations have a 
certain ariety: a number of places or slots to be filled.
Thus, the rejection of some principles of obliteration of structure 
(Absorption and Permutation in this case) entails the need to enrich and 
complicate our ideology with new notions. Again, this does not prove that 
this enrichment is worthless (less so that it is technically arduous, or formally 
flawed). Nonetheless, in the context of the typical cost-benefit analyses of 
philosophical investigations, increased complexity is a cost, and not a minor 
one either. While in this context I cannot establish whether propositions and 
facts exist and are structured, anti-extensional entities, mereological monism 
makes it clear that structured facts and propositions are a philosophically 
committing, expensive option.
8.3 Extensionalism and stipulation
Could we stipulate that facts and propositions are in a certain way? Or are they 
something out there, endowed with an objective nature of some kind? When 
philosophical entities are at stake, it seems as though the fate of Extensionalism 
could be settled with a stipulation. The same suspicion arises with respect to 
nonphilosophical abstract entities (such as sets, or structures employed in formal 
semantics for the interpretation of a formal language), when these abstract 
entities are attributed some parts and mereology is applied to them.
It is difficult to generalize claims about such a wide and diverse domain of 
things, but—at least in some cases—it seems plausible that it is a matter of choice 
and stipulation whether to be extensionalist or not.
In the debate about concrete entities (as in our example involving Monte 
Grappa and Mountmatter in Chapter  7), it seems that the discernibility 
intuitions are a datum; we are not free to stipulate that Mountmatter would 
survive the annihilation of a molecule, or that it is photogenic; we can only 
interpret some data in various ways. By contrast, nothing similar happens in 
the case of abstract entities, because there is no discernibility intuition at play. 
The entities at stake are philosophical constructions that can be designed to 
violate Extensionalism.
Why are facts and propositions often stipulated in an anti-extensionalist way? 
The reason for this relatively common—though controversial—choice seems to 
lie in language. Facts have the main theoretical role of making sentences true; 
propositions are the objects of so-called propositional attitudes, and attitudes 

Mereology
122
are attributed by complex sentences, in which smaller sentences figure in the 
so-called that-clauses.
The fact that Paris is west of Berlin is conceived as a sort of metaphysical 
mirror of the sentence “Paris is west of Berlin,” which the fact would make 
true. The (false) proposition that Berlin is west of Paris is conceived as a sort of 
metaphysical mirror of the sentence “Berlin is west of Paris,” which is included in 
the that-clause of the belief ascription “John believes that Berlin is west of Paris.”5
This mirroring can be identified as the source of the anti-extensionalist 
trends in the metaphysics of facts and propositions. It is because these entities 
are construed as metaphysical “shadows” of natural language that order and 
repetition matter in them: we can refer to the same thing twice, and it matters—
for the syntax and for the truth conditions of a sentence—whether a referential 
expression is the subject or the direct object of a predicate. In the literature about 
facts and propositions, this is a major source of perplexity about them: after all, 
why should we think that there are structured entities in the world that mirror 
the structure of linguistic entities?
Here we cannot decide whether facts and propositions exist, and whether 
it is sound to construe them as structural mirrors of sentences. It is enough to 
reiterate that, when these kinds of theoretical entities are at stake, some decisions 
and stipulations about them must be adopted, and that, in the context of such 
stipulations, the intrinsic desirability of structure-free, content-only identity 
conditions should be countenanced as a benefit in favor of extensionalist options.
8.4 Extensionalism and language
Language is the primary origin of anti-extensionalist theories of facts and 
propositions. However, it is important to remark that language, by itself, does 
not provide any compelling evidence against Extensionalism.
This remark is important because, while facts and propositions are 
theoretical entities whose existence is doubtful and whose nature could involve 
a stipulative element, sentences, words, letters, and analogous linguistic 
entities are not such that their existence can simply be denied. We have 
(more in linguistics than in philosophy) lots of evidence about their existence 
and nature. Thus, if language offered clear exceptions to Extensionalism, 
Extensionalism would be in serious trouble.
The statement that language does not offer any evidence against 
Extensionalism may sound surprising. Prima facie, language displays many 

Extensionalism and Abstract Entities
123
violations of Extensionalism. However, the more we analyze these seeming 
violations, the more we see that they depend on philosophy-laden, controversial 
assumptions. Basically, the apparent violations of Extensionalism in language 
depend on taking language as something metaphysically extraordinary. If, by 
contrast, linguistic items are taken as down-to-earth, standard, concrete items, 
then linguistic items are no less Extensionalism-friendly than mountains, statues, 
persons, and other concrete items.
Already Lewis was aware that language is a major source of prima facie 
attractive anti-extensionalist examples. These examples may involve letters and 
words, since it seems that different words can have the same letters as parts:
It might be said, for instance, that the two words “master” and “stream” are made 
of the same six letters.6
Other examples involve words and sentences: the sentence “Romeo loves Juliet” 
seems to have the same words as parts as the different sentence “Juliet loves 
Romeo.”
These latter examples are closely linked to anti-extensionalist sentence-like 
conceptions of facts and propositions: in the case of facts, for example, the fact 
that Romeo loves Juliet will be thought to have the same parts as the different 
fact that Juliet loves Romeo, as much as the sentence that Romeo loves Juliet 
would have the same parts as the different sentence that Juliet loves Romeo.
Linguistic entities, at several levels of complexity (letters, syllables, words, 
syntagms, sentences, and so on), can be viewed in two very broad ways. They 
can be seen as tokens: these tokens can be concrete inscriptions, with a specific 
spatial location, or sounds, that occur at a certain time. Let us focus on written 
tokens: “master,” “stream,” and “master” are three word-tokens. In each of these 
word-tokens, there are six letter-tokens.
The three word-tokens are mutually mereologically disjoint: they do not 
share any letter-token. Token-words do not usually share token-letters: in usual 
English notations, token-words are sharply separated. The same happens with 
sentences: the token-sentences “Romeo loves Juliet” and “Juliet loves Romeo” do 
not have the same token-words as constituents; by contrast, they do not share 
any token-word.
However, letters, words, and sentences can be seen as types, as well: linguistic 
types would be abstract, repeatable entities, of which each token is an instance. 
In this sense, the word-type “master” would include the same letter-types 
included by the word-type “stream”; and the sentence-types “Romeo loves Juliet” 
and “Juliet loves Romeo” would include the same word-types.

Mereology
124
Is Extensionalism doomed? Only if some highly controversial choices are 
made. Sure, we tend to say that “master” and “stream” are made of the same 
letters, and we have the impression that this claim is true. By contrast, if the 
claim is meant to refer to linguistic tokens, then it should be false. But what we 
mean by that allegedly true claim is far from clear.
If what we mean is that “master” and “stream” are two word-types that 
include the same letter-types, we would be inclined to claim that also “master” 
and “masters” (as well as “stream” and “streams”) are made of the same letters. 
But the inclination to assent to this latter claim is much weaker: it would be 
reasonable to object that “master” and “masters” are not made of the same 
letters, because “masters” includes a letter which “master” does not include. This 
objection cannot but concern letter-tokens (and, in particular, the additional 
token of “s” in “masters”). Nonetheless, there is no evidence of any ambiguity 
between types and tokens between the claim that “master” and “stream” are 
made of the same letters and the claim that “master” and “masters” are not.
A solution might be to interpret the claim that some words are made of some 
letters in terms of tokens and similarity. “Master” and “stream”—the two token-
words—are made of six token-letters each: there is a one-to-one correspondence 
between their constituting token-letters such that each token letter is similar 
to the corresponding one in the other word. The fact that we tend to use the 
expression “same letters”—instead of “similar letters”—could be explained as an 
appeal to qualitative identity: the token-letters would be numerically different, 
but still so similar in terms of their linguistically relevant features as to be 
regarded as “the same letter”—a bit like when we say that Venus and Mars are 
the same celestial body, and we mean that they share enough features to be both 
planets, in spite of the fact that they are obviously numerically different.7
Thus, we have a way to explain why we say that different words are made of 
the same letters, without incurring in an exception to Extensionalism. Given 
that this explanation does not involve linguistic types at all, we could keep it 
as an indication that linguistic types do not exist at all, and a fortiori cannot 
determine an exception to Extensionalism. However, this would be a far-fetched 
and hazardous conclusion: it seems correct to say that the English alphabet is 
made up of twenty-six letters, and it would be awkward to insist that it is made 
up of twenty-six concrete inscriptions. Analogously, when a dictionary provides 
the definition of a word, it seems that it does not give the definition either for a 
single token or for a definite plurality of tokens: the definition is expected to be 
valid also for future tokens, that is—from the most straightforward viewpoint—
for new instances of the abstract type.

Extensionalism and Abstract Entities
125
Getting rid of linguistic types is a challenging (and fascinating) nominalistic 
project—endorsed in various ways by mereological monists such as Goodman 
and Quine, and in a different context by Wilfrid Sellars.8 The kind of nominalism 
that is here at stake is not the nominalism about structure that is entangled with 
mereological monism, but nominalism about linguistic types. It can be motivated 
by a radical form of naturalism about language, according to which—at least 
at the syntactic level—language should consist only of concrete, perceivable, 
down-to-earth entities; or by a more general kind of nominalism, according to 
which any commitment to repeatable entities, universals, or possibly abstract 
entities in general, is best avoided.
However, if Extensionalism were to rely on nominalism about linguistic types, 
it would inherit all its difficulties. There are several alternatives. First of all, in 
the philosophy of language there is a lively debate about what linguistic types are. 
According to an influential proposal by David Kaplan, linguistic types are not 
abstract, repeatable entities, but standard continuants, that is, entities that persist 
through time.9 Different tokens would be temporal parts of types. A token would 
count as a part of the same type of a previously uttered or written token if and 
only if it is uttered or written with the intention of repeating the previous token.
Kaplan’s proposal is independently motivated. Kaplan has no apparent 
interest in preserving mereological Extensionalism. The main reason for 
Kaplan’s proposal is that similarity is a poor guide to linguistic types: we classify 
linguistic word-tokens such as “Phosphorus” and “Fosforus” as belonging to the 
same type, in spite of their patent notational difference; we classify some written 
and oral linguistic tokens as belonging to the same type, in spite of the fact that it 
is not clear at all in which sense a sound is similar to a written sign. By contrast, 
in all these cases—according to Kaplan—there is a sort of causal link between 
different tokens of a same type; and the unifying element of each type would be 
the intention to repeat previous tokens.
If linguistic types are standard, concrete continuants, then they do not 
raise any specific concern for Extensionalism. They can be reconciled with 
Extensionalism through the strategies we discussed in Chapter 7, Section 7.7.
Kaplan’s metaphysics of linguistic types is attractive, but this is not the place 
for a full assessment of its merits and problems. However, even assuming that 
linguistic types exist and that, contra Kaplan, they are repeatable, abstract 
universals, Extensionalism can be defended in other ways. As we have seen, it is 
possible and quite reasonable to admit linguistic types, while at the same time 
denying—as in the above case—that we are referring to linguistic types when we 
say that different words (sentences) have the same letters (words) as parts.

Mereology
126
Nonetheless, quite independently of what we mean when we say that different 
types have the same parts, we should decide whether linguistic types have parts 
at all, and—if so—what parts they have. We could construe them as mereological 
atoms, but this would be strange, since there is a clear sense in which words are 
in sentences, and letters are in words.
At this point, we might attempt to claim that word-types are parts of sentence-
types, and that letter-types are parts of word-types, but that there are other parts 
as well. As observed by Varzi,10 it is highly anomalous, and in open contrast 
with CEM, to exclude from the domain of the parts of something the fusions of 
its parts. More specifically, why should syllable-types, and in general arbitrary 
combinations of consecutive letter-types in a word, not be parts of word types? 
And why should syntactically complex units (such as the combination of a 
predicate with its direct object) not be parts of sentence-types? If we admit these 
different parts, then “master” and “stream”—even if regarded as types—share 
some parts (the letter-types), but differ in many other parts (only “master” has 
“ma” as part, and only “stream” has “str” as part); as a result, they do not deliver 
any exception to Extensionalism.
However, this solution too is anomalous: if the order does not matter (if CEM 
obliterates it), it should not matter even when establishing what combinations 
of letters are admitted as parts of words (or what combinations of words are 
admitted as parts of sentences). The restriction to combinations of consecutive 
letters is unmotivated, and, once it is dropped, both “ma” and “str” end up being 
parts of both “master” and “stream.” Since the letters are the same in both words, 
also any combination of letters will be the same in both words.
A better solution (a solution we need only if we insist that linguistic types exist 
and are abstract entities, and not standard continuants as Kaplan has proposed) 
is to concede that linguistic types are not mereological fusions of other linguistic 
types, but sets. As Lewis says about “master” and “stream,”
then indeed two things are generated set-theoretically out of the same six 
members. (Lewis, 1991, p. 71)
The idea—which Lewis does not detail any further—is not that “master” 
and “stream”—as types—are sets whose members are the six letters, because in 
that case they would be the same sets: according to the Axiom of Extensionality 
(endorsed by any set theory), two sets are identical if and only if they have the 
same members. By contrast, linguistic types would be more complex sets, in 
which the order and the repetition are codified, for example by marking the 
parts with a natural number.11 The word “master” would be the set {{m,1}, {a,2}, 

Extensionalism and Abstract Entities
127
{s,3}, {t,4}, {e,5}, {r,6}}, while “stream” would be the different set {{s,1}, {t,2}, {r,3}, 
{e,4}, {a,5}, {m,6}}.
This set-theoretic understanding of linguistic types might seem artificial, or 
even arbitrary: there are many other ways of codifying order set-theoretically 
(instead of inserting numbers in subsets, we could mark the order by including 
each letter in different levels of singletons).12 This risk of arbitrariness in set-
theoretical interpretations of entities which are not prima facie sets is widely 
discussed in the philosophy of mathematics: numbers too can be identified with 
different sets, and there seems to be no clear motivation for preferring some 
sets to others.13 How are we supposed to choose between them? In the linguistic 
case, if word-types, sentence-types, and so on are expected to exist, and to be a 
primary object of linguistics, how can their nature be arbitrary?
One could here resort to some of the replies usually given in the philosophy 
of mathematics: for example, one could say that words are a certain kind of set 
(perhaps the one with natural numbers of which we gave two examples above), 
and that our lack of reasons to choose that specific kind of set over another 
is simply a matter of ignorance (due to contingent facts or to the constitutive 
epistemic limits of human beings); if we knew better, we would know that words 
are things of that kind.
Perhaps it is better to acknowledge that abstract linguistic types (if they exist 
at all, and if they are really abstract, contra Kaplan), as much as other abstract or 
theoretical entities (such as facts and propositions), are connected with a kind 
of stipulation; and that, if we stipulate them in an anti-extensionalist way, then 
they will violate Extensionalism. When we decide what an abstract word-type 
is (as well as when we decide what a fact or a proposition is), we can make it 
extensional or not: the price of making it non-extensional is that we lose an 
economic and general way of providing identity conditions for word-types.
Thus, the only linguistic entities which constitute a danger for mereological 
Extensionalism are linguistic types, if their existence is conceded and if they 
are construed as abstract entities, and not as standard concrete continuants, as 
Kaplan has proposed. Abstract linguistic types can violate Extensionalism, if the 
stipulations about them violate Extensionalism. This makes them quite similar 
to other abstract entities, such as sets.
There is no specific danger for Extensionalism in language. Linguistic 
counterexamples to Extensionalism apply only if the ontology of language hosts 
abstract entities, such as abstract linguistic types. While I do not claim to have 
shown that the ontology of language should not host such things, it is important 
to keep in mind that it is not clear or evident that there are abstract linguistic 

Mereology
128
types. Even if abstract linguistic types are admitted, the problems they raise for 
Extensionalism are simply an instance of the general problems raised by abstract 
entities. We are going to discuss these problems in the next two sections.
8.5 A limitation for Extensionalism
It seems that in certain cases the fate of Extensionalism can be decided with a 
stipulation. After all, Extensionalism consists in the obliteration of structure, but 
it is perfectly possible to introduce structured abstract entities in mathematics or 
in semantics. Some of these entities are even called structures, as is the case in 
algebra and in formal semantics. Mereologyphi cannot forbid these stipulations, 
and it would be wrong and presumptuous for philosophers to claim that there is 
something technically wrong in them.
I will propose that, in certain cases, the mereological monist should simply 
concede that there are counterexamples to Extensionalism in the realm of 
abstract entities, and restrict its ambitions of formality/generality to the realm 
of concrete entities. This distinction might correspond to a general difference 
between abstract and concrete entities: abstract entities can be created by 
stipulation, while concrete entities cannot. Thus, Extensionalism would concern 
those entities in relation to which it cannot be violated in a too simple, stipulative, 
fiat way.
The nature of the structured abstract entities at stake (those which could 
violate Extensionalism) is strictly constrained by specific theories. This is the 
case with sets themselves, whose nature is expected to be completely determined 
by some axioms. However, even once these axioms are established, it seems that 
some stipulations can concern the application of mereological concepts to sets, 
and determine whether sets obey Extensionalism or not.
Consider again the two sets with which in the previous section we have 
identified the word-types “master” and “stream”: {{m,1}, {a,2}, {s,3}, {t,4}, 
{e,5}, {r,6}} and {{s,1}, {t,2}, {r,3}, {e,4}, {a,5}, {m,6}}, respectively. The ultimate 
constituents of these two sets—which Goodman, as we know, considered to be 
the content of these sets—are the same six letters and the natural numbers from 
1 to 6: m, a, s, t, e, r, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. These “basic” constituents are differently 
arranged, stratified in the two sets.
So do sets ultimately violate mereological Extensionalism or not? It depends 
again on the stipulation, as seems to be generally the case when abstract or 
theoretical entities are confronted with Extensionalism. Here the crucial 

Extensionalism and Abstract Entities
129
stipulation does not concern the nature of sets, but the way in which parthood 
is applied to sets.
Goodman saw sets as essentially anti-extensional items, and devised his own 
calculus of individuals as a more extensionalist (hyperextensional), nominalistic 
(in the sense of nominalism about structure) alternative to set theory. However, 
it is possible to look at sets and Extensionalism from a different viewpoint, and 
reach a different conclusion. From a pluralistic perspective, Fine focuses on 
the operation of set-building, which connects elements of a set to the set itself. 
This operation—in opposition to mereological Fusion—violates Collapse and 
Leveling (two of the principles discussed in Chapter 5, Section 5.7). This means 
that members—and not ultimate members—are taken as parts of sets. And, 
from this perspective, the set-theoretical Axiom of Extensionality warrants that 
there are not two sets with the same elements: if the parts of a set are its elements, 
then sets respect Extensionalism after all.
By contrast, Lewis takes the fact that set-theoretic membership is not 
transitive as a reason to think that membership is not parthood, and claims that 
the parts of a set are its subsets. As a result, {{m,1}, {a,2}, {s,3}, {t,4}, {e,5}, {r,6}} 
(the set with which the type “master” would be identified) and {{s,1}, {t,2}, {r,3}, 
{e,4}, {a,5}, {m,6}} (the set with which “stream” would be identified) would have 
different parts: for example, {{a,2}, {s,3}} would be part of “master,” but not part 
of “stream”; {{e,4}, {m,6}, {s,1}} would be part of “stream,” but not of “master.”
Thus, Goodman, Fine, and Lewis disagree on what is part of a set: ultimate 
elements, for Goodman; set-theoretic elements, for Fine; subsets, for Lewis. As a 
consequence of these decisions, the sets with which the word-types “master” 
and “stream” are identified will respect or fail to respect Extensionalism: for 
they have the same ultimate elements, but different set-theoretic elements, and 
different subsets.
By contrast, when concrete entities are at stake, we are not “free” to decide 
what is part of what, and the fate of Extensionalism cannot be determined by 
such decisions. It would be viciously ad hoc to deal with potential concrete 
counterexamples to Extensionalism by selecting the parts of something in 
a specific way. In the case of abstract entities, these kinds of decisions should 
be taken in any case, and it is legitimate, and not ad hoc, to identify parts of 
them—“parts of classes,” as the title of Lewis’s book runs—so as to respect 
Extensionalism.
Lewis would probably disagree with this reconstruction of his work; he would 
deny that subsets are parts of classes because of a stipulation. He would claim that 
subclasses—and neither members nor ultimate members—are parts of classes 

Mereology
130
because membership is not transitive and it is possible for two classes to have 
the same ultimate members. But in this way Extensionalism is simply assumed, 
instead of being argued for.
Unfortunately, when abstract entities are at stake, it is difficult to do any 
better. The stipulations that can be made about abstract entities and about 
the application of parthood to them are simply free to violate Extensionalism. 
The mereological monist could staunchly deny that structured abstract entities 
exist, by embracing fascinating and arduous nominalistic programs (in which the 
nominalism at stake is not nominalism about structure, but nominalism about 
abstract entities); or insist in preferring Extensionalism-friendly stipulations 
about what parts they have. As we have seen, Lewis’s idea that the parts of sets 
are their subsets (instead of their elements, or fundamental elements) prevent 
sets from being counterexamples to Extensionalism.
Does this strategy for defending Extensionalism in the case of abstract entities 
always make sense? A very general perplexity one could voice is that the strategy 
in question aims to make extensional entities that were designed to be non-
extensional. Suppose that we find a more or less bizarre way of “extensionalizing” 
structures, that is, those algebraic entities defined by a set (the domain of the 
structure) and some operations and relations on such domain. Structures are 
usually employed in formal semantics to provide an interpretation of a formal 
language. The idea behind structures is precisely that one and the same set can 
be the domain of different structures: the role of operations and relations in a 
structure is precisely to specify how the elements of the domain are arranged.
Suppose that we found a way to extensionalize structures. There would 
be something really curious and ironic in this operation: we would take 
entities whose usual name (“structure”) suggests—rather correctly—that the 
arrangement of what is in them matters, and we would show that, given a 
certain way of construing them and applying mereological concepts to them, 
they respect mereological Extensionalism. It seems that we would have simply 
found a way to hide the arrangement of entities in a structure. Moreover, our 
decisions and stipulations would be unashamedly driven by our need to respect 
Extensionalism, without any attempt to be faithful to the real nature of structures 
themselves.
In general, Extensionalism about abstract entities raises different issues 
from those raised about concrete entities in Chapter 7. It seems that we can 
stipulate structured abstract entities that prima facie violate Extensionalism; 
and that, in many cases, it is de facto very useful to stipulate such entities (the 
myriad of applications of sets and structures is strong evidence of the usefulness 

Extensionalism and Abstract Entities
131
of the respective stipulations). After that, we can make further stipulations 
about the way in which mereological concepts should be applied to them, in 
order to safeguard Extensionalism. However, in some cases—such as the case 
of structures—these further stipulations risk clashing with the motivations for 
thinking that those entities exist.
Given these difficulties, the mereological monist is better off withdrawing 
her pretense of absolute formality or topic-neutrality. The peculiar connection 
between abstract entities and stipulations always leaves the possibility of 
violating Extensionalism open. There are various strategies to reconcile the 
apparent exceptions to Extensionalism with Extensionalism, but some lead 
to disappointing results, which seem to apply mereological concepts to non-
extensional entities in a way that is in strident contrast with the expected nature 
of these entities.
8.6 Why it is reasonable to exclude abstract entities
The decision to limit Extensionalism (and hence the claim of adequacy for the 
identity conditions provided by CEM) to concrete entities may seem painful. It 
is a limitation for mereological monism on the whole: in the realm of abstract 
entities, parthood and composition are allowed to work in a different way. 
However, there are two main reasons why this cost does not divest mereological 
monism of its interest and raison d’être.
First, the categorical distinction between abstract and concrete entities is 
expected to be definite (that is, exempt from vagueness) and modally rigid 
(what is abstract is necessarily non-concrete, and what is concrete is necessarily 
nonabstract).14 This means that, after the restriction, mereological monism still 
holds for a precisely delimited—and patently very wide—domain of entities.
However, it is important to remark that not all kinds of entities I have discussed 
in this chapter are abstract. Some of them (in particular facts) are theoretical 
entities—they are introduced in a philosophical theory, in order to play some 
explanatory roles and given an appropriate cost-benefit analysis—but are not 
abstract. Facts are thought by their supporters to be constituents of the world: 
according to Wittgenstein’s famous motto in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, 
“the world is the totality of facts.”15 As a result, facts are expected to have some 
kind of spatial and temporal location. According to some epistemologists, facts 
are the primary objects of knowledge.16 Facts could also be involved in causal 
links and scientific laws.

Mereology
132
Facts are really a risky bugbear for Extensionalism: a metaphysics of facts 
is a picture of concrete reality (about which no stipulation is expected to settle 
what there is) in which the order and the repetition of constituents matter, and 
should not be obliterated. Even once it is conceded that Extensionalism and 
mereological monism do not hold for abstract entities, facts cannot be disposed 
of in this way.
Nonetheless, extensionalists still have some attractive ways out at their 
disposal. First of all, facts could be entities without parts, or could be identified 
with sets of possible worlds (as it is more often done with propositions).17 In this 
latter hypothesis, they would be classified as abstract entities, and would quit 
the expected domain of application of mereological monism. Second, one could 
deny that facts exist. There is nothing like a consensus about the commitment to 
facts in contemporary metaphysics. For any of the above-listed theoretical roles, 
there are alternatives to facts (tropes, relata-specific relations, events).
Finally, the line of reaction we have suggested above for mereological monism 
is more plausible in the case of facts than it is in the case of properly abstract 
entities, such as sets and structures. In the case of sets and structures, we have 
seen that they are plausibly introduced with the accompanying specific intention 
to account for certain kinds of arrangements of what is in them (stratification 
for sets, a much richer array of structural features for structures); and that—as 
a consequence—it is undesirable to be forced to apply mereological concepts to 
them in a structure-obliterating way.
Facts are different: facts are introduced in order to play the roles—among 
others—of truth makers and objects of knowledge but this in itself does not 
require them to be structured. The hypothesis that they have no parts, or are 
sets of a certain kind, is prima facie left open by their roles. From this viewpoint, 
facts are a special case: it is not easy to make another example of plausibly 
concrete entities that—according to a certain conception of them—threaten 
to undermine Extensionalism. Thus, it is not surprising that the mereological 
monist needs a specific treatment in this case: either a rejection of facts also 
on the basis of Extensionalism itself, or a deliberately extensional conception of 
them, or the thesis that facts are—contra expectations—abstract.
Second, we have seen that one major advantage of mereological monism—
an advantage warranted by Extensionalism—is the provision of clear-cut and 
simple identity conditions for every entity. Now, suppose that the mereological 
monist is forced to restrict its ambitions, and in particular to admit that sets and 
other abstract entities are not extensional in the mereological sense. This would 
be a significant concession, but the concession would concern entities which can 

Extensionalism and Abstract Entities
133
be expected to have definite and clear identity conditions quite independently 
of mereological monism. In other words, the great merit of Extensionalism is 
to provide definite and clear identity conditions; but abstract entities do not 
need them, because their respective theories already provide definite and clear 
identity conditions for them.
Consider sets: the Axiom of Extensionality claims that sets are identical if and 
only if they have the same members. Thus, sets have definite, explicit identity 
conditions, no matter how mereology is applied to them and whether they obey 
mereological Extensionalism or not. These identity conditions also display a 
certain level of formality or topic-neutrality (which, as we know, is a gradable 
feature): no matter what kinds of things the elements of these sets are (they may 
be other sets, individuals, universals, or anything else), sets have their identity 
conditions dictated by the Axiom of Extensionality.
Structures are no different: structures are identical if and only if they have the 
same domain and the same relations and operations on that domain. Moreover, 
structures are usually represented as ordered sets whose elements are their 
domain, a set of operations on it, and a set of relations on it. Thus, structures 
would be nothing but complex and stratified sets, and would enjoy the clear and 
definite identity conditions dictated by the Axiom of Extensionality.
The overall picture suggests that it is not by chance that the contraposition 
of mereological wholes and sets is a recurring element in the philosophical 
history of mereology (from Goodman to Lewis, up to pluralist approaches à la 
Fine). The sensibility to structure, which abstract entities (through their identity 
conditions) are often stipulated to have, can be expressed in set-theoretical terms. 
Set-theoretical elementhood and the operation that connects the elements of a 
set to the set itself could be thought to play in the realm of abstract entities the 
role played by parthood and Fusion in the realm of concrete entities.
The idea of a double-tier reality—concrete mereological wholes on the one 
hand and abstract sets on the other, connected by those instances of set-theoretic 
membership in which a concrete entity is member of a set—is far from new. 
Also Lewis in Parts of Classes points to it, quite independently of his attempt 
to distinguish what is mereological in set theory. His “Division Thesis” runs as 
follows:
Division Thesis: Reality divides exclusively into individuals and classes. (Lewis 
1991, p. 7)
To claim that every abstract entity enjoys the identity conditions of sets is a 
bold claim, which I do not aspire to prove in the present context. But even if one 

Mereology
134
doubts this claim, it is reasonable to assume that every abstract entity, even if 
it is not a set, is such that a theory provides identity conditions for it. If so, and 
if the strategies to reconcile abstract entities with Extensionalism are deemed 
unsatisfying, the mereological monist has a way out: she could opt for a strategic 
and well-motivated retreat from the domain of abstract entities.

9.1 Motivations for a non-extensional mereology
In this book, we are focusing on a specific mereologytheo: CEM. According to 
mereological monism, it is the right one. In the literature—particularly in the 
recent literature—several other, nonclassical kinds of mereologytheo are to be 
found. These are often motivated by the need of eschewing Extensionalism.
In some cases, the need for a non-extensional mereologytheo is not motivated 
by the explicit conviction that reality violates Extensionalism, but by the need 
to have a framework for managing fictional or scientifically controversial 
scenarios.
The typical fictional example1 involves Borges’s Aleph:
I saw the Aleph from all points. I saw the earth in the Aleph and in the earth the 
Aleph once more and the earth in the Aleph […].
The Aleph would have everything as a proper part (including the Earth). As other 
claims in Borges’s story would show, also the Earth would have everything as a 
proper part, including the Aleph. This is not directly a (fictional) counterexample 
to Extensionalism, because the Aleph and the Earth do have different proper 
parts: only the Aleph—and not the Earth—has the Earth as a proper part; only 
the Earth—and not the Aleph—has the Aleph as a proper part. Nonetheless, 
it is a scenario incompatible with classical mereology, and in particular with 
the Asymmetry of proper parthood: the Aleph and Earth are different, mutual 
proper parts.
None of the fictional and parascientific examples in the literature 
are uncontroversially counterexamples from reality, and thus show that 
Extensionalism or other CEM’s theorems are false metaphysical theses. 
Nonetheless, they are useful as a source of inspiration for alternative frameworks, 
in particular if these frameworks are taken with an instrumental attitude 
9
The Alternatives to Extensionalism

Mereology
136
(remember that in this book my attitude toward CEM is not instrumental: to my 
mind, CEM is the sound and complete doctrine of parthood and composition 
for concrete entities).
In Chapter 8, Section 8.6 we have seen that abstract entities do not really 
require an alternative to CEM, because—so to say—they are an alternative to 
CEM, at least as regards identity conditions: their respective theories provide 
them with clear identity conditions.
Thus, the two major motivations for exploring non-extensional theories of 
parthood are: an instrumental attitude, according to which it is useful to have 
a technical framework for non-extensional scenarios, possibly motivated by 
fictional or parascientific examples; the steady belief that Monte Grappa and 
Mountmatter are different and have the same proper parts. This belief is steady 
because it resists all the monist attempts to show that Monte Grappa is identical 
to Mountmatter (Chapter  7, Sections 7.3 and 7.4), as well as the arguments 
suggesting that, if they are different, then their proper parts too are different 
(Chapter 7, Section 7.5).
Before making a couple of examples of non-extensional mereologies, let 
us briefly discuss another scenario that belongs to the same group as Borges’s 
Aleph. However, this is not a literary example, but a sort of thought experiment 
inspired by the literature on time travels. Suppose that I want to build a wall with 
a single brick, but with a time machine at my disposal. At a certain time tm I take 
my brick back to a previous time tn, and I put my transported brick next to the 
brick that was already at tn. Now I have an initial fragment of a wall that has the 
size of two bricks, but the two bricks are numerically identical, by hypothesis. 
I could iterate the procedure at many other times after tm, thereby obtaining an 
entire wall made of a single, multilocated brick.2
The example presupposes that time-travel is possible—and this is a 
presupposition that I am not going to discuss.3 However, this is not the only 
controversial presupposition: another is that when the brick is moved back to 
a time in which it already existed, it is possible to put it next to itself. This kind 
of example would point to a supposed failure of Fine’s principles of Absorption. 
While, to my mind, no concrete counterexample to Extensionalism is compelling, 
what is interesting about these counterexamples is that they point to different 
kinds of arrangement of parts in a whole. Fine’s analysis of what structure is 
can be usefully compared with these alleged counterexamples. Various non-
extensional mereologies correspond to the violation of some of Fine’s principles 
of obliteration, while usually abiding by—or staying neutral about—other 
principles.

The Alternatives to Extensionalism
137
Nonetheless, the sensibility to some kinds of structural arrangement can 
be more easily matched with the sensibility to some other kinds of structural 
arrangement. We know that sets violate both Collapse and Leveling (since 
they are sensible to the stratification of what is in them), while they respect 
Absorption and Permutation. Correspondingly, the reasons for violating 
Absorption (and thus to countenance repetition) usually match the reasons for 
violating Permutation (and thus to countenance order).
The common root in this latter combination (the violation of both 
Absorption and Permutation) is the idea that it matters for the identity of 
the wholes what role or roles a part plays. The specification “for the identity 
of the whole” is—as always—pivotal in order to capture the real disagreement 
with mereological monists: mereological monists do not deny—at least qua 
mereological monists and extensionalists—that in a qualitative description of 
a whole it is often important to give an account of the relations between the 
parts, their respective position, their functional roles, and so on. They deny only 
that these aspects have any bearing on the identity conditions of wholes; and, 
due to their narrow understanding of mereologydis, mereological monists think 
that it is not the business of mereologydis to account for what does not matter for 
the formal features of parthood, or for the identity and existence conditions of 
wholes. Anti-extensionalists disagree inasmuch as, according to them, structural 
features matter for the identity conditions of wholes.
9.2 Roles, forms, Extensionalism
If you care about roles and positions, you will be inclined both to admit that a 
single thing can play more than one role, or cover more than one position, and 
to admit that two wholes can differ simply because two of their parts have their 
role switched in them, even if they have all their parts in common. Thus, for 
example, in a non-extensional, structural theory of parthood sketched by Karen 
Bennett,4 wholes have slots: roles to be filled by parts. The same part can fill 
more than one slot in a whole. An obvious consequence of Bennett’s approach is 
that there can be two wholes that have the same slots and the same parts, but are 
nonetheless different because the slots are differently occupied.
Other kinds of non-extensional mereologiestheo are more directly motivated 
by concrete cases such as that of Monte Grappa and Mountmatter, or by fictional 
and parascientific examples, such as those of the Aleph and of the wall made 
of a single brick. Consider the case of Monte Grappa and Mountmatter again. 

Mereology
138
As we have noted in Chapter 7, Section 7.6, there is a gap in the kind of dualism 
that stems from Varzi’s reading of the debate. According to Varzi, the coherent 
dualist thinks that, at every level of complexity, there is a structured entity and 
a colocated portion of matter. In this thorough form of dualism, there are some 
relations that still lack an explanation: the relations between each structured 
entity and the colocated portion of matter.
Is it a mereological relation, which our mereologytheo should characterize in 
some way? Due to my strong monist inclinations, I have difficulties in making my 
mind up about this supposed relation between Monte Grappa and Mountmatter. 
Perhaps dualists should simply construe the relation between Monte Grappa and 
Mountmatter as colocation, and colocation should be dealt with by a theory of 
spatial location.
An alternative is to say that the portion of matter is in the object, but not 
vice versa. This idea comes from a broadly Aristotelian hylomorphist tradition, 
according to which the object is a substance—that is some kind of compound of 
form and matter. The matter is in the substance, but not vice versa.
Hylomorphism is a relatively popular doctrine in contemporary philosophy, 
in particular among so-called Neo-Aristotelian philosophers.5 Hylomorphists 
tend to disagree with mereological monism, but also among themselves. 
The differences among them hinge in particular on the role of form in a substance. 
Some of them (Fine for example) deny that the form is a part of a substance, 
while others (Kathrin Koslicki) disagree with Fine, and believe that the form is 
part of a substance. The inclusion of form among the parts of a substance solves 
the problem with Extensionalism, because the object and the portion of matter 
end up having different parts: the substances (Monte Grappa, the forest, and 
all their parts) have their forms as parts, while the colocated portions of matter 
(Mountmatter and all its parts) have no forms as parts.
One problem with Koslicki’s extensional variety of hylomorphism is that 
the purpose of form should be to embody the structure of the parts, and it 
is not clear if this role can be played by an additional part. It seems that the 
structuring role of form as an additional part could end up consisting in the 
mutual arrangement of form and the other parts. But then form would not really 
explain or embody the structure: the real structure would consist in the way in 
which form structures the material parts. A regress seems to ensue.
Structure should consist in a net of relations, in which material parts can be in 
a certain order, appear multiple times, and at various levels of complexity. This is 
what structure is, and adding a further part named “form” could be a superfluous 
step, and could ignite a regress. One could reply that form as an additional part is 

The Alternatives to Extensionalism
139
not superfluous, because it helps to reconcile dualism about objects and portions 
of matter with Extensionalism; but if this is its only function, then the move 
seems viciously ad hoc.
9.3 Dropping Weak Supplementation
If form is not introduced as an additional part, the relation between Monte Grappa 
and Mountmatter can hardly find a mereological representation within CEM as 
it is. One could insist that Mountmatter is in Monte Grappa. In these cases, the 
word constitution is sometimes used (while in some other cases “constitution” 
is synonymous with “composition,” and some xx constitute/compose a y if and 
only if y is the fusion of xx): Mountmatter would constitute Monte Grappa.
Is constitution a parthood relation? If it is not, then it bears no consequence 
for the theory of parthood. If it is, then the claim becomes that the portion of 
matter is part of the object, but different from it. This would mean that the 
portion of matter is a proper part of the object. But, insofar as form is not a part 
of the object, nothing else would be part of the object.
This needs a departure from CEM. It is not immediately clear that it is a 
departure from Extensionalism, because Monte Grappa is deemed to be different 
from Mountmatter, but has also a different proper part: Mountmatter is a proper 
part of Monte Grappa, but Mountmatter is not a proper part of itself (proper 
parthood is irreflexive). However, something else in CEM must be dropped. 
Among the principles of CEM, Uniqueness of Composition should be dropped. 
Both Monte Grappa and the colocated portion of matter would count as the 
fusion of all the smaller portions of matter (or of any selection of portions of 
matter such that nothing—so to say—is left over). Thus, two allegedly different 
things would be the fusions of the same things.
When a principle of CEM “seen from above”—as in Lewis’s formalization—is 
dropped, one needs to look at weaker principles that can be retained. And, as 
we have seen in Chapter 6, while Extensionalism is weaker than Uniqueness 
of Composition, the choice of dropping Uniqueness of Composition while 
preserving Extensionalism is not very promising, because it ends up introducing 
unmotivated, intermediate “groups” of parts (see Chapter  6, Section  6.1 in 
particular).
Moreover, this route does not meet the needs of a dualist, for whom the 
portion of matter is a proper part of the colocated object, but not vice versa. 
Thus, while this case does not directly disobey Extensionalism, it disobeys 

Mereology
140
another CEM theorem, which in the presentations of CEM from below is often 
taken as an axiom, and deemed to be constitutive of what parthood is:6 Weak 
Supplementation.
The idea behind Weak Supplementation is that, if x is a proper part of ­y—
instead of being an improper part of y, that is, y itself—it is because there is 
something more in y: this something more is a part of y that does not overlap with 
x (i.e., this part of y has no part in common with x):

(Weak Supplementation)
The reason why Weak Supplementation is often taken for granted is that, if a 
whole includes nothing more than one of its proper parts, then that proper part 
is—so to speak—suspiciously improper. But if we look at the kind of dualism 
we are assessing, it seems clear that it consists in a systematic violation of Weak 
Supplementation, such that every substance has a proper part (the colocated 
portion of matter), but no other part disjoint from it.
Nonetheless, the sheer and isolated denial of Weak Supplementation does 
not seem, in itself, a desirable strategy.7 If the formal features of P (Reflexivity, 
Antisymmetry, Transitivity) and PP (Irreflexivity, Asymmetry, Transitivity) are 
preserved, the rejection of Weak Supplementation brings with itself the failure 
of Extensionalism, that is to say of the way in which CEM provides identity 
conditions for the entities it is about. Moreover, it also delivers an unsatisfying 
concept of proper part. In CEM, “proper part” is meant to designate a part 
different from the whole, and, if Weak Supplementation alone is dropped, this 
difference is left completely unexplained: mereology would not explain the 
alleged difference between Monte Grappa and Mountmatter at all.
If this is the outcome, it would have been much better to retain Extensionalism 
and the full power of CEM, and a consistent, global dualism in which the relation 
between objects and portions of matter is not explained at all: the reason why we 
went further was that we sought to explain the relation between Monte Grappa 
and Mountmatter in mereology. Getting rid of Weak Supplementation leaves us 
without the explanation we were expecting to find.
9.4 Reciprocal proper parts
The anti-extensionalist, at this point, might wish to get rid of the neo-
Aristotelian idea that the portion of matter is in the more structured object, 
but not vice versa. This idea of a one-directional mereological relation between 

The Alternatives to Extensionalism
141
Mountmatter and Monte Grappa was ultimately rooted in the presence of 
form, which was expected to explain the difference between Monte Grappa 
and Mountmatter. In Koslicki’s variety of hylomorphism, form is actually a 
part among others, and explains the difference between Monte Grappa and 
Mountmatter, while at the same time triggering a regress. If, by contrast, 
form is not a part, then there is no mereological explanation of the difference 
between Monte Grappa and Mountmatter, and the need for this explanation 
was the only motivation we had to depart from the kind of consistent, 
extensionalist dualism in which the difference was left unexplained (at least as 
far as mereologydis is concerned).
An alternative is to think that the mereological relation between Monte 
Grappa and Mountmatter is not one-directional, but reciprocal. Actually, if 
we go back to the alleged sources of discernibility between Monte Grappa and 
Mountmatter, there is nothing in them to suggest a one-directional mereological 
relation between them; it is not clear why Mountmatter should be in Monte 
Grappa, but not vice versa (this idea simply slipped into the dialectics through 
a confrontation with Aristotelian hylomorphism). Only one of them (Monte 
Grappa) would survive the annihilation of a cubic meter of snow; and only 
one of them (Mountmatter) would not be destroyed if the various pieces of it 
were disseminated across a vast tract of land by a violent volcanic eruption. 
In scrutinizing these reasons, with which the dualist motivates her stance, it is 
not easy to understand why one of the two should be before or after the other in 
the kind of order that the relation of parthood is for its domain.
A promising kind of non-extensional mereologytheo set forth by Aaron Cotnoir8 
admits reciprocal parthood. This requires Cotnoir to modify a formal feature 
of parthood: for, in CEM, parthood is antisymmetrical, and proper parthood 
is asymmetrical; no parthood relation is allowed to hold reciprocally between 
two entities. Cotnoir, as we will see, drops the Antisymmetry of parthood, and 
redefines proper parthood.
Before assessing the details of Cotnoir’s proposal, it is worth remarking that it 
coheres with the spirit of dualism about objects and portions of matter. According 
to the spirit of dualism, at a single level of mereological complexity there are 
two things. Thus, dualism finds its most appropriate expression in a theory of 
parthood only if this theory allows—as Cotnoir’s non-extensional mereologytheo 
does—two different things to be in a reciprocal relation of parthood.
Cotnoir’s revision consists in dropping the Antisymmetry of parthood, while 
redefining proper parthood; given the redefinition, the Asymmetry of proper 
parthood is preserved. When applied to the case of an object and the colocated 

Mereology
142
portion of matter, this results in the claim that Monte Grappa and Mountmatter 
are reciprocal parts.
The redefinition of proper parthood distinguishes it from parthood tout 
court, by excluding just the cases of mutual parthood, instead of excluding 
specifically the identity case.
 

(Proper Parthood—Cotnoir’s Redefinition)
The identity case (that is, the hypothesis that something is a proper part of itself) 
is excluded nonetheless, given that the new definition of proper parthood makes 
it explicitly asymmetric and, as a consequence, irreflexive.
As Cotnoir underlines,9 the resulting kind of theory of parthood is an 
attractive kind of anti-extensionalism. The Antisymmetry of parthood could be 
seen as a sort of Extensionalism for improper parthood, so that it is ideologically 
consistent for the anti-extensionalist to reject it. Antisymmetry is the claim 
that, if some things have the same improper parts (that is, the same things that 
occupy the same mereological level for the same portion of reality), then they 
are identical; thus, the anti-extensionalist should reject it, because her own anti-
extensionalism can be understood as the claim that two different things can 
occupy the same mereological level.
What happens to identity? Cotnoir’s mereologytheo does not provide identity 
conditions for wholes. Nonetheless, it can specify a relation of mereological 
similarity.10 Mereological similarity is an equivalence relation that connects 
those entities that occupy the same level of mereological complexity; Monte 
Grappa and Mountmatter are mereologically similar; any other concrete entity is 
mereologically similar to the colocated portion of matter. Mereological similarity 
is not identity: it is a sort of mereological indiscernibility that comes without any 
accompanying generalized indiscernibility: mereological indiscernibles may still 
be discernible in relation to non-mereological features. Thus, Monte Grappa and 
Mountmatter may differ in modal and aesthetic features, as expected by dualists.
It is important to remark that the general picture of reality that stems from a 
mereologytheo of this kind is largely undetermined: the reasons to think that Monte 
Grappa and Mountmatter are numerically distinct and mereologically similar 
are not given by Cotnoir’s mereologytheo itself. As far as Cotnoir’s mereologytheo is 
concerned, monism about constitution could be true. Or there could be three, or 
four, or any other number of colocated things. This does not mean that this kind 
of anti-extensionalism is committed to an indefinite multiplication of entities, 
but that it does not rule out an indefinite multiplication of entities. The appeals 

The Alternatives to Extensionalism
143
to discernibility and indiscernibility do not replace mereological Extensionalism 
in its role of a guide as to how many things there are.
Indeed, in general, discernibility/indiscernibility arguments are reliable 
guides to diversity, but not to identity. The converse of the Indiscernibility of 
Identicals allows us to infer diversity from discernibility; since it is a relatively 
uncontroversial principle, discernibility can be considered a reliable guide to 
diversity. By contrast, indiscernibility is not a reliable guide to identity, because 
the principle of Identity of Indiscernibles (according to which things that share 
all their properties are identical) is a highly controversial metaphysical doctrine.11 
As a result, the fact that the modal and aesthetic properties we discussed in 
Chapter 7 lead us to distinguish—if the dualist is right—two colocated things 
(instead of three, or more) does not imply that there are only two things there. 
Cotnoir’s non-extensional mereologytheo—in contrast with CEM—does not 
provide identity conditions for the entities it is about.12
From an anti-extensionalist viewpoint, the fact that a mereologytheo does 
not provide identity conditions for wholes is likely to be seen as a virtue: anti-
extensionalism is the claim that the identity conditions should countenance not 
only parts, but also the way in which these parts are structurally arranged. Thus, 
the identity conditions should countenance features which do not belong to the 
subject matter of mereologydis.
9.5 Strong Supplementation and Extensionalism
A virtue of Cotnoir’s non-extensional mereologytheo is its relative conservativity 
with respect to CEM. The rejection of the Antisymmetry of parthood brings 
with itself the rejection of Extensionalism and Uniqueness of Composition, but 
other important principles are preserved.
Weak Supplementation holds for the redefined PP. But also another pivotal 
theorem of CEM is preserved: Strong Supplementation. Strong Supplementation 
is prima facie a very reasonable principle. It is a claim about the cases in which 
something (x) is not a part of something else (y). In some of these cases, x is 
completely outside of y. In others, x and y overlap, but x is not entirely in y, and 
thus it is not a part of it; in some of these latter cases, y is actually a proper part 
of x. In all these cases, there is something in x (a part of it) that is completely 
outside of y, that is, that does not overlap with y. The principle can be formalized 
as follows:

(Strong Supplementation)

Mereology
144
In order to understand why Strong Supplementation is a very reasonable 
principle, it is useful to reflect on its converse. According to the converse, if no 
part of x is disjoint from y, then x is part of y. Nothing in x makes it external—so 
to say—to y, and so it is reasonable to conclude that x is part of y.
There is an ideological connection between Strong Supplementation and 
Extensionalism: according to Extensionalism, there is no numerical difference 
without difference in parts; according to Strong Supplementation, there is no 
non-parthood between x and y without an allotted ground in x (namely, the part 
of x that does not overlap with y).
Indeed, given Strong Supplementation and the Antisymmetry of parthood, 
Extensionalism follows. But what should an anti-extensionalist reject? As we have 
seen, the rejection of Antisymmetry, in particular if coupled with a redefinition 
of proper parthood, is a well-motivated move from the viewpoint of dualism 
about constitution (and dualism about constitution is the pivotal motivation for 
anti-extensionalism about concrete, nonfictional, non-intrinsically controversial 
entities): it allows for a mereological representation of the relation between an 
object and its colocated portion of matter.
By contrast, the link between the rejection of Strong Supplementation and 
the motivations of dualism is less transparent. The following is a Hasse diagram 
representing a failure of Strong Supplementation:
a
b
d
c
Here, the relation between the two wholes (a and b) is not represented at all. 
a and b are not part of one another, and this is exactly the reason why a and b 
violate Strong Supplementation in both directions: a is not part of b, b is not part 
of a; but a has no part that does not overlap with b, and b has no part that does 
not overlap with a.
Thus, a non-extensional mereologytheo in which Strong Supplementation 
fails is not motivated by the need to represent the relation between objects 
and their colocated portions of matter mereologically. Quite the opposite 
is the case: a mereologytheo in which Strong Supplementation fails does not 
characterize the relation between objects and their colocated portions of 
matter mereologically.
Indeed, the kind of anti-extensionalism stemming from the denial of 
Antisymmetry is significantly different from the one stemming from the 
denial of Strong Supplementation. The former is better suited to characterizing 

The Alternatives to Extensionalism
145
internally a kind of dualism about constitution, because it does not leave the 
mutual relation between an object and its portion of matter unexplained.
By contrast, if the inclination toward anti-extensionalism comes from 
the general conviction that the arrangement of parts matters for the identity 
conditions of wholes, then perhaps it is better to leave the relations between 
different wholes with the same parts out of the explanatory target of mereologytheo: 
in this case, the initial motivation is precisely that this difference cannot be 
captured in terms of parthood, and thus not even by mutual parthood.
This difference reveals an important dichotomy between motivations of 
anti-extensionalism. On one side, some anti-extensionalists are convinced by 
counterexamples to Extensionalism, and by alleged sources of discernibility 
between entities and colocated portions of matter. On this terrain, it is worth 
repeating that: (1) there are good ways to dispel the discernibility intuitions 
(such as counterpart theory and metalinguistic interpretations of negations, 
Chapter 7, Sections 7.3 and 7.4); (2) discernibility intuitions lead to dualism, 
and not directly to anti-extensionalism; Varzi has shown that when dualism is 
consistently endorsed at every level of complexity, there is no reason at all to 
endorse anti-extensionalism (Chapter 7, Section 7.5). However, if (1) and (2) are 
not accepted as sufficient reasons to endorse Extensionalism, then the dualist 
discernibility intuitions are better served by a rather conservative kind of anti-
extensionalism, such as Cotnoir’s rejection of Antisymmetry of parthood and 
redefinition of proper parthood.
On the other side of the dichotomy, anti-extensionalism is sometimes motivated 
by the sheer conviction that the arrangement of parts matters for the identity 
conditions for wholes. When confronted with this attitude, the mereological 
monist should always make sure that her anti-extensionalist opponent is 
aware that what is at stake in the debate are only the identity conditions. 
Extensionalism is not committed to denying that in an adequate description of 
reality the relations between parts have a pivotal role. As a matter of fact, many 
twentieth-century mereological monists are nominalists also about properties 
and relations, and might prefer a characterization of reality in which only 
spatiotemporally located individuals play a role. However, while mereological 
monism is deeply entrenched with nominalism about structure, its links with 
other kinds of nominalism are looser, and of a mainly historical character. 
There is no inconsistency in endorsing mereological monism (Extensionalism 
included), while being realists about relations.
The inarticulate impression that mereological monism provides a flat picture 
of reality, and that every mereological whole is a sort of inert heap, should not be 

Mereology
146
overrated: mereological monism is content with denying that the arrangement 
of parts has some bearing on the identity and existence conditions for wholes 
(we will discuss existence conditions in Part Three). It does not dictate that 
the arrangement of parts is not important. Conversely, the mere insistence 
on the importance of structures or relations in reality falls short of falsifying 
mereological monism, and Extensionalism in particular.

Part Three
Unrestricted Composition
Abstract
This part of the book analyzes and defends the principle of Unrestricted 
Composition, according to which given some things—no matter how many and 
how disparate they are—their fusion exists. In order to formulate this principle, 
we need a way of speaking collectively of a plurality of entities whose number 
can vary indefinitely. Chapter 10 shows that plural quantification is the best tool 
for this purpose, and in particular that it is preferable to quantification over sets 
and to schematic formulations of mereological principles, mainly due to reasons 
of philosophical perspicuity. Chapter 11 discusses the definition of Fusion, and 
compares it with another plausible yet non-equivalent definition. Chapter 12 
analyzes various cases of problematic fusions which, according to some scholars, 
make Unrestricted Composition a counterintuitive principle, and shows that 
they are substantially different from one another. Chapter 13 scrutinizes the so-
called Lewis-Sider argument in support of Unrestricted Composition, as well as 
some previous versions of it by Quine and Williams. The philosophical gist of the 
Lewis-Sider argument is shown to consist in the idea that mereology should be 
a neutral tool, and this idea is closely associated with a Quinean understanding 
of existence. Finally, in Chapter  14, I discuss the impact on Unrestricted 
Composition of the adoption of a non-Quinean metaontology. In particular, 
I show that some considerations in favor of Unrestricted Composition can be 
reformulated in an interestingly different way, if Fine’s so-called postulationism 
or expansionism is adopted.


10.1 Mereological monism and ontological economy
Is it true that mereological monism delivers ontological economy? In Part Two, 
we have seen that Extensionalism rules out the existence of multiple wholes 
with the same proper parts. But one could observe that this does not warrant 
a great overall ontological economy because it leaves open the possibility that 
there are a lot of parts, and a lot of wholes. In Chapter 7, we have seen that 
Extensionalism is actually compatible both with monism and with dualism 
about material constitution: the consistent dualist will be committed both to 
objects and to colocated portions of reality, at each level of reality. The resulting 
kind of extensionalist dualism seems to be rather deficient from the viewpoint 
of absolute ontological economy.
However, the keyword here is “absolute.” Only the sheer denial of the 
existence of certain entities or kinds of entities warrants absolute ontological 
economy. Mereological monism is not about that: it is a philosophical thesis 
about parthood and cognate relations, and it can warrant economy only within 
the limits of its subject matter. Extensionalism warrants that two different 
things have the same proper parts, but does not warrant any economy about 
parts.
Given the general nominalistic motivations for mereological monism 
we have discussed in Chapter 5, it is perhaps more ideologically coherent to 
combine mereological monism with other kinds of doctrines which care about 
ontological economy (insofar as nominalists usually consider ontological 
economy an important theoretical virtue). This is perhaps the reason why 
Lewis—for example—was a monist about material constitution, and why I have 
strong monist inclinations myself. But these links are only a matter of ideological 
coherence: no inferential link leads from mereological monism to absolute 
ontological economy.
10
Mereological Fusion and Plural Logic

Mereology
150
There is another reason—a reason quite independent of Extensionalism, and 
altogether more important—why the link between mereological monism and 
ontological economy can be doubted: Unrestricted Composition, the principle 
of CEM to which this part of the book is devoted. Unrestricted Composition 
warrants that, given some entities, there is a fusion of them. In the language of 
plural logic:

(Unrestricted Composition)
Does Unrestricted Composition really go against the kind of ontological 
economy which nominalism aspires to? Before investigating the philosophical 
significance and the reasons for and against Unrestricted Composition and its 
bearing on ontological economy, we need to clarify two potential controversies 
about its formulation. The first controversy concerns the resort to plural 
quantification in the formulation of Unrestricted Composition. The second 
concerns the definition of Fusion (Σ).
Both these controversies might seem to also concern Uniqueness of 
Composition, since plural quantification and the relational constant for Fusion 
appear in the formulation of Uniqueness of Composition as well. However, we 
have seen in Chapter 6 that the interesting philosophical content of Uniqueness 
of Composition is expressed by Extensionalism, and Extensionalism does not 
require plural quantification or the constant for Fusion in any of the formulations 
we have discussed. Thus, the possible problems concerning plural quantification 
and the operation of Fusion do not concern the philosophical core of Uniqueness 
of Composition.
I am going to suggest that these problems do not really concern what is at stake 
with Unrestricted Composition either, but it is important to prevent the opposite 
doubt that they matter, given that plural quantification and Fusion do figure 
prominently in the formulation of Unrestricted Composition. The  problems 
concerning the application of plural quantification in mereologytheo will be 
discussed in the remainder of this chapter, while the definition of Fusion will be 
the subject matter of Chapter 11.
10.2 Plural quantification
First, why is plural quantification employed in the formulation of Unrestricted 
Composition? Fusion is a multi-one relation. The number of its inputs is not fixed: 
it can vary from one to infinity. The values of a plural variable are some objects 

Mereological Fusion and Plural Logic
151
in the domain of quantification, from one to infinity. Thus, plural quantification 
seems to be the perfect tool for expressing mereological Fusion, and it is used 
not only in Uniqueness of Composition and Unrestricted Composition, but 
already in the definition of Fusion/Composition.
The definition, which we will analyze and justify in Chapter 11, says—in 
accordance with the provisional characterization of Fusion set forth in Chapter 4, 
Section 4.4—that something is a fusion of some things if and only if each of 
those things is part of the fusion and each part of the fusion overlaps with at least 
one of those things. Thus, it includes plural variables for the fused entities both 
in the definiendum and in the definiens, and the predicate is one of (≺)—which is 
distinctive of plural logic—in the definiens.
 

(Fusion–Definition)
We cannot replace the plural variable with a plurality of variables in the 
definition of Fusion (as well as in Uniqueness of Composition and Unrestricted 
Composition) and make Fusion a more than binary predicate, because there 
would not be any right number of argument places for it. This is not a merely 
technical problem: it is a symptom of the fact that, when in an operation the 
number of inputs is variable, we need a symbol for these variably numerous 
entities. We are talking about them collectively, and not distributively: when we 
say that a chair is the fusion of four legs, a back, and a seat, this does not imply 
that the chair is also the fusion of the seat only, or of only three or four legs. 
The kind of predication we make about the fused entities concerns them all as a 
totality, and not each of them separately.
Plural quantification fits the bill perfectly. A quick look at the growing 
literature about plural quantification shows that its introduction is often 
motivated by the need to express collective predication (in cases such as “the 
besiegers surrounded the building,” in which none of the besiegers individually 
surrounded the building).
However, there are several long-standing philosophical and technical 
controversies about the admissibility and the understandability of plural 
quantification.1 Moreover, there are presentations of CEM in which—often out 
of the conviction that plural quantification is a controversial tool, which should 
be avoided whenever possible—plural quantification is not used. Thus, it is 
unavoidable for us to take a look at these controversies, in order to make sure 
that the adoption of plural quantification really is the best option at our disposal 
in formulating CEM.

Mereology
152
Some of the controversies about plural quantification do not matter at all for 
us, such as those concerning the link with quantification in predicative position 
and the interaction with modal logic, and we will not discuss them. However, the 
seemingly most heated controversy about plural quantification concerns its so-
called logicality, and this controversy could be suspected to have a bearing on the 
application of plural quantification in mereologytheo. Is plural logic really logic? 
This could be perceived as a relevant aspect from the viewpoint of mereology 
itself.
If mereology were logic, it would be undesirable to use nonlogical language 
in defining one of its core notions (Fusion), which appears in two of its axioms. 
However, this worry is less important than it seems. Indeed, mereology is not 
logic. Let us qualify and discuss this claim in the next section, before examining 
(in Section 10.4) the alternatives to plural quantification in the definition of 
Fusion, and in axioms such as Unrestricted Composition.
10.3 Mereology is not logic
The claim that mereology is logic is sometimes attributed to the twentieth-
century fathers of mereology, but in some cases the attribution is unconvincing, 
while in others it relies on an extremely broad, obsolete notion of logic, which by 
design ends up including also metaphysical doctrines.
Goodman, for example, never qualified his calculus of individuals as logic: 
he understood it as a true, general, nominalistically motivated metaphysical 
doctrine (and this even though he never used the word “metaphysics”—a rather 
unpopular term at the time—in this context). Leśniewski saw mereology as a 
fragment of a larger project, which he would probably have qualified as “logic,” 
but which was expected to concern also classical metaphysical problems, such as 
the nature of instantiation.
From a contemporary perspective, neither mereologydis, nor mereologytheo, 
nor mereologyphi are logic, according to any interesting contemporary 
understanding of logic. Mereologytheo can be formulated in a logical language 
and framework (our formulation is in the language and framework of plural 
logic), but this does not make mereologytheo itself a kind of logic. We have 
seen in Chapter  3 that, according to mereological monism (mereologyphi), 
CEM (mereologytheo) is a highly general doctrine and can, as a result, be called 
“formal,” if formality is simply construed as a gradable form of generality and 
topic-neutrality. By contrast, if the formality of a theory is given by the fact that 

Mereological Fusion and Plural Logic
153
the truth of its principles is warranted by their form, then nobody thinks that this 
holds for CEM. Even for the most bigoted mereological monist, such as myself, 
predicates such as P should be interpreted in a specific way (that is, as expressing 
parthood) in order to obtain a model for mereology. Nobody thinks that P and 
other mereological predicates should be semantically treated as logical constants 
(while this happens for example for the identity predicate =, when it is added to 
the language of first-order logic).
Logicality might be confused with analyticity, but it is not the same thing. 
While the analytic/synthetic distinction is controversial in itself, prototypical 
cases of analytic truths such as “no bachelor is married” are obviously false for 
many interpretations of their nonlogical vocabulary. Obviously one could argue 
that logical principles too are analytic, but there is a huge difference between 
the alleged analyticity of “no bachelor is married” and the alleged analyticity 
of logical principles: the truth of sentences of the first kind depends on specific 
interpretations of nonlogical terms; the truth of sentences of the second kind 
depends on the fixed meaning of logical vocabulary (connectives, quantifiers, 
identity).
In any case, nobody thinks that CEM in its full strength consists of analytical 
truths. At most, some scholars think that a limited core of weak mereological 
principles in CEM is constitutive for the meaning of the term “part” (and thus 
could be considered analytic, because these principles would be true in virtue 
of the meaning of the mereological lexicon in them): this is sometimes held for 
Transitivity, or for Weak Supplementation.2
This contention is doubtful: from the perspective adopted in this book, the 
meaning of  “part” plays no special role in assessing these principles; what we do in 
mereologydis is select and analyze the literal uses of parthood terms, with a special 
focus on spatial uses; after that, we assess whether there are counterexamples to 
the resulting principles, that is whether there are parts of parts that are not parts 
(in the case of Transitivity), or whether there are instances of proper parthood in 
which the whole does not have any part disjoint from the proper part (in the case 
of Weak Supplementation).
In some cases, the temptation arises to say that, without these principles, 
“parthood” and “proper parthood” would lose their expected meanings. 
However, this is not the aim of our enterprise; language has the important, 
heuristic function of helping to identify and demarcate the relations we want to 
study. But, after this phase, our purpose is to ascertain how these relations work, 
and the question of whether a certain principle is implicit in the alleged semantic 
content of certain predicates is of no real importance from this perspective.

Mereology
154
In any case, there is no reason to think that stronger principles like 
Extensionalism, or Strong Supplementation, or Unrestricted Composition 
are analytic. Thus, CEM is not analytic, and mereological monists should not 
claim (and, as far as I know, do not claim) that CEM—the highly general theory 
of parthood and cognate relation—is analytic; on its part, analyticity is not 
logicality. As a result, mereology—in any of the three ways of meaning the word 
“mereology”—is far from logical. Thus, also even if plural logic fails to be logic, 
this is no reason not to use it in mereologydis.
Even if mereology is not logic, it could be desirable to formulate it in a purely 
logical language. One could argue that the complexity of a theory depends 
on the number and formal features of the nonlogical predicates it includes.3 
Plural logic countenances a specific predicate (≺) and distinguishes—for many 
predicates—two kinds of argument places: those which should be occupied by 
plural terms, and those which should be occupied by singular terms. If plural 
logic is logic, then this complexity is in no way specific to CEM, and should not 
be countenanced when we assess the complexity of CEM. Thus, if plural logic 
were logic, the nonlogical content of CEM could coincide with the mereological 
content of CEM, and this could be desirable from an analytic viewpoint.
The claim that plural logic is logic heavily depends on the way in which 
logicality is construed. Plural logic could qualify as logic in the sense that, in 
contrast with mereology itself, the truth of its principles seems to depend only 
on the form of its principles. Principles (such as the principle that no plurality is 
empty, or the comprehension principles) simply characterize the links between 
different kinds of variables, and between language and the admitted values of 
plural variables.
There are many other ways of construing logicality,4 and I do not purport 
here to determine whether plural logic is logic under other points of view: for 
example, whether plural logic is ontologically innocent, or whether the fact that 
a plural expression can take many elements of the domain as its value entails 
a hidden ontological commitment to sets, under the deceptively diminutive 
sobriquet of pluralities. However, it is important to note that the risk of an implicit 
commitment to sets/pluralities is one to which any many-one operation in which 
the many are in a variable number is exposed. Mereological Fusion is such an 
operation: the input of Fusion are many things, considered collectively.
Thus, CEM is not logic, and it is not intrinsically problematic to express 
it within a framework (such as plural logic) whose logicality is dubious. 
Nonetheless, while not compulsory, it could be desirable to express CEM in a 
purely logical framework. However, the main sense in which plural logic risks 

Mereological Fusion and Plural Logic
155
failing to be logical concerns its alleged, implicit ontological commitment to 
pluralities, but this risk is implicit in any way of expressing a many-one relation 
or operation in which the number of the many (in our case, the number of the 
fused entities) is not fixed.
10.4 The alternatives to plural quantification: Sets
We have seen that the risk of an implicit commitment to pluralities characterizes 
mereological Fusion in itself. Perhaps, it characterizes plural quantification too 
(this should be determined within the debate on the logicality of plural logic); 
but, if this is the case, this is a confirmation that plural logic is the perfect tool 
for formulating CEM. This outcome finds some confirmation when plural 
quantification is compared to the alternative ways in which CEM can be and has 
been formulated.
The most obvious alternative is quantification over sets. Goodman himself, 
in spite of his rejection of sets as non-hyperextensional entities, defines Fusion 
as an operation from sets to individuals. Our above definition of mereological 
Fusion as a relation would be transformed as follows (Y is a variable for sets, ∈ 
is set-theoretical membership):
 

(Fusion–Set-theoretic Definition)
In a sense, there is no great difference between quantifying plurally over fused 
entities and quantifying over a set of fused entities. The only concern might be 
that—due to the need to avoid the set-theoretic paradoxes—for some choice 
of entities there is no set that includes them exactly. According to the most 
standard axiomatic set theories, there is no set whose elements are all the sets 
and nothing else, and no set whose elements are all the sets that are not members 
of themselves. But there is no real reason to fuse all the sets or all the Russell-
paradoxical sets, thus the above set-theoretical definition of Fusion would not 
loose any significant generality.
Plural logic—from its origins in the works of George Boolos—was specifically 
motivated by the need to avoid sets. The shunning of sets is often motivated 
by ontological qualms: sets would be mysterious entities, which a traditional 
nominalist such as Goodman cannot stomach, for example because the 
distinction between a singleton {x} and its only element x is mysterious to him. 
But, for the kind of mereological monism we expound and motivate in this book, 

Mereology
156
it is not clear that the ontological commitment to sets is to be avoided. After 
all, in Chapter 8, we have conceded that abstract entities are a difficult testbed 
for Extensionalism, insofar as nothing forecloses the possibility of stipulating 
entities that violate it. This puts sets out of the expected domain of application 
of mereological monism, and there would be nothing strange in resorting to 
some abstract entities such as sets—quite familiar and so useful in many other 
fields—in formulating CEM.
Thus, ontological concerns about sets are not a good reason to prefer plural 
quantification over sets.5 Again, the commitment to some kinds of pluralities 
comes from the pivotal occurrence in CEM of a many-one operation whose 
number of inputs is variable. However, it would be wrong to infer from this that 
it is immaterial whether to resort to plural quantification or to quantification 
over sets in formulating CEM.
A good reason to prefer plural quantification over sets is that it would be a 
categorical mistake to involve sets. In the above set-theoretic definition of Fusion, 
we end up literally fusing a set: the relational predicate of Fusion is flanked by 
two singular referential expressions, which refer respectively to a set and a 
whole. Thus, the relation/operation expressed by the predicate would connect 
these referents. But the relation/operation that mereology aims to study is one 
that goes from the parts to the whole. The set of the parts is simply foreign to 
this context.
Categorical mistakes play an important role in the motivations for plural 
reference and quantification in general. Already Boolos remarked that “it is 
haywire to think that when you have some Cheerios, you are eating a set.”6 Plural 
expressions in natural language refer to entities, without any apparent mediation 
of abstract entities such as sets. The plural expressions, by themselves, do not 
“unify” these things into a further thing (a set) “representing” them.7 What is 
“unifying” in a sentence like “I eat Cheerios” is that Cheerios (many Cheerios) 
occupy a single argument place of a predicate, in this case “eat.”
Boolos’s case of “I eat Cheerios” is perhaps not really a compelling example, 
because it is not clear that the predication over Cheerios is collective, and not 
distributive: after all, if I eat some Cheerios, I also eat each of them singularly, 
and the various actions of eating each of them are simply coordinated in space 
and time. It is true that it would be a categorical mistake to involve sets in the 
relation of eating. But perhaps, ideally, I could avoid both plural reference 
and sets in this case, because I could analyze “I eat Cheerios” in a long, quite 
unpractical conjunction of sentences about me and each of the Cheerios: “I 
eat Cheerios” would be a merely convenient abbreviation of this conjunction. 

Mereological Fusion and Plural Logic
157
“I eat Cheerios” seems to be a distributive predication about Cheerios. In other 
cases, such as in the aforementioned sentence “the besiegers surrounded the 
building,” it seems wrong to analyze them in terms of individual predications: 
the sentence does not imply that each besieger individually surrounded that 
building.
The occurrence of the term for the parts in a claim of mereological Fusion 
is more similar to that of “the besiegers” in “the besiegers surrounded the 
building,” than to that of “Cheerios” in “I eat Cheerios.” A claim of the sort “t is 
the fusion of uu” (such as “the chair is the fusion of four legs, a seat and a back”) 
is collectively about uu: the chair is not a fusion of the back only, or of any other 
of the mentioned parts singularly. Thus, it is a case in which it is indispensable 
to find a way to talk about many things (the fused things), but in which it would 
be a categorical mistake to involve a set.
It is possible to insist that the set is merely a representative of a plurality, and 
that it is a mere expedient needed to fill a single argument place with many 
things; at a deep level, what is fused are the elements of the set, and not the set 
itself. However, it is not clear why an exception should be made to the general rule 
according to which a relation expressed by a predicate relates the entities denoted 
by the referential expressions that occupy the argument places of the predicate. 
If not out of a general hostility toward plural reference and quantification, there 
is no reason to adopt a kind of semantic revisionism according to which the 
denotation of the referential expressions is not what is involved in the relation/
operation of Fusion (namely, the parts), but a representative of them (a set). 
Thus, the reason to prefer plural quantification over sets in formulating CEM is 
that only plural quantification correctly identifies the real input of Fusion: the 
fused entities.
10.5 The alternatives to plural quantification: Schemas
Another quite popular alternative to plural quantification in the definition of 
Fusion, and in axioms such as Unrestricted Composition, is to involve a formula 
that is satisfied by all the fused entities and them alone. Given the legs, the seat, 
and the back of my chair, there would be an open formula φ satisfied by those 
things and by nothing else.
For example, Varzi defines Fusion as follows:8

(Fusion–Varzi’s Definition)

Mereology
158
This definition says that x is the sum of those things that satisfy φ, on the usual 
conditions: each entity that satisfies φ is part of x, and everything that is part of 
x overlaps with at least one of the entities that satisfy φ.
The occurrence of φy on the left side of the definition requires some syntactic 
and semantic clarifications.9 It is an open formula that occupies an argument 
place of the Fusion predicate. But usually open formulas do not occur in such a 
syntactic position, and it is not clear what they denote (and thus, in the specific 
case in question, what the input of a fusion is). It is meant by those who define 
Fusion in this way as a sort of plural referential expressions built from an open 
formula (a sort of plural definite description).10
In the formulation of Uniqueness of Composition and Unrestricted 
Composition, in order to express what we expressed in the version with plural 
quantification, we need to make sure that something satisfies φ. While the 
nonexistence of an empty plurality is warranted by a plural logic principle, here 
nothing warrants that φ is simply unsatisfiable. For this reason, Uniqueness of 
Composition and Unrestricted Composition will need a restricting condition, 
which makes sure that φ is satisfied:
 

(Uniqueness of Composition–Schematic)

(Unrestricted Composition–Schematic)
By replacing φ in these schemas with any formula of the language, we would 
obtain an axiom of CEM.
Two technical concerns can be raised about the resulting formalization of 
CEM. The first is negligible, while the other unveils the real, philosophical 
problem that makes the axiomatization of CEM in plural logic preferable. 
A first, negligible technical concern is that, when Uniqueness of Composition 
or Unrestricted Composition are formulated schematically, CEM is not finitely 
axiomatizable: if our language includes an infinite number of formulas φ, 
each of them will give rise to an instance of Uniqueness of Composition and 
Unrestricted Composition. However, plural logic is not finitely axiomatizable 
either, thus the only difference is that, in these schematic versions of the 
principles, the nonfinite axiomatisability is simply moved from the underlying 
logic and brought to evidence.
A second technical worry is that the schema has as many instances as the 
formulas in our language. However, the language of first-order logic in which 
CEM would be expressed has only denumerably many formulas. However, as 

Mereological Fusion and Plural Logic
159
Varzi writes, “for most purposes this limitation is negligible, as normally we are 
only interested in those sets of objects that we are able to specify.”11 It is actually 
enough to have in the language a name for each fused entity. In this case, we 
can introduce a formula that is satisfied only by what is identical to one among 
certain entities (thereby simulating what ≺ expresses in plural logic). Given that 
“Tom” is the name of Tom, “Dick” is the name of Dick, and “Harry” is the name 
of Harry, the following predicate ψ, if defined as follows, will be satisfied by Tom, 
Dick, Harry and nothing else:
Given ψ, we could easily assert that Tom, Dick, and Harry have a unique 
fusion. What we obtain is de facto a way of speaking about Tom, Dick, and 
Harry and of presenting them as the input of the Fusion operation. This happens 
through the mediation of a rather artificial—yet successful—description.
One could say that the same happens in plural logic, insofar as plural logic 
is usually expected to include a comprehension principle, according to which, 
given a nonempty formula φ, there are some things such that each of them 
satisfies φ. The principle could be expressed—in a schematic form—in the 
following way:
The similarities between the various ways of defining mereological sums 
and formulating the principles of CEM about sums are not surprising: after all, 
nothing suggests that they differ in their adequacy, or even less that they make 
CEM a substantially different theory. The motivations for choosing one or the 
other have to do with philosophical perspicuity. From this viewpoint, the main 
reason why the formulation of CEM in plural logic seems preferable to me to 
the schematic formulation concerns the division of labor between the core of 
general purpose, logical expressive tools through which mereologytheo (CEM) is 
expressed, and the controversial content of mereologytheo (concerning parthood 
and cognate relations).
The schematic formulation and the formulation in plural logic differ in the 
ways in which they construe the connection between formulas and pluralities 
of entities satisfying these formulas. According to plural logic, this problem 
belongs to the logical core of general purpose expressive tools. The schematic 
formulation instead brings this aspect into play within CEM: since Uniqueness 
of Composition and Unrestricted Composition are expressed schematically 
through formulas, the problem of the correspondence between formulas 

Mereology
160
and pluralities of entities that satisfy them ends up influencing directly the 
axiomatization of CEM—since the axioms are the instances of the schema in 
which a specific formula replaces φ, the exact list of axioms depends on the 
linguistic resources at disposal.
By contrast, this aspect should not belong to the contents of CEM at all. 
Mereological Fusion is far from being the only kind of collective predication. For 
example, in the description of human actions—such as in the above example of 
the besiegers surrounding the building, or in the case of some people forming a 
political party, or writing a book together—it is extremely important to attribute 
an action to many subjects, without thereby attributing that action to each of 
them. Thus, the need to regulate plural reference and quantification, and in 
particular the nexus with the linguistic resources at disposal, is a general need, 
that has no exclusive link with mereology.
Thus, general plural logic is the right place where to regulate this aspect, in 
particular through a schematic principle of comprehension. The exclusion of 
empty pluralities too is apt to be achieved at this level: it is not a peculiarity 
of CEM to exclude that a relation of Fusion in some cases connects no entity 
with a fusion. It is a general fact about collective predications that they are 
about one or more entities, and not about zero entities: thus, the restriction to 
satisfiable formulas in (Uniqueness of Composition—Schematic Version) and 
(Unrestricted Composition—Schematic Version) is simply out of place; the 
rejection of empty pluralities belongs to plural logic.
The supporter of the schematic formulations might counter that the 
formulation of CEM in plural logic conceals some problematic presuppositions, 
such as the linguistic limitations. However, it is a virtue to conceal these problems 
in CEM, because they concern collective predications in general, and should not 
be exposed in any single theory including collective predications.
More in general, the formulas which should replace φ in the schematic 
formulations do not really play any role in mereology at all. In assessing 
Uniqueness of Composition and Unrestricted Composition, we do not reflect 
about the formulas that the fused entities satisfy exclusively. In many cases—
that is, in all those cases in which no reasonably natural predicate is satisfied 
exclusively by the fused entities—the formula will be artificial, like ψ in the 
above-mentioned example with Tom, Dick, and Harry.
Thus, the schematic version of the definition of Fusion brings into 
mereologytheo problems that do not belong to mereologytheo. Moreover, there 
is no reason to prefer this version to the one in plural logic, except a general 
aversion to plural quantification (quite independent of mereological problems). 

Mereological Fusion and Plural Logic
161
This is not the place for dispelling such an aversion, but perhaps the importance 
and pervasiveness of the relation of Fusion is in itself a good enough reason 
to think that we need an expressive tool for collective predication, without 
the intermediation of sets, and without any direct involvement of identifying 
formulas.


11.1 What a fusion should be
I have justified my preference for formulations of the definition of Fusion, and of 
the related mereological principles, in plural logic in Chapter 10. We can now go 
back to analyzing the specific content of the definition of Fusion:
 

(Fusion—Definition)
In the definiens, there is a binary conjunction of individually necessary and 
jointly sufficient conditions which y must satisfy in order to qualify as a fusion 
of xx. The first conjunct ensures that every fused entity is itself part of the fusion. 
The second conjunct requires that whatever is part of the fusion has a part in 
common (i.e., overlaps) with one of the fused entities.
(Fusion—Definition) is neither simple nor immediately perspicuous. 
However, a recent, important paper by Paul Hovda1 has shown that it is 
the most suitable formulation, when you adopt an axiomatization of CEM 
from above. In other words, this is an apt definition for the formulation of 
Uniqueness of Composition and Unrestricted Composition, which—together 
with Transitivity—constitute an adequate formalization of CEM, delivering as 
theorems all the other principles discussed in this book (such as Reflexivity, 
Antisymmetry of P, Weak and Strong Supplementation).
Other, seemingly more perspicuous definitions of Fusion are actually unfit 
for this task; nonetheless, when the axioms resorting to these more perspicuous 
formulations are conjoined with other mereological principles, then you 
obtain other axiomatizations of CEM of equal strength. Since these different 
axiomatizations of CEM ultimately prove the same theorems, and since our 
purpose in this book is to discuss and defend the metaphysical contents of 
CEM from a philosophical perspective, I will limit my analysis (in particular in 
11
The Definition of Fusion

Mereology
164
Section 11.2) to only another, quite attractive and plausible definition of Fusion, 
and show how it differs from (Fusion—Definition).
However, it is interesting to ask beforehand what expectations a definition of 
Fusion should satisfy. When we analyze these expectations, we discover that the 
prima facie abstract and intimidating (Fusion—Definition) satisfies them quite 
nicely, also in comparison with the (prima facie more attractive) alternative 
definition we are going to discuss. In order to illustrate these expectations, it 
is useful to consider a prototypical, spatial scenario. Let us take the example 
of a chair again. Insofar as it is extended, the chair is partially located in many 
places: it is a bit where its back is, a bit where its seat is, and a bit where each 
leg is. The chair on the one hand and its parts collectively, on the other, have 
something in common: the parts are collectively located where the chair is. It 
does not matter whether I am considering disjoint parts or not. I can also cover 
the chair with overlapping parts: the body of the chair (composed of the back 
and of the seat), the back, the seat, and the legs; or even the chair itself, and 
the four legs. The parts in each of these lists are collectively located where the 
chair is.
There are many different lists of things that are collectively located where the 
chair is. There is no spatial region such that the chair is partially in that region, 
and in one of these lists nothing is partially there. Nor is there any spatial region 
such that something in one of the lists is partially in that spatial region, while the 
chair is not partially in that spatial region.
Now, forget about space: mereology is not the theory of spatial parthood, 
both because it is meant to be applied also to other instances of parthood and 
because a proper treatment of space requires subtleties that mereology does not 
offer. Still, the same idea seems to be at work. Suppose that you wanted to assess 
whether a particular is the mereological fusion of the properties it instantiates. 
What you should expect is that there is nothing in the individual that is not in at 
least one of the properties; and that the properties are such that they collectively 
cover whatever the individual is.
The picture just drawn has some metaphorical elements. It is not clear what 
we mean by locutions such as “cover” or “whatever the individual is.” But the 
purpose of mereology is precisely to clarify these slippery concepts. (­Fusion—
Definition) manages to qualify a fusion as something that includes whatever is 
collectively in the fused entities and nothing else.
 

(Fusion—Definition)

The Definition of Fusion
165
The first conjunct of (Fusion—Definition) ensures that every fused entity is 
part of the fusion. It is clear why this is a necessary condition for something to be 
a fusion: if a fused entity were not part of the fusion, then it would somehow be 
outside it. But it is not a sufficient condition, and this is why the definiens must 
include a second conjunct. It is not sufficient because many other things “bigger” 
than the chair have its back, seat, and legs as parts. Given Transitivity (an axiom 
of CEM), whatever has the entire chair as part, has the parts of the chair as its 
parts as well. And the chair is part of the furniture of the room in which it is, of 
the furniture of the building, and of many other very inclusive objects.
We need to exclude objects that are too big. The second conjunct of (­Fusion—
Definition) achieves this result: it requires that nothing is part of the fusion 
unless it overlaps with at least one of the fused entities. Suppose that, by contrast, 
something is part of the fusion, but does not overlap with any of the fused 
entities. Then this part of the fusion would be something that is nowhere to be 
found in the fused entities.
It is noteworthy that we cannot obtain the same result by requiring that the 
fusion has no part that is not a part of one of the fused entities, because the 
fusion must include entities that are a bit in one of the fused entity and a bit in 
another. In the example of the chair, consider again the body of the chair, made of 
the back and of the seat, but not of the legs. Now, the chair includes the body as a 
part; and should count as the fusion of the back, of the seat, and of the four legs. 
But the body is not part of any of these fused entities. Thus, a patently legitimate 
case of Fusion would be ruled out by the following, undesirable definition of 
Fusion:
The chair would not be the fusion because it would include a part that is not 
part of any of the fused entities. These additional parts can be obtained by fusing 
some of the fused entities, or some parts of the fused entities. In any case, they 
are never disjoint from all the fused entities. And this is exactly what (­Fusion—
Definition) soundly rules out in its second conjunct.
11.2 Minimal upper bounds and fusions
If other principles of CEM were assumed as axioms, there would be other ways 
of precisely satisfying the expectation that a fusion includes the fused entities 
and nothing extraneous to them. But these other definitions are not suitable for 

Mereology
166
an axiomatization of CEM in which Transitivity, Uniqueness of Composition, 
and Unrestricted Composition are the only axioms. This is the reason why we 
employ (Fusion—Definition). After all, in spite of its prima facie complexity, it 
proved to be quite faithful to our desiderata.
Nonetheless, it is interesting to take a quick look at an alternative definition. 
It characterizes a fusion as what, in the chains of parthood relations, is the first 
common thing you find when going up from the fused entities: you can imagine 
parthood relations as a tree (Hasse diagrams picture them precisely in this way), 
and the fusion is the first node you reach no matter from which of the fused 
entities you set out.2 This means that the fusion would be part of anything of 
which all the fused entities are parts.
This intuitive characterization corresponds to the algebraic notion of minimal 
upper bound. Indeed, we can define the Minimal Upper Bound (MUB) relation in 
mereology as follows:
 

(Minimal Upper Bound—Definition)
Not every Minimal Upper Bound is a mereological fusion. It can happen that 
one or more things have a Minimal Upper Bound which includes also something 
completely extraneous to them. Consider the following Hasse diagram, in which 
b and c3 have a as their Minimal Upper Bound, in spite of the fact that a includes 
also d, which is completely extraneous to b and c.
a
c
d
b
However, there is something deviant in this diagram, and it is difficult to find 
a metaphysically plausible scenario in which a Minimal Upper Bound of some 
things is not their fusion. Consider the seat and the back of my chair. Obviously, 
the chair is not their fusion, because it also includes the legs. Nor is the chair 
their Minimal Upper Bound. The above mentioned body of the chair is their 
Minimal Upper Bound: it is the first thing you meet when you go upward along 
the parthood relations within the chair.
A case in which a Minimal Upper Bound of some things is not their fusion is 
a case in which, for some reason, something is missing in the chains of parthood 
relations. If what we have called the body of the chair did not exist, and no proper 
part of the chair were to include both the seat and the back and nothing else, 
then the chair itself would be the Minimal Upper Bound of the seat and the back, 

The Definition of Fusion
167
but would not be their fusion. In this scenario, the chair would be with respect 
to the seat and the back what a is in the above Hasse diagram with respect to b 
and c.
However, this scenario is hardly realistic. Why should the body of the chair 
(as well as all the intermediate partial objects between the body and the chair in 
the chain of parthood relations) not exist? It seems that Minimal Upper Bounds 
and fusions diverge only in models of mereology (such as the one pictured in the 
Hasse diagram above, or the case in which a chair has a seat and a back, but no 
body) in which there are some metaphysically inexplicable omissions.
Now, if you have CEM in full strength, however it is axiomatized, you can 
rule out these deviant scenarios, and show that any Minimal Upper Bound is a 
fusion and vice versa.4 In particular, the following principle—a theorem of CEM, 
dubbed Filtration—is needed:

(Filtration)
Filtration warrants that a Minimal Upper Bound has no part that does not 
overlap with at least one of the things of which it is the Minimal Upper Bound: 
exactly what a Minimal Upper Bound of some things needs in order to be their 
fusion as well. The above Hasse diagram violates Filtration, insofar as a is the 
Minimal Upper Bound of b and c, but has also d as a part, in spite of the fact that 
d does not overlap with b and c.
In the next chapters, we will focus only on (Fusion—Definition), and 
try to understand what reasons can be adduced for and against Unrestricted 
Composition, according to which given some entities (however chosen), there 
is their fusion.


12.1 These fusions do not exist
In the debate about Unrestricted Composition, the resort to intuitions is 
extraordinarily widespread. Intuitions are a very controversial topic in 
contemporary metaphilosophy1: some philosophers attribute an evidential 
value to them (whereby intuiting that p would provide some kind of prima facie 
justification for p), others a purely motivational value (whereby intuiting that p 
would be simply a motivation for trying to argue in favor of p, by providing non-
intuitive evidence for p), and others still reject the idea that intuitions might play 
any role whatsoever in serious philosophy.
Any of these positions can be combined with different contentions about 
what intuition is. For example, intuition can be a strictly individual mental state 
or event, or be connected to an objective feature of its content: in this latter 
case, p is said to be intuitive, in the sense that p has a disposition to be intuited, 
quite independently of how often and in which circumstances this disposition 
is manifested.
When Unrestricted Composition is at stake, a very common claim is that 
Unrestricted Composition is a counterintuitive principle, because it forces us 
to accept the existence of lots of entities which instead, according to some 
intuitions, would not exist. The role of p in this debate is played by some negative 
existential statements, concerning mereological fusions. Consider the following 
examples:
(a)	 The fusion of the chair and of the Statue of Liberty does not exist.
(b)	 The fusion of the White House and of the Colossus of Rhodes does not exist.
(c)	 The fusion of David Cameron and of one of his counterparts in another 
possible world does not exist.
(d)	 The fusion of David Cameron and of the number 2 does not exist.
12
Allegedly Counterintuitive Entities

Mereology
170
None of these sentences stands in direct contradiction to the principle of 
Unrestricted Composition. Indeed, the principle says that, for any things (plural 
quantification), there is their mereological fusion, but does not say which things 
there are. Thus, the principle is not in charge of establishing whether the chair 
and the Statue of Liberty, the counterparts of Cameron and the number 2 exist, 
but only makes a general and conditional claim: if the entities to be fused exist, 
then their fusion exists.
This means that there is an easy and—from our perspective—quite 
uninteresting way of defending Unrestricted Composition from the allegedly 
intuitive claims (a)–(d) (however their intuitiveness is meant): one could 
agree that the sums at stake do not exist, because in each case one or both the 
allegedly fused entities do not exist either. The plausibility of this attitude varies 
from case to case. Some of the entities involved are object of hoary ontological 
controversies. In particular, in (c), the existence of counterparts of Cameron 
depends on the existence of counterparts, and in general on the existence of 
entities in other possible worlds, and indirectly on the existence of possible 
worlds themselves. In (d), the existence of the number 2 seems to depend on the 
general existence of natural numbers.
However, while ontological controversies are particularly acute in these cases, 
in the other cases too, for broad philosophical reasons, you could doubt the 
existence of the entities to be fused. For example, according to some philosophers 
(the so-called presentists), only present entities exist, and thus the Colossus of 
Rhodes does not exist.
In some cases, however, the reasons to doubt the existence of the entities to 
be fused are not independent of the debate about Unrestricted Composition, but 
presuppose that Unrestricted Composition is false. Peter van Inwagen argues that 
composition happens only in those cases in which a life is involved.2 According 
to him, among the entities in (a)–(d), only David Cameron exists. According to 
so-called nihilists, such as Theodore Sider,3 composition never happens, except 
in the limit case in which mereological atoms are the fusions of themselves. As a 
result, none of the entities to be fused in (a)–(d) exist (at least if—as it seems—
they are not atoms).
12.2 Negative existential intuitions
It is useful to put aside the controversies about the existence of the entities to be 
fused. Let us grant that they exist and ask why intuitions—according to some 

Allegedly Counterintuitive Entities
171
philosophers—support (a)–(d), thereby clashing with Unrestricted Composition. 
In this section I will try to voice and analyze these intuitions, while in Section12.3 
I will suggest that it is contentious to assess their exact content and—even more—
to translate them into a viable alternative to Unrestricted Composition.
The negative existential (a) (“the fusion of the chair and of the Statue of Liberty 
does not exist”) is about the fusion of two categorically homogeneous entities, 
which we usually classify as artifacts. The reason to doubt that their fusion exists 
is that, if it existed, it would be a spatially discontinuous and seemingly causally 
inefficient entity. Given (Fusion—Definition), the fusion would include the chair 
and the Statue of Liberty as parts, and would be such that all its parts overlap 
either with the chair or with the Statue of Liberty. From a spatial point of view, 
the resulting fusion would be partially where the chair is (in my room), and 
partially where the Statue of Liberty is. Moreover, both the chair and the Statue 
of Liberty are involved in some causal chains: they have been produced in a 
certain way; the Statue of Liberty slightly deviates the wind that hits it; the chair 
intercepts my body when I let myself fall onto it. Is the fusion involved in some 
further causal process? One can argue that it is not.
Case (b) (“the fusion of the White House and of the Colossus of Rhodes 
does not exist”) also involves two categorically homogeneous entities, again two 
artifacts. However, the difference with (a) is that these entities could be thought 
to have existed at different times. The Colossus of Rhodes was destroyed by 
an earthquake in the year 226 B.C., and the White House was completed 2026 
years later, in A.D. 1800. Thus, there is an additional reason (in comparison to 
the reasons for case (a)) to doubt the existence of their fusion: the fusion is a 
temporally disconnected entity that would cease to exist at a certain point and 
would resume existing later.
While (a) involves a spatially disconnected fusion and (b) a temporally 
disconnected fusion, the disconnection in (c) (“the fusion of David Cameron 
and of one of his counterparts in another possible world does not exist”) is 
modal. The fused entities would inhabit different possible worlds. Suppose 
that counterpart theory is integrated with Lewis’s modal realism, according to 
which possible worlds and the individuals inhabiting them (construed as parts 
of possible worlds) exist in the same exact sense in which our world and their 
parts exist. Then, the fusion in (c) would still be categorically homogeneous (it 
would be the fusion of two people, if we assume that the involved counterpart of 
Cameron is a person), but would raise further concerns: it would not be simply 
spatially sparse, but such that its parts are mutually not at any distance in space 
and time—indeed, according to modal realism, possible worlds are closed under 

Mereology
172
relations of spatiotemporal distance, and this means that if two things are in 
different worlds, then they are not reciprocally very far in space-time, but lack 
reciprocal spatiotemporal relations on the whole. Moreover, also their lack of 
causal efficiency would be more radical, and—so to say—a matter of principle, 
since it would be grounded on the general fact that possible worlds are also 
closed under causal relations, so that inter-world causality is foreclosed.
Finally, in modal realism, possible individuals are parts of possible worlds. 
But the fusion at stake would not be part of any single possible world. Some 
of its parts would be part of the possible world of which Cameron is part (that 
is, of the actual world). Some others would be part of the different possible 
world of which Cameron’s involved counterpart is part. Some others (such as 
the fusion of Cameron’s left arm and the nose of his counterpart) would not 
be  part of any world. Thus, the fusion in question would not be a possible 
individual. But  “possible individual” could be deemed synonymous with 
“possible existent”; thus, the fusion would not be a possible existent, and a fortiori 
would not be an actual existent: the conclusion that the fusion does not exist (as 
(c) claims) would thus be easily reached.
In (d) (“the fusion of David Cameron and of the number 2 does not exist”), 
the terms of the operation of Fusion—that are also parts of the fusion, in the 
light of the first conjunct of (Fusion—Definition)—would be categorically 
heterogeneous, from the viewpoint of the distinction between concrete and 
abstract entities. Given any plausible way of drawing the abstract/concrete 
divide, Cameron and the number 2 fall on opposite sides of the distinction, that 
is, Cameron is concrete, and 2 is abstract: for example, persons are involved in 
causal processes, while numbers are not; persons have a location in space-time, 
numbers lack such a location.
It would be hard to classify the fusion at stake as concrete or abstract: it would 
be a hybrid thing. However, one could argue that the abstract/concrete divide is 
exhaustive. Given a thing whatsoever, either it is concrete or abstract: either it 
participates in causal processes or it does not; either it is located in space-time or 
it is not. Insofar as the fusion in (d) seems to fall short both of being abstract and 
of being concrete, one could conclude that (d) simply does not exist.
12.3 A variety of intuitions
In Chapter  13 we will see how the defender of Unrestricted Composition 
can react to these lines of thought, and finally translate some of them into an 

Allegedly Counterintuitive Entities
173
argument that is, surprisingly, in favor of Unrestricted Composition. But, before 
this, it is important to ask to what extent and in what sense (a)–(d) are intuitive. 
There are important differences among them.
In some cases, we are not given a proper reason to believe in negative 
existential statements. In cases such as (a) (“the fusion of the chair and of the 
Statue of Liberty does not exist”) and (b) (“the fusion of the White House and of 
the Colossus of Rhodes does not exist”) in particular, the denier of Unrestricted 
Composition aims to argue that spatially sparse and temporally sparse entities 
are unacceptable ontological commitments, and does so in the light of general 
principles that merely express the claim that those things do not exist.
In some other cases, however, an intermediate step is introduced. For example, 
there are some appeals to the principle that nothing is noncausally efficient; 
and since the fusions are considered causally inefficient, it is inferred that they 
do not exist. However, it is not exactly clear what motivates the principle that 
only causally efficient things exist. After all, it is a very contentious principle 
(sometimes dubbed the Eleatic Principle) that would also forbid the existence 
of number 2 involved (in the role of fused entity) in (d).4 It seems as though an 
evidential use of intuition is made in support of the general principle that only 
causally efficient things exist, also when it is not made directly in support of the 
negative existential statement.
Thus, in cases (a) and (b), the appeals to intuition seem to be really brute: also 
when a general principle is involved, this general principle is simply motivated 
by the same intuitions that motivate the specific negative existential intuition.
(c) and (d) are significantly different from (a) and (b). In the case of (c) (“the 
fusion of David Cameron and of one of his counterparts in another possible 
world does not exist”), we lack arguably any intuition about counterparts, quite 
independently of the evidential or nonevidential value of intuitions. Counterpart 
theory is a philosophically motivated logical framework for paraphrasing modal 
claims into standard quantified claims. The reasons adduced against inter-world 
fusions make appeal to the way in which counterpart theory and modal realism 
are built: this apparatus forbids us to consider inter-world individuals possible. 
Also in the case of (d) (“the fusion of David Cameron and of the number 2 does 
not exist”), we have probably no intuition, and the reasoning is built upon the 
alleged exhaustiveness and exclusiveness of the abstract/concrete divide.
Some critics of Unrestricted Composition are explicit in assigning decisive 
value to intuitions in support of (a) and (b). For example, Daniel Korman thinks 
that (a) and (b) are true counterexamples to the principle, and that they falsify 
it.5 Their justification would lie in intuition, and Korman refers to Juri Bengson’s 

Mereology
174
theory of intuition as a quasi-perceptual, truth-conducive intellectual mental 
state or event.6 One could attempt to counter Korman’s viewpoint from a general, 
methodological perspective, but intuition is a complicated methodological issue 
that cannot adequately be discussed in this book.
What we will try to show in Chapter 13—following the so-called Lewis-Sider 
argument for Unrestricted Composition—is that these intuitions cannot be 
translated into an alternative to Unrestricted Composition, and that they can 
be respected without denying Unrestricted Composition. In Chapter 14 we will 
also see that, in articulating some of these intuitions, some metaontological 
assumptions about the nature of existence play an important role.

13.1 Quine, Williams, and the argument from vagueness
The most powerful, as well as the most criticized, argument in favor of 
Unrestricted Composition has been formulated by Lewis in a few pages of his 
book On the Plurality of Worlds.1 The reason why this argument appears for the 
first time in Lewis’s masterpiece on modal realism is connected with (c) (“the 
fusion of David Cameron and of one of his counterparts in another possible 
world does not exist”). According to Lewis, the argument for Unrestricted 
Composition is so powerful that it forces modal realism to admit trans-world 
individuals of all sorts (not only the relatively sober one considered in (c)), in 
spite of the fact that these trans-world individuals do not play any explanatory 
role in modal realism and counterpart theory.
Trans-world individuals (that is, individuals with parts in different possible 
worlds) are not counterparts of anything. Due to a principle of counterpart 
theory, every counterpart is part of a world.2 The reason why Lewis admits trans-
world individuals such as the fusion of Cameron and one of his counterparts is 
that, according to him, the argument we are about to expound is a compelling 
one: thus modal realism should make room for trans-world individuals, in spite 
of their being hardly useful and highly problematic.
The argument was made explicit by Lewis for the first time in 1986, and 
was later substantially improved by Sider. However, it was partially implicit in 
some considerations previously advanced in favor of Unrestricted Composition 
by other mereological monists, and these forerunners’ simple formulations are 
actually quite useful for appreciating the gist of the argument.
Nelson Goodman, in “A World of Individuals,” presents Fusion as a “generating 
relation” that goes from some things (the entities to be fused) to a single thing 
(their fusion). As we know, Goodman cared a lot about the comparison with 
sets. Unrestricted Composition too was motivated in his view by the need to put 
13
The Argument from Vagueness

Mereology
176
wholes on par with sets. In sets, given any individuals and/or sets whatsoever 
(no matter how sparse, categorically heterogeneous, or causally disconnected), 
there is—except in those cases that are ruled out by the need to avoid ­Russell-
like paradoxes—another set whose elements are those very things. The calculus 
of individuals was expected to differ from set theory inasmuch as it identifies 
whatever is built from the same basic constituents, but also to match the power of 
set theory in other respects: therefore, Unrestricted Composition was needed.3
The idea was also that Fusion is a central notion of the calculus of 
individuals, and that it is a virtue of the calculus that this basic operation is 
always defined: it is a virtue that, if we take a denoting term and apply the 
operator “the fusion of” to it, we are warranted to obtain a denoting term. 
This was probably felt to contribute to the formal character of the calculus. 
Mereologydis should not deal at all with the complex net of intuitions and 
controversial, topic-specific theoretical assumptions that can lead us to assent 
to the negative existentials (a)–(d).
When you review the motivations in favor of (a)–(d) in Chapter 3, Section 3.2, 
it is quite evident that it could be risky to countenance them when assessing an 
axiom of the right theory of parthood: they have nothing to do with parthood 
and cognate relations at all, and embody controversial metaphysical theses 
on other subjects (such as the nonexistence of causally inefficient items, the 
meaning of the expression “possible individual,” or the exhaustiveness of the 
abstract/concrete divide).
However, the need to have an always defined operation of Fusion and the 
nonformal character of the motivations against Unrestricted Composition 
are not, by themselves, compelling motivations in favor of Unrestricted 
Composition. It is easy for the opponent of Unrestricted Composition and of 
mereological monism in general to object that the need for an always defined 
operation and the formal character of mereologydis could simply fall together 
with Unrestricted Composition, as mutually entangled facets of mereological 
monism. The mereological monist cannot invoke these as reasons for 
endorsing Unrestricted Composition. Her opponent is precisely arguing that 
composition is restricted, that Fusion is not an always defined operation (if it 
is an operation at all), and that mereologydis should not be formal and topic-
neutral, because the conditions for some things to compose another thing are 
topic-specific.
However, what matters is not that the criteria that would lead us to subscribe 
(a)–(d) are nonformal, but that they are not suitable to be translated into a clear-
cut condition that limits the domain of what exists.

The Argument from Vagueness
177
This theme already emerges in two short declarations by Quine and by 
Donald Williams (an important—but long disregarded—father of twentieth-
century metaphysics, who applied mereology to his own theory of tropes). 
In 1981 Quine wrote:
More objects are wanted, certainly, than just bodies and substances. We need 
all sorts of parts and portions of substances. For lack of a definable stopping 
place, the natural solution at this point is to admit as an object the material 
content of any portion of space-time, however irregular and discontinuous and 
heterogeneous. (Quine 1981, p. 11)
Quine is here talking exclusively of concrete entities, and—again within this 
limited domain—he is not saying that, given some entities however chosen, 
there is their mereological fusion. He is saying that in “any portion of space-
time, however irregular and discontinuous and heterogeneous” there is an 
object. Thus, the domain is narrower than that of Unrestricted Composition, 
and the claim is about the presence of an object in space-time. These differences 
notwithstanding, it is interesting that the only reason provided by Quine in 
support of his thesis is the “lack of a definable stopping place.”
Consider (a) (“the fusion of the chair and of the Statue of Liberty does not 
exist”), and suppose that I decide that the chair and the Statue of Liberty have 
no fusion, because they are too far apart in space. How could we translate “too 
far apart” into a condition under which the operation of Fusion is defined? 
On my desk there is a PhD dissertation, printed on unstapled sheets. Since I 
am in the process of reading it, it actually consists of two heaps of sheets: one 
with the sheets I have already read, and another with the sheets still to be read. 
Within each heap, the sheets are very close, one on top of another. By contrast, 
the two heaps are at a certain distance from one another, about 7 centimeters. 
Is there any reason to think that both the sheets already read and those yet to 
be read have a fusion, while the two heaps (or—equivalently—all the sheets) 
do not? Is there a threshold of distance within which there is a fusion, and 
beyond which there is no fusion? It would seem outrageously arbitrary to fix 
such a threshold.
You might feel that the chair and the Statue of Liberty are definitely too far 
apart, while the sheets read are definitely close enough to one another. You might 
even insist on a definite outcome about the two heaps of sheets of the same 
dissertation, and say for example: some sheets have a fusion if and only if they 
are such that we can go from any of the sheets to any other through a chain of 
sheets that are in touch.

Mereology
178
The exact content of these criteria will be difficult to establish (for example, 
it is not easy to explain what “being in touch” means4), and it is apparent that 
these criteria are far from formal and inter-categorical: a bikini is admitted as a 
fusion of its two parts, in spite of the fact that its parts are spatially disconnected. 
It seems that entities such as bikinis—or tea sets—are such that their parts are 
expected to be spatially disconnected: if the two parts of a bikini were welded, 
that would not be strictly speaking a bikini any more; and if the cups, teaspoons, 
sugar bowl, and so on, were all glued together, this would produce a very 
anomalous tea set.
In cases such as (a), it is difficult to identify a “definable stopping place” (in 
Quine’s words), and even if one insists and finds it, it seems that the imposed 
conditions are so specific to kinds of objects that they actually do not concern 
fusions at all, but rather the fact of belonging to those specific kinds. The bottom 
and the top constitute a bikini on the necessary constitution of not being welded. 
Some sheets constitute a heap of sheets if and only if they touch one another.
We could even consider the same entities to be fused, and obtain different 
outcomes. Thus the sheets on my desk do seem to compose an unstapled copy 
of a PhD dissertation. And the copy of the PhD dissertation seems to be their 
fusion (it includes the sheets as parts, and does not overlap with anything that 
does not overlap with at least one of the sheets). Thus, there exists the fusion of 
the sheets, and our tendency to deny that they have a fusion can be viewed as 
the tendency to deny that they form a heap of sheets; as a form of restrictivism 
about heaps of sheets—and not about fusions; and there is nothing strange in the 
fact that the conditions for something to be a heap of sheets are not formal, but 
specific to heaps of sheets.
This approach also makes sense of the absence of “a definable stopping place.” 
The lack of a definite threshold between what counts as a heap of sheets and what 
does not is not surprising at all: the concept of heap is a prototypical example 
of a vague concept. We have clear cases of heaps (including a lot of sheets) and 
clear cases of non-heaps (including very few sheets), but there is no threshold 
(no exact number of sheets) within which there is no heap and beyond which 
there is. It is sensible to argue that the number of sheets is not the only factor in 
being a heap of sheets: the spatial proximity between the sheets also comes into 
play. From this viewpoint, there are clear cases of heaps (in which the sheets 
are glued together, or perfectly stacked) and clear cases of non-heaps (in which 
the sheets are separated by other objects), but there is no threshold of proximity 
(no maximal distance, no pseudo-scientific concept of continuity) within which 
there is no heap and beyond which there is.

The Argument from Vagueness
179
Vagueness is a very complex philosophical and logical issue. But—whatever 
theory of vagueness you adopt—it seems that there is nothing strange in the 
fact that, when you spell out the conditions for something to fall under a vague 
concept, these conditions too are vague. If they were not vague, if they imposed 
a threshold beyond which something falls under the concept and below which it 
does not (say, in the case of the heap of sheets: 100 sheets), then the conditions 
would not provide a sound, conservative analysis of the vague concept. By 
contrast, they would provide a specific precisification of the vague concept.
According to supervaluationism (one of the most popular semantic treatments 
of vagueness5), any vague concept can be made precise (precisified) in several 
ways: in the case of the concept of heap of sheets one could suggest different 
thresholds; but none of these precisifications constitutes a correct analysis 
of the concept. By contrast, a correct analysis should have as many possible 
precisifications as the vague concept analyzed.
In all cases in which we have the temptation to say that composition is 
restricted according to certain criteria, this temptation can be reinterpreted and 
satisfied by saying that these criteria actually concern the application of certain 
concepts; and that, in cases of disparate fusions, no contentful concept can be 
applied, and a fortiori no criteria of application for these concepts.
Unrestricted Composition does not say that something falls under a certain 
concept. It says that something (the fusion) exists on the condition that some 
things (the fused entities) exist. Fusion is a relation: but to be a fusion of something 
is not a contentful concept. It is coextensional with existence: everything is the 
fusion of itself; thus, whatever exists is a fusion of something, namely of itself 
(and, trivially, whatever is a fusion exists).
The notion of existence that is often presupposed in the debate about 
Unrestricted Composition is such that existence is univocal, is adequately 
expressed by the so-called particular or existential quantifier of first-order 
logic, and is not a contentful or discriminating concept. It is the so-called 
Quinean concept of existence, strictly connected to Kant’s and Moore’s thesis 
that existence is not a predicate or a property—a thesis upheld by Quine 
throughout his philosophical career, and further refined and made explicit 
by Peter Van Inwagen in several works.6 Lewis—the creator of the vagueness 
argument we are going to discuss—was strictly faithful to Quinean orthodoxy 
about existence.
When existence is thus conceived, existence is not a concept, is not primarily 
expressed by a predicate, and can hardly be regarded as a bearer of vagueness: 
the claim that a fusion exists can be expressed (and is primarily expressed) 

Mereology
180
without any predicate, and thus without anything to which vagueness is typically 
attributed.
Together with Quine, the other forerunner of the Lewis-Sider argument 
for Unrestricted Composition is Donald Williams. In 1959, many years before 
the Quine’s text quoted above, Williams discussed his adoption of Goodman’s 
calculus of individuals—which was at the time a rather novel and controversial 
apparatus—to his own theory of tropes. In this context, Williams resorts to the 
concept of vagueness in the discussion of Unrestricted Composition.
Williams remarks that it is very common, in particular among neo-
Aristotelian philosophers, “to distinguish ‘real things’ or ‘wholes,’ like an atom, 
an axe, a cabbage, a man, from ‘mere sums’: the former are solid, they contrast 
with the milieu, they hang together while they move, and so forth.” However, 
these conditions are not suitable for restricting the domain of fusions, that—at 
least if mereological monism is admitted—is also the domain of unrestricted 
quantifiers, that is, the domain of what exists or there is according to Quinean 
metaontology. And the reason for this is that “the idea is vague.”7
Consider solidity, for example: we can build a so-called soritic series of things 
tk where k varies from 0 to n, such that, for each k, tk+1 is more solid than tk. But 
there is no value k such that from that point of the series onward tk is solid. 
Thus, if solidity were used as a criterion for existence (or for being a fusion), 
existence itself would be vague. But since existence is not vague, solidity and 
similar features should not be used as a criterion of existence.
13.2 Lewis’s version of the argument
Lewis’s version of the argument in On the Plurality of Worlds, while standing 
in ideal continuity with Quine’s and Williams’s versions, makes various points 
clearer, and in particular stresses a semantic aspect: nothing in the sentence that 
expresses the existence of a fusion is vague. By contrast, the conditions under 
which we would want to restrict composition are vague: this means that these 
conditions cannot be satisfied.
In Quine’s and Williams’s simple versions, this semantical aspect was not 
made explicit. According to Quine, there are actually no general, “definable” 
restricting conditions. According to Williams, the restricting conditions are 
vague, and vague conditions cannot restrict “formal” features, such as existing 
or being a fusion. Against Quine and Williams, the restrictionist could object 
that restricting conditions can be defined in a case by case way, and it is simply 

The Argument from Vagueness
181
a prejudice that no vague condition can restrict existence. Many restrictionists 
nowadays hold that existence is vague, and can therefore be restricted by vague 
conditions.
Lewis writes:
We are happy enough with mereological sums of things that contrast with 
their surroundings more than they do with one another; and that are adjacent, 
stick together, and act jointly. We are more reluctant to affirm the existence of 
mereological sums of things that are disparate and scattered and go their separate 
ways. A typical problem case is a fleet: the ships contrast with their surroundings 
more than with one another, they act jointly, but they are not adjacent nor do 
they stick together. (Lewis 1986b, p. 211)
The criteria according to which we would tend to restrict composition are 
different, and are in some cases in mutual conflict: a fleet seems to contrast with 
what surrounds it, but is made of spatially sparse parts (the ships). In most cases, 
the ships of a fleet move in the same direction (they “act jointly”), but this is not 
always the case: it happens that some ships of a fleet leave for an expedition, 
while other ships of the same fleet stay moored in the harbor.
One can also imagine a soritic series of intermediate conditions, or of 
more radical forms of separation among the ships. Again, it seems that vague 
conditions are involved, and that they are conditions for the fusion of the ships 
to be a fleet (i.e., to fall under the concept fleet), but not condition for there to 
be a fusion of the ships. In the soritic series at stake, we have various fusions 
that gradually (and without a precise threshold) count more and more as a fleet. 
It is the concept of fleet that is vague, and the fusions are the domain of what is 
gradually more and more of a fleet in the soritic series.
Nonetheless, one could insist that composition is restricted. What we 
intuit—the restrictionist insists—is not only that a bunch of distant and 
uncoordinated ships are not a fleet, but also that they do not compose 
anything. If intuition is a personal mental state or event, it is irrelevant that 
I—for example—do not share this intuition. My own intuition is that a bunch 
of distant and uncoordinated ships does not compose a fleet, but composes 
something that does not deserve a specific sortal predicate in natural 
language, at least not one more specific than “bunch of ships.” However, the 
restrictionist has a different intuition, and the clash between my intuitions 
and hers risks ending up in a dialectical stalemate.
However, at this point, Lewis objects to the restrictionist that the vague 
conditions at play—no matter whether and to what extent they are supported 

Mereology
182
by intuition—cannot restrict composition because composition is expressed in a 
part of language in which nothing is vague. Lewis writes:
The trouble with restricted composition is as follows. It is a vague matter whether 
a given class satisfies our intuitive desiderata for composition. Each desideratum 
taken by itself is vague, and we get still more vagueness by trading them off each 
against each other. […] But if composition obeys a vague restriction, then it 
must be sometimes a vague matter whether composition takes place or not. And 
that is impossible. (Lewis 1986b, p. 212)
When I claim that some things have a fusion (given our definition of Fusion, 
which is quite similar to the definition that Lewis later adopted in Parts of 
Classes), I am claiming that there is something such that the fused entities are 
its parts and that each of its parts overlaps with at least one of the fused entities. 
The  language I am employing includes logical language (quantifiers, truth-
functional connectives, the predicate ≺ of plural logic, parentheses) and the 
mereological language: the relational constants for parthood (P) and for Overlap 
(˚). But, as we know, ˚ is introduced by a definition in terms of parthood, and, 
when all the definitions are resolved, the only nonlogical predicate is P. Thus, 
in order to satisfy our “intuitive” motivations for restricting composition, 
vagueness should concern the claim that a certain fusion exists. This requires 
that either parthood or logical language is vague.
The idea is that, given a vague condition for composition, vagueness could 
not fail to be inherited by the claim that the fusion exists. A restriction on 
composition would take the following schematic form, in which φ expresses the 
vague, restricting condition, and Σ could be analyzed in terms of P and logical 
language through the definitions of Fusion and Overlap:

(Restricted Composition)
But, if φ is vague and (Restricted Composition) holds, the right side of the 
biconditional in (Restricted Composition) cannot fail to be vague. Moreover, 
within the right side of the biconditional in (Restricted Composition), at least 
one subsentential expression should be vague too, because vagueness does not 
concern sentences only.8 The fact that a sentence is vague (that it has several 
precisifications, or that it has an intermediate degree of truth, according to 
the semantic analysis of vagueness that is adopted) depends on the vagueness 
of something in its vocabulary. The most obvious bearers of vagueness at the 
subsentential level are predicates. Once the definitions are resolved, the only 
predicates at stake in (Restricted Composition) are P and the plural-logical 
predicate ≺. Could any of these two predicates be vague?

The Argument from Vagueness
183
13.3 What cannot be vague
≺, in plural logic, is closely connected to plural identity. It is actually used in the 
standard definition of plural identity, according to which some things xx are 
identical to some things yy if and only if anything that is one of (≺) xx is also one of 
yy and vice versa.9 However, identity is not vague: there are powerful and refined 
arguments against vague identity in the literature.10 For our limited purposes, it 
is enough to observe that identity—at least in its standard characterization—is 
that relation that anything has with itself and with nothing else. What could be 
vague in identity? If identity is not vague, ≺ cannot be vague either.
What about P? P is a constitutive piece of a theory of parthood that, while 
being highly general according to mereological monism, fails to be logical. 
Thus—one could argue—there is nothing wrong in thinking that parthood is 
vague. Consider a cloud: it seems to lack definite boundaries. One could think 
that, in the peripheral area of the cloud, there are some water molecules that are 
borderline cases of parts of the cloud.
However, there is at least one quite convincing alternative that accounts for 
cloud-like scenarios, without making parthood vague. In the case of the cloud, 
one could follow Lewis and claim that there are actually many objects (that are 
plausible candidates for the role of reference of “the cloud”), each of which has 
a definite domain of parts. Vagueness would not concern parthood, but the 
reference of the expression “the cloud.”
This alternative is obviously preferable to vague parthood, if you have 
adopted a standard conception of identity together with another pivotal piece of 
mereological monism, namely Extensionalism. If P is vague, then PP is vague. 
Extensionalism claims that nonatomic things are identical if and only if they 
have the same proper parts: thus identity would inherit the vagueness of PP.
In any case, it is not necessary to presuppose mereological principles, and 
exclude in this way that parthood is affected by vagueness. The point is that 
if composition is restricted by vague conditions, then it is indeterminate what 
exists. As we have already seen, since everything is a fusion of itself, the domain 
of what exists coincides with the domain of what is the fusion of something.
In the Quinean tradition, existence is adequately expressed by the existential 
quantifier of first-order logic, but in order to obtain a syntactically well-formed 
existence claim, we need to factor in at least one predicate. The most obvious 
choice is the identity predicate, insofar as identity is in turn closely connected to 
existence: identity is the relation that anything has with itself and nothing else; this 
means that the extension of the identity relation will include all and only those 

Mereology
184
ordered couples, each of which includes two times whatever exists. Thus, to claim 
that Fusion is limited by a vague condition is to say that existence is limited by a 
vague condition, and that there is something vague in some claims of this sort 
(where a would be a constant referring to a fusion, the existence of which is vague):
We have already excluded the hypothesis that identity is vague (which—given 
the tight connection between identity and existence—is already a way to exclude 
that existence is vague). The underlying idea behind the vagueness argument 
for Unrestricted Composition is that Fusion is a “generating relation” (a label 
already introduced by Goodman for Fusion and for the operation that associates 
the basic elements of a set to the set itself): it is an existential claim. By contrast, 
the intuitions that militate against Unrestricted Composition involve the idea 
that some vague conditions should restrict composition; but vague conditions 
cannot restrict existence, because existence is not vague.
Why cannot existence be vague? An important reason to rule out the possibility 
that existence is vague has been provided by Sider.11 This additional reason 
may be required by those who do not share some of the general philosophical 
assumptions underlying Lewis’s version of the argument (as illustrated above). 
For example, it might seem that the non-vagueness of parthood depends on 
mereological monism, and should not be presupposed when arguing in favor 
of one of its claims; or that the non-vagueness of logical language (including the 
quantifier ) is simply assumed as an aspect of the overall adoption of a Quinean 
metaontology, in turn deeply entrenched within mereological monism due to a 
combination of historical and substantial reasons.
Sider directly defends the idea that it cannot be indeterminate which fusions 
exist, by connecting the existence of fusions to numbers: if it were vague whether 
certain things have a fusion, it would be vague whether these things exist, 
and then it would be vague how many things exist. But numerical sentences 
cannot be vague. As Sider claims, “mereological terms are not needed to express 
numerical sentences” (p. 127). Thus, any residual doubt about the vagueness of 
the mereological lexicon is irrelevant.
There is a rather close link between numerical ascriptions and existential 
claims. The claim that “there are exactly three things” is usually paraphrased in 
first-order logic in the following way (and thus in terms of identity, quantifiers, 
and connectives, without any residue of nonlogical language):

The Argument from Vagueness
185
Unanalyzed cardinality ascriptions add a level at which vagueness is more 
clearly unacceptable. What could be vague in the English sentence “there are 
exactly three things”? What—if, for example, supervaluationism is adopted—
could be precisified in different ways? Numbers are an unlikely candidate for 
vagueness. Vagueness would be inherited from the restricting conditions up 
to the cardinality ascriptions. Thus, if vagueness is unacceptable at the level of 
cardinality ascriptions, it is unacceptable already at the level of the restrictions 
on composition.
13.4 The Lewis-Sider argument versus intuitions
We can now compare the alleged counterexamples to Unrestricted Composition 
(a)–(d) with the Lewis-Sider argument for Unrestricted Composition. It is 
important to scrutinize the differences among the four cases.
(a)	 The fusion of the chair and of the Statue of Liberty does not exist.
(b)	 The fusion of the White House and of the Colossus of Rhodes does not exist.
(c)	 The fusion of David Cameron and of one of his counterparts in another 
possible world does not exist.
(d)	 The fusion of David Cameron and of the number 2 does not exist.
The difference between (a) and (b) is quite negligible: (a) denies the existence 
of a spatially disconnected fusion; (b) of a temporally disconnected fusion. 
Spatially and temporally disconnected fusions will tend to be devoid of causal 
power, will fail to act jointly, and will not move in coordinated ways. But all these 
features—as well as the underlying spatial and temporal disconnectedness—
will come in degrees and allow for soritic series of gradually closer, more 
integrated, and more coordinated entities. To draw a sharp boundary in these 
series would be arbitrary, and would simply not respect the expected criteria. In 
order to respect these criteria, it should be vague when composition happens, 
what exists, and how many things there are. The Lewis-Sider argument shows 
that how many things there are and what exists cannot be vague, and hence 
that there is no way to limit composition in the way which (a) and (b) would 
suggest.
On the other hand, (c) (involving a fusion whose inputs inhabit different 
possible worlds) and (d) (involving a fusion whose terms are one abstract and 
the other concrete) are significantly different. The difference lies in the fact that 
the two distinctions are arguably exempt from vagueness. Assume Lewis’s modal 

Mereology
186
realism. Given two entities whatsoever,12 either they inhabit the same world, or 
they inhabit different worlds.
Also in the case of (d) the abstract/concrete divide seems to be sharp and 
exempt of vagueness. We have already seen that it can be understood in several 
ways, but this means at most that terms such as “concrete” or “abstract” are 
ambiguous, not that they are vague.
Thus, while we have good reasons in support of (c) and (d), it seems that 
these reasons can be satisfied without incurring in any form of vagueness: the 
restrictionist can argue that, definitely, no inter-world fusion and no hybrid 
abstract/concrete fusion exists. The Lewis-Sider argument—as we have presented 
it—cannot be directly used against these sharp limitations of compositions.
Both Lewis and Sider were aware of this limitation. More exactly, Lewis 
discusses a case such as (c), and Sider explicitly excludes a case such as (d) from 
the targets of his argument. In a long parenthetical comment, Lewis writes:
(To be sure, a ban against trans-world composition would not itself be a vague 
restriction, so it would not fall victim to the argument just given. But taken by 
itself it would be unmotivated. To motivate it, we have to subsume it under a 
broader restriction. Which can’t be done, because a well-motivated broader 
restriction would be vague.) (Lewis 1986b, p. 213)
The idea is that modal realism is (or was, when Lewis was writing) a new 
theory: Lewis is presenting it in On the Plurality of Worlds. In this context, he 
considers whether composition happens when the entities to be fused inhabit 
different worlds. The exclusion of inter-world individuals would actually benefit 
modal realism. Given the acceptance of Unrestricted Composition, Lewis is 
forced to admit inter-world individuals as impossible individuals. In his system, to 
be a possible individual is to be part of a possible world. Inter-world individuals 
are not parts of possible worlds and so are—by definition—impossible. 
Impossible individuals cannot be counterparts, and, as was later pointed out,13 it 
is quite difficult to establish what it means for them to have a property possibly 
or necessarily. According to Lewis, we simply exclude them usually from our 
domains of quantification. They do not serve any explanatory purpose. The only 
reason to accept them is given by the fact that other restrictions to composition 
are unacceptable inasmuch as they are vague; and thus it would be unacceptable 
to restrict composition only in this case, without a legitimating precedent at our 
disposal.
Lewis’s argument against a definite restriction of composition and the 
resulting ban on inter-world individuals are not very compelling. First of all, 

The Argument from Vagueness
187
it is not clear why we should have a precedent, a “broader restriction,” as Lewis 
writes in the passage above. Since in this case we have a definite criterion for 
rejecting inter-world individuals, it is not clear why it does matter that we lack a 
definite criterion elsewhere. Moreover, cases such as (d) might seem to offer the 
precedent expected by Lewis: a ban on mixed fusions of abstract and concrete 
entities is exempt from any kind of vagueness.
However, Lewis would not have admitted such a precedent. In Parts of Classes, 
Lewis admits also fusions of individuals and classes (and thus, of prototypical 
cases of concrete and abstract entities respectively): “I am committed to all 
manner of unheard-of things: trout-turkeys, fusions of individuals and classes, 
all the world’s styrofoam, and many, many more” (Lewis 1991, p. 80). In spite of 
the heterogeneity of these fusions, it seems that for Lewis the commitment to 
all of them is justified by the general argument for Unrestricted Composition, 
which he had already set forth in On the Plurality of Worlds, and reformulates in 
Parts of Classes.
Vagueness seems to be absent both for inter-world fusion and abstract-
concrete fusions, and it is tempting to conclude that the Lewis-Sider argument 
should not be applied to these cases; that—pace Lewis—the abstract/concrete 
divide is clear and important enough to justify a specific and nonarbitrary 
restriction of composition; and, finally, that, once this limitation is admitted, 
other sharp, non-vague limitations could be accepted, as in the case of inter-world 
fusions for example (in this case, we should always remember that they matter 
only if we admit the existence of entities in other possible worlds: Unrestricted 
Composition does not dictate the existence of fusions of nonexistent things).
Sider, who presents his own version of the argument in Four-Dimensionalism, 
and so within a treatment of the persistence of concrete entities in time, explicitly 
restricts his attention to concrete entities14—no matter how sparse in space and 
time—for which the desirable restrictions on composition are arguably vague.
13.5 Unrestricted Composition and formal mereology
It is worth examining Lewis’s formulation of the argument for Unrestricted 
Composition in Parts of Classes, because it offers an interesting hint about the 
general idea that underlies the argument. This general idea militates against any 
restriction of composition, quite independently of the vagueness or definiteness 
of the restricting conditions we are inclined to impose on composition. 
Moreover, it makes explicit the connection between the Lewis-Sider argument 

Mereology
188
and Quinean metaontology, to which we will return in Chapter 14 (by asking 
what would happen if we adopted a different metaontology).
Lewis writes:
Existence is not some special distinction that befalls some of the things. Existence 
just means being one of the things there are, nothing else. The fuzzy line between 
less queer and more queer fusions cannot possibly coincide with the sharp edge 
where existence gives out and nothing lies beyond. (Lewis 1991, p. 81)
In this book, we are presenting mereologydis as an area of metaphysics that 
concerns the formal features of the parthood relation and the conditions of 
identity and existence for wholes, and mereological monism (mereologyphi) as 
the philosophical thesis that CEM tells the complete truth about these subjects. 
According to the standard Quinean conception, identity and existence are 
topic-neutral concepts, and are expressed in logical language (through the 
specific “logical” predicate “=”, to be added to first-order logic, and through the 
existential quantifier, respectively). No condition should be satisfied in order to 
exist or to be self-identical (the domain of what exists coincides with the domain 
of what is self-identical).
No substantial, categorical distinction between entities has any bearing on 
existence. Unrestricted Composition is the piece of CEM that is about existence: 
it provides existence conditions for wholes. These conditions should not lead us 
out of the field of topic-neutral concepts, such as existence and identity. Thus, 
the only condition we are allowed to impose concerns the existence of the fused 
entities.
Specific, substantial conditions should not concern existence. The fact that 
in many cases—such as those motivating the restriction at which (a) (“the 
fusion of the chair and of the Statue of Liberty does not exist”) and (b) (“the 
fusion of the White House and of the Colossus of Rhodes does not exist”) aim—
these conditions are vague is simply a symptom of the fact that no condition 
should be imposed at all. Vagueness can only concern conditions (and the 
predicates which express these conditions), while existence has—so to say—no 
condition.
What is at stake here is the neutrality of mereology. Mereology is not logic 
(for the reasons I have explained in Chapter 10, Section 10.3), but a metaphysical 
doctrine. Nonetheless, mereology is deeply connected to logical notions, such 
as those of existence and identity. Existence “is not some special distinction,” 
and should not be limited by specific conditions that depend on controversial, 
substantial, metaphysics-laden distinctions, such as spatially compact versus 

The Argument from Vagueness
189
spatially sparse, or temporally continuous versus temporally discontinuous, or 
abstract versus concrete, or intra-world versus inter-world.
In the case of the first two distinctions, their inadequacy to limit existence 
is made clear by their vagueness or fuzziness (“the fuzzy line between less 
queer and more queer fusions”), while the latter two distinctions are exempt 
from vagueness. Nonetheless, they are contentful and depend on categorical 
distinctions; they impose a “special distinction that befalls some of the things.”
It should be admitted that there is a difference between the Lewis-Sider 
argument and this general stance underlying it (and which only Lewis 
makes explicit). The argument shows that the expected vague limitations on 
composition cannot be accomplished, because nothing can be vague in what 
concerns the existence of fusions. The general stance is not an argument: it is the 
staunch conviction, rooted in Quinean metaontology, that existence should not 
be limited by category-specific conditions.
This conviction is strictly connected to the idea that mereologydis is only about 
formal features of parthood and identity and existence conditions for wholes, and 
should not be mixed with theories about spatial and temporal continuity, causal 
efficacy, possible and impossible individuals, or abstract/concrete distinctions.
If you disagree with this conviction, the Lewis-Sider argument for Unrestricted 
Composition is still there, but it is powerless against counterexamples such as (c) 
and (d). These cases could still be treated piecemeal. (c) (“the fusion of David 
Cameron and of one of his counterparts in another possible world does not 
exist”) depends very clearly on controversial doctrines about modality (such as 
modal realism), and could be avoided if these doctrines are rejected.
(d) (“the fusion of David Cameron and of the number 2 does not exist”) 
involves an abstract entity (the number 2) and could, as a consequence, be 
compared with the conclusions we reached in our discussion of Extensionalism 
in Chapter 8. There we showed that the strategies to defend Extensionalism are 
more successful in the case of concrete entities than in that of abstract entities, and 
that this could legitimize a restriction of the degree of generality of mereological 
monism: perhaps, CEM tells the complete truth about the identity conditions 
of concrete entities only. From this viewpoint, the limitation of Unrestricted 
Composition to concrete entities (the admission that there is no fusion when 
some of the entities to be fused are abstract) could confirm that mereological 
monism should limit its ambitions to the realm of concrete entities.
The kind of formality to which mereology aspires is—as we have argued in 
Chapter 3—gradable, and the limitation to concrete entities leaves mereological 
monism still with a large domain of application. Moreover—as we have already 

Mereology
190
noted in Chapter 8—this limitation could be explained by the fact that abstract 
entities are the object of stipulations, and that there is nothing surprising in the 
fact that stipulative entities can violate Unrestricted Composition (as much as 
they can violate Extensionalism): it is enough to stipulate that they violate it.
13.6 What about intuitions?
Let us recap the results of our analysis: the Lewis-Sider vagueness argument 
works primarily in cases such as (a) and (b). In cases such as (c) and (d) it 
needs to be supported by a general characterization of mereologydis as a formal 
discipline, deeply associated with formal notions such as those of existence 
and identity. The mereological monist in me is more than happy to embrace 
this characterization of mereologydis, but arguably it is not fair to presuppose 
this characterization when arguing in favor of Unrestricted Composition, a 
pivotal thesis of mereological monism itself. Those who do not endorse this 
characterization of mereologydis may prefer to accept that certain kinds of fusions 
(such as hybrid abstract/concrete fusions and inter-world fusions) do not exist. 
In the especially important case (d) (“the fusion of David Cameron and of the 
number 2 does not exist”), the limitation coheres with the idea that mereological 
monism in general should limit its ambitions of generality to concrete entities.
What about the intuitions in support of (a)–(d)? We have seen that they are 
much more vivid in the case of (a) and (b) (spatially and temporally disconnected 
fusions), and these cases are more directly affected by the powerful Lewis-Sider 
argument. With regard to these intuitions, we have not yet established whether 
they are evidential intuitions or motivating intuitions. According to Korman’s 
recent defense of a restrictionist approach to composition—according to which 
only so-called ordinary objects exist—intuitions have an evidential role: the 
counterexamples to Unrestricted Composition would show that Unrestricted 
Composition is false.15
The evidential value of the intuitions in support of (a) and (b) can be doubted, 
quite independently of the general, arduous problem of whether intuitions can 
have any evidential value or not.16 The problem is that those intuitions that 
support (a) and (b) are too unspecific to be taken as evidence, quite independently 
of any specific stance about the evidential roles of intuitions in philosophy or 
elsewhere. It is not clear at all what “existence” the fusions at stake would lack. 
Indeed, the motivations brought forward in support of (a) and (b) suggest that 
there is a tight connection between the features that the fusions would lack, and 

The Argument from Vagueness
191
the kind of existence that they would lack. The same would actually hold in the 
case of (c) and (d), if (c) and (d) were supported by intuitions at all (which—as 
we have seen—is doubtful).
(a)–(d) are reasons against Unrestricted Composition only if it is assumed 
that existent things have causal powers, are spatially or temporally continuous, 
inhabit a single world, and are either totally abstract or totally concrete. But this 
presupposes a connection between existence and these features. It is far from 
clear that (a)–(d) in themselves militate against Unrestricted Composition, 
because Unrestricted Composition claims that fusions exist in the sense of 
existence expressed by the existential quantifier: Unrestricted Composition does 
not say that fusions have causal powers, are spatially or temporally continuous, 
and so on.
(a)–(d) do not easily translate into arguments against Unrestricted 
Composition because it is not clear that they really are counterexamples to 
the kind of generalized existential statement that Unrestricted Composition 
is. And  so, Lewis is right in treating them not as counterexamples, but as 
unsatisfiable motivations for restricting composition. They are undetermined 
hints, in which it is not clear which notion of existence is at stake. They are not 
enough to obtain counterexamples to Unrestricted Composition. Nonetheless, 
they are enough to be motivated to assess if it is plausible to confront them with a 
restriction of composition, that is, with a restriction of existence in the Quinean 
sense. Given the Lewis-Sider argument, it turns out that—at least when the 
restricting condition is vague, as happens in the realm of concrete entities—
these motivations cannot be satisfied.


14.1 Unrestricted Composition, Meinongian existence, 
Williamson’s concreteness
Unrestricted Composition is about existence. It warrants that Fusion is an 
always defined operation: if the entities to be fused exist, then their fusion 
exists. What does this say about fusions? Nothing, except that they exist. It 
does not require them to play any explanatory role, participate in causal links, 
or play any role in an exhaustive description of the world. We have seen that 
inter-world fusions—in reference to which Lewis formulates the first mature 
version of the argument, after Quine’s and Williams’s early sketches—are 
more of a problem than an asset for modal realism. This seems to hold also in 
other cases. Unrestricted Composition delivers heterogeneous and redundant 
entities that are never to be mentioned outside of philosophy: within the 
concrete domain (in cases such as (a) and (b), Chapter 12, Section 12.1), the 
heterogeneity, redundancy, irrelevance come in degrees, and can generate 
soritic series. Nonetheless, in the high ranks of the soritic series, we get 
entities that are definitely useless.
These useless entities would exist, but fail to instantiate any interesting, 
autonomous properties. They would inherit the properties of their parts. 
As Lewis writes, “the trout-turkey in no way defies description. It is neither fish 
nor fowl, but it is nothing else: it is part fish and part fowl. […] Its character is 
exhausted by the character and relations of its parts” (Lewis 1991, p. 80). But 
this means that every significant property is already instantiated by the parts of 
these fusions.
Now, one could be tempted to ask: why should we care at all about this kind 
of existence? In serious metaphysics, we should only care about what exists in a 
thicker sense. Contemporary metaontology offers a great variety of alternatives 
to Quinean orthodoxy,1 in which various thicker notions of existence play a role. 
14
Unrestricted Composition and Metaontology

Mereology
194
Many kinds of Meinongians think that the existential quantifier (which it would 
be less misleading to call particular quantifier) does not express existence, which 
would be expressed by a genuine, discriminating predicate. The discriminating 
property expressed by this predicate can be meant in several ways. For example, 
Francesco Berto thinks that to exist is to have causal powers.2
Timothy Williamson thinks that existence is an abused notion, and that 
it is better to get rid of the label “existence” in philosophy, and to replace it 
with two notions. One is the notion of “being something,” or “being identical 
to something,” and is adequately expressed by the existential quantifier (it 
corresponds to Quinean existence). The other notion is concreteness.3
Kit Fine, and other philosophers who assign prominence to the notion of 
grounding,4 are ready to concede that existence is expressed by the existential 
quantifier, but thinks that existence should not be the central concern of 
ontology: ontology should instead focus on what is real or fundamental. 
Reality comes in degrees, defined by the grounding relation: what grounds is 
more real than what it grounds. Fundamentality is the attribute of what is at 
the beginning of the chains of grounding: what grounds other things, but is 
in turn ungrounded.
What impact could these alternative metaontologies have on Unrestricted 
Composition? Unrestricted Composition is usually formulated and has been 
defended by Lewis in the context of Quinean metaontology. Metaontology 
matters: given a certain metaontology, the significance of Unrestricted 
Composition could change, and we could have at our disposal a richer or 
poorer stock of notions to express distinctions among the domain of admitted 
fusions.
What surely does not change from one metaontology to another is the literal 
content of Unrestricted Composition:

(Unrestricted Composition)
Unrestricted Composition states that, for every things, something in the domain 
of the existential quantifier is their fusion. For the Quineans, this means that the 
fusion exists. For the Meinongians, it does not mean this. Some Meinongians 
(such as Terence Parsons5) think that the particular quantifier corresponds 
to the natural language quantifier “there is.” Some more recent Meinongians 
(the so-called noneists6) think that no ontological feature is expressed by the 
particular quantifier.
Some of these debates can be interpreted as disagreements about which terms 
should be used to designate what is in the domain of unrestricted quantifiers: 

Unrestricted Composition and Metaontology
195
for these terms the traditional label transcendentals is sometimes used.7 While 
these disagreements may be pragmatically important (insofar as it is important 
to use a perspicuous and unambiguous terminology in philosophy), they have 
no direct bearing on the question of what is in the domain of unrestricted 
quantifiers.
Meinongians enjoy the advantage of having a specific predicate (exist) for the 
fusions that really matter. They could accept Unrestricted Fusion, and still subscribe 
to (a)–(d), and deny the existence of many “undesirable” fusions. Since “existence” 
is a predicate for them, the Lewis-Sider argument cannot be applied to their 
notion of existence: there is nothing strange in the fact that a predicate irreducible 
to a logical notion is vague (predicates are the standard-bearers of vagueness). 
Nonetheless, the argument can be developed in support of the principle as it is, 
except for the fact that the principle does not speak of the existence of fusions, but 
rather of their being in the domain of the unrestricted quantifier.
One can see the advantage of reserving the word “existence” for the restricted, 
vaguely delimited domain. However, the restricting conditions at play in (a)–(d) 
are highly heterogeneous: spatial continuity, temporal continuity, causal efficacy, 
and so on do not seem to characterize any single concept, such as Meinongian 
“existence.” Moreover, we have seen that Berto construes existence specifically as 
causal efficacy. As a consequence, the restrictions that would be motivated by the 
intuitions in support of (a)–(d) would not always identify the domain of what 
exists in Berto’s understanding of existence.
Similar considerations concern Williamson’s repudiation of existence in 
favor of being something and concreteness. Clearly, Unrestricted Composition, 
if conjoined with Williamson’s metaontology, concerns being something: it 
affirms that, given any entities whatsoever, their fusion is something—that it 
is identical to something. As in the Meinongian case, the intuitions underlying 
(a)–(d) could be instead referred to the other notion, concreteness. Concreteness 
can be meant as being in space-time, or as having causal efficacy.8 Also in these 
cases, the variety of motivations supporting (a)–(d) do not seem to identify any 
unitary notion of existence as concreteness.
14.2 Fine’s metaontology
In the above cases of non-Quinean metaontology, the only difference that 
concerns Unrestricted Composition is that both the Meinongians and Williamson 
have at their disposal a notion (existence for the Meinongians, concreteness for 

Mereology
196
Williamson) whose extension does not correspond to the unrestricted domain 
of quantification. This notion can be used to interpret (a)–(d). However, nothing 
changes in the arguments in support of Unrestricted Composition. The domain 
of fusions is still the domain of unrestricted quantification, in spite of the 
fact that the latter domain is now distinguished from the narrower domain of 
existents or of concrete entities.
Fine’s metaontology—and in general the kind of anti-Quinean metaontology 
that is often adopted by grounding theorists—might seem to be better equipped 
to look at Unrestricted Composition in a way significantly different from the 
Quinean one. Grounding is a kind of order, and, as such, is well equipped to 
characterize degrees of distinction. Moreover, the explanatory hierarchies 
defined by the grounding relation are not univocal: grounding is a relation, and 
no common feature (such as existence or concreteness) is expected to be shared 
by every fundamental entity, or to be instantiated to a higher degree by what 
grounds than by what is grounded.
Thus, the grounding theorist can admit that all the fusions exist, but insist 
that their roles in the explanatory hierarchies is extremely different. She can 
explain the negative existential judgments such as (a)–(d) in terms of degrees of 
reality: the heterogeneous fusions at stake would have a low degree of reality, in 
spite of existing and being in the range of our quantifiers.
However, an element of complication is Fine’s opposition to unrestricted 
quantification. According to him, no quantifier is absolutely unrestricted, and the 
domain of our quantifiers can be indefinitely expanded by postulations.9 The 
clearest case of these expansions would be the passage from the quantification 
over natural numbers to the quantification over relative numbers, and then over 
rational numbers, over real numbers, and so on: these expansions would not 
consist in the discovery of previously existing but unknown numbers, but in a 
sort of creative postulation.
This means that, from Fine’s viewpoint, also the admission of new fusions 
could be a sort of expansion by postulation. In one of the discussions of his 
expansionist or postulationist metaontology, Fine concedes something very 
similar to Unrestricted Composition. He claims that, even if at present we 
have no need to quantify over a given strange and heterogeneous fusion, this 
need could arise at a future time, for unforeseeable reasons. He compares this 
situation to what happens in the case of numbers.
Fine takes a car-bouquet as an example. It is a temporally extended entity that 
is initially a car and later becomes a bouquet of flowers: given some assumptions 
about the ontology of time that cannot be discussed here, the existence of this 

Unrestricted Composition and Metaontology
197
entity would be imposed to us by Unrestricted Composition. Fine thinks that 
at present the car-bouquet is not in the domain of our quantifiers, but that the 
domain could be expanded to include it:
We may imagine that some future religious sect holds the view that cars are 
endowed with souls who migrate to a neighboring bouquet of flowers after 
a gestation period of nine months (stranger religious views have been held). 
The  putative bodies of these souls are called “car-bouquets” and, although 
everyone is willing to recognize the existence of car-bouquets, there is 
considerable disagreement over whether they have souls. Again, we may explain 
why it is correct for us to deny the existence of car-bouquets and yet also correct 
for the future generations to affirm their existence by appeal to a difference in 
what each of us has introduced into the ontology. (Fine 2007, p. 165)
As we have seen in Part Two, Fine himself is a mereological pluralist: in his 
Towards a Theory of Part, the existence conditions for wholes are—together with 
identity conditions and the connected principles of obliteration—an aspect of 
a pluralist approach to parthood; thus, we should expect that various theories 
of parthood differ in restricting, or nonrestricting composition.10 However, 
quite independently of his mereological pluralism, Fine’s peculiar non-Quinean 
metaontology leads him to adopt a sort of Unrestricted Composition at the 
meta-level: given some entities (no matter how disparate), we can always expand 
our domains of quantification and include them.
It is also interesting that this claim of indefinite expandability of the domain 
to new fusions is conceded by Fine, precisely because there is no precise 
(i.e., exempt from vagueness) and principled (i.e., nonarbitrary) criterion for 
limiting it.
[…] there appears to be no precise and principled line of division between 
those objects—such as cars and bouquets of flowers—whose existence we are 
ordinarily inclined to accept and those objects—such as “car-bouquets”—whose 
existence we are ordinarily inclined to reject. It therefore appears that there can 
be no theory that is internally satisfactory in providing a precise and principled 
basis for determining what exists and yet also externally satisfactory in being 
consonant with what we ordinarily take to exist. (Fine 2007, pp. 162–163)
Thus, the very impossibility of satisfying vague and arbitrary conditions of 
restriction drives Fine to concede unrestricted expansions of the domain to 
include fusions. If you want to reject mereological monism, it seems that the 
combination of Fine’s pluralism with his own postulationism in metaontology 
is a promising (but at present largely unexplored) alternative, one that is 

Mereology
198
surprisingly consonant with mereological monism at a deeper level (insofar 
as—for example—it replaces Unrestricted Composition with unrestricted 
expandability). When you add to that picture a theory of grounding, you have 
also a tool to differentiate between various fusions you quantify over in terms of 
degrees of reality.
However, Fine’s position depends on various controversial assumptions, 
most notably the rejection of unrestricted quantification, and the related 
idea that the domains of quantification are indefinitely expandable. After all, 
without unrestricted quantification, also the literal formulation of Unrestricted 
Composition has no settled, definitive meaning. However, it is not clear that 
there are any good arguments to reject unrestricted quantification. In the 
literature, there are also compelling defenses of unrestricted quantification (e.g., 
by Williamson11), and it is beyond the purpose of this book to settle such a general 
problem. If unrestricted quantification is admitted, the fusions cannot be added 
at a later point to the domains of quantification, when a certain need arises. 
In order to serve future needs, disparate fusions must be—so to say—always 
there, in the domain of unrestricted quantifiers: the evolving, heterogeneous, 
and vague conditions of inclusion cannot be satisfied by a continuous alteration 
of the domain itself.
According to the picture drawn by the backers of Unrestricted Composition, 
all the fusions are in the unrestricted domain of quantification. The vague and 
revisable limitations on what matters for us are interpreted as limitations on 
what is relevant, or spatially continuous, or intra-world: for all these limitations, 
simple or complex predicative expressions are available, and these predicates 
will be in most cases vague.
It seems that Unrestricted Composition can handle car-bouquets with relative 
ease: they exist even if they do not matter; if and when they matter, our stock 
of predicates can be adjusted to the need to qualify them. Fine’s metaontology 
could be independently motivated, and in this case it would offer an interesting 
alternative to mereological monism, in which Unrestricted Composition would 
be replaced by a metaprinciple of indefinite expandability of the domain of 
fusions. However, as far as mereologydis is concerned, the need not to exclude 
by vague criteria car-bouquets and similarly bizarre entities (which might 
become relevant in the future due to unforeseeable events) is perfectly served 
by Unrestricted Composition and mereological monism: the car-bouquet is a 
fusion, whose existence (expressed by the existential/particular quantifier of 
first-order logic) is warranted by the existence of the car and of the bouquet of 
flowers (the fused entities).

Unrestricted Composition and Metaontology
199
14.3 Unrestricted Composition and the narrow 
understanding of mereology
There are some solid arguments in support of Unrestricted Composition, in 
particular when no abstract/concrete hybrid fusion is involved. Nonetheless, 
many philosophers reject Unrestricted Composition, and try to resist the Lewis-
Sider argument with various strategies. Some claim that existence is vague;12 
others that composition is restricted in a definite and brutal way, rather than 
by vague, explicit criteria, and hence that the argument from vagueness cannot 
apply;13 other philosophers still—the so-called mereological nihilists—argue 
that there is another way of avoiding vague and arbitrary limitations of the 
domain of what exists, namely by claiming that composition never occurs, that 
no things have a fusion (except in the limiting case in which a mereological atom 
is the fusion of itself).14
In this book we cannot discuss any of these alternatives, partly due to space 
constraints and partly because the motivations and the articulation of these 
stances do not belong to mereologydis according to the narrow understanding of 
it. For example, the idea that existence is vague, in spite of the fact that seemingly 
no expression is vague in existential statements and in the related numerical 
sentences, must be supported by a full-fledged theory of vagueness. The idea 
that composition happens brutally and primitively in some cases and not in 
others requires a method for discriminating admissible and nonadmissible 
primitives in metaphysics. Mereological nihilism requires a massive strategy 
of reconciliation with our referential and cognitive practices, which seem to 
involve lots of complex entities with parts, and perhaps no mereological atom 
at all. The  mere remark that these alternatives require seemingly expensive 
assumptions outside narrow mereologydis is obviously not a compelling reason 
to reject them: perhaps these assumptions are legitimate and independently 
motivated.
To my mind, the Lewis-Sider argument and its ideological gist are 
completely convincing, and the intuitive counterexamples (even when they 
are actually intuitive) do not really concern the Quinean kind of existence 
expressed by existential/particular quantifiers. To exist or to be in the domain 
of an unrestricted quantifier is not to be important, to instantiate some kind 
of distinguished feature, or to instantiate a predicate; it is to be in the domain 
of what can instantiate predicates. The chair-statue (as much as Lewis’s trout-
turkey, and Fine’s more complex car-bouquet) could become relevant, and begin 
to fall under certain sortal predicates.

Mereology
200
It is not difficult to carry out a quick mental experiment in which this happens. 
Consider a deviant sect, somewhat similar to the one considered by Fine in the 
passage quoted in Section 14.2, but keen on fusions of a different kind. This 
other sect claims that each artifact in the world is deeply connected to another 
artifact somewhere in the world: these couples of artifacts are in a close relation 
of artifact-twinness.
The sect is convinced that, in order to properly and efficiently use an artifact, 
it is important for us to be aware of its twin, and consider in our mind the two 
artifact-twins as a single thing. Suppose also that the chair and the Statue of 
Liberty are, according to the sect, artifact-twins. When we use the chair, in order 
to sit on it properly and efficiently, we should consider in our mind the chair-
Statue of Liberty (the fusion of the artifact-twins).
Fine would say that in this case the domain of quantification is expanded, 
while the defender of Unrestricted Composition claims that the chair-statue 
existed beforehand: what the sect has done is not bring something new into 
existence (indeed, no physical change happened in the vicinity of the chair and 
of the statue), but endow it with a new role.
Mereologydis, according to the mereological monist, should not deal at all 
with the kind of change that happens when the sect develops a certain belief 
about the chair and the statue. The kind of arbitrary, plausibly vague, hardly 
definable process that consists in becoming relevant (or in becoming unitary 
or cohesive) should not be investigated by a discipline that is so strongly caught 
up with logical notions such as identity or existence. Unrestricted Composition 
allows mereologydis to stay clear of these problems, and this might be taken to be 
the ultimate reason why mereological monism endorses it.

Appendix: Mereological Monism, without 
Composition as Identity
15.1 Ontological innocence?
In this book, we have analyzed mereological monism. However, there are some 
things we have never said, but that are often said when mereological monism is 
discussed. Namely, we have never said that:
(a)	 a fusion is nothing over and above the fused entities;
(b)	 a fusion is not a further ontological commitment over the fused entities;
(c)	 a fusion and the fused entities are the same portion of reality;
(d)	 a fusion is identical to the fused entities;
(e)	 CEM is ontologically innocent.
By contrast, in Part Three and in particular in Chapter 14, we have underlined 
that there is a strong connection between the viewpoint of mereological monism 
on Unrestricted Composition and Quinean metaontology. According to Quinean 
metaontology, existence is adequately expressed by the existential/particular 
quantifier of first-order logic. This means that according to Unrestricted 
Composition, given some things, there is their fusion; or, equivalently, that their 
fusion exists. Thus, CEM, as a theory, is ontologically committed to the existence 
of a fusion for any choice of entities, if ontological commitment is meant in a 
Quinean sense. As we know, it is not committed to the idea that fusions exist 
in a thicker sense, have causal powers, exist in space-time, are concrete, are 
fundamental, and so on; however, it is committed to their belonging to the 
domain of the unrestricted quantifiers, and this is what ontological commitment 
consists in from a Quinean point of view.
Nothing in CEM suggests that this ontological commitment is identical to the 
fused entities, and hence that it is not a further ontological commitment with 
respect to them. Nothing suggests that fusion is an exclusively reflexive relation 
that does not bring us anything new.

Appendix: Mereological Monism, without Composition as Identity
202
Nelson Goodman classified fusion as a “generating relation.”1 A generating 
relation leads us from some things (the fused entities) to another thing that it 
is generated by them. Goodman was well aware that there are liminal cases in 
which the fusion is identical to the fused entities, namely when there is only 
one fused entity; and that there are other cases in which the fusion is identical 
to one of the fused entities, namely those in which all the fused entities are 
parts of one of them. In these liminal cases, the fusion is one of the fused 
entities, and as a result is not a further ontological commitment. Nothing is 
generated by the generating relation in these cases. However, these liminal 
cases are precisely liminal; they are the least interesting cases of fusion. In every 
other application of the Fusion operation, there is a new, further ontological 
commitment, contra (b): in order for the existential statement about the fusion 
to be true, something different from the parts has to be included in the domain 
of quantification.
No endorsement of theses such as (a)–(e) is to be found in Goodman, Quine, 
or other mereological monists of their generation. In those days, it was clearer 
than today that mereological monism and nominalism are closely connected 
(Goodman and Quine were among the staunchest champions of nominalism as 
well). Nominalists assign great importance to ontological economy. Nonetheless, 
mereological monism was not thought to be a tool of ontological economy in 
the sense characterized by (a)–(e). Mereological monism was quite rightly only 
associated with nominalism about structure.
Nominalism about structure actually delivers a kind of ontological economy: 
given some entities, mereological Fusion delivers only one whole, while, for 
example, an infinite number of sets can be obtained. Goodman’s principle 
that there is no difference that is not a difference in content—in spite of the 
shortcomings we discussed in Sections 5.5 and 5.6—captures the kind of 
ontological economy at which mereological monism aims—in particular, 
through Uniqueness of Composition and Extensionalism. This ontological 
economy consists in not having more than one whole with the same proper 
parts (Extensionalism), or more than one fusion from the same fused entities 
(Uniqueness of Composition). It does not consist in the whole or the fusion 
being nothing over and above the parts or the fused entities.
Nonetheless, many more recent mereological monists—such as Lewis—
have committed themselves to some among (a)–(e). In some cases, they have 
attributed to the resulting philosophical contention—dubbed Composition 
as Identity by Lewis himself—a sort of unifying or grounding function for 
mereological monism. Their idea seems to be that, given Composition as 

Appendix: Mereological Monism, without Composition as Identity
203
Identity, mereological monism becomes much more reasonable than it would 
otherwise be; or even that some principles of CEM can be inferred from claims 
such as (a)–(e).
In Section 15.2 I analyze (a)–(e), their mutual connections, and their role as 
facets of the philosophical contention dubbed Composition as Identity. In the 
Section 15.3 I try to explain why many philosophers think that mereological 
monism is unified or grounded by (a)–(e) (or by some of them), and argue that 
the connection between mereological monism and Composition as Identity is 
actually weak. Finally, in Section 15.4 I suggest that mereological monists should 
actually stay clear of Composition as Identity, because Composition as Identity 
extends the expected explanatory duties of mereologydis, in sharp contrast to the 
way in which mereological monists construe mereologydis.
With this analysis I aim to show not that (a)–(e) are false (even though I 
am personally convinced that they are2), but rather that they are extraneous to 
mereological monism. It is coherent and advisable to adopt the philosophical 
stance defended in this book without thereby subscribing to any of those 
claims.
15.2 Is the whole nothing over and above its parts?
The debate on Composition as Identity hinges upon the claims (a)–(e). (a)–(e) 
are not an indivisible package of claims: some philosophers endorse only some 
of them, while rejecting others.
(a) (“a fusion is nothing over and above the fused entities”) can be taken 
as the common core of the sometimes shaky intuitions at stake in the debate 
on Composition as Identity, mainly because it can be understood in several 
ways. What does it mean to be “nothing over and above”? This expression has 
sometimes been regarded as obscure and hardly intelligible.3 However, it is 
perhaps simply ambiguous, and, once disambiguated, (a) turns out to express 
something intelligible after all, albeit highly controversial.
One can imagine at least three interpretations of “nothing over and above.” 
In a first sense, it means that the fusion is identical to the fused entities, as much 
as the most important philosopher born in Oberlin is identical to David Lewis. 
There is no thing that David Lewis is identical to, and the most important 
philosopher born in Oberlin is not identical to, because they are mutually 
identical. The same would hold for—say—Benelux on the one hand, and the 
Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg on the other.

Appendix: Mereological Monism, without Composition as Identity
204
This leads to (d), which is the most obvious formulation of the principle of 
Composition as Identity. It also delivers (b) and (e): if a thing x is identical to a 
thing y, then x is not a further ontological commitment with respect to y, and 
does not make any theory or any sentence committed to x ontologically more 
guilty or burdened than it already was for being committed to y.
The idea behind this reasoning is that Fusion works exactly as identity and, 
as a consequence, delivers the same kind of ontological innocence. Identity is a 
rather well-known relation, characterized by some principles. Most importantly, 
it obeys the Indiscernibility of Identicals. If Tully is identical to Cicero, then they 
instantiate exactly the same properties and relations. Thus, the expectation is 
that a fusion and the fused entities instantiate exactly the same properties and 
relations. And this, at least prima facie, seems false. Consider Benelux, the fusion 
of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg: it is a single multinational entity, 
and it has Belgium as a proper part. By contrast, the Netherlands, Belgium, and 
Luxembourg are three nations and none of them has Belgium as a proper part.
Nonetheless, a huge literature in defense of Composition as Identity, by 
philosophers such as Einar Bøhn, Aaron Cotnoir, Paul Hovda, and Megan 
Wallace,4 tries to defend the idea that a fusion and the fused entities are—against 
all appearances—indiscernible. In order to accomplish this result, they follow 
various routes, such as relativizing the properties and relations that seem to make 
a whole discernible from its parts to a concept, a viewpoint, or a way of counting.
A second interpretation—one not discussed in the literature, yet quite credible 
as an interpretation of what “nothing over and above” means in general—is even 
more directly connected to indiscernibility. The quantification in “nothing” could 
be a second-order quantification. This kind of quantification would be similar to 
that expressed by “something” in “London is something that Cockington Forge 
is not: namely, a metropolis.” In this reading, (a) would mean that the fusion has 
no feature that its parts lack. Also in this case, a kind of semantic revisionism is 
needed in order to dispel the impression that—for example—the fusion is one, 
while the parts are many.
Thus, also this second interpretation is committed to an indiscernibility claim. 
The so-called weak or moderate forms of Composition as Identity, endorsed by 
Lewis, Sider, and Bricker,5 admit that a whole is not indiscernible from its parts. 
They are moderate because they accept that composition is not governed by 
the same principles that govern identity, and in particular that composition fails 
to respect the Indiscernibility of Identicals. Moderate Composition as Identity 
renounces (d), and only claims that composition is analogous to identity, but 
is not, strictly speaking, identity. Alternatively, the champions of Moderate 

Appendix: Mereological Monism, without Composition as Identity
205
Composition as Identity could claim that composition is an identity relation, but 
that this identity is of a kind that does not obey the Indiscernibility of Identicals. 
In both cases, they admit that the fusion is discernible from the fused entities. 
As Lewis writes: “What’s true of the many is not exactly what’s true of the one. 
After all they are many while it is one.”6
While these moderate forms of Composition as Identity are not committed to 
the claim that a fusion is indiscernible from the fused entities, they nonetheless 
need to replace indiscernibility in some way. The claim that fusion is analogous 
to identity, but does not respect the Indiscernibility of Identicals, is exposed to 
the charge of cheating. As Sider writes, any defender of Composition as Identity 
who claims that Indiscernibility does not hold for composition “would arouse 
the suspicion that their use of ‘is identical to’ does not really express identity.”7 
In order to avoid this charge, weak Composition as Identity needs to show that 
the whole and its parts, while not strictly speaking indiscernible, enjoy a kind of 
intimacy analogous to indiscernibility.
In order to make composition significantly analogous to identity, the champion 
of Composition as Identity needs to replace indiscernibility with a milder kind 
of dependence between the features of a whole and those of its parts. This leads 
some defenders of Composition as Identity to introduce portions of reality, and to 
subscribe to claim (c), that is, a fusion and the fused entities are the same portion 
of reality. While the notion of portion of reality is never really clarified, the idea 
is that in reality a fusion and the fused entities play the same role in a way. When 
I ask what there is in Benelux, I can reply in various ways: I can say that there is 
Benelux; or that there are the Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg; or that 
there are the molecules constituting Benelux. Each of these replies is exhaustive: 
given a list of entities that cover Benelux, it would be redundant to add something 
else to that list. This is because each of these answers would cover the same 
portion of reality, whatever a portion of reality might be.
Thus, the portion of reality would be the bearer of the substantial features that 
are common to the fusion and to the fused entities, while other, more superficial 
and less objective features could vary between things that are the same portion of 
reality. Lewis, according to whom Indiscernibility does not hold for composition, 
writes: “the many and the one are the same portion of Reality and the character 
of that portion is given once and for all whether we take it as many or take it as 
one.”8 He then adds: “It does matter how you slice it [the portion of reality], not 
to the character of what’s described, of course, but to the form of the description.”
Thus, even when you deny that Indiscernibility holds for composition, you 
still end up connecting in some way the important features of the fusion (its 

Appendix: Mereological Monism, without Composition as Identity
206
“character,” as Lewis writes) to the analogously important features of the fused 
entities. How this works might be a mystery,9 but—if the analogy between 
composition and identity has any content—it seems unavoidable that the 
features of the whole and the features of the parts are strictly connected, either 
by Indiscernibility or in a weaker—but nonetheless contentious—way.
This could happen also in the third interpretation of (a). The champion of this 
last interpretation is free to reject the other four claims (b)–(e). Expressions such 
as “over and above” can be interpreted in a way that does not amount to identity 
or indiscernibility between its terms, but rather to metaphysical grounding.10 
The nature of grounding and of its relata has become the subject of a lively and 
increasingly complex debate over the last decades, but, for the sake of relative 
simplicity, let us simply assume that grounding relates facts.11 The idea would be 
that x is nothing over and above y if and only if some facts concerning y explain 
(in a metaphysical sense) or ground at least the most important facts concerning 
x. In our case (in which the place of y would be taken by a plurality of parts yy), 
the fact that the parts exist or that the parts have certain features would explain 
or ground the fact that the whole exists or that it has certain features.
It makes sense to interpret the claim that the whole is nothing over and 
above its parts in terms of grounding, because grounding is expected to be an 
exhaustive kind of explanation, without any residuum: thus the idea would be 
that, given y, no further explanation is needed for x.
An important difference between this interpretation and the other two is 
that the relation at play is not symmetric. Identity is obviously symmetric, as is 
indiscernibility. Grounding is generally thought to be asymmetric;12 insofar as 
it is a kind of explanation, it cannot go both ways, because no real, noncircular 
explanation is expected to go both ways.
This interpretation of “nothing over and above” can involve the features of 
the whole and of the parts, if the facts that ground and are grounded concern 
these features; if—in the example of the chair—the solidity of the chair is 
grounded in the way in which the back, the seat and the legs are chemically 
composed and glued together. Grounding is expected to be a hyperintensional 
notion, and to warrant a necessary connection between its terms: this means 
that, in this hypothetical instance of grounding, the fact that the parts of the 
chair have certain features would necessitate the fact that the chair has certain 
features.
By contrast, if the facts involved concern only the existence of the whole and 
of the parts, then the idea would be that the existence of the parts explains the 
existence of the whole. The existence of the parts would therefore also necessitate 

Appendix: Mereological Monism, without Composition as Identity
207
the existence of the whole. No other features of parts and whole would be 
involved in this case.
At this point, it is clear that, according to the way in which the ambiguous 
claim (a) is interpreted, the relatively clearer claims (b)–(e) will or will not 
follow. However, in all cases, you end up endorsing philosophical claims that do 
not belong to mereologydis in its narrow sense: they are neither claims about the 
formal features of parthood relations nor claims about the conditions of identity 
and existence of complex entities. In most interpretations, what is at stake are the 
features of parts and whole, and their mutual link.
In spite of the fact that the philosophical gist of Composition as Identity 
does not belong to mereologydis, all the philosophical claims (a)–(e) are often 
discussed in the contemporary literature about mereology. David Lewis has 
explicitly defended Composition as Identity in his manifesto of mereological 
monism in Parts of Classes, albeit in the moderate variety.13 Kathrin Koslicki, 
in her book The Structure of Objects, devotes an entire chapter to criticizing 
Composition as Identity,14 because she aims to criticize mereological monism 
and feels that Composition as Identity is a central aspect of mereological 
monism. But why does she feel so, if claims (a)–(e)—which represent various 
facets of Composition as Identity—are not about mereologydis?
15.3 From Composition as Identity to mereological monism?
Let me try to explain why Composition as Identity has been often seen as an 
aspect of mereological monism, by assessing whether it is possible to argue 
in favor of Composition as Identity on the basis of mereological monism, or 
whether it is possible to argue in favor of mereological monism on the basis of 
Composition as Identity.
There is no convincing argumentative route from mereological monism to 
Composition as Identity. There are many varieties of Composition as Identity, and 
subtle differences among (a)–(e). For the sake of simplicity, let us focus on a single 
thesis, namely (d)—the most obvious and literal formulation of Composition as 
Identity—according to which a fusion is identical to the fused entities.
If you insist on finding a connection between (d) and mereological monism, 
this connection will probably involve nominalism about structure. As we 
have seen in Part Two, mereological monism denies any role to structure in 
the identity conditions for complex entities. As a consequence—one might be 
tempted to argue—why should a fusion be different from the fused entities? 

Appendix: Mereological Monism, without Composition as Identity
208
Structure cannot account for this difference, so the mereological monist should 
concede that there is no difference at all, but identity.
This line of argument is misleading. First of all, Extensionalism and Uniqueness 
of Composition simply affirm that structure cannot mark a difference between 
different wholes with the same parts. They do not say anything about the difference 
between the parts and the whole, between the fused entities and the fusion.
Fusion in CEM is an operation that connects—in its most interesting 
instances—many things to one thing. Fusion presupposes and determines several 
differences between its inputs and its output: the inputs are many, the output is 
one; the output is a fusion of the inputs, while the inputs are not the fusion of 
themselves; in many cases the output has all the inputs as proper parts, and in 
many of these cases the inputs do not have all of themselves as proper parts.
However, the difference between the fusion and the fused entities could also 
consist in something else. There could be many other differences between fused 
entities and fusion, about which CEM is completely silent. As far as mereological 
monism is concerned, a whole could instantiate emergent properties, which are 
not only different from the properties and inter-relations of the parts, but also 
modally and explanatorily independent of them.
As we have seen in the previous section, Composition as Identity—according 
to most ways of construing it—is committed to a kind of dependence between 
the features of the whole and those of its parts; this kind of dependence will be 
absolute indiscernibility, or partial indiscernibility, or modal dependence, or 
grounding, according to the variety of Composition as Identity adopted. This 
arguably leads to an incompatibility between Composition as Identity and 
emergent properties.15 However, this incompatibility is only an outcome of 
Composition as Identity, and not of mereological monism. As a consequence, 
mereological monists may argue that a fusion is made different not only by the fact 
that the fusion is obtained from the parts through a many-one operation, but also 
by many other kinds of features that are simply not investigated by mereologydis, 
and about which the mereological monist is proudly neutral and silent.
Thus, there is no argumentative route from mereological monism to 
Composition as Identity. The argumentative route in the opposite direction, from 
Composition as Identity to mereological monism, is only slightly more convincing.
It is true that Composition as Identity entails Uniqueness of Composition 
(and thus Extensionalism, which is a weaker consequence of Uniqueness of 
Composition, as we have seen in Chapter 6, Section 6.1). Consider the seat, the 
back, and the legs. Suppose that Uniqueness of Composition fails, and in particular 
that the seat, the back, and the legs have two different fusions, f1 and f2. However, 

Appendix: Mereological Monism, without Composition as Identity
209
given (d), both f1 and f2 are identical to the seat, the back, and the legs. But identity 
is transitive; thus, f1 is identical to f2. Assuming Composition as Identity, we have 
reduced the failure of Uniqueness of Composition to a contradiction. Thus, 
Uniqueness of Composition follows from Composition as Identity.
The route from Composition as Identity to Unrestricted Composition is 
much more arduous, and has been convincingly criticized by Kris McDaniel and 
Ross Cameron.16 One could say something along the lines of this: if Cicero and 
Tully are identical and Cicero exists, then Tully cannot fail to exist. Fair enough: 
but we are presupposing that Cicero and Tully are identical. This presupposition 
is legitimate in the case of Cicero and Tully. However, when this reasoning is 
exported to composition, the corresponding presupposition is not supported by 
Composition as Identity.
Composition as Identity warrants that if the Netherlands, Belgium, 
and Luxembourg compose Benelux, then the Netherlands, Belgium, and 
Luxembourg are identical to Benelux. But it does not warrant the antecedent 
of this conditional; that is, it does not warrant that the Netherlands, Belgium, 
and Luxembourg compose Benelux. In the specific case of Benelux, it might 
seem obvious that there is composition (although mereological nihilists would 
disagree). By contrast, consider a controversial fusion of spatially sparse 
entities, such as Pisa’s Leaning Tower and Agra’s Taj Mahal. The restrictionist of 
composition simply denies that they compose anything, that their fusion exists. 
Thus, the restrictionist can endorse (d), and still consistently deny that the 
Leaning Tower and the Taj Mahal are identical to their fusion, because according 
to her the Leaning Tower and the Taj Mahal have no fusion at all.
Only the conjunction of Unrestricted Composition and Composition as 
Identity warrants that the Leaning Tower and the Taj Mahal are identical to their 
fusion. But then the reasoning presupposes Unrestricted Composition, and is not 
a way of arguing for Unrestricted Composition on the basis of Composition as 
Identity.
No other interesting principle of CEM is entailed by Composition as Identity. 
Thus, also the route from Composition as Identity to mereological monism 
merely consists in the fact that Composition as Identity entails Uniqueness 
of Composition and Extensionalism. But Uniqueness of Composition and 
Extensionalism are very reasonable principles in themselves, for which—as we 
have seen in Part Two—it is actually very hard to find a counterexample, at least 
in the domain of concrete entities.
Composition as Identity is a comparatively much more controversial doctrine, 
which may be defended—if at all—by adopting venturous and underexplored 

Appendix: Mereological Monism, without Composition as Identity
210
semantic tools. As a result, the mereological monist should not endorse 
Composition as Identity because Composition as Identity entails Uniqueness of 
Composition and Extensionalism. It is wiser to directly defend Uniqueness of 
Composition and Extensionalism.
15.4 Why mereological monists should stay clear  
of Composition as Identity
To recap: the reason why Composition as Identity is often mentioned in the 
debates about mereological monism is that there are some seeming connections 
between them. These connections, once analyzed, boil down to the modestly 
interesting fact that Composition as Identity entails Uniqueness of Composition 
and Extensionalism.
Thus, there is no good reason why mereological monists should endorse 
Composition as Identity. While in the previous section we have focused on (d), 
the same seems to hold also for the other claims (a), (b), (c), and (e) in the 
ideological vicinity of Composition as Identity.
No principle of mereological monism entails Composition as Identity. On the 
other hand, no principle of mereological monism entails that Composition as 
Identity is false. Nonetheless, there are good reasons for mereological monists 
not to endorse Composition as Identity qua mereological monists.
Composition as Identity is committed to some controversial theses that do 
not belong to mereologydis at all. Due to the extension of the Indiscernibility of 
Identicals to composition or to the controversial denial of emergent properties we 
have discussed in Section 15.2, Composition as Identity is a thesis mainly about 
the properties of wholes and the properties and interrelations of parts. Identity 
is constitutively connected to the sharing of features: to say that some things 
are identical is to rule out that they have different—or at least autonomous—
features.
Identity without any kind of indiscernibility is simply not identity at all. 
Mereological monism does not entail any kind of indiscernibility between a 
fusion and the fused entities, and in general any claim about substantial features 
of whole and parts. Thus, mereological monism has simply no significant tie 
with Composition as Identity. Any confusion between mereological monism 
and Composition as Identity conflicts with the programmatic restriction 
of mereological monism to a narrow understanding of mereologydis, and is a 
potential source of discredit for mereological monism.

Introduction
1	
Some confusions may arise between philosophical mereology and mereologyphi. 
It is useful to restate the distinction. I always use “philosophical mereology” as 
equivalent to general mereologydis: a philosophical discipline that studies the 
relation of parthood and other cognate relations. By contrast, I use “mereologyphi” 
to designate a specific philosophical thesis, namely the thesis (also dubbed 
“mereological monism”) that classical mereology is the general and exhaustive 
theory of parthood and composition.
2	
Fine (1994), p. 138.
3	
Lewis (1991), pp. 72–87.
4	
Simons (1987).
5	
Varzi (2016). The first edition of the entry was published in 2003.
6	
Koslicki (2008), Sattig (2015). Some collective books about related topics also 
include a similarly succinct presentation of mereologytheo, for example, Cotnoir and 
Baxter (2014), Calosi and Graziani (2014), Kleinschmidt (2014).
7	
Eberle (1970).
8	
Lewis (1991), p. 75. This unfortunate characterization of mereology by Lewis is 
criticized in Bennett (2015).
9	
The very status of logic as a neutral tool that can be applied to any kind of 
reasoning, without being an autonomous subject of controversy, is highly dubious, 
but this topic falls outside the scope of our present inquiry.
10	 See Chapter 3 for a discussion of a kind of formality/generality that comes in degrees.
11	 Lewis (1991), p. 82.
12	 Bøhn (2014), Cotnoir (2013a), and Wallace (2011b), among others.
13	 Many recent, important papers on Composition as Identity are collected in Cotnoir 
and Baxter (2014).
Chapter 1
1	
The expression “mereological harmony” is employed in a similar (but more refined) 
sense in Uzquiano (2011).
2	
According to Yablo (1998), the difficulty of drawing a sharp line between literal 
and metaphorical claims is a widespread methodological issue in ontology, which 
Notes

Notes
212
becomes especially acute in the case of existential claims. As Yablo makes clear, some 
metaphorical claims (the so-called dead metaphors) are nonetheless about reality. In 
the lexical area of mereology, “the neck of the bottle is part of the bottle” includes a 
metaphor, but is nonetheless about spatial, prototypical parthood in reality. In many 
of these cases, it seems that the metaphorical component does not directly concern 
the term “part” or other mereological lexicon, but the referential terms for parts and 
wholes (in this case, the metaphorical referential expression is “the neck of the bottle”).
3	
The application of mereological concepts to words, sentences, and other linguistic 
items will be discussed in Chapter 8, Section 8.4.
Chapter 2
1	
Lewis (1991).
2	
Lewis does not mention an explicit polemical target, namely a philosopher according 
to whom the elements of a set are parts of it. This claim was later defended by Fine 
(2010). Lewis (1986a) argues in a similar way against Armstrong’s and Forrest’s 
structural universals; Lewis (1998) argues against Armstrong’s states of affairs.
3	
The most famous is Donald Williams: see Williams (1953). Paul (2002) is a contemporary 
defense of the claim that universal properties are parts of individuals. In our example, we 
make no claim to be adequately representing any specific, viable theory of properties.
4	
Both the seminal joint work with Leonard (Goodman and Leonard 1940) and 
the more mature version of it in Goodman (1951, ch. II) can be considered 
presentations of CEM from above in the sense explained in the text.
5	
Simons (1987), ch. 2. Both Moltmann (1997) and Casati and Varzi (1999) identify 
from below a sort of minimal mereology, whose contents allegedly reflect the 
meaning of part terms in natural languages.
Chapter 3
1	
We will later see (in particular in Chapter 4, Section 4.3) that it is useful to 
distinguish between parthood and proper parthood, but that this distinction does 
not amount to any substantial kind of dualism.
2	
The notion of topic-neutrality was originally developed by Gilbert Ryle. See, for 
example, Ryle (1954), p. 116.
3	
A refined analysis of the different senses in which logic can be said to be formal is 
MacFarlane (2000). At least two of the three senses of formality I distinguish in this 
section (namely, the first and the second) are discussed by MacFarlane. See also 
MacFarlane (2002), Beall and Restall (2006), Dutilh Novaes (2011).

Notes
213
4	
Smith (2003).
5	
While it is evident that generality can come in degrees, “topic-neutrality” could seem 
like a feature that either holds or not. I do not aim to oppose this lexical intuition 
about “topic-neutral.” I simply stipulate that topic-neutrality, as it is understood 
in this book, is instantiated at a high degree by a theory that holds true for a lot 
of various entities. A highly topic-neutral theory is neutral between these various 
entities; the theory holds true no matter which among these entities are our topic.
6	
See, for example, Van Inwagen (1998, 2014).
Chapter 4
1	
Rescher (1955).
2	
Varzi (2006).
3	
Fine (2010), p. 560.
4	
The definitions of mereological predicates are meant in this book as linguistic 
definitions (and not as metalinguistic definition). That is, they enrich the 
language of a theory (in this case, the theory is CEM) with a new predicate, 
which is satisfied at the conditions indicated on the right side of the definition. 
They belong to the object language. The variables flanking the defined predicate 
are explicitly universally quantified. This is done for the mere sake of linguistic 
economy (no need to use metavariables) and uniformity with the axioms. There 
would be nothing wrong in replacing them with metalinguistic definitions. See 
Simons (1987), p. 21 e p. 46, for some (also historical) remarks on linguistic and 
metalinguistic definitions in mereology.
5	
See, for example, Schaffer (2009) and Sider (2011), ch. 1.
6	
Every asymmetric relation is trivially antisymmetric, insofar as no couple of entities 
in an asymmetric relation satisfies the antecedent of Antisymmetry.
7	
See Gilmore (2014) for an introduction, and Kleinschmidt (2014) for a collection of 
essays on mereology and location.
8	
In the literature it is possible to find a number of potential counterexamples 
to Locke’s thesis. See in particular Fine (2000) and Spolaore (2012). These 
counterexamples are not directly connected to mereological problems, and we will 
not discuss them.
9	
This position in the debate on material constitution was originally set forth in Thomson 
(1998). In Chapter 9 we will discuss how it was further developed by Cotnoir (2010).
10	 Among the deniers of Locke’s thesis, Koslicki (2008) chooses this option.
11	 See, for example, Varzi (2000) and Varzi (2014).
12	 A different stipulation is sometimes made in the literature about the meaning of 
“composition” (for example, in Van Inwagen (1995) and Varzi (2014)), according to 

Notes
214
which composition is an operation that has only nonoverlapping things as inputs. In 
our reconstruction of mereological monism, this operation does not play any role. 
The choice to make “Fusion” and “Composition” coreferential also highlights the fact 
that, in CEM, there is a single operation that goes from many things to one thing.
13	 Also the two principles of CEM could be dubbed Uniqueness of Fusion and 
Unrestricted Fusion, respectively.
Chapter 5
1	
See Gruszczyński and Varzi (2015) for a different picture of the twentieth-century 
origins of mereology, in which the Leśniewski’s tradition is opposed to Husserl’s 
tradition—which construes mereologydis in a very broad sense—and Goodman’s 
contribution is given much less importance.
2	
See Burgess (2015) for a balance on Lewis’s project from the perspective of 
contemporary set theory.
3	
Varzi (2016), § 1.
4	
It is worth noting that Goodman has also rather non-spatial cases in mind, such 
as the relation between a property and an individual instantiating it. This was the 
main application of the calculus of individuals in Goodman (1951).
5	
Goodman (1956).
6	
The verb “to build” is here used in a metaphorical sense: neither Goodman nor 
anyone else in the debate thinks that it corresponds to an action of building 
performed by a subject.
7	
In some axiomatic set theories, the Singleton Axiom warrants that this operation is 
always defined.
8	
This relation is the transitive closure of set-theoretic membership. Given a relation 
R, its transitive closure S is the smallest transitive relation of which R is a subrelation. 
The “bottom ends” (the ultimate elements, in the case of sets) are such that they are 
in the relation S with the sets, but nothing is in the relation S with them.
9	
See Shiver (2015) about the problem of defining atomism and universal 
decomposability in atoms.
10	 This is warranted by the so-called Axiom of Foundation, according to which every 
non-empty set is disjoint from one of its elements.
11	 See, in particular, the third kind of formality discussed in Chapter 3, Section 3.1.
12	 See, Arnztenius (2008) for an overview of the scientific topics for which the 
hypothesis of gunk is relevant. See also Zimmermann (1996) for the relation 
between gunk and naïve physics.
13	 In Borghini and Lando (2016), I have argued that Humean supervenience and 
mereological monism are actually mutually incompatible.

Notes
215
14	 Lewis (1994) argues that there is an a priori and necessary core in HS, according 
to which “‘how things are’ is fully given by the fundamental, perfectly natural, 
properties and relations that those things instantiate.” But the identification of 
fundamental relations with spatiotemporal ones and the thesis that fundamental 
properties are instantiated by “points” or “point-sized occupants of points” 
are characterized as “yet another speculative addition to the thesis that truth 
supervenes on being,” restricted to possible worlds “like ours” (p. 474).
15	 Maudlin (2007) (in particular Ch. 2). See also Hüttemann (2004).
16	 This shortcoming is also discussed in Oliver (1993).
17	 Fine (2010), in particular §§ V–VI.
18	 For an in-depth discussion of the relation between facts and Extensionalism, see 
Betti (2015) (in particular Ch. 2). Betti invokes mereological Extensionalism within 
an argument against the existence of facts.
19	 At least if the relation is not conceived in a very peculiar way. According to Betti 
and Wieland (2008), the so-called relata-specific relations can play the role of truth 
makers. The relation at stake in our example would be specific to Marseille and 
Paris, in the sense that, if the relation exists, then Marseille and Paris exist too and 
are connected by that relation.
Chapter 6
1	
Varzi (2008) distinguished different, nonequivalent ways of expressing mereological 
Extensionalism and their mutual relations (see in particular pp. 108–111).
2	
The formulation in terms of parts tout court could be analyzed in the same way as 
well. Also in this case, the right-to-left direction is trivial.
3	
By contrast, various kinds of revisionists about identity may be tempted to reject 
the Indiscernibility of Identicals. This happens with so-called relative identity 
(see, for example, the classic Geach 1967) and with other kinds of pluralism about 
identity (see Baxter 1988, 1989, 1999).
4	
See, for example, Armstrong (1997), p. 122. See Bennett (2015), pp. 251-252 for 
some interesting remarks about the interaction between Lewis and Armstrong on 
this topic.
Chapter 7
1	
See, for example, Varzi (2001b).
2	
The typical follower of this line of attack to Extensionalism adopts a theory 
of ontological vagueness, such as that of Tye (1990) or Korman (2015), ch. 9. 

Notes
216
However, for the sake of relative simplicity, here we will refrain from focusing on a 
specific stance.
3	
A classical argument against ontological vagueness builds upon the impossibility of 
vague identity (see Evans (1978)), but the link between ontological vagueness and 
vague identity has been criticized by Noonan (2008) and Paganini (2011).
4	
In the theory of indeterminate identity, the converse of the Indiscernibility of 
Identicals is sometimes differentiated from the Indiscernibility of Identicals, and 
the former is rejected, while the latter is accepted (see Parsons 2000, pp. 38–39). 
This distinction requires a form of logical revisionism and will not be discussed in 
the present book. The theory of indeterminate identity is also connected with the 
admission of fuzzy objects, which we have seen in Section 7.1 to be in tension with 
mereological monism.
5	
This aspect of counterpart theory is more clearly expressed in the mature version 
of Lewis (1986b) than in the original version of Lewis (1968). It is also expressed 
quite clearly in the postscript C—“Vagueness and Variety of Counterpart 
Relations”—added in Lewis (1983), pp. 42–43 to the reissue of Lewis (1968).
6	
See Schnieder (2006). See also Varzi (2002).
7	
Baxter (1988) makes the first step: objects can instantiate and fail to instantiate 
one and the same properties, and be discernible from themselves. Baxter 
explicitly rejects—in a number of works and with a plurality of motivations—the 
Indiscernibility of Identicals. According to him, Professor Sambunjak is identical 
to Petra the chamois, but discernible from her. See also Baxter (1989). While, due 
to space constraints, I cannot discuss Baxter’s approach in this book, it should be 
noted that it is compatible with Extensionalism.
8	
Schnieder’s example presupposes that it is true that the dog at stake is a cur, in 
spite of the fact that it is impolite to call it so. Otherwise, the negation could be 
understood as a standard, truth-functional negation. For a more refined analysis of 
analogous examples, see Predelli (2013), § 5.8 and § 8.3.
9	
Varzi (2008). See also Varzi (2000).
10	 Varzi (2008), pp. 121–122.
11	 See in particular Laycock (2006) and McKay (2016).
12	 A kind of dualism is explicitly applied to the relation of an artifact with its matter/
stuff in McKay (2015). It is noteworthy that McKay feels the need to formulate a 
specific mereology for stuff. As a consequence, his overall approach does not conform 
to mereological monism. The ensuing kind of dualism can also be compared with 
Thomas Sattig’s quasi-hylomorphism, as it is expounded in Sattig (2015).
13	 Thomson (1998) and Cotnoir (2010).
14	 See Hawley (2015) for a general introduction to perdurantism.
15	 Two important readings on this problem are Gilmore (2009) and Giaretta and 
Spolaore (2012).

Notes
217
16	 If quantification over indices is deemed logically deviant, one could prefer to turn 
PP into a three-place predicate, where the additional argument place would be for 
times. See Giaretta and Spolaore (2012) for an assessment of the two options.
Chapter 8
1	
Cotnoir (2013b), pp. 842–843, n. 6 claims that “non-classical mereology is a bit of 
a misnomer,” since it might wrongly suggest that the deviance from classicalness 
concerns logic. However, the same remark could be made about the classical 
versus nonclassical distinction in mechanics or economics: also in these cases, the 
classicalness from which some approaches deviate does not need to involve logic.
2	
For a thorough, critical analysis of structured facts, see again the first part of Betti 
(2015). Several reasons to doubt that structured propositions (and in general mind-
independent propositions) exist are discussed in Iacona (2002).
3	
For a contemporary defense of adverbialism, see Kriegel (2008).
4	
An anti-extensionalist mereology countenancing slots has been sketched out in 
Bennett (2013). See also Chapter 9, Section 9.2.
5	
As a side remark, it should be noted that facts and propositions are mutually 
entangled in notorious ways. As a result, given identity conditions for facts and 
propositions in which the order and repetition of constituents is accounted for, it is 
upon those who think that both structured facts and Russellian propositions exist 
to provide a way to distinguish—for example—the fact that Paris is west of Berlin 
from the (true) proposition that Paris is west of Berlin. Otherwise, it is also possible 
to identify facts and true propositions.
6	
Lewis (1991), p. 78.
7	
It is controversial that an expression of the form “the same P” can really express 
qualitative identity. See, for example, McGinn (2000), ch. 1.
8	
Goodman and Quine (1947), Goodman (1968), and Sellars (1963).
9	
Kaplan (1990). See also Hawthorne and Lepore (2011) and Sainsbury (2015).
10	 Varzi (2008), p. 128.
11	 This set-theoretical codification of ordered n-tuples is usually attributed to Felix 
Hausdorff.
12	 This codification of order is inspired by the so-called Wiener–Kuratowski definition 
of ordered couples.
13	 See the classical Benacerraf (1965).
14	 Also the stronger claim that what is abstract is necessarily abstract is—as far as I 
know—undisputed. The stronger claim that what is concrete is necessarily concrete 
is rejected—for reasons independent of the present discussion—by Williamson 
(see, for example, Williamson 2013, pp. 7–8).

Notes
218
15	 Wittgenstein (1961), 1.1. See Lando (2007) for a discussion of the application of 
mereological tools to Wittgenstein’s metaphysics.
16	 See, for example, Hossack (2007).
17	 The idea that facts contain particular and universals has been widely criticized for 
a variety of reasons, and various alternatives have been discussed, for example, in 
Fine (1982), Lowe (1998), and Vallicella (2002).
Chapter 9
1	
This example is first mentioned in Sanford (1993).
2	
The example has been introduced in Gilmore (2007) from the perspective of the 
relations between mereology and space, and in Effingham and Robson (2007) from 
the perspective of the philosophy of time. The simplified exposition presented here 
can be found in Cotnoir (2010), p. 841.
3	
For a general introduction to the philosophical controversies concerning the 
possibility of time travels, see, for example, Smith (2013).
4	
Bennett (2013).
5	
Fine (1999), Johnston (2006), and Koslicki (2008), among others.
6	
See, for example, Simons (1987), p. 28.
7	
See Smith (2009) for an analysis and defense of nonclassical mereologies in which 
Weak Supplementation is dropped.
8	
The first exposition of this proposal is in Cotnoir (2010), where it is presented as a 
reaction to Varzi’s defense of mereology in Varzi (2008). See also Cotnoir (2015).
9	
Cotnoir (2010), p. 401.
10	 Ibid., p. 402. See also Simons (1987), p. 117.
11	 See Forrest (2012) for an overview of the debate on the Identity of Indiscernibles.
12	 In the debate about the principle of Identity of Indiscernibles, the risk of indefinite 
multiplication of colocated entities is considered by Della Rocca (2005) as a reason 
to endorse the principle itself.
Chapter 10
1	
For a short introduction to plural logic and the controversies surrounding it, see 
Linnebo (2014). For a more in-depth study, see Oliver and Smiley (2013).
2	
On Weak Supplementation, see, for example, Simons (1987), p. 116.
3	
This idea of simplicity is roughly inspired by Goodman’s calculus of simplicity 
(Goodman (1951), ch. III).

Notes
219
4	
See Linnebo (2014), § 3 for a distinction of the various ways in which the expected 
logicality of plural quantification could be meant.
5	
If, however, the ontological commitment to sets is deemed intrinsically undesirable, 
then it is important to interpret plural quantification in a way that avoids any 
implicit commitment to set-like pluralities. See Carrara and Martino (2009) for an 
interesting attempt in this direction, and for the application of it to CEM.
6	
Boolos (1984), pp. 448–449.
7	
However, in defense of the idea that sets have—in the semantics of plural 
expressions—the role of unique representatives of many things, see Black (1971) 
and Simons (1982).
8	
Varzi (2016), § 4.3.
9	
While the other definitions in this book are all meant as linguistic definitions (see 
Chapter 4, n. 4), Varzi’s definition of Fusion should be meant as a metalinguistic 
definition: the left side and the right side of the definition are metalinguistic names 
of the same formula in the object-language. Thus, the problem that a formula is not 
usually allowed to occupy the argument place of a predicate can raise legitimate 
philosophical concerns (which I discuss in the next pages), but does not jeopardize 
the syntactic well-formedness of the definition. Metavariables should be introduced, 
but I skip over this complication. It is expected that z and x do not occur free in φ.
10	 See Oliver and Smiley (2013), ch. 8, for a discussion of plural definite descriptions.
11	 Varzi (2016), § 4.3.
Chapter 11
1	
Hovda (2009).
2	
Ibid., p. 63, for a more in-depth discussion.
3	
Also c and d, b and c, and each of b, c, and d individually have a as their Minimal 
Upper Bound in the scenario pictured by the above diagram.
4	
See again Hovda (2009), pp. 65–66, for the proofs.
Chapter 12
1	
See Gendler (2010) for an overview.
2	
Van Inwagen (1995).
3	
Sider (2013).
4	
Armstrong (1978), p. 5 and Field (1989), p. 62 are two classical defenses 
of the Eleatic Principle. See Oddie (1982) for an analysis of different versions of it.

Notes
220
5	
Korman (2015), ch. 4.
6	
Bengson (2015).
Chapter 13
1	
Lewis (1986b), pp. 211–213.
2	
See postulate P3, Lewis (1968), p. 114.
3	
In Goodman and Leonard (1940), the equivalent of Unrestricted Composition is 
the first axiom I.1 (p. 48).
4	
On this topic, see, for example, Zimmermann (1996).
5	
See, for example, Fine (1975) and Lewis (1982) for two (significantly different) 
forms of supervaluationism about vagueness.
6	
Quine (1948) and Van Inwagen (1998, 2014).
7	
Williams (1959), p. 219.
8	
Pace Korman (2015), ch. 9. According to Korman, the indeterminacy at play in 
composition restrictions does not depend—in some cases—on any semantic  
feature of subsentential expressions. As a consequence, indeterminacy is a  
non-compositional semantic feature of sentences.
9	
See, for example, Yi (2005), p. 487 and Yi (2006), p. 243.
10	 The debate on vague identity hinges upon the short argument presented by 
Evans (1978).
11	 Sider (2001), § 4.9.
12	 For the sake of simplicity, we exclude here from the inputs of Fusion inter-world 
entities (entities that have themselves parts in different worlds). Their existence is 
imposed to modal realism by Unrestricted Composition itself.
13	 See Varzi (2001a). Inter-world individuals are, by contrast, explicitly defended 
by the so-called doctrine of five-dimensionalism, according to which individuals 
have modal parts, analogous to the temporal parts postulated by many four-
dimensionalists. See Graham (2015) for a recent defense of this thesis.
14	 See, for example, Sider (2001), p. 127.
15	 Korman (2015). See also Korman (2010).
16	 See Williamson (2007), ch. 7 for the most influential rejection of evidential uses of 
intuition.
Chapter 14
1	
See Berto and Plebani (2015) for an introduction to contemporary metaontology 
(in particular chs. 7–8).

Notes
221
2	
Berto (2013), ch. 4.
3	
Williamson (2013), ch. 1.
4	
See Fine (2001) and Fine (2012). The metaontology of Schaffer (2009) is, from our 
limited viewpoint, in agreement with Fine’s metaontology. By contrast, Audi (2012) 
sketches a theory of grounding that is compatible with a Quinean metaontology.
5	
Parsons (1980).
6	
See, for example, Priest (2005).
7	
See Lando and Spolaore (2014) for the distinction between transcendental 
disagreement and ontological disagreement. David Lewis sometimes uses the 
expression “blanket term” for transcendentals (see, for example, Lewis (1986b), 
p. 100).
8	
Williamson (2013) (p. 6, n. 6) chooses to remain neutral on the correct 
characterization of concreteness.
9	
See Fine (2006). Fine (2005) applies postulationism to the philosophy of 
mathematics.
10	 Fine (2010) is not explicit about existence conditions for various kinds of wholes. 
In other words, nothing plays for existence conditions the role played in Fine’s 
framework by the principles of obliteration I have discussed in Chapter 5, 
Section 5.7. This is perhaps due to the fact that Fine (2010) is merely sketching a 
future pluralistic theory of parthood.
11	 Williamson (2006).
12	 Koslicki (2008) and Korman (2015).
13	 Markosian (1998).
14	 Sider (2013). While their stances differ in many important respects that we cannot 
analyze here, also Unger (1979), Van Inwagen (1995), Merricks (2001), and Rosen 
and Dorr (2002) can be classified as nihilists or quasi-nihilists.
Appendix
1	
See Goodman (1951), § II.3, Goodman (1956), p. 17, and Goodman (1958).
2	
For some objections to some important formulations of Composition as Identity, 
see Carrara and Lando (2016).
3	
Van Inwagen (1994), pp. 210–211. See also Van Inwagen (2006), n. 1.
4	
Bøhn (2014), Cotnoir (2013a), and Wallace (2011b). For an introduction to the 
general debate on Composition as Identity, see Cotnoir (2014) or Wallace (2011a).
5	
Lewis (1991), pp. 81–87, Sider (2007), and Bricker (2015).
6	
Lewis (1991), p. 87.
7	
Sider (2007), p. 59.
8	
Lewis (1991), p. 87.

Notes
222
9	
In Borghini and Lando (2016) we have shown that the connection between 
the features of the whole and the features of its parts—as it is envisaged by the 
moderate forms of Composition as Identity—is a peculiar kind of supervenience. 
See also McDaniel (2008) and Calosi (2016).
10	 See Cameron (2014) for a much more in-depth interpretation of Composition as 
Identity in terms of grounding. See also Loss (2016).
11	 This is, for example, the contention of Rosen (2010). For an introduction to 
metaphysical grounding, see Correia and Schnieder (2012) and Raven (2015).
12	 Asymmetry is explicitly indicated as a pivotal feature of grounding in key texts such 
as Fine (2012), Rosen (2010), and Schaffer (2009). However, Rodríguez-Pereyra 
(2015) has proposed some counterexamples to the asymmetry of grounding.
13	 There is some exegetical controversy about the kind of Composition as Identity that 
should be attributed to Lewis. See Bøhn (2011).
14	 Koslicki (2008), Ch. III.
15	 See Borghini and Lando (2016) for a detailed analysis of this incompatibility.
16	 McDaniel (2010) and Cameron (2012). However, Harte (2002), Merricks (2001), 
and Bøhn (2014) defend the idea that Composition as Identity entails universalism.

Armstrong, David. 1978. A Theory of Universals. Universals and Scientific Realism 
Volume II. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Armstrong, David. 1989. A Combinatorial Theory of Possibility. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Armstrong, David. 1997. A World of States of Affairs. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Arnztenius, Frank. 2008. “Gunk, Topology, and Measure.” In Oxford Studies in 
Metaphysics: Volume 4, edited by D. Zimmermann, 225–47. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Audi, Paul. 2012. “A Clarification and Defense of the Notion of Grounding.” In 
Metaphysical Grounding, edited by F. Correia and B. Schnieder, 101–21. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Baxter, Donald. 1988. “Identity in the Loose and Popular Sense.” Mind 97 (388): 575–82.
Baxter, Donald. 1989. “Identity through Time and the Discernibility of Identicals.” 
Analysis 49 (3): 125–31.
Baxter, Donald. 1999. “The Discernibility of Identicals.” Journal of Philosophical 
Research 24: 37–55.
Beall, J. C., and Gregory Restall. 2006. Logical Pluralism. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Benacerraf, Paul. 1965. “What Numbers Could Not Be.” The Philosophical Review 74 (1): 
47–73.
Bengson, John. 2015. “The Intellectual Given.” Mind 124 (495): 707–60.
Bennett, Karen. 2013. “Having a Part Twice Over.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 
91 (1): 83–103.
Bennett, Karen. 2015. “‘Perfectly Understood, Unproblematic, and Certain.’” In  
A Companion to David Lewis, edited by B. Loewer and J. Schaffer, 250–61. 
Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.
Berto, Francesco. 2013. Existence as a Real Property. Berlin: Springer.
Berto, Francesco, and Matteo Plebani. 2015. Ontology and Metaontology. London: 
Bloomsbury.
Betti, Arianna. 2015. Against Facts. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Betti, Arianna, and Jan Wieland. 2008. “Relata-Specific Relations: A Response to 
Vallicella.” Dialectica 62 (4): 509–24.
Black, Max. 1971. “The Elusiveness of Sets.” The Review of Metaphysics 24 (4): 614–36.
Bøhn, Einar. 2011. “Commentary on Parts of Classes.” Humana.Mente 19: 151–8.
References

References
224
Bøhn, Einar. 2014. “Unrestricted Composition as Identity.” In Composition as Identity, 
edited by A. Cotnoir and D. Baxter, 143–65. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Boolos, George. 1984. “To Be Is to Be a Value of a Variable (or to Be Some Values of 
Some Variables).” The Journal of Philosophy 81 (8): 430–49.
Borghini, Andrea, and Giorgio Lando. 2016. “Humean Supervenience and Mereological 
Monism.” Synthese, OnlineFirst, 1–21.
Bricker, Philip. 2015. “Composition as a Kind of Identity.” Inquiry 59 (3): 264–94.
Burgess, John. 2015. “Lewis on Mereology and Set Theory.” In A Companion to David 
Lewis, edited by B. Loewer and J. Schaffer, 459–70. Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.
Calosi, Claudio. 2016. “Composition, Identity, and Emergence.” Logic and Logical 
Philosophy 25 (3): 429–43.
Calosi, Claudio, and Pierluigi Graziani (eds). 2014. Mereology and the Sciences.  
Berlin: Springer.
Cameron, Ross. 2012. “Composition as Identity Doesn’t Settle the Special Composition 
Question.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 84 (3): 531–54.
Cameron, Ross. 2014. “Parts Generate the Whole, but They Are Not Identical to It.” In 
Composition as Identity, edited by A. Cotnoir and D. Baxter, 90–110. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Carrara, Massimiliano, and Giorgio Lando. 2016. “Composition, Indiscernibility, 
Coreferentiality.” Erkenntnis 81 (1): 119–42.
Carrara, Massimiliano, and Enrico Martino. 2009. “On the Ontological Commitment  
of Mereology.” The Review of Symbolic Logic 2 (1): 164–74.
Casati, Roberto, and Achille Varzi. 1999. Parts and Places. Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press.
Correia, Fabrice, and Benjamin Schnieder. 2012. “Grounding: An Opinionated 
Introduction.” In Metaphysical Dependence: Grounding and Reduction, edited by  
F. Correia and B. Schnieder, 1–36. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cotnoir, Aaron. 2010. “Antisymmetry and Non-Extensional Mereology.” The 
Philosophical Quarterly 60 (239): 396–405.
Cotnoir, Aaron. 2013a. “Composition as General Identity.” Oxford Studies in 
Metaphysics: Volume 8, edited by K. Bennett and D. Zimmermann, 295–322. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Cotnoir, Aaron. 2013b. “Strange Parts: The Metaphysics of Non-Classical Mereology.” 
Philosophy Compass 8/9: 834–45.
Cotnoir, Aaron. 2014. “Composition as Identity: Framing the Debate.” In Composition 
as Identity, edited by A. Cotnoir and D. Baxter, 3–23. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Cotnoir, Aaron. 2015. “Abelian Mereology.” Logic and Logical Philosophy 24 (4): 429–47.
Cotnoir, Aaron, and Donald Baxter (eds). 2014. Composition as Identity. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Della Rocca, Michael. 2005. “Two Spheres, Twenty Spheres, and the Identity of 
Indiscernibles.” Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 86 (4): 480–92.

References
225
Dutilh Novaes, Catarina. 2011. “The Different Ways in Which Logic Is (Said to Be) 
Formal.” History and Philosophy of Logic 32 (4): 303–32.
Eberle, Rolf. 1970. Nominalistic Systems. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Effingham, Nick, and Jon Robson. 2007. “A Mereological Challenge for Endurantism.” 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 85: 633–40.
Evans, Gareth. 1978. “Can There Be Vague Objects?” Analysis 38 (4): 208.
Field, Hartry. 1989. Realism, Mathematics & Modality. Oxford: Blackwell.
Fine, Kit. 1975. “Vagueness, Truth, and Logic.” Synthese 30 (3/4): 265–300.
Fine, Kit. 1982. “First-Order Modal Theories III —Facts.” Synthese 53 (1): 43–122.
Fine, Kit. 1994. “Compounds and Aggregates.” Noûs 28 (2): 137–58.
Fine, Kit. 1999. “Things and Their Parts.” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 23 (1): 61–74.
Fine, Kit. 2000. “A Counter-Example to Locke’s Thesis.” The Monist 83 (3): 357–61.
Fine, Kit. 2001. “The Question of Realism.” Philosophers’ Imprint 1 (1): 1–30.
Fine, Kit. 2005. “Our Knowledge of Mathematical Objects.” In Oxford Studies in 
Epistemology: Volume 1, edited by T. Z. Gendler and J. Hawthorne, 89–110. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Fine, Kit. 2006. “Relatively Unrestricted Quantification.” In Absolute Generality, edited 
by A. Rayo and G. Uzquiano, 20–44. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fine, Kit. 2007. “Response to Kathrin Koslicki.” Dialectica 61 (1): 161–6.
Fine, Kit. 2010. “Towards a Theory of Part.” The Journal of Philosophy 107 (11): 559–89.
Fine, Kit. 2012. “Guide to Ground.” In Metaphysical Grounding, edited by F. Correia and 
B. Schnieder, 37–80. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Forrest, Peter. 2012. “The Identity of Indiscernibles.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, edited by E. Zalta, Winter 2012 (first edition 1996), http://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/win2012/entries/identity-indiscernible/
Geach, Peter. 1967. “Identity.” The Review of Metaphysics 21 (1): 3–12.
Gendler, Tamar Szabó. 2010. Intuition, Imagination, and Philosophical Methodology. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Giaretta, Pierdaniele, and Giuseppe Spolaore. 2012. “A Mereology for the Change  
of Parts.” In Between Logic and Reality, edited by N. Miĉêvić, M. Trobok, and  
B. Zarnicć, 243–59. Dordrecht: Springer.
Gilmore, Cody. 2007. “Time Travel, Coinciding Objects, and Persistence.” In Oxford 
Studies in Metaphysics: Volume 3, edited by D. Zimmermann, 177–98. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Gilmore, Cody. 2009. “Why Parthood Might Be a Four-Place Relation, and How It 
Behaves if It Is.” In Unity and Time in Metaphysics, edited by L. Honnefelder,  
E. Runggaldier and B. Schick, 83–133. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Gilmore, Cody. 2014. “Location and Mereology.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, edited by E. Zalta, Fall 2014 (first edition 2013), http://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/fall2014/entries/location-mereology/
Goodman, Nelson. 1951. The Structure of Appearance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.

References
226
Goodman, Nelson. 1956. “A World of Individuals.” In The Problem of Universals: A 
Symposium, edited by I. Bochensky, A. Church, and N. Goodman, 13–31. Notre 
Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Goodman, Nelson. 1958. “On Relations That Generate.” Philosophical Studies 9 (5): 
65–66.
Goodman, Nelson. 1968. Languages of Art: An Approach to a Theory of Symbols. 
Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
Goodman, Nelson, and Henry Leonard. 1940. “The Calculus of Individuals and Its 
Uses.” The Journal of Symbolic Logic 5 (2): 45–55.
Goodman, Nelson, and Willard Van Orman Quine. 1947. “Steps towards a Constructive 
Nominalism.” The Journal of Symbolic Logic 12 (4): 105–22.
Graham, Andrew. 2015. “From Four to Five-Dimensionalism.” Ratio XXVIII (1): 14–28.
Gruszczyński, Rafał, and Achille Varzi. 2015. “Mereology Then and Now.” Logic and 
Logical Philosophy 24 (4): 409–27.
Harte, Verity. 2002. Plato on Parts and Wholes. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hawley, Katherine. 2015. “Temporal Parts.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 
edited by E. N. Zalta, Winter 2015 (first edition 2004), http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2015/entries/temporal-parts/
Hawthorne, John, and Ernest Lepore. 2011. “On Words.” The Journal of Philosophy  
108 (9): 447–85.
Hossack, Keith. 2007. The Metaphysics of Knowledge. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hovda, Paul. 2009. “What Is Classical Mereology?” Journal of Philosophical Logic 38 (1): 
55–82.
Hüttemann, Andreas. 2004. What’s Wrong with Microphysicalism? London: Routledge.
Iacona, Andrea. 2002. Propositions. Genova: Name.
Johnston, Mark. 2006. “Hylomorphism.” The Journal of Philosophy 103 (12): 652–98.
Kaplan, David. 1990. “Words.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary 
Volumes 64: 93–119.
Kleinschmidt, Shieva (ed.). 2014. Mereology & Location. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Korman, Daniel. 2010. “The Argument from Vagueness.” Philosophy Compass 5 (10): 
891–901.
Korman, Daniel. 2015. Objects. Nothing Out of the Ordinary. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Koslicki, Kathrin. 2008. The Structure of Objects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, Uriah. 2008. “The Dispensability of (Merely) Intentional Objects.” Philosophical 
Studies 141 (1): 79–95.
Lando, Giorgio. 2007. “Tractarian Ontology: Mereology or Set Theory?” Forum 
Philosophicum 12 (2): 24–39.
Lando, Giorgio, and Giuseppe Spolaore. 2014. “Transcendental Disagreement.” The 
Monist 97 (4): 597–620.
Laycock, Henry. 2006. Words without Objects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

References
227
Lewis, David. 1968. “Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic.” The Journal of 
Philosophy 65 (5): 113–26.
Lewis, David. 1982. “Logic for Equivocators.” Noûs 16 (3): 431–41.
Lewis, David. 1983. Philosophical Papers. Volume I. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, David. 1986a. “Against Structural Universals.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 
64 (1): 25–46.
Lewis, David. 1986b. On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, David. 1986c. Philosophical Papers. Volume II. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Lewis, David. 1991. Parts of Classes. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, David. 1992. “Critical Notice of D. Armstrong, A Combinatorial Theory of 
Possibility.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 70 (2): 211–24.
Lewis, David. 1993. “Many, but Almost One.” In Ontology, Causality, and Mind: Essays 
on the Philosophy of D.M. Armstrong, edited by J. Bacon and L. Reinhardt, 23–38. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, David. 1994. “Humean Supervenience Debugged.” Mind 103 (412): 473–90.
Lewis, David. 1998. “The Truthmakers.” Times Literary Supplement 4948: 30.
Linnebo, Øystein. 2014. “Plural Quantification.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, edited by E. Zalta, Fall 2014 (first edition 2004), http://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/fall2014/entries/plural-quant/
Loss, Roberto. 2016. “Parts Ground the Whole and Are Identical to It.” Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy 94 (3): 489–98.
Lowe, Jonathan. 1998. The Possibility of Metaphysics. Oxford: Clarendon.
MacFarlane, John. 2000. “What Does It Mean to Say That Logic Is Formal?” PhD thesis, 
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh.
MacFarlane, John. 2002. “Frege, Kant, and the Logic in Logicism.” The Philosophical 
Review 111: 25–65.
Markosian, Ned. 1998. “Brutal Composition.” Philosophical Studies 92 (3): 211–49.
Maudlin, Tim. 2007. The Metaphysics within Physics. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
McDaniel, Kris. 2008. “Against Composition as Identity.” Analysis 68 (2): 128–33.
McDaniel, Kris. 2010. “Composition as Identity Does Not Entail Universalism.” 
Erkenntnis 73 (1): 97–100.
McGinn, Colin. 2000. Logical Properties. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McKay, Thomas. 2015. “Stuff and Coincidence.” Philosophical Studies 172 (11): 3081–
100.
McKay, Thomas. 2016. “Mass and Plural.” In Plurality and Unity. Logic, Philosophy, and 
Linguistics, edited by A. Arapinis, M. Carrara, and F. Moltmann, 171–93. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Merricks, Trenton. 2001. Objects and Persons. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Moltmann, Friederike. 1997. Parts and Wholes in Semantics. New York: Oxford 
University Press.

References
228
Noonan, Harold. 2008. “Are There Vague Objects?” Analysis 64 (2): 131–4.
Oddie, Graham. 1982. “Armstrong on the Eleatic Principle and Abstract Entities.” 
Philosophical Studies 41: 285–95.
Oliver, Alex. 1993. “Classes and Goodman’s Nominalism.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society 93: 179–91.
Oliver, Alex, and Timothy Smiley. 2013. Plural Logic. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Paganini, Elisa. 2011. “Vague Objects without Ontically Indeterminate Identity.” 
Erkenntnis 74 (3): 351–62.
Parsons, Terence. 1980. Nonexistent Objects. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Parsons, Terence. 2000. Indeterminate Identity: Metaphysics and Semantics. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Paul, Laurie. 2002. “Logical Parts.” Noûs 36 (4): 578–96.
Predelli, Stefano. 2013. Meaning without Truth. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Priest, Graham. 2005. Towards Non-Being. New York: Oxford University Press.
Quine, Willard Van Orman. 1948. “On What There Is.” The Review of Metaphysics 2 (5): 
21–38.
Quine, Willard Van Orman. 1981. Theories and Things. Harvard: Harvard University 
Press.
Raven, Michael. 2015. “Ground.” Philosophy Compass 10 (5): 322–33.
Rescher, Nicholas. 1955. “Axioms for the Part Relation.” Philosophical Studies 6 (1): 8–11.
Rodríguez-Pereyra, Gonzalo. 2015. “Grounding Is Not a Strict Order.” Journal of the 
American Philosophical Association 1 (3): 517–34.
Rosen, Gideon. 2010. “Metaphysical Dependence: Grounding and Reduction.” In 
Modality: Metaphysics, Logic, and Epistemology, edited by B. Hale and A. Hoffmann, 
109–36. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rosen, Gideon, and Cyan Dorr. 2002. “Composition as a Fiction.” In The Blackwell 
Guide to Metaphysics, edited by R. Gale, 151–74. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ryle, Gilbert. 1954. Dilemmas. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sainsbury, Mark. 2015. “The Same Name.”, Erkenntnis 80 (2): 195–214.
Sanford, David. 1993. “The Problem of the Many, Many Composition Questions.” Noûs 
27 (2): 19–28.
Sattig, Thomas. 2015. The Double Lives of Objects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schaffer, Jonathan. 2009. “On What Grounds What.” In Metametaphysics, edited by D. 
Chalmers, D. Manley and R. Wasserman, 347–83. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schnieder, Benjamin. 2006. “By Leibniz’s Law: Remarks on a Fallacy.” The Philosophical 
Quarterly 56 (222): 39–54.
Sellars, Wilfrid. 1963. “Abstract Entities.” The Review of Metaphysics 16 (4): 627–71.
Shiver, Anthony. 2015. “How Do You Say ‘Everything Is Ultimately Composed of 
Atoms’?” Philosophical Studies 172 (3): 607–614.
Sider, Theodore. 2001. Four-Dimensionalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sider, Theodore. 2007. “Parthood.” The Philosophical Review 116 (1): 115–97.
Sider, Theodore. 2011. Writing the Book of the World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

References
229
Sider, Theodore. 2013. “Against Parthood.” In Oxford Studies in Metaphysics: Volume 
8, edited by K. Bennett and D. Zimmermann, 237–93. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Simons, Peter. 1982. “Plural Reference and Set Theory.” In Parts and Moments: Studies 
in Logic and Formal Ontology, edited by B. Smith, 199–260. Munich: Philosophia.
Simons, Peter. 1987. Parts. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, Barry. 2003. “Ontology.” In Blackwell’s Guide to the Philosophy of Computing and 
Information, edited by L. Floridi, 155–66. Oxford: Blackwell.
Smith, David. 2009. “Mereology without Weak Supplementation.” Australasian Journal 
of Philosophy 87: 505–11.
Smith, Nicholas J. J. 2013. “Time Travel.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 
edited by E. Zalta, Spring 2016, http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2016/entries/
time-travel/
Spolaore, Giuseppe. 2012. “Not Just a Coincidence. Conditional Counter-Examples to 
Locke’s Thesis.” Thought 1 (2): 108–15.
Thomson, Judith. 1998. “The Statue and Its Clay.” Noûs 32 (2): 149–73.
Tye, Michael. 1990. “Vague Objects.” Mind 99 (396): 535–57.
Unger, Peter. 1979. “There Are No Ordinary Objects.” Synthese 41 (2): 117–54.
Uzquiano, Gabriel. 2011. “Mereological Harmony.” In Oxford Studies in Metaphysics: 
Volume 6, edited by K. Bennett and D. Zimmermann, 199–224. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Vallicella, William. 2002. “Three Conceptions of States of Affairs.” Noûs 34 (2): 237–59.
Van Inwagen, Peter. 1994. “Composition as Identity.” Philosophical Perspectives 8: 
207–20.
Van Inwagen, Peter. 1995. Material Beings. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Van Inwagen, Peter. 1998. “Meta-Ontology.” Erkenntnis 48 (2): 233–50.
Van Inwagen, Peter. 2006. “Can Mereological Sums Change Their Parts?” The Journal of 
Philosophy 103 (12): 614–30.
Van Inwagen, Peter. 2014. Existence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Varzi, Achille. 2000. “Mereological Commitments.” Dialectica 54 (4): 283–305.
Varzi, Achille. 2001a. “Parts, Counterparts, and Modal Occurrents.” Travaux de Logique 
14 (1): 151–71.
Varzi, Achille. 2001b. “Vagueness in Geography.” Philosophy & Geography 4 (1): 49–65.
Varzi, Achille. 2002. “Words and Objects.” In Individuals, Essence, and Identity: Themes 
of Analytic Metaphysics, edited by A. Bottani, M. Carrara, and P. Giaretta, 49–75. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Varzi, Achille. 2006. “A Note on the Transitivity of Parthood.” Applied Ontology 1 (2): 
141–6.
Varzi, Achille. 2008. “The Extensionality of Parthood and Composition.” The 
Philosophical Quarterly 58 (230): 108–33.
Varzi, Achille. 2014. “Counting and Countenancing.” In Composition as Identity, edited 
by A. Cotnoir and D. Baxter, 47–69. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

References
230
Varzi, Achille. 2016. “Mereology.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by 
E. Zalta, Spring 2016 (first edition 2003), http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2016/
entries/mereology/
Wallace, Megan. 2011a. “Composition as Identity: Part 1.” Philosophy Compass 6 (11): 
804–16.
Wallace, Megan. 2011b. “Composition as Identity: Part 2.” Philosophy Compass 6 (11): 
817–27.
Williams, Donald. 1953. “On the Elements of Being: I.” The Review of Metaphysics 7 (1): 
3–18.
Williams, Donald. 1959. “Mind as a Matter of Fact.” The Review of Metaphysics 16 (4): 
203–25.
Williamson, Timothy. 1994. Vagueness. London: Routledge.
Williamson, Timothy. 2006. “Absolute Identity and Absolute Quantification.” In 
Absolute Generality, edited by A. Rayo and G. Uzquiano, 369–89. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Williamson, Timothy. 2007. The Philosophy of Philosophy. Oxford: Blackwell.
Williamson, Timothy. 2013. Modal Logic as Metaphysics. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1961. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul.
Yablo, Stephen. 1998. “Does Ontology Rest on a Mistake?” Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volume 72: 229–61.
Yi, Byeong-Uk. 2005. “The Logic and Meaning of Plurals. Part I.” Journal of 
Philosophical Logic 34 (5–6): 459–506.
Yi, Byeong-Uk. 2006. “The Logic and Meaning of Plurals. Part II.” Journal of 
Philosophical Logic 35 (3): 239–88.
Zimmermann, Dean. 1996. “Could Extended Objects Be Made Out of Simple Parts? An 
Argument for Atomless ‘Gunk.’” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 56 (1): 
1–29.

Index
abstract entities 9–11, 70, 117–34
reasonable to exclude 131–4
abstract linguistic types 127
ad hocness 50–2, 91
aesthetic properties 97, 99–104
anti-extensionalism 109, 120, 142, 144–5
motivations of 145
anti-Quinean metaontology 196
antisymmetry 6, 15, 21, 22, 24, 55–9, 
141
violation of 57–8
arbitrariness 56–7, 91
arbitrary lexical analysis 19
argument from vagueness 175–80
Armstrong, David 82, 215n.4
facts 91
theory of composition 82–3
Arnztenius, Frank 214n.12
artifact-twinness 200
asymmetry 55, 57–8, 135, 140–1, 
222n.12
atomism 73–7
axiomatization 5, 60, 158, 160, 163
Zermelo-Fraenkel 71
Axiom of Extensionality 72
Bengson, Juri 173–4
Berto, Francesco 194
understanding of existence 195
Betti, Arianna 215n.19
bikini, parts of 178
Bøhn, Einar 204
Borghini, Andrea 214n.13, 222n.9
calculus of individuals 214n.4
Cameron, David 172, 175
Cameron, Ross 209
Casati, Roberto 212n.5
categorical mistakes 156
causal efficacy 195
causally inefficient entities 171
CEM. See Classical Extensional Mereology 
(CEM)
Classical Extensional Mereology (CEM) 1, 
4, 5, 10–11, 32
alternatives to 89
axiomatization of 5, 60, 158, 160, 163
complexity of 154
fundamental relation in 55
neutrality of 74–5
principles of 7, 9, 36, 41, 42, 139, 
150, 209
reformulation of 115
complex entities 70
complexity, levels of 123
component 29
composition 63, 67, 76, 91–2, 139, 182, 
212n.11
definite restriction of 186–7
desirable restrictions on 187
formal features of 47
nonarbitrary restriction of 187
theory of 82–3
vague limitations on 189
Composition as Identity 11–12, 201–10
debate on 203
literal formulation of 207
to mereological monism 207–10
philosophical gist of 207
varieties of 207
concrete entities 128
constitution 7, 55, 57, 139
contemporary metaontology 193–4
contemporary metaphilosophy 169
cost-benefit analysis 131
Cotnoir, Aaron 111, 141, 204, 217n.1
non-extensional mereology 141
rejection of antisymmetry of parthood 
145
counterintuitive doctrine 9
counterparthood 99
flexibility of 105

Index
232
counterpart theory 97–9, 173
creative postulation 196
dead metaphors 211n.2
degrees of reality 196
dichotomy 145
discernibility 108
alleged sources of 145
discipline, mereology as 3–5
characterization of 30, 190
explanatory scope of 1–2, 6
formal character of 176
introductions to 7
methodology of 29
narrow understanding of 137, 210
provisional characterization of 27
subject matter of 24
domains of quantification 186
double-tier reality 133
duality/dualism 96–7, 109–10, 138–9, 145, 
149, 216n.12
motivations of 144
spirit of 141
Eberle, Rolf 7
Nominalistic Systems 7
Effingham, Nick 218n.2
empty pluralities 160
endurantism 114–15
entities
causally inefficient 171
minimal 76
redundant 193
spatially discontinuous 171
structured 106, 109–10, 118–19
epistemic desirability 83
essential/accidental distinction 2
essentialism 3
evidential intuitions 190
existence 2, 44–5, 117
existential quantifier 179
expansionist metaontology 196
expected generality 90–1
explanatory hierarchies 196
Extensionalism 65, 69, 71, 125
basic idea of 67–8
characterization of 54
controversial aspect of 112–13
criticism to 100
facts and 118–21, 215n.18
formulated 88–90
ideological content of 85
and language 122–8
limitation for 128–31
motivations for non-extensional 
mereology 135–7
opponents of 98
origins of mereology 67–9
propositions and 118–21
reciprocal proper parts 140–3
role for forms 137–9
role for structures in 109–11
and stipulation 121–2
supplementation and 143–6
and time 111–15
Uniqueness of Composition and 
Extensionalism 85–8
verbal tricks 90–2
vindicated 104–9
violations of 82, 106, 123
extensionalist dualism 149
extensional (non-fuzzy) mountains 93–6
facts 118–21, 131–2
anti-extensionalist theories of 122
and Extensionalism 118–21, 215n.18
metaphysics of 122
Fine, Kit 51, 58, 194, 212n.2, 221n.10
metaontology 195–8
pluralism 197–8
principles of obliteration 78–84, 110, 117
Quinean metaontology 197
Towards a Theory of Part 197
flexibility of counterparthood 105
formality 19, 44–5, 133, 152–3
ambitions of 128
concept of 39
senses of 39–42, 212n.3
formal mereology, Unrestricted 
Composition and 187–90
formal ontology 39, 40
fundamentality 53, 54, 59, 194, 196, 202, 
215n.14
Fusion 59–63, 67, 197, 208, 213n.11
definition of 151, 160, 163–7, 193
domain of 198
do not exist 169–70
features of 205–6

Index
233
heterogeneity of 187
minimal upper bounds and 165–7
provisional characterization of 151
set-theoretical definition of 155
of sheets 178
of ships 181
fuzziness 189
fuzzy objects 95, 96
genuine parthood 32
Gilmore, Cody 218n.2
Goodman, Nelson 175–6, 212n.4, 
214n.4
approach circular 77–8
assumption of transitivity 78
calculus of simplicity 218n.3
conception of nominalism 74
on hyperextensionality 71–2
nominalistic dictum 77
A World of Individuals 71, 78, 175
grounding, 194, 206
gunk 73–7, 214n.12
harmony, principle of 19
Hasse diagrams 86–7
heap of sheets 178, 179
heterogeneous entities 45
homonymy 23
Hovda, Paul 163, 204
Humean supervenience 76, 214n.13
hylomorphism 138
extensional variety of 138
variety of 141
hyperextensionality 71–3
Goodman on 71–2
sets, wholes 72–3
hyperintensional notion 206
identity 44–5
theory of 40
impossible individuals 186
improper parthood 142
indefinite expandability, metaprinciple 
of 198
independent motivations 91
indeterminate identity 216n.4
Indiscernibility of Identicals 90, 143, 
204–6, 210
instantiation, characterization of 33
inter-world individuals 186, 187–8
intuition 181, 190–1
evidential roles of 190
Lewis-Sider argument vs. 185–7
negative existential 170–2
variety of 172–4
Kaplan, David 125
and linguistic types, 125–6
Korman, Daniel 173–4, 215n.2, 220n.8
Koslicki, Kathrin 7, 207
extensional variety of hylomorphism 
138, 141
Lando, Giorgio 214n.12, 217n.5, 220n.7, 
221n.2
language, Extensionalism and 122–8
Leibniz’s Law 11–12, 90
Leonard, Henry 69, 212n.4
levels of complexity 123
Lewis, David 5, 7–9, 32, 68, 76, 82, 129, 
193, 203, 205, 207, 212n.2, 214n.14, 
215n.4, 221n.7
about parthood and composition 6–7
mereological monism 5–7, 55
modal realism 186
On the Plurality of Worlds 175, 180, 
186
Parts of Classes 6, 9, 32, 68, 78, 129, 
133, 187, 207
perspective of contemporary set theory 
214n.2
transworld individuals 175
and vagueness 180–2
Lewis-Sider argument 185, 189, 199
vs. intuitions 185–7
for Unrestricted Composition 174, 
189
linguistic entities 123
linguistic types 125, 126
abstract 127
set-theoretic understanding of 127
literal parthood 23–5
Locke’s thesis 56, 213n.8
logic
mereology and 8
as neutral tool 211n.9
logicality 152–4
logical revisionism 216n.4

Index
234
MacFarlane, John 212n.3
Maudlin, Tim 76
McDaniel, Kris 209
McKay, Thomas 216n.12
Meinongian existence 193–5
mereological atoms 74, 108
mereological complexity 141
mereological harmony 211n.1
mereological indiscernibility 142
mereological monism 4–5, 109–10, 133, 
145–6, 180, 188, 197, 207, 214n.13
acceptance of 9
advantage of 132
Classical Extensional Mereology 35–7
Composition as Identity 207–10
constitutive aspect of 12
degree of generality of 189
discriminating power 31–3
formality of 41
generality of 117
ideology of 68
and Lewis 5–7
motivations of 68
nominalistic motivations for 149
and ontological economy 149–50
philosophical upholders of 36
as refutation tool 33–6
restriction for 10
mereological nihilism 199
mereology
and abstract entities 9–11
as discipline (see discipline, 
mereology as)
domain of 50
formal 42–4
fundamental relation of 53
is not logic 152–5
as logical doctrine 8
narrow understanding of 199–200
natural language role in 18
nonclassical 5
origins of 67–9
perfectly understood, unproblematic 
and certain 8–9
as philosophical thesis (see 
philosophical thesis, mereology as)
role of 15
scope of 26, 29
as theory (see theory, mereology as)
metalinguistic negation 99–104
metaontology
contemporary 193–4
expansionist 196
Fine's 195–8
postulationist 196
metaphorical claims 211n.2
metaphorical parthood 23–5
metaphysical grounding 206
metaphysically extraordinary 123
methodological arbitrariness 24
minimal entities 76
minimal mereology, 212n.5
minimal upper bounds (MUB) 165–7
modal dependence 208
modal properties 97–9
modal realism 171–3, 175
Moltmann, Friederike 212n.5
monism 5–7, 11–12, 44, 50–2, 149
Monte Grappa and Mountmatter 96-107, 
109, 121, 136-142
discernibility between 105
mereological relation between 141
modal differences between 97
motivating intuitions 190
mutual parthood 58, 145
negative existential intuitions 170–2
Neo-Aristotelian philosophers 138
neutrality of mereology 188
nihilists 170
nominalism 8, 69, 88, 125, 150
about structure 69
declaration of 71
Nominalistic Systems (Eberle) 7
nonatomism 75
nonclassical mereologies 5, 117
non-extensional mereologies 136
motivations for 135–7
non-heaps 178
non-mereological composition 9, 91
non-parthood, potential case of 31
non-Quinean metaontology 195–6
nonselective parthood 29–30, 32
analysis of 30
non-vagueness of parthood 184
Noonan, Harold 216n.3
“nothing over and above,” interpretation 
of 203, 204, 206

Index
235
obliteration
Fine’s principles of 78–84, 110, 117, 
197
of structure 121
On the Plurality of Worlds (Lewis) 175, 
180, 186
ontological economy, mereological 
monism and 149–50
ontological vagueness 215n.2
ontology 39, 194
formal 39
innocence 201–3
stuff 111
ordered couples 217n.12
Overlap 26, 59-61, 92, 114, 163
Paganini, Elisa 216n.3
part/parthood 135, 153, 212n.1
antisymmetry of 47, 141
between region of space 23
and composition 1–3
definition of 61
extension of 53
features of 47, 52, 59
formal features of 2, 5, 21, 26, 
27–8, 30
general and exhaustive theory of 
32, 75
genuine 32
intuitive constraints 27–8
Lewis’s viewpoint on 6, 7
lexical meaning of 17–18
literal 23–7
logic of 117
metaphorical 23–7
non-extensional theories of 136
nonselective 29–30, 32
non-transitive relation of 51
non-vagueness of 184
ordinary usages of 19
paradigmatic 25–7
pluralist approaches 17, 197
prototypical 15, 55–6
reciprocal 22, 23
reflexive 47
selective 29–30, 48
spatial 19, 25–7, 48
structural theory of 137
subject-specific 30
subrelations of 48
univocity/non-univocity of 17–18
vague 183
paradigmatic parthood 25–7
partial indiscernibility 208
particular quantifier 179
Paul, Laurie 212n.3
perdurantism 113
philosophical mereology 3–4, 
29–30, 42
provisional characterization of 23
philosophical thesis, mereology as 3–5
description of 4–5
sympathetic introduction to 7
photogenicity 100
plural identity, definition of 183
pluralism 31, 50–2
pluralist approach to parthood 197
plurality 154
empty 160
of entities 159–61
representative of 157
plural quantification 150–2
alternatives to 152
general aversion to 160–1
schemas 157–61
sets 155–7
portions of reality 205
postulationism 197–8
postulationist metaontology 196
precisification 179
proper parthood 52, 53, 153, 212n.1
propositional attitudes 119, 121–2
propositional logic 40
propositions 118–21
anti-extensionalist theories of 122
metaphysics of 122
prototypical parthood 55–6
qualitative identity 124
quantification 204
domain of 186, 198, 200
second-order 204
unrestricted 196, 198
Quine, Willard Van Orman 1, 44, 90, 125, 
147, 177, 180
concept of existence 179
metaontology 180, 194, 197
orthodoxy 44, 45, 179, 193–4

Index
236
realism 56
reciprocal parthood 22, 23
reciprocal proper parts 140–3
reflexivity 52–5
region of space 19–20
parthood between 23
relations between 25–6
relata-specific relations 215n.19
relative identity 215n.3
relativization 114–15
Rescher, Nicholas 48
Restricted Composition 182
restrictivism, form of 178
Robson, Jon 218n.2
Ryle, Gilbert 212n.2
Sambunjak, Petra 100–3, 216n.7
Sattig, Thomas 7
Schaffer, Jonathan 221n.4
schemas 157–61
second-order quantification 204
selective parthood 29, 48
selectivity 19–21
semantic revisionism 157
set-like pluralities 219n.5
sets 72–3, 155–7
set-theoretic membership 129, 133, 214n.8
set-theoretic paradoxes 155
set theory 71, 72, 74, 83
shallowness 56–7
Simons, Peter 6, 212n.5
Smith, Barry 40
soritic series of things 180
space 19
region of (see region of space)
spatial continuity 195
spatial location 19, 20
parthood and 19
spatially discontinuous entities 171
spatial parthood 25–7, 49
spatial proximity 178
spirit of dualism 141
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
(Varzi) 6
stipulation 121–2
Strong Supplementation 58, 143–4
structural arrangement 137
structured abstract entities 128, 130
structured entities 106, 109–10, 118–19
structured facts 120
structured propositions 217n.2
The Structure of Objects (Koslicki) 207
structures 69, 133
stuff ontologies 111
supervaluationism 179
supervenience 3, 76
temporal continuity 195
theory, mereology as 3–5
introductions to 7
logic 8
nonclassical kinds of 135
Thomson, Judith 111
threshold 178
of distance 177
of proximity 178
time, Extensionalism and 111–15
token-letters 123
tokens, definite plurality of 124
topic-neutrality 39, 133, 212n.2, 213n.5
Towards a Theory of Part (Fine) 197
transitivity 21, 22, 24, 32, 33, 47
confirmation of 49
monism, pluralism and ad hocness 50–2
parthood 47–50
trans-world individuals 175
Tye, Michael 215n.2
unanalyzed cardinality ascriptions 185
Uniqueness of Composition 47, 62–3, 87, 
150, 163
main role of 86
univocity/non-univocity of “part” 
17–18
Unrestricted Composition 95–6, 179, 194, 
199–200
alleged counterexamples to 185
arguments against 191
critics of 173
and formal mereology 187–90
formulation of 150–1
Lewis-Sider argument 180
literal formulation of 198
principle of 170, 193–5
vagueness argument for 184
violation of 82
unrestricted quantification 194–6, 198
unsatisfiable motivations 191
unstructured entities 106
upper bounds, minimal 165–7

Index
237
vague/vagueness 199
argument from 175–80
bearers of 182
concept of 180
identity 216n.3
intuitions 190–1
Lewis-Sider argument vs. intuitions 
185–7
parthood 183
theory of 179
unrestricted composition and formal 
mereology 187–90
Van Inwagen, Peter 44, 170
Varzi, Achille 6, 48, 61, 69, 70, 108–10, 
126, 145, 157–8, 212n.5, 215n.1
definition of Fusion 219n.9
Wallace, Megan 204
Weak Supplementation 140
Wieland, Jan 215n.18
Williams, Donald 177, 180, 212n.3
Williamson, Timothy 194
concreteness 193–5
repudiation of existence 195
word-tokens 123
Yablo, Stephen 211n.2
Zermelo-Fraenkel axiomatization 71
Zimmermann, Dean 214n.12


