
Meta-analysis
in Medical Research
The handbook for the
understanding and
practice of meta-analysis

To those who have helped me become
who I am, even if they expected more
I am very grateful to Alberto Pilotto and Angelo Andriulli for many
stimulating and thoughtful discussions on a number of theoretical and
practical aspects of meta-analysis.
I am indebted to Giorgio Gasparro, DP man, for his patience with my
requests.
A heart-felt thanks to Andrew K Burroughs, beacon of knowledge and
wisdom for many people. Without his advice and support, this work
would have never been written.

Meta-analysis
in Medical Research
The handbook for the
understanding and
practice of meta-analysis
Gioacchino Leandro
Gastroenterologist, Biostatistician
Castellana Grotte, Italy
FOREWORD BY
Giuseppe Gallus
Head of the Institute of Medical Statistics
University of Milan, Italy

c⃝2005 Gioacchino Leandro
Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
BMJ Books is an imprint of the BMJ Publishing Group Limited, used under licence
Blackwell Publishing, Inc., 350 Main Street, Malden, Massachusetts 02148-5020, USA
Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd, 550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
The right of the Author to be identiﬁed as the Author of this Work has been asserted in
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988,
without the prior permission of the publisher.
First published 2005
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Leandro, Gioacchino.
Meta-analysis in medical research : the handbook for the understanding and practice of
meta-analysis / Gioacchino Leandro.
p.
;
cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-4051-2733-3 (alk. paper)
1. Meta-analysis.
2. Medicine–Research–Evaluation.
[DNLM:
1. Biomedical Research–methods.
2. Meta-analysis.
3. Bias (Epidemiology)
4. Publication Bias. WA 950 L437m 2004]
I. Title.
R853.M48L43
2004
610′.72–dc22
2004017776
ISBN 1-4051-2733-3
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library
Set in 10/13.5 Sabon by TechBooks, India
Printed and bound in India by Replika Press Pvt. Ltd.
Commissioning Editor: Alison Brown
Editorial Assistant: Claire Bonnett
Development Editor: Fiona Pattison
Production Controller: Kate Charman
For further information on Blackwell Publishing, visit our website:
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com
The publisher’s policy is to use permanent paper from mills that operate a sustainable forestry
policy, and which has been manufactured from pulp processed using acid-free and elementary
chlorine-free practices. Furthermore, the publisher ensures that the text paper and cover board
used have met acceptable environment accrediation standards.

Contents
Foreword
ix
Preface
xi
Introduction
1
A brief history
4
Aims
5
How to Plan a Meta-Analysis
7
Deﬁning the outcomes
8
Choosing the characteristics of the trials that one
wants to select
8
The ‘grey literature’
9
Finding and evaluating the articles
10
Statistical procedures
13
Interpretation of results
14
Bias in Meta-Analytical Research
15
Sampling bias
16
Selection bias
18
Within study bias
19
Other biases
19
Appendix
20
Statistical Procedures
23
Fixed effects models
24
Random effects models
29
vii

viii
Contents
Working Procedures
33
Accuracy of the data
34
Evaluation of the numeric output for each trial
35
Evaluation of the pooled effect
38
Additional considerations on heterogeneity
39
Quantifying heterogeneity: the I2 index
42
Tests for publication bias
42
Number needed to treat (NNT)
43
Graphical representation
44
How to Read, Evaluate and Present a Meta-Analysis
57
How to read and evaluate a meta-analysis
58
How to present a meta-analysis
59
Examples
61
How to Use the Program
63
General information
64
Installation of the program
64
Structure of the program
65
Use of the program
69
Getting started
70
References
87
Glossary
89
Index
93

Foreword
In their current medical practice, physicians need to be updated with the re-
sults of the most important clinical studies. In addition, they are often asked
to be part of trials and to evaluate the results of new diagnostic tools and
experimental data. A good knowledge of principles and the methodology of
statistics is therefore mandatory for all physicians.
Although there has been an increasing interest in evidence-based practice
of medicine in the past few years, the data interpretation is still performed
badly and statistics are often misused. Among the principal reasons for this
is the lack of knowledge concerning the use of mathematical and statistical
tools, and a consequent tendency to avoid them if possible. Thus, those
physicians who are more familiar with this type of statistics, and who know
what is required in good medical practice and how to communicate with
their colleagues, are of great help.
This guide to meta-analysis, together with the included statistical soft-
ware, is the work of a clinician and it deals with the difﬁculties mentioned
above.
The reader is introduced to the principal aspects of meta-analysis using
a simple terminology, which does not imply a superﬁcial approach. The
most common errors encountered in the practical application of statistical
procedures are discussed.
The program is designed for easy use, which
will help clinicians to utilize meta-analysis. The handbook contains a short
section dedicated to the statistical procedures applied. A basic knowledge of
statistical methods is an essential starting point, but this manual can also be
of great interest and provide useful information for those who have greater
experience and are consolidating their statistical knowledge. It is therefore
logical that the author’s choice has been to concentrate on practical guidelines
rather than describing statistical methods.
ix

x
Foreword
I am therefore very pleased to write a Foreword for this handbook of
meta-analysis, with certainty that it will be a success.
Professor Giuseppe Gallus
Head of the Institute of Medical Statistics
University of Milan, Italy

Preface
The aim of this handbook is to provide the clinical researcher, who is tra-
ditionally not familiar with mathematics and statistics, with the basic prin-
ciples necessary to understand the power of meta-analysis and the essential
instruments to perform a good clinical study. For this purpose I have chosen
simple and direct language, using easy concepts and examples to enable an
intuitive understanding of the problems, at the same time trying to avoid
over-simpliﬁcation.
For these reasons this manual is not intended as a textbook on meta-
analysis, but rather a learning tool or a guide for the clinical researcher to
understand the basic principles of statistics so that later it may be helpful for
correct use of meta-analysis.
This book should enable the reader to perform a meta-analysis, report its
results in the correct way and also help understand and critically evaluate
meta-analysis published in scientiﬁc journals. For further information the
reader is referred to other texts or articles.
The software included is easy to use and it contains innovative functions
(i.e. moving information from program to program in Windows), additional
procedures (cumulative meta-analysis, number needed to treat (NNT), pub-
lication bias assessment, test for asymmetry of funnel plot) and graphics not
available in other programs (Galbraith’s plots, funnel plot and its test for
asymmetry). The plot for the sub-group analysis, especially for sensitivity
analysis, allows a better understanding of the effect of therapies or proce-
dures on sub-groups in clinical trials. These features make the program a
complete and useful tool.
The chapter on statistical analysis explains the computational methods in
detail using simple terms and examples. The expert reader will ﬁnd in this
section the formal aspects of the statistical procedure used, whereas a begin-
ner will learn several concepts which will be very useful in understanding
meta-analysis.
xi

xii
Preface
A complete section is devoted to step-by-step working characteristics of
the meta-analysis, which may be useful to the reader to resolve two key
questions: “What can we do?” and “How can we do it?” This section
reconsiders all the topics previously discussed and uses them in realistic
settings by showing in detail the practical applications of NNT, cumulative
meta-analysis, publication bias assessment, test for heterogeneity, ﬁxed effect
model and random effect model, and so on.
This manual is therefore a theoretical and practical learning tool in its
own right, and can be used even without the accompanying software.
Gioacchino Leandro

1
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The use of meta-analysis in medicine has increased in recent years due to a
growing interest from both physicians and statisticians.
A meta-analysis combines in a single conclusion the results of different
studies conducted on the same topic and with the same methods.
Meta-analysis is a tool that helps in understanding the results of
intervention in medicine. However, it is not the only or not always the
best tool.
1

2
Chapter 1
The publication of medical reviews and guidelines for good clinical practice
has become a common and useful tool for updating most clinical topics.
This reﬂects a need for clinicians to practice ‘evidence-based medicine’.
Evidence-based medicine has introduced well-deﬁned rules for the criti-
cal evaluation of medical data. The use of meta-analysis has a prominent
role in the validation and interpretation of the results of clinical studies. In
other words, if a well designed and well conducted meta-analysis has shown
that drug A is more effective than drug B, we can assume that this informa-
tion is correct and there would be no need for further investigation on this
issue.
Reporting results of a research protocol is crucial in the process of learn-
ing, because it serves both as a conclusion and a new beginning for further
study. In fact, a clinical trial is the application of theory to practice, accom-
plished through well-deﬁned rules of experimentation in order to validate
the underlying hypothesis and to achieve relevant results. These results then
form the basis for further theories and thus for other clinical trials. Medical
practice is greatly inﬂuenced by the results of clinical studies, especially if
they are brought to public attention through prestigious scientiﬁc journals or
the mass media.
In the scientiﬁc world, new therapies have a greater impact, so a greater
number of publications are therefore produced. However, it is hard to deﬁne
the quality and the importance of each study. Different studies on the same
topic often provide discordant conclusions, giving the reader a confused
message. In order to clarify the matter we need the help of experts who can
provide a conclusive synthesis of the results of different studies.
The growing number of invited reviews and the ‘state-of-the-art’ lectures
is a clear example of the need for unequivocal communication for highly
debated topics.
Meta-analysis, when well designed and appropriately performed, is a pow-
erful tool for synthesis. It is an analytical method where both independent
and different studies are integrated and their results pooled into a single
common result. The meta-analysis, when compared to other forms of re-
viewing separate studies, has the great advantage of being less inﬂuenced
by the personal opinion of the reviewer, and provides unbiased conclusions.
Moreover, in a meta-analysis all the results of the single studies examined
are reported, and the reader may easily recalculate the data and compare
them with the conclusions derived by the authors.
The term meta-analysis was coined in 1976. This identiﬁes a process of
analysis retrospectively performed on available published data on a speciﬁc
topic.

Introduction
3
When the analysis is done on individual data, it is called a meta-analysis of
individual patients. Basically, once the analyst has chosen the most relevant
published trials on a subject, instead of performing the meta-analysis on
them, he may directly contact the authors of the studies in order to obtain
the complete data of the individuals enrolled in the trials. A new set of
data is thus created that contains all or part of the information regarding
the subjects considered. Meta-analysis of individual patients has techniques
of evaluation and objectives different from those explained in this textbook
and will not be considered here.
It is a common mistake to consider meta-analysis as a simple statistical test.
In fact, meta-analysis is a ﬁeld of study in itself, and it is important to know
about, understand and apply it in all its necessary steps in order to avoid
bias. This systematic approach produces results that are worth the effort.
A systematic review as a meta-analysis of the published data is very useful,
since a large amount of data is published every year in scientiﬁc literature.
In 1940 there were roughly 2300 biomedical journals and the number has
increased to more than 23000 in 1990, with an incredible quantity of peer-
reviewed papers, comments and letters. This large amount of information
often contains scattered data and discordant conclusions. Critical works of
synthesis with systematic reviews are therefore mandatory.
A correct systematic review on a topic requires collection and analysis of
all published data and not only of those which are more interesting, relevant,
or easily available.
Two steps are thus important for the analysis: ﬁrst, a complete collection
of the published literature, and second, the synthesis of the information
acquired. Such synthesis can be done by an expert in the ﬁeld as a traditional
review, which may have a personal bias, or the synthesis can be made in a
more structured and objective fashion using meta-analysis.
The importance of a single study is the result of both its place within the
spectrum of a speciﬁc topic and the amount of information that it brings to
this spectrum. Each study has its intrinsic characteristics and the conclusions
it provides may not be generalisable or comparable with those from other
studies. On the other hand, some other studies may have similar designs
and their results may be taken together for more general considerations.
Therefore, adequate attention should be paid to know how the information
is obtained from each study to make sure it is correct and can be used
appropriately within a meta-analysis.
Systematic reviews and meta-analysis make it possible to validate the re-
sults of single studies. This has been the case for several pharmacological in-
tervention studies, where meta-analysis has contributed to establish the role

4
Chapter 1
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
1990
1995
2000
Figure 1.1 Number of articles, grouped by years, where the word meta-analysis has been
cited in the abstract.
of a speciﬁc drug in the treatment of some diseases, resolving any possible
doubt that a single study might have advanced. Moreover, performing a sys-
tematic review on a topic requires the critical examination of the methods
utilized in the different studies for the evaluation of the data; this may be
useful to identify methodological faults in the planning or carrying out of
these clinical studies, improving the quality of the research for future.
The interest in meta-analysis and its application in the biomedical world is
growing rapidly. A simple search through the Medline system has conﬁrmed
the increasing diffusion of this method of analysis. Figure 1.1 shows the num-
ber of articles, grouped by years, where the word meta-analysis has been cited
in the abstract, implying the use of it in the analysis of the data presented.
This clearly shows that:
r the diffusion of meta-analysis is steadily increasing in the world of biomed-
ical research;
r biomedical journals give importance to articles using meta-analysis.
In summary, knowing how to read, understand, have a critical opinion, and
possibly perform, a meta-analysis will be a valuable tool for the researcher
who wants to be abreast of modern biomedical research.
A BRIEF HISTORY
The ﬁrst meta-analysis is attributed to Pearson (1904) who analysed the data
from ﬁve studies on the correlation between the vaccination for enteritic fever
and its mortality.

Introduction
5
In 1932 Fisher noticed that the natural logarithm of the value given by the
p of a test multiplied by −2 is exactly distributed as a chi-square with two
degrees of freedom. From this we can deduce that the sum of m logarithms
of p is distributed as a chi-square with 2m degrees of freedom:
χ2
2m = −2
m

j=1
Ln(pj)
By this means, Fisher identiﬁed a way to derive a single p value from the p
values of more than one study.
This method is known as Fisher’s inverse chi-squared method. It was the
ﬁrst of a long series of methods aimed at giving a cumulative value of p.
This type of meta-analysis can be applied to studies where the value p
is present without a measure of the effect, or when the design of different
studies or the types of treatment are so different that to evaluate a cumulative
effect would not be correct.
The limitations of this method are:
1 The values of different studies are not weighted according to their char-
acteristics (e.g. number of subjects, variability.).
2 It is not possible to have an idea of the size of the effect: the p value
suggests only the probability for an event to occur by chance without
providing any information on the size of the event and therefore on the
clinical relevance of the observation.
3 It is impossible to pool studies which have opposite outcomes, in other
words if we are evaluating the efﬁcacy of two different procedures, A and
B, and one study shows that A is better than B and the other shows that B
is better than A, we cannot combine the two studies together because the
result may be misleading.
4 It is not possible to further assess the differences, because only the p value
is considered without any evaluation of the quality and the methodology
of the studies considered.
In 1976, Glass characterised meta-analysis as a speciﬁc technique for the
ﬁrst time.
AIMS
One of the main objectives of clinical research is to obtain clear and reliable
results that can be utilised in the management of patients and possibly as a
basis for clinical guidelines. Clinical trials do not always reach this target and
often give contrasting results. Meta-analysis, if correctly used, contributes
to achieve this target, and allows for a critical evaluation of the studies under
consideration.

6
Chapter 1
Meta-analysis contributes to many aspects of clinical research, for
example:
r increases the statistical power of a comparison;
r improves the estimation of the effect of a treatment;
r combines the results of studies that are contrasting;
r answers new questions;
r analyses sub-groups of subjects selected from different studies;
r analyses trends (e.g. within a time-frame, in a sub-group of patients with
the same characteristics);
r deﬁnes areas in which further studies are needed;
r analyses if and how previous studies have modiﬁed knowledge on a certain
topic
All these aspects can be evaluated using a methodology, which is intrinsically
an objective one as opposed to the ‘experts opinion’, which is, by deﬁnition,
subjective.
Moreover, it is always possible to update a meta-analysis if it is ‘not con-
clusive’ when new studies are published in the literature.

2
CHAPTER 2
How to Plan a
Meta-Analysis
The Study Design
Meta-analysis is a fundamental part of the process of conducting a
systematic review of the literature.
It requires a close collaboration between experts of the topic under
investigation and experts in statistical methods applied to the biomedical
ﬁeld.
7

8
Chapter 2
For the purpose of teaching we can identify different steps in putting together
a meta-analysis. Every step has its precise rules aimed at avoiding bias in the
analysis to provide more reliable results with an accurate estimation of the
events under investigation.
As is the case of a clinical trial, a systematic review must be carefully
designed in order to avoid the possibility of biases and errors that may affect
the results. It is therefore necessary to deﬁne the aims of the analysis and
the rules and methods that are necessary to achieve them.
DEFINING THE OUTCOMES
The ﬁrst step to consider is to deﬁne the outcomes to be analysed by meta-
analysis. It is advisable to determine a primary outcome (i.e. mortality,
efﬁcacy of a treatment) that is considered in all the studies selected for the
analysis, and then one or more secondary outcomes that may be useful to
answer speciﬁc questions (i.e. side effects, sub-groups of patients) that are
not necessarily considered in all the studies selected.
CHOOSING THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
TRIALS THAT ONE WANTS TO SELECT
For this step, it is advisable to consider the largest possible number of studies,
and only in a second phase to select studies based on different discriminat-
ing factors (number of subjects considered, drop-out rate, randomisation
criteria, and so on).
It is important to deﬁne where and how the search will be conducted.
The most accurate medical bibliographic sources are Medline and Embase.
Searching for a topic in only one of the two databases is likely to retrieve
only about one third of the published papers and therefore both databases
should be used in order to obtain an accurate reference list. In practice, this
happens rarely because Medline is a free Web site and easy to use, whereas
Embase is a subscription Web site and may be somewhat difﬁcult to use.
Although time consuming, alternative options might be to hand-search for
published papers, for example in the Index Medicus, and to seek advice from
leading experts in the ﬁeld.
In order to search effectively, it is crucial to choose the correct key words
that will precisely identify the topic of our investigation. Usually only studies
published in English are considered. Although this is a reasonable choice,
sometimes it may be quite restrictive. In fact, some biomedical areas or

How to Plan a Meta-Analysis
9
clinical procedures might be conﬁned to non-English-speaking countries,
i.e. ‘natural medicine’ in China or hyperbaric therapy in Russia.
Once the search has been completed, it is also advisable to check the
references cited in each article and to start new searches on that basis.
It may be useful to have two different people conducting the same search:
one operating through a computer-based database (i.e. Medline), while the
other utilizes more traditional systems, i.e. the Index Medicus, and then
exploring the queries through the references cited in the articles found.
When the search is complete, an estimation of the number of papers not
found through the two systems should be done (see the Appendix, page 20).
If a more advanced search is needed (i.e. articles published before a speciﬁc
year or considering only a number of subjects greater than a deﬁned number),
the inclusion criteria for the analysis should be decided at the beginning and
should be well deﬁned in the study design, explaining the reasons for the
selection.
This complete procedure should be described in detail as it represents a
fundamental part of the methods section that will be included in the ﬁnal
paper.
THE ‘GREY LITERATURE’
The grey literature is that produced by government, universities,
business, and industries, both in print and electronic formats, but
which is not controlled by commercial publishing interests and where
publishing is not the primary activity of the organization.
IIIrd International Conference on Grey Literature, 1997
Most of the grey literature of biomedical interest is represented by conference
and congress proceedings, newsletters, theses, house journals, committee
reports and more. However, the most important and easily accessible source
for pooling data for meta-analysis is from published abstracts and reports
from scientiﬁc meetings. Before including data in the meta-analytic process,
the following two aspects should be carefully considered:
1 Data reliability. Abstracts often report only partial results and they are
presented at several congress proceedings. Furthermore, methods and side
effects are not always well reported. This problem may be solved by a
careful assessment of the reported data in order to avoid duplication of
included patients.
2 Publication bias. Randomised Controlled Trials (RCTs) presented at sci-
entiﬁc meetings are not always published in journals included in reference

10
Chapter 2
databases. It is known that more than one half of the abstracts are pub-
lished within 2 years and that another one third are under review for pub-
lication. It has been estimated that only 16% of them are not traced. The
time lag between the conference presentation and the full-text publication
may vary, ranging from 1 to 5 years with a median time of 2.7 years. More-
over, papers with signiﬁcant versus not signiﬁcant results, and presented
(oral presentations) versus not presented papers are published earlier.
In general, we suggest:
r to extend a bibliographic search to abstracts presented at top scientiﬁc
events in the ﬁeld of interest;
r to limit the abstract search to within 3–5 years;
r to carefully evaluate the abstracts in order to avoid duplication of included
patients;
r to perform the meta-analysis by including and excluding the abstracts to
evaluate if and how the pooled effect is modiﬁed (sensitivity analysis that
is easily run by means of the sub-group analysis option).
FINDING AND EVALUATING THE ARTICLES
It is now easier to ﬁnd the articles as most of the scientiﬁc journals are
available on-line. It is, however, far more difﬁcult to read, evaluate and
draw the necessary data for the analyses.
A careful reading of all the articles is mandatory.
Adequate attention
should be paid to identify articles based on the same group of patients,
or using sub-groups of subjects already considered in other studies. The
inclusion in the analysis of groups of subjects who are not independent
will lead to a selection bias (we will discuss this in detail in the following
chapter).
There are different ways of reading a scientiﬁc paper: a quick and informal
reading of the title and the abstract, which can identify key points for further
consideration; a more careful reading, which can utilize a scoring system
or a check list; and a formal reading with a mathematical check of the
data presented. Every reader has his or her own approach to the scientiﬁc
publication, depending on the experience and the level of information that
one wants to obtain from it. However, if one needs to perform a meta-
analysis, a formal and careful reading is required in order to gather different
aspects that may be helpful to understand the result of the analysis, identify
the diversity of the studies considered and explain particular aspects that
may emerge from the analysis.

How to Plan a Meta-Analysis
11
Figure 2.1
Independent of the result that may be obtained, a meta-analysis is also a
unique learning experience: the articles will be read several times while the
results of the analysis reveal new insights that might have been underesti-
mated on ﬁrst reading, appreciate skills and tricks of the scientiﬁc language,
discover what is hidden between the lines and what may not be reported
deliberately by the authors in order to avoid possible discrepancies in the
results. In other words, one learns a great deal about how to read and how
to write a scientiﬁc article.
The reading of the selected articles should follow a scheme that will be
useful in the collection of the data necessary for the meta-analysis. Figure 2.1
shows an example of a computer-based form for the collection of the data
designed for meta-analysis. The form is a computer sheet for data entry in
the program of meta-analysis used in the software of this manual.
Speciﬁcally, the following information should be entered:
a) Generic information: The information about the name of the ﬁrst author,
year, name of the journal and category of publication (peer-reviewed pa-
per or abstract) makes the paper easy to retrieve if further evaluation is
needed. The number of the trial (that will appear in all the outputs, ei-
ther numeric or graphic) should be a progressive number or the reference
number of the article included in the bibliography once the meta-analysis
is complete and the paper is written.

12
Chapter 2
b) Design of the trial: The design information, such as double blinded,
open trial, randomised, follow-up period, and all other characteristics of
the design, is considered important to understand in detail the different
modalities of the studies. The collection of this information should be
very careful and precise, because very often the differences in the study
design may be a cause of differences and discrepancies in the results.
c) Treatment of the study group and control group: A trial is a compari-
son between two treatments, such as a drug versus a placebo or a new
drug versus an old one. Moreover, it is important to register the dosage
used in the studies and the length of treatment. Again, differences in the
dosage or length of treatment, or the drug used as a control, may generate
discrepancies.
d) The number of events, the number of patients at risk in the two groups,
and the different outcomes are the basis of the calculation used in the
meta-analysis. It is important to collect the number of dropouts in dif-
ferent studies (separately for each of the different outcomes) in order to
conduct both a ‘per protocol’ analysis (PP) and a meta-analysis with more
selected criteria, considering the dropouts as treatment failures ‘intention-
to-treat analysis’ (ITT). In this case the type of event under analysis (suc-
cess or failure) will determine how the position of the dropouts are con-
sidered: either with the number of events or with the number of subjects
treated.
e) The quality score is a way of rating the quality of the studies to be in-
cluded in the meta-analysis, verifying the presence of some ‘markers of
quality’ deﬁned before starting the evaluation procedure. For example,
a double-blinded study would be rated 2, a single-blinded 1, and so on.
Different scoring systems have been proposed by various authors, each
one presenting some advantages and therefore there is no standard sys-
tem of evaluation available. The discussion of these systems is beyond
the scope of this handbook, but we need to consider that:
r although a score system may be utilized in a meta-analysis, it is prefer-
able to avoid this because ﬁrstly there is no general agreement on a
standard evaluation system and secondly its use would introduce an-
other bias that needs to be considered;
r if we use a scoring system, we should divide the studies considered
according to its classiﬁcation in different sub-groups (i.e. low, medium
and high quality) and then proceed with a sensitivity analysis (sub-
group analysis) in order to verify if the effect of the treatment is variable
among the different sub-groups; this use of a scoring system is more
acceptable.

How to Plan a Meta-Analysis
13
In conclusion, we would like to point out that a meta-analysis is by def-
inition already able to evaluate the quality of the studies (we will come
back to this later) in a precise and unbiased way. The use of a scoring
system that inevitably rejects the small studies in favour of the large stud-
ies would lead to the underestimation of the results of some studies and
the overestimation of others.
f) Flags: it is useful to assign some ﬂags to every trial to identify them
for particular characteristics in order to perform an analysis of sensi-
tivity (sub-groups analysis). For example, if we are evaluating all the
studies on gastric carcinoma from different geographic areas, the vari-
ous trials could be segregated based on different risk of gastric cancer in
the general population of these areas (low and high risk areas) and a sub-
group analysis performed to evaluate if the risk factor under analysis (e.g.
Helicobacter pylori infection) has a different inﬂuence in different are-
as. Multiple ﬂags may be assigned to a single study to characterise it for
multiple factors (i.e. children, high risk areas, non-randomised trials). In
this way, we may perform multiple sub-group analyses without much dif-
ﬁculty, or further meta-analysis based only on a portion of the collected
studies (e.g. only on children, randomised trials).
STATISTICAL PROCEDURES
The statistical methods will be described in detail in Chapter 4. This hand-
book will explain how to choose a proper method . These procedures will be
described brieﬂy in this section giving a few insights that will be developed
later.
The results of a trial may be expressed as odds ratio (OR) or risk difference
(RD), which is also known in epidemiology as absolute risk reduction (ARR).
As meta-analysis is a way of aggregating the results of multiple trials, the
results obtained may be expressed as pooled odds ratio (ORp) or pooled risk
difference (RDp).
In order to pool the results of the different studies, we should assume
that these results would give an evaluation of effect, which would be the
same for all studies, and that the effects evaluated would be part of the same
distribution (sample estimates of the same mean). This assumption should
be veriﬁed with a statistical test, the test for heterogeneity. If this is correct,
in a further analysis we can use formulas based on this assumption, called
ﬁxed effects models. If we are not constrained by the studies belonging to the
same population (i.e. the studies evaluated are sampled from a population
that contains several populations, each with its own mean), and therefore

14
Chapter 2
we assume that the variability of the results depends on the variability of the
intra- and inter-studies, we will use procedures called random effects models.
Other statistical procedures are the test for publication bias, the num-
ber needed to treat (NNT) and the cumulative meta-analysis, which will be
discussed in the following chapters.
INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS
The interpretation of the results obtained with a meta-analysis is the result of
a series of evaluations that start from the evaluation of the size of the pooled
effect, the possible causes of heterogeneity, the evaluation of the ‘stability’
of the meta-analysis (i.e. the pooled effect is not changed signiﬁcantly by the
addition of new studies), and the calculation of the number needed to be
treated.
These topics will be covered in the chapter on ‘working procedures’ of
this handbook (see Chapter 5), since for the clinical researcher a practical
approach with examples is far more useful than a theoretical one.

3
CHAPTER 3
Bias in Meta-Analytical
Research
These are several biases that may alter the results of a meta-analysis.
Knowing the possible biases, it is essential to avoid them or at least to
minimize their effects.
15

16
Chapter 3
There are multiple biases that may inﬂuence the results of a meta-analysis.
Amongst them, the researcher usually only considers the publication bias,
while all the others are generally underestimated or ignored.
In this chapter we will list all the possible biases and give some advice on
how to avoid them.
SAMPLING BIAS
This bias is caused by the difﬁculties in retrieving all the studies on a topic.
1 Publication bias: Since usually only studies where a signiﬁcant difference
is found are published, this implies that some completed studies are not
published and therefore cannot be considered in the meta-analysis. These
may have results discordant from the published studies. Therefore, the
meta-analysis might have had a different result if all trials could have been
considered. However, quite often non-published studies are presented as
abstracts for scientiﬁc meetings and therefore we can have a more com-
prehensive analysis by also including the abstracts.
The publication bias has two forms. The conformity publication bias
is due to the fact that, if there is a common opinion already established
on a topic, it will be easier to publish studies that are in accord with this
opinion, while discordant results are less likely to be accepted.
The opposite of this ‘editorial philosophy’ is the inverse conformity
publication bias, where papers conﬁrming already established data may
be considered redundant, while discordant results may be accepted as a
novelty.
The publication bias has three different sources: the author, the sponsor
of the trial, and the editorial policy of the journal to which the paper has
been submitted.
Both authors and the editorial boards of journals are usually less
interested in publishing a paper with negative results. The sponsor of the
study is not usually happy with results that do not conﬁrm the efﬁcacy of
a new medicine or intervention.
There are several ways to evaluate the presence and the importance of
a publication bias, since its effects cannot be eliminated. Among them,
the more commonly used are:
(a) The graphic method by Light and Pillemer (Funnel Plot) for which a
plot is calculated using the effect size and the sample size of every trial:
the resulting ﬁgure, in the absence of publication bias, is a reversed fun-
nel. Some alternatives for X and Y axes are available. The X axis may
represent Risk Ratio, Odds Ratio and Risk Difference. The Y axis may

Bias in Meta-Analytical Research
17
 
0.1
1
10
Risk  Ratio
Favours treatment
Favours control
10
100
1000
10 000
100 000
Sample  Size
Outlier
study ?
Figure 3.1
represent the trial size, the precision of the trial (1/SE), the variance
and a number of other options. The standard representation is given
by the Odds Ratio and the trial size. Other representations have par-
ticular aims that go beyond the purpose of this work. This is a very
approximate method since it is only a visual judgment of the data. It is
used very commonly because it is easy to complete and gives a simple
ﬁgure. Its use is acceptable only if the meta-analysis includes a large
number of studies but not in a meta-analysis with a small number of
studies. A good practice to avoid evaluating the publication bias only
according to visual judgment is to use a test for asymmetry applied to
the funnel plot. We will discuss later the test for asymmetry.
(b) Klein’s method is based on the following hypothesis: if the unpub-
lished studies have the same characteristics, with regard to the number
of subjects and their variability as the published ones, how many un-
published studies with negative or null results are needed to inﬂuence
the results of the meta-analysis? This number is the whole number
immediately above:
k Ln OR
1.96
2
W −k
where W is the mean of the weights of k trials per Wi = 1
Vi (see page
42 for details).

18
Chapter 3
This test does not exactly answer the question ‘is there or not a publica-
tion bias?’. It is instead an indirect test of reliability of the meta-analysis
when it is dealing with problems of publication bias. Furthermore, a quan-
titative approach is to be preferred and the META program will provide
this assessment which is the Publication Bias Assessment.
2 If the search is internet based (e.g. Medline), there are other kinds of
biases:
2.1 Indexing bias: This occurs due to poor indexing of the studies in
the internet database. This error may especially occur when an ar-
ticle is new and it has been introduced into the database recently.
In a second phase, checks are made and the mistakes are usually
corrected.
2.2 Search bias: This occurs due to difﬁculties in retrieving all the indexed
papers in the database. The rate of studies identiﬁed by an expert user
utilizing the internet-based databases is between 32% and 80%, and
it is far lower with inexperienced users. For this reason, it is crucial
to pay attention to the search strategy. It is always useful to invite
several people to conduct independent searches and then compare
their results.
3 If the search is based both on internet-based databases and on non-
internet-based methods (review of the literature, etc.)
there are other
biases:
3.1 Reference bias: This occurs when there is a likelihood that some
studies are cited frequently and others may not be cited at all.
3.2 Multiple publication bias: This occurs due to the publication of the
same results in multiple articles.
3.3 Multiply-used subjects bias: This occurs due to publication of re-
sults involving different sub-groups derived from the same group of
subjects.
All these biases can be avoided by a careful reading of the articles.
SELECTION BIAS
1 Inclusion criteria bias: This may occur if the inclusion criteria decided for
use in the meta-analysis somehow exclude relevant studies. Since it is an
inclusion bias, this error is difﬁcult to detect, quantify and avoid once the
criteria have been selected.
2 Selector bias: If precise criteria of selection are not deﬁned from the be-
ginning, the person involved in the search may use his or her own criteria

Bias in Meta-Analytical Research
19
and this may give varying results. An ideal way to avoid this bias is to
deﬁne precise selection criteria and evaluate the studies according to the
criteria without considering their results.
WITHIN STUDY BIAS
Once the papers have been selected, there may be difﬁculties obtaining the
data we need from the results of the studies.
1 Bias caused by the meta-analyst:
1.1 Extractor bias: This occurs due to inaccuracy in the recording of the
results. This is very common and difﬁcult to avoid. It may greatly
affect the result of the analysis. It is always useful to perform two
separate readings and to resolve discordant evaluations.
1.2 Quality score bias: If the system used to score the quality of the papers
is not strictly deﬁned, there is the possibility of a personal judgment
by the reader that may affect the results of the analysis. The bias is
easily avoidable by not using any scoring system.
2 Bias due to inadequate accuracy in reporting the results by the authors of
the studies:
2.1 Reporting bias: An example of this bias is a trial designed to evaluate
multiple outcomes, but where only the signiﬁcant results are reported.
This bias is unavoidable and often impossible to quantify. One can
always contact the authors to obtain all the results. Very often having
unreported data in a study means that the study is of poor quality.
2.2 Recording error bias: It is due to errors made by the authors interpret-
ing the results obtained. It occurs in about 1% of the data reported. It
is not very important in a meta-analysis, because it is a random error,
especially if the number of subjects is large enough. It adds only an
element of imprecision to the estimate.
OTHER BIASES
These are not considered often; however, they may be as important as those
listed above.
1 Geographical bias: It may not be advisable to group the results of stud-
ies conducted in different geographical areas, because the differences in
prevalence and incidence of pathologies and risk factors may have im-
portant effects on the results. If this is the case, it may be inappropriate
to do a meta-analysis on all the studies in order to obtain an estimate of

20
Chapter 3
the mean effect. Instead, a sensitivity analysis should be performed eval-
uating sub-groups of studies from the same area and subsequently decide
whether all of the results can be pooled together.
2 Follow-up time bias: The length of the follow-up is relevant if there is a
time-dependent effect in the outcome considered. Studies using the same
drug at the same dosage may have different results if the drug has been
administered for different periods of time. If the time-dependent effect is
not considered, and it is a very common issue in the clinical setting, the
evaluation of the mean effect can be biased.
APPENDIX
In this appendix an interesting technique for the evaluation of the com-
pleteness of the search for references is described. It allows an acceptable
evaluation of the number of papers that have not been found despite the two
different methods utilized and previously described. This is very important
information for the correct evaluation of a meta-analysis.
This system is an application of the ‘capture–mark–recapture’ method
used by biologists in order to count the whole number of a single animal
species in a geographic area. If, for example, we want to know the number
of sharks in the Mediterranean Sea, we can mark all the sharks that we are
able to catch and then release them in a deﬁned period of time. After a
period of time necessary for the marked sharks to get dispersed in the sea,
we count the prevalence of the marked sharks among all the sharks caught
in a deﬁned period of time: this will give us an estimate of the total number
of sharks in the area.
Database
Yes
No
Yes
M
n – m
n
Hand-search
No
M – m
?
N – n
M
N – M
N
In our case, let us assume that the Medline-based search for papers on a
particular topic in a deﬁned period of time has given a total of M papers,
while the search based on the Index Medicus and the references of other
papers has resulted in a number of n papers. Of all those, a number m of
papers would be included in both groups of papers. We can now build the
table shown.

Bias in Meta-Analytical Research
21
Considering the formulas for the calculation of the expected value, N, the
total number of papers (found + not found), assuming the independence of
the sources, will be:
N = M(n/m)
This estimate of maximum likelihood is partially distorted for small numbers,
and it could be more precisely obtained using the Chapman method:
N = (M + 1)(n + 1)/(m + 1) −1
The variance of N will be:
Var(N) = (M + 1)(n + 1)(M −m)(n −m)/[(m + 1)2(m + 2)]
with a conﬁdence interval of 95%.
A mandatory requirement for the use of the capture and recapture method
is the independence of the sources.


4
CHAPTER 4
Statistical Procedures
Knowing the statistical procedures is of great importance in choosing
which test is needed and why.
Different results with different software packages are the result of different
approximation methods used in the software formulae.
23

24
Chapter 4
This chapter contains several formulae which could be very helpful to those
who want to understand the calculations used in the procedures. This chap-
ter is also useful in understanding meta-analysis in general as it contains
fundamental elements and concepts of meta-analysis.
As stated earlier, meta-analysis is a procedure that allows aggregation of
the results of multiple studies. This aggregation is not the simple sum of the
data obtained from all the studies, but a procedure that “weights” the results
of each study according to its precision. In fact, if the precision is estimated
on the width of the dispersion, namely the variance, then the weight of each
study i is given by the inverse of the variance:
Wi = 1
Vi
(1)
where Wi is the weight and Vi the variance of the outcome of the study.
In other words, if a study has a wide variance (= dispersion = imprecision)
it will have a small weight in determining the ﬁnal result of the analysis (the
“pooled” result of the meta-analysis), while a study with a small variance
(= greater precision) will have a greater weight.
The general formula of the meta-analysis expresses the global outcome D
in terms of a weighted mean:
D =
 widi
 wi
(2)
with the sum extended to n studies.
The numerator is an expression of the above-mentioned concept, the de-
nominator has the simple function of normalizing the weight used.
Once it is established that the measure of the outcome of each single study
is to be weighted by its precision, one has to deﬁne what needs to be evaluated
in the study, or the di of formula (2).
This entity could be either the difference in the rate of the event between
the two groups under study or the Odds Ratio (OR).
The procedures used in the calculation may be divided into two categories:
ﬁxed effects models and random effects models.
FIXED EFFECTS MODELS
The ﬁxed effects models are based on the assumption that the available
studies taken as a group give an estimate of the same treatment effect so
that the estimated effects can be considered as part of the same distribution

Statistical Procedures
25
(sample estimates of the same mean). However, this hypothesis needs to be
proven using a statistical procedure named “test for heterogeneity”.
This analysis allows the investigator to assess whether the studies under
evaluation deal with the same parameter or not.
The test for heterogeneity is based on the following equation:
χ2 =
m

j=1
wj

ˆ j −ˆ
2
(3)
In the case where the null hypothesis of homogeneity is satisﬁed, the above
equation approximately distributes as a chi-square with m −1 degree of
freedom. Here ˆ j is the estimate of the effect in the j −n study, ˆ is the
estimate of the pooled effect and wj is the weight of the j −n study.
The results of such analysis can be represented as a table as follows:
Studied condition (e.g. ulcer healing)
Yes
No
Total
Drug N
A
B
A + B
Drug S
C
D
C + D
Total
A + C
B + D
A + B is the total number of individuals treated with the drug under study
(new drug), A is the number of subjects included in the group where the event
(i.e. healing) has occurred and B is the group of patients where the expected
effect did not occur. C + D is the number of subjects treated according
to a current standard of care (standard drug), C is the number of subjects
included in the group where the event occurred and D is the group of patients
where the expected effect did not occur.
The calculation of the difference of percentage (also called absolute risk
reduction (ARR)) is not a difﬁcult computational problem and is performed
by applying the following formula:
d =
A
A + B −
C
C + D
(4)
or the more general formula:
d = Oi
Ni
−Os
Ns
(4b)
where Ois the observed events (deaths, complications, etc.), N is the number
of subjects included in the study, i is the new treatment and s is the standard
treatment.

26
Chapter 4
The 95% conﬁdence interval is calculated by the usual formula:
CI(95%) = d ± 1.96 ∗SE(d)
(5)
where d is the percentage difference and SE(d) is the standard error of the
difference calculated according to the following formula:
SE(d) =

Os ∗(Ns −Os)
N3s
−Oi ∗(Ni −Oi)
N3
i
(6)
After having calculated the difference and the standard error of the difference
in each study, the pooled effect is obtained by applying the general formula
of the meta-analysis (2) and is not to be confused with the D of formula (4).
The conﬁdence interval of D is calculated as follows:
CI(95%) = D ±
1.96
 wi
(7)
The test for heterogeneity is calculated as follows:
χ2 =
 
wi ∗[di −D]2
(8)
where D is the pooled effect, di and wi are the percentage difference and the
weight of the i −n study, respectively.
The Odds Ratio (OR) needs some further detailed explanation. The calcu-
lation of the OR may be performed according to different methods. The most
used are the methods by Mantel-Haenszel, Peto, and Gart. Some examples
are illustrated step-by-step in order to make them easier to understand.
A) Mantel-Haenszel method
Considering the data included in the table on p. 25, the OR is calculated
using the following formula:
OR = A/B
C/D = A ∗D
B ∗C
(9)
which deﬁnes the result of the comparison within each study.
The OR, especially for rare events, may be considered as an estimate of
the Relative Risk, and indicates how many times the exposure (the particular
procedure or the treatment) increases the risk of the event. In this case, A +
B ≈B and C + D ≈D.

Statistical Procedures
27
By examining formula (9) it is evident that, if the tables include some zeros,
the estimate may have a value of 0 or ∞. In order to avoid this problem,
in the program a value of 0.5 is always added to every single cell. This may
cause very small differences in the results when compared to other software
programs.
The 95% conﬁdence interval for the OR can be calculated using the stan-
dard formula:
CI(95%) = exp [Ln OR ± 1.96 ∗SE(Ln OR)]
(10)
where SE(Ln OR) is the standard error of the natural logarithm of the OR.
As a practical example, we now consider two studies on lung cancer in
women exposed to passive cigarette smoking (Garﬁnkel et al., 1985, Lam
et al., 1987), see Table 4.1.
Table 4.1
Example of studies on lung cancer in women exposed to passive
cigarette smoking.
Exposed
Not exposed
Total
Study 1
Cases
90
44
134
Controlled
245
157
402
Total
335
201
536
Study 2
Cases
115
84
199
Controlled
152
183
335
Total
267
267
534
Formula (9) allows us to calculate the OR of the two studies:
OR1 = A ∗D
B ∗C = 90 ∗157
44 ∗245 = 1.31
OR2 = 115 ∗183
84 ∗152 = 1.65
The approximated variance, acceptable when the OR is close to 1, is calcu-
lated using the following formula:
Vi =
ni
(bi ∗ci)
(11)
Then:
V1 =
536
44 ∗245 = 0.05
V2 =
534
84 ∗152 = 0.042

28
Chapter 4
The weight of each study is calculated from (1):
W1 = 1
V1
=
1
0.05 = 20.00
W2 = 1
V2
=
1
0.042 = 23.81
The estimate of the pooled OR according to Mantel-Haenszel is obtained by
applying formula (2):
ORM−H = (OR1 ∗W1) + (OR2 ∗W2)
W1 + W2
= 1.31 ∗20 + 1.65 ∗23.81
23.81 + 20.00
= 1.4
The variance of the ORM−H is calculated according to a complicated formula,
which in this case gives us the result of 0.019. The estimate of the 95%
conﬁdence interval is calculated by applying formula (10), which provides
us with the lower and upper limits: 1.14–1.95.
Due to multiple advantages and precision, this method is widely used and
is frequently found in computer programs.
B) Peto method
The Peto method is based on a modiﬁcation of the Mantel-Haenszel method.
The ﬁrst step is the calculation of the expected value of the events in
every single group, according to the standard formula of the product of the
marginal totals divided by n. Speciﬁcally, considering the table 4.1, we have:
E1 = (a1 + b1) ∗(a1 + c1)
n1
= 134 ∗335
536
= 83.75
E2 = (a2 + b2) ∗(a2 + c2)
n2
= 199 ∗267
534
= 99.5
The difference between the observed and expected events is then calculated:
Study 1 = 90 −83.75 = 6.25
Study 2 = 115 −99.5 = 15.5
The variance of these quantities is:
Vi = [Ei ∗(bi + di) ∗(ci + di)]
ni ∗(ni −1)
And then:
Study 1 = (90 ∗201 ∗402)/(536 ∗535) = 25.36
Study 2 = (99.5 ∗267 ∗335)/(534 ∗533) = 31.27

Statistical Procedures
29
The natural logarithm of the ORP is calculated:
Ln ORP = sum of (observed −expected)/sum of the variances
Ln ORP = (6.25 + 15.5)/(25.36 + 31.27) = 21.75/56.63 = 0.38
and:
ORP = exp(Ln ORP) = 1.46
The 95% conﬁdence interval is calculated as follows:
CI(95%) = exp
	
ORP ±
1.96
 Vi

which easily gives us the lower and upper limits: 1.13–1.90.
Using the Peto calculation, the presence of a 0 value in a cell does not
affect the calculation, and therefore no approximation is needed.
Tests for heterogeneity
Mantel-Haenszel method:
Q =

wi (Ln ORi −Ln ORMH)
Peto method:
Q =
 
wi ∗(Oi −Ei)2
−
 (Oi −Ei)2
 Vi
where Q has a chi-square distribution with degrees of freedom equal to n −1
studies. The statistical power of this test is very low if the meta-analysis in-
cludes a few studies, thus the rejection of the hypothesis of heterogeneity
is not always a valid test to establish that the same quantity is being mea-
sured. In particular, obvious clinical heterogeneity in different studies may
not result in statistical heterogeneity.
Use of sensitivity analyses may be
needed to establish whether clinical differences inﬂuence the results of the
meta-analysis.
RANDOM EFFECTS MODELS
These models of analysis do not require the assumption that each study is
derived from the same population of patients and therefore the n studies can
be considered as a part of separate populations, each with their own mean.
Therefore, the variability of the estimate may have two sources: within the
study and between the studies.

30
Chapter 4
The DerSimonian–Laird method applied to the ORs needs the following
calculations:
Ln ORdl =
 
w∗
i ∗Ln ORi

 w∗
i
where
w∗
i =
1

D +

1
wi

D = [Q−(S −1)] ∗ wi
 wi
2 − w2
i

where S is the number of the studies and
Q =

wi (Ln ORi −Ln ORMH)
and
variance∗
i =

w∗
i
There is no universal consensus on the choice of ﬁxed or random effect
models.
The next chapter will illustrate in more detail some theoretical
controversies regarding this important aspect of meta-analysis.
Quantifying heterogeneity
A detailed theoretical discussion on indices of quantitative evaluation of
heterogeneity is beyond the aim of this work.
The three main indicators of the quantitative evaluation of heterogeneity
are the following:
H is the square root of the chi-square for heterogeneity statistics divided
by its degrees of freedom. It describes the relative excess in Qover its
degrees of freedom.
R is the ratio of the standard error of the mean from the random effect
meta-analysis to the standard error of a ﬁxed effect meta-analytic
estimate. It describes the inﬂation in the conﬁdence interval for a
summary estimate under a random effect model compared with a
ﬁxed effect model.
I2 is a transformation of the H that describes the proportion of total
variation in study estimate that is due to heterogeneity.

Statistical Procedures
31
The main characteristics of these indicators, as well as their strengths, are:
r the dependence on the extent of heterogeneity;
r the scale invariance (this feature makes it possible to compare these indi-
cators also from meta-analyses with different scales and outcomes); and
r the size invariance, i.e. these measures are not dependent on the number
of the studies.
Quantifying publication bias
The calculation of the intercept and the β-coefﬁcient follows the same pro-
cedure as the regression analysis.
α =
n

i=1
yi
n −β
n

i=1
xi
n
β =
n
i=1 (xi −¯x)(yi −¯y)
n
i=1 (xi −¯x)2
SE(α) =




n
i=1 (yi −ˆy)2
n −2
∗
	
1
n −2 +
¯x2
 (xi −¯x)2

for x =
1
SE() and y =

SE()
95% CI(α) = α ± 1.96 ∗SE(α).


5
CHAPTER 5
Working Procedures
The essence of meta-analysis relies on a careful analysis of the data, on the
numerical approach, and also on a standard and innovative graphical
approach.
The supervision by an expert statistician, or at least the discussion of the
results obtained with him or her, is essential for a complete understanding
of meta-analysis and a better use of this statistical tool.
The present chapter gives a step-by-step guide through the practical phases
of the analysis, illustrating how to deal successfully with problems that
may be encountered during the procedure.
33

34
Chapter 5
The understanding of the following practical instructions as well as allowing
one to perform a meta-analysis correctly, will also allow a critical evaluation
of a meta-analysis performed by others. In the latter case, it is essential to dis-
sect all the factors that explain how the investigators went about their meta-
analysis. As a useful start-up project, one can reproduce a meta-analysis
already published following the instructions described below.
After completing the phases of study design, literature search and evalua-
tion of studies under analysis according to the procedures already described,
and following completion of the forms for each study, the meta-analysis can
be performed and the results interpreted.
ACCURACY OF THE DATA
Once the data are entered and the calculations made, the evaluation of the
results can proceed. The output of a meta-analysis must always include the
original data, which should be checked for input errors.
The data must always be searched for in the original papers in order
to perform an independent analysis and evaluation.
The absence of the
original data in a report in a meta-analysis always represents a potential
error, suggesting that the authors may not want their statistical work to be
double-checked by other investigators.
Figure 5.1 shows the data relative to Example 1. These are a series of
clinical trials studying the effect of the drug cimetidine on gastric ulcer healing
after four weeks of treatment. The papers are ordered by year of publication,
ORIGINAL DATA
Author
Journal
Score Year
PLACEBO
Ent.
Obs.
CIMETIDINE
Ent.
Obs.
11 Bader
12 Frost
13 Englert
14 Cremer
15 Lambert
16 Dick
17 Navert
18 Ciclitira
19 Landecker
10 Clarke
11 Isemberg
12 Dawson
13 Graham
14 Frank 
Clin Exc Med
Br Med J
Gastroenterol
Bruss Exec Med
Bruss Exc Med
Gastroenterol
Gastroenterol
Gut
Med J Austr
Austr NZ J Med
New Engl J Med
Scand J Gastroenterol
Ann Int Med
Clin Ther
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1977
1977
1978
1978
1978
1978
1978
1979
1979
1980
1983
1984
1985
1989
27
22
62
11
25
29
10
25
23
15
35
20
67
80
26
23
60
8
24
30
21
35
25
15
38
20
66
83
18
18
42
7
17
18
10
23
21
9
20
11
43
63
10
6
38
8
9
12
3
13
13
3
9
6
30
44
TOTALS
451
204
474
320
Figure 5.1

Working Procedures
35
which is the standard way of data presentation in the software. A different
presentation may be used in selected settings such as the evaluation of a given
effect according to the size of the sample, or to the frequency of the event in
the control group.
For both groups (treated subjects and controls) there are two columns
of data: number of patients studied and the events (healing in this case)
observed. To make the reading of the table easier, entering the ﬁrst group as
the controls followed by the study group is recommended.
Having these data available, one can perform and analyse ‘per protocol’
(PP) or, when needed, by an ‘intention-to-treat’ analysis (ITT) where the
dropouts are taken as failures. In the case of PP, the dropouts are not eval-
uated in the analysis and the number of such patients will be automatically
subtracted from the total number of subjects studied. In the ITT, if the event
is favourable (ulcer healing, etc.), the number of subjects is not modiﬁed,
whereas if the event is adverse (death, ulcer, relapse etc.) the number of
dropouts is added to the number of observed events. This procedure is cur-
rently used in biomedical research but it has a problem in that the assignment
of a subject to the group of observed events is made in a systematic rather
than random way, contrary to what it would be in an intention-to-treat
procedure.
In the example provided, the data do not include the dropouts and this is
justiﬁed by the fact that in those years Cimetidine was a great innovation to
cure the patients with gastric ulcer, the total number of cases was extremely
small and the follow-up very short (four weeks). All the reported studies
were original papers with the exception of the abstract by Navert (no.7).
Overall, the analysis has been performed with 14 trials, most of them were
small in size, with a total of 925 patients, 451 receiving a Placebo and 474
cimetidine.
EVALUATION OF THE NUMERIC OUTPUT FOR
EACH TRIAL
The numeric output is evaluated by selecting all the available options in the
menu that displays all the options when using the program.
Figure 5.2 shows the ‘simpliﬁed’ output that contains, for each trial, the
calculations related to the Risk Difference and to the Odds Ratio, accord-
ing to Gart and Peto. This is usually more than sufﬁcient in a standard
procedure.
In this example, one can see that the single trials have apparently contrast-
ing results: in fact, seven trials show a signiﬁcant superiority of Cimetidine,
while the other seven do not show any difference as compared to the placebo.

36
Chapter 5
CONDENSED
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
32.19
50.99
8.71
14.77
34.83
18.62
17.62
13.71
27.48
40.00
26.92
25.00
20.38
20.90
57.62
76.10
25.49
49.67
61.00
43.69
53.16
38.83
52.32
72.01
48.40
54.64
36.93
35.17
3.63
8.54
1.46
2.06
4.05
2.07
1.96
1.74
3.72
5.22
3.09
2.70
2.28
2.54
1.19
2.29
0.69
0.24
1.26
0.75
0.43
0.62
1.02
1.11
1.17
0.76
1.14
1.31
11.07
31.81
3.08
17.68
13.06
5.75
8.94
4.88
13.60
24.58
8.17
9.55
4.55
4.93
3.55
7.41
1.47
2.32
3.94
2.08
2.01
1.75
3.68
5.01
3.03
2.71
2.26
2.51
1.22
2.33
0.70
0.26
1.30
0.76
0.45
0.62
1.07
1.19
1.19
0.79
1.15
1.32
10.34
23.61
3.09
20.42
11.95
5.72
9.04
4.96
12.62
21.06
7.70
9.35
4.47
4.79
6.77
25.88
−8.07
−20.13
8.67
−6.45
−17.92
−11.40
2.64
7.99
5.43
−4.64
3.82
6.64
Difference of percentage
GART
∆
MIN
MAX
OR
MIN
MAX
PETO
OR
MIN
MAX
Figure 5.2
This is evident by considering the 95% conﬁdence interval: if this interval
includes one in the OR or zero in the RD, the result is not statistically sig-
niﬁcant.
However, considering Figure 5.2, the central measure (either the OR or
the RD) is always in favour of cimetidine and it is more or less consistent
in all the trials considered. This could suggest that the non-signiﬁcant result
may be due to the small number of subjects (i.e. small sample size, low
power). A conﬁrmation of this suspicion may be obtained from the results
of the meta-analysis.
Difference of percentage
Author
PLACEBO
CIMETIDINE
%Obs.
Ent.
∆
%Obs.
ES(∆)
MIN
MAX
Ent.
11 Bader
12 Frost
13 Englert
14 Cremer
15 Lambert
16 Dick
17 Navert
18 Ciclitira
19 Landecker
10 Clarke
11 Isemberg
12 Dawson
13 Graham
14 Frank 
27
22
62
11
25
29
10
25
23
15
35
20
67
80
37.04
27.27
61.29
72.73
36.00
41.38
30.00
52.00
56.52
20.00
25.71
30.00
44.78
55.00
26
23
60
8
24
30
21
35
25
15
38
20
66
83
69.23
78.26
70.00
87.50
70.83
60.00
47.62
65.71
84.00
60.00
52.63
55.00
65.15
75.90
32.19
50.99
8.71
14.77
34.83
18.62
17.62
13.71
27.48
40.00
26.92
25.00
20.38
20.90
12.97
12.81
8.56
17.81
13.35
12.79
18.13
12.81
12.67
16.33
10.96
15.12
8.44
7.28
57.62
76.10
25.49
49.67
61.00
43.69
53.16
38.83
52.32
72.01
48.40
54.64
36.93
35.17
6.77
25.88
−8.07
−20.13
8.67
−6.45
−17.92
−11.40
2.64
7.99
5.43
−4.64
3.82
6.64
Figure 5.3

Working Procedures
37
11 Bader
12 Frost
13 Englert
14 Cremer
15 Lambert
16 Dick
17 Navert
18 Ciclitira
19 Landecker
10 Clarke
11 Isemberg
12 Dawson
13 Graham
14 Frank 
2.26
3.20
1.00
0.66
2.34
1.40
0.87
1.05
1.98
2.09
2.28
1.54
2.33
2.76
1.76
1.49
2.63
0.91
1.68
1.92
1.29
1.90
1.51
1.27
2.02
1.55
2.83
2.96
1.29
2.14
0.38
0.72
1.40
0.73
0.67
0.55
1.31
1.65
1.13
0.99
0.82
0.93
0.57
0.67
0.38
1.10
0.60
0.52
0.78
0.53
0.66
0.79
0.50
0.64
0.35
0.34
2.40
3.46
1.12
2.87
2.57
1.75
2.19
1.59
2.61
3.20
2.10
2.26
1.52
1.60
3.63
8.54
1.46
2.06
4.05
2.07
1.96
1.74
3.72
5.22
3.09
2.70
2.28
2.54
1.19
2.29
0.69
0.24
1.26
0.75
0.43
0.62
1.02
1.11
1.17
0.76
1.14
1.31
11.07
31.81
3.08
17.68
13.06
5.75
8.94
4.88
13.60
24.58
8.17
9.55
4.55
4.93
0.17
0.83
−0.36
−1.43
0.23
−0.29
−0.85
−0.48
0.02
0.10
0.16
−0.27
0.13
0.27
ODDS RATIO (Logarithmic scale - GART)
Author
Y
X Ln(OR)
ES
Min
Max
OR
MIN MAX
Figure 5.4
If a detailed analysis of the calculations performed for obtaining the results
showed in Figure 5.2 is needed, this can be done by choosing the option
Expanded results. The output will provide the information shown in Figures
5.3–5.5.
Figure 5.3 shows the data relative to the Risk Difference organised in
columns showing the patients included and the rate of events (healing) that
occurred in the two groups studied (placebo and cimetidine), the difference
in rates with their relative standard error and the 95% conﬁdence interval
of the risk difference.
11 Bader
12 Frost
13 Englert
14 Cremer
15 Lambert
16 Dick
17 Navert
18 Ciclitira
19 Landecker
10 Clarke
11 Isemberg
12 Dawson
13 Graham
14 Frank 
27
22
62
11
25
29
10
25
23
15
35
20
67
80
10
6
38
8
9
12
3
13
13
3
9
6
30
44
26
23
60
8
24
30
21
35
25
15
38
20
66
83
18
18
42
7
17
18
10
23
21
9
20
11
43
63
13.7
12.3
39.3
6.3
12.7
15.3
8.8
21.0
17.7
6.0
15.1
8.5
36.2
54.5
4.26
5.73
2.66
0.68
4.27
2.75
1.19
2.00
3.29
3.00
4.90
2.50
6.77
8.52
0.297
0.349
0.144
1.231
0.321
0.257
0.587
0.281
0.396
0.537
0.226
0.399
0.121
0.108
3.55
7.41
1.47
2.32
3.94
2.08
2.01
1.75
3.68
5.01
3.03
2.71
2.26
2.51
1.22
2.33
0.70
0.26
1.30
0.76
0.45
0.62
1.07
1.19
1.19
0.79
1.15
1.32
10.34
23.61
3.09
20.42
11.95
5.72
9.04
4.96
12.62
21.06
7.70
9.35
4.47
4.79
Author
ODDS RATIO (Observed-Expected-PETO)
PLACEBO
Ent. Obs.
CIMETIDINE
Ent. Obs. Expec.
O-E
V
OR
Min
Max
Figure 5.5

38
Chapter 5
Figure 5.4 shows the calculations of the Odds ratio according to Gart. Fig-
ure 5.5 shows the Odds ratio according to Peto. Peto’s statistical method is
based on the difference between the expected values and those observed in the
study, and it is not affected by the presence of cells containing zero as a value.
The expanded output is not required for each meta-analysis as it represents
only the details of the calculations performed. It does not add information
useful to the analysis. It is designed for those who wish to obtain further
information on what has been done and, in particular, to enable a manual
check on the statistical procedure.
EVALUATION OF THE POOLED EFFECT
The printed page that shows the summary of the meta-analysis has two
distinct parts.
The ﬁrst shows the analysis performed by the ﬁxed effects models. This
model requires that the estimates of treatment effect obtained from all trials
belong to the same distribution. This requirement has to be veriﬁed by some
procedures. The ﬁrst is the Galbraith plot, which will be described in a
subsequent chapter. The other procedure is related to the formal test of
statistical heterogeneity, which is more precise because it does not have any
approximation that is inherent in the graphical representation.
The pooled effect for the data considered in the current example is shown
in Figure 5.6.
The result of this test for heterogeneity is indicated by Q, which is a chi-
square with the degrees of freedom (df) shown below it, under the hypothesis
of homogeneity. The statistical signiﬁcance is also shown in the same section
(p(Q)). Which of the four tests of statistical heterogeneity is used, is related to
the procedure chosen to evaluate the data. This aspect will be discussed later.
Once it is clear that the test for heterogeneity is not signiﬁcant (p = 0.584),
the hypothesis that the trials under study have the same distribution is vali-
dated and therefore one can proceed to use the information in the table (see
Figure 5.6).
If we focus on the column ‘Difference of percentage’, the ﬁrst line indicates
the mean effect. Between Cimetidine and Placebo there is a mean difference
in efﬁcacy of 23.3% with a 95% conﬁdence interval of 17.2–29.3 (bottom
rows). This effect is signiﬁcant as shown by both the conﬁdence interval
(which does not cross 0) and the speciﬁc test of statistical signiﬁcance whose
p is reported in the fourth row (0.000).
The other columns show the Odds ratio calculated using the procedures
already described. Small differences between results can be noted. They are

Working Procedures
39
FIXED EFFECT MODEL
DIFFERENCE
OF
PERCENTAGE
Peto
Gart
Mantel-Haenszel
LOG ODDS RATIO
SE(Φ)
z
p(z)
0.233
0.031
7.547
0.000
0.956
0.135
7.085
0.000
0.945
0.139
6.807
0.000
0.982
0.140
7.014
0.000
Q
p(Q)
df
11.318
0.584
13
8.524
0.808
13
8.617
0.801
13
8.563
0.805
13
OR
95%CI
2.600
2.572
2.671
0.293
0.172
1.996
3.387
1.959
3.375
2.030
3.515
Φ
Figure 5.6
due to the difference in the calculations performed for each test, caused in
part by the approximation introduced in the method of Gart and Mantel-
Haenszel, as described earlier.
Moving from the ﬁrst to the last row of the table, there is the natural
logarithm of the Odds ratio () for each test, its standard error (SE(Φ)), the
signiﬁcance (z) and its relative p value, the test Q for heterogeneity with its
signiﬁcance (p(Q)) and the degrees of freedom (df) and the Odds ratio (OR)
with its conﬁdence interval (95%CI).
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS ON
HETEROGENEITY
In the example shown in Figure 5.6, the test for statistical heterogeneity is
not signiﬁcant and the analysis should be restricted to this section by using
the data as presented. However, if the test for statistical heterogeneity is
signiﬁcant, the random effect model must be used.
It is important to note that there is no consensus on how to proceed in the
evaluation and interpretation when heterogeneity is present.

40
Chapter 5
If there is statistical heterogeneity, this means that the trials do not be-
long to the same distribution. A search for the causes of heterogeneity and
evaluation of ‘outlier trials’ needs to be done and analyses with and without
outlier trials need to be performed. However, even if the reason for hetero-
geneity is not detected by a careful review of the trials, the random effect
model should still be used because it does not have the requirement that all
the trials must come from the same distribution. Therefore, the conﬁdence
interval is wider and the model is more conservative.
There is a body of opinion that states that the random effect model should
always be used, because (a) the results are very similar compared to ﬁxed ef-
fect models when statistical heterogeneity is not present, (b) the results from
the random models are more ‘conservative’, and (c) measurements in biology
have an intrinsic heterogeneity because of the variability between the indi-
viduals. This variability can best be represented by a random effect model.
The author’s opinion is that one always needs to remember, as stated by
Jenicek, that the purpose of a meta-analysis is not only to calculate a mean
effect as a statistical summary, but to derive meaningful evidence for clinical
problems that apparently do not have deﬁnitive answers.
On this basis, one needs to read the study again in order to understand
and interpret information from all the data presented. At the same time,
the researcher should be able to form his or her own opinion. This is very
important particularly when there is a possible debate on the interpretation
of the output, for example, when there is heterogeneity.
The author’s suggested algorithm is summarised in Figure 5.7. This sug-
gests that when there is no statistical heterogeneity, one should always use a
HETEROGENEITY
FIXED EFFECT
MODELS
SUBGROUPS
ELIMINATE
INCLUDE
RANDOM EFFECT
MODELS
IGNORE
EXPLAIN
ABSENT
PRESENT
Figure 5.7

Working Procedures
41
ﬁxed effect model. However, for the reasons previously discussed, the result
would not change even after using a random effects model. When hetero-
geneity is present, never ignore it. Read the papers again trying to identify
every possible difference in the inclusion criteria, in the exclusion criteria,
in the characteristics of the subjects (mean age, co-morbidities, severity of
disease) in order to ﬁnd a way to separate trials into homogeneous groups.
If this attempt is successful, the analysis of sub-groups using the ﬁxed effect
model will solve the problem. On the other hand, if, by reading the papers,
it is found that the statistical heterogeneity is part of the variability of the
selected sample of trials and not the effect of differences among the groups
of patients or the treatment regimens, then in this case, in this case only, the
author recommends for using a random effect model.
The random effects model results can be interpreted using the same criteria
as described earlier.
Here the results (Figure 5.8) are very similar to those obtained by the
ﬁxed effect model as there is no statistical heterogeneity. If heterogeneity is
present, there can be several differences, particularly in the size of the OR
conﬁdence interval. The method used to calculate OR in the random effect
models is called the DerSimonian–Laird method.
RANDOM EFFECT MODEL
DIFFERENCE
OF
PERCENTAGE
LOG
ODDS
RATIO
0.233
0.031
7.547
0.000
0.945
0.139
6.807
0.000
Φ
SE(Φ)
z
p(z)
Q
p(Q)
df
OR
95%CI
0.293
0.172
2.572
1.959
3.375
Figure 5.8

42
Chapter 5
QUANTIFYING HETEROGENEITY: THE I 2 INDEX
It is known that Cochrane’s Q test for heterogeneity has a low statistical
power when meta-analyses include few studies. In this case, a cut off value
of 10% for signiﬁcance is more appropriate, even though it is likely to imply
higher Type I error (false positive conclusion). Conversely, the test has ex-
cessive power to detect clinically unimportant heterogeneity when the meta-
analysis includes many studies, particularly mega-trials.
Moreover, this test explores all heterogeneity, not only the true heterogene-
ity, i.e. the heterogeneity that is due to the actual difference among studies. A
very useful approach to this problem is to separate the total variation across
studies into the heterogeneity due to true difference (true heterogeneity) and
the heterogeneity due to chance. The I2 index expresses the percentage of
the total variation across studies due to heterogeneity. Some authors have
arbitrarily indicated the I2 values of 25%, 50% and 75% as evidence of
low, moderate and high heterogeneity, respectively. However, while the I2
index and its 95% CI are helpful in expressing a quantitative judgment on
heterogeneity, these values cannot be considered as categories for decision
making.
The program provides the calculation of the I2 index and its 95% CI for
the four methods of calculating Cochrane’s Q test.
TESTS FOR PUBLICATION BIAS
The publication bias has already been discussed in the previous chapter.
When the result of a meta-analysis is statistically signiﬁcant, the publi-
cation bias needs to be examined. To do so we can apply three different
procedures:
1 The Publication Bias Assessment according to the Klein formula: This
procedure does not answer the question ‘is there or not a publication
bias?’ but does answer the question: ‘if a publication bias is present, how
many null or negative studies are needed to void the ﬁndings from the
meta-analysis?’ This data is obtained automatically from the software
as an output similar to that shown in Figure 5.9. In this case the test
demonstrates that 155 studies with null or negative results are needed
to make the meta-analysis show no difference between treatments, and
therefore we can consider our results reliable.
There are no guidelines for a practical use of the results of this test. In
particular, there is no threshold number that validates the results of meta-
analysis. Common sense and practice helps.

Working Procedures
43
PUBLICATION BIAS ASSESSMENT
(number of void or negative trials necessary to render the meta-analysis meaningless.): 116
Number Needed to Treat (95% C.I.):  4 (3/6)
Number Needed to Treat (95% C.I.) (R.E.M.):  4 (3/7)
Test of funnel plot asymmetry: α=0.45   95%C.I.=–1.36/2.26    p(z)=0.63
Figure 5.9
2 The Funnel Plot: A full description of this plot can be found in Chapters
3 and 7.
3 The test for asymmetry applied on the funnel plot: Once standardised
estimates of ORs (on Y axis) and precision (on X axis) are obtained, for
each study a regression line can be drawn. In the absence of publication
bias, the intercept on Y axis (α) must be 0. If the 95% CI of α crosses the
zero line, we cannot say there is a publication bias. Conversely, if the 95%
CI of α does not cross the zero line, we can say there is a publication bias
(see also page 53–54). The meta-analysis page shows numerical values of
the intercept, its 95% CI, and its p value (Figure 5.9).
NUMBER NEEDED TO TREAT (NNT)
Another important and interesting calculation to give a real ‘bedside’ mean-
ing to the results of meta-analysis is the Number Needed to Treat (NNT).
For example, when the aim of a meta-analysis is to evaluate the efﬁcacy of
one drug versus another in relation to a one-year survival or to the healing
of an ulcer, the NNT indicates how many patients are to be treated to see the
one-unit difference between the two treatments. For example, in the eval-
uation of cimetidine versus placebo in the healing of gastric ulcer, NNT =
4 means that one needs to treat four patients using cimetidine to heal one
additional patient compared to Placebo. This information can also be used
for some pharmaco-economical evaluations.
When we perform such an evaluation on the efﬁcacy of a new drug, ei-
ther using a clinical trial or a meta-analysis, the result will lead us to the
conclusion whether or not the new drug is signiﬁcantly more effective than
the standard therapy. We will not have the information on the magnitude
of the difference between the two strategies (probabilistic approach). The
NNT measures the effect of a therapy (quantitative approach).
This number is calculated as the reverse of the ‘pooled risk difference’
 1
θ

,
so that two different values are produced depending on the ﬁxed effect model

44
Chapter 5
or the random effect model. Both values are calculated by the program,
together with their 95% conﬁdence interval (Figure 5.9).
GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION
The standard plots
In this section, the presentation of results of a meta-analysis using graphical
display is illustrated. The ﬁgures may be obtained from both ﬁxed effect
models and random effect models. In our example, because no heterogeneity
was found, the ﬁxed effect model was used to make the graphic plot.
Figure 5.10 shows a standard plot, commonly used and seen in the articles
based on meta-analysis. It shows the OR and its conﬁdence interval, repre-
sented by a box and two lines on each side of the box, for each individual
study. If the conﬁdence interval crosses the vertical line of unity, the result
is not statistically signiﬁcant.
On the left, outside the rectangle, the reference numbers of each trial are
shown.
Although all calculations for OR are performed using natural logarithms,
OR rather than its logarithm is more appropriate in reporting results as it
is easier to interpret. However, the scale needs to be logarithmic so that
the two segments of the conﬁdence interval are displayed symmetrically in
relation to the central box.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
2.600 (1.996/3.387)
Better PLACEBO
Better CIMETIDINE
1/64
1/16
1/4
1
4
16
64
Figure 5.10

Working Procedures
45
All trials show a trend for better efﬁcacy of Cimetidine as compared to
Placebo, although some individual trials do not reach statistical signiﬁcance,
in part, due to the small number of patients.
At the bottom, outside the rectangle, the pooled OR shows a statistically
signiﬁcant beneﬁt of Cimetidine.
Although this graph has become the classical way to represent a meta-
analysis, it does not give much information. Indeed, it shows only the OR
of each study and the pooled OR with their respective conﬁdence interval.
The results may also be expressed as Risk Difference. Figure 5.11 shows
this other kind of graph based on the same data set. It is important to note
that using the RD, the scale is linear and not logarithmic, and that the line
of identity is 0, not 1.
Another graphic plot that gives a more detailed representation of the data
is Forest’s Plot (Figure 5.12). In this plot, the graphic part is identical to the
plots in Figures 5.9 and 5.10, but additional information is added on the side:
author, year of publication, number of events/number of subjects included
in the study for each group. This kind of graph may also be presented using
either the OR-related or the RD-related data.
The plot related to the cumulative meta-analysis represents a speciﬁc ap-
proach to a different problem. An example is shown in Figure 4.12. In this
plot, the trials must be listed in a chronological order of publication. The
ﬁrst OR refers to the ﬁrst trial in time order, the second is the result of a
pooled OR between the ﬁrst and the second trial, the third is the pooled OR
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
0.233 (0.293/0.172)
Better PLACEBO
Better CIMETIDINE
−75.00
−50.00
−25.00
0.00
25.00
50.00
75.00
Figure 5.11

46
Chapter 5
2.600 (1.996/3.387)
Better PLACEBO
Better CIMETIDINE
1/64
1/16
1/4
1
4
16
64
N. AUTHOR
YEAR PLACEBO
CIMETIDINE
11 Bader
12 Frost
13 Englert
14 Cremer
15 Lambert
16 Dick
17 Navert
18 Ciclitira
19 Landecker
10 Clarke
11 Isemberg
12 Dawson
13 Graham
14 Frank 
1977
1977
1978
1978
1978
1978
1978
1979
1979
1980
1983
1984
1985
1989
10/27
6/22
38/62
8/11
9/25
12/29
3/10
13/25
13/23
3/15
9/35
6/20
30/67
44/80
18/26
18/23
42/60
7/8
17/24
18/30
10/21
23/35
21/25
9/15
20/38
11/20
43/66
63/83
Pooled (Fixed effect)
204/451
320/474
Figure 5.12
among the ﬁrst three trials, and so on. The last OR is the one resulting from
a meta-analysis of all the studies. In other words, this plot shows how every
new study added to the previous meta-analysis is able to modify the result
of the meta-analysis itself. On the left-hand side of the ﬁgure, the number
of patients added in every year is listed.
From this graph, one can see that in the year of publication for the ﬁrst two
studies (1977), the results were already deﬁnitively in favour of Cimetidine.
These results were conﬁrmed in the next year. All subsequent studies after
1978 can be considered as unnecessary or even harmful, because of the risk
of adding uncertainty to a problem already solved by the meta-analytical
evaluation. These later studies, by adding more patients to the meta-analysis,
have allowed a more precise estimation of the OR, which however remains
substantially unchanged (the precision is greater when the random error
Better PLACEBO
Better CIMETIDINE
1/64
1/16
1/4
1
4
16
64
Year
N. Trial
Patients
1977
1978
1979
1980
1983
1984
1985
1989
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
53
98
220
239
288
347
378
438
486
516
589
629
762
925
Figure 5.13

Working Procedures
47
decreases; in this case, the conﬁdence interval becomes smaller, represented
by shorter lines).
The cumulative meta-analysis allows a historical evaluation of the data
published in the literature and makes possible evaluations unfeasible with
the standard meta-analysis. However, the ﬁnal pooled ORs, whether by the
standard or cumulative meta-analysis, are identical.
A similar representation can be obtained by considering the difference of
percentage instead of the OR. The way of reading the data is similar, although
the scale is not logarithmic in this case and is expressed as a difference of
percentage.
The Galbraith plot
The Galbraith plot is a more informative graphical representation. In this
graph every trial is represented by a number.
The graph axes have two
different characteristics: on the x axis the precision of the study (Figure
5.14, line a), as the inverse of the standard error of the OR, or the inverse
of the dispersion
x =
1
SE()
and on the y axis the standardised OR logarithm (Figure 5.14, line b), which
expresses the amount of the effect, given by
y =

SE()
where  = Ln OR.
Points which are closer to the origin (0,0) indicate poorly informative trials,
whereas points far from the origin represent the most precise trials and have
more weight in the meta-analysis.
For each trial, one can obtain the OR by drawing a line from the 0,0 point
to the logarithmic scale, crossing through the point representing the trial
(Figure 5.15, line c). The conﬁdence interval, which is always approximated
in a graph, is obtained by drawing two lines between 0,0 and y ± 2 and then
reading the value on the scale (Figure 5.15, lines d and e).
The Galbraith plot contains three continuous parallel lines (Figure 5.16,
lines f, g and h). The central one, in bold, points to the pooled OR on the
scale (line f), the conﬁdence interval is indicated by the segment of arc parallel
to the scale (segment i). These three lines, the arc and the numerical values
of the OR and of its 95% conﬁdence interval are automatically calculated
by the program.

48
Chapter 5
6
5
4
3
2
3:2
1
2:3
1:2
1:3
1:4
1:5
1:6
6
5
4
3
2
3:2
1
2:3
1:2
1:3
1:4
1:5
1:6
Precision x=1/SE(∆)
Relative error
100%
50%
33%
25%
20%
0
2
4
6
Precision x=1/SE(∆)
Relative error
100%
50%
33%
25%
20%
0
2
4
6
−2
0
2
1
Standardised
log odds ratio
y = ∆/SE(∆)
−2
0
2
1
Standardized
log odds ratio
y = ∆/SE(∆)
a
b
d
c
e
This represents a single
trial given by the symbol 1
Figure 5.14
Figure 5.15

Working Procedures
49
6
5
4
3
2
2.021
3:2
1.303
1
0.841
2:3
1:2
1:3
1:5
1:4
1:6
Precision x=1/SE(∆)
Relative error
100%
50%
33%
25%
20%
0
2
4
6
−2
0
2
Standardised
log odds ratio
y = ∆/SE(∆)
g
f
i
h
Better
controls
Better
treated
7
6
8
1
2
5
Figure 5.16
The other two lines, originating from 0, ±2 (Figure 5.16, lines g and h),
indicate a ‘homogeneity area’ within their limits.
If one or more points
(trials) are outside of this area, they are considered as ‘heterogeneous’.
If this occurs, we need to undergo all the procedures previously discussed
for heterogeneity.
Thus, the Gallbraith plot contains some elements that make it very infor-
mative as compared to the traditional plots: it includes the precision (as the
inverse of the variance or the dispersion) of every single study, and the ho-
mogeneity area identiﬁes which studies are ‘outside the mean’, establishing
heterogeneity in the analysis.
Figure 5.17 shows the Gallbraith plot based on the previously described
example of Cimetidine versus Placebo.
One can see that: (1) all the studies are within the homogeneity area; (2)
all are in the higher part of the graphic plot; thus, (3) all are in favour of

50
Chapter 5
6
5
4
3
3.387
2.600
1.996
3:2
1
2:3
1:2
1:3
1:5
1:4
1:6
Precision x=1/SE(∆)
Relative error
100%
50%
33%
25%
20%
0
2
4
6
−2
0
2
Standardised
log odds ratio
y = ∆/SE(∆)
Better
PLACEBO
Better
CIMETIDINE
2
9
6
4 7
8
10
3
14
13
5 11
12
Figure 5.17
Cimetidine; and (4) the relative error (imprecision) is very high in several
studies, because these are very small.
Figure 5.18 shows the Gallbraith plot based on the difference in percent-
age. In this case, the line of equivalence has a value of 0 and the scale, as in
the traditional plot, is linear.
The l’Abb`e plot
Figure 5.19 shows the l’Abb´e plot. In this graphic plot, each trial is again
represented by a number. The coordinates on X−Y axes are the proportion
of the observed events in the control and treated subjects, respectively.
The solid line represents the points where the event rate in the two groups
is identical. The other lines represent the points where a difference of 25%
and 50% occurs between the groups.
The size of the circle containing the number of the trial is proportional to
the sample size of the trial.

Working Procedures
51
2
−2
0
2
0.172
Better
CIMETIDINE
Better
PLACEBO
0.233
0.293
10 51
9 11
14
3
8
6
12
Precision x = 1/SE(∆)
Standardised
estimate
y = ∆/SE(∆)
Relative error
0.00
0.06
0.13
0.19
6.40
8.00
10.67
16.00
32.00
47
13
Figure 5.18
Figure 5.19

52
Chapter 5
This graph can be useful in understanding some of the causes of hetero-
geneity. Some examples will be discussed later.
The Funnel plot
Figure 5.20 shows an example of the Funnel plot where all the trials are
plotted on X−Y axes. The X axis represents the Odds Ratio with a log scale
while the Y axis shows the sample size also with a log scale.
The trials included in the Funnel plot seem to be distributed quite sym-
metrically around the axis represented by the pooled Odds Ratio.
Figure 5.21 shows the plot from a meta-analysis that investigated the
effect of a drug aimed at reducing mortality. The Funnel plot shows an
obvious asymmetry around the pooled Odds Ratio axis. As shown by the
graph, studies with wide sample size are less effective. This may be partly
responsible for the asymmetry; however, it may also be due to the absence
of published papers with small sample size and negative results.
If using this plot, it should be kept in mind that the results are not quanti-
tative but given by a visual assessment, which may be very obvious in some
cases but less so in others.
1/64
1/16
1/4
1
ODDS RATIO
100
N
10
1000
4
16
64
Figure 5.20

Working Procedures
53
N
10
100
1000
10000
100000
1/64
1/16
1/4
1
ODDS RATIO
4
16
64
Figure 5.21
The test for asymmetry of the Funnel plot
Figure 5.22 shows the test for asymmetry of the Funnel plot related to cases
in Figure 5.20. As shown, 95% CI of the intercept crosses the zero line and
therefore indicates there is no signiﬁcant publication bias.
Figure 5.23 shows the test for asymmetry of the Funnel plot related to
cases in Figure 5.21. As shown, 95% CI of the intercept does not cross the
zero line and therefore indicates there is a signiﬁcant publication bias.
The plot for sub-group analysis
Figure 5.24 shows how the sub-group analysis may be helpful to understand
a problem in the hetereogeneity of the subjects considered.
A number of studies evaluating the efﬁcacy of Somatostatin in prevent-
ing post-ERCP pancreatitis were collected. The meta-analysis, by analysing
all the trials, did not show a signiﬁcant effect of the drug (pooled ORs—
represented at the bottom of the ﬁgure), but the great variability of efﬁcacy
observed in the trials gives rise to the suspicion that something in the trial
design or conduct could have caused this difference. Therefore, the trials
were divided according to the administration methods of Somatostatin: in

54
Chapter 5
Precision x=1/SE(∆)
Standardised
log odds ratio
y = ∆/SE(∆)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
−2
0
2
+
+
+
++
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Figure 5.22
three studies, Somatostatin was given by intravenous bolus , in three studies
as slow bolus and in ﬁve trials by continuous infusion.
The sub-group analysis demonstrates that in the ﬁrst and third group there
is a signiﬁcant efﬁcacy of the drug, while in the second group no difference
was demonstrated compared to Placebo. Whether this is a true reﬂection of
the drug efﬁcacy needs to be assessed with biological clinical trials testing
this apparent difference.
This kind of graph, generated by the software program, is easy to read and
has the advantage of showing in a single ﬁgure, a synthesis of the graphical
and numerical results of multiple meta-analysis: one for each of the evaluated
groups and one for all the groups together. Moreover, both the results of the
Precision x=1/SE(∆)
Standardised
log odds ratio
y = ∆/SE(∆)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
−2
0
2
++ +
+
+
+
++
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Figure 5.23

Working Procedures
55
0.344 (0.111/1.062)
0.312 (0.108/0.897)
1.401 (0.775/2.532)
1.411 (0.780/2.551)
0.327 (0.147/0.731)
0.302 (0.141/0.647)
0.585 (0.326/1.049)
0.673 (0.442/1.039)
Better Controls
Better Treated
IL AUTHOR
YEAR Controls Treated
1/64
1/16
1/4
1
4
16
64
bolus
3 Bordes
7
Deschner
10 Bordes
1988
1989
1998
2/17
1/8
8/80
0/16
2/17
2/80
short term
1 Andriulli
5 Seari
9 Persson
long term
2  Borsch
4  Testoni
6  Flati
8  Guelrud
11 Poon
1984
1988
1988
1991
1999
1/10
5/26
1/15
6/8
11/111
1/10
2/27
0/11
2/8
3/109
2002
1988
1992
13/199
4/22
5/28
21/183
2/17
4/26
SubGroup
11/105
4/113
(REM)
(FEM)
SubGroup
22/249
27/226
(REM)
(FEM)
SubGroup
24/170
8/165
(REM)
(FEM)
Pooled
57/524
39/504
(REM)
(FEM)
Figure 5.24
pooled ORs, as calculated according to the ﬁxed effect model (FEM) and the
random effect model (REM), are displayed.
Using ‘ﬂags’ while entering the trials in the meta-analysis program allows
the trials to be recognised according to their characteristics, which makes
the analysis of different sub-groups easy and avoids any modiﬁcation of the
database at this point.
The sub-group analysis is a powerful tool to explore the causes of some
differences in the results of the trials that are not dependent on the quality
of the drug or the procedure under evaluation.


6
CHAPTER 6
How to Read, Evaluate
and Present a
Meta-Analysis
A meta-analysis paper must contain all the details necessary to understand
what has been done and how it was done.
By strictly following the rules for the correct execution of a meta-analysis,
a good meta-analysis will be obtained. However, in order to give a good
interpretation of the results this is not sufﬁcient in itself.
The close collaboration between the meta-analyst and the clinician, an
expert in the topic under evaluation, is required in order to accomplish the
best interpretation of the results.
57

58
Chapter 6
HOW TO READ AND EVALUATE A
META-ANALYSIS
In reading a scientiﬁc paper, one not only tries to learn from other investiga-
tors experienced in the subject, but one also evaluates all the procedural and
methodological aspects that contribute to the overall value of the work pre-
sented. To do so, quality scores have been proposed. They can be applied to
evaluate quantitatively and in an objective manner the quality of the article.
In meta-analysis, as in clinical trials, before accepting the conclusions, a
critical evaluation has to be performed.
The most commonly used criteria for the evaluation of a meta-analysis
are listed in Figure 6.1, which can be easily accessible on-line from: http://
york.ac.uk/inst/crd/info.htm
Validation of a meta-analysis
The 10 points rule
1.
Did the authors work according to a written protocol?
2.
Did they carefully describe the questions to be answered by the meta-analysis?
3.
Did they clearly describe their research strategy?
4.
Did they evaluate the quality of the trials included in the meta-analysis?
5.
How was the information summarised?
6.
Did they include the characteristics of the patients enrolled in the trials?
7.
Did they use a graphic presentation of the results?
8.
Did they investigate the outcome heterogeneity?
9.
How was the overall therapeutical gain calculated?
10. Was the publication bias taken into account?
Figure 6.1
It is evident that these ten rules comprise all the technical and method-
ological aspects of a meta-analysis, even though not all authors accept all
of them. In particular, Rule 4, while asking whether or not the investigator
made sure of the accuracy and scientiﬁc value (quality) of the trials included
in the analysis, fails to ask how the trials were evaluated. The assessment
of the quality of a trial is not part of the ﬁnal calculations of meta-analysis,
but it is essential to gather information for the evaluation of heterogeneity
or a sensitivity analysis. Rule 7 asks whether or not the results are reported
using a graphic plot, but it does not deal with the accuracy of such a repre-
sentation. Finally, clinical information on the actual value of the work is not
taken into account while evaluating the quality of the meta-analysis. This
latter issue represents one of the most important aspects in all the validations
and quality assessments.
Figure 6.2 shows our interpretation of the concept of the quality of a
meta-analysis, combining methodological concerns with more general con-
siderations on the appropriateness of such an investigation.

How to Read, Evaluate and Present a Meta-Analysis
59
Validation of a meta-analysis
The golden rules
1.
Was a RCT the most appropriate way to approach the problem?
2.
Are sources, inclusion and exclusion criteria, methods and end points clearly defined?
3.
Did the authors evaluate the homogeneity of the inclusion/exclusion criteria for each trial?
4.
How were the dropouts evaluated in each trial?
5.
Was the heterogeneity of the outcome investigated?
6.
Was the sensitivity evaluated in at least one way?
7.
Was the publication bias calculated?
8.
Is the output of the meta-analysis correct and complete?
9.
Was an expert statistician consulted during the analysis?
Figure 6.2
If an RCT is not the ideal study design for a particular investigation, a
meta-analysis should not be performed. Frequently meta-analyses have been
performed with RCTs when RCT was not the ideal way to establish the
efﬁcacy of a therapy. If such a meta-analysis were to show no evidence of
beneﬁt of a particular therapy, then this conclusion would be unsound, ﬁrstly
because the RCT is not the appropriate study design, and secondly because
there may be very few RCTs performed in this particular area.
Another crucial aspect is how to deal with dropouts. They should always
be taken into account. Studies that show a 5% dropout should not be in-
cluded in the same meta-analysis with others that have a 50% dropout rate.
These differences may represent important discrepancies between trials. It is
a good practice to include studies which have a similar dropout rate, dura-
tion of follow-up and so on in a single meta-analysis, and to use sensitivity
analyses for trials in which these parameters are very different.
Rule 8 will be addressed below.
Rule 9 underlines the importance of
a statistician evaluating statistical procedures and a physician interpreting
the clinical ﬁndings. Therefore, a strong collaboration between these two
professionals is essential, in our opinion, to guarantee accuracy and the
clinical relevance of a meta-analysis.
HOW TO PRESENT A META-ANALYSIS
There are different ways to present the results of a meta-analysis and the
graphic output. This can make it difﬁcult for the reader to evaluate the
data correctly and understand how the meta-analysis was carried out. This
observation has practical clinical relevance since it is often difﬁcult to decide
whether to change one’s clinical practice according to the results of a meta-
analysis.
When presenting a meta-analysis the data should be provided as numbers
(tables) and graphics to help the reader to judge how well the analysis was
performed. In particular, we always recommend including:

60
Chapter 6
The number of trials in the meta-analysis
The total number of patients evaluated
This information describes the population studied. It is easy to understand
that the relevance and impact of a meta-analysis performed on 50 trials
is greater than that of an analysis of three trials. The same consideration
applies to the number of subjects studied.
The test for heterogeneity
It is important to know whether the patients included in each single trial have
the same distribution. If heterogeneity is present, the investigator should
explain how it was interpreted and what has been done to remove it. Het-
erogeneity can also be represented using graphic plots (the Galbraith plot is
preferred over the Funnel plot as the latter has no quantitative evaluation)
but it is essential to perform the test and include its result in the paper.
Publication bias assessment (PBA)
PBA is a tool used to assess how many unpublished studies, similar to those
published and analysed, are needed to make the results of the meta-analysis
not statistically signiﬁcant. This helps to reinforce the validity of the results
provided.
Number needed to treat (NNT)
Odds ratio or risk difference
These data have to be reported numerically as well as using a graphic plot,
and each value needs its own conﬁdence interval.
Graphic representation
The standard plot and Forest plot are the most used for graphic representa-
tions. The Galbraith plot gives the most complete and informative graphic
representation. In fact, it not only shows the effect of the treatment but also
the precision and the effect of each single trial included in the meta-analysis.
It also provides information on heterogeneity between the trials analysed.
Sub-group analysis
When discrepancies between the size of the effect under evaluation are noted
for studies, it is mandatory to look for differences in study design, partic-
ularly in the patient inclusion and exclusion criteria, mode of drug admin-
istration or dose, or different techniques in surgical or radiological trials.

How to Read, Evaluate and Present a Meta-Analysis
61
This will enable the undertaking of an analysis of sub-groups based on these
potential differences, which often allow a better understanding of the data,
for example assessing the direct relationship between the efﬁcacy of treat-
ment and some speciﬁc characteristic of trial design, including characteristics
of patients, e.g. old versus young.
EXAMPLES
A few examples of correct representations of a meta-analysis are shown
below.
In the ﬁrst example (Figure 6.3) the upper left corner shows the subject
of the meta-analysis, trials of Interferon versus placebo for the treatment
of hepatitis C. The meta-analysis was performed with the selection of 15
trials including a total number of 767 patients (upper right corner). The
Galbraith plot shows that all the trials were similar for individual precision
of the estimate of the effect, and there was no heterogeneity.
IFN vs. Placebo
Sustained Response at 6 months
15 trials
767 patients
Het    p = 1.00
PBA = 168
NnT = 5
OR = 7.9  (5.1 - 12.2)
1/64
7
16
14
11
12
14
15
25
9
8
13
21
22
26
Better PLACEBO
1/16 1/4
4
16
64
12.173
7.929
6 5.164
Better
IFN
5
4
3
2
3:2
1
2:3
1:2
6
4
2
−2
0
2
Standardized
log odds ratio
y = ∆/se(∆)
0
100%
Relative error
Better IFN
Precision x =1//se(∆)
50% 33% 25%
20%
Better
PLACEBO
1:3
1:4
1:5
1:6
Odds ratio
(log scale)
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1
Figure 6.3
From this graphic representation it is possible to conclude that Interferon is
an effective drug. The PBA is 168, indicating that the analysis is very reliable.
NNT and Odds ratio are also represented together with their conﬁdence
intervals.
The second example (Figure 6.4) shows the sustained anti-viral response,
following 6 months Interferon alone versus Interferon + Ribavirin for the

62
Chapter 6
IFN vs IFN+Ribavirin
Sustained Response at 6 months
5 trials
1062 patients
Het p = 0.40
PBA = 142
NnT = 4
OR = 5.3  (4.0 - 7.1)
1/64
5
4
1
2
3
Better IFN
1/16
1/4
1
4
16
64
Better IFN + RIBAV
Relative error 100% 50% 33% 25% 20%
6
4
2
0
Precision x = 1//se(∆)ˆ
Standardized
log odds ratio
y = ∆/se(∆)
ˆ
ˆ
−2
0
2
4
5
1
2
3
7.120
5.335
3.998
Better
IFN + RIBAV
65
4
3
1
2
Odds ratio
(log scale)
Better
IFN
1:2
1:3
2:3
1:4
1:5
1:6
3:2
Figure 6.4
treatment of hepatitis C. Five trials were included in the analysis and the
total number of patients was 1062.
The Galbraith plot clearly shows that two out of the ﬁve trials have a
precision signiﬁcantly higher than that of the other three, indicating that
these two studies can be considered as ‘mega-trials’ (i.e. a greater number
of patients were included).
This way of illustrating the results of a meta-analysis is the most complete
and accurate for any software.

7
CHAPTER 7
How to Use the
Program
The program is easy and intuitive to use as it is a Windows-based program.
The handbook will describe in detail all the functions of the program;
possible problems are explored.
63

64
Chapter 7
GENERAL INFORMATION
META is a program for META-ANALYSIS. It has a database into which it
is easy to enter the original data and to elaborate the data statistically. The
graphic section allows a visual representation of this data and allows it to
be printed using any Windows-supported printer.
Although one can use this program without speciﬁc training, this part of
the handbook provides useful information in order to use it properly to its
full potential.
Minimum requirement of the system
Processor: PENTIUM III (or compatible);
Operative system: Windows 9x/ME/XP/2000.
Memory: 64 MB of conventional memory free;
Hard disk with at least 10 MB free;
Colour Monitor with a resolution of at least 800 × 600;
Printer any Laserjet or InkJet Windows-supported.
Main characteristics of the program
The program is designed to
r save a large number of studies organised in one or more databases and to
easily modify data already entered;
r create and save data regarding multiple endpoints for each individual study
with an easy and fast evaluation these data;
r select only a part of the data entered for a separate evaluation;
r sort the inserted studies for different ﬁelds, with a simple click of the
mouse;
r produce an analytical or graphic output (derived from results of the calcu-
lations) for the video or for the printer. The program is compatible with
most printers, and it generates printouts with high resolution graphics;
r select the format of the output according to individual needs, avoiding the
printing of unnecessary results.
The program is entirely written in Delphi language and it uses archives in
Paradox format.
INSTALLATION OF THE PROGRAM
To install the program on a computer follow these steps:
1 Insert the installation CD (auto-starting), then wait for the automatic start
of the installation program.

How to Use the Program
65
2 If the installation program does not start automatically, click on the icon
‘My computer’ on the screen, then on the CD drive and double-click on
the Setup.exe icon.
3 Follow the instructions of the installation program (all the CD ﬁles will
be transferred to the hard disk).
STRUCTURE OF THE PROGRAM
The program ‘Metanalysis’ has been designed to work with all operative
systems that are Windows-based. Thus, the characteristic of its structure is
similar to all standard Windows programs.
Main features of the program
The program window will open in this way:
Title bar Menu bar
Tools bar
List of trial page Editing of trial
page
Status bar
Title bar
Shows the program title ‘Metanalysis’, followed by the complete path name
of the current trial.
Menu bar
It contains the menu items for different program functions.

66
Chapter 7
Some of the menu items have a sub-menu that can be seen by clicking
the item selected.
To open the selected function, click over the item.
A short description of the different functions of the menu is given below
(the symbol ‘/’ indicates the separation between the main menu item
and the sub-menu item).
File/New
To create a new archive ﬁle.
File/Open
To open an existing archive ﬁle. The program, when started, automatically
opens the last meta-analysis used by the program. Therefore, one needs to
use this function only when moving from one meta-analysis to another.
File/Save as. . .
To save the meta-analysis on a ﬁle different from that in use, or on a ﬂoppy
disk or another drive, or to transfer the meta-analysis to another computer.
Close
To close the meta-analysis.
Exit from Metanalysis
To exit completely from the program.
Select/All trials
To see all the meta-analysis trials without any selection ﬁlter.
Select/Simple select
To add a selection ﬁlter to the meta-analysis trials using the most signiﬁcant
ﬁelds. Only the selected trials will be shown and the calculation will be done
on them.
Select/Advanced select
Another function to add some selection ﬁlters. It differs from the previous
one since it utilizes all the ﬁelds. It can be used especially by those familiar
with the SQL language (System Query Language).
Select/Display/Execute SQL query
To show and modify the SQL query relative to the current selection. Useful
only for those who are familiar with the SQL language.

How to Use the Program
67
Calculate
To calculate the meta-analysis using only the selected trials. This computa-
tion is necessary to obtain the output both in text format and in graphic form.
Display/Graphic Results
After having used the function ‘calculate’, it is possible with this function to
see and print the results of the ﬁnal calculations in a graphic format. Different
types of graphs are available and will be described in later sections.
Display/Analytic Results
To see and print the results of the calculation in text format.
Display/Variables
To see the values of the main variables used by the program. It is useful if a
debugger program needs to be used.
Options
To set different options of the program.
Tools bar
It contains a series of buttons to rapidly access the main functions of the
program.
The ﬁrst series of buttons are grouped in a tools bar that allows display and
editing of different trials.
The other buttons are similar to those used for the other menu items.
The buttons are not always active. When a program function is not available,
the corresponding button is not activated and appears in grey.
When moving the mouse pointer over a button, the program will show a
message explaining the button function for a few seconds.
Status bar
Shows the following information:
r the position of the trial inside the table;
r the total number of selected trials;
r the order of the included trials;
r the page of the list of trials;
r a global view in a grid form of the trials included in the table;
The user has the opportunity to select part of the trials and only these will
be seen in the grid.

68
Chapter 7
The grid shows only the most signiﬁcant data of the trials; to have a
complete list of the trials one needs to go to the ‘Trial Detail’ page.
Trial Detail page
This page shows in detail the data of each single trial and allows editing of
every part of its data.
Legend
List of risk
factors or
outcomes
ID number
A numeric ﬁeld to identify a trial in a unique way. It can be shown, instead of
the ‘Symbol’ ﬁeld, to identify the trial in the different graphical and analytical
outputs.
Symbol
This ﬁeld also identiﬁes a trial in a unique way. It can be used instead of the
ﬁeld ‘ID Number’.
Type of trial
It can be either a ‘Full paper’ or an ‘Abstract’. To select one of the two
options just click over the text cell.
Quality score
It can be a number included between 0 and 100. It can be useful to order
the trials in different outputs.
Flags
This ﬁeld allows the attachment of ‘ﬂags’ to indicate with characters (up
to 10) some characteristics of the study. It is possible to use any kind of
character; every character will identify a characteristic. Later, during analy-
sis, it will be possible to select all studies having a speciﬁc characteristic. For

How to Use the Program
69
example: ‘MC’ might have the meaning of ‘Male Children’. When a new
ﬂag is added (never used before during the meta-analysis), it is necessary to
edit the table of ﬂags by clicking over the button next to the text cell and
adding it to the speciﬁc table of the new ﬂag and its description.
Author
Name of the ﬁrst author who published the article.
Journal
Name of the journal, in full or abbreviated form.
Year
Year of publication of the study.
Note
Any note up to a maximum of 100 characters.
RISK FACTORS description
It is possible to add more than one ‘Risk Factor’ (survival, side effects, length
of stay, etc.). In the phase of computation it will be possible to choose any
particular risk factor for evaluation using the meta-analysis.
+/–
The character ‘+’ or ‘−’ indicates if the event under study is a positive event
(recovery, survival, etc.) or a negative one (recurrence, death, etc.). This will
modify the insertion of some legends in the ﬁgures.
Exposed–Events–Drop
The numeric values to be inserted for every trial and every factor. In the
heading of these columns the corresponding legend should be indicated.
File format
For each meta-analysis the program generates two ﬁles on the disk: one with
the “.DB” extension, which is a database table in paradox format; the other
has the ‘.INI’ extension, which is a conﬁguration ﬁle. The name and the
allocation of these two ﬁles are decided by the user.
USE OF THE PROGRAM
This chapter does not contain any information regarding the Windows oper-
ating system. For any problem concerning this topic we recommend referring
to a Windows user manual.

70
Chapter 7
GETTING STARTED
To start the program, double-click the Metanalysis icon on the desktop. If
you do not ﬁnd the Metanalysis icon on the desktop, try clicking over the
START menu Programs\Metanalysis.
When you open the program for the ﬁrst time, you will see the following
window:
It is now necessary to create a new ﬁle, as explained in detail in the following
section.
How to create a new metanalysis ﬁle
Select from the menu the ﬁeld File/New or click over the tools bar button.
A dialogue box will appear to choose the name of the ﬁle.
Write the name for the new ﬁle inside the text cell ‘File name’ i.e. ‘Test’
(the ﬁle’s name should respect the ﬁle’s name rules for Windows).
Conﬁrm by clicking over the ‘Open’ button.
The following program window will appear:
To add a new trial
Click
over the tools bar button. If the page currently in use is the ‘List
of trials’ page, the edit page ‘Trial Detail’ will appear automatically and it
will be possible to add the trial’s data.

How to Use the Program
71
To conﬁrm the inserted data in this page and save them, you need to click
over the tools bar button; to delete them click over the button
.
To modify a pre-existing trial
If the page currently in use is the ‘List of trials’, you need to ﬁrst open the
‘Trial detail’ page by clicking over the speciﬁc icon or double-clicking the
grid row. It is now possible to modify any ﬁeld of the trial.

72
Chapter 7
Be aware that the ﬁelds with grey background (Description, +/−and the
two legends) are global and if you make a change to these data, the change
will affect all the trials in the meta-analysis ﬁle.
How to save the meta-analysis
Usually, you do not need to save the meta-analysis ﬁle, because the program
will automatically save the ﬁle while you are working on or updating the ﬁle.
However, you may want to save the meta-analysis ﬁle with a different
name, in a different folder of the hard-disk or in another drive to move it to
another computer. In these cases, select from the menu the item ‘File/Save
as. . . ’.
A new dialogue window will appear where you will indicate the new folder
or the new ﬁle name. The ﬁle name must have the ‘.DB’ extension that will
automatically be added by the program.
The saved meta-analysis will be the active one on the program.
How to select the trials for analysis
Usually, the program works on all the trials included in the table for the
meta-analysis.
However, one can decide to select only a part of the trials for the meta-
analysis.
To easily set some selection criteria for the trials, click over the menu item
‘Select/Simple select’
or over the toolbar button.
The program will now show the windows with a form to deﬁne the selec-
tion criteria.

How to Use the Program
73
Add to the form ONLY the data necessary for the selection.
For example, if selecting all the trials with an ID number greater than or
equal to 10, published in the 1980s and not including the abstracts, you
should ﬁll in the form like this:
More details are needed for the two selection ﬁelds ‘Flags AND’ and ‘Flags
OR’; these ﬁelds allow selection based on the ‘ﬂags’ added to the different
trials.
In each ﬁeld you can insert multiple characters, each one related to a ﬂag.
The characters inserted in the ‘Flags AND’ ﬁeld must be present in the
Flags ﬁeld of the trials to be selected; on the other hand, by adding more
than one character in the ‘Flags OR’ ﬁeld, the program will select all the
trials in which at least one of the inserted characters is present in the Flags
ﬁeld.
For example, let us assume that in the table trial we have four trials with
the following ﬂags: trial 1 ‘BCM’, trial 2 ‘AB’, trial 3 ‘CDE’, trial 4 ‘M’.
If in the ‘Flags AND’ ﬁeld we write the character ‘BM’, only the ﬁrst trial
will be selected, because it is the only one containing both the ﬂag ‘B’ and
‘M’.
If in the ‘Flags OR’ ﬁeld we write the characters ‘BM’, three trials will be
selected: the ﬁrst, the second and the fourth, because in these three trials at
least one character contained in this ﬁeld is present.

74
Chapter 7
Advanced Select
This function, like the previous one, permits selection of the trials to be
evaluated, but it works in a different way and it is reserved for those who
are familiar with the internal structure of the trial table and are familiar with
SQL (System Query Language).
The Insert criteria button allows insertion of a new selection criterion. A
window will appear where it will be possible to select the ﬁeld for the selec-
tion, the operator and the value to be compared.
For example, if one wants to select all the trials with an ID Number > 4,
one needs to ﬁll the window as follows:

How to Use the Program
75
It is possible to insert multiple selection criteria. Each criterion has its
own row in the space of the window.
With the buttons
and
you can invert the row order.
Each row contains a single variable or characteristic. The program auto-
matically defaults to associating these together by the operation AND. To
change this selection the operator AND is changed to OR by clicking the
button Insert OR.
If you want to select all the trials with an ID Number > 4 or the ‘B’
character in the Flags ﬁeld, the selection window will appear as follows:
To modify a criterion, double click over the speciﬁc row or click over the
Edit criteria button, after having selected the row with the mouse.
To delete a criterion, use the Remove criteria button.
To delete all the selection criteria, click the Clear all button.
After having set the different selection criteria, the Save Query and Load
Query buttons will save all the selection criteria inserted, which will be saved
on the ﬁle for later operations.
The Execute button will generate and perform the SQL instruction related
to the inserted criteria. As a result, in the trials table only the selected trials
will appear.
The SQL button shows the SQL instruction generated by the program.
Those familiar with SQL may modify the instruction according to their
needs.

76
Chapter 7
How to show all the trials
After having selected the trials, having removed the selection ﬁlter in order
to show all the trials included in the meta-analysis ﬁle, select the Select/All
trials function or click
over the tools bar button.
Calculate
This is the function that performs the analysis on the selected trials and
calculates all the meta-analysis data. During this phase, it is possible to send
the output of the calculation directly to the printer. In every case, the results
are saved for further outputs either to the screen or printer.
All the form ﬁelds must be ﬁlled before starting the calculation.
The Date is the date of calculation and it will appear on the outputs. One
can modify it by typing or by clicking the button on the right-hand side of
the text cell using the mouse.
The Type of Analysis ﬁeld may be ‘ITT (Intention To Treat)’ or ‘PP (Per
Protocol)’. By selecting one of these procedures, the meta-analysis will be
performed according to the calculation described in Chapter 5.
Risk Factor may be either ‘All’ or only one of the Risk factors inserted
in the meta-analysis table. By selecting one of the risk factors, the program
will perform the calculation considering only that factor. If one selects ‘All’
instead, the program subsequently elaborates all the Risk factors. In this
case it is necessary to check the Output on Printer ﬁeld in order to obtain
the output on the printer, because only the data from the last Risk factor is
automatically fully saved and available for the output.
The Trial indicator ﬁeld may be ‘Number’, ‘Symbol’ or ‘Point’. These are
three different ways to identify each trial in the graphic or numerical outputs.

How to Use the Program
77
The Flags for Sub-group analysis ﬁeld allows a ‘Sub-group analysis’ out-
put. In practice, if one inserts a number of ﬂags in this ﬁeld (used for the
different trials), it is possible to obtain a graphic output with the data of the
trials grouped according to these ﬂags.
The OK button starts the calculation process that will last a variable pe-
riod of time depending on the number of trials selected and the computer’s
performance.
If the check box Output on Printer is checked, the printed output will
occur at the same time with the calculation. In any case, the data of the last
elaborated risk factor will be saved automatically.
Graphic Results
Once the meta-analysis has been completed, it can be shown on the screen
or printed on paper in different graphic formats. To activate this function,
select the item ‘Display/Graphic result’ from the menu or click
over the
tools bar button.
The following window will produce an output either on screen or printer
by selecting the speciﬁc page (click either one of the icons on the upper part
of the window).
Output on Screen
Just select one of the different plot types, the Model and the Pooled result,
then click the Display button.

78
Chapter 7
Example of the L’Abb`e plot.
SE
s
SE(∆)
Example of the Galbraith plot.

Example of a Standard plot.
Example of a Standard cumulative plot.
Example of the Forest plot.

80
Chapter 7
When this graph is shown on screen:
It is possible to set the size of the graph by clicking over the windows bor-
ders and moving the mouse in the direction desired without releasing
the mouse button.
With the File/Save to item you can save the graphic plot on ﬁle (BMP
format).
File/Print prints the graph on paper (it is better to use the speciﬁc print
function for the graphs described below).
Edit/Copy to clipboard uses the Windows clipboard to copy the graph
image and then paste it over in any Windows program that utilizes
the clipboard, such as PowerPoint or Word.
Output on Printer
By selecting this page you can send the graphic output to the printer.
Different printing modalities may be selected for the graphics, which will
be sent to an A4 format paper.
The program will arrange different graphs over a sheet of paper.
The Printer Setup button allows one to choose the printer to use and the
modalities of printing.
The Print button starts the printing.

How to Use the Program
81
Examples of printing of an F.E.M. Odds ratio.

82
Chapter 7
Analytical Result
You can show and print the data of the meta-analysis in a numerical format.
This function will be activated by selecting the item Display/Analytical
result from the menu or by clicking
on the tools bar button.

How to Use the Program
83
In this window you can choose different output formats that you want.
The Print button will directly execute the printing of the data.
The Preview button will show the data on the screen as they will be printed.
ORIGINAL DATA
Author
Journal
Score Year
CIMETIDINE
H2-BLOCKERS
Ent.
Obs.
Ent.
Obs.
1 Wriight
2 Dowson
3 bgs
4 Baron
5 Kellow
6 Bianchi Porro
7 Perez
8 Inouve
Mpf
Scand
gUT
Scand
Digestion
Digestion
Curr
Drugs
22
0
0
0
0
0
2
94
1982
1984
1984
1983
1983
1985
1990
1988
33
20
101
137
22
85
30
151
17
11
63
81
14
38
14
110
32
18
96
155
22
82
36
146
15
11
63
105
13
36
20
109
TOTALS
579
348
587
372
Date: 26/01/2003
File: a1.DB - Aim: 4 Sett
Type of analysis: ITT (Intention To Treat)
Example of Original Data.

84
Chapter 7
 to render the meta-analysis meaningless.):155 
Example of a Meta-analysis Table page.
Options
This function allows the setting of some parameters of the program.
The different set-ups are divided into three sections:
Fonts
You can choose the type of font that the program should use while showing
the graphs and the symbols identifying the trials.

How to Use the Program
85
Colours for Graphics
In this section you can choose the colour for the background, the lines and
the data on the graphs.

86
Chapter 7
By clicking over one of the three buttons a window will be opened for the
choice of colour.
Legend
To set a legend that will be shown on the graphs.
You can choose between two ﬁxed items (‘Better’ and ‘Favour’) or indicate
a personalised item.

References
C.D. Mulrow. Rationale for systematic reviews. BMJ 309: 597–599, 1994.
K. Pearson Report on certain enteric fever inoculation statistics. BMJ 3:1243–1246, 1904.
R.A. Fisher. Statistical Methods for Research Workers. London: Oliver and Boyd, 1932.
A. Whitehead, N.M.B. Jones. A Meta-analysis of clinical trials involving different classi-
ﬁcations of response into ordered categories. Stat Med 13: 2503–2515, 1994.
V. Hasselblad, D.C. McCrory. Meta-analytic tools for medical decision making: a practical
guide. Med Decis Making 15: 81–96, 1995.
S.G. Thompson. Why sources of heterogeneity in meta-analysis should be investigated.
BMJ 309: 1351–1355, 1994.
A. Whitehead, J. Whitehead. A general paramentric approach to the meta-analysis of
randomized clinical trials. Stat Med 10: 1665–1677, 1991.
S. Klein, J. Simes, G.L. Blackburn. Total parenteral nutrition and cancer clinical trial.
Cancer 58: 1378–1386, 1986.
T.C. Chalmers. Problems induced by meta-analysis. Stat Med 10: 971–980, 1991.
K.A. L’Abb`e, A.S. Detsky, K. O’Rourke. Meta-analysis in clinical research. Ann Int Med
107: 224–233, 1987.
R.F. Galbraith. A note on graphical presentation of estimated odds ratios from several
clinical trials. Stat Med 7: 889–894, 1988.
D.T. Felson. Bias in meta-analytic research. J Clin Epidemiol 45: 885–892, 1992.
D. Petitti. Meta-analysis, Decision Analysis and Cost-effectiveness Analysis (Methods for
quantitative synthesis in medicine), Oxford: Oxford University Press.
H. Cooper, L.V. Hedges eds. Handbook of Research Synthesis. New York: Russel Sage
Foundation, 1994.
JPT Higgins, SG Thompson. Quantifying heterogeneity in a meta-analysis. Stat Med 21:
1539–1558, 2002.
87


GLOSSARY
Bias. Introduction of a systematic error in a procedure that leads to a wrong
estimate of a phenomenon. In a meta-analysis there are several potential
biases that need to be controlled. The most important is the ‘publication
bias’.
Capture–mark–recapture method. Method used for estimating data that
could not be measured by traditional assessment methods.
Cumulative meta-analysis plot. Approach that shows how much any new
study added to the previous meta-analysis is able to modify its result.
Evidence-based medicine. Approach to clinical problems aimed at the inte-
gration of individual clinical expertise with the best clinical evidence avail-
able from a systematic review. In other words EBM is the use of both evidence
and experience in clinical practice.
Fixed and random effects models. Calculations performed under two dif-
ferent hypotheses. In the ﬁrst hypothesis, the effects evaluated are expected
to be part of the same distribution. If this assumption is not met, it means
that the studies are sampled from a population that includes several differ-
ent populations, each provided with its own mean. In this case, it could be
necessary to use a random effect model.
Grey literature. It is the name given to material produced by government,
academies, business and industries; both in print and electronic formats,
but which is not controlled by commercial publishing interests and where
publishing is not the primary activity of the organisation.
Heterogeneity. In meta-analysis, it refers to the various responses to a given
treatment among the included studies. It might relate to the biological differ-
ence among the individuals, but also to other differences that are not always
detectable. The statistical heterogeneity may be assessed through speciﬁc
89

90
Glossary
tests (test for heterogeneity) and also the extent to which the heterogeneity
is due to chance may be evaluated (I2 Index).
Intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis.
Strategy of analysis in which all ran-
domised patients are analysed, even though they have not completed the
treatment. They are considered cases of therapeutic failure.
Meta-analysis. Method that aims to reach the comprehensive synthesis of
data issued from a systematic research and to analyse congruent and diver-
gent ﬁndings from reports in literature. It should be the methodological
ground of a systematic review.
Number needed to treat (NnT). It is the number of patients that one needs
to treat with the drug under study to heal one patient more than placebo or
reference drug. It is a ‘bed-side’ measure of therapeutic gain. It is easy to
calculate:
NnT =
1
RD
or
1
pooled RD.
It is an integer number and its approximation is to the higher integer.
Outcomes.
All that can be the subject of a clinical study. If we are inves-
tigating the effect of a drug on recovery from a certain disease, outcomes
might be the recovery itself, side effects, mortality, data related to the drug
administration, etc.
Per-protocol (PP) analysis. Strategy of analysis in which only patients who
completed the trial are analysed.
It is useful when we are interested in
knowing the real efﬁcacy of a drug.
Plot. Graph in which two quantities or a quantity and a group of categories
are put in relationship. The most used plots in meta-analysis are those of
Forrest, Galbraith, L’Abb`e, the Funnel plot and the cumulative meta-analysis
plot.
Quality score. Rating the quality of the studies which are to be included in
the meta-analysis, verifying the presence in them of some ‘markers of quality’
deﬁned before starting the evaluation procedure. It is useful for sensitivity
analyses.
Randomised controlled trial (RCT). This is a clinical study with two major
characteristics: randomisation and the presence of a control group.
Risk. In an epidemiological/statistical context, it is the proportion of an
event (death, healing and success of a therapy). In other words, the number

Glossary
91
of events divided by the number of studied cases. If we observe 320 cases of
gastric ulcer healing in 474 patients treated with cimetidine, the proportion
or the risk of healing is 67.5%.
320
474 = 0.675.
It should be remarked that within this context the term ‘risk’ does not involve
a negative judgment on the observed event, even though the negative events
are called ‘risk’, and positive events called ‘beneﬁt increase’.
The 95% Conﬁdence Interval (CI) is used to study the inconsistency of the
estimate of a risk. It is the interval of the estimate obtained if the study is
replicated n times on 800 subjects.
The interval is calculated according to the following formula:
p ± 1.96 ∗SE(p)
where p is the proportion (which is 0.675 in our example) and SE(p) is the
standard error of p.
SE(p) =

p ∗(1 −p)/n
where n is the total number of the subjects of the study. Continuing with
our example of ulcer healing,
0.675 ± 1.96

0.675 ∗0.325/474
0.675 ± 0.042
95%CI = 0.633 −0.717.
If we are studying another population of subjects with gastric ulcer treated
with placebo and observing 204 healings out of 451 subjects, the following
table can be used:
Healing
Total
Yes
No
Cimetidine
320
154
474
Placebo
204
247
451
We can thus calculate the following:
Risk difference (RD)
320
474 −204
451 = 0.675 −0.452 = 0.223

92
Glossary
The difference of the proportion of the events observed in the two groups
refers to the therapeutic gain (+22.3%). In epidemiological terms the RD is
known as Absolute Risk Reduction (ARR).
Risk ratio (RR)
320
474
204
451 = 1.49.
It refers to the extent to which the frequency of an event (in our example,
the recovery from gastric ulcer) can vary in the presence of the factor we
are studying (treatment with cimetidine) compared to absence of the latter
(placebo).
Odds ratio (OR). A measure that is similar to the Risk Ratio because it refers
to the estimate of the latter when the event is not frequent (≤10%). It is
calculated as follows:
320 ∗247
154 ∗204 = 79040
31416 = 2.52.
If the Risk Difference or the Odds Ratio is calculated from a meta-analysis,
and therefore from more studies, they are called pooled RD or pooled OR.
Systematic research.
Complete literature search throughout all potential
data sources by means of deﬁned procedures aiming at the inclusion of all
aspects of the search question.
Systematic review. Review performed by an expert in the ﬁeld based not only
on the knowledge of the single investigator but also on data issued from a
systematic research.

Index
absolute risk reduction 13, 25, 92
abstract
bibliographic search for 10
inclusion and exclusion for meta-analysis
10
for scientiﬁc paper reading 10
Advanced Select option of META program
Clear all button 75
Edit criteria button 75
Execute button 75
Insert criteria button 74
Insert OR button 75
Load Query button 75
Remove criteria button 75
Save Query button 75
SQL button 75
analytical results display in META program
82. See also graphic results display in
META program
ARR. See absolute risk reduction
articles
evaluating 10
ﬁnding 10
reading 11
bias
extractor 19
follow-up time 20
geographical 19
inclusion criteria 18
indexing 18
introduction in scoring systems 12
meta-analyst caused 19
in meta-analytical research 15
multiple publication 18
multiple used subjects 18
publication 9, 16, 18
quality score 19
recording error 19
reference 18
reporting 19
search 18
selector 18
bibliographic search for abstracts 10
bibliographic sources 8. See also medical
bibliographic sources
biomedical interest
grey literature 9
use of meta-analysis 4
capture–mark–recapture method 89, 20
Chapman method 21
check list for scientiﬁc paper reading 10
chi-square
distribution 5, 25, 29
for heterogeneity 30
CI. See conﬁdence interval
Cimetidine versus Placebo trials
data accuracy example 34
Galbraith plot 47, 49
l’Abb`e plot 51
number needed to treat 43
standard plot 44, 45, 46
trials output evaluation 36, 37
clinical research objectives 5
clinical trials 58
characteristics choosing 8
Cochrane’s Q test for homogeneity
42
β-coefﬁcient calculation 31
collection of published literature 3
conﬁdence interval 21
95% conﬁdence interval 91
in ﬁxed effects models 26
conﬁdence interval estimation
by Mantel-Haenszel method 27
by Peto method 29
for trials output evaluation 36, 37
93

94
Index
conformity publication bias 16
cumulative meta-analysis 14, 45
plot 89
data accuracy
Cimetidine drug effect example 34
intention to treat analysis 35
per protocol analysis 35
Placebo drug effect example 34
data collection for meta-analysis
design of trial information 12
ﬂags 13
generic information 11
outcomes 12
quality score 12
study and control group treatment 12
data reliability 9
degrees of freedom 5, 25, 29
DerSimonian–Laird method 30, 41
difference of percentage
calculation 25
estimation for trials output evaluation 36
in ﬁxed effect model 38, 39
dispersion 24, 47
Embase 8
evidence-based medicine 89
extractor bias 19
FEM. See ﬁxed effects models
ﬁle format in META program 69
Fisher’s inverse chi-squared method 5
ﬁxed effects models 13, 24, 89
difference of percentage calculation 25
Gart estimations 39
Mantel-Haenszel method 26, 39
Peto method 28, 39
pooled effect evaluation 38
statistical heterogeneity and 40
sub-group analysis 55
test for heterogeneity 25
See also random effects models
ﬂags information 13
follow-up time bias 20
Fonts function in META program 84
Funnel plot
method 16
odds ratio calculation 52, 53
for publication bias assessment 43
test for asymmetry 43, 53
See also Galbraith plot; l’Abb`e plot
Galbraith plot 47
Cimetidine versus Placebo trials 50
log odds ratio estimation 48
precision estimation 48
See also Funnel plot; l’Abb`e plot
gastric ulcer (data accuracy example)
34
generic information 11
geographical bias 19
graphic representation in meta-analysis
presentation 60
graphic results display in META program 77.
See also analytical results display in
META program
graphical presentation
Cimetidine versus Placebo example 44, 45,
46
Funnel plot 52
Galbraith plot 47
l’Abb`e plot 50
plot for sub-group analysis 53
standard plots 44
graphics colors in META program 85
grey literature 9, 89
heterogeneity 89
considerations on 39
null hypothesis of 25
quantifying 30, 42
quantitative evaluation 30
statistical 39
See also test for heterogeneity
I2 index 42
imprecision 24
inclusion criteria bias 18
independence of sources 21
indexing bias 18
Insert criteria button 74
Insert OR button 75
intention to treat analysis 12, 35, 90.
See also per protocol analysis
interferon versus placebo (meta-analysis
representation example) 61
internet-based search bias
indexing bias 18
search bias 18
inverse conformity publication bias 16
ITT. See intention-to-treat analysis
Klein formula
for publication bias assessment 42
Klein’s method 17
l’Abb`e plot 50
Cimetidine versus Placebo example 51
See also Funnel plot; Galbraith plot

Index
95
legend setting in META program 86
log odds ratio estimation 48
Mantel-Haenszel method 26
for conﬁdence interval estimation 27
pooled odds ratio estimation 28
tests for heterogeneity 29
variance estimation 28
See also Peto method
maximum likelihood estimation 21
mean, weighted 24
medical bibliographic sources
Embase 8
Medline 8
medicine results using meta-analysis 1
Medline 8, 9
menu bar options
Calculate 67
Close 66
Display/Analytic Results 67
Display/Graphic Results 67
Display/Variables 67
Exit from Metanalysis 66
File/New 66
File/Open 66
File/Save as . . . 66
Options 67
Select/Advanced select 66
Select/All trials 66
Select/Display/Execute SQL query 66
Select/Simple select 66
meta-analysis
abstracts inclusion and exclusion
aspects 10
application in biomedical ﬁeld 4
biases 15
clinical research aspects 6
cumulative 14, 45
data accuracy aspects 34
data collection for 11
deﬁned 90
graphical representation 44
heterogeneity considerations 39
history 4
involved statistical methods 13
for medical data evaluation 2
in medicine 1
number needed to treat 43
pooled effect evaluation 38
published data collection 3
randomized controlled trials and 59
reading and evaluation 58
representation examples 61
results interpretation 14
scoring systems 12
statistical procedures used in 24
as statistical test 3
sub-group analysis 53
synthesis of information 3
test for publication bias 42
trial output evaluation 35
See also META program
meta-analysis planning 7
clinical trials characteristics choosing 8
outcomes planning 8
meta-analysis presentation 59
graphic representation 60
number needed to treat 60
publication bias assessment 60
sub-group analysis 60
test for heterogeneity 60
meta-analyst caused bias
extractor 19
quality score 19
meta-analytic process aspects
data reliability 9
publication bias 9
META program
characteristics 64
installation 64
risk factors description 69
system requirements 64
trial detail page 68
META program structure
menu bar 65, 66
status bar 67
title bar 65
tools bar 67
See also menu bar options
META program, use of
Advanced Select option 74
all trials showing 76
analytical results display 82
ﬁle saving 72
Fonts function 84
graphics colors 85
legend setting 86
metanalysis ﬁle creation 70
new trial addition 70
Options function 84
output on printer 80
output on screen 77
pre-existing trial modiﬁcation 71
showing of graphic results 77
trials selection 72
metanalysis ﬁle
creation 70
saving 72

96
Index
multiple publication bias 18
multiple used subjects bias 18
NNT. See number needed to treat
number needed to treat 14, 90
Cimetidine versus Placebo example 43
in meta-analysis presentation 60
probabilistic approach 43
quantitative approach 43
numeric output evaluation 35
odds ratio 13, 24, 26
according to Gart 37
according to Peto 37
calculation 92
deﬁned 92
for graphical presentation 44, 45
in Funnel plot 52, 53
Mantel-Haenszel method 27
Peto method 29
pooled 28, 45
in publication bias 16
for trials output evaluation 35, 37
See also risk ratio
odds ratio calculation in ﬁxed effects models
Mantel-Haenszel method 26
Peto method 29
odds ratio estimation in random effect
models 30
Options function in META program 84
OR. See odds ratio
ORp. See pooled odds ratio
outcomes 12, 90
outcomes planning
primary outcome 8
secondary outcome 8
output evaluation, trial 35
PBA. See publication bias assessment
per protocol analysis 12, 35, 90. See also
intention to treat analysis
percentage difference 26
Peto method
for conﬁdence interval estimation
29
tests for heterogeneity 29
variance estimation 28
See also Mantel-Haenszel method
Placebo. See Cimetidine versus Placebo
plot 90
Funnel 52
Galbraith 47
l’Abb`e 50
for sub-group analysis 53
standard 44
pooled effect 25, 26
pooled effect evaluation
conﬁdence interval estimation 39
degrees of freedom 39
natural logarithm of odds ratio 39
odds ratio calculations 39
standard error calculations 39
test for heterogeneity 38, 39
pooled odds ratio 13
pooled odds ratio calculations
for graphical presentation 45
Mantel-Haenszel method 28
pooled risk difference 13, 43
PP analysis. See per protocol analysis
precision calculation
Galbraith plot 48
sub-group analysis 54
publication bias 9
conformity 16
inverse conformity 16
quantitative evaluation 31
test for 14
publication bias assessment
Funnel plot for 43
Klein formula 17, 42
in meta-analysis presentation 60
Q test for homogeneity, Cochrane’s 42
quality score 58
bias 19
deﬁned 90
information 12
quantifying heterogeneity
I2 index 42
in random effects models 30
quantifying publication bias 31
random effects models 29, 89
DerSimonian–Laird method application
30
difference of percentage 41
log odds ratio estimation 41
odds ratio calculation 30
quantifying heterogeneity 30
quantifying publication bias 31
standard error estimation 41
statistical heterogeneity and 40
sub-group analysis 55
See also ﬁxed effects models
randomized controlled trials 9, 59
deﬁned 90

Index
97
RCT. See randomized controlled trials
RD. See risk difference
RDp. See pooled risk difference
recording error bias 19
reference bias 18
reference databases 9
references search. See search for references
technique
regression analysis 31
relative error 50
Galbraith plot 48
relative risk estimation 26
REM. See random effects models
reporting bias 19
risk 90
risk difference 13
calculation 91
in publication bias 16
See also pooled risk difference
risk difference estimation
for graphical presentation 45
for trials output evaluation 35, 36, 37
risk factors description
Exposed–Events–Drop 69
ﬁle format 69
risk ratio
calculation 92
in publication bias 16, 17
See also odds ratio
RR. See risk ratio
sampling bias 16. See also selection bias;
study bias
scientiﬁc paper reading
abstract reading 10
checklist for 10
scoring system for 10
title reading 10
scoring systems
bias introduction 12
quality score 12
for scientiﬁc paper reading 10
usage in meta-analysis 12
search bias 18
search for references technique
capture–mark–recapture method 20
Chapman method 21
independence of sources 21
maximum likelihood estimation 21
sharks number estimation example 20
selected articles reading 11
selection bias 18. See also sampling bias;
study bias
selector bias 18
sensitivity analysis 12, 13
sharks number estimation (example of
references search) 20
Somatostatin example (sub-group analysis),
53
SQL, 74
standard error 26
estimation 91
in ﬁxed effects models 26
in Galbraith plot 47
statistical heterogeneity 39
in ﬁxed effect model 40
in random effect model 40, 41
statistical methods
odds ratio 13
pooled odds ratio 13
pooled risk difference 13
risk difference 13
statistical procedures
cumulative meta-analysis 14
ﬁxed effects models 13, 24
number needed to treat 14
random effects models 14, 29
test for publication bias 14
statistical test for heterogeneity 13
study bias
extractor 19
quality score 19
recording error 19
reporting 19
See also sampling bias; selection bias
sub-group analysis
log odds ratio calculation 54
in meta-analysis presentation 60
plot for 53
precision calculation 54
Somatostatin example 53
synthesis of information 3
System Query Language 74
systematic research 92
systematic review 92
test for asymmetry of Funnel plot 53
test for heterogeneity 13, 25, 26, 39
Cochrane’s Q test 42
Mantel-Haenszel method 29
in meta-analysis presentation 60
Peto method 29
for pooled effect evaluation 38
test for publication bias 14
treatment of control group 12
treatment of study group 12

98
Index
trial
addition in META program, new 70
comparison 12
detail page 68
information 12
modiﬁcation in META program,
pre-existing 70
output evaluation 35
selection in META program 72
showing in META program, all 76
trial detail page ﬁelds
ﬂags 68
quality score 68
symbol 68
type of trial 68
trial results expressing as
odds ratio (OR) 13
risk difference (RD) 13
variance 24
variance estimation
Mantel-Haenszel method 28
Peto method 28
weight calculation 28
weighted mean 24

