This article appeared in Contemporary Debates in Metaphysics, edited by J. Hawthorne, T. Sider, and D. 
Zimmerman (Oxford:  Blackwell, 2008), pp. 321-40.
THE MOON AND SIXPENCE:
  A DEFENSE OF MEREOLOGICAL UNIVERSALISM
The thesis I am called upon to defend is this:  given any collection of objects, no matter 
how disparate or widely scattered, there is a further object composed of them all.  For 
example, there is an object composed of my left tennis shoe and the lace that is threaded 
through its eyelets—so far, perhaps, no surprise.  But there are all of the following 
objects as well:  the object composed of the lace threaded through my left shoe and the 
lace threaded through my right shoe; the object composed of the Eiffel Tower and the tip 
of my nose; the object composed of the moon and the six pennies scattered across my 
desktop.  For any objects a through z, whatever and wherever they may be, there is an 
object having those objects as its parts.  This thesis goes by several names: 
conjunctivism (Chisholm), unrestricted composition (Lewis), and mereological 
universalism (van Inwagen).1  It is often thought to fly in the face of common sense, but it 
has won the allegiance of several philosophers, and it is a standard element in the formal 
theory of part and whole as it was developed in the twentieth century.  In what follows I 
shall explain why I believe it to be true.
1 Roderick Chisholm used the term ‘conjunctivism’ in his lectures.  David Lewis uses the term ‘unrestricted 
composition’ in On the Plurality of Worlds (Oxford:  Blackwell, 1986), pp. 211-13, and Peter van Inwagen 
uses the term ‘universalism’ in Material Beings (Ithaca, N.Y.:  Cornell University Press, 1990), p. 74.  Of 
these three authors, only Lewis espouses universalism.

1.  Classical mereology
Mereology (from the Greek word meros for 'part') is the theory of part and whole. 
Lesniewsi (1916), Tarski (1937), and Leonard and Goodman (1940) have all presented 
formal systems of mereology, with definitions, axioms, and proofs of theorems.2  To give 
the flavor of these systems, I shall present some of their key definitions and axioms here.
     Let us take as primitive the relation symbol ‘x < y’ for ‘x is part of y’.  Other 
mereological notions can then be defined as follows:
x is a proper part of y  iff x is a part of y & x ≠ y.  (A proper part of something is a part 
of it that is distinct from the whole.)
x and y overlap (sometimes symbolized ‘x o y’) iff for some object z, z is part of x and 
z is part of y.  (Things that overlap are things that have a part in common.)
x and y are disjoint iff x and y do not overlap.  (Disjoint things are things with no part in 
common.)
Now for a notion that will be of special importance to us here, the notion of a 
mereological sum (or fusion).  Tarski defines it thus:
x is a sum of set A iff (y)(y is a member of A -> y < x) & (y)(y < x -> Ez(z is a member 
of A & y o z).  (In other words, every member of A is a part of x, and every part of x 
overlaps some member of A.)
For example, a sum of the set {the Eiffel Tower, JVC’s nose} would be an entity that has 
each of the members of that set as parts and each of whose parts overlaps either the Eiffel 
Tower or JVC’s nose. (Why don’t we express the second clause of the definiens more 
simply by saying that every part of x is a member of A?  The answer is that we wish to 
count as parts of the sum such things as the rivets and beams in the Eiffel Tower, which 
2 For a survey of various systems with references, see Peter Simons, Parts:  A Study in Ontology (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1987).  One presentation of Tarski’s system is Alfred Tarski, “Foundations of the 
Geometry of Solids,” in Logic, Semantics, and Metamathematics (Oxford:  Oxford University Press, 1956), 
pp. 24-29.  For the system of Nelson Goodman and Henry Leonard, see “The Calculus of Individuals and 
its Uses,” Journal of Symbolic Logic, 5 (1940), GET PP.  
2

are not members of the doubleton set {the Eiffel Tower, JVC’s nose}, but which do 
overlap one of the members.)
     It is possible to define the notion of a sum without presupposing the existence of sets, 
so long as we use some other device to similar effect, such as plural variables.  Van 
Inwagen gives the following definition:
x is a sum of the ys =df  the ys are all parts of x and every part of x overlaps at least one 
of the ys.3
  
Thus, a sum of all the pennies in the universe would be a thing of which all the pennies 
are parts and every part of which is (either a penny or) something overlapping a penny.4  
     Here is some alternative terminology:  instead of saying that x is a sum of A (or of the 
ys), we could say that the various members of A (or the ys) compose x.5  If the ys have 
been enumerated (say as a and b), we can use the expression ‘a + b’ as a name for the 
sum of the ys.  
     I now proceed to Tarski’s axioms, of which there are two.  The first says that the 
relation is part of is transitive:
A1.  If x is part of y and y is part of z, then x is part of z.
The second axiom pertains to the existence and uniqueness of sums:
A2.  Ex(x is a member of A) -> Ex(x is a sum of A & (y)(y is a sum of A -> x = y)
This axiom says that every nonempty set has a unique sum.  It will be useful to divide the 
import of it in two.  One half (the half that employs only the first conjunct in the 
consequent) says that for any nonempty set of entities, there is at least one sum of that 
3 Van Inwagen, Material Beings, p. 29.  Van Inwagen explains plural variables and plural quantification in 
chapter 2.  A similar device is used by David Lewis in Parts of Classes (Oxford:  Blackwell, 1991), GET P.
4 The phrase in parentheses is redundant, since every penny overlaps a penny.
5 Some authors, like van Inwagen, prefer to use the locution ‘the ys compose x’ only when there is no 
overlap among any of the ys.  In this usage, New York City would be composed by its five boroughs, but 
not by the boroughs together with Central Park.
3

set, that is, at least one entity that the members of that set compose.  The other half (the 
half that employs the second conjunct in the consequent) tells us that there is at most one 
such sum. 
     The uniqueness of sums is perhaps almost as controversial as their existence.  It 
arguably implies that a statue and the clay of which it is made are one and the same, for 
they are both sums of exactly the same molecules.  My main concern in what follows will 
be defending the existence half of the axiom, but at times I shall draw upon uniqueness as 
well.
     There are other axiomatizations of classical mereology besides Tarski’s, differing from 
his and from one another in what notions they take as primitive, in whether they 
presuppose the existence of sets, and in what principles they choose as axioms.  For our 
purposes here, all these systems are equivalent.  They all assume the same formal 
properties (transitivity and the like) for the part-whole relation, and they all have the 
same implications regarding the existence and uniqueness of sums.6
     The view that every set has a sum, or that any objects whatsoever are parts composing 
a larger whole, has its mirror image in the doctrine that any objects whatsoever are 
wholes composed of smaller parts.  The second view is a denial of the existence of 
6 As an example, I present here an axiomatization of Leonard and Goodman’s mereology due to Rolf 
Eberle, Nominalistic Systems (Dordrecht:  D. Reidel, 1970).  There are three axioms:
A1.  x < y <-> (z)(z o x -> z o y)
A2.  ExFx -> Ex(y)(y o x <-> Ez(Fz & y o z))
A3.  (z)(z o x <-> z o y) -> x = y 
A1 does the work of Tarski’s first axiom, for it implies that the part-of relation is transitive.  (It also implies 
that the relation is reflexive.)  A2 and A3 together do the work of Tarski’s second axiom without taking for 
granted the existence of sets.  A2 tells us that if there any Fs, then there is something that overlaps exactly 
those things that overlap an F.  Since ‘F’ could be a disjunctive predicate like ‘is identical either with the 
moon or with the Eiffel Tower’, this axiom guarantees the existence of a sum of any two or more entities. 
A3 secures the uniqueness of sums.  If x and y are composed of the same things, whatever overlaps either 
will overlap the other, and A3 tells us in that case that x and y are identical.  (In the consequent of A3, I 
have put ‘x = y’ where Eberle had a Leibnizian definition of it, ‘A -> A[y//x]’.)
4

mereological atoms, or simples, in favor of the view that everything has parts within parts 
ad infinitum.  To believe that matter is infinitely divisible in this way is to believe in what 
David Lewis calls “atomless gunk.”7  To believe in all the sums countenanced by the 
classical mereologist is to believe in what I shall call (without prejudice) mereological 
junk.  Belief in junk and belief in gunk are independent of each other, and a commitment 
to gunk is not part of classical mereology.  Nonetheless, the two views are to some extent 
mutually reinforcing (as I show below), and I myself accept a package of views in 
mereology that includes them both.  To the question “When are objects parts?” I say 
“Always,” and to the question “when are objects wholes?” I again say “Always.”8
     How did it come about that modern axiomatizations of mereology all take for granted 
an assumption that seemingly flies in the face of common sense—that in addition to 
pebbles and houses and planets, there are such junky objects as the object allegedly 
composed of the moon and the pennies on my desk?  I don’t know, unless the answer is 
that the assumption is not so counter-intuitive after all.9  For my part, when I was first 
asked to entertain the idea that there are such wildly scattered and gerrymandered objects, 
my reaction was not “How crazy!” but “Why not?”  In what follows, I shall do my best to 
get the reader to agree.
     One word before we begin about what is at issue.  If you accept that there is such a 
parcel or aggregate of matter as that composed of the moon and the pennies, you already 
7 David Lewis, Parts of Classes (Oxford:  Blackwell, 1991), p. 20.  
8 I have defended the gunk hypothesis (which is one half of Kant’s Second Antinomy) from Kant’s attempt 
to refute it in Problems from Kant (Oxford:  Oxford University Press, 1999), pp. 63-65.  For an argument in 
its favor, see Dean W. Zimmerman, “Could Extended Objects Be Made Out of Simple Parts?  An Argument 
for ‘Atomless Gunk’,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 56 (1996), 1-29.  
9 Perhaps another reason is that some proponents of mereology wanted it to do some of the work of set 
theory, in which case a very catholic notion is needed of which objects make up wholes.
5

agree with me, even if you don’t consider that aggregate to be very thinglike.  It need not 
be a thing, in any narrow sense of the term; it need only be there. 
  
2.  Against real coincidence
One of my reasons for believing in mereological universalism is that it affords a solution 
to what is sometimes called “the paradox of coincidence” or “the explosion of reality.”  I 
shall need to sketch some background before we can appreciate this problem.
     What is the ontological status of an everyday object like a desk or a snowball?  Is it 
something over and above the matter of which it is composed?  The broadly Aristotelian 
answer is yes:  the desk is distinct from the wooden pieces from which it was assembled, 
and the snowball is distinct from the snow from which it was crafted.  The snowball is a 
compound of matter and essential form.10  Its matter is a certain quantity of snow; its 
form is roundness together with separation from other snow.  When the snow was formed 
into a ball, a genuinely new entity came into being.  It is not identical with the snow for at 
least two reasons:  first, the snow existed before the ball was created; second, the ball 
might survive the melting of some of the snow around its edges.  It has an identity that 
transcends that of the particular matter of which it is made. 
     The Aristotelian position leads to a problem that Sosa has dubbed “the explosion of 
reality.”11  To be drawn into the problem, ask yourself the following question:  which 
10 For discussion of the snowball as a paradigm composite of form and matter, see Ernest Sosa, "Subjects 
Among Other Things," in Philosophical Perspectives, Volume I, edited by James Tomberlin (Atascadero, 
CA:  Ridgeview Publishing Co., 1987), pp. 155-87.
11Ernest Sosa, “Putnam’s Pragmatic Realism,” The Journal of Philosophy, 90 (1993), 605-26.  The key 
section of this article for present purposes, "Nonabsolute Existence and Conceptual Relativity," is reprinted 
along with an addendum in Metaphysics: The Big Questions, edited by Peter van Inwagen and Dean 
Zimmerman (Oxford:  Blackwell, 1998), pp. 399-410.  I have developed the explosion problem 
independently in “Mereological Essentialism, Mereological Conjunctivism, and Identity Through Time,” 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 11 (1986), 141-56.
6

aggregates of matter and which forms are such that when those aggregates come to 
exemplify those forms, a new entity is thereby created?  It seems to me that an impartial 
Aristotelian ought to answer as follows:  whenever any matter instantiates any form, a 
new entity thereby exists.  Consider, for example, the entity Sosa calls a snowdiscall, 
which has its matter a chunk of snow and as its form any shape between being round and 
being disc-shaped.  If you take a snowball and flatten it, you destroy the snowball (having 
deprived it of its essential form), but you leave a snowdiscall in its place.  Moreover, the 
snowdiscall you leave was there all along, sharing matter with the original snowball.  Our 
own conceptual scheme may not recognize snowdiscalls, but that seems to be just a 
parochial failure to acknowledge entities that are ontologically on a par with snowballs.
     From here it is but a short step to the recognition that an impartial Aristotelian (or 
“absolutist” as Sosa calls him) should admit that there are millions of entities inhering in 
any parcel of matter.  Consider the following series of shapes:  being round, being round 
or flattened up to degree 1, being round or flattened up to degree 2, and so on, until we 
reach the property of being round or flattened up to some degree including being 
squashed into a disc.  We may distinguish infinitely many such shapes.  From an 
impartial or absolute point of view, each of these shapes has as much claim as roundness 
to be regarded as the essential form of an entity of some type.  An ordinary snowball, it 
would therefore seem, coincides with infinitely many other entities—snowdiscalls of all 
possible degrees.
     Some may resist this result because they boggle at the sheer number of entities 
involved.  I resist it myself because the entities involved would all share exactly the same 
place and exactly the same matter, thus violating two plausible philosophical principles: 
7

“Two or more things cannot be in the same place at the same time” and “There cannot be 
difference of entities without difference of content.”12
     How are we to avoid the endless proliferation of entities sharing exactly the same 
place and matter?13  One way would be to eschew the Aristotelian line in favor of a 
logical atomist or eliminativist line.  The eliminativist says that composite entities are 
really fictions or logical constructions.  To say that a table exists is just shorthand for 
saying that some wooden legs and a top have been fastened together; it is not to posit any 
new entity in addition to the parts.  Similarly, to say that a snowball exists is just to say 
that some snow has been formed into a ball.  We don’t get the myriads of entities the 
absolutist recognizes because we don’t even get as far as the table and the snowball.  It is 
correct to say, of course, that there is a snowball in my hand, just as it is correct to say 
that the sun is now setting; but in either case, the truth underlying what it is correct to say 
is something different. Yes, the sun is setting, but that is simply to say that the earth is 
rotating so that the sun is disappearing from view.  Yes, there is a snowball in my hand, 
but that is simply to say that some snow has been scooped up, made round, and placed in 
my hand.  More generally, any statement asserting the existence of a composite entity or 
predicating something of it must be mere shorthand for some statement telling us how 
certain basic entities are configured.
12 The first principle is often advanced under the name “the impenetrability of matter.”  The second is 
advanced by Nelson Goodman, The Structure of Appearance (Indianapolis, IN:  Bobbs-Merrill, 1966; 2d 
edition), p. 36.
13 Ted Sider devotes a chapter of Four-Dimensionalism (Oxford:  Oxford University Press, 2001) to “The 
Paradoxes of Coincidence,” canvassing many more strategies than I consider here for avoiding the result 
that distinct objects can share the same parts and occupy the same location.  The fact that such a plethora of 
strategies has been developed shows the extent and depth (at least among philosophers) of the intuition that 
real coincidence is something to be avoided if possible.
8

     The trouble for such eliminativism is that it does not go well with the possibility that 
perhaps there are no basic or simple entities.14  As was said above, I am inclined to 
believe that all is gunk—that every entity has smaller parts, and that we never bottom out 
with the simple.  If this is so much as possible, trouble arises for the eliminativist in the 
form of the following argument:
1.  Composite entities are (of necessity) facons de parler:  to say that a composite 
exists is merely to say that its elements are arranged in a certain way.
2.  It is possible that there are no simples--that is, that everything is composite.
3.  Therefore, it is possible that everything that exists is a facon de parler.
     The conclusion I take to be absurd--it cannot be that everything is a merely nominal 
existent.  As a believer in the possibility of gunk, I reject Leibniz’s maxim “if there are 
compounds, there must be simples,” but I accept in its place “if there are nominal 
existents, there must be real existents.” 
     We now have two problematic alternatives before us—unbridled Aristotelianism, 
which involves the incredible explosion of reality, and thoroughgoing eliminativism, 
which threatens to give us fictions unfounded in any facts.  How are we to navigate 
between these extremes?  
     Sosa proposes to do so by espousing a view he calls conceptual relativism.15  In his 
view, ascriptions of existence are always relative to conceptual schemes.  What exists 
relative to one scheme may not exist relative to another, and nothing can be said to exist 
apart from all schemes.  In order for an entity to exist relative to a scheme, the scheme 
must recognize the essential form of that entity as one of the approved forms whose 
14 As noted by Sosa in “Putnam’s Pragmatic Realism.”
15 Ibid.
9

union with appropriate matter generates a new object.  The explosion is blocked, in 
Sosa’s view, because we are not forced to say (and are indeed forbidden to say) that all 
the entities in the exploded universe exist absolutely speaking.  Various of them exist 
relative to one or another scheme, but no scheme is privileged in a way that would enable 
us to say that the entities it recognizes are the entities that exist, period.    
     I have the following misgiving about the conceptual relativist’s way out.16  Is not 
absolutism itself one possible scheme?  We abjured absolutism because it leads to an 
incredible explosion.  But then shouldn’t we also abjure any scheme that embraces 
absolutism?  Yet that would go against the spirit of conceptual relativism, if conceptual 
relativism holds that all schemes are on a par.  To put this question another way, how does 
conceptual relativism avoid the explosion if it bestows its blessing equally on all 
schemes, including schemes that set off the explosion?  And at the other extreme, how 
does it avoid the absurdities of eliminativism if it countenances eliminativism as a 
possible scheme as well?
      I prefer a route between Scylla and Charybdis that draws on the principles of classical 
mereology.  As for Scylla (the explosion), classical mereology does admittedly involve an 
expansive proliferation of entities (for any n given initially, at least 2n –1 altogether), 17 
but it is more like a controlled nuclear reaction than an atomic blast.  Moreover, classical 
mereology does not involve what seems to me the really serious objection to absolutism, 
namely, that it implies the existence of indefinitely many distinct entities sharing the 
same space and consisting of exactly the same matter as any given entity.  This is because 
of the uniqueness axiom of classical mereology:  if entities x and y have all the same 
16 For further discussion, see my “On What There is Now:  Sosa on Two Forms of Relativity,” in 
Philosophers and Their Critics:  Ernest Sosa, edited by John Greco.
17 If there are three atoms, a, b, and c, there will be seven entities altogether:  a, b, c, a + b, b + c, a + c, and 
a + b + c.  If a, b, and c have their own parts, there will be many more entities altogether.
10

parts (at some level of decomposition), they are really one and the same. You cannot have 
two entities, such as a snowball and a snowdiscall, that are composed of exactly the same 
H20 molecules.  For a given region of space, there will be at most one entity that exactly 
fills it, and for a given tract of matter, there will be just one entity that is composed of 
exactly the matter in that tract.
     Our Charybdis was the threat of total nihilism if we go eliminativist.  For what if there 
are no simple or ultimate parts of matter?  If all composite entities are merely nominal 
existents, it would then follow that everything is a merely nominal existent, which is 
absurd.  But as a classical mereologist, I need not hold that all composites have merely 
nominal existence; I need only hold that composites of matter and essential form have 
nominal existence.  Mereological sums are composite entities that are not constituted by 
any essential form--as far as their existence is concerned, nothing matters but their matter. 
Or, if you prefer, you could say that mereological sums are entities whose essential form 
is nothing more than the co-existence of the relevant parts.  In any case, as sheer 
aggregates of matter, they exist just so long as their parts exist, no matter how radically 
rearranged, finely chopped, or widely scattered.  So even if there are parts within parts all 
the way down, the threat of nihilism is averted.  You can safely believe in gunk if you 
also believe in junk.
     Here, then, is one philosophical advantage of classical mereology:  it is one way of 
simultaneously avoiding the excesses of unbridled Aristotelianism and the austerities of 
thoroughgoing eliminativism. 
3.  Against arbitrariness and indeterminacy
11

Universalism is one answer to what van Inwagen calls the Special Composition Question: 
when do a number of objects form a whole?  Or, as he states it using plural variables, 
when is there an object y such that the xs compose y?18  There are two extreme answers to 
this question:  always, which is the answer given by universalists, and never, which is the 
answer given by the philosophers van Inwagen calls nihilists.19  There are also various 
moderate or in-between answers, which give the answer ‘sometimes, but not always’.  In 
this section, I shall argue for universalism by elimination, exposing problems with 
nihilism and with all the likely in-between answers.
     I can be brief with nihilism.  Nihilism says that no objects ever compose a whole--that 
there are no composite objects in the universe, but only mereological simples.  There are 
no such things, then, as the Washington Monument or Clinton’s desk or even a molecule 
of H2O.  That sounds drastic, but the force of the doctrine is mitigated somewhat if we 
accord a kind of nominal existence to composite objects.  There are no desks, but there 
are atoms arranged desk-wise; no water molecules, but atoms of hydrogen and oxygen 
arranged H2O-wise, and so on.  The reader will recognize nihilism as a very close relative 
of the eliminativism discussed in the previous section.20
     It is close enough, indeed, to be subject to the same difficulty.  Isn’t it a possibility that 
there are no atoms, that all is gunk?  If so, nihilism becomes worthy of its name:  it 
18 Material Beings, pp. 30-31.  Van Inwagen distinguishes this from the General Composition Question, 
which seeks an equivalent to ‘the xs compose y’ with the variable ‘y’ free.  For subtle reasons detailed in 
chapter 4, he thinks the General Composition Question is much more difficult to answer than the Special 
Composition Question.
19 Actually, van Inwagen’s nihilist says that there is never a y that the xs compose unless there is only one of 
the xs—the degenerate case of a thing composing itself.
20 Both doctrines imply that there are no composite objects, but they are not quite equivalent.  One 
difference is that thoroughgoing eliminativism implies that there are no objects consisting of a single atom 
exemplifying a monadic form, while nihilism is silent on this point. 
12

implies not just that there are no composite objects, but that there are no objects 
whatsoever that really exist.  For this reason, I reject it.21 
     On then, to the moderate answers, which hold that composition sometimes occurs, but 
not always—it is subject to restrictions.
     If composition is restricted, it must presumably be restricted by some principle.  The 
principle will look like this:  the xs compose something iff the xs stand to one another in 
relation R.  But what would the principle be?  The most obvious candidates are all open 
to criticism.  Either they fail to gibe with the ordinary judgments they are supposed to 
codify, or they incur objectionable arbitrariness or vagueness, or both.
     One restriction might be this:  objects that compose something must exactly occupy 
some continuous region of space. Perhaps equivalently, they must be in contact:  any two 
of them must either be in contact with each other or connected by a chain of contact 
relations running among the rest of them.  That would rule out many of the more bizarre 
mereological sums, such as the sum of the Eiffel Tower and my nose.  But it would also 
rule out many things that common sense probably wishes to rule in:  the land mass of the 
state of Michigan, tokens of the letter ‘i’, and, if physics is to be believed, almost all of 
the familiar objects around us.  Even such a paradigm of continuity as my desk is really a 
scattered swarm of subatomic particles, separated from one another by comparatively 
vast distances.
     Unless supplemented by some other principle, the continuity principle would also rule 
in many things that common sense would prefer to rule out.  Although tower + nose is 
ruled out (because disconnected), tower + nose + corridor of connecting air is ruled in—
21 Ted Sider also raises this difficulty for nihilism in “Van Inwagen and the Possibility of Gunk,’ Analysis, 
53 (1993), 285-89.
13

that object does occupy a continuous region of space.22  If it is to be ruled out in the end, 
it must be because some other principle disqualifies the corridor of air as an eligible 
connecting part.23
     Another principle that doubtless plays a role in everyday thought is that objects 
compose a whole if and only if they exhibit some degree of dynamical 
interconnectedness.  This might be spelled out in various ways—for example, by saying 
that not many forces would separate the objects, or that they tend to move together as a 
unit.  When I wiggle my nose, nothing much happens to the Eiffel Tower, but when I 
move the north end of my car into the garage, the south end usually comes along with it. 
This principle might (or might not) be understood liberally enough so that the sun and the 
nine planets of our solar system, which tend to move together through the cosmos, 
compose an object.
     The cohesion principle (as we may call it) does not tally any better than the contact 
principle with common-sense judgments about when objects make up a whole.  A house 
built of carefully piled stones probably qualifies as a genuine whole for common sense, 
even though one can move many of the stones without moving the rest of the house. 
Conversely, a mother cow and her newborn calf may move about together and exhibit a 
considerable degree of reluctance to be separated from one another without thereby being 
regarded as a whole.24  
     The two principles considered so far—that objects are parts of the same whole when 
they are in contact and when they move together in harness or share a common fate--are 
22 I revert to the pretense that tower, nose, and air are themselves continuous.
23 For further objections to the principle of continuity or contact, see van Inwagen, chapter 3.  For example, 
it would imply that a new thing comes into being when you and I shake hands.
24 The example is Ned Markosian’s in “Brutal Composition,” Philosophical Studies, 92 (1998), 211-49. 
14

attributed to infants by some psychologists.25  I must therefore be a very backward 
scholar, for it seems that I no longer recognize principles that were familiar to me before I 
was out of my cradle.
     The principles of cohesion and contact are open to another criticism that has more 
general force, applying, as I suspect, to nearly any plausible moderate principle that the 
reader is likely to formulate.26  It is this:  if a principle invokes a relation whose holding is 
a matter of degree, then the principle is going to give rise either to objectionable 
arbitrariness or to objectionable vagueness.27  There will be objectionable arbitrariness if 
some minute degree of cohesiveness (or whatever) makes the difference between forming 
a whole and not, and there will be objectionable vagueness if it is indeterminate at which 
point along some continuum of cohesiveness a new whole comes into being.  
     The objection I am raising has been elaborated by Ted Sider in a form I will call the 
“Sider sorites.”28  There are three premises and a conclusion:
P1.  If in some cases composition occurs and in others cases it does not, then there are 
cases in which composition occurs that are connected by a continuous series with 
cases in which composition does not occur.
25 Susan Carey and Elizabeth Spelke, “Domain-Specific Knowledge and Conceptual Change,” in Mapping 
the Mind:  Domain Specificity in Cognition and Culture (Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press, 1994), 
pp. 169-200.  The authors find these principles (which they call the principles of contact and cohesion) 
guiding the reasoning even of four-month old infants.  For example, an infant who sees two dumbbell heads 
moving together will be surprised when a screen obscuring the space between the heads is removed to 
reveal no connecting handle.  This is supposed to show that the infant believes that if objects move together 
(cohesion), they are parts of one object, and if they are parts of one object, they are not separated by any 
gap (contact).
26 Actually, if the contact principle is understood strictly so that contact is not a matter of degree, it will not 
be open to the objection I am about to raise.  It will, however, remain open to the objection that many of the 
objects recognized by common sense are composed of parts that are not in strict contact.
27 In “Mereological Essentialism, Mereological Conjunctivism, and Identity Through Time,” I voiced the 
complaint thus:  “I doubt that we can find any principle for doing this [admitting just the wholes that 
common sense normally admits] that is not either vague, arbitrary, or a matter of degree” (p. 145).  I should 
perhaps have subordinated the first two disjuncts to the third:  because the unity-making relations invoked 
in the principles are matters of degree, the principles will give rise either to arbitrariness or to vagueness.
28 Theodore Sider, Four-Dimensionalism (Oxford:  Clarendon Press, 2001), pp. 121-32.  I have adapted 
Sider’s argument so that its conclusion is a disjunction—either universalism or nihilism—rather than 
universalism outright. 
15

P2.  There is no sharp cut-off point in any such series.  That is, there is no pair of 
adjacent cases such that composition (definitely) occurs in one and (definitely) does 
not occur in the other.
 
P3.  It is always determinate whether composition occurs.  That is, in every case, either 
composition (definitely) occurs or it (definitely) does not occur.
Conclusion:  Either composition always occurs or it never occurs.
     The argument is in effect an argument excluding all the moderate positions and 
forcing us to choose between the extremes.  If we have already rejected the nihilist 
extreme, we are then left with universalism as the only game in town.
     To see how Sider’s conclusion follows from the premises, it may be useful to consider 
another instance of the same logical pattern in which we substitute ‘baldness’ for 
‘composition’ to obtain a classical sorites.29  The first premise then tells us that if baldness 
occurs on some heads but not others, then there are pairs of heads, one bald and the other 
not, between which there extends a continuous series of heads differing only slightly, say 
by one hair each.  Of course, the heads need not lie next to each other along any spatial 
path, nor need the series be continuous in the mathematical sense implying that between 
any two heads there is a third.  Sider’s idea is just that we can construct a series in which 
adjacent members are as similar as we like in whatever respect is deemed relevant to the 
occurrence of baldness or composition.  The second premise now tells us that a single 
hair never makes the difference between being bald and not being bald.  The third 
premise tells us that every head must be either bald or not bald—tertium non datur.  Sider 
29 The term ‘sorites’ is sometimes used broadly as a name for a chain of reasoning in which each 
intermediate conclusion is used as a premise to generate the next conclusion.  It also used more narrowly 
for instances of such reasoning involving vague predicates like ‘is bald’ and ‘is a heap’.  ‘Soros’ is the 
Greek word for ‘heap’. 
16

actually says “definitely bald or definitely not bald,” but these words, it seems to me, add 
nothing but emphasis.30  
     To extract our conclusion, note that P2 and P3 imply that the consequent of P1 is false. 
Suppose such a series of heads as P1 describes.  The first head is bald; what about the 
second?  It cannot be nonbald, or we would get a sharp cut-off, contrary to P2.  Nor can it 
be indeterminate as to baldness or nonbaldness, or we would violate P3.  It must therefore 
be bald.  We can repeat this reasoning for each successive head, proving eventually that 
the last head is bald, but that contradicts the description of the series.  The antecedent of 
P1 must therefore be false, which is to say that the conclusion is true.
     To illustrate what happens when we switch from baldness back to composition, 
imagine a hook, a line, and a pole that I buy in order to make a fishing rod.  When the 
three components lie in separate bins at the hardware store, they do not (according to 
likely moderate principles) compose any further object.  Side by side on my workbench, 
they still do not compose a new object.  When the line is tied tightly enough around the 
hook at one end and the pole at the other, they do compose a new object.  But what 
happens before the knots are tight?  What if the diameter of the knots is several times that 
of the pole, so that lifting the pole leaves the line behind?  What if the diameter is now 
one millimeter less?  You get the idea:  to avoid objectionable arbitrariness or 
indeterminacy, we must say that the three components always composed a further thing. 
(Of course, I am not saying that they always composed a fishing rod).
     In the baldness version of the sorites, most will find the conclusion (that baldness 
occurs in all cases or none) absurd.  They will therefore try to find a false premise.  A 
30 ‘Definitely F’ and ‘F’ are arguably equivalent.  Whatever is definitely F is F, and as for the converse, can 
there be anything that is F but not definitely so?  We do not need to rely on this argument, however, for the 
original sorites reaches its conclusion just as well if ‘F occurs or F does not occur’ is substituted for ‘F 
definitely occurs or F definitely does not occur’ in P2 and P3.
17

commonly fingered culprit is P3:  with vague predicates like ‘bald’, it may be said, we do 
get indeterminacy.  There is a range of heads in the series that are neither bald nor not 
bald, and our sorites reasoning cannot traverse this region of indeterminacy.
     That may be a good response to the baldness sorites,31 but the parallel response is not a 
good response to the Sider sorites.  We cannot treat composition on the model of 
baldness.  The reason has been forcefully stated by David Lewis in a well-known 
passage:
The only intelligible account of vagueness locates it in our thought and language.  The 
reason it’s vague where the outback begins is not that there’s this thing, the outback, 
with imprecise borders; rather there are many things, with different borders, and nobody 
has been fool enough to try to enforce a choice of one of them as the official referent of 
the word ‘outback’.  Vagueness is semantic indecision.32
It is a consequence of this thesis (often called the linguistic theory of vagueness) that 
whenever vagueness gives rise to indeterminacy about whether P, that is because some 
term occurring in ‘P’ is vague—we haven’t made up our minds what exactly it refers to. 
But then how can there be any indeterminacy about whether composition occurs?  Lewis 
continues:
But not all of language is vague.  The truth-functional connectives aren’t, for instance. 
Nor are the words for identity and difference, and for [mereological] overlap.  Nor are 
the idioms of quantification, so long as they are unrestricted.  How could any of these 
be vague?  What would be the alternatives between which we haven’t chosen? 
The question whether composition takes place in a given case, whether a given class 
does or does not have a mereological sum, can be stated in a part of language where 
nothing is vague.  Therefore, it cannot have a vague answer.33 
31 Here is a reason for thinking otherwise, however:  to block the argument from reaching the conclusion 
that the last head is bald, one must hold that somewhere along the series we pass from a head that is bald to 
a head with one more hair that is neither bald nor not bald, but simply indeterminate.  Isn’t a sharp divide 
between baldness and indeterminacy as bad as the already rejected sharp divide between baldness and 
nonbaldness?
32 Lewis, On the Plurality of Worlds, p. 212.
33 Ibid.
18

     I believe Lewis’s reasoning can be spelled out as follows.  A correct answer to the 
Special Composition Question will take the form ‘Ey(the xs compose y) iff the xs stand 
to one another in relation R.’  I have suggested that any candidate for ‘R’ in a moderate 
answer will likely be vague, so that it will be vague or indeterminate whether the right-
hand side of this biconditional holds, even when the xs have been perfectly delineated.  In 
that case, it must also be vague or indeterminate whether the left-hand side holds.  But 
how can that be?  Recall that the left-hand side may be spelled out in mereological 
primitives thus:  ‘Ey(the xs are all parts of y and every part of y has a part in common 
with at least one of the xs)’.  The only terms occurring in that formula are variables, 
quantifiers, the logical connective ‘and’, and the mereological term ‘is part of’.  To which 
of those can we trace any indeterminacy?34  Which of them have we not made up our 
minds about?            
     In this regard, contrast ‘is part of’ with ‘is bald’.  If we know exactly who James is and 
exactly how hair is distributed on his head, it may still be uncertain and indeterminate 
whether he is bald, because we have never decided exactly what property ‘bald’ 
expresses.  But if we know exactly what objects A and B are, how can it be indeterminate 
whether one is part of the other?  You draw the boundaries around any two objects, and I 
will tell you whether one is part of the other.
     With the idioms of existence and quantification, it is again hard to find a source of 
indeterminacy in semantic indecision.  ‘Everything’, ‘something’, ‘there is’—is there 
34 In actual instances of the formula, the plural variable ‘the xs’ will be replaced by a term referring to some 
concrete plurality of objects.  We may suppose that there is nothing vague about what this term refers to, for 
we are investigating vagueness that arises even when the xs have been perfectly delineated.
19

really something here we haven’t made up our minds about?  As Lewis says, what would 
be the alternatives between which we haven’t chosen?35
     Lewis brings out a further reason for not assimilating existence to baldness, apparently 
connected with the dictum that existence is not a predicate.  If it is vague whether 
someone is bald, there is someone whom we do not know how to classify—he sort of is, 
sort of isn’t, and we just don’t know what to say.  But if it is vague whether there exists 
something composed of the xs, it is not that there sort of is and sort of isn’t an entity 
composed by the xs and we just don’t know whether to classify this entity as existent or 
nonexistent.  If the entity is there for us to equivocate over, it exists unequivocally.  There 
is nothing that lies in the indeterminate zone between existing and not existing.36 
     Sider drives home the objection about vague existence engendered by vague 
composition in this way:  a vague restriction on composition would make it indeterminate 
how many concrete objects there are in the universe, but there cannot be any 
indeterminacy in such a question about number, since it is stateable in purely logical 
vocabulary.37  One who is gung-ho on gunk may not complete the argument in this way, 
however, since a gunky universe would contain an infinite number of objects even if 
there were vague restrictions on composition.  Nonetheless, one may object to vague 
existence in particular cases even if it does not affect the total count of objects.  
35 A loophole in the argument of the last three paragraphs has occurred to me, but I do not know how 
seriously to take it.  Could it be that we have left nothing unsettled about the meaning of the open sentence 
‘x is part of y’ and nothing unsettled about the quantifier ‘Ey...’,  yet there is still indeterminacy in certain 
formulas constructed by putting these elements together, for example, ‘Ey(x is part of y & z is part of y)’? 
36 Compare Lewis, pp. 212-13, and van Inwagen, p. 233.  This contrast between existence and baldness 
may in the end be spurious, however.  In his final chapter, van Inwagen shows that it depends on the 
inference from ‘it is indefinite whether ExFx’ to ‘there is something such that it is indefinite whether it is 
F’, and he sketches a logic in which this inference fails.
37 Sider, pp. 126-30.
20

4.  Souls and brutes
There are two in-between answers to the Special Composition Question that deserve 
consideration before we finally settle in favor of universalism.  One is van Inwagen’s 
view that the xs compose something if and only if their activity constitutes a life—if and 
only if they are “ensouled” in the old-fashioned sense that connotes a mode of 
organization rather than an immaterial substance.  The other is the “brute composition” 
view of Ned Markosian, according to which it is simply a brute fact that some 
arrangements of objects compose things and others do not.
     Let me begin by acknowledging a strong pressure pushing us away from the extremes 
and toward the middle.  The David Lodge character Morris Zapp, a deconstructionist who 
had previously professed that the self is a fiction, was once jolted by the realization “I 
will die; therefore, I am.”  Zapp’s realization, coupled with the assumption what I am if I 
exist is some compound of particles, provides a basis for thinking that some in-between 
answer must be correct after all.  If I am a composite object that presently exists, nihilism 
is false.  If I am a composite object that will cease to exist upon the dispersal of its parts, 
universalism is false.  So some in-between answer must be correct. 
     This is a powerful argument for a moderate answer.  If it is to be resisted, it must 
apparently be on one of three grounds:  that I don’t really exist, that I won’t really cease 
to exist, or that I am not a composite object.  One who took the first option would 
presumably believe himself to be some sort of logical construct or nominal entity, like the 
particles arranged deskwise we considered above.  One who took the second option 
would believe that he will not cease to exist upon his death, but will enjoy a Lucretian 
sort of immortality, no longer afflicted with consciousness but surviving as sundry 
21

particles scattered through the biosphere.  One who took the third option would believe 
that he is an extended physical atom or a purely psychical monad.   I leave the weighing 
of these options to the reader.38  
      Van Inwagen rejects all three options.  He thinks that he and you and I are all 
composite objects.  So what is special about the things making us up, but not about just 
any old things, that lets them compose something?   Van Inwagen’s answer is life:  there 
is something that the xs compose iff the activity of the xs constitutes a life.39  In his view, 
living organisms are the only composite objects.  If the xs are ever to amount to anything, 
they need to get a life.
     As van Inwagen is at pains to acknowledge, it is often a vague matter whether the 
activity of a group of particles constitutes a life.  There may be no definite point at which 
the activity of the cells in a growing embryonic mass comes to constitute a life, or at 
which the activity of a fatally damaged brain ceases to constitute a life.  There may be no 
definite answer as to whether the activities associated with viruses and mitochondria ever 
38 There is also an important but hard-to-classify fourth option that we should consider.  In this option, we 
deny the premise that says ‘if I am a composite object that will cease to exist upon the dispersal of its parts, 
universalism must be false.’  We argue that this premise is false because ‘universalism is true & I am a 
composite object & I will cease to exist upon the dispersal of my parts’ is a possible combination.  Let 
universalism be true (every set has a sum) and let me be a composite object in the sense that there is a 
certain set of objects of which I am a sum.  It could still be true that I will cease to exist upon the dispersal 
of the parts in that set.  Of course, a sum of those parts will still exist after their dispersal, but I am not and 
never was identical with that sum, even though I was formerly composed of the very parts that compose it. 
I was another sum, with essential properties (consciousness or life, perhaps) not possessed by the sum that 
continues to exist.  Plainly, this view rejects the uniqueness axiom of classical mereology.
     In this view, some composite objects are “mere” mereological sums, while others are supersums:  they 
satisfy the definition of a sum, but they also have persistence conditions or essential forms that go beyond 
those of a mere sum.  Uniqueness is violated because a mere sum and a supersum may be sums of the same 
parts.
     How shall we classify this view?  It subscribes to the letter of universalism, but also has an air of 
moderation about it.  We can raise something like the Special Composition Question all over again:  when 
do the xs compose a supersum?  If the answer is “only when their activity constitutes a life,” then we are 
giving an answer that savors of moderation.
     I believe that a position along these lines is the intended view of those who say that they wish to 
distinguish the ‘is’ of composition from the ‘is’ of identity.  I am composed of the particles in a certain sum, 
they say, but I am not identical with that sum.  They do not always realize that for better or for worse, they 
are renouncing uniqueness.
39 Material Beings, p. 82.
22

constitute a life.  On van Inwagen’s view, then, composition is governed by a vague 
restriction.  His view therefore incurs the objection of the previous section against 
theories that make it a vague matter whether composition occurs:  they countenance a 
variety of vagueness that infects existence itself and cannot be traced to any terms whose 
meanings we have never made precise.  In response, van Inwagen mounts a sustained 
challenge to the linguistic theory of vagueness.40  I cannot hope to resolve that issue here, 
but must simply flag it as one of the issues on which the present issue turns.
     The other in-between answer I want to consider is that of Ned Markosian.  In my 
objections above to moderate views, I took for granted that if composition is restricted, it 
must be restricted by some principle.  That is precisely the assumption Markosian 
challenges.  He advocates a position according to which some objects compose wholes, 
others do not, and there is no saying why.  They just do or do not, as the case may be, and 
their no deeper fact in virtue of which they do or do not.  That certain objects compose 
wholes and others do not is simply a brute fact.41
     I cannot fault Markosian for his repudiation of principle, since in some matters, I 
myself am a man of no principle.  Consider identity through time.  If object A existing 
today is identical with object B that existed yesterday or last year, must there be some 
deeper fact in virtue of which that identity obtains?  Not always.  Imagine a perfectly 
homogeneous red jelly filling an infinite green pipe, perhaps moving through the pipe or 
perhaps remaining at rest.42  If the jelly moves during the interval from t1 to t2, then the 
portion of jelly in a certain segment s2 at t2 is identical with the portion of jelly in the 
40 Material Beings, chapters 17-19.
41 “Brutal Composition,” cited above.
42 This example is a variant on the example of the rotating disk discussed by Kripke and others.  For further 
discussion and references, see Sider, Four-Dimensionalism, pp. 224-36.
23

neighboring segment s1 at t1.  But what deeper facts does this identity fact derive from? 
None that are not themselves identity facts, for example, the fact that each of molecules 
composing the jelly in s2 at t2 is identical with one of the molecules composing the jelly 
in s1 at t1.  I believe there are bound to be identity facts that do not hold in virtue of any 
further facts that are not themselves identity facts.43
     Markosian’s view enables him to sidestep the objections I raised to moderate views in 
the preceding section.  I objected to certain obvious principles (of contact, cohesion, and 
the like) on the ground that they are either too strict or too lax to underwrite ordinary 
judgments about composition, and I intimated that a similar fate would befall any other 
moderate principles.  Markosian can accept this in stride; it is part of his reason for 
declaring that no satisfactory principles governing composition are to be had.  I also 
raised the objection that if composition is restricted, we can avoid objectionable 
indeterminacy only at the cost of objectionable arbitrariness, as shown in the Sider 
sorites.  Markosian has a neat way around the sorites—he can say that there is nothing 
objectionable about sharp cut-off points between cases of composition and cases of 
noncomposition.  Consider a parallel he offers:  we could line up a thousand individuals 
ranging in height from one meter to two meters in one-millimeter increments, the shorter 
500 all left-handed and the taller 500 all right-handed.  In this series there would be only 
a one-millimeter difference in height between the last of the lefties and the first of the 
righties.  No problem, though, for who said height had anything to do with handedness? 
There is similarly no problem in a series where a minute difference in degree of cohesion 
(or whatnot) separates the cases where composition occurs from those in which it does 
43 Markosian says that his brutal composition view is compatible with the following supervenience thesis: 
worlds alike in their distribution of universals are alike in their compositional facts.  It may be that the 
jelly-and-pipe example shows that identity facts are not even supervenient in this sense.   
24

not, for Markosian does not claim that cohesion or anything else is that in virtue of which 
composition obtains.  Things would be otherwise for someone who thought cohesion was 
relevant and had either to specify an exact degree of it or leave matters indeterminate.
     Markosian’s position is respectable and not easily refutable, but I have two qualms 
about it.  First, although the view is advanced in defense of common sense, it is not 
entirely friendly to common sense.  The person on the street probably believes not only 
(i) that the beams and rivets of the Eiffel Tower compose an object while the Tower and 
the moon do not, but also (ii) that he has some idea why this is so, having to do with 
contact, cohesiveness, or the like.  Markosian’s view that composition is brute is 
consistent with point (i) but undermines point (ii).  Second, although the view does not 
incur the same charge of arbitariness as do intuitive principles of composition, it seems 
nonetheless to involve its own brand of arbitrariness.  To see this, consider an analog of 
the brute composition view that might be advanced to solve the “explosion” problem of 
section 3.  The problem was this:  how can we admit that some objects are new entities 
over and above the matter of which they are composed without admitting that there are 
millions of objects co-inhabiting any lump of matter?44  A believer in brute compounds of 
matter and form could deal with the problem by saying that only a few of all those 
millions exist, and it is a brute matter which.  Perhaps when snow is formed into a ball, a 
new entity, a snowball, comes into being, but when snow is formed into a disk or an 
ellipsoid or an irregular lump, no new entity comes into being—the snow just becomes 
44 Note that the existence principles of the Aristotelian go far beyond any composition principles--even the 
universalist’s unrestricted composition principle.  The unbridled Aristotelian believes not only that any xs 
compose something, but also that any xs compose indefinitely many things.  The moon and the six pennies 
may compose not only their mereological sum, but also the configuration known as a full Monty, which 
exists just when the moon is full and the pennies all lie tails up.  When we turn a penny over, we destroy the 
Monty but not the sum.  Since these entities are distinct despite having the same parts, the Aristotelian 
implicitly rejects the uniqueness axiom of classical mereology.
25

differently shaped.  Why is that?  It just is.  I find that possibility pretty hard to swallow, 
and brutal composition does not go down any easier.
5.  Question or pseudo-question?
I expect that some readers of this essay will be impatient with the entire issue.  Is there or 
is there not an object composed of the pencil on my desk and the mug on the cabinet ten 
feet away?  It makes no difference, these readers will say—there is really nothing here to 
argue about.  I wish to close by discussing two grounds on which it might be urged that 
our question is a pseudo-question:  that no empirical evidence or conceptual 
considerations will settle who is right, and that the difference between the two sides is 
merely verbal.
     Gideon Rosen and Cian Dorr point out that the issue separating universalists and their 
opponents is neither straightforwardly empirical nor straightforwardly conceptual.45  The 
issue is not straightforwardly empirical, for we cannot settle it simply by looking around 
or performing a test in a laboratory.  Regardless of which side is right, the course of our 
experience will be the same.  Nor is the issue straightforwardly conceptual, for we cannot 
settle it by an analysis of the meaning of ‘part’ (or other relevant terms) that shows the 
thesis propounded by one side to be analytic (and the opposed thesis therefore 
contradictory).
     From this circumstance, the positivists of an older generation would have concluded 
that there is no genuine issue.  If a thesis and an alleged rival of it are both consistent (so 
neither is analytic) and if they both tally equally well with the totality of observational 
45Gideon Rosen and Cian Dorr, “Composition as Fiction,” in TITLE, edited by Richard M. Gale (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2002), pp. 151-74.  See also what Hilary Putnam has to say about the differences between the 
universalist (personified by “the Polish logician”) and the atoms-only theorist (personified by Carnap) in 
The Many Faces of Realism (La Salle, Ill.:  Open Court, 1987), pp. 18-19.
26

data, then it cannot be the case that one of them is true and the other false.  Perhaps both 
of them are true--both really say the same thing despite differences in verbal formulation. 
(That is what Reichenbach said about rival systems of geometry-cum-physics, such as 
Euclidean geometry coupled with a complex physics and non-Euclidean geometry 
coupled with a simple physics.)  Perhaps neither of them is true—both are meaningless 
verbiage in so far as they go beyond what is supported by empirical data.  (That is what 
Ayer said about the dispute between those who affirm and those who deny the existence 
of a transcendent God.)  Either way, it is not the case that one thesis is true and its 
apparent rival false; there is nothing to debate about.
     Positivism of that sort is no longer in vogue, and no wonder.  What is the status of its 
leading principle--that nothing is true unless it is either true on conceptual grounds or 
better supported than its rivals by the totality of observational data?  As critics have often 
pointed out, the positivist’s principle fails to measure up to its own standards.  What 
empirical or conceptual considerations establish the positivist’s own thesis, or at least 
give it an edge over the competing theses of metaphysical realists?  None have ever been 
brought forth, and I doubt that any could be.  The principle is therefore self-refuting, and 
cannot be used to discredit mereological debates.     
     Eli Hirsch takes the dispute among universalists, nihilists, and common-sense 
moderates to be a paradigm of a merely verbal dispute.46  In a dispute of this sort, there is 
a disputed sentence D and there are two undisputed sentences U1 and U2 such that 
everyone can agree that D is true if it means the same as U1 and everyone can agree that 
D is false if it means the same as U2.  Moreover, one side is most charitably interpreted 
46 Eli Hirsch, “Physical-Object Ontology, Verbal Disputes, and Common Sense,” Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research, 70, 2005, 1-30, especially p. 16.
27

as meaning U1 by the disputed sentence and the other as meaning U2.47  In the case at 
hand, one of the disputed sentences is ‘There is an object x such that x is composed of the 
pencil on my desk and the mug on the cabinet.’  Hirsch would say that everyone can 
agree that this is true if it means what he takes universalists to mean by it, namely, U1: 
there is a pencil on my desk, and there is a mug on the cabinet.  Everyone can also agree 
that it is false if it means what he takes foes of universalism to mean by it, namely. U2: 
there is a mass of matter composed of the pencil on my desk and the mug on the cabinet. 
The only issue, Hirsch thinks, is whether U1 or U2 is what the disputed sentence means 
in English.48
     For my part, I cannot see that the dispute is so easily shown to be verbal.  To begin 
with, it is not obvious to me that U2 is false, for it is not clear to me that phrases like 
‘mass of matter’ or ‘portion of matter’ in English do not apply to spatially disconnected 
objects.  More seriously, I do not believe that U1, the supposedly charitable interpretation 
of the universalist’s claim offered by Hirsch, is all I mean by D.  I realize that 
unconverted members of my audience already assent to that much, and I am trying to 
convince them of something more.  The something more, though entailed by U1 if I am 
right, is not merely an analytical or by-virtue-of-meaning consequence of it.   Perhaps my 
47 The textbook example of a verbal dispute and its resolution was provided by William James in his report 
on a camping trip (quoted in Irving Copi, Introduction to Logic (New York:  Macmillan, 1978; 5th edition), 
pp. 127-78).  One of the campers circled a tree in an effort to get a glimpse of a squirrel that was clinging to 
the trunk on the other side and always managing to keep the trunk between himself and his pursuer.  A 
metaphysical dispute broke out among the rest of the campers:  did the man go around the squirrel or not? 
Yes, James offered, if “going around” means being successively to the north, east, south, and west of him; 
no, if it means being successively to the front, left, rear, and right of him.  James noted that most of the 
campers were satisfied with his solution, though some found it an evasion of the issue.  Hirsch assimilates 
many disputes about the ontology of physical objects, such as the dispute between universalists and their 
opponents, to James’s incident.
48 Hirsch actually applies this strategy to the dispute over temporal sums, such as the “first wood, then 
ceramic” object composed of the present temporal part of my pencil and a later temporal part of the mug, 
but one might apply it as well to the dispute over spatial sums of contemporaneous objects.
28

arguments in this essay have fallen short of establishing universalism, but if so, that at 
least shows that there was something that needed to be established.  Universalism is not 
merely a restatement of the obvious.
              
      
29

