  
“A Moving Picture of Thought”
Peirce’s Existential Graphs
John F. Sowa
24 August 2012
CTF’12 Conference in Düsseldorf

2
““A Moving Picture of Thought”
A Moving Picture of Thought”
Outline:
 1. Search for a natural logic  
      Slide 3
 2. Peirce’s existential graphs                    
        10
 3. Peirce’s rules of inference                                
        26
 4. Psycholinguistic issues                                                         35
 5. Methods of reasoning                              
   
  49
 
Note:  This outline and the section summaries have a green background.  The detailed slides are in white. 

3
1. Search for a Natural Logic
1. Search for a Natural Logic
Every feature of every version of logic is an abstraction 
from some feature of some natural language.
Children learn to use those features correctly long before 
they learn to read.
But the usual notations for symbolic logic are difficult to 
learn and use even by adults.
Philosophers, psychologists, and linguists have been 
searching for a simpler system of “natural logic.”
But they have not reached a consensus that is compatible 
with all the data from all branches of cognitive science.

4
Controversies About Language
Ten linguists and philosophers who span the range of ideas:
● Noam Chomsky:  Generative syntax is the essence of language.
● Roman Jakobson:  Syntax without semantics is meaningless.
● Michael Halliday:  Language is social semiotic.
● Jerry Fodor:  Speech is generated from a language of thought.
● Sydney Lamb:  Knowledge consists of connections in a network.
● Richard Montague:  Any natural logic must be a formal logic.
● Ludwig Wittgenstein:  Games (Sprachspiele) are the foundation.
● Yorick Wilks:  Wittgenstein was right, but more detail is needed.
● Roger Schank:  Background knowledge is essential.
● Fred Jelinek:  Statistics is key to all language processing.
Can their insights tell us what kind of reasoning is natural?
What is the neural and psycholinguistic evidence for them?

5
The Ideal Language Processor
Sentences uttered by a child named Laura before the age of 3. *
    Here’s a seat.  It must be mine if it’s a little one.
    I went to the aquarium and saw the fish.
    I want this doll because she’s big.
    When I was a little girl, I could go “geek geek” like that,
    but now I can go “This is a chair.” 
Laura used Boolean, modal, temporal, and causal operators.
She also used metalanguage about her own language.
No computer system today has her ability to learn, speak, and 
understand language.
* John Limber, The genesis of complex sentences. In T. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and 
the acquisition of language. New York: Academic Press, 1973.  
http://pubpages.unh.edu/~jel/JLimber/Genesis_complex_sentences.pdf 

6
Is Logic the Foundation for Language?
Richard Montague (1970) treated NLs as a version of logic: 
“I reject the contention that an important theoretical difference exists 
between formal and natural languages.” 
Hans Kamp (2001) followed Montague with qualifications:
“The basic concepts of linguistics — and especially those of semantics — 
have to be thought through anew...  Many more distinctions have to be 
drawn than are dreamt of in current semantic theory.” 
Barbara Partee (2005) added further qualifications:
“The present formalizations of model-theoretic semantics are undoubtedly 
still rather primitive compared to what is needed to capture many 
important semantic properties of natural languages...  There are other 
approaches to semantics that are concerned with other aspects of natural 
language, perhaps even cognitively deeper in some sense, but which we 
presently lack the tools to adequately formalize.”

7
Mathematical Discovery is not Formal
Paul Halmos, mathematician: 
“Mathematics — this may surprise or shock some — is never deductive  
in its creation.  The mathematician at work makes vague guesses, 
visualizes broad generalizations, and jumps to unwarranted conclusions.  
He arranges and rearranges his ideas, and becomes convinced of their 
truth long before he can write down a logical proof...  the deductive stage, 
writing the results down, and writing its rigorous proof are relatively 
trivial once the real insight arrives;  it is more the draftsman’s work not 
the architect’s.” 
Albert Einstein, physicist: 
“The words or the language, as they are written or spoken, do not seem 
to play any role in my mechanism of thought.  The psychical entities 
which seem to serve as elements in thought are certain signs and more 
or less clear images which can be voluntarily reproduced and combined... 
The above-mentioned elements are, in my case, of visual and some of 
muscular type. Conventional words or other signs have to be sought for 
laboriously only in  a secondary stage, when the mentioned associative 
play is sufficiently established and can be reproduced at will.”

8
Chess Playing is not Formal
Chess is just as formal as any branch of mathematics.
But human chess players think like mathematicians:
● They “see” what moves are good or bad.
● They use formal analysis primarily to check for errors.
Adriaan de Groot (1965) interviewed dozens of chess 
players, ranging from amateurs to the world champion:
● Chess masters don’t search any deeper than good amateurs.
● Masters see the best moves at first glance.
● But amateurs stare at the board for hours and never see them.
For chess playing and theorem proving, computers are 
far better than humans at brute-force search.
But humans are much, much better at perception.

9
Methods of Reasoning
For everyone from Laura to Einstein, reasoning depends 
more on perception and action than formal logic:
● Meanings expressed in language are based on perception.
● Mental models based on mechanisms of perception and action       
  are necessary even for mathematics.
● Formal logic is an abstraction from patterns in natural languages.
● Computer systems can manipulate formal symbols much faster      
  and more accurately than any human.
● But computers are much worse in perception.
● That limitation makes them unable to process language in the         
  same way that people do.
How can reasoning use the mechanisms of perception?

10
2. Peirce
2. Peirce’’s Existential Graphs
s Existential Graphs
Charles Sanders Peirce published research in logic, philosophy, 
physics, mathematics, astronomy, chemistry, and psychology.  
In logic, he invented three very different notations:
● Relational algebra (1870), which is used in relational databases,
● Algebraic notation for predicate calculus (1880, 1885), and
● Existential graphs (1897), which he called his chef d’oeuvre.
He was an associate editor of the Century Dictionary, for which 
he wrote, revised, or edited over 16,000 definitions.
He is most famous for his theory of signs or semiotics, which 
includes every branch of cognitive science as a special case.
He claimed that the operations on existential graphs generate   
“a moving picture of the action of the mind in thought.”
Some psychologists and philosophers believe he was right.

11
How to say “A cat is on a mat.”
Gottlob Frege (1879):
Charles Sanders Peirce (1880, 1885):
        Σx Σy Catx • Maty • Onx,y 
Giuseppe Peano (1895):
        x y Cat(x) ∧ Mat(y) ∧ On(x,y) 
Charles Sanders Peirce (1897):
        
All four notations have logically equivalent semantics.

12
Existential Graphs Without Negation
A simple notation for a useful subset of logic.
The only logical operators are existence and conjunction:
     xyz (isaStagirite(x)  teaches(x,y)  isaMacedonian(y) 
∧
∧
∧
        conquersTheWorld(y)  isaDiscipleOf(x,z)  isanOpponentOf(x,z)
∧
∧
            
∧isaPhilosopherAdmiredByChurchFathers(z)).
This subset of logic can represent the content of any database, 
including relational databases and RDF triples.
See Peirce’s own tutorial on EGs:  http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/egtut.pdf 

13
Existential Graphs
A graph notation for logic with a minimum of primitives:

14
Boolean Combinations
Areas nested inside an odd number of negations are shaded.

15
The Scope of Quantifiers
The scope is determined by the outermost point of the line. 
The bottom graph can be read in three equivalent ways.

16
Translating EGs to English
Most existential graphs can be read in several equivalent ways.
Left graph:
A red ball is on a blue table.
Some ball that is red is on some table that is blue.
Right graph:
Something red that is not a ball is on a table that is not blue.
A red non-ball is on a non-blue table.
On some non-blue table, there is something red that is not a ball.

17
Scope of Quantifiers and Negations
Ovals define the scope for both quantifiers and negations.
Left graph:
If there is a red ball, then it is on a blue table.
Every red ball is on some blue table.
Right graph:
If a red ball is on something, then it is a blue table.

18
Multiple Nested Negations
Complex patterns of negations can be read in many ways.
If  something red that is not a ball is on something else,                            
then the latter is a table that is not blue.
If a red thing is on something that is not a non-blue table,                  
then the former is a ball.
If a red thing is on something else,                                                             
then either the former is a ball or the latter is a table that is not blue.

19
Predicate Calculus
The widely used Peirce-Peano algebraic notation:

20
Translating EG to Predicate Calculus
An operator-by-operator translation:
~(∃x)(∃y)(Red(x) ∧ ~Ball(x) ∧ On(x,y) ∧ ~(Table(y) ∧ ~Blue(y)))
 
An operator-by-operator translation to English:
It’s false that there are x and y such that x is red, x is not a ball,       
x is on y, and it’s false that y is a table that is not blue.
 

21
Metalanguage
A relation attached to an oval makes a metalevel statement 
about the proposition expressed by the nested graph. *
Peirce allowed the names of relations to contain blanks.
The relation named 'You are a good girl' has zero arguments.   
It is an existential graph that express a proposition.
The relation named 'is much to be wished' has one argument.  
It makes a statement about the proposition inside the oval.
* From Charles Sanders Peirce, Reasoning and the Logic of Things, The Cambridge 
Conferences Lectures of 1898, Harvard University Press, p. 151.
 

 
 
Lambda Abstraction
The top EG says Aristotle is a Stagirite who teaches Alexander 
who conquers the world.
In the EG below it, the names Aristotle and Alexander are 
erased, and their places are marked with the Greek letter λ .
That EG represents a dyadic relation:  ___ is a Stagirite who   
teaches ___ who conquers the world.
Peirce used an underscore to mark those empty places, but 
Alonzo Church marked them with λ . 

23
Issues in Mapping Language to Logic
Hans Kamp observed that the features of predicate calculus do 
not have a direct mapping to and from natural languages. *
Pronouns can cross sentence boundaries, but variables cannot.
● Example:  Pedro is a farmer.  He owns a donkey.
● (∃x)(Pedro(x) ∧ farmer(x)).  (∃y)(∃z)(owns(y,z) ∧ donkey(z)).
● There is no operator that can relate x and y in different formulas.
The rules for scope of quantifiers are different.
● Example:  If a farmer owns a donkey, then he beats it.
● In English, quantifiers in the if-clause govern the then-clause.
● But in predicate calculus, the quantifiers must  be moved to the front.
● Formula:  (∀x)(∀y)((farmer(x) ∧ donkey(y) ∧ owns(x,y)) ⊃ beats(x,y)).
In narratives, the default operator between NL sentences is 
usually equivalent to 'and then'.
* Hans Kamp & Uwe Reyle (1993) From Discourse to Logic, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
 

24
Linking Existential Quantifiers 
Kamp invented Discourse Representation Structure (DRS) as a 
logic with a simpler mapping to and from NLs.
EGs (left) and DRSes (right) support equivalent operations.
By connecting  EG lines or merging DRS boxes,
 

25
Quantifiers in EG and DRS
Peirce and Kamp independently chose isomorphic structures.
● Peirce chose nested ovals for EG with lines to show coreference.
● Kamp chose boxes for DRS with variables to show coreference.
● But the boxes and ovals are isomorphic:  they have the same constraints  
  on the scope of quantifiers, and they have the same mapping to NLs.
Example:  If a farmer owns a donkey, then he beats it.
In both EG and DRS, quantifiers in the if-area are existential, and they 
include the then-area within their scope.
 

26
3. Peirce
3. Peirce’’s Rules of Inference
s Rules of Inference
Peirce’s rules support the simplest, most general reasoning 
method ever invented for any logic.
Three pairs of rules, which insert or erase a graph or subgraph:
1. Insert/Erase:  Insert anything in a negative area; erase anything     
    in a positive area.
2. Iterate/Deiterate:  Iterate (copy) anything in the same area or any   
    nested area; deiterate (erase) any iterated copy.
3. Double negation:  Insert or erase a double negation (pair of ovals  
    with nothing between them) around anything in any area.
These rules apply to propositional logic, first-order logic, modal 
logic, and higher-order logic.
They can be adapted to many syntaxes, including DRS, predicate 
calculus, frame notations, and even natural language. 
Instead of symbols, the relation labels could also be images.

27
A Proof by Peirce’s Rules
Conclusion:  Pedro is a farmer who owns and beats a donkey.
 

28
Proving a Theorem
Peirce’s only axiom is the empty graph – a blank sheet of paper.
● The empty graph cannot say anything false.
● Therefore, the empty graph is always true.
● Silence is golden.
A theorem is a proposition that is proved from the empty graph.
● For the first step, only one rule can be applied:  draw a double          
  negation around a blank area.
● The next step is to insert the hypothesis into the negative area.
The Praeclarum Theorema (splendid theorem) by Leibniz:
((p⊃r)  (
∧q⊃s))  ((
⊃
p∧q)  (
⊃r∧s))
In the Principia Mathematica, Whitehead and Russell took 43 
steps to prove this theorem.
With Peirce’s rules, the proof takes only 7 steps. 
 

29
Praeclarum Theorema
((p⊃r)  (
∧q⊃s))  ((
⊃
p∧q)  (
⊃r∧s))
Note that the if-parts of (p⊃r) and (q⊃s) are white, because those 
areas are nested two levels deep.
But the if-part of (p∧q)  (
⊃r∧s) is shaded, because that area is 
nested three levels deep.
 

30
Proof of the Praeclarum Theorema
Each step is labeled with the number of the rule:
3i, insert double negation.   1i, insert ((p⊃r)  (
∧q⊃s)).   2i, iterate (p⊃r).     
1i, insert q.   2i, iterate (q⊃s).   2e, deiterate q.  3e, erase double negation.
For humans, perception determines which rule to apply.
Look ahead to the conclusion to see which rule would make    
the current graph look more like the target graph.
 

31
Applying Peirce’s Rules to Other Notations 
With minor changes, Peirce’s rules can be applied to almost any 
notation for logic, including useful subsets of natural languages.
Definition:  A proposition X is more general than Y, and Y is more 
specialized than X, iff X is true in every model in which Y is true.
Modified version of Peirce’s first pair of rules:
● Insert:  In a negative context, any  propositional expression may     
  be replaced by a more specialized expression.
● Erase:  In a positive context, any propositional expression may be  
  replaced by a more general expression.
The rules of Iterate/Deiterate and Double Negation are unchanged.
This modification holds for existential graphs, since erasing any 
subgraph makes a graph more general.
But this version can be easier to apply to other notations.

32
Peirce’s Rules Applied to English
Use shading to mark 
the positive and 
negative parts of each 
sentence.
Rule 1i specializes 'cat' 
to 'cat in the house'.
Rule 1e generalizes 
'carnivore' to 'animal'.
This method of reasoning is sound for sentences that can be 
mapped to a formal logic.  It can also be used on propositional 
parts of sentences that contain some nonlogical features.

33
A Proof in English
Use shading to mark positive and 
negative parts of each sentence.
Rule 1i specializes 'a cat' to 'Yojo', 
and Rule 2i iterates 'Yojo' to replace 
the pronoun 'it'.
Rule 2e deiterates the nested copy 
of the sentence 'Yojo is on a mat'.
As a result, there is nothing left 
between the inner and outer 
negation of the if-then nest.
Finally, Rule 3e erases the double 
negation to derive the conclusion.
 

34
 Natural Deduction
To simplify the proof procedures, Gerhard Gentzen developed  
a method he called natural deduction.
But Peirce’s method is a version of natural deduction that is 
simpler and more general than Gentzen’s:
For a proof of equivalence, see http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/egtut.pdf 
 

35
4. Psycholinguistic Issues
4. Psycholinguistic Issues
Human language is based on the way people think about 
everything they see, hear, feel, and do.
And thinking is intimately integrated with perception and action.
The semantics and pragmatics of a language are
● Distributed in the brains of every speaker of the language,
● Situated in the local time and space of each speaker,
● Dynamically generated and interpreted in terms of a constantly       
  developing and changing context,
● Embodied and supported by the sensory and motor organs.
The precision of formal logic is an important special case.
But a candidate for a natural logic should also be applicable to 
vague and informal methods of learning, talking, and reasoning.

36
Precision and Vagueness
Charles Sanders Peirce:
“It is easy to speak with precision upon a general theme.  Only, one 
must commonly surrender all ambition to be certain.   It is equally   
easy to be certain.   One has only to be sufficiently vague.   It is not      
so difficult to be pretty precise and fairly certain at once about a very 
narrow subject.”  (CP 4.237)
Alfred North Whitehead:
“Human knowledge is a process of approximation.  In the focus of 
experience, there is comparative clarity.  But the discrimination of this 
clarity leads into the penumbral background.  There are always 
questions left over.  The problem is to discriminate exactly what we 
know vaguely.”  Analysis of meaning (1937).

37
What is a Chair?
The egg-yolk theory puts typical examples in the yolk and 
unusual examples in the egg white (Lehmann & Cohn 1994).

38
What is a Number?
Concepts in science and mathematics grow and change.

39
Microsenses
The linguist Allen Cruse coined the term microsense for a 
specialized sense of a word in a particular application.
Examples of microsenses:
● Spatial terms in different situations and points of view.
● The many kinds of chairs or numbers in the egg whites.
● The kinds of balls in various ball games:  baseball, basket ball,        
   billiard ball, bowling ball, football, golf ball, softball, tennis ball.
● Computer science requires precise definitions, but the meanings    
  change whenever programs are revised or extended.
● Consider the term file system in Unix, Apple OS X, Microsoft              
  Windows, and IBM mainframes.
Microsenses result from using old words in new activities.
Any attempt to limit the proliferation of new microsenses would 
destroy the flexibility and extensibility of natural languages.

40
Using Background Knowledge
People resolve ambiguities and choose the correct microsenses 
by retrieving background knowledge about the options.
Choosing the microsense:  My dog bit the visitor’s ear.
● By imagining the relative size of people and dogs, one would assume  
  it was more likely to be a doberman than a dachshund.
● But if one knew the visitor was in the habit of bending over to pet a      
  dog, it might even be a chihuahua.
Resolving an ambiguous parse:  The chicken is ready to eat.
● From knowledge about typical food, one would assume the chicken     
  had been cooked and prepared as a meal.
● If the word chicken were replaced with dog, one might assume the        
  dog was begging for food.
● But people in different cultures may make different assumptions. 
The many microsenses and the dependence on background 
knowledge require highly flexible methods of reasoning.

41
From EG to CG
Existential graphs show logical structure as simply as possible:
● Only three logical operators:  existence, conjunction, and negation.
● All content expressed by relations, with 0 or more arguments. 
Conceptual graphs add more features to the EG foundation:
● More operators:  or, if-then, equivalence, every, metalanguage.
● Point of quantification expressed by a concept box instead of a line.
● Some monadic relations are used to express types.
● Concept box is partitioned in a type field and a referent field.
● Referent field has generalized quantifiers, referents, and indexicals.  
A default ontology designed for mapping to and from NLs:
● Thematic roles and other relations used in linguistics.
● Context boxes for propositions and situations.
● Temporal, modal, causal, and intentional relations.  
Operations adapted from DRS and other linguistic systems.

42
Mapping a Text to CG 
A very short story:
Yojo the cat and a mouse were in the basement of a house               
at 10:17 UTC.  Yojo chased the mouse.  He caught the mouse.      
He ate the head of the mouse.
Context-free translation:
● Translate each phrase of each sentence without considering the context.
● Leave some types and relations underspecified.
● Mark unresolved indexicals with the symbol #.   
As more information becomes available from the context,
● Replace indexical markers with coreference labels.
● Specialize (or correct) the type labels on concepts and relations.   
Since DRS contexts are isomorphic to the EG and CG contexts, 
the DRS rules for indexicals can be adapted to CGs.

43
CG with Indexical Markers
The symbol # marks a concept with an unresolved indexical.
Each # marker must be replaced with a coreference label.

44
CG with Indexicals Resolved
Symbols *x and *y are defining labels; ?x and ?y are bound labels.
In the pure graph notation, coreference is shown by lines.

45
Psychological Issues
Endorsement by the psychologist Philip Johnson-Laird (2002):
“Peirce’s existential graphs... establish the feasibility of a                    
  diagrammatic system of reasoning equivalent to the first-order         
  predicate calculus.”
“They anticipate the theory of mental models in many respects,          
  including their iconic and symbolic components, their eschewal       
  of variables, and their fundamental operations of insertion and         
  deletion.”
“Much is known about the psychology of reasoning... But we still       
  lack a comprehensive account of how individuals represent              
  multiply-quantified assertions, and so the graphs may provide          
  a guide to the future development of psychological theory.”
Johnson-Laird published many papers about mental models.
His comments on that topic are significant, especially in 
combination with the other properties of the graphs.
 

46
Mental Maps, Images, and Models 
The neuroscientist Antonio Damasio (2010):
“The distinctive feature of brains such as the one we own is their 
uncanny ability to create maps...  But when brains make maps, they  
are also creating images, the main currency of our minds.  Ultimately 
consciousness allows us to experience maps as images, to  
manipulate those images, and to apply reasoning to them.”
The maps and images form mental models of the real world or  
of the imaginary worlds in our hopes, fears, plans, and desires.
Words and phrases of language can be generated from them.
They provide a “model theoretic” semantics for language that 
uses perception and action for testing models against reality.
Like Tarski’s models, they define the criteria for truth, but they 
are flexible, dynamic, and situated in the daily drama of life.

47
Reasoning with Mental Models
From Damasio and other neuroscientists:
● Mental models are patterns in the sensory projection areas that       
  resemble patterns generated during perception.
● But the stimuli that generate mental models come from the frontal   
  lobes, not  from sensory input.
● The content of the mental models is generated by assembling          
  fragments of earlier perceptions in novel combinations.
 From suggestions by Johnson-Laird:
● The nodes of an existential graph could represent images or             
  fragments of images from long-term memory.
● The connecting lines of an EG would show how those fragments     
  are assembled to form a mental model.
● The logical features of EGs could be used to represent rules and     
  constraints for reasoning about those models.
 
 

48
Neurocognitive Network for the Word 'fork'
Network in the left hemisphere, adapted from Sydney Lamb (2011):
● C:     Concept of a fork in the parietal lobe links to all other areas.
● V:      Visual recognition in the temporal lobe links to the visual cortex.
● T:      Tactile feel of a fork in the somatosensory cortex.
● M:     Motor schemata for manipulating a fork in the motor area.
● PR:   Phonology for recognizing the word 'fork' in Wernicke’s area.
● PA:   Phonology for the sound of /fork/ in the primary auditory cortex.
● PP:   Phonology for producing the articulation of /fork/ in Broca’s area.

49
5. Methods of Reasoning
5. Methods of Reasoning
All methods are based on the pattern matching of perception:
All methods are based on the pattern matching of perception:
●  Associative access by matching images and patterns of images.
Associative access by matching images and patterns of images.
●  Approximate matches for analogies and metaphors in the right             
Approximate matches for analogies and metaphors in the right             
  hemisphere of the cerebral cortex.
  hemisphere of the cerebral cortex.
●  Precise, detailed pattern matches in the left hemisphere.
Precise, detailed pattern matches in the left hemisphere.
Analogies can support informal case-based reasoning:
Analogies can support informal case-based reasoning:
●  Long-term memory stores large numbers of previous experiences.
Long-term memory stores large numbers of previous experiences.
●  Any new case can be matched to similar cases in LTM.
Any new case can be matched to similar cases in LTM.
●  Close matches suggest likely features or results of the new case. 
Close matches suggest likely features or results of the new case. 
Formal logic is based on disciplined applications of analogy:
Formal logic is based on disciplined applications of analogy:
●  Induction:  Generalize multiple cases to create rules or axioms.
Induction:  Generalize multiple cases to create rules or axioms.
●  Deduction:  Match (unify) a new case with part of some rule or axiom.
Deduction:  Match (unify) a new case with part of some rule or axiom.
●  Abduction:  Form a hypothesis based on aspects of similar cases.
Abduction:  Form a hypothesis based on aspects of similar cases.
Peirce’s graphs and rules can be adapted to these methods.
Peirce’s graphs and rules can be adapted to these methods.  

50
Deduction is Only a Part of Reasoning
From Alfred North Whitehead, Modes of Thought: 
 “Both in science and in logic, you have only to develop your             
   argument sufficiently, and  sooner or later you are bound to arrive  
   at a contradiction, either internally within the argument, or               
   externally in its reference to fact.”
 “The topic of every science is an abstraction from the full concrete  
   happenings of nature.  But every abstraction neglects the influx     
   of the factors omitted into the factors retained.”
 “The premises are conceived in the simplicity of their individual       
   isolation.  But there can be no logical test for the possibility that    
   deductive procedure, leading to the elaboration of compositions,   
   may introduce into relevance considerations from which the           
   primitive notions of the topic have been abstracted.”
 “We must be systematic, but we should keep our systems open.”

51
Criticisms of Deduction
Example by the physician Sextus Empiricus (2nd century AD):
Every human is an animal.
Socrates is human.
Therefore, Socrates is an animal. 
If the major premise was derived by checking every human,
then Socrates was considered, and the argument is circular.
Otherwise, the induction was incomplete and uncertain.
Criticism by the legal scholar Ibn Taymiyya (14th century):
● Every empirical theory is derived by induction from cases.
● Any deduction from such a theory can be obtained by applying       
  analogical reasoning to exactly the same cases. 

52
Case-Based Reasoning
Theories are most important in physics, which has general theories 
that apply to everything without exception.
But in business, medicine, and the law, general theories are rare.
For such fields, case-based reasoning is more appropriate.

53
Peirce’s Cycle of Pragmatism
This diagram, based on Peirce’s writings, shows how different 
methods of reasoning can interact with perception and action.
Many cycles of observing, reasoning, and testing may be needed.

 
 
Processing the Knowledge Soup
Structured theories can be crystallized out of an unstructured 
soup of everything in long-term memory.
The Society of Mind by Marvin Minsky (1986, 2006):
● There can be no single, unified theory of all neural computation.
● The brain contains many areas specialized for different purposes.
● Learning creates new specializations for every human need.
● The result is a society of interacting heterogeneous modules.
● Knowledge consists of a network of K-lines that connect related     
  aspects in areas of the brain with different specializations.
● Emotions are the driving forces that motivate all operations.
Peirce’s cycle of induction, abduction, deduction, and action  
can accommodate a mixture of diverse methods.
It may be traversed in milliseconds for acting in an emergency, 
minutes for hard problems, or months for advanced research.

 
 
Language Understanding
Language is directly related to perception and mental imagery.
● The primary “language of thought” is imagery, including auditory         
  images such as “inner speech” or an imagined melody.
● Peirce’s graphs, Lamb’s networks, and Minsky’s K-lines are related      
  hypotheses about the links that constitute knowledge in the brain.
● Language understanding uses perceptual mechanisms to interpret      
  speech or writing in terms of those networks.
Semantics is grounded in mental models of the world.
● The continuous world is mapped to continuous mental images.
● As Peirce said, “symbols grow.”  Word meanings adapt to the               
  continuity by an open-ended variety of microsenses.
Pragmatics is integrated with all social interactions.
● The great apes have a complex social life without a human language.
● But language facilitates social interactions – even for apes that learn   
  a rudimentary subset.  (Greenspan & Shanker 2004).

56
Conclusion 
All ten insights capture important aspects of language:
● Noam Chomsky:  Generative syntax is the essence of language.
● Roman Jakobson:  Syntax without semantics is meaningless.
● Michael Halliday:  Language is social semiotic.
● Jerry Fodor:  Speech is generated from a language of thought.
● Sydney Lamb:  Knowledge consists of connections in a network.
● Richard Montague:  Any natural logic must be a formal logic.
● Ludwig Wittgenstein:  Games (Sprachspiele) are the foundation.
● Yorick Wilks:  Wittgenstein was right, but more detail is needed.
● Roger Schank:  Background knowledge is essential.
● Fred Jelinek:  Statistics is key to all language processing.
Peirce’s semiotics is a general framework that can relate them.

 
 
Related Readings
Sowa, John F. (2011) Peirce’s tutorial on existential graphs, Semiotica 186:1-4, 345-394. 
      http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/egtut.pdf 
Johnson-Laird, Philip N. (2002) Peirce, logic diagrams, and the elementary operations of reasoning,
      Thinking and Reasoning 8:2, 69-95.  http://mentalmodels.princeton.edu/papers/2002peirce.pdf 
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko (2003) Peirce’s magic lantern of logic: Moving pictures of thought,
      http://www.helsinki.fi/science/commens/papers/magiclantern.pdf 
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko (2011) Moving pictures of thought II, Semiotica 186:1-4, 315–331,
      http://www.helsinki.fi/~pietarin/publications/Semiotica-Diagrams-Pietarinen.pdf 
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko (2004) Grice in the wake of Peirce, Pragmatics and Cognition 12:2, 295-315.    
    http://www.helsinki.fi/~pietarin/publications/Grice%20in%20the%20Wake%20of%20Peirce-Pietarinen.pdf
Lamb, Sydney M. (2011) Neurolinguistics, Class Notes for Linguistics 411, Rice University.
      http://www.owlnet.rice.edu/~ling411
Sowa, John F. (2010) Role of logic and ontology in language and reasoning,
      http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/rolelog.pdf 
Sowa, John F. (2008) Conceptual Graphs for Representing Conceptual Structures,
      http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/cg4cs.pdf
Sowa, John F. (2006) Peirce’s contributions to the 21st Century,
      http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/csp21st.pdf 
For other references, see the general bibliography,
      http://www.jfsowa.com/bib.htm 

