Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
Finn ˚Arup Nielsen1(B), Daniel Mietchen2, and Egon Willighagen3
1 Cognitive Systems, DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark,
Lyngby, Denmark
faan@dtu.dk
2 EvoMRI Communications, Jena, Germany
3 Department of Bioinformatics - BiGCaT, NUTRIM, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands
Abstract. Scholia is a tool to handle scientiﬁc bibliographic information
through Wikidata. The Scholia Web service creates on-the-ﬂy scholarly
proﬁles for researchers, organizations, journals, publishers, individual
scholarly works, and for research topics. To collect the data, it queries the
SPARQL-based Wikidata Query Service. Among several display formats
available in Scholia are lists of publications for individual researchers and
organizations, plots of publications per year, employment timelines, as
well as co-author and topic networks and citation graphs. The Python
package implementing the Web service is also able to format Wikidata
bibliographic entries for use in LaTeX/BIBTeX. Apart from detailing
Scholia, we describe how Wikidata has been used for bibliographic infor-
mation and we also provide some scientometric statistics on this infor-
mation.
1
Introduction
Wikipedia contains signiﬁcant amounts of data relevant for scientometrics, and
it has formed the basis for several scientometric studies [4,14,15,17,18,20,21,
28,29,34,39]. Such studies can use the structured references found in Wikipedia
articles or use the intrawiki hyperlinks, e.g., to compare citations from Wikipedia
to scholarly journals with Thomson Reuters journal citation statistics as in [20]
or to rank universities as in [39].
While many Wikipedia pages have numerous references to scientiﬁc articles,
the current Wikipedias have very few entries about speciﬁc scientiﬁc articles. This
is most evident when browsing the Academic journal articles category on the
English Wikipedia.1 Among the few items in that category are famed papers such
as the 1948 physics paper The Origin of Chemical Elements [2] – described in
the English Wikipedia article Alpher–Bethe–Gamow paper 2 – as well as the 1953
article Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids: A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic
1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Academic journal articles.
2 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alpher%E2%80%93Bethe%E2%80%93Gamow paper.
c
⃝The Author(s) 2017
E. Blomqvist et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2017 Satellite Events, LNCS 10577, pp. 237–259, 2017.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70407-4_36

238
F.˚A. Nielsen et al.
Acid [37] on eight Wikipedias. Another scientiﬁc article is Hillary Putnam’s Is
Semantics Possible? [31]3 from 1970 on the Estonian Wikipedia.
References in Wikipedia are often formatted in templates, and it takes some
eﬀort to extract and match information in the template ﬁelds. For instance, in
a study of journals cited on Wikipedia, a database was built containing journal
name variations to match the many diﬀerent variations that Wikipedia editors
used when citing scientiﬁc articles [20]. The use of standard identiﬁers — such
as the Digital Object Identiﬁer (DOI) — in citations on Wikipedia can help to
some extent to uniquely identify works and journals.
Several other wikis have been set up to describe scientiﬁc articles, such as
WikiPapers, AcaWiki, Wikilit [25] and Brede Wiki [22].4 They are all examples of
MediaWiki-based wikis that primarily describe scientiﬁc articles. Three of them
use the Semantic MediaWiki extension [16], while the fourth uses MediaWiki’s
template functionality5 to structure bibliographic information.
Since the launch of Wikidata6 [36], the Wikimedia family includes a platform
to better handle structured data such as bibliographic data and to enforce input
validation to a greater degree than Wikipedia. Wikidata data can be reiﬁed to
triples [5,9], and RDF/graph-oriented databases, including SPARQL databases,
can represent Wikidata data [10]. The Wikidata Query Service (WDQS)7 is an
extended SPARQL endpoint that exposes the Wikidata data. Apart from oﬀering
a SPARQL endpoint, it also features an editor and a variety of frontend result
display options. It may render the SPARQL query result as, e.g., bubble charts,
line charts, graphs, timelines, list of images, points on a geographical map, or
just provide the result as a table. These results can also be embedded on other
Web pages via an HTML iframe element. We note that Wikidata is open data
published under the Public Domain Dedication and Waiver (CC0),8 and that it
is available not only through the SPARQL endpoint, but also as Linked Data
Fragments9 [35] and—like any other project of the Wikimedia family—through
an API and dump ﬁles.10
In the following sections, we describe how Wikidata has been used for biblio-
graphic information, some statistics on it and present Scholia, our website built
to expose such information. We furthermore show how Scholia can be used for
bibliography generation and discuss limitations and advantages with Wikidata
and Scholia.
3 https://et.wikipedia.org/wiki/Is Semantics Possible%3F.
4 http://wikipapers.referata.com/, https://acawiki.org/, http://wikilit.referata.com/
and http://neuro.compute.dtu.dk/wiki/.
5 https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Help:Templates.
6 https://www.wikidata.org.
7 https://query.wikidata.org.
8 https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/deed.en.
9 https://query.wikidata.org/bigdata/ldf.
10 The API is at https://www.wikidata.org/w/api.php, and the dump ﬁles are available
at https://www.wikidata.org/w/api.php.

Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
239
Table 1. Summary of Wikidata as a digital library. This table is directly inspired by
[11, Table 1]. Note that the size has grown considerably in August 2017. The value of
2.3 million is per 2 August 2017. A week later the number of scientiﬁc articles had
passed 3 million.
Dimension
Description
Domain
Broad coverage
Size
>2, 300, 000 scientiﬁc articles
Style of Metadata
Export via, e.g., Lars Willighagen’s citation.jsa
Persistent Inbound Links?
Yes, with the Q identiﬁers
Persistent Outbound Links Yes, with identiﬁers like DOI, PMID, PMCID, arXiv
Full Text?
Via identiﬁers like DOI or PMCID; dedicated property
for ‘full text URL’
Access
Free access
ahttps://github.com/larsgw/citation.js
2
Bibliographic Information on Wikidata
Wikidata editors have begun to systematically add scientiﬁc bibliographic data
to Wikidata across a broad range of scientiﬁc domains — see Table 1 for a sum-
mary of Wikidata as a digital library. Individual researchers and scientiﬁc arti-
cles not described by their own Wikipedia article in any language are routinely
added to Wikidata, and we have so far experienced very few deletions of such
data in reference to a notability criterion. The current interest in expanding bib-
liographic information on Wikidata has been boosted by the WikiCite project,
which aims at collecting bibliographic information in Wikidata and held its ﬁrst
workshop in 2016 [33].
The bibliographic information collected on Wikidata is about books, arti-
cles (including preprints), authors, organizations, journals, publishers and more.
These items (corresponding to subject in Semantic Web parlance) can be inter-
linked through Wikidata properties (corresponding to the predicate), such as
author (P50),11 published in (P1433), publisher (P123), series (P179), main
theme (P921), educated at (P69), employer (P108), part of (P361), sponsor
(P859, can be used for funding), cites (P2860) and several other properties.12
Numerous properties exist on Wikidata for deep linking to external resources,
e.g., for DOI, PMID, PMCID, arXiv, ORCID, Google Scholar, VIAF, Crossref
funder ID, ZooBank and Twitter. With these many identiﬁers, Wikidata can act
as a hub for scientometrics studies between resources. If no dedicated Wikidata
property exists for a resource, one of the URL properties can work as a substi-
tute for creating a deep link to a resource. For instance, P1325 (external data
11 The URI for Wikidata property P50 is http://www.wikidata.org/prop/direct/P50
or with the conventional preﬁx wdt:P50. Similarly for any other Wikidata property.
12 A Wikidata table lists properties that are commonly used in bibliographic contexts:
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Template:Bibliographical properties.

240
F.˚A. Nielsen et al.
Table 2. Statistics on bibliographic information in Wikidata on 2 August 2017.
Count
Description
2,380,009 Scientiﬁc articles
93,518
Scientiﬁc articles linked to one or more author items
5,562
Scientiﬁc articles linked to one or more author items and no author name
string (indicating that the author linking may be complete)
3,379,786 Citations, i.e., number of uses of the P2860 property
16,327
Distinct authors (author items) having written a scientiﬁc article
13,332
Distinct authors having written a scientiﬁc article with author gender
indicated
available at) can point to raw or supplementary data associated with a paper.
We have used this scheme for scientiﬁc articles associated with datasets stored in
OpenfMRI [27], an online database with raw brain measurements, mostly from
functional magnetic resonance imaging studies. Using WDQS, we query the set
of OpenfMRI-linked items using the following query:
?item wdt:P1325 ?resource .
filter
strstarts(str (? resource),
"https :// openfmri.org/dataset/")
A similar scheme is used for a few of the scientiﬁc articles associated with data
in the neuroinformatics databases Neurosynth [38] and NeuroVault [6].
When bibliographic items exist in Wikidata, they can be used as references
to support claims (corresponding to triplets with extra qualiﬁers) in other items
of Wikidata, e.g., a biological claim can be linked to the Wikidata item for a
scientiﬁc journal.
By using these properties systematically according to an emerging data
model,13 editors have extended the bibliographic information in Wikidata. Par-
ticularly instrumental in this process was a set of tools built by Magnus Manske,
QuickStatements14 and Source MetaData,15 including the latter’s associated
Resolve authors tool16 as well as the WikidataIntegrator 17 associated with the
Gene Wiki project [30] and the fatameh tool18 based on it. Information can be
extracted from, e.g., PubMed, PubMed Central and arXiv and added to Wiki-
data.
13 https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:WikiProject Source MetaData/
Bibliographic metadata for scholarly articles in Wikidata.
14 https://tools.wmﬂabs.org/wikidata-todo/quick statements.php.
15 https://tools.wmﬂabs.org/sourcemd/.
16 https://tools.wmﬂabs.org/sourcemd/new resolve authors.php.
17 https://github.com/SuLab/WikidataIntegrator/.
18 https://tools.wmﬂabs.org/fatameh/ with documentation available at https://www.
wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:WikiProject Source MetaData/fatameh.

Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
241
How complete is Wikidata in relation to scientiﬁc bibliographic information?
Journals and universities are well represented. For instance, 31,902 Wikidata
items are linked with their identiﬁer for the Collections of the National Library
of Medicine (P1055). This number can be obtained with the following WDQS
SPARQL query:
SELECT (COUNT (? item) AS ?count) WHERE {
?item wdt:P1055 ?nlm .
}
Far less covered are individual articles, individual researchers, university depart-
ments and citations between scientiﬁc articles. Most of the scientiﬁc articles in
Wikidata are claimed to be an instance of (P31) the Wikidata item scientiﬁc
article (Q13442814). With a WDQS query, we can count the number of Wikidata
items linked this way to scientiﬁc article:
SELECT (COUNT (? work) AS ?count) WHERE {
?work wdt:P31 wd:Q13442814 .
}
As of 2 August 2017, the query returned the result 2,380,009, see also Tables 1
and 2 (the number of scientiﬁc articles has grown considerable since the end
of July 2017). In comparison, arXiv states having 1,289,564 e-prints and ACM
Digital Library states having 24,668 proceedings.19 In 2014, a capture/recapture
method estimated the number of scholarly English-language documents on the
public web to be “at least 114 million” [13], while researchers found 87,542,370
DOIs in the Crossref database as of 21 March 2017 [32], thus Wikidata currently
records only a minor part of all scientiﬁc articles. There were 16,327 authors
associated with Wikidata items linked through the author property (P50) to
items that are instance of scientiﬁc article:
SELECT (COUNT(DISTINCT ?author) AS ?count) WHERE {
?work wdt:P50 ?author .
?work wdt:P31 wd:Q13442814 .
}
The number of citations as counted by triples using the P2860 (cites) property
stood at 3,379,786:
SELECT (COUNT (? citedwork) AS ?count) WHERE {
?work wdt:P2860 ?citedwork .
}
The completeness can be fairly uneven. Articles from Public Library of Sci-
ence (PLOS) journals are much better represented than articles from the jour-
nals of IEEE. On 9 August 2017, we counted 160,676 works published in PLOS
journals with this WDQS query,
19 As of 2 August 2017 according to https://arxiv.org/ and https://dl.acm.org/
contents guide.cfm.

242
F.˚A. Nielsen et al.
SELECT (COUNT (? work) AS ?count) WHERE {
?work wdt:P1433 ?venue .
?venue wdt:P123 wd:Q233358 .
}
while the equivalent for IEEE (Q131566) only returns 4,595. Note that 160,676
PLOS articles are far more than the 4,553 PLOS articles reported back in 2014
as cited from the 25 largest Wikipedias [17], thus Wikidata has a much better
coverage here than Wikipedia.
Table 3. h-indices for three researchers whose publications are well-covered in
Wikidata. For Web of Science, we searched its core collection with “Nielsen F˚A”,
“Willighagen E” and “Jensen LJ”.
Service
Finn ˚Arup Nielsen Egon Willighagen Lars Juhl Jensen
Google Scholar 28
24
72
ResearchGate
28
23
–
Scopus
22
22
60
Web of Science 18
20
57
Wikidata
9
12
21
Given that Wikidata only has around 3.4 million P2860-citations, it is no
surprise that the current number of citations is considerable less than the citation
counts one ﬁnds in other web services, — even for authors with a large part
of their published scientiﬁc articles listed in Wikidata. Table 3 shows h-index
statistics for three such authors. The Wikidata count has been established by
WDQS queries similar to the following:
SELECT ?work (COUNT (? citing_work) AS ?count) WHERE {
?work wdt:P50 wd:Q20980928 .
?citing_work
wdt:P2860 ?work .
}
GROUP BY ?work
ORDER BY DESC (? count)
Even for these well-covered researchers, the h-index based on P2860-citations in
Wikidata is around two to three times lower than the h-indices obtained with
other services.
The sponsor property (P859) has been used extensively for research funded by
the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), with 52,852
works linking to the organization, 18,135 of which are instance of scientiﬁc
articles, but apart from NIOSH, the use of the property has been very limited
for scientiﬁc articles.20
20 National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health has a Wikimedian-in-
Residence program, through which James Hare has added many of the NIOSH works.

Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
243
3
Scholia
Fig. 1. Overview screenshot of part of
the Scholia Web page for an author:
https://tools.wmﬂabs.org/scholia/au
thor/Q20980928. Fig. 2 zooms in on
one panel.
Scholia provides both a Python pack-
age and a Web service for presenting
and interacting with scientiﬁc information
from Wikidata. The code is available via
https://github.com/fnielsen/scholia, and a
ﬁrst release has been archived in Zenodo
[23].
As a Web service, its canonical site runs
from the Wikimedia Foundation-provided
service
Wikimedia
Toolforge
(formerly
called Wikimedia Tool Labs) at https://
tools.wmﬂabs.org/scholia/, but the Scholia
package may be downloaded and run from
a local server as well. Scholia uses the Flask
Python Web framework [7].
The current Web service relies almost
entirely on Wikidata for its presented data.
The frontend consists mostly of HTML
iframe elements for embedding the on-
the-ﬂy-generated WDQS results and uses
many of the diﬀerent output formats from
this service: bubble charts, bar charts, line
charts, graphs and image lists.
Initially, we used the table output from
WDQS to render tables in Scholia, but as
links in WDQS tables link back to Wiki-
data items — and not Scholia items — we
have switched to using the DataTables21
Javascript library.
Through a JavaScript-based query to
the MediaWiki API, an excerpt from the
English Wikipedia is shown on the top
of each Scholia page if the corresponding
Wikidata item is associated with an article
in the English Wikipedia. The label for the
item is fetched via Wikidata’s MediaWiki
API. While some other information can
be fetched this way, Scholia’s many aggre-
gation queries are better handled through
SPARQL.
Scholia uses the Wikidata item iden-
tiﬁer as its identiﬁer rather than author
21 https://datatables.net/.

244
F.˚A. Nielsen et al.
Table 4. Aspects in Scholia: Each Wikidata item can be viewed in one or more aspects.
Each aspect displays multiple “panels”, which may be, e.g., a table of publications or
a bar chart of citations per year.
Aspect
Example
Example panels
Author
Scientists
List of publications, publications per year,
co-authors, topics, timelines, map, citations,
academic tree
Work
Papers, books
Recent citations, citations in the work,
statements supported in Wikidata
Organization Universities
Aﬃliated authors, co-author graph, recent
publications, page production,
co-author-normalized citations per year
Venue
Journals, proceedings
Recent publications, topics in the publications,
author images, proliﬁc authors, most cited
works, most cited authors, most cited venues
Series
Proceedings series
Items (venues) in the series, published works
from venues in the series
Publishers
Commercial publisher Journals and other publications published,
associated editors, most cited papers, number
of citations as a function of number of
published works
Sponsor
Foundations
List of publications funded, sponsored authors,
co-sponsors
Topic
Keywords
Recent publication on the topic, co-occurring
topics
Disease
Mental disorders
Genetically associated diseases, publications
per year
Protein
Receptor proteins
Cofunctional proteins, publications per year
Pathway
Receptor pathways
Participants, recently published works,
publications per year
Chemical
Acids
Identiﬁers, related compounds, physchem
properties, recently published works on the
chemical, publications per year
name, journal titles, etc. A search ﬁeld on the front page provides a Scholia
user with the ability to search for a name to retrieve the relevant Wikidata
identiﬁer. To display items, Scholia sets up a number of what we call “aspects”.
The currently implemented aspects (see Table 4) are author, work, organization,
venue, series, publisher, sponsor, award, topic, disease, protein, chemical and
(biological) pathway.
The present selection was motivated by the possibilities inherent in
the Wikidata items and properties. We plan to extend this to further
aspects. A URL scheme distinguishes the diﬀerent aspects, so the URL path

Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
245
/scholia/author/Q6365492 will show the author aspect of the statistician Kanti
V. Mardia, while /scholia/topic/Q6365492 will show the topic aspect of the per-
son, i.e., articles about Mardia.
Likewise, universities can be viewed, for instance, as organizations or as spon-
sors. Indeed, any Wikidata item can be viewed in any Scholia aspect, but Scholia
can show no data if the user selects a “wrong” aspect, i.e. one for which no rel-
evant data is available in Wikidata.
For each aspect, we make multiple WDQS queries based on the Wikidata
item for which the results in the panels are displayed. Plots are embedded with
HTML iframes. For the author aspect, Scholia queries WDQS for the list of
publications, showing the result in a table, displaying a bar chart of the number
of publications per year, number of pages per year, venue statistics, co-author
graph, topics of the published works (based on the “main theme” property),
associated images, education and employment history as timelines, academic
tree, map with locations associated with the author, and citation statistics – see
Fig. 1 for an example of part of an author aspect page. The citation statistics
displays the most cited work, citations by year and citing authors. For the aca-
demic tree, we make use of Blazegraph’s graph analytics RDF GAS API22 that
is available in WDQS.
The embedded WDQS results link back to WDQS, where a user can mod-
ify the query. The interactive editor of WDQS allows users not familiar with
SPARQL to make simple modiﬁcations without directly editing the SPARQL
code.
Related to their work on quantifying conceptual novelty in the biomedical
literature [19], Shubhanshu Mishra and Vetle Torvik have set up a website pro-
ﬁling authors in PubMed datasets: LEGOLAS.23 Among other information, the
website shows the number of articles per year, the number of citations per year,
the number of self-citations per year, unique collaborations per year and NIH
grants per year as bar charts that are color-coded according to, e.g., author role
(ﬁrst, solo, middle or last author). Scholia uses WDQS for LEGOLAS-like plots.
Figure 2 displays one such example for the number of published items as a func-
tion of year of publication on an author aspect page, where the components of
the bars are color-coded according to author role.
For the organization aspect, Scholia uses the employer and aﬃliated Wiki-
data properties to identify associated authors, and combines this with the author
query for works. Scholia formulates SPARQL queries with property paths to
identify suborganizations of the queried organization, such that authors aﬃliated
with a suborganization are associated with the queried organization. Figure 3
shows a corresponding bar chart, again inspired by the LEGOLAS style. Here,
the Cognitive Systems section at the Technical University of Denmark is dis-
played with the organization aspect. It combines work and author data. The
bar chart uses the P1104 (number of pages) Wikidata property together with a
normalization based on the number of authors on each of the work items. The
22 https://wiki.blazegraph.com/wiki/index.php/RDF GAS API.
23 http://abel.lis.illinois.edu/legolas/.

246
F.˚A. Nielsen et al.
Fig. 2. Screenshot of Scholia Web page with the number of papers published per year
for Finn ˚Arup Nielsen: https://tools.wmﬂabs.org/scholia/author/Q20980928. Inspired
by LEGOLAS. Colors indicate author role: ﬁrst, middle, last or solo author. (Color
ﬁgure online)
Fig. 3. Scholia screenshot with page production for a research section (Cognitive Sys-
tems at the Technical University of Denmark), where the number of pages per paper
has been normalized by the number of authors. The bars are color-coded according to
author. The plot is heavily biased, as only a very limited subset of papers from the
section is available in Wikidata, and the property for the number of pages is set for
only a subset of these papers. From https://tools.wmﬂabs.org/scholia/organization/
Q24283660. (Color ﬁgure online)

Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
247
bars are color-coded according to individual authors associated with the organi-
zation. In this case, the plot is heavily biased, as only a very limited subset of
publications from the organization is currently present in Wikidata, and even the
available publications may not have the P1104 property set. Other panels shown
in the organization aspect are a co-author graph, a list of recent publications
formatted in a table, a bubble chart with most cited papers with aﬃliated ﬁrst
author and a bar chart with co-author-normalized citations per year. This last
panel counts the number of citations to each work and divides it by the number
of authors on the cited work, then groups the publications according to year and
color-codes the bars according to author.
Fig. 4. Screenshot from Scholia’s publisher aspect with number of publications versus
number of citations for works published by BioMed Central. The upper right point
with many citations and many published works is the journal Genome Biology.
From
https://tools.wmﬂabs.org/scholia/publisher/Q463494.
For the publisher aspect, Scholia queries all items where the P123 property
(publisher) has been set. With these items at hand, Scholia can create lists
of venues (journals or proceedings) ordered according to the number of works
(papers) published in each of them, as well as lists of works ordered according
to citations. Figure 4 shows an example of a panel on the publisher aspect page
with a scatter plot detailing journals from BioMed Central. The position of each
journal in the plot reveals impact factor-like information.

248
F.˚A. Nielsen et al.
Listing 1. SPARQL query on the work aspect page for claims supported by a work,
— in this case Q22253877 [1].
SELECT ?item ?itemLabel ?property ? propertyLabel
?value ?valueLabel
WITH {
SELECT
distinct ?item ?property ?value
WHERE {
?item ?p ?statement .
?property
wikibase:claim ?p .
?statement ?a ?value .
?item ?b ?value .
?statement
prov:wasDerivedFrom/
<http :// www.wikidata.org/prop/reference/P248 >
wd:Q22253877 .
}
} AS %result
WHERE {
INCLUDE %result
SERVICE
wikibase:label {
bd:serviceParam
wikibase:language
"en ,da ,de ,es ,fr ,it ,jp ,nl ,no ,ru ,sv ,zh" . }
}
ORDER BY DESC (? itemLabel)
For the work aspect, Scholia lists citations and produces a partial citation
graph. Figure 5 shows a screenshot of the citation graph panel from the work
aspect for a speciﬁc article [3]. For this aspect, we also formulate a special query
to return a table with a list of Wikidata items where the given work is used
as a source for claims. An example query for a speciﬁc work is shown with
Listing 1. From the query results, it can be seen, for instance, that the article
A novel family of mammalian taste receptors [1] supports a claim about Taste
2 receptor member 16 (Q7669366) being present in the cell component (P681)
integral component of membrane (Q14327652). For the topic aspect, Scholia uses
a property path SPARQL query to identify subtopics.
For a given item where the aspect is not known in advance, Scholia tries to
guess the relevant aspect by looking at the instance of property. The Scholia
Web service uses that guess for redirecting, so for instance, /scholia/Q8219 will
redirect to /scholia/author/Q8219, the author aspect for the psychologist Uta
Frith. This is achieved by ﬁrst making a server site query to establish that Uta
Frith is a human and then using that information to choose the author aspect
as the most relevant aspect to show information about Uta Frith.
We have implemented a few aspects that are able to display information
from two or more speciﬁed Wikidata items. For instance, /scholia/organiza-
tions/Q1269766,Q193196 displays information from University College London
and Technical University of Denmark. One panel lists coauthorships between

Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
249
Fig. 5. Screenshot of part of a Scholia Web page at https://tools.wmﬂabs.org/scholia/
work/Q21143764 with the partial citation graph panel of the work aspect for Johan
Bollen’s article from 2009 [3].
authors aﬃliated with the two organizations. Another panel shows a “Works per
year” plot for the speciﬁed organizations, see Fig. 6. Likewise, an address such
as /scholia/authors/Q20980928,Q24290415,Q24390693,Q26720269 displays pan-
els for 4 diﬀerent authors. With the graph queries in BlazeGraph, Scholia shows
co-author paths between multiple authors in a graph plot. Figure 7 shows the
co-author path between Paul Erd˝os and Natalie Portman, which can give an
estimate of Portman’s Erd˝os-number (i.e., the number of coauthorships between
a given author and Erd˝os).
A few redirects for external identiﬁers are also implemented. For instance,
with Uta Frith’s Twitter name ‘utafrith’, /scholia/twitter/utafrith will redirect
to /scholia/Q8219, which in turn will redirect to /scholia/author/Q8219. Scholia
implements similar functionality for DOI, ORCID, GitHub user identiﬁer as well
as for the InChIKey [8] and CAS chemical identiﬁers.
For the index page for the award aspect, we have an aggregated plot for all
science awards with respect to gender, see Fig. 8. The plot gives an overview of
awards predominantly given to men (awards close to the x-axis) or predominantly
given to women (awards close to the y-axis).

250
F.˚A. Nielsen et al.
Fig. 6. Screenshot of panel with “Works per year” on Scholia aspect for multiple orga-
nizations, here the two European universities University College London and the Tech-
nical University of Denmark.
Fig. 7. A co-author path between Paul Erd˝os and Natalie Portman (Natalie Hershlag)
on the page for multiple authors https://tools.wmﬂabs.org/scholia/authors/Q37876,
Q173746.

Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
251
Fig. 8. Aggregation on science awards with respect to gender from the award aspect
index page at https://tools.wmﬂabs.org/scholia/award/ with number of male recipients
on the x-axis and number of female recipients on the y-axis.
4
Using Wikidata as a Bibliographic Resource
As a command-line tool, Scholia provides a prototype tool that uses Wikidata
and its bibliographic data in a LATEX and BibTEX environment. The current
implementation looks up citations in the LATEX-generated .aux ﬁle and queries
Wikidata’s MediaWiki API to get cited Wikidata items. The retrieved items are
formatted and written to a .bib that bibtex can use to format the bibliographic
items for inclusion in the LATEX document. The workﬂow for a LATEX document
with the ﬁlename example.tex is
latex
example
python -m scholia.tex write -bib -from -aux
example.aux
bibtex
example
latex
example
latex
example

252
F.˚A. Nielsen et al.
Here, the example document could read
\ documentclass{article}
\usepackage[utf8 ]{ inputenc}
\begin{document}
\cite{Q18507561}
\ bibliographystyle {plain}
\bibliography {example}
\end{document}
In this case, the \cite command cites Q18507561 (Wikidata: a free collab-
orative knowledgebase [36]). A DOI can also be used in the \cite command:
instead of writing \cite{Q18507561}, one may write \cite{10.1145/2629489}
to get the same citation. Scholia matches on the “10.” DOI preﬁx and makes a
SPARQL query to get the relevant Wikidata item.
The scheme presented above can take advantage of the many available style
ﬁles of BibTEX to format the bibliographic items in the various ways requested
by publishers. We have used Scholia for reference management in this paper.
This means that all cited papers in this paper are entered in Wikidata.
There are various issues with the translation. Though planned to support
UTF-8 encoding at least since 2003 [26], as of 2017, BibTEX does not support
UTF-8 completely. The problem results in wrong sorting of the bibliographic
items as well as wrong extraction of the surname, e.g., “Finn ˚Arup Nielsen” gets
extracted as “˚Arup Nielsen, Finn” instead of “Nielsen, Finn ˚Arup” and sorted
among the last items in the bibliography rather than under “N”. A workaround
could convert UTF-8 encoded characters to LATEX escapes. A small translation
table can handle accented characters, but miss, e.g., non-ASCII non-accented
characters like ø, æ, ˚a, ð and Ð. The combination of Biblatex/Biber can handle
UTF-8, but required style ﬁles might not be available. The current Scholia imple-
mentation has a very small translation table to handle a couple of non-ASCII
UTF-8 characters that occur in names.
5
Discussion
WDQS and Scholia can provide many diﬀerent scientometrics views of the data
available in Wikidata. The bibliographic data in Wikidata are still quite limited,
but the number of scientometrically relevant items will likely continue to grow
considerably in the coming months and years.
The continued growth of science data on Wikidata can have negative impact
on Scholia, making the on-the-ﬂy queries too resource demanding. In the current
version, there are already a few queries that run into WDQS’s time out, e.g.,
it happens for the view of co-author-normalized citations per year for Harvard
University. If this becomes a general problem, we will need to redeﬁne the queries.
Indeed, the WDQS time out will be a general problem if we want to perform
large-scale scientometrics studies. An alternative to using live queries would be
to use dumps, which are available in several formats on a weekly basis, with
daily increments in between.24 The problem is not a limitation of SPARQL,
24 https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Database download.

Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
253
but a limitation set by the server resources. Some queries may be optimized,
especially around the item labeling.
Working with Scholia has made us aware of several issues. Some of these
are minor limitations in the Wikidata and WDQS systems. The Wikidata label
length is limited to 250 characters, whereas the ‘monolingual text’ datatype used
for the ‘title’ property (P1476) is limited to 400 characters. There are scholarly
articles with titles longer than those limits.
Wikidata ﬁelds cannot directly handle subscripts and superscripts, which
commonly appear in titles of articles about chemical compounds, elementary
particles or mathematical formulas. Other formatting in titles cannot directly
be handled in Wikidata’s title property,25 and recording a date such as “Summer
2011” is diﬃcult.
Title and names of items can change. Authors can change name, e.g. due to
marriage, and journals can change titles, e.g. due to a change of scope or transfer
of ownership. For instance, the Journal of the Association for Information Sci-
ence and Technology has changed name several times over the years.26 Wikidata
can handle multiple titles in a single Wikidata item and with qualiﬁers describe
the dates of changes in title. For scientometrics, this ability is an advantage in
principle, but multiple titles can make it cumbersome to handle when Wikidata
is used as a bibliographic resource in document preparation, particularly for
articles published near the time when the journal changed its name. One way to
alleviate this problem would be to split the journal’s Wikidata item into several,
but this is not current practice.
In Wikidata, papers are usually not described to be aﬃliated with organi-
zations. Scholia’s ability to make statistics on scientiﬁc articles published by an
organization is facilitated by the fact that items about scientiﬁc articles can
link to items about authors, which can link to items about organizations. It
is possible to link scientiﬁc articles to organization directly by using Wikidata
qualiﬁers in connection with the author property. However, this scheme is cur-
rently in limited use. This scarcity of direct aﬃliation annotation on Wikidata
items about articles means that scientometrics on the organizational level are
unlikely to be precise at present. In the current version, Scholia even ignores
any temporal qualiﬁer for the aﬃliation and employer property, meaning that
a researcher moving between several organization gets his/her articles counted
under multiple organizations.
25 By way of an example, consider the article “A library of 7TM receptor C-terminal
tails. Interactions with the proposed post-endocytic sorting proteins ERM-binding
phosphoprotein 50 (EBP50), N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF), sorting nexin
1 (SNX1), and G protein-coupled receptor-associated sorting protein (GASP)”,
another article with the title “Cerebral 5-HT2A receptor binding is increased in
patients with Tourette’s syndrome”, where “2A” is subscripted, and “User’s Guide
to the amsrefs Package”, where the “amsrefs” is set in monospaced font.
26 http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1002/(ISSN)2330-1643/issues
records
these former titles: Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, Journal of the American Society for Information Science, and American
Documentation.

254
F.˚A. Nielsen et al.
Data modeling on Wikidata gives rise to reﬂections on what precisely a “pub-
lisher” and a “work” is. A user can set the publisher Wikidata property of a
work to a corporate group, a subsidiary or possibly an imprint. For instance,
how should we handle Springer Nature, BioMed Central and Humana Press?
Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records (FRBR) [12] suggests a
scheme for works, expressions, manifestations and “items”. In Wikipedia, most
items are described on the work level as opposed to the manifestation level (e.g.,
book edition), while citations should usually go to the manifestation level. How
should one deal with scientiﬁc articles that have slightly diﬀerent “manifesta-
tions”, such as preprint, electronic journal edition, paper edition and postprint,
or editorials that were co-published in multiple journals with identical texts? An
electronic and a paper edition may diﬀer in their dates of publication, but oth-
erwise have the same bibliographic data, while a preprint and its journal edition
usually have diﬀerent identiﬁers and may also diﬀer in content. From a sciento-
metrics point of view, these diﬀerence in manifestation may not matter in some
cases, but could be the focus of others. Splitting a scientiﬁc article as a work
(in the FRBR sense) over multiple Wikidata items seems only to complicate
matters.
The initial idea for Scholia was to create a researcher proﬁle based on Wiki-
data data with list of publications, picture and CV-like information. The inspi-
ration came from a blog post by Lambert Heller: What will the scholarly proﬁle
page of the future look like? Provision of metadata is enabling experimentation.27
In this blog post, he discussed the diﬀerent features of several scholarly Web
services: ORCID, ResearchGate, Mendeley, Pure, VIVO, Google Scholar and
ImpactStory. In Table 5, we have set up a table listing Heller’s features for the
Wikidata–Scholia combination. Wikidata–Scholia performs well in most aspects,
but in the current version, Scholia has no backend for storing user data, and user
features such as forum, Q&A and followers are not available.
Beyond the features listed by Heller, which features set Wikidata–Scholia
apart from other scholarly Web services? The collaborative nature of Wikidata
means that Wikidata users can create items for authors that do not have an
account on Wikidata. In most other systems, the researcher as a user of the
system has control over his/her scholarly proﬁle and other researchers/users
cannot make amendment or corrections. Likewise, when one user changes an
existing item, this change will be reﬂected in subsequent live queries of that
item, and it may still be in future dumps if not reverted or otherwise modiﬁed
before the dump creation.
With WDQS queries, Scholia can combine data from diﬀerent types of items
in Wikidata in a way that is not usually possible with other scholarly proﬁle
Web services. For instance, Scholia generates lists of publications for an orga-
nization by combining items for works and authors and can show co-author
graphs restricted by aﬃliation. Similarly, the co-author graph can be restricted
to authors publishing works annotated with a speciﬁc main theme. Authors
27 http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2015/07/16/scholarly-proﬁle-of-
the-future/.

Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
255
Table 5. Overview of Wikidata and Scholia features in terms of a scholarly proﬁle.
Directly inspired by a blog post by Lambert Heller (see text).
Feature
Description
Business model
Y
Community donations and funding from
foundations to Wikimedia Foundation and
aﬃliated chapters
Portrait picture
Y
The P18 property can record Wikimedia
Commons images related to a researcher
Alternative names
Y
Aliases for all items, not just researchers
IDs/proﬁles in other systems
Y
Numerous links to external identiﬁers:
ORCID, Scopus, Google Scholar, etc.
Papers and similar
Y
Papers and books are individual Wikidata
items
Uncommon research products
Y
For instance, software can be associated
with a developer
Grants, third party funding
(N)
Currently no property for grant holders
and probably no individual grants in
Wikidata. The sponsor property can be
used to indicate the funding of a paper
Current institution
Y
Aﬃliation and employer can be recorded
in Wikidata
Former employers, education
Y
Education, academic degree can be
speciﬁed, and former employers can be set
by way of qualiﬁers
Self-assigned keywords
(Y)
The main theme of a work can be
speciﬁed, interests or ﬁeld of work can be
set for a person. The values must be items
in Wikidata. Users can create items
Concepts from controlled vocabulary
Y
See above
Social graph of followers/friends
N
There are no user accounts on the current
version of Scholia
Social graph of co-authors
Y
Citation/attention metadata from
platform itself
Y
Citations between scientiﬁc articles are
recorded with a property that can be used
to count citations. Citation/reference
between Wikidata items
Citation/attention metadata from other
source
(N)
Deep links to other citation resources like
Google Scholar and Scopus
Comprehensive search to match/include
papers
(N)
Several tools like Magnus Manske’s Source
MetaData that look up bibliographic
metadata based on DOI, PMID or PMCID
Forums, Q&A etc
N
Deposit own papers
(Y)
Appropriately licensed papers can be
uploaded to Wikimedia Commons or
Wikisource
Research administration tools
N
Reuse of data from outside of the service
Y
API, WDQS, XML dump, third-party
services

256
F.˚A. Nielsen et al.
are typically annotated with gender in Wikidata, so Scholia can show gender
color-coding of co-author graphs. On the topic aspect page, the Scholia panel
that shows the most cited works that are cited from works around the topic
can point to an important paper for a topic – even if the paper has not been
annotated with the topic – by combining the citations data and topic annota-
tion. References for claims are an important part of Wikidata and also singles
Wikidata out among other scholarly proﬁle Web service, and it acts as an extra
scientometrics dimension. The current version of Scholia has only a few panels
where the query uses references, e.g., the “Supports the following statement(s)”
on the work aspect page, but it is possible to extend the use of this scientometrics
dimension.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by Innovationsfonden through the
DABAI project. The work on Scholia was spawned by the WikiCite project [33]. We
would like to thank the organizers of the workshop, particularly Dario Taraborelli.
Finn ˚Arup Nielsen’s participation in the workshop was sponsored by an award from
the Reinholdt W. Jorck og Hustrus Fund. We would also like to thank Magnus Manske,
James Hare, Tom Arrow, Andra Waagmeester, and Sebastian Burgstaller-Muehlbacher
for considerable work with Wikidata tools and data in the context of WikiCite. This
paper was extended from another paper [24]. We thank Chiara Ghidini and the two
other reviewers for providing suggestions for the improvement of that manuscript.
References
1. Adler, E., Hoon, M.A., Mueller, K.L., Chandrashekar, J., Ryba, N.J., Zuker, C.S.:
A novel family of mammalian taste receptors. Cell 100, 693–702 (2000)
2. Alpher, R.A., Bethe, H., Gamow, G.: The origin of chemical elements. Phys. Rev.
73, 803–804 (1948)
3. Bollen, J., de Sompel, H.V., Hagberg, A., Chute, R.: A principal component analy-
sis of 39 scientiﬁc impact measures. PLOS ONE 4, e6022 (2009)
4. Eom, Y.H., Frahm, K.M., Bencz´ur, A., Shepelyansky, D.L.: Time evolution of
Wikipedia network ranking. Eur. Phys. J. B 86 (2013). Article ID 492
5. Erxleben, F., G¨unther, M., Kr¨otzsch, M., Mendez, J., Vrandeˇci´c, D.: Introduc-
ing Wikidata to the Linked Data web. In: Mika, P., et al. (eds.) ISWC 2014.
LNCS, vol. 8796, pp. 50–65. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-11964-9 4
6. Gorgolewski, K.J., Varoquaux, G., Rivera, G., Schwarz, Y., Ghosh, S.S., Maumet,
C., Sochat, V.V., Nichols, T.E., Poldrack, R., Poline, J.B., Yarkoni, T., Margulies,
D.S.: NeuroVault.org: a web-based repository for collecting and sharing unthresh-
olded statistical maps of the human brain. Front. Neuroinformatics 9, 8 (2015)
7. Grinberg, M.: Flask Web Development, April 2014
8. Heller, S.R., McNaught, A., Stein, S., Tchekhovskoi, D., Pletnev, I.: InChI - the
worldwide chemical structure identiﬁer standard. J. Cheminformatics 5, 7 (2013)
9. Hern´andez, D., Hogan, A., Kr¨otzsch, M.: Reifying RDF: what works well with
Wikidata? In: Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Scalable Seman-
tic Web Knowledge Base Systems, September 2015. http://users.dcc.uchile.cl/
∼dhernand/research/ssws-2015-reifying.pdf

Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
257
10. Hern´andez, D., Hogan, A., Riveros, C., Rojas, C., Zerega, E.: Querying Wikidata:
comparing SPARQL, relational and graph databases. In: Groth, P., et al. (eds.)
ISWC 2016. LNCS, vol. 9982, pp. 88–103. Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-46547-0 10
11. Hull, D., Pettifer, S., Kell, D.: Defrosting the digital library: bibliographic tools for
the next generation web. PLOS Comput. Biol. 4, e1000204 (2008)
12. IFLA Study Group on the Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records:
Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records, February 2009. http://www.
iﬂa.org/ﬁles/assets/cataloguing/frbr/frbr 2008.pdf
13. Khabsa, M., Giles, C.L.: The number of scholarly documents on the public web.
PLOS ONE 9, e93949 (2014)
14. Kikkawa, J., Takaku, M., Yoshikane, F.: DOI links on Wikipedia. In: Morishima,
A., Rauber, A., Liew, C.L. (eds.) ICADL 2016. LNCS, vol. 10075, pp. 369–380.
Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-49304-6 40
15. Kousha, K., Thelwall, M.: Are Wikipedia citations important evidence of the
impact of scholarly articles and books? J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. 68, 762–779 (2016)
16. Kr¨otzsch, M., Vrandeˇci´c, D., V¨olkel, M.: Semantic MediaWiki. In: Cruz, I., et al.
(eds.) ISWC 2006. LNCS, vol. 4273, pp. 935–942. Springer, Heidelberg (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1007/11926078 68
17. Lin, J., Fenner, M.: An analysis of Wikipedia references across PLOS publi-
cations, December 2014. https://ﬁgshare.com/articles/An analysis of Wikipedia
references across PLOS publications/1048991/ﬁles/1546358.pdf
18. Maggio, L.A., Willinsky, J., Steinberg, R., Mietchen, D., Wass, J., Dong, T.:
Wikipedia as a gateway to biomedical research: the relative distribution and use
of citations in the English Wikipedia. bioRxiv.org: the preprint server for biology,
July 2017
19. Mishra, S., Torvik, V.I.: Quantifying conceptual novelty in the biomedical litera-
ture. DLib Mag. 22(9/10) (2016). https://doi.org/10.1045/september2016-mishra
20. Nielsen, F.˚A.: Scientiﬁc citations in Wikipedia. First Monday 12 (2007). http://
ﬁrstmonday.org/article/view/1997/1872
21. Nielsen,
F.˚A.:
Clustering
of
scientiﬁc
citations
in
Wikipedia,
Decem-
ber 2008. http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/pubdb/views/edoc download.php/5666/pdf/
imm5666.pdf
22. Nielsen, F.˚A.: Brede Wiki: a neuroinformatics web service with structured infor-
mation. Front. Neur. Conference Abstract: Neuroinformatics (2009). https://doi.
org/10.3389/conf.neuro.11.2009.08.072
23. Nielsen, F.˚A., Mietchen, D., Willighagen, E.: Scholia, March 2017
24. Nielsen, F.˚A., Mietchen, D., Willighagen, E.: Scholia and scientometrics with Wiki-
data, March 2017. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1703.04222.pdf
25. Okoli, C., Mehdi, M., Mesgari, M., Nielsen, F.˚A., Lanam¨aki, A.: The people’s ency-
clopedia under the gaze of the sages: a systematic review of scholarly research
on Wikipedia, March 2012. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract
id=2021326
26. Patashnik, O.: BIBTEX yesterday, today, and tomorrow. TUGboat 24, 25–30
(2003). https://www.tug.org/TUGboat/Articles/tb24-1/patashnik.pdf
27. Poldrack, R., Barch, D.M., Mitchell, J.P., Wager, T.D., Wagner, A.D., Devlin,
J.T., Cumba, C., Koyejo, O., Milham, M.P.: Toward open sharing of task-based
fMRI data: the OpenfMRI project. Front. Neuroinformatics 7, 12 (2013)
28. Pooladian, A., Borrego, ´A.: Methodological issues in measuring citations in
Wikipedia: a case study in Library and Information Science. Scientometrics 113,
455–464 (2017)

258
F.˚A. Nielsen et al.
29. Priem, J., Piwowar, H.A., Hemminger, B.M.: Altmetrics in the wild: using social
media to explore scholarly impact, March 2012. https://arxiv.org/html/1203.4745
30. Putman, T.E., Lelong, S., Burgstaller-Muehlbacher, S., Waagmeester, A., Diesh,
C., Dunn, N., Munoz-Torres, M., Stupp, G., Wu, C., Su, A.I., Good, B.M.:
WikiGenomes: an open web application for community consumption and cura-
tion of gene annotation data in Wikidata. In: Database 2017, March 2017. http://
biorxiv.org/content/biorxiv/early/2017/01/21/102046.full.pdf
31. Putnam, H.: Is semantics possible? Metaphilosophy 1, 187–201 (1970)
32. Romero, A.R., Tzovaras, B.G., Greene, C.S., Himmelstein, D.S., McLaughlin, S.R.:
Sci-Hub provides access to nearly all scholarly literature. PeerJ preprints, July 2017
33. Taraborelli, D., Dugan, J.M., Pintscher, L., Mietchen, D., Neylon, C.: WikiCite
2016 report, November 2016. https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/
2/2b/WikiCite 2016 report.pdf
34. Teplitskiy, M., Lu, G., Duede, E.: Amplifying the impact of open access: Wikipedia
and the diﬀusion of science. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. 68(9), 2116–2127 (2017)
35. Verborgh, R., Sande, M.V., Colpaert, P., Coppens, S., Mannens, E., de Walle,
R.V.: Web-scale querying through linked data fragments. In: Proceedings of the
Workshop on Linked Data on the Web, July 2014. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1184/
ldow2014 paper 04.pdf
36. Vrandeˇci´c,
D.,
Kr¨otzsch,
M.:
Wikidata:
a
free
collaborative
knowledge-
base.
Commun.
ACM
57,
78–85
(2014).
http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/
2014/10/178785-wikidata/fulltext
37. Watson, J.D., Crick, F.: Molecular structure of nucleic acids: a structure for
deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature 171, 737–738 (1953). http://www.nature.com/
nature/dna50/watsoncrick.pdf
38. Yarkoni, T., Poldrack, R., Nichols, T.E., Essen, D.C.V., Wager, T.D.: Large-scale
automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data. Nat. Methods 8,
665–670 (2011)
39. Zhirov, A.O., Zhirov, O.V., Shepelyansky, D.L.: Two-dimensional ranking of
Wikipedia articles. Eur. Phys. J. B 77, 523–531 (2010)

Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
259
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium
or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were
made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s
Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

