SURVIVALISM, CORRUPTIONISM, AND MEREOLOGY
DAVID S. ODERBERG
University of Reading
Abstract. Corruptionism is the view that following physical death, the human 
being ceases to exist (until Resurrection) but their soul persists in the aferlife. 
Survivalism holds that both the human being and their soul persist in the 
aferlife, as distinct entities, with the soul constituting the human. Each position 
has its defenders, most of whom appeal both to metaphysical considerations and 
to the authority of St Tomas Aquinas. Corruptionists claim that survivalism 
violates a basic principle of any plausible mereology, while survivalists tend to 
reject the principle, though without as much detail as one would like. In this 
paper I examine both the key exegetical issues and the mereological question, 
arguing (i) that Aquinas cannot be shown to have supported the principle in 
question, and (ii) that the principle should be rejected on independent grounds. 
If correct, some key planks in support of survivalism are established, with others 
to await further examination.
I. INTRODUCTION
Tere is a  vigorous and fascinating debate currently taking place in 
philosophy of religion, concerning the nature of immortality. Although 
both sides are almost without exception followers of, or inspired by, 
the thought of St Tomas Aquinas, the debate has interest for anyone 
who either believes in, or wants at least to make sense of, the idea of 
a life following physical death. Moreover, at least some of the issues that 
have been aired should be of interest to those with no special regard 
for Tomistic thought; indeed they have interest beyond philosophy of 
religion altogether.
Both sides make classical Tomistic assumptions, wholly in line 
with traditional Christian thought, concerning the immortality of the 
human soul and its fate of reward, punishment, or purgation following 
EUROPEAN JOURNAL FOR PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION 4/4 (WINTER 2012), PP. 1-26

2
DAVID S. ODERBERG
a human’s physical death. Te debated question is the following: does 
the human being, i.e. human person, survive physical death along with 
his soul, or is it only his soul that survives his physical death? Following 
Patrick Toner, the philosopher who has contributed most to the debate 
and in many ways set its terms, I call those who believe that only the soul 
survives corruptionists, and those who believe the soul and the person 
survive survivalists.1
One might have thought this question settled long ago by some 
authority recognized by both sides. Surely, for example, Aquinas made it 
clear exactly what he thinks, this being just the sort of question he would 
have been minded to answer – as it were a question made in Heaven for 
a Christian Aristotelian? Or must it not be that some extra-philosophical 
source – Church dogma, the practically unanimous teaching of theolo-
gians, even Scripture itself – has at least supplied an answer worthy of 
acceptance by both sides, with only the philosophical mechanics of the 
correct view, so to speak, lef to be worked out? Surprisingly, this seems 
not to be the case. I  have not made an exhaustive search of relevant 
sources, nor is the matter of extra-philosophical authority something 
that deserves special attention in a philosophy article. Tat said, it does 
seem that the matter of survivalism versus corruptionism is still a wholly 
open philosophical question. And there is a  signiﬁcant number of 
philosophers on both sides.2
Tere are at least three major issues at the centre of this ongoing 
dispute. One is whether Aquinas himself was a survivalist or corruptionist. 
Corruptionists make a very strong case that Aquinas believed as they do, 
but my view is that although a compelling case for Aquinas’s survivalism 
is hard to make, he can and should be interpreted in a  way that is 
consistent with survivalism.3 Another is whether corruptionism is as 
1 See Toner 2009a, 2009b, 2010, 2012. Brown 2005 coined the term ‘corruptionist’.
2 Toner (2012): n.1 gives a long list. Apart from being the leading corruptionist himself, 
there are among others: Kenny (1993): 138; Pasnau (1992): 380ﬀ.; Davies (1992): 215-20. 
Te survivalists include: Stump (2003): 51-4; Brown (2005): 120-4; Hershenov and Koch-
Hershenov (2006); Hershenov (2008). All of the corruptionists just listed claim both that 
corruptionism is correct and that Aquinas held it. Te same goes for the survivalists apart 
from Hershenov (and Koch-Hershenov), who think Aquinas was a corruptionist and 
wrong about it. In Oderberg (2005) and (2007) I also defend survivalism and attribute 
the same view to Aquinas.
3 For the strongest case in favour of a corruptionist reading, see Toner (2009a) and 
his other articles. Stump (2003) and (2006) oﬀers a  plausible reading of Aquinas as 
survivalist. See also Oderberg (2005).

3
SURVIVALISM, CORRUPTIONISM, AND MEREOLOGY
well equipped as survivalism to account for the deserts that are meted 
out in the aferlife.4 For the survivalist, since the person persists beyond 
physical death, it is they who are rewarded or punished. Te corruptionist 
has the diﬃcult task of accounting for what seems to be the unfairness 
of rewarding or punishing one thing (the soul) for what something else 
(the now non-existent person) did during its earthly life. A third issue 
is whether survivalism violates a  putatively self-evident principle of 
mereology, called the Weak Supplementation Principle, since it seems 
to involve the view – assuming, along hylemorphic lines, that a person 
is not identical to their soul nor could ever become identical to their soul 
– that following physical death a person continues to exist with only one 
proper part, namely their soul. It is this third issue that will occupy the 
remainder of the present paper.
II. THE WEAK SUPPLEMENTATION PRINCIPLE: 
SOME BACKGROUND
Classical extensional mereology (CEM) is generally held to include the 
Weak Supplementation Principle (WSP) as one of its axioms.5 Taken 
to be one of the minimal requirements of any adequate mereology, the 
principle states: if x is a proper part of y (i.e., any part of y other than y 
itself, y being an ‘improper’ part of itself), then there is some other proper 
part z of y that does not overlap x, that is, shares no part with x.6 In other 
words, nothing can have a ‘single’ proper part in the technical sense of 
a proper part that is not ‘supplemented’ by another that is disjoint from 
it. WSP will evidently be violated if an object has a numerically single 
proper part. It will also be violated if an object has many disjoint proper 
parts but also has a proper part that overlaps – shares parts with, is not 
disjoint from – all of the others. For the part that overlaps all the others 
will itself exist without a supplement.
Kathrin Koslicki thinks WSP is ‘pretheoretically plausible’ and 
‘partially constitutive of the meaning of “is a proper part of”’.7 Indeed 
4 For the argument that corruptionism has serious problems accounting for the 
fairness of post-mortem rewards and punishments, see Hershenov and Koch-Hershenov 
(2006). For a detailed and ingenious response (ultimately unsuccessful, in my view) see 
Toner (2012).
5 Simons (1987): 28ﬀ.
6 No proper part, of course, and no improper part – which would be the case if x = y.
7 Koslicki (2008): 183.

4
DAVID S. ODERBERG
she appeals to WSP in defence of a neo-Aristotelian, hylemorphic theory 
of material constitution. Since, she argues, an object such as a statue can 
be constituted by a single lump of clay (a proper part of the statue, i.e. 
not identical to it) that has no other disjoint material parts, there must 
be a formal part (its structure) to supplement the lump, giving the statue 
two constitutive and non-overlapping parts. For Eﬃngham and Robson, 
‘denying WSP is not a credible option’ since it is ‘not only eminently 
plausible and in accord with our intuitions, but it is also an axiom of just 
about every mereology available’.8 Casati and Varzi note sympathetically 
that ‘[s]ome authors (most notably Peter Simons) regard [WSP] as 
constitutive of the meaning of “part” and would accordingly list it along 
with the lexical postulates of mereology’.9
Not everyone shares this intuition concerning WSP. Maureen 
Donnelly, in the course of a detailed examination of the role of WSP in 
Koslicki’s theory, writes: ‘I myself have no intuitions whatsoever regarding 
the truth or falsity of (WSP).’10 She thinks the idea that WSP is in accord 
with general intuitions about parthood has not been shown to have any 
empirical support, and that there is no conception of parthood in general 
such that non-philosophers (or for that matter philosophers, since not all 
accept the principle) could appeal to it in defence of the idea that weak 
supplementation just is one aspect of what it is to be a part of anything 
whatsoever. Donald Smith expresses himself even more strongly, taking 
WSP to be plain false.11 Eﬃngham and Robson, to whom Smith is 
replying, propose the idea of a multiply located, time-travelling brick 
that composes an entire wall, arguing that the scenario requires four-
dimensionalism in order to bring it into line with WSP. (No single brick, 
without supplementation, can compose an entire wall – only distinct, 
disjoint temporal parts can do so.) Smith, by contrast, denies the need for 
a four-dimensionalist interpretation, arguing that the scenario, bizarre 
though it may be, demonstrates the falsity of WSP. Indeed, the atypical 
nature of the thought experiment shows, for Smith, that WSP is routinely 
accepted by mereologists – and by non-philosophers who understandably 
8 Eﬃngham and Robson (2007): 635.
9 Casati and Varzi (1999): 39. Tey note that it fails in some mereologies that admit 
the existence of ‘open’ individuals, viz., entities with no boundaries as parts, as well as 
‘closed’ entities that do contain boundary parts; but they, like Simons, are hostile to the 
very distinction (1999: 79).
10 Donnelly (2011): 230.
11 Smith (2009).

5
SURVIVALISM, CORRUPTIONISM, AND MEREOLOGY
restrict their understanding to the familiar material objects of ordinary 
experience – precisely because they do not consider atypical cases when 
framing their formal axioms or foundational principles.
With this background in mind, we can see that an appeal to WSP is 
one of the weapons the corruptionist will use against the survivalist. For 
if, as survivalists claim, both the soul and the person survive physical 
death – the separation of the soul from the body – the only credible 
relation they can have in the aferlife is that of part to whole. Te person 
survives, but only because he still has a proper part – the single proper 
part that is his soul. So, for example, Stump writes of Aquinas’s position: 
‘a human being can exist when he is composed of nothing more than one 
of his metaphysical constituents, namely his form or soul. For Aquinas, 
in the case of human beings, the persistence of one metaphysical part 
of the whole thing is suﬃcient for the existence of that thing.’12 Again, 
Hershenov and Koch-Hershenov defend the view that ‘it is metaphysically 
possible for us to survive the loss of our body while remaining distinct 
from but intimately connected to our soul whose only ontological status 
becomes that of being our only proper part’.13 I have expressed the same 
position, framed in terms of constitution (as does Stump).14
Here is the response of the leading corruptionist. Patrick Toner ﬁrst 
claims that WSP ‘is a  deeply intuitive principle’. Secondly, he claims 
that ‘St Tomas himself endorsed it, or something very much like 
it’.15 By ‘something very much like it’, Toner means that Aquinas may 
not have had the disjointness aspect of WSP in mind, but he at least 
thought that any object with a proper part must have at least one other 
non-identical proper part, which is suﬃcient to make the anti-survivalist 
point. Clearly there is both an exegetical issue and a philosophical issue, 
though consideration of the former naturally leads to the latter. Since 
the authority of St Tomas is invoked on both sides, and getting clear on 
his view takes us to some of the metaphysical questions at hand, I will 
proceed by ﬁrst examining Aquinas’s position, discussing at the same 
time the philosophical matters it raises. I will then leave Aquinas to one 
side and examine both the corruptionist’s anti-survivalist objections and 
the positive survivalist case.
12 Stump (2003): 53.
13 Hershenov and Koch-Hershenov (2006): 440.
14 Oderberg (2005); (2007).
15 Toner (2009b): 456 for both quotations.

6
DAVID S. ODERBERG
III. WAS AQUINAS A DEFENDER OF WEAK SUPPLEMENTATION?
Te textual evidence does suggest that St Tomas believed no object 
could have a single proper part, but it is not clear that he intended the 
principle to apply equally to the extra-mundane case of the separated 
soul. In other words, I read him as falling within the group (laymen and 
philosophers) Donnelly and Smith both envisage as not having exotic 
cases in mind when taking it as self-evident that nothing can have a single 
proper part. So, for example, Toner oﬀers us passages in which Aquinas 
aﬃrms the need for multiple parts of wholes, but which do not bear the 
weight he puts on them as enunciations of universal principle.16 In one 
place, Aquinas gives the relation of ‘a part ... to another part in order to 
make up the whole’ as an example of union;17 in another, he says that ‘the 
parts of these substances are many, because since each whole is composed 
of many parts, there must be more component parts than composite 
wholes’.18 Te ﬁrst quotation involves no more than a passing reference to 
a typical example of union given along with many others, and can hardly 
be read as the statement of a universal truth. Te second is in the context 
precisely of a discussion by Aristotle of wholly material substances (in 
particular plants and non-human animals), and is part of the defence of 
the thesis that the parts of substances are not themselves substances. In 
neither context is there any evidence that St Tomas had the full gamut 
of cases in mind; rather, he was thinking only of material composition, as 
do most people when they consider the part-whole relation.
Since isolated references such as these achieve little, it is potentially 
more fruitful to look for a more oﬃcial-sounding statement expressed 
in a context where the philosophical underpinnings are apparent. To be 
sure this is what Toner does, oﬀering us a thesis Aquinas indisputably 
takes to be a ‘ﬁrst principle of demonstration’: ‘when it is known what 
a whole is and what a part is, it is at once recognized that every whole is 
greater than its part.’19 To this Toner adds, on behalf of corruptionism: 
16 Toner (2009b): 459.
17 Summa Teologica (hereafer ST): I.II q.28 a.1, obj.2, Aquinas (1914): 326. [‘pars toti 
vel alteri parti ad constitutionem totius ...’]
18 Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics: Book 7, Lesson 16, n.2, Aquinas (1995): 540 
(para. 1632). [‘partes esse plurimas harum substantiarum, quia, cum unumquodque totum 
ex pluribus componatur, oportet plures esse partes componentes quam tota composita.’]
19 ST: I q.2 a.1, obj.2., Aquinas (1920): 20. (My translation is a slight modiﬁcation of 
the latter. Of course, by ‘greater than its part’ St Tomas means ‘greater than each of its 
parts’, as Toner also notes; otherwise it would be what is technically known as a ‘slam 

7
SURVIVALISM, CORRUPTIONISM, AND MEREOLOGY
‘If an object has just one proper part, then the object is no greater or 
lesser than its part.’20 Tis, however, is not an assertion Aquinas makes, 
but a proposition to which Toner commits Aquinas on philosophical 
grounds. Why should we (or Aquinas) think an object with a sole proper 
part is no greater than that part?21 We need to look ﬁrst at what ‘greater’ 
may mean. Clearly, if ‘greater’ has a purely quantitative sense (e.g., spatial 
or material) Toner’s claim won’t apply to an immaterial soul sustaining the 
immaterial existence of a person. But then Aquinas’s own principle that 
the whole is greater than its part will not apply either, and the survivalist 
ought to accept that principle as a universal truth. So we should accept, 
as Toner insists, that when St Tomas says ‘greater’ he does not restrict 
the meaning to quantitative part-whole relations. Since – at least in the 
case of substances, including persons – the part subserves the whole and 
is ontologically dependent on it (as Aquinas, following Aristotle, holds to 
be the case) ‘greater’, when it comes to substances, means something like: 
‘possessed of some quality or characteristic that marks the whole out as 
ontologically independent and the part as ontologically dependent and 
subservient to the whole.’ 
So for the survivalist, the obvious move to make is to point out that 
the soul is ontologically dependent on the person whose soul it is. Contra 
Platonism or Cartesianism, the soul is not a complete substance in its 
own right, however intimately it might be united to a particular body 
for all of its earthly existence. On the Tomistic view the soul informs 
the matter that makes up the body of the person. More precisely, the 
soul informs prime matter, a featureless material substratum, to produce 
a particular person’s body. (Tat it is prime (or primary) rather than 
secondary matter the substantial form unites with in producing any 
substance is a key point to which I will return later.) For Aquinas it would 
be incoherent to suppose that a given person’s soul should be capable 
– logically – of informing the matter of some other person’s body. Te 
soul, then, is wholly derivative from the person, as is the person’s matter. 
Te person is logically and ontologically primary, the soul secondary.22 
dunk’ for survivalism.) [‘scito enim quid est totum et quid pars, statim scitur quod omne 
totum maius est sua parte.’]
20 Toner (2009b): 456.
21 It is not clear to me what Toner’s ‘or lesser’ adds to the argument.
22 To be sure, Aquinas believes that God creates each human soul (ST I q.90 aa.2-3, 
Aquinas 1922: 256-9) but this does not leave room for the hypothesis that the soul He 
created for one person He might have created for another. Tis is clear enough from 

8
DAVID S. ODERBERG
Te soul, being made for the matter of a particular body, tends essentially 
to union with that matter again (as will occur at the Resurrection) in 
order to function fully as the soul it is – of a  particular person. Te 
person does not tend essentially to union with anything in order to have 
its full function. Afer death, the person exists in a diminished, highly 
reduced state, but that is because she lacks a body, not because she needs 
to unite with a body. Another way of putting the idea is that a person has 
the intrinsic tendency to be a hylemorphic compound; the soul, however, 
has no tendency to be a compound, only to unify with another part so 
as to constitute a complete person. And as to function and operation, 
Aquinas could not be clearer: the soul does not think or understand in 
any way other than that in which the eye sees. ‘Man understands through 
his soul’, he writes, just as man sees through his eyes.23 Tis latter point 
itself should encourage the corruptionist to reconsider what they are 
committing themselves (and Aquinas) to: for if the soul exists without 
the person in the aferlife, and yet is still capable of intellectual operation, 
then on Aquinas’s analogy it would be like the existence of an eye that 
is capable of seeing (in the derivative sense, since it sees in no other) 
without an organism to which it belongs, and which performs the very 
primary act of seeing in virtue of which the eye can even be truly said to 
see in the ﬁrst place.
Te survivalist, then, has a coherent and plausible story to tell about 
how the post-mortem person is greater than their singleton part – the 
soul. Yet Toner’s response to this way of explaining the distinction 
between soul and person is to object: ‘Saying that the two things diﬀer 
in their properties doesn’t solve the problem [of accounting for their 
distinctness]: it states it.’24 To which the survivalist rejoinder ought to 
be that denying the possibility of a whole greater than its singleton part 
is just to assume WSP in the ﬁrst place, which is precisely the principle 
in dispute! I  submit that there is a  misunderstanding of the dialectic 
here. Te survivalist’s objective is not – or at least should not be – to 
prove the truth of their position by showing how the person and 
ST I q.90 a.4, Aquinas (1922): 259-61, where Aquinas argues that each soul is created at 
the exact same time that the body to which it is united comes into existence, ﬁtted for 
that body alone. (How could it be otherwise if it informs the matter of which the body 
is composed?)
23 ST I q.75 a.2, ad 2, Aquinas (1922): 8-9. [‘Potest igitur dici quod anima intelligit, 
sicut oculus videt, sed magis proprie dicitur quod homo intelligat per animam.’]
24 Toner (2009b): 457.

9
SURVIVALISM, CORRUPTIONISM, AND MEREOLOGY
their singleton proper part diﬀer in properties.25 Te survivalist has 
independent grounds for believing both soul and person exist, grounds 
concerned mainly with justice and personal responsibility (issues that 
await a diﬀerent discussion), but also purely metaphysical reasons having 
nothing to do with a diﬀerence of properties (such as the analogy with 
the eye just noted). Te question at hand is: if survivalism is true, can the 
soul and person be distinguished? Te corruptionist wonders what could 
distinguish them, in contrast with the case of there being more than one 
proper part – where it is clear that the whole must be greater than any of its 
parts. Te survivalist oﬀers various ways in which soul and person diﬀer 
in their natures, showing that WSP is not the only way of guaranteeing 
a distinction between whole and part. What the survivalist appeals to is 
not a concoction of hypotheses about how the soul and person might 
diﬀer, but claims about how they do and must diﬀer given their essential 
natures, upon which latter both sides agree.26 So, to clarify the dialectic: 
when it comes to WSP, the survivalist does not and cannot use its mere 
denial, however justiﬁed, to prove that soul and person must exist in the 
aferlife (pre-Resurrection). Te corruptionist, on the other hand, wants 
25 It might be thought the survivalist could do this, since it would involve an 
uncontroversial appeal to the Indiscernibility of Identicals: if the soul can be shown to 
have/lack properties the person lacks/has, then of course they must be distinct. But this 
would not do. Take a more mundane case, where I convince a rather deluded you that 
Al Gore is not Bill Clinton because Clinton is from Arkansas and Gore is not. Here, we 
both agree that Bill Clinton and Al Gore exist; it’s just a question of working out whether 
they are the same person. In the survivalism/corruptionism debate, the key issue is 
precisely whether, in the aferlife, both soul and person exist, or soul only. I cannot prove 
that both exist by distinguishing them since this would indeed be question begging. But 
as I note above, this is not the survivalist’s argumentative strategy anyway.
26 It might look as though the corruptionist also appeals to a Leibnizian principle, namely 
the more controversial Identity of Indiscernibles. Again, this is not quite what is going on. 
Te corruptionist argues that the soul and person in the aferlife are indiscernible, but 
does not conclude that they must be identical. Afer all, both sides agree with Aquinas’s 
famous statement, ‘I am not my soul’ [‘anima mea non est ego’] (Commentary on St Paul’s 
First Letter to the Corinthians 15: lec. 2; see <http://josephkenny.joyeurs.com/CDtexts/
SS1Cor.htm#152> [last accessed 25.7.12]). So the corruptionist concludes not that soul 
and person must be the same since if they were distinct they would be indiscernible, but 
that either the soul or the person does not exist at all in the aferlife (as always, qualiﬁed by 
‘before the Resurrection’). Since everyone in this debate agrees that the soul does exist, it 
must be the person who does not. (Note, in passing, that the passage within which ‘anima 
mea non est ego’ occurs is commonly appealed to by the corruptionist as prime evidence 
that Aquinas is on their side. See, for example, Kenny (1993): 138 and note at 173. I will 
examine this and all the other relevant texts on another occasion.)

10
DAVID S. ODERBERG
to use the truth of WSP to argue that corruptionism must be true, since 
otherwise the person would have to exist with a single proper part. And 
as part of their defence of WSP, they argue that any object with a single 
proper part could not be distinguished from that part; so, in the case 
of soul and person, the person cannot exist if the soul alone does (with 
no supplementary part). But all sides agree the soul does exist with no 
supplementary part, following physical death. Te survivalist, by showing 
in a principled way how soul and person would diﬀer in properties if they 
both existed in the aferlife, blocks the corruptionist move.
Before leaving St Tomas behind (not entirely), I want to close this 
section with another important text cited by Toner.27 Te passage from 
Aristotle on which Aquinas comments is as follows: ‘[I]f it [sc. something] 
is a compound [sc. of elements], clearly it will be a compound not of one 
but of more than one (or else that one will be the thing itself) ...’28 Here 
is St Tomas’s gloss:
Terefore, if this something else when found is not an element but is 
composed of elements, it is evident that it is not composed of one element 
only but of many; because if it were not composed of many but of only 
one, it would follow that that element would be the same as the whole; 
for what is composed of water only is truly water.29
Now for Toner’s gloss on Aquinas: ‘What this quotation seems to tell us 
is that anything composed of only one thing must be identical with that 
one thing ... if a thing has only one part, that part must be an improper, 
rather than a proper part: the whole must be the same as the one part.’30 
Immediately, however, there is a  wrinkle, for as Toner recognizes, 
Aquinas’s example of water suggests that he had in mind a wholly diﬀerent 
idea, namely that if something is composed of only one kind of element, 
then it must be the same kind of thing as the element. Toner makes two 
main points to shore up his interpretation.31 Te ﬁrst is that ‘the reason 
27 Toner (2009b): 458.
28 Metaphysics VII: 1041b22, Ross (1928). Te Greek reads: ‘ei de ek stoixeiou, dēlon 
hoti oux henos alla pleionōn, ē ekeino auto estai ...’
29 Aquinas (1995): 552. [‘Si ergo istud aliud inventum, non sit elementum, sed sit ex 
elementis; palam est quia non est ex elemento uno tantum, sed ex pluribus elementis. 
Quia si non esset ex pluribus, sed ex uno tantum, sequeretur quod esset illud idem 
elementum totum. Quod enim est ex aqua tantum, est vere aqua.’]
30 Toner (2009b): 458.
31 He also makes a third in a note: Toner (2009b): 470, n.21. It is that even if we 
allow that a whole could be composed of a single part with which it was not numerically 

11
SURVIVALISM, CORRUPTIONISM, AND MEREOLOGY
we ﬁnd it so obvious that a whole composed of just one element must 
be the same kind of thing as the element is that we ﬁnd it obvious that 
a whole composed of just one part is identical with that part’. I do not 
see the connexion, since only an equivocation over ‘same kind’ could 
generate one. Where Aquinas is clearly talking only about one thing’s 
being made of the same kind of stuﬀ as another, Toner uses this sense ﬁrst 
and the second sense – being the same kind/species of thing – immediately 
following. Te reason we ﬁnd it obvious that something composed of 
only one kind of stuﬀ must be made of the same kind of stuﬀ as the stuﬀ 
(tautologically) is itself has nothing to do with the speciﬁc identity of the 
thing and the stuﬀ and everything to do with composition: if it’s only got 
wood as the stuﬀ of which it is made, it is wholly wood, and the same 
for water or any other stuﬀ.32 But if anyone – myself excluded – ﬁnds it 
obvious that an object with a single part must be numerically – and hence 
speciﬁcally – identical to that part, it cannot be because of something to 
do with the stuﬀ of which they are/it is composed; otherwise, they would 
have to ﬁnd it obvious that an object composed of more than one part 
must be numerically – and hence speciﬁcally – identical to all of the parts 
taken collectively, so long as those parts were themselves all made of the 
same stuﬀ. Corruptionists should not want to accept that, assuming they 
allow – as I take it they do – for numerical identity of a whole through 
mereological change. 
Te second point is that ‘if the compound must be of the same kind of 
thing as the one element in it, and the human being is composed solely 
identical, we would be saddling Aquinas with the ‘bizarre’ view that two things of the 
same kind can wholly coincide. I think this point, like the ﬁrst, trades on an equivocation 
over ‘kind’. Te two putatively overlapping things – say, the clay statue and the lump 
of clay – are indeed of diﬀerent kinds: one is an artefact, the other is a lump of (let us 
suppose) naturally occurring matter. Yet both are made of the same kind of stuﬀ, viz. 
clay. Or one will be an artefact of one kind and the other an artefact of another kind 
(say, a statue made out of a bicycle): they will be generically identical but speciﬁcally 
distinct. But they will both be made of the same kind of stuﬀ (metal, say). For a watery 
example, suppose a large puddle of water and the water that composes it. Te ﬁrst is 
a puddle (a countable object), the second some stuﬀ (non-countable) that composes and 
wholly overlaps with it. But both are made of water. Moreover, in Oderberg (1996) I give 
unrelated examples of two objects of the same kind wholly coinciding even in the ﬁrst 
sense of ‘kind’, viz. speciﬁc identity; I call such examples ‘Leibnizian cases’. So the view 
Toner labels as bizarre is in fact quite plausible.
32 Tis is one reason why the so-called fallacy of composition does not apply 
universally.

12
DAVID S. ODERBERG
of her soul, then she’s the same kind of thing as her soul’.33 But this would 
be absurd, since then the human being would be a proper part of herself 
which is impossible, or else this would simply mean she was identical 
to her soul, contrary to Aquinas’s view, on which both sides are agreed. 
Again, however, it is the equivocation on ‘same kind’ which produces 
a specious objection. St Tomas’s water example shows that he is speaking 
of compositional identity, not speciﬁc identity. So it should be with the 
soul and the person, and so it is: the person following physical death is 
made of a single immaterial proper part; from which it follows that just 
as the part is immaterial, so is the whole.
To conclude this section, I claim that the whilst the corruptionist puts 
forward an impressive-seeming case to the eﬀect that Aquinas believed 
in the Weak Supplementation Principle (or something suﬃciently 
similar to make the corruptionist’s point), the truth is that the case 
rests on a  combination of misreadings or tendentious interpretations 
of passages from St Tomas, coupled with references to brief passages 
that were never meant to be oﬃcial statements of Aquinas’s position on 
composition. Like most of us, he almost certainly took it as a general 
truth that wholes require more than one proper part. But he never takes 
on this speciﬁc question in the immediate context of a  discussion of 
post-mortem survival. Te survivalist certainly cannot contend that 
Aquinas anywhere denies WSP. But the survivalist case does not rest on 
this. A defensive reading of Aquinas that is both plausible and allows 
space for a view of mereology consistent with survivalism is all that the 
survivalist should ask from the Angelic Doctor.34
33 Toner (2009b): 458-9.
34 I also would like to note the following interesting passage, brought to my attention 
by Gyula Klima. In the Commentary on the Sentences, Aquinas writes: ‘Otherwise is the 
opinion of Aristotle, which all moderns follow, that the soul is united to the body as form 
to matter; whence the soul is a part of human nature, and not human nature itself. And 
since the essence of the part diﬀers from the essence of the person, as it is said, so the 
separated soul cannot be called a person: since although, being separate, it is not actually 
a part, still it has the nature of being [the natural tendency to be] a part’ (lib. 3 d. 5 q. 3 a. 
2 co.; my translation). [‘Alia est opinio Aristotelis quam omnes moderni sequuntur, quod 
anima unitur corpori sicut forma materiae: unde anima est pars humanae naturae, et non 
natura quaedam per se: et quia ratio partis contrariatur rationi personae, ut dictum est, 
ideo anima separata non potest dici persona: quia quamvis separata non sit pars actu, 
tamen habet naturam ut sit pars.’ See <http://www.corpusthomisticum.org/spd3004.
html#92376> (last accessed 27.6.12).]

13
SURVIVALISM, CORRUPTIONISM, AND MEREOLOGY
IV. SHOULD WE BELIEVE 
IN THE WEAK SUPPLEMENTATION PRINCIPLE?
Moving on from the more arcane reaches of Tomistic exegesis, I want 
to consider WSP in the light of general metaphysical considerations. 
It is understandable why its supporters speak as though it were 
a conceptual truth of parthood that wholes must have more than one 
part.35 For material substances and the bits that compose them are the 
typical phenomena we have in mind when thinking about parts. It is 
the perceptually familiar that sets the framework within which we think 
about most of the core metaphysical concepts. Tis is why eﬃcient 
causation is the model according to which most philosophers and layfolk 
think about causation in general, and why it is much easier, even for 
a  highly trained philosopher, to ponder the concrete rather than the 
abstract. More speciﬁcally, a certain kind of spatial thinking dominates 
our grasp of parthood – the idea, that is, of a part as spatially smaller 
than the whole. If a material whole has a certain spatial extent, then any 
one of its parts must have a smaller extent. And if it is smaller, there must 
be at least one other non-overlapping part to make up the remainder. It is 
this idea of a remainder to which Koslicki appeals to defend the intuitive 
plausibility of WSP.36 Although she does not explicitly put this in a spatial 
context, I think Donnelly is right to suggest that spatial thinking – in 
Again, a quick ﬁrst reading would suggest St Tomas is saying quite clearly that the 
separated soul is not a part of anything, so there is no whole (the person) in existence 
in the pre-Resurrection aferlife. What is really going on here, I submit, is nothing more 
than Aquinas’s usual denial that the soul is the person (anima mea non est ego). Te 
context (‘otherwise is the opinion ...’) is Aquinas’s rejection of Platonic dualism and any 
metaphysic that has the person as an accidental unity of body and soul, with the soul 
a complete substance in its own right and the essence of the person being given wholly by 
the soul. As for ‘it is not actually a part ...’, I read this as meaning not that in the aferlife the 
soul is a part of nothing; rather, that it is not doing what it actually does on earth, namely 
compose with another part (matter) to constitute the complete person. In the aferlife 
it still has the natural tendency to unite with a body, which is why it is an incomplete 
substance: the soul’s entire reason for being, as it were, is to inform matter. It can exist on 
its own, i.e. apart from matter, but neither it, nor the person it constitutes in the aferlife, 
functions perfectly (in full accordance with their natures). Te soul lacks the performance 
of those functions, such as sensible memory, that rely on the body, and the person, in 
virtue of this, also lacks those functions. Further, the person cannot exercise any bodily 
functions, including those the soul never could do – walk, embrace, eat, and so on.
35 From now on I will usually omit the adjective ‘proper’ when speaking of proper 
parts, and speak explicitly of improper parts when referring to the latter.
36 Koslicki (2008): 168.

14
DAVID S. ODERBERG
the sense of parts as spatially smaller than their wholes – lies behind the 
remainder idea. She comments: ‘But once we allow that a whole can have 
a proper part which is spatially co-extensive with it, then I think that 
(WSP) loses its appeal.’37
Consider, then, three closely related examples of objects that seem 
to have a single part spatially co-extensive with the whole. One is the 
notorious statue and the lump of clay, which Koslicki discusses at 
great length to motivate her case. Another is proposed by a survivalist: 
a tree that has all its branches cut oﬀ until all that is lef is its trunk.38 
A third, rather gruesome example that I have proposed in the past, is 
a person whose entire body is amputated below the neck, with their head 
maintained by futuristic technology.39 All of these cases, I submit, violate 
WSP because they involve a whole’s possessing a part that is not disjoint 
from any other part of the whole. Te corruptionist should accept this 
way of interpreting the cases, and so cannot appeal to WSP as a universal 
truth that immediately blocks the survivalist account of the aferlife.
Consider the statue and clay. It takes, in my view, a leap of metaphysical 
thinking too far to suggest that these are not distinct objects with 
distinct persistence conditions.40 If they are distinct, the question is 
what relation they have to each other apart from spatial coincidence. 
It is not enough to say that the lump’s existence, assuming the lump to 
be appropriately conﬁgured, is suﬃcient for the existence of the statue, 
true though it be. Te question is what relation holds between the statue 
and the lump, not between the statue’s existence and that of the lump. 
Moreover, many objects can spatially coincide without the existence of 
one being suﬃcient for the existence of the other: two beams of light, 
emanating from distinct sources but perfectly overlapping, will not be 
such that the existence of one is suﬃcient for the existence of the other.41 
It is no surprise that so many metaphysicians adopt a ‘constitution’ view 
of the matter, according to which the lump constitutes the statue over 
the period of the statue’s existence. In other words, if you think – as you 
should – that the statue and lump are distinct objects, then what other 
relation could there be between them during the time of their coincidence 
37 Donnelly (2011): 230.
38 Hershenov and Koch-Hershenov (2006).
39 Oderberg (2005); (2007): ch.10.
40 Te literature on this is extensive. For an overview, see Rea (1997). For a well-known 
debate on the topic, see Burke (1992), Lowe (1995), Burke (1997).
41 See further Oderberg (1996).

15
SURVIVALISM, CORRUPTIONISM, AND MEREOLOGY
than that of part to whole? Te term ‘constitution’ as used in this context 
is clearly a philosophical term of art but should not mislead anyone into 
thinking it is not a mereological notion all the same.
Te easiest way to think of a part that constitutes a whole is as either 
the single or the largest proper part of a thing:42 single if the whole has 
no other proper parts because the single part is mereologically simple 
or the transitivity of proper parthood fails; largest if the whole has more 
than one proper part. ‘Largest’ need not be understood spatially. For 
example, suppose the soul were mereologically complex (an unorthodox 
view among traditional believers in immortality, but leave that aside). In 
the aferlife it would still constitute the person, being the person’s largest 
proper part, but where ‘largest’ would be understood non-spatially, for 
instance in terms of asymmetric relations of entailment between the 
powers of the soul and the powers of any of its parts.
So if the constitution view is correct, there are parts that constitute 
and parts that do not. Te ones that do not nevertheless compose, 
partially or completely, the whole. Moreover, there is no sharp division 
between compositional parts and constitutive parts, or better, between 
parts playing a compositional role and parts playing a constitutive role. 
Suppose, for instance, that our statue constituted wholly by a lump of 
clay nevertheless has some broken parts, and that these are repaired by 
a few lumps of plaster. Te lump of clay still exists, we should say, but 
it no longer plays a constitutive role: it now plays a compositional role, 
composing with the lumps of plaster to produce the statue. Conversely, 
suppose the lumps of plaster fall oﬀ: now the lump of clay has reverted 
to its constitutive role and no longer plays a compositional role in the 
sense I mean. Te survivalist takes this as an analogy for what happens 
at physical death: the soul, which previously played a compositional role 
in union with matter to produce the soul-body compound that is the 
person, now plays a purely constitutive role as the person’s single proper 
part. Tis way of looking at constitution should dispel worries that 
there is something, as it were, ontologically ‘spooky’ about constitutive 
parthood. A constitutive part – one playing a constitutive role – can also 
be, or have been, a compositional part in the usual sense of ‘part’ at some 
other point in the history of the whole.
42 Note: this deﬁnition is not supposed to prove that constitution occurs. Rather, if you 
have established on independent metaphysical grounds that constitution occurs, you can 
understand the part that does the constituting in the way deﬁned above.

16
DAVID S. ODERBERG
Next, although one might not regard constitution as a weird relation, 
still one might think it entails the problematic result that distinct objects 
can share all their parts. Now, as Toner recognizes,43 this does not apply 
to the survivalist scenario, since the soul does not have parts in the ﬁrst 
place, though he uses the point to cast overall doubt on constitution. 
Moreover, even if the soul has parts (as I noted, a heterodox view in this 
debate), soul and person will not share all their parts, since the person 
will have the soul as a part but the soul will not be a part – proper part, 
remember – of itself. Still, it is worth noting that the statue and lump of 
clay should not be regarded as sharing all their parts, even leaving aside 
the obvious fact that they don’t both have the lump as a proper part.44 Te 
statue has a nose and arms, the lump does not, albeit some of its parts are 
nose- and arm-shaped. If I squash the statue’s nose I have destroyed one 
of its parts, and probably reduced its artistic and monetary value at the 
same time. But I have not also destroyed a part of the lump: the lump is 
still all there, but the statue is not.
Still, classical mereology recognizes both a weak and a strong version 
of supplementation. Te Strong Supplementation Principle says that if x 
is not a part of y, then x has a part (proper or improper) that is disjoint 
from y.45 Te SSP rules out two objects’ sharing all of their parts, and 
with the anti-symmetry of parthood (if x is part of y and y is part of x, 
then x = y) entails WSP.46 On a spatial reading of parthood, SSP is highly 
plausible: if my lef arm is part of me but I am not part of my lef arm, 
there, there will be parts of me beyond the spatial boundaries of, i.e. 
43 Toner (2009b): 458.
44 Koslicki denies it (2008: 178, n.15), as does Baker (2000) although the latter makes 
a distinction between having parts derivatively and having them non-derivatively. She 
claims that the lump and statue do share all their parts if we include both derivative and 
non-derivative possession, but stresses that this is a signiﬁcant metaphysical diﬀerence 
which requires the qualiﬁcation of a phrase like ‘x has part P’ if we are to understand 
what is going on. I am not persuaded by the distinction, at least when it comes to some 
cases of possession of parts: to say that the lump has a nose derivatively is merely to say 
that it stands in the constitution relation to an object (the statue) that has a nose non-
derivatively. It is hard to see what is gained by calling this the possession of a part, and 
the thought is counter-intuitive: as noted above, if I squash the statue’s nose I have truly 
destroyed one of its parts, but have I also truly destroyed a part of the lump? Hardly: the 
lump is all there; it has not been mutilated, only reconﬁgured; but the statue really has 
been mutilated. (Tomson (1983; 1998) by contrast, does think the statue and clay share 
all their parts.)
45 Simons (1987): 29.
46 Donnelly (2011): 237.

17
SURVIVALISM, CORRUPTIONISM, AND MEREOLOGY
disjoint from, my lef arm. But there are more ways not to share parts 
than spatial ways: in the case of coincident objects like the statue and the 
lump, SSP is false: the statue is not part of the lump, but it has no parts 
that do not overlap any part of the lump. Yet the statue still has parts (like 
a nose) the lump lacks. So if we deny WSP, and retain anti-symmetry (as 
I think we should), we must deny SSP; but we do not thereby aﬃrm that 
distinct objects can share all their parts.
Furthermore, even if we replace SSP with a  broader non-sharing 
principle – if x is distinct from y then either x has a part that is not part 
of y or vice versa – we still do not capture all there is to the distinctness 
of coincident objects. If we suppose that the statue and lump do share 
all their parts, they are still distinguished by virtue of their diﬀerent 
persistence conditions and modal properties: the lump came into 
existence before the statue and can persist beyond the destruction of the 
statue, and so on. A more diﬃcult case is the tree reduced to its trunk. 
We cannot really say the tree and trunk come into existence at diﬀerent 
times, nor that they could have, nor that one could outlast the other.47 
But the trunk was once spatially included within the tree and now is not. 
Te tree can survive having, say, ninety percent of its matter cut away, 
but the trunk cannot. Te tree can, say, grow fruit but the trunk cannot, 
albeit the trunk supports the growth of new fruit (as do the roots, but 
they do not grow fruit either). Again, as I noted earlier, the point is not 
to prove that there are distinct objects here, a tree and a trunk: rather, if 
there are distinct objects, they are capable of being distinguished – and 
this even if we suppose they share all of their parts.48
My claim is that the statue/clay, tree/branch, and head/person 
cases all violate WSP, and in a way that is far less exotic than the time-
travelling brick albeit – in the second and third cases – involving some 
subtle considerations going to the root of hylemorphism. First, the 
47 Killing the tree cannot leave the trunk if, following Aristotle, we do not regard the 
dead wood that was the trunk as still a trunk – rather than just a trunk-shaped lump of 
dead wood – afer the tree has died. On Aristotle’s ‘homonymy principle’, see Te Parts of 
Animals 640b35-641a5 (Ross 1912).
48 Toner (2009b: 461) seems to misinterpret the mereological principle in play here. 
He claims that he can accept WSP while also accepting that two distinct material objects 
may share all their parts ‘at some level of decomposition’. But levels of decomposition do 
not come into it. Te worry about sharing of parts is not that the statue and lump, say, 
have all the same atoms. Te worry is that if they have all of their parts in common, at 
all levels of decomposition, they cannot be distinct. I have argued against this, but it is 
important to note what the source of the concern is.

18
DAVID S. ODERBERG
statue and clay. Te lump of clay is wholly co-extensive with the statue. 
Although, as I have argued, they do not share all their parts, there is 
no proper part of the statue that is disjoint from the lump: the statue’s 
nose, for instance, although not a part of the lump, shares some of the 
clay belonging to the lump. Now, Donnelly (2011) argues in detail that 
there are alternative systems of mereology that do not have WSP as 
an axiom yet give the parthood relation suﬃcient logical properties to 
distinguish it from other strict partial orderings (such as ‘strictly less 
than’; all such orderings being asymmetric and transitive). In particular, 
she argues that in one alternative system, if we allow the statue and lump 
to be proper parts of each other (denying anti-symmetry), then there 
is no supplementation principle that applies. Only if one is not part 
of the other does an analogue of WSP come into play. Whilst I accept 
Donnelly’s overall point that WSP does not have to ﬁgure as an axiom of 
every formal mereology capable of distinguishing parthood from other 
strict partial orderings, and that WSP is not self-evident anyway (except 
where proper parthood is understood solely in terms of smaller spatial 
extent), I ﬁnd it a high price to pay that we should hold the statue to be 
a part of the lump. Rather, it may be that the nature of parthood cannot 
adequately be captured in a formal system. More precisely, it may be that 
all we can say about the agreed logical properties of parthood is that they 
make it a strict partial ordering, but in order to diﬀerentiate it from other 
strict partial orderings we have to say something purely metaphysical, 
not logical or formal.
To put some ﬂesh on this idea, we need to examine a number of truths 
about the various relations between parts – all in the neighbourhood of 
WSP – that strongly suggest there is no universal principle of supple men-
ta tion, let alone one that can be captured in any kind of formalization. 
Taken as a universal truth about parthood, WSP is false: the statue and 
clay, the tree and its trunk, the bodiless head and the person whose head 
it is, all violate WSP. On the other hand, there is something about the 
tree/trunk and head/person cases – and, I  would add, the survivalist 
scenario – that requires, as it were, respect for the spirit of WSP though 
they violate its letter. Neither the tree reduced (constitutively) to its 
trunk, nor of course the person reduced to his head, function normally. 
Both are in a highly impaired state, the removal of which requires the 
reinstatement of mereologically non-overlapping parts: the head needs 
its body for the person to function normally, and the trunk needs 
branches and leaves for the tree it constitutes to function normally. 

19
SURVIVALISM, CORRUPTIONISM, AND MEREOLOGY
Similarly, as both sides of the survivalism/corruptionism debate agree, 
the soul needs a body for the person to function in his proper way, as 
a mereological compound. Te soul has an intrinsic, essential tendency 
to unite with matter and is unable to carry out the functions it subserves 
that also require matter, such as sensation and of course the maintenance 
of bodily functions. Put this way, what we can say about the disembodied 
soul is weaker than WSP, which requires an actually existing disjoint part 
with which the soul must compose if the soul is to be a part of a whole at 
all. Tough weaker, however, it is a far deeper metaphysical insight about 
the nature of certain kinds of part (those that belong to animate beings) 
that cannot be captured by a formal principle. Tis might be discomﬁting 
for mereology as a purely formal system, but it means nothing untoward, 
and is indeed rich material, for mereology conceived as the metaphysical 
study of parts and wholes.
Te corruptionist might, nevertheless, look for a  principle weaker 
than WSP that is still formalizable and suﬃcient to undercut survivalism. 
Whether intentionally or not, Toner hints at this strategy when, in 
discussing the tree/trunk case, he insists that ‘anything with a proper 
part must have at least two disjoint proper parts’, going on to explain that 
‘both the tree and the trunk do have at least two disjoint proper parts 
(the tree has lots of molecules as parts, and so does the trunk)’.49 But this 
is a misstatement of WSP and hence the explanation is not to the point. 
Te principle that anything with a proper part must have at least two 
disjoint proper parts is what Cody Gilmore calls ‘quasi-supplementation’: 
if x is a proper part of y, then there are z and w such that z and w are 
disjoint proper parts of y.50 QSP does not require that every proper part 
of a whole must itself have a disjoint proper part, only that any whole 
with a proper part must have disjoint proper parts. Clearly the statue, 
the tree, and the bodiless person all have multiple disjoint proper parts, 
but neither the lump of clay, nor the trunk, nor the head have any proper 
parts disjoint with them. Te corruptionist might wish to say51 that QSP 
neatly cleaves these cases from the survivalist one because the former 
all obey QSP but the latter does not: the post-mortem, pre-Resurrection 
person does not have more than one proper part. Like WSP, however, 
QSP does not have intuitive plausibility outside a speciﬁc context, that of 
49 Toner (2009b): 461.
50 Gilmore (2009): 119, n.45. Cited also by Donnelly (2011): 231.
51 I emphasize that I am not suggesting Toner would wish to say this.

20
DAVID S. ODERBERG
material objects with parthood understood as smaller spatial inclusion. 
Gilmore claims that QSP does justice to the intuition Simons appeals to 
in defence of WSP, namely that ‘if a universe is complex (i.e. has proper 
parts at all), then at least two of these parts will be disjoint’.52 Perhaps, 
if the intuition is understood to be about mereological complexity in 
general rather than mereological composition in particular, and if our 
model of complexity is material.53 What I mean by this is that to say the 
universe or something in it is complex is only to say that it has more than 
one part; but to say something more, speciﬁcally about how the parts ﬁt 
together, is to speak about composition. It is hard to see how a complex 
universe can be consistent with everything’s overlapping everything else, 
as Simons points out. So in the material world, thinking about the spatial 
chunks that are typically smaller in extent than their wholes, we should 
expect QSP to hold. Tere is no reason, however, to expect this to be the 
case with immaterial objects and their parts: hence, to suppose that QSP 
excludes the survivalist scenario is not to justify anything, only to note 
the diﬀerence between it and the material analogues.
I now want to raise a more important point, to the eﬀect that WSP 
itself, though we might plausibly think of it as a principle of composition 
rather than (like QSP) a principle of complexity, does not say all that 
needs to be said about composition in this context, and what remains 
to be said cannot be formalized. Toner has a  further objection to 
Hershenov and Koch-Hershenov’s tree/trunk example, namely that their 
interpretation of it is incompatible with the proper hylemorphic account 
of the case, one with which hylemorphists on both sides should agree. 
If the tree and trunk do both exist and coincide spatio-temporally, the 
tree does have a part the trunk lacks, namely a substantial form (the 
classical version of Koslicki’s ‘formal part’). Te trunk, being a material 
spatial part of the tree, is not a substance in its own right, following 
Aristotle. Like a person’s arm or big toe, such a part is truly informed by 
the substantial form of the whole, but it does not have its own substantial 
form since that would make it a substance in its own right – contra its 
52 Simons (1987): 27.
53 And if we take what Simons thinks is a truth about the universe to be a truth 
about the objects in it as well. Classical extensional mereology, taking parthood to be 
unrestrictedly transitive, treats claims about things in the universe and their parts to be 
claims about parts of the universe and vice versa. I let pass this dubious way of looking at 
the universe and its denizens, as well as putting aside the issue of transitivity, and simply 
take QSP (and WSP) to be a claim about anything that is complex.

21
SURVIVALISM, CORRUPTIONISM, AND MEREOLOGY
ontological dependence on the whole. Hence, for Toner, ‘the tree/trunk 
example does not help motivate the rejection of WSP.’54
Although he does not elaborate, I  take it that Toner holds the 
substantial form of the tree to be a part that is disjoint from the trunk, 
thus verifying WSP in this case. Te problem, though, is that on the 
classical hylemorphic view the tree is decidedly not a  compound of 
trunk and substantial form. Even if one wished to distinguish between 
the tree with all its branches and leaves on the one hand, and the lump 
of plant matter (cellulose, etc.) constituting it on the other (doubtful at 
best, but let’s assume it), the tree would not be a compound of substantial 
form and that lump. Rather, what the substantial form of any material 
substance unites with and informs is the underlying prime matter from 
which that substance, suitably informed, arises. If it were otherwise, the 
hylemorphist would be committed to the view that the lump of plant 
matter – secondary matter, for Aristotelians – gets its properties from 
something other than its substantial form. In other words, the properties 
of the trunk, wood, branches, bark, leaves, ﬂowers, fruit, and so on, would 
have nothing to do with the form of the tree and everything to do with 
something else – if not another substantial form in addition to the tree’s 
form, thus violating the unicity of substantial form (the impossibility of 
multiple substantial forms in the same substance; see the remarks above), 
then some other collection of accidental forms that impart to the plant 
matter its own independent reality and characteristics before (logically 
before) the substantial form has done any work at all. And with that, 
substantial forms should be dispensed with as idle explanatory wheels.
To avoid this anti-hylemorphic destination, we must insist that 
substantial form never unites with secondary matter: it only unites with 
an underlying primary stuﬀ in order to produce the ﬁnished substance. 
But this is something that is not captured by WSP, nor can it be 
formalized. WSP requires only that every part of a whole have a disjoint 
part: it says nothing about how the disjoint parts ﬁt together, how they 
function in relation to each other. Since the model for WSP is materially 
ﬁlled spatial regions smaller than the whole, we already have a grasp of 
the metaphysic behind the principle: these regions ﬁlled with matter lie 
within the area or volume of the whole; we can appeal to topology and 
various kinds of material connexion to spell out, if only incompletely, 
the way the material parts ﬁt together. But this is not the right model 
54 Toner (2009b): 461.

22
DAVID S. ODERBERG
for the form/matter relation: the informing of matter is a diﬀerent and 
distinctive kind of relation, one involving concepts of actuality and deter-
minacy. Te parts are not themselves bits of anything; rather, they are 
metaphysical principles (in the sense of originating sources) from which 
the material substance arises. Te substantial form of the tree might be 
disjoint from the trunk, but it is not something that composes with the 
trunk; it composes only with prime matter. So to say that WSP is veriﬁed 
in the case of the tree/trunk is to apply a material model of composition 
to another kind of composition altogether, and to mix levels of parts in 
the process. Since the form of the tree does not compose with the trunk, 
its disjointness from the trunk is not something deriving its reality from 
the truth of WSP, which is a compositional principle about parts of the 
same level, and material ones at that. Te disjointness of the form of 
the tree and the trunk is something that falls out of a general theory 
of form/matter composition, with the trunk as secondary matter and the 
form of the tree as an immaterial part – a universal – that composes 
with underlying prime matter, the union of which results in secondary 
matter – the trunk, if the tree is reduced to this, and also the roots, leaves, 
branches, and so on if the tree is in its complete state.55
Te upshot of this rather abstract digression is that even if the tree 
has a substantial form disjoint from the trunk, this has nothing to do 
with WSP. Te trunk still lacks a disjoint part in the sense in which WSP 
is supposed to apply. Similarly for the person and their bodiless head: 
the hylemorphist grants that the person has a substantial form – their 
soul – but this does not verify WSP either, since the full compositional 
story is that for all the understandably loose talk of man as a union of 
soul and body, souls do not compose with bodies. Bodies are secondary 
matter – the result of the soul’s union with primary matter. Te body has 
no life of its own, no identity save as the body of this particular human 
being: to speak of the soul’s literally informing a body is, quite simply, to 
double-count the soul’s function in the compound or else to deny that 
a substance – in this case, a human being – has exactly one substantial 
form. In which case the bodiless head does still falsify WSP inasmuch as 
55 Koslicki’s approach to form, interpreting it as structure, is more congenial to the 
idea that the form of the tree, for example, is a disjoint part of any lump of matter that 
composes the tree at some time. Tis is because she understands form as structure, and the 
content that structure conﬁgures is, for her, what a classical Aristotelian calls secondary 
matter. In my view, however, there are serious problems with this new interpretation of 
form as structure: see Oderberg (forthcoming).

23
SURVIVALISM, CORRUPTIONISM, AND MEREOLOGY
WSP oﬀers a principle of composition that does not apply to these kinds 
of scenario: there is no appropriate disjoint part to be the supplement of 
the trunk or the head. In the statue/clay case, moreover, there is not even 
a substantial form to appeal to in the ﬁrst place, since artefacts are not 
substances: they are constituted by substances – a single lump of clay, in 
the case under discussion – but are themselves ontologically dependent 
entities (dependent on an ‘artworld’, as is sometimes said, or on minds 
that impose functions or purposes on the artefacts).56 And even if we do 
not say that WSP is falsiﬁed in such cases, rather than that it does not 
apply, the result is the same: WSP is not a universal truth about parts 
and wholes.
V. CONCLUSION
I have argued that there is no persuasive case to the eﬀect that Aquinas 
believed in the Weak Supplementation Principle, so the corruptionist 
cannot appeal to this agreed authority in support of their case. For the 
survivalist, it would be convenient if a case could be made that Aquinas 
clearly believed WSP to be false. For that matter, it would be highly 
agreeable for either side if it could be shown he clearly asserted their 
position. But matters are more complicated than that. I doubt that Aquinas 
ever gave WSP the sort of consideration contemporary mereologists do, 
let alone applied it deliberately to the question of post-mortem survival. 
Te more general, and important, question of whether Aquinas believed 
in survivalism or corruptionism is similarly a complex exegetical matter 
with no neat answer. My view is that he was a survivalist, but this must 
await another occasion.
56 In fact the proper account of artefacts is a far more complex aﬀair than I indicate 
here. In Oderberg (2007): ch.7 I argue that at least some artefacts – among which I count 
the typical philosopher’s statue – should be thought of as identical to an accidental unity, 
to use the Aristotelian term, consisting of a substance and one or more accidental forms. 
So the statue is a lump of clay plus whatever accidents modify that lump to have a certain 
shape, texture, and various other qualities. Tis view does not prevent the lump from 
constituting the statue, however, since constitution is not identity in the sense in which 
the constitution view employs the term. So we can still properly say that the statue is 
indeed constituted by a lump of clay, yet is identical not to the lump itself, but to the 
plurality consisting of (identical to) the lump that constitutes the statue plus the accidents 
that modify the lump. Still, this account does not verify WSP. Te accidents are not parts 
of the statue, although the constituting lump is, along with the smaller parts such as arms 
and nose that result from the accidents’ conﬁguring the lump; so there is no question of 
disjoint supplements.

24
DAVID S. ODERBERG
Te mereological issues at play in the survivalism/corruptionism 
debate also require careful analysis given the hylemorphic assumptions 
of both sides. For a non-hylemorphist, the cases discussed above should 
be seen as clear violations of WSP. But the hylemorphist should agree 
as long as they are attentive to how the form/matter union needs to be 
understood. One does not have to appeal to time-travelling bricks or 
other exotica of dubious plausibility to make a case against WSP. Given 
this, the soul/person case can be put in its proper context: it is a highly 
exotic case given mundane mereological thinking, but WSP’s truth 
does not stand or fall with it. We can already cast doubt on WSP before 
looking beyond the material world, albeit we have to think of parthood 
in a broader way than is usually done outside metaphysics. With this 
in place, we can free the survivalist position from being shackled to 
principles that do not themselves stand up to detailed scrutiny.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aquinas, Tomas. 1914. Te ‘Summa Teologica’ of St. Tomas Aquinas, Literally 
Translated by Fathers of the English Dominican Province, vol. 6 (London: R. 
and T. Washbourne, Ltd.)
Aquinas, Tomas. 1920. Te ‘Summa Teologica’ of St. Tomas Aquinas, Literally 
Translated by Fathers of the English Dominican Province, vol. 1 (London: 
Burns Oates and Washbourne Ltd.)
Aquinas, Tomas. 1922. Te ‘Summa Teologica’ of St. Tomas Aquinas, Literally 
Translated by Fathers of the English Dominican Province, vol. 4 (London: 
Burns Oates and Washbourne Ltd.)
Aquinas, Tomas. 1995. Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics, trans. J.P. 
Rowan (Notre Dame, IN: Dumb Ox Books)
Baker, Lynne Rudder. 2000. Persons and Bodies: A Constitution View (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press)
Brown, Christopher M. 2005. Aquinas and the Ship of Teseus (London: 
Continuum)
Burke, Michael. 1992. ‘Copper Statues and Pieces of Copper: A Challenge to the 
Standard Account’, Analysis, 52: 12-17
Burke, Michael. 1997. ‘Coinciding Objects: Reply to Lowe and Denkel’, Analysis, 
57: 11-18
Davies, Brian. 1992. Te Tought of Tomas Aquinas (Oxford: Clarendon Press)
Donnelly, Maureen. 2011. ‘Using Mereological Principles to Support 
Metaphysics’, Te Philosophical Quarterly, 61: 225-46

25
SURVIVALISM, CORRUPTIONISM, AND MEREOLOGY
Eﬃngham, Nick, and Jon Robson. 2007. ‘A  Mereological Challenge to 
Endurantism’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 85: 633-40
Gilmore, Cody. 2009. ‘Why Parthood Might be a Four-Place Relation, and How 
it Behaves if it is’, in L. Honnefelder, E. Runggaldier, and B. Shick (eds), Unity 
and Time in Metaphysics (Berlin: De Gruyter), pp. 83-133
Hershenov, David B. 2008. ‘A Hylomorphic Account of Tought Experiments 
Concerning Personal Identity’, American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly, 
82: 481-502
Hershenov, David B., and Rose Koch-Hershenov. 2006. ‘Personal Identity and 
Purgatory’, Religious Studies, 42: 439-51
Kenny, Anthony. 1993. Aquinas on Mind (London: Routledge)
Koslicki, Kathrin. 2008. Te Structure of Objects (New York: Oxford University 
Press)
Lowe, E.J. 1995. ‘Coinciding Objects: In Defence of the “Standard Account”’, 
Analysis, 55: 171-8
Oderberg, David S. 1996. ‘Coincidence Under a  Sortal’, Te Philosophical 
Review, 105: 145-71
Oderberg, David S. 2005. ‘Hylemorphic Dualism’, in E.F. Paul, F.D. Miller, and 
J. Paul (eds), Personal Identity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 
pp. 70-99
Oderberg, David S. 2007. Real Essentialism (London: Routledge)
Oderberg, David S. (forthcoming). ‘Is Form Structure?’
Pasnau, Robert. 1992. Tomas Aquinas on Human Nature (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press)
Rea, Michael C. (ed.). 1997. Material Constitution: A Reader (Lanham, MD: 
Rowman and Littleﬁeld)
Ross, W.D. (ed.). 1928. Te Works of Aristotle Translated into English, vol. 8, 2nd 
ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press)
Simons, Peter. 1987. Parts: A Study in Ontology (Oxford: Clarendon Press)
Smith, Donald. 2009. ‘Mereology Without Weak Supplementation’, Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy, 87: 505-11
Smith, J.A., and W.D. Ross (eds). 1912. Te Works of Aristotle Translated into 
English, vol. 5 (Oxford: Clarendon Press)
Stump, Eleonore. 2003. Aquinas (London: Routledge)
Stump, Eleonore. 2006. ‘Resurrection, Reassembly, and Reconstitution: Aquinas 
on the Soul’, in B. Niederbacher and E. Runggaldier (eds), Die Menschliche 
Seele: Brauchen wir den Dualismus? [Te Human Soul: Do We Need Dualism?] 
(Frankfurt: Ontos Verlag), pp. 151- 71
Tomson, Judith Jarvis. 1983. ‘Parthood and Identity Across Time’, Te Journal 
of Philosophy, 80: 201-20
Tomson, Judith Jarvis. 1998. ‘Te Statue and the Clay’, Nous, 32: 149-73

26
DAVID S. ODERBERG
Toner, Patrick. 2009a. ‘Personhood and Death in St. Tomas Aquinas’, History of 
Philosophy Quarterly, 26: 121-38
Toner, Patrick. 2009b. ‘On Hylemorphism and Personal Identity’, European 
Journal of Philosophy, 19: 454-73
Toner, Patrick. 2010. ‘St. Tomas Aquinas on Death and the Separated Soul’, 
Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly, 91: 587-99
Toner, Patrick. 2012. ‘St. Tomas Aquinas on Punishing Souls’, International 
Journal for the Philosophy of Religion, 71: 103-16

