Mereological Ontological Arguments and Pantheism1 
 
 
Mereological ontological arguments are -- as the name suggests -- ontological arguments 
which draw on the resources of mereology, i.e. the theory of the part-whole relation.2 
 
An instance of arguments of this kind is the following: 
 
1. I exist. (Premise, contingent a priori) 
2. (Hence) Some -- i.e. least one -- thing exists. (From 1) 
3. Whenever some things exist, there is some thing of which they are all parts. 
(Premise, from mereology) 
4. (Hence) There is exactly one thing of which every thing is a part. (From 2, 3) 
5. The unique thing of which every thing is a part is God. (Definition, pantheism) 
6. (Hence) God exists. (From 4, 5) 
 
The status of premise 1 is controversial: friends of two-dimensional modal logic (and 
others) will be reluctant to grant that the proposition that I exist is both contingent and 
knowable a priori (even by me). Instead, they will insist that all that I know a priori is 
that the sentence “I exist” expresses some true proposition or other when I token it. But, 
of course, even that will suffice for the purposes of the argument. Provided that I know a 
                                                 
1 “Whenever  two or three of you are gathered together in my name, there I am also” Matthew 18:20. 
2 For more information about mereology, see, for example, Simons, P (1987) Parts: A Study in Ontology 
New York: Oxford University Press. 

 
2
priori that the sentence “I exist” expresses some true singular proposition or other -- i.e. 
some proposition or other which contains an individual -- then I have an a priori 
guarantee that there are some individuals, and so I am entitled to assert 2. Of course, it 
will remain true that there are some people who refuse to accept 2: consider, for example, 
those ontological nihilists who think that the proper logical form of every sentence can be 
given in a feature-placing language.3 However, many people will be prepared to grant 
that we can know a priori that there are at least some individuals -- and that it enough to 
sustain interest in our argument to this point.4 
 
The status of premise 3 is also controversial: there are various reasons why one might be 
inclined to reject it. However, it is important to be clear about exactly what the premise 
says. Note, in particular, that it does not say that, whenever some things exist, there is 
some thing which is the mereological sum of those things. Rather, what it says is that, 
whenever some things exist, there is some thing of which all of those things are parts -- 
i.e. the thing completely overlaps each of the parts, but the parts together need not 
completely overlap the thing. Of course, given the mereological claim about sums, the 
weaker claim follows: so friends of unrestricted mereological composition will certainly 
be happy with 3. But one could subscribe to 3 on independent grounds: one might think, 
for example, that it is just impossible for there to be two things which are not both parts 
of a single, more-inclusive, thing. Again, there will be people who are not prepared to 
                                                 
3 See, for example, O’Leary-Hawthorne, J. and Cortens, A. (1995) “Towards  Ontological Nihilism” 
Philosphical Studies 79,2, pp.143-165 
4 Also, it might be possible to develop a related argument within the framework of ontological nihilism. 
For, presumably, the sentence ‘I exist’ will translate into a sentence which is contingent a priori, and which 
entails the translation of the sentence ‘Some things exist’. Of course, mereological pantheism would also 

 
3
accept 3. But, for now, it seems reasonable to suppose that there will be lots of people 
who are quite happy with it. (We shall have more to say about 3 later.) 
 
The inference of 4 from 3 looks distinctly suspicious. Indeed, it seems to have the form of 
the quantifier-exchange fallacy which moves from ∀∃ to ∃∀. However, we can patch 
this. What we need to suppose is that we can talk unrestrictedly about every thing. Now, 
consider all things. If premise 3 is correct, then it does indeed follow that there is some 
thing of which every thing is a part. (By ‘part’, I mean ‘proper or improper part’ of 
course.) Moreover, it is then extremely plausible to suggest that there can only be one 
such thing: in order to deny this, one would need to deny the uniqueness of composition 
(a course which is possible, but, at least prima facie, quite unattractive). Of course, some 
people will not be happy with the claim that we can talk unrestrictedly about every thing. 
Among the reasons which might be given for this unhappiness, perhaps the most 
important is the suggestion that unrestricted quantification leads to paradox. However, it 
is important to bear in mind that we are talking about quantification over individuals 
here. Whether one supposes that there are finitely many, or countably many, or 
continuum many, or Beth-2 many, or even proper class many, individuals, it is hard to 
see how any contradiction can arise from this assumption. Of course, there are other 
objections which one might make to the totality assumption. However, it again seems 
reasonable to suppose that there will be lots of people who are quite happy with it. (Once 
more, we shall return to this assumption later.) 
 
                                                                                                                                                  
need to be reconceived -- as indeed would mereology. I leave all of this as an exercise for ontological 

 
4
On the basis of the above considerations, it seems reasonable to suggest that there will be 
lots of people -- including lots of people who do not count themselves as having any 
kinds of religious beliefs -- who will be happy with the argument to 4. Or, perhaps better, 
there will be lots of people -- including lots of people who do not count themselves as 
having any kinds of religious beliefs -- who will be prepared to accept the following 
argument at least as far as 5: 
 
1. I exist. (Premise, contingent a priori) 
2. Some things -- i.e. at least one -- exist. (From 1) 
3. If some things exist, then there are some things which are all of the things that 
exist. (Premise, from the meaning of ‘all’.) 
4. Whenever some things exist, there is some thing of which they are all parts. 
(Premise, from mereology) 
5. There is exactly one thing of which every thing is a part. (From5 3, 4) 
6. The unique thing of which every thing is a part is God. (Definition, pantheism) 
7. Hence God exists. (From 5, 6) 
 
In other words, there will be lots of people who are happy to allow -- on more or less a 
priori grounds -- that there is exactly one thing of which every thing is a part. So, for 
these people, the important question will be whether the thing of which every thing is a 
part deserves to be called ‘God’. If this thing does deserve the name, then pantheism is 
                                                                                                                                                  
nihilists (if such there be). 
5 Strictly speaking, the axiom of uniqueness of composition is also required to get to 5 from 3 and 4.  Cf. 
the discussion in Section IV below. 

 
5
vindicated; if this thing does not deserve the name, then -- presumably -- pantheism (or, 
at least, this kind of pantheism) is simply a mistake.6 
 
 
I 
 
 
Before we can decide whether the thing of which every thing is a part deserves to be 
called ‘God’, we need to know more about the attributes of this thing. Even if our 
mereological ontological argument is successful, it doesn’t give us much information 
about the thing of which every thing is a part (nor about its parts). Morevoer, it is clear 
that opinion here will divide widely according to prior metaphysical conviction. 
 
Consider physicalists -- i.e. those who suppose that there is exactly one physical universe, 
which has none but physical parts. These people will suppose that the thing of which 
every thing is a part is the physical universe. (I assume, of course, that these physicalists 
suppose that there are no non-physical individuals.) 
 
Consider modal realists -- i.e. those who suppose that there are many possible worlds.7 
These people will suppose that the thing of which every thing is a part is the mereological 
                                                 
6 One should distinguish between distributive pantheism -- the view that each thing is divine -- and 
collective pantheism -- the view that the thing of which all things are parts is divine. Moreover, when 
considering collective pantheism, one should distinguish between mereological collective pantheism -- the 
view that the thing of which all things are parts is just the mereological sum of all its proper parts -- and 
non-mereological collective pantheism -- the view that the thing of which all things are parts is something 

 
6
sum of the possible worlds. (I assume, of course, that these modal realists suppose that 
there are no individuals which are not overlapped completely by the sum of possible 
worlds.) 
 
Consider Platonists -- i.e. those who suppose that, amongst the things which there are, 
there are non-spatio-temporal individuals laid up in Plato’s Heaven. These people will 
suppose that all of these individuals number among the parts of the thing of which every 
thing is a part. 
 
And so on.8 Some of these views seem to lead to better candidates for the name ‘God’ 
than others. However, in order to make progress on this question, we need to think some 
more about what a decent deserver of that name should be like. 
 
In some respects, the result is bound to be heterodox. However we proceed, we are not 
going to arrive at a personal creator. But that’s as it should be: pantheists -- of the kind 
under consideration here -- typically do not suppose that there is a personal creator. 
Moreover, there are ways of recovering many other parts of religious orthodoxy. 
Consider the modal realist view mentioned above. Everything that can be done is done by 
some part of the thing of which every thing is a part -- so there is a sense in which this 
being is omnipotent. Everything that can be known is known by some part of the thing of 
                                                                                                                                                  
over and above the mereological sum of all its proper parts. Throughout this paper, the topic of discussion 
is collective pantheism -- and, in particular, mereological collective pantheism. 
7 For more about modal realism, see Lewis, D. (1986) On The Plurality of Worlds Oxford: Blackwell. 
8 Another view which deserves mention in this connection is that kind of physicalism which is committed 
to the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. On this view, the thing of which all things are 
parts is (of course) the mereological sum of all of the many worlds. 

 
7
which every thing is a part -- so there is a sense in which this being is omniscient. Every 
possible virtue is possessed by some part of the thing of which every thing is a part -- so 
there is a sense in which this being is omnibenevolent. (Not quite the traditional sense, of 
course. After all, every possible vice is also possessed by some part of the thing of which 
everything is a part -- so, in the same kind of sense, this being is omnimalevolent. 
Moreover, this remains true even if lots of apparently possible evil worlds are deemed 
impossible.) Every thing is located in the thing of which every thing is a part -- so there is 
a sense in which this being is omnipresent. Provided that one is prepared to allow 
temporal parts into one’s ontology, one can also get a sense in which the thing of which 
every thing is a part is omnitemporal. And so on. (Perhaps you could even make a case 
for the claim that the sum of possible worlds is a being than which no greater can be 
conceived: after all, on this view, there is no greater being to have conceptions of!) 
 
Perhaps it is worth noting that similar points can be made about the physicalist view 
mentioned above. Everything that is done is done by some part of the thing of which 
every thing is a part -- so there is a sense in which this being is omnipotent. Everything is 
known is known by some part of the thing of which every thing is a part -- so there is a 
sense in which this being is omniscient. Every virtue that is possesses is possessed by 
some part of the thing of which every thing is a part -- so there is a sense in which this 
being is omnibenevolent. (Not quite the traditional sense, of course. After all, every vice 
that is possessed is also possessed by some part of the thing of which everything is a part 
-- so, in the same kind of sense, this being is omnimalevolent..) Every thing is located in 
the thing of which every thing is a part -- so there is a sense in which this being is 

 
8
omnipresent. And so on. (Perhaps you could even make a case for the claim that the 
physical world is a being than which no greater can be conceived: after all, on this view, 
there is no greater being to have conceptions of!)9 
 
These kinds of considerations about the attributes of the thing of which every thing is a 
part do not speak to the most important issue. Somehow or other, the appropriateness of 
the application of the name ‘God’  to an object depends upon (i) whether or not it is 
appropriate to take up typical religious attitudes towards that object; and perhaps also on 
(ii) whether or not that object could properly be seen as the focus of one of the well-
known organised religions. Of course, it isn’t easy to say what the typical religious 
attitudes are: but, amongst them, there should surely be some kind of awe and also some 
kind of dependence and gratitude. Awe is easy: it is natural to think that our physicalists 
would be in awe of the physical thing of which all other things are parts. (Such awe may 
not be mandatory; however, it would surely be widespread.) But if that’s all we are 
talking about -- something on the order of an aesthetic response to a spectacular 
landscape -- then it just seems wrong to say that there is anything of religious 
significance here. In order to deserve the appellation ‘religious’ there must be more: 
feelings of dependence and gratitude (or other responses on which the machinations of 
organised religion can get a grip). But there is no reason to think that these responses will 
be appropriate for the kinds of things of which all other things are parts mentioned above. 
Indeed, it would just be a mistake to respond to the physical universe -- or the sum of 
                                                 
9 It will be natural to object that omniscience, omnipotence, etc. should not be given the radically 
extensional understanding which our physicalists provide. This is a fair point; however, it is also worth 
noting that omniscience, omnipotence, and so on, are sometimes understood in the non-modal way which 

 
9
possible worlds -- with responses that are only appropriately directed towards persons. 
(There are, of course, senses in which one might have feelings of dependence upon, and 
gratitude towards, the thing of which every thing is a part, First, dependence: clearly, 
your continued existence depends upon its continued existence -- if it goes out of 
existence, then so do you. Second, gratitude: given the first point, there is clearly some 
sense in which you should be grateful that the thing of which every thing is a part has not 
gone out of existence. Of course, the important point to make is that these are not the 
‘religious’ responses to which reference was made above. Even though it is hard to 
articulate precisely, there is clearly a good sense in which the kinds of dependence and 
gratitude which it would be appropriate to have are not religious.) 
 
No doubt, the conclusion of this discussion was obvious from the beginning. Even if we 
are as concessive as we can be about the claim that there is one thing of which every 
thing is a part, our merological ontological argument is bound to lack probative force. 
You can call my physicalists ‘pantheists’ if you like -- after all, the word can be yours to 
do with as you please -- but it won’t follow that these people have religious beliefs (in 
any ordinary sense of the word ‘religious belief’). Likewise for our modal realists and 
Platonists. Of course, it remains at least a doxastic possibility that the thing of which 
every thing is a part is a being with religious significance -- that all depends on what the 
thing of which every thing is a part turns out to be. But we aren’t going to learn anything 
about this from our ontological argument (or from any other ontological argument either). 
If our physicalists and modal realists and Platonists are wrong about the nature of the 
                                                                                                                                                  
we have indicated: most powerful (or, at least, than which there is none more powerful), most knowing (or, 

 
10
thing of which every thing is a part, then it could turn out that their beliefs about this 
thing ought to be religious -- but, as things stand, there is no reason to think that it is in 
fact the case that beliefs about the thing of which every thing is a part ought to be 
religious (in the sense gestured at above). 
 
 
II 
 
 
The objection of the previous section might be thought of as a minimal objection to our 
mereological ontological argument. As we noted, it is certainly possible to contest some 
of the metaphysical assumptions which the argument requires. However, the argument 
can be firmly resisted even if all of these assumptions are allowed to stand. 
Consequently, the sensible thing to do is to adopt this line of resistance, since it costs so 
little in terms of theoretical commitments. 
 
This approach is consistent with the general approach to ontological arguments which I 
advocated in my Ontological Arguments and Belief in God.10 In that book, I developed a 
taxonomy of six different kinds of ontological arguments, and then suggested that each 
kind of ontological argument is vulnerable to the same kind of minimal criticism, viz. that 
the arguments have one reading on which they are invalid, and another reading on which 
                                                                                                                                                  
at least, than which there is none more knowing), and so on. 
10 Graham Oppy (1996) Ontological Arguments and Belief in God New York: Cambridge University Press. 

 
11
they are question-begging (i.e. require assumptions which non-theists can reasonably 
reject, at least for all that the ontological arguments in question show). 
 
However, the identification of mereological ontological arguments -- given only the 
briefest of treatments in my book11 -- suggests that this general criticism is not quite 
right. For, in many cases, ontological arguments will also have a third reading on which 
they are neither question-begging, nor invalid, but on which the entity whose existence 
they establish is a being of no religious significance. Consider, for example, the 
following argument: 
 
1. I conceive of a being than which no greater can be conceived.  (Premise) 
2. (Hence) A being than which no greater can be conceived exists. (From 1, by a 
familiar argument which I shan’t reproduce here.) 
3. (Hence) God exists. 
 
The question to ask about this argument is how to construe expressions of the form “I 
conceive of X”. Clearly, there is a “relational” sense in which a sentence of this form can 
only be true if X exists; and there is another “non-relational” sense in which a sentence of 
this form can be true whether or not X exists. If “I conceive of X” is meant to be 
construed in the latter “non-relational”  way, then an opponent of the above ontological 
argument should insist that the argument is invalid. (I omit further details, since they are 
not relevant to the point I wish to make here.) On the other hand, if “I conceive of X” is 
                                                 
11  See p.262. 

 
12
meant to be construed in the former, “relational” way, then the opponent of the argument 
has a choice: either deny that X exists -- which is tantamount to claiming that the 
argument is question-begging -- or else accept that X exists, but deny that X is a being 
which has any religious significance. (As noted above, in the case in question, our modal 
realist could claim that the being than which no greater can be conceived is just the 
mereological sum of all possible worlds, a being which is in no sense a good deserver of 
the name ‘God’.)12 
 
 
III 
 
 
One way of restating the conclusion of our minimal criticism of mereological ontological 
arguments in section I is that they do not provide an interesting or informative mode of 
presentation of the being whose existence they purport to establish. There are many 
metaphysical perspectives from which one can accept the claim that there is a thing 
which has every thing as a part -- but many of these seem to have nothing at all to do 
with religious belief. 
 
A similar point can be made concerning a debate about the interpretation of St. Anselm’s 
Proslogion. Some people hold that the existence of God is established by the end of Part 
                                                 
12 If I were revising my book, I would certainly add  mereological ontological arguments to my taxonomy, 
and devote a chapter to their discussion. However, this addition would not make any substantive difference  
to the criticisms of ontological arguments which I develop there. 

 
13
II; others hold that the existence of God is not established until the end of Part III; and yet 
others hold that the existence of God is not established until the end of the entire work, or 
at any rate the end of Part XXIII. However, all agree that the existence of a being than 
which no greater can be conceived is established by the end of Part II -- and they also all 
agree that the being than which no greater can be conceived is God. So the point of 
disagreement is just about whether a mode of presentation has been found which makes it 
clear that the being whose existence has been established is God. 
 
Our discussion of pantheism suggests that there may be some point to this debate -- c.f. 
the dismissive remarks in my book13. For -- to use the same example again -- it might be 
that our modal realists can agree that there is a unique being than which no greater can be 
conceived: and, if that is right, then there is reason to think that the existence of God has 
not been established by the end of Part II. (Of course, theists should agree that the being 
whose existence is established by the end of Part II is God; but they should not think that 
the argument will persuade non-theists of the truth of the claim that the sentence ‘God 
exists’ expresses a truth.) Naturally, there are reasons why one might be sceptical about 
the claim which I have just made: one might doubt that ‘greater than’ should be cashed 
out in mereological terms; one might doubt that our modal realists are really entitled to 
analyse conceivability in terms of possibility; and so on. However, the point I want to 
make is just this: there will be some people who will (apparently) reasonably think that 
the argument of Proslogion II is sound, but that the being whose existence it establishes 
is not a being of any religious significance. 
                                                 
13 See  pp.208-9. 

 
14
 
(It is also worth thinking a little more about the expression ‘being than which no greater 
can be conceived’. It is at least possible to take this expression to exhibit the same 
‘relational’ / ‘non-relational’ ambiguity which was discussed above in connection with 
the expression ‘I conceive of X’. In one sense, the greatest being -- if there is such -- is 
the being than which no greater can be conceived. For our modal realists, and under 
plausible assumptions about the mereological nature of greatness, this being is just the 
sum of possible worlds. So, on the ‘relational’ reading, the being than which no greater 
can be conceived just is the sum of possible worlds. Since some traditional theistic 
conceptions talk about ‘the sum of all possibilities’, it is not obvious that we should think 
that these considerations are entirely irrelevant to traditional theistic argumentation.) 
 
 
IV 
 
 
Many people will feel that the minimal criticism of mereological ontological arguments 
for which I have argued can be supplemented with much stronger criticisms. In 
particular, there will be many people who will think that premises 3 and 4 of the revised 
version of the argument will not stand up to scrutiny. So perhaps it will be a good idea to 
close with a slightly closer look at these premises. 
 

 
15
Premise 3 says that if some things exist, then there are some things which are all of the 
things that exist. Why might one be disposed to reject this claim? Apart from the worries 
about ‘total’ entities mentioned in the introduction, the most likely suggestion is that 
considerations from ordinary language suggest that quantification is always restricted 
quantification: there is no sense to be made of the suggestion that there can be 
unrestricted quantification. In my view, one only has to state this claim in order to see 
how implausible it is. Consider the claim that everything is self-identical. Surely the most 
natural way to understand the quantifier here is to take it to be unrestricted: absolutely 
every single thing without exception is identical to itself. But, when we quantify 
unrestrictedly, we quantify over absolutely all the things there are: and, if we can 
quantify over all the things there are, then there are some things such that they are all the 
things there are. (Perhaps my counterargument is question-begging. Too bad. The claim 
that, if there are some things, then there are some things which are all the things there are 
strikes me as a very good candidate for a claim which is both analytic and a priori. It is 
often hard to find good arguments for primitive claims of this sort.) 
 
I suppose that some people will hold that ‘exists’ is ambiguous: it has different senses in 
different discourses. On this view, to say that chairs and numbers exist will be, strictly 
speaking, nonsensical. For while according to number discourse, it is analytic that there 
are numbers, and according to chair discourse, it is analytic that there are chairs, there is 
no discourse in which one can say that there are both chairs and numbers (and hence in 

 
16
which one can ask whether there are chairs, and whether there are numbers).14 However, 
against this kind of Carnapian position, I want to side with Quine: ‘exists’ is univocal, 
and there is a single language in which all claims about existence can be assessed.15 Of 
course, I’m not offering an argument here; rather, I have identified one class of people 
who will not be disposed to accept Premise 3. As I have already hinted, I think that this 
view is extreme; moreover, I expect that only something equally extreme will suffice for 
the rejection of Premise 3. 
 
Premise 4  is -- at least prima facie -- much more problematic. Premise 4 says that 
whenever some things exist, there is some thing of which they are all parts. But there 
seem to be lots of views on which this claim is mistaken. Suppose, for example, that you 
think that there are non-spatio-temporal individuals (such as numbers). Suppose further 
that you are not a friend of unrestricted mereological composition. Then it might well 
seem natural to you to claim that there are lots of pairs of things which are not both parts 
of some more inclusive thing: e.g. my heart and the number 2. Of course, if you are a 
friend of unrestricted mereological composition, then you get Premise 4 for free: but, 
otherwise, it seems that the acceptability of Premise 4 will depend upon prior 
metaphysical conviction about what there is.16 
 
                                                 
14 The locus classicus for this view is Carnap’s “Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology” in Meaning and 
Necessity: A Study in Semantics and Modal Logic (second edition, enlarged) Chicago, Ill: Chicago 
University Press, 1956.  See also Huw Price (1992) “Metaphysical Pluralism” Journal of Philosophy 89, 8, 
pp.387-409. 
15 For Quine’s arguments, see “On What There Is” in From a Logical Point of View Cambridge MA: 
Harvard University Press, pp.1-19. 

 
17
Curiously, the kind of thought which typically motivates opposition to unrestricted 
mereological composition -- namely, that deservers of the appellation ‘thing’ must have 
some kind of ‘inner unity’ which is not bequeathed by mere mereological composition -- 
is an intuition which is shared by many theists and pantheists. One of the key religious 
intuitions is that there is -- or, indeeed, that there must be -- some kind of ‘inner unity’ to 
things. Consequently, there is some reason to think that Premise 4 of our mereological 
ontological argument cannot properly be motivated by an appeal to unrestricted 
mereological composition: the principle of unrestricted mereological composition doesn’t 
capture -- and, indeed, is plausibly at odds with -- one of the principle intuitions of many 
theists and pantheists. 
 
Even amongst those who are prepared to accept unrestricted mereological composition, 
there may be some who are prepared to deny (the standard mereological axiom of) 
uniqueness of composition. For instance, there are those who think that there is a relation 
of constitution which is not mereological in nature: the statue and the lump of clay from 
which the statue is constituted are distinct, even though they have the same clay-ey parts. 
However, this example isn’t enough to motivate rejection of uniqueness of composition: 
for, in this example, the relation of constitution is not symmetrical -- the clay constitutes 
the statue, but the statue does not constitute the clay. Consequently, the statue has parts -- 
e.g. the left hand part of the statue and the right hand part of the statue -- which the clay 
does not (remember that we are supposing that the statue is distinct from the clay from 
                                                                                                                                                  
16 For some other arguments which might plausibly be taken as objections to the idea that there is one thing 
of which all other things are parts, see van Fraassen, B. (1995) “World ‘ Is Not A Count Noun” Nous 29, 2, 
pp.139-157. I hope to discuss these arguments elsewhere. 

 
18
which it is constituted). In order to deny uniqueness of composition on these kinds of 
grounds, one needs to find a case in which the relation of constitution is symmetrical: for 
then one could hold that there are two distinct entities which have exactly the same parts. 
It is not easy to think of a plausible example of this, however. 
 
In sum, then: there are various views which will lead one to reject the mereological 
ontological argument for the existence of the thing of which all things are parts. I doubt 
that there are arguments which will persuade people who hold these views to change their 
minds. However, there are also many people who will accept the argument for the 
existence of the thing of which all things are parts. Some of these people will be 
pantheists -- but if they are, it will be for reasons which the mereological ontological 
argument does not make apparent.  
 
 
Appendix: Dessert 
 
 
Many formulations of mereology include the null part -- i.e. the thing which is part of 
every thing. (The inclusion of the null part bestows a nice symmetry on the resulting 
theory.) This fact provides the means to include a discussion of ‘the devil’ in our theory -
- provided, of course, that we are prepared to identify ‘the devil’ with the null part. Of 
couse, this suggestion doesn’t make much sense from the standpoint of orthodox theism -
- the devil is not merely the contrary or opposite of God -- but it is important to 

 
19
                                                
remember that pantheism already stands at a considerable remove from orthodoxy.17 
Moreover, we can see that ‘the devil’ will have lots of interesting properties once the 
identification with the null part is made. (For instance, since ‘the devil’ is part of every 
thing, there is a good sense in which ‘the devil’ is omnipresent. Moreover -- as noted 
above -- ‘the devil’ turns out to be the exact opposite -- the dual -- of the thing of which 
every thing is a part. Given the attitudes which the pantheist supposes are appropriate for 
the thing of which every thing is a part, it seems natural to think that the pantheist will 
suppose that contrary attitudes are appropriate for ‘the devil’. And so on.) 
 
As I mentioned above, not all mereologists accept the existence of the null part. Those 
who do not, and who provide reasons for rejecting the null part, can be taken to be 
providing reasons for rejecting ‘the devil’ (under the proposed identification). However, I 
shan’t bother to labour this point here.18 
 
 
17 Similar points can be made about discussions of the being than which no lesser can be conceived, the 
being than which no worse can be conceived, etc. Even if these beings have nothing to do with the devil -- 
as traditionally conceived -- they are of interest in their own right in the discussion of parodies of 
ontological arguments. (C.f. Oppy (1996), p.182.) 
18 I am indebted to Daniel Nolan for discussion of the material presented in this paper. In particular, the 
idea that one might identify the null part with ‘the devil’ is his. (Perhaps he will produce a more elaborate 
discussion of this idea elsewhere). 

