
Job #:111543 
Author Name: Drucker 
Title of Book: Perspectives on the History of Mathmatical Logic 
ISBN #: 9780817647681 

Modern Birkh~user Classics 
Many of the original research and survey monographs in pure and 
applied mathematics published by Birkh~user in recent decades 
have been groundbreaking and have come to be regarded as foun- 
dational to the subject. Through the MBC Series, a select number of 
these modern classics, entirely uncorrected, are being re-released in 
paperback (and as eBooks) to ensure that these treasures remain ac- 
cessible to new generations of students, scholars, and researchers. 

Perspectives on the History 
of Mathematical Logic 
Thomas Drucker 
Editor 
Reprint of the 1991 Edition 
Birkh~iuser 
Boston 9 Basel ~ Berlin 

Thomas Drucker 
Carlisle, PA 17013 
U.S.A. 
Originally published as a monograph 
ISBN-13:978-0-8176-4768-1 
DOI: 10.1007/978-0-8176-4769-8 
e-ISBN-13:978-0-8176-4769-8 
Library of Congress Control Number: 2007940495 
Mathematics Subject Classification (2000): 01A05.03-03 
9 
Birkh~iuser Boston 
All rights reserved. This work may not be translated or copied in whole or in part without the writ- 
ten permission of the publisher (Birkh~iuser Boston, c/o Springer Science+Business Media LLC, 233 
Spring Street, New York, NY 10013, USA), except for brief excerpts in connection with reviews or 
scholarly analysis. Use in connection with any form of information storage and retrieval, electronic 
adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter de- 
veloped is forbidden. 
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks and similar terms, even if they 
are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are 
subject to proprietary rights. 
Cover design by Alex Gerasev. 
Printed on acid-free paper. 
987654321 
www. birkhauser 
corn 

Thomas Drucker 
Editor 
Perspectives on 
the History of 
Mathematical Logic 
Birkh~iuser 
Boston Basel Berlin 

Thomas Drucker 
304 South Hanover Street 
Carlisle, PA 17013 
USA 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Perspectives on the history of mathematical logic. Thomas Dmcker, 
editor. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references. 
ISBN 0-8176-3444-4 
ISBN 3-7643-3444-4 
I. Logic. Symbolic and mathematical--history. I. Dmckcr, 
Thomas. 
QA9.P43 
1991 
90-49462 
511.3'09--dc20 
CIP 
Chapter by John W. Dawson, pp. 84-100, copyright 9 1985 by the Philosophy of Science 
Association. Reprinted with permission. 
9 1991 by Birkh/iuser Boston. Inc. 
Copyright is not claimed for works by U.S. Government employees. 
All rights reserved. This work may not be translated or copied in whole or in part without 
the written permission of the publisher (Birkh/iuser Boston. Inc.. 675 Massachusetts Avenue. 
Cambridge. Massachusetts 02139, USA), except for brief excerpts in connection with reviews or 
scholarly analysis. Use in connection with any form of information storage and retrieval, elec- 
tronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or 
hereafter developed is forbidden. 
The use of general descriptive names, trade names, trademarks, etc. in this publication, even if 
the former are not especially identified, is not to be taken as a sign that such names, as understood 
by the Trade Marks and Merchandise Marks Act, may accordingly be used freely by anyone. 
Permission to photocopy for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific 
clients, is granted by Birkh/iuser Boston, Inc. for libraries registered with the Copyright Clearance 
Center (CCC), provided that the base fee of $0.00 per copy, plus $0.20 per page is paid directly 
to CCC, 21 Congress St., Salem, MA 01970, USA. Special requests should be addressed directly 
Birkh/iaser Boston, Inc. 675 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. 
Typeset by Asco Trade Typesetting Ltd., Hong Kong. 
Printed and bound by Edwards Brothers, Inc., Ann Arbor, Michigan. 
Printed in the United States of America. 
987654321 
ISBN 0-8176-3444-4 
ISBN 3-7643-3"H'!. 4 

Dedicated to 
the memory of Jean van Heijenoort 

Acknowledgments 
I should like to thank all the authors for permission to include their contribu- 
tions included here. Most of them were originally given as papers in the special 
session on the History of Logic at the American Mathematical Society's 
meeting in Chicago in March 1985. With regard to help in organizing that 
session, I am grateful to Ward Henson, Wolfgang Maass, and Anil Nerode. 
A number of papers that were delivered in that session, and are not included 
here, have appeared elsewhere or in some other form. 
Thanks are due to John Dawson and to the Philosophy of Science Associa- 
tion for permission to reprint his paper, "The Reception of Grdel's Incomplete- 
ness Theorem," from the volume of proceedings of their annual meeting in 
1984. It was felt that the paper's appearance here would help to secure for it 
an audience that might have missed its earlier publication. 
I am grateful to the van Heijenoort family for permission to dedicate the 
volume to Jean van Heijenoort. The biographical tribute to him is by Irving 
Anellis. 
Among the contributors I should like to express special thanks to Irving 
Anellis, William Aspray, and Judy Green. Anellis was responsible for the 
volume's having the chance to contain the three papers (Anellis on "The 
L/Swenheim-Skolem Theorem," Seidin, and Wang) that were not delivered 
at the special session in Chicago, and for helping with the arrangements 
involved in dedicating the volume to his old teacher Jean van Heijenoort. 
Aspray supplied editorial experience, assistance, and judgment that were 
always welcome and helpful. Green furnished the impetus that was a sine qua 
non of the volume's appearance. 
I should like to thank the staff of Birkh~iuser Boston for their studious 
attention to the publication of the manuscript. 

Contents 
Acknowledgments 
Contributors 
Jean van Heijenoort (1912-1986) 
IRVING H. ANELLIS 
Introduction 
THOMAS DRUCKER 
vii 
xiii 
xv 
The Problem of Elimination in the Algebra of Logic 
JUDY GREEN 
Peirce and the Law of Distribution 
NATHAN HOUSER 
The First Russell Paradox 
IRVING H. ANELLIS 
Principia Mathematica and the Development of Automated 
Theorem Proving 
DANIEL J. O'LEARY 
Oswald Veblen and the Origins of Mathematical Logic at Princeton 
WILLIAM ASPRAY 
The L6wenheim-Skolem Theorem, Theories of Quantification, 
and Proof Theory 
IRVING H. ANELLIS 
The Reception of G6del's Incompleteness Theorems 
JOHN W. DAWSON, JR. 
G6del's and Some Other Examples of Problem Transmutation 
HAO WANG 
The Development of Self-Reference: L6b's Theorem 
C. SMORYNSKI 
10 
33 
47 
54 
71 
84 
101 
110 

x 
Contents 
The Unintended Interpretations of Intuitionistic Logic 
W~M RUITENBURG 
The Writing of Introduction to Metamathematics 
STEPHEN C. KLEENE 
In Memoriam: Haskell Brooks Curry 
JONATHAN P. SELDIN 
The Work of J. Richard Biichi 
Drag SIEFKES 
Index Nominum 
134 
161 
169 
176 
191 

Contributors 
IRVING H. ANELLIS 
Modern Logic Publishing, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA 
WILLIAM ASPRAY 
Center for the History of Electrical Engineering, Rutgers University, 
New Brunswick, New Jersey 08903, USA 
JOHN W. DAWSON, JR. 
Department of Mathematics, Pennsylvania State University, York. 
Pennsylvania 17403, USA 
and Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA 
THOMAS DRUCKER 
Department of Philosophy, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
Wisconsin 53706, USA 
JUDY GREEN 
Department of Mathematics, Marymount University, Arlington, 
Virginia 22207-4299, USA 
NATHAN HOUSER 
Peirce Edition Project, Indiana University-Purdue University at 
Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA 
STEPHEN C. KLEENE 
Department of Mathematics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
Wisconsin 53706, USA 
DANIEL J. O'LEARY 
37 Applevale Drive, Dover, New Hampshire 03820, USA 
WIM RUITENBURG 
Department of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, 
Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53233, USA 

xii 
Contributors 
JONATHAN P. SELDIN 
Department of Mathematics, Concordia University, Montr6al, 
Qu6bec H4B I R6, Canada 
DIRK SIEFKES 
Technische Universit/it Berlin, Institut fiir Software und Theoretische 
Informatik, D-1000 Berlin 10, Germany 
C. SMORYNSKI 
429 S. Warwick, Westmont, Illinois 60559, USA 
HAO WANG 
Department of Mathematics, Rockefeller University, New York, 
New York 10021, USA 

Jean van Heijenoort (1912-1986) 
Irving H. Anellis 
Jean van Heijenoort was formally trained as a mathematician, and specialized 
during the early part of his career in differential geometry. Most of his 
scholarly career, however, was devoted to logic, foundations of mathematics, 
and especially the history of logic, in which he was largely self-educated, but 
deeply influenced by his close friend Georg Kreisel. 
From Frege to G6del was his most influential work and the principal 
basis for his reputation. Yet it was not his only important contribution: 
he edited, as well, a collection of Herbrand's logical writings, served on a 
number of editorial boards, including that of the Journal of Symbolic Logic, 
to which he contributed many reviews, and, at the time of his death, was one 
of the co-editors of G6dei's collected works; there were, besides, his shorter 
papers in the history and philosophy of logic, some published during his 
lifetime, others not, many posthumously also published in his Selected Essays. 
In addition, he did original work, published and unpublished, in model- 
theoretic proof theory, centered on his proofs of the soundness and complete- 
ness of the falsifiability tree method for both classical and nonclassical logics. 
For van Heijenoort (1976), "Mathematical logic is what logic, through 
twenty-five centuries and a few transformations, has become today." From 
Frege to G6del documents the most crucial and profound of these transfor- 
mations. Van Heijenoort's special interest within this perspective was the 
development of quantification theory as a family of formal systems providing 
different techniques for carrying out proofs in first-order logic. The principal 
contributors to this development were Frege and Hilbert, with their respective 
axiomatic systems and Hilbert's metamathematics; L6wenheim, whose work 
helped to clarify the concepts of satisfiability and validity for Hilbert's system; 
Herbrand, whose development of his own quantification theory unified and 
advanced the work of Hiibert and L6wenheim; Gentzen, who both developed 
the sequence calculus and helped formulate the method of natural deduction; 
and G6del, whose incompleteness theorems defined the limitations of Hilbert's 
program. Van Heijenoort's booklet El Desarrollo de la Teoria de la Cuantifica- 
ci6n encapsulates this history. Turning back from this perspective to the broad 
outline of the history of mathematical logic, van Heijenoort (1986) once wrote: 

xiv 
Jean van Heijenoort (1912-1986) 
"Let me say simply, in conclusion, that Begriffsschrift (1879), LSwenheim's 
paper (1915), and Chapter 5 of Herbrand's thesis (1929) are the three corner- 
stones of modern logic." 
References 
van Heijenoort, J. (ed.) (1976), From Frege to Gfdel: A Source Book in Mathematical 
Logic, 1879-1931, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, Preface, p. vii. 
van Heijenoort, J. (1986), Logic as Calculus and Logic as Language, Selected Essays, 
Bibliopolis, Naples (copyright 1985), pp. 11 16; see p. 16. 

Introduction 
Thomas Drucker 
Mathematical logic is an impressive edifice, and the bulk of its development 
has taken place within the last century. Logic as a discipline goes back at least 
a couple of millennia further, at least as far as the formal representation of 
reasoning is concerned. Suggestions for a greater resemblance of logic to 
mathematics are frequent in the papers of Leibniz, and there is a sizable 
secondary literature which discusses what Leibniz may have had in mind. 
Nevertheless, the breathtaking rate of progress of mathematical logic, as 
attested to by the deluge of journals, texts, and papers, is a more recent 
development. 
It is easy for a cursory survey of the development of the field to induce 
feelings akin to hero-worship. The 1930s were a period of creation in mathe- 
matical logic that continue to shape the field. Names such as G6del (the subject 
of a couple of chapters in this volume) and Tarski, Church, Curry (the subject 
of another chapter herein), and Kleene (who is represented as author as well 
here) seem to have given mathematical logic an impetus it has never lost. We 
are fortunate to have some of these pioneers still with us, contributing techni- 
cally, historically, and philosophically. 
One of the remarkable contributions that these giants, upon whose shoul- 
ders later generations have stood, have made to our historical understanding 
is the extent to which their work arose out of discussions and in settings 
including colleagues less remembered today. The immense contributions of 
those named above and others emerged as the result of working on problems 
that were already in the air. The particular form their work took was in 
response to a particular teacher or exposition. There were shoulders upon 
which they too had stood in their turn. 
The purpose of the history of science, broadly conceived, of which the 
history of mathematics and the history of mathematical logic form province 
and subprovince, is to understand the nature and development of the scientific 
enterprise. It seeks to replace the naive wonder at monuments with a sense 
for the tools and materials required for their creation. As the chapters here 
indicate, wonder does not die in the presence of understanding but becomes 
illuminated and illuminating. The practicing logician's ability to make pro- 

xvi 
Introduction 
gress thrives on an understanding of his predecessors. (I remember recently 
sitting at a dinner surrounded by logicians planning to spend a summer 
reading Schrrder's 1890 lectures on the algebra of logic.) 
The chapters included in this volume range broadly in time and subject, 
but they are all dedicated to unraveling the thoughts and the circumstances 
that have contributed to the evolution of mathematical logic. They involve 
technical details and philosophical underpinnings, support of colleagues and 
establishment of chairs. Some of the chapters give an insider's view of a 
particular development in the field, while others are detailed critical analyses 
of influential pieces of work. Their common feature is making sense rather 
than magic out of advances, binding together a community of contributors 
rather than leaving the impression of isolated wonder-workers. As the motto 
of the international chess federation has it, Gens una sumus. (We are one 
people.) 
Bertrand Russell said that pure mathematics was born in the work of 
George Boole, whose work applied some of the techniques of algebra to the 
analysis of reasoning. It is safer to say that mathematical logic owes its 
birth to Boole's work, which gives the impression that progress has been 
made in Leibniz's dream of reducing argumentation to calculation. The kinds 
of laws being introduced in the study of algebra could be used at least to 
represent, if not entirely to supplant, the Aristotelean and subsequent rules 
governing the syllogism. The Latin tags associated with remembering which 
forms of the syllogism were valid could be replaced by algebraic argument, 
although logicians with a classical training did not immediately jump onto 
the mathematical bandwagon. 
The point is that, with the work of Boole, questions about logic could 
take the form of mathematical questions, and Judy Green's paper on the 
problem of elimination looks at some nineteenth-century work in this setting. 
As she notes, the subsequent development of the field of logic has tended to 
cloak the contributions of logicians like Venn and Ladd-Franklin, and this 
has been unjust in two respects. In the first place, the work done on the 
problem has been ignored by those looking for progress in areas more easily 
recognizable. In addition, the background against which the logicians whose 
work remains better known has been inadequately represented. Green gives 
an introduction which offers the reader several pathways into the literature 
and incentives for pursuing them. 
One of the figures whose contributions to the algebra of logic tend to 
have been ignored as part of the treatment accorded an unfashionable disci- 
pline was the polymath Charles Sanders Peirce. In Peirce's case his choice of 
notation and vocabulary has not aided the student seeking to understand his 
contributions to the development of logic. Rather more work is required, even 
by English-speakers, to get a handle on Peirce's methods and fundamental 
ideas. 
Fortunately, Peirce has been the subject of attentive scholarship, exempli- 
fied by Nathan Houser's piece on the law of distribution. In addition to 

Introduction 
xvii 
such published sources as the work of Carolyn Eisele, the archives of the 
Peirce project at Indiana University-Purdue University at Indianapolis have 
afforded Houser the material for pursuing Peirce's work on the law of distri- 
bution over a number of years. It should perhaps be recognized explicitly that 
many of the questions about the history of logic in which one comes to be 
interested are incapable of being answered in the absence of archival material 
on which to draw. Some of the other papers in this volume would have been 
impossible to write without the collections of the papers of logicians such as 
Russell and Grdei. 
This observation can give rise both to melancholy and to hope. On the 
one hand, to quote Christian Thiel, "I must mention as a serious obstacle 
for the historiography of ... logic the loss of many Nachl~sse of logicians 
during and even after the Second World War." This remark is found in his 
paper entitled "Some Difficulties in the Historiography of Modern Logic" in 
the Atti del Convegno lnternazionale di Storia della Logica published in 
1983. Although he relates some lugubrious anecdotes about the disappearance 
of archives, there is underlying the despair the hope that somewhere copies 
exist. Access to libraries in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union may offer 
troves of material, even if finding out what is there can be time-consuming. 
Fortunately, the Peirce archives have not had to suffer the effects of war 
the way many European archives have, and they furnish a good deal of 
illumination about the early days of axiomatic logic. The interplay between 
Peirce and SchriSder bears witness to the stature of at least one representative 
of American mathematics in the European arena. Peirce was writing at a time 
when the direction of subsequent research in mathematical logic was far from 
clear, and some of his own shifts had their effect on the field. Houser's chapter 
rescues Peirce's work from its own notation and carries on the chronicle of 
the algebraization of logic. 
There is no chapter in this volume exclusively devoted to the work of 
Gottlob Frege, but it is safe to say that there is no shortage of material 
elsewhere portraying a range of Fregean contributions. The two volumes of 
Michael Dummett on Frege, Hans Sluga's contribution to the series "The 
Arguments of the Philosophers," and Baker and Hacker's "excavations" pre- 
sent three approaches to Frege along quite different lines. In addition, Frege 
has left his traces on a number of other contributions, especially those con- 
cerned with Russell. 
Bertrand Russell's technical contributions to mathematical logic came 
toward the earlier part of his career, but it is hard to overestimate the 
importance of Principia Mathematica in setting the tone for subsequent discus- 
sion of mathematical logic. Few readers may have read it cover to cover, but 
Russell and Whitehead's attitudes shaped the presentation of the discipline. 
It is not a coincidence that it was the system presented there that was the 
target of Grdel's work at the beginning of the 1930s, well after Russell had 
stopped actively pursuing mathematical logic. 
Perhaps the best known incident in the history of mathematical logic 

xviii 
Introduction 
was Frege's having given up in despair on his axiomatization of mathematics 
after receiving a note from Russell pointing out the derivability of a paradox 
(now known as Russell's) within Frege's formal system. Since this is a point 
at which Russell and Frege scholarship converge, there is no shortage of 
discussion of exactly the point Russell was trying to make and exactly how 
Frege took it. Irving Anellis uses material from the Russell archives at McMas- 
ter University to try to map out Russell's progress toward the result he sent 
to Frege, and its relationship to Cantor's original foundation of set theory. 
The result is a plausible reconstruction, originally from 1985, not entirely in 
line with suggestions put forward by those using other materials. 
Anellis' chapter is an example of the care required to make progress in 
the history of mathematical logic rather than speculation. The besetting 
fault of the history of mathematics is to assume that there is only one path to 
a given result, and that it was pursued steadily and promptly once the 
result was in sight. Trying to document such a pursuit verges on the impossible 
and depends heavily on dating of letters, drafts, and even doodlings. There is 
a pleasure in reconstructing the development of an idea without worrying 
about finding evidence for it. Unfortunately, by the time evidence has been 
sought for and discovered, the pleasure has a good chance of giving way to 
fatigue. The reader making his way in the footsteps of the investigator may 
still find it a challenge, but the path will be easier to follow thereafter. 
As an indication of the influence of Principia Mathematica, Daniel O'Leary's 
chapter discusses some of the early work on automated theorem proving. 
Since automated theorem proving falls within the fashionable discipline of 
artificial intelligence, there is no shortage of discussions of the methods them- 
selves elsewhere. What O'Leary's chapter illuminates is the extent to which 
Russell and Whitehead furnished the model by which theorem proving is to 
be assessed. The manner in which Russell and Whitehead carried out their 
derivations could serve as a guide and a target for those wishing to find ways 
of carrying out the process mechanically. 
Just as one cannot make bricks without straw, so one cannot do mathe- 
matics without money. Although it is not always clear how closely connected 
quantity and quality are in mathematical publications, there is no doubt that 
receiving attention from funding agencies will produce a flurry of activity in 
any mathematical discipline. Part, at least, of the enormous outburst of papers 
in mathematics after the Second World War can be put down to increased 
financial support. 
William Aspray's chapter is a model of investigating the creation of a 
program in mathematical logic, namely, that at Princeton. He points out 
the wealth of accomplishment of those who spent time at Princeton in the 
1930s and proceeds to explain how such a center could be created in so 
short a time. His work combines examination of university records and 
published sources with oral histories that he conducted to fill in the gaps 
in the available material. The result is a study of the interplay of campus 
politics and shifting intellectual alliances that leaves one amazed that con- 
stellations of genius are ever allowed to form by circumstance. 

Introduction 
xix 
The historical dimension supplied by Aspray's chapter is one that histor- 
ians of logic cannot ignore. Trying to explain the career of a logician of 50 or 
100 years ago depends on the state of the discipline, but it also depends on 
the kind of welcome that the discipline received institutionally and financially. 
Getting a handle on the structure of decision-making within German uni- 
versities before the First World War may not seem to have much to do with 
the development of mathematics, but it can be essential for understanding 
the careers of mathematical practitioners. Their work depended upon their 
surroundings, and their surroundings depended upon German educational 
policies and decision-making. Princeton in the earlier part of this century may 
not seem quite as far removed from the contemporary reader's experience, but 
the historian has the task of making sure that distinguishing features are 
not overlooked. 
David Hilbert bestrode the German mathematical world like a colossus 
and when he developed an interest in mathematical logic, it received a good 
deal of attention. "Hilbert's Program" has been the subject of a good deal of 
literature, especially from the philosophical point of view, but the emergence 
of Hilbert's philosophical attitudes out of his mathematical practice is still in 
need of further attention. In general, the subject of proof theory was initiated 
not exclusively on a technical basis, but in order to see how far Hilbert's 
Program could be carried out. The results obtained did not always have a 
clear philosophical significance but initiated avenues for technical work. 
Irving Anellis' second chapter ties together a number of the issues that 
attended the early years of proof theory. There has always been a kind 
of tension in the discipline between the figures of Herbrand and Gentzen, 
rendered romantic by their early deaths, and the details involved in assessing 
the consequences of adopting rules of inference in various forms. The discus- 
sion of proof theory ranges over a good part of the continent of Europe, 
England, and North America, all with the central goal of casting light on 
Herbrand's motivation for initiating such a fertile branch of mathematical 
logic. 
In the same way that some notice was given to the absence in this volume 
of a chapter specifically on Frege, perhaps some excuse is appropriate for the 
absence of anything specifically devoted to the Polish school of logicians 
between the two wars. Kuratowski's volume of recollections has been trans- 
lated into English, and even though it is devoted to Polish mathematics as 
a whole, logic bulked sufficiently large in the distinctive achievements of 
the community there to receive a good deal of attention. It is also worth 
mentioning the collection Studies in the History of Mathematical Logic, edited 
by Stanislaw J. Surma and published in Wrodaw in 1973. Although not 
organized along national lines, the papers in that volume take up a number 
of themes and contributions of Polish logicians. 
With the period 1930-1931 one arrives at the enigmatic and brilliant 
figure of Kurt G6del, perhaps the most familiar of all mathematical logicians 
to the general population of mathematicians and even to the public. It 
seems that the complacency of the logical community after the appearance of 

xx 
Introduction 
Principia Matheraatica has been exaggerated, but the effects of Grdel's "0ber 
formal unentscheidbare S~itze der Principia Mathematica und verwandter 
Systeme" have played their part across a variety of disciplines. Douglas 
Hofstadter's GiJdel, Escher, Bach served in the 1980s to bring the name at 
least before the book-buying public (how many of the copies thoughtfully 
given during that decade were read with care is a question worth asking). 
Oxford University Press has been publishing the collected papers of Grdel, 
and a couple of members of the editorial board of that project are contributors 
to this volume. John Dawson, in particular, has come to know the papers of 
Grdel (down to the handwriting) in a way that no one else does, and his 
chapter here draws attention to the role of Grdel's incompleteness theorems 
in the debates over the foundations of mathematics then prevailing. There has 
long been a tendency to come to Grdel's results in discussing philosophy 
of mathematics with a remark like, "What Gtidel's theorems show is that 
Hilbert's Program was dead." Dawson points out that Grdel's technical 
results open doors rather than close them, and warns (as have some other 
recent commentators) about the dangers of attaching single philosophical 
labels to ideas from logic. 
Two other chapters in this volume follow up the themes of Grdel and 
self-reference. Hao Wang spent a good deal of time talking with G/Sdel in 
his later years, and has transmuted some of the material of their conversations 
into a book of memoirs of Grdel. The wealth of Gtidel's interests and the 
range of his speculations are sometimes easier to find in his conversations than 
to document in his published writings. 
Wang uses his chapter here to speculate on the connection between ideas 
taking various forms. Even where problems are logically equivalent, that 
does not indicate that they can be solved with equal ease or that the con- 
sequences of their solution will be equally transparent. Logic traditionally has 
been connected with psychology, but logical equivalence cannot be replaced 
by psychological equivalence. The paper offers in practical form evidence of 
the importance of psychological contexts even in mathematical discovery. 
The other chapter following from Grdel's work on self-reference follows 
the theme of self-reference rather than that of Grdel and comes from the 
pen of Craig Smoryfiski, who has already contributed to the literature of 
self-reference in a number of forms. There is a perennial fascination with 
the subject, since it can be captured with such ease with a single sentence 
and yet can produce such a divergence of proposed "solutions." Smoryfiski 
has long been concerned with keeping unjustified speculation separate from 
the evolution of mathematical logic, and his care in approaching the work of 
Hilbert, for example, has helped to keep the historical and philosophical 
record straight. Again the ease of coming up with tempting solutions to 
problems of self-reference makes it important to see how the consequences of 
self-reference have unfolded. 
Smoryfiski's chapter shares with Wang's an interest in the different rates 
at which apparently equivalent fields and questions develop. He speculates 

Introduction 
xxi 
on the sources of the differences when it comes to an area with such immediate 
philosophical attractiveness as self-reference. In the course of his paper he 
notes that writing history is neither sorting out credit nor preparing a chrono- 
logy, but explaining a development. His use of technical developments in the 
field itself to explain the rate of development is ingenious, even if the ingenuity 
is a beneficiary of self-reference itself. 
It would have been reasonable to say in the 1930s that a spectre was 
haunting European mathematics--the spectre of intuitionism. Although not 
many mathematicians may have felt tempted to follow the philosophical 
path that led Brouwer to intuitionism, they could appreciate the consequences 
for the use of certain results like the Axiom of Choice. The fear that intuitionis- 
tic methods would somehow deprive mathematics of results both valuable and 
beautiful was certainly a factor in Brouwer's being removed from the editorial 
board of Mathematische Annalen at Hilbert's instigation. The threat was seen 
as a political one as much as an intellectual one. 
The danger to classical mathematics appears to have been greatly exag- 
gerated, based on the quantity of mathematics being done and taught at 
present in an entirely classical style, lntuitionism has not, however, fallen into 
neglect. One source of the continued interest in Brouwer's ideas has been the 
attractions of constructive mathematics, whether from within mathematics or 
from computer science. Even those with little sympathy for Brouwer's philo- 
sophical position have to admit that nonconstructive methods are of little help 
to the programmer. Although the line of usefulness to the programmer would 
not be drawn quite where Brouwer had drawn it, the kind of ideas that 
Brouwer introduced would indicate the path to be followed. 
More surprising perhaps is the appearance of intuitionism where one 
would not have expected it a priori. The whole subject of topos theory has 
provided a kind of algebraic support for intuitionism as a foundation for 
mathematics. This is but one of the lines of investigation examined by Wim 
Ruitenburg, who has carried on the tradition of Dutch scholarship in the area 
of intuitionism from the works of Brouwer, Heyting, and Troelstra. The idea 
of his chapter is to trace interpretations of intuitionism in unexpected places, 
and the widespread presence of these interpretations argues for something 
correct in the intuitionist attitude. Again technical details mingled with history 
provide better ammunition for a philosophical point of view than the specula- 
tion characteristic of earlier discussions of intuitionism. 
Among the contributors to the articulation of the technical consequences 
of intuitionism, and the senior contributor to this volume, is Stephen Kleene, 
part of the glorious band at Princeton in the 1930s. Kleene's influence on the 
field of mathematical logic has been immense, both in terms of the books and 
papers he has written, and in terms of the students who have come out of the 
program at the University of Wisconsin. The Kleene Symposium held there 
in 1978 bore witness to the fruitfulness of his ideas in his own work and those 
of others. 
For many years Kleene's Introduction to Metamathematics was the most 

xxii 
Introduction 
widespread textbook for those interested in learning how logic worked. With 
revisions it continues to be popular in English and in translation, and here 
Kleene offers the story of how he decided what belonged in the book and in 
what order. Usually the analysis of a field in terms of its textbooks requires 
immense hours of reading and comparison, but the fact that Kleene took the 
trouble to put his own composition process on paper gives the student of the 
history of recent logic a head start. 
Another of the great logicians of the 1930s, who remained active and 
influential throughout his life, was Haskell B. Curry. Curry's contributions 
to logic spanned a variety of areas, although his name is perhaps most 
associated with the ideas of formalism as a mathematical philosophy that 
he espoused in print. From the technical point of view, the area of logic 
for which he deserves a good deal of credit is that of combinatory logic, 
from which (in addition to the work of Church) many of the subsequent 
investigations of the lambda calculus take their start. 
One memorial to Curry is the book To Mock a Mockingbird by Raymond 
Smullyan that came out in 1985 and was dedicated "to the memory of 
Haskell Curry--an early pioneer in combinatory logic and an avid bird- 
watcher." On a more modest scale is the chapter by Jonathan Seldin included 
here assessing the importance of Curry's work both for logic and for computer 
science. Seldin was both student and colleague of Curry and can serve as a 
guide through the thickets of combinatory logic. 
A characteristic which has not worked to the disservice of mathematical 
logic in recent years has been its usefulness to the burgeoning discipline of 
computer science. It is often hard to tell whether the work done by those with 
a background in logic could not just as easily be called theoretical computer 
science at least. As noted above, intuitionism has been able to draw on the 
attractions of constructive mathematics for the computer scientist. 
It is perhaps fitting then to end with a tribute to a logician whose work 
is of equal interest to workers in both logic and computer science. J. Richard 
Biichi worked in a variety of areas, and the kinds of conclusions to which 
he came (solutions to problems or measurement of levels of complexity) 
were diverse as well. Dirk Siefkes' chapter indicates the extent to which 
mathematical logic continues to offer techniques to other disciplines, as well 
as make progress on the questions associated with its past. 
These chapters put together do not give a history of mathematical logic 
over the last century. Even on individual logicians they do not claim to be 
exhaustive. The collection does, however, indicate some of the richness of 
ideas that are involved in studying the history of logic and the variety of 
materials which can be pressed into service. National and chronological 
boundaries are not respected by the development of the field. 
There are many areas in which progress can be made. Collected works 
for other logicians will offer the chance for commentary as well as for consulta- 
tion. The interplay of political and social factors in the development of logic 

Introduction 
xxiii 
in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and the Soviet Union, for instance, would make 
a fascinating narrative. The path back to Boole may not be as long as that in 
other branches of mathematics, but mapping out the complexities of the 
terrain will be a project of many years, tongues, and hands. 

The Problem of Elimination in 
the Algebra of Logic 
Judy Green 
A central objective in any system of logic is to determine what conclusions 
follow from given premises. A special case is the recognition of valid syllo- 
gisms. Intermediate in generality is the problem ofelimination, i.e., eliminating 
a logical variable from an equation or set of equations. The use of the word 
elimination in this context appears as early as 1854 in George Boole's treatise, 
An Investioation of the Laws of Thouoht, which contains the following descrip- 
tion of the problem: 
As the conclusion must express a relation among the whole or among a part of the 
elements involved in the premises, it is requisite that we should possess the means 
of eliminating those elements which we desire not to appear in the conclusion, and 
of determining the whole amount of relation implied by the premises among the 
elements which we wish to retain. Those elements which do not present themselves 
in the conclusion are, in the language of the common Logic, called middle terms; 
and the species of elimination exemplified in treatises on Logic consists in deducing 
from two propositions, containing a common element or middle term, a conclusion 
connecting the two remaining terms. But the problem of elimination, as contem- 
plated in this work, possesses a much wider scope. It proposes not merely the 
elimination of one middle term from two propositions, but the elimination generally 
of middle terms from propositions, without regard to the number of either of them, 
or to the nature of their connexion. To this object neither the processes of Logic 
nor those of Algebra, in their actual state, present any strict parallel. 1 
The elimination in "common Logic" to which Boole referred is exemplified 
by syllogistic reasoning, and the problem of elimination can therefore be 
interpreted as the search for an algorithm to extend reasoning of the syllogistic 
type to reasoning that involves more than two premises or three terms. Indeed, 
a derivation of some of the traditional syllogisms was quite generally included 
in the exposition of new algebras of logic. 
Boole, in Laws of Thouoht, published a general solution to the problem of 
elimination of the term x from statements that can be written as equations of 
the form f(x) = 0, for functions f(x) = ax + b~, where a and b are logical 
expressions in which x does not appear. 2 Boole correctly asserted and claimed 
to prove, but did not in fact prove, that any function of x can be written in 
the form ax + b~. 3 Using that fact he showed that elimination of x from 

2 
Judy Green 
f(x) = 0 produces the equation f(1)" f(0) = 0. 4 In 1877 Ernst Schr6der proved 
Boole's assertion about the representation of logical functions and modified 
Boole's formula for elimination to a more easily employable form, i.e., from 
ax + b.~ + c = 0, which is equivalent to (a + c)x + (b + c)~ = 0, one deduces 
ab + c=O. s 
In 1881 John Venn characterized this solution of the problem of elimination 
as follows: 
We must say that the complete results of the elimination of any term from a given 
equation are obtained by breaking it up into a series of independent denials, and 
then selecting from amongst these all which either do not involve the term in 
question, or which by grouping together can be made not to involve it .... So 
understood, the rule for elimination in Logic seems complete. 6 
Despite Venn's statement of completeness for the rule of elimination and 
Boole's earlier claim "that in this peculiar system, the problem of elimination 
is resolvable under all circumstances alike, ''7 the Boole-Schr6der method of 
elimination is not adequate even for a reasonable treatment of the syllogism. 
While the universal statements "All S is P" and "No S is P" have the respective 
algebraic translations S/5 = 0 and SP = 0, the particular statements "Some S 
in P" and "Some S is not P" cannot be expressed as equations in Boole's system 
using only S, P, S, P, and 0. In order to represent particular statements, Boole 
introduced a symbol v that he described as "the representative of some, which, 
though it may include in its meaning all, does not include none. ''a With this 
interpretation of v, Boole expressed "Some S is P" as vS = vP and "All S is 
P" as S = vP. He also reduced this representation of "Some S is P" to 
vSP + vPS = 
0. 9 Although the introduction of the symbol v allowed Boole to 
derive the valid syllogisms, including those with a particular premise, he could 
not do so by simply applying his rule of elimination.I~ It was because of this 
difficulty of dealing with particular statements that a generally accepted 
solution of the elimination problem sufficient for a complete treatment of the 
syllogism came so late in the development of the algebra of logic. 
In 1883, almost 30 years after Boole published Laws of Thought, Christine 
Ladd-Franklin introduced notation that led to a notable success in dealing 
with particulars. 11 Although Ladd-Franklin did not entirely succeed in 
solving the general elimination problem, she did solve the problem of the 
syllogism. She based her algebra on two copul~e: v, representing mutual 
exclusion, and v, representing partial inclusion. Thus "No S is P" was 
represented by S ~ P or (SP)v, while "Some S is P" was represented by S v P 
or (SP) v. 
This representation of the relations of traditional logic allowed Ladd- 
Franklin to give a simple solution of the problem of elimination for sets that 
consisted of premises of valid syllogisms. Since there are no valid syllogisms 
in which both premises are particular statements, her solution involved only 
two cases. Ladd-Franklin found that elimination of x from the two universal 
premises a ~-x and b v x produced (ab)v, while elimination from the uni- 

The Problem of Elimination in the Algebra of Logic 
3 
versal premise a v x and the particular premise bvx produced (b~)v.12 The 
first of these is merely the Boole-Schr6der method written using Ladd- 
Franklin's copul~e. 
Using this restricted solution of the problem of elimination, Ladd-Franklin 
stated a recognition principle for all valid forms of the syllogism in terms of 
the two separate cases: 
All the rules for the validity of the doubly universal syllogism are contained in these: 
(1) The middle term must have unlike signs in the two premises. 
(2) The other terms have the same sign in the conclusion as in the premises. 
All the rules for the validity of the universal-particular syllogism are contained in 
these: 
(1) The middle term must have the same sign in both premises. 
(2) The other term of the universal premise only has its sign changed in the 
conclusion. ~ 3 
Ladd-Franklin used the well-known fact that a syllogism is valid precisely 
if the set of three statements consisting of the premises and the denial of the 
conclusion cannot all hold at one time ~4 to restate this recognition principle 
as follows: 
Take the contradictory of the conclusion, and see that universal propositions are 
expressed with a negative copula [v] and particular propositions with an affirma- 
tive copula [ v ]. If two of the propositions are universal and the other particular, 
and if that term only which is common to the two universal propositions has unlike 
signs, then, and only then, the syllogism is valid? ~ 
Her symbolic representation of this result, known as the Ladd-Franklin 
formula, is: 
(a V b)(b V c)(c v a)V. 16 
As noted above, the problem of elimination is considerably more general 
than just eliminating one of three terms from two statements, as in syllogistic 
reasoning. The general problem is to eliminate some among any number of 
terms from any number of statements, ending up with as much information 
as possible about all the remaining terms. In the same essay in which her 
treatment of the syllogism appears, Ladd-Franklin presented a solution to the 
problem of elimination for any number of conjunctions of universal state- 
ments and disjunctions of particular statements. Unfortunately, she did so 
using no symbols and left out an important clause of the conclusion. Further- 
more, her solution was misinterpreted by Venn in his 1883 review of the book 
in which her article appeared. 17 Ladd-Franklin had not, in fact, stated a 
correct solution to the problem, but her omission was irrelevant to Venn's 
misinterpretation. 
A universal statement, or conjunction (combination) of universal state- 
ments, can be written in Ladd-Franklin's notation as (ax + b.~ + c)q-. A 
particular statement, or disjunction (alternation) of particular statements, can 

4 
Judy Green 
be written (ex + f~ + g) v. Ladd-Franklin wrote: 
From a combination of universal propositions, the conclusion, irrespective of any 
term or set of terms to be eliminated, x, consists of the universal exclusion of the 
product of the coefficient of x by that of the negative of x, added to the excluded 
combinations which are free from x as given.18 
In symbols, eliminating x from (ax + bY, + c)V produces (ab + c)V. This, as 
she pointed out, is just Schr6der's modification of Boole's formula. Ladd- 
Franklin continued: 
If the premises include an alternation of particular propositions, the conclusion 
consists of the partial inclusion of the product of the total coefficient of x in the 
particular propositions by the negative of that of x in the universal propositions, 
added to the included combinations which are free from x as given. 19 
In symbols, eliminating x from (ax + b~ + c)V and (ex + f~ + g) v produces 
the additional conclusion (ed + g) v. This solution is incorrect in general since 
the additional conclusion should read (e~ + fb + g) v. 
Venn's mistake was based on his misinterpretation of Ladd-Franklin's 
use of the expression "included combinations which are free from x as 
given." Venn stated that Ladd-Franklin gave as the additional conclusion 
(ed + c + g) v, indicating that he interpreted the term "included combina- 
tions" typographically to mean terms appearing in either the universal or 
particular statement. 2~ In fact, Ladd-Franklin very clearly was using the term 
"included combinations" logically to refer to the terms appearing in the 
particular statement, or "inclusion," in the same way she had used the term 
"excluded combinations" to refer to the terms appearing in the universal 
statement, or "exclusion." Strangely, although Ladd-Franklin replied to 
Venn's review, she corrected neither his misinterpretation nor her own error. 2 t 
The misreading of Ladd-Franklin's solution by Venn is just one indication 
that he did not fully appreciate the importance of the concept of partial 
inclusion. While he did understand that Boole's use of the symbol v to 
represent particular statements was not completely successful, Venn was not 
at that time convinced, as Ladd-Franklin was, of the necessity of introducing 
a separate copula to represent such statements. He answered, "I am inclined 
to think that it is not" to the question of 
whether any perfectly general treatment of [particular propositions] is available, 
that is, corresponding in generality and brevity to those which Boole has given 
and which have been simplified in their practical employment by a succession of 
writers, z2 
It was not until logicians accepted a specific way of writing "Some S is P," 
usually as SP # 0 or SP > 0, that particular statements were treated system- 
atically. For example, in 1894 Venn analyzed at length the symbolic expression 
SP > 0. 23 Although Venn's inclusion of this analysis in the second edition of 
Symbolic Logic indicates that he eventually understood the usefulness of a 
second connective to express particular statements, he continued to minimize 

The Problem of Elimination in the Algebra of Logic 
5 
the importance of such statements. In fact, his analysis was immediately 
followed by a discussion outlining the reasons for his belief that "particular 
propositions, in their common acceptance, are of a somewhat temporary and 
unscientific character. ''24 
The difficulties connected with solving the problem of elimination for 
conjunctions of particular and universal statements, while based in part on a 
lack of reasonable notation for particular statements, were also rooted in the 
fundamental fact that a conjunction of particular statements is not equivalent 
to a single particular statement. Although Ladd-Franklin did not state a 
solution to the problem of elimination for conjunctions of both universal and 
particular statements, she did state: 
When a combination of particular propositions is included among the premises, 
the conclusion consists of a combination of the same number of particular 
propositions, z5 
She then gave as an example the elimination of x from (px) ~, (qx)V, (ax) v, 
and (bx) v, which has as its strongest conclusion not involving x, (a~) v and 
(bi~ q) v. As s did not appear in any of Ladd-Franklin's premises, she neither 
repeated nor corrected the error she had made earlier in the essay. 
In the same 1883 volume in which Ladd-Franklin's essay appeared, O.H. 
Mitchell introduced a new way of writing the universal statement "No S is P" 
as "Everything is either S or P," (S + ,~ 
Mitchell also introduced a new 
way of writing the particular statement "some S is P" as "Something is S and 
P," (SP)u. He characterized his algebra of logic as one in which 
All propositions ... are expressed as logical polynomials, and the rule of inference 
from a set of premises is: Take the logical product of the premises and erase the terms 
to be eliminated. 27 
He noted that this rule works for all propositions, as long as no variable to 
be eliminated stands as a term alone. Mitchell pointed out that for universal 
statements this is equivalent to the negative (dual) of the Boole-Schr6der 
method, i.e., the elimination of x from (f(x))l produces (f(0)+f(1))l. 
Although Mitchell's method allows for the easy treatment of particulars, it 
makes the treatment of universals somewhat more complicated. For example, 
to handle the syllogism Baroko in Mitchell's system we translate the premises 
"All P is M" and "Some S is not M" as (P + M)~. (SM--)u. Since for any 
logical polynomials F and G, F~ Gu implies (FG)~, the premises of Baroko imply 
((P + M)'(SM))u or equivalently (PSM)~. Eliminating M by erasing, we get 
as our conclusion (/5S)~, or "Some S is not P," as desired. 
Mitchell also explained how his method could be used in other algebras of 
logic. Expressing "Nothing is F" by Fo, he noted that "Fo and F, are the two 
fundamental forms of proposition in [Ladd-Franklin's-I method. ''2s However, 
instead of explicitly solving the problem that Ladd-Franklin proposed, elimi- 
nating a variable simultaneously from a particular and from a universal 
statement, Mitchell merely stated that "Elimination from Fo is performed by 
multiplyino coeff 
from Fu, by addin# them. ''29 

6 
Judy Green 
The solution of the general elimination problem for conjunctions of uni- 
versal and particular statements was first given by Schr6der in 1885 when he 
showed that the elimination ofx from ax + bg = O, ex + f2 ~ O, mx +ng ~ O, 
... is ab = O, e~ + fb ~ O, md+ nb ~ 0 ..... 30 Both Ladd-Franklin's and 
Mitchell's systems were entirely adequate for the expression of the solution 
and either might easily have anticipated it. Indeed, as we have seen, Ladd- 
Franklin correctly presented an example that is equivalent to the elimination 
of x from ax = O, ex ~ O, and mx 4= 0 but gave a flawed solution when there 
is only one equation and one inequality. In addition, she stated the solution 
in the special case when only the inequalities are present, i.e., when a = b = 0. 
Here again Ladd-Franklin did not use symbols to state the result, but this 
time her solution was correct, i.e., "From particular propositions by them- 
selves no conclusion follows, otherwise than by simply dropping unnecessary 
information. ''al This is simply Mitchell's law of erasure applied individually 
to each particular proposition. Schr6der acknowledged that this special case 
is implicit in Mitchell's work but did not mention that it is explicit in Ladd- 
Franklin's essay. 32 Had Mitchell, however, simply dualized ax + b~ = 0 to 
((~ + ~)-(b + x))~, which equals (~ + ~x + bY)~, and applied his laws of 
multiplication and erasure, he would have anticipated Schr6der's complete 
result. Like Mitchell himself, Schr6der appears not to have seen the full 
implications of Mitchell's ideas. 
Even after the problem of elimination was solved, it remained of interest 
to logicians. Schr6der, in his lengthy Vorlesunoen fiber die Algebra der Logik, 33 
devoted many sections to the problem, and in 1901 Eugen Mtiller, citing 
Schroder's Vorlesunoen as his source, published separately a detailed account 
of elimination and its application to the syllogism. 34 In a series of articles 
concerning logical equations, Platon Poretsky also addressed the problem of 
elimination. 35 In the first of these articles Poretsky derived both the Boole- 
Schr6der law of elimination for ax + b~ + c = 0 and Mitchell's law of erasure 
for ax + bff + c = 1. 36 He did not address the problem for particular state- 
ments ax + b~ + c r O. Later he dualized the elimination problem in a novel 
way: he posed and solved the problem of finding the weakest statements not 
involving x from which each of ax + b.~- + c = 0 and ax + b.~ + c = 1 may 
be inferred. Poretsky called these statements causes of the original statements 
and asserted correctly that the cause ofax + b~ + c = 0 is a + b + c = 0, and 
the cause ofax + b~ + c = I is ab + c = 1. 37 However, Poretsky's proof relies 
on the inference of a = 0 or b = 0 from ab = 0. Unaccountably, Poretsky 
insisted on the universal validity of this inference even while quoting Schr6der 
to the contrary. 3s It should be noted that N.I. Styazhkin in his History of 
Mathematical Logic from Leibniz to Peano claimed that "in the article 'The 
Law of Roots in Logic, '39 Poretskiy solved the elimination problem for logical 
equations. ''4~ In fact, in that article, published in 1896 in Russian and in 
French, Poretsky solved the problem of finding expressions for one variable 
in a logical equation in terms of the other variables. Although in linear algebra 

The Problem of Elimination in the Algebra of Logic 
7 
solving for a variable is equivalent to eliminating it, this is not the case in the 
algebra of logic. 
In his 1890 dissertation, A.H. Voigt also addressed the problem of solving 
a logical equation for an unknown. 41 In the course of doing so, Voigt factored 
ax+b~+c= 
1 as (a+b+c)(x+b+c)(~+a+c)= 
1 and obtained 
a + b + c = 1, reproducing Mitchell's law of erasure. He obtained a "general 
solution" of the original equation from the equations generated by the other 
two factors. 42 
Long after the algebra of logic had ceased to be an area of active research 
among mathematical logicians, David Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann 
returned to the subject, showing that it can be embedded in modern mathema- 
tical logic as the monadic predicate calculus. .3 Although they systematically 
derived the valid syllogisms within that context, their treatment masks the 
accomplishments of those logicians who developed the algebra of logic during 
the second half of the nineteenth century. 
Notes 
!. George Boole, An Investigation of the Laws of Thought (1854; reprint with 
corrections, New York: Dover Publications, 1958), 8. 
2. Throughout this chapter we write x for l - x and adopt the convention that in 
any expression of the form ax + bE + c, the only appearances of x are the ones 
explicitly shown. 
3. Boole, Laws of Thought, 72. 
4. Ibid., 101. 
5. Ernst Schr0der, Der Operationskreis des Logikkalkuls (Leipzig: B.G. Teubner, 
1877: reprint, Stuttgart: B.G. Teubner, 1966), 14, 23. 
6. John Venn, Symbolic Logic (London: Macmillan. 1881), 295. 
7. Boole, Laws of Thought, 100. 
8. Ibid., 124. 
9. Ibid. 
10. Ibid., 232-36. 
11. Christine Ladd, "On the Algebra of Logic," in Studies in Logic, by Members of 
the Johns Hopkins University (Boston: Little, Brown & Co. 1883), 17-71. This essay 
was written before Ladd-Franklin was married and therefore it appeared under the 
name Christine Ladd. The essay was to have been Ladd-Franklin's doctoral disserta- 
tion at Johns Hopkins, but was not accepted as such because in 1882 Hopkins 
would not grant degrees to women. Ladd-Franklin received her Ph.D. from Hopkins 
in 1926. 
12. Ibid., 38. 
13. Ibid., 39. In 1883 G.B. Halsted pointed out a close relation between this 
disposition of the syllogism and an earlier paper of his own ("The Modern Logic," 
Journal of Speculative Philosophy 17 [1883]: 210-13; "Statement and Reduction of 
Syllogism," Journal of Speculative Philosophy 12 [1878]: 418-26). Ladd-Franklin's 
result was unquestionably independent and, in fact, was stated more clearly. 
14. Ladd-Franklin later coined the term "'antilogism" for this set of statements 

8 
Judy Green 
("The Reduction to Absurdity of the Ordinary Treatment of the Syllogism," Science 
n.s. 13 [328"1 [12 April 1901]: 575). 
15. Ladd, "Algebra of Logic," 41. E.W. Beth described Ladd-Franklin's work as 
"the first adequate treatment of classical syllogism" ("Hundred Years of Symbolic 
Logic," Dialectica 1 [1947]: 337). 
16. Ladd, "Algebra of Logic," 40. 
17. John Venn, review of Studies in Logic, by Members of the Johns Hopkins 
University, Mind 8 (1883): 594-603. 
18. Ladd, "Algebra of Logic," 45. 
19. Ibid., as corrected in the correspondence section of Mind 9 (1884): 322. 
20. Venn, review of Studies in Logic, 599. 
21. Mind 9 (1884): 322. 
22. Venn, review of Studies in Logic, 598. 
23. John Venn, Symbolic Logic, 2d ed. (London: Macmillan, 1894; reprint, Bronx, 
N.Y.: Chelsea Publishing Co., 1971), 184-88. 
24. Ibid., 189. 
25. Ladd, "Algebra of Logic," 46. 
26. O.H. Mitchell, "On a New Algebra of Logic," in Studies in Logic, by Members 
of the Johns Hopkins University (Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1883), 72-106. 
Mitchell's and Ladd-Franklin's representations of universal expressions are the only 
essentially new entries that Venn added to the list of translations of"No S is P" when 
he published the second edition of Symbolic Logic in 1894 (Symbolic Logic [188 l-l, 407; 
Symbolic Logic [1894; reprint 1971-l, 481). 
27. Mitchell, "New Algebra of Logic," 72. 
28. Ibid., 97-98. 
29. Ibid., 98. 
30. Ernst Schr6der, "Ober das Eliminationsproblem im identischen Kalkul," 
Tagblatt der 58. Versammlung deutscher Naturforscher und ,4rtze in Strassburg (1885): 
353-54. 
31. Ladd, "Algebra of Logic," 46. 
32. Schr6der, "Uber das Eliminationsproblem," 353. 
33. Ernst Schr6der, Vorlesungen f~ber die Algebra der Logik, 2d ed. 3 vols. (Bronx, 
N.Y.: Chelsea Publishing Co., 1966). 
34. Eugen Miiller, Das Eliminationsproblem und die Syllogistik (Leipzig: B.G. Teub- 
ner, 1901). Beilage zu dem Programm des grossherzoglichen Gymnasiums in Tau- 
berbischofsheim fiir das Schuljahr 1900/1901. Programm Nr. 674. 
35. Platon Poretsky, "Sept lois fondamentales de la th6orie des 6galit6s logiques," 
Bulletin de la Soci~t~ Physico-Math~matique de Kasan, 2d ser., 8 (1898-99): 33-103, 
129-81, 183-216; idem, "Quelques lois ult6rieures de la th6orie des ~galit6s logiques," 
Bulletin de la Soci&~ Physico-Math~matique de Kasan, 2d ser., 10 (1900-01): 50-84, 
132-80, 191-230; I l (1902): 17-58. 
36. Poretsky, "Sept lois fondamentales," 91-98. 
37. Poretsky, "Quelques lois ult6rieures," 10: 158-65. 
38. Ibid., 10: 54. 
39. Platon Poretsky, "La Ioi des racines en logique," Revue de math~matiques 
(Rivista di matematica) 6 (1896-99): 5-8; Russian version, "Zakon korney v logike," 
Nauchnoe obozrenie no. 19 (1896). 
40. N.I. Styazhkin, History of Mathematical Logic from Leibniz to Peano (Cam- 
bridge: MIT Press, 1969), 219. 

The Problem of Elimination in the Algebra of Logic 
9 
41. Andreas Heinrich Voigt, Die Aufl6sung yon Urtheilssystemen, das Eliminations- 
problem und die Kriterien des Widerspruchs in der Algebra der Logik (Leipzig: Alex- 
ander Danz, 1890). 
42. Ibid., 18-20. 
43. D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann, Grundziige der theoretischen Logik (Berlin: 
Julius Springer, 1928), 34-42; idem, Principles of Mathematical Logic (New York: 
Chelsea Publishing Co., 1950), 44-54 (translation of 2d ed. [1938], with revisions). 

Peirce and the Law of Distribution 
Nathan Houser 
In the spring of 1880, not long before leaving for Europe on scientific business 
for the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey, Charles Peirce sent a 
paper entitled "On the Algebra of Logic" to The American Journal of Mathe- 
matics I (hereafter referred to as AJM-1880; I will similarly refer to two other 
papers published in that journal). Peirce had just taken up a lectureship at 
The Johns Hopkins University and in November 1879 wrote to his father that 
he was taking great pains with his lectures. But Peirce retained his assistant- 
ship in the Coast Survey and for the next 5 years conducted two careers, one 
as a lecturer in logic at The Johns Hopkins, the other as a scientist, already 
with 20 years of service for the Coast Survey, where since 1872 he had been 
in charge of measuring gravity. During those years Peirce was a frequent 
commuter on the B & O Railroad between Baltimore and Washington. 
Peirce vigorously carried out his duties, but his health broke under the 
strain and during the winter and spring of 1880 he suffered several serious 
bouts of illness. That gave Peirce the opportunity to work on his logic, and 
in March, while confined to his quarters in Baltimore, he finished AJM-1880. 
In early April he submitted it for publication and by the end of the month was 
on his way to Europe on assignment for the Coast Survey, his mind primarily 
focused on scientific matters. The issue of The American Journal of Mathe- 
matics that carried Peirce's paper was printed in September 1880 and was in 
circulation by the end of the month. "On the Algebra of Logic" ran for over 
40 pages and ended with a note that it would be continued. A paper of great 
complexity, it is described by Arthur N. Prior as an attempt by Peirce to bring 
syllogistic logic into "organic connection" with his logic of relatives. 2 It might 
be better described as part of Peirce's ongoing attempt to establish the ade- 
quacy of the algebra of logic as a general deductive logic, suitable for the 
representation of deductive thought in the broadest sense, by demonstrating 
its connection to syllogistic, the accepted standard of deductive inference for 
over two thousand years. In particular, Peirce hoped to show that the whole 
development of the algebra of logic could be based on syllogistic principles, a 
Peirce began the formal presentation of his calculus with a section on "The 

Peirce and the Law of Distribution 
11 
Algebra of the Copula" (Part 1, w in which he discussed the relation between 
logical consequence (premiss therefore conclusion) and implication (/f ante- 
cedent then consequent) and obtained a reduction of syllogistic reasoning to 
Barbara. 4 He continued with "The Logic of Non-Relative Terms" (Part II, w 
his logic of "and" and "or. ''5 This part of Peirce's logic, when combined 
with his algebra of the copula, gives a complete basis for and some develop- 
ment of classical propositional calculus. 6 It is not my purpose here to examine 
that achievement of Peirce, or to convey a sense of the full scope of his 
paper, which continues with his pioneering logic of relations. 7 My focus will 
be on just one of the theorems of Peirce's system, the law of distribution. My 
purpose is to give, in a summary (and preliminary) fashion, an account of 
Peirce's work on the law of distribution, and to say something about the 
results of his doubts about its status as a theorem. I will suggest that one result 
may have been Peirce's transition from his derivational approach to logic in 
1880 to his truth-function approach of 1885. 8 In general, I hope to show that 
there was a major turning point in Peirce's logical development between 1880 
and 1885 which calls for more concentrated attention. 
In traditional logic "distribution" is likely to be understood with reference 
to the quantity of logical terms, 9 but here it is understood to concern logical 
operations, and the effect of applying operations to complex logical terms 
which themselves contain operational signs. 1~ In particular, I am interested 
in the law of distribution (also known as the principle of distribution or the 
distributivity principle), which is the canonical expression of the relation of 
addition and multiplication or, in logic, disjunction and conjunction. In the 
algebra of mathematics the law of distribution is frequently given in the form 
x(y + z) = xy + xz 
and is called the principle of distribution of multiplication over addition. In 
symbolic logic, after an appropriate shift in the meaning of the connectives, 
that formula is called the principle of distribution of conjunction over disjunc- 
tion. For logic Peirce added a second distribution principle, 
(a+(b  c))=((a+b)  
which is called the principle of distribution of disjunction over conjunction.t 
Together, these two principles constitute what I call the full law ofdistribution. 
There are other distribution principles involving other operations, and differ- 
ent forms of the above formulas, but for my purposes there is no need for a 
wider account. 
The mathematical principle of distribution must have been discovered by a 
pioneer of the virgin wilds of mathematics; it was enunciated in geometric 
terms by Euclid, and his proof is the first known proof of the principle. ~2 
According to Thomas L. Heath, in his commentary on Euclid, Heron of 
Alexandria was the first to adopt an algebraic form for the principle and to 

12 
Nathan Houser 
employ an algebraic method of proof. But Heron maintained that it is impos- 
sible to produce a strictly algebraic proof of the principle of distribution? 3 
Heron's claim appears to have been refuted in 1881 when the principle of 
distribution received an algebraic demonstration as a theorem of arithmetic at 
the hands of Charles S. Peirce. In "On the Logic of Number" (AJM- 1881)14 
Peirce succeeded for the first time in constructing a simple set of axioms from 
which the natural numbers can be derived. ~s He proved the principle of 
distribution by mathematical induction, which he called Fermatian inference. 
However, the 1881 principle of distribution was strictly a principle of arithme- 
tic and could not easily be generalized for logic. But Peirce had already made 
important advances in logic. 
Concurrent with Peirce's interest in the foundations of mathematics was an 
equally deep and closely related interest in the foundations of logic. By the 
mid-1860s Peirce had become deeply involved in the movement to generalize 
algebra, a movement that had begun at least as early as Leibniz, and that 
blossomed in the work of George Boole. t6 Boole thought that the logic of 
Aristotle was not the foundational logic, that syllogistic operations were not 
the ultimate processes of logic.17 He maintained that the ultimate laws of 
logic are mathematical in form and that logical method should be analogous 
to the method of mathematics. By the simple, yet ingenious, device of 
restricting the values of the terms of ordinary mathematical algebra to the two 
values 0 and 1, Boole discovered that numerical algebra can be transformed 
into a more general algebra of logic. ~s Boole recognized that this algebra of 
logic was subject to various interpretations and that it might be employed as 
a calculus of classes, of probability, or of propositions. He believed that the 
most distinguishing difference between his algebra of logic and ordinary 
algebra, resulting from the limitation to two values, was the validity of the 
index law ((a x a) = a)--(a 2 -- a)--in the former but not in the latter? 9 
Boole's disjunctive operation, symbolized by the sign of addition, was 
"exclusive," so that with reference to classes, class A plus class B equals the 
class of everything A or B but not both A and B. One important outcome 
of Boole's definition of"or" was the proscription of the following two formulas 
from his set of laws: 
((a + a) = a), 
((a + (b x c)) = ((a + b) x (a + c))). 
The second of these formulas expresses the principle of distribution of disjunc- 
tion over conjunction, which is invalid in Boole's logic as is its counterpart in 
arithmetic. 
On 12 March 1867 Peirce presented a paper to the American Academy of 
Arts and Sciences 2~ in which he introduced some modifications of Boole's 
calculus to improve its effectiveness for questions involving probability. Peirce 
clearly distinguished between arithmetical and logical operations, and em- 
ployed distinctive signs to represent logical operators) 1 His most important 
deviation from Boole's system, a modification that Jevons had already made 

Peirce and the Law of Distribution 
13 
and that most followers of Boole have made, 22 was the substitution of in- 
clusive for exclusive disjunction. That eliminated the barrier to a full duality 
between the laws pertaining to logical addition and multiplication. 23 
According to the principle of duality, for any theorem (or principle or law) 
in which the signs of conjunction or disjunction appear, there is a correspond- 
ing theorem in which the sign of disjunction replaces the sign of conjunction, 
and the sign of conjunction replaces the sign of disjunction, in every occur- 
rence. 24 We saw that ((a x a) = a) is a law in Boole's system, but its dual, 
((a + a) = a), is not. Similarly, the principle of distribution of conjunction over 
disjunction, expressed by the formula ((a x (b + c)) = ((a x b) + (a x c))), is 
valid in Boole's system, but its dual, the principle of distribution of disjunction 
over conjunction, expressed by the formula ((a + (b x c))= ((a + b)x 
(a + c))), is invalid. But if we use Peirce's logical addition instead of Boole's 
exclusive disjunction, we can add ((a + a) = a)and ((a + (b x c)) = ((a + b) x 
(a + c))) to our logic and we are left with a thoroughgoing duality of laws. 
Peirce's presentation on 12 March 1867 was the first introduction of 
the second part of the law of distribution. In his 1880 review of Frege's 
Begriffsschrift, Ernst Schr6der remarked on the importance of that discovery 
and on Peirce's priority. 2s But Peirce not only asserted the full law of distribu- 
tion for the Boolean algebra of classes, he also gave its first proof, which was 
published in 1868 in the Academy's Proceedings. I will not repeat the proof 
here--it can be found on pages 13-14 of the recently published second volume 
of the Writings of Charles S. Peirce and in Collected Papers 3.4--but will 
mention only that Peirce's method of proof was to show that the two main 
formulas of the law of distribution pick out the same region of the universe 
on each side of their equals signs. The proof is easily illustrated by Venn 
diagrams, a standard method ofestablishing the law of distribution in Boolean 
algebra today. 26 However, it is a method of proof limited to principles of the 
logic of classes. 
In AJM 1880 Peirce again asserted the full law ofdistribution. His general 
procedure in presenting his 1880 calculus, a logic similar to systems of natural 
deduction, 27 was to prove his theorems from accepted argument forms and 
principles of inference. Peirce's intention was to restrict his basis to standard 
syllogistic forms and principles, with his definitions of  ("and") and + ("or") 
serving as key rules of inference. Unfortunately, Peirce did not explicitly set 
out the basis of his system. 
Peirce's logic of nonrelative terms, starting with Part II, w 28 appears, at 
first anyway, to be self-contained. One notices immediately that there are 
numbered expressions (thirty-six in all) beginning with (1), and that most of the 
formulas after (3) are given as theorems. Peirce's expressions (1) (3) are 
sometimes taken as the basis of his 1880 algebra of logic. They were presented 
by Peirce as follows (except for some notational changes), 29 where the symbol 
is to be regarded like the I of standard Boolean algebra, as representing the 
Universe (for Peirce the Universe of possibility), and 0 as representing the 
empty Universe (the impossible). 

14 
Nathan Houser 
a ---< oo, 
If a --< c and b --< c, 
then a + b --< c; 
and conversely, 
ifa+b--<c, 
then a --< c and b --< c. 
0-<a. 
(1) 
If c --< a and c --< b, 
(2) 
then c --< a x b; 
and conversely, 
if c --< a x b, 
(3) 
then c -< a and c --< b. 
From this basis, using uniform substitution, Peirce proved four theorems 
(actually theorem-sets) before asserting the law of distribution. His theorems 
may be given as follows: 
a --< (a + b), 
(4a) 
(a x b) -< a, 
(4b) 
b --< (a + b), 
(4c) 
(a x b) -< b; 
(4d) 
a = (a + a), 
(Sa) 
(a x a) = a; 
(5b) 
(a + b) = (b + a), 
(6a) 
(a x b)= (b x a); 
(6b) 
((a + b) + c) = (a + (b + c)), 
(7a) 
(a x (b x c)) = ((a x b) x c). 
(7b) 
Peirce labeled (4a)-(4b) together as A; (5a) and (5b) together as B; (6a) and 
(6b), the commutative principle, together as C; and (7a) and (7b), the associative 
principle, together as D. He then asserted E, the distributive principle (the law 
of distribution), 
((a + b) x c) = ((a x c) + (b x c)), 
(8a) 
((a x b) + c) = ((a + b) x (b + c)), 
(8b) 
which he declined to prove, claiming it was easy but too tedious. 3~ Although 
he had already published the 1867 distribution proof for the logic of classes, 
as a theorem of the logical calculus of AJM-1880, interpreted as a logic of 
propositions (and terms), the law of distribution stood in need of a rigorous 
new proof. Peirce clearly implied that his calculus was adequate for such a 
proof, and gave the distinct impression that he had produced one (or saw how 
to produce one). He apparently expected his readers to accept the derivability 
of the law of distribution on his word (or their acumen), but Peirce's assurance 
was not good enough for Schr6der. 
Sometime before 1880 Peirce and Schr6der had become correspondents 
about the algebra of logic, 3~ and it was not long after the publication of AJM- 
1880 that Schr6der wrote to Peirce to ask about the omission of the proof. 32 
SchrSder conveyed his suspicion, if not already a conviction, that one of the 

Peirce and the Law of Distribution 
15 
principles of distribution was independent in Peirce's system. But Peirce was 
on assignment for the Coast Survey at the time of Schr6der's inquiry and did 
not have access to his AJM-1880 notes; nor was he able to "reproduce" his 
proof. He concluded that he had been mistaken in thinking that he had 
produced a genuine proof, his mind having been clouded by illness when he 
wrote his 1880 paper. 
In September 1883 Schr6der presented a paper to the British Association 
for the Advancement of Science in which he claimed that Peirce could not 
have proved the law of distribution. (Schr6der represented the law as four 
conditionals instead of two equivalences. When the principle of duality is 
applied to a conditional, in addition to the systematic replacement of the 
signs of conjunction and disjunction, the antecedent and consequent must be 
reversed.) Schr6der contended that ((a x (b + c)) -< ((a  b) + (a  c))) and 
its dual, (((a + b) x (a + c)) --< (a + (b x c))), were independent in Peirce's 
algebra of logic and, therefore, could not be proved. 33 If those formulas were 
to be brought into logic, Schr6der maintained, one of them would have to be 
taken as an independent axiom. 3g Thus ((a  (b + c)) --< ((a  b) + (a x c))) 
and its dual, (((a + b) x (a + c))-< (a + (b x c))), were discredited as 
theorems of AJM- ! 880. 
Schr6der published his independence proof in 1890 in volume 1 of his 
Aloebra der Looik. His proof, which was characterized by Huntington as 
succeeding "by a very complicated method, "35 was widely accepted, initially 
even by Peirce. 36 But the independence of the law of distribution is relative 
to a system, in this case the system characterized by the basic expressions 
numbered (1)-(3). Given that basis, the full law of distribution cannot be 
derived, but, as Schr6der maintained, can only be asserted as an independent 
principle. 37 However, a closer look at Peirce's logic of nonrelative terms 
suggests that (1)-(3) do not adequately represent its basis. 38 The most obvious 
deficiency is the absence of any formula involving negation. Although negative 
expressions are not asserted until (18), (((c  a) --< b) --< ((c  b) --<d)), 
many follow, and it is clear that some basic negation formula is required. Of 
course, (18) comes too late to lend support to Peirce's distribution formulas. 
To justify (18) Peirce appealed to the three clauses of his definition of 
negation from the section of AJM- 1880 on the algebra of the copula (Part I, 
~4): (i) that ~ is of the form (a -< 0), (ii) (a -< ~), and (iii) (~ -< 
a). 39 This 
crucial reference back to Part I, ~4 clearly suggests that Peirce intended the 
principles of his algebra of the copula to be applicable to his logic of non- 
relative terms. Furthermore, since all of the formulas of his nonrelative logic 
can be written as conditionals, it seems unlikely that he did not intend the 
basic principles of the algebra of the copula to carry forward, g~ While there 
are many principles or rules from Part I, ~4 which might be appealed to in 
Part II, for present purposes I will select only the principle of identity 
a --< a 
I, ~4(1) 
and a principle that Prior describes as a relative of the deduction theorem, 

16 
Nathan Houser 
the principle that 
a 
b 
and 
a 
I, ~4(2) 
..c 
" b-<c 
are of the same validity. As Prior points out, this latter principle resembles 
De Morgan's account of the role of implication in reasoning. 41 I will call this 
rule "Peirce's Rule," which I take to be strong enough to permit the inference 
of either side as conclusion from the other as premiss. 42 To elucidate my 
understanding of Peirce's Rule I will restate it in the following general form, 
where n may be any number greater than or equal to zero: 
An 
B 
if and only if 
AM 
..C 
..B--<C. 
Peirce's practice suggests that something like this form is what he had in mind, 
although his statement of the rule appears to be the single case where n = 1. 
A complete account of Peirce's logic would certainly have to elaborate Peirce's 
justification for building up his algebra of the copula from this powerful 
principle (and the law of identity), but for the purposes of this paper I will 
admit the principle, I, ~4(2), in its general form, and appeal to it to justify the 
assertion of rules as conditionals and the use of indirect proofs. This supposes 
that Peirce would have regarded the inference of (a --< b) from (a " b), or 
vice versa, as a case under the rule. Under the general form of Peirce's Rule, 
this would be the case where n = 0. 43 
Two other principles from Part I, ~4, modus ponens and the principle of 
transitivity, will be employed, but they are not given as basic rules of inference. 
Modus ponens is obtained by substituting (a--< b) for a in (1), yielding 
((a --< b) --< (a --< b)). Then by two applications of Peirce's Rule, we obtain 
(If(a -< b) and a, then b). The principle of transitivity is obtained by assuming 
(a --< b), (b --< c), and a, from which b and c can be derived by modus ponens. 
By applying Peirce's Rule to discharge the third assumption, a, we obtain the 
transitivity principle, "If(a --< b)and (b --< c), then (a -< c)." I will appeal to 
modus ponens (MP) and transitivity (Trans) in what follows as derived rules. 
Instead of bringing in the negation formulas mentioned above (from Part 
I, ~), we can go to the beginning of Peirce's logic of nonrelative terms (Part 
II), where before he asserts (1) he gives the following as equivalent inferences 
(my numbers): 
(i) a and b 
is of the same validity 
a 
9 c 
with the inference 
.. Either b or c 
(ii) 
a 
is of the same validity 
a and 
9 Either b or c 
with the inference 
.. c 
He also equates the basic conditional (a -< b) with these two expressions: 
(iii) (The possible) --< Either d or b; 
(iv) a which is b -< (The impossible). 

Peirce and the Law of Distribution 
17 
Selecting from these expressions I will augment Peirce's system by adding 
the law of identity (I, ~4(1)), Peirce's Rule (I, ~4(2)), and conditional forms of 
(ii) and (iii). The augmented system can be represented as follows: 
RI. If a, b .'. c, then a .'. Ib --< c), and the converse. (Peirce's Rule) 
R2. If (a -< c) and (b -< c), then ((a + b) -< c), and the converse. 
R3. lf(c -< a) and (c -< b), then (c -< Ca  b)), and the converse. 
I. a--<a. 
II. (a --< (b + c)) -< ((a x b) -< c). 
III. Ca --< b) --< (~ + b). 
IV. a --< oc. 
V. 0-< a. 
If we further augment Peirce's system to allow for indirect proofs, which 
supposes Peirce's Rule to be a form of the deduction theorem, we can prove 
the law of distribution Cwithout using IV or V). To facilitate the proof I will 
use uniform substitution, as did Peirce, and rules associated with primary 
conditional formulas, and will permit the conjoining of properly obtained 
steps. These liberties can all be justified, to some extent at least, by Peirce's 
own procedure. 4. To facilitate the proof further I will make use of Peirce's 
theorems (4a)-C4d), modus ponens (MPJ, and transitivity (Trans). 
19. 
1. (a+ 
2. c. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. a--< 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
b) xc. 
a. 
(a x c). 
(a x c)+(b x c). 
((a  c) + (b x c)). 
((a + b) x c) --< (a + b). 
(((a + b) x c)  a) ---< b. 
((a+b) x c) x K. 
b. 
(b x c) 
13. (a x c)+(b x c). 
14. ~--< ((a x c) + (b x c). 
15. (~ + a)-< ((a x c) + (b x c)). 
16. (a -< a). 
17. (~ 4- a). 
18. (ax 
c)+(b 
x c). 
((a+b) 
xc)-<((a 
xc)+(bx 
c)). 
Assumption. 
1, rule of (T4d) {SaC-b, b}. 
Assumption. 
3, 2 conjunction. 
4, rule of (T4a) 
~ 
b 
{Sax~, ~xc}. 
3-5 discharge assumption (RI). 
Assumption. 
$~b, ~[(T4b). 
8, rule of II {S(o+~ ~, ~,}. 
1, 7 conjunction. 
9, 10 MP. 
11, 2 conjunction. 
12, rule of (T4c) {Sb~c, ~}. 
7-13 discharge assumption (R 1). 
14, 6 R2. 
I. 
16, rule oflII {S~}. 
15, 17 MP. 
1 - 18 discharge assumption (R 1). 
No effort has been extended to insure that the augmented system is minimal, 
and indeed if we admit the principle of duality, we see at once that it is not, 
for IV and V are duals and one can be dispensed with. Prior has shown further 
how to refine the set of fundamental principles of AJM-1880. 45 But the above 
set serves to show that the law of distribution is not independent in Peirce's 1880 
logic relative to a carefully selected, but not unduly contrived, set of principles. 

18 
Nathan Houser 
A different proof may be obtained without adding any negation formula if 
we strengthen R2 as follows (making it applicable to four terms): 
R2: 
If ((a --< c) and (b -< c)), then ((a + b) --< c); 
R2': 
If((a --< c) and (b --< d)), then ((a + b) --< (c + d)). 
The proof runs as follows: 
1. ax(b+c). 
2. a. 
3. (b + c). 
4. b. 
5. (a x b). 
6. b-< (a x b). 
7. c. 
8. (a x c). 
9. c -< (a x c). 
10. (b + c) -< ((a x b) + (a x c)). 
11. (a x b)+(ax 
c). 
12. (a x (b + c))--< ((a x b) + (a x c)). 
Assumption. 
1, rule of (Tab) {Sb~+,} 
1, rule of(T4d) {sb+bc} 
Assumption. 
2, 4 conjunction. 
4-5 discharge assumption (RI). 
Assumption. 
2, 7 conjunction. 
7-8 discharge assumption (R1). 
6, 9 R2'. 
3, 10 MP. 
1 - 11 discharge assumption (R 1). 
If we replace R2 with the complex constructive dilemma we can go directly 
from steps 3, 6, and 9 to step 11. A version of R2' appears as theorem (12) in 
AJM-1880 
and is easily derived in the augmented system: 
. 
1. (a ---< c) x (b -< d). 
Assumption. 
2. (a -< c). 
1, rule of(T4b) {(a-~n, 
b 
(b---< d) }. 
3. (b --< d). 
1, rule of(T4d) {~a~o, 
b 
(b--< d) }" 
4. c -< (c + d). 
(4a) Sff, ~. 
5. a -< (c + d). 
2, 4 (Trans). 
6. d -< (c + d). 
(4c) b 
S~, r 
7. b -< (c + d). 
3, 6 (Trans). 
8. (a + b)-< 
(c + d). 
5, 7 R2. 
((a -< c) x (b -< d)) 
-< ((a +b) -< (c + d)). 
1-8 discharge assumption (R1). 
Peirce also asserted R2' as a theorem in an early version of his paper. +6 
We see then that the independence of the principle of distribution depends 
on a restriction of the basis of Peirce's logic to I, R2, and R3; but I contend 
that such a restriction is by no means explicitly made by Peirce. It is a common 
complaint that Peirce often did not clearly lay out the foundations of his 
systems of logic. 
The above proofs of the problematic part of the law of distribution are not 
Peirce's, and it is far from certain that he would have embraced any of them 
when he wrote his 1880 paper. It is, perhaps, less likely that he would have 
accepted them after Schr6der's criticism which shook his confidence in the 
1880 system and raised serious doubts that the algebra of logic could be 
developed in complete harmony with syllogistic. +7 For two thousand years 
syllogistic had been the accepted standard of deductive rationality. Even 

Peirce and the Law of Distribution 
19 
Boole had to some extent judged the adequacy of his algebra of logic as a 
system of general logic by how it compared with syllogistic. It is not surprising 
that Peirce wanted to give his algebra of logic the pedigree of a syllogistic 
ancestry, and he thought he had succeeded in AJM-1880 until Schr6der 
raised objections. Schr6der convinced Peirce that part of the distributive law 
depends on principles that cannot be regarded as syllogistic and that any 
"proof" would have to appeal to dilemmatic principles of inference, which 
would annul Peirce's exclusive reliance on syllogistic principles. 
The dilemma is a form of argument which appears to have roots in the 
disjunctive syllogism of the ancient Megarian and Stoic Schools that rivalled 
the Peripatetic School of Aristotle. It was first systematically employed as a 
form of inference around 1500. 4s Four standard dilemmatic forms were given 
by Richard Whately in his Elements of Logic (1826), from which Peirce got 
his first taste of Logic: 
a--~C 
a----< c 
b-<c 
b-<d 
a+b 
a+b 
..c 
.'.c+d 
simple constructive dilemma 
complex constructive dilemma 
a-<b 
a--<c 
a-<c 
b-<d 
b+~ 
~+tt 
simple destructive dilemma 
complex destructive dilemma 
Whately held that all reasoning whatever is fundamentally syllogistic and 
can be reduced to some set of standard syllogistic arguments, ultimately to 
Barbara. This is remarkably close to the view that Peirce held, and hoped to 
further, in AJM-1880. `*9 According to Whately s~ a dilemma of this somewhat 
contrived form 
p--<q 
P+P 
..q+r 
can be reduced to these two conditional arguments 
p--<q 
~-<r 
P 
..q 
..r 

20 
Nathan Houser 
Since we cannot deny both p and i~, we must admit one or the other of the 
conclusions, and thus we can simply substitute the two conditional syllogisms 
for the dilemma. But in Peirce's view there is a critical dependence here, and 
in any dilemma, on the law of excluded middle, which he came to regard as the 
characteristic feature of dilemmatic reasoning in general. In the definition of 
"dilemma" for the Century Dictionary, which Peirce contributed perhaps as 
early as 1886, he remarked that without the law of excluded middle the 
dilemma would not stand, but all of ordinary syllogistic would remain intact. 
Therefore the dilemma must be regarded as distinct from syllogism. 
This is a rather thorny issue that needs to be thoroughly worked out. On the 
one hand, the law of excluded middle has long been regarded as one of the 
three traditional (and fundamental) laws of logic, the other two being the laws 
of identity and noncontradiction. On the other hand, Peirce came to regard 
the dilemma, at least partly because of its dependence on the law of excluded 
middle, as distinct from ordinary syllogism. Related difficulties with negation 
and reference to individuals crop up again and again in Peirce's writings. 5t But 
for now we must merely conclude that as a result of Schrrder's criticism of 
AJM- ! 880, Peirce abandoned his attempt to "derive" his algebra of logic from 
syllogistic, having come to believe that an essential part of his logic, notably an 
important part of the law of distribution, depended on dilemmatic reasoning. 
At least by 1883 Peirce had definitely come to regard his 1880 calculus, 
in particular his definitions of logical multiplication and addition, as in- 
adequate for the syllogistic foundation of the algebra of logic, 52 and by 1885 
he openly credited Schrrder with having revealed this inadequacy. 5a Yet 
Peirce never seemed reconciled to the expedient of simply asserting the prob- 
lematic principle as an independent definition or axiom. 
The period from 1880 to 1885 was the only extended period of Peirce's life 
when he was in regular dialogue with his own students of logic. There are 
nearly fifty writings on logic or mathematics in the Peirce Papers now assigned 
to those years, and it was in 1883 that Studies in Looic, by Peirce and his 
students, first appeared in print. 54 In 1883, when Peirce began to write "On 
the Algebra of Logic, Part II" (MS 527), which opens with a discussion of the 
faults of the first paper, he no longer seemed compelled to justify his basic 
principles by drawing them from a syllogistic foundation. Peirce experimented 
with alternative definitions of disjunction and conjunction in which logical 
values, or truth-values, appeared. It may have been a combination of Peirce's 
characterization of material implication (a --< b) as true if either a is false or b 
is true, and false only if a is true while b is false, 55 and his full-fledged 
acceptance of dilemmatic reasoning, that suggested experimentation with 
truth-values; but in any case, Peirce was led to truth-function characteriza- 
tions of his formulas, and suggested that (a + b) be defined as ((a -< b) --< b) 
and, with '7"" standing for "necessarily false," that (a x b) be defined as 
((a --< (b --< f)) --< f). By 1884, perhaps a year earlier, Peirce was using 
what is today commonly called the "method of assigning truth-values" as a 
decision procedure, and no longer thought that a logical truth required the 

Peirce and the Law of Distribution 
21 
pedigree of a syllogistic ancestry (or a derivation from laws of logic). At least 
by 1886 he was aware that the problematic part of the law of distribution 
could be shown, by the truth-value method, to be a logical truth, s6 It 
appears to have been this truth-function approach to logic that led Peirce, 
in 1883-84, to the discovery of the principle now known as Peirce's law, 
(((a -< b) -< a) --< a), the fifth icon in his well-known 1885 paper on the 
algebra of logic (AJM-1885). 57 In a footnote to AJM-1885 Peirce associated 
his "fifth icon" with dilemmatic reasoning, remarking that the dilemma "in- 
volves" that formula. His idea may have been that the necessity of his fifth 
icon can be demonstrated by arguing dilemmatically that whether a is true or 
false the icon will be true so it must be necessary. He explained that in 
AJM-1880 he had overlooked the distinctive character of the dilemma, and 
that that oversight, probably due to the general neglect of that mode of 
reasoning, had led him to the erroneous belief that "the whole of nonrelative 
logic was derivable from the principles of ancient syllogistic." 
It is somewhat curious that after having recognized the special character of 
dilemmatic reasoning and the need for including dilemmatic principles with 
syllogistic principles for a complete calculus of logic, Peirce did not return to 
the logic of AJ M-1880 to see what could be salvaged. His "failure" to produce 
an adequate proof of the law of distribution when questioned by Schrrder, 
and his apparent acceptance of Schrrder's claim that it was impossible in the 
1880 system, seem to have resulted in his loss of confidence in that system. 
Consequently, it must have come as a shock when in turning over old papers 
from the 1880s he discovered his long lost proof, written up as though for 
publication. We do not know when Peirce recovered his proof but the story 
did not begin to emerge until the latter days of 1903. 
On 11 December of that year Edward V. Huntington wrote to Peirce that 
he was "engaged in working out the independence of the postulates which lie 
at the basis of the algebra of symbolic logic" and that he wanted to discuss 
some "questions of notation" before writing up his paper in full for presenta- 
tion to the American Mathematical Society. 58 A card from Huntington dated 
29 December 1903 indicates that Peirce had replied with a painstaking letter 
and had taken the opportunity to reveal his recovered proof. Huntington 
wrote that he would "go over the proof with the greatest interest." (Peirce's 
letter to Huntington containing the proof is not extant, but in the Peirce 
Papers at Harvard there are several preliminary drafts, all dated 24 December 
1903, of the proof and part of Peirce's letter. 59) The crucial principle of that 
proof, not explicit in AJM-1880, is identified by Huntington as 
If a ---< b is false, 
then there is an element x, not 0, such that x --< a and x --< b. 
After examining Peirce's proof, Huntington wrote back to proclaim its sound- 
ness and to acknowledge its importance. 6~ He said that by using the proof he 
could "decidedly" simplify his list of assumptions, and he asked for Peirce's 
permission to use the demonstration. Peirce was pleased to comply, and when 

22 
Nathan Houser 
Huntington's paper appeared it contained a lengthy footnote to Theorem 22a 
giving Peirce credit for the demonstration and reproducing a note by Peirce 
that gave a brief history of the proof. 6~ Thus, nearly a quarter of a century 
after it should have appeared, Peirce's proof of the problematic part of the 
law of distribution came into the mainstream of the development of formal 
logic. When C.I. Lewis published his Survey of Symbolic Logic in 1918, he used 
Peirce's proof which he took from Huntington. 62 
Peirce's omission of the proof in 1880, and his subsequent inability to 
produce it for Schr6der, may have raised some doubts that there ever had 
been a proof, even one that Peirce had mistakenly thought sound. But when 
Huntington published his landmark paper in 1904, such suspicions were 
soundly put to rest; clearly Peirce had a proof. The employment of Peirce's 
proof by Huntington and Lewis is testimony to its soundness and importance, 
and its validity has recently been endorsed by Roberts and Crapo in their 
paper entitled "Peirce Algebras and the Distributivity Scandal," presented in 
1968 to the Association for Symbolic Logic. 63 Still it might be asked whether 
there is any evidence, beyond Peirce's own account, that he had the proof in 
1880 when he published his paper, or whether he produced it later to relieve 
embarrassment. 
In the Peirce Papers at Harvard there is a note to AJM-1885 reported by 
the editors of the Collected Papers to have been written up for publication 
shortly subsequent to that paper. 64 In the note Peirce outlined part of a 
proof of the problematic principle of distribution (though not the most prob- 
lematic part) that is remarkably similar to part of the proof that he sent 
to Huntington. It might be conjectured that Peirce did not produce the 
"Huntington" proof before he wrote his 1885 paper, and that the proof he 
uncovered is the one he describes in his AJM-1885 note. 
But even if the proof Peirce sent to Huntington was not originally drawn 
up for his 1880 paper, he was not mistaken in thinking he had produced a 
proof for that paper. A recent study of a little-examined manuscript, MS 575, 
has revealed that it is almost certainly part of an early version of AJM-1880. 
More importantly, it contains a somewhat abbreviated proof of the full law 
of distribution from the following principles: 65 
R 1. If (a ---< b) and (b ---< c), then (a --< c). 
R2. If (a --< c) and (b --< c), then ((a + b) --< c). 
R3. If (c --< a) and (c --< b), then (c ---< (a x b)). 
I. (a + b) --< (b + a). 
II. (b x a)--< (a x b). 
III. a --< (a + b). 
IV. (a x b) --< a. 
V. a-< 1. 
VI. 0 --< a. 
VII. a --< a. 
VIII. b--< ((a  b) + (~ x b). 
IX. ((a + b) x (~+ b))-< b. 

Peirce and the Law of Distribution 
23 
There is a close resemblance between these expressions and those given in 
AJM-1880; only Rl and the negation formulas, VIII and IX, do not appear 
in the AJM-1880 list of basic principles or theorems (see page 14 above). R l 
appears in AJM-1880 as a derived rule, but some strengthening of the basis 
as given on page 17 is required before VIII and IX can be derived. This might 
be achieved in various ways, for example by adding the principle of double 
negation, a form of which was given by Peirce in AJM- 1880 (Part l, w as 
part of his definition of negation, and by asserting III (page 17), following 
Peirce, as an equivalence instead of a conditional. Or we might simply replace 
R2 with R2' (page 18), although R2' was not given in AJM-1880. 
My concern in this chapter has been to consider Peirce's systems only in 
connection with the law of distribution, not in connection with broader 
concerns such as completeness, consistency, and minimality. A comparison of 
MS 575 and AJM-1880 from this broader perspective would shed light on 
the development of Peirce's logic in the few weeks, or at most months, that 
separate them. A preliminary point of interest is that the MS 575 system does 
not include Peirce's Rule (R1 from AJM-1880) without which we can neither 
use an indirect method of proof, nor derive the rule of Modus Ponens. 
I have reconstructed Peirce's MS 575 proof(without using V or VI) and can 
attest that it is tedious, as Peirce claimed it to be in AJM-1880, for my 
reconstruction runs to over 150 steps. It is not the same proof that Peirce sent 
to Huntington in 1904. Nevertheless, it is now clear that when Peirce sent his 
1880 paper to The American Journal of Mathematics he had indeed produced 
a proof of the full law of distribution. 
But even if Peirce's proof should turn out to be flawed, a new and careful 
look at Peirce's 1880 paper and the transitional writings between it and 
AJM-1885 is desirable, for during that 5-year period Peirce introduced two 
major discoveries into the history of logic: truth-function analysis and the logic 
of quantification. 66 It is likely that Peirce's development of quantification 
theory, stimulated by the conceptual and notational advances of his student 
O.H. Mitchell, 67 is in part the result of his effort to overcome Schr6der's 
criticisms. To some extent, then, both of these important developments grew 
out of Peirce's dissatisfaction with his 1880 paper. Moreover, it was during 
those years that Peirce was finally able to shake off the firm grip of syllogism, 
a liberation that may be taken to represent his decisive turn to modern logic. 
Notes 
For helpful comments or advice I wish to thank James Van Evra, Max H. Fisch, 
Christian J.W. Kloesel, Ursula Niklas, Paul B. Shields, and Atwell Turquette. Special 
thanks go to Don D. Roberts for his astute and gracious assistance. The Department 
of Philosophy of Harvard University has generously granted me permission to refer 
to and quote from their collection of Peirce Papers, now housed in the Houghton 
Library. 
A preliminary version of this chapter was presented in March 1985 to The American 
Mathematical Society in a Special Session on the History of Logic, organized by 
Thomas L. Drucker. 

24 
Nathan Houser 
I. "On the Algebra of Logic," American Journal of Mathematics 3 (1880), 15-57. 
"On the Algebra of Logic" is included in the Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce 
(CP 3.154- 25 l) and will be published in volume 4 of the Writings of Charles S. Peirce. 
Throughout these notes abbreviated references will be made to four sources: (1) 
Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vol. 3, eds. Charles Hartshorne and 
Paul Weiss, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1933; (2) Writings of Charles 
S. Peirce, vol. 2, eds. Moore, Fisch, Kloesel, Roberts, and Ziegler, Bloomington, 
Indiana University Press, 1984; (3) New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce, 
vol. III-l, ed. Carolyn Eisele, The Hague, Mouton, 1976; and (4) The Charles S. Peirce 
Papers at the Houghton Library of Harvard University. In references to the Collected 
Papers I will give volume and paragraph numbers (CP 3.xyz), for Writings I will give 
volume and page (W2.xyz), for New Elements, volume and page (NEIII- 1.xyz), and for 
the Peirce Papers I will give manuscript numbers according to the Robin Catalogue 
and page numbers as assigned by the Institute for Studies in Pragmaticism, Lubbock, 
Texas (MS xyz, p. #). 
2. Arthur N. Prior, "The Algebra of the Copula," Studies in the Philosophy of 
Charles Sanders Peirce, Second Series, eds. Edward C. Moore and Richard S. Robin, 
University of Massachusetts Press (1964), 79-94. In Prior's opinion Peirce did not 
quite achieve his purpose, although he did take a definite step forward. 
3. Peirce's comparison of syllogistic with Boole's algebra of logic was underway 
by 1865 when he gave a series of lectures at Harvard entitled "On the Logic of 
Science." Those lectures appear in the first volume of the new edition of Peirce's 
writings, The Writings of Charles S. Peirce 1857-1866 (see especially the sixth lecture, 
pp. 223-239). 
4. This may overstate Peirce's achievement. Peirce is well known for having shown 
as early as 1866 in his "Memoranda Concerning the Aristotelean Syllogism" (Wl.505; 
CP 2.792-806) that every reduction of one syllogistic figure to another takes the logical 
form of the figure being reduced. Max Fisch calls this Peirce's "first major discovery 
in logic" (W l.xxxv). However, Prior claims that Peirce's AJM- 1880 red uctions are free 
of implicit assumptions of what is to be proved. (Prior, 84.) 
5. The original publication (AJM 1880) was divided into "Chapters" instead of 
"Parts." 
6. See Prior for an account of the success of Peirce's 1880 logic. It is not universally 
agreed that Peirce's purpose was to construct a propositional logic per se. For criticism 
of Prior's account see Randall R. Dipert, "Peirce's Propositional Logic," Review of 
Metaphysics 34 (March 1981), 569-595. 
7. Peirce used the term "relative" instead of "relation," but J. Brunning, in a 
recent dissertation for the University of Toronto has forcefully argued that Peiree 
knew he was working with relations in 1880 (even as early as 1870). 
8. In 1880 Peirce thought that to establish theoremhood a statement had to be 
derived by accepted rules from pedigreed laws (in 1880 the best pedigree from Peirce's 
standpoint seems to have been an undisputed descent from syllogistic), while in 1885 
he admitted as "theorems" (logical truths) statements shown to be necessary by 
truth-function analysis. Without explicitly saying so, Peirce seems to have expanded 
his conception of validity to include what is now often called "semantic validity." See 
Susan Haack, Philosophy of Lo#ics (Cambridge University Press, 1978, pp. 13-14)for 
a brief account of the syntactic-semantic distinction. 
9. After Peter of Spain a term is said to be distributed when it is taken universally 
and to be undistributed if it is not taken universally. In the statement "All men are 

Peirce and the Law of Distribution 
25 
mortal," the term "men" is distributed because its reference is to every man, but 
"mortal" is undistributed because its reference is not to every mortal. In general, 
for traditional Aristotelean logic, we can classify the four propositional forms by the 
status of their subject and predicate terms with reference to distribution. (Baldwin's 
Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology, Vol. 1, "Distribution," by R. Adamson, 
p. 289.) 
10. Boole gives an early general definition of distribution on p. 34 of The Laws of 
Thought (Dover, 1958). See also The Mathematical Analysis of Logic (1847), pp. 16-17. 
I I. Usually I will use lowercase letters from the front of the alphabet (a, b, c, d) to 
represent logical terms, and lowercase letters from farther back (x, y, z) to represent 
numerical terms. Peirce's usage varies and my "standardization" of notation may put 
the reader at risk of missing certain subtleties of Peirce's work. However, in a paper 
such as this one, there is at least an equal risk of confusion likely to result from an 
erratic and inconsistent notation. 
12. Euclid's principle (II, 1) was given as follows: "If there be two straight lines, and 
one of them be cut into any number of segments whatever, the rectangle contained by 
the two straight lines is equal to the rectangles contained by the uncut straight line 
and each of the segments." (Euclid's Elements, Dover, I, 375.) 
Suppose we have a rectangle with one side of length x and with an adjacent side 
of length w. For the simplest application of Euclid's principle we shall suppose that 
side w is divided into two segments of lengths y and z. Thus w = y + z. According to 
Euclid's principle the area of the rectangle xw is equal to the sum of the areas of the 
rectangles xy and xz. Since w = y + z, we can characterize this simplest case of Euclid's 
principle as x(y + z) = xy + xz, which is the law of distribution for the algebra of 
mathematics. 
Euclid's demonstration of II, I is given and discussed by Hogben in Mathematics 
for the Million, 135ff. In 1888 David Hilbert published his Grundlagen in which 
he, following others, completed Euclid's Elements. HilbeWs proof of the distributive 
law for multiplication appears in Beth's The Foundations of Mathematics, p. 146. 
13. Heron lived in the third century A.D. and wrote a systematic commentary of the 
Elements. See Heath, Dover, 20ft., for an examination of the evidence for dating 
Heron's commentary. Heath indicates that Heron expressed the law of distribution 
in a formula equivalent to the standard algebraic expression a(b + c + d) = ab + 
ac + ad. Heath attributes this information to the commentary of an-Nairizi (ed. 
Curtze, p. 89). See Heath, Dover I, 373. However, the signs "+" and "x" as symbols 
of addition and multiplication did not make their appearance until about the fifteenth 
century, and there do not seem to have been any previous commonly accepted symbols 
for these operations. See Hogben, Mathematics for the Million, pp. 306-307. 
14. American Journal of Mathematics 4 (1881), 85 95; CP 3.252 288. 
15. For the demonstration of Peirce's priority in this achievement see Paul Bartram 
Shieids's dissertation, Charles S. Peirce on the Lo#ic of Number (Fordham University, 
1981). 
16. There are scores of important mathematicians and logicians that could be 
located between Leibniz and Boole. Some giants stand out; Augustus De Morgan and 
Sir William Rowan Hamilton perhaps above the rest; but there are many others, not 
the least of which was Charles Peirce's father, Benjamin Peirce. Yet it is generally 
agreed that from the standpoint of logic George Boole played the greatest single role 
in the turn to modern thought. 
17. Boole, The Laws of Thouffht, p. 10. 

26 
Nathan Houser 
18. Boole, The Laws of Thought, p. 37; see also p. 166. 
19. See Boole's The Mathematical Analysis of Logic, p. 18, and The Laws of 
Thought, p. 37. This special law of logic appears to have been recognized by Leibniz: 
see his "Study in the Logical Calculus," written in the early 1690s, and published in 
Loemker's Philosophical Papers and Letters of Leibniz, pp. 380-81. 
20. Peirce's paper was published early in 1868 by the Academy though he had 
preprints by December 1867. 
21. Peirce introduced the sign "=" to signify numerical identity (distinguished 
from numerical equality); thus "a logically equals b" (a - b) means "a and b denote 
the same class." He used a comma to signify logical multiplication (conjunction) 
and a plus sign with a comma in the lower right-hand quadrant (+,) to signify 
logical addition (conjunction). 
22. In his introduction to Studies in Logic (p. iv) Peirce remarked on Venn's 
singular reluctance to modify Boole's system. 
23. The conception of duality that follows should be distinguished from that 
associated with Boole's law of duality, x(1 - x) = 0, which is a form of the law of 
noncontradiction. See Boole's Laws of Thought (Dover), pp. 49-51. 
24. If we consider the main principles of Boole's calculus (ignoring the formulas 
that involve subtraction and division), we can list them in a column on the left 
with their duals (numbered with primes) in a column on the right. 
(1) xy=yx. 
(1') x+y=y+x. 
(2) z(x + y)=zx + zy. 
(2') z + xy=(z + x)(z + y). 
(3) 
lfx=y, thenzx=zy. 
(3') 
Ifx=y, thenz+x=z+y. 
(4) x 2 = x 
[xx = x]. 
(4') x + x = x. 
Schr6der is usually credited with being the first to present the dual laws for logical 
multiplication and addition in corresponding columns. See his 1877 Der Operations- 
kreis des Looikkalkuls. According to Peirce, the practice was probably introduced 
into geometry by Gergonne about 1820 (CP 4.277). 
25. Originally published in the Zeitschrift f~r Mathematik und Physik 25 (1880), 
81-94. Republished in translation by Victor H. Dudman in Southern Journal of 
Philosophy 7 (1969), 139-150. In The Johns Hopkins University Circular for April 
1880, p. 49, Schr6der was reported to have made an earlier reference to Peirce's 
priority in Leo Koenigsberger's Repertorium der literarischen arbeiten aus dem ge- 
biete der reinen und angewandten mathematik (Leipzig: B.G. Teubner, 1877-79). 
26. See, for example, Marcel Rueff and Max Jeger, Sets and Boolean Algebra, 
Allen and Unwin, London, 1970, p. 21. 
27. Arthur N. Prior, in the paper cited in note 2, interprets the nonrelative logic 
of AJM-1880 as an axiomatic system, although he remarks that Peirce's "metalogic 
is ... loosely stated, and has something in common with systems of natural de- 
duction" (p. 79). Instead of introducing axioms Peirce identified some fundamental 
rules of inference, some given as definitions, and a rule (Part 1, ~4(2)) for condition- 
alizing his rules. He did not, however, prove the rule of conditionalization as a theor- 
em, although he did later (in 1898) for his system of Existential Graphs. (See Don 
D. Roberts, "The Existential Graphs and Natural Deduction," Moore and Robin, 
pp. 113-114.) 
28. CP 3.198ff. 

Peirce and the Law of Distribution 
27 
29. The a's in (1) and the c's in (2) and (3) appear as x's in AJM-1880. See 
note l I above. 
30. The arrangement of terms in (8a) and (8b) differs from the earlier expressions 
of the law of distribution. From here on I will usually adhere to these forms. By 
the principles of substitution and commutativity the formulas as expressed earlier 
can be retrieved. 
31. Peirce's note on p. 32 (AJM-1880)--CP 3.199n--reveals that he was familiar 
with Schr6der's Der Operationskreis des Logikkalkuls at least by the spring of 1880, 
and Schrrder's reference to Peirce's "On an Improvement in Boole's Calculus of Logic" 
in his review of Frege's Begriffsschrift (see note 25 above) shows that he was acquainted 
at least with that work of Peirce's by 1880. Records of correspondence in the files of 
Max Fisch indicate that Peirce and Schrrder began their first (about 4-year) period of 
correspondence around this time. 
32. This letter has never been found (nor has Peirce's reply) but these events 
are described elsewhere in the Peirce Papers. 
33. The sign -< (claw) was introduced by Peirce in 1870 in his "Description 
of a Notation for the Logic of Relatives .... '" (CP 3.47; W2.360). Peirce uses the claw 
as a general connective that can be interpreted as the sign of inclusion, the copula of 
a categorical assertion, or the connective of a conditional sentence. 
34. An abstract of Schrrder's paper was printed in the Report of the Fifty-Third 
Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, held at Southport 
in September 1883. (London: John Murray, 1884.) Either Schrrder or his printer 
appear to have transposed the formulas in expressing which can and which cannot be 
proved. Peirce always identified a(b + c) -< ab + ac and its dual (a + b)(a + c) -< 
a + bc as the contentious formulas. In any case, Schrrder announced to the world that 
Peirce had failed in his 1880 construction. Schr6der's full discussion of this matter can 
be found in his Vorlesungen iiber die Algebra der Logik, Bd. 1, w 
a(b + c) = ab + ac appears as an axiom in Schrrder's 1877 Der Operationskreis des 
Logikkalkuls, (pp. 9-10). 
35. Edward V. Huntington, "Sets of Independent Postulates for the Algebra of 
Logic," Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 5 (1904), 288-309. See 
p. 291n. 
36. See MS 547, p. 013, and CP 3.384n (AJM-1885). 
37. The independence of (((a + b) x c) -< ((a x c) + (b x c))) and (((a + c) x 
(b + c)) -< ((a  b) + c)) has been elegantly demonstrated to me by Professor Atwell 
Turquette, in a letter of l0 June 1985, in which he sketched an independence proof 
relative to the system that consists of (1)-(3). 
38. I will not consider here the extent to which Peirce may have believed that 
(I)-(3) adequately represented the basis of his 1880 logic. 
39. CP 3.201. As the first clause of his definition of negation Peirce gave "~ is 
of the form a -< x," but he apparently intended x to stand for "what does not occur" 
(see CP 3.191). 
40. In a letter to E.V. Huntington dated 24 December 1903 (MS L210) Peirce wrote 
about AJM-1880: "You will observe that p. 33 [CP 3.199] follows the whole algebra 
of the copula, where negation is already introduced & defined." 
41. Prior, p. 79. Prior refers to De Morgan's article "Syllogism" in the English 
Cyclopaedia ( 186 l). 
42. John Venn in his Symbolic Logic, p. 93 (Chelsea reprint of 1894 second edition), 

28 
Nathan Houser 
noted that the rule equating the proposition "xy is a or b'" with "'x~ is .~ or b" is 
"sometimes called Peirce's rule." Venn also gave a more general statement of this rule. 
I have found no evidence that the name, "Peirce's rule," has been carried forward to 
denote this, or any other, proposition or rule. 
43. In 1898 Peirce gave an explicit statement of"Peirce's Rule" (for his Existential 
Graphs) which took account of the case where n = 0. See my above reference to Don 
D. Roberts in note 27. 
44. Whenever I use the rule of a theorem to justify a step in the proofs that 
follow, I am abbreviating the proof by omitting a statement of the theorem and an 
application of MP. See Prior, p. 93, re Peirce's implicit use of the rule that (p and q .'. r) 
is of the same validity as, and interderivable with ((p x q) .'. r). 
45. That is the general purpose of Prior's paper "The Algebra of the Copula." 
Prior gave (in Polish notation) the following axioms as representing Peirce's 1880 
algebra of logic: 
1. (b --< c) -< ((a --< b) -< (a -< c)). 
2. (a -< (b --< c)) --< (b -< (a --< c)). 
3. (a --< a). 
4. (~ ---< a). 
5. (0 --< a). 
6. (a ---< c) -< ((b --< c) --< ((a + b) -< c). 
7. ((a + b) ---< c) ---< (a ---< c). 
8. ((a + b) -< c) -< (b -< c). 
9. ((a -< b) -< ((a -< c) -< (a -< (b  c))). 
I0. (a ---< (b ---< c)) ---< ((a x b) ---< c). 
46. See MS 575, p. 21. MS 575 will be remarked on toward the end of this chapter. 
47. Peirce may have begun to question the integrity of his 1880 calculus even 
before Schr6der raised objections. In Note B to Studies in Logic (CP 3.328-358), 
entitled "The Logic of Relatives" and written in the fall or winter of 1882, there 
is an indication that Peirce was beginning to have some doubts about the derivability 
of the full law of distribution. He included the problematic part as a definition with 
what he termed "the main formulae of aggregation and composition," something he 
had not done in AJM- 1880, and characterized the problematic formula as "unobvious 
and important," while he called the unproblematic part "obvious and trivial." Al- 
though in Note B Peirce primarily discusses relative logic he says that relative terms 
can be aggregated and compounded like others. His remarks about the law of distribu- 
tion appear to apply equally to both relative and nonrelative logic. 
48. According to Peirce (in NEIII-1.289 and CP 2.532) the dilemma was first 
treated in books on rhetoric but was introduced into logic about 1500 by Laurentius 
Valla. 
49. Peirce would not have claimed that all reasoning can be reduced to Barbara, 
only deductive reasoning. (See note 4 above.) I do not know where Whately stood on 
this point. 
50. Whately, Elements, 114. 
51. A good beginning for understanding the problems of Peirce's logic in the light 
of the developments following Principia Mathematica is Randall R. Dipert's disserta- 
tion "Development and Crisis in Late Boolean Logic: the Deductive Logics of Peirce, 
Jevons, and Schr6der" (Indiana University, 1978). 

Peirce and the Law of Distribution 
29 
52. MS 527, pp. 13, 15. 
53. Peirce claimed (CP 3.384n.) that in Note B to Studies in Logic he had "virtually" 
anticipated Schr6der in detecting the inadequacy of AJM-1880 (see note 47 above). 
54. Studies in Logic, By Members of The Johns Hopkins University. Edited by C.S. 
Peirce, Boston: Little, Brown, and Company. Reprinted in 1983 by John Benjamins 
Publishing Company. 
55. MS 527, p. 12. Mitchell also used this disjunctive definition of implication. 
Peirce does not appear to have been familiar at this time with the propositional logic 
of the Megarian and early Stoic logicians, although he knew of it by way of the 
Epicurean critiques. His student, Allen Marquand, lists Zeller's 1880 Stoics, Epicureans, 
and Sceptics as a reference in his "The Logic of the Epicureans" which appeared in 
Studies in Logic. Epicurean logic, particularly that of Philodemus, was the subject of 
Marquand's doctoral thesis for The Johns Hopkins University, for which Peirce was 
his advisor. 
56. See MS $38 (NEIII-1.284ff.), from a correspondence course Peirce offered 
after he left The Johns Hopkins. 
57. "On the Algebra of Logic: A Contribution to the Philosophy of Notation," The 
American Journal of Mathematics 7 (1885) 180-220; CP 3.359-403. Peirce "proved" 
his fifth icon by a short truth-table method. (See MS $527, pp. 2 and 14, for early 
appearances of Peirce's law.) 
Lukasiewicz may have been the first to refer to the fifth icon as "Peirce's Law." (See 
J. Lukasiewicz, Selected Works, ed. L. Borkowski, Amsterdam: North-Holland Pub. 
Co. (1970), p. 296.) The importance of"Peirce's law" for the development of modern 
logic is widely recognized. According to Hao Wang "it is now a familiar result that it 
is necessary to add Peirce's law ... to render the positive implicational calculus 
classically complete" (From Frege to G6del: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 
1879-1931, ed. Jean van Heijenoort, p. 416). A more obscure, though interesting, 
reference to "Peirce's law" (without reference to Peirce) was made by Bertrand Russell 
in a letter to Frege (12.12.1904: Philosophical and Mathematical Correspondence, 
Gottlob Frege, eds. Gabriel, Hermes, Kambartel, Thiel, and Veraart, Chicago, Uni- 
versity of Chicago Press, 1980, p. 168): 
For negation I use as a primitive law: 
[-.'.pDq.~.p:~.p 
which is hardly self-evident. 
Russell called this formula the "principle of reduction.'" His remark is curiously 
similar in manner of presentation to Peirce's own statement in AJM-1885, a paper 
Russell appears to have been acquainted with. 
See Atwell R. Turquette's "Peirce's Icons for Deductive Logic" (Studies, pp. 95- 
108; see note 2 above) for an assessment of AJM-1885. Turquette gives many helpful 
interpretative suggestions. 
58. The Peirce-Huntington correspondence referred to here is all located in MS 
L210 of the Peirce Papers in the Houghton Library at Harvard University. 
59. The drafts of the letter that give the proof appear to deal almost entirely with 
it and contain no general discussion of Huntington's paper. It would seem, then, that 
Peirce's "painstaking" letter must have been sent separately from the one which 
contained the proof. 
The following is the proof as it appears in the most finished draft (with only stylistic 

30 
Nathan Houser 
alterations). The numbers in parentheses refer to formulas in Peirce's published paper 
(AJM-1880), and those in square brackets are steps in the proof. Peirce retained + 
(but with a curved horizontal line) as his sign of disjunction but used a raised dot (-) 
as the sign of conjunction. 
Here is the "tedious" 
llI 33. 
proof of the distributive principle to which I referred Amer. J. Math. 
By(3) 
a'c-<c, 
By(3) 
b'c-<c, 
[1] 
.'. by(2) 
a.c+b.c-<c. 
By(3) 
a'c--<a 
andby(4) 
a-<a+b.'.a'c-<a+b, 
By(3) 
b'c-<b 
andbyC4) 
b-<a+b.'.b.c-<a+b, 
[2] 
.'. by(2) 
a.c+b.c-<a+b. 
From [1] and [2] by (2) 
a.c + b.c --< (a + b).c. 
Now if 
there must be something, m, such that 
[3] 
m -< (a + b)'c 
while 
[4] 
171 ---< a + b'c. 
[5] 
From [3] by (3) m --< a + b. 
[6] 
From [3] by (3) m ---< c. 
From [4] by p. 28 (19) 
a + b'c --< ~. 
Whence by p. 33 (3) a --< ~, 
[7] 
and by p. 28 C19) m -< a, 
and by (3) b-c --< ~, 
and by p. 28 (19) 
re-<b.c. 
(a + b).c -< a + b'c 
(that is, if(a + b).c~a 
+ b'c) 
"This follows from the Dictum 
de omni. That is, it is part of the 
definition of the copula --< that 
if y -< z either y = 0 
or there is something x such that 
x -< y 
If z = 
0 this is so 
x -< z 
even if y = O. 
.It must be so ify --< y. 
Then since ra is not 0 (when m -< b, m -< c, m -< b- c which is absurd), 
by (2) either m -< c contrary to [6], 
or (what we are thus forced to) m -< b. 
But this being the case there must be something, I, such that 
[8] 
l -< m, 
[9] 
t -< b. 
Whence by p. 28 (19) 
b --< T. 
From [8] and [7] 
1 -< a. 
[10] 
Whence by p. 28 (19) 
a -< [, 
and from [9] and [10] by (2) a + b -< 1. 
[l 1] 
Whence by p. 28 (19) 
I -< a + b. 
[12] 
But from [8] and [5] 
l -< a + b. 
And since [11] and [12] cannot both be true the hypothesis that 
(a + b)' c -< a + b' c is absurd. 
[13] 
We have then 
(a+b)'c-<a+b.c. 
Whence by p. 33 (6) c.(a + b) -< (b + a). c, 
and by [13] 
(b+a).c-<b+a'c, 
and by p. 33 (6) 
b+a.c--<a.c+b, 
and by p. 33 (5) (a + b). c --< (a + b). c- c 
and by (6), etc., 
(a + b)' c --< c' Ca + b)- c -< a. c + b. c, etc. 

Peirce and the Law of Distribution 
31 
Peirce added this note: 
I give the above for what it is worth. There may be some fallacy in it. But the principle of 
introducing m and I is certainly not itself fallacious. At least it does not seem to me so. You 
observe that p. 33 follows the whole algebra of the copula, where negation is already 
introduced & defined. But my mind is not now near this subject. 
On 31 January 1902 Peirce had recorded an earlier version of this proof in his logic 
notebook, MS 339(c), p. 437. 
60. Huntington replied on 7 February 1904: 
There is no doubt in my mind that the demonstration is perfectly complete, if one grants 
the necessary assumptions from the "algebra of the copula," namely: 
(A) if a -< b is false, then there is an element x, not 0, such that x --< a and x --< b; and 
(B) ira -< b. then inversely b ---< ~. 
Of these two assumptions, the first one, (A), is the only one which is essential, as the other 
can be readily derived from it. 
61. Huntington, p. 300n. See CP 3.200n. 
62. The proof that Huntington (and later, Lewis) gives for the first part of the law 
of distribution is nearly identical to that of Peirce (except for notational differences), 
but Peirce does not receive credit for it. Huntington may have worked out this part of 
the proof himself, or he may have found it elsewhere. According to Peirce, this principle 
of logic orignated with Boole and was retained by Jevons (AJM- 1880; CP 3.200, n. 3), 
but there is no indication that either Boole or Jevons gave a demonstration. In 1883 
when Schr6der announced that only part of the law of distribution is demonstrable 
(see note 25 above), he indicated that the demonstration followed "the method of Ch. 
Peirce." Thus it is possible that even the proof of this part of the law of distribution 
came (at least indirectly) from Peirce. 
63. Henry H. Crapo and Don D. Roberts, Abstract of"Peirce Algebras and The 
Distributivity Scandal." Journal of Symbolic Logic 34 (1969), 153-154. Peirce's proof, 
and the significance of AJM-1880 for the development of lattice theory, is discussed 
in Crapo's Lattice Theory, University of Waterloo, 1966. 
64. MS 567 contains what remains of Peirce's note to AJM- 1885; a large selection 
was included in the Collected Papers, 3.403A-M. In 3.403An Hartshorne and Weiss 
remark that these notes were written up for publication. It is probably the paper Peirce 
intended as the second part of AJM-1885, which Simon Newcomb refused to publish 
in The American Journal of Mathematics because Peirce would not say its subject was 
mathematics rather than logic. 
65. Peirce does not explicitly distinguish between definitions, rules, and axioms. 
66. Frege is often credited with the discovery of the modern quantifier, and the 
1879 publication of his Begriffsschrift, at least 4 years before the publication of a paper 
by Peirce that might be argued to contain modern quantification theory (Note B in 
Studies in Logic) and 6 years before AJM-1885, is strong prima facie evidence for 
Frege's priority. But Hilary Putnam, in a recent paper about Peirce as a logician 
("Peirce the Logician," Historia Mathematica 9, no. 3, August, 1982) distinguishes 
between discovery that is historically first and discovery that is effective in the sense 
that it initiates a line of research. He says that Frege discovered the quantifier in the 
first sense but that Peirce and his students were its discoverers in the second sense. 

32 
Nathan Houser 
67. O.H. Mitchell, "On a New Algebra of Logic," Studies in Logic, pp. 72-106. 
Peirce frequently remarked on the importance and originality of Mitchell's work; see, 
for example, MS 527 and CP 3.363. Besides its importance for the development of 
quantification theory, Mitchell's work raised doubts for Peirce about the wisdom of 
basing his logic on implication. 

The First Russell Paradox 
Irving H. Anellis 
1. Introduction 
In 1896, Russell read Arthur Hannequin's (1895) book Essai Critique sur 
l'H ypoth~se des Atomes duns la Science Contemporaine, which introduced him 
to Cantor's work for the first time. Shortly thereafter, in 1897, he read Louis 
Couturat's (1896) book De l'lnfini Math~matique and published a review of 
that book in the journal Mind (Russell, 1897). Couturat gave a very careful 
exposition of Cantorian set theory and, most unusual for its day, a very 
favorable one. Russell at first rejected Cantorian set theory, for reasons which 
I detail in Anellis (1984b). Nevertheless, after reading Russell's review of his 
book, Couturat established a correspondence with Russell (1897-1914) that 
lasted until Couturat's tragic death. Thanks to Couturat's efforts, Russell came 
to appreciate better and understand Cantor's work, and soon entered into 
correspondence with Cantor. Cantor soon furnished Russell with reprints of 
his work including Ober die elementare Frage der M annigfaltigkeitslehre (1892). 
This new attitude towards Cantorian set theory, however, did nothing to 
diminish Russell's critical eye. And after reading Cantor (1892), Russell was 
able to obtain the first version of the Russell paradox. In w which is the heart 
of this chapter, I use unpublished documentary evidence to show that Russell 
obtained a version of his famed paradox much earlier than has been com- 
monly assumed, and, with the aid of a work of Crossley (1973) in which the 
Russell paradox was derived directly from the Cantor paradox, I show how 
Russell had done the same, as early as December 1900. For these reasons, it 
becomes necessary to sort through the complex and sometimes confused 
chronological debates on the origin of the Russell paradox (w and the equally 
complex and contentious chronological debate concerning the connections of 
the Russell paradox with the other set-theoretic paradoxes, especially the 
Cantor and Burali-Forti paradoxes, with which the Russell paradox is linked 
in the historical literature (w 

34 
Irving H. Anellis 
2. Chronology of Discovery 
There is some confusion about the chronology of the discovery of the Russell 
paradox. J.B. Rosser (1953, p. 201) states that "the Cantor and Burali-Forti 
paradoxes were discovered about the same time as the Russell paradox .... " 
although he gives no specific year or date. Gregory H. Moore (1982 p. 89) 
notes that Zermelo, working in Schr6der's algebraic logic, obtained "what 
later became known as Russell's paradox, two years before Russell himself" 
found the paradox. Since the date of Zermelo's discovery, using Moore's 
evidence, may be either 1899 or 1900, then we are led to conclude that Russell's 
discovery occurred in either 1901 or 1902. Most likely, Moore had 1901 in 
mind, in light of the evidence provided by Jean van Heijenoort (1967a, Editor's 
Introduction, p. 124) and others. 1 Taking our cue from Rosser (1953, p. 201), 
let us now examine the history of the Cantor and Burali-Forti paradoxes. 
We know that Cantor and Burali-Forti found the paradoxes of the greatest 
cardinal and the greatest ordinal in the years 1897-1899. The usual date for 
Cantor is 1899, with reference to his 28 July 1899 letter to Dedekind (Zermelo, 
1932), while others refer to Cantor's (1895-97) Beitriige zur Begriindung der 
transfiniten Mengenlehre. The reference for Burali-Forti (1897) is his Una 
questione sui humeri transfiniti. The discussion of the Cantor and Burali-Forti 
paradoxes is significant in any consideration of the discovery of the Russell 
paradox, thanks to the connections which Russell's paradox is said to have 
to them. (We shall examine these connections in w 
The usual date given for the discovery by Russell of his paradox is based 
on Russell's letter to Frege of 16 June 1902. 2 
We must note that Russell (1901, p. 95) alludes to the Cantor paradox in 
his survey Recent Work on the Principles of Mathematics. Jourdain (1912, p. 
153) refers to this article; but there is no explanation of the Cantor paradox, 
and no mention at all of the Russell paradox in that survey. Beyond that, we 
can refer to Ivor Grattan-Guinness (1978, p. 135), who in turn refers to Philip 
E.B. Jourdain (1913, p. 146), where, according to Grattan-Guinness, Jourdain 
claims that Russell discovered Cantor's paradox in January 1901, and his own 
in June of that same year. If we refer to Jourdain's (1915, p. 206) notes in 
his translation of Cantor (1895-97), then again we are given the year 1901, 
but without reference to the month, and asked to refer to Jourdain (1912). 
Jourdain (1913, p. 146) does refer to a note sent to him by Russell, according to 
which Russell corrects Jourdain's (1912, p. 153) assertion of the 1912 article 
that the survey (Russell, 1901) was written in January 1901 and that he 
"found his contradiction in June. In January he had only found that there 
must be something wrong..." (Jourdain, 1913 p. 146), without knowing what. 
It worried Russell that "Cantor's proof would show that there is a greater 
transfinite cardinal than the number of all entities." Jourdain is not more 
explicit than that. In his Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, Russell 
(1919, p. 136) also recalls 1901 as the year in which he discovered his paradox, 
while attempting "to discover some flaw in Cantor's proof that there is no 
greatest cardinal." 

The First Russell Paradox 
35 
Given the conflicting claims made by Russell himself, both to Jourdain and 
others, as Grattan-Guinness (I 978, pp. 134-135) delineates, it is perhaps best 
to rely upon archival materials rather than on Russell's retrospective recollec- 
tions. This becomes all the more important inasmuch as, in the only reference 
to the Russell paradox in the published Russell Jourdain correspondence 
(Grattan-Guinness, 1977, pp. 24 29), no mention is made of the chronology 
of the discovery. 
A.R. Garciadiego Dantan (1983) in his thesis has also considered the history 
of the Russell paradox. 3 In the abstract, Garciadiego (1984) specifically men- 
tions correspondence between Russell and Couturat. As I shall show (w the 
letter of 8 December 1900 from Russell to Couturat in the Russell Archives 
conveys the first version of the Russell paradox. If this is the case, Bunn's 
claims (1980, pp. 238-239) for January 1901 would be substantiated. But 
despite reference to the Russell-Couturat correspondence, Garciadiego gives 
the date of May 1901, referring to the penultimate draft of Russell's Principles 
of Mathematics, as the time of Russell's first statement of his paradox. 
Except for Biackwell, Garciadiego Dantan, Grattan-Guinness, Griffin, 
and Moore, none of the people who contributed to the discussion of the 
chronology of the discovery of the Russell paradox (apparently) had access to 
the Russell Archives, and so they based their assertions on available published 
evidence, or on Russell's own, sometimes conflicting, recollections (see 
Grattan-Guinness, 1978, pp. 134-135, fin. 4). Of these people, none cite 
Russell's 8 December 1900 letter as the source for the Russell discovery. 
Therefore, the scholarly consensus among Russell experts who have had 
access to the Russell Archives assigns June 1901 as the earliest time for 
discovery by Russell of his paradox. Of these, only Blackwell and Grattan- 
Guinness have seriously considered the chronology, and Blackwell (1984 5, 
p. 276) did so only in a passing reference. 4 
Before leaving this review of the literature on the chronology of the dis- 
covery of the Russell paradox for a consideration of purely technical questions 
on the connection between the Russell paradox and the Cantor and Burali- 
Forti paradoxes, and the correlation of these questions with the chronological 
question, it would not be amiss to mention Russell's very close collaborations 
with G.H. Hardy and A.N. Whitehead during the period from the 1890s to 
1913, and their mutually shared interests in the paradoxes of set theory. But 
there is nothing extant in the Russell Archives, unfortunately, in the way of 
notes or correspondence between Russell and Hardy or Russell and White- 
head, which can further aid our study of this matter. 
3. The Connection of the Russell Paradox with the Cantor 
and Burali-Forti Paradoxes, and the Chronology of the 
Russell Paradox 
There are, in the literature, five distinct theories of how Russell discovered his 
paradox, each with its own variations. The first holds that Russell obtained 

36 
Irving H. Anellis 
his paradox by deriving it from the Burali-Forti paradox (Temple, 1981, p. 
261). Another holds that it was obtained by an analysis of the proof of the 
Burali-Forti paradox (Peano, 1902-1906, p. 144). A third asserts that the 
Russell paradox is derived from the Cantor paradox. It is espoused by Kleene 
(1971, p. 37); by Beth (1966, p. 484), who fudges by saying that after Cantor's 
paradox became known to Russell the latter constructed his own paradox; by 
Crossley (1973) and Bunn (1980, p. 239), who show how to obtain the Russell 
paradox from the Cantor paradox; by Grattan-Guinness (1978, p. 130), who 
cites Crossely and Bunn; and by H.C. Doets (1983, p. 300), who goes so far as 
to claim that Russell's paradox is Cantor's paradox, and whose reconstruction 
of the Russell paradox from the Cantor paradox is most inelegant compared 
to Crossley's. Another theory asserts that Russell obtained his paradox from 
an analysis of Cantor's paradox and the proof of the Cantor theorem. It is 
espoused by Irving M. Copi (1971, p. 7); P.H. Nidditch (1962, p. 70); A. Levy 
(1979, p. 87), who gives a reconstruction; by N.B. Cocchiarella (1974, p. 553), 
who states that the argument for the Russell paradox is a variant of the 
argument for Cantor's theorem; by Grattan-Guinness (1978, p. 129), referring 
in particular to Russell (1903, pp. 366-367); and by Grattan-Guinness (1980, 
p. 76). This is the theory that Russell himself adopted in his Introduction to 
Mathematical Philosophy. The fifth theory is that the set-theoretic paradoxes 
share a common structure, which is exposed by the Russsell paradox. Accord- 
ing to this theory, the Cantor and Burali-Forti paradoxes are variants or 
special cases of the Russell paradox. Its advocates are Copi (1971, p. 7), van 
Heijenoort (1967b, p. 46), Temple (1981, p. 33), and Rosser (1953, p. 205). The 
most common version of this theory is, from the philosophical perspective, 
that the paradoxes share the structure of the "vicious circle principle," as 
defined by Chihara (1973, p. 3) and Poincar6 (1906, pp. 307-308). 
Grattan-Guinness does not make clear what relation, if any, there is 
between the Russell paradox and the paradoxes of the greatest cardinal and 
the greatest ordinal. He espouses at once both the third and fourth theories. 
J. van Heijenoort (1967b, p. 46) makes it clear that the paradox of the greatest 
ordinal is the Burali-Forti paradox, and the paradox of the greatest cardinal 
is the Cantor paradox, and is due to Cantor himself, as a direct result of the 
power set axiom--or Cantor theorem, van Heijenoort also makes it clear that 
the Cantor and Burali-Forti paradoxes arise from technical difficulties in 
Cantor's naive set theory, while the Russell paradox, which is of the same 
loyical kind, is more basic insofar as it involves "the bare notions of set and 
element" (van Heijenoort, 1967a, p. 124, Editor's Introduction; 1967b, p. 46). 
Rosser (1953, p. 205) notes that the Russell paradox proves that ~ (x e x) does 
not determine a class, whereas the Cantor and Burali-Forti paradoxes prove 
that additional statements (about largest cardinal and largest ordinal) do 
not determine classes. Thus, it is not surprising that van Heijenoort should 
conclude that part of the stimulus for Russell's discovery of his paradox was 
a reflection about the Cantor and Burali-Forti paradoxes and their structure. 
Grattan-Guinness (1972), however, quotes Russell's 15 March 1906 letter to 

The First Russell Paradox 
37 
P.E.B. Jourdain, to the effect that Russell engaged in serious reflection about 
the Burali-Forti paradox only as late as 1905. Despite Grattan-Guinness's 
inferences, there is no explicit statement in Russell's letter to Jourdain linking 
the Burali-Forti paradox to the Russell paradox. While Russell must have 
been mistaken in his recollection of 1905 as the year in which he studied the 
Burali-Forti paradox, given his references to that paradox in The Principles 
of Mathematics, p. 323, of 1903, we are led nevertheless to connect the 
chronology of the Russell paradox to the Cantor paradox alone, as evidence 
provided by Coffa (1979) (which we shall consider momentarily, in w suggests. 
This does nothing, however, to invalidate the theory that the Burali-Forti and 
Cantor paradoxes share the logical structure of the Russell paradox--the 
most basic paradox of set theory--and that the Burali-Forti and Cantor 
paradoxes are just variants or special cases of the Russell paradox. 
As is well known, the Russell paradox, in its present form, stems from 
Frege's allowing a function to be taken as an indeterminate argument for 
another, higher-order function. Thus, as van Heijenoort points out (1967b, p. 
46), it is equivalent in structure to the Burali-Forti and Cantor paradoxes. Let 
S be the set of all sets, having cardinality ~t. If the sets composing the set S are 
well-ordered aggregates, that is, have each a least element and a well-defined 
linear succession of elements, then we ask whether S itself is well-ordered. Now 
let U be the set of all subsets of S. Then the cardinality of U must be greater than ct. 
Now according to Cantor (1883a, p. 169), U must also be well-ordered. For 
Russell in the Principles, it does not follow that if each subset of U is well-ordered, 
then so is U. Thus, for Burali-Forti and Cantor, the question is whether the 
aggregates defined by the ordinal of U and the cardinal fl of U are well-ordered. 
Now we recall that the Russell set r is the set whose elements are sets which 
are not members of themselves. For all x, x 9 r if and only if x ~ x (which 
Rosser (1953, p. 205) wrote as ~(x 9 x~); we get immediately that r 9 r if and 
only ifr r r by substitution using universal instantiation. As Russell noted, the 
problem becomes that of whether r can count as a class; for if x is the class of 
all classes, then necessarily r 9 x if r is a class. Thus, the problem now is 
whether the class of all classes is a class. At first, Russell thought it was. But 
this is exactly the problem raised by Russell when first examining Cantor, and 
it is raised, as we shall see (in w 
in exactly these same terms in Russell's 8 
December 1900 letter to Couturat. Thus, Russell is essentially raising the 
question of whether x is a well-ordered aggregate if we can obtain r 9 r r r r r 
from x 9 rc~x r x. For Russell it does not follow from x 9 r and x's being 
well-ordered that r is a well-ordered aggregate. Moreover, if x is the class of 
all classes, it becomes an open question whether x is well-ordered. But if in 
fact the class of classes is a class, then the set-theoretic paradoxes arise. 
Thus, Rosser (1953, p. 23) takes the Russell paradox to warrant a distinction 
between sets and classes, according to which all sets are classes while some 
classes are nonsets. 5 In 1900, however, Russell made no such distinction 
between sets and classes. He held that the class of classes is a class. Thus, the 
set-theoretic paradoxes were built into Cantor's naive set theory. 

38 
Irving H. Anellis 
4. The First Russell Paradox 
The first Russell paradox, or more carefully, the first version of the Russell 
paradox, is connected with a mistake which Russell discovered in Cantor's 
(1892) proof of the nonexistence of a greatest cardinal, i.e., precisely in connec- 
tion with the Cantor paradox. The Cantor paradox arises in Cantor's proof 
of his theorem that there is no greatest cardinal. Thus those who connected 
the Russell paradox to the Cantor paradox were correct; they were mistaken 
only in believing that Russell discovered his paradox in 1901. 6 The first Russell 
paradox was stated by Russell in a letter to Couturat of 8 December 1900. 
According to this letter, Cantor's attempt to prove the inexistence of a greatest 
cardinal contains a mistake which in fact, thought Russell, proves exactly the 
opposite of what Cantor intended. The subject of this proof is now known as 
Cantor's theorem, which reads (Cantor, 1892, p. 77): "... die Miichtigkeiten 
wohldefinierter Mannigtfaltigkeiten kein Maximum haben oder, was dasselbe ist, 
... jeder gegebenen Manni~faltigkeit L eine andere M an die Seite gestellt 
werden kann, welche yon stiirker Miichtigkeit ist als L," ("the power of a 
well-defined set has no maximum or, what is the same, for each given set L 
another M can be found whose power is greater than that of L.") 
Cantor gave two proofs for his theorem. The first is the famous diagonal 
argument which, for any given set, allows us to construct a new set from the 
elements of the original set such that the new set contains some elements 
not contained in the original set, so that the cardinality of the new set is 
greater than that of the original set. (This diagonal proof is carefully and 
fully explained by Joseph W. Dauben (1980, pp. 204-205), and is hastily 
summarized by Grattan-Guinness (1978, pp. 127-128).) Our concern is with 
the second proof. The first proof shows that the cardinality of the new set is 
greater than that of the orignial set. The second proof purports to show that 
the new set is neither smaller than nor equal in cardinality to the original set. 
This second proof runs as follows. 
Let L be the linear continuum, let R be the set of all reals x in the interval 
[0, 1], and let M be the set of all one-to-one functions f(x) from elements 
x ~ [0, 1] onto the set {0, 1 }. Now if there is an isomorphism f: x ~ {0, 1 } 
such that f(xo) = 1 and f(xv) = 0 (for all v # 0, x, e [0, 1]), then M does not 
have a smaller cardinality than L. Now suppose that card(M) = card(R). Then 
there is a binary function F(x, z) from f into elements z e [0, 1], and F is an 
isomorphism. It is here, at this stage in his proof, that Cantor announces that 
a contradiction follows. Define g(x) such that 
{~ 
if F(x,x)=O, 
g(x) = 
if F(x, x) = l, 
Since g(x) is characteristic over a subset of R, then g(x) c M. But now g(x) 
also cannot have a value z = Zo result from F(x, z), since F(zo, Zo) is not the 
same as g(zo). Thus, contrary to hypothesis, no such isomorphism as f can 
occur, since clearly f(x~) = f(x~) if and only ifx~ = xB, by definition ofisomor- 

The First Russell Paradox 
39 
phism. But it does not always necessarily happen that x, = xa. This means 
that for f: PA ~ A (writing PA as the power set of A), f cannot be an 
isomorphism, since card(PA)> card(A). Thus, card(M)> card(R). But by 
hypothesis, card(M) = card(R). This contradiction, the Cantor paradox, is a 
paradox of cardinality. 
We may reformulate it in more familiar terms, set-theoretically rather than 
function-theoretically. Define the power set of a, P(a), as Ix: x c a}. Given the 
power set axiom (i.e., Cantor's theorem), which means that 
3xVy(x ~ y ~ Vz(z E x ~ z ~ a)), 
write Yz(z e x ~ z ~ a) as x c a. We thus get P(a) = 3xVy(x e yc~ x c a), 
which means that if a is an element of the set A, it is also an element of the 
power set of A, and, more importantly, that for any set A, clearly PA ~ A. Let 
B be so defined that B c PA =~card(B)< card(PA). Clearly PA contains 
subsets of A, among these B, including ~ and A itself. So card(PA) > card(A). 
In fact, Cantor's theorem says, in modern terminology, that if card(A) = ct, 
then card(PA) = 2". But now let S be the set of all sets. Then card(PS) > 
card(S), by the previous result. But by definition of S as the set of all sets, 
clearly S ~- PS. Therefore, we have 
card(PS) > card(S) & S ~- PS. 
This is again the Cantor paradox, and is clearly a paradox of cardinality. But 
it has now been expressed in Russellian terms, by defining S as the set of all 
sets (or, what was the same for Russell, the class of all classes). In fact, as we 
shall now see, Russell in 1900 was already expressing the Cantor paradox in 
exactly these terms, as the class of all classes being a class. In doing so, he was 
giving the first version of the Russell paradox, which we shall distinguish from 
the classical version of the Russell paradox found in June 1901, some 6 months 
later and carried out in the classical version in terms of the Russell set. 
Russell wrote, in his letter to Couturat (1900 Russell to Couturat, 8 
December 1900); 
I have found a mistake in Cantor, who holds that there is no greatest cardinal 
number. But the number of classes is the greatest number. The best proof to the 
contrary that Cantor gives is found in Jahresber. Deutsch. Math.-Verein. I, 1892, 
pp. 75 78. It consists basically, in showing that, if u is a class of which the number 
is or, the number of classes contained in u (which is 2") is larger than ~t. But the proof 
presupposes that there are some classes contained in u which are not individuals 
of u: now if u = Class, this is false: every class of classes is a class. 7 
Unfortunately, Russell did not go on to develop his argument more ex- 
haustively, or provide a formal proof, in his letter to Couturat. Nor can 
anything be located in the Russell Archives which develops the argument 
suggested to Couturat in the quoted letter. Nor has Grattan-Guinness, who 
has done research at the Russell Archives and who has considered the chrono- 
logy of the origin of the Russell paradox, given any indication of having found 

40 
Irving H. Anellis 
evidence of an early (prior to June 1901) version of the Russell paradox. He 
does give (Grattan-Guinness, 1978, p. 127), as we have noted, a reference to 
Cantor's (1892) paper, including the passages to which Russell referred in his 
letter to Couturat. But Grattan-Guinness (1978, pp. 127-128) is concerned 
here exclusively with the development of the diagonal argument which Cantor 
used to prove his theorem and prove the nondenumerability of the linear 
continuum. Grattan-Guinness (1978, pp. 129-130) attempts to show that the 
Russell paradox can be obtained from the Cantor paradox within the argu- 
ment for Cantor's theorem, but does not conclude that Russell actually did 
so. Instead he discusses how a reconstruction of the Russell paradox from 
Cantor's argument mioht go, relying on that alluded to by Bunn (1980, p. 239) 
and carried out by Crossley (1973) to show that such a reconstruction is 
possible. Grattan-Guinness (1978, p. 128) incorrectly asserts that Cantor failed 
to associate M with the linear continuum, by failing to assign elements of 
x e [0, 1] to {0, 1}. But as we have seen, this is precisely what Cantor (1892, 
p. 77) did do, by allowing f(x) to be a subset of M taking x o ~ [0, 1] to 1 
and every other x ~ [0, 1] to 0, while L = x ~ [0, 1]. Elsewhere, Cantor had 
already shown that there is an isomorphic correspondence between the points 
in the topology of L and the elements of the set of reals (see, e.g., Cantor (1883a, 
p. 343)). 
The late J. Alberto Coffa does much better. His 1979 article (Coffa, 1979 
p. 33) quotes Russell's 8 December 1900 letter to Couturat and claims (p. 37) 
that, thinking back to that letter, Russell, around May 1901, realized that the 
thoughts expressed to Couturat were merely--in Coffa's words--a "gestalt 
switch away from the celebrated paradox." Moore (1988, p. 52) argued that 
Russell in his 8 December 1900 letter to Couturat "expressed the paradox of 
the largest cardinal .... but still did not regard it as a paradox." Moore (1988, 
p. 53) goes on to say that it was not until May of 1901, however, "that Russell 
discovered Russell's paradox as a paradox ...". I go further than Coffa and 
Moore. 
It is evident that Russell, although he did not work through the details, 
declaring to Couturat that it would have been too involved to do so, did in fact 
obtain a primitive version of the Russell paradox, that is, the .first version of 
the Russell paradox, on 8 December 1900. He did so by restating, in set- 
theoretic terms, the Cantor paradox, that is, by substituting the class of classes 
for the power set PS and substituting the class contained in the class of classes 
for the set S. Russell was no longer considering the cardinality of S and of PS, 
but class inclusion. It was left only to rewrite this in terms of the Russell set, 
and easy step, and to consider the nature of class inclusion with respect to the 
Russell set. 8 This may also be considered in terms of the well-ordering of the 
set of all sets as much as in terms of self-reference. What Coffa meant by a 
"gestalt switch" enabling Russell to see the classical version of his paradox 
embedded in the analysis of the Cantor paradox, I suggest, is appropriately 
understood in relation to Russell's statement to Jourdain, reported in Jour- 
dain (1913, p. 146), of the realization that something was wrong with Cantor's 
proof of his theorem, without knowing what. It is appropriate to interpret this 

The First Russell Paradox 
41 
to mean that Russell recognized the problem, and even what the problem was, 
without yet being able to full apprehend its portent for set theory and without 
yet having the requisite tools to attempt a solution. 
Despite these uncertainties, we can see that the core of the classical Russell 
paradox is already present in the letter of 8 December 1900 by following the 
work of J.N. Crossley (1973). He was able, without having access to the letter, 
to directly translate into set-theoretic terms Cantor's function-theoretic treat- 
ment of the cardinality of the power set as given in Cantor (1892), and thereby 
he independently obtained a version of the Russell paradox. 
Crossley (1973) show that the cardinality of PS and of S are not equal, 
which is half of Cantor's argument: namely that card(PS) > card(S). Take S 
to be the universe, and thus obtain card(PS) = card(S), i.e., PS ~- S. Iff is an 
isomorphism between PS and S, then for y = {x ~ S: ~(x e f(x))}, we obtain 
y ~ S =~ y e PS. This implies that for some z e S, y = f(z). Then for all x e S, 
we get x ~yr 
~(x e f(x)), which means that x e.f(z)r 
~(x e f(x)), lfx = z, 
then by substitution, we immediately get z E f(x)r 
~ (z E (f(z)), which is the 
classical Russell paradox. It also follows that there can be no such isomor- 
phism f between S and PS. Moreover, if we replace PS with the class of classes, 
S with the class u in Russell's letter to Couturat, and substitute the nonisomor- 
phism of PS > S with the condition of being the Russell set, we obtain the 
standard version of the classical Russell paradox. It is sufficient to point to 
the class of classes as being a class--introduced in the letter to Couturat-- 
together with the assertion that there are some classes in u = which are not 
individuals of u and letting u = class, to obtain the first, or primitive, version 
of the Russell paradox from the Cantor paradox as presented Cantor (1892). 
Most assuredly, Russell is already interested, in this letter, in the paradox 
involving set inclusion, and not the cardinalities of the sets. Thus, Crossley's 
derivation of the Russell paradox from the Cantor paradox as presented in 
1892 confirms my conjecture (Anellis, 1983, 1984a, b, pp. 9-10, 1987, pp. 20-25) 
that Russell's criticism of Cantor is the unproved anticipation, or primitive 
version, of the Russell paradox, and predates by approximately 18 months the 
official classical version, the final version presented in his letter of Frege. At 
most, we have the first version of the Russell paradox, obtained some 6 months 
before the first version of the classical Russell paradox. What is patently 
missing, however, in Russell's appraisal o~ Cantor's argument in the letter to 
Couturat, is the "very long argument" that Russell mentioned to Couturat 
which would justify Russell's appraisal. Only that would permit the historian 
to confirm that Russell actually came to a realization that he had the paradox 
in hand when he wrote the letter, or to determine how close he came there to 
fully worked out precursor of the classical Russell paradox. 
Acknowledgments 
J.N. Crossely informed me about his derivation of the Russell paradox from 
the proof of Cantor's theorem in a note dated 15 February 1984. Kenneth 
Blackwell of the Russell Archives at McMaster University and Nick Griffin 

42 
Irving H. Anellis 
[formerly] of the Bertrand Russell Editorial Project at McMaster University 
expertly and expeditiously provided answers to my inquiries, and copies of 
required documents. Their assistance is greatly appreciated. Thomas Druck- 
er's expert use of the editor's blue pencil went a long way towards improving 
what began as a long and rambling essay, and has earned him the gratitude 
of readers of this chapter. I also wish to thank Alexander Abian for his careful 
reading. 
Notes 
1. In the television series 'Nova' program "A Mathematical Mystery Tour," pre- 
pared by BBC-TV in 1984 and broadcast on 5 March 1985. Moore explicitly refers to 
the traditional date of June 1901, in connection with the letter to Frege of 16 June 
1902. (See the transcript of this program, p. 12; transcript # 1208, WGBH, c. 1985.) 
2. Kleene (1967, p. 186) gives the year as 1902, as do the historians of mathematics 
Carl Boyer (1968, p. 663) and George Temple (1981, p. 32), and the historians of logic 
William and Martha Kneale (1962, p. 652). Elsewhere, Temple (p. 261) considers 
June 1901 as the discovery month, in connection with Russell's (1903) writing of the 
Principles of Mathematics (which was undertaken in 1900) and with his study of 
the Burali-Forti paradox. Temple there gives the letter to Frege as Russell's first 
announcement of the paradox. Guiseppe Peano (1902-1906, p. 144), Evert W. Beth 
(1966, p. 207), Azriel Levy (1937, p. 6), and Kleene (1971, p. 37) give the year as 1903, 
which, as Grattan-Guinness (1980, p. 76) and R. Bunn (1980, p. 238) note, is actually 
the year of first publication of the Russell paradox (in Principles of Mathematics, 
p. 323) and Frege's Grund#esetze der Arithmetik, (1903, II, pp. 253-265). P.H. Nidditch 
(1962, p. 70), H. DeLong (1970, p. 81), and Jean van Hiejenoort (1967a, Editor's 
Introduction, p. 124), in their histories of logic, give the year 1901 for Russell's discovery 
of his paradox, as does the chief Russell Archivist, Kenneth Blackwell (1984-5, p. 276), 
who cites for his evidence the penultimate draft of the Principles of Mathematics and 
Russell's own claims (see Russell (1919, p. 136)). Blackwell and van Heijenoort give the 
date as June 1901, Blackwell citing archival evidence. R. Bunn (1980, pp. 238-239) gives 
January 1901 as the proximate date of Russell's discovery, however, and 1901 as the 
year of his first mention of it in print, although there is little evidence adduced by Bunn 
to support his conclusion. 
3. By his rather strange and elaborate subtitle to his thesis--Bertrand Russell and 
the origin of the set-tbeoretic paradoxes: An inquiry into the causes that allowed and 
motivatd him to create some of the best-known paradoxes and how others were 
discovered--Garciadiego appears to suggest that Russell discovered the Cantor and 
Burali-Forti paradoxes prior to their discoveries by Cantor and Burali-Forti. More- 
over, Moore and Garciadiego's article (1981) claims explicitly that Russell discovered 
the Burali-Forti paradox before Burali-Forti himself did so. This is clearly impossible, 
since Burali-Forti published his paradox in 1897, and it is based on his reading of 
Cantor's 1892 and 1895 papers while Cantor discovered his paradox not later than 
1899, and by many accounts in 1897, and in fact one can find it as early as 1892. In 
any of these cases, Russell could not possibly have discovered the Cantor or Burali- 
Forti paradoxes earlier than 1897; as his notebook, What Shall I Read? (Russell, 1983), 
indicates, Russell did not begin reading Cantor in a serious and systematic way until 
the latter part of 1897, after completing his review of Couturat. Since I have not had 

The First Russell Paradox 
43 
direct access to Garciadiego's work, I shall disregard it for this study. I have seen the 
abstract and have also benefitted from discussions about it with Kenneth Blackwell 
of the Russell Archives and Nick Griffin (formerly) of the Bertrand Russell Editorial 
Project. 
4. If we turn to Grattan-Guinness, we find that our confusion concerning this 
chronology remains undiminished. Thus, Grattan-Guinness (1978, p. 129) writes that 
"Cantor was the first mathematician to discover paradoxes in set theory. Around the 
time of Russell's discovery of his work he found the paradoxes of the greatest ordinal 
and the greatest cardinal .... Russell discovered the cardinal paradox for himself early 
in 1901, and sometime in the next 6 months found his own." It is not immediately clear, 
from Grattan-Guinness's equivocal use of pronouns, that the one who discovered the 
paradoxes of the greatest ordinal and the greatest cardinal, after Russell discovered 
Cantor's work, was Cantor, not Russell; but one must assume from the first sentence 
quoted that Grattan-Guinness meant that Cantor discovered the Cantor paradox (and 
the Burali-Forti paradox) about the time that Russell discovered Cantor's work. We 
must also immediately point out what is either a very distinct error or, minimally, the 
source of additional confusion; Grattan-Guinness seems here to suggest that Russell 
discovered Cantor's work in or around 1901, and as a result found the Cantor paradox 
in early 1901, whereas I have already shown--and as Grattan-Guinness himself is in 
fact aware--that Russell first became aware of Cantor's work as early as 1896, at 
which time he began to read French translations of Cantor's work published in Acta 
Mathematica of 1883, as I pointed out (Anellis 1983, 1984b, 1987, pp. 1 4) (see Anellis 
1984a, p. 2 for a list of Cantor's papers read by Russell in 1896, as based on Russell's 
own records in What Shall ! Read?), while his first favorable contact with Cantor's 
work was made in connection with Couturat's book (1896), that is, in 1897, the very 
year in which Burali-Forti published his paradox and the very year in which Cantor 
published Part I1 of Cantor (1895-97), in which is evident the Cantor paradox. 
5. In same way, Cantor (1895-97) himself, in consideration of his own paradox, 
eventually came to distinguish between complete and incomplete multiplicities. 
Whether such distinctions are sufficient to avoid the paradoxes has been rendered 
questionable by Alexander Abian, who has formulated the paradox A e xc:.x r x, 
allowing us to obtain A 9 A r162 A r A. On this question, Abian states (private communi- 
cation, 20 December 1985): 
Another example which shows that in general the assertion of the existence of sets which are 
supposed to satisfy some unrestricted property is not permissible and may lead to a paradox, 
is the following assertion of the existence of a set A via: 
(1) 
(x)(A 9 x.cz.x r x) 
or which is the same as: 
(xl(A C x ~ 
x 9 x). 
Note that neither is equivalent to Russell's example, i.e., 
Ix)(x 9 A ~ x r x) 
or 
Ix)(x r ,,t o x(- x). 
Considering (1), we see that A can neither a set nor a class because replacing x in (1) by the 
empty see ~ we have: 

44 
Irving H. Anellis 
where A 9 ~ is always false (regardless of whether A is a set or a class) and O r ~ is always 
true, which gives us False r 
is a paradox. 
The conclusion from Abian's paradox is that neither sets nor classes should be 
formulated in terms of arbitrary and unrestricted (that is noncanonical) properties and 
that some axioms prescribing some rules for formations of sets and classes should exist 
which hopefully do not yield paradoxes (and they should be appropriatedly corrected 
in case they yield paradoxes). The first published announcement of the Abian paradox 
was published by Anellis (1988). 
6. Russell himself is responsible for popularization of this error. In Russell (1919, 
p. 136) he wrote, "When I first came upon this contradiction, in the year 1901. I 
attempted to discover some flaw in Cantor's proof that there is no greatest cardinal .... " 
Thus, his memory is faulty on the date, but correct on the circumstance of the 
connection of the Russell paradox with the Cantor paradox. 
7. The original runs, "J'ai d6couvert une erreur dans Cantor, qui soutient qu'il n'y 
a pas un nombre cardinal maximum. Or le nombre des classes est le nombre maximum. 
La meilleure des preuves du contraire que donne Cantor se trouve dans Jahresber. 
Deutsch. Math.-Verein. 1, 1892, pp. 75-78. Elle consiste au fond ~i montrer que, si u est 
un [sic] classe dont le nombre estct, le nombre des classes contenues dans u (qui est 
2 ") est plus grand que ct. Mais la preuve pr/~suppose qu'il y a des classes contenues 
dans u qui ne sont pas des individus d'u; or si u = classe, ceci est faux: tout [sic] classe 
de classes est une classe." 
8. In this way, we obtain directly the Grelling paradox of heterologicality (see van 
Heijenoort (1967b, p. 47)), which is, like the classical version of the Russell paradox, a 
paradox of self-reference. 
References 
AR is used to designate unpublished documents located in the Bertrand Russell 
Archives, Mills Memorial Library, at McMaster University. BREP is used to designate 
typeset documents prepared by the Bertrand Russell Editorial Project at McMaster 
University for planned publication in Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell; numerical 
designations refer to tentative placement of these papers by volume number and article 
number. 
Anellis, I.H. (1983), Bertrand Russell's earliest reactions to Cantorian set theory, 
Preliminary report, Abstracts Amer. Math. Soc. 4, 531. 
Anellis, I.H. (1984a), Russell on Cantor: An early version of the Russell paradox? 
Preliminary report, Abstracts Amer. Math. Soc. 5, 128. 
Anellis, I.H. (1984b), Bertrand Russell's earliest reactions to Cantorian set theory, 
1896-1900, in J.E. Baumgartner, D.A. Martin, and S. Shelah, (eds.), Axiomatic Set 
Theory, Contemp. Math. 31, 1-11. 
Anellis, I.H. (1987), Russell's earliest interpretation of Cantorian set theory, 1896-1900, 
Philosophia Mathematica (n.s.) 2, 1-31. 
Anellis, I.H. (1988), The Abian Paradox, Abstracts of papers presented to the American 
Mathematical Society 9, 6. 
Beth, E.W. (1966), The Foundations of Mathematics, rev. ed., Harper & Row, New 
York. 
Blackwell, K. (1984-5), The Text of the Principles of Mathematics, Russell (2), 4 
(1984-1985), 271-288. 

The First Russell Paradox 
45 
Boyer, C.B. (1968), A History of Mathematics, Wiley, New York. 
Bunn, R. (1980), Developments in the foundations of mathematics, 1870-1910, in I, 
Grattan-Guinness (ed.), From the Calculus to Set Theory. 1630-1910: An In- 
troductory History, Duckworth, London, pp. 221-255. 
Burali-Forti, C. (1897), Una questione sui numeri transflniti, Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo 
11, 154-164. (English translation in van Heijenoort (1976a, pp. 104-111). 
Cantor, G. (1883a), Essais math~matiques, Acta Math. 2, 305-414. 
Cantor, G. (1883b), Grundlagen einer allgemeinen Mannigfaltigkeitslehre Math. Ann. 
21,545-586. (Reprinted in Zermelo (1932, pp. 165-204).) 
Cantor, G. (1892), Ober die elementare Frage der Mannigfaltigkeitslehre, Jahresber. 
Deutsch. Math.-Verein. 1, 75-78. 
Cantor, G. Cantor an Dedekind, 28 Juli, 1899, Zermelo (1932, pp. 443-447). (English 
translation in van Heijenoort (1967a, pp. 113-!17).) 
Cantor, G. (1895-97), Beitr~ige zur Begriindung der transfiniten Mengenlehre, Math. 
Ann. 46, 481-512; 49, 207-246. (English translation in Jourdain (1915).) 
Chihara, C.S. (1973), Ontology and the Vicious Circle Principle, Cornell University 
Press, New York. 
Cocchiarella, N.B. (1974), Fregean semantics for a realist ontology, Notre Dame J. 
Formal Logic 15, 552-568. 
Coffa, J.A. (1979), The humble origins of Russell's paradox, Russell (o.s.) nos. 33-34, 
31-37. 
Copi, I.M. (1971), The Theory of Logical Types, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London. 
Couturat, L. (1896), De I'lnfini MathEmatique, F61ix Alcan, Paris. 
Crossley, J.N. 11973), A note on Cantor's theorem and Russell's paradox, Austral. J. 
Philos. 51, 70-71. 
Dauben, J.W. (1980), The development of Cantorian set theory, in I. Grattan-Guinness 
(ed.), From the Calculus to Set Theory, 1630-1910: An Introductory History, 
Duckworth, London, pp. 181-219. 
DeLong, H. (1970), A Profile of Mathematical Logic, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. 
Doets, H.C. (1983), Cantor's paradise. Nieuw Arch. Wisk. 1,290-344. 
Frege, G. (1903), Grundgesetze der Arithmetik !!, Pohle, Jena. 
Garciadiego Dantan, A.R. (! 983), Bertrand Russell and the Origin of the Set-Theoretic 
Paradoxes, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Toronto. 
Garciadiego Dantan, A.R. (1984), Abstract: Bertrand Russell and the origin of the 
set-theoretic paradoxes, Dissert. Abstracts International 44, 2864-A. 
Grattan-Guinness, I. (1972), Bertrand Russell on his paradox and the multiplicative 
axiom: an unpublished letter to Philip Jourdain, J. Philos. Logic I, 103-110. 
Grattan-Guinness, 1. (ed.) (1977), Dear Russell-Dear Jourdain: A Commentary on 
Russell's Logic, Based on His Correspondence with Philip Jourdain, Columbia 
University Press, New York. 
Grattan-Guinness, I. (1978), How Bertrand Russell discovered his paradox, Historia 
Math. 5, 127-137. 
Grattan-Guinness, I. 11980), Georg Cantor's influence on Bertrand Russell, Hist. 
Philos. Logic 1, 61 69. 
Hannequin, A. (1895), Essai Critique sur l'Hypoth~se des Atomes darts la Science 
Contemporaine, Masson, Paris. 
Jourdain, P.E.B. (1912), Mr. Bertrand Russell's first work on the principles of mathe- 
matics, Monist 22, 149-158. 
Jourdain, P.EB. (1913), A correction and some remarks, Monist 23, 145-148. 

46 
Irving H. Anellis 
Jourdain, P.E.B. (trans.) (1915), Cantor, Contributions to the Founding of the Theory 
of Transfinite Numbers, with an Introduction and Notes, Open Court, New York. 
(Reprinted by Dover, New York, 1955.)(English translation of Cantor (1895).) 
Kleene, S.C. (1967), Mathematical Logic, Wiley, New York. 
Kleene, S.C. (1971), Introduction to Metamathematics, North-Holland/American 
Elsevier, Amsterdam/New York. 
Kneale, W. and Kneale, M. (1962), The Development of Logic, Clarendon Press, 
Oxford. 
Levy, A. (1979), Basic Set Theory, Springer-Verlag, New York. 
Moore, G.H. (1982), Zermelo's Axiom of Choice: Its Origins, Development and Influence, 
Springer-Verlag, New York. 
Moore, G.H. (1988), The roots of Russell's paradox, Russell (n.s.) 8, 46 56. 
Moore, G.H. and Garciadiego, A.R. (1981), Burali-Forti's paradox: a reappraisal of its 
origins, Historia Math. 8, 319-350. 
Nidditch, P.H. (1962), The Development of Mathematical Logic, Routledge & Kegan 
Paul, London; Dover, New York. 
Peano, G. (1902 1906), Super teorema de Cantor-Bernstein et additione, Riv. Mat. 8, 
136-157. 
Poincar6, H. (1906), Les Math6matiques et ia Iogique. IV. Rev. M&aphysique et de 
Morale 14, 294-317. 
Rosser, J.B. (1953), Logic for Mathematicians, McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Russell, B. (1983), What Shall I Read? MS notebook, AR. Covers the years 1891-1902. 
(In K. Blackwell, N. Griffin, R. Rempel, and J. Slater (eds.), Collected Papers of 
Bertrand Russell, I, Allen and Unwin, London, pp. 347-365.) 
Russell, B. (1897), Review of De l'Infini Math~matique by Louis Couturat, AR-BREP 
2:6. Mind 6, 112-119. 
Russell, B. RusselI-Couturat Correspondence, 1897-1914, AR. 
Russell, B. (1901), Recent work on the Principles of Mathematics, AR-BREP 2:39, 15 
pp. Published in International Monthly 4, 83-101. (Reprinted as Mathematics and 
the Metaphysicians, B. Russell (1918), Mysticism and Logic, Longmans, Green, 
New York, pp. 74-96.) 
Russell, B. (1902), Letter to Frege (June 16, 1902), in German; AR. (English translation 
by B. Woodward in van Heijenoort (1967a, pp. 124-125).) 
Russell, B. (1903), Principles of Mathematics, Cambridge University Press, London. 
Russell, B. (1919), Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, Allen and Unwin, London. 
Temple G. (1981), 100 Years of Mathematics, Springer-Verlag, New York. 
van Heijenoort, J. (ed.) (1967a), From Frege to G6del: A Source Book in Mathematical 
Logic, 1879-1931. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. 
van Heijenoort, J. (1967b), Logical paradoxes, in P. Edwards (ed.), Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, Vol. 5, Macmillan, New York, pp. 45-51. 
Zermelo, E. (ed.) (1932), Cantors Gesammelte A bhandlungen mathematischen und philo- 
sophischen lnhalts, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. (Reprinted: Olms, Hildesheim, 1962.) 

Principia Mathematica and 
the Development of Automated 
Theorem Proving 
Daniel J. O'Leary 
I. Introduction 
The present chapter describes the first two major published works in auto- 
mated theorem proving, the Logic Theory Machine (LT) of Newell, Shaw, and 
Simon about 1956 and the work of Wang in 1958. Both works attempted to 
prove theorems in propositional logic found in Principia Mathematica. While 
the LT is the first published example of automated theorem proving, Martin 
Davis, in 1954, wrote a program to prove theorems in additive arithmetic 
(Loveland, 1984, p. 1). His results were not published. 
Part I, Section A of Principia Mathematica (PM) (Whitehead and Russell, 
1935) is entitled "The Theory of Deduction" and covers 35 pages of the 
sixteen-hundred page work. In this section, Whitehead and Russell state and 
prove about two hundred theorems in propositional logic. The LT attempted 
to prove the first 52 theorems and succeeded with 38. Wang's program proved 
them all. The two projects had the same goal, but quite different approaches. 
Even the concept of what constitutes a proof is different. 
To help understand the differences in these approaches we adopt some 
definitions from Loveland 0984). By automated theorem proving we mean 
"the use of a computer to prove nonnumerical results ... often [requiring] 
human readable proofs rather than a simple statement 'proved'." Loveland 
identifies two major approaches to automated theorem proving which he calls 
the logic approach and the human simulation or human-orientated approach. 
"The logic approach is characterized by the presence of a dominant logical 
system that is carefully delineated and essentially static over the development 
stage of the theorem proving system." 
The human simulation programs attempt to find proofs in the way a 
mathematician would. They usually have a body of facts, a knowledge base 
to which they refer, an executive director which controls the decision-making 
process, and the ability to chain both forward and backward. Newell, Shaw, 
and Simon's LT is a human simulation theorem prover; it attempts to find a 
proof a human would find using all the theorems proved previously. Wang's 
work follows the logic approach, and tends to give a result more akin to the 
word "proved" with reasons why the assertion can be made. 

48 
Daniel J. O'Leary 
2. The Logic Theory Machine (LT) 
Herbert Simon and Allen Newell of Carnegie-Mellon University and J.C. 
Shaw of the Rand Corporation wrote the LT programs in 1956 and 1957. 
They wrote this human simulation program to understand "how it is possible 
to solve difficult problems such as proving mathematical theorems, discover- 
ing scientific laws from data, playing chess, or understanding the meaning of 
English prose." (Newell et al., 1956, p. 109) They state: 
The research reported ... is aimed at understanding the complex processes (heuris- 
tics) that are effective in problem solving. Hence, we are not interested in methods 
that guarantee solutions, but which require vast amounts of computation. Rather, 
we wish to understand how a mathematician, for example, is able to prove a 
theorem even though he does not know when he starts how, or if, he is going to 
succeed. 
2.1. Inside the Logic Theory Machine 
The LT has three methods available to prove theorems: substitution, detach- 
ment, and chaining. The user gives the LT a theorem to prove and all theorems 
in PM up to that point. The LT may not have proved any of them. The 
theorems which precede the one to be proved are placed on a theorem list. 
The program refers to this theorem list as it attempts to apply various proof 
techniques. 
The substitution method attempts to transform an entry on the theorem 
list to the desired theorem. It may substitute variables or replace connectives 
based upon definitions. The detachment method makes use of modus ponens. 
Assume we wish to prove B. The LT searches the theorem list for an entry of 
the form A implies B. If one is found A becomes a subproblem which the 
LT adds to a subproblem list. Chaining falls into two types, forward and 
backward. Both methods rely on the transitivity of implication. Assume the 
LT wishes to prove A implies C. In forward chaining the LT searches the 
theorem list for an entry of the form A implies B and if found, enters B 
implies C on the subproblem list. In backward chaining the LT searches 
the theorem list for B implies C and enters A implies B on the subproblem list. 
The LT contains an executive director which controls the use of the three 
methods. The executive director uses the following scheme: 
First use substitution. 
Should substitution fail, try detachment. The result of each detachment is 
submitted to the substitution method. If substitution fails, then the result 
of detachment is placed on the subproblem list. 
Try forward chaining next and submit the result to substitution. If a proof 
has not been found, the result of forward chaining is added to the sub- 
problem list. 
Try backward chaining in a manner similar to forward chaining. 

Principia Mathematica and the Development of Automated Theorem Proving 
49 
When all the methods have been tried on the original problem, the ex- 
ecutive director goes to the subproblem list and chooses the next subproblem. 
The techniques are applied in the same sequence, and if no proof is found the 
next problem on the subproblem list is tried. 
The search for a proof stops when one of four conditions have been met: 
1. the LT has found a proof; 
2. the bounds set on time for the search have been exceeded; 
3. the bounds set on memory for the search have been exceeded; or 
4. no untried problems remain on the subproblem list. 
2.2. An Example of a Logic Theory Proof 
One of the theorems LT proved is 
*2.45 
b: "(p v q). D.'p. 
It is instructive to compare the proofs of LT, PM, and Wang's program. In 
PM the proofs are often abbreviated. The authors (Whitehead and Russell, 
1935, p. vi), state "The proofs of the earliest propositions are given without 
omission of any step, but as the work proceeds the proofs are gradually 
compressed, retaining however sufficient detail to enable the reader by the 
help of the references to reconstruct proofs in which no step is omitted." 
The proofs of *2.45 in PM is presented as: 
*2.45 
P: ~(p v q). ~. ~p 
[2.2, Transp]. 
Transp refers to one of seven theorems which carry that name. The proof given 
by LT and the reconstruction from PM are identical. (Wang's proof is given 
below.) The reconstruction of the proof is: 
*2.45 
-(p v q).D.-p 
1. 
p.D.p v q 
*2.2 
2. 
p ~ q. ~ . ~q D -p 
"2.16 [Transp] 
q/p v q 
3. 
p~.pvq:=:~(pvq).~.-p 
Sub. in2 
4. 
~(p v q). ~ . "p 
Modus ponens 3, l 
By examining the proof, one may trace the successful path taken by LT. 
The theorem list contains all theorems up to *2.45. Since the consequent of 
"2.16 has the same structure as the theorem to be proved, a substitution will 
make them identical (see lines 2 and 3 in the proof). The LT then tries to find 
a match for the antecedant and locates *2.2 on the theorem list. 
3. Wang's Techniques 
Newell, Shaw, and Simon contrasted algorithmic and heuristic methods in 
searching for a proof. The algorithmic methods guarantee that if a problem 

50 
Daniel J. O'Leary 
has a solution it will be found. No claim, however, is made on how long it 
will take or the resources required. In the heuristic method we give up the 
guarantee, but solutions may be found at reduced cost. 
To illustrate the algorithmic method, Newell, Shaw, and Simon put forward 
the British Museum Algorithm--look everywhere. All axioms are proofs of 
length 1. All proofs of length n are formed by making all the permissible 
substitutions and replacements in proofs of length (n - 1) and all permissible 
detachments of pairs of theorems generated up to this point. This method will, 
of course, generate every theorem of PM, but at a high cost. 
Wang thought the argument against the algorithmic method, taking the 
British Museum Algorithm as an example, was weak. He wanted to show that 
there were other algorithmic methods available and the British Museum 
Algorithm only a straw man. Wang sought a method that guaranteed a proof 
and did not require extensive running time. 
3.1. The Wang Program 
Wang's algorithm, based on sequent logic, is much better than the British 
Museum Algorithm. Five connectives are used in PM: negation, implication, 
disjunction, conjunction, and equivalence. Wang's system uses eleven rules of 
inference. One rule identifies a theorem, five introduce a connective on the 
left-hand side of the sequent arrow, and five introduce a connective on the 
right-hand. These rules are stated below: 
P1. Initial rule: If2, ~ are strings of atomic formulas, then 2 ~ ~ is a theorem 
if some atomic formula occurs on both sides of the arrow. 
In the following ten rules, 2 and ( are always strings (possibly empty) of 
atomic formulas. 
P2a. Rule ~: 
If~, ~--. 2, p, then (~2, ~~,p. 
P2b. Rule -~: If A, p ~ rt, r then 2, ~~, p ~ rr. 
P3a. Rule ~&: If( ~ 2, ~, r and ( ~ 2, r p, then ( ~ 2, ~&~k, p. 
P3b. Rule &~: If2,~b,@,p~n, 
thenA,~&d/,p~n. 
P4a. Rule ~ v : If ( ~ 2, r ~b, p, then ( ~ 2, ~ v ~,, p. 
P4b. Rule v--,: IfA,~,p~n, then 2,~ v d/,p~n. 
P5a. Rule ~: 
If(,~A,~,p, 
then 2~4 ~ ~k,p. 
P5b. Rule ~: 
If;t, ~,, p ~ n and 2, p ~ n, ~, then 2, ff ~ ~,, p ~ n. 
P6a. Rule ~=: If (~, ( ~ ;t, ~b, p and d/, ( ~ A, ~, p, then ( ~ A, ~ = @, p. 
P6b. Rule =--~: If ~, ~b, 2, p ~ n and 2, ~ ~ n, (~, d/, then 2, ~ = d/, p ~ rc. 
In sequent logic a theorem is proved by taking a finite set of strings in the 
form specified by rule PI and applying the other rules until the theorem is 
proved. Wang's program turns this process around. The applications of the 
inference rules were deduced by starting at the theorem until a finite number 
of occurrences of rule P1 are reached. Given a theorem in PM to prove, one 
places a sequent arrow in front of it and proceeds. If, however, the main 

Principia Mathematica and the Development of Automated Theorem Proving 
51 
connective is an implication, Wang often replaces it with the sequent arrow 
and then starts. 
3.2. Examples Of Proofs 
The proof of *2.45 generated by this method is shown below: 
*2.45 
~(p v q)~ "p 
(1) 
(1) 
~~p, p v q 
(2) 
(2) p-~pvq 
(3) 
(3) p ---, p, q 
(4) 
The numbers on the right-hand side are line numbers. The numbers on the 
left-hand side show which line was used to produce the line of interest. The 
connectives are dealt with in order, from left to right. Negation, the left-most 
connective of line (1) can be introduced on the left-hand side of a sequent 
arrow by rule P2b, so line (1) could be generated by something of the form in 
line (2). The lines are examined until the conditions of rule PI are satisfied. 
Another example is given by 
"5.21 
[-:~p&~q.~.p-q 
a proof of which is shown below. 
"5.21 
~-p& 
"q. ~ .p =- q 
(1) 
(1) 
"p& ~q ~p = q 
(2) 
(2) 
"p, -q~p = q 
(3) 
(3) 
~q~p-=q,p 
(4) 
(4) 
~p - q,p, q 
(5) 
(5) 
p-~ q, p, q 
(6) 
(5) 
q-~ p, p, q 
(7) 
The connectives are dealt with from left to right, across the proof line as 
before. Finally, at line (5) there is an equivalence on the right-hand side of the 
arrow. By Rule P6b this must have come from two formulas. One is found in 
line (6) and the other in line (7). 
The proof is always in the form of a finite tree, and the program conducts 
a depth-first search through the tree. A branch is explored until all connectives 
are eliminated. The program then checks that rule P1 is satisfied. The program 
stops when all branches have been explored. The formula submitted is a 
theorem if rule P1 is satisfied at the bottom of each branch of the search tree. 
The program does not produce proofs in the sense of PM, since it does not 
refer to previously proved theorems, nor is there a progression of theorems 
from a set of axioms. 

52 
Daniel J. O'Leary 
4. Sidelights of the Logic Theory Machine 
Simon (1956) wrote to Russell in late 1956 and described the work of the LT. 
Russell (1956) replied, "I am delighted to know that Principia Mathematica 
can now be done by machinery. I wish Whitehead and I had known of this 
possibility before we wasted ten years doing it by hand. I am quite willing to 
believe that everything in deductive logic can be done by machinery." The LT 
was named as a co-author on a paper submitted to the Journal of Symbolic 
Logic, but the paper was refused (Tiernay, 1983). 
The proof of *2.85 given in PM, shown below, contains an error. The LT 
was able to find a remarkable proof of *2.85. 
*2.85 
I--:.pvq.~.pvr:~:p.v.q~r 
Dem. 
[-Add. Syll]l-:.p v q. = .r: ~ .q ~ r 
(1) 
t-.'2.55.~ P::-p.~:.p~r.~.r:. 
[,Syll] 
~ :.p v q. ~ .p v r: ~ :p v q. ~ .r:. 
[(1).'2.83] 
~ :.p v q. = .p v r: ~ :q = r 
(2) 
I-. (2).Comm. ~ P:. 
pvq.~.pvr:~:~p.~.q~r: 
[--*2.45] 
~ :p. v .q ~ r:. ~ b. Prop 
The line numbered (2) cannot be obtained as indicated. The intent of 
Whitehead and Russell here is not clear, as explained in an unpublished paper 
from the Russell Conference of 1984. Simon (1956) wrote to Russell stating 
that the LT had "created a beautifully simple proof to replace a far more 
complex one in [Principia Mathematical." The proof sent to Russell, however, 
contains a simple error. The correct proof is shown below: 
*2.85 
pvq.~.pvr:~:p.v.q=r 
1. p~q.~:q~r.~.p~r 
*2.06 
p/q, q/p v q, r/p v r 
2. q~pvq.~:pvqDpvr.~.q=pvr 
Sub. 1 
3. q~pvq 
"1.3 
4. p v q ~ p v r. ~ .q ~ p v r 
Modus ponens 3, 2 
5. pvq~pvr.~.~qv(pvr) 
Def. of = 
6. pv(qvr).~.qv(pvr) 
"1.5 
p/~q, q/p 
7. -qv(pvr).~.pv(~qvr) 
Sub. 6 
8. pvq~pvr.~.pv(-q 
vr) 
Chain with5and7 
9. p v q~p 
v r.~.p, 
v.q~r 
DefofD 
In his letter Simon states, "The machine's proof is both straightforward and 
unobvious, we were much struck by its virtuosity in this instance." 

Principia Mathematica and the Development of Automated Theorem Proving 
53 
5. Conclusion 
Principia Mathematica is clearly a human creation. Its formalism, however, 
almost begs for a mechanical procedure. There is no surprise that, when 
looking for some human endeavor to simulate with a computer, PM is 
chosen. Both methods described here have had a profound effect on auto- 
mated theorem proving. The work of Newell, Shaw, and Simon laid a strong 
foundation for the modern techniques of artificial intelligence. The work of 
Wang immediately opened up a new front in the battle to understand what 
computers can do. 
Bibliography 
Loveland, D.W. (1984), Automated theorem proving: a quarter-century review, in 
Automated Theorem Proving (Bledsoe and Loveland, eds.), American Mathe- 
matical Society, Providence, RI, pp. 1-45. 
Newell, A., Shaw, J.C., and Simon, H.A. (1956), Empirical explorations of the logic 
theory machine: A case study in heuristics. Proceedings of the Western Joint 
Computer Congress, 1956, pp. 218 239. Also in Computers in Thought (Fie- 
genbaum and Feldman, eds.), McGraw-Hill New York, 1963, pp. 134-152. Page 
numbers cited are from this reference. 
O'Leary, D.J. (1984), The Propositional Logic of Principia Mathematica, and Some of 
its Forerunners. Presented at the Russell Conference, 1984, Trinity College, Uni- 
versity of Toronto. Unpublished. 
Russell, B. (1956), Letter to Herbert Simon dated 2 November 1956. Located at the 
Russell Archives, McMaster University. 
Simon, H. (1956) Letter to Bertrand Russell dated 9 September 1957. Located at the 
Russell Archives, McMaster University. 
Tiernay, P. (1983), Herbert Simon's simple economics. Science 83, 4, No. 9, November 
1983. 
Wang, H. (1960), Toward mechanical mathematics, IBM J. Res. Develop., 1960, 2-22. 
Also in Logic, Computers and Sets, Chelsea, New York, 1970. 
Whitehead, A.N. and Russell, B. (1935), Principia Mathematica, 2nd ed., Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 

Oswald Veblen and the Origins of 
Mathematical Logic at Princeton* 
William Aspray 
The remarkable transformation from Aristotelean to mathematical logic in 
the period 1880-1930 was largely a European affair. The important centers of 
change were all located in Europe. I Few Americans pursued research in logic, 
and those who did seldom contributed to mainstream developments. 2 By the 
end of the 1930s, however, the United States had developed an important, 
indigenous research program in mathematical logic) For the first time 
American faculties were training their own students, making their own re- 
search contributions, and publishing their own research journals at levels 
competitive with the best Europe had to offer. 
In the 1930s Princeton became a leading center for mathematical logic, 
both nationally and internationally. Its role in the formation of recursive 
function theory is well known, as are the contributions of its leading logicians, 
Alonzo Church and Kurt G6del. The combined mathematical faculties of 
Princeton University and the Institute for Advanced Study formed a potent 
research nucleus that attracted a regular flow of national and international 
visitors, including many interested in logic: Paul Bernays, Haskell Curry, 
Kurt G6del, Karl Menger, Emil Post, Alan Turing, and Stanislaw Ulam. 
The university bountifully produced strong Ph.D.s in mathematical logic: 
Alonzo Church, A.L. Foster, J. Barkley Rosser, Stephen Kleene, Alan Turing, 
Leon Henkin, and John Kemeny--a number of whom became leaders of 
mathematical logic in the post-war generation. 4 At the same time, Princeton 
raised the Journal of Symbolic Logic to its present level of international 
distinction. 
Others have written about the development of recursive function theory 
and the contributions of Church and G6del. 5 This chapter discusses instead 
the preparations for this golden era in Princeton. It is primarily the story of 
Oswald Veblen, his use of mathematical logic to pursue a secure foundation 
* I appreciate the critical reading of early drafts of this paper by Thomas Drucker, 
Sheldon Hochheiser, Gregory Moore, and Albert Tucker; information provided by 
Irving Anellis, John Corcoran, and Dale Johnson; and research assistance from Robbin 
Clamons and Marek Rostocki. 

Oswald Veblen and the Origins of Mathematical Logic at Princeton 
55 
for geometry, and his efforts to establish an institutional context in Princeton 
conducive to mathematical research. 
1. From Geometry to Postulate Theory 
Veblen did not contribute to the discipline of mathematical logic as we 
know it today, but instead to a transitional discipline known generally as 
American Postulate Theory. His work, together with that of E.V. Huntington, 
E.H. Moore, Edwin Wilson, and several others at the turn of this century, 
investigated the logical adequacy of axiom systems for mathematics. 6 For the 
Postulate Theorists, logic was a subject worth developing only so far as it 
contributed to the rigorous, i.e., axiomatic, advancement of working mathe- 
matics. The group developed concepts of completeness, independence, and 
categoricity in order to apply them to axiom systems for algebra, geometry, 
and analysis. 
Veblen was first and foremost a geometer. Indeed, he was the leading 
American geometer of the period, with fundamental contributions to projec- 
tive geometry, topology (analysis situs), differential geometry, and spinors. His 
interest in logic followed naturally out of an interest in the foundations of 
geometry, so it is not surprising that his contributions to logic are reported 
mainly in his publications on geometry. 
After completing undergraduate degrees at Iowa and Harvard in 1910, 
Veblen entered the graduate mathematics program at the University of Chica- 
go. There he came under the influence of Oskar Bolza, Heinrich Maschke, and 
particularly E.H. Moore, who directed his dissertation research. Moore had 
taken a strong interest in the foundations of geometry at about the time 
Veblen arrived at Chicago, because of the publication in 1899 of David 
Hilbert's Grundlayen der Geometrie and the recent foundational research of 
Moritz Pasch and Giuseppe Peano. In 1901 Moore wrote his most significant 
paper on the foundations of geometry, 7 and in the 1901-1902 academic 
year presented a course and research seminar on the subject, which Veblen 
attended) 
Veblen's first professional publication was a comparison of Hilbert's logical 
foundations in Grundlagen der Geometrie with those provided in lesser-known 
works by Levi-Civita, Pasch, Peano, and Veronese. Veblen points out that, 
despite the numerous enthusiastically positive reviews of Hilbert's work, 
which sought to correct the logical inadequacies of Euclid's Elements, the 
Grundlayen itself left room for logical improvement. In particular, Veblen 
shows that the number of Hilbert's undefined terms can be reduced, that 
Hilbert makes a logical error in demonstrating the independence of his axioms 
of congruence, and (reiterating a result of E.H. Moore) that one of Hilbert's 
axioms can be deduced from the other axioms. 
Veblen continued these investigations in his doctoral dissertation, which 
he completed in 1903 and published in 1904. 9 The dissertation presents 

56 
William Aspray 
an axiomatic system for three-dimensional Euclidean geometry. His system 
follows the approach of Pasch and Peano, rather than that of Hiibert and 
Pieri. 1~ It is based on two undefined terms, "point" and "order," and only 
twelve axioms. 1~ Veblen devotes considerable attention to the logical ade- 
quacy of his system. He carefully distinguishes in the modern way between 
axioms and derived statements, and between axioms and definitions. ~2 After a 
general discussion of the importance of independence in axiom systems, he 
gives examples that establish the independence of each of his axioms. He 
also shows how each class of objects satisfying his axioms can be coordina- 
tized, and how two such classes can be placed in one-to-one correspondence 
by identifying their coordinate systems, so as to establish the categoricity of 
the axiom system. ~ 3 
Veblen remained at Chicago as an associate for two years after his degree 
was granted, during which time he helped to advise R.L. Moore's dissertation 
on the foundations of Euclidean geometry. After his move to Princeton in 
1905, Veblen focused first on foundational issues in real analysis and projective 
geometry. ~4 One paper presented a categorical and independent system of 
axioms for order properties in the linear continuum and in well-ordered sets.~ 5 
In analysis, Veblen presented the first rigorous proof of the Jordan Curve 
Theorem and continued his study of the nature of compactness. ~6 The Heine 
Borel Theorem, which was one of the axioms presented in his dissertation, 
became the basis for the first "rigorous and systematic treatment in English 
on theory of functions of a real variable. ''~ 7 
The research on the foundations of projective geometry were carried out 
by Veblen in collaboration with his Princeton colleague, John Wesley Young. 
In 1908 they presented the first independent set of axioms for projective 
geometry, for spaces with real or complex coordinates. ~a Their work culmi- 
nated in the two-volume treatise Projective Geometry, which served as the 
standard advanced textbook for many years. 19 By adopting an algebraic 
approach, in which they considered the group of transformations associated 
with the geometry, they were able to extend Klein's Erlanger program to 
projective geometry. 2~ They were attentive to the logical properties of their 
axiom system and attempted "not merely to prove every theorem rigorously 
but to prove it in such a fashion as to show in which spaces it is true and to 
which geometries it belongs. ''~ 
Although their primary purpose in these volumes was pedagogical, they 
devoted considerable attention to foundational issues. The first chapter of 
volume I discusses the nature of undefined elements, unproved propositions, 
consistency, categoricity, independence, and the logical properties of a formal 
mathematical system. They defended this approach in the Preface to the first 
volume in a way that revealed Veblen's hope for a unified treatment of and 
foundation for all of geometry: 
Even the limited space devoted in this volume to the foundations may seem a 
drawback from the pedagogical point of view of some mathematicians. To this we 
can only reply that, in our opinion, an adequate knowledge of geometry cannot be 
obtained without attention to the foundations. We believe, moreover, that the 

Oswald Veblen and the Origins of Mathematical Logic at Princeton 
57 
abstract treatment is peculiarly desirable in projective geometry, because it is 
through the latter that the other geometric disciplines are most readily coordinated. 
Since it is more natural to derive the geometrical disciplines associated with the 
names of Euclid, Descartes, Lobatchewsky, etc., from projective geometry than it 
is to derive projective geometry from one of them, it is natural to take the founda- 
tions of projective geometry as the foundations of all geometry. 22 
Veblen's later research, in analysis situs (topology), differential geometry, 
and spinors, showed the same interest in foundational issues as his earlier 
work. 23 A paper of 1913 co-authored with James Alexander set forth a 
logically organized and rigorous account of Henri Poincar6's memoirs on 
analysis situs. A paper of 1931 co-authored with J.H.C. Whitehead presented 
a set of axioms for differential geometry of n-dimensional manifolds. 24 Veblen 
struggled for several decades to extend Klein's Erlanger program to all of 
geometry, including topology and differential geometry. He was never success- 
ful in unifying the foundation for geometry, and in the end had to admit 
that a branch of mathematics should be called 9eometry "because the name 
seems good, on emotional and traditional grounds, to a sufficient number of 
competent people. ''25 
One last study of foundations by Veblen deserves mention. In his 1924 
presidential address to the American Mathematical Society, Veblen placed 
the foundations of geometry into the larger context of the foundations of 
mathematics. 26 He notes that, although geometry and real analysis were being 
taught from an arithmetical point of view, "the arithmetical definition of 
mathematics ... hardly seems adequate when we examine its foundations ... 
the whole arithmetical structure is a portion of the edifice of formal logic 
which we are not as yet able to separate off. ''27 He points out the contributions 
of Russell and Whitehead to the logic of propositions and the logic of classes, 
and suggests that their work leads to the arithmetization of mathematics 
(which he attributes to Kronecker and Study). He notes the problem this 
arithmetization program has with the definition of irrational number, the 
theory of infinite classes, and the set-theoretic paradoxes, and points to 
Hilbert's program as "the latest and, I think, most promising" attempt to 
resolve these difficulties. He closes the address by stating: 
Whether or not this is a correct statement of Hilbert's program, the conclusion 
seems inescapable that formal logic has to be taken over by mathematicians. The 
fact is that there does not exist an adequate logic at the present time, and unless 
the mathematicians create one, no one else is likely to do so. In the process of 
constructing it we are likely to adopt the Russell view that mathematics is coexten- 
sive with formal logic. This, I suppose, is apt to happen whether we adopt the 
formalist or the intuitionalist point of view. 2a 
2. Veblen as Institution Builder 
The most enduring names in mathematics have generally been those of the 
great researchers. Veblen's research contributions to logic do not match 

58 
William Aspray 
those of Peano, Zermelo, or G5del; and, on these criteria, it seems just 
that Veblen's name has been all but lost from the history of logic. But we 
must remember that to flourish even mathematics, generally regarded as the 
scientific discipline least dependent on its social context, has certain require- 
ments: financial support and research time for its practitioners, good educa- 
tional programs and libraries, a community of knowledgeable practitioners, 
and communication channels such as professional meetings and journals. In 
this light, Veblen's contributions appear more significant, for in addition to 
being an able researcher he was one of the chief builders of strong American 
mathematical research institutions. These efforts resulted in the growth of 
American logic, particularly in Princeton. 
The story begins with Veblen's appointment in 1905 as a preceptor in the 
Princeton University Mathematics Department. 29 Only 10 years earlier the 
institution had been known as The College of New Jersey and was an in- 
tellectual backwater, with a nonresearch mathematics faculty offering a curri- 
culum exclusively of elementary courses. Within that decade the college adop- 
ted its present name, established graduate education, and hired Woodrow 
Wilson as president to reform the educational program. Wilson established a 
preceptorial program at Princeton, which resulted in smaller classes and 
more personalized instruction--a program that was strongly supported by 
Henry Burchard Fine, chairman of the mathematics department and dean of 
the faculty. Fine used the extra faculty positions the preceptorial system 
required to hire promising young research mathematicians without regard to 
nationality--a hiring practice not followed by other American universities. 
Veblen, together with Gilbert Bliss, Luther Eisenhart, and John Wesley Young 
were hired in 1905, the first year of the preceptorial program. Over the 
next 20 years, Fine used these positions to hire other promising young research 
mathematicians: James Alexander, G.D. Birkhoff, Pierre Boutroux, Thomas 
Gronwall, Einar Hille, Solomon Lefschetz, and J.H.M. Wedderburn. 
Veblen's career advanced rapidly. He was promoted to full professor in 
1910 and became one of three organizational and intellectual leaders of the 
department, together with Fine and Eisenhart. His books on Projective Geo- 
metry (1910; 1918) and Analysis Situs (1922) were recognized as the leading 
works in their fields. Through the 1910s and early 1920s he held increasingly 
important positions in the professional communities of American mathe- 
matics and science: member, American Philosophical Society, 1912; vice- 
president, American Mathematical Society (AMS), 1915; AMS Colloquium 
Lecturer, 1916: vice-president, Mathematics Association of America, 1917; 
member, National Academy of Science, 1919; various senior positions, Nation- 
al Research Council (NRC), Division of Physical Sciences, 1920-23; vice- 
president, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 1921; and president, AMS, 
1923-24. 
Veblen was an activist reformer during his term as AMS president. He 
established an endowment fund for the society and raised money to subsidize a 
stronger publication program. Using to advantage his positions within the 

Oswald Veblen and the Origins of Mathematical Logic at Princeton 
59 
AMS and NRC, he arranged for mathematicians to be supported under the 
NRC fellowship program, which had been limited previously to physicists 
and chemists. These actions enabled promising American research mathe- 
maticians to hold post-doctoral positions at leading centers of mathematical 
research in Europe and America, and to publish their results in American 
journals. 
Fine, Veblen, and other Princeton mathematicians continued to pursue 
their independent research careers as time permitted, but through the early 
1920s Princeton remained primarily an undergraduate teaching institution. 
Heavy undergraduate teaching loads prevailed, most faculty had to work at 
home for lack of offices, and little money was available to improve facilities 
or research opportunities. 
Veblen sought to rectify this situation with a proposal for an Institute 
for Mathematical Research, which he submitted between 1924 and 1926 to the 
National Research Council and the General Education Board of the Rocke- 
feller Foundation. His proposal called for an institute of four or five senior 
mathematicians and an equal number of junior colleagues, who would devote 
themselves "entirely to research and to the guidance of the research ofyounger 
men. ''3~ These mathematicians were to be released from all usual teaching and 
committee duties, though they were to "be free to offer occasional courses for 
advanced students. ''3~ Believing it to be a further incentive to funding, Veblen 
proposed the institute be dedicated to applied mathematics--a subject he 
regarded as under-represented in the United States. 
Neither organization supported Veblen's plan, but it influenced the Prince- 
ton University fund drive for the sciences that Dean Fine organized in 1926 
for President Hibben. In a fund-raising document Fine outlined the needs of 
the mathematics department, many of them expressed earlier by Veblen: 
endowed research professorships, increased staff with lighter teaching loads 
allowing time for research, offices and other facilities for the mathematical 
community, graduate scholarships, continued support for the journal Annals 
of Mathematics edited at Princeton, and a research fund for use to meet 
changing conditions. The Rockefeller Foundation awarded Princeton one 
million dollars for this research fund, which the university matched by 1928 
with two million dollars in alumni gifts. One-fifth of the total, six hundred 
thousand dollars, was allocated to the mathematics department. 
These alumni gifts included chairs in mathematics and mathematical 
physics endowed by an old friend of Fine, Thomas Jones, and Jones's brother 
David and niece Gwenthalyn. Veblen held the chair in mathematics from 1926 
until his resignation from the university in 1933. 
In 1928, Jones and his niece provided additional funds to build and main- 
tain a mathematics building. Veblen assumed responsibility for the design of 
a building, as Jones said, "any mathematician would be loath to leave. ''32 Fine 
Hall housed private faculty studies (many generously appointed with carved 
oak paneling, fireplaces, leather sofas, and oriental rugs), a well-designed and 
well-stocked mathematics and physics library, three classrooms designed 

60 
William Aspray 
to the specific needs of mathematics instruction, and two common rooms 
(with kitchens) for social and intellectual interaction of the faculty, graduate 
students, and visitors. 33 Veblen carefully planned each feature to promote 
research and the interaction he believed was important to sustain it. In his 
own words, he wanted a center "about which people of like intellectual 
interests can group themselves for mutual encouragement and support, and 
where the young recruit and the old campaigner can have those informal and 
easy contacts that are so important to each of them. ''34 The design was 
tremendously successful; Fine Hall became a place that attracted a large 
community of graduate students, faculty, post-doctoral fellows, and visiting 
mathematicians to interact on both social and intellectual levels--a "grand 
hotel of mathematics" as one faculty member called it. 3s 
By the time the mathematics department moved into Fine Hall in 1931, all 
of the needs of the mathematics department outlined in Fine's 1926 fund- 
raising document had been fulfilled, except for a larger professional staff 
with time for research. This need was met, and the overall situation improved 
further, with the founding of the Institute for Advanced Study. The story of 
its founding is told elsewhere, and need not be told here. 36 What is less well 
known is Veblen's role in shaping the institute and, in doing so, improving 
the overall strength of mathematics at Princeton. 
Veblen was hired in 1932 as the first faculty member of the institute. 
He was the chief architect of the institute's research environment, and served 
informally as a behind-the-scenes administrator--"the power behind the 
throne" as one admiring colleague referred to him. 37 Even after his retirement, 
in 1950, he continued to exert a profound influence on the affairs of the 
institute, as a member of its board of trustees. 
He was largely responsible for hiring the other original members of the 
faculty: James Alexander, Albert Einstein, Marston Morse, John von Neu- 
mann, and Hermann Weyl. The departure of Alexander, Veblen, and von 
Neumann for the institute, and of Einar Hille for Yale, seriously threatened the 
university's research strength in mathematics that had been carefully nurtured 
over the previous quarter century. Sensitive to the potential damage to 
the university and the institute's need for a good research library, physical 
facilities, and a critical mass of trained mathematicians, Veblen and Eisenhart 
arranged for the institute to share quarters with the department in Fine Hall-- 
an arrangement which continued until the institute built Fuld Hall a mile from 
the university campus in 1939. 38 
In the early years the direction of the institute was uncertain. Its charter 
established it as an educational organization with the right to grant doctoral 
degrees. Some instead envisioned the institute as offering a protected research 
environment, where advanced researchers could pursue their work without 
teaching duties or other distractions. Under Veblen's direction, the institute 
steered a third course which emphasized both post-doctoral education and 
advanced research. In effect, the Institute for Advanced Study realized 
Veblen's earlier plan for an Institute for Mathematical Research. The senior 

Oswald Veblen and the Origins of Mathematical Logic at Princeton 
61 
faculties of the institute were not encumbered with committee or teaching 
duties, though they sometimes elected to teach graduate or post-graduate 
seminars open to both the institute and the university communities. There 
was ample support to bring visitors to the institute to pursue their research. 
The institute was a particular attraction to young mathematicians of research 
promise, a number of whom served as research assistants to the permanent 
faculty. 39 Especially in the 1930s, when the institute and the department were 
housed together in Fine Hail, there were ample opportunities for graduate 
students to interact with the institute faculty and visitors; and a number of 
dissertations were informally directed by institute personnel. "~~ 
In the end, the founding of the institute greatly strengthened mathematics 
in Princeton. Many new mathematical appointments were made, including 
those to Kurt G6del at the institute and Alonzo Church at the university. In 
the 1930s the university awarded 39 Ph.D.s in mathematics, among which 
were those to A.L. Foster, Stephen Kleene, J. Barkley Rosser, Alan Turing, 
and J.H.C. Whitehead (all of whom studied with Church or Veblenj. Several 
hundred distinguished mathematicians from around the world were long-term 
visitors to Princeton in this decade. With the careful shepherding of Veblen 
and others, Princeton had become what the Danish mathematician Harald 
Bohr called "the mathematical center of the world. ''41 
3. Logic at Princeton 
Veblen was interested in logic as a branch of mathematics, and he believed 
that general strength in mathematics contributed to strength in logic. This 
belief was confirmed by what happened in Princeton. The strong faculty, 
graduate program, and fellowship support attracted a strong pool of graduate 
students. In a number of cases the students who wrote dissertations on 
problems in logic chose Princeton for graduate study not because of any 
special interest in logic, but because of the overall quality of its mathematics 
program. 42 This same quality attracted the many distinguished visitors from 
the United States and abroad. The impact this had on logic is aptly aphorized 
by Rosser's declaration that four-fifths of American logic was at Princeton. 43 
Veblen adamantly held that Princeton's in-house editing of professional 
journals contributed markedly to the mathematics program; that the journals 
provided the local community with an outlet for publication, a wide set 
of contacts in the greater mathematical community, early information on 
new mathematical talent, and some control over the direction of research 
(especially American research}. So Veblen pushed Princeton to provide funds 
to support Annals of Mathematics, Annals of Mathematics Studies, Journal of 
Symbolic Logic, and Annals of Mathematical Statistics, and to house their 
editorial offices. 
Although the Association for Symbolic Logic and its organ, the Journal 
of Symbolic Logic, had their origins in the Philosophy Department at Brown 

62 
William Aspray 
University, Princeton contributed to their early development. 44 Church, H.B. 
Curry, and Rosser were among those on the committee that founded the 
association; and Church became the principal editor of the journal, a position 
he held for many years at Princeton and later at UCLA. Lack of funding 
placed the journal in jeopardy in its first year, but Dean Gauss of the Princeton 
Graduate School organized a plan for research institutions to provide sub- 
vention funds until the journal could survive on the association's membership 
dues. This plan was carried out successfully, and Princeton University and 
the Institute for Advanced Study were two of the nine institutions that 
contributed. Church's involvement was crucial in giving the journal the 
research importance it has today. 
Church and Veblen shared a strong interest in developing symbolic logic 
as a branch of mathematics rather than as a branch of philosophy. Church 
wrote to Veblen in 1935 at his summer home in Maine to report the 
"unfortunate" choice of C.H. Langford as his co-editor for the journal, and of 
the possibility that philosopher C.I. Lewis might decline the presidency of 
the association. 45 Church wanted to promote Hermann Weyl for president 
instead of Lewis, but was hampered by Weyl's unwillingness to support a 
journal or association of logic proposed by philosophers. Church continued: 
Weyl is surely mistaken in supposing that there is no need for the proposed 
journal. Mathematical journals accept papers in symbolic logic with considerable 
reluctance, and clearly do not have the space to publish all that deserves publication, 
as I know from experience, not only with my own papers and those of Rosser and 
Kleene, but in refereeing papers of others. In regard to Weyl's apparent objection 
to the part of philosophers, which is probably based on the admittedly considerable 
amount of nonsense published by philosophers in this field, it seems to me that the 
sensible thing is to try to direct the present undertaking into worthwhile channels, 
rather than to ignore it or try to suppress it. It is precisely for this reason that I 
would like to see Weyl, or someone else of genuine ability and understanding, as 
president. 
Of course, when you get right down to it, mathematicians also have been 
known to publish nonsense in the name of symbolic logic. 
Anywhere [sic], there is undoubtedly a need for the advent of a younger 
generation of philosophers, especially philosophical logicians, with a really adequate 
understanding of mathematics. And a joint enterprise between mathematicians and 
philosophers like the present one would seem to be a good way of contributing 
towards such a result. 46 
Veblen should be remembered particularly for his role in shaping the careers 
of Alonzo Church and Kurt G6del. Veblen singled out Church from among 
his undergraduate students and encouraged him to remain at Princeton 
for graduate study. Veblen arranged for Church's fellowship support as a 
graduate student, introduced him to the study of logic, and eventually directed 
his dissertation on the axiom of choice. Church remembers being attracted 
to Veblen's courses because of Veblen's interest in foundational issues. As 

Oswald Veblen and the Origins of Mathematical Logic at Princeton 
63 
Church writes: 
I was generally interested in things of a fundamental nature. As an under- 
graduate even I published a minor paper about the Lorentz transformation, the 
foundations of relativity theory. It was partly through this general interest and 
partly through Veblen, who was still interested in the informal study of foundations 
of mathematics. It was Veblen who urged me to study Hilbert's work on the plea, 
which may or may not have been fully correct, that he himself did not understand 
it and he wished me to explain it to him. At any rate, I tried reading Hilbert. Only 
his papers published in mathematical periodicals were available at that time. 
Anybody who has tried those knows they are very hard reading. I did not read as 
much of them as I should have, but at least I got started that way. Veblen was 
interested in the independence of the axiom of choice, and my dissertation was 
about that. It investigated the consequences of studying the second number class, 
that is, subordinates, if you assume certain axioms contradicted the axiom of 
choice. 47 
This kind of interest in logic and foundations was not shared by other 
members of the Princeton mathematics faculty in the 1920s, or by anyone in 
the philosophy department. As Church said of the mathematics faculty's 
interest in logic in the 1930s after he had joined their ranks, "There were 
not many others interested in this field, and it was not thought of as a 
respectable field, with some justice. There was a lot of nonsense published 
under this heading. ''4a 
While Church was off in G6ttingen in 1929 on the second year of a 
National Research Council post-doctoral fellowship, Veblen convinced his 
colleagues to hire Church as an assistant professor. 49 Veblen continued to 
follow Church's career with interest and to support his advancement through 
the professorial ranks. 
Veblen's role in bringing Kurt G6del to the institute is less clear, but 
certainly important, s~ It is suspected that Veblen learned of G6del's work 
through his colleague John von Neumann, who had made fundamental 
contributions to set theory and proof theory in the 1920s, and was one of the 
first people to appreciate the significance of G6ders incompleteness results. 
G6dei made three visits to the institute between 1933 and 1939. In 1939, with 
the Nazi administration interfering with his efforts to obtain a teaching 
position in Vienna and threatening his conscription to military service, G6del 
wrote to Veblen for help with emigration. 51 Somehow, the necessary visas and 
exit permits were arranged, and G6del arrived in Princeton to become an 
ordinary member of the institute. G6del remained at the institute the rest of 
his career, s2 
Conclusions 
Veblen was an able research mathematician with an abiding interest in 
geometry and its foundations. Somewhat by accident, these interests led him 

64 
William Aspray 
to logic. Following Hiibert's lead, Veblen believed the only secure foundation 
for geometry was an axiomatic foundation; and to demonstrate the adequacy 
of his axiomatic systems he found that he needed to hone the tools of logic. 
In so doing, he made some minor contributions to the technical field of 
mathematical logic, as we know it today, as well as more significant applica- 
tions of logic to the foundations of geometry. 
These studies engendered in Veblen a general interest in logic, one that 
was not shared by many of his mathematical colleagues in Princeton or 
elsewhere. He believed there should be a close relationship between logic 
and mathematics. Logic was a subject that should be developed for the 
service it could provide to mathematics; and to serve well, logic should be 
developed into a mathematical discipline. He inculcated these beliefs in the 
graduate students he trained at Princeton, in particular into Alonzo Church. 
And these beliefs were realized through the work of Church and G6del, 
mathematicians whose careers he advanced in important ways. 
Largely through the stage-setting efforts of Veblen, Princeton became a 
leading national and international research center in logic. This came about 
not so much because of Veblen's interest in logic, as through the strong 
mathematical research programs he helped to create, first at Princeton 
University and later at the Institute for Advanced Study. The general strength 
in Princeton mathematics was critical to the rise of logic there. Veblen, perhaps 
better than any other mathematician of his time, understood the importance 
of environmental factors to the growth of mathematics. And it was these 
environmental factors that caused logic to flourish in Princeton. 
Notes 
1. Leading European centers of logic included Amsterdam, Cambridge, G6ttingen, 
Turin, and Warsaw--though none of them maintained their strength in logic through- 
out the entire half century under consideration. 
2. Further evidence of the weakness of American logic is given by prominent 
examples of aspiring American logicians being encouraged to complete their logic 
education in Europe: Veblen sent Alonzo Church to G6ttingen for a year; Norbert 
Wiener visited England to study with Bertrand Russell. This is part of a more 
general pattern of European study for young Americans aspiring to mathematical 
research careers, which was accomplished regularly after 1924 with the assistance of 
National Research Council post-doctoral fellowships. The number of Americans who 
pilgrimaged to Europe is uncertain; and some Americans, such as Emil Post and the 
students of C.S. Pierce at Johns Hopkins, never felt a need for European study. A better 
picture will only emerge after a systematic study of the American logical community, 
e.g., an examination of the educations of the early members of the Association for 
Symbolic Logic. 
3. There is little written about the history of American logic. Birkhoff presents 
in the American Mathematical Society Semicentennial Addresses (1938) a general 
overview in a seven-page subsection on "Symbolic Logic and Axiomatics." Van Evra 
(1966) contains historical descriptions of the work of Alonzo Church, C.I. Lewis, 
C.S. Pierce, and W.V.O. Quine. Dipert 11978) provides historical insight into Pierce's 

Oswald Veblen and the Origins of Mathematical Logic at Princeton 
65 
work. Scanlan (1982) contains material on the American Postulate Theorists. There is 
a need for a history of this subject, which would cover both the technical results 
and their social context (development of research faculties and doctoral programs, 
professional societies and journals, funding, etc.). A project, directed by Christian 
Thiel, on "Sozialgeschichte der Logik" is now underway. Thony Christie and Karin 
Beikuefner, part of the research team, are covering aspects of American logic. See 
Peckhaus (1986) for details. 
4. These names are listed in chronological order of the date the Ph.D. was awarded, 
from Church in 1927 to Kemeny in 1949. The Princeton experiences of some of these 
logicians are given in the Princeton Mathematics Community (PMC) in the 1930s 
Oral History Project, the results of which are held by the Mudd Library, Princeton 
University. In particular, see the comments of Alonzo Church (PMC 5), Alfred Leon 
Foster (PMC 12), Leon Henkin (PMC 14, 19), John Kemeny (PMC 22), Stephen 
Kleene (PMC 23), and J. Barkley Rosser (PMC 23). Secondary copies of the transcripts 
are held by repositories around the United States, including the Charles Babbage 
Institute of the University of Minnesota. 
5. See Davis (1965) and Kleene (1981) on the history of recursive function theory. 
The author is also preparing an article on the antecedents of this development. See 
Kleene (1987) and Feferman et al. (1986) on the life and work of G6del. John Dawson 
is preparing a full-length biography of G6del. 
6. For biographical information about Veblen see Archibald (1938, pp. 206 211), 
MacLane (1976), and especially Montgomery (1963~. Veblen was such a central figure 
in the Princeton mathematics community that he is discussed in 35 of the 45 interviews 
in the Princeton Mathematics Community in the 1930s Oral History Project (Mudd 
Library, Princeton University). See, especially, the interviews with Albert Tucker. 
7. Written and delivered at a meeting of the American Mathematical Society in 
1901, Moore (1902) presents projective axioms (axioms of connection and order) for 
the general n-dimensional geometry. 
8. Moore's seminar also inaugurated the research program in foundations of 
geometry of Nels J. Lennes, who occasionally worked jointly with Veblen on this 
subject. R.L. Moore entered the graduate program at Chicago in 1903 and became 
interested in the foundations of geometry under the influence of E.H. Moore and 
Veblen. See Johnson (1984) for additional information. 
9. Veblen (1904a). 
10. See Pasch (1882), Peano (1889; 1894), Hilbert (1899), and Pieri (1899). 
11. Tarski was the first to note, in 1934, that Veblcn had made a logical error. See 
Tarski (1956a, pp. 306-307; 1956b). Wilder (1965, p. 41) describes the error as follows: 
"Or consider the system of Euclidean geometry given by Veblen in 1904[a]. Only two 
terms, 'point" and "order,' were left undefined, all other geometrical terms presumably 
being defined in terms of these. However, as was first pointed out by Tarski ... the 
definition of'congruent' involves not just 'point' and 'order," but a geometric entity E 
which is not postulated by the system, but is arbitrarily chosen. Consequently, it is 
possible to find two models of Veblen's system consisting ofthe same points and having 
the same order relations between points, but in which congruence is different in the 
sense that two given pairs of points may be congruent in one model but not in the 
other." 
12. On the difference between definitions and axioms, Veblen points to Padoa 
(1901), E.H. Moore (1903), and Veblen (1903). There seems to be an implicit criticism 
here of Hilbert's logical indiscretions in the Grundla.qen der Geometrie. 

66 
William Aspray 
13. Veblen notes that the term "categorical" was introduced by John Dewey, and 
that Hilbert (1899) and Huntington (1902) had previously investigated the categoricity 
of systems. Corcoran (1980; 1981) points out that Veblen infers completeness from 
categoricity without argument, and apparently does not distinguish between the two 
concepts. Moore (1988, Section 6) also provides a detailed historical account of 
categoricity. 
14. Veblen also wrote two popular articles (1905a, 1906) in this period on the 
foundations of Euclidean geometry, which provide historical accounts of the search 
for a logically rigorous axiomatic foundation. He continued to write about the founda- 
tions of geometry later in his career. Veblen (1911) presents a popular account of the 
modern axiomatic treatment of Euclidean geometry. 
15. Veblen (1905b). Veblen cites Cantor (1895) and Huntington (1905) as a founda- 
tion for his work. 
16. The Jordan Curve Theorem is proved in Veblen (1905c); the studies ofcompact- 
ness are made in Veblen (1904b) and Veblen and Lennes (1907). 
17. Veblen and Lennes (1907, p. iv). On page iii the authors write, "The general aim 
has been to obtain rigor of logic with a minimum of elaborate machinery. It is hoped 
that the systematic use of the Heine-Borel theorem has helped materially toward this 
end .... " 
18. Veblen and Young (1908). They were also careful to show the system was 
categorical. 
19. Veblen and Young (1910/1918). As the introduction to the second volume 
indicates, Veblen wrote the second volume largely without assistance from Young. 
20. Their interest in the abstract group classification of geometries is discussed in 
the Preface to volume II. 
21. Veblen and Young (1918, p. iv). 
22. Veblen and Young (1910, pp. iii-iv). 
23. Veblen's 1916 Cambridge Lectures, published as Veblen (1922), stood for 
many years as a standard source on topology: Veblen and Whitehead (1932) had 
similar stature for the study of differential geometry. 
24. Veblen and Whitehead (1931). Characteristic of Veblen, the authors were 
careful to demonstrate the consistency and independence of the axioms. See also the 
account in Veblen and Whitehead (1932, Ch. 6). 
25. Veblen (1932, p. 17). The first of Veblen's three Rice Institute lectures, entitled 
"The Modern Approach to Elementary Geometry" and published in Veblen (1934), 
presents a beautifully drawn summary of Veblen's mature views on geometry and its 
foundations. 
26. Published as Veblen (1925). In his address he also remarked on the relationship 
between the mathematical and physical investigations of space, e.g. between Euclidean 
geometry and Newtonian physics, and between Riemannian geometry and relativity 
theory--and what this means for the foundations of geometry. In a 1922 address to 
the Mathematics Section of the American Academy for the Advancement of Science, 
published as Veblen (1923), he acknowledges the value that the abstract, i.e., axiomatic, 
approach has had for geometry, and provides some refections on the value of this to 
the study of classical and modern mechanics and other branches of physics. 
27. Veblen (1925, p. 140). 
28. Veblen (1925, p. 141). 
29. The story of the rise of Princeton mathematics is told in greater detail in Aspray 
(1988). Also see the transcripts of the Princeton Mathematics Community in the 1930s 
Oral History Project. 

Oswald Veblen and the Origins of Mathematical Logic at Princeton 
67 
30. Letter. Veblen to Vernon Kellogg, 10 June 1924. Oswald Veblen Papers, Li- 
brary of Congress. 
31. Ibid. 
32. Anonymous {1931, p. 113). In a letter, 19 February 1929, Veblen describes to 
Luther Eisenhart the rooms at Burlington House, home of the Royal Society, and 
Cambridge as models for Princeton. He also quotes from a letter he had received from 
their benefactor, Thomas Jones, dated 25 January 1929: "the building is not to 'be a 
laboratory in which a great deal of manual work as well as brain work must be carried 
on; it should be a house of mathematics--a haunt of mathematicians in which the 
spirit and the traditions of generations will be perpetuated and cherished. That cannot 
be accomplished in a barn'." Fine Hall was certainly not a barn. Veblen mentioned 
elsewhere using the universities of Paris and Oxford as models for Fine Hall. 
33. Veblen desired to promote close ties between mathematics and physics; so 
Fine Hall was placed adjacent to Palmer Laboratory of Physics and a connecting 
corridor was built, the holder of the chair in mathematical physics was given an 
office in Fine Hall, the library contained both the mathematics and physics research 
literature, and the physicists were welcomed to afternoon tea. 
34. Anonymous 11931, p. 1121. 
35. Bienen (1970, p. 17). 
36. See Flexner (1960). 
37. Private communication from Albert W. Tucker, 1985. 
38. There is some correspondence in the Veblen Papers (Library of Congress) 
with Eisenhart over the potential damage the institute will cause the university mathe- 
matics program. See especially Eisenhart's letter of 15 August 1932. 
39. For example, Richard Brauer and Nathan Jacobson were assistants to Weyl; 
Banesh Hoffmann and Leopold lnfeld were assistants to Einstein; Wallace Givens, 
Abraham Taub, and J.H.C. Whitehead were assistants to Veblen; Henry Wallman was 
assistant to Alexander; and William Duren and Everett Pitcher were assistants to 
Morse. The only IAS faculty member to use his assistants to assist with team research 
projects was Morse. 
40. Since dissertation direction by institute faculty was informal, it is difficult to 
verify. However, Albert Tucker has told me he believes that the dissertations of Wallace 
Givens, Israel Halperin, and Joachim Weyl (Hermann Weyl's son) were informally 
directed by Veblen, von Neumann, and Weyl, respectively. (Private communication, 
4 January 88). 
41. A remark made in 1936 before an international scientific audience. As quoted 
in Chapin (1958). 
42. See, for example, Rosser's comments in the oral history the author conducted 
with Rosser and Stephen Kleene, 26 April 1984. PMC 23, the Princeton Mathematics 
Community in the 1930s Oral History Project. 
43. By which he meant Rosser, Kleene, Church, and Curry. The other fifth, Quine, 
was at Harvard. (Rosser/Kleene interview, op. cit.) 
44. See Ducasse and Curry (1962) for additional information about the early 
history of the association and the journal. 
45. This and the remaining information in the paragraph is in a letter from Church 
to Veblen, 19 June 1935 (Oswald Veblen Papers, Library of Congress). In an earlier 
draft of this paper the author interpreted this letter as evidence that Church was biased 
against philosophers, to which one knowledgeable reviewer took strong exception. The 
remark about Langford in the letter is inconclusive; there may have been personal 
or other reasons besides disciplinary status that cause Church to view Langford's 

68 
William Aspray 
appointment as "unfortunate." In the author's interview with Church (see footnote 47), 
however, Church characterizes Lewis as a "leader" among "philosophers who were 
interested in symbolic logic frcm the point of view of its relevance to philosophy rather 
than math" and Church indicated his unwillingness to use Lewis's logic text for this 
reason. I do believe that Lewis's philosophical orientation was the reason Church 
favored Weyl's appointment as president. 
46. Ibid. 
47. Alonzo Church, Oral History PMC 5, 17 May 1984, conducted by the author. 
The Princeton Mathematics Community in the 1930s Oral History Project. 
48. Church interview, op. cir. 
49. The Veblen Papers (Library of Congress) include a regular correspondence 
between Veblen and Church during the two years Church was away from Princeton 
on a National Research Council fellowship. They correspond about the work of 
Brouwer, Curry, Hilbert, Ramsey, and Russell (see, especially, Veblen's letter of 28 
April 1928 about Hilbert's continuum paper); who Veblen recommends Church study 
with during the second year of his fellowship (Brouwer, Hilbert, or Weyl); how to help 
Curry get a fellowship and teaching position; and information on the new mathematics 
building at Grttingen (Church sent floor plans on 26 January 1929). 
50. This account is taken largely from Feferman et al. (1986), which includes 
additional biographical information about G6del and about his contributions while 
at the institute. 
51. There were at least two reasons for Grdel to have written Veblen about 
this matter: Grdel was scheduled to visit the institute in 1939, and Veblen handled 
many such personnel matters (there being almost no professional administration at 
the institute); also, Veblen was a leader in the United States in aiding refugee mathe- 
maticians, helping dozens of mathematicians to emigrate and avoid the Nazi peril. 
Grdel had notoriously frail physical and mental health and knew the deleterious effect 
military service would have. 
52. Grdel was made a permanent member of the institute in 1946 and professor in 
1953. 
Bibliography 
American Mathematical Society (1938), Semicentennial Addresses, American Mathe- 
matical Society, New York. (Volume 2 of American Mathematical Society 
Semicentennial Publications.) 
Anonymous (1931), A memorial to a scholar-teacher, Princeton Alumni Weekly, 30 
October 1931, pp. III ll3. 
Archibald, R.C. ( 1938), A Semicentennial History of the American Mathematical Society 
1888-1938, Vol l, American Mathematical Society, New York. 
Aspray, W. (1988), The emergence of Princeton as a world center for mathematical 
research, 1896-1939, in W. Aspray and P. Kitcher (eds.), History and Philosophy 
of Modern Mathematics, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, pp. 344- 
364. 
Bicnen, L.B. (1970), Notes found in a Klein bottle, Princeton Alumni Weekly, 21 April 
1970. pp. 17-20. 
Cantor, G. (1895), Zur Begriindung der transfiniten Mengenlehre, I, Math. Ann. 46, 
481 - 507. 
Chaplin, V. (1958), A history of mathematics at Princeton, Princeton Alumni Weekly, 
9 May 1958. 

Oswald Veblen and the Origins of Mathematical Logic at Princeton 
69 
Corcoran, J. (1980), Categoricity, Hist. Philos. Logic !, 187-207. 
Corcoran, J. ( 1981 ), From categoricity to completeness, Hist. Philos. Logic 2, 113-119. 
Corcoran, J. (1986), Undefinability tests and the Erlanger program: Historical foot- 
notes, Proceedings, International Congress of Mathematicians, Berkeley 1986, 
p. 339. 
Davis, M. (1965), The Undecidable: Basic Papers on U ndecidable Proposit ions, Unsolv- 
able Propositions, and Computable Functions, Raven Press, Hewlett, NY. 
Dipert, R. (1978), Development and Crisis in Late Boolean Logic: The Deductive 
Logics of Peirce, Jevons, and Schr6der, Ph.D. Dissertation, Indiana University. 
Ducasse, C.J. and Curry, H.B. (1963), Early history of the Association for Symbolic 
Logic. J. Symbolic Logic 27, 255-258. Addendum: J. Symbolic Logic 28, p. 279. 
Eisenhart, L.P. (1931), The progress of science: Henry Burchard Fine and the Fine 
Memorial Hall, Scient!]ic Monthly 33, 565-568. 
Feferman, S. et al. (eds.) (1986), Kurt GiJdel Collected Works, Vol. 1, Oxford University 
Press, New York. (Gfdel's Life and Work, pp. 1-36.) 
Fine, H.B. (unsigned) (1926), The Role of Mathematics, The Princeton Fund 
Committee. 
Flexner, A. (1960), Abraham Flexner: An Autobiography, Simon and Schuster, New 
York. 
Hilbert, D. (1899), Grundlagen der Geometrie, Teubner, Leipzig. English trans, by E.J. 
Townsend, Open Court, Chicago, 1902. 
Hille, E. (1962), In Retrospect, Notes, Yale Mathematical Colloquium, 16 May 1962. 
Huntington, E.V. (1902), A complete set of postulates for the theory of absolute 
continuous magnitude, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 3, 264-279. 
Huntington, E.V. (1905), A set of postulates for real algebra, comprising postulates for 
a one-dimensional continuum and for the theory of groups, Trans. Amer. Math. 
Soc. 56, 17-41. 
Johnson, D. (1984), Mathematical Research in the United States from 1890: The Case 
of the University of Chicago, Hampden-Sydney College, unpublished. 
K leene, S.C. ( 1981 ), Origins of recursive function theory, A nn. Hist. Comput. 3, 52-67. 
Kleene, S.C. (1987), Kurt G6del, Biographical Memoirs Nat. Acad. Sci. 56, 135 178. 
MacLane, S. (1976), Oswald Veblen, Dictionary of Scientific Biography, 599 600. 
Montgomery, D. (1963), Oswald Veblen, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 69, 26-36. 
Moore, E.H. (1902), On the projective axioms of geometry, Trans. Amer. Math. Sot:. 3, 
142-158. 
Moore, E.H. (1903), On the foundations of mathematics, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (2), 9, 
402-424. 
Moore, G.H. (1988), The emergence of first-order logic, in W. Aspray and P. Kitcher 
(eds.), History and Philosophy of Modern Mathematics, University of Minnesota 
Press, Minneapolis, pp. 95-135. 
Padoa, A. (1901), Logique et Histoire des Sciences, Biblioth~que du Congr~s Interna- 
tional de Philosophic, 1II. 
Pasch, M. (1882), Vorlesungen i~ber neuere Geometrie, Teubner, Leipzig. 
Peano, G. (1889), I principii di geometria, Fratelli Bocca, Turin. 
Peano, G. (1894), Sui fondamenti della geometria, Riu. Mat. 4, 51-59. 
Peck haus, V. (1986), Case studies towards the establishment of a social history of logic, 
Hist. Philos. Logic 7, 185-186. 
Pieri, M. (1899), Della geometria elementare come sistema ipotetico deduttivo. Mono- 
grafia del punto e del moto, Memorie della Reale Accademia delle Scienze di Torino 
(2), 49, 173 222. 

70 
William Aspray 
Reingold, N. (1981), Refugee mathematicians in the United States of America, 1933- 
1941: Reception and reaction, Ann. Sci. 38, 313-338. 
Scanlan, M. (1982), American Postulate Theorists and the Development of Axiomatic 
Method, 1901-1930. Ph.D. Dissertation, SUNY, Buffalo. 
Tarski, A. (1956a), Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics: Papers from 1923 to 1938, 
trans, by J.H. Woodger. Clarendon, Oxford. 
Tarski, A. (1956b), A general theorem concerning primitive notions of Euclidean 
geometry, lndag. Math. 18, 468-474. 
Van Evra, J. (1966), A History of Some Aspects of the Theory of Logic, 1850-Present. 
Ph.D. Dissertation, Michigan State University. 
Veblen, O. (1903), Hilbert's foundations of geometry, Monist, 13, 303-309. 
Veblen, O. 11904al, A system of axioms for geometry, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 5, 343- 
384. 
Veblen, O. (1904b), The Heine-Borel theorem, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 10, 436-439. 
Veblen, O. (1905a), Euclid's parallel postulate, Open Court 19, 752-755. 
Veblen, O. (1905b), Definition in terms of order alone in the linear continuum and in 
well-ordered sets, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 6, 165-171. 
Veblen, O. (1905c), Theory of plane curves in nonmetrical analysis situs, Trans. Amer. 
Math. Soc. 6, 83-98. 
Veblen, O. (1906), The foundations of geometry: An historical sketch and a simple 
example, Popular Science Monthly n.y., pp. 21-28. 
Veblen, O. ( 1911), The foundations of geometry, in J.W.A. Young, Mon#raphs on Topics 
of Modern Mathematics, Longmans, Green, New York, Chapter I, pp. 1-51. 
Veblen, O. (1922), Analysis Situs, American Mathematical Society Colloquium Pub- 
lications, volume 5, part 2. 
Veblen, O. (1923), Geometry and physics, Science 57, 129-139. 
Veblen, O. (1925), Remarks on the foundations of geometry, Bull Amer. Math. Soc. 31, 
121 141. 
Veblen, O. (1934), Certain aspects of modern geometry--A course of three lectures, 
Rice Institute Pamphlets 31,207-255. 
Veblen, O. and Alexander, J.W. (1913), Manifolds of n dimensions, Acta Math., Series 
2, 14, 163-178. 
Veblen, O. and Lennes, N.J. (1907), Introduction to Infinitesimal Analysis, Wiley, New 
York. 
Veblen, O. and Whitehead, J.H.C. (1931), A set of axioms for differential goemetry, 
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 17, 551-561. 
Veblen, O. and Whitehead, J.H.C. (1932), Foundations of Differential Geometry, Cam- 
bridge Tracts in Mathematics and Mathematical Physics, number 29, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Veblen, O. and Young, J.W. (1908), A set ofassumptions for projective geometry, Amer. 
J. Math. 30, 347-380. 
Veblen, O. and Young, J.W. (1910/1918), Projective Geometry, 2 volumes (volume two 
by Veblenl, Ginn, Boston. 
Wilder, R.L. (1965), Introduction to The Foundations of Mathematics, Wiley, New 
York. 

The L/iwenheim-Skolem Theorem, 
Theories of Quantification, and 
Proof Theory* 
Irving H. Anellis 
Warren Goldfarb (1971, p. 17) wrote that "Herbrand's work had an immediate 
impact on the Hilbert school," and quotes Paul Bernays (Hilbert and Bernays, 
1934, 1939, vol. 1, "'Foreword") to the effect that "the appearance of the works 
of Herbrand and G6del have altered proof theory." We are concerned here 
to explore the role which Herbrand's work had in developing the discipline 
of proof theory. More specifically, we are interested in formulating a theory 
about the impact which questions raised by Herbrand, about the meaning of 
satisfiability in Hilbert's axiomatic method, had on the proliferation of quanti- 
fication theories presented as alternatives to Hilbert's system. 
Important surveys of proof theory research have been made by Kreisei 
(1968, 1971), Minc (1975), and Prawitz (1971). Van Heijenoort (1976) has 
studied the development in theories of quantification, and Goldfarb (1979) has 
sought to present an historically accurate understanding of the way in which 
logicians such as Frege, Russell, Hilbert, and Herbrand, among others, under- 
stood their own contributions to quantification theory in the context of the 
interpretation of quantifiers for a universe of discourse. Thus, he is interested 
in the relations between syntax and semantic interpretation on one hand, and 
deducibility under quantifier interpretations for each formal system on the 
other. 
In what follows, I wish to argue that the impetus for the development of 
proof theory, and the competing quantification theories developed after 1931, 
is to be sought in the questions raised by Herbrand (1930a) in the attempt to 
clarify the concept of being a proof for a Hilbert-type quantification theory. 
* An early version of this chapter was presented to the American Mathematical Society 
on 25 January 1979 (Anellis, 19791, under the title The L6wenheim-Skolem theorem, 
theories of quantification, and Beweistheorie. Under that same title, it was to have 
appeared in the planned but never-executed Proof Theory, Constructive Mathematics 
and Applications: Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society Special Session 
on Proof Theory, to have been edited by this author and G.E. Minc. 
The current version of the chapter has been improved by the helpful comments of 
G.E. Minc and Thomas Drucker. 

72 
Irving H. Anellis 
The Hiibert system, along with related systems, those of Frege and of White- 
head and Russell, precede the work of Herbrand. By contrast, the important 
work of Ja~kowski (1934) and Gentzen (1934)followed three years after the 
work of Herbrand. Moreover, we must note that GSdei's (1931) incomplete- 
ness results are contemporary with Herbrand's thesis. Axiomatic systems, of 
course, began with Frege's Begriffsschrift (! 879) and reached their peak in the 
Principia Mathematica of Whitehead and Russell ( 1910-1913). By 1931, there 
were two major axiomatic systems--the Frege-type system and the Hilbert- 
type system. Here I wish to examine the connections between proof theory 
and theories of quantification, and to explain how questions about the nature 
of proofs for axiomatic systems led to the development of alternatives to those 
systems. 
The historical evidence available suggests that Herbrand's thesis (1930) 
and GSdel's incompleteness results (1931), appearing within months of one 
another, together had a profound impact on the primacy of the axiomatic 
method. Certainly, the Russell paradox and the theory of types introduced 
into set theory to resolve the paradox can be seen as the best example known 
of the incompleteness of the Whitehead-Russell axiomatic system as defined 
by G6del's theorem. The examination by Herbrand (1930a) of the meaning of 
being a proof for the Hiibert system forced serious questions to be asked about 
Hilbert-type systems. We are interested here in the technical repercussions of 
the work of Herbrand, and argue that these repercussions of Herbrand's 
study of the nature of proof in Hilbert's system included the development of 
alternative theories of quantification. It is not coincidental that the majority 
of alternative formal quantification theories devised to rival the axiomatic 
method arose within a few years of the publication of both the GSdel results 
and, more particularly, Herbrand's study. 
It is not clear that there is an historical relationship between G/Sdel's 
theorem and Herbrand's study of Hilbert's concept of proof. For van 
Heijenoort, the role of G6del's incompleteness theorem is, if not central, then 
certainly crucial, in the history of logic, and played a significant role not only 
in the history ofmetamathematics, but also in the development of philosophies 
of mathematics. My investigation indicates that the technical developments 
in the Hilbert-type systems and the rise of the other systems were stimulated 
less by the G/Sdel incompleteness results than by questions raised, through the 
studies of Herbrand, by the L/Swenheim-Skolem theorem on No-satisfiability. 
Herbrand's (1930a) efforts, and his use of the L6wenheim-Skolem theorem in 
that study, are central to the further development of quantification theory and 
provide the crucial link between proof theory and theories of quantification. 
Kreisel (1976, p. 128) has said that, "though the aims of Hilbert's program 
and the theory of proofs are usually unrelated and often in conflict, it should 
not be assumed that the aims of that theory are in conflict with Hilbert's own 
interests," and that "at least at one time, his principal interest was to attract 
the attention of mathematics to the topic of mathematical proofs as an object 
of (mathematical) study: and the 'grand' program was to have been the bait." 

The L/Swenheim Skolem Theorem and Theories of Quantification 
73 
If we understand by quantification theory that fragment of Frege's or 
Russell's system that contains no variables of type greater than 2 and no 
quantifiers but those taking only individuals within their scope--i.e., first- 
order functional calculus (with identity)-- then, says Goldfarb (1979, pp. 352- 
353), "we cannot expect quantification theory to arise naturally within the 
iogicist program, because neither Frege nor Russell treated metamathe- 
matical, i.e., proof-theoretic, questions about the "underlying logic" of the 
various areas of mathematics." This claim of Goldfarb's is difficult to accept: 
surely both Frege and Russell aimed specifically to develop their systems 
for the logicization of mathematics (see, e.g., Frege's Ober den Zweck der 
Begriffsschrift (1883). It would clearly be a false claim if applied to Hilbert's 
program. Hilbert (1900)is precisely an application of the study of the logic of 
proofs to the formalization of the real number system, and hence to analysis. 
The correct interpretation is that quantification theory arose as part of the 
attempt to clarify Hilbert's conception of the nature of proofs. And this 
was done by Herbrand. Herbrand used the opportunity provided in his 
investigation of Hilbert's system to set forth the first alternative quantification 
theory, namely, Herbrand quantification (QH), the Gentzen sequent calculus, 
and the method of natural deduction introduced by Jagkowski appeared soon 
after, in 1934, as rivals to the axiomatic method and to QH- 
According to Jean van Heijenoort (1976, p. 7), the theory of quantification 
is a "family of formal systems" whose members include Hilbert-type, or 
axiomatic, systems, Herbrand Quantification, the Gentzen Sequent Calculus, 
and Natural Deduction. Van Heijenoort (1976) traces the history of the 
evolution or development (desarrollo) of quantification theory, starting from 
the definition of the Hilbert program (see also Kreisel 1959, p. 150), according 
to which "proof itself is an object of study" for mathematics) and the Herbrand 
system, through the G6del incompleteness results and consideration of the 
Gentzen Sequent Calculus and Natural Deduction. Finally, he ties them all 
together for comparison and for enumeration of each of their respective 
contributions towards clarification of the concept of proof. 
It is clear from Herbrand's own comments that his investigations were 
undertaken to clarify the concept of being a proof for a Hiibert-type quanti- 
fication system. In the introduction to his Recherches sur la thkories de la 
d~monstration (1930a), he speaks of the recursive method to "prove that every 
true proposition of a given theory has a property A" (see the translation by 
Goldfarb (1971, p. 49)), and immediately ties this to the finitist limit on 
recursive proofs enunciated by Hilbert. For Herbrand, this finitist limit 
demands a challenge specifically to the transfinitist proofs of L6wenheim (in 
terms of ~r 
and require that L6wenheim's infinite conjunction 
be reinterpreted as Herbrand expansion. All of this gives impetus to inves- 
tigations in proof theory and into the concept of validity. The G6del results 
did not serve to initiate these investigations. They were already underway in 
Herbrand's work, months before G6del announced his results. The evidence 
is that much of Herbrand's concern centered explicitly on the L6wenheim- 

74 
Irving H. Anellis 
Skolem theorem, and particularly on the idea of No-satisfiability obtained 
from the k-satisfiability for every finite k of Lrwenheim infinite conjunction. 
Herbrand (1930b) dealt separately with Hilbertian finitism. 
The alternatives to the axiomatic method cam fast and furious after 1931; 
but the example of Herbrand shows that the G/Sdei results did not necessarily 
precede--or cause--the development of alternative quantification theories. 
We can accept the claims of van Heijenoort (1976) that: 
(1) theory of quantification is a "family of formal systems"; 
(2) the several theories of quantification, rather than being in competition, 
represent a natural development (desarrollo). 
However, to this set of conclusions must be added the thesis that: 
(3) technical developments in Hilbert-type systems, including development of 
Beweistheorie by H ilbert-Bernays (1934, 1939), and development of alter- 
native theories of quantification, are primarily due to questions raised by 
the Lrwenheim-Skolem theorem rather than by Grdel's incompleteness 
results. 
The axiomatic method provides results on the basis of the concept of formal 
system. We are provided with a set of axioms, a list of formulas from which 
we derive other formulas, the theorems of the system, and an inference rule, 
the rule of detachment, by which theorems may be derived from the axioms 
of the system. The concept of proof is never considered; it is extrasystematic, 
metamathematical. Lrwenheim (1915), for example, had no notion of proof, 
but only (as van Heijenoort, (1977, p. 183) reminds us) of satisfiability and 
validity, whereas Skolem was looking for a proof procedure (for completeness) 
(see van Heijenoort (1977, p. 185)). A proof is just a string or sequence of 
formulas or axioms, the last line of which, the Endformula, is a theorem proved 
in the system. (The Hilbert-type axiomatic system is defined by the Hilbert 
program with its underlying formalist philosophy (see, e.g., Hilbert (1918); also 
Kreisel (1959).) 
Herbrand, following the Lrwenheim-Skolem results on satisfiability, was 
led to seek a clarification of satisfiability or validity. This proof-theoretic 
investigation began with the Lrwenheim-Skolem theorem which, in its sim- 
plest form, states that if full first-order quantification theory Q (i.e., first-order 
functional calculus with identity) has an interpretation in a subdomain Q' of 
Q, then Q has a countable model, or is satisfiable. More precisely; if Q is 
satisfiable for some finite k, then it is No-satisfiable. And any class K having a 
formula P in Q which is k-satisfiable for every countable k is No-satisfiable, 
or has a formula P' in Q which is a copy of P, and P' is No-satisfiable. As 
stated by Skolem (1923) it reads: 
If [a set of] axioms are consistent, then there is a domain B for which the axioms 
are satisfied, and for which all elements of B are enumerable with the use of the positive 
finite integers. 

The L6wenheim-Skolem Theorem and Theories of Quantification 
75 
We may reformulate this in our terminology as follows: 
Theorem 1 (L6wenheim Skolem). l f full first-order quantification theory Q is 
satisfiable for some finite k, then it is No-satisfiable; and any class K havin 9 a 
formula F in Q which is k-satisfiable for every countable k is No-satisfiable, or 
has a .formula F' in Q which is a copy of F, and F' is No-satisfiable. 
L6wenheim (1915) showed that if a finitely valid formula F is not valid, 
then it is not No-valid; or by contraposition, that if F is No-valid, then it is 
k-valid for any countable k, where it is not invalid for some finite domain. 
Skolem (1920) proved this theorem and generalized it to a denumerably 
infinite set of formulas, such that: 
(a) if F is satisfiable, then F is satisfiable in the domain of natural numbers, 
where a proper assignment is made to the predicate letters of F; and 
(b) if F is satisfiable, i.e., there exists a domain D in which F is satisfiable, then 
F is satisfiable in a denumerable subdomain D' of D. for the same assign- 
ment of meanings to predicate letters of F. 
Skolem (1923) was able to simplify his proof by utilizing the law of infinite 
conjunction and dispensing with the Axiom of Choice used in the earlier proof. 
On the basis of the infinite conjunction used by Skolem to obtain his results 
on No-satisfiability in Theorem I, Herbrand (1930a) was able to provide an 
expansion, now known as Herbrand expansion, and generate his Th~orOme 
Fondamental (see Goldfarb (1971, pp. 168 169i and van Heijenoort (1968, 
p. 554)). 
"Herbrand's work can be viewed," says van Heijenoort (1968 Editor's 
Introduction, p. 526) "as a reinterpretation, from the point of view of Hilbert's 
program, of the results of L6wenheim and Skolem. Of his fundamental theo- 
rem Herbrand (1931, p. 4) writes "'that it is a more precise statement of the 
L6wenheim-Skolem theorem'." 
In general form, we have: 
Theorem 2 (Fundamental Theorem, Herbrand). For some.formula F of classi- 
cal quantification theory, an infinite sequence of quantifier-free formulas FI , F2, 
... can be effectively 9enerated, for F provable in (any standard) quantification 
theory, if and only if there exists a k such that F is (sententially) valid; and a 
proof of F can be obtained .from F k. 
As originallystated by Herbrand, this says: 
(1) lf .lbr some number p a proposition P has property B of order p, the 
proposition P is true. Once we know any such p, we can construct a proof of P. 
(2) /f we have a true proposition P, together with a proof of P. we can, from 
this proof, derive a number p such that P has property B of order p. 

76 
Irving H. Anellis 
Let us give an example. To do so, we require some definitions. A formula 
of QM is called rectified if it contains no vacuous quantifier, no variable has 
free or bound occurrences in it, and no two quantifiers bind occurrences of 
the same variable. A quantifier in a rectified formula is called existentialoid if 
it is existential and in the scope of an even number of negation symbols, or 
universal and in the scope of an odd number of negation symbols; otherwise 
it is universaloid. A variable in a rectified formula is an existentialoid variable 
if and only if it is bound by an existentiaioid quantifier, and is universaloid 
variable if and only if it is bound by a universaloid quantifier (see van 
Heijenoort (1975, p. 1) and (1982, p. 58)). 
EXAMPLE. If Exp[F, Dk] is a Herbrand expansion of F over Dk (where Dk is 
the kth element of the sequence D containing the individual constants and 
universaloid variables of F and the elements of Do ..... D~_I, where initial Do 
contains the individual constants and the existentialloidally free universaloid 
variable F, and where, if F contains none of these, the one element of D O is an 
arbitrary individual contant Uo), then the formula F is provable in classical 
quantification theory if and only if there exists a k such that Exp[-F, Dk] is 
sententially valid. 
Thus, for FQ a formula of classical quantification theory without identity, 
for the kth Herbrand expansion FQ,,k for any k, F o ~ FQ, k, and FQH k is sententi- 
ally valid. (For more details, see van Heijenoort (1968, 1975, 1982).) 
Herbrand expansion is a more general case of the infinite conjunction used 
by Skolem to obtain his results on No-satisfiability. It allows Herbrand to 
begin with a formula written in Skolem (prenex) normal form and then 
delete all quantifiers in the normal-form formula by expansion up to k-many 
elements (for a k-ary domain) using conjunction for universaloid expressions 
and disjunction for existentialoid expressions within the formula. This method 
is required in Qn because Herbrand adopted the finitism of Hilbert, for which 
the concept of satisfiability, especially No-satisfiability, in the Lrwenheim- 
Skolem theorem, is metamathematically unsound. 
Hilbert considered to-inconsistent systems even prior to the construction 
of such systems by G/Sdel (1931). The aim of the Hilbert program and of the 
technical developments in Beweistheorie for Hilbert was to provide a proof 
procedure for the consistency of full quantification theory within and by way 
of the axiomatic method. For Herbrand, to-inconsistency is of itself question- 
able, and the concept of to-consistency (indeed of consistency) must be modified 
proof-theoretically by a careful and precise definition of satisfiability in QH. 
In the case of Hilbert's work on to-inconsistency, every attempt was made 
to prove the consistency of arithmetic. For example, there is Hilbert's call for 
the axiomatization of arithmetic, together with his proof for its consistency 
(Hilbert, 1904) and his formalization of number theory (Hilbert, 1900). The 
proof-theoretic form of G/Sdel's 1930 completeness theorem (Grdel, The com- 
pleteness of the axioms of the .functional calculus of Iooic in van Heijenoort 

The L6wenheim-Skolem Theorem and Theories of Quantification 
77 
(1967, pp. 583 591)) is given by Hilbert and Bernays (1934, 1939, vol. 2, 
pp. 205-253), and, in G6del's version, makes heavy use of techniques of LSw- 
enheim and Skolem (see van Heijenoort's introductory comments in From 
Frege to Gfdel, p. 582). This attempt to provide a consistency proof for full 
quantification theory, particularly of arithmetic, even taking into account the 
completeness results of G6del, was made at the same time by Herbrand (1931). 
The Hilbert program, as developed by the Hilbert Bernays Beweistheorie, 
seeks to provide finitist constructive proofs for elementary arithmetic ~o. 
Under a finitist program, as taken over by Herbrand, and particularly thanks 
to his Fundamental Theorem, Herbrand found o~-consistency/inconsistency to 
be a metamathematicaily unsound, and spurious, concept. It is easy to see 
why. Herbrand's (1930a) objections are leveled first against L/Swenheim's 
(1915) intuitive formulation of the notion "true in an infinite domain". Next, 
he argued that Hilbert's concept of completeness (Vollstiindigkeit) did not 
clarify the concept of being a proof (van Heijenoort, 1967, Burton Dreben's 
not H); his objection is based on the fact that consistency fails to imply 
provability, and that for Hilbert, completeness implies decidability but 
consistency does not imply provability. Thus, in his study of Hilbert's 
Beweistheorie, von Neumann (1927) concentrates his attention on the question 
of noncontradiction (Widerspruchsfreiheit). Herbrand's task was to define 
provability in terms of validity. He therefore explicitly took for himself the 
task of associating completeness with validity. 
By establishing within ~o the conditions sufficient for formalization of ~o 
as given by Kreisel (1968, p. 322), we elaborate at the same time the relation 
between completeness and validity for a system S and Bew s, the proof predicate 
of S: 
(a) A ~ Bews(nA, At) for A ~ A, where ,4 is a class of assertions of ~o, and 
A r is a formula of the formal system S, and n is a function from A into 
formal derivations of S; 
(b) Bews( f, At) --, A for A E A and f a variable. 
If these two conditions are satisfied, we established the adequacy of ~o and 
obtain finitist proofs in the system S of every A r E ,4 of ~o. Thus, every 
theorem A r of ~o is decidable. 
Perhaps the most representative feature of QH is its elimination of modus 
ponens. This rests on the nature of Herbrand expansions, that is, Herbrand 
conjunctions and disjunctions, and on the set of connectives of QH, with 
Herbrand expansion (conjunction), Herbrand disjunction, and negation being 
a base. 1 Gentzen's (1934) Sequent Calculus rests on the results of Herbrand, 
but goes further by giving an analysis of the sentential parts of the proof of 
validity. Also, unlike QH, the Gentzen theory contains a Hauptschnitt which 
is extended to the intuitionistic calculus and to modal logic. These are 
perhaps some of the reasons for Girard's (1982, p. 29) claim that "Herbrand's 
'Th6or6me Fondamental', one of the milestones of mathematical logic, is also 
one of the few basic results of proof-theory, only challenged (and presumably 

78 
Irving H. Anellis 
overtaken) by Gentzen's Hauptsatz." (Girard then goes on to examine the 
current import of Herbrand's theorem for proof theory.) 
Gentzen (1934, p. 409, ftn.) himself claims that Herbrand's fundamental 
theorem is just a special case of his own versch~rfter Hauptsatz, insofar as 
Herbrand's theorem applies to a sequent whose antecedent is empty and 
whose succedent is a single prenex formula, while the verschfTrfter Hauptsatz 
applies to any prenex formulas. (The Hauptsatz, to remind readers, presents 
cut-elimination, and is analogous to Herbrand's elimination of modus ponens 
for QH.) However, Gentzen's cut-elmination for prenex formulas is not as 
general or as strong as the Herbrand elimination of modus ponens for QH. 
Statman (1977) uses the cut-elimination analogue of Herbrand's Fundamental 
Theorem to elucidate what can be learned from a direct proof of a theorem 
in a formal calculus. He takes Herbrand's theorem as a corollary to the 
Completeness Theorem; then using the cut-elimination technique, he proves 
completeness within the KreiseI-Tait equation calculus. Statman thereby 
helps, indirectly, to elucidate the connections between QH and the Gentzen 
Sequent Calculus. 
Unlike QH and Gentzen's Sequent Calculus, the method of natural deduc- 
tion places extreme emphasis on modus ponens as a method of inference, 
and in this regard it returns to the conditionalization introduced into the 
Begriffsschrift by Frege as the principal logical connective and the rule of 
detachment of the Hilbert-type axiomatic method. The central features of the 
method of natural deduction are the rule of conditionalization and quantifier 
rules. The Gentzen Sequent Calculus features rules for introduction and 
elimination of connectives and quantifiers, and in this has some affinity with 
the natural deduction method. The use of the two rules of universal generaliza- 
tion (UG) and existential instantiation (El) reintroduce into Q=, quantification 
theory with identity and prenex normal form, serious difficulties with respect 
to the satisfiability or even decidability of certain theorems of Q=. 
It was Ja~kowski (1934) who, in 1934, first utilized the idea of Lukasiewicz 
(1925) to found proofs on the rules of intuitive logic. 2 Ja~kowski's system 
uses UG and universal instantiation (UI), and is therefore considered to be 
insufficiently natural, since it does not provide for existential quantifiers (see 
Anellis (1990b)). The N-sequenzen (natural sequences) were found to be more 
intuitively acceptable, allowing existential as well as universal quantification. 
Thus, the Gentzen method, employing N-sequents, appeared to be preferable 
to the unnatural natural deduction of Ja~kowski, and there was a consequent 
rush to naturalize and save Ja~kowski's method. Ironically, Lukasiewicz 
proposed natural deduction as an alternative to the axiomatic systems just 
because he thought that those systems were unnatural, not only because 
they exhibited difficulties with restrictions on acceptable quantifiers, but also 
because they did not appear to bear any resemblance to the way the working 
mathematician actually obtained his results. The inference rules which were 
delineated by Hilbert were thought, then, to be artificial. J. Fang (1984) raises 
today the same objections to Gentzen's system as Ja~kowski--and for that 

The L6wenheim-Skolem Theorem and Theories of Quantification 
79 
matter, Gentzen--raised to Hiibert's axiomatic method. To these objections, 
he also adds (1984, p. 14) the complaint that Gentzen's system is unnatural 
because it is too complicated and contains an over-abundance of inference 
rules; he even claims that Gentzen himself was "perfectly aware of the 
"unnatural' aspect in some artificial rules of inference," citing in particular 
Gentzen's rules (3a) and (3b) (i.e., the laws of addition: P--* (P v Q) and 
Q ~ (P v Q) (Gentzen, 1934, p. 186)). But then Fang is among those who 
would prefer a return to classical Aristotelean syllogistic. 
Despite the work of Quine (1955), Prawitz (1965), and others, UG and El 
persist as sore spots for natural deduction. 3 We are led to suppose that, among 
alternative systems of natural deduction, the N-sequents of Gentzen are 
preferable to other, particularly Copi-type, deductions. (A history of the 
vicissitudes and problems encountered in attempts to devise quantification 
rules for natural deduction is given by Anellis (1990b).) 
The problems encountered in formulating quantifier rules, particularly the 
problems arising from UG and EI in Copi-style natural deduction systems, 
returns us to the question of satisfiability for quantified formulas involving 
these two troublesome and elusive rules. We can prove, for example, that some 
formula F' of Q= is k-satisfiable for any finite k but is not (k - 1))-valid; or 
that some formula F" of Q= is k-satisfiable for any finite k but is not b~ o- 
satisfiable. For Q_, under UG and El, we face the Law of Lesser Universes. 
According to this law, for 0 < ct </~ cardinals, if a formula F is satisfiable in 
a universe of cardinality ~t, it is also/~-satisfiable; and if F is//-valid, it is also 
at-valid. Now the Law of Lesser Universes applies only to those quantification 
theories in which formulas occur in disjunctive normal form, and in which 
there is neither identity nor a universal quantifier. However, for Q=, satisfi- 
ability and validity depend largely on the cardinality of the universe of 
discourse. The questions raised by natural deduction have been rendered 
less sharp by the introduction by Prawitz (1968) into the natural deduction 
systems of non-Gentzen type, and especially into higher-order predicate 
calculus, of an analogue of Gentzen's Hauptsatz on cut-elimination (Schnitt- 
elimination). 
In his important work, Takeuti (1975) has done much with the Gentzen 
sequential method, and it is perhaps to be preferred to the Hiibert inferential 
method. Schiitte (1960, 1977) takes Hilbert's method as a starting point, and 
is nearly indistinguishable from Hilbertian Beweistheorie. Takeuti's work in 
proof theory may even be preferable to that of Schiitte, and indeed can be seen 
as a third alternative to both the Hilbert and Gentzen methods, in fact, 
combining the best features of both. (Feferman (1977, 1979) has reviewed both 
Takeuti (1975) and Schfitte (1977).) 
Quantification theory, starting from the definition of the Hilbert program 
and the construction of Herbrand quantification, through the G6del in- 
completeness results to the Gentzen sequences and natural deduction, pre- 
sents a "family of formal systems," a development of quantification theory, 
in the attempt to clarify the concepts of proof, satisfiability, and t, alidity. Over 

80 
Irving H. Anellis 
the years, some progress may even be presumed to have been made. The two 
works by Takeuti and Schfitte give important new results, some of which are 
pointed out by Feferman. In spite of the differences in style between them, 
with Schfitte's Beweistheorie strongly influenced by the Hilbert-type system 
and Takeuti's Proof Theory belonging strictly to the Gentzen-sequent system, 
they tend to complement and complete one another. It was the problems 
inherent in the Lrwenheim Skolem theorem concept of No-satisfiability that 
served as a prime stimulus for work in proof theory and in the development 
of technical results in quantification theory, including Herbrand's QH, 
Gentzen's Sequent Calculus, and the other systems of the Natural Deduction 
method whose principal contributors include Ja~kowski, Prawitz, and Quine. 
The reader may also be reminded that the Semantic Tableaux of Beth are a 
semanticization of the Gentzen Sequence Calculus, and that the Truth Tree 
method introduced by Jeffrey (1967) is a simplification of Beth Tableaux 
through the intermediacy of Hugues Leblanc's application of semantic tableaux 
to natural deduction. We need not, therefore, list these technical innovations 
as separate members of the family of formal systems, but must note that 
Jeffrey (1967, p. ix) himself traces the Tree Method back even to Herbrand. 
For a complete history of the tree method, see Anellis (1990a). 
Interestingly, and as I had noted earlier, van Heijenoort (1977, p. 183, 185) 
reminds us that Lrwenheim had no notion of proof, just of satisfiability, and 
that Skolem had been seeking a proof procedure for completeness of Hilbert- 
type quantification theory. It is certainly clear that the weakness of Hilbert- 
type quantification theory became evident in and because of the Lrwenheim- 
Skolem theorem. It was precisely this weakness that became fully explicit in 
Herbrand expansion as an enlargement of the Lrwenheim-Skolem infinite 
conjunction presented by Skolem in his normal-form translations of Hilbert's 
quantified formulas, and which, I claim, thereby led to important work in 
Hilbert's Beweistheorie specifically, and in proof theory generally, and to the 
construction of alternative theories of quantification, to systems other than 
axiomatic theories. 
Notes 
1. For an axiom system (or for any theory of quantification), the [smallest] set of 
primitive logical connectives, in terms of which other logical connectives come to be 
defined, is called a base. For Frege's system, negation and implication constitute the 
base; for the Principia Mathematica system, negation and disjunction constitute the 
base. 
In QH, a base can be understood as the set of connectives in virtue of which 
existentialoidally quantified formulas can be expanded (Herbrand disjunction) and by 
which universaloidally quantified formulas can be expanded (Herbrand conjunction), 
together with negation. 
2. See Anellis (1990b. p. 5). Ja~kowski (1934, p. 5) is more specific and refers to 
Lukasiewicz's 1926 seminar, in which some of the ideas were first worked out, and to 
their presentation at the First Polish Mathematical Congress in Lw6w in 1927 and 

The L6wenheim-Skolem Theorem and Theories of Quantification 
81 
subsequent publication in the Congress Proceedings (Ksiega pamiatkowa pierwszego 
polskiego zjazdu matematycznego, Krak6w, 1929). 
3. I do not number Copi among those whose work should be considered. The 
notorious history of his revisions for EI and UG in successive editions of his Symbolic 
Logic has been chronicled by Anellis (1990b). 
References 
Anellis, I.H. (1979), The L6wenheim-Skolem theorem, theories of quantification, and 
Beweistheorie (Abstract), Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 26, A-22. 
Anellis, I.H. (1990a), From semantic tableaux to Smullyan trees: the history of the 
falsifiability tree method, Modern Logic !, 36-69. 
Anellis, I.H. (1990b), Forty years of unnatural natural deduction and quantification: 
a history of first-order systems of natural deduction, from Gentzen to Copi, 
preprint. 
Fang, J. (1984), The most unnatural "natural deduction," Contemp. Philos. 10, no. 3, 
13-15. 
Feferman, S. (1977), Review of Proof Theory by Gaisi Takeuti, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 
(1), 83, 351-361. 
Feferman, S. (1979], Review of Proof Theory by Kurt Schfitte, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 
(2), !, 224-228. 
Frege, G. (1879), Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgehildete Formelsprache 
des reinen Denkens, L. Nebert, Halle. 
Frege, G. (1883), Ober den Zweck der Begr![fsschrift, Sitzungsberichte der Jenaischen 
Gesellschaft fiir Medicin und Naturwissenschaft fur des Jahr 1882, pp. 1-I0. 
(English translation by V.H. Dudman in Austral. J. Philos. 46 (1968), 89-97.) 
Gentzen, G. (1934), Untersuchungen fiber das Iogische Schliessen, Math. Z. 39, 176- 
210, 405-431. 
Girard, J.-Y. (1982), Herbrand's theorem and proof theory, in J. Stern (ed.), Proc. 
Herbrand Symposium, Logic Colloquium '81, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 
29-38. 
G6del, K. (1931), 0ber formal unentscheidbare S/itze der Principia Mathematica und 
verw/indter Systeme. I. Monatsh. Math. Phys. 38, 173-198. (English translation 
in van Heijenoort (1976a), pp. 581-591.) 
Goldfarb, W.D. (ed.) (1971), Jacques Herbrand. Logical Writings, Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Goldfarb, W.D. (1979), Logic in the twenties: the nature of the quantifier, J. Symbolic 
Logic 44, 351-368. 
Herbrand, J. (1930a), Recherches sur la th~orie de la d~monstration, Prace Towarzystwa 
Naukowege Warszawskiego, Wydzial IIl, 33. (English translation in Goldfarb 
(1979), pp. 46-202; translation of Chapter 5 in van Heijenoort (1976a), pp. 529- 
581.) 
Herbrand, J. (1930b), Les bases de la logique hilbertienne. Revue de M~taphysique et 
de Morale 37, 243-255. (English translation in Goldfarb (1979), pp. 203-214.) 
Herbrand, J. (1931), Sur la non-contradiction de l'arithm6tique, d. Reine Angew. Math. 
166, I-8. (Eng!!sh translation in Goldfarb (1979), pp. 282 298.) 
Hilbert, D. (1900), Uber den Zahlbegriff. Jahresb. Deutsch. Math.-1/erein. 8, 180-194. 
Hilbert, D. Ober die Grundlagen der Logik und Mathematik, Verhandlungen des dritten 

82 
Irving H. Anellis 
internationalen Mathematiker-Kongress in Heidelberg (1904), pp. 174-185. (En- 
glish translation in van Heijenoort (1976a), pp. 129-138.) 
Hilbert, D. (1918), Axiomatisches Denken, Math. Ann. 78, 405-415. (Reprinted in David 
Hilbert, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, III, 2nd ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1970, pp. 
146-156.) 
Hilbert, D. and Bernays, P. (1934, 1939), Grundlagen der Mathematik, 2 vols., Springer- 
Verlag, Heidelberg. 
Jagkowski, S. (1934), On the rules of supposition in formal logic, Studia Logica 1, 5-32. 
Jeffrey, R.C. (1967), Formal Logic: Its Scope and Limits, McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Kreisel, G. (1959), Hilbert's programme, Logica: Studia Paul Bernays dedicata, editions 
du Griffon, Neuchatel, pp. 142-167. 
Kreisel, G. (1968), A survey of proof theory, I, J. Symbolic Logic 33, 321-388. 
Kreisel, G. (1971), A survey of proof theory, I I, in J.E. Fenstad (ed.), Proc. 2nd Scandin. 
Logic Symposium, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 109-170. 
Kreisel, G. (1976), What have we learnt from Hilbert's second problem? in F. Browder 
(ed.), Proc. Symposium Pure Math., 28, Mathematical Developments Arising From 
Hilbert Problems, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, pp. 93-130. 
L/Swenheim, L. (1915), IJber M/Sglichkeiten im Relativkalkiil, Math. Ann. 76, 447-470. 
(English translation in van Heijenoort (1976a), pp. 323-251.) 
Lukasiewicz, J. (1925), O pewnym sposobie pojmowania (On a certain way of conceiv- 
ing the theory of deduction), Przeglad Filozoficzny 28, 134-136. 
Minc, G.E. [Mints-] (1975), Teorija dokazatel'sty (arifmetika i analiz), ltogi Nauki i 
Tehniki. Algebra, Topologija, i Geometrija 13, 5-49. (English translation: Theory 
of proofs (arithmetic and analysis), in J. Soviet Math. 7, no. 4, 501-531.) 
Prawitz, D. (1965), Natural Deduction: A Proof-Theoretical Study, Almqvist & Wiksell, 
Stockholm. 
Prawitz, D. (1968), Hauptsatz for higher-order logic, J. Symbolic Logic 33, 452-457. 
Prawitz, D. (1971), Ideas and results in proof theory, in J.E. Fenstad (ed.), Proc. 2rid 
Scand. Logic Symposium, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 235-307. 
Quine, W.V. (1955), A proof procedure for quantification theory, J. Symbolic Logic 20, 
141-149 (Reprinted in W.V. Quine, Selected Logic Papers, Random House, New 
York, 1966, pp. 196-204.) 
Schiitte, K. (1960), Beweistheorie, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
Schiitte, K. (1977), Proof Theory, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, revised edition of SchiJtte 
(1960), J.N. Crossley (trans.). 
Skolem, T. (1920), Logisch-kombinatorische U ntersuchungen fiber die Erffihlbarkeit und 
Beweisbarkeit mathematischen Siitze nebst einem Theoreme fiber dichte Menge, 
Videnkasselskapets skrifter, I, Matematik-naturvidenskabelig klasse 4. (Reprinted 
in J.E. Fenstad (ed.), Selected Works in Logic by Th. Skolem, Universitetsforlaget, 
Oslo, 1970, Sect. 1, pp. 103-115; English translation in van Heijenoort (1976a), 
pp. 254-263.) 
Skolem, T. (1923), Einige Bemerkung zur axiomatischen Begriindung der Mengenlehre, 
Matematikerkongressen i Helsingfors den 4-7 Juli, 1922, Den femte Skandina- 
viska matematikerkongressen, Redogfrelse, Akademiska Bokhandeln, Helsinki 
(Helsingfors), pp. 217-232. (Reprinted in J.E. Fenstad (ed.), Selected Works in 
Logic by Th. Skolem, Universitetsforlaget, Oslo, 1970, pp. 137-152; English trans- 
lation in van Heijenoort (1976a), pp. 291-301.) 
Statman, R. (1977), Herbrand's theorem and Gentzen's notion of a direct proof, in 

The Lrwenheim-Skolem Theorem and Theories of Quantification 
83 
J. Barwise (ed.), Handbook of Mathematical Logic, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 
pp. 897-912. 
Takeuti, G. (1975), Proof Theory, North-Holland/American Elsevier, Amsterdam, 
New York. 
van Heijenoort, J. (ed.) (1967), From Frege to Gfidel: A Source Book in Mathematical 
Logic. 1879 1931, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. 
van Heijenoort, J. (1968), Preface, in J. van Heijenoort (ed.), Jacques Herbrand, Ecrits 
Logiques, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris. pp. 1-12. 
van Heijenoort, J. (1975), Herbrand, Unpublished MS. 
van Heijenoort, J. (1976), El desarrollo de la teoria de la cuantificacirn, Universidad 
nacional aut6noma de Mrxico, Mexico City. 
van Heijenoort, J. (1977), Set-theoretic semantics, in R. Grandy and M. Hyland (eds.), 
Logic Colloquium 1976, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 183-190. 
van Heijenoort, J. (1982), L'oeuvre de Jacques Herbrand et son contexte historique, in 
J. Stern (ed.), Proc. Herbrand Symposium, Logic Colloquium '81, North-Holland, 
Amsterdam, pp. 57-85. 
von Neumann, J. (1927), Zur Hilbertschen Beweistheorie, Math. Z. 26, 1-46. 
Whitehead, A.N. and Russell, B. (1910-1913), Principia Mathematica, 3 vols., Cam- 
bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 

The Reception of G6dei's 
Incompleteness Theorems 
John W. Dawson, Jr. 
"Die Arbeit iiber formal unentscheidbare S/itze wurde wie ein Erdbeben empfun- 
den; insbesondere auch yon Carnap."--(Popper, 1980). 
"Kurt G6del's achievement in modern logic ... is a landmark which will remain 
visible far in space and time?'--John von Neumann t 
It is natural to invoke geological metaphors to describe the impact and the 
lasting significance of Gfdel's incompleteness theorems. Indeed, how better 
to convey the impact of those results--whose effect on Hilbert's program was 
so devastating and whose philosophical reverberations have yet to subside-- 
than to speak of tremors and shock waves? The image of shaken foundations 
is irresistible. 
Yet to adopt such seismic imagery is to suggest that the aftermath of 
intellectual upheaval is comparable to that of geological cataclysm: a period 
of slow rebuilding, preceded initially by widespread confusion and despair, or 
perhaps determined resistance; and though we might expect G6del's dis- 
coveries to have provoked just such reactions, according to most commenta- 
tors they did not. Thus van Heijenoort states "although [G6del's paper] 
caused some momentary surprise, its results were soon widely accepted" 
(van Heijenoort, 1967, p. 594). Similarly, Kreisei has averred that "expected 
objections never materialized" (Kreisel, 1979, p. 13), and Kleene, speaking of 
the second incompleteness theorem (whose proof was only sketched in G6dei's 
(1931)), has even claimed "it seems no one doubted it" (Kleene, 1976, p. 767). 
If these accounts are correct, one of the most profound discoveries in 
the history of logic and mathematics was assimilated promptly and almost 
without objection by G6del's contemporaries--a circumstance so remarkable 
that it demands to be accounted for. The received explanation seems to be 
that G/Sdel, sensitive to the philosophical climate of opinion and anticipating 
objections to his work, presented his results with such clarity and rigor as to 
PSA 1984, Volume 2, 
Copyright 9 1985 by the Philosophy of Science Association. 
Reprinted with permission. 

The Reception of G6del's Incompleteness Theorems 
85 
render them incontestable, even at a time of fervid debate among competing 
mathematical philosophies. The sheer force of G6del's logic, as it were, swept 
away opposition so effectively that G6del abandoned his stated intention of 
publishing a detailed proof of the second theorem (G6del, 1931, p. 198). 
On the last point there can be no dispute, as G6dei stated explicitly to van 
Heijenoort that "the prompt acceptance of his results was one of the reasons 
that made him change his plan" (van Heijenoort, 1967, ftn. 68a, p. 616). We 
may question, however, to what extent G6ders subjective impression reflected 
objective circumstances. We must also recognize the hazard in assessing the 
cogency of G6ders arguments from our own perspective. To be sure, the 
exposition in G6dei (1931) now seems clear and compelling; the proofs strike 
us as detailed but not intricate. But did it seem so at the time? After all, 
arithmetization of syntax was then a novel device, and logicians were not then 
so accustomed to the necessity for making precise distinctions between object- 
and metalanguage. Indeed, J. Barkley Rosser (who himself contributed to 
the improvement of G6ders results) has observed that only after G6del's 
paper appeared did logicians realize how careful they had to be (cf. Grattan- 
Guinness, 1981, ftn. 3, p. 499); precisely because of G6ders results we no longer 
share the formalists' naive optimism, and so we are likely to be more receptive 
to G6del's ideas. 
Our faith in the efficacy of logic as a tool for overcoming intellectual 
resistance should also be tempered by consideration of the reception accorded 
other "paradoxical" results. For example, the L6wenheim-Skolem theorem, 
first enunciated by L6wenheim in 1915 and established with greater precision 
and broader generality by Skolem in a series of papers from 1920 to 1929, is 
certainly less profound than G6del's discovery (with which, however, it is 
still sometimes confused)---yet it generated widespread misunderstanding 
and bewilderment, even as late as December 1938. (See, in particular, the 
discussion in Gonseth (1941, pp. 47 52).) 
In what follows, I shall examine the reaction to G6ders theorems in some 
detail, with the aim of showing that there were doubters and critics, as well as 
defenders and rival claimants to priority. (Of course, there were also some who 
accepted G6ders results without fully understandin9 them.) 
1. 1930: Announcement at K6nigsberg 
Elsewhere (Dawson, 1984) I have described in detail the circumstances sur- 
rounding G6del's first public announcement of his incompleteness discovery. 
In summary, the event occurred during a discussion on the foundations of 
mathematics that took place in KiSnigsberg, 7 September 1930, as one of the 
final sessions of the Second Conference on Epistemology of the Exact Sciences 
organized by the Gesellschaft f~r empirische Philosophie. At the time, G6del 
was virtually unknown outside Vienna; he had come to the conference to 
deliver a 20-minute talk on the results of his dissertation, completed the 

86 
John W. Dawson, Jr. 
year before and just then about to appear in print. In that work, G6del had 
established a result of prime importance for the advancement of Hilbert's 
program: the completeness of first-order logic (or, as it was then called, the 
restricted functional calculus); so it could hardly have been expected that the 
day after his talk G6del would suddenly undermine that program by asserting 
the existence of formally undecidable propositions. As Quine has remarked, 
"'[although] completeness was expected, an actual proof of completeness 
was less expected, and a notable accomplishment. It came as a welcome 
reassurance .... On the other hand the incompletability of elementary number 
theory came as an upset of firm preconceptions" (Quine, 1978, p. 8 l). 
To judge from the (edited) transcript of the discussion published in 
Erkenntnis (Hahn et al., 1931), none of the other participants at K6nigsberg 
had the slightest inkling of what G6del was about to say, and the announce- 
ment itself was so casual that one suspects that some of them may not have 
realized just what he did say. In particular, the transcript gives no indication 
of any discussion of G6dei's remarks, and there is no mention of G6del at all 
in Reichenbach's post-conference survey of the meeting (published in Die 
Naturwissenschaften 18: 1093-1094). Yet two, at least, among those present 
should have had foreknowledge of G6del's results: Hans Hahn and Rudolf 
Carnap. 
Hahn had been G6del's dissertation advisor. He chaired the discussion at 
K6nigsberg, and it was presumably he who invited G6del to take part. Of 
course, G6del might not have confided his new discovery to him--indeed, 
Wang has stated that "G6del completed his dissertation before showing it to 
Hahn" (Wang, 1981, ftn. 2, p. 654)--but in introductory remarks to the 
dissertation that were deleted from the published version (at whose behest we 
do not know), G6dei had explicitly raised the possibility of incompleteness 
(without claiming to have demonstrated it). Perhaps Hahn just didn't take the 
possibility seriously. 
In any case, G6del did confide his discovery to Carnap prior to the discus- 
sion at K6nigsberg, as we know from Aufzeichnungen in Carnap's Nachlass. 
Specifically, on 26 August 1930, G6del met Carnap, Feigl, and Waismann at 
the Cafe Reichsrat in Vienna, where they discussed their travel plans to 
K6nigsberg. Afterward, according to Carnap's entry for that date, the discus- 
sion turned to "G6dels Entdeckung: Unvoilst/indigkeit des Systems der PM; 
Schwierigkeit des Widerspruchsfreiheitbeweises. ''2 Three days later another 
meeting took place at the same cafe. On that occasion, Carnap noted "Zuerst 
[before the arrival of Feigl and Waismann] erz~ihlt mir Gi~del von seiner 
Entdeckungen." Why then at K6nigsberg did Carnap persist in advocating 
consistency as a criterion of adequacy for formal theories? That he might have 
done so just to provide an opening for G6del seems hardly credible. It seems 
much more likely that he simply failed to understand G6del's ideas. (As it 
happens, a subsequent note by Carnap dated 7 February 1931, after the 
appearance of G6del's paper, provides confirmation: "G6del hier. Uber seine 
Arbeit, ich sage, dass sie doch schwer verst/indlich ist.") Later, of course, 

The Reception of G6del's Incompleteness Theorems 
87 
Carnap was among those who helped publicize G6del's work; but Popper's 
remark quoted at the head of this article seems to be an accurate characteriza- 
tion of Carnap's initial reaction. 
One of the discussion participants who did immediately appreciate the 
significance of G6del's remarks was John von Neumann: After the session he 
drew G6del aside and pressed him for further details. Soon thereafter he 
returned to Berlin, and on 20 November he wrote G6del to announce his 
discovery of a remarkable [bemerkenswert] corollary to G6ders results: the 
unprovability of consistency. In the meantime, however, G6del had himself 
discovered his second theorem and had incorporated it into the text of his 
paper; the finished article was received by the editors of Monatshefte 17 
November. 3 
2. 1931: Publication and Confrontation 
In January 1931 G6del's paper was published. But even before then, word of 
its contents had begun to spread. So, for example, on 24 December 1930, 
Paul Bernays wrote G6del to request a copy of the galleys of (1931), which 
Courant and Schur had told him contained "bedeutsamen und fiberraschenden 
Ergebnissen." G6del responded immediately, and on 18 January 1931, 
Bernays acknowledged his receipt of the galleys in a 16-page letter in 
which he described G6dei's results as "ein erheblicher Schritt vorw/irts in der 
Erforschung der Grundlagen probleme." 
The G6del-Bernays correspondence is of special interest (in the absence of 
more direct evidence 4) for the light it sheds on Hilbert's reaction. In the same 
letter of 18 January, Bernays discussed Hilbert's "recent extension of the 
usual domain of number theory"--his introduction of the to-rule--and yon 
Neumann's belief that every finitary method of proof could be formalized in 
G6ders system P. Bernays himself saw G6del's theorem as establishing a 
disjunction: either yon Neumann was right, and no finitary consistency proof 
was possible for the systems G6del considered, or else some finitary means 
of proof were not formalizable in P--a possibility G6del had expressly noted 
in his paper. In any case, Bernays felt, one was impelled [hingedriingt] to 
weaken G6del's assumption that the class of axioms and the rules of inference 
be (primitively) recursively defnable. He suggested that the system obtained 
by adjoining the to-rule would escape incompleteness yet might be proved 
consistent by finitary means. But (according to Carnap's Aufzeichnuno of 21 
May 1931) G6del felt that Hilbert's program would be compromised by 
acceptance of the to-rule. 
Somewhat later G6del sent Bernays an offprint of the incompleteness 
paper, enclosing a copy for Hilbert as well. In his acknowledgement of 20 
April, Bernays confessed his inability to see why a truth predicate could not 
be formally defined in number theory 
he went so far as to propose a 
candidate for such a definition--and why Ackermann's consistency proof 

88 
John W. Dawson, Jr. 
[which he had accepted as correct) could not be formalized there as well. By 
3 May, when he wrote G6dei once more, Bernays had recognized his errors, 
but the correspondence remains of interest, not only because it exposes 
Bernays' difficulties in assimilating the consequences of G6ders theorems, but 
because it furnishes independent evidence of G6del's awareness of the formal 
undefinability of the notion of truth--a fact nowhere mentioned in (1931). 5 
G6ders formal methods, as employed in the body of (1931), thus seem 
to have served their purpose in securing the acceptance of his results by three 
of the leading formalists. But at the same time, even among those who ap- 
preciated the value of formalization, G6del's precise specification of the system 
P raised doubts as to the generality of his conclusions. 6 On the other hand, 
those opposed to formal systems could point to G6ders results as reason 
for dismissing such systems altogether. 
Partly to obviate such objections, G6del soon extended his results to a 
wider class of systems (in (1930/31) and (1934)), and in the introduction to 
(1931) he also gave informal proofs of his results based on the soundness 
of the underlying axiom systems rather than on their formal consistency 
properties. Undoubtedly, he hoped this informal pr6cis would help his readers 
to cope with the formal detail to follow; but all too many read no further. 
Ironically, because of the misinterpretations it subsequently spawned, the 
introduction to (1931) has been called that paper's "one 'mistake'" (Helmer, 
1937). 
During 1931, G6del spoke on his incompleteness results on at least three 
occasions: at a meeting of the Schlick circle (15 January), in Karl Menger's 
mathematics colloquium (22 January), and, most importantly, at the annual 
meeting of the Deutsche Mathematiker-Vereinigung in Bad Elster (15 Septem- 
ber), where, in Ernst Zermelo, he encountered one of his harshest critics. 
At issue between the two men were profound differences in philosophy 
and methodology. In his own talk at Bad Elster (abstracted in Zermelo 
(1932)), Zermelo lashed out against "Skolemism, the doctrine that every 
mathematical theory, even set theory, is realizable in a countable moder'--a 
doctrine that Zermelo regarded as an embodiment of Richard's antinomy. 
For Zermelo, quantifiers were infinitary conjunctions or disjunctions of 
unrestricted cardinality; and since the truth values of compound statements 
were therefore determined by transfinite induction on the basis of the truth 
values assigned to the Grundrelationen, Zermelo argued that this determination 
itself constituted the proof or refutation of each proposition. There were no 
"undecidable" propositions, simply because Zermelo's infinitary logic had no 
syntactic component. Consequently, Zermelo dismissed G6del's "attempt" to 
exhibit undecidable propositions, saying that G6del "applied the 'finitistic' 
restriction only to the 'provable' statements" of his system, "not to all state- 
ments belonging to it, ''v so that G6ders result, like the L6wenheim-Skolem 
theorem, depended on (unwarranted) cardinality restrictions. It said nothing 
about the existence of "absolutely unsolvable problems in mathematics." 
In his published remarks, Zermelo did not fault the correctness of G6del's 

The Reception of Grders Incompleteness Theorems 
89 
argument; he merely took it as evidence of the untenability of the "'finitistic' 
restriction." But on 21 September, immediately following the conference, 
Zermelo wrote privately to Grdei to inform him of "'an essential gap" [eine 
wesentliche Liicke] in his argument. (See Dawson (1985) for the full text of this 
letter.) Indeed, Zermeio argued, simply by omitting the proof predicate from 
G6ders construction one would obtain a formal sentence asserting its own 
falsity, yielding thereby "a contradiction analogous to R ussel[1]'s antinomy." 
Zermelo's letter prompted a further exchange of letters between the two 
men (published in Grattan-Guinness (1979)), with Grdel patiently explaining 
the workings of his proof, pointing out the impossibility of defining truth 
combinatorially within his system, and emphasizing that the introductory 
pages of his paper (to which Zermelo had referred) did not pretend to preci- 
sion, as did the detailed considerations later on. In reply, Zermeio thanked 
Grdel for his letter, from which, he said, he had gained a better understanding 
of what Grdel meant to say; but in his published report he still failed utterly 
to appreciate Grdel's distinctions between syntax and semantics. 
3. Recognition, and Challenges to Priority 
Despite (or perhaps because of) Zermelo's reputation as a polemicist, his 
crusade against "Skolemism" won few adherents, and his criticisms of Grders 
work seem to have been disregarded. In the spring of 1932 Karl Menger 
became the first to expound the incompleteness theorem to a popular au- 
dience, in his lecture Die neue Loyik (published by Franz Deuticke in 1933 
as one of "fiJnf Wiener Vortrage" in the booklet Krise und Neuaufoau in den 
exakten Wissenschaften; see Menger (1978) for an English translation). The 
following June Grdel submitted (1931) to the University of Vienna as his 
Habi/itationsschrift, and in January 1933 he accepted an invitation to spend 
the academic year 1933-34 at the newly established Institute for Advanced 
Study in Princeton. 
On 11 March 1933, Grdel's Dozentur was granted. That same day Paul 
Finsler in Ziirich addressed a letter to Grdel requesting a copy of (1931). He 
was interested in Grders work, he said, because it seemed to be closely related 
to earlier work of his own (Finsler, 1926). He had already glanced fleetingly 
at Grdel's paper, and he acknowledged that Grdel had employed "a narrower 
and therefore sharper formalism." It was "of course of value," he conceded, 
"actually to carry out [such] ideas in a specific formalism," but he had 
refrained from doing so because he felt that he had already established the 
result in a way that "'went further in its application to Hilbert's program." 
Grdel recognized the challenge for what it was, and in his reply of 25 March 
he characterized Finsler's system as "not really defined at all" [iiberhaupt nicht 
definiert], declaring that Finsler's ideas could not be carried out in a genuinely 
formal system, since the antidiagonal sequence defined by Finsler (on which 
his undecidable proposition was based) would never be representable within 

90 
John W. Dawson, Jr. 
that same system. Finsler retorted angrily that it was not necessary for a 
system to be "sharply" defined in order to make statements about it; it was 
enough that "one be able to accept it as given and to recognize a few of its 
properties." He could, he said, "with greater justice" object to G6ders proof 
on the grounds that G6dei had not shown the Peano axioms that he employed 
to be consistent (G6del's second theorem notwithstanding?). He saw that the 
truth of G6del's undecidable sentence could only be established metamathe- 
matically and so concluded that there was "no difference in principle" between 
his and G6ders examples. 
Van Heijenoort (1967, pp. 438-440) has analyzed Finsler's paper in detail, 
concluding that it remains a sketch whose "affinity [with G6del's paper] 
should not be exaggerated." In effect, whereas "G6del put the notion of formal 
system at the very center of his investigations," Finsler rejected such systems 
as artificially restrictive (prompting Alonzo Church to remark dryly that such 
"restricted" notions have at least the merit of being precisely communicable 
from one person to another") (Church, 1946). Instead, especially in his (1944), 
Finsler attempted to show the consistency of the assertion that were no 
"absolutely undecidable" propositions. 
In contrast, Emil Post directed his efforts toward showing that there were 
absolutely unsolvable problems in mathematics, s Early on, nearly a decade 
before G6del, Post realized that his methods could be applied to yield a 
statement undecidable within Principia whose truth could nevertheless be 
established by metamathematicai considerations. Hence, Post concluded, 
"mathematical proof was [an] essentially creative I-activity]" whose proper 
elucidation would require an analysis of "all finite processes of the human 
mind"; and since the implications of such an analysis could be expected to 
extend far beyond the incompleteness of Principia, Post saw no reason to 
pursue the latter. 
Concern for the question of absolute undecidability thus led Finsler, Post, 
and Zermelo, in varying directions, away from consideration of particular 
formal systems. Unlike Finsler and Zermelo, however, Post expressed "the 
greatest admiration" for G6del's work, and he never sought to diminish 
G6ders achievement. Indeed, Post acknowledged to G6del that nothing he 
had done "could have replaced the splendid actuality of your proof," and that 
"after all it is not ideas but the execution of ideas that constitute[s] ... 
greatness." Post's (1965)"Account of an Anticipation" was not submitted until 
1941 and (after being rejected) only finally appeared in print in 1965, 11 years 
after Post's death. 9 
It is worth noting G6del's own opinion of the notion of absolute undecid- 
ability, as expressed in the unsent letter draft cited in note 5: 
As for work done earlier about the question of formal decidability of mathematical 
propositions, I know only a paper by Finsler .... However, Finsler omits exactly 
the main point which makes a proof possible, namely restriction to some well- 
defined formal system in which the proposition is undecidable. For he had the 
nonsensical aim of proving formal undecidability in an absolute sense. This leads to 

The Reception of G6del's Incompleteness Theorems 
91 
[his] nonsensical definition [of a system of signs and of formal proofs therin] ... 
and to the flagrant inconsistency that he decides the "formally undecidable proposi- 
tion by an argument ... which, according to his own definition ... is a formal proof. 
If Finsler had confined himself to some well-defined formal system S, his proof... 
could [with the hindsight of G6ders own methods] be made correct and applicable 
to any formal system. I myselfdid not know his paper when I wrote mine, and other 
mathematicians or logicians probably disregarded it because it contains the obvious 
nonsense just mentioned. (G6del to Yossef Balas, 27 May 1970). 
Especially as applied to Finsler's later work, the epithet "obvious nonsense" 
is well deserved--Finsler (1944) in particular is an almost pathological 
example of the confusion that can arise from failure to distinguish between 
use and mention--and G6del was undoubtedly sensitive to any rival claim 
to priority for his greatest discovery. Nevertheless, the passage quoted above 
is uncharacteristically harsh, and insofar as it ridicules the idea of "proving 
formal undecidability in an absolute sense" it seems to ignore G6del's own 
remarks in 1946 before the Princeton Bicentennial Conference, in which he 
suggested that, despite the incompleteness theorems, "closer examination 
shows that [such negative] results do not make a definition of the absolute 
notions concerned impossible under all circumstances." In particular, he 
noted that "'by a kind of miracle" there is an absolute definition of the concept 
of computability, even though "it is merely a special kind of demonstrability 
or decidability"; and in fact, the incompleteness theorems may be subsumed 
as corollaries to the existence of algorithmically unsolvable problems. Finsler, 
of course, had no such thing in mind in 1933, nor did G6del. But what of Post? 
Had he not been hampered by manic-depression, might he have pre-empted 
G6del's results? In any case, G6del contributed far less than Post to the 
development of recursion theory, even though he gave the first definition of 
the notion of general recursive function (in (1934), following a suggestion of 
Herbrand). Until Turing's (1936/37) work, G6del resisted accepting Church's 
thesis (see Davis (1982) for a detailed account), and we may well wonder 
whether G6del's focus on specific formalisms did not tend to blind him to the 
larger question of algorithmic undecidability. G6del repeatedly stressed the 
importance of his philosophical outlook to the success of his mathematical 
endeavors; perhaps it may also have been responsible for an occasional 
oversight. (See Kleene (1981a, b) for recent accounts of the origins of recursive 
function theory and Feferman (1985) for another view of G6ders role as a 
bystander.) 
4. Assimilation, and Later Criticism 
After his I.A.S. lectures in the winter and spring of 1934, G6dei returned to 
Vienna and turned his attention to set theory. By the fall of 1935, when he 
returned briefly to the I.A.S., he had already succeeded in proving the relative 
consistency of the axiom of choice. In the meantime, however, he had also 

92 
John W. Dawson, Jr. 
once had to enter a sanatorium for treatment of depression. Back in America, 
he suffered a relapse that forced him to return to Austria just two months after 
his arrival. He re-entered a sanatorium and did not resume teaching at the 
University of Vienna until the spring of 1937. 
During this period of incapacitation, G6del's incompleteness results were 
improved by Rosser (1936)(who weakened the hypothesis of to-consistency to 
that of simple consistency) and extended, as already noted, through the 
development of recursion theory by Church, Kleene, and Turing. By 1936, 
then, the incompleteness theorems would seem to have taken their place 
within the corpus of firmly established mathematical facts. 
In that year, however, the correctness of G6del's conclusions was chal- 
lenged in print by Charles Pereiman (1936), who asserted that G6del had in 
fact discovered an antinomy. According to Perelman, if the soundness of the 
underlying axiom system were assumed (as G6del had done in his informal 
introductory remarks), G6del's methods could be employed to prove two false 
equivalences, namely 
Dem(--~ Fq) = Dem(qFq) 
and 
Dem(qFq) = --- Dem(qFq), 
where "qFq" denotes G6dei's undecidable sentence and "Dem" denotes 
G6del's provability predicate (called "'Bew" in G6del (1931)). The second 
statement is obviously a contradiction, and Perelman proposed to exorcise it 
by the radical expedient of rejecting the admissibility of the set of G6del 
numbers of unprovable sentences. 
Pereiman's equivalences display a rather obvious conflation of object- and 
metalanguage, and, as Kleene noted in his review of Perelman (1936), if 
expressed without abuse of notation, "the first of them is not false, and the 
second is not deducible" (Kleene, 1937a)--indeed, properly formulated, the 
first equivalence is just the statement that "qFq" is formally undecidable. It 
would thus be tempting to dismiss Perelman as a crank, were it not that his 
arguments were apparently taken quite seriously by many within the mathe- 
matical community--so much so, in fact, that two individuals, Kurt Grelling 
and Olaf Helmer, felt obliged to come to G6dei's defense. 
Grelling was among those who had traveled with G6del to K6nigsberg 
in 1930. On 2 February, 1937, he wrote G6del to advise him of Hempei's 
report that "angesehene Mathematiker" in Brussels and Paris were being 
"taken in" [hereingefallen] by Perelman's arguments. If G6del were not al- 
ready planning to publish a rebuttal, Greiling requested permission to do so 
on his behalf. G6dei did not in fact enter into the controversy, and Grelling's 
(1937/38) article appeared at about the same time as Helmer's (1937). 
Grelling began his reply to Perelman by giving an informal outline of 
G6dei's proof, drawing a careful distinction between arithmetical statements 
and their metamathematical counterparts. Through the process of arith- 
metization, he explained, a metamathematical statement Q' was associated 

The Reception of G6del's Incompleteness Theorems 
93 
to G6dei's arithmetical statement Q, in such a way that to any formal 
proof of Q there would correspond a metamathematical proof of Q'; but, he 
asserted, a metamathematical proof or refutation of Q' would lead directly to 
a metamathematical contradiction ("Sowohi ein Beweis von Q' als auch eine 
Widerlegung wiirde unmittelbar auf einen Widerspruch ffihren.") (Grelling, 
1937/38, p. 301), and so Q itself must be formally undecidable. Grelling went 
on to analyze Perelman's formal arguments, especially his claims that 
(n). Dem(.Fn). ~ . Dem(Dem(,Fn)) 
(1) 
and 
(n).~ Dem(,Fn). ~. Dem(,-Dem(.Fn)) 
(2) 
were provable in G6dei's system. Without commenting on the abuse 
of notation involved (whereby "Dem" should correspond to G6del's meta- 
mathematical predicate "Bew," not to the G6del number of its arithmetical 
counterpart), he [correctly) accepted (1) as demonstrable, while rejecting (2). 
Helmer, on the other hand, stressed Perelman's notational confusion, 
pointing out that +"Dem' is a predicate applicable to numbers only," so 
that "if formula (1) is to be significant, the expression +.Fn" must denote a 
number and not a sentence." One might therefore construe ',Fn' "as a 
designation of the number correlated [via arithmetization] to the sentence 
resulting from the substitution of'n' at the argument-place of the nth predicate 
in the syntactical denumeration of all the numerical predicates," but even so, 
Helmer argued, formula (I) "'[could] not possibly be legitimated." (Helmer, 
1937). 
The articles of Grelling and Helmer were criticized in their turn by Rosser 
and Kleene in reviews published in the Journal of Symbolic Loyic (Rosser 
(1938) and Kleene (1937b)). Rosser noted that "[Grelling's] exposition of the 
closing steps of G6dei's proof" did not agree with his own understanding 
of it, and that Grelling's statement quoted above to the effect that Q' 
was metamathematicaily undecidable was "indubitably false .... since in a 
preceding sentence he says that Q' is a metamathematical theorem.'" Here, 
however, we may quibble: Grelling does not say that Q' is a metamathematical 
theorem--he refers to it merely as "ein metamathematischer Satz," which 
in this context simply means a statement or proposition; rather, Grelling's 
statement is "indubitably false" precisely because Q' is a metamathematical 
theorem [in the sense that metamathematical arguments show Q to be true in 
its intended interpretation). As to Helmer, Kieene agreed that the source of 
Perelman's errors lay in his failure to distinguish between formulas and 
their G6del numbers, but he also noted Helmer's failure "to distinguish as 
consistently between ... metamathematical statements and .formal mathemati- 
cal sentences as between those and ... syntactical numbers" of the latter. At the 
same time he affirmed the basic legitimacy of Perelman's equivalence (1), 
"Helmer notwithstanding." 
The controversy sparked by Perelman's paper exposes not only the fragility 
of the earlier acceptance of G6del's results, but also the misunderstandings of 

94 
John W. Dawson, Jr. 
those results by their would-be defenders. Thus Grelling and Helmer, while 
criticizing Perelman's confusion between object- and metalanguage, were 
themselves not always careful about syntactic distinctions. Grelling saw a 
metamathematical contradiction where none existed, and Helmer wrongly 
traced Perelman's error to a formula that is in fact provable (though not so 
easily as Perelman thought); while Rosser, by mistranslating "Satz," failed 
to recognize the real source of Grelling's misunderstanding. Only Kleene 
emerged from the debate untarnished ("clean"). 
For a more detailed account of Perelman's claims and their refutation, the 
reader may turn to Chapter 3, Section 5 of Ladri6re's book (1957). That source 
also includes a discussion of two other, still later objections to G6del's 
work by Marcel Barzin (1940) and Jerzy Kuczyfiski (1938). Neither of their 
challenges seems to have received much notice at the time, so I shall devote 
little attention to them here, except to note that their criticisms, unlike 
Perelman's, were based on G6ders detailed formal proof rather than his 
informal introductory arguments; like Perelman, however, both Barzin and 
Kuczyfiski thought G6del had discovered an antinomy. (In essence, Barzin 
confused formal expressions with their G6del numbers, while Kuczyfiski, to 
judge from Mostowski's (1938) review, overlooked the formal antecedent 
"Wid(~:)" in G6del's second theorem.) 
5. Lingering Doubts 
In 1939, the second volume of Hilbert and Bernays' Die Grundlagen der 
Mathematik appeared, in which, for the first time, a complete proof of G6del's 
second incompleteness theorem was given. Whether because of its meticulous 
treatment of syntactic details or because of Hilbert's implied imprimatur, the 
book at last seems to have stilled serious opposition to Grdel's work, at least 
within the community of logicians, a~ 
Outside that community it is difficult to assess to what extent Grdel's 
results were known, much less accepted or understood. It seems likely that 
many working mathematicians either remained only vaguely aware of them 
or else regarded them as having little or no relevance to their own endeavors. 
Indeed, until the 1970s, with the work of Matijasevic and, later, of Paris 
and Harrington, number theorists could (and often did) continue to regard 
undecidable arithmetical statements as artificial contrivances of interest only 
to those concerned with foundations. 
Among the few non-logicians (at least to my knowledge) who took cogni- 
zance of G6ders work in writings of the period was Garrett Birkhoff. In the 
first edition of his Lattice Theory (1940) he observed (p. 128) that "the existence 
of 'undecidable' propositions ... seems to have been established by Skolem 
[n.b.] and Grdei." In a footnote, however, he qualified even that tentative 
acceptance, noting that "Such a conclusion depends of course on prescribing 

The Reception of G6del's Incompleteness Theorems 
95 
all admissible methods of proof... [and] hence.., should be viewed with deep 
skepticism." In particular, he believed that "Carnap [had] stated plausible 
methods of proof excluded by G6del." In the revised edition (1948), the 
corresponding footnote (p. 194) is weakened to read "The question remains 
whether there do not exist perfectly 'valid' methods of proof excluded by 
I-G6del's] particular logical system"; but the reference to Skolem is retained 
in the text proper, and an added sentence (p. 195) declares that the proof of 
the existence of undecidable propositions "'is however non-constructive, and 
depends on admitting the existence of uncountably many 'propositions,' but 
only countably many 'proofs'." Clearly, Birkhoffhad not actually read G6del's 
paper. His statements echo those of Zermelo, but he does not cite Zermeio's 
report. 
Of still greater interest are the reactions of two philosophers of stature: 
Ludwig Wittgenstein and Bertrand Russell. Wittgenstein's well-known com- 
ments on G6del's theorem appear in Appendix I of his posthumously 
published Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics (extracted in English 
translation on pp. 431-435 of (Benacerraf and Putnam 1964)). Dated in the 
preface of the volume to the year 1938, they were never intended to be 
published and perhaps should not have been--but that, of course, is irrelevant 
to the present inquiry. Several commentators have discussed Wittgenstein's 
remarks in detail (see, e.g., the articles by A.R. Anderson, Michael Dummett, 
and Paul Bernays, pp. 481-528 of (Benacerraf and Putnam 1964)), and 
nearly all have considered them an embarrassment to the work of a great 
philosopher. Certainly it is hard to take seriously such objections as "Why 
should not propositions ... of physics.., be written in Russell's symbolism?"; 
or "The contradiction that arises when someone says 'I am lying' ... is of 
interest only because it has tormented people"; or "The proposition 'P is 
unprovable' has a different sense afterwards [than] before it was proved" 
(Benacerraf and Putnam, 1964, pp. 432, 434). Whether some more profound 
philosophical insights underlie such seemingly flippant remarks must be 
left for Wittgenstein scholars to debate; suffice it to say that in G6del's 
opinion, Wittgenstein "advance[d] a completely trivial and uninteresting 
misinterpretation" of his results. (G6del to Abraham Robinson, 2 July 1973.) 
As to Russell, two passages are of particular interest here, one published 
and one not, dating respectively from 1959 and 1963. The former, from My 
Philosophical Development (p. 114), forms part of Russell's own commentary 
on Wittgenstein's work: 
In my introduction to the Tractatus, I suggested that, although in any given 
language there are things which that language cannot express [my emphasis], 
it is yet always possible to construct a language of higher order in which these things 
can be said. There will, in the new language, still be things which it cannot say [my 
emphasis again], but which can be said in the next language, and so on ,ld infinitum. 
This suggestion, which was then new, has now become an accepted commonplace 
of logic. It disposes of Wittgenstein's mysticism and, I think, also of the newer 
puzzles presented by G6del. 

96 
John W. Dawson, Jr. 
It might be maintained that in this passage Russell is making the same 
point that G6del himself stressed in his (1930/31), that by passing to succes- 
sively higher types one can obtain a transfinite sequence of formal systems 
such that the undecidable propositions constructed within each system are 
decidable in all subsequent systems. Contrary to Russell, however, G6del 
emphasized that each of the undecidable propositions so constructed is 
already expressible at the lowest level. 
The second passage is taken from Russell's letter to Leon Henkin of 
1 April 1963:11 
It is fifty years since I worked seriously at mathematical logic and almost the only 
work that I have read since that date is G6del's. I realized, of course, that G6del's 
work is of fundamental importance, but I was puzzled by it. It made me glad that 
I was no longer working at mathematical logic. If a given set of axioms leads to a 
contradiction, it is clear that at least one of the axioms must be false. Does 
this apply to school-boys" arithmetic, and, if so, can we believe anything that we 
were taught in youth? Are we to think that 2 + 2 is not 4, but 4.001? Obviously, 
this is not what is intended. 
You note that we were indifferent to attempts to prove that our axioms could 
not lead to contradictions. In this G6del showed that we had been mistaken. But 
I thought that it must be impossible to prove that any given set of axioms does not 
lead to a contradiction, and, for that reason, I had payed little attention to Hilbert's 
work. Moreover, with the exception of the axiom of reducibility which I always 
regarded as a makeshift, our other axioms all seemed to me luminously self-evident. 
I did not see how anybody could deny, for instance, that q implies p or q, or that 
p or q implies q or p. 
... In the later portions of the book ... are large parts consisting of... ordinary 
mathematics. This applies especially to relation-arithmetic. If there is any mistake 
in this, apart from trivial errors, it must also be a mistake in conventional ordinal 
arithmetic, which seems hardly credible. 
If you can spare the time, I should like to know, roughly, how, in your opinion, 
ordinary mathematics--or, indeed, any deductive system--is affected by G6ders 
work. 
A curious ambiguity infects this letter. Is Russell recalling his bewilderment 
at the time he first became acquainted with G6del's theorems, or is he express- 
ing his continuing puzzlement? Is he saying that, intuitively, he had recognized 
the futility of Hilbert's scheme for proving the consistency of arithmetic but 
had failed to consider the possibility of rigorously proving that futility? Or is he 
revealing a belief that G6dei had in fact shown arithmetic to be inconsistent? 
Henkin, at least, assumed the latter; in response to Russell's closing request, 
he attempted to explain the import of G6ders second theorem, stressing the 
distinction between incompleteness and inconsistency. Eventually a copy of 
Russell's letter made its way to G6del, who remarked that "Russell evidently 

The Reception of G6del's Incompleteness Theorems 
97 
misinterprets my result; however he does so in a very interesting manner .... " 
(G6del to Abraham Robinson, 2 July 1973.) 
6. Conclusions 
Insofar as it refers to the acceptance of G/Sdel's results by formalists, the 
received view appears to be correct. G6del's proofs dashed formalist hopes, 
but at the same time they were most persuasive to those committed to 
formalist ideals. In other quarters, the incompleteness theorems were by no 
means so readily accepted; objections were raised on both technical and 
philosophical grounds. Especially prevalent were the views that G6ders 
results were antinomiai or were of limited generality. Cardinality restrictions, 
in particular, were often perceived to be responsible for the phenomenon 
of undecidability. 
G/Sdel succeeded where others failed because of his attention to syntactic 
and semantic distinctions, his restriction to particular formal systems, and 
his concern for relative rather than absolute undecidability. He anticipated 
resistance to his conclusions and took pains to minimize objections by his style 
of exposition and by his avoidance of the notion of objective mathematical 
truth (which was nevertheless central to his own mathematical philosophy). 
Though aware of criticisms of his work, he shunned public controversy and 
considered his results to have been readily accepted by those whose opinion 
mattered to him; nevertheless, his later extensions of his results display his 
concern for establishing their generality. 
In the long run, the incompleteness theorems have led neither to the 
rejection of formal systems nor to despair over their limitations, but, as Post 
foresaw, to a reaffirmation of the creative power of human reason. With 
G/Sdel's theorems as centerpiece, the debate over mind versus mechanism 
continues unabated. 
Notes 
1. Remarks, 14 March 1951, at the Einstein Award ceremonies. 
2. "Schwierigkeit," not "Unm/Sglichkeit": We know from other sources that G6del 
did not obtain his second theorem until after the K6nigsberg meeting. 
3. Even earlier, on 22 October, G6del (1930) had communicated an abstract of 
his results to the Vienna Academy of Sciences. 
4. In a letter to Constance Reid of 22 March 1966, G~Sdel stated that he "never met 
Hilbert ... nor [had] any correspondence with him." The stratification of the German 
academic system may have discouraged contact between the two men. 
5. In the draft of a reply to a graduate student's query in 1970, G/Sdel indicated 
that it was precisely his recognition of the contrast between the formal definability of 
demonstrability and the formal undefinability of truth that led to his discovery of 
incompleteness. That he did not bring this out in (1931)is perhaps explained by his 
observation (in a crossed-out passage from that same draft) that "in consequence of 

98 
John W. Dawson, Jr. 
the philosophical prejudices of [those] times ... a concept of objective mathematical 
truth.., was received with greatest suspicion and widely rejected as meaningless." For 
a fuller discussion of G6ders avoidance of semantic issues, see Feferman (1985). Re 
Tarski's theorem on the undefinability of truth, see Tarski (1956), especially the 
bibliographical note, p. 152; footnote 1, pp. 247-248; the historical note, pp. 277-278; 
and footnote 2, p. 279. In those notes Tarski makes clear his indebtedness to G6ders 
methods, relinquishing, so it would seem, any claim to priority for G6del's own results 
(except for the prior exhibition of a consistent yet to-inconsistent formal system). 
6. Church, for example, in a letter to G6del dated 27 July 1932, stated "I have been 
unable to see ... that your conclusions apply to my system" (as, in fact, they did not, 
since that system was subsequently shown to be inconsistent). In recent correspondence 
with the author, Church has acknowledged that he "was among those who thought 
that the ... incompleteness theorems might be found to depend on the peculiarities of 
type theory," a theory whose "unfortunate restrictiveness" he was trying to escape 
through a "'radically different formulation of logic." Church goes on to remark, "indeed 
[the calculus of 2-conversion] might be claimed as a system of logic to which the 
G6del incompleteness theorem does not apply. To ask in what sense this claim is sound 
and in what sense not is not altogether pointless, as it may give insight into ... where 
the boundary lies for applicability of the incompleteness theorem." (A. Church to J. 
Dawson, 25 July 1983.1 
7. On his own offprint of Zermelo's remarks, G6del marked this statement with 
the annotation "Dieser Behauptung ist mir ganz nicht verstandlich und scheint ... in 
sich widerspruchsvoll zu sein .... " 
8. Quotations and paraphrases of Post in this and the following paragraph are 
from his letter to G6del of 30 October 1938. 
9. It would be most interesting to know G6del's opinion of Post's work. I have 
found no letters to Post in G6del's Nachlass and little mention of Post in G6ders other 
correspondence. 
10. Not that Hilbert capitulated in the face of G6ders results; for in the introduction 
to the first volume of Grundlaoen der Mathematik (dated March 1934) Hilbert declared: 
Im Hinblick auf dieses Ziel [showing the consistency of arithmetic] m6chte ich hervorheben, 
dass die zeitweilig aufgekommene Meinung, aus gewissen neueren Ergebnissen yon G6del 
folge die Undurchf'tihrbarkeit meiner Beweistheorie, als irrtiimlich erweisen ist. Jenes Ergebnis 
zeigt in der Tat auch nur, dass man fiir die weitergehenden Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweise den 
finiten Standpunkt in einer sch/irferen Weise ausnutzen muss, als dieses bei der Betrachtung 
der elementaren Formalismen erforderlich ist. 
11. I am grateful to the Russell Archives, McMaster University, for permission to 
quote from this letter. 
References 
Barzin, M. (1940), Sur la Port~e du Th~or~me de M. G6del, Acad~mie Royale de 
Bel#ique, Bulletin de la Classe des Sciences, Series 5, 26, 230-239. 
Benacerraf, P. and Putnam, H. (eds.) (1964), Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected 
Readinys, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
Church, A. (1946), Review of Finsler (1944), J. Symbolic Loyic 11, 131-132. 
Davis, M. ~1965), The Undecidable. Raven Press, Hewlett, NY. 
Davis, M. (1982), Why G6del didn't have Church's thesis, Inform. and Control 54, 3-24. 
Dawson, J.W., Jr. (1984), Discussion on the foundation of mathematics, Hist. Philos. 
Lo#ic 5, 111 - 129. 

The Reception of G6del's Incompleteness Theorems 
99 
Dawson, J.W., Jr. (1985), Completing the G6del-Zermelo correspondence, Historia 
Math. 12, 66-70. 
Feferman, S. (1985), Conviction and caution: A scientific portrait of Kurt G6del, Philos. 
Natur. 21,546-562. 
Finsler, P. (1926), Formale Beweise und die Entscheidbarkeit, Math. Z. 25, 676 682. 
(English translation in van Heijenoort (1967), pp. 440-445.) 
Finsler, P. (1944), Gibt es unentscheidbare S~itze? Comment. Math. Heir. 16, 310-320. 
G6del, K. (1930), Einige metamathematische Resultate fiber Entscheidungsdefinitheit 
und Widerspruchsfreiheit, Anzeiger der Akademie der Wissenschaft in Wien 67, 
pp. 214-215. (English translation in van Heijenoort (1967), pp. 595-596.) 
G6del, K. (1930/31), IJber Vollst~indigkeit und Widerspruchsfreiheit, Ergebnisse eines 
mathematischen Kolloquiums 3, pp. 12-13. (English translation in van Heijenoort 
(1967), pp. 616 617.) 
G6del, K. (1931), Uber formal unentscheidbare S/itze der Principia Mathematica und 
verwandter Systeme I, Monatsh. Math. Phys. 38, 173-198. (English translation in 
van Heijenoort (1967), pp. 596-616.) 
G6del, K. (1934), On Undecidable Propositions of Formal Mathematical Systems, 
Mimeographed notes by S.C. Kleene and J.B. Rosser of lectures by Kurt G6del 
at the Institute for Advanced Study. (As reprinted in Davis (1965), pp. 39-74.) 
Gonseth, F. (ed.) (1941), Les Entretiens de Ziirich sur les Fondements et la methode des 
sciences math~matiques, 6 9 Decembre 1938, Leeman, Zurich. 
Grattan-Guinness, I. (1979), In memoriam Kurt G6del: His 1931 correspondence with 
Zermelo on his incompletability theorem, Historia Math. 6, 294-304. 
Grattan-Guinness, 1. (1981), On the development of logics between the Two World 
Wars, Amer. Math. Monthly 88, 495-509. 
Grelling, K. (1937/38). Gibt es eine G6delsche Antinomie? Theoria 3, 297-306. Zusiitze 
und Berichtigungen, ibid. 4, 68-69. 
Hahn, H. et al. (1931), Diskussion zur Grundlegung der Mathematik, Erkenntnis 2, 
135-151. (English translation in Dawson (1984), pp. 116-128.) 
Helmer, O. (1937), Perelman versus G6del, Mind 46, 58-60. 
Kleene, S.C. (1937a), Review of Perelman (1936), J. Symbolic Logic 2, 40 41. 
Kleene, S.C. (1937b), Review of Helmer (1937), J. Symbolic Logic 2, 48-49. 
Kleene, S.C. 11976/78), The Work of Kurt G6del, J. Symbolic Logic 41, 761-778. 
Addendum, ibid. 43, 613. 
Kleene, S.C. (198 la), Origins of recursive function theory, Ann. Hist. Comput. 3, 52-67. 
(Corrigenda in Davis (1982), footnotes 10 and 12.) 
Kleene, S.C. (1981b), The theory of recursive functions, approaching its centennial, 
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 5, 1, 43-61. 
Kreisel, G. (1979), Review of Kleene (1978). (Addendum to Kleene (1976).) Zentralblatt 
.]fir Mathematik und ihre Grenzgebiete 366, 03001. 
Kuczyfiski, J. (1938), O Twierdzeniu G6dla, Kwartalnik Filozoficzny 14, 74-80. 
Ladri6re, J. (1957), Les Limitations Internes des Formalismes, Nauwelaerte, Louvain; 
Gauthier-Villars, Paris. 
Menger, K. (1978), Selected Papers in Logic and Foundations, Didactics, Economics. 
(Vienna Circle Collection, Number 10.) Reidel, Dordrecht. 
Mostowski, A. (1938), Review of Kuczyfiski (1938), J. Symbolic Logic 3, 118. 
Perelman, C. (1936), L'Antinomie de M. G6del, Acadbmie Royale de Belgique, Bulletin 
de la Classe des Sciences, Series 5, 22, 730-736. 
Popper, K.R. (1980), Der wichtigste Beitrag seit Aristoteles, Wissenschaft aktuell 4/80, 
50-51. 

100 
John W. Dawson, Jr. 
Post, E.L. (1965), Absolutely unsolvable problems and relatively undecidable proposi- 
tions: Account of an anticipation, in Davis (1965), pp. 338 433. 
Quine, W.V. (1978), Kurt G6del (1906-1978). Year Book of the American Philosophical 
Society 1978, 81-84. 
Rosser, J.B. (1936), Extensions of some theorems of G6del and Church, J. Symbolic 
Logic 1, 87-91. (Reprinted in Davis (1965), pp. 231-235.) 
Rosser, J.B. (1938), Review of Grelling (1937/38), J. Symbolic Logic 3, 86. 
Tarski, A. (1956), Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics. Edited and translated by J.H. 
Woodger. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Turing, A.M. (1936/37), On computable numbers, with an application to the 
Entscheidungsproblem, Proc. London Math. Soc., Series 2, 42, 230-265. Corri- 
genda, ibid. 43, 544-546. (Reprinted in Davis (1965), pp. 115-154.) 
van Heijenoort, J. (ed.) (1967), From Frege to G6del. A Source Book in Mathematical 
Logic, 1879-1931, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Wang, H. (1981), Some facts about Kurt G6del, J. Symbolic Logic 46, 653-659. 
Zermelo, E. (1932), Lrber Stufen der Quantifikation und die Logik des Unendlichen, 
Jahresber. Deutsch. Math. Verein. 41, part 2, 85-88. 

Giidel's and Some Other Examples 
of Problem Transmutation 
Hao Wang 
I am much struck by the historical fact that in attempting to prove the 
(relative) consistency of analysis, G6del was led to certain propositions 
undecidable in segments of set theory. He then brought the propositions 
into an elegant arithmetic form and, independently of this improvement, 
realized that his result also implied a negative reply to the initial problem of 
proving consistency (not only of analysis but even of number theory). For 
lack of a suitable term, I have chosen to call this phenomenon "problem 
transmutation," by which I mean to cover an indefinite and wide range of 
related phenomena. 
I am aware that I do not have a precise concept here, but wish merely 
to illustrate the unexpected course of one task leading to another, by assem- 
bling a few examples with which I happen to be familiar. Besides more 
examples from G6del, I shall include my less controlled movement from 
automatic theorem proving to the invention of a combinatorial game which 
was meant to help give a decision procedure for, but instead made possible a 
negative solution of, an interesting case of the Entscheidungsproblem. In 
addition, a conjecture is offered in regard to the influence of this type of 
work on S.A. Cook's surprising discovery on the complexity question of the 
propositional calculus. 
1. Historical Background: Hilbert and Proof Theory 
In 1900 Hilbert turned his attention from the foundations of geometry to offer 
an axiom system for analysis, departing from the usual genetic approach to 
the study of the concept of(real) number (in "fiber den Zahlenbegriff"). Indeed 
the consistency of some such system is listed as the second problem in the 
list of his Paris lecture of the same year. Hilbert's axioms characterize the 
real numbers as forming a real Archimedean field which permits no further 
extension to any field of the same kind. 
The requirement of nonextendibility is given in a pregnant axiom of 
completeness which, however, has a complex logical structure and is indeed 

102 
Hao Wang 
somewhat ambiguous. As we now know, this matter of closing-off or com- 
pleteness calls for going beyond formal systems even when we consider the 
simpler case of integers. In current terminology, only the second-order Peano 
axioms are complete, first-order axioms for the integers are incompletable. 
It is interesting to see that Hilbert soon came to relate the question of axio- 
matically closing-off the theory of integers to that of the indeterminate range 
of what makes up of logic. 
In 1901 he gave a lecture to the G6ttingen mathematical society on the 
problems of completeness and decision (of true or false by the axioms). 
In E. Husserrs formulation, Hilbert asked (Philosophie der Arithmetik, Husser- 
lina, 1970, p. 445): "Would I have the right to say that every proposition 
dealing only with the positive integers must be either true or false on the basis 
of the axioms for positive integers? .... When we assert that a proposition is 
decided on the basis of the axioms of a domain, what may we use for this apart 
from the axioms? The whole of logic. What is that? All theorems, which 
are free from every particularity of a domain of knowledge, what holds 
independently of all 'special axioms,' of all material of knowledge.--But we 
come thus to a neat fix: in the domain of algorithmic logic? in that of finite 
cardinals? in the theory of combinations? in the general theory of ordinals 
numbers? And finally isn't the richest set theory itself purely logical?" 
I have quoted this passage in full because it is relevant to certain current 
debates, particularly with regard to the range of logic. I tend to agree with 
Dedekind and Hilbert (and G6del) that logic includes set theory. If we use 
this concept of logic, then we are justified in accepting the familiar argument 
for proving Peano's axioms categorical. Hence, each proposition is "decided" 
by the axioms (i.e., either true or false). But this decidability or determination 
is different from the more strict requirement of an algorithm to carry out the 
decision in each case. The stricter decidability is the concept which is familiar 
nowadays and most likely also what Hilbert wanted. But Hilbert's foremost 
concern was consistency proofs; next came completeness which for him was 
probably a weaker requirement in general than decidability. 
In his 1904 Heidelberg lecture on the foundations of logic and arithmetic 
Hilbert for the first time observed that, while one can prove the consistency 
of geometry by an arithmetic interpretation, for the consistency of arithmetic 
(meaning number theory and analysis) "the appeal to another fundamental 
discipline seems unreasonable." He suggested a plan of building up logic and 
arithmetic simultaneously, as well as the thought of translating proofs into 
the language of formulas (of symbolic logic) thereby turning the proof of 
consistency (the proof of the "'existence of the infinite") into a problem of 
elementary arithmetic. Probably for lack ofgood ideas and for interest in other 
matters (particularly integral equations and physics), Hilbert did not return to 
this area until his 1917 Zurich lecture on axiomatic thinking in which Hilbert 
praised the "axiomatization of logic" by Whitehead and Russell as "the 
crowning of all the work of axiomatization." Of course there remained for 
Hilbert the matter of proving consistency and he proposed that the concept 
of specific mathematical proof be itself made the object of study. 

G6ders and Some Other Examples of Problem Transmutation 
103 
It was only since 1920 that Hiibert, in collaboration with Paul Bernays and 
provoked by the opposition from Weyl and Brouwer, began to concentrate 
on proof theory. The fruits of this labor were reported in the first Hamburg 
lecture of 1922, the 1922 Leipzig lecture, the 1925 Mtinster lecture on 
the continuum, and the second Hamburg lecture of 1927. Meanwhile, 
apart from Bernays, other young mathematicians, notably M. Sch6nfinkel, 
W. Ackermann, and J. yon Neumann, also joined in the exciting enterprise. 
By 1928 it was believed that the consistency of number theory had been 
achieved by the finitist method envisaged by Hilbert (and Bernays) and 
that even a similar proof of the consistency of analysis had been essentially 
completed, only "the proof of a purely arithmetical elementary theorem of 
finiteness" was wanting. 
2. Hilbert's List of Problems 
On 3 September 1928 Hilbert delivered the address "Probleme der Grundle- 
gung der Mathematik" and he "received a stormy applause at the beginning 
as well as after the end of the address." [Atti del Conoresso lnternationale dei 
Mathematici, Bologna 3 10 Septembre 1928, Bologna, 1929, vol. I, pp. 135- 
141; also Math. Ann., vol. 102 (1930), pp. 1-9; also Grundlaoen der Geometrie, 
seventh edition, 1930, Anhang X; also K. Reidemeister, Hilbert Gedenkband, 
1971, pp. 9-19]. 
Hilbert began his address by reviewing general advances in mathematics 
over the 10-year period to 1928 and then announced that the work of 
Ackermann and von Neumann had carried out a (finitist) consistency proof 
of number theory. Then he listed four yet unresolved problems. 
PROBLEM I (Finitist) consistency proof of the basic part of analysis (or second- 
order functional calculus). Hilbert stated that Ackermann had already worked 
out the main part of such a proof, only an elementary finiteness condition 
remained to be established. He remarked that the proof would justify the 
theory of real numbers with the Dedekind cuts, the second-order Peano 
axioms, and the theory of Cantor's second number class. 
PROBLEM 2. Extension of the proof to higher order functional calculi (or the 
part of the simple theory of types to three or four or five levels). Hiibert 
mentioned in this connection the additional problem of proving the con- 
sistency of a stronger axiom of choice, because his formulation contains a 
certain form of the axiom of choice as an integral part of the basic system. 
It is interesting that Hilbert did not mention explicitly full set theory but 
confined himself to what we would now consider small fragments of set theory 
adequate to the development of standard mathematics (of 1928). 
PROBLEM 3. Completeness of the axiom systems for number theory and analy- 
sis. Hilbert remarked on the familiar fact that second-order theories are indeed 

104 
Hao Wang 
complete in both cases on the basis of the usual proofs that they are categor- 
ical. The problem is to render the proofs of categoricalness "finitely rigorous." 
For number theory, Hilbert explained his idea by requiring that the proof of 
isomorphism of two models be "finitely recast" to show that whenever a 
proposition A can be shown to be consistent with the axioms the opposite of 
A cannot be shown to be so. In other words, whenever A is consistent with 
the axioms, it is provable. This seems to be more specific than the familiar 
idea of so rendering the second-order axioms more explicit that we do have 
"formal" axiomatic systems. In any case, Hilbert appears to believe at that 
time that such complete formal systems exist. 
Hiibert did not mention the question of decidability of number theory 
and analysis. We are now familiar with Turing's observation that if a formal 
system is complete in the sense just mentioned it is also decidable. If Hilbert 
had been aware of this connection at that time, he would probably have been 
more skeptical about the existence of complete formal systems in the two cases, 
since presumably he would have more doubt about these theories being 
decidable.--But I am merely conjecturing and have not looked into the 
historical evidence about Hiibert's beliefs at that time on these questions of 
completeness and decidability. 
PROBLEM 4. The problem of completeness of the system of logical rules 
(i.e., the first-order logic) in the sense that all (universally) valid sentences are 
provable. Hilbert offered this as an example of purely logical problems which 
fall under his proof theory. This same problem was also mentioned in the first 
edition of the Hiibert-Ackermann textbook of 1928. 
Hilbert did not list the Entscheidungsproblem (for the first-order logic), 
which was of course a central problem in his school, except to mention 
that for monadic quantification theory the known method of solving the 
Entscheidungsproblem (Schrtder's elimination problem) also yielded a proof 
of completeness of the rules in the subdomain. Perhaps Hilbert did not include 
this or the decision problem for number theory because he did not regard 
them as belonging to his proof theory. 
3. G~del's Dramatic Response 
In the summer of 1929, after graduating from the University of Vienna, 
Gtdel began to concentrate on research. At about this time he read the 
Hilbert-Ackermann textbook. Gtdel soon settled Hilbert's Problem 4 by 
proving the completeness of the first-order logic, and the whole work had been 
written up as his dissertation and approved by autumn 1929. 
In the summer of 1930 Gtdel undertook to study the problem of proving 
the consistency of analysis. He was probably familiar with the work of 

Gfdel's and Some Other Examples of Problem Transmutation 
105 
the Hilbert school and aware that there were gaps in the proposed finitist 
consistency proof of number theory. In his own words of 1976 as he had me 
formulate in the third person: 
He found it mysterious that Hilbert wanted to prove directly the consistency 
of analysis by finitist method. He believes generally that one should divide the 
difficulties so that each part can be overcome more easily. In this particular case, his 
idea was to prove the consistency of number theory by finitist number theory, and 
prove the consistency of analysis by number theory, where one can assume the truth 
of number theory, not only the consistency. The problem he set for himself was 
the relative consistency of analysis to number theory; this problem is independent 
of the somewhat indefinite concept of finitist number theory. 
I am under the impression that according to the consensus today, finitist 
number theory as originally envisaged by Hilbert consists basically of the 
quantifier-free theory of primitive recursive functions. It is on the basis of an 
identification more or less like this that we can speak of G6del's results 
as settling Hiibert's problems unambiguously. G6del's contrast between 
consistency and truth of number theory calls for some comment. As I under- 
stand his distinction, it allowed for different answers to the then unsettled 
question whether there exists complete formal systems of number theory. If 
there were such a system, then its consistency would also give truth of number 
theory. Otherwise the remaining task of proving the consistency of number 
theory by finitist number theory would seem to call for some clarification. One 
possibility is to envisage a whole class of formal systems of number theory 
which taken together would determine truth in number theory in the strong 
sense that all and only true propositions of number theory are provable in the 
union of the class, as well as a scheme of proving the consistency of each of 
the systems by finitist number theory. Another possibility is to prove by finitist 
number theory the consistency of a standard though incomplete system of 
number theory, say the first-order number theory, which, though incomplete, 
determines univocally truth in number theory, e.g., by containing an adequate 
definition of truth in number theory. Given the distinction of consistency from 
truth, there is an idle question of adding something to help bring together the 
two halves envisaged by G6del, in order to yield the stronger conclusion of a 
consistency proof of analysis by finitist method. G6dei undoubtedly found 
truth in number theory much clearer than the consistency of analysis so that 
the problem he set for himself was both important and more definite than the 
other half. 
G6del quickly found that truth in number theory cannot be defined in 
number theory, quite apart from particular formal axiom systems for number 
theory. He was then able to formulate propositions in elementary segments 
of type theory or set theory which are not decidable in them. After announcing 
the result in the September meeting at K6nigsberg he improved the result to 
obtain elegant arithmetic propositions which are undecidable in the given 
formal system, and also discovered that for the familiar systems of number 
theory and set theory, there can be no consistency proof of any of these systems 

106 
Hao Wang 
formalizable in the system itself. Hence, since the finitist method as explained 
by Hiibert should be formalizable in these systems, G6del had not only settled 
Hilbert's Problems 1 and 2 negatively, but also refuted Hilbert's belief that a 
finitist consistency proof of number theory had already been found. Moreover, 
he had also settled Hilbert's Problem 3 negatively. In all these cases G6del 
proved that the finitist proofs and complete formal systems asked for in these 
questions simply cannot exist. 
In the spring of 1961 I had an opportunity to go with a friend to visit L.E.J. 
Brouwer at his house (uninvited as was the custom with him). He did most 
of the speaking and discoursed on diverse topics apparently at random. I 
remember his mentioning, for totally different reasons in each case, Huygens, 
Hadamard, Heyting, and G6del. Of G6ders incompleteness results, he 
expressed astonishment that so much had been made of them, saying that the 
conclusions had been evident to him for a long time before 1931. Of course a 
major difference is that G6del's precise formulations were convincing to 
people with widely different beliefs while Brouwer's convictions were based 
on a motley of much less explicitly or homogeneously expressed interesting 
ideas. Moreover, the wide implications of G6del results can only be negated 
from a highly special point of view that to most mathematicians and philo- 
sophers must appear highly arbitrary and one-sided. 
Even though it seems fair to say that G6del had destroyed Hilbert's 
original program, G6del continued to be interested in the underlying problem 
of mathematical evidence, and to look for natural broadenings of Hilbert's 
stringent requirements. In 1933 G6del published a note to establish that 
classical number theory is as consistent as intuitionistic number theory (an 
observation also made independently by Bernays and by G. Gentzen). In 1942 
G6del found an interpretation of intuitionistic number theory by primitive 
recursive functionals which were regarded by him as an extension of Hiibert's 
finitist method. 
Another "transmutation" of problems and ideas is in connection with 
the continuum problem. In 1976 G6del thought that it was in 1930 when he 
began to think about the continuum problem and heard about Hilbert's 
proposed outline of a proof of the continuum hypothesis in axiomatic set 
theory as presented in the 1925 lecture "On the infinite." Hilbert's idea was 
to just construct (recursive) ordinals and use recursively defined sets and 
functions of orders indexed by such ordinals. Consistent with his belief 
that finitist consistency proofs exist for strong systems, Hilbert believed and 
thought he could prove that these exhausted all the ordinals and all the sets 
of integers. Hence, since it is easy to see and prove in set theory that the 
cardinalities of these ordinals and these sets are the same, he thought that he 
had (the outline of) a proof of the continuum hypothesis in set theory. More, 
Hilbert thought that the axioms of set theory are also true in his constructive 
interpretation along the same line. That is why he thought he also had (the 
outline of) a finitist consistency proof of the axioms of set theory (as known 
then). 

G6del's and Some Other Examples of Problem Transmutation 
107 
G6del used the idea of analyzing sets (of integers) into orders indexed 
by ordinals. Instead of using recursively defined sets, he soon thought of the 
first-order definable sets in the ramified hierarchy. He experimented with 
different ways of introducing (countable) ordinals for some time. Finally the 
idea of using all ordinals occurred to him. This implies that instead of proving 
the continuum hypothesis one could only hope for a relative consistency proof 
unless one could get all ordinals in some suitably explicit way. In 1976 G6del 
thought that it was in 1935 when he verified that all the axioms of set theory 
at the time, including the axiom of choice, are satisifed by the constructible 
sets, i.e., the ramified theory over all ordinals. In 1938 he proved that the 
(generalized) continuum hypothesis also holds in this model. 
4. The Entscheidungsproblem 
The practice of speaking of the decision problem of the first-order logic as the 
Entscheidungsproblem must have begun around 1920. For example, this 
usage is in the title ofH. Behmann's paper of 1922 (in Mathematische Annalen). 
G6del's report in 1932 of his decision procedure for an interesting special case 
also follows this usage. In the literature the first proof of the unsolvability of 
the general case is commonly attributed to A. Church. But it could be argued, 
and I believe this is G6del's view, that A.M. Turing was really the first one to 
give a complete proof of this result. This is because it was Turing who 
for the first time gave a convincing explication of the intuitive concept of 
computability and algorithm. Hence, only after this explication can we hope 
to get general unresoivability results. From this viewpoint Turing's own proof 
of the unsolvability of the Entscheidungsproblem is directly complete while 
Church's slightly earlier proof is only completed by adding Turing's explica- 
tion plus the proof that all Turing computable functions are indeed recursive. 
From 1953 on 1 began to think about the relation between logic and 
computers. For a long time before that I had felt disappointed that the for- 
mal precision in making proofs entirely explicit seems pointless in practice 
and most mathematicians have little sympathy with this aspect of logic. I was, 
therefore, pleased with the idea that fast computers can take advantage of the 
precision to take over parts of the task of proving theorems, filling i~1 gaps, 
etc. Some of these general thoughts were written up in 1954 and included as 
additional remarks in a paper devoted to a programming version of Turing 
machines, later published at the beginning of 1957 in Journal of the Association 
.for Computing Machinery. It was not until the summer of 1958 that Brad 
Dunham provided me with an opportunity to learn programming and carry 
out in part these vague ideas. The result was surprisingly gratifying not only 
in the quick speed but especially in the unexpected discovery that all the 
theorems of Principia Mathematica in first-order logic fall under a very simple 
and familiar decidable subclass with fast decisions. These results were written 

108 
HaoWang 
up and submitted by December 1958 but for some curious reason the IBM 
Journal published it only in January 1960. 
Meanwhile I had obtained in July 1959 a visiting position at Bell Labo- 
ratories to continue this work. After tidying up the loose ends left over from 
summer 1958, I began to investigate the patterns of Herbrand expansions 
of natural classes of formulas in first-order logic. I came upon the major 
unsettled case of AEA formulas, i.e., formulas of the simple form AxEyAzM- 
xyz, with no quantifiers in M. Most people who had worked on it since the 
1920s probably conjectured that the case is decidable. The patterns of Her- 
brand expansions of these formulas are especially simple and can be re- 
presented in a natural way by certain simple finite sets of points on the 
Cartesian plane. Since my colleagues at Bell Labs were not familiar with logic, 
I was frustrated in trying to discuss with them what I thought was an elegant 
combinatorial problem. In the beginning of 1960 I came upon a picturesque 
formulation of a closely related problem, known since as the domino problem 
or Wang tiles. 
At that time I thought that the basic domino problem must be decidable 
(i.e., every solvable set has a periodic solution) and that the decision procedure 
would lead to one for the AEA case. Soon I realized that if some domino or 
tile is required to occur in every solution (the "origin-constrained" problem), 
then one can simulate Turing machines and thereby show the modified 
problem to be unsolvable. More than a year later I lectured at Harvard on 
these ideas (in autumn 1961) and within a month, with the collaboration of a 
student, A.S. Kahr, who had no previous training in logic at all, I was able to 
show that my construction can be extended from the origin-constrained 
problem to the "diagonal-constrained" problem, thereby showing that the 
AEA case is, contrary to expectation, unsolvable and indeed a reduction class 
for the whole of first-order logic. This incidentally unifies all the reduction 
classes in a simple way. About two years later another student, Robert 
Berger, showed that the basic (i.e., unconstrained) domino problem is also 
unsolvable, contrary to my original conjecture. These dominoes or colored 
tiles have found various other applications over the last 20 years or so. 
The proof of the unsolvability of the AEA case by colored tiles also goes 
through the simulation of Turing machines and can be viewed as a drastic 
simplification of Turing's proof in the sense that he used much more complex 
formulas than those in the AEA form to express basically the same thing about 
Turing machines. Steve Cook came around a little later and was before long 
fully indoctrinated in these economical representations. With his intense 
interest in computational complexity, he was a few years later able to carry 
the economy even further by using the idea of indeterministic computation 
which is to deterministic computation much as provability is to decidability. 
He proved in his paper of 1971 (ACM Conference on Theory of Computing) 
that nondeterministic Turing machines can even be represented by formulas 
in the propositional calculus in such a way as to sustain a desired relation 

G6del's and Some Other Examples of Problem Transmutation 
109 
between the consistency (or satisfiability/of a formula and certain specific 
behaviors of its corresponding machine. This unexpected "transmutation" has 
led to the formulation of the central open problem of computational complex- 
ity, commonly stated in the abbreviated form of asking whether P = NP. 

The Development of Self-Reference: 
LOb's Theorem 
C. Smoryfiski 
Social processes operate on the sciences and social history must be understood 
in order to understand the history of science. This simple truth has trans- 
cended mere axiomatic truth; it has transcended mere fashion: today, the social 
treatment is de rioueur in the history of science and the history of computing. 
In the history of mathematics, however, the social emphasis is not so firmly 
entrenched. Historians who discuss the history of mathematics certainly 
steep their discussions in social contexts, but the history of mathematics 
is quite often written by mathematicians or, at least, mathematical educators, 
and mathematicians generally do not care about the overall societal back- 
ground. Modern mathematics has largely divorced itself from the sciences 
and has become something of an intellectual sport, a game of ideas. Now, 
mathematicians are somewhat social and love anecdotes about fellow mathe- 
maticians, but this is as far as their interest in social history goes: Where the 
sciences inject history into their textbooks and discuss the growth of ideas, the 
history in most calculus texts limits itself to paragraph-length biographies, 
and one of the most successful textbooks on the history of mathematics is 
highly anecdotal, its author having additionally published no fewer than three 
books consisting of nothing but anecdotes. When the mathematician wants 
to discuss history (i.e., history of mathematics) and he wants to discuss it 
seriously and will not settle for mere anecdotes, it is not the social forces 
that created a need for a given type of mathematics that he writes about-- 
mathematics has the odd habit of developing long before it is useful (i.e., before 
it is needed by society at large); it is not a simple chronology that he lists-- 
despite all one reads about how the mathematician is like a fish out of water 
when he is not doing mathematics, he is not as stupid as all that; it is the 
development of the subject that interests him: What was the key idea? How 
did it come about? etc. 
The topic of the present paper is the development of self-reference in, say, 
arithmetic, i.e., formal linguistic self-reference of the kind used by G6del as 
opposed to the functorial self-reference of the Recursion Theorem. The most 
salient feature of this opposition is the paucity of the former as compared with 
the opulence of the latter. How can we account for this? An explanation 

The Development of Self-Reference: L6b's Theorem 
111 
can occur on one of many levels. One could surmise that formal linguistic 
self-reference interests the philosophically minded logician, that the mathe- 
matically oriented logician would be attracted to the functorial self-reference, 
and that, as mathematicians are more inclined toward technical development, 
we would naturally expect greater development of the Recursion Theorem 
and related recursion theoretic matters. The socially minded historian could 
even point to references to computability in the titles of books on recursion 
theory and, inferring some relationship, emphasize the increasing importance 
of computers to society. Put so bluntly, he would be wrong, but a knowledg- 
able scientific historian--with a knowledge of philosophy--could make a 
good case for something similar: Recursion Theory--all the undecidability 
results, complexity results, and results generally revealing our mathematical 
limitations--is the natural mathematical expression of the central r61e of 
intellectual impotence of twentieth century Western thought. (I refer here to 
du Bois-Reymond's ignorabimus, relativity theory, the Heisenberg uncertainty 
principle, logical positivism, and--eventually--Gfdel's Theorems and their 
wake; if I knew anything about it, I am sure I could list trends in art and 
literature as well.) Such a theory, like Spengler's Decline of the West, is 
very pleasing and gives one a very broad perspective, but interpreting it ---if 
possible at all--is more of an art--like divination--than a technology, and 
this is, to me, a failing of all social history of the sciences: It is painting with 
broad strokes; it gives a good background, but doesn't do too well with details. 
I wish in this chapter to be very specific. I also wish to be mathematical, 
and I mean this in two ways: First, and rather obviously, I intend to be 
mathematical in historical style; I shall look at the mathematical development. 
Second, I take seriously the existence of subjective phenomena, something not 
done by all social historians, whose belief in objectivity I cannot swallow. 
(An extreme example is given by Derek de Solla Price. Incidentally, I am 
here overexaggerating the anti-subjectivity of the social historian: Goldberg's 
Understanding Relativity is a good refutation of my exaggeration. Nonethe- 
less, there is something to my remarks.) 
The question I wish to address (not directly, rather it is to be kept in the 
back of one's mind) is: How do we account for the slow development of formal 
linguistic self-reference, particularly when we compare it to the development 
of recursion theory? In 'Fifty years of self-reference in arithmetic' (Smoryfiski, 
1981 b), I suggested that most mathematical logicians found Kieene's recursion 
theory an emotionally safer outlet for their self-referential propensities. This 
is another exaggeration, but, again, one with some foundation: How many 
textbooks do not draw a distinction between mere incompleteness (some 
sentence is undecided) and G6del's First Incompleteness Theorem (the 
sentence asserting its own unprovability is undecided)? Are not modern 
mathematical logicians openly embarrassed at the blatant intensionality 
behind G6ders two Incompleteness Theorems? (Cf., e.g., the opening para- 
graphs of Friedman, McAloon, and Simpson (1982) and Simpson (1983) 
in this regard; note, incidentally, how the authors of the former decry the 

112 
C. Smoryfiski 
artificiality of the consistency statement proven undecided by G6del while 
simultaneously pointing with pride in the title of their paper to the equivalence 
of their undecidable sentence with 1-consistency?) Also, in Smoryfiski (1981 b), 
I noted that so basic a result as the Diagonalization Lemma, which is a 
clear antecedent to Kleene's fully generally formulated Recursion Theorem of 
1938, was not stated in any form in many textbooks. This, I said, was another 
example of the negative attitude logicians had (and have) toward formal 
linguistic self-reference. 
There is something to the above explanation, but it is, nevertheless, not 
completely satisfying. Not only is it hopelessly naive, but, like the application 
of social history to anything specific, it is too broad, too general, and cannot 
be accepted as an explanation. In discussing microcosmic developments, 
one prefers microcosmic to macrocosmic explanations. Moreover, the mathe- 
matician wants a mathematical explanation, preferably a theorem to the effect 
that A had to precede B (say), but an explanation in terms of mathematical 
practice will do, e.g., A could not have done B because everyone was thinking 
C and the goal D would not have required B .... In these terms, Kuhn's 
language of paradigms and paradigm shifts seems just the thing the mathe- 
matician might like. Why did Recursion Theory develop instead of Proof 
Theory? Answer: A paradigm shift? Kieene's success was so great it became 
the new paradigm; incompleteness gave way to undecidability. I shall use 
this language and try to keep in focus what researchers had in view in the 
sequel. My topic will be the very microcosmic one of the history of L6b's 
Theorem. 
1. Henkin's Problem and Kreisers First Response 
In the 1950s, the tie between logic and philosophy was stronger than it is 
today. Where nowadays the textbooks are invariably titled Introduction to 
Mathematical Lo#ic and emphasize model theory and recursion theory, the 
textbook of the 1950s was Kleene's Introduction to Metamathematics and it 
had an extended discussion of foundations and the paradoxes. The paradoxes, 
needless to say, were the first paradigm in self-reference. I have the impression 
that interest in the paradoxes survived well into the 1950s. Incompleteness 
results were still partially viewed as analogues to paradoxes and variants of the 
paradoxes were transformed into variant incompleteness results. G/Sdel's 
self-referential sentence, 
"I am unprovable," 
was a formal counterpart to the paradoxical 
"I am lying." 
As with the latter, if"I am unprovable" is false, it must be provable, whence 
true--whence unprovable; but nothing paradoxical now occurs. The sentence 
"I am telling the truth," 

The Development of Self-Reference: L6b's Theorem 
113 
doesn't lead to any paradox on assumption of its truth or falsity. There seems 
to be no way of deciding whether it should be true or false. By analogy, one 
could not readily decide whether 
"I am provable" 
should be true or false. Since the truth of the G6del sentence is decidable, 
it seemed plausible to Leon Henkin that someone could decide this new 
sentence. 
In 1952, the Journal of Symbolic Logic instituted a short-lived problems 
column. Herein Henkin posed the problem of the truth or falsity of the 
sentence "I am provable." His exact wording, which is important in under- 
standing the sequel, was: 
IfE is any standard formal system adequate for recursive number theory, a formula 
(having a certain integer q as its G6del number) can be constructed which expresses 
the proposition that the formula with G6del number q is provable in Z. ls this 
formula provable or independent in E? 
Nowadays, we would state this problem as follows: 
Let Pr(v) be the formula expressing provability in the system E referred to 
above. G6dei produced a sentence r satisfying 
E I- ~o ~ ~pr(r~pl), 
(where r~pl is the G6del number of ~p) and showed that q~ is unprovable. 
Suppose instead that a sentence ~o satisfies 
E ~- (p ~ pr(r~pl). 
Is (p provable? 
This is not an accurate rendering of Henkin's problem, but is, rather, the 
generalization affirmatively solved by L6b. Kreisel's response fairly dramati- 
cally points to the difference between the two formulations. 
In a note, Georg Kreisel (1953) showed that the answer to Henkin's prob- 
lem was "yes" and "no"; it depended on how one expressed provability and 
on the formula constructed to express its own provability. The key word here, 
and in Henkin's formulation of the problem, is "express." 
The Diagonalization Lemma in its most natural mathematical formulation, 
if not its strongest such, asserts that to any arithmetic formula ~,v, with the 
one free variable v, there is a sentence tp such that, retaining Henkin's E, 
~_, ~-- ~ ,*-~, ~J (I 149 1 ) . 
In Smoryfiski (1981b), 1 pointed out that many logic textbooks do not state 
this lemma and, instead, repeat the construction every time the authors wish 
to apply the lemma. I exhibited this as an instance of the lack of a genuine 
development of self-reference. This is, I think, the case: Mathematically, it 
makes good sense to prove the lemma and apply the provable equivalence of 
,,o to ~,(r~o~)--provided one knows, as experience teaches us, that this is 

114 
C. Smoryfiski 
generally all one needs to know about 40 and its relation to Sv. If one has not 
studied self-reference, one merely follows tradition .... In any event, this 
mathematical experience was not available in 1953 when Kreisel's paper was 
submitted, nor, afortiori, in 1952 when Henkin posed his problem. Moreover, 
there is the philosophical issue: The relation between the formula qJv and the 
fixed point 40 constructed by G6dei's method is stronger than the mere 
equivalence of 40 and 4s(r401); 40 literally has the form g,(t) for some term t which 
evaluates to the code r40(t)~. Thus, 40 literally expresses if(r401). Henkin did not 
want to know if some sentence accidentally equivalent to the assertion of its 
own provability was provable (I assume the truth of this, that 
E I- 0 = 0 +-+ pr(rO = 01), 
was obvious); he did not ask if all such sentences were provable (there being 
no reason at the time to believe in--or even surmise--such uniformity); 
he wanted to know if the (a?) sentence so constructed to express its own 
provability was provable. It was this question Kreisel addressed. 
Kreisei relaxed slightly the stricture that 40 be constructed to express its own 
provability. To him, for 40 to express that it had a property ~v, it was enough 
for 40 to be of the form ~(t) for some term t evaluating to r40~; t did not have 
to be the term constructed by G6del's method. There is no evidence that 
Henkin or anyone objected to this relaxation. Kreisei departed more radically 
from Henkin's intended problem by choosing his own means of expressing 
provability rather than using the predicate Pr(v) constructed by G6del. Should 
he have stuck to G6deFs predicate? What does, or should, one mean by saying 
that a predicate expresses provability? Kreisel proposed the following: 
Criterion for the Expression of Provability. A formula P(v), with only v free, 
expresses provability in the system Z iff, for any sentence 40, one has 
Z t- p(r401) iff E t- 40. 
[N.B. This is exactly what one needs to obtain the independence of Gfdel's 
sentence. If one is only interested in the unprovability of the Gfdel sentence, 
one needs only the right-to-left implication.] 
Under this criterion for expressing provability and the earlier cited one for 
self-expressibility, Kreisel constructed two predicates expressing provability 
and one sentence apiece expressing its own provability. One was provable and 
one was not. Let us look at these examples. 
EXAMPLE I. There is an expression Pl(v) of provability and a sentence ~0 
expressing its own provability (relative to P1) such that Z I- 40. 
Proof. Once again, the provabilities of 
0 = 0 +-+ pr(rO = 0 l) 
and 
0 = 0 

The Development of Self-Reference: L6b's Theorem 
115 
are irrelevant as 0 = 0 is merely equivalent to and does not express its own 
provability. 
Kreisel begins by choosing q9 via G6del's construction to express 
pr(rq~ ~ q~l). He then takes Pl(x) to be pr(r~ol-~ x), where -~ denotes the 
primitive recursive function such that for all sentences 
rzil 
~-~ rj(21 = 
I j( 1 ~ Z21 
for all sentences 7,t, X2. 
~0 expresses/'1 (rtp~) in K reisers sense and it remains only to check that P~ (v) 
expresses provability in Kreisers sense. In fact, as Kreisel points out, Px(v) is 
equivalent to Pr(v) and the latter expresses provability as was known, e.g., 
from Hilbert and Bernays (1939). 
Kreisel merely remarks that P~(v) and Pr(v) are equivalent. It would 
be interesting to see how he proved this as the available Hilbert-Bernays 
Derivability Conditions were rather awkward. I shall derive this equivalence 
using the more managable L6b Derivability Conditions. Both sets of condi- 
tions will be listed in full in the next section; here let me simply cite the two 
from L6b's list that I need: 
DI. EFO=> EFpr(rO l) 
D2. E I-pr(rO 1) A pr(rO -+ 7~ 1) --+ pr(rz1), 
for any sentences 0, Z- 
First, observe: For tp expressing Pr(rtp --+ ~pl), 
E F tp -+ tp ~ E F pr(rtp --+ tpl), byD1 
==:, E F tp, 
by choice of tp 
E I- pr(r@), 
by DI. Also, 
E I-Pl(r~, 1) ~ Pl(r~bl) A Pr(rtpl), 
by (1) 
I-Pl(r~, 1) ~ pr(rtp 1) A Pr(ftp -, ~1), 
by choice ofP 1 
I- Pl (r~l) ~ er(r~b i), 
by D2. 
This is half of what we want. For the converse, observe 
Z F ~ ~ (4o ~ ~k) =~ E F pr(r~k ~ (q~ --* ~)1), 
by D 1 
==:- E F pr(r~k 1) -~ pr(rtp -> d/l), 
by D2 
E F pr(rff l) -+ Pl (r~bl), by choice of Pt. 
(1) 
[] 
In a footnote in his paper, Kreisel gives a simpler example supplied by 
Henkin. The example cited here is, however, of some interest. 
EXAMPLE II. There is an expression P, of provability and a sentence ~b express- 
ing its own provability (relative to P2) and such that Y. ~ ~,. 

116 
C. Smoryfiski 
Here, Kreisel begins by choosing ~k to express 
[r@a :/: r@~ ~ pr(r~b~)] ^ [r~ = r@~ ~ pr(rO = 1~)1 
and then defines 
P2(X): [x ~ rr 
_. Pr(x)] ^ Ix = rd/1 --* er(rO = ]-1)]. 
The details of the proof that this works do not interest us here. Again, in a 
footnote, Kreisei offers a simpler variant due to Henkin. 
It is amusing to note that if ~o is any sentence other than ~ satisfying 
E I-- ~ ",-~ P2 (rq~l), 
then 
E t- ~o ~ pr(r~o 1) 
and L6b's Theorem (el. the next section) yields 
E I-q~. 
If one applies G6dei's construction to/'2, the sentence q~ one constructs will 
not be ~,--for ~b is of the form P2(tl) where tl refers to 
Ix ~ x ---, Pr(x)] ^ [x = x --, er(r0 = 11)], 
while q~ is of the form P2(t2) where t 2 refers to P2(x). Hence, Kreisel does not 
solve the problem if we do not relax the restriction on self-expression to not 
requiring the actual sentence G6del's method constructs for P2. 
Incidentally, this example, in which distinct fixed points behave differently, 
though not atypical of self-reference, is atypical of metamathematicai applica- 
tions of self-reference. However, it would take more experience to recognize 
this and to relax the demand of self-referential expression to an acceptance of 
mere provable equivalence. 
2. Lfib's Solution, Lfib's Theorem, and Kreisel's Response 
To discuss L6b's solution to Henkin's problem and see how close and yet 
how far Kreisel's Example I was from it, we must back up a bit and recall 
Paul Bernays' proof (in Grundlagen der Mathematik II) of the Second 
Incompleteness Theorem. This proof is not so simple as that currently 
expounded (say, that in my Self-Reference and Modal Logic). Simplification 
comes with experience and Bernays was offering the first detailed proof of the 
Second Incompleteness Theorem. In his published paper G6del (1931) had 
merely remarked that his proof showed 
E F-Con(E) -~ --1 pr(r~01), 
(1) 
where ~o was his sentence asserting its own unprovability, whence 
s ~-Con(E) ~ ~0. 
(2) 
Thus, since ~ is unprovable, (2) shows that Con(E) is unprovable. The full 

The Development of Self-Reference: L6b's Theorem 
117 
details of the derivation of(I) were left by G6del to a sequel he never published, 
i.e., he left the task of expounding them to others. Bernays performed this task. 
Basically, Bernays proved the Second Incompleteness Theorem by formaliz- 
ing the proof of the First Incompleteness Theorem, using as lemmas to handle 
some of the details certain derivability conditions, now known as the Hilbert- 
Bernays Derivability Conditions: 
HB 1. E F- <p --* ~' ~ ,Y, I'- pr(rtp 1) ~ Pr(r~b 1). 
HB2. E t-pr(r-qq~vq ~ pr(r-l~p~l), for each numeral ~. 
HB3. Iff is a primitive recursive unary function and fis a function constant 
denoting it, 
Z F-fv = 0 ~ pr(rff~ = ~1), 
where rtpt~l indicates, not rtpvl, but the more complicated sub(rtpv 1, 
hum(v)), the term with free variable v denoting the G/Sdel number of 
the result of replacing v in tpv by the vth numeral. 
The Hiibert-Bernays Derivability Conditions, which came out in 1939, 
were the closest thing to an attempt to analyze Pr(v) before Kreisel replaced 
them by the criterion of expressibility cited in the previous section: 
CE. E ~- P(rtpl) 
iff Y- I- q~. 
For his predicates P, Kreisel had only CE to use, although he evidently used 
more about Pr(v), but he never codified what he used. The Hilbert-Bernays 
Derivability Conditions codify a bit more, but they were technical iemmas in 
a single proof and clearly were not intended as an analysis of Pr(v): HB2, for 
example, has the obvious improvement: 
E I- pr(rtpv I) ~ pr(rq~t i), t any term. 
Moreover, the extension of HB3 to functions of several variables is also 
obvious. 
In 1954, Martin Hugo L6b doubly announced his solution to Henkin's 
problem. The lesser of the two announcements was a contributed talk at the 
International Congress of Mathematicians in Amsterdam, the proceedings of 
which conference includes his abstract (L6b, 1954) for this talk. The greater 
of the two announcements was a paper (L6b, 1955) submitted to the Journal 
of Symbolic Looic, the paper, augmented by comments of the referee, appeared 
the following year. L6b's paper is notable for four things: 
(1) the introduction of the new L6b Derivability Conditions (or, the Deriv- 
ability Conditions); 
(2) the solution of Henkin's problem for sentences expressin9 their own 
provabilities; 
(3) the solution of the more general problem in which sentences are merely 
required to be equivalent to their own provabilities; 
(4) a further generalization called L6b's Theorem. 

l ! 8 
C. Smoryfiski 
The ICM abstract contains (1) and (2); contributions (3) and (4) occur only in 
the JSL paper and L6b credits the anonymous referee (Henkin) for noticing 
that his proof of (2) actually established (3) and (4). Contribution (2) was, of 
course, the heart of the matter; nonetheless, contributions (l) and (4) are the 
most important. 
L6b's Derivability Conditions (in my preferred order) are: 
D1. E ~- <p ~ E I- pr(rtpl), 
D2. E t-pr(rtp 1) A pr(rtp ~ ~b 1) ~ pr(r~bl), 
D3. E ~- pr(rtp 1) ~ pr(rpr(rtpl)l), 
for all sentences tp, ~b. In his paper, he actually lists two more, namely HBI 
and HB3. However, HB1 is redundant, HB3 is used only to derive D3, and 
only DI-D3 are used in the subsequent proof, and it has thus become 
customary to list only these three conditions. As L6b pointed out, D l can 
be found in Hilbert-Bernays although Bernays did not list it among his 
"Ableitbarkeitsforderungen" HB1-HB3. Moreover, D2 is an improved version 
of HB1, and, as just mentioned, D3 is a consequence of HB3. Thus, L6b's 
Derivability Conditions do not in any way constitute a technical break- 
through. They are marvellous nonetheless, for they constitute the beginning 
of an analysis of Pr(v), a step toward the proper generality, and useful lemmas 
--as we have already seen in discussing Kreisers first example and as we shall 
see in discussing L6b's Theorem. 
L6b's Theorem, isolated by Henkin as the general result established by 
L6b's proof once one removes the unnecessary premises is the following: 
L6b's Theorem. Let ~, be any sentence. If ~. t- pr(r~b 1) ~ ~', then IF. ~- ~b. 
Proof. Assume 
E ~- pr(rff l) --, ft. 
(1) 
Let tp be such that 
E b ~p ,--,. pr(rtp 1) ~ ~b. 
(2) 
(Actually, L6b constructs 4o expressing pr(rtp 1) ~ ~,. Even though the theorem 
is stated in the mathematically most natural terms, in his proof L6b still clings 
to the philosophical formulation.) Observe 
E bpr(rtpl), --, pr(rpr(rtp a) --, ~,1), by (2), Dl, D2 
I- pr(rtp 1) ~ pr(rpr(rtpl) l) ~ pr(r~kl), by D2 
b pr(rtP 1) -~ pr(r~kl), 
by D3 
I- pr(rtp a) ~ ~k, 
(3) 
by assumption (l). But (2) and (3) yield E I-<p, whence 
E I- pr(rtpl), 
by D1 
I-~k, by (3). 
[] 

The Development of Self-Reference: L6b's Theorem 
119 
There is so much to say about this proof I scarcely know where to begin. 
It is such a delight that one would expect it to have led to a lot of similar 
playing around. Yet it didn't Why? The explanation I hinted at in my review 
of Boolos' book (Smoryfiski, 1981 a) may strike one as facetious and is defini- 
tely quite naive, but there may be something to it: L6b's Theorem is of supreme 
metamathematical (hence: philosophical) importance: Where G6del's (philo- 
sophically important) Second Incompleteness Theorem merely asserts the 
consistency of a theory to be unprovable in the theory, L6b's Theorem 
transcends this and characterizes those instances of soundness provable in the 
theory as those trivially so provable. My explanation was that L6b's Theorem 
became sacrosanct and nobody dared to "play around" with it. 
In any event, L6b's paper tied L6b's Theorem a second time to philosophy 
by remarking that the referee (the ubiquitous Henkin) had uncovered a new 
paradox underlying the fixed point q~+-~pr(r~01)~b: Imagine a sentence 
asserting 
"If I am true, then so is A." 
If B is this sentence, 
B=B~A, 
then B can only be false if B is true and A is false. Thus B is true. But then 
B --* A is true, whence A is true--and this, regardless of what A is. (It turns 
our that this paradox was not brand new: It pops up in discussing Haskell 
Curry's paradoxical combinator in Combinatory Logic--cf. van Bentham 
(1978) for discussion.) 
A somewhat less emotional hypothesis than the one that philosophy 
frightens off mathematicians is that philosophy guides one's actions and that 
again the wrong philosophy was in place. Perhaps the discovery of the new 
paradox showed that the old paradigms were still in place and mathematical 
experimentation was not called for. Thus, for example, it was not noticed until 
the 1970s that the solution to the generalized Henkin problem, 
E b ~o ~ Pr(r q~ 1) ~ E b r 
(*) 
was a general as L6b's Theorem, 
For, if 
y. p_ pr(rtp I) ~ tp, 
then ~p = ~ ^ Pr(r~, l) satisfies 
E I- ~p ~ pr(r~f), 
and (,) yields 
5" }-~0 
The only one who (to my knowledge) can be said to have played around 

120 
C. Smoryfiski 
with this stuff prior to the 1970s is Kreisel, who in various expositions (e.g., 
Kreisel (1968) and Kreisel and Takeuti (1974)) derived Lrb's Theorem using 
the alternate fixed point 
Z ~- q9 ~ pr(rq> -+ ~bl), 
where it is assumed that 
t- Pr(' ~, 1) --+ ~,. 
Kreisel appears to have been quite pleased with this fixed point and asserted 
in his joint paper with Takeuti that the proof using his fixed point is more 
general than Lrb's in that it only uses positive intuitionistic reasoning. As 
Lrb's proof clearly assumes no more (but cf. Section 4, below), one must 
assume his preference really to be based on something else. Personally, I 
cannot help but noticing a similarity between his new fixed point 
~0 ~ pr(r~o --, r 
(,) 
and his old predicate 
Pl (' ~ b l) = pr(rq 9 ~ ~b i). 
In this latter, ~o was chosen by 
q~ ~ pr(rq~ ~ qol). 
Choosing, instead, q~ to depend on ~b, one just gets (,). In any event, the 
superiority of one of Kreiscl's or Lrb's fixed points over the other seems, at 
this conceptual level, to boil down to: Lrb's fixed point yields a marginally 
shorter derivation of L6b's Theorem and Kreisel's yields a marginally shorter 
proof of the Formalized Lrb's Theorem: 
Formalized Liib's Theorem. For any sentence ~k, 
Y_. p-pr(rer(r~s 1) --+ ~k 1) --. er(r~,l). 
Proof. Choose q) so that 
Z k- tp ~ Pr(l~ ~ d/1). 
From this equivalence, the instance, 
~_ pr(r q) ~ ~k l) __. pr(r pr(r q) ~ ffl)l), 
of D3, and application of D1, D2, we get 
E I- r ~ pr(r4o 1) 
I- q~ ~ pr(rq~ 1) ^ pr(rq) ~ ~bl), 
by choice of 
I-tp -~ pr(r~l). 
Conversely, 
Z I- pr(r~b 1) ~ pr(r~ ~ ~bl), by D 1, D2 
t- pr(r~b 1) ~ ~0, by choice of tp. 

The Development of Self-Reference: L6b's Theorem 
121 
Thus, E I-q~ ~-~ pr(r~b 1) and D1, D2 again yield 
Y I-pr(r~ ~) ~ Pr(' pr(r~k 1) ~ ~l), 
which is slightly more than desired. 
[] 
3. The Modern Period, I: Solovay's Theorem 
The proof of the Formalized L6b's Theorem given at the end of the last section 
is in the more modern, abstract spirit. There is no reference to the construction 
either of ~o or of Pr(v). The proof uses the existence of ~ merely as something 
given by an existence proof as something satisfying the property 
E I-- ~o ~ pr(rq~l); 
it uses L6b's Derivability Conditions as established lemmas in an almost 
axiomatic framework. This is what has happened to the subject: In the 1970s, 
this axiomatic approach, divorced from philosophy (in particular, from the 
paradoxes), developed. Moreover, it developed among a new, younger set of 
researchers. Before encountering this development, however, I want to take a 
parting glance at Kreisel. 
For years, Kreisel appears to have been the only one interested in formal 
linguistic self-reference. He is the only one who consistently wrote on the 
subject. Still, we can trace two common themes in his writings back to his 
1953 paper. One theme is the question of what it means to express provability. 
In an article in Lectures on Modern Mathematics 11I (Kreisel, 1965), he 
discussed a notion of canonicality of proof predicates in attempting to isolate 
Pr(v) from other candidates P(v). Ultimately, he decided that Pr(v) is canonical 
for the usual presentation of E, but that his predicates P(v) are also canonical 
for oddly presented formal systems, that Rosser's Theorem is not based on 
"Rosser's trick" but on a canonical Rosser proof predicate for another oddly 
presented formal system, and that there is a similar canonical proof predicate 
for naturally, if untraditionally, presented formal systems such as cut-free 
analysis. Moreover, for these various canonical (whence: consideration- 
worthy) predicates, it may still be the case that there is a difference between 
sentences expressing certain properties of themselves and mere fixed points. 
His joint paper with Gaisi Takeuti, published in 1974, is the clearest example 
of this: For the usual systems E, any G6del sentence (i.e., any sentence tp 
such that Z ~- q~ ,--, 7 pr(r~l)) is equivalent to Con(E), whence any two G6del 
sentences are provably equivalent. And, any two Henkin sentences (sentences 
q~ such that E I-- q~ ~ pr(rq~l)) are provably equivalent (since they are provable). 
Kreisel and Takeuti investigate these sentences and the Rosser sentence (not 
defined here) for the special system E of Cut-Free Analysis, i.e., a second-order 
theory of arithmetic based on direct rules of inference. They prove that: 
(i) any two G6del sentences for this special Y are provably equivalent; 
(ii) each literal Henkin sentence (i.e., each sentence expressing its own prov- 

122 
C. Smoryfiski 
ability) is refutable in E, but that there are provable Henkin sentences (e.g., 
= 0); and 
(iii) all literal Rosser sentences for E are equivalent, but not all Rosser sen- 
tences are. 
Mathematically, this joint work with Takeuti is much deeper than anything 
in self-reference that had gone before, but this depth is in the proof theory of 
cut-free analysis. In the introduction to the paper, Kreisel suggests that those 
who have "doubts about the significance" of cut-free analysis can view the 
paper as supplying "'counterexamples' in a general theory of self-referential 
propositions of formal systems." As work in self-reference, this is exactly the 
perspective by which to view the paper: It offers no positive theory, it fails to 
give direction for further research Iself-referentially, it has no sequel), and its 
focus is extremely narrow. It is safe to say that Kreisel (the author principally 
responsible for the self-referential material) has gone beyond the paradigm of 
the paradoxes, and one might say he is in that transitional period in which 
problems arise bringing forth the new paradigms. In any event, with this paper, 
he is not in the modern (i.e., current) period whereby the uniqueness and 
explicit definability of the Grdel and Henkin sentences have been nicely 
generalized and the foundations of a limited "general theory of self-referential 
propositions," against which his counterexamples can be placed, have been 
laid. To reach the current period, a conceptual shift is necessary. 
The conceptual shift needed--if only in the accidental, historical sense--is 
away from intension: The notion of a sentence's expressing something about 
itself has not proven fruitful, nor has the notion of canonicality of expression 
of a proof predicate, nor has the insight that a Rosser sentence is a Grdel 
sentence for a Rosser proof predicate. What has proven fruitful is a more 
axiomatic approach: One thinks of any proof predicate and works with the 
properties it has (e.g., DI-D3). Ultimately, this yields an analysis of methods; 
crudely, it leads to modal logic, the new predicate being treated like a (black) 
box accessible only by some list of its properties. The chief results of this modal 
analysis have become the new paradigms governing research in formal linguis- 
tic self-reference. These results were, however, not the real breakthroughs-- 
the gestalt shifts; these results were possible because a conceptual change had 
already taken place. 
The conceptual change cannot chronologically be pinpointed with any 
accuracy. There were several modern beginnings and a few precursors, such 
as Montague's (1963) paper. As I do not view the assignation of credit to be 
the task of the historian, I shall simply choose the first published paper nearing 
the modern perspective as a typical enough beginning. 
Angus Macintyre and Harry Simmons are mathematical logicians, not 
philosophical ones. They did not like self-reference in arithmetic. As Simmons 
once confided in me, they could not understand how their friend Donald 
Jensen was able to concoct self-referential formulas which would allow him 
to prove various lemmas. In an article Macintyre and Simmons (1973) set 

The Development of Self-Reference: L6b's Theorem 
123 
about on the task of replacing diagonalization by some one major con- 
sequence thereof. The strongest consequence they could think of was L6b's 
Theorem. 
At the time their paper came out, I recall being of two minds. I liked their 
paper, but I could not find anything about it that I could put my finger 
on and say "This is good; this is what I like." Kreisel's review pinpoints 
the problem: "They disregard the familiar asymmetry between positive and 
negative metamathematical results, and thereby produce a host of terato- 
logical problems." The Macintyre-Simmons paper is a transitional one in 
which a new problem area is being introduced and some concepts are being 
provisionally put forward, but they have not reached their final forms. It was 
only after these concepts crystallized that one could point to this paper and 
say "Macintyre and Simmons accomplished x, y, and z." 
In a serious, thorough-going history of self-reference one would have to go 
into this paper carefully and consider the other origins of the modern subject. 
(I know of three: L6b and de Jongh in Amsterdam, Magari and Sambin in 
Italy, and Boolos and Solovay in the United States. There are others who may 
have been close.) Here, I shall simply state the new framework, then go back 
to say what was accomplished by L6b, Macintyre and Simmons, and others, 
and finally I shall say a little about the new paradigms that ultimately arose 
in this framework. The new framework is, as I have already noted, modal logic. 
The idea is to treat Pr(v) as necessity and use the language and tools of modal 
logic to study Pr(v). 
I assume the reader is familiar with the notation of modal logic. (If he is 
not, the best place I can refer him to for the following discussion is the 
very reasonably priced Self-Reference and Modal Logic (Smoryflski, 1985).) 
If we let the modal box, F1, stand for provability, what are the obvious 
properties of the box? The Derivability Conditions yield the axioms and rules 
of inference: 
DI. A / VIA; 
D2. DA ^ F-](A ~ B)--* V1B; 
D3. I-]A --* I-IDA. 
Diagonalization can be modally formulated, either by the addition of special 
constants or as a rule of inference (cf. Chapter ! of Smoryfiski (1985) for 
details); but, if like Macintyre and Simmons we want to avoid diagonalization, 
the strongest known result was L6b's Theorem, 
LT. [-]A ~ A /A, 
or the Formalized L6b's Theorem, 
FLT. [-I(VqA --, A) ---, [S]A. 
The modal language gives us a great deal. No mean prize it affords us is a 
simple criterion of elegance by means of which we can objectively declare 
L6b's Derivability Conditions to be more elegant than Bernays'. The extra- 

124 
C. Smoryfiski 
modal-propositional character of L6b's reference to the sentence q~ expressing 
Pr(r~o 1) ~ ~, is now not merely inelegant, but it has also become extraneous 
to the point that it will puzzle the modern reader--provided he notices that 
L6b is not merely repeating the construction of q~ for the sake of exposition. 
The modal language also explains clearly what I had only hinted at in the 
beginning of this section in stating how pleasant the proof at the end of Section 
2 of the Formalized L6b's Theorem was: The proof is a purely modal proposi- 
tional deduction. 
What Macintyre and Simmons accomplished, put in these modal terms, 
was a number of things. Working with D1-D3 as the modal axioms and rule 
of inference of a basic modal system, which I shall call BML in accordance 
with Smoryfiski (1985), they showed: 
(1) The schema LT is equivalent to the schema FLT over BML. 
(2) The schema LT is equivalent over BML to the existence of fixed points p 
to Flp ~ A and, moreover, such p is equivalent to F1A ~ A. 
(3) A similar equivalence over BML obtains between FLT and the existence 
of(definable) fixed points p to [--l(p ~ A). 
On an absolute scale, Macintyre and Simmons cannot be said to have accom- 
plished much; on a relative scale, ignoring the disparity of philosophical 
interest and ignoring any considerations of amount of effort, we find more 
here than in L6b's paper, more than Kreisel's proof of L6b's Theorem, even 
more than in G6del's paper! The Macintyre-Simmons paper is a watershed, 
but a skewed one--it lies more heavily on this (i.e., the modern) side of the 
watershed: It is the first paper on self-reference with so much in it and yet 
which is not universally recognized as a milestone, which is "just another 
paper" as it were. It is the last paper that needs to be mentioned because of 
its mere existence; henceforth, all references are selective. 
I have said before that writing history is not sorting out credit. Nor is it 
preparing a chronology. It is, rather, an explanation of a development. Follow- 
ing Macintyre and Simmons, the rest of my story is inevitable: The problems 
were "in the air," there was a great deal of talent out there ..... The net result 
was the following three theorems, which have become the new paradigms. 
Uniqueness Theorem. Let PrL be the extension of BML by the addition of 
FLT. Let, further, A(p) be a formula in which every occurrence of p lies inside 
the scope of a O. Then: 
PrL b [] (p ~ A(p)) ^ [-](q ~ A(q)) ~ D(p ~ q). 
Explicit Definability Theorem. Let p, A(p) be as in the precedin9 result. There 
is a modal formula D possessin9 only those atoms in A other than p and such that 
PrL b D*--~ A(D). 

The Development of Self-Reference: L6b's Theorem 
125 
Completeness Theorem. For any modal A, 
PrL t-- A iff E I- A*, 
.Jor every interpretation * in ~, in which [] is interpreted by Pr~v). 
The first of these generalizes the uniqueness of the G6dei and Henkin 
sentences and, following Macintyre and Simmons, that of the L6b and 
Kreisel sentences. It seems to be the "proper" generalization. The Uniqueness 
Theorem is not particularly difficult: it was independently proven by Claudio 
Bernardi (1976), Dick de Jongh (unpublished, cf. Chapter 2 of Smoryfiski 
(1985), and Giovanni Sambin (1976) by three different methods. Bernardi's 
proof generalizes most easily and will be given in this yet greater generality 
in the next section. 
The Explicit Definability Theorem is due to de Jongh (unpublished, 
cf. Smoryfiski (1979, 1985)) and Sambin (1976) following partial results of 
Bernardi (1975) and Smoryfiski (1979). The ultimate proofs of de Jongh and 
Sambin are rather more similar than different and again generalize nicely. 
There are now other proofs, but these do not generalize [or, better: have not 
done so yet). The full proof (in generality) can be found in Smoryfiski (1985); 
I shall not present it here as it would take too much space. However, I do note 
that it is an induction in which L6b's Theorem is applied during the basis step. 
The Completeness Theorem is most interesting. It is the deepest of the three 
results, a fact testified to by knowledge of the proofs as well as such external 
indicators as the fact that it was proven solely by Robert M. Solovay even 
though it was known as an open problem by all the other researchers. In 
richness of consequence, as well as depth of proof, Solovay's Theorem is 
again the deepest of the three results--cf. Chapter 3 of Smoryfiski (1985) for 
details. 
Solovay's Theorem is more of meta-historic importance to us. It offers a 
mathematical explanation of why, for example, Macintyre and Simmons 
could not find anything stronger than L6b's Theorem in their attempt to 
replace diagonalization: In the restricted modal language under consideration, 
there is nothing stronger. In a sense, Solovay's Theorem completes a chapter 
in the history of self-reference. 
4. The Modern Period, 11: A Generalization of LOb's Theorem 
As one chapter ends, another usually begins. Modern work on self-reference 
in arithmetic has primarily been in pursuit of analogues to the three para- 
digms. Franco Montagna has, for example, investigated the "Feferman 
predicate" of Feferman ( ! 960) in one paper (Montagna, 1978) and the broader 
context of quantified modal logic for the familiar predicate Prtt,) in another 
paper (Montagna, 1984). In the latter paper, for example, he showed that the 

126 
C. Smoryflski 
Uniqueness Theorem generalized, and that the Explicit Definability Theorem 
failed modally, but so did Completeness (relative to the obvious axioms). In 
a sequel, Smoryfiski (1987) completed the second task by showing that the 
Explicit Definability Theorem also failed arithmetically. 
The new programmes can be described thus: Let p(v) be a new predicate 
and consider either a modal logic with [] denoting p or with a new operator 
V denoting p and [] still denoting Pr; or generalize the language in some 
other way. Determine whether or not fixed points are unique in this language. 
Find explicit definitions of the fixed points where possible. Find a complete 
axiomatization. 
The difference between, say, the counterexamples of Montagna and 
Smoryfiski on the one hand and those of Kreisel and Takeuti on the other is 
this new set of paradigms. The new counterexamples are derived with an eye 
to the general theory and are stated less anecdotaily. (Of course, old counter- 
examples can be looked at anew.) Another difference is that the paradigms are 
general positive results to aim at and greater success may now be possible--as 
one sees by contrasting Montagna's generalized Uniqueness Theorem to 
Kreisel and Takeuti's isolated uniqueness result for GSdel sentences. 
Because of their close connection with LSb's Theorem, I wish in this section 
to discuss the currently strongest generalizations of the Uniqueness and 
Explicit Definability Theorems. These are my own results, but they merit 
discussion nonetheless and, moreover, they are not so deep that I will be in 
danger of appearing to show off. 
The Uniqueness Theorem tells us that a lot of self-referential sentences are 
unique (up to provable equivalence): If p(o) is an arithmetical instance of a 
modal formula, and if 
Z I- (01 "---* ,o(r(01 ]), 
Z I- q~z *-~ p(r~02]), 
then 
Y. t-tpl ~-~, ~02. 
How many more p's does this hold for? It turns out that a simple property of 
p is all that is needed to apply Bernardi's proof (slightly simplified!) to obtain 
the uniqueness of the fixed point for p. 
Definition. A formula p(v), with only v free, is substitutable iff, for all sentences 
~0,~, 
5:- I- pr(r(o ~ 
I//]) --* p(rq~]) ,_~ p(r~]). 
Two weaker conditions worth mentioning in passing are extensionality and 
provable extensionality. 
Definitions. A formula p(v), with only v free, is extensional iff, for all sentences 
~0,~, 
I- ~0 *-~ I~ =~Y- I- p(rfp])*---* p(r~]). 

The Development of Self-Reference: L6b's Theorem 
127 
p is provably extensional iff, for all sentences ~0, ~, 
E ~- pr(rt# ,,-* ~b ') --* pr(rp(rq~ 1) ,,_, p(r~bl)l). 
For a El-sound theory E, provable extensionality implies extensionality. 
Moreover, by D3, substitutability implies provable extensionality. We will 
prove in a moment that the Uniqueness Theorem holds if p is substitutable. 
It does not hold for general extensional or provably extensional formulas. For 
example, Albert Visser has observed that Feferman's predicate is provably 
extensional yet has inequivalent fixed points. (Here, one might ask, & la Kreisel 
and Takeuti (or, indeed: & la Henkin), about literal fixed points, i.e., are 
sentences expressing their provabilities with respect to Feferman's predicate 
provably equivalent?) 
Generalized Uniqueness Theorem. Let p(v) be substitutable. Let q~, ~ be sen- 
tences satisfyiny 
E Fq~p('@), 
E I-@ ~p('@"). 
Then E ~- ~o ~ g,. 
Proof. This is a straightforward adaptation of Bernardi's proof of the 
Uniqueness Theorem for A(p) in PrL. To illustrate the modal-propositional 
nature of the proof, I will carry out the proof in a modal system I call SR- 
(from self-reference). SR- is obtained by adding to PrL a new modal operator 
V and an axiom schema asserting its substitutability, 
S . [q ( A ~-~ B ) -, . V A .--, V B. 
We want to show: 
SR- FI-q(p,--,Vp) A [Z](q,-+ Vq)---, Fl(p~-~q). 
Observe, 
SR- ~-F-l(p~-,q)~.Vp,-,Vq, 
byS 
t- 
[] 9 
--. [--l(Vp,--. Vq) 
t- 
I-](p4--~Vp) ^ [~(q+-~Vq) 
-~ [[3 M(p,--,q) --, [S](p ~--~ q)-I 
(*) 
I- 
[](p~-~Vp) A [S](q~--~Vq) 
--* [] [ [-] [-] ( p ~-~ q ) ~ V-](p ~-'~ q)] 
1- 
[](p~-~ Vp) A [--](q~--* Vq)~ 
[] I--](p*--'q), 
by FLT, whence 
SR- I-Fl(p,--, Vp) A [--](q,--, Vq)-. [-](p~--,q), 
by(*), 
where the unexplained steps are derived by applications of D1-D3. 
[] 

128 
C. Smoryfiski 
One can similarly derive a generalization to fixed points to A(p) for p lying 
only in the scopes of []'s and V's in A. The crucial point is the substitutability 
of A(p), which follows from the appropriate modal substitution lemma for 
SR-. 
As for the question of the Explicit Definability of fixed points, I have shown 
(Smoryfiski, 1987) that the substitutability of p is not enough to guarantee the 
explicit definability (in the appropriate language) of any fixed point 
E I- r ~ p(r(pl). 
However, if one assumes p to be E 1 , the Explicit Definability Theorem holds 
for all appropriate formulas constructed from Pr(v) and p(v). In modal terms, 
one extends SR- to a modal theory SR by an axiom asserting p to have the 
one statable property of E 1 -formulas: demonstrable completeness, 
DC. VA ~ [--IVA. 
Then one can prove: 
Generalized Explicit Definability Theorem. Let A(p) be a formula of the 
language of SR in which every occurrence of p lies in the scope of a modal 
operator [] or V. There is a sentence D possessing only those atoms of A other 
than p and such that 
SR t-- D ,--, A(D). 
A proof of this can be found in Chapter 4 of Smoryfiski (1985). The key to 
the proof is a generalization to V of an extension for [] of L6b's Theorem 
due to Sambin (1974). The proof of this generalization is an easy adaptation 
of Sambin's proof, which is a nice modal application of FLT. I am tempted 
to give this proof. Instead, let us look at the following, which can be used 
as a lemma in an alternate proof of the Generalized Explicit Definability 
Theorem: 
Generalized Formalized Liib's Theorem. For any sentence A of the language 
of SR, 
SR I-V(VA ~ A)~--,VA. 
Modally, this is proved as a second application of the jtist cited generaliza- 
tion of Sambin's result. As I said, I shall not give this latter proof, whence I 
shall not give the modal proof of the Generalized Formal L6b's Theorem. 
Instead, for reasons that will be clear, I will give an arithmetic proof of the 
arithmetic formulation of this theorem. 
Proof of the Arithmetic Version. Let p(v) be a substitutable E l-formula, let ~, 
be given and define <p so that 
E I- (p ~-,. p(rcp --,, ~1). 
(I) 

The Development of Self-Reference: L6b's Theorem 
129 
(p is an analogue to Kreisel's fixed point. Given my earlier remark that 
Kreisei's fixed point is marginally better for proving the Formalized L6b's 
Theorem and given that we wish to prove a generalization of the Formalized 
Theorem, 
T. I-p(rp(rVj ') ~ ~1),--, p(' VD), 
(the unformalized version, 
z k p(rr ~) --, 4,, = z ~-p(~r 
Js not valid in this generality), the choice of fixed point is obvious. (Indeed, I 
have been unable to obtain the result using an analogue to L6b's fixed point. 
Perhaps Kreisel's remark, cited in Section 2 above, that his fixed point gives 
a more general proof than L6b's has something to it after all.) 
We will prove the theorem by showing 
For, then one has 
Since (p is E t, 
But D1-D2 yield 
by (4), 
E be ,_, p(r@ i). 
(2) 
Conversely, 
T. F-(p ~ VJ.,-,. p(r@ I) --, VJ 
l_Pr(rq~ _., @.,_,.plr@1)__, @i), by DI 
l_(p,_~p(rp(r~).__, @i), by substitutability 
F p(r@")*-, p(r p(r@ ~) --* ~), 
by (2). 
E b(p -~ pr(r(pl). 
T_. k pr(r(P 1) ~ pr(r((p --, ~) ~ ~1) 
I- pr(rq~ 1) ~. p(rr --* ~,1) 6-, p(rvjl ) 
k pr(r ~p~) ~ . (p ,-~ p(~ ~ ~), 
by(l) 
h (p -*. (p *-~ p(r@l), 
by (3) 
H r ~ p(r~l). 
T. I-p(r@l) --, pr(rp(r@l)l), 
since p is ]E 1 
F pr(rp(rVJl) --* q~l) ^ p(r@l) ~ pr(r(pl), 
by D2 
l_ Pr(, p(.@1) ._, q)1) ^ p(r@1)__, [(p,_., p(r@1)], 
k" Pr(' p(r ~ 1) ---* (p i) ~. p(r@l) __, (p 
bp(~@l) __, (p, 
by L6b's Theorem. 
(3) 
(4) 
[] 

130 
C. Smoryfiski 
As for the third paradigm--a completeness theorem, nothing should be 
expected for SR- or SR: These modal systems are attempts to analyze specific 
proofs, not predicates. However, one can specialize the interpretation of V to 
a fixed p, ask what additional axioms are needed, and attempt a completeness 
theorem for the resulting system. The nicest positive result in this direction is 
Carlson's Theorem (Carlson, 1985). Other examples can be found in Chapter 
4 of Smoryfiski (1985). 
5. Concluding Remarks 
Solovay's Completeness Theorem could not have been proven in the 1950s. 
Its proof, which I have not discussed here, uses Kripke models for modal logic, 
which models first came on the scene the following decade and spent another 
decade or so being developed. The other work reported on, however, does 
not mathematically go beyond the mid-1950s. Except for the notion of a 
El-formula, a concept which crystallized somewhat later, and which could 
even have been replaced by the (more general) proof-generated concept of a 
demonstrably complete formula, no new notions were needed. What was 
missing was the right choice of concepts to emphasize, along with a more 
playful spirit which would have led more quickly to the observations of 
Macintyre and Simmons, thence, perhaps, to the two new paradigms of 
Uniqueness and Explicit Definability of many fixed points. 
I do not wish to overstate the case. These new paradigms are not the only 
directions to be followed in studying self-reference; they (and one other, 
unrelated to L6b's Theorem) are merely the currently most successful for 
our goal of understanding linguistic self-reference--even Solovay's Theorem, 
which at first sight is not clearly related to self-reference per se. There are other 
developments that seem promising; however, these are not related to L6b's 
Theorem to which I wish in this paper to narrow our attention. 
There are also some mini-developments related to L6b's Theorem that may 
merit consideration. Foremost among these is a "new" proof of L6b's Theorem 
which first became well known in the latter half of the 1970s, but which had 
been known for several years by a number of people. The earliest discovery 
of it that I know of was by Saul Kripke who hit upon it in 1967 and showed 
it to a number of people at the UCLA Set Theory Meeting that year. It is 
very pleasant: Suppose by way of contraposition that E b ~ ~,. Then E + ~, is 
consistent and, by G6del's Second Incompleteness Theorem, 
Z + ~qJ ~Con(E + ~O) 
~- ~Pr(rlq -*0 = 11), by definition of Con 
whence 
7Pr(r~bl), 
by DI, D2, 
Y b L 
--, ~pr(r~b ~) 
pr(r~b 1) ~ ~. 

The Development of Self-Reference: L6b's Theorem 
131 
Once this new proof came to be widely known, it was widely over- 
emphasized. Solovay (1976) named the modal system PrL "G" after G6del, 
Boolos (1979) named his book on this modal logic based on L6b's Derivability 
Conditions (which he, like others, confused with Bernays') and L6b's Theorem 
after G6del's Second Incompleteness Theorem, and moderate compromisers 
still call the logic GL for G6del L6b. No doubt this is done because of the 
glory attached to G6dei's name; it is not caused by any influence the Second 
Incompleteness Theorem had on the development of the subject and, as 
historians, we should be aware of this: Kripke's discovery of the proof was 
back in 1967, but by the time this proof became well known the new paradigms 
had already been discovered. This may be a bit of luck: Knowledge of this 
proof might have made G6dei's Second Incompleteness Theorem the para- 
digm and it might have taken longer for a Macintyre and Simmons to come 
along .... In this regard, note that Kreisel's preferred fixed point 
satisfies 
Z l- q9 ~ pr(rq9 --+ q,,1) 
i.e., 
is a G6del sentence for Z + ~b, and we are left, ft. ia Kreisei and Takeuti, 
with a too narrow self-referential paradigm. (One good thing: ,~o does not 
literally express its unprovability from ~g,). 
But, if I complain of the over-invocation of G6del's name in the modern 
work, this must be a minor complaint: After performing the sacred rite of 
reverence, perhaps crediting L6b's Theorem to G6del or perhaps not, the 
modern researchers then go on their merry ways as if they had never heard 
of the Second Incompleteness Theorem or the paradoxes. They have looked 
to proof theory and universal algebra for non-self-referential paradigms for 
research in PrL. In short, a small, but healthy, development is in progress. 
We no longer see, as we did with L6b's sticking to a sentence ~0 expressing 
pr(r~01) ~ ~ or with the textbook writers' failure to mention the Diagonaliza- 
tion Lemma, a turning of one's back on the obvious. Of course, this may be 
short-lived: As one wedded to the modal programme, which, as I have said 
but not convincingly indicated above, has begun to show some real progress, 
I find it hard to appreciate anything that does not fit my perspective--the 
usual complaint of maturity. For example, in G6del, Escher and Bach, Douglas 
Hofstadter (1979) asked about explicit Henkin sentences, i.e., sentences which 
not only assert their own provability, but also provide what they consider to 
be proofs. He noted that, since 
Z k-0 = 1~-~ Prov(0, r0 = 11), 
0 = 1 is a refutable explicit Henkin sentence and asked if there were any 
provable explicit Henkin sentences, i.e., pairs r t such that 
Z ~- ~o ,--, Prov(t, r(f) 

132 
C. Smoryfiski 
with E I-~0. Soiovay (1985) answered this affirmatively. This is appealing, but 
I cannot say why and I thus ignored the result in my book (Smoryfiski, 1985). 
Do I get to say, along with one world leader, "History will absolve me," or 
will I qualify as an obscure indication that in 1985 the new concepts had not 
yet been universally recognized? 
References 
Van Bentham, J. (1978), Four paradoxes, J. Philos. Looic 7, 49-72. 
Bernardi, C. (1975), The fixed point theorem for diagonalizable algebras, Studia Logica 
34, 239-251. 
Bernardi, C. (1976), The uniqueness of the fixed point in every diagonalizable algebra, 
Studia Logica 35, 335-343. 
Boolos, G. (1979), The Unprovability of Consistency, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 
Carlson, T. (1985), Modal logics with several operators and provability interpretations, 
Israel J. Math., to appear. 
Feferman, S. (1960), Arithmetization of metamathematics in a general setting, Fund. 
Math. 49, 35-92. 
Friedman, H. McAIoon, K. and Simpson, S. (1982), A finite combinatorial principle 
which is equivalent to the l-consistency of predicative analysis, in G. Metakides 
(ed.), Patras Logic Symposion, North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
G6del, K. (1931), 16ber formal unentscheidbare S/itze der Principia Mathematica und 
verwandter Systeme I, Monatsh. Math. Phys. 38, 173-198. 
Henkin L. (1952), Problem, J. Symbolic Logic 17, 160. 
Hilbert, D. and Bernays, P. (1939), Grundlagen der Mathematik II, Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin. 
Hofstadter, D. (1979), Gfdel, Escher and Bach, Harvester Press, Sussex, UK. 
Kreisel, G. (1953), On a problem of Henkin's, Proc. Netherlands Acad. Sci. 56, 405 406. 
Kreisel, G. (1965), Mathematical logic, in T.L. Saaty (ed.), Lectures on Modern Mathe- 
matics lIl, Wiley, New York. 
Kreisel, G. (1968), Notes concerning the elements of proof theory, Lecture Notes, 
UCLA. 
Kreisel, G. Review of Macintyre and Simmons (1973), Zentralblatt 288.02018. 
Kreisel, G. and Takeuti, G. (1974), Formally self-referential propositions for cut-free 
classical analysis and related systems, Diss. Math. ll8. 
L6b, M.H. (1954), Solution of a problem by Leon Henkin, Proc. of the ICM 1954 II, 
405-406, North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
L6b, M.H. (1955), Solution of a problem of Leon Henkin, J. Symbolic Logic 20, 
115-118. 
Macintyre, A. and Simmons, H. (1973), G6del's diagonalization technique and related 
properties of theories, Colloq. Math. 28, 165-180. 
Montagna, F. (1978), On the algebraization of a Feferman's predicate, Studia Logica 
37, 221-236. 
Montagna, F. (1984), The modal logic of provability, Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 25, 
179-189. 
M ontague, R. (1963), Syntactical treatments of modality, with corollaries on reflexion 
principles and finite axiomatizability, Acta Phil. Fennica 16, 153-167. 

The Development of Self-Reference: L6b's Theorem 
133 
Sambin, G. (1974), Un estensione del theorema di L6b, Rend. Sem. Mat. Univ. Padova 
52, 193 199. 
Sambin, G. (1976), An effective fixed-point theorem in intuitionistic diagonalizable 
algebras, Studia Logica 35, 345-361. 
Simpson, S. (1983), Review of Paris, J. Symbolic Logic 48, 482 483. 
Smoryfiski, C. (1979), Calculating self-referential statements I: explicit calculations, 
Studia Logica 38, 17-36. 
Smoryfiski, C. (1981a), Review of Boolos (1979), J. Symbolic Logic 46, 871-873. 
Smoryfiski, C. (I 981 b), Fifty years of self-reference in arithmetic, Notre Dame J. Formal 
Logic 22, 357-374. 
Smoryfiski, C. (1985), Self-Reference and Modal Logic, Springer-Verlag, New York. 
Smoryfiski, C. (1987), Quantified modal logic and self-reference, Notre Dame J. Formal 
Logic 28, 356-370. 
Solovay, R.M. (1976), Provability interpretations of modal logic, Israel J. Math. 25, 
287-304. 
Solovay, R.M. (1985), Explicit Henkin sentences, J. Symbolic Logic .SO, 91-93. 

The Unintended Interpretations of 
Intuitionistic Logic 
Wim Ruitenburg 
Abstract. We present an overview of the unintended interpretations of intuitionistic logic 
that arose after Heyting formalized the "observed regularities" in the use of formal parts 
of language, in particular, first-order logic and Heyting Arithmetic. We include unintended 
interpretations of some mild variations on "official" intuitionism, such as intuitionistic 
type theories with full comprehension and higher order logic without choice principles or 
not satisfying the right choice sequence properties. We conclude with remarks on the quest 
for a correct interpretation of intuitionistic logic. 
1. The Origins of Intuitionistic Logic 
Intuitionism was more than 20 years old before A. Heyting produced the first 
complete axiomatizations for intuitionistic propositional and predicate logic: 
according to L.E.J. Brouwer, the founder of intuitionism, logic is secondary 
to mathematics. Some of Brouwer's papers even suggest that formalization 
cannot be useful to intuitionism. One may wonder, then, whether intuitionistic 
logic should itself be regarded as an unintended interpretation of intuitionistic 
mathematics. 
I will not discuss Brouwer's ideas in detail (on this, see Brouwer (1975) and 
Heyting (1934, 1956)), but some aspects of his philosophy need to be high- 
lighted here. According to Brouwer mathematics is an activity of the human 
mind, a product oflanguageless thought. One cannot be certain that language 
is a prefect reflection of this mental activity. This makes language an uncertain 
medium (see van Stigt (1982) for more details on Brouwer's ideas about 
language). 
In "De onbetrouwbaarheid der logische principes" ((Brouwer, 1981, 
pp. 253 259); for English translations of Brouwer's work on intuitionism, see 
Brouwer (1975)) Brouwer argues that logical principles should not guide but 
describe regularities that are observed in mathematical practice. The Principle 
of Excluded Third, A v 7 A, is an example of a logical principle that has 
become a guide for mathematical practice instead of simply describing it: the 
Principle of Excluded Third is observed in verifiable "finite" situations and 

The Unintended Interpretations of Intuitionistic Logic 
135 
generalized to a rule of mathematics. But according to Brouwer mathematics 
is not an experimental science, in which one only has to repeat an experiment 
sufficiently often to establish a law, so the Principle of Excluded Third should 
be discarded. 
All his life Brouwer avoided the use of a formal language or logic, perhaps 
because of its unreliability, perhaps because of his personal style (see Brouwer 
(1981a, p. xi)). This does not imply that he did not believe in the possibility of 
a useful place for logic in intuitionistic mathematics, but rather that Brouwer 
would not himself resort to a formal language. This attitude was detrimental 
to the development of intuitionistic logic: it was not until 1923 that Brouwer 
discovered the equivalence in intuitionistic mathematics of triple negation and 
single negation (Brouwer, 1925). 
While Brouwer may have been uncompromising with respect to his 
philosophy, his mathematical and philosophical talent was understood and 
appreciated by his thesis adviser D.J. Korteweg. In 1908 Korteweg advised 
Brouwer, after Brouwer completed his thesis, to devote some time to "proper" 
mathematics, as opposed to foundations, so as to earn recognition and become 
eligible for a university position. This initiated Brouwer's brief career as a 
topologist. Between 1909 and his appointment as Professor at the University 
of Amsterdam in 1912 Brouwer developed the technique of triangulation, 
showed the invariance of dimension, and proved his fixed-point theorem 
(Brouwer, 1975a, b). 
Brouwer's ideas about language did not prevent others from considering 
formalizations of parts of intuitionism. A.N. Koimogorov (1925) gave an 
incomplete description of first-order predicate logic. Of particular interest is 
his description of the double negation translation. Although this is sketchy in 
some parts, it is fair to say that Kolmogorov anticipated G6del's translation 
from classical to intuitionistic formal systems (~4, G6del, 1933). V. Giivenko 
(1928) described a fragment of intuitionistic propositional logic in order to 
establish the double negation of the Principle of Excluded Third. This was in 
reply to M. Barzin and A. Errera's 1927 paper, in which they attempted to 
prove Brouwer's mathematics inconsistent. Glivenko's 1929 paper appeared 
after he had seen Heyting's formalization of intuitionistic logic. In this paper 
Glivenko showed that the double negation of each classically derivable 
propositional statement is intuitionistically derivable. This result cannot be 
extended to first-order logic, as ~VxIP(x) v 
,P(x)) cannot be contradicted in 
intuitionistic logic for unary atomic predicates P. 
It took someone other than Brouwer to provide the first complete 
axiomatization of first-order intuitionistic logic. Heyting, a former student of 
Brouwer, wrote his Ph.D. thesis in 1925 on an intuitionistic axiomatization 
of projective geometry, the first substantial contribution to the intuitionistic 
program not from Brouwer himself (Troelstra, 1981). In 1927 the Dutch 
Mathematical Society published a prize question that included the quest 
for a formalization of intuitionistic mathematics. Heyting wrote an essay 

! 36 
Wim Ruitenburg 
on the topic, for which he was awarded the prize in 1928. An expanded 
version appeared in Heyting (1930a, b, c). It included an axiomatization of 
intuitionistic first-order logic (using a version of equality between partial 
terms, thereby foreshadowing the existence predicate of D.S. Scott (1979)); 
Heyting Arithmetic, HA (the intuitionistic equivalent of Peano Arithmetic, 
PA); and analysis (the theory ofchoice sequences), though this last axiomatiza- 
tion was not complete. 
In modern notation, using sequents, Heyting's axiomatization of intuitio- 
nistic predicate logic can be stated as follows. There are three logical axiom 
schemas and two axiom schemas for equality. The closure rules are: a thin 
horizontal line means that if the sequents above the line hold, then so do the 
ones below the line; a fat line means the same as a thin line, but in either 
direction. 
AI-A 
At-B 
Bt-C 
APC 
At-T 
s 
A~-B 
AF-C 
B~-A 
CI-A 
APBAC 
AABt-C 
B v Ct-A 
A~-B--*C 
A I-Bx 
- - t  
A ~-Bt 
A t-Bx 
Bx t-A 
A hVxBx 
3xBx ~-A 
TPx=x 
x = yhAx ~ Ay * 
In case t the variable x is not free in A and the term t does not contain a 
variable bound by a quantifier orB; in cases ~ the variable x is not free in A; 
and in case 9 the variable y is not bound by a quantifier of A. 
Let F be a set of formulas, sequents, and rules and let ~r be a formula. We 
write F I- ~r, F proves tr, if there exists a finite subset A ___ F u { T } such that 
/~6~ a 6 I- tr is a sequent derivable from the system above plus the sequents and 
rules ofF. We use t-tr as an abbreviation for -1- ~-a, ,tr as an abbreviation for 
a ~ 1, and tr ~ r as an abbreviation for (tr ---, r) ^ (r ~ a). If we add the axiom 
schema I-A v -,A to the system above of intuitionistic logic, we obtain an 
axiomatization for classical first-order logic. 
In the language of HA we have the usual binary function symbols + and 
9 , the unary function symbol S, and the constant symbol 0. The axiom system 

The Unintended Interpretations of lntuitionistic Logic 
137 
of HA has the following nonlogical axiom schemas and rule: 
Sx = Ot-_l_, 
Sx = Sy~-x = y, 
I-x+O=x, 
~-x + Sy = S(x + y), 
I-x.O = O, 
t- x" Sy = (x" y) + x, 
A (x) b A (Sx) 
A (0) I- A (x) ' 
where x is not free in A(O) in the rule above. The system HA is strong enough 
to prove essentially all number-theoretic results we find in any text on number 
theory. The main exceptions involve theorems related to incompleteness 
proofs of PA and statements that are true in PA only because of their logical 
form, like t-co v ~co for some undecidable statement co. In fact, if HA t-a v r, 
then HA ~- a or HA I- z. Similarly, if HA t- 3xax, then HA [- am for some natural 
number m. 
The systems of classical mathematics and intuitionistic mathematics 
diverge more noticeably when we consider the theory of real numbers or 
abstract mathematics. 
In a letter to O. Becker in 1933, Heyting described how he came to his 
axiomatization essentially by going through the axioms and rules of the 
Principia Mathematica (Whitehead and Russell, 1925) and making a new 
system of axioms and rules out of the acceptable axioms. (The papers by 
Troeistra (1978, 1981) discuss in more detail the period around the formaliza- 
tion of intuitionistic logic./ 
Like Brouwer, Heyting considered logic with mixed feelings. Heyting feared 
that his formalization would divert attention from the underlying issues (see 
Heyting 11930a, b, c), or the discussion of these papers by A.S. Troeistra (1978, 
1981)). Later he even expressed disappointment in that his papers Heyting 
(1930a, b, c), had distracted the attention from the underlying ideas to the 
formal systems themselves. Those papers, then, do not represent a divergence 
between Heyting's ideas and Brouwer's. On the contrary, Brouwer clearly 
appreciated Heyting's contributions to clarify intuitionism (Troelstra, 1978). 
Alongside intuitionism other schools of constructive mathematics deve- 
loped. Most well known among these are finitism (Hilbert and Bernays, 1934), 
Markov (recursive) constructivism (Sanin, 1958; Markov, 1962), and Bishop's 
constructivism (Bishop, 1967). A discussion of these can be found in Troelstra 
(1977). Here it suffices to note that all these constructive schools settled on 
the same first-order logic, by means of different philosophies. Most of the 
essential differences involve second- or higher-order mathematical questions. 

138 
Wim Ruitenburg 
Differences also occur at the level of arithmetic; in particular, the Markov 
school allows the so-called Markov Principle to extend HA: 
Vn(An v 7An) ^ 773nAn ~-3nAn, 
where A is a formula of arithmetic. The corresponding rule is weaker and 
already holds in HA: 
HA ~-Vn(An v ~An) ^ 773nAn 
HA 1- 3nAn 
2. Interpretations for Propositional Logic 
The main impact of Heyting's formalization of intuitionistic logic was its 
availability to a much wider audience of mathematicians and logicians. For 
the first time nonintuitionists could get a hold on intuitionism. This brought 
some vital intellectual blood into the development ofintuitionism; before 1940 
there were very few intuitionists, even in the Netherlands (Troelstra, 1981). 
Now nonintuitionists began to take steps to relate intuitionistic logic with 
other concepts, in particular, the theory of recursive functions and model 
theory. An early example of this is G6dei (1932) (see G6dei (1986) for all early 
work of G6del). In this paper G6del essentially constructed a countable 
properly descending sequence of logics T~ between intuitionistic propositional 
calculus and the classical propositional calculus such that each T~ is valid on 
just those linearly ordered Heyting algebras of length at most i + 1. 
The first completeness theorem for the intuitionistic propositional calculus 
came from M.H. Stone (1937) and A. Tarski (1938) in 1937-38. They 
discovered that topological spaces form a complete set of models for the 
intuitionistic propositional calculus in the same way that Boolean spaces do 
for the classical propositional calculus: the completeness theorem for the 
classical propositional calculus based on Boolean spaces X works by assign- 
ing to each atom a clopen (closed and open) subset of X and by interpreting 
disjunction, conjunction, and negation as set-theoretic union, intersection, 
and relative complement. For intuitionistic propositional logic Stone and 
Tarski obtained a completeness theorem for topological spaces by assigning 
open sets to atoms and by interpreting disjunction, conjunction, and implica- 
tion as in the classical case, except that when a resulting set was not open, it 
had to be replaced by its interior. See the remarks below on the relationship 
of this interpretation to an interpretation for $4. 
The significance of Tarski and Stone's interpretation (geometrization of 
logic) is clear from our current perspective. It was too early for further 
development, however, as category theory did not appear until the 1940s, and 
sheaf theory had to wait nearly until the 1950s. 
G6del (1933b)embedded intuitionistic propositional logic into Lewis's 
modal propositional logic $4. The system $4 is a propositional logic with a 

The Unintended Interpretations of lntuitionistic Logic 
139 
modal operator, V1. For the logical constants q- and  and the logical 
operators ^, v, -~, and -1 we take the rules and axioms of classical proposi- 
tional logic. The modal operator [-], "provable," satisfies all substitution 
instances of the axioms 
[~A b A, 
and the rule 
VI(A--, B) F[]A ~ fiB, 
F-IA ~ [-IF-IA, 
I--A 
~-[3A' 
In G6del (1933b) we actually find two closely related translations. One of 
G6del's embeddings A ~ A' is equivalent to the following inductively defined 
translation: 
Y'= i--iT; 
_1_'= [q _l_; 
p' = I--lp, 
p an atom; 
(A ^ B)'= D(A' ^ B'); 
(A v B)'= [](A' v B'); 
and 
(A --, B)' = [](A' --, B'). 
We can easily show that some of the [--I's in the translation above are 
redundant; $4 I-A' ~--~ F-I(A'). For this interpretation 
I-tr 
if and only if $4 b a'. 
G6del proved only one direction: if tr holds intuitionistically, then its trans- 
lation tr' holds in $4. The reverse implication was established by J.C.C. 
McKinsey and A. Tarski (1948). 
A topological model for $4 consists of a set X provided with a topology. 
We assign a subset ~P]] _~ X to each atom P and extend the interpretation 
inductively to all propositions of the language by defining 
~T~ = 
~ 
= 
~ ^ B~ = 
~A ~ B~ = 
,A~ = 
~a -~ B~ = 
~I--]A~ = 
X; 
I[A~ r 
where c stands for complement; 
~A~ c u [[B~; 
and 
lnt~-A~, 
where Int stands for interior. 

140 
Wim Ruitenburg 
Using G6ders interpretation of intuitionistic logic into $4, we obtain the 
Stone-Tarski interpretation for intuitionistic logic: a topological model for 
intuitionistic propositional logic consists of a set X provided with a topology. 
We assign an open subset [[PH ~- X to each atom P. The interpretation is 
extended inductively to all propositions of the language by defining 
= x; 
= 
IrA ^ B]] = ~A]] n ~B~; 
[[A v B]] = ~A~ w ~B~; 
D~A~ = Int(l[A]]C); and 
[[A -* B] = Int([[A]] c u ~B~). 
We write (X, I[']]) ~ ~0 if ~q~]] = X. The completeness theorem is: for all sets of 
propositions F u {q~}, 
F F ~o r for all (S, ~.~), if(X, [[- ]]) ~, for all 7 e F, then (S, n"~) r 
Several mild variations on the equivalence between $4 and G6del's transla- 
tion have been discovered since 1933. There is, however, another modal logic 
of note, which is based on the provability operator in PA. This system, called 
G, was discovered by R.M. Solovay (1976) to be sufficient to characterize a 
certain form of provability in PA. The system G distinguishes itself from $4 
by having all substitution instances of the axioms 
I--I(A --+ B) I-- f--lA --+ FIB, 
I-]([S]A --+ A) I- 9 
(L6b's rule), 
and the rule 
bA 
FDA 
for the modal operator D. The axiom schema [-IA b U]U]A is derivable in G. 
Note that $4 and G are relatively inconsistent. 
The formulas of the modal language of G can be embedded into the 
language of number theory as follows. Let Prov(ra]) be the proof predicate of 
PA. Each map (I) that maps the atoms p of the modal language to sentences 
(1)p of the language of PA can be extended to a map of all formulas 
by induction: ~T = T, OL = J_, tl)(A o B) = ~A o ~B for o ~ { ^, v, ~}, 
9 , A = ~A, and ~([]A) = Prov(r@A]). Then Solovay's result says 
GI-tr 
if and only if PAI-~a 
for allO. 
In 1978 R. Goldblatt (1978) showed how to interpret intuitionistic proposi- 
tional logic in G. Combine the translation A ~ A' with the translation A ~ A ~ 
from the modal language to itself, defined inductively by pO = p, To = T, 

The Unintended Interpretations of lntuitionistic Logic 
141 
A_";' = _L,(A o B) ~ = A c~ o Be' for o 6 { ^, v, --*},(,A) ~ = ,A~ 
5 = 
A ~ A WI(A~). Goldblatt's result can then be stated as 
Fa 
if and only if 
GF(a') r 
In his paper Goldblatt mentioned an earlier proof by A. Kuznetsov and 
A. Muzavitski. 
Combining the results of Solovay and Goldblatt, we obtain 
Fa 
ifand only if 
PA b(1)((a') ~) 
for all (I). 
Most interpretations for propositional calculus were also extended to 
first-order logic interpretations (see w 
3. Realizability 
By the early 1930s there were two theories that dealt with the notion of 
constructive process: intuitionism and recursion theory. 
In 1931 Heyting developed the proof-interpretation that accompanies his 
formalization of intuitionism. In Heyting (1934) we find both Heyting's inter- 
pretation and Koimogorov's problem-interpretation of 1932, while in Hiibert 
and Bernays (1934) the concept of"incomplete communication" of a construc- 
tive statement is discussed. Brouwer himself was vague about the interpreta- 
tion of the logical operators. 
On the other hand, the notion of a recursive function was, by Church's 
thesis (1936), considered to be equivalent to that of an effectively computable 
function. 
S.C. Kleene was the first to seriously consider the possibility of a more 
precise connection between the two, in particular, between HA and recursive 
function theory (Kleene, 1973). When an intuitionist claims 3nan there should 
be an effective process p to find n. When an intuitionist claims Vm3na(m, n) 
there must be a construction p such that for all numbers m, pm is an effective 
process for finding an n such that a(m, n). Kleene conjectured in 1940 that this 
p should embrace the existence of a recursive function f such that a(m, fin) 
holds for all m. This was not at all obvious at the time (Kleene, 1973). 
In Hilbert and Bernays (1934) it was expounded that an intuitionistic 
statement like 3morn is an incomplete communication of a more involved 
statement giving m such that am. In the same way a statement like o v r is an 
incomplete communication of a more involved statement either establishing 
a or establishing r. Kleene's idea was to somehow add this missing information 
to statements so that when he arrived at expressions like Vm3na(m, n) the 
added information would include the requested recursive function. Since 
formulas in HA are defined inductively by complexity, adding the missing 
information would have to be done by induction on the complexity of for- 
mulas. In early 1941 Kleene finally succeeded in bringing this idea to fruition, 
finding a version of it which encoded the missing information in natural 
numbers: number realizability (Kleene, 1945). 

142 
Wim Ruitenburg 
In number realizability missing information, encoded in numbers, is added 
in such a way that a formula a is realizable by a number e, written era, if it is 
derivable in HA. The intended meaning of era is that the number e encodes 
information "missing" from the communication that the formula a is true 
intuitionistically. It is defined by induction on the complexity of formulas of 
the language of HA. This notion of realizability did not follow Heyting's 
proof-interpretation (Heyting, 1934, w 
which indicated a certain liberty in 
defining variations and extensions of realizability, a fact already employed in 
Kieene (1945). 
According to the proof-interpretation an implication a ~ z is established 
only if we provide a construction C that converts a proof of a into a proof of 
z. The Hilbert-Bernays version distinguishes itself by requiring that the 
construction C convert information establishing tr into information establish- 
ing z. A key idea of number realizability was to use partial recursive functions 
instead of total recursive functions, which helped in extending the definition 
of realizability through implication. A total construction replies to all input. 
If the input is not information establishing a, the reply may be meaningless. 
A partial construction need only provide information (establishing z) from 
information establishing a; on other data it may be undefined. It is not 
clear whether before 1941 anyone else was aware of the importance of this 
distinction. 
Let (x, y) represent a recursive pairing funtion over HA, with recursive 
projection functions plx and p2 x. Thus, x = (plx, p2x), p~ (x, y) = x, and 
p2(x, y) = y. Let {" }" represent the Kleene bracket expression, where {x}y is 
the result of applying the xth partial recursive function to the number y; write 
!{x}y to indicate that {x}y is defined. Since {x}y is a partial function, it is 
more natural to describe it by a recursive relation. This is essentially Kleene's 
T-predicate. For our purposes we use the existence of a ternary relation 
T(x, y, z) such that T(x, y, z) ~ {x} y = z. All expressions mentioned above are 
expressible in the language of HA. 
Number realizability is a translation A ~ xrA for formulas not containing 
the variable x, which is defined inductively by: 
xrT 
xr_L 
xr(t = u) 
xr(A A B) 
xr(A v B) 
xr(A -, B) 
xr(3yAy) 
xr(V y A y) 
-- T; 
= 
 
= 
t = 
u, 
t, u terms; 
= plxrA ix p2xrB; 
= (plx = 0 ~pExrA) A (ptx ~ 0 ~p2xrB); 
= Vy(yrA ~ !{x}y A {x}yrB); 
= p2xrA(plx); 
and 
= Vy(!{x}y A {x}yrAy). 

The Unintended Interpretations of Intuitionistic Logic 
143 
A formula is called almost negative if it is built up from formulas of the form 
3x(t = u) using A, --h and V. The added information in the construction 
of the realizability translation embodies the assumption that all functions 
are recursive. This idea can be formalized by the axiom schema ECTo, the 
extended Church's thesis: 
Vx(Ax ~ 3yB(x, y))F3zVx(Ax ---. !{z}x A B(X, {z}x)), 
where A is an almost negative formula. The study of Kieene's number real- 
izability culminated in the following results of Troeistra (1973, p. 196): 
HA + ECT o ~-A ~--~ 3x(xrA) 
and 
HA + ECToFA 
ifandonlyif 
HA~-3x(xrA). 
So if HA ~-Vx3yg(x, y), then there is a number e such that HA ~-erVx3yt~(x, y). 
Using the translation above, this implies 
HA bVx(!{e}x A p2({e}x)r~r(x, pl({e}x))). 
So f(x) = P l({e} x) is the recursive function sought after for HA extended with 
ECTo: 
HA + ECT o ~-Vxtr(x,f(x)). 
Number realizability did explicate the Hilbert-Bernays interpretation of 
incomplete information, but it did not give a recursive witness for Vx3ya(x, y)- 
sentences over HA simpliciter. To make the method above work for HA alone, 
Kleene introduced a variation of number realizability consisting of a transla- 
tion A ~ xqA for formulas not containing the variable x, defined inductively 
by: 
xqT = T; 
xql = l; 
xq(t = u) = t = u, 
t, u terms; 
xq(A A B) = plxqA A p2xqB; 
xq(A v B) = (plx = 0 ~ A A p2xqA) A (plx r 0---, B A p2xqB); 
xq(A -~ B) = Vy((A ^ yqA) ~ !{x}y A {x}yqB); 
xq(3yAy) = A(plx ) A p2xqA(plx); 
and 
xq(VyAy) = Vy(! {x}y A {x}yqAy). 
Using q-realizability, we can show 
HA ~-Vx(Ax ~ 3yB(x, y)) 
implies 
HA FVx(Ax ~ !{e}x A Blx, {e}x)) 
for some e, 

144 
Wim Ruitenburg 
where A is almost negative. Then f(x)= {e}x is the function that Kleene 
conjectured in 1940. 
Kleene's original conjecture went beyond HA to claim that if in any in- 
tuitionistic system that includes HA we prove F Vx~ytr(x, y), then there should 
be a recursive function f such that F Vxa(x, fx). For that reason Kleene 
developed a formal system for Heyting's Analysis, the theory of choice sequences, 
and in 1957 extended realizability to it (see Kleene (1973) for further references). 
For later work on and applications of realizability, see Troelstra (1973) and 
Beeson (1985). 
The connection above between intuitionistic arithmetic and recursion 
theory suggests that there may be connections between computer science and 
intuitionism as well. 
The computer science aspect of recursion theory focuses on complexity 
theory rather than on the class of all general recursive functions. Following a 
conjecture of S. Cook, S. Buss found subsystems of HA that allowed for an 
analog of Kleene's realizability, except that instead of representing all general 
recursive functions, the representable functions are the ones restricted to 
subclasses of the polynomial-complexity hierarchy. 
Let E~, l-lo ~, E~, H~, Y~, 1-1~ .... be the Meyer-Stockmeyer polynomial 
hierarchy of predicates (Stockmeyer, 1976), where NP = E~, and co-NP = FI~. 
Define ISIS' = PTC(E~-I), the functions computed by a polynomial time Tur- 
ing machine with an oracle for a Z~'_l-predicate. The 0, l-valued functions of 
Flip form the class A~. Note that P = Ag is the class of polynomial complexity 
predicates, and Fl~ is the class of polynomial complexity functions. 
Based on earlier work, Buss (1985a) considered subsystems IS~ ~_ IS 2 ~_ 
IS~ ~_ ... of HA, defined as follows: let Ixl be the length of the number x written 
in binary form, that is, Ixl = [-log2(x + 1)], and let Lx/2J be division ofx by 
2, rounded down. A quantifier is bounded if it occurs in the form Vx _< t or 
3x < t for some term t. A quantifier is sharply bounded if it occurs in the form 
Vx < Itl or 3x < Itl. A formula is of bounded complexity E~ if it is equivalent 
to a formula in prenex form with i bounded-quantifier alternations with Z on 
the outside, ignoring sharply bounded quantifiers. A formula is of hereditarily 
bounded complexity HE~ if all its subformulas are also of complexity E~. The 
systems IS~2 are axiomatized by basic sets of axioms (depending on i) and the 
following induction schema for HE~' formulas A: 
Then the systems IS ~, satisfy (Buss, 1985b): 
ISi~ ~-Vxl ...xn3yA(x 1 ..... x n, y) 
implies 
there exists a Fly'-function f: N n ~ N such that 
A(ml ..... m,, f(m 1 ..... m,)) is valid in N, for all m I ..... mn. 

The Unintended Interpretations of lntuitionistic Logic 
145 
Conversely, for each Wl~'-function f there is a formula A(x, y) such that for all 
m e N', A(m, fro) is valid in N, and IS~ I-Vx3yA(x, y). 
4. The Double Negation Translation, and the 
Dialectica Interpretation 
Grdei initiated two more unintended interpretations, which for purposes of 
exposition I will treat in this section. In 1925 Kolmogorov gave an incomplete 
sketch of the so-called double-negation translation, which essentially con- 
sisted of doubly negating each subformula of a formula. This embedded 
the classical predicate calculus into the intuitionistic calculus. GSdel's trans- 
lation of GSdel in 1933 is an example of a fully developed double negation 
translation for the case of arithmetic, including a precise translation for the 
quantifiers. 
In modern notation the double negation translation is as follows: 
T'=T; 
_L'= _L; 
P" = ~ ,P, 
P an atom; 
(A ^ B)'=A'^ 
B'; 
(A v B)" = 7(~A" ^ ~B'); 
(A ~ B)" = A" -, B'; 
(VxA)" = VxA'; 
and 
(3xA)" = 1Vx~A'. 
Note that I-a',--, 7~a'. Let C be the axiom schema of Excluded Third, i.e., 
I-- A v ~A. Then 
C I- a 
if and only if I- ~r'. 
Since in HA an atomic formula is equivalent to its double negation, this 
implies that each formula in HA, built up from the atoms using only negation, 
conjunction, and universal quantification, is equivalent to its double negation. 
So from Grders translation we obtain the result that for formulas a of 
arithmetic, built up from the atoms using only negation, conjunction, and 
universal quantification, 
PAI--(r 
if and only if HAFa. 
Since in classical logic each first-order formula is equivalent to a formula using 
only negation, conjunction, and universal quantification, this implies that PA 
and HA are equiconsistent and that PA is embedded in HA. 
The result above was discovered independently by Gentzen and Bernays 
in 1933. 

146 
Wim Ruitenburg 
In 1958 G6del gave the Dialectica interpretation, in which logical complex- 
ity was replaced by the use of higher types. The language L(N - HA") that 
it was originally designed for is a typed language with equality. The types are 
defined inductively: there is a bottom type N and for each pair of types r, s 
an operator type (r)s which is a set of operators from r to s. The axiom 
of extensionality Vf# e (r)s((Vx 9 rfx = #x) ~ f = g) is not assumed from the 
outset: In the model HRO mentioned below the elements of(r)s are essentially 
algorithms describing functions from r to s rather than functions themselves. 
For each type s there are variables x s, yS, .... New terms can be constructed 
from old ones by composition, provided that the types match. 
The theory N - HA ~ is based on many-sorted intuitionistic predicate logic 
plus some defining axioms for particular constants: constants 0 9 N and 
S 9 (N)N, and for all r, s, and t, constants H~.z 9 (s)(t)s, E,.~. t 9 ((r)(s)t)((r)s)(r)t, 
and R, 9 (s)((N)(s)s)(N)s. Subscripts and superscripts will be suppressed when 
the meaning of the terms is unambiguous. We write xyz as abbreviation 
for (xy)z. For 0 and S we have the usual number-theoretic axioms of zero 
and successor. For H, 22, and R, IIxy = x, Exyz = xz(yz), RxyO = x, and 
Rxy(Sz) = y(Rxyz)z. The constants rI and E are analogous to the terms 
K = 2xy.x and S = 2xyz.xz(yz) of lambda calculus (Barendregt, 1984, 
p. 31), and the elements k and s of a combinatory algebra (Barendregt, 1984, 
p. 90). The constants R are used to construct the primitive recursive functions 
((Troelstra, 1973, pp. 51ff), (Barendregt, 1984, pp. 568ff)). By using the higher 
types we actually obtain a larger class of recursive functions. 
There are several models for this theory mentioned in Troelstra (1973, 
Ch. 2) and an overview in Troelstra (1977, pp. 1026ff). One non-trivial example 
is the model HRO, the hereditarily recursive operations. Assign a domain 
V, c N to each type r such that VN = N and x 9 V~,~, ~ Vy 9 lz,3z ~ ~({x}y = z). 
To make all sets V, disjoint, replace n 9 V, by (n, r) 9 I/. HRO is not extensional, 
as different elements (m, r), (n, r) 9 V, may define the same partial recursive 
function {m} = {n}. Application is defined by (m, (r)s). (n, r) = ({m} n, s). 
The fundamental idea behind the Dialectica interpretation is the exchange 
of complexity for higher types. This is illustrated by the replacement of 
formulas of the form Vx 9 r~y 9 so(x, y) by 3z 9 (r)sVxa(x, zx). In the presence 
of sufficiently strong choice principles and Excluded Middle all formulas 
are equivalent to formulas in prenex form, and repeated application of the 
replacement above translates a formula A into an equivalent formula of the 
form A o = qxVyA o(X, y) with A o quantifier-free. The Dialectica interpretation 
generalizes this translation from classical logic to an intuitionistic theory 
similar to N - HA '~ called WE - HA". The theory WE - HA ~ distinguishes 
itself from N - HA" by the schemas 
x~,~ = y~,~s ,._+ Vz,(x,,~z , = y~,~Sz,) 
and 
PFxz = yzFAx 
FAy 

The Unintended Interpretations of Intuitionistic Logic 
147 
where P is a quantifier-free formula with terms of type N only in which x, y, 
and z do not occur. The above schemas make WE - HA ~' weakly extensional. 
For each formula Az we define two translations, A ~ and A o, where 
A ~ = 3xVyAD(x, y, z) and A o is quantifier free. We extend the translation 
inductively as follows (n is a variable over N): 
A ~ = A o = A, 
A an atom. 
For the other clauses, let A ~ = 3xVyAD(x, y), B D = 3uVvBD(u, v). Then: 
(A A B)o= Ao A Bo; 
(A v B)D = (n = 0 --* A o) A (n # 0 ~ Bo); 
(A ~ B)D = A o(x, Yxv) ~ Bo(Ux, v); 
(3zA(z))o = A(z)o: 
(VzA(z)) o = Ao(Xz, y, z); 
(A A B) D = 3xuVyv(A A B)o 
= qxuVyv(A o A Bo); 
(A v B) ~ = 3nxuYyv(A v B)o 
= 3nxuVyv(n = 0 --, Ao(x, y)) A (n :~ 0 ~ Bo(u, v)); 
(A ~ B) ~ = (3xVyAo --, quVvBo) ~ 
= (Vx3uVv3y(Ao ---, Bo)) D 
= qUYVxv(A ~ B)o 
= 3UYVxv(Ao(x, Yxv) --* Bo(Ux, v)); 
(3zA(z)) ~ 
3zxVy(3zA(z)) o 
= 3zxVyAo(x, y, z); 
and 
(VzA(z)) ~ = qXVzy(VzA(z)) o 
= qXVzyAD(Xz, y, z). 
A ~ and A need not be intuitionistically equivalent unless A is of the form 
3xVyB with B quantifier-free. The Dialectica interpretation has the following 
properties. 
If WE 
- 
HA '~ F A then WE - HA '~ F VyAo(t, y) for some sequence of terms t, 
and 
WE-HA 
~'+SFA 
if and only if 
WE-HA 
~ 
D 
for particular extensions S of WE - HA ~ (Troelstra, 1977, pp. 1032ff). See 
Troelstra (1973, Ch. 3, w and (1977) for more on the Dialectica interpretation. 

148 
Wim Ruitenburg 
5. Interpretations for Predicate Logic 
The extension of the Stone-Tarski models for propositional logic to first- 
order predicate logic was done by A. Mostowski (1948). More models for 
predicate logic soon followed: pseudo-Boolean algebras by McKinsey and 
Tarski (1948) and H. Rasiowa and R. Sikorski (1953); Beth models by E.W. 
Beth (1956, 1959); and Kripke models by S. Kripke (1965). Kripke models 
turned out to be particularly efficient and easy to use (see, for instance, 
(Smoryfiski, 1973)), because they implicitly use partial elements in their defini- 
tion. I will give a description of Kripke models below, where I discuss a 
first-order extension of Lewis's system $4, leaving the others as special cases-- 
up to isomorphism--of the sheaf models of w There were some techniques 
to convert a model of one kind to a model of another, but there was no unifying 
concept of model. In fact, classical set theory seems not to permit the construc- 
tion of a natural unifying concept. The development of a unifying concept had 
to wait until the further advancement of category theory, particularly topos 
theory. 
G6ders interpretation of the intuitionistic propositional calculus in Lewis's 
system $4 was extended to an interpretation of the intuitionistic predicate 
calculus in QS4, the first-order generalization of $4, independently by Rasiowa 
and Sikorski (1953b) and S. Maehara (1954). Kripke models were announced 
in Kripke (1959) in 1959 as a specialization of Kripke's models for the system 
of modal predicate logic QS4, in which intuitionistic logic could be embedded. 
The system QS4 is the first-order extension of the system $4, where for 
terms, equality, and the quantifiers 3 and V, we have the usual axioms and 
closure rules: 
A ~Bx 
A FBt 
A FBx 
BxPA 
A F VxBx 
3xBx ~- A 
TFx=x 
x = yFAx--~ Ay * 
In case t the variable x is not free in A and the term t does not contain a 
variable bound by a quantifier of B; in cases ~ the variable x is not free in A; 
and in case 9 the variable y is not bound by a quantifier of .4. 
G6del's embedding A ~ A' can be extended to first-order logic by 
(VxAx)'= Fq(VxA'x); and 
(3xAx)'= I-7(3xA'x). 
Again we have QS4 hA',--, EI(A'), and 
Fa 
if and only if QS4Fa'. 

The Unintended Interpretations of lntuitionistic Logic 
149 
Kripke models for QS4 are defined by pairs K = (S, I), where S = (P, Ds) 
is an inhabited structure and I is an interpretation, as follows. 
The notion of structure generalizes the traditional notion of set. A structure 
S = (P, D s) consists of a partially ordered set P = (P, < )--P is called the set 
of nodes--and a functor D s from P to the category of sets. For an inhabited 
structure, the sets must be nonempty. The structure S must be inhabited 
for the same reason that models of first-order logic must be inhabited: it 
allows for simpler rules for the quantifiers. So for each a 9 P we have a 
nonempty set Ds~t; for ct < fl a function (as)~: Ds~ ~ Dsfl; and for ~t < fl < 7, 
(as)~ = (as)~(as)~. In this way an element does not have to exist above all nodes. 
For each number n >_ O, let S" = (P, Ds,) be the structure on P defined by 
(Ds,,)a = (Ds~)" and by (as,) ~ = ((as)j)". For all ~ (Dso)Ct is a singleton. A 
substructure of S is a structure R = (P, DR) on P such that DRa c_ Dsat for all 
nodes ~t and such that its maps (%)~ are restrictions of the maps (as) ~. A map 
F: S ~ T between structures S = (P, Ds) and T = (P, Dr) consists of a collec- 
tion of functions {F,: Dsa ~ Dr~lct 9 P}, such that for all ~t < fl the following 
diagram commutes: 
Ds ~ 
~; ~ Dr~t 
Dsfl ~ 
Orfl 
The structures and maps above form the functor category S r, where S is the 
category of sets. 
The interpretation I in the definition of Kripke model assigns to each n-ary 
atomic predicate P of the language a substructure R of S" and to each n-ary 
function symbol f a map F: S" ~ S, where constant symbols are interpreted 
as 0-ary functions. The equality predicate is interpreted by the equality rela- 
tion E = (P, D~) on S z defined by De~ = {(e, e)[e 9 S~}. A term t is interpreted 
as the composition T of the interpretations of its parts. 
Given a Kripke model K = ((P, D), 1), let LK be the extension of the 
first-order language L obtained by including constant symbols for the ele- 
ments of LL~pDct. Write ~lt-Qs~P(t, u .... ), in words, P(t, u .... ) is satisfied 
above ~t, if (T,, U, .... ) 9 Rot. Extend the satisfaction relation II-qs4 inductively 
to all sentences of LK as follows: expression ~ll-qs4tp is well-formed if all new 
constant symbols of LK occurring in ~p are from D~t. In that case we sometimes 
write tp, instead oftp. Given 9 < fland ~p,, ~pp is the formula constructed from ~0, 
by replacing the constant symbols for c 9 D~t by the constant symbols for 
a~(c) 9 Dfl. Use the same notation for constant symbols and constants, as it 
is clear from context which interpretation is intended. Extend the definition 
of I~-os ~ inductively by: 
~[bqs4 T; 

150 
Wim Ruitenburg 
ctlbQs4(tp ^ ~b)~.r 0tll-es4tp~ and ctlI-Qs4~; 
9 l~-Qs4(tP v r 
r ~l%s4tP~ or ctlI-Qs4~,,; 
ctIbQs4(tp ~ ~,)~ ~ ctlt-Qs4tp~ implies 0tlt-Qs4~,~; 
~lI-Qs4(t-tP)~ r it is not the case that O~[~-Qs,,tp~ , 
otlI-Qs4(Vxtp(x))~ ~ ctlI-Qs4tP(C)~ for all c e Dot; 
~tll-es4(3xtp(x))~ r ~lI-Qs4tP(C)~ for some c e Dot; 
and 
ctlI-Qs4(F3tp)~ ~ fllI-Qs4% for all fl > ct. 
We write K bQs4 tp if ctlI-Qs4<p~ for all nodes ~t e P. The completeness the- 
orem for QS4 then reads: for all sets of sentences F u {tp}, 
QS4, F I- tp r for all K, if K bQs,~ ~' for all Y e F, then K bQs,, <P- 
Using the translation from intuitionistic predicate logic to QS4, we get 
the following interpretation for intuitionistic logic: Kripke models are pairs 
K = (S, I~ as before, with S an inhabited structure, and I assigning sub- 
structures, maps, and the equality relation to atomic predicates, function 
symbols, and the equality predicate. Define II-- on atoms in exactly the same 
way as II-Qs4. The extension of II- to the extended language of first-order 
intuitionistic predicate logic LK differs, however: extend II- inductively by: 
all-T; 
~tll-(tp ^ ~,)~r 
and ~ll-~b~; 
0tll-(q~ v ~,)~o~tlbtp~ or ~tll-r 
~tlt-(tp ~ ~,)~ fllb% implies flll-~,~, for all fl > ~; 
ctlt--(Vxtp(x))~oflll-tp(c)~ for all fl > ~t and all c e D[3; and 
~tll-(=txtp(x))~o~tll-tp(c)~ for some c e Dot. 
For predication, equality, negation, and bi-implication this means: 
~tlI-P(t, u .... )~(T~, U~ .... ) e R~; 
~tlb(t = u)~r 
T~ = U~; 
~tlb(~tp)~=,it is not the case that flit-% for any fl _> ct; 
and 
ctll-(tp ~-~ ~)~ r for all fl >_ ct, flit-% if and only if fllb~. 
We can easily verify that if :t _< fl and ~tlb(p~, then fill-%. 
Define K b (p to mean that ~tlt-tp for all nodes a e P. The corresponding 
completeness theorem is: for all sets of sentences F ~ {tp}, 
F I- (p r for all K, if K b ? for all V e F, then K b (p. 

The Unintended Interpretations of lntuitionistic Logic 
151 
A major example of the use of Kripke models occurs in forcing as developed 
by P.J. Cohen in 1963 (Cohen, 1966). A generalized version is in Keisler (1973) 
and is based on work in Rasiowa and Sikorski (1963) on Boolean-valued 
model theory. The generalization includes the forcing methods introduced by 
A. Robinson and J. Barwise. One stage consists of constructing a so-called 
forcing property: given a countable language L with countably many constant 
symbols, construct a partially ordered set P where the nodes are pairs 
p = (p, fp) such that the fp are finite sets of atomic sentences from L with 
fp ~_ fr whenever (p, fp) < (q, f~). Construct a Kripke model K on P by assign- 
ing sets Dp= {cltpcefp for some q~} to peP, and relations R for each 
predicate n-ary P such that Rp = {elPeefp}, where e = (c~ ..... c,). The 
equality symbol is interpreted as a binary relation ~ and need not be the 
standard equality relation of K. Then K constitutes a forcing property if it 
satisfies 
K ~Vx(~ ~x ,~ x) 
and 
K ~Vxy((x ~ y A q~(x)) ~ ~tp(y)) 
for all formulas ~, where y is not bound by a quantifier of tp. 
Given a forcing property K, the forcing relation II- is defined as for in- 
tuitionistic forcing, except that the equality symbol -- is interpreted by ~. 
Weak forcing I1-~, is defined by Pl~-,oq~ if and only if pll--tp', where q~" is the double 
negation translation of ~. Forcing properties and the construction of generic 
models can now be considered as part of topos theory. The connection 
between topoi and independence proofs for the continuum hypothesis, was 
made by M. Tierney (1972). This was one of the main driving forces behind 
F.W. Lawvere and Tierney's development of topos theory. 
6. Topoi 
Topos theory has its origins in three separate lines of mathematical develop- 
ment. In the introduction of Johnstone (1977) we find the first and the 
third: sheaf theory and the category-theoretic foundation of mathematics. The 
second line is expounded in the preface of Goidblatt (1979). 
The first line is sheaf theory, which was developed after the second world 
war as a tool for algebraic topology. Later the concept of a sheaf over a 
topological space was extended to that of a sheaf over a site in order to enable 
the construction of more "topologies" in algebraic geometry. Categories of 
sheaves over a site are known as Grothendieck topoi. 
The second line of development was initiated by Cohen's forcing technique 
in his proof of the independence of the continuum hypothesis. It was realized 
very early that Cohen's forcing and Kripke's forcing were closely related 
examples of some common technique connecting intuitionistic logic and 

152 
Wim Ruitenburg 
classical set theory. The topic was picked up by D.S. Scott and R. Soiovay in 
1965, when they developed the theory of Boolean-valued models of ZF. In the 
late 1960s Scott considered the natural generalization to Heyting-valued 
models. 
The third line involved the attempts to axiomatize category-theoretically 
well-known categories such as module categories. P.T. Johnstone (Johnstone, 
1977) mentioned as an early example the proof of the Lubkin-Heron- 
Freyd Mitchell embedding theorem (Freyd, 1964) for abelian categories, 
which showed that there is an explicit set of elementary axioms that imply all 
the finitary exactness properties of module categories. Lawvere tried the same 
for the category of sets. 
Cartesian closed categories preceded topoi. In fact, a topos is a finitely 
complete Cartesian closed category satisfying one extra property. A category 
is finitely complete if all finite diagrams have limits and colimits. A finitely 
complete Cartesian closed category C has all finite limits and colimits expli- 
citly given by functors, and the functors -  b: C ~ C have right adjoints. 
The category-theoretic axioms of forming new arrows from previously con- 
structed ones are represented as sequent rules and axioms below. The letters 
A, B, C .... represent object variables, and f, 9, h .... are arrow variables. The 
arrows 0A, la and ida are introduced as axioms. A thin horizontal line means 
that if the arrows above the line exist, then there exists a corresponding arrow 
below the line. A fat line means the same as a thin line except that the 
correspondence is one-to-one and onto. 
A 
A 
tA 1 
ALB 
A&C 
A <f,a))B x C 
A  Bf c 
A 
q~f, C B 
A idal' A 
A f B B&C 
gf ,C 
0 ~ 
nLA C~A 
B H C f+o A 
The notion of finitely complete Cartesian closed category is a straightforward 
generalization of intuitionistic propositional logic: take the formulas of a 
propositional logic as objects and have a unique arrow from ~0 to q, exactly 
when q~ I--~,. Thus models of intuitionistic propositional logic give rise to 
examples of finitely complete Cartesian closed categories. This also implies 
that the notion of Cartesian closed category is too weak to capture a sufficient 
number of properties of higher order set theory. 
Grothendieck topoi, on the other hand, do reflect a substantial part of set 
theory. A more detailed description of and references to the development 
of the notion of Grothendieck topos can be found in Gray (1979). Of 

The Unintended Interpretations of lntuitionistic Logic 
153 
main interest to us is Giraud's Theorem (1963-64), which characterizes 
Grothendieck topoi by certain exactness conditions (Johnstone, 1977, pp. 15- 
18). Lawvere considered Grothendieck topoi as models for his generalized set 
theory. His early axiomatization, however, still included some set-theoretic 
aspects, and was therefore not purely category-theoretical. An adaptation 
of Giraud's exactness conditions could provide a generalized set theory 
axiomatized purely in terms of finite exactness conditions and constructions. 
Lawvere's discovery that each Grothendieck topos has a subobject classifier 
t: ! ~ f~ completed that picture. It then turned out that a small number of 
finite exactness conditions, plus the existence of a subobject classifier, sufficed 
to develop a category-theoretic notion of set theory. During the year 1969-70 
in Halifax Lawvere and Tierney developed the fundamentals of elementary 
topos theory. 
An elementary topos is a finitely complete Cartesian closed category E that 
has a subobject classifier. The existence of finite colimits follows from the other 
axioms (Mikkelsen, 1976; Par6, 1974), so a topos E only has to satisfy: 
(1) E has all finite products and equalizers. 
(2) E is Cartesian closed: The functor b ~ b x a has a right adjoint functor 
b ~ b", for all a. 
(3) E has a subobject classifier t:l ---, fL That is, for each monomorphism 
f: a --, b there is a unique Xl, the classifying map, from b to the truth value 
object f~ such that the following is a pullback: 
a 
f 
, 
b 
l 
1 
, f~ 
In the definition above we assume that all limits are given functorially. For 
(1), finite products and equalizers are sufficient to construct all finite limits 
IMac Lane, 1971, p. 109). For 12), the objects b" behave like the function 
sets b" in the category S of sets. The map ZI of (3) then behaves like the 
characteristic function of the image of f. In fact, the category of sets S is a 
topos, with f~ -~ {0, 1}. 
Topoi have an internal logical structure just like S: intuitionistic type 
theory. This was first made explicit by W. Mitchell (1972). A topos need not 
satisfy any additional choice principles, like Dependent Choice or Countable 
Choice. It does however have full comprehension for each object, and a 
power-set construction: for each A, ~A is its power-object. Both category 
theory and intuitionism worked in a field that in some way extended the 
traditional universe of classical logic and sets. That both fields meet in topos 
theory suggests that they satisfy S. Mac Lane's dictum: good general theory 
does not search for the maximum generality, but for the right generality (Mac 
Lane, 1971, p. 103). 

154 
Wim Ruitenburg 
Colimits are derivable from the definition above for the same reason that 
existential quantification and disjunction (and, in fact, conjunction and nega- 
tion) are definable in terms of universal quantification and implication over 
f~ (Prawitz, 1965; Scott, 1979): 
t-(p ^ q)~--~ Vr((p -~ (q --* r)) --* r), 
I-(p v q)~-* Vr(((p ~ r) ^ (q -~ r)) ~ r), 
I-(~p) ~-~ Vr(p ~ r), 
~- (~x~o(x) ) ,-, vr(V x( q,(x) -, r) -, r), 
where p, q, and r are variables over the set of truth values f~. Similarly, the 
union of two subsets X and Y of a set S is the intersection of all the subsets of S 
containing both X and Y. 
Let C be a small category. Then the functor category S c is a topos. Objects 
ofS c are also called presheaves. So Kripke models are presheaves. Finite limits 
and colimits are created pointwise: (X x Y)(a) = X(a) x Y(a) for all a; 
l(a) = {0} for all a; and if F is the coequalizer off, g: X --, Y, then for all a 
F(a) is the coequalizer off(a) and g(a). Let X and Y be presheaves of S c. For 
the exponent presheaf yX we consider "local" natural transformations. Just 
taking function sets yX(a) = Y(a) xta~ usually does not work: functions at node 
a must be provided with information as to what they look like at later stages 
x, reached from a by maps f: a ~ x. Let a be an object of C. The comma 
category C T a has as objects arrows f: a -~ x and g: a ~ y, and as arrows maps 
w: f -~ g, with w: x -, y from C, satisfying wf = g. There are induced functors 
Xo and Y~ from C 1" a to S defined by X~(f) = X(x), Xo(w) = X(w), Yo(f) = Y(x), 
and Ya(w) = Y(w). Set yX(a) equal to the set of natural transformations from 
X~ to Yo. For p: b--* a, define yX(p): yx(b ) ~ yX(a ) by yX(p)w = Pwp. As 
to the truth value object f~, let a be an object of C. Set fl(a) to be the 
set of subobjects s in S c of the representable functor C(a, -): C --, S. So 
s(x) ~_ C(a, x) for all objects and arrows x of C. For p: a -~ b, define f2(p): 
f~(a) --, Xq(b) by f~(p)(s) = t with fe t if and only iffp e s. 
It is possible to construct subtopoi of sheaves sh~(E) of a topos E by 
restricting the number of possible truth values off~ using a topology j, not to 
be confused with, and quite different from, a topology on a set. A Grothendieck 
topos is a category equivalent to a topos of the form sh~(SC), so Grothendieck 
topoi are elementary topoi. All models of first-order intuitionistic logic men- 
tioned in w are sheaves in Grothendieck topoi. 
The definition of topology went through several generalizations until Law- 
vere arrived at the following definition: a topology on a topos E is a map 
j: ~-~f~ satisfying (1) j.t = t; (2) j.j = j; and (3) j" ^ = ^ .(j x j), where 
^ is the intersection map, the classifying map of (t, t): l ~ f~ x f~. The 
subobject ~ of f~ of fixed points of j represents the remaining possible truth 
values and is the truth value object in shj(E). 
Rather than describe the general procedure of making a Grothendieck 
topos, we illustrate the construction for the special case of sheaves over a 

The Unintended Interpretations of Intuitionistic Logic 
155 
topological space. Let X be a topological space, and let S P be the topos of 
presheaves on the partially ordered set P = O(X) ~ The set O(X) is the 
partially ordered set of open subsets of X ordered by inclusion. The dual 
category P is therefore the lattice of open subsets of X ordered by containment 
U < V if and only if U ___ V. Presheaves S consist ofsets S(U) for all U ~ O(X) 
and restriction maps aW: S(U) ~ S(V) for all pairs of open sets U ~ V. The 
truth value object f~ is defined by f~(U) = {S ___ O(U)I W ___ V ~ S implies 
W e S}. Define a topos-theoretic topology j that relates to the set-theoretic 
topology O(X) by setting maps Ju: f~(U) ~ f~(U) such that ju(S) = { V ~ O(U)J 
V _~ uS}. Then f~ is such that f~(U) = O(U) and (f~j)~(W) = Vc~ W. The 
resulting topos shi(S P) = sh(X) is the subcategory of sheaves of S p, that is, the 
presheaves R satisfying: 
(1) If Sc_O(U) is such that uS= U, and x, yeR(U) are such that 
aW(x) = trvV(y) for all V e S, then x = y. 
(2) If S ~_ O(U) is such that uS = U, and there are elements Xv e R(V) such 
that av~w(Xv) = avW~w(xw) for all V, W ~ S, then there exists x e R(U) such 
that aW(x) = Xv for all V e S. 
Grothendieck topoi also have natural number objects. In functor categories 
S P the constant presheaf N defined by N(a) = oJ for all a performs this role. 
Lawvere's original definition of natural number object is equivalent to P. 
Freyd's elementary characterization (Freyd, 1972): A topos has a natural 
number object N it there exist arrows o: 1 ~ N and s: N ~ N (zero and 
successor) such that 1 -~ N ~- N is a coproduct diagram and N --, 1 is a 
coequalizer of s and ida: N ---, N. In Grothendieck topoi the natural number 
object satisfies all first-order statements of classical number theory, but in the 
general situation of elementary topoi with natural number object it only has 
to satisfy the higher order equivalent of HA. 
Cohen's forcing and many methods used in independence proofs of set 
theory are in fact topos theoretic techniques (Tierney, 1972; S6edrov, 1984). 
There are many more applications of internal intuitionistic logic via topos 
theory. Proceedings like Fourman et al. (1979) and Troeistra and van Dalen 
(1982), and monographs like Kock (1981) and S~drov (1984) show just a few 
examples of the possible applications of intuitionistic logic and topos theory 
to such areas as Banach spaces, analysis, sheaf theory, topology, differential 
geometry, complex variables, algebra, and set theory. The applications to 
classical mathematics confirm in a concrete way that proving something 
constructively really means proving something more. 
Brouwer provided classical proofs for his results in topology and later 
denounced these proofs as being insufficient for an intuitionist. It will be 
ironic if intuitionistic methods and sheaf models provide a method to prove 
Brouwer's contributions to topology. 
It was the discovery of the effective topos Eft by M. Hyland and the 
subsequent development of tripos theory that gave rise to topoi, which bring 
into topos theory the previous models of realizability and the Dialectica 

156 
Wim Ruitenburg 
interpretation (Hyland, 1982; Hyland et al., 1980). In an unpublished manu- 
script in 1977, W. Powell formulated in a classical context a semantics for 
realizability that has analogies with Hyland's approach. A significant differ- 
ence between old style realizability and Eft-style topoi is that realizability gives 
interpretations of logical structures, while Eft allows us to think of realizability 
as model theory. The truth value of a sentence A in Eff is the set of numbers 
e such that erA. 
Currently topos theory is the unifying concept behind the unintended 
interpretations of intuitionistic logic. 
7. Intended Interpretations of Intuitionistic Logic 
With so many unintended interpretations available for intuitionistic logic, we 
might at first expect that there should be at least one undisputed proper 
interpretation. That this is not the case can be explained as follows: an 
unintended interpretation presents no reason for dispute since it is, after all, 
unintended. An intended interpretation has to reflect how a real intuitionist-- 
Brouwer, say--interprets the connectives. Since Brouwer never made an 
attempt at this himself, we seem to get closest to it by considering Heyting's 
proof interpretation for first-order logic and its extensions by G. Kreisel. 
The following describes the Brouwer-Heyting-Kreisel (BHK) proof inter- 
pretation. A statement ~0 is true only if we have a proof p for it which satisfies 
the following requirements: 
(1) p proves (p A ~ just in case p consists of a pair q, r of proofs of ~o and ~, 
respectively. 
(2) p proves q~ v ~, just in case p consists of a pair n, q such that either n = 0 
and q proves tp or n = 1 and q proves ft. 
(3) p proves tp ~ ~b just in case p consists of a pair q, r such that q is a 
construction that converts each proof s of tp into a proof q(s) of ~k and such 
that r is a proof that q is such a construction. 
(4) p proves 3xq~(x) just in case p consists of a pair q, r such that q is a 
construction that yields an element c such that r is a proof of ~p(c). 
(5) p proves Vxtp(x) just in case p consists of a pair q, r such that for all c in 
the domain, q(c) is a proof of ~o(c), and such that r is a proof that q is so. 
Kreisel (1962) proposed the addition of the "extra proof r" clauses in the 
descriptions of the ---,-case and the V-case. The interpretation is not reductive: 
it does not break proofs p down into simpler notions. Parts of the proof 
interpretation have been brought into question (for references, see van Dalen 
(1982, p. 61)). Questions arose as to whether one can quantify over a universe 
of all proofs, or whether the extra proof r is of a nature similar to proofs p. 
Intuitionists see the proof interpretation as an explanation rather than an 
interpretation of intuitionistic logic. Moreover, as Brouwer indicated, (formal) 
language is not trustworthy, and from that point of view the dispute is not 
surprising. Heyting's formalization itself, however, appears to be undisputed. 

The Unintended Interpretations of lntuitionistic Logic 
157 
Acknowledgments 
This chapter would not have been completed had it not been for the avail- 
ability of many excellent papers on historical aspects of constructive mathe- 
matics. In particular I wish to mention, and highly recommend, the papers 
of Troelstra on historical aspects of intuitionism, the historical appendix in 
Beeson (1985), and Kleene's (1973) autobiographical notes. I want to thank 
John Simms and Paul Bankston for many helpful comments and suggestions 
for improvement. 
References 
Barendregt, H.P. (1984), The Lambda Calculus, Its Syntax and Semantics, rev. ed., 
Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, Vol. 103, North-Holland, 
Amsterdam. 
Barwise, J. (ed.) (1977), Handbook of Mathematical Logic, Studies in Logic and the 
Foundations of Mathematics, Vol. 90, North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
Barzin, M. and Errera, A. (1927), Sur la logique de M. Brouwer, Acad. Roy. Belg. Bull. 
Cl. Sci. 5, No. 13, 56-71. 
Beeson, M.J. (1985), Foundations of Constructive Mathematics, Ergebnisse der Mathe- 
matik und ihrer Grenzgebiete 3. Folge, Band 6, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
Bertin, E.M.J., Bos, H.J.M. and Grootendorst, A.W. (eds.), (1978), Two Decades of 
Mathematics in the Netherlands 1920-1940, Part I. Centre for Mathematics and 
Computer Science, Amsterdam. 
Beth, E.W. (1956), Semantic construction of intuitionistic logic, Med. Konink. Nederl. 
Akad. Wetensch., new series 19, No. 11. 
Beth, E.W. (1959), The Foundations of Mathematics, North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
Bishop, E. (1967), Foundations of Constructive Analysis, McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Brouwer, L.E.J. (1925), Intuitionistische Zerlegung mathematischer Grundbegriffe, 
Jahresber. Deutsch. Math.-Verein. 33, 251 256. 
Brouwer, L.E.J. (1975a), Collected Works, Vol. I, Philosophy and Foundations t~f Mathe- 
matics, A. Heyting (ed.), North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
Brouwer, L.E.J. (1975b), Collected Works, Vol. II, Geometry. Analysis. Topology, and 
Mechanics, H. Freudenthal (ed.), North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
Brouwer, L.E.J. (1981a), Over de Grondslagen der Wiskunde, Ph.D. 1907, with addi- 
tions from D.J. Korteweg, G. Mannoury, and D. van Dalen (ed.), (1981a), CWI 
Varia, Vol. l, Centre for Mathematics and Computer Science, Amsterdam. 
Brouwer, L.E.J. (1981 b), Brouwer's Cambridge Lecture Notes, with preface and notes 
by D. van Dalen (ed.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Buss, S.R. (1985a), Bounded Arithmetic, Ph.D. Thesis. 
Buss, S.R. (1985b), The polynomial hierarchy and intuitionistic bounded arithmetic, 
preprint. 
Cohen, P.J. (1966), Set Theory and the Continuum Hypothesis, Benjamin, New York. 
Crossley, J.N. Dummett, M.A.E. (eds.), (1965), Formal Systems and Recursive Functions, 
North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
van Dalen, D. (1982), Braucht die konstruktive Mathematik Grundlagen?, Jahresber. 
Deutsch. Math.-Verein. 84, 57-78. 
Fourman, M.P. Mulvey, C.J. Scott, D.S. (eds.), (1979), Applications of Sheaves, Lecture 
Notes in Mathematics 753, Springer, New York. 

158 
Wim Ruitenburg 
Freyd, P. (1964), Abelian Categories, Harper and Row, New York. 
Freyd, P. (1972), Aspects of topoi, Bull. Austral. Math. Soc. 7, 1-76. 
Glivenko, V. (1928), Sur la logique be M. Brouwer, Acad. Roy. Belg. Bull. CI. Sci. 5, 
No. 14, 225-228. 
Glivenko, V. (1929), Sur quelques points de la logique de M. Brouwer, Acad. Roy. Belg. 
Bull. CI. Sci. 5, No. 15, 183-188. 
G6del, K. (1932), Zum intuitionistischen Aussagenkalkiil, Anzeiger der Akademie der 
Wissenschaften in Wien, 69, 65-66. 
G6del, K. (1933a), Zur intuitionistischen Arithmetik und Zahlentheorie, Ergebnisse 
eines mathematischen Kolloquiums 4, 34-38. 
G/Sdel, K. (1933b), Eine Interpretation des intuitionistischen Aussagenkalkiils, Ergeb- 
nisse eines mathematischen Kolloquiums 4, 39-40. 
G6del, K. (1958), Ober eine bisher noch nicht beniitzte Erweiterung des finiten Stand- 
punktes, Dialectica 12, 280-287. 
G6del, K. (1986), Kurt G6del, Collected Work, Vol. I, S. Feferman, J.W. Dawson, S.C. 
Kleene, G.H. Moore, R.M. Solovay, J. van Heijenoort (eds.), Oxford University 
Press/Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Goldblatt, R. (1978), Arithmetical necessity, provability, and intuitionistic logic, Theor- 
ia 44, 38-46. 
Goldblatt, R. (1979), Topoi, the Categorial Analysis of Logic, Studies in LoRic and the 
Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 98, North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
Gray, J.W. (1979), Fragments of the history of sheaf theory, in Fourman et al. (1979), 
pp. 1-79. 
Heyting, A. (1930a), Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Logik, Sitzungsberichte 
der preuBischen Akademie von Wissenschaften, Physikalisch-mathematische 
Klasse, pp. 42-56. 
Heyting, A. (1930b), Die formalen Reoeln der intuitionist ischen M athematik 11, Sitzungs- 
berichte der preuBischen Akademie von Wissenschaften, Physikalisch-mathema- 
tische Klasse, pp. 57-71. 
Heyting, A. (1930c), Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Mathematik 1II, 
Sitzungsberichte der preuBischen Akademie yon Wissenschaften, Physikalisch- 
mathematische Klasse, pp. 158-169. 
Heyting, A. (1934), Mathematische Grundlagenforschung. Intuitionismus. Beweistheorie, 
Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete 3. Folge, Band 4, Springer- 
Verlag, Berlin. 
Heyting, A. (1956), lntuitionism, an Introduction, Studies in Logic and the Foundations 
of Mathematics, Vol. 34, North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
Hilbert, D. and Bernays, P. (1934), Grundlagen der Mathematik, Vol. 1, Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin. 
Hyland, J.M.E. (1982), The effective topos, in Troelstra and van Dalen (1982), pp. 165- 
216. 
Hyland, J.M.E., Johnstone, P.T. and Pitts, A.M. (1980), Tripos theory, Math. Proc. 
Camb. Philos. Soc. 88, 205-232. 
Johnstone, P.T. (1977), Topos Theory, L.M.S. Monographs, Vol. 10, Academic Press, 
New York. 
Keisler, H.J. (1973), Forcing and the omitting types theorem, in Morley (1973), pp. 96- 
133. 
Kleene, S.C. (1945), On the interpretation of intuitionistic number theory, J. Symbolic 
Logic 10, 109-124. 

The Unintended Interpretations of Intuitionistic Logic 
159 
Kleene, S.C. (1973), Realizability: A retrospective survey, in M athias and Rogers (1973), 
pp. 95-112. 
Kock, A. (1981), Synthetic Differential Geometry, London Mathematical Society Lec- 
ture Note Series, Vol. 51, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Kolmogorov, A.N. (1925), O principe tertium non datur (Sur le principe de tertium 
non datur), Mat. Sbornik (Recueil mathematique de la societ6 mathematique de 
Moscou) 32, 646-667. (English translation in van Heijenoort (1967)) 
Kreisel, G. (1962), Foundations of intuitionistic logic, in Nagel et al. (1962), pp. 198- 
210. 
Kripke, S.A. (1959), Semantical analysis of modal logic, J. Symbolic Logic 24, 323 - 324. 
Kripke, S.A. (1965), Semantical analysis of intuitionistic logic I, in Crossley and 
Dummett (1965), pp. 92-130. 
Lawvere, F.W. (ed.), (1972), Toposes, Algebraic Geometry and Logic, Lecture Notes in 
Mathematics 274, Springer-Verlag, New York. 
Mac Lane, S. (1971), Categories for the Working Mathematician, Graduate Texts in 
Mathematics, vol. 5, Springer-Verlag, New York. 
Maehara, S. (1954), Eine Darstellung der intuitionistischen Logik in tier Ktassischen, 
Nagoya Math. J. 7, 45-64. 
Markov, A.A. (1962), On constructive mathematics, Trudy Mat. Inst. Steklov 67, 8-14; 
English translation in Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. 98, 2nd series (1971), !-9. 
Mathias, A.R.D. and Rogers, H. (eds.), (1973), Cambridge Summer School in Mathe- 
matical Logic, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 337, Springer-Verlag, New York. 
McKinsey, J.C.C. and Tarski, A. (1948), Some theorems about the sentential calculi of 
Lewis and Heyting, J. Symbolic Logic 13, 1-15. 
Mikkelsen, C.J. (1976), Lattice-Theoretic and Logical Aspects of Elementary Topoi, 
Arhus Universitet Various Publications 25, Aarhus University. 
Mitchell, W. (1972). Boolean topoi and the theory of sets, d. Pure Appl. Algebra 2, 
261-274. 
Morley, M.D. (ed.), (1973), Studies in Model Theory, MAA Studies in Mathematics 8, 
The Mathematical Association of America, New York. 
Mostowski, A. (1948), Proof on non-deducibility in intuitionistic functional calculus, 
J. Symbolic Logic 13, 204-207. 
Nagel, E., Suppes, P. and Tarski, A. (eds.), (1962), Logic Methodology, and Philosophy 
of Science, Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA. 
Par& R. (1974), Colimits in topoi, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 80, 556-561. 
Prawitz, D. (1965), Natural Deduction. A Proof-Theoretical Study, Almqvist & Wiksell, 
Stockholm. 
Rasiowa, H. and Sikorski, R. (1953a), On satisfiability and deducibility in non-classical 
functional calculi, Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci. Cl. 3, 229-231. 
Rasiowa, H. and Sikorski, R. (1953b), Algebraic treatment of the notion of satisfiability, 
Fund. Math. 40, 62-95. 
Rasiowa, H. and Sikorski, R. (1963), The Mathematics of Metamathematies, PWN-- 
Polish Scientific Publishers, Warsaw. 
Sanin, N.A. (1958), On the constructive interpretation of mathematical judgments, 
Trudy Mat. Inst. Steklov 52, 226-311; English translation in Amer. Math. Soc. 
Transl. 23, 2nd series (1963), 109-189. 
S~edrov, A. (1984), Forcing and Classifying Topoi, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., Vol. 48, Nr. 
295, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI. 

160 
Wim Ruitenburg 
Scott, D.S. (1979), Identity and existence in intuitionistic logic, in Fourman et al. (1979), 
pp. 660-696. 
Smoryflski, C. (1973), Applications of Kripke models, in Troelstra (1973), pp. 324-391. 
Solovay, R.M. (1976), Provability interpretations of modal logic, Israel J. Math. 25, 
287-304. 
van Stigt, W.P. (1982), L.E.J. Brouwer, the signific interlude, in Troelstra and van Dalen 
(1982), pp. 505-512. 
Stockmeyer, L.J. (1976), The polynomial-time hierarchy, Theoret. Comput. Sci. 3, l-22. 
Stone, M.H. (1937), Topological representation of distributive lattices and Brouwerian 
logics, Casopis Pest. Mat. Fys. 67, 1-25. 
Tarski, A. Der AussagenkalkiJl und die Topologie, Fund. Math. 31, 103-134. 
Tierney, M. (1972), Sheaf theory and the continuum hypothesis, in Lawvere (1972), 
pp. 13-42. 
Troelstra, A.S. (ed.), (1973), M etamathematical lnvestigat ion of lntuitionistic Arithmetic 
and Analysis, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 344, Springer-Verlag, New York. 
Troelstra, A.S. (1977), Aspects of constructive mathematics, in Barwise (1977), pp. 973- 
1052. 
Troelstra, A.S. (1978), A. Heyting on the formalization of intuitionistic mathematics, 
in Bertin et al. (1978), pp. 153-175. 
Troelstra, A.S. (1981 ), Arend Heyting and his contribution to intuitionism, Nieuw Arch. 
Wisk. 29, 3rd series, No. 1, 1-23. 
Troelstra, A.S. and van Dalen, D. (eds.), 0982), The L.E.J. Brouwer Centenary 
Symposium, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, Vol. 110, 
North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
van Heijenoort, J. (ed.), (1967), From Frege to G6del. A Source Book in Mathematical 
Logic, 1879-1931, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Whitehead, A.N. and Russell, B. (1925), Principia Mathematica, "Second edition, 
vol. I, Cambridge University Press, 1925; "Second edition, vol. II," Cambridge 
University Press, 1927; "Second edition, vol. III," Cambridge University Press, 
1927. Cambridge, UK. 

The Writing of 
Introduction to Metamathematics 
Stephen C. Kleene 
It was suggested that I talk here on the writing of my book Introduction to 
Metamathematics (IM). 
In the summer of 1936 I drew up an outline for a graduate course on 
the foundations of mathematics, the first to be given at the University of 
Wisconsin, Madison. It ran in the fall semesters of 1936-37, 1938-39, and 
1940 41, as well as more recently. 
In the fall of 1939, Saunders MacLane suggested to Rosser and me that we 
jointly write a Carus monograph on foundations. But instead of doing that 
(the Carus monographs are rather compact books, tending to be of less 
than 200 pages), each of us separately wrote a book of over 500 pages. My 
Introduction to Metamathematics, was published in 1952. The ninth reprint by 
the Dutch publishers was in 1988.1 According to incomplete records, about 
17,500 copies were sold through 1986, not counting sales of a reprint in Taiwan 
and of two in Japan, of two printings of the Russian translation (the first 
consisting of 8000 copies), of one of the Spanish translation, and of one of the 
Chinese translation (in two volumes). 2 I must leave to others the assessment 
of the role the book may have played in the teaching of mathematical logic 
and foundations over the years. 
I calculated that all of my spare time for 789 years went into the composition 
of the book. But the earlier preparation of my logic course was determining 
for the first ten chapters, which essentially followed that course. Subsequent 
chapters largely contain material used in seminars given in the spring 
semesters following the course beginning with 1938 -39, except for the last two 
chapters (XIV and XV). 
So what went into the course, the seminars, and the book? Mostly topics 
that stood out in the landscape of mathematical logic for me as an observer in 
the 1930s. 
In 1983, I wrote, "G6del's paper 1931 was undoubtedly the most exciting 
and the most cited article in mathematical logic and foundations to appear in 
the first 30 years of the century. "3 I learned of that paper, shortly after its 
publication, while I was a graduate student at Princeton. In subsequent 
research, I used G6del's method (which I learned from it) of numbering 

162 
Stephen C. Kleene 
the formal objects, and the Herbrand-G6del notion of "general recursive 
functions" (from G6del 1934), in giving another version of G6del's first 1931 
incompleteness theorem in 1936, and more simply in 1943 (abstract published 
in 1940) in connection with my arithmetical hierarchy (given independently by 
Mostowski in 1947). I had originally intended to publish the details on my 
arithmetical hierarchy (w 
in the book) only through the book, hoping 
thereby to promote its sales. But I decided at the beginning of 1942 to publish 
them separately, when I realized that the publication of the book was far off. 
The writing of it had to be set aside during my military service in 1942-1945, 
while the uncompleted manuscript reposed in Saunders MacLane's office in 
Widener Library at Harvard. 
What came to my mind in 1936 for my new course on the foundations 
mathematics? G6ders 1931 results applied to Hilbert's uncompleted program 
for vindicating classical mathematics (which had been shaken by the para- 
doxes of set theory) by embodying a suitable portion of it in a formal system 
and proving that system consistent by safe ("finitary") methods in a new 
mathematical discipline to be called "proof theory" or "metamathematics." It 
struck me that the most exciting developments in foundations then centered 
around this program, and results such as G6ders which came out of con- 
templating it. So I drew up a syllabus for the course which would give the 
student the whole broad picture of Hilbert's program (with the context in 
which it arose and with comparisons with the other outstanding foundational 
approaches), and which would allow one to present G6del's theorems convey- 
ing a full understanding of them. 
Thus I had to present the idea of a formal system, and train the student 
intensively in working with one. As I remarked in the preface of the book, the 
simplest formal system for the purpose of exhibiting such results as G6del's 
is one for elementary number theory (based on first-order logic). 
I put into the course (and book) three introductory chapters to set the 
enterprise in its broad historical context, and to present necessary funda- 
mental concepts. 
Then there followed (in Chapters IV-VIII) my specimen of a formal system, 
studied in stages. I think students of logic, confronted with the axioms and 
rules of inference of a formal system, had to rack their brains rather hard to 
construct proofs of formal theorems in it. The deduction theorem of the 
first-order predicate calculus (first proved by Herbrand in 1930) provides great 
assistance in proving implications. It was emphasized in another context in 
Church's logic course in the fall of 1931-32. I used a similar treatment of 
disjunctions (proof by cases) in my 1934 paper. In brief, it is an easy step from 
the deduction theorem to a similar treatment of proofs of formulas involving 
each of the logical constants. Thus (originally in my 1936-37 course) I came 
to my treatment of logic in IM, w 
via a set of derived rules for the intro- 
duction and elimination of logical symbols. (One also finds versions of it 
in JaCkowski 1934, Gentzen 1934-35, and Bernays, 1936.) I followed yon 
Neumann 1927 when I was treating logic as a subsystem of formal number 

The Writing of Introduction to Metamathematics 
163 
theory, in using axiom schemata instead of propositional and predicate vari- 
ables with formal substitution rules for them. 
I arrived at the formulation and basic discussion of G6ders two famous 
1931 incompleteness theorems at the end of Chapter VIII. In the next two 
chapters (IX and X) I gave a treatment of primitive recursive functions (what 
G6del in 1931 called simply "recursive functions") and completed the proof 
of his first incompleteness theorem. 
I continued in seminars, and thence in the book, with chapters on general 
recursive functions (G6del 1934, adapting a suggestion of Herbrand, and 
Kleene 1936), partial recursive functions IKleene 1938, discovered late in 
1936), and computable functions (Turing 1936-37 and Post 1936). 
My treatment of computable functions, considerably reworked from 
Turing's account and in some respects closer to Post 1936, was first introduced 
in my seminar in the spring of 1941. (That seminar was honored by the 
presence of Richard Brauer.) Turing applied his machines primarily to com- 
pute the dual expansions of real numbers x (0 _< x _< 1), the successive digits 
being printed ad infinitum on alternate squares of a one-way infinite tape, 
while the intervening squares were reserved for temporary notes used as 
scratch work in the continuing computation. (Many of Turing's technical 
details were incorrect as given, and a person who wishes to follow his treat- 
ment in detail will profit from the critique in the appendix to Post 1947.) I 
respected and took over Turing's brilliant conception of the kinds of opera- 
tions a human, or physical computer can perform, and thus the basic mode 
of operation of his machines, But, continuing from my Chapters IX, XI, and 
XII, I wanted rather to consider the computability of number-theoretic func- 
tions. I chose to use a machine of his sort to compute a given such function 
by supplying it with a tape on which is printed an argument (or n-tuple of 
arguments) of the function, and asking that the machine eventually come to 
a stop with the corresponding function value printed on the tape following 
the argument(s). A natural number n, as argument or value, I represented by 
n + 1 tallies printed on consecutive squares, with blank squares separating 
the representations of two numbers. 
In his w 
Turing suggests that possibly the simplest way to use a machine 
of his to compute, e.g., a function ~b(n) of"an integral variable," n would be to 
let it compute the sequence of 0s and ls with the number of Is between the 
nth and (n + 1)th 0 being the value of ~(n). 4 That, in my opinion, would 
certainly be more cumbersome to work with than my method. Moreover, 
that method breaks down when one seeks to apply it to the partial recursive 
functions which I introduced in 1938 (and w 
Wang (1974, p. 84) says, "G6del 
points out that the precise notion of mechanical procedures is brought out 
clearly by Turing machines producing partial rather than general recursive 
functions. In other words, the intuitive notion does not require that a 
mechanical procedure should always terminate or succeed. A sometimes 
unsuccessful procedure, if sharply defined, still is a procedure, i.e., a well 
determined manner of proceeding. Hence we have an excellent example here 

164 
Stephen C. Kleene 
of a concept which did not appear sharp to us but has become so as a result 
of a careful reflection. The resulting definition of the concept of mechanical 
by the sharp concept of'performable by a Turing machine' is both correct and 
unique. Unlike the more complex concept of always-terminating mechanical 
procedures, the unqualified concept, seen clearly now, has the same meaning 
for the intuitionists as for the classicists. Moreover, it is absolutely impossible 
that anybody who understands the question and knows Turing's definition 
should decide for a different concept." 
I remember that, when in the spring of 1940 I used the words "partial 
recursive function" in a conversation with G6del, he immediately asked, 
"What is a partial recursive function?". Church in 1936 had avoided the 
concept of "partial recursive function" by using "potentially recursive 
function." 
Having started out to build the course (and the first ten chapters of the 
book) toward getting G6del's incompleteness theorems, it was essentially 
irresistible to proceed to these next three chapters (XI, XII, and XIII). 
There had been such exciting developments in the foundational research at 
Princeton (involving Church, G6del, Rosser, and myself)just before my 
coming to Wisconsin in the fall of 1935, culminating in Church's thesis 
(proposed in 1934 and 1935 and published in 1936) and its applications, and 
in Turing's 1936-7 work, and Post's 1936, of each of which I learned a bit 
later! For the history of these developments, see Kleene (1981) and Davis 
(1982). 
In brief, when I was invited in 1936 to teach a graduate course in the 
foundations of mathematics, and later (first in 1939) to extend it by a seminar, 
these were the topics which seemed to me the most exciting. Naturally, I was 
influenced by where my own research interests lay. There was no existing 
connected treatment of them in an English text book that I could just follow. 
(Quite a bit of the material was available in German in Fraenkel 1928, Hilbert 
and Ackermann 1928, Heyting 1934, and Hiibert and Bernays 1934 and 1939.) 
So I designed the course (giving my students dittoed notes), expanded it in 
seminars, and subsequently wrote it all into my own textbook. 
Incidentally, the symmetric form of G6del's theorem (w 
which I dis- 
covered in 1946-47, was in the manuscript of my book when I showed 
it to Mostowski on his visit to Madison in April 1949, on whose urging 
I published it separately in 1950. Kreisel wrote me on 4 October 1983 that 
G6del on several occasions remarked on this symmetric form as being a very 
significant improvement of his incompleteness results. Kreisel continued, "The 
reasons are so patently clear that I did not bother to ask him to elaborate." I 
did not ask Kreisel to elaborate. But I will attempt now to do so myself. 
Fundamental requirements on a formal system are as follows: 
(1) It should be effectively recognizable what linguistic objects (formulas) of 
the system express certain well-defined propositions of mathematics-- 
those of a domain of intuitive mathematics that we are choosing the formal 

The Writing of Introduction to Metamathematics 
165 
system to include a formalization of. If this domain includes some 
elementary number theory, then by Church's 1936 thesis discussed in w 
to any well-defined one-place number-theoretic predicate (propositional 
function of one natural number variable x) of this domain, the G6del 
number of the formula expressing the proposition taken as its value 
for a given natural number as argument (i.e., as value of x) will be a 
general recursive function of the argument x. We are assuming G6dei 
numbers assigned to symbols, strings of symbols, and strings of strings of 
symbols in the standard way. 
(2) It should be possible to check effectively without fail whether a string of 
formulas we have before us constitutes a proof in the system. Then, by 
Church's thesis, to be the G6dei number of a proof is a general recursive 
predicate. There is a primitive recursive function which, applied to the 
G6del number of a proof, gives the G6del number of the formula proved 
by it (its last formula). 
(3) And ofcourse, for any propositions to which the qualities of being true or 
false apply in a clear way, we want a proof of the formula asserting one of 
those propositions to exist only when the proposition is true. For my 
symmetric form of G6del's theorem, I use only as much of this as is assured 
by simple consistency (after Rosser 1936 and my 1943, top p. 64). 
In the 1931 version of G6del's first incompleteness theorem, the formal 
systems to which it applied were "'Principia Mathematica (Whitehead and 
Russell 1910-12, second edition 1925, 1927) and related systems." It was far 
from clear then that the theorem would apply to all formal systems satisfying 
in reasonable measure the aforesaid requirements (inclusive of systems quite 
remote in their details from G6del's examples), except ones so weak (unrobust) 
as to be of slight interest. 
That the theorem applies to all conceivable simply consistent slightly 
robust systems is given by my symmetric form of G6del's theorem. For the 
robustness, what I ask is that they include a formalization of the small piece 
of elementary number theory which I now describe. 
I use two recursively enumerable sets Co = .~,(Ey)Wo(x,y) and C1 = 
.~,(Ey) W1 (x, y) (the variables range over the natural numbers O, 1, 2 .... ), where 
Wo(x, y) and W~ (x, y) are two particular primitive recursive predicates (defined 
on p. 308). For each of i = 0 or 1, and any given x such that x ~ Ci (i.e., such 
that (Ey) W~(x, y)), a proof of that fact in intuitive elementary number theory 
exists, resting simply on our ability (because W~ is primitive recursive) to verifty 
for the given x and a suitable y that W~(x, y) is true. Furthermore, an easy 
argument in intuitive elementary number theory shows that my two sets Co 
and C1 are disjoint. 
For a formal system to come under my symmetric form of G6del's theorem, 
it should formalize the foregoing, thus: 
(a) For each of i = 0 and 1 and each x, it shall have a formula (which we can 
find effectively from the i and x) expressing the proposition x c Q (i.e., 

166 
Stephen C. Kleene 
(Ey)Wi(x,y)), and likewise one expressing x r Ci. I shall denote these 
formulas by "3y W~(x, y)" and "73y W/(x, y)," respectively, avoiding placing 
any restriction on the actual symbolism of the system; and for simple 
consistency I merely understand that for no i and x are both of those 
formulas provable. 
(b) Corresponding to the intuitive provability of x e Ci whenever true, in it 
for each of i = 0 and each x: 
(.) 
If x e Ci, then 3yWi(x, y)is provable. 
(c) Corresponding to the intuitive proof of the disjointness of Co and Cl, in 
it for each x: 
If 3yWo(x, y) is provable, then 73yWl(x, y) is provable. 
If 3yWl(x, y) is provable, then 73yWo(x, y) is provable. 
My symmetric form of G6ders theorem shows that, for each formal system 
which encompasses this small piece of number theory and is simply consistent 
(no matter what novelties of symbolism, or of methods of proof, it may have), 
we can find a number f such that the formula 73yWo(f, y) is true but unprov- 
able while 3yWo( f, y) is also unprovable (and symmetrically, a number y such 
that 73yW a (g, y) is true while it and 3yWI (g, y) are both unprovable). 
Thus, for each such formal system, we have as a formally undecidable 
proposition (Ey)Wo(f, y) a respective value of one preassigned predicate 
(Ey)Wo(x, y), a result which G6del did not have in 1931. Just the theory 
of that particular predicate provides inexhaustible scope for mathematical 
ingenuity, s 
The symmetric form of G6ders theorem, as I stated it in abstract terms in 
1950, says simply that to any two disjoint recursively enumberable sets D O 
and Da with Do ~ Co and Da = Ca, a number f can be found such that 
fr D o u D a. Applying this by taking D o to be the x's such that 3yWo(x, y) is 
provable (so by (*), Do = Co) and O t to be the x's such that 73yWo(x, y) is 
provable (so by the simple consistency, Da is disjoint from Do; and by (.) and 
(**), O1 ~ C1), the f we get does the job. 6 
Chapter XIV picked up some standard topics of mathematical logic which 
one would recognize in the 1930s as important and which had not found 
a place in Chapters I-XIII. Those earlier chapters provided background 
material, using which these topics could be treated compactly. Among these 
topics were some outstanding model-theoretic results (G6del's 1930 complete- 
ness theorem, including the theorem of L6wenheim 1915 and Skolem 1920 
extended to include "compactness," in w 
and Skolem's 1922-23 paradox, 
and his 1933, 1934 nonstandard arithmetics, in w 
as well as some more 
topics in proof theory (metamathematics). After all, I had to live up to the title 
of the book; and one of the jewels of proof theory was eliminability theory 
after Hilbert and Bernays 1934; so I put in w 
Even G6ders completeness 
theorem for the predicate calculus (w 
has a proof-theoretic version after 
Hilbert and Bernays 1939 (IM, Theorem 36) and a relation to my arithmetical 
hierarchy (IM, Theorems 35 and 38). 

The Writing of Introduction to Metamathematics 
167 
As to the final Chapter XV, I first became aware of Gentzen's elegant 
1934-35 paper in 1947, and used it to expound some results on consistency 
proofs in w 
And I concluded with ~80-82 on intuitionistic systems, the last 
giving an exposition of research initiated by me in 1941, and published by me 
in 1945 and David Nelson (in his Ph.D. thesis written under my direction) in 
1947. The first pages of Kleene (1973) give the history. This research estab- 
lished a connection between intuitionism and the subjects of general and 
partial recursive functions and Church's thesis, which were in the main line of 
the book (Chapters XI and XII). I remember Tarski telling me that he found 
this an interesting connection, which he had not thought of searching for 
himself. I was not under the spell of Brouwer, except to the extent that, when 
something can be done intuitionistically (not just classically), I feel it has 
more concrete content. Indeed, w 
emphasizes this. I had many interesting 
conversations with Brouwer from 1948 on, and felt he was sympathetic to 
my work. Many logicians not identified as intuitionists have paid attention 
to intuitionism (e.g., Kolmogorov (1932); G6del 1932, 1932-33; Gentzen 
1934-35; Jagkowski 1936; Gentzen 1936, p. 532 and Bernays (cf. IM, p. 495)). 
I had from the beginning made a point of identifying (at very little cost of space) 
which results hold for the intuitionistic versions of the formal systems being 
considered. 
I have been asked why I did not include much model theory, or go 
further into set theory. Little of what is presented now in an introductory 
model theory course was known in 1952 when my book was published. As 
remarked in Chapter XIV, I did include some outstanding results. As to set 
theory, G6ders work on the consistency of the continuum hypothesis first 
came out in 1938 (and Cohen's completion of an independence proof for it in 
1963-64), which was after the basic choices had been made as to the direction 
my course, seminars and book would take. Unlike the selections from model 
theory treated in Chapter XIV, this topic (involving details of the development 
of set theory formulated in logical symbolism, rather than just of logic and 
number theory) could not have been added without taking considerable 
space. 
I intended to make the book essentially self contained, so that a reader with 
typical undergraduate-mathematics-major preparation could follow the story 
I was telling without having to supplement it by outside sources. At the same 
time I endeavored to be generous with references to the literature, both to give 
credit as due, and also (sometimes stating results) with the idea of encouraging 
the reader to enlarge his knowledge beyond what he could learn from the 
book. 
I hoped all the topics I chose to work into the book would be of lasting 
significance. As I treated them, they made too bulky a manuscript to leave 
room for any other massive development. 
Had I made the manuscript of the book any bigger, it might not have been 
published. Proof: The manuscript was accepted in principle on 4 April 1950 
for publication by D. Van Nostrand Co. But on 31 August 1950, they wrote 
me backing out on the basis of the estimate by their printer that it would be 

168 
Stephen C. Kleene 
600 pages and would have to sell several thousand copies in the next few years 
to recoup the cost of printing. I replied that, by my calculation from a line 
count of my typescript, it would be 550 pages. ~ I then persuaded the North- 
Holland Publishing Company (with whom I had been in personal contact in 
Amsterdam in the spring of 1950 about printing the Journal of Symbolic Logic) 
to share with P. Noordhoff Ltd. the risk of printing my book, with Van 
Nostrand agreeing to bring out an American. edition from sheets printed in 
the Netherlands. 
Notes 
1. There has been no revision--only a few equal-space changes, two notes added 
in open spaces at ends of chapters, and the updating of eleven references which in 1952 
were "to appear," as is indicated on p. vi of the sixth (1971) and later reprints. 
2. On 31 December 1984 Moh ShawKwei, who translated IM into Chinese in 
1965, wrote me "Now at last the Chinese translation of your work Introduction to 
Metamathematics comes off the press--only the first half of it yet. The other half, I 
hope, will be pressed in about a year." 
3. Italicized dates, as here "'1931,'" constitute references to the Bibliography of 
Introduction to Metamathematics, or (mainly for dates after 1952) to its Supplement at 
the end of the present article. IM was the first work, in any area of scholarship with 
which I am acquainted, to use dates (years) for the references. 
4. This covers the case Turing's "integral variable" n ranges over the positive 
integers. If it ranges over the natural numbers, the number of l's preceding the first 0 
shall be the value of r 
5. In 1943 and IM, w 
I used as the preassigned predicate (Y)TI (x, x, y) with the 
assumption of to-consistency; and in 1936 (y)(Ez)T~ (x, y, z) with a more complicated 
consistency assumption. 
6. That D O and D~ are recursively enumerable follows from the above fundamental 
requirements (1) and (2) using Church's thesis. 
7. One may observe that, not counting the ten preliminary pages i-x with the 
preface and table of contents, it turned out to be exactly 550 pages, with the last page 
of the text, 516, filled to the last line. 
Supplement to the Bibliography in IM 
Cohen, P.J. (1963-4), The independence of the continuum hypothesis, and ibid., II. 
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 50, 1143-1148 and 51, 105-110. 
Davis, M. (1982), Why G6del didn't have Church's thesis, Inform. and Control, 54, 3-24. 
Kleene, S.C. (1973), Realizability: A retrospective survey. Cambridge Summer School 
in Mathematical Logic, 1971, in A.R.D. Mathias and H. Rogers (eds.), Lecture 
Notes in Mathematics, No. 337, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 95-112. 
Kleene, S.C. (1981), Origins of recursive function theory. Ann. Hist. Comput. 3, 52-67. 
For six corrections, see Davis (1982), footnotes 10 and 12. 
Kolmogorov, A.N. (1932), Zur Deutung der intuitionistischen Logik, Math. Z. 35, 
58-65. 
Wang, H. (1974), From Mathematics to Philosophy, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 
London and Humanities Press, New York, xiv + 428 pp. 

In Memoriam: Haskell Brooks Curry 
Jonathan P. Seldin 
Haskell Brooks Curry died on 1 September 1982 at the age of 81. He will 
be remembered as one of the founders of mathematical logic in the United 
States. In particular, he did much to develop combinatory logic, with which 
his name will always be associated. 
He was born on 12 September 1900, at Millis, Massachusetts. His father 
was president of the School of Expression in Boston, which is now known as 
Curry College. He graduated from high school in 1916 and received his A. B. 
in mathematics from Harvard University in 1920. 
He began his graduate work in electrical engineering at MIT in a program 
that involved working half-time at the General Electric Company, but he grew 
more interested in pure science than in engineering, and in 1922 he returned 
to Harvard to study physics. He received his A.M. in physics from Harvard 
in 1924. Then, in line with his increasing interest in foundations, he went on 
to further study in mathematics, his undergraduate major. 
He continued to study mathematics at Harvard until 1927; during this 
period his interest in mathematical logic grew more and more important. 
This interest, which had begun as early as 1922, originally involved reading 
on the side. He had, in fact, been advised by several faculty members from 
Harvard and elsewhere, including Norbert Wiener, to stay away from logic. 
But during 1926 27 he had an idea that caused Wiener and others to change 
their minds and encourage him to pursue logic. His idea had to do with the 
rule of substitution in the first chapter of Whitehead and Russell, (1910 1913); 
this rule and modus ponens, are the only rules given there for the propositional 
calculus. Curry noticed that the rule of substitution is considerably more 
complicated than modus ponens, and he wanted to break it down into simpler 
rules. His idea was to use what he later called combinators for this purpose. 
As a result of this idea and the encouragement it generated, he decided 
to change the subject of his dissertation to logic. In 1927-28, he went to 
Princeton to assume an instructorship, where he pursued this idea. In 
November 1927, he found in the Library at Princeton (Sch6nfinkel, 1924), 
which anticipated his notion of combinator. Unfortunately, Sch6nfinkel was 
by then in a mental hospital and was unlikely to do any more scientific work. 

170 
Jonathan P. Seldin 
Fortunately, Paul Bernays at G/Sttingen was familiar with his work, and so 
Curry decided to go there. 
Before leaving the USA, he married on 3 July 1928, Mary Virginia 
Wheatley of Hurlock Maryland, a former student at the School of Expression. 
They were to have two children, Anne and Robert, and seven grand-children. 
At G6ttingen, Curry immediately set to work on his dissertation (Curry, 
1930), in which he set up a system of what we now call pure combinatory 
logic. (The dissertation contained a proof that the system was what we now 
call combinatorially complete, a proof of consistency, and a finite axiomatiza- 
tion of the extensionality rule.) It was completed within one academic year, 
and Curry was examined on 24 July 1929. Although he had done most of his 
work with Bernays, the referee was David Hilbert. Some of his memories of 
the examination are recorded in Reid (1970, p. 190). 
In September 1929, the Currys moved to State College, Pennsylvania, 
where Curry took up a position on the faculty of the Pennsylvania State 
College. For the next five years he extended the system of his dissertation 
in a series of papers culminating in Curry (1934a), in which he was able to 
interpret the first-order predicate calculus. He had also begun to think about 
strengthening the system to one of type-free logic in which set theory could 
be interpreted; see the abstract in Curry (1934b). In this work he was aided 
by the opportunity to spend the year 1931-32 at the University of Chicago as a 
National Research Council Fellow. 
This line of research was paralleled by the work of Church and his students, 
Kleene and Rosser, on type-free logic based on ;t-calculus; see, for example, 
Church (1932). All of this work was brought to a halt in 1934 by Kleene and 
Rosser, who found a contradiction that could be derived in the system of Curry 
(1934a); see Kleene and Rosser (1935). After this Church and his students gave 
up the idea of using a system of this sort as a basis for ordinary systems of 
mathematical logic. But as explained in Seldin (1980), Curry was prepared for 
the possibility that his system might be inconsistent and had some ideas for 
dealing with this without giving up his original program. He spent the rest of 
the 1930s analyzing the contradiction discovered by Kleene and Rosser and 
developing a program for a new system of combinatory logic that would be 
consistent and still strong enough to serve as a basis for systems of quantifica- 
tion logic in the ordinary sense. During this period he became acquainted with 
the work of Gentzen on consistency proofs. 
Meanwhile, Curry became a founding member of the Association for 
Symbolic Logic. He was Vice-President in 1936-37 and President in 1938-40. 
In 1938-39 he spent a year in residence at the Institute for Advanced 
Study at Princeton. 
At the end of the 1930s, he was asked to present his views on the nature 
of mathematics to the International Congress for the Unity of Science 
scheduled for Cambridge, Massachusetts, September 1939. The result was 
(Curry, 1939), the first of a long series of papers in which he developed 
the philosophy of mathematics that he called formalism. (The basic ideas 

In Memoriam: Haskell Brooks Curry 
171 
for this philosophy were already present in his earliest published work; see 
Seldin, (1980, p. 11).) 
By 1941 and early 1942, he had worked out a specific program of research 
in combinatory logic, applying Gentzen's techniques to obtain consistency 
proofs of a number of systems. He published this program as Curry (1942b). 
But when the United States entered World War II, he decided to put logic 
aside and devote his energies to the war effort. In May 1942, he left Penn 
State and went to the Frankford Arsenal, where he remained until January 
1944. He then went to the Applied Physics Laboratory at Johns Hopkins 
University and remained there until, in March 1945, he moved on to the 
Ballistics Research Laboratories at the Aberdeen Proving Ground. His work 
on the problem of fire control brought him into contact with the ENIAC, an 
early computer designed to compute trajectories of artillary shells and other 
projectiles. For his last three months at the Aberdeen Proving Ground, he 
was Chief of the Theory Section of the Computing Laboratory. This work 
led to a series of publications on computing for about a decade after the war, 
(see Hindley and Seldin (1980, pp. xiii-xx)). 
In September 1946, Curry returned to Penn State. He wanted to continue 
work in computing, but he was unable to interest the Penn State administra- 
tion in venturing into this new field. Thus, he turned back to logic. 
When he received an invitation to give a series of lectures at the University 
of Notre Dame, Indiana, he decided to devote the lectures to Gentzen's 
techniques. The resulting lectures were written up and published as Curry 
(1950). 
During the summer of 1948, he went back to Europe to attend the Tenth 
International Congress of Philosophy. There he was asked to write a short 
book of less than 100 pages on combinatory logic for a series on logic to 
be put out by the newly formed North-Holland Publishing Company. The 
people who asked him had no idea how much unpublished material there 
was on the subject and of how much work needed to be finished in order 
to write a proper presentation. So he sent them Outlines of a Formalist 
Philosophy of Mathematics (Curry, 1951) instead. But he kept thinking about 
a book on combinatory logic, and finally decided to ask Robert Feys of the 
University of Louvain, Belgium, to collaborate with him. In 1950 Curry 
obtained a Fulbright grant to spend the year 1950 51 there working on this 
book. While there, he also wrote Ler 
de Logique Algebrique. The book on 
combinatory logic was not finished until 1956; it appeared as Combinatory 
Logic, volume I. It contained a considerable amount of new research, and 
among its results were a thorough study of the Church-Rosser Theorem 
for 2-calculus (including an extension to 2flr/-reduction), standardization 
theorems for both 2fl- and 2flr/-reduction, and a proof of the normal form 
theorem for functionality. (The theory of functionality, which is also known 
as simple type assignment, is similar to Church's type theory; see Church 
(1940).) 
After Combinatory Logic, volume I, was published, Curry again turned 

172 
Jonathan P. Seldin 
his attention to Gentzen's proof theory, producing the book Foundations 
of Mathematical Logic (Curry, 1963). Part of his reason for doing this was 
that he wanted to use the Gentzen techniques in connection with a proposed 
second volume on combinatory logic. This second volume would develop 
systems of combinatory logic which would be an adequate foundation for 
type-free higher order logic. Two papers (Curry, 1960, 1961) began the 
development of the theory of restricted generality along the lines already 
outlined in Curry (1942b). (Restricted generality concerns quantifiers of the 
form (Vx 9 A)B(x); Curry had observed that most quantifications in ordinary 
mathematics are over restricted ranges.) He was interested in this theory partly 
because his original reaction to the paradox of Kleene and Rosser had been 
that the problem was in the postulates for the universal quantifier, and this 
interest remained even after he showed (Curry, 1942a) that a contradiction 
could be derived from the postulates for implication alone. 
In 1960, Curry became Evan Pugh Research Professor at Penn State, 
and was thus relieved of undergraduate teaching duties. This undoubtedly 
helped him finish Foundations of Mathematical Logic (Curry, 1963) sooner 
than he otherwise would have, and enabled him to turn his full attention to 
the second volume on combinatory logic in 1964. Robert Feys had died in 
1961, and the amount of.new research needed for this book was large; as a 
result, he invited Roger Hindley to join him on the project in 1965 and J.P. 
Seldin in 1968. But this is getting ahead of the story. 
In 1966, he retired from Penn State after 37 years and took the position 
of Professor of Logic, History of Logic, and Philosophy of Science and also 
director of the Instituut voor Grondslagenonderzoek en Philosophie der 
Exacte Wetenschappen (Institute for Foundation Studies and Philosophy of 
the Exact Sciences) at the University of Amsterdam. He stayed at Amsterdam 
for four years until he retired again in 1970. 
The year 1970 was also the year the manuscript for Combinatory Logic, 
volume II was finished; it appeared in 1972. In addition to revising parts 
of volume I (Curry and Feys, 1958), it contains a chapter on representing 
recursive functions, one on restricted generality, one on implication and the 
universal quantifier, and one on type theory. 
In 1971-72 Curry was Visiting Mellon Professor of Mathematics at the 
University of Pittsburgh. Otherwise, he lived at State College, Pennsylvania 
(the town where Penn State is located), where he continued his research 
(producing five papers in the 1970s) and his reviewing work (he was a regular 
reviewer for the Zentralblatt j~r M athematik und ihre Grenzgebiete 193 I- 1939, 
Mathematical Reviews 1940-1979, and Comput!ng Reviews 1965-1979; he 
also wrote several reviews for the Journal of Symbolic Logic and other 
publications). 
Even in 1978, when he was 78 years old, he was still working on a research 
problem: that of finding a reduction relation (called "fl-strong reduction") 
that would go with combinatory//-equality and correspond to 2fl-reduction. 
But in the summer of 1979 he suffered a stroke and had to give up all 
scientific work for more than a year. Nevertheless, he recovered enough to 

In Memoriam: Haskell Brooks Curry 
173 
resume work on the fl-strong reduction problem in 1981. He was still working 
on this in the spring of 1982. A progress report of this work was presented 
by J.P. Seldin to Logic Colloquium "82, Florence, Italy in August 1982; 
see Curry et al. (1984). In July Curry's health began to deteriorate, and 
although he was able to attend the Association for Computing Machinery 
Symposium on LISP and Functional Programming at Pittsburgh, Pennsylva- 
nia, 15-18 August 1982 (where he and Alonzo Church were jointly honored 
at a banquet), he was by that time very ill. He died of a stroke on 1 September 
1982. 
Curry's mathematical career spanned close to 60 years, and he was princi- 
pally responsible for the development of a new field, combinatory logic. In 
the beginning, this was seen mainly as a tool in the foundations of mathe- 
matics. When this avenue appeared blocked by paradoxes (to just about 
everybody except Curry and F.B. Fitch), interest declined for awhile. But by 
the 1970s, Curry was gratified to see interest grow again and become greater 
than before. His studies in "pure" combinatory logic have been taken up and 
developed by Barendregt and his group, and "applied" combinatory logics 
are currently of interest as tools in computer science. 
In fact, there is more interest in Curry's work among computer scientists 
today than there is among logicians. This is, in my opinion, only partly 
because both 2-calculus and combinatory logic (in both their typed and 
untyped versions) are useful as prototypes for many of the new languages now 
being designed. It is also partly a result of the fact that Curry came to logic 
from applied mathematics. Most mathematical logicians come to the subject 
from pure mathematics or from philosophy, and as a result bring with them 
strong opinions as to what is logically "correct." Curry did not have most 
of these strong opinions, but took a strongly pragmatic attitude towards the 
acceptance (or rejection) of a formal system (which he always considered to 
be dependent on a specific purpose). This lack of strong attitudes and prag- 
matic approach seemed strange to most other logicians. In addition, many 
logicians had trouble understanding why he was so interested in matters that 
seemed too technical to bother with. But now that computers have grown 
powerful enough to do meaningful symbolic calculations, it has become 
apparent that these "technical" matters are extremely important for practical 
implementations. Furthermore, most computer scientists react to their subject 
the same way other applied mathematicians do, and thus find Curry's 
pragmatic attitude essentially the same as their own. 
Curry had the following Ph.D. students (the dates in parentheses are the 
dates they finished their dissertations): Edward J. Cogan (1955), Kenneth 
L. Loewen I1962), Bruce Lercher (1963), Luis E. Sanchis (1963), Jonathan 
P. Seldin (1968), and Martin W. Bunder (1969). John A. Lever also wrote a 
masters thesis with him in 1977. 
In addition to his mathematical work, Curry was widely known for his 
interest in ornithology. He considered it a hobby and described it as bird- 
watching, but he pursued it with some seriousness. Among his mathematical 
notes (which are filed by date rather than by subject) can be found several 

174 
Jonathan P. Seldin 
reports of bird sightings. The hobby has also led to some interesting incidents 
(Gaber, 1949): 
In Norway in 1928, while unintentionally trespassing upon the king's estate, he 
narrowly escaped being chewed up by two of the palace dogs and was saved from 
them by a tall handsome man. Ten years later, upon seeing the pictures in the papers 
of the members of a Norwegian mission to this country, he was quite surprised to 
learn that his rescuer was none other than the Crown Prince Olaf of Norway. 
His hobby has even afforded him the opportunity of having a laugh at the 
expense of one of his colleagues. Having an exam scheduled for one of his classes 
one afternoon, he arranged to have the test papers taken to the room where the 
test was to be given while he went out for a few hours in search of birds. He arrived 
back from his walk too late to stop off at his office and leave his binoculars there, 
so he went directly to where the test was being given. When he walked into the 
room with his binoculars slung over his shoulder, one of the more excitable 
professors on hand spotted him and exclaimed, "My God, Curry, you're not going 
to use those things to check on the students!" "Why, certainly," replied Curry. He 
immediately stationed himself in the rear of the room and proceeded to scan the 
room with his glasses. On subsequent exams when the excitable professor was to 
be present, he made it a point to carry his binoculars with him. 
It is possible that some people would conclude on meeting Curry for 
the first time that he was somewhat distant. But those of us who knew him 
better knew otherwise. This apparent aloofness would be manifest only when 
his mind was on a mathematical problem, for like all good mathematicians 
he had great powers of intense concentration. As the end of the biographical 
sketch in Hindley and Seldin (1980) says of him and his wife: 
Everybody who know the Currys is aware of how friendly and helpful they 
always are. Haskell has always done more for colleagues and students than be a 
source of important ideas (although, of course, his ideas have been of tremendous 
importance). He has also always been willing to listen to anybody who wanted 
to talk to him, to discuss their ideas, and to give whatever encouragement he could. 
(Surely many of us have heard stories of his taking time to help a student having 
trouble in an elementary course taught by somebody else.) His office door has 
always been open. And this has undoubtedly been an important contribution 
to the enthusiasm of many of those of us working in combinatory logic. Also well 
known wherever the Currys have lived has been the hospitality they have both 
shown. There [were'] always many parties and other, less formal gatherings, and 
we conjecture that Virginia's cooking has also played a role in the growth of interest 
in combinatory logic. 
Acknowledgment 
I would like to thank Roger Hindley for his helpful criticisms and suggestions. 
References 
Church, A. (1932), A set of postulates for the foundation of logic, Ann. of Math. (2) 
33, 346-366. 

In Memoriam: Haskell Brooks Curry 
175 
Church, A. (1940), A formulation of the simple theory of types, J. Symbolic Logic 
5, 56 68. 
Curry, H.B.1 (1930), Grundlagen de kombinatorischen Logik (lnauguraldissertation), 
Amer. J. Math. 52, 509-536, 789-834. 
Curry, H.B. (1934a), Some properties of equality and implication in combinatory 
logic, Ann. of Math. (2) 35, 849-860. 
Curry, H.B. (1934b), Foundations of the theory of abstract sets from the standpoint 
of combinatory logic (Abstract), Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 40, 654. 
Curry, H.B. (1939), Remarks on the definition and nature of mathematics, J. Unified 
Science 9, 164-169. 
Curry, H.B. (1942a), The inconsistency of certain formal logics, J. Symbolic Logic 
7, 115-117. 
Curry, H.B. (1942b), Some advances in the combinatory theory of quantification, 
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 28, 564-569. 
Curry, H.B. (1950), A Theory of Formal Deducibility, Notre Dame Math. Lectures 
No. 6, Notre Dame, Indiana. 
Curry, H.B. (1951), Outlines of a Formalist Philosophy of Mathematics, North-Holland, 
Amsterdam. 
Curry, H.B. (1952), Ler 
de Logique AIgebrique, Gauthier-Villars, Paris and Nauwe- 
laerts, Louvain. 
Curry, H.B. (1960), The deduction theorem in the combinatory theory of restricted 
generality, Logique et Analyse 3, 15-39. 
Curry, H.B. (1961), Basic verifiability in the combinatory theory of restricted generality, 
In Essays on the Foundations of Mathematics, Magnes Press of Hebrew Uni- 
versity, Jerusalem, pp. 165-189. 
Curry, H.B. (1963), Foundations of Mathematical Logic, McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Curry, H.B. and Feys, R. (1958), Combinatory Logic, Vol. I, North-Holland, 
Amsterdam. 
Curry, H.B., Hindley, J.R., and Seldin, J.P. (1972), Combinatory Logic, Vol. II, North- 
Holland, Amsterdam. 
Curry, H.B., Hindley, J.R., and Seldin, J.P. (1984), Beta strong reduction in combina- 
tory logic: Preliminary report (Abstract), J. Symbolic Logic 49, 688. 
Gaber, A.M. (1949), Profile: Dr. Haskell B. Curry, typescript of 8 pages filed by 
Curry under the date 11 April 1949. 
Hindley, J.R. and Seldin, J.P. (eds.) (1980), To H.B. Curry: Essays on Combinatory 
Logic, Lambda Calculus and Formalism, Academic Press, London. 
Kleene, S.C. and Rosser, J.B. (1935), The inconsistency of certain formal logics, Ann. 
of Math. (2) 36, 630-636. 
Reid, C. (1970), Hilbert,.Springer-Verlag, New York and Berlin. 
SchSnfinkel, M. (1924), Uber die Bausteine der mathematischen Logik, Math. Ann. 92, 
305-316. 
Seldin, J.P. (1980), Curry's program, in Hindley and Seldin, (1980), pp. 3-33. 
Whitehead, A.N. and Russell, B. (1910-1913), Principia Mathematica, 3 vols., Cam- 
bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
I A complete list of Curry's publications can be found in Hindley and Seldin (1980), 
pp. xiii-xx. The works listed here are those cited in this paper. 

The Work of J. Richard Biichi 1 
Dirk Siefkes 2 
Abstract. J. Richard Biichi has done influential work in mathematics, logic, and com- 
puter sciences. He is probably best known for using finite automata as combinatorial 
devices to obtain strong results on decidability and definability in monadic second order 
theories, and extending the method to infinite combinatorial tools. Many consider his 
way of describing computations in logical theories as seminal in the area of reduction 
types. With Jesse Wright, identifying automata with algebras he opened them to alge- 
braic treatment. In a book which I edited after his death he deals with the subject, and 
with its generalization to tree automata and context-free languages, in a uniform way 
through semi-Thue systems, aiming for a mathematical theory of terms. Less recog- 
nized is his concept of'abstraction" for characterizing structures by their automorphism 
groups, which he considered basic for a theory of definability. An axiomatic theory of 
convexity which originated therefrom is partly published jointly with W. Fenton. Also 
partly published is joint work on formalizing computing and complexity on abstract 
data types with the present author. Unpublished is, and likely will be, his continued 
work on an algorithmic version of Gauss" theory of quadratic forms, which stemmed 
from his interest in Hilbert's 10th problem. Results in the existential theory of conca- 
tenation, which link the two areas, are published jointly with S. Senger. Saunders 
MacLane and I edited a volume of Collected Works of Richard Bachi. 
Working with J. Richard Buchi has been strenuous, frustating, and beautifully 
rewarding. Our meetings always lasted through the night. We would start 
with a heated political discussion, or inquire into a biological question--he 
had read most of Darwin. Then we would head into mathematics. If he 
brought up the subject, he would be the teacher and I the student, and I would 
learn a lot. He never, however, told me what he knew. Rather, he would work 
on some problem, in this way trying to make me see the things he saw. When I 
i Died 11 April 1984. 
2 I did this work with the help of travel grants from Purdue University and from the 
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. They enabled me to visit Purdue University twice 
after Richard Bfichi's death to look through his notes. I also thank the Deutsche 
Forschungsgemeinschaft, the Stiftung Volkswagenwerk, and the Fulbright Commis- 
sion for earlier travel grants to work with Richard Bfichi. 

The Work of J. Richard Biichi 
177 
brought up the subject, it was worse. He would ask questions which might 
sound silly: I would answer; he would ask more questions; I would realize 
that I had better answer carefully; but soon my answers would not fit, and 
my ideas would crumble away. Then we would start together afresh, and 
something new and beautiful would evolve, although it might take a long time. 
This is the way he dealt with mathematics, or any other field. He could 
not talk, or hear, about a subject. He had to work through it, each time 
anew, to make it his own. (For this reason he quarrelled with so many 
people: after a conversation both parties would think that the other had 
learned from himself.) This unrelenting way of working made him one of 
the great mathematicians of our time; he never stopped short of creating a 
clear and complete picture. 
He did not, however, get stuck in the details either. He gave new directions 
to many fields. (I learned of many of them only after his death when I 
looked through his notes.) He always investigated the history of the area, 
and was deeply involved with the philosophical, social, and personal problems 
of people in mathematics and in science in general. 
Now you see the double squeeze I am in: I am supposed to write about 
Richard Btichi's work, although he himself would have hated that; and much 
of it I do not even know well. So instead of writing about subjects and results 
and giving a complete overview, let me show you some of the things he liked to 
work with, and just mention some others. This still will not do, but it is 
the best that came to my mind. 
1. Trees, Algebras, Automata, and Languages 
Richard Biichi liked trees. So do I. Thus let me start with the trees which 
played a role in much of his mathematics. The full binary tree has a root 
e and successors wl and w2 for each node w: 
\ 
/ 
\ 
/ 
\ 
./ 
\ 
/ 
11 
12 
21 
22 
\ /  
\ 
/ 
i 
2 
It represents the set {1, 2}* of words over the alphabet {1, 2} with empty 
word e, where words are written left-to-right. Or in another formulation: 
it represents the free algebra generated by the element e and the unary 
operations ~1 and ~2. Every algebra with the same generators is a quotient 
(homomorphic image) of this one. Every finite such algebra is also a finite 
automaton over the alphabet { 1, 2}: nodes are states, connected by paths in the 
tree (input wordsJ. 

178 
Dirk Siefkes 
For an example take a finite automaton which accepts the language (set) L 
of words with an even number of 2s: 
1 
1 
2 
The two states tell whether the input has had an even or an odd number of 2s 
so far. Map the automaton into the tree by putting the initial state at the 
root and closing a path when you hit a state the second time: 
1 
2 
Identifying states gives back the automaton. So automata and unary algebras 
are really the same. 
In the years 1952-1962 Richard B~ichi and his coworkers in the Logic of 
Computer Group at the University of Michigan--especially Jesse Wright, 
Calvin Elgot, Jim Thatcher, Robert McNaughton, Michael Harrison, and 
Hao Wang--established and worked out these connections: 
languages ,--, automata ~ unary algebras ,-, grammars. 
The relevant publications are nos. 10-12 in the bibliography, as well as 
the later no. 17. For years he worked on a book, no. 39, which contains 
all this material and its (by now well-known) generalization to the more-than- 
unary case: 
term languages ~ tree automata ~ algebras ,---, tree grammars. 
In both cases finite automata correspond to regular grammars (= semi-Thue 
systems). Richard Biichi goes back and forth between the unary and the 
general case to get the right notions of "regular," "automaton," etc. In the 
unfinished final part of the book, first for Polish notation and then for 
arbitrary terms, he generates, parses, and evaluates term languages through 

The Work of J. Richard Biichi 
179 
context-free grammars. He applies this approach to LRk-languages, and to 
an analysis of term algebras, aiming for a mathematical theory of mathe- 
matical notation. Most interesting seems to me the result that ground term 
rewriting systems (this is not Biichi's terminology) generate just the regular 
term languages. More details can be found in a paper I wrote on the book, 
mentioned in the appendix. 
2. Discrete Spaces 
A finite automaton is a discrete deterministic system. Starting with his doctor- 
al dissertation and continuing through all his life, Richard Biichi also used the 
more general setting of discrete spaces to investigate discrete systems. Some 
of this work on set spaces, lattices, discrete linear and convex closure, directed 
graphs, and matroids is contained in the publications nos. 1-4, 19, and 34-38 
William Fenton gave a talk on his work with Richard Biichi on convexity 
theory at this 1985 conference. Other material will likely remain unpublished. 
3. Finite Automata on Infinite Input, Monadic Theories, 
and Determinacy 
The (weak) monadic second-order theory of a class of structures is the ele- 
mentary theory enriched by quantifiable variables for (finite) predicates, i.e., 
sets. It was Richard Biichi's idea to express statements on finite automata as 
formulas of (weak) monadic second-order theories, and in this way to get 
decidability and definability results for such theories by using combinatorial 
statements expressed in terms of finite automata. For an example write T (true) 
for the state "odd" and the input 1 and F (false) for the state "even" and the 
input 2 of the automaton in Section 1: 
T 
T 
F 
Then the automaton accepts the word w ~ {F, T}* iff there is an accepting 
"run," i.e., a sequence of states v ~ {F, T}* beginning and ending with F and 
following the transition condition. This statement can be read as a formula 
of the weak monadic second order theory of the successor on the natural 
numbers: 
3Z. -,Zo A Vt(Zt' ,--, (Zt ~ Xt)), 

180 
Dirk Siefkes 
where X := wFF .... Z := vFF .... and ' is the successor function. Richard 
Biichi showed that "automata formulas" of this type constitute a normal form 
and in this way proved that the theory is decidable; see publication no. 7. The 
same method works for arbitrary ordinals (publication no. 13). Using this 
method Calvin Elgot obtained related results; see also the joint abstract no. 5. 
The input X and the run Z in the above automata formula are actually 
infinite, though eventually constant, sequences. Two years later Richard Biichi 
had generalized his method to automata on co-input (to-automata) and to the 
strong monadic second order successor theory (publications nos. 8 and 16). 
For example, the formula 
qZ.-,Z o ^ Vt(Zt' *-*(Zt ~, Xt)) ^ q'~ Zt 
says that the above automaton accepts those sequences X which contain an 
even number of Fs or infinitely many of them. Automata formulas for non- 
deterministic to-automata yield a normal form: 
3Z.A[Zo] A VtBeXt, Zt, Zt'] A q~'t C[Zt]. 
Robert Mcnaughton proved that every such automaton can be changed into a 
deterministic one if one replaces the acceptance condition 
3'~t C[Zt] 
by 
sup Z 9 D 
where 
sup Z := {s; 3~'t Zt = s} 
is the set of states which occur infinitely often. 
Similar ideas with more and more sophisticated automata and thus more 
and more help from infinite combinatorics and set theory work for all ordinals 
<to2; see publications nos. 14, 24, 28. They also work for nonstandard 
structures like to + to*, and allow one to axiomatize the theories in question 
and to characterize their complete extensions by prime models (publications 
nos. 25 and 26); see also the paper by Charles Zaiontz in the same volume as 
no. 28. The central part of the normal form construction is always a comple- 
mentation lemma, which says that the automaton-acceptable sets are closed 
under complement, and thus allows one to rewrite the negation of an auto- 
mata formula as an automata formula. It is crucial to find the right transition 
and final conditions for the automata, which make them jump not only from 
one state to the next one, but also to the limit, for example, from to to to + 1, 
or to co + to*. Yuri Gurevich, Menachem Magidor, and Saharon Shelah have 
shown that at to2 decidability depends even on statements about big ordinals; 
so what is the natural theory there? 
Robert McNaughton was the first to observe the close connection of the 
area to problems on infinite two-person games with complete information. 
Such a game is given by a condition C(X, Y) on to-sequences over two finite 
sets H and K. Two players I and J alternately choose from H and K respec- 
tively. Their moves depend on the previous choices of both players, and 
constitute two to-sequences X and Z. Player J wins if the result satisfies the 
condition C; otherwise player I wins. A winning strategy for player J (/) is 
an operation W (I/) which to any play of the opponent yields a play which 

The Work of J. Richard Biichi 
181 
beats him: 
VX C(X, WX), 
or 
YY 7C(VY, Y) 
respectively. 
A game is determinate if one of the players has a winning strategy. A finite- 
state winning strategy is one which can be realized by an m-automaton. 
Richard Bi.ichi and Lawrence Landweber proved that all games definable 
in the monadic second-order theory of successor are determinate; one can 
decide who wins, and can construct a finite-state winning strategy; see publica- 
tions nos. 15 and 18. This had been stated as problem by Richard Bi.ichi 
in no. 8, and conjectured by Robert McNaughton. By another result of Biichi 
and Landweber (see no. 16), the games in question are just the regular sets in 
the Boolean algebra over F~, i.e., definable by Boolean combinations of 
formulas 
3yVt >_ Y (Xt, Yt) E L, 
where (X, Y) is thought of as a path in an H  K-tree, (Xt, Yt) is the corre- 
sponding node at height t, and the congruence induced by L has finite rank 
(cf. Section 1). In the early 1970s Richard Biichi removed the restriction to 
regular sets; see nos. 20 (for closed sets) and 27. The last part of the result then 
reads: one can decide who wins, and can construct a winning strategy which 
is finite-state over the given game. He published the proof in no. 29 for the 
slightly bigger class of F~ c~ Gao-games (one more quantifier change). 
In a very difficult and complicated construction Michael Rabin extended 
Richard Bfichi's method of handling monadic second-order theories with 
the help of finite automata, to the binary tree, i.e., to the case of two successors. 
He observed that his proof together with McNaughton's result on deter- 
ministic m-automata yields the second half of the Biichi Landweber result, 
namely decidability and construction; it does not yield determinacy. In no. 27 
Richard Btichi introduced determinacy as a general tool for eliminating 
quantifiers, and proved especially that his determinacy for Boolean Fo-games 
together with McNaughton's result yields Rabin's decision procedure. For 
this he showed that in the monadic second-order theory of two successors the 
complementation lemma follows from a determinacy statement, namely, the 
automata normal form here is 
3 W. A [ We] A Vu B [ Vu, Wu, Wu 1, Wu 2] A VX sup WX ~ D, 
(1) 
where the input V and the run W are finite-state trees, X is a path through 
the tree, and sup WX is the sup (as defined above) of the run W along the 
path X. Using McNaughton's result he brought formula (1) into the form 
3WVX3Z.Z o = c A Vt(Zt'~--~ B[Zt, Xt, W)(t, VXt]) A sup Z ~/), 
(2) 
where V, W, and X are as above, and Z is the run of a deterministic 
co-automaton along X. Now the formula 
3Z.Z o = c A Vt(Zt'.--} B[Zt, Xt, Yt, VXt]) A supZ6/~ 
defines a special Boolean Fo-game where player I chooses from the set { 1, 2}, 

182 
Dirk Siefkes 
and V is a parameter tree. Therefore formula (2) says that player J has a 
winning strategy for that game. By determinacy the negation of (2) can be 
brought into the same form; thus, this holds for (1) as well. 
4. Quadratic Forms, the Five Squares Problem, 
and Diophantine Equations 
For many years Richard Biichi worked on quadratic forms. He presented 
Gauss' class field theory in an algorithmic form, rather in the spirit of Gauss 
himself, but more thoroughly organized in a way which was suitable for his 
purpose. It seems that his interest in quadratic forms stemmed from Hilbert's 
10th problem, which asks for a procedure to decide whether a given set of 
Diophantine (i.e., integer coefficient) equations has a solution. He tried to 
approach it by reducing Diophantine equations to equations on square num- 
bers in the following way. 
Let xl < "'" < x, be positive integers, n _> 3. If they are consecutive, i.e., 
xi+l = xl + 1, then the second difference of their squares in 2, namely, 
(x~+l - x~) - (x~ - x2_1) = (x, + 1) 2 - 2x~ + (x, - 1) 2 = 2. 
Richard Biichi raised the question: Are there nonconsecutive integers with this 
property? He knew a procedure to generate infinitely many such sequences in 
the case n = 4 (and thus n = 3); an example is 6, 23, 32, 39. For n = 5 the 
question is open; his students called it the "5-squares problem." He proved: 
If for some n the answer to the n-squares problem is "no," then for any 
Diophantine equation P one can construct a set Q of Diophantine equations 
with only quadratic terms s.t. P has an integral solution iff Q has: 
3z,...z.,P(z,, 
z.) 0 
iff 
3y~...ykA (y'2 I 
where P is a polynomial with integer coefficients, A is an integer matrix, and 
B is an integer vector. The idea of the proof is to define the relations 
y=x+l, 
y=x 2, 
and finally z=x.y, 
with the help of squared variables and existential quantifiers. Thus if the 
answer is "no," Hilbert's l 0th problem can be stated in this much simpler form. 
Since by now Hilbert's 10th problem has been solved in the negative, the 
result amounts to the following: If the answer to some n-squares problem is 
"no," then there is no procedure to decide whether a given set of Diophantine 
equations with only squared variables has a solution; or slightly more general: 
then the existential theory of addition over the integers with the predicate "is 
a square" is undecidable. 
Carl Friedrich Gauss in his Disquisitiones Arithmeticae (1800) investi- 

The Work of J. Richard Biichi 
183 
which numbers M can be represented by quadratic forms, i.e., as 
M = ax 2 + bxy + cy 2, 
where a, b, c and x, y are integers. He denotes a form F by its coefficients 
(a, b, c), and classifies forms by the determinant of their matrix 
b2 
~2 
b/2, 
D := ac - -4- = 
c 
or, as one does it today, by their discriminant b 2 - 4ac = -4D. He calls two 
forms F and F' equivalent if they can be transformed into each other by a 
unimodular transformation: 
(h k)(a b/2"~(h ;) 
F' = ATFA = 
j 
b/2 
c J\k 
where 1,41 = hj - ki = + 1. 
Equivalent forms have the same discriminant and represent the same numbers, 
and conversely: two forms which represent the same numbers are equivalent. 
For each discriminant there are only finitely many classes of forms (class field 
theorem). Gauss devotes much of the book to studying which types of classes 
occur for which types of discriminants. 
For these investigations Richard Bi.ichi introduces three structures. First 
he notes that the positive unimodular matrices (of dimension 2 by 2) are 
freely generated from the unit matrix e through multiplication from the right 
by matrices 1 and 2, where 
e:=(~ 0), 
l:=(l 1 ~), 
2:=(10 :). 
Thus they can be represented by the full binary tree of Section 1. To generate 
all unimodular matrices he adds the inverses 
I 
~) 
and 
2=(10 
-11) 
i =(-1 
of I and 2. In this way he gets the structure ~I 
\ / 
\ / 
\ 
/ 
\ 
/ 
11 
12 
21 
22 
/ 
/ 
\ 
/ 
/ 
\ 
/\ 
\12 
\21 "/ 
/ 
\ 
~ 
/ 
\ 
e 
\~1 / 
~ "  
\i2 / 
/ 
'~..~ 
i / 
\ 
-, ./\../ 
-,. / 
\ 
.,- 
~2 
21 
1~" 
il 
/ 
\ 
/ 
\ 
/ 
\ 
/ \ 

184 
Dirk Siefkes 
of unimodular matrices. It is not free; for example, L 2 = - e, and thus L 4 = e, 
where 
Gauss uses L instead of 1 to generate the unimodular matrices. Therefore 
he misses the connection to the word algebra, and thus to the other two 
structures. 
Richard Biichi gets the second structure from an algorithm which 
Nicomachus introduced around 100 A.D. in his Arithmetics. Nicomachus 
states that it generalizes the Euclidean algorithm for computing the greatest 
common divisor of a pair of integers. It applies to triples of integers, and yields 
at each step four new triples. Thus it results in the structure NIC: 
\ 
/ 
\ 
/ 
(a +b +c,b+2c, 
c) 
(a.b +2a, a+b 
+c) 
/ 
\ 
/ 
\ 
(a, b. c) 
\ 
/ 
\ 
/ 
(a, b - 2a, a - b + c) 
(a - b + c. b - 2c, c) 
/ 
\ 
/ 
\ 
If F(a, b, c) is a form, then the NIC-structure consists of the forms equivalent 
to F. In fact NIC is a homomorphic image of the structure 1/of unimodular 
matrices if we map the matrix A into the form A*FA (see above). For example, 
er Fe = F and 
(10 
l)(a 
b/2"](1 
I r(a, b, c) 1 = 
1 
b/2 
c ] \ 1 
=(a+b+c b/2+c) 
k, b/2 + c 
c 
~) = (a + b/2 
b/2 + 
= (a + b + c,b + 2c, c), 
which is upper left successor of (a, b, c) in NIC. The connection to U also 
explains in which sense the Nicomachus algorithm generalizes the Euclidean 
algorithm, namely, in tl 
and therefore in the positive unimodular matrices the predecessor operations 
apply the Euclidean algorithm to both rows simultaneously. 
The third structure consists of the conjugates ~ 
of some given matrix 
X for unimodular matrices A. With the generators 1, 2, i, 2 from above the 
conjugacy structure is 

The Work of J. Richard Biichi 
185 
\ 
,/ 
\ 
/ 
iXl 
2~X2 
/ 
/ 
-. 
"\ 2X2 "/ ~ 
1Xi / 
/ 
\ 
/ 
\ 
It is obviously again a homomorphic image of the structure 1I. In fact, it is 
isomorphic to the NIC-structure if we map the form F = (a, b, c) into the 
matrix 
-- 
--C 
, 
where t = 0, 1 is the residuum modulo 4 of the discriminant of F. Thus also 
the conjugacy structure can be viewed as representing the class of forms 
equivalent to F. 
Going back and forth between the three structures and using whichever he 
found convenient, Richard Biichi reconstructed Gauss' results on quadratic 
forms, and worked on the 5-squares problem. Nothing of this work is 
published, and is preserved only in very many notes, some of it in lecture notes 
taken by the author and by Steven Senger. 
5. Words, Turing Machines, and Recursive Functions 
Richard Biichi refers often to Hiibert's 10th problem in his early notes. It may 
well be that more of his work was stimulated by that problem, and this is 
surely the case with the existential theory of words over a finite alphabet. Since 
we represent numbers by words, Hilbert's 10th problem would be solved in 
the negative if the existential theory of words were undecidable. He therefore 
was long interested in that problem, but was overtaken by Makanin who 
proved in 1976 that this theory is decidable. An offspin of this interest is the 
work he did with Steven Senger on definability and decidability in extensions 
of that theory; see publications nos. 32 and 33. Steven Senger gave a talk on 
these results at this 1985 conference. 
Besides the first accounts of his work on finite automata and algebra 
(no. 10) and on monadic second-order theories (no. 8) Richard Biichi published 
a third landmark paper in 1962 (no. 9), in which he proves that the prefix 
3 A V3V is a reduction type. In the proof he expresses the halting problem for 
Turing machines in formulas of this type, and thereby--although he did not 
invent "domino" or "tiling" problems--he is the first to use them in such a 
reduction, which is now the standard method. 
Also in the area of computability, in 1980 Richard Biichi (together with 
Bernd Mahr)joined the present author in studying recursive definitions on 

186 
Dirk Siefkes 
arbitrary partial algebras. In publications nos. 30 and 31 we show that 
recursion is a natural tool to formulate algorithms over any data structure, 
and to analyze their cost. 
6. Abstraction 
The relation of proportionality in a muitiplicative group, 
p(x, y, u, v) :~x.y -1 = u.v -1, 
can be characterized by simple axioms. Let T be the elementary theory of p 
with these axioms, let T 1 be the elementary theory of groups with multi- 
plication 9 , inverse -1, and unit e as primitives, and let T2 be T plus the constant 
e without additional axioms. Then 7"1 and T z are strongly equivalent; namely 
their basic notions are interdefinable, and thus they have the same models up 
to this change of primitives. Richard Biichi and Jesse B. Wright in publications 
nos. 5 and 6 call T an abstraction of T 2 (and thus of group theory) in either of 
the following senses: 
(i) T is weaker than T 2 in expressive power, namely the constant e is not 
definable in T; but Tand Tz have the same models up to adding or deleting 
e. 
(ii) The automorphism group of T extends that of T 2, namely by the transla- 
tions (which are not group automorphisms). 
Another example of abstraction appears already in Richard BiJchi's doctoral 
thesis, no. I. These observations were the starting point for his long-lasting 
work towards a theory of definability, incorporating Craig's lemma and Beth's 
definability theorem. Part of the work was done together with Kenneth 
Danhof, and is published in nos. 21-23. The manuscript no. 40 was not 
published because Biichi refused to shorten it; see abstract no 11. 
Acknowledgment 
I am grateful to Sylvia Biichi, Leonard Lipshitz, and Walter Schnyder who 
helped me through the ups and downs of discovering what Richard Biichi had 
left behind. I also thank William Fenton and Steven Senger, his two last 
doctoral students, for helpful conversations, and Ernst Specker for arranging 
with the ETH ZiJrich to store the Biichi material. Beat Glaus of the Archiv of 
the ETH library has gone through the tremendous work of catalogizing it, so 
that now all the notes and unpublished papers are accessible. 
Publications 
1. Die Boole'sche Partialordnung und die Paarung von Gefiigen. Portugal. Math. 7 
(1950), 119- i 78. Doctoral dissertation. 

The Work of J. Richard Biichi 
187 
2. Representation of complete lattices by sets. Portugal. Math. 11 (1952), 151-167. 
3. Investigation of the equivalence of the axiom of choice and Zorn's lemma from 
the viewpoint of the hierarchy of types. J. Symbolic Logic 18 (1953), 125-135. 
4. On the existence of totally heterogeneous spaces. Fund. Math. 41 (1954), 97-102. 
5. (with Jesse B. Wright) The theory of proportionality as an abstraction of group 
theory. Math. Ann. 130 (1955), 102-108. 
6. (with Jesse B. Wright) lnvariants of the anti-automorphisms of a group. Proc. 
Amer. Math. Soc. 8 (1957), 1134-1140. 
7. Weak second-order arithmetic and finite automata. Z. Math. Logik Grundlag. 
Math. 6 (1960), 66-92. 
8. On a decision method in restricted second order arithmetic. Proc. Int. Congress 
Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science, 1960, Berkeley. Stanford Univer- 
sity Press, Stanford, California, 1962, 1-11. Invited address. 
9. Turing machines and the Entscheidungsproblem. Math. Ann. 148 (1962), 201-213. 
10. Mathematische Theorie des Verhaltens endlicher Automaten. Z. Angew. Math. 
Mech. 42 (1962), T9-T16. Invited address, yearly meeting of the German Soc. Appl. 
Math. and Mech. 
11. Regular canonical systems and finite automata. Arch. Math. Logik Grundlag. 6 
(1964), 91-111. 
12. Algebraic theory of feedback in discrete systems. In: E. Caiamello (ed.), Automata 
Theory, 1. Course on Automata Theory, Ravello, Italy, 1964, Academic Press, New 
York, 1966, 70-101. 
13. Transfinite automata recursions and weak second order theory of ordinals. Proc. Int. 
Congress Logic, Methodology, Philosophy of Science 1964, Jerusalem. North- 
Holland, Amsterdam, 1965, 2-23. Invited address. 
14. Decision methods in the theory of ordinals. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 71 (1965), 
767-770. 
15. (with Lawrence H. Landweber) Solving sequential conditions by finite state strate- 
gies. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 138 (1969), 295-311. 
16. (with Lawrence H. Landwebcr) Definability in the monadic second-order theory 
of successor. J. Symbolic Logic 34 (1969), 166-170. 
17. (with William H. Hosken) Canonical systems which produce periodic sets. Math. 
Systems Theory 4 (1970), 81-90. 
18. Algorithmisches Konstruieren yon Automaten und die Hersteltung yon Gewinn- 
strategien nach Cantor-Bendixson. Tagungsbericht Automatentheorie und For- 
male Sprachen, Math. Forschungsinst. Oberwolfach, 1969. Mannheim, Germany, 
1970, pp. 385-398. Invited address. 
19. (with Gary Haggard) Jordan circuits of a graph. J. Combin. Theory 10 (1971), 
185-197. 
20. (with Steven Klein) On the presentation of winning strategies via the Cantor- 
Bendixson Method. Report Purdue University CSD TR-81, 1972, 14 pp. 
21. (with Kenneth J. Danhof) Model theoretic approaches to definability. Z. Math. Logik 
Grundlag. Math. 18 (1972), 61-70. 
22. (with Kenneth J. Danhof) Definability in normal theories. Israel J. Math. 14 (1973), 
248-256. 
23. (with Kenneth J. Danhof) Variations on a theme of Cantor in the theory of 
relational structures. Z. Math. Logik Grundlag. Math. 19 (1973), 411-426. 
24. The monadic second-order theory of to t. In: J.R. Biichi, D. Siefkes, The Monadic 
Second-Order Theory of All Countable Ordinals. Lecture Notes in Math, vol. 328, 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975, pp. 1-127. 

188 
Dirk Siefkes 
25. (with Dirk Siefkes) Axiomatization of the monadic second-order theory of r 1. 
Same volume as 24, pp. 129-217. 
26. (with Dirk Siefkes) The complete extensions of the monadic second-order theory 
of countable ordinals. Report Forschungsinstitut fiir Math., ETH Ziirich (1974), 
45 pp. Z. Math. Logik Grundlag. Math. 29 (1983), 289-312. 
27. Using Determinacy of Games to Eliminate Quantifiers. In: M. Karpinski (ed.) Fund. 
of Comp. Theory, 1977. Lecture Notes in Comp. Sci., vol. 56, Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin, pp. 367-378. Invited address. 
28. (with Charles Zaiontz) Deterministic automata and the monadic theory of ordinals 
<co 2. Z. Math. Logik Grundlag. Math. 29 (1983), 313-336. 
29. State-strategies for games in Fo~ ~ G6~ J. Symbolic Logic 48 (1983), 1171-1198. 
30. (with Bernd Mahr, Dirk Siefkes) Manual on REC--A Language for Use and 
Cost Analysis of Recursion Over Arbitrary Data Structures. Bericht Nr. 84-06 
Techn. Univ. Berlin, FB lnformatik (1984), 79 pp. 
31. (with Bernd Mahr, Dirk Siefkes) Recursive Definition and Complexity of Func- 
tions Over Arbitrary Data Structures. Proc. 2. Frege Conference, G. Wechsung 
ed., Akademie Verlag, Berlin, 1984, pp. 303-308. 
32. (with Steven O. Senger) Coding in the existential theory of concatenation. Arch. 
Math. Logik Grundlag. 26 (1986/87), 101-106. 
33. (with Steven O. Senger) Existential definability and decidability of extensions of the 
theory of concatenation. Z. Math Logik Grundlag. Math. 34 (1988), 337-342. 
34. (with William E. Fenton) Large convex sets in oriented matroids. J.'Combin. Theory, 
series B 45 (1988), 293-304. 
35. (with William E. Fenton) Directed circuits of a graph with an application to series- 
parallel graphs. Manuscript. 
36. Implicative Boolean algebras, Copeland's theory of conditional probability. Manu- 
script. 
37. (with T. Michael Owens) Skolem rings and their varieties. Report Purdue University 
CSD TR-140, 1975. 
38. (with T. Michael Owens) Complemented monoids and hoops. To be submitted. 
39. Finite automata, their algebras and grammars. An approach to a theory of formal 
expressions. D. Siefkes (ed.), Springer-Verlag, New York, 1989. 
40. Relatively categorical and normal theories. Manuscript, 1963-1965. 
Abstracts 
I. (with Jesse B. Wright) Abstraction versus generalization. Proc. Int. Congress of 
Math. Amsterdam 1954,398. 
2. (with Jesse B. Wright) A fundamental concept in the theory of models. J. Symbolic 
Logic 21 (1956), 110. 
3. (with William Craig) Notes on the family PC A of sets of models. J. Symbolic Logic 
21 (1956), 222-223. 
4. (with Calvin C. Elgot, and Jesse B. Wright) The nonexistence of certain algorithms 
of finite automata theory. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 5, l (1958), 98. 
5. (with Calvin C. Elgot) Decision problems of weak second-order arithmetic and 
finite automata, I. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 5, 7 (1958), 834. 
6. Regular canonical systems and finite automata. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 6, 6 
(1959), 618. 
7. On the hierarchy of monadic predicate quantifiers. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 7 

The Work of J. Richard Biichi 
189 
(1960), 381. 
8. On a problem of Tarski. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 7 (1960), 382. 
9. Turing machines and the Entscheidungsproblem. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 8 
(1961), 354. 
I0. Validity in finite domains. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 8 (1961), 354. 
11. Logic, arithmetic, and automata. Proc. Int. Congress of Math. 1963. Almquist and 
Wiksells, Uppsala 1963. 
12. Relatively categorical and normal theories. Proc. Int. Symp. on Theory of Models, 
Berkeley, 1963. North-ltolland, Amsterdam, 1965, pp. 424-426. 
13. Transfinite automata recursions. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 12 (1965), 371. 
14. Restricted second-order theory of ordinals. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 12 11965), 
457. 
15. (with Lawrence H. Landweber) Definability in the monadic second-order theory 
of successor. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 14 (1967), 852. 
16. Affine definability of affine invariants of Euclidean geometry. Notices Amer. Math. 
Sot:. 15 (1968), 932. 
17. (with Kenneth J. Danhof) A strong form of Beth's definability theorem. Notices 
Amer. Math. Soc. 15 (1968), 932. 
18. (with Dirk Siefkes) Axiomatization of the monadic second-order theory of count- 
able ordinals. Tarski Symposium, Berkeley, 1971. 
19. The monadic second-order theory of to1. Preliminary report. Notices Amer. Math. 
Soc. 18 (1971), 662. 
Doctoral Students 
William Henry Hosken (1966)--Canonical Systems which Produce Regular Sets. 
Lawrence Hugh Landweber (1967) 
A Design Algorithm for Sequential Machines 
and Definability in Monadic Second Order Arithmetic. 
Gary Martin Haggard (1968)--Embedding of Graphs in Surfaces. 
Kenneth Joe Danhof (1969) 
On Definability and the Cantor Method in Model 
Theory. 
Peng-Siu Mei (1971)--Linear Closure Spaces and Matroids, Convex Closure Spaces 
and Paramatroids. 
Jean-Louis Lassez (1973)--On the Relationship Between Prefix Codes, Trees and 
Automata. 
Charles Zaiontz (1974)--Automata and the Monadic Theory of Ordinals < o~2. 
Terrence Michael Owens (1975)--Varieties of Skolem Rings. 
William Ellis Fenton (1982)--Axiomatic Convexity Theory. 
Steven Orville Senger (1982)- -The Existential Theory of Concatenation over a Finite 
Alphabet. 
Further Publications 
Dirk Siefkes: Grammars for Terms and Automata. On a book by the late J. Richard 
Biichi. In: Computation Theory and Logic, Egon B6rger (ed.), Lect. Notes Comp. 
Sci., vol. 270 (R6dding memorial volume), Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987, 
pp. 349-359. 
Saunders Maclane, Dirk Siefkes ed.: Collected Works of J. Richard Bach(. 
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1990. 

Index Nominum 
Abian, A. 
143 
Ackermann, W. 
7, 9, 87, 103-104, 164 
Alexander, J. 
57-58, 60, 67 
Anderson, A. 95 
Anellis, I. 
80 
an-Nairizi 
25 
Baker, G. 
xvii 
Barendregt, H. 
173 
Barwise, K. 
151 
Barzin, M. 
94, 135 
Becker, O. 
137 
Beeson, M. 
157 
Behmann, H. 
107 
Berger, R. 
108 
Bernardi, C. 
125 127 
Bernays, P. 
54, 71, 74, 77, 87-88, 
94-95, 103, 106, 115-118, 123, 131, 
141-143, 145, 162, 164, 166-167, 
169 
Beth, E. 
8, 25, 36, 42, 80, 148, 186 
Birkhoff, Garrett 
94-95 
Birkhoff, George 
58 
Bishop, E. 
137 
Blackwell, K. 
35, 42 
Bliss, G. 
58 
Bohr, H. 
61 
Bolza, O. 
55 
Boole, G. 
xvi, xxiii, I-7, 12-13, 19, 
25-26, 31 
Boolos, G. 
119, 123, 131 
Boutroux, P. 
58 
Boyer, C. 
42 
Brauer, R. 
67, 163 
Brouwer, L. 
xxi, 68, 103, 106, 134-135, 
137, 141,155, 167 
Brunning, J. 
24 
B/ichi, J. 
xxii, 176-189 
Bunder, M. 
173 
Bunn, R. 
35-36, 40, 42 
Burali-Forti, C. 
33-37 
Buss, S. 
144 
Cantor, G. 
xviii, 33-46, 66 
Carlson, T. 
130 
Carnap, R. 
86 87, 95 
Chihara, C. 
36 
Church, A. 
xv, xxii, 54, 61-65, 67-68, 
90-92, 98, 107, 141, 162, 164-165, 
167-168, 170-171,173 
Cocchiarella, N. 
36 
Coffa, A. 
37, 40 
Cogan, E. 
173 
Cohen, P. 
151,155, 167 
Cook, S. 
101,108, 144 
Copi, I. 
36, 79-80 
Courant, R. 
87 
Couturat, L. 
33, 35, 37-41 
Craig, W. 
186 
Crapo, D. 
22, 31 
Crossley, J. 
33, 36, 40-41 
Curry, H. 
xv, xxii, 54, 62, 67-68, 119, 
169 175 
Danhof, K. 
186 
Darwin, C. 
176 
Dauben, J. 
38 
Davis, M. 
47, 164 
Dawson, J. 
65 
Dedekind, R. 
34, 102 
de Jongh, D. 
123, 125 
DeLong, H. 42 
De Morgan, A. 
16, 25, 27 

192 
Index Nominum 
Dewey, J. 
66 
Dipert, R. 
24, 28 
Doets, H. 
36 
Dreben, B. 
77 
duBois-Reymond, P. 
1 !1 
Dummett, M. 
xvii, 95 
Dunham, B. 
107 
Duren, W. 
67 
Einstein, A. 
60, 67 
Eisele, C. 
xvi 
Eisenhart, L. 
58, 60, 67 
Elgot, C. 
178, 180 
Errera, A. 
135 
Euclid 
11, 15 
Fang, J. 
78-79 
Feferman, S. 
79-80, 91,125, 127 
Feigl, H. 
86 
Fenton, W. 
176, 179 
Feys, R. 
171-172 
Fine, H. 
58-59 
Finsler, P. 
89-91 
Fisch, M. 
24, 27 
Fitch, F. 
173 
Foster, A. 
54, 61, 65 
Fraenkel, A. 
164 
Frege, G. 
xiii, xvii xviii, 13, 27, 29, 31, 
37, 42, 71-73, 78, 80 
Freyd, P. 
152, 155 
Friedman, H. 
111 
Garciadiego Dantan, A. 
35, 42 
Gauss, Carl 
182-183 
Gauss, Christian 
62 
Gentzen, G. 
xiii, xix, 72-73, 77-82, 
106, 145, 162, 167, 170-172 
Girard, J.-Y. 
77, 78 
Giraud, J. 
153 
Givens, W. 
67 
Glivenko, V. 
135 
G6del, K. 
xiii, xv, xvii, xix-xx, 54, 58, 
61-64, 68, 71-74, 76, 79, 84-100, 
101-102, 104-107, 110-117, !19, 
121-122, 124, 130 131,135, 
138-140, 145-148, 161-167 
Goldberg, S. 
111 
Goldblatt, R. 
140-141,151 
Goidfarb, W. 
71, 73, 75 
Gonseth, F. 
85 
Grattan-Guinness, I. 
34-40,42-43 
Grelling, K. 44, 92 94 
Griffin, N. 
35 
Gronwall, T. 
58 
Grothendieck, A. 
151-155 
Gurevich, Y. 
180 
Haack, S. 
24 
Hacker, P. 
xvii 
Hadamard, J. 
106 
Hahn, H. 
86 
Halperin, I. 67 
Halsted, G. 
7 
Hamilton, W.R. 
25 
Hannequin, A. 
33 
Hardy, G. 
35 
Harrington, L. 
94 
Harrison, M. 
178 
Heath, T. 
11,25 
Heisenberg, W. 
111 
Helmer, O. 
88, 92-94 
Henkin, L. 
54, 65, 96, 113-119, 121, 
122, 127, 131 
Herbrand, J. 
xiii, xiv, xix, 71-83, 91, 
162-163 
Heron of Alexandria 
11-12, 25 
Heron 
152 
Heyting, A. 
xxi, 106, 134-138, 
141-142, 156, 164 
Hibben, J. 
59 
Hilbert, D. 
xiii, xix, xx, 7, 9, 25, 55-57, 
63-66, 68, 71-83, 84, 87, 89, 94, 96, 
98, 101-106, 115, 141-143, 162, 
164, 166, 170, 182, 185 
Hille, E. 
58, 60 
Hindley, R. 
172 
Hoffmann, B. 
67 
Hofstadter, D. 
xx, 131 
Hogben, L. 
25 
Huntington, E. 
15, 21-23, 27-29, 31, 
55, 66 
Husserl, E. 
102 
Huygens, C. 
106 
Hyland, M. 
155 
In~ld, L. 
67 
Jacobson, N. 
67 
Ja~kowski, S. 
72-73,78,80,162,167 
Jeffrey, R. 
80 
Jensen, D. 
122 
Jevons, A. 
12,31 

Index Nominum 
193 
Johnstone, P. 
151 
Jones, D. 
59 
Jones, G. 
59 
Jones, T. 
59 
Jourdain, P. 
34, 37,40 
Kahr, A. 
108 
Keisler, H. 
151 
Kemeny, J. 
54, 65 
Kleene, S. 
xv, xxi-xxii, 36, 42, 54, 
61-62,65,67,84,91-94, 111-112, 
141-144, 157, 170, 172 
Klein, F. 
56-57 
Kneale, W. and M. 
42 
Kock, A. 
155 
Kolmogorov, A. 
135, 141,145, 167 
Korteweg, D. 
135 
Kreisel, G. 
xiii, 71-74, 77-78, 84, 
113-118, 120-127, 129, 131,156, 
164 
Kripke, S. 
130-131, 148 151 
Kronecker, L. 
57 
Kuczyflski, J. 
94 
Kuhn, T. 
112 
Kuratowski, K. 
xix 
Kuznetsov, A. 
141 
Ladd, C. See Ladd-Franklin, C. 
Ladd, Franklin, C. 
xvi, 2-8 
Ladri6re, J. 
94 
Landweber, L. 
181 
Langford, C. 
62 67 
Lawvere, F. 
151-153, 155 
Leblanc, H. 
80 
Lefschetz, S. 
58 
Leibniz, G. 
xv, xvi. 12, 25, 26 
Lennes, N. 
65 
Lercher, B. 
173 
Lever. J. 
173 
Levi-Civita, T. 
55 
Levy, A. 
36,42 
Lewis, C.I. 
22-23, 31, 62, 64, 68, 138, 
148 
L6b, M. 
113, 115 121,123-126, 
128-131 
Loewen, K. 
173 
Loveland, D. 
47 
Lowenheim, L. 
xiii, xiv, 72-77, 80, 85, 
88, 166 
Lubkin 
152 
Lukasiewicz, J. 
29, 78, 80 
Macintyre, A. 
122-125, 130-131 
MacLane, S. 
153, 161-162 
Maehara, S. 
148 
Magari, R. 
123 
Magidor, M. 
180 
Mahr, B. 
185 
Makanin 
185 
Markov, A. 
137-138 
Marquand, A. 
29 
Maschke, H. 
55 
Matijasevic, Y. 
94 
McAloon, K. 
111 
McKinsey, J. 
139-140, 148 
McNaughton, R. 
178, 180-181 
Menger, K. 
54, 88-89 
Meyer, A. 
144 
Minc, G. 
71 
Mitchell, O. 
5 6, 8, 23, 31-32 
Mitchell, W. 
152 153 
Moh, S. 
168 
Montagna, F. 
125-126 
Montague, R. 
122 
Moore, E.H. 
55, 65 
Moore, G.H. 
34, 35, 40, 42 
Moore, R.L. 
56, 65 
Morse, M. 
60, 67 
Mostowski, A. 
94, 148. 162, 164 
Miiller, E. 
6. 8 
Muzavitski, A. 
141 
Nelson, D. 
167 
Newcomb, S. 
31 
Newell, A. 47 50, 53 
Nicomachus 
184 
Nidditch, P. 
36, 42 
Olaf 
174 
Padoa, A. 
65 
Paris, J. 
94 
Pasch, M. 
55-56 
Peano, G. 
36, 42, 55-56, 58, 90, 102 
Peirce, B. 
25 
Peirce, C.S. 
xvi-xvii, 10-32, 64 
Perelman, C. 
92 
Petrus Hispanus 
24 
Philodemus 
29 
Pieri, M. 
56 
Pitcher, E. 
67 
Poincar6, J.H. 
36, 57 
Popper. K. 
84-87 

194 
Index Nominum 
Poretskiy, P. See Poretsky, P. 
Poretsky, P. 
6, 8 
Post, E. 
54, 64, 90-91, 97-98, 163 
Powell, W. 
156 
Prawitz, D. 
71, 79-80 
Price, D. 
111 
Prior, A. 
10, 15, 24, 26, 28 
Putnam, H. 
31 
Quine, w. 
64, 67, 79-80, 85 
Rabin, M. 
181 
Ramsey, F. 
68 
Rasiowa, H. 
148, 151 
Reichenbach, H. 
86 
Richard, J. 
88 
Roberts, H. 
22, 31 
Robinson, A. 
95, 97, 151 
Rosser, J.B. 
34, 36-37, 54, 61, 62, 65, 
67, 85, 92-94, 121, 161,164-165, 
170-172 
Russell, B. xvi, xvii-xviii, 29, 33-46, 
52, 57, 64, 68, 71-73, 95-96, 102 
Sambin, G. 
123, 125, 128 
Sanchis, L. 
173 
~edrov, A. 
155 
Schlick, M. 
88 
Sch6nfinkel, M. 
103, 169 
Schr6der, E. 
xvi, xvii, 2-8, 13-15, 
18-23, 26-28, 31, 34, 104 
Schur, I. 
87 
Schiitte, K. 
79-80 
Scott, D. 
136, 152 
Seldin, J. 
172-174 
Senger, S. 
176, 185 
Shaw, J.C. 
47-50, 53 
Shelah, S. 
180 
Shields, P. 
25 
Sikorski, R. 
148, 151 
Simmons, H. 
122-125, 130-131 
Simon, H. 
47-50, 52-53 
Simpson, S. 
111 
Skolem, T. 
72, 74-77, 80, 85, 88 89, 
94-95, 166 
Sluga, H. 
xvii 
Smoryfiski, C. 
125-126 
Smullyan, R. 
xxii 
Solovay, R. 
123, 125, 130-132, 
140-141,152 
Spengler, O. 
111 
Statman, R. 
78, 82 
Stockmeyer, L. 
144 
Stone, M. 
138, 140 
Study, E. 
57 
Styazhkin, N. 
6, 8 
Surma, S. 
xix 
Tait, W. 
78 
Takeuti, G. 
79-80, 120-122, 126-127, 
131 
Tarski, A. 
xv, 65, 98, 138-140, 148, 167 
Taub, A. 
67 
Temple, G. 
36,42 
Thatcher, J. 
178 
Thiel, C. 
xvii, 65 
Tierney, M. 
151,153 
Troelstra, A. 
xxi, 137, 143, 146-147 
Tucker, A. 
67 
Turing, A. 
54, 61, 91-92, 104, 107-108, 
163, 168 
Turquette, A. 
27, 29 
Ulam, S. 
54 
Valla, L. 
28 
van Bentham, J. 
119 
van Heijenoort, J. 
xiii-xiv, 34, 36-37, 
42, 44, 71-77, 84-85, 90 
Veblen, O. 
54-70 
Venn, J. 
xvi, 2-4, 7-8, 26-27 
Veronese, G. 
55 
Visser, A. 
127 
Voigt, A. 
7,9 
yon Neumann, J. 
60, 63, 67, 77, 84, 87, 
103, 162 
Waismann, F. 
86 
Wallman, H. 
67 
Wang, H. 
29, 47, 49-51, 53, 86, 108, 
163, 178 
Watson, J.H. 
See Smoryfiski, C. 
Wedderburn, J. 
58 
Weyl, H. 
60, 62, 67-68, 103 
Weyl, J. 
67 
Whately, R. 
19, 28 
Whitehead, A.N. 
xvii, 35, 52, 57, 
72-73, 102 

Index Nominum 
195 
Whitehead, J.H.C. 
57, 61, 67 
Wiener, N. 
64, 169 
Wilson, E. 
55 
Wilson, T.W. 
58 
Wittgenstein, L. 
95 
Wright, J. 
176, 186 
Young, J.W. 
56, 58, 66 
Zaiontz, C. 
180 
Zeller, E. 
29 
Zermelo, E. 
34, 58, 88-90, 95 

