
 Philosophy of Religion  
 Keith Yandell’s  Philosophy of Religion: A Contemporary Introduction  was one of 
the ﬁ rst textbooks to explore the philosophy of religion with reference to religions 
other than Christianity. This new, revised edition explores the logical validity and 
truth-claims of several world religions—Christianity, Judaism, Islam, Hinduism, 
Buddhism, and Jainism—with updated, streamlined discussions on important 
topics in philosophy of religion such as: 
 • 
religious pluralism 
 • 
 freedom and responsibility 
 • 
evidentialist moral theism 
 • 
reformed epistemology 
 • 
doxastic practice epistemology 
 • 
the problem of evil 
 • 
ontological and cosmological arguments. 
  Other new features include updated Questions for Reﬂ ection and new anno-
tated bibliographies for each chapter, as well as an updated Glossary. This exciting 
new edition, much like its classic predecessor, is sure to be a classroom staple for 
undergraduate students studying philosophy of religion, as well as a comprehen-
sive introductory read for anyone interested in the subject.  
 Keith E. Yandell  taught at the University of Wisconsin-Madison until his retirement 
in 2011. He is author of  Christianity and Philosophy ,  Basic Issues in the Philosophy 
of Religion ,  Hume’s “Inexplicable Mystery” ,  The Epistemology of Religious 
Experience , and (with Harold Netland)  Christianity and Buddhism .  

 Routledge Contemporary Introductions to Philosophy 
 Series editor: Paul K. Moser, Loyola University of 
Chicago  
  This innovative, well-structured series is for students who have already done an 
introductory course in philosophy. Each book introduces a core general subject in 
contemporary philosophy and offers students an accessible but substantial transi-
tion from introductory to higher-level college work in that subject. The series is 
accessible to non-specialists, and each book clearly motivates and expounds the 
problems and positions introduced. An orientating chapter brieﬂ y introduces its 
topic and reminds readers of any crucial material they need to have retained from 
a typical introductory course. Considerable attention is given to explaining the 
central philosophical problems of a subject and the main competing solutions and 
arguments for those solutions. The primary aim is to educate students in the main 
problems, positions, and arguments of contemporary philosophy rather than to 
convince students of a single position. 
 Ancient Philosophy 
 2nd Edition 
 Christopher Shields 
 Classical Modern Philosophy 
 Jeffrey Tlumak 
 Continental Philosophy 
 Andrew Cutrofello 
 Epistemology 
 3rd Edition 
 Robert Audi 
 Ethics 
 2nd Edition 
 Harry J. Gensler 
 Metaethics 
 Mark van Roojen 
 Metaphysics 
 3rd Edition 
 Michael J. Loux 
 Moral Psychology 
 Valerie Tiberius 
 Philosophy of Art 
 Noël Carroll 
 Philosophy of Biology 
 Alex Rosenberg and Daniel 
W. McShea 
 Philosophy of Economics 
 Julian Reiss 
 Philosophy of Language 
 2nd Edition 
 William G. Lycan 

 Philosophy of Mathematics 
 2nd Edition 
 James Robert Brown 
 Philosophy of Mind 
 3rd Edition 
 John Heil 
 Philosophy of Perception 
 William Fish 
 Philosophy of Psychology 
 José Luis Bermudez 
 Philosophy of Religion 
 2nd Edition 
 Keith E. Yandell 
 Philosophy of Science 
 3rd Edition 
 Alex Rosenberg 
 Philosophy of Social Science 
 Mark Risjord 
 Social and Political Philosophy 
 John Christman 
 Forthcoming: 
 Bioethics 
 Jason Scott Robert 
 Feminist Philosophy 
 Heidi Grasswick 
 Free Will 
 Michael McKenna 
and Derk Pereboom 
 Metaphysics 
 4th Edition 
 Michael J. Loux 
and Thomas M. Crisp 
 Phenomenology 
 Walter Hopp 
 Philosophy of Action 
 Sarah Paul 
 Philosophy of Film 
 Aaron Smuts 
 Philosophy of Literature 
 John Gibson 
 Social and Political Philosophy 
 2nd Edition 
 John Christman 
 Virtue Ethics 
 Liezl van Zyl 

This page intentionally left blank

 Philosophy of Religion 
 A Contemporary Introduction 
 Second Edition 
 Keith E. Yandell  
 

 First published 2016 
 by Routledge 
 711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 
 and by Routledge 
 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN 
 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa 
business  
 © 2016 Taylor & Francis 
 The right of Keith E. Yandell to be identiﬁ ed as author of this work 
has been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 
of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted 
or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from 
the publishers. 
 Trademark notice : Product or corporate names may be trademarks 
or registered trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁ cation 
and explanation without intent to infringe. 
 First edition published 1999 by Routledge 
 Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data  
 Names: Yandell, Keith E., 1938– author. 
 Title: Philosophy of religion : a contemporary introduction / 
 Keith E.  Yandell. 
 Description: 2 [edition]. | New York : Routledge, 2016. | 
 Series: Routledge   contemporary introductions to 
 philosophy | Includes bibliographical 
  references and index. 
 Identiﬁ ers: LCCN 2015041756 | ISBN 9780415963701 (alk. paper) 
 Subjects: LCSH: Religion—Philosophy. | Religions. 
 Classiﬁ cation: LCC BL51. Y275 2016 | DDC 210—dc23 
 LC record available at  http://lccn.loc.gov/2015041756  
 ISBN: 978-0-415-96369-5 (hbk) 
 ISBN: 978-0-415-96370-1 (pbk) 
 ISBN: 978-1-315-67623-4 (ebk) 
 Typeset in Times New Roman and Gill Sans 
 by Apex CoVantage, LLC  
 

 For Sharon  

This page intentionally left blank

 Contents  
 Annotated Table of Contents  
xiii
 Preface to Second Edition  
xvi
 Preface to First Edition 
xvii
  1 Introduction  
1
 Suggested Readings   
2
 PART I
Philosophy and Religion  
5
  2 What Is Philosophy? What Is Religion? 
 What Is Philosophy of Religion?  
7
 Philosophy  
7
 Objectivity  
9
 Religion 
10
 Philosophy of Religion  
11
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
12
 Suggested Readings  
13
  3 What Sorts of Religion Are There?  
15
 Monotheistic Religion  
15
 Nonmonotheistic Religion  
16
 Criteria for Individuating Religions  
19
 Suggestions as to Common Features  
22
 Conclusion  
23
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
24
 Suggested Readings  
24
  4 What Sorts of Religious Experience Are There?  
26
 Structure and Content  
26
 Descriptions  
28
 Direct/Indirect Experience 
35
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
36
 Suggested Readings  
37

x Contents
  5 The Importance of Doctrine and the Distinctness of 
 Religious Traditions  
39
 Doctrine  
39
 Truth-Claims 
42
 Identity 
43
 Diversity 
47
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
50
 Suggested Readings  
51
  6 Religious Pluralism  
53
 Religious Plurality and Religious Pluralism  
53
 Hick’s Purposes  
53
 More Recent Normative Religious Pluralism  
58
 Conclusion  
61
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
61
 Suggested Readings  
62
 PART II
Religious Conceptions of Ultimate Reality  
65
  7 Monotheistic Conceptions of Ultimate Reality  
67
 Generic Philosophical Monotheism  
67
 Greek Monotheism  
67
 Semitic Monotheism  
70
 Hindu Monotheism  
71
 Monotheisms and Atheisms  
72
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
77
 Suggested Readings  
78
  8 Nonmonotheistic Conceptions of Ultimate Reality  
80
 Advaita Vedanta Hinduism  
80
 Jainism and Buddhism  
87
 Conclusion  
93
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
93
 Suggested Readings  
95
 PART III
Arguments concerning Monotheistic Conceptions  
97
  9 Arguments against Monotheism  
99
 Three Questions  
99
 The Problem of Evil  
100
 The Consistency Issue  
103
 The Evidential Issue  
106

Contents xi
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
115
 Suggested Readings  
116
 10 Arguments for Monotheism  
117
 Proof  
117
 Logical Necessity  
119
 Purely Conceptual Proofs and the Ontological Argument  
121
 Empirical Proofs, Argument Strategies, and Principles of 
Sufﬁ cient Reason  
128
 Arguments by Thomas Aquinas  
130
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
154
 Suggested Readings  
157
 11 Monotheism and Religious Experience  
159
 Phenomenologically Thick Experiences  
159
 Experience as Direct Evidence  
160
 A Principle of Experiential Evidence 
163
 Being Evidence versus Providing Evidence  
169
 The Evidential Argument from Religious Experience  
171
 The Principle of Experiential Evidence Applied  
172
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
175
 Suggested Readings  
176
 PART IV
Arguments concerning Nonmonotheistic Conceptions  
179
 12 Arguments concerning Nonmonotheistic Conceptions  
181
 Appeals to Argument and Appeals to Experience  
181
 Advaita Vedanta  
181
 Jainism and Buddhism on Persons  
183
 Identity 
184
 Personal Identity  
185
 Bundle Theory  
186
 Substance Theory  
192
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
199
 Suggested Readings  
202
 13 Enlightenment-Based Arguments and Nonmonotheistic 
 Conceptions of Ultimate Reality  
203
 Appeals to Enlightenment Experience 
203
 Self-Authentication  
206
 Advaita Appeal to Enlightenment Experience  
217
 Jain-type Appeals to Experience  
218
 Buddhist-type Appeals to Experience  
223
 The Contrasting Arguments  
225

xii Contents
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
228
 Suggested Readings  
230
 PART V
Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason  
231
 14 Religion, Morality, and Responsibility  
233
 Divine Command Ethics  
234
 Euthyphro Dilemma  
235
 Ultimate Values: Buddhism  
237
 Ultimate Values: Jainism  
238
 Morality without Religion?  
239
 Depth, Breadth, and Length  
241
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
266
 Suggested Readings  
268
 15 Faith and Reason  
269
 Faith  
269
 Reason and Rationality  
276
 Conﬁ rmationism  
280
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
288
 Suggested Readings  
289
 16 Some Further Vistas  
290
 Moser  
291
 Plantinga 
291
 Alston 
292
 Questions for Reﬂ ection  
293
 Suggested Readings  
293
 Glossary  
295
 Bibliography  
301
 Index  
314
 

 Annotated Table of Contents  
 Chapter 1: Introduction  
  Four different basic types of religious traditions are described: monotheism, abso-
lute monism, atheistic substance dualism, and atheistic non-dualism. The former 
two are in effect views of monotheism as ultimate versus apparent, and the latter 
views concern the nature of human persons. 
 Chapter 2: What Is Philosophy? What Is Religion? What Is Philosophy 
of Religion? 
  Philosophy is the construction and assessment of conceptual systems; religions 
are views of the cosmos that diagnose and propose a cure for a universal human 
spiritual illness; and philosophy of religion analyses and assesses the core con-
cepts and arguments relative to these diagnoses and cures. 
 Chapter 3: What Sorts of Religion Are There?  
  Criteria are offered for discerning types of religion in terms of their doctrinal 
stances. 
 Chapter 4: What Sorts of Religious Experience Are There?  
  By comparison between religious and non-religious experience, and their struc-
ture and content, criteria are developed relative to reﬂ ection on the evidential 
potential of religious experience. 
 Chapter 5: The Importance of Doctrine and the Distinctness of 
Religious Traditions  
  It is argued that doctrinal difference is to be expected among diverse religious 
traditions and that no diagnosis or cure is offered without doctrine. This is so even 
for religions that may claim to lack doctrines altogether. 
 Chapter 6: Religious Pluralism  
  Assuming moral agreement among at least the major religious traditions, reli-
gious pluralists set aside the diagnoses and cures central to those traditions. Even 
granting the controversial assumption, the enterprise seems deeply ﬂ awed. 

xiv Annotated Table of Contents
 Chapter 7: Monotheistic Conceptions of Ultimate Reality  
  Comparisons and contrasts are drawn among a stylized Greek, Christian, and 
Hindu monotheism. These are relevant to future discussions. 
 Chapter 8: Nonmonotheistic Conceptions of Ultimate Reality  
  The basic views as to what there is according to Advaita Vedanta Hinduism, Jain-
ism, and Theravada Buddhism are presented in philosophically accessible terms 
and their philosophical commitments laid out. 
 Chapter 9: Arguments against Monotheism  
  Arguments that belief in God and evil is logically inconsistent, consistent but 
against the evidence, and inconsistent to hold God blameless for allowing things 
we hold humans wrong to allow are assessed. 
 Chapter 10: Arguments for Monotheism  
 The arguments that it is impossible that God not exist and that if there are things 
that exist dependently then God exists are analyzed in detail. 
 Chapter 11: Monotheism and Religious Experience  
  Appeal to religious experiences that are apparently experiences of God is consid-
ered in the context of a principle of experiential evidence developed by consider-
ing counter-examples. 
 Chapter 12: Arguments concerning Nonmonotheistic Conceptions  
  The difference between arguments appealing to enlightenment experience and 
those appealing to other matters is noted, and arguments of the latter sort related 
to Advaita, Jainism, and Theravada are discussed. 
 Chapter 13: Enlightenment-Based Arguments and Nonmonotheistic 
Conceptions of Ultimate Reality  
  Since appeal to esoteric enlightenment experience is absolutely central to each 
tradition, the phenomenological description of such experiences—the way they 
seem to their subjects—and their use in supporting the traditions in which they 
occur are assessed. 
 Chapter 14: Religion, Morality, and Responsibility  
  The difference between freedom with determinism and freedom against determin-
ism, and their connection to moral responsibility, is analyzed. Metaphysical value 
and moral value are distinguished and related. 
 Chapter 15: Faith and Reason  
  Faith that and faith in are distinguished. The deepest critique of faith, if it suc-
ceeds, is the claim that there are no religious claims to believe or not since they are 
neither true nor false. A variety of such views are discussed. Then the strategy of 
arguing to the best explanation, or at least as good as its competition, is discussed 
as a means of giving content to faith. 

Annotated Table of Contents xv
 Chapter 16: Some Further Vistas  
 Paul Moser’s appeal to moral experience as evidence for God’s existence, Alvin 
Plantinga’s reformed epistemology for which it is reasonable to believe in God 
without evidence, and William Alston’s view that religious experience and belief 
should be seen in the context of a belief-forming practice, are sketched as further 
ways of giving content to faith. 

 Preface to Second Edition 
 The  Second Edition  continues the structure of the  First : it explores central issues 
in philosophy of religion in comparative terms cross-culturally by considering 
ideas and practices from Christianity, Hinduism, Jainism, and Buddhism. 
 A new ﬁ rst chapter structures the book as a whole, providing a large-scale con-
ceptual map for what is to come. The second chapter, after explaining the nature 
of philosophy, religion, and philosophy of religion, ﬁ lls in that larger-scale map 
with the most pertinent details. It contains more precisely deﬁ ned criteria than 
were offered in the previous edition. 
 Other major topical improvements to the  Second Edition include: 
   •  
Updates to  Chapter 6 , “Religious Pluralism,” building on the earlier focus on 
the work of John Hick now to discuss Paul Knitter and other newer ways of 
approaching religious pluralism. 
 • 
A revised and updated discussion of the problem of evil in  Chapter 9 , “Argu-
ments against Monotheism.” 
 • 
A new sort of disguised compatibilism, discussed in  Chapter 14 , “Religion, 
Morality, and Responsibility.” 
  •  
A new concluding  Chapter 16 , “Some Further Vistas,” which discusses the 
philosophy of religion in relation to three perspectives in epistemology not 
under review in the  First Edition— moral evidentialism, reformed epistemol-
ogy, and doxastic practice epistemology. Although presented by Christian 
monotheists, they have potential application to other traditions as well. 
 Pedagogically, the main signiﬁ cant new feature is a new annotated Table of Con-
tents, with every chapter description including reference to key concepts and 
claims discussed therein. 
 Updated bibliographies are included at the end of each chapter and updated 
notes and a general glossary along with a general index are included at the end of 
the volume. 

 Preface to First Edition 
 Contemporary academia is secular. The idea that religious views of any tradi-
tional sort should guide the research or inform the worldview of any discipline is 
rejected out of court. Things were not always so. Professor John Bascom, former 
President of my own university, used to give a capstone undergraduate course in 
how to prove the existence and nature of God; his practice was more typical than 
surprising. Times have changed. 
 A student of mine once published a paper he wrote for a seminar he took with 
me. It argued that there is reason to reject a particular set of religious beliefs. In 
effect, the responses of his former professors ranged from  we all know that stuff 
is false  through  considering whether religious claims are true or false isn’t part of 
the academic game  to  saying someone’s religious beliefs are false is impolite and 
politically unwise . None of these responses is atypical. 
 Nonetheless, both traditionally and currently, the philosophy of religion has 
made rational assessment of religious claims central to its purposes. Endeavor-
ing to determine the meaning, and the truth value—the  sense  and the  truth-or-
falsity— of religious claims is part and parcel of this discipline. Some philosophers 
have denied that there are any religious claims, proposing that what seem to be 
such really are meaningless. Other philosophers have held that religious traditions 
can only be understood in their own terms, each describing a conceptual world 
inaccessible to any other so that there is no “neutral place” from which assessment 
can be offered. (As we will see, this misleading metaphor disguises a perspective 
whose incoherence has, alas, not mitigated its inﬂ uence.) Taking either the  all 
supposed religious claims are nonsense  or the  every religion its own conceptual 
world unrelated to all others  line is itself opting for some philosophical views as 
opposed to others. Those outside of philosophy who assume one line or the other 
assume what desperately needs proof. In so doing, they draw intellectual drafts 
on empty accounts. These days, the  nonsense  line1 is seldom heard but the  own 
conceptual world  line is everywhere. The best way to show that the  nonsense and 
the  own conceptual world  lines are utterly mistaken is to offer the sorts of assess-
ments that these lines suppose to be impossible. That is the basic task before us. 
This task has three components: presentation of data, assessment of arguments, 
and reﬂ ection on experiences. 

xviii Preface to First Edition
 Presentation of Data 
 We begin by saying what religion is and what philosophy is. There are no non-
controversial answers to these questions. Nonetheless, clarity about how religion 
and philosophy are construed in this text should be helpful for understanding the 
rest of what is said. Then we consider what kinds of religions there are, what 
religious experience is, and what kinds of religious experience there are. Some 
religious experiences, for example, are seen as experiences of God; others are not. 
Some religions are monotheistic; they hold that God exists and has very strong 
powers. Others hold that ultimate reality is not God, but something else. Both 
sorts of religious traditions not surprisingly offer accounts of what persons are, 
and one tradition typically offers a different view of this matter than another. Such 
differences are philosophically as well as religiously signiﬁ cant, and they require 
our attention. There is more than one concept of God, and so more than one kind 
of monotheism. Similarly, nonmonotheistic religions differ in terms of how they 
conceive of what exists and has religious importance. So we need to look at dif-
ferent notions of ultimate reality, conceived as divine or not. 
 Since the variety of religions is great, no one book could responsibly deal with 
philosophy of religion in connection with all of them. Our scope will include 
representative views from Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, 
and Jainism. Each of these traditions is itself complex, and while we can hope 
to be fair, we cannot pretend to be exhaustive. One great divide among religious 
traditions comes between those that are monotheistic and those that are not. Our 
discussion will be divided along these lines with no suggestion that “nonmono-
theism” is more than a label of convenience; each variety of nonmonotheism we 
discuss, like each variety of monotheism, will be positively characterized in terms 
of its own indigenous perspective. 
 Without any suggestion that this is their only or primary importance, religions 
provide the raw material for philosophical reﬂ ection. At this point, we will have 
our raw data for philosophical reﬂ ection. Once we have reﬂ ected brieﬂ y on how 
arguments can be constructed and assessed, and on how appeal to experience as 
evidence may be crafted and evaluated, we can turn to asking what reason, if any, 
there is to think that the religious perspectives already described might be true. 
 Escaping Incoherence 
 There are academic circles in which talk of truth, let alone religious perspectives 
being true, is about as popular as a teetotal sermon at a local pub. For this to be the 
line to take, it must be true (in the sense of “true” that was supposedly dismissed) 
that talk of truth is somehow so problematic as to require its abandonment. This 
line thus appears to be incoherent; it appears so because it is. 
 The devotees of a religious tradition typically take what their sacred texts say 
to be true. Nor is it beyond their ability to think what this “being true” might 
amount to. Monotheists will take  God exists  to be true—they will suppose that 

Preface to First Edition xix
an omnicompetent being exists on whom the world depends. Some religious non-
monotheists will think this claim false, and will think that such claims as  Persons 
are indestructible or  Persons are nothing more than momentary states are true. As 
Aristotle once said, a proposition is true if things are as it says they are, and not 
otherwise. Aristotle, and most devotees of most traditions, have no difﬁ culty in 
understanding what this means. It is possible to educate oneself out of all possibil-
ity of learning anything. Aristotle and ordinary religious people have not suffered 
this injury. 
 Using the Data (I) 
 Arguments have been offered for, and others against, religious beliefs. This is so 
regarding both monotheistic traditions and nonmonotheistic traditions. Far from 
such arguments going deeply against the grain of the religious traditions, sin-
cere and admired devotees of such traditions have offered arguments for their 
own perspective and against other perspectives. If it is true that some religious 
believers have rejected any such idea as needless if not inappropriate, others have 
entered enthusiastically into the enterprise. The idea that offering such arguments 
is somehow inherently against all religious thought and practice is not substanti-
ated by the history of these traditions. Many of these arguments are provocative 
and powerful; they deserve our attention. Some of these arguments concern the 
existence and nature of God; others concern the nature of persons. In each case, 
such disputes tie in tightly with different views of salvation and enlightenment, 
of what one may expect and hope. The arguments interact signiﬁ cantly with the 
traditions in ways often ignored. 
 Related to the possibility of such arguments are competing notions of faith, of 
reason, and of their connections. Also related are competing views of the capaci-
ties and limits of religious language. If all claims about God, for example, are 
non-literal, how does this affect what sorts of arguments can be offered on behalf 
of these claims? Does this place them simply beyond argument altogether?  Are all 
claims about God non-literal? Hence, along with considering arguments, we must 
discuss issues concerning the nature and scope of religious language. 
 Using the Data (II) 
 People claim to have religious experiences. We thus ask what evidence, if any, 
such experience provides for religious belief. Appeal to at least apparent experi-
ence of God, for example, can but need not be another version of an argument for 
God’s existence. One could argue:  people seem to have experience of God; the 
best explanation of this fact is that God causes those experiences; hence there is 
reason to think that God exists . Similarly, one could argue:  there seems to be a 
computer in front of me; the best explanation of things so appearing is that there 
is a computer in front of me; so there is reason to think a computer is there . But 
I seem simply to see the computer; my belief that it is there is a matter of at least 

xx Preface to First Edition
seeming to see it and having no reason to think that things are not as they seem. 
I neither see something else from which I infer to my computer nor offer claims 
about best explanations. Similarly, many have claimed to experience God, not to 
have some experience of something from which they can then properly infer that 
God exists. We will consider religious experience, viewed as evidence for God’s 
existence by virtue of its being a matter of “seeing God” rather than simply as a 
matter of its being the source of a premise in a proof of God’s existence. 
 Differing views of persons are also supported by appeals to experience, par-
ticularly to introspective and enlightenment experiences. How such experiences 
should be described, and what signiﬁ cance they bear, is a matter of central dis-
pute, particularly between such nonmonotheistic traditions as Jainism and Bud-
dhism. Further, competing accounts of what persons are connect closely with 
diverse accounts of morality and of value generally. These close connections are 
no insigniﬁ cant part of what gives the disputes their importance to the traditions 
involved. Discerning these traditions widens one’s understanding of the views 
involved, and enriches the sorts of possible assessments of competing appeals to 
experience. Closely connected with these topics are competing notions of human 
survival of death and whether any of them have any basis or support. 
 Summary 
 The core of philosophy of religion, as of philosophy generally, is metaphysics 
and epistemology, systematic attempts to give defensible answers to the questions 
 What is there?  and  How can we know what there is?  At the core of any religious 
tradition is its own answer to these questions, construed as and embedded in an 
answer to the basic problem to which the tradition addresses itself as the rationale 
for its existence—thus our own concentration on accounts of religious reality and 
religious knowledge. How is ultimate reality conceived, and how are human per-
sons viewed in relation to ultimate reality? With what consequences for salvation 
or enlightenment, morality, and any afterlife there may be? What arguments are 
offered for, and what against, these views? What appeals to experience are made 
for one view and against another? What assessment should be offered of these 
arguments and appeals? 
 In sum, our intent is to describe the basic perspectives concerning ultimate 
reality and our relations to it as seen by several of the major religious traditions, 
and to ask what, if anything, there is by way of reason or evidence to think any 
of the claims that deﬁ ne these perspectives are true, or are false. The underlying 
conviction is that an academia in which such questions are not somewhere raised, 
and competing answers debated, illegitimately ignores issues of great importance, 
and does so without decent excuse. 
 Besides being important, philosophy of religion is fun. One gets to learn what 
people in quite different cultural contexts believe about God, the nature of per-
sons, good and evil, salvation, and enlightenment; to see what they take to follow 
from these beliefs; and to think as clearly and well about them as one can. Perhaps 

Preface to First Edition xxi
this is not everyone’s cup of tea, but for those at all inclined to it, it should be a 
thoroughly enjoyable project. I hope that this volume is as much serious fun to 
read as it was to write. 
 Suggested Readings 
 Alston, William (1967) “Problems of Philosophy of Religion,”    Encyclopedia of Philoso-
phy , Volume 6 (New York: Macmillan), p. 286–288. A brief issue-oriented summary of 
the ﬁ eld. 
 Bascom, John (1980)  Natural Theology  (New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons). A presentation of 
arguments for the existence of God by an early President of the University of Wisconsin. 
 Collins, James (1967)  The Emergence of the Philosophy of Religion  (New Haven: Yale 
University Press). A history of the ﬁ eld that ﬁ nds its recent roots in nineteenth-century 
philosophy. 
 Lewis, H. D. (1967) “History of the Philosophy of Religion,”       Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 
Volume 6 (New York: Macmillan), p. 276–285. A brief, historically oriented summary 
of the ﬁ eld. 

This page intentionally left blank

 There are a great many religions being practiced as you read this sentence. Each 
has its ways of interpreting and responding to the world. Expressed in rites and 
rituals, institutions and practices, each has a view of what there is—of the cosmos 
as a whole and of the role and status of persons in it. Taken seriously, these views 
have implications for most if not all of life. Some practice withdrawing from the 
world, looking internally into oneself for answers to questions as to what one is 
and how one may ﬂ ourish. Others look to a community for such answers. Many 
if not all treat verbal traditions or oral texts, or both, as being at least helpful and 
more likely authoritative in terms of discerning a proper path in life. Among these 
religions, we will consider four examples. Each includes a view of what there is 
(metaphysics), of how it may be known (epistemology), and of what has deep 
value (value theory, including ethics). Our choices are cross-cultural and intended 
to be representative of two diverse sorts of religious tradition. No disrespect is 
intended to any religious tradition in this selection. The ﬁ eld is too vast to cover 
in one volume, and one cannot help being selective. The idea is to provide very 
diverse samples. One type is monotheistic, centering on God. The other is non-
monotheistic, centering on the individual. The former considers how one may be 
rightly related to a personal God, the other how we may become rightly related 
to an impersonal ultimate reality. Within these broad categories, there are further 
differences. Within monotheism (among other alternatives) there are philosophi-
cal sources in Plato and Aristotle; the Semitic religions Judaism, Christianity, and 
Islam; and two Hindu varieties developed by Ramanuja and Madhva. Among 
these we will largely consider Christianity in the sense of what seems the most 
generally agreed-upon central doctrines without entering into denominational 
disputes. A similar practice will be followed with respect to our other examples. 
Hindu thought also contains a religious tradition Advaita Vedanta, with ‘Vedanta’ 
referring to the teaching of the Vedas, ancient Hindu sacred texts. ‘Advaita’ means 
non-dual. It is Advaita’s view that persons, physical objects, and God are appear-
ances, and what is real is an impersonal, qualityless Brahman. Developed classi-
cally by Shankara, this view is probably best presented in comparison and contrast 
to the relentless monotheism of the later Ramanuja, though the emphasis will be 
on the perspective of Advaita Vedanta as an example of a type of religious tradi-
tion distinct from our other three. A quite different approach is taken by Jainism, 
 1 
 Introduction 

2 Introduction
another Indian religious tradition. It holds that there are two fundamentally dis-
tinct sorts of existents, immaterial souls or minds and material particles of which 
physical objects are composed. Neither are viewed as created, both are held to be 
beginningless and endless, and the view is atheistic. Jainism is basically doctrin-
ally homogenous in contrast to the varieties of Vedantic religion. Indian thought 
also offers our fourth example of a distinct religious tradition, namely Theravada 
Buddhism. Known as “The Tradition of the Elders” (the early followers of the 
Buddha) this tradition contrasts sharply to Jainism. For Jainism, the ultimate con-
stituents of the world are things or substances, things that endure over time and 
throughout change. Crucially, on this view, minds are indestructible. Theravada 
view the cosmos (nirvana aside) to be entirely composed of conscious states and 
physical states, each of which is momentary, lasting barely long enough to exist 
at all. A mind on this view is a causally linked bundle of conscious states at a time 
and another entirely new bundle at the next time, the new bundle being caused by 
the old. The series is nothing more than the individual bundles. A physical object 
is analogously structured, with non-conscious states as its constituents. Later 
Buddhist traditions often drop out the reference to non-conscious states. 
 The goal of our religions is salvation in the case of monotheism and enlighten-
ment in the case of our nonmonotheistic traditions. The former involves sinners, 
persons who have acted in ways that are against God’s will, repenting of those 
sins and asking God’s forgiveness. Assuming the repentance is genuine, God will 
forgive and grant the repentant sinner everlasting life with God and other believ-
ers. This is, of course, a very brief account of the matter, but perhaps it will serve 
to make clear how different the monotheistic view is in this regard from the non-
monotheistic views. The typical term for the goal of our other religions, as noted, 
is ‘enlightenment.’ The conceptual background to this idea contains reference 
to reincarnation and karma. The basic idea of reincarnation is that each person 
beginninglessly and, without becoming enlightened, endlessly is in a cycle of 
birth and rebirth into one new life after another. The law of karma can be thought 
of as a mindless rule book that states the penalties to be exacted for wrong actions 
and rewards for good actions. Then it is the nature of the universe that these penal-
ties be exacted to their full limit, no merciful exceptions allowed. Only if a person 
has an enlightenment experience in which the truth of the Jain (in one case) or the 
Buddhist (in another case) is existentially seen can one become enlightened. This 
can occur only in a lifetime in which all remaining karmic credits and debits can 
be paid out. Only by coming to existentially believe a true doctrine can enlighten-
ment be achieved, so getting the doctrine right matters. This gives us a taste of 
some of the views discussed in what follows. 
 Suggested Readings 
 Christianity 
 Davis, Stephen T. (2006)  Christian Philosophical Theology (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press). A good example of work at the crossroads of philosophy and theology. 

Introduction 3
 Gilson, Etienne (1955)  History of Christian Philosophy in the Middle Ages (New York: 
Random House). Survey of a highly signiﬁ cant period of Christianity by a renowned 
historian of philosophy. 
 McGrath, Alister (2010)  Christian Theology: An Introduction  (West Sussex, UK: Wiley-
Blackwell).  Nicely covers Christian thought from the church fathers to modern times. 
 ——— (2012)  The Christian Theology Reader  (West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell).   Fine 
companion to the above. 
 Osborn, Eric (2009)  The Beginning of Christian Philosophy  (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press). A good historical introduction to earliest Christian philosophy. 
 Hindu Vedanta 
 Dasgupta, Surendranath (2000)  A History of Indian Philosophy  (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass). 
 In ﬁ ve volumes, detailed and balanced; arguably the successor to Radhakrishnan. 
 Deutsch, Eliot and Dalvi, Rohit (2004)  The Essential Vedanta: A New Sourcebook of 
Advaita Vedanta (Ilford, Essex, UK: Wisdom Books). Good collection of Advaita texts. 
 Ganeri, Martin (2015)  Indian Thought and Western Theism: The Vedanta of Ramanuja 
(New York: Routledge). Compares “qualiﬁ ed non-dualistic” Vedanta with Western scho-
lastic theism. 
 Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli (2009)  History of Indian Philosophy  (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press). From Rig Veda to Ramanuja, in two volumes, views Advaita as the consum-
mation of Indian philosophy; has become a classic. 
 Sarma, Deepak (2003)  An Introduction to Madhva Vedanta  (Farnham, Sussex, UK: Ash-
gate). Good general introduction to dualistic Vedanta. 
 Jainism 
 Dundas, Paul (2002)  The Jains  (New York: Routledge). Brief account of historical Jainism 
including scripture and tradition. 
 Jacobi, Hermann (2005)  Jaina Sutras (London: Forgotten Books). Jain sacred scriptures. 
 Jaini, Padmanabh (1998)  The Jaina Path of Puriﬁ cation  (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass). The 
Jain route to enlightenment. 
 Paniker, Agustin (2012)  Jainism: History, Society, Philosophy, and Practice  (Delhi: Moti-
lal Banarsidass). A rounded view of the roles of the tradition. 
 Sharma, Arvind (2001)  A Jaina Perspective on the Philosophy of Religion  (Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass). Book by an accomplished interpreter of Indian philosophy. 
 Buddhism 
 Bodhi, Bhikkhu and His Holiness the Dalai Lama (2005)  In the Buddha’s Words: An 
Anthology of Discourses from the Pali Canon  (Ilford, Essex, UK: Wisdom Books). 
A good introduction to Theravada scripture. 
 Emmanuel, Steven (2013)  A Companion to Buddhist Philosophy (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell). 
 Covers a broad range of topics, including conceptual foundations, metaphysics, epistemol-
ogy, and ethics. 
 King, Richard (1999)  Indian Philosophy: An Introduction to Hindu and Buddhist Thought 
(Washington, DC: Georgetown). Brief and yet comprehensive. 
 Siderits, Mark (2007)  Buddhism as Philosophy: An Introduction  (Indianapolis, IN: 
Hackett).  An introduction to Buddhist philosophy with relevant texts. 

4 Introduction
 Warder, A. K. (2008)  Indian Buddhism  (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass). A careful scholarly 
account that focuses on social implications but also gives an account of how Buddhist 
traditions developed. 
 Williams, Paul, Tribe, Anthony and Wynne, Alexander (2013)  Buddhist Thought: A Com-
plete Introduction to the Indian Tradition  (New York: Routledge). As excellent as it is 
ambitious. 

 Part I 
 Philosophy and Religion 

This page intentionally left blank

 Philosophy 
 What Is Philosophy? 
 No non-controversial answer is possible, and this is not a book about what 
philosophy is. So I will just say what I take philosophy to be, and go on to do 
philosophy. 1  Philosophy is the enterprise of constructing and assessing categorial 
systems. The tasks necessary to this enterprise are philosophical tasks, and the 
requisite skills are philosophical skills. The tasks in question, and the skills, need 
not be restricted to only philosophical ones. The obvious example of cases in 
which not only philosophical tasks and questions are necessary is in the “philoso-
phy of” disciplines—philosophy of the arts, mathematics, logic, physics, biology, 
history, or religion, for example. 2  A categorial system is, not surprisingly, a system 
of categories. A category is a basic concept, primitive in the sense that it is not 
analyzable in terms of other concepts. The categories of a full-blown philosophi-
cal system will be concepts of things or entities (in the broadest sense of ‘thing’ 
or ‘entity’), thoughts, or values. 3  Philosophy is the enterprise of constructing and 
assessing categorial systems. Much of Ancient, Medieval, and Modern philoso-
phy was deliberately pursued systematically. Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, Descartes, 
Leibniz, Spinoza, Locke, Berkeley, Hume, and Kant all constructed complex 
systems of philosophy. Their intent was, as a later philosopher put it, “to see 
things, and see them whole”—to develop an integrated account of (say) things, 
knowledge, and values. Much of contemporary philosophy has been suspicious 
of any such large-scale endeavors and has tended to stick to particular problems. 
Nonetheless, in dealing with particular problems, these philosophers too accepted 
general claims that placed constraints on what they could consistently accept else-
where; even philosophy concerned only with particular problems is implicitly 
general. 
 I take religious claims to be neither more nor less open to rational assessment 
than any other sorts of claims. Any difference there is concerns difﬁ culty, not 
possibility. Nor do I see any reason to think that offering rational assessment of 
religious claims is in principle harder than, say, assessing attempts to offer a uni-
ﬁ ed theory for all of physics, or to solve the problems of the foundations of modal 
 What Is Philosophy? What Is 
Religion? What Is Philosophy 
of Religion? 
 2 

8 Philosophy and Religion
logic. Contrary to the preferences of some philosophers, some Religious Studies 
professors, and even some religious thinkers themselves, religious traditions do 
partly consist of literal propositions, belief in which constitutes being a member 
of the tradition, the falsehood of which is inconsistent with the tradition being a 
means to salvation or enlightenment. These traditions are anything remotely like 
what they claim to be only if what they say is true. I shall offer respect to the 
diversity of religious traditions by taking those claims seriously enough to try to 
see what can be said for and against them. 
 One can easily ask  How can you tell whether a religious belief is true or not? , 
try to think of some general way in which this could be done, and give up. That 
question is a paralysis question. There is no single answer to it; religious claims 
are made about quite a diversity of things, and some must be assessed in one way 
and others in other ways. The only sensible way to proceed is on a claim-by-
claim, case-by-case basis; given enough cases, one may then be able to general-
ize. In what follows, I will try to understand, and then assess, a variety of religious 
beliefs. The sorts of assessments offered will typically be relevant to other, similar 
claims not mentioned here. There are simply too many religions to deal with all 
of them in one book, even if one knew enough to do that. If you like to think in 
terms of books having agendas, my major agenda is to show, by detailed argu-
ment, that it is possible to rationally assess religious beliefs. In this respect, it runs 
against a belief that is very popular in our culture, namely that matters of religion 
are simply private affairs concerning how you feel about big things. This belief 
seems to me patently false. 
 It also runs against the tendency in some (certainly not all) Religious Studies 
circles, and (worse) even among some philosophers, to the effect that to think of 
religions as seriously containing propositions whose truth greatly matters so that 
accepting them involves accepting claims is to misunderstand them. It is possible 
to reply to such philosophers on their own terms. Since it challenges the very pos-
sibility of faith, we will do so in our chapter on Faith and Reason. Another reply 
is given by looking carefully at what is supposedly meaningless in the sense of 
being neither true or false—by doing philosophy of religion to show the falsity 
of this view by looking at the actual authoritative texts of religious traditions, and 
seeing what they actually do say. It is highly unlikely that the scriptures of the 
world religions really say nothing that is true or false—that is, that they say noth-
ing. Even if one wanted to say that all the apparent declarative sentences in these 
sources were really imperatives, an imperative makes sense only in the context of 
a set of truth-value-bearing propositions. Efforts to claim that so-called religious 
propositions are not meaningful because (a) they are not mere reports of what 
can be sensed, or (b) they cannot be falsiﬁ ed by appeal to sensory evidence, or 
(c) they cannot be conﬁ rmed by sensory observation alone, commit intellectual 
suicide.  They  make no claim that can be tested by appeal to any or all of (a), (b), 
and (c); on their own terms, they convey no sense. Thus they rule out nothing. 
If we can properly believe only what science tells us, then we cannot properly 
believe that we can properly believe only what science tells us. I grant that much 
can be learned by tracing the myriad mistakes made by those who suppose that 

What Is Philosophy? What Is Religion? 9
there is no such thing as a religious truth or falsehood. But the success rate for 
those who have most vociferously asserted this has been dismal, and we may 
draw the veil of silence over their efforts. Others feel that trying to assess reli-
gious beliefs is not really polite, something no nice person would do. I note that 
those who possess these standards for politeness or nicety do not ﬁ nd much sup-
port in the religious traditions themselves. There we ﬁ nd real disagreement and 
argument. The religious traditions typically are not patron of such philosophical 
politeness—or political correctness. They do not say that those who reject the idea 
that seeking for religious truth, and arguing for or against religious doctrines—
being impolite—are to be shunned. Those who reject serious inquiry into the truth 
or falsity of religious beliefs, by ﬁ rmly rebuking and rejecting those who think 
this task worthwhile, themselves engage in what on their own terms is itself a sad 
lack of politeness. Such notions of politeness and nicety are cases of failure of 
nerve and unwillingness to think hard about some of the most important matters. 
 The book that follows offers a sustained argument. It does not offer a particular 
philosophical system, though no doubt its philosophical commitments (as would 
any others) considerably constrain the sort of system that one who accepts them 
could consistently accept. Arguably, some sorts of religious tradition come off 
better under rational assessment than do others. As the argument develops it will 
become clear as to how there can be a basis for such judgments. 
 Objectivity 
 Objectivity is rightly prized in philosophy as elsewhere. To be objective in the 
relevant sense is, roughly, to accept or reject a belief on the basis of what can be 
said in favor of, and what can be said against, its truth, no matter whether one 
would prefer the belief to be true or not. There are two views about objectivity 
that I reject. On one account, a book on the philosophy of religion can be objective 
only if it conforms to the pattern “Tradition A says this, Tradition B says that, Phi-
losopher C argues against this in this way, but Philosopher D argues against the 
same thing like that, and now everybody decide for themselves without the author 
interfering.” The assumption is that description can be objective, but assessment 
cannot be. Of course the author or authors of such a text have had to decide what 
was important enough to be favored by their attention, which interpretations of 
the traditions so favored were probably accurate, what arguments were the more 
interesting and forceful, what could properly be said about these arguments, and 
the like. It remains bafﬂ ing as to why one should suppose  these  assessments can 
be objective whereas assessments of the religious beliefs themselves are impossi-
ble, particularly since offering the relevant descriptions involve tasks very similar 
to those included in making assessments. If it is granted that one can be objective 
about description, it is arbitrary to think that one cannot be objective about assess-
ment. The other view is that objectivity is impossible to obtain about anything. 
There is obviously no reason to take this view seriously. It proclaims  Objectivity 
about any belief is impossible to obtain  and so if its proponents are right they are 
just being so kind as to share a small bit of their autobiographies, something on 

10 Philosophy and Religion
the level of  I don’t like seafood , which of course has no philosophical relevance 
whatever. If they are wrong, then again we need not worry about their claim. The 
truth about objectivity is that it is hard to achieve, especially about things that 
matter, and that one can do one’s best to try. Sometimes one succeeds. For an easy 
example, the objective truth is that if James says  Nothing said in English is ever 
true , what he says is either true or false. If it is false, then it is false. But if it is true, 
then it is false. So, either way, it is false. 
 Religion 
 What Is Religion? 
 Our world contains a perplexing diversity of religious traditions. Increasingly, 
representative congregations or conclaves of these traditions can be found in any 
major city. Our question is simply  What is religion?  Responsible answers will 
reﬂ ect what one ﬁ nds in traditions universally agreed to be religious. 4 
 A Deﬁ nition of Religion 
 Broadly speaking, deﬁ nitions of ‘religion’ tend to fall into one of two classes. One 
sort of deﬁ nition is substantial or doctrinal; a given religion is deﬁ ned in terms 
of the beliefs its adherents accept that make them adherents of that religion, and 
religion generally is characterized in terms of beliefs that all religions are alleged 
to share. Another sort of deﬁ nition is functional or pragmatic; ‘religion’ is deﬁ ned 
in terms of what it is alleged that all religions do or what the social function 
of religion is alleged to be. Some deﬁ nitions, of course, are somewhat less than 
objective. Marx’s claim that religion is the opiate of the people is not proposed as 
a scholarly and neutral deﬁ nition of religion—or, even if it is presented as neutral, 
it isn’t. It is a functional deﬁ nition rather than a substantial deﬁ nition. “Religion is 
the superstitious acceptance of the belief that God exists” is a non-neutral substan-
tial deﬁ nition. “Religion is the act of getting right before God” is a non-neutral 
deﬁ nition that is partly substantial and partly functional. 
 As a basis for answering our question, we need a neutral deﬁ nition. A neutral 
deﬁ nition will not presuppose some particular answer to any of our substantial phil-
osophical questions. It will not presuppose that some particular religious tradition 
is true (or false) or that no religious traditions are true (or false). For reasons that 
will become clear shortly, it will be nice if the deﬁ nition can be both functional and 
also recognize the important point made by attempts to give a substantial deﬁ ni-
tion. Consider this deﬁ nition:  a religion is a conceptual system that provides 
an interpretation of the world and the place of human beings in it, bases an 
account of how life should be lived given that interpretation, and expresses this 
interpretation and lifestyle in a set of rituals, rites, institutions, and practices. 
This is a functional deﬁ nition; it views religions as providing persons with accounts 
of their world and their place in it—interpretations that are relevant to day-to-day 
living and that are given life in institutions, practices, and rituals. It recognizes the 

What Is Philosophy? What Is Religion? 11
importance of religious activities. It also recognizes the importance of a doctrinal 
element in religious traditions. If doctrines without rituals are empty, then rituals 
without doctrines are blind. By ‘rituals’ here one should not think only of a Catholic 
Mass or a highly liturgical Anglican or Lutheran Service. A Plymouth Brethren cel-
ebration of the Lord’s Supper or a Baptist celebration of adult baptism is a ritual in 
the sense of being a religious activity charged with theological meaning. The intent 
is that this deﬁ nition be neutral in the sense recently characterized. Social science 
treatments of religion tend to focus on the institutions, rites, rituals, and practices, 
viewed either collectively as cultural artifacts or individually as sources of personal 
meaning. Philosophical discussions of religion tend to focus on the doctrines that 
religions offer and live by. These approaches are supplementary, not competitive, 
though academics often play down, or even deny, the importance of what they do 
not happen to study. Since this deﬁ nition includes a conceptual component, it is 
inevitable that some reject it as too intellectual in spite of its containing emphasis on 
the embodiment of religion in institutions, rites, rituals, and practices. The tendency 
to downplay the centrality of doctrine to religion is as pervasive as the reluctance to 
consider truth or falsehood in connection with religious belief.  
 Another Deﬁ nition 
 A different, but compatible, characterization of religion makes use of the notions 
of diagnosis and cure. A religion proposes a  diagnosis  (an account of what it takes 
to be the basic problem facing human beings) and a  cure (a way of permanently 
and desirably solving that problem): one basic problem shared by every human 
person 5  and one fundamental solution that, however adapted to different cultures 
and cases, is essentially the same across the board. Religions differ insofar as 
their diagnoses and cures differ. For example, some religions are monotheistic 
and some are not. Hence some diagnoses are offered in terms of alienation from 
God and cures are presented that concern removing that alienation, while other 
diagnoses and cures make no reference to God. Other diagnoses will ﬁ nd the basic 
problem is the unsatisfactory nature of human life and offer a cure that altogether 
removes one from the human condition. 
 Philosophy of Religion 
 What Is Philosophy of Religion? 
 Metaphysics, epistemology, and ethics are disciplines within philosophy. Meta-
physics is the enterprise of constructing and assessing accounts of what there is. 
Epistemology is the enterprise of constructing and assessing accounts of what 
knowledge is and how it can be attained. Ethics is the enterprise of constructing 
and assessing accounts of what makes actions right or wrong, what makes per-
sons good or evil, what possesses intrinsic worth, what sort of life is worth living, 
and how these matters are related. 6  Philosophy of religion combines these enter-
prises in offering philosophically accessible accounts of religious traditions and 

12 Philosophy and Religion
assessing those traditions. Nothing very complex need inherently to be involved in 
offering philosophically accessible accounts of religious traditions, though there 
will be complex cases. The idea is to offer clear and literal 7  expressions of key 
doctrines. It is not unusual for a religion to contain metaphysical, epistemological, 
and ethical commitments. Then philosophy of religion will offer philosophically 
accessible accounts of these commitments and consider what can be said for and 
against the philosophical positions that have been taken. 
 A further feature of philosophy is worth highlighting. As Edmund Gettier once 
remarked, in philosophy you do not really understand a position unless you under-
stand the arguments for it. 8 Such claims as: 
 A. All that exists is minds and ideas. 
 B. If a proposition P is necessarily true then  P is necessarily true  is also neces-
sarily true. 
 C. The existence of evil is logically compatible with the existence of God. 
 are such that one does not understand them unless one also grasps the reasons 
that can be offered on their behalf. This is why trying to teach philosophy without 
discussion of arguments is like trying to teach mathematics without reference to 
numbers. The reason, then, why we will pay attention to arguments is that this is 
a book in philosophy. Speculation unsupported by reasons is not science. Neither 
is it philosophy. 
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
  1. Explain what “Philosophy is the construction and assessment of cat-
egorial systems” means. 
 2. 
Explain and assess the claims “The claim that objectivity is impossible 
is self-defeating” and “Objectivity is possible.” 
 3. 
Distinguish between functional and substantial deﬁ nitions of religion. 
 4. 
Give and explain a deﬁ nition of ‘religion.’ 
 5. 
Give and explain a deﬁ nition of ‘philosophy of religion.’ 
 Notes 
 1.  Everett Hall (1958)  Philosophical Systems  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press) 
offers what I take to be the best book ever written on the nature of philosophy, though 
the ﬁ nal chapter disappoints. 
  2.  Cf. Alvin Plantinga’s (Professor of Philosophy at the University of Notre Dame) remark 
to the effect that good philosophizing is just thinking really hard and well is right so far 
as it goes, and it is what one thinks about that makes one’s thought philosophical. 
  3.  Cf. the comments by Everett Hall (1960)  Philosophical Systems: A Categorial Analysis 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press), p. 3–6, on what Medieval philosophers said 

What Is Philosophy? What Is Religion? 13
regarding  being, truth, and goodness . Thoughts that something is so are either true or 
false, and  being true or false  is essential to their nature. So  thing, thought, and value , 
like  being, truth, and goodness , come under theory of reality, theory of knowledge, and 
ethics, which are the core disciplines for the philosophy of religion. 
 4.  In terms of speciﬁ cs, our focus will be on Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Bud-
dhism, and Jainism—on Semitic and (South Asian) Indian religion. 
 5. By gods and goddesses as well, if there are any; by every person other than God. 
  6.  Need it be said that these characterizations, accurate so far as they go, do not begin to 
plumb the complexities of these disciplines? 
  7.  The view that all language, or all religious language, is non-literal is unfortunately wide-
spread. It will be discussed further. As my comments here reveal, I take the view to be false. 
  8.  The degree to which this is, or is not, peculiar to philosophical claims does not matter 
for our purposes; it is enough that it is true of philosophical claims. 
 Suggested Readings 
 Bertocci, Peter (1951)  An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion  (Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall). Covers a wide range of issues in the philosophy of religion with a 
detailed discussion of the teleological argument. 
 ——— (1970)  The Person God Is  (London: George Allen and Unwin, Ltd.). Detailed pre-
sentation of theistic personalism (the view that persons are irreducible—not a complex 
made up of simpler things—and [in the case of God] ultimate). 
 Brightman, E. S. (1940)  A Philosophy of Religion (New York: Prentice-Hall). Also covers 
a wide range of issues, arguing for the view that God is ﬁ nite. 
 Burtt, E. A. (1951)  Types of Religious Philosophy  (New York: Harper and Brothers). After 
discussing Greek and biblical thought, considers major traditions and some issues in 
philosophy of religion. 
 Eliade, Mircea (1959)  The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion  (San Diego, 
CA: Harcourt, Brace, and World). Finds the core of religion in a (sometimes suppressed) 
sense of the sacred, in the non-rational numinous—a sense of the uncanny (in its stron-
ger forms) that is irreducible to other feelings. 
 Hall, Everett (1960)  Philosophical Systems: A Categorical Analysis  (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press). A brilliant analysis of the nature of philosophy. 
 ——— (2010)  What is Value?: An Essay in Philosophical Analysis  (New York: Rout-
ledge). An application of Hall’s view of philosophy to the property of having value.   An 
account and application of the view of philosophy much like that assumed in this text. 
 MacIntosh, H. R. (1940)  The Problem of Religious Knowledge  (New York: Harper and 
Brothers). Discussion of wide range of theories of religious knowledge. 
 Otto, Rudolph,  The Idea of the Holy  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). A classic that ﬁ nds 
the core of monotheistic religion in numinous experience, an experience of a holy and 
unique being. 
 Pals, Daniel (2008)  Introducing Religion: Readings from the Classical Theorists (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press). Reading from Tylor through Geertz. 
 Patterson, Robert Leet (1970)  The Philosophy of Religion  (Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press). An account of the natures of philosophy and religion followed by a discussion of 
issues in the philosophy of religion. 
 Sire, James (2015)  Naming the Elephant: Worldview as a Concept  (Downer’s Grove, IL: 
IV Academic). A very accessible account of the history of the notion and the role of 
worldviews in human life. 

14 Philosophy and Religion
 Smart, Ninian (1999)  Worldviews: Crosscultural Explorations of Human Beliefs (New 
York: Pearson). Explores major religious and secular views of the world in terms of 
their conceptual organization, ways of assessing what has worth, and social structures. 
 Stausberg, Michael (2009)  Contemporary Theories of Religion: A Critical Companion 
(New York: Routledge). Seventeen theories of religion presented by scholars represent-
ing philosophy and the social sciences. 
 Thomas, George F. (1970)  Philosophy and Religious Belief  (New York: Charles Scribner’s 
Sons). Discussion of grounds of belief, God and the world, and freedom and grace. 
 ——— (1973)  Religious Philosophies of the West  (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons). 
Discusses the positions of Western philosophers of religion from Plato through Tillich, 
with glance beyond. 
 Thompson, Samuel (1955)  A Modern Philosophy of Religion  (Chicago: Henry Regnery). 
Another account of the natures of philosophy and religion followed by a discussion of 
issues in the philosophy of religion. 
 Wieman, H. N. and Meland, Bernard Eugene, eds. (1936)  American Philosophers of Reli-
gion  (Chicago: Willett, Clark, and Co). Varieties of philosophies of religion held in 
American culture. 
 Yandell, Keith (1971)  Basic Issues in the Philosophy of Religion  (Boston: Allyn and 
Bacon). Contains criteria for assessing worldviews.     

 Monotheistic Religion 
 Some religious traditions are monotheistic. These traditions center on God, a 
being that is thought of as not depending on anything else for existence whereas 
the existence of everything else depends on God. 1  We will be concerned with 
three historical sorts of monotheism—Greek, Semitic, and Hindu. 
 Semitic monotheisms—Judaism, Christianity, and Islam—typically hold such 
claims as the following. God created the world in the sense that everything there 
is except God depends on God, and not conversely. The world that God created is 
real, not illusory, and that it exists is a good, not an evil, state of affairs. Human 
persons are created by God and in God’s image with the dual consequence that 
every person has (in Kant’s terms) dignity, not price (every individual has a 
unique worth derived from the fact of being created in God’s image), and that 
the basis of ethics is realizing one’s nature as made in God’s image by imitating 
the behavior ascribed to God (insofar as this is possible to creatures). Human 
individuality is real, not illusory, and it is good that individual persons exist, not 
evil. God loves all persons in the sense of willing their ultimate good and acting 
for it. Central to being made in God’s image is the capacity for loving oneself and 
others in this sense of willing their ultimate good and acting for it. Love in this 
sense is thus primarily volitional, not primarily emotional. God is all-knowing, 
all-powerful, all-good, and as made in His image people have some knowledge, 
power, and capacity for goodness. (This is, of course, quite different from human 
nature being “inherently good” in the sense that persons cannot help being good 
moral agents—inherent value is not the same as inherent goodness.) God is provi-
dential in the sense of governing the course of history and moving toward an end 
(the kingdom of God), so that time and the historical process are one-directional 
(not cyclical), and time and historical events and persons are real, not illusory, and 
it is a good, not an evil, that there are temporal and historical processes. God is 
holy in the dual sense that He is unique, alone worthy of being worshipped, and 
that He is morally pure or righteous. Thus worship is not a preliminary religious 
experience to be later transcended; its appropriateness is built into the nature of 
the Creator/creature distinction, which is not dissolvable. Since God is righteous, 
God judges sin (i.e., that which persons freely do to thwart others and themselves 
 What Sorts of Religion Are There? 
 3 

16 Philosophy and Religion
becoming mature good persons); since God loves all persons, this intolerance of 
sin follows from the nature of divine love. Thus human sin and guilt are real, not 
illusory, and it is held better that persons act freely as moral agents than that they 
be unable to sin. The basic religious problem is sin, not ignorance, and the basic 
religious need is for forgiveness, not for more information or enlightenment. Sal-
vation, the solution of the basic religious problem is by grace (God’s unmerited 
favor), not by human effort (or, for some traditions, not by human effort alone). 2 
 Not every variety of monotheism holds that God has acted in the sense of bring-
ing about events. Semitic monotheism holds that God has acted in history at real 
times and in real places to give revelation to persons and to act on their behalf. 3 
In these traditions, religious doctrine  essentially  concerns certain persons and 
contains essential references to events. Religious knowledge is primarily gained 
through revelation (a process initiated by God) rather than through reﬂ ection, 
meditation, self-abasement, good works, yoga, and the like. Hindu monotheism 
views salvation as release from the beginningless and potentially endless round 
of birth and rebirth under the law of karma. The law of karma is administered by 
God and God has the power to release persons from the cycle of rebirth. There is 
a central theme of divine grace, God’s unearned favor, which can rescue from the 
birth after rebirth. Sometimes this is viewed as sufﬁ cient of itself, but otherwise 
enlightenment is viewed as a joint product of divine grace combined with the 
human merit of good works. Insofar as there is such a thing as Greek monothe-
ism, in Plato God is a Designer rather than an absolute creator, and for Aristotle 
is an Unmoved Mover who does not act but who is viewed as a ﬁ nal cause with 
the nature of everything else imitating the already fully realized nature of the 
Unmoved Mover in virtue of its inherent teleological tendency to become as per-
fect an example of a thing of its kind as is possible to it. The Mover does not act on 
the world, or even know any contingent truths (true propositions that might have 
been false) but does know the necessary truths (of logic, mathematics, metaphysics). 
Neither prayer nor worship play a role here. 
 Nonmonotheistic Religion 
 Indian nonmonotheistic religions such as Advaita Vedanta Hinduism, Theravada 
Buddhism, and Jainism, hold such claims as these. This world is a place of suffer-
ing and “unsatisfactoriness.” There is a cycle of birth and rebirth. 4  There is a law of 
karma—one’s misdeeds yield bad consequences to oneself and one’s good deeds 
yield good consequences to oneself. The basic religious problem is that of escaping 
the round of birth and rebirth ( samsara ) and the way to do so is through enlighten-
ment experience (roughly  moksha  for the Advaita Vedantin,  kevala  for the Jain, 
 nirvana  or  nibbana  for the Theravadin). The natural world (roughly, the set of 
objects of sensory experience) is in some sense unreal or illusory (except for Jain-
ism). In Advaita only qualityless Brahman exists. For Theravada we misread our 
experience as that of an enduring subject of experience and take the external world 
to be made up of enduring objects, and there is neither enduring subjects nor endur-
ing objects. The person, or self, (except for Jainism) of everyday experience—the 

What Sorts of Religion Are There? 17
“empirical self”—is in some sense unreal or illusory. There is no course of history 
toward an end or fulﬁ llment. For Advaita temporal and historical processes are 
also in some sense unreal or illusory, and for Theravada we take processes to occur 
to something that endures. The basic religious problem is (in a rather technical 
sense of the word ‘ignorance’) ignorance, not sin (there is no God to sin against) 
and the basic religious need is for enlightenment, not for forgiveness (there is no 
God to forgive). Religious knowledge is gained through meditation, not through 
revelation (there is no God to offer revelation) and no religious doctrine essentially 
concerns certain persons or contains essential reference to places. Salvation comes 
through one’s own efforts (there is no God to help), and involves the cessation of 
at least the “empirical self.” Enlightenment experience is self-authenticating—in 
it one learns the truth and by having the experience one learns it in such a manner 
that no other evidence could show that what one supposedly learned was false. 5  
 Reincarnation and Karma Doctrine 
 The doctrines of reincarnation and karma provide a general background to Indian 
Religion. Even those religions that do not accept it literally provide a reinterpre-
tation of it. The basic idea is that everyone beginningless goes from one life to 
another without end unless enlightenment occurs. These reincarnations may occur 
in many places and under diverse circumstances as determined by one’s actions 
in previous lifetimes. A good deed yields positive consequences and an evil deed 
earns negative consequences determined by an iron-clad natural law. The excep-
tion is in monotheistic traditions God can forgive wrong action and prevent the 
negative consequences. 
 One might ﬁ nd the idea of there being karmic laws governing a reincarnation 
cycle that may never end quite attractive—a sort of free cosmic travel program 
in which you go from life to life forever. If you live a sufﬁ ciently good life, your 
next life will be full enough of positive consequences to make it desirable. The 
indigenous perspective contains no such optimistic view. 
 Presumably, one cannot guarantee one’s next lifetime will be lived in a good 
enough way to yield happy circumstances. But this is a minor consideration com-
pared to the actual indigenous view, as the following passages make clear. 
 A Hindu text, Maitri Upanishad I, 3,4, reads as follows: 
  In this ill-smelling body which is a conglomerate of bone, skin, muscle, mar-
row, ﬂ esh, semen, blood, mucus, tears, rheum, feces, urine, wind, bile, and 
phlegm . . . what is the good of the enjoyment of desires? . . . In this body, 
which is afﬂ icted with desire, anger, covetousness, delusion, fear, despon-
dency, envy, separation from the desirable, union with the undesirable, 
hunger, thirst, senility, disease, sorrow, and the like, what is the good of the 
enjoyment of desires? . . . we see this whole world is decaying . . . 
 In this sort of cycle of existence what is the good of the enjoyment of desires 
when after a man has fed on them there is seen repeatedly his return to 
earth? . . . In this cycle of existence, I am a frog in a waterless well. 

18 Philosophy and Religion
 A story in its Jain version: 
  A traveler . . . journeying through a dense forest . . . encountered a mad 
elephant which charged him. . . . As he turned to ﬂ ee, a terrible demoness 
with a sword in her hand appeared before him and barred his way. There was 
a great tree near the track, and he ran up to it . . . but he could ﬁ nd no foothold 
in its smooth trunk. His only refuge was an old well . . . and into this he leapt. 
As he fell, he managed to catch hold of a clump of reeds which grew from 
the wall. . . . Looking down, he saw that the bottom . . . was surrounded by 
snakes which hissed at him. . . . In their midst was a mighty python, its mouth 
agape waiting to catch him. . . . Raising his head, he saw two mice . . . bus-
ily eating away at the roots. Meanwhile, the wild elephant ran up to the well 
and, enraged at losing its victim, charged at the trunk of the tree. Thus he 
dislodged a honeycomb which hung from a branch above the well [which] 
fell upon the man. . . . Angry bees swarmed round his head and tormented 
him. . . . But one drop of honey fell on his brow, rolled down to his face, and 
reached his lips. Immediately, he forgot his peril and thought of nothing else 
than getting another drop of honey. 
 A Theravada text: 
  What then is the Holy Truth of Ill? Birth is ill. Decay is ill. Sickness is ill. 
Death is ill. To be disjoined from what one likes means suffering. Not to get 
what one wants, also that means suffering. In short, grasping at any of the ﬁ ve 
Skandas (the ﬁ ve elements of personality) involves suffering. 
 We have a Hindu description of someone in samsara as a frog in a waterless 
well, a Jain text picturing someone in samsara as helplessly clinging to a clump 
of reeds waiting to fall into a python’s mouth, and a Buddhist text describing life 
in samsara as suffering. This is not the material from which a cosmic travel ﬁ rm 
could cull advertisements. This is what provides the backdrop for much of India’s 
religious tradition. 
 Doctrines Speciﬁ c to Advaita Vedanta 
 For the Advaitin, ultimate reality (that which does not depend on anything else for 
its existence) is apersonal and eternal, unchanging, and permanent. The real self 
( Atman ) is identical to this ultimate reality ( Brahman ) and in moksha learns this 
truth, thereby escaping samsara, losing all individuality, and being “absorbed” 
into Brahman. As an Advaita texts says: 
  The man who has once comprehended Brahman to the (real) Self does not 
belong to this transmigratory world . . . there prevails the false notion that the 
Lord (i.e., Brahman) and the transmigratory world are different. 6 

What Sorts of Religion Are There? 19
 Doctrines Speciﬁ c to Jainism 
 For the Jain, there are an inﬁ nite number of real (non-illusory) things which 
are eternally distinct from one another. Among these distinct things are persons 
(souls,  jivas ) who can attain enlightenment in which (a) omniscience is attained, 
and (b) personal identity, or individuality, is not lost. Though the Jains believe in 
individual immortality, they do not believe in a Deity. Two Jain texts tell us: 
 Modiﬁ cations cannot exist without an abiding or eternal something—a per-
manent substance. 7  Liberation is the freedom from all karmic matter, owing 
to the non-existence of the cause of bondage and to the shedding of the  kar-
mas . After the soul is released, there remain perfect right-belief, perfect right-
knowledge, and the state of having accomplished all. 8 
 Doctrines Speciﬁ c to Theravada (= Hinayanna) Buddhism 
 For the Theravada Buddhist tradition, an individual person is a set of elements, 
each momentary and transitory, and everything else is made up of momentary, 
transitory states. There is no enduring self (Atman) nor is there an unchanging 
ultimate reality (Brahman). In nirvana, one learns this truth concerning “imper-
manence.” Depending on which of the competitive interpretations one accepts, 
ﬁ nal nirvana is the cessation of even this transitory self with consequent release 
from all desire. In any case, no series of bundles of momentary states is more than 
that in a nirvanic state. A Buddhist text asserts the following: 
  Nagasena (or any other person’s name) is but a way of counting, term, appel-
lation, convenient designation, mere name for the hair of my head, hair of my 
body, . . . brain of the head, form, sensation, perception, the predispositions 
and consciousness. But in the absolute sense there is no ego. 9 
 The implication is that there is no enduring subject of experience—indeed, no 
subject of conscious states who is distinct from those states. Persons reduce with-
out remainder to collections of conscious states, the collections being nothing 
over and above the states. For Advaita, reincarnation belongs only to the level of 
appearance, not to the level of reality. For Jainism and Theravada it is real, and 
there is a difference as to what transmigrates = for the Jain, an enduring soul, for 
the Theravadin, a series of causally connected bundles of conscious states. 
 Criteria for Individuating Religions 
 It is natural to take one’s cue for identifying distinct religious traditions from our 
characterization of that in virtue of which a tradition is religious, namely the pres-
ence of both diagnosis and cure. One result goes as follows: 

20 Philosophy and Religion
 Difference and Incompatibility 
  (1)  Religion A differs from Religion B if the disease that A diagnoses is different 
from the disease that B diagnoses. 
  (2)  Religion A differs from Religion B if the cure that A prescribes is different 
from the cure that B prescribes. 
 (3) Religion A differs from Religion B if what must exist if A’s diagnosis is cor-
rect is different from what must exist if B’s diagnosis is correct. 
  (4)  Religion A differs from Religion B if what must exist if A’s cure is successful 
in curing what it diagnoses is different from what must exist if B’s cure is 
successful in curing what it diagnoses. 
 (5)  Religion A differs from Religion B if, according to A, what must be known in 
order to achieve or receive salvation or enlightenment is different from what, 
according to B, must be known in order to achieve or receive enlightenment.  
 Incompatibility 
  (6)  Religion A differs from Religion B if at least part of what must exist if A’s 
diagnosis is correct cannot coexist with at least part of what must exist if B’s 
diagnosis is correct. 
  (7)  Religion A differs from Religion B if at least part of what must exist if A’s 
cure is correct cannot coexist with what must exist if B’s cure is correct. 
  (8)  Religion A differs from Religion B if what one must know in order to become 
saved or enlightened according to A cannot be true if what one must know in 
order to become saved or enlightened according to B is true. 
 Criteria (1) and (2) appeal directly to what we have suggested is at the core of a 
religious tradition. Criteria (3) and (4) appeal to religion-relevant metaphysical 
difference as determined by the core. Criterion (5) appeals to a religion-relevant 
epistemological difference as determined by the core. Criterion (6) focuses on 
the question of the compatibility of what must exist if both of two diagnoses are 
true. Criterion (7) raises the same question concerning cures. Criterion (8) consid-
ers the compatibility of what two traditions require to be known for salvation or 
enlightenment. 
 Some Applications: 
 If we very brieﬂ y list ﬁ rst the diseases diagnosed, and the cures proposed, by 
Christianity, Advaita Vedanta, Jainism, and Theravada Buddhism, we get this 
result: 
 DIAGNOSES: 
 CHRISTIANITY: sin, separation from God 
 ADVAITA: ignorance of the identity of each Atman (person) with qualityless 
Brahman 
 JAINISM: false belief that one is dependent for existence on one’s body; ignorance 
of one’s inherent immortality as an immaterial jiva or soul 

What Sorts of Religion Are There? 21
 THERAVADA: false belief that one is an enduring mental substance; ignorance that 
one is nothing more than a causally linked collection of conscious states at a time 
and a causal series of collections over time, with a great many psychological 
attachments to ﬂ eeting things and events 
 CURES: 
 CHRISTIANITY: repentance and confession, commitment to God through Christ 
 ADVAITA: having an esoteric experience in which one realizes that one is identical 
to qualityless Brahman 
 JAINISM: having an esoteric experience in which one recognizes one’s distinctness  
 from one’s body and lack of dependence on it, freed from the limitations of 
knowledge and power that embodiment imposes 
 THERAVADA BUDDHISM: an esoteric experience in which one sees the absence of an 
enduring subject of experience—indeed of any experiential subject at all—
and is released from all attachments 
 With due apologies for the brevity and inadequacy of these summaries, they are 
sufﬁ cient to allow us to see that applying criteria (1) and (2) yields four religious 
traditions, each with its diagnosis and cure that differs from all the others. Hence 
we have four religious traditions on both criteria. 
 Criterion (3) deals with what must exist if a tradition’s diagnosis is correct. 
Without going into details we can represent the answers in these terms: 
 What Must Exist if the Diagnoses Are Correct: 
 CHRISTIANITY: persons who have committed and are guilty of sin, a holy and lov-
ing God 
 ADVAITA:  every person under illusion that they are distinct from qualityless Brah-
man and the non-personal Brahman to which each is identical 
 JAINISM: immortal persons embodied in inessential physical bodies who mistak-
enly identify themselves with their bodies 
 THERAVADA: collections of momentary states causally connected into bundles, 
which are related causally in a series containing belief in an enduring subject 
of experience 
   Criterion (4) concerns what must exist if the cure a tradition proposes is 
successful: 
 What Must Exist if the Cures Are Accurate: 
 CHRISTIANITY: a holy, loving God who becomes incarnate in Christ 
 ADVAITA: Brahman without qualities 
 JAINISM: kevala experience, which involves permanent escape from karma and 
reincarnation cycle and detachment from one’s body 
 THERAVADA: ﬁ nal nirvana, which involves escape from karma and reincarnation cycle 
   Criterion (5) refers to what must be known in order to be saved or enlightened. 

22 Philosophy and Religion
 CHRISTIANITY:  
the news concerning the death and resurrection of Christ 
 
  (how this relates to those who have never heard the news varies within Chris-
tendom and is beyond our topic here) 
 ADVAITA: that the level of appearance is illusory and the level of reality alone 
real 
 JAINISM: that one is neither identical to, nor dependent for existence on, one’s 
body 
 THERAVADA: that the self is illusory and attachment to anything prevents 
enlightenment 
 Criteria (6) through (8) concern not merely difference but incompatibility. Of 
course if two diagnoses, or cures, or recipes for salvation or enlightenment are 
logically inconsistent, the difference is deeper than it would be otherwise. The 
result is clear: given criteria (1) through (8), each of our traditions is a distinct 
religion. The application of the criteria to other traditions will discern still more 
religions. 
 There are other criteria. For example: Religion A differs from religion B if the 
sacred verbal traditions or texts of A are different from the sacred verbal traditions 
or texts of B, or A’s rites and rituals are different from B’s, or A’s institutions are 
different from B’s. Further, one could replace “different from” by “incompatible 
with.” At this point, one will need to understand the goals and purposes involved, 
which require doctrinal considerations. 
 Suggestions as to Common Features 
 We have distinguished between religions in terms of their most deeply religious 
concerns speciﬁ ed in their cores. Of course one can use broader, vaguer terms 
with different results. Religions that fall into different categories given our cri-
teria may be classiﬁ ed together on other criteria. There is no more problem or 
conﬂ ict about this than there is in the fact that Volkswagens and Chevrolets fall 
under the same category if our category is automobiles and a different category 
if it is products of German industry. Among the more popular of the general clas-
siﬁ cations intended to put as many religions in the same basket as possible are 
“object of ultimate concern” (Tillich) and “source of self-transcendence” (Hick). 
The former casts its nets widely, so that pursuit of wealth or sport counts as 
religious, as is the case of the man who turned down an earlier occasion of heart 
transplant so he could watch his alma mater play a bowl game. There are uses 
for such wide categories, but they are not tied as closely to the actual contents of 
religious traditions as seems important for extended philosophical reﬂ ection. The 
second houses a deep ambiguity neglect of which yields considerable confusion. 
To transcend the self may mean seriously following the Semitic second com-
mandment in the famous “You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, 
mind, soul and strength, and your neighbor as yourself,” which is intended in 
horizontal as well as vertical terms to include love and aid given for the sake of 

What Sorts of Religion Are There? 23
the one loved, not for gain or recompense. This occurs in the context of a belief 
that men and women are created in the image of God, which grounds human dig-
nity. There is another quite different, at least nearly opposite, sense in which to 
transcend oneself is to give up one’s personal identity, or one’s belief in or sense 
of personal identity. Compassion, which is also elicited by self-giving love, is 
prized as a means of losing attachment to everything one can lose. Behaviorally, 
the one sort of compassion may look just like the other, but the respective roots 
and goals differ deeply. 
 To put the point in a different way, one popular suggestion is that all religions 
have in common the goal of enabling its participants in achieving self-transcen-
dence. This proposal contains a deep ambiguity. What self-transcendence means 
obviously depends on what transcendence amounts to. The ambiguity is easily 
extended—what transcendence involves is self-lessness. This leads to the ques-
tion  What, exactly, is self-lessness?  At this point, it is high time to remove the 
ambiguity. 
 The goal of self-lessness, understood one way, is to seek as a metaphysical goal 
the obliteration of attachment to anything. The goal of self-lessness, understood 
another way, is ethical, roughly amounting to living a life of service to others. 
One sense of the term conveys the idea of transcending being a self, or transcend-
ing the idea that there is a self at all. The other, in a context in which being a self 
includes having great worth to be developed and not lost, promotes growth of the 
self into its potential as a moral agent. There is a difference between not being 
selﬁ sh and not wanting to be a self. 
 No doubt there are psychological goals (e.g., to live in a world that is not mean-
ingless and in which one has an identiﬁ able place) and sociological goals (e.g., 
to be a part of a social group in which one is accepted and with which one shares 
values and interests). Religious traditions can provide and support this. These, of 
course, are needs and goals that are also satisﬁ ed and reached in non-religious 
ways. Naturally, psychology, sociology, and anthropology of religion deal with 
the aspects of religion relevant to their interests, collecting data and proposing 
theories to explain that data; this is not competitive to philosophy of religion. 
Our characterization is offered with one eye on religious traditions and the other 
one on philosophical issues that the traditions raise. Whether or not there is an 
elusive essence of religion, and whether if there is our deﬁ nition captures it, can 
be debated. Our contention is that our characterization is fair to at least many 
religious traditions and captures much if not all that is of interest to philosophers 
of religion insofar as they are on duty. 
 Conclusion 
 We have argued that, on the matters of most importance to the traditions them-
selves, our religious traditions differ in deep ways. Reading their doctrines non-
literally is an imperial reconstruction aimed at removing this incompatibility. 
The project amounts to sufﬁ ciently secularizing the traditions to turn them into 

24 Philosophy and Religion
stories that are intended to have moral inﬂ uence. The traditions themselves are 
left behind. This hardly seems a means of respecting them. 
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
 1. 
What philosophical issues do the core doctrines of monotheism raise? 
 2. What philosophical issues do the core doctrines of nonmonotheistic 
religion raise? 
 3. 
Are the criteria used for distinguishing between religions religiously 
neutral (not favoring one religion over another) and accurately applied? 
 4. Which doctrines in Advaita Vedanta and Christianity are most clearly 
opposed? 
 5. Which doctrines in Jainism and Theravada Buddhism are most clearly 
opposed? 
 Notes 
1. Or of everything else that  can  have a source. A monotheist who holds that there are 
abstract objects, that abstract objects exist with logical necessity and so cannot not exist, 
and that what cannot not exist cannot be created but exists on its own, will not, if she is 
consistent, think that abstract objects can have a source of existence, and so will not take 
God to be such a source. The matter is controversial.
  2.  This is not to deny that new knowledge may be involved in attaining salvation—but that 
this is not all that is needed. 
  3.  Examples: Judaism, the Passover Event; Christianity, the Cross and Resurrection; 
Islam, the Revelation to the Prophet. 
  4.  Hindu monotheists accept this claim and the following two claims; they view God 
as the Agent behind reincarnation and karma and take enlightenment experience to 
involve repentance of one’s sins followed by God’s forgiveness and acceptance of 
one’s worship. 
  5.  The point is the  epistemic  one that enlightenment experience is said to yield incorrigible 
knowledge not the  psychological one that it yields unretractable belief. 
  6.  Radhakrishan, Sarvapelli and Charles Moore (1957)  Sourcebook in Indian Philosophy 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press), p. 513. 
 7.  RM, 269. 
 8.  RM, 260. 
 9.  RM, 284. 
 Suggested Readings 
 Buckareff, Andrei and Nagasawa, Yujin (2016)  Alternative Concepts of God: Essays on 
the Metaphysics of the Divine  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Essays, pro and con, 
concerning non-orthodox concepts of divinity. 

What Sorts of Religion Are There? 25
 Christian, William (1972)  Oppositions of Religious Doctrines: A Study in the Logic of 
Dialogue Among Religions  (London: Macmillan). An account of how we can discover 
and understand disagreements among religions’ essential teachings. 
 Larsen, Gerald James and Deutsch, Elliot, eds. (1988)  Interpreting across Boundaries 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press). Investigates some of the challenges and 
rewards of considering religion in a cross-cultural context. 
 Schmidt, Wilhelm (1931)  The Origin and Growth of Religion (London: Methuen and Com-
pany). A controversial but very interesting defense of the view that monotheism is the 
earliest religion. 
 Sharma, Arvind (2011)  Our Religions: The Seven World Religions Introduced by Preemi-
nent Scholars from Each Tradition  (Taunton, MA: HarperCollins, Kindle). Each essay 
is written by a scholar who is a member of the tradition presented who also has eminent 
standing as an expert. 
 Smart, Ninian (1960)  A Dialogue of Religions  (London: SCM Press). Presents the views of 
various religions on central topics in the form of a dialogue. 
 ——— (1964)  Doctrine and Argument in Indian Philosophy  (London: Allen and Unwin). 
Clear and comprehensive presentation of the basic claims of different Indian philosophi-
cal systems. 
 Smith, Huston (2009)  The World’s Religions  (Taunton, MA: HarperCollins, Revised 
and Updated, Kindle). A classic that deals with the “inner” side of a large selection of 
religions. 
 Ward, Keith (1999)  Religion and Human Nature  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Dis-
cusses views of human nature and eschatology from multiple religious perspectives.    

 Structure and Content 
 The basic interest of religious experiences for the philosophy of religion lies in 
whatever potential they may have for providing information about what there 
is. Those who think that there are experience-independent material objects typi-
cally suppose that perceptual experience—seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, and 
touching—are on the whole a reliable source of information about these objects. 
Moral experience is regarded by moral realists—roughly, those who think that 
there actually are obligations, duties, right and wrong ways of behaving, ways of 
being a good or an evil person, and the like—as having similar information poten-
tial. The discussion that follows is governed by two underlying queries: What sort 
of information about what there is might religious experiences provide, and how 
could one tell? While these underlying questions do not receive direct attention 
until later chapters, the presentation here looks forward to the discussion there. 
 The notion of a “kind” of experience, like so many others, is not one that is 
sharply delineated in everyday thought. It is a term we will need to deﬁ ne in a 
way that is fair to the experiences, but is useful for our purposes. That said, there 
are various sorts of religion; there are also various sorts of religious experience. 
The notion of a sort of experience is not immediately obvious. Let us begin with a 
criterion for experiences being of a different sort that has to do with the structure 
of an experience. Consider such experiences as feeling nauseous, dizzy, or dis-
oriented; consider also generalized anxiety and generalized euphoria, where the 
force of “generalized” is to cancel out the idea that there is something in particular 
about which one is anxious or euphoric. Sensory experience is subject-conscious-
ness-object (s-c-o) in structure, as are at least apparent experiences of God. In 
contrast, nausea and the like are subject-content (s-c) in structure. These experi-
ences do not seem to their subjects to be matters of sensing something external, 
subject-content experience. To be anxious about a small dog wandering near traf-
ﬁ c, euphoric at the thought of buttermilk doughnuts, or pained by a friend’s harsh 
words, is to have a subject-consciousness-object experience. The phenomenology 
of an experience is “what it is like to the subject” to have the experience. To 
fear Frankenstein is to have an outer-directed experience. In another jargon, it 
is inherently intentional in the sense of apparently being “of something.” Just as 
one’s thought that Frankenstein would not be great to have as a neighbor is about 
 What Sorts of Religious 
Experience Are There? 
 4 

Religious Experience 27
Frankenstein is not cancelled by there being no such being, fear of Frankenstein 
is not cancelled by Frankenstein’s absence. The structure of both the thought and 
the feeling is subject-conscious object; this is an essential feature of its structure. 
 We now need some criteria. 
 Criterion One: Experience A is of a different sort from experience B if A is of 
subject/consciousness object structure and B is of subject/content structure, 
or conversely. 
 Whether or not there are other experiential structures besides the two we have 
mentioned, an experience possessing one of the two identiﬁ ed structures is a dif-
ferent kind from the other. 1 
 A central doctrine of Theravada Buddhism is that all there is to you now is a 
bundle of physical states that do not involve consciousness and mental states that 
do involve consciousness; there is no subject that has these states. A core doctrine 
in Jainism insists that there is a subject that has such states—states must be states 
of something. It adds that the subject of these states—every human being—is 
immortal and immaterial. Advaita Vedanta agrees with Jainism regarding what it 
calls the “level of experience,” but its core doctrine insists that at what it calls the 
“level of reality” (the way things really are) there exists only qualityless Brah-
man. Each tradition claims that its core doctrine is seen to be true if one has its 
particular type of enlightenment experience. Were all three sorts of enlightenment 
experience reliable, you would be a subject of your experiences, a subjectless set 
of causally connected states, and identical to a being or state that has no properties 
whatever. Thus the traditions hold incompatible doctrines. 
 Our current interest concerns what they have in common, namely their appeal to 
enlightenment experience. What sort of structure does such an experience have? 
 Subject-consciousness-object experience, if it is reliable, is awareness of 
something ontologically distinct from the subject. Subject-content experience is 
awareness of one’s own psychological and physical states. But the metaphysical 
structure—substantial subject in states that depend for their existence on the sub-
stantial subject whose states they are versus causally related states that are not states 
of anything—of persons is not one of one’s mental or physical states; at least it is 
not typically listed along with joy and being seated, which normally one feels and 
is aware of by being aware of one’s body. Nonetheless there are religious traditions 
and philosophical positions that maintain that our metaphysical structure is some-
thing we can know by direct (non-inferential) awareness. If this is also introspec-
tion, it is introspective awareness of something quite different than whether one has 
a headache. One’s metaphysical structure is not mind-dependent nor is it something 
that exists distinct from and independent of oneself. We will discuss later some of 
the philosophical context of the Jain-Buddhist dispute. For now, we need a characte-
rization of this sort of experience. Perhaps something along these lines will do. 
  Criterion Two: If an experience, if reliable, is an awareness of something 
neither mind-dependent nor distinct from oneself, and so is not sensory per-
ceptual or standardly introspective, then it is an introversive experience. 2 

28 Philosophy and Religion
 Descartes claimed that when you are in pain, strictly speaking, you are aware of 
yourself-being-in-pain—aware of being a subject distinct from the state but aware 
of the state. This self-awareness is reliable and introversive. In sharp contrast, 
Hume claimed that when we introspect, we learn that all we are is a bundle of 
states. “I am in pain,” stated with metaphysical care, is better expressed “A pain state 
is among the causally connected states that currently composes me.” Jainism sides 
with Descartes and much of Buddhism with Hume, save that the Buddhist view 
grants that the Descartes-Jain view is the common sense view. 
 Monotheistic traditions include visions and dreams among divine revelations. 
These are subject-consciousness-object experiences with perceptual content. 
They are in one way at least like hallucinations (secularists of course will see the 
relation as identity)—most of their content is not veridical. Experience 2 (follow-
ing) is an example. God is represented as a king sitting on a throne. It is not part 
of Jewish theology that the maker of heaven and earth literally sits on a throne. 
For the monotheist, the setting is not something that is to be taken literally; it is 
setting (in this case) for the verbal content of the vision. The setting is symbolic. 
The verbal content is literal. While it can be trickier to deal with visions (and 
dreams), which raise questions of interpretation not typically required by percep-
tual experiences, dreams are sometimes considered as, in effect, visions had by 
the sleeping. 
 There are many other ways of cutting up the experiential pie. There are 
perceptual—visual, tactual, auditory, gustatory, and olfactory—experiences, 
and moral and aesthetic experiences, for example. Nonetheless this division 
seems much less relevant to, and helpful for, our inquiries, and we can add oth-
ers should they be added. 
 Experiences typically will have affective content. Enlightenment experiences 
standardly are described as peaceful, blissful, and having thorough absence of 
attachment. Monotheistic experiences often at least typically include a response 
of awe and reverence. These feelings are taken to be signs of, and evidence for, 
enlightenment experience and experience of God. 
 Descriptions 
 We next need some examples of religious experiences. 
 Monotheism: Jewish, Christian, Hindu 
 Experience 1 
 Moses, tending the ﬂ ock of his father-in-law Jethro, sees a bush that apparently 
is burning and not consumed by the ﬁ re. Then, the text of Exodus tells us: 
 And Moses said, “I will turn aside and see this great sight, why the bush is 
not burnt.” When the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, God called to him 
out of the bush, “Moses, Moses!” And he said, “Here am I.” Then he [God] 
said, “Do not come near; put off your shoes from your feet, for the place on 

Religious Experience 29
which you are standing is holy ground.” And he said, “I am the God of your 
Father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob.” And Moses 
hid his face, for he was afraid to look at God. 
 (Exodus 3: 3–6) 
 Experience 2 
  In the year that King Uzziah died I saw the Lord, high and holy and lifted up; 
and his train ﬁ lled the temple. Above him stood the seraphim; each had six 
wings: with two he covered his face, and with two he covered his feet, and with 
two he ﬂ ew. And one called to another and said: “Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of 
Hosts; the whole earth is full of His glory.” And the foundations of the thresh-
olds shook at the voice of him who called, and the house was ﬁ lled with smoke. 
And I said: “Woe is me! For I am lost; for I am a man of unclean lips and 
I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for my eyes have seen the king, 
the Lord of hosts!” Then ﬂ ew one of the seraphims to me, having in his hand a 
burning coal which he had taken with tongs from the altar. And he touched my 
mouth, and said: “Behold, this has touched your lips; your guilt is taken away, 
and your sin forgiven.” And I heard the Lord saying, “Whom shall I send, and 
who will go for us?” Then I said, “Here I am! Send me.” And he said, “Go.” 
 (Isaiah 6: 1–9) 
 Experience 3 
  I [John] was in the Spirit on the Lord’s day, and I heard behind me a loud 
voice like a trumpet saying, “Write what you see in a book and send it to 
the seven churches. . . . Then I turned to see the voice that was speaking to 
me, and on turning I saw seven golden lampstands, and in the midst of the 
lampstands one like a son of man, clothed with a long robe and with a golden 
girdle round his breast; his head and his hair were white as wool, white as 
snow; his eyes were like a ﬂ ame of ﬁ re, his feet were like burnished bronze, 
reﬁ ned as in a furnace, and his voice was like the sound of many waters; in 
his right hand he held seven stars, from his mouth issued a sharp two-edged 
sword, and his face was like the sun shining in full strength. When I saw him, 
I fell at his feet as though dead. But he laid his right hand upon me, saying 
“Fear not, I am the ﬁ rst and the last, and the living one; I died, and behold 
I am alive forevermore, and I have the keys of Death and Hades.” 
 (Revelation 1:10–18) 
 Experience 4 
  Father of all, Master supreme, Power supreme in all the worlds, Who is like 
thee? Who is beyond thee? I bow before thee. I prostrate before thee, and 
I beg thy grace, O glorious Lord. As a father to his son, as a friend to his 
friend, as a lover to his lover, be gracious unto me, O God. In a vision I have 
seen what no man has seen before; I rejoice in exultation, and yet my heart 

30 Philosophy and Religion
trembles with fear. Have mercy upon me, Lord of Gods, refuge of the whole 
universe: show me again thine own human form. I yearn to see thee again 
with thy crown and scepter and circle. Show thyself to me in thine own four-
armed form, thou of arms inﬁ nite, Inﬁ nite Form. 
 (Bhagavagita (Song of the Blessed Lord)  Chapter 11 , paragraphs 43–46) 
 Comment 
 Examples 1–4 are subject-consciousness-object in structure. In saying this we 
are not assuming the experiences are veridical. Having a subject-consciousness-
object experience does not guarantee the existence of the item toward which an 
outer-directed experience is targeted. There is an interesting phrase in 4—God is 
described as having an inﬁ nity of arms. This goes down well in Delhi as indicat-
ing omnipotence. It would not go down well in Detroit where seeing something 
with as many as eight legs can lead to a call to the exterminator. One must expect 
different descriptions to express the same or similar concepts as one moves from 
one culture to another. Also similar expressions may express different concepts. 
The experiences are obviously phenomenologically subject-concept-object and 
the at least apparent object elicits reverence and awe. It is sometimes said that a 
transcendent God cannot be of object of experience because such a God is not 
(a space and time) object. ‘Object’ here simply means “that which is experienced.” 
To claim that an omnipotent cannot do this seems obviously false. (Whether God 
should be thought of as an eternal [timeless] being or an everlasting being [no 
temporal beginning, no temporal ending, and no gaps in the middle] is a point at 
dispute in contemporary philosophy of religion.)  
 Theravada Buddhism 
 Experience 5 
  This monk life leads to complete detachment, to freedom from desire, to 
peace, to superknowledge, to the highest insight, to nibbana. 
 (Digha Nikaya II, 251) 
 Experience 6 
  This is peace, this is the highest, namely the calming of the activities, the 
rejection of all attachment, the destruction of craving, the freedom from 
desire, nibbana. 
 (Anguttara Nikaya V, 110) 
 Experience 7 
   . . . freedom from pride, restraint of thirst, uprooting of attachment, cutting 
off of the cycle of existences, destruction of craving, freedom from desire, 
ceasing, nibbana. 
 (Ibid., I, 88) 

Religious Experience 31
 Experience 8 
  But when I comprehended, as it really is, the satisfaction of the world as sat-
isfaction, the misery as misery, and the escape as escape, then I fully under-
stood and accepted full Buddha status, and the knowledge and the vision 
arose in me: sure is the release of my mind: this is my last birth. 
 (Ibid., I, 259) 
 Experience 9 
  It is recognized that there is nothing but what is seen of the mind itself where 
recognizing the nature of the Self-mind, one no longer cherishes the dualism 
of discrimination, where there is no more thirst or craving, where there is no 
more attachment to external things. 
 (Surangama) 
 Comment 
 Nirvana (= nibbana) is described in these passages in both positive terms (features 
it has) and negative terms (features that it lacks). Peace, superknowledge, highest 
insight, cutting off the cycle of existences, plus detachment, freedom from pride and 
desire and craving and illusion—the latter are viewed as conditions that bind one 
to the cycle of rebirth and the exceptionless law of karma, so that reaching nirvana 
means that one has escaped these conditions that pull one away from reaching nir-
vana. An account of nirvana is typically rather general. The question most likely to 
be asked about it is whether, in that state or condition (it is not a place), personal 
identity is retained. The basic problem is that personal identity, strictly speaking, is 
not retained in this, or any, lifetime. The Buddha is recorded as refusing to answer 
the question whether the self exists, does not exist, both exists and does not exist, or 
neither exists nor fails to exist. The questions assume that there is a self to survive or 
not survive. Further, pondering the questions does not help toward liberation from 
craving. 3 What Theravada Buddhists hold persons to be is one collection of ephem-
eral causally related momentary states at a moment, and a causally connected series 
of the same over time. Seeing that this is so is a central element in attaining Buddhist 
nirvana. To achieve nirvana is in part to perceive the truth of this doctrine. Nirvana is 
said to be ineffable, beyond space and time, peaceful, a blissful consciousness. One 
thing is clear: in nirvana there is no more to personal identity than there was under 
pre-nirvanic conditions. The idea is roughly this: when you see, as you do in enlight-
enment, that you are just one ephemeral bundle after another you will abandon all 
attachments. The metaphysical insight and the cessation of attachment go together.  
 Jainism 
 Experience 10 
   . . . with the knees high and the head low, in deep meditation, he [Mahavira, a 
founder of Jainism] reached Nirvana, the complete and full, the unobstructed, 

32 Philosophy and Religion
unimpeded, inﬁ nite and supreme, best knowledge and intuition, called Kev-
ala . . . he was a Kevalin, omniscient and comprehending all objects, he knew 
all conditions of the world, of gods, men, and demons; whence they come, 
where they go, whether they are born as men or animals, or become gods or 
hell-beings; their food, drink, doings, desires, open and secret deeds, their 
conversation and gossip, and the thoughts of their minds; he saw and knew 
all conditions in the whole world of all living beings. 
 (Jaina Sutras I, 201, 202) 
 Experience 11 
  With supreme knowledge, with supreme intuition, with supreme conduct, . . .
with supreme uprightness, with supreme mildness, with supreme dexterity, with 
supreme patience, with supreme freedom from passions, with supreme con-
trol, with supreme contentment, with supreme understanding, on the supreme 
path to ﬁ nal liberation, which is the fruit of veracity, control, penance, and 
good conduct, the Venerable One meditated on himself for twelve years. 
During the thirteenth year the second month of summer, in the fourth fort-
night . . . on its tenth day, when the shadow had turned towards the east 
and the ﬁ rst wake was over . . . [the Venerable One] in a squatting position, 
with joined heels, exposing himself to the heat of the sun after fasting two 
and a half days without drinking water, being engaged in deep meditation, 
reached the highest knowledge and intuition called Kevala, which is inﬁ nite, 
supreme, unobstructed, unimpeded, complete, and full . . . he was a Kevalin, 
omniscient and comprehending all objects; he knew and saw all conditions 
of the world, of gods, men, and demons; whence they come, whither they go, 
whether they are born as men or as animals or become gods or hell-beings, 
the ideas, the thoughts of their minds, the food, doings, desires, the open and 
secret deeds of all the living beings in the whole world; he the Arhat, for 
whom there is no secret, knew and saw all conditions of all living beings in 
the world, what they thought, spoke, or did at any moment. . . . [This is] ﬁ nal 
liberation. 
 (Ibid., I, 263, 271) 
 Experience 12 
  Mahavira quitted the world, cut asunder the ties of birth, old age, and death; 
become a Siddha, a Buddha, a Mukta, a maker of the end (to all misery), 
ﬁ nally liberated, freed from all pains. 
 (Ibid., I, 264, 265) 
 Experience 13 
  Mahavira obtained the highest knowledge and intuition, called Kevala, which 
is inﬁ nite, supreme, unobstructed, unimpeded, complete, and full . . . ﬁ nal 
liberation. 
 (Ibid., I, 265, 266) 

Religious Experience 33
 Experience 14 
   . . . he reached Nirvana, the complete and full, the unobstructed, unimpeded, 
inﬁ nite and supreme, best knowledge and intuition, called Kevala. 
 (Ibid., I, 201) 
 Experience 15 
  (The liberated) with their departing breath reach absolute perfection, wis-
dom, liberation, ﬁ nal Nirvana, the end of all misery. 
 (Ibid., I, 94) 
 Experience 16 
  Having annihilated his Karman (= karma) both meritorious and sinful, being 
steadfast (self-controlled) . . . [the enlightened one] crossed the ocean-like 
ﬂ ood of worldly existence and obtained exemption from transmigration. 
 (Ibid., I, 111, 112) 
 Experience 17 
   . . . what is called Nirvana, or freedom from pain, or perfection, which is 
in view of all; it is the safe, happy, and quiet place which all the great sages 
reach. This is the eternal place, in view of all, but difﬁ cult of approach. Those 
sages who reach it are free from sorrow, they have put an end to the stream 
of existence. 
 (Ibid., I, 128) 
 Experience 18 
 (Kevalins) have obtained perfection, enlightenment, deliverance, ﬁ nal beati-
tude, and . . . an end to all misery. 
 (Ibid., II, 158) 
 Experience 19 
  (A Kevalin) obtains perfection, enlightenment, deliverance, and ﬁ nal beati-
tude and puts an end to all misery. 
 (Ibid., II, 173) 
 Comment 
 Here too nirvana (= kevala) is described in terms of what features it has and what 
features it lacks. Here, the seeker retains personal identity (he had it in all past 
lives). His knowledge is no longer limited by embodiment, belief that one is one’s 
body or that being embodied is necessary for existence is replaced by a conviction 
that one is simply an immaterial mental substance, and one is assured of one’s 
immortality free from suffering and misery. 

34 Philosophy and Religion
 Advaita Vedanta 
 Experience 20 
  When a seer sees the brilliant Maker, Lord, Person, the Brahman-source, 
then, being a knower, shaking off good and evil, stainless, he attains supreme 
identity with Him. 
 (Mundaka Upanishad III, i, 3) 
 Experience 21 
  Not by sight is it grasped, not even by speech, not by any other sense-organs, 
austerity, or work, by the peace of knowledge, one’s nature puriﬁ ed—in that 
way, however, by meditating, one does behold him who is without parts. 
 (Ibid., III, i, 8) 
 Experience 22 
 That which is the ﬁ nest essence—the whole world has that as its self. That is 
Reality. That is Atman. That art thou. 
 (Chandogya Upanishad VI, ix, 4) 
 Experience 23 
  Now, when one is sound asleep, composed, serene, and knows no dreams—
that is the self (Atman) . . . that is the immortal, the fearless. That is Brahman. 
 (Ibid., VIII, xi, 1) 
 Experience 24 
  Then Usasta Cakkayan questioned him. “Yajnavalkya,” said he, “Explain to 
me who is Brahman present and not beyond our ken, him who is the self in 
all things.” [Yajnavalkya replies:] “Verily, he is the great, unborn self, who is 
this (person) consisting of knowledge among the senses. In the space within 
the heart lies the ruler, the lord of all, the king of all.” 
( Brhadaranyaka Upanishad III) 
 Comment 
 The doctrinal context is this: what we refer to as a person is an Atman that is 
plagued by illusion that there is the world there appears to be with physical 
objects, human beings, cows, mountains. This is the level of appearance, and 
Brahman (God) exists in this world. So long as the Atman continues to suffer from 
this illusion, it stays in the cycle of rebirth and under the law of karma. Enlighten-
ment comes via an experience in which one recognizes the illusion as an illusion 
and the identity of the Atman and Brahman, conceived as qualityless Brahman in 
which there are no distinctions to be made. 

Religious Experience 35
 Direct/Indirect Experience 
 The question as to what counts as a direct experience of something quickly gets 
complicated. The simplest example is introspection—pain does not need an inter-
mediary from which we infer that we are in pain. Other sensations ﬁ t the same 
pattern. You do not have to infer that you are adding two and two from your 
writing down the thought and then inferring that you are having it. Sensory per-
ception is often viewed similarly. If you see a computer screen, you do not need 
to think “There seems to be a computer screen there; if there seems to be a com-
puter screen there, there probably is one; so probably there is a computer screen 
there.” While it may be a cardboard model for advertising, a hologram of a screen, 
or the content of a hallucination, you will take it to be the case that there is a 
screen there, and the practice of doing that will work nicely. But there is a posi-
tion held by competent thinkers, who offer arguments for their view, that what 
one is directly aware of in sensory perception is not the object perceived but sense 
data that are caused by the object, and the sense data gives you generally reliable 
information about physical objects in your environment (indirect realism). But 
then one never has direct awareness of any mind-independent objects. What, then, 
justiﬁ es your belief that there are such objects? One answer is: nothing, there just 
are the mind-dependent sense data (roughly, idealism). Another is that nothing 
justiﬁ es the belief on the sense data view, so our choices are skepticism and the 
view that we are directly aware of mind-independent physical objects (direct real-
ism). With this light touch on the epistemology of perception, we can turn brieﬂ y 
to analogous questions concerning religious experiences. 
 We begin with subject-consciousness object experience—apparent experiences 
of God. Experience 2 has Isaiah having a vision in which God sits on a throne. 
God is not, according to Jewish theology, a material being. So God does not sit. 
The visual images are representative of God as ruler but are not to be taken liter-
ally. What about the verbal message? That is trickier. God is not a native Hebrew 
speaker, but there is no reason why an omnipotent, omniscient being could not 
cause sound waves that amount to “Whom shall I send for us?” 
 So perhaps the verbal communication is direct experience of God, thereby 
expressing thoughts God literally has. (Objections to the idea that anything said 
about God can be literal will be discussed in a later chapter. We can note for now 
that the claim that God is such that nothing literal can be said about God is itself 
something literal said about God, and further the question arises as to how one 
knows that nothing said about God can be literally true.) 
 So where do our monotheistic religious cases ﬁ t? One could view them as indi-
rect because they may come at the end of a speciﬁ ed process. Perhaps Mary at 
least seems to experience God, after having gone through a sort of preparatory 
religious procedure intended to reach that success. Perhaps she offered a pre-
scribed sacriﬁ ce, and then entered a house of worship and prayed. Perhaps if John 
at least seems to experience God after he has fasted, gone to a worship service, 
confessed his sins, and taken Communion; and then only then prays humbly for 
God’s presence. What is not clear is why any of this should make the experience 

36 Philosophy and Religion
indirect. For one thing, it is not at all a central doctrine of most sorts of monothe-
ism that if one does A, B, and C, then this will constrain God to appear. The view 
of God as sovereign typically prevents there being a ritual the performance of 
which is supposed to guarantee a divine visit. Further, nothing in either person’s 
behavior places them behind a veil that God could not pass through. 
 One suggestion is that whatever in a vision or dream represents God as having a 
feature that an immaterial being cannot have, take that as the setting for whatever 
may be direct. Thus the words Isaiah hears may be direct—God actually having 
the thoughts the words expressed—whereas the throne is setting for the words, 
there to identify to Isaiah who is their source. So perhaps this is a sensible way to 
distinguish what is direct versus indirect. The basic idea is that while all of the 
experience is caused by God, the setting part of a dream or vision is not accurate to 
what God is, and the part that is accurate regarding God is the best candidate for 
being direct experience; God, as immaterial, has no vocal cords, but as omnip-
otent can cause words that do communicate thought that God has. The setting 
imagery, while perhaps caused by God, is not true of God or the sender who is not 
in a literal temple. So long as the information content is correct, perhaps whether 
we call the hearing of the voice is direct experience or not is not crucial—God has 
been reliably experienced if the words express God’s thoughts, and that is enough. 
We will leave this suggestion for further reﬂ ection, which should include what to 
say concerning symbolic features of such experiences as 1–4, and in response to 
the question as to whether all of our experiences can be indirect (and if they all 
are, from what does the inference that makes an experience indirect begin?). 
 What, then, of the non-theistic cases? Theravada Buddhism, Jainism, and 
Advaita Vedanta (concerning the level of reality) are non-theistic. For Jainism 
enlightenment experience is awareness of one’s being immaterial, immortal, and 
omniscient. It is thus an introversive experience—one is aware of one’s nature. 
Common sense, everyday experience reveals oneself as a subject of experience 
rather than a series of ephemeral bundles of conscious states. Enlightenment 
experience adds to common sense, correcting the tendency to think of oneself 
as simply physical or dependent for existence on the physical. It more accurately 
sees the nature of the jiva or soul. For Theravada, it is again the structure of 
what we call persons that is exposed in enlightenment experience. Assuming such 
experiences occur, both in the Jain and the Buddhist case, the experience is direct 
and intravercive. If both are introversive, then introversive experiences can be 
mistaken, since at least one of the Jain and the Buddhist experiences must 
be incorrect as to what the structure of persons really is. 
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
  1. 
What, exactly, is a phenomenological description and why is it impor-
tant to have them? 
 2. 
Are the criteria for different kinds of experience clear and properly 
applied? 

Religious Experience 37
 Notes 
1. Perception as s-c-o is generally accepted. Introspection of sensations and introspection 
of psychological attitudes phenomenologically differ in that, save for generalized anxi-
ety, etc., the latter has an object—something feared or hoped, and are outer-directed.
 2.  A technical term used as deﬁ ned. 
  3.  Though the idea that there is an enduring self is sometimes viewed as dangerous pre-
cisely because it leads to what the tradition views as unfortunate attachment. 
 Suggested Readings 
 Dan, Joseph (2003)  The Heart and the Fountain: An Anthology of Jewish Mystical Expe-
riences  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Presents numerous selections from Jewish 
mysticism, with commentary. 
 Happold, F. Crossﬁ eld (1991)  Mysticism: A Study and an Anthology (London: Penguin 
Books).   Independent of a controversial view of mystical experience are some twenty-
six selections from Hinduism, Plato, and Christianity plus a ﬁ nal example from nature 
mysticism. 
 James, William (1902)  Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in Human Nature (London: 
Random House). Gifford Lectures with lots of reports of religious experiences described by 
James as “extreme” examples, classiﬁ ed by their effects and the personality types of those 
who have them, presented in the context of James’s pragmatism and pluralism. 
 Katz, Steven T. (2012)  Comparative Mysticism: An Anthology of Original Sources (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press). Selections from Jewish, Christian, Islamic, Hindu, Buddhist, 
Confucian, Taoist, and Native American sources. 
 McGinn, Bernard (2006)  The Essential Writings of Christian Mysticism (New York: 
Random House). Nearly one hundred selections from Christian mystics. 
 Otto, Rudolph (1958)  The Idea of the Hol y (Oxford: Oxford University Press). A classic. 
Highly inﬂ uential discussion of experience of the holy, which Otto calls “the numinous”—
the uncanny at its most extreme, where awareness of the numinous humbles the subject; 
the numinous content of religious experience is reducible to no other felt content. 
 Pike, Nelson (1960)  Mystic Union: An Essay in the Phenomenology of Mysticism (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell). Careful discussion of the prayers of Quiet, Union, and Rapture in several 
Medieval mystics, in which Pike argues that, upon careful examination, the phenom-
enology of these states is theistic. 
 3. 
Suppose we learned somehow that sensory perception was always 
unreliable. Would it follow that all sort of subject-consciousness-
object experience was unreliable? 
 4. 
What, if anything can be learned about the possible evidential poten-
tial of religious experience by reﬂ ecting concerning the types of non-
religious experience? 
 5. Suppose your friend Kim has what you both take to be a religious 
experience—say, one that seemed to be an experience of God. Could 
this be evidence for you that God exists? Why, or why not?   

38 Philosophy and Religion
 Radhakrishnan, Sarvepali and Moore, Charles (1967)  A Sourcebook in Indian Philosophy 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press). A standard reference work with a very use-
ful collection of Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain texts that include descriptions. 
 Stace, Walter T. (1966)  Mysticism and Philosophy  (New York: Lippincott). Standard state-
ment of view on which mystical experience is not subject-consciousness-object. Divides 
mystical experience into extrovertive (experience of unity of nature in which the subject 
is included) and introvertive (which is devoid of concepts and images). 
 Wiebe, Phillip H. (2004)  God and Other Spirits  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). In a 
sober and scholarly manner, quotes and discusses reports of experiences that their sub-
jects regard as encounters with God and other spirits, thus including in his examples a 
wider than typical range of experiences. 
 Zaehner, R. C. (1960)  Concordant Discord  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Deserves to 
be a classic. Argues that Stace leaves out an important type of introvertive mysticism, 
namely the love mysticism of both India and the West—a type of experience that is 
theistic.    

 Doctrine 
 Agreement on the Importance of Doctrine 
 It is fairly well known that the New Testament contains such passages as that 
in which Jesus says “I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no one comes to the 
Father but by me.” 1  One reads that “he who believes in the Son has eternal life; 
he who does not obey the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on 
him.” 2  St. Peter asserted, “There is salvation in no one else [but Jesus Christ], 
for there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be 
saved.” 3 It is less well known that the other religious traditions we have discussed 
have similar emphases. The Advaita Vedantin Shankara, for example, forthrightly 
says that “if the soul . . . is not considered to possess fundamental unity with 
Brahman—an identity to be realized by knowledge—there is not any chance of its 
obtaining ﬁ nal release.” 4  A text from the  Jaina Sutras  bluntly tells us, “Those who 
do not know all things by  kevala  (knowledge), but who being ignorant teach a law 
(of their own), are lost themselves, and work the ruin of others in this dreadful, 
boundless Circle of Births. Those who know all things by the full Kevala knowl-
edge, and who are practicing meditation and teach the whole law, are themselves 
saved and save others.” A Buddhist text speaks plainly to this effect: “If one does 
not proceed in this manner [to “proceed in this manner” is to “develop the under-
standing which results from the study of the (Buddhist) teachings”], inasmuch as 
meditation on some erroneous idea cannot even clear away doubt, recognition of 
reality will not arise and consequently meditation will be proﬁ tless like that of the 
Tirthikas (i.e., non-Buddhists, especially Jains).” 5  The theme of these passages is 
clear enough. To put them in one jargon: there is a heaven to gain and a hell to 
shun; there is one way to gain heaven and shun hell, and there are plenty of ways 
to shun heaven and gain hell. 
 This insistence on the importance of doctrine comes out in another way. It is 
not an accident that, as we have noted, the experiences that are religiously central 
to our traditions are typically called  enlightenment experiences or they are said to 
yield knowledge of God; 6  they are described as  cognitive . An Advaitin description 
of moksha goes like this: “When a seer sees . . . the Brahman-source, then, being 
a knower, shaking off good and evil, stainless, he attains supreme identity with 
 The Importance of Doctrine 
and the Distinctness of 
Religious Traditions 
 5 

40 Philosophy and Religion
Him.” 7  The Jaina Sutras speak of “the highest knowledge and intuition, called 
‘Kevala’ which is . . . ﬁ nal liberation.” 8  A Theravada text says, “The monk life 
leads to complete detachment, to freedom from desire, to cessation, to peace, to 
superknowledge, to the highest insight, to nibbana.” 9 Correspondingly, the New 
Testament says, “We know that the Son of God has come and has given us under-
standing so that we may know Him who is true.” 10 
 This feature of religion is often regarded with sadness or disapproval, an unfor-
tunate but accidental feature that can be removed from religious traditions with 
gain and without loss. Such suggestions fail to understand what a religion is. 
A doctor who diagnoses Mary as having migraine headaches and proposes Dar-
von and stress reduction as cure differs from a doctor who diagnoses Mary as 
feigning pain and recommends psychoanalysis. The one thinks that Mary’s pain is 
real and requires medical attention; the other thinks that Mary has no pain and is 
faking it and thus offers no remedy for pain at all. The ﬁ rst doctor, if she is com-
petent and conﬁ dent of her diagnosis, will predict continuing anguish for Mary as 
long as her migraine headaches are ignored. The second doctor, if he is competent 
and conﬁ dent of his diagnosis, will predict continuing fakery on Mary’s part until 
she faces her childhood. This is what one would expect; it does not arise from 
either or both of the doctors being immoral, loving controversy, or taking pleasure 
in the thought of the suffering of others. 
 One who sincerely embraces a religious tradition accepts that tradition’s diag-
nosis and cure of what it takes to be a deep problem in dire need of treatment. The 
founders, authorities, texts, doctrines, and experiences of the tradition are focused 
on properly diagnosing and successfully curing the believer’s illness, which it 
takes to be an illness we all share. A sincere Christian, Advaita Vedantin, Thera-
vada Buddhist, and Jain will differ as to the diagnoses they accept and the cures 
they embrace. Each will take the others’ diagnoses to be in error and the others’ 
cures to be ineffective regarding what the real problem is. 
 To actually believe that John is a sinner in need of God’s forgiveness, or that 
John is unknowingly identical to qualityless Brahman, or that John at a time is 
but a cluster of momentary states and over time a series of such clusters and will 
unfortunately remain so unless he recognizes his nature and enters nirvana, or 
that John is actually an enduring and indestructible self-conscious being whose 
embodiment hides his omniscience and existential security, is also to think that 
anything incompatible with the diagnosis and cure that one accepts is false. If 
it is true (as it is) that the National Basketball franchise that has won the most 
championships is the Boston Celtics, it is not another thing for it to be false that 
the Celtics are not this franchise. If it is true that we are in need of God’s gracious 
forgiveness, and that this is the basic religious problem that I share with all others, 
then if my belief is true it is not another thing for it to be false that this is not the 
basic religious problem that I share with all others. The same holds for the truth 
about any other proposed diagnosis. Any diagnosis is either true or not true. The 
same applies to whether any cure gets things right. 
 It is worth noting and emphasizing that the passages quoted above are not 
simply exceptions that do not deeply reﬂ ect the perspectives that we have been 

Importance of Doctrine and Distinctness 41
discussing. A religion typically offers an account of the conditions in which we 
exist, a conception of the religious problem that we face because of existing in 
those conditions, and a solution to that problem that is viewed as realistically 
facing and resolving that problem under those conditions. Different religions see 
those conditions differently. They hence describe the basic religious problem dif-
ferently. They therefore offer different solutions. If you think that all religion is a 
crock, you will not take seriously those descriptions of the conditions in which we 
exist, and the problem that we thereby face; they will not describe live options for 
your acceptance. But you can still see that they are different and that the solutions 
offered are different. If you think that we are not in danger from ﬁ re or from ﬂ ood, 
you will not think we need a ﬁ re extinguisher or an ark. But you can still see that 
the ﬁ re-fearers disagree with water-fearers in their analysis of our troubles and in 
their proposed remedies. 
 Relativity of Religious Problems? 
 It has been suggested that, just as different people have different diseases, so 
they may have different basic religious problems. One form this might take is to 
view religions as alternative therapies and propose that when therapy is needed 
we have experts who can direct patients to what seems the most appropriate 
religious milieu. This might lead to a new discipline—spiritology, perhaps—in 
which psychologists and psychiatrists made the analysis of a person’s problem 
and a spiritual director who was intimately acquainted with a set of religious 
practices would place the patient in contact with what seemed the religious tra-
ditions most cordial to the patient’s psyche (of course the exact arrangements 
would be worked out by those involved). This is in entire accord with secularized 
forms of religion, and all that would be required would be to psychologize the 
religious traditions. Different strokes for different folks. How successful such 
an enterprise might be is not clear. Getting agreement on the criteria for success 
might be rather difﬁ cult. 
 The suggestion of different strokes for different folks has a different applica-
tion. That comes in the idea that different people actually have the different ill-
nesses the non-psychologized diverse religions diagnose. This is a quite different 
program because it includes taking seriously the cures actually proffered by the 
religions themselves. As we have seen, the diagnoses and cures presuppose that 
the world is mind-independently structured in certain ways with certain contents. 
They presuppose a certain list of metaphysical claims, or at least one of a con-
strained set of such claims. They are not metaphysically neutral. They cannot be 
coherently divorced from their associated metaphysical perspectives without psy-
chological (or some other) reduction. But the present suggestion does not intend 
to be reductionistic. 
 As we have said, religious traditions focus on what they take to be the deep-
est religious illness and suppose it to be shared by all human beings. This is not 
arbitrary on their part—the problem, however construed, is one viewed by these 
traditions as closely connected to human nature. On their view, the problem  is 

42 Philosophy and Religion
human nature, or it is due to a universal misuse of capacities possession of which 
is constitutive of being human, or the like. They take it that everyone lives in the 
same cosmos, has the same nature, and is disjointed or warped in essentially 
the same way. From their perspective, to seriously propose that different persons 
have different religious problems at the deepest level is tantamount to suggesting 
that not all human beings are members of the same species. This suggestion is 
incompatible with at least most religious traditions, and there is little if any reason 
to think it true. The viewpoints expressed in the passages recently quoted, then, 
is exactly what one would expect from anyone who was sincerely committed to 
the religious tradition in question—who took that tradition’s diagnosis and cure to 
ﬁ t their condition and meet their deepest religious needs. There is no good reason 
to think it wicked of religious believers to hold the views these passages both 
express and speak to, their deepest needs. Sincere Marxists, Socialists, Feminists, 
Freudians, Supplyside Economists, Animal Rights Activists, Right to Choose 
Advocates, Right to Life Advocates, and Secular Humanists hold similar views 
regarding the issues on which they have deeply held views. That is, they actually 
believe what they say and act on. 
 Consider again for a moment the what the diagnoses and cures offered by the 
traditions we are considering: living in appearance and experiencing reality in an 
enlightenment experience in which you realize you are identical to a qualityless 
reality; thinking oneself to be a material body that has dependent existence and 
having an enlightenment experience in which you discover that you are essentially 
immaterial and indestructible, so that your enduring existence is secure; discerning 
in an enlightenment experience that you are not an enduring being but are composed 
of one collection of simultaneous conscious states at a time and a causal series of 
such collections over time; and recognizing yourself as a creation by God who has 
sinned and needs repentance of those sins and God’s forgiveness. For one person to 
have all these problems would require that she be altogether bereft of properties, an 
always enduring mental substance, one unenduring collection of conscious states 
after another, and an enduring person who has sinned and need divine redemption. 
No one person can manage to be all these things. Each diagnosis is correct only if 
each other diagnosis is mistaken. Each diagnosis requires that the world be one way 
rather than another, and the worlds in question are logically incompatible worlds. 
The same holds for the proposed cures. The different strokes for different folks, so 
far as religious diagnoses and cures go, is logically inconsistent.  
 Truth-Claims 
 Religions make what are sometimes called “truth-claims,” though of course that 
is redundant since to make a claim in the sense of asserting something is to say 
that what is asserted is true. Truth-claims are just claims; there are  false claims 
but there aren’t any “falsity-claims.”  Of course  religions make claims—if they 
asserted nothing, there would be no religions. Sometimes—particularly when a 
religious tradition is under rational scrutiny, or when a would-be believer rec-
ognizes that she thinks what she would like to be her religion is false and wants 

Importance of Doctrine and Distinctness 43
to keep it anyway—a religious tradition may be presented as claiming, and even 
may claim, that it makes no claim except that it makes no claims. But once the 
crisis is over, we are back to talking about God and sin and salvation, or Atman 
and Brahman and moksha and identity, or jivas and kevala and enlightenment, or 
momentary states and nirvana and release from the Wheel. It is in the very nature 
of a religion to offer an account of our situation, our problem, and its solution. 
Not every problem can arise in every situation; not every problem has the same 
solution. The account of our problem depends on the account of our situation; the 
account of our salvation depends on what we are and what we need to be saved 
from. To accept a religion is to embrace some particular and connected account of 
the situation and problem and solution. 
 Two popular contemporary perspectives often keep people from seeing reli-
gious differences. One is a popular sort of academic quasi-religion that has as one 
of its doctrinal claims that religions do not differ. The other is the sort of popular 
religious perspective that supposes all religions to be down-deep identical; this 
sort of religion, of course, is different from those religions (most if not all others) 
that do not think that religions do not differ. 11  If you accept the claim that all reli-
gions are the same as part of your secular religion, you may have as much trouble 
in admitting that not all religions are the same as members of the Flat Earth Soci-
ety have in admitting the earth is an oblate spheroid. 12 
 The thing to note here 13  is that none of these sorts of views can be made com-
patible with any of the religious traditions we have been describing; they are not 
expositions of, and they are plainly incompatible with, those perspectives. This is 
highly relevant, since these views are often presented as compatible with, if not as 
expositions of, one or more of these traditions; they are not. 
 The question arises as to whether, in some signiﬁ cant sense, all religions are 
really the same. As we have seen, in various senses they are not. They teach dif-
ferent doctrines, and if some of those doctrines are true then others are false. 
They appeal to experiences that differ in content and structure; if some of those 
experiences are reliable then the others are not. They propose different diagnoses 
and cures, and if one of those diagnoses is true then others are false and if one of 
those cures is genuine then the others are not. So, in various senses of the same—
making the same claims, appealing to the same experiences, proposing the same 
diagnoses, offering the same cures, agreeing on the structure and content of the 
world—it is emphatically false that all religions are the same. What other senses 
of “are the same” might there be? 
 Identity 
 Two Kinds of Identity: Content Identity and Function Identity 
 The question as to whether all religions are the same raises another: The same 
regarding what? Once we see this, we can see our question splitting in two: Do 
all religions have the same doctrinal content? Do they all serve the same psycho-
logical and/or social function? Do all religions have content-identity, and do they 

44 Philosophy and Religion
all have function-identity? The answers are connected. At the basic of doctrinal 
difference is divergent views of what (if anything) exists independently; what (if 
anything) is that on which everything else depends for continued existence; how 
deep in the nature of things personal self-awareness, reason, and morality are; 
what (if anything) makes a person good; how (if any way) life should be lived; 
whether ultimate intrinsic worth resides in persons; and (if there is one) what the 
afterlife includes. These are all metaphysical issues, and differences here color 
one’s morality in profound ways. Considering the diagnoses and cures, and the 
metaphysical and value differences embedded in diagnoses and cures, which are 
deep in the religious traditions in which they are offered, are the strong beginnings 
of answers to the questions just raised. 
 Low Standards for Identity: Vagueness, Generality, 
and Trivial Results 
 In spite of the partial descriptions we have offered of four religious traditions, it is 
possible to answer the question concerning content-identity afﬁ rmatively. So long 
as one makes the suggested criterion for identity of content vague and general, 
one can get the result that all of our religious traditions have identity of content. 
Thus one might suggest that all religious traditions (or at least those canvassed 
here) agree that a person’s life does not consist in the abundance (or paucity) of 
material possessions; here is some identity of content. The same goes for identity 
of function. Thus one might suggest some such claim as  all religions provide 
meaning to life for their adherents ; to that extent, our religious traditions have 
identity of function. 
 In spite of the fact that the matters on which our traditions agree are neither 
obvious nor unimportant, there is a sense in which the result that one gets by using 
such vague and general criteria for identity of content or function is trivial. The 
result that all religions are the same regarding content and/or function is purchased 
at two prices. One price is that what each tradition regards as most important is 
entirely left out. The other price is that the traditions themselves hardly make an 
appearance before they are judged identical and dismissed; most of the relevant 
information about the traditions is not used, and that ignoring of central religious 
content does not respect the religions or really much discuss them, their content 
having largely been ﬁ ltered out. I suggest, therefore, that we use high standards 
for content-identity and function-identity among religions. 
 High Standards for Identity: Clarity, Speciﬁ city, 
and an Interesting Thesis 
 What these standards should be is not far to seek. Two religious traditions have 
identity of content if and only if they teach the same doctrines. Two religious tra-
ditions have identity of function if and only if they serve the same psychological 
or social function. 

Importance of Doctrine and Distinctness 45
 Some Common Themes 
 All of the religions described earlier agree on such claims as these: human life is 
not limited to three-score-and-ten years on this earth; nothing that we can lose is 
of ultimate value (this is one moral of the Jain story); pleasure is not the ultimate 
good; violence is not an end in itself; there is a correct description of our actual 
cosmic situation, our consequent basic religious problem, and its real and acces-
sible solution; some actual religious tradition has the truth about these matters; it 
is foolish to live only for power or pleasure or wealth. These are not obvious or 
trivial truths; plenty of people would reject, say, more than three of these claims. 
Suppose that someone suggests that all religions have the same content if they all 
agree on some such claim as  A few years of life on earth under present conditions 
is not all there is  or  Materialistic values are inadequate as a basis for living . It 
plainly is worth noting that at least our four religious traditions—and many others 
as well—share these themes. Claiming, as I shall, that it is false that all religions 
are the same need not blind one to seeing that they agree on some things. But 
none of the things that they agree on are what the traditions themselves take to be 
the most important. I will argue that in fact the things they disagree about are the 
most important. 
 Two Sorts of Doctrines: Metaphysical and Moral 
 If one looks at the accounts we have given of four religious traditions, it is clear 
that they include claims about at least two sorts of matters: what there is, or meta-
physics, and what there ought to be, or ethics. I will brieﬂ y draw out some of 
the metaphysical, and some of the moral, claims that are constitutive of these 
religious traditions. 
 Some Kinds of Metaphysics 
 Arguably  the , and certainly  a , central sort of religious experience within the clas-
sical monotheisms, Christianity included, is what Rudolph Otto, in  The Idea of the 
Holy , called “numinous” experience (though there are problems with his second-
order characterizations of it.) 14  In such an experience, the subject of the experi-
ence at least seems to experience an awesome Being who is unapproachable save 
on its own terms, majestic, overpowering, independent, living, possessed of great 
energy, unique, compelling, both attractive and dangerous. Typical responses 
come in terms of awe, a sense of creaturehood and dependence, worship, and 
guilt for one’s sins. Plainly these experiences have a subject/consciousness/object 
structure; they at least seem to be encounters with something that exists quite 
distinct from and independent of the experiencing subject. 
 The relevance of this to our current topic is this: within the Christian tra-
dition, experience and doctrine both emphasize the role of a Creator and 
Providence on whom all else depends. Between God and any human person 
there is a one-way dependence relationship; it is blasphemous to deny the 

46 Philosophy and Religion
Creator-creature distinction. For Advaita Vedanta, what seems to be creature 
really is, not strictly the Creator, but at any rate underived Being. Creature-
hood, sin, forgiveness, and the Divine Person as well, are illusory; all there is, 
is qualityless and apersonal Brahman. Jainism ascribes to each person, as he or 
she really is as opposed as to how he or she seems to be, the independence of 
everything else that Christianity ascribes to God alone. It denies that there is 
any Creator, but denies as well that personal individuality is illusory or should 
or even can be lost in a sea of qualityless being. The Theravadin accepts neither 
God nor the Jain substantival soul, maintaining that all there is, is transitory 
save for  nirvana  itself, the attaining of which involves not only the cessation 
of desire but apparently the cessation of individuality. In one sense, of course, 
setting aside the deep problems with such a notion, being identical to a quality-
less and so apersonal Brahman and being absorbed into an apersonal state does 
not give one much to choose between, and some of his Vedantic critics accused 
Shankara of being a crypto-Buddhist. 
 However one should decide the question of the identity of the Advaita Vedanta 
Brahman and the Theravada  nirvana , it is clear that at the least ultimate reality 
is conceived quite differently in Christianity and Jainism, on the one hand, and 
Advaita Vedanta and Theravada on the other. So is the nature and status of human 
beings. There is not identity of content here. It is false that all religions are doc-
trinally the same. 
 Some Kinds of Morality 
 The highest good for Advaita Vedanta is achieving moksha; the highest good for 
Jainism is achieving kevala; the highest good for Theravada is achieving nirvana. 
Our traditions recognize a distinction between experience had now that guaran-
tees later escape from the Wheel, and post-mortem liberation itself. The highest 
good we can have in this life is achieving experiences that guarantee liberation 
at death. A key question in understanding how liberation is understood is this: Is 
personal identity retained in enlightenment? The Advaita answer and arguably the 
Theravada answer, for different reasons, is negative; the Jain answer is positive. 
All other values in these traditions are secondary to the end of enlightenment. In a 
tradition in which persons do not survive into ﬁ nal enlightenment, persons cannot 
themselves have deep intrinsic value or inherent worth. So they lack such worth in 
Advaita Vedanta and Theravada, and possess it in Judaism, Christianity, Vedantic 
Monotheism, and Jainism. Thus the metaphysics and ethics of our religious tradi-
tions differ greatly. This is a difference in content that cannot be removed, without 
utterly altering the religious traditions at their core. 
 My argument here can be stated brieﬂ y as follows. Our four traditions deeply 
differ in their morality in the ways noted; they embrace different, and importantly 
incompatible, values. Two religious traditions are functionally identical only if 
their basic values—what they take to have inherent or intrinsic worth—are simi-
lar, for the lifestyles that religions sanction are functions of the intrinsic values 
they embrace. Hence our traditions are not functionally identical. 

Importance of Doctrine and Distinctness 47
 There is an objection to my argument that goes as follows. It is possible that a 
tradition embraces one set of values and that its adherents follow another. Thus the 
fact that two traditions sanction different values does not entail that they are not 
functionally identical, for their adherents may follow similar or identical values. 
 This objection embodies a popular mistake. The values a religion embraces 
are those its authoritative oral traditions and written texts, as interpreted by its 
accepted leaders, sanction. If the adherents of a tradition do not embrace the val-
ues their own tradition sanctions, they are to that degree heretical or hypocriti-
cal, and nothing about religious functionality follows from their behavior or their 
value commitments. Attempts to evaluate religious traditions by looking at the 
behavior of its adherents is worthless as evidence regarding the tradition; what 
is evidentially relevant is what values the tradition’s authoritative texts sanction. 
 Diversity 
 I suggest, on the basis of what we have already said, that it is a plain fact that there 
is doctrinal diversity between religions; it simply is false that all religions are the 
same regarding content. 
 The Agreement on the Importance of Doctrine Undercuts 
the Attempt to Both Represent the Traditions 
and Deny that Doctrine Matters 
 A matter on which our traditions do agree prevents anyone from successfully 
claiming to represent these traditions and yet going on to say that while there are 
doctrinal divergences these do not really matter. Those who try to do this may be 
contemporary secularists who do not care about religious matters or professors 
who think that tolerance for different opinions requires that the deep differences 
should be downplayed. They may be adherents of the rare religion that says that 
all religions are really the same even though in fact they are not. They may be 
adherents of one or another religious tradition who either do not know their own 
tradition very well or are just confused. They may be religious pluralists who 
reduce religions to a compatible morality and take as non-literal everything that 
does not ﬁ t through their conceptual and pedagogical ﬁ lter. But it is clear that, in 
their traditional forms, religious traditions take as essential to salvation precisely 
matters on which there is deep disagreement among religious traditions. 
 Tolerance and Respect 
 An argument sometimes is offered that two people who really respect one another 
cannot knowingly disagree on ultimate religious matters, and since we respect 
each other as persons we cannot really disagree on ultimate religious, even though 
we may seem to. One of my two Ph.D. advisors, who by the way did respect each 
other, was an orthodox Rabbi and the other an atheist; both became my lifelong 
friends. I regret that I never saw anyone try to persuade my Rabbi friend that he 

48 Philosophy and Religion
really did not disagree with Christianity or atheism or my atheist friend that 
he really believed in God; it would have been interesting. The reply to this argu-
ment is that since people plainly do manage both to knowingly differ on basic 
religious matters and yet respect one another, tolerance is compatible with known 
difference on ultimate matters. 
 It has become popular to argue that if Kim and Kay are both religious—say, 
one a Vedantic monotheist and the other a Theravada Buddhist—and know each 
other to be about equally intelligent, well-informed, and intellectually honest, 
each should grant that the other is as likely right as he or she is. Whether one can 
be enlightened in a Theravada context, and forgiven of one’s sins by God in a 
Vedantic context, compatibly with putting this view in practice is a question worth 
asking. If part of the popular view is that one should proportion one’s belief to the 
evidence, then it seems that each would have to suspend judgment, and presum-
ably thereby be unsure whether enlightenment or salvation has occurred. Faith in 
a context in which one is as unsure as one is sure—that is, in doubt—as to such 
matters may dilute the medication required for cure beyond the measure at which 
it is successful. How that goes will have to be thought through regarding each 
religious tradition. 
 There is a difﬁ culty with this view that lies just below the surface. Call the 
view the Tolerance Balance Policy (TBP)—one is intolerant unless one grants that 
anyone who accepts a different religion than oneself is as intelligent, relevantly 
informed, and intellectually honest as oneself if one does not grant that the other is 
as likely right as one is regarding one’s own. It is not obvious that the TBP should 
be limited to religious belief. Its serious application to philosophy would produce 
an epistemic modesty of colossal magnitude. Its chance of general adoption is the 
academy is minute. Suppose, then, one suggested that the TBP be limited to beliefs 
where difference in belief is not unlikely to lead to violence of some sort. Call the 
result of this modiﬁ cation the Restricted Tolerance Balance Policy (RTBP). This 
would not restrict the policy to religious belief. Political beliefs, beliefs about the 
right to dwell on a given plot of land, and legal conﬂ icts begin a long list. There is 
a certain charm to the thought of a presidential debate with every statement of pol-
icy disagreement closing with “But my opponent is as likely right as I am.” Both 
TBP and RTBP face the same difﬁ culty, namely that equally intelligent, relevantly 
informed, and intellectually honest people will have different views concerning the 
correctness of either view of what counts as rational belief, and (if there is such a 
thing as epistemic ethics) whether either policy could be validly derived from the 
principles of epistemic ethics. So if we were to follow the policy’s requirements 
we would not follow the policy’s requirements. Perhaps it would be better to work 
to expand the belief that it is not permissible to kill or maim those with whom one 
disagrees on things that matter deeply to both self and neighbor.  
 The Plain Fact of Functional Diversity on High Standards 
 I suggest on the basis of what we have said that it simply is plain that there is not 
functional identity among religious traditions. They hold such divergent values 

Importance of Doctrine and Distinctness 49
that the ends they seek and the values they inculcate make it impossible for them 
to serve the same psychological ends or the same social functions, unless we 
describe these ends or functions with high generality. There may be some point 
to doing so sometimes, but if we ever want to look with any care at the religious 
phenomena we shall have to do so with far more speciﬁ city and clarity than will 
allow us to maintain cross-religious functional identity. 
 The Doctrinal and Functional Diversity of Religious Traditions 
 Our original question was: Are all religions really the same? This split into fur-
ther questions: Have they the same content? Have they the same function? Any 
culture that wants survival success will frown on members of the culture having 
free license to kill each other, ﬂ ee all interpersonal cooperation, and so on, and 
so is likely, if it long endures, to favor survival-promoting behavior. This need 
not amount to more than mores to prevent extinction based on prudence. On high 
standards that yield a signiﬁ cant conclusion rather than low standards that yield a 
trivial conclusion, the answers to our questions are “No” and “No.” 
 What Does It Matter?: The Answer to This Question Depends on 
Whether Any of the Traditions Are True 
 One’s answer to  What difference does it make?  will depend on what view one 
takes of the religious traditions. If one supposes that all religious traditions are 
false, then probably it will not make all that much difference though it is still 
important in our world to know what the religious traditions say and do. Sup-
pose, however, one accepts one of the religious traditions. In one way, the answer 
is the same whichever of our traditions you accept. Consider the monotheisms, 
Advaita, Jainism, and Theravada Buddhism. Suppose one of the traditions has the 
diagnosis and the cure just right. If you embrace the right one and then read all 
the others as if they said the same thing, you will be wrong three times about what 
the other religions teach but you will have saved your soul (or whatever). If you 
accept a wrong one, and then read all the others as saying what that one says, then 
you hide from yourself the truth that you need by identifying it with the falsehood 
that you believe. 
 In another way, the answer to  What difference does it make?  will depend on 
what tradition one accepts. For in each case the conception of what believing and 
living the truth will bring is importantly different, as is the conception of what one 
gets when one believes and lives a falsehood. 
 There is a complicating factor that I mention in conclusion. I suspect that what 
most deeply motivates people to maintain that all religions are the same is that they 
cannot stand the idea that anyone be sincere and not be saved (or whatever). Some-
times this involves their thinking that no matter what anyone thinks, so long as they 
are sincere, they deserve heaven—even if all they sincerely believe in is pleasure 
seeking or hatred and torture. But sometimes it involves believing that anyone 
who sincerely is seeking the truth and wants to do what is right must somehow 

50 Philosophy and Religion
make it home, religiously speaking. They think that since right belief is taken in 
religious traditions to be basic to being saved (or whatever), then if everyone who 
seeks salvation is to make it home, religiously speaking, all religious traditions 
must have the same beliefs. In some religious traditions at least, it is possible to 
respond with some degree of sympathy to this suggestion without denying the 
plain facts of the matter. Reincarnation traditions tend to talk here of other lives in 
other times and climes. The classical monotheisms talk of people being judged by 
their response to the truth that is available to them, and recently even of a “baptism 
of desire” in which genuine desire for the truth is taken as tantamount to possession 
of it. Exactly how this is developed will differ from tradition to tradition, and sub-
tradition to sub-tradition, and doing this in any detail is not part of my task here. 
I merely point out that the connection between correct belief and being saved (or 
whatever) is by no means always taken in a wooden graceless way, particularly not 
within the classical monotheisms. But that is another story. Our story in this chap-
ter ends when we have noted that it is false that all religions are the same regarding 
doctrine any more than they are the same regarding diagnosis and cure, or regard-
ing the experiences they take to be essential to salvation or enlightenment, or in 
what they take to be or have the deepest moral or religious value.  
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
  1. 
What is the rationale that underlies the religious exclusivist texts 
quoted in this chapter? 
 2. 
What is the importance of the claims shared by religious traditions? 
 3. 
What is the importance of the claims particular to a religious tradition? 
 4. Can you construct a religion that makes no claims about what there is? 
 5. Distinguish between functional sameness and substantial sameness. 
Which will seem more important to our four religions, and—in each 
case—why? 
 Notes 
  1.  John 14:6. 
  2.  John 3:36. 
  3.  Acts 4:12.7. 
  4.  George Thibaut, tr. (1962)  The Vedanta Sutras of Badarayanna with the Commentary 
of Sankara  (New York: Dover Publications; originally published 1896), Vol. II, p. 399. 
   5.  Geshe Sopa and Elving Jones,  A Light to the Svatantrika-Madhyanika , p. 62; privately 
circulated. 
   6.  The knowledge in question is not construed as merely knowledge by description, but 
there is no pretense of a knowledge by acquaintance that does not include some knowl-
edge by description. 
  7.  Munkara Upanishad III, i, 3. 

Importance of Doctrine and Distinctness 51
  8.  Ibid., I, 271. 
  9.  Digha Nikaya II, 251. 
 10.  I John 5:20. 
  11.  B’hai and Advaita Vedanta both hold this view; so do various secularized versions of 
Protestantism and Catholicism. 
  12.  Another factor promoting the view “all religions are the same” is a popular sort of 
mind-set that has persuaded itself that religions make no claims at all. Sometimes 
this rests on some principle of meaning (that is likely not to meet its own standard). 
Sometimes it is based on a view of what it is to know that something is true (that is 
likely not to be knowable on its own standards). Sometimes it rests on some sort of 
relativism (that is likely in turn to make relativistic the view that no religion makes 
truth-claims). Sometimes it rests on a new account of truth (that will serve its intended 
purpose only if it is true in the a sense of truth of which it gives no account). Each of 
these perspectives has its own varieties, and it would take some space to describe, and 
more space to discuss, these views. The present author has argued against such view 
in  Christianity and Philosophy  (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1984) and  Hume’s 
“Inexplicable Mystery”: His Views on Religion (Philadelphia: Temple University 
Press, 1990), as well as in “Empiricism and Theism,”  Sophia , Vol. 7, No. 3, Octo-
ber 1968, pp. 3–11; “A Reply to Nielsen,”  Sophia , Vol. 7, No. 3, October 1968, p. 18, 
19; “Some Varieties of Relativism,  International Journal For Philosophy of Religion , 
Vol. 19, 1986, pp. 61–85. 
 13.  I have written about these views elsewhere. 
 14.  Cf. the present author’s  Basic Issues in the Philosophy of Religion , Chapter One. 
 Suggested Readings 
 Carr, Brian and Mahalingham, Indira (1996)  Companion Encyclopedia of Asian Philoso-
phy  (London: Routledge). Contains discussions of issues, views, and ﬁ gures in Persian, 
Indian, Buddhist, Chinese, Japanese, and Islamic philosophy. 
 Chakravarti, Siddhanta and Shri Nemichandra, ed. and tr. (1927)  The Sacred Books of the 
Jain ,  Vol. V, Commatsara Jiva-Kanda (The Soul)  (Ajitashram, Lucknow (India): Central 
Jaina Publishing House). Jain teaching on the soul, with commentary by translator. 
 Frank, Daniel H. and Leaman, Oliver (1997)  History of Jewish Philosophy  (London: Rout-
ledge). A comprehensive volume on the nature and foundations of Jewish philosophy 
and its Medieval, modern, and contemporary representatives. 
 Gombrich, Richard (2009)  What the Buddha Thought (Shefﬁ eld, UK: Equinox). Explana-
tion of Buddhist thought by a famous senior scholar. 
 Kelly, J. N. D., ed. (2006)  Early Christian Doctrines  (London: Bloomsbury Aca-
demic). Account of early Christian doctrines by a recognized scholar in the history 
of doctrine. 
 Lipner, Julius (1986)  The Face of Truth: A Study of Meaning and Metaphysics in the 
Vedantic Theology of Ramanuja  (Albany, NY: SUNY Press). A clear, excellent study 
of Ramanuja. 
 McGrath, Alister E. (1998)  Historical Theology  (Oxford: Blackwell). An historical presen-
tation of the major ﬁ gures and doctrines of Christian thought. 
 Nasr, S. H. and Leaman, Oliver (1996)  History of Islamic Philosophy  (London: Routledge). 
A very comprehensive presentation of Islamic philosophy: its history, context, represen-
tatives, ﬁ elds, and issues. 
 Otto, Rudolph (1958)  The Idea of the Holy (New York: Oxford University Press). 

52 Philosophy and Religion
 Pandurangi, K. T. (2011)  Visnu Tattva Vinirnaya of Shri Madhvacharya  (Sankarapura Ben-
galuru Kantaka, India: Dvaita Vedanta Studies). Work in which Madhva lays out his 
basic doctrines. 
 Quasten, Johannes (1996)  Patrology  (Allen, TX: Christian Classics Reprint). A standard 
reference work for the Church Fathers dealing with Patristic literature from the Apostle’s 
Creed to the “golden age” of their Greek and Latin writings. 
 Ramanuja, (tr. George Thibaut) (2012)  The Vedanta-Sutras with the Commentary by 
Ramanuja  (Amazon Digital). Reprint from  Sacred Books of the East , Ramanuja’s Visis-
tadvaita reading of the Sutras. 
 Timalsina, Sthaneshwar (2014)  Consciousness in Indian Philosophy: The Advaita Doc-
trine of ‘Awareness Only’  (New York: Routledge). An analysis and defense of the core 
doctrine of Advaita.    

 Religious Plurality and Religious Pluralism 
 John Hick was the philosopher whose views dominated normative religious plu-
ralism, both in philosophy and religious studies in the later twentieth and early 
twenty-ﬁ rst century. His major exposition was  An Interpretation of Religion 
(1991), and his last book  The New Frontier of Religion and Science  (2010) occu-
pied largely the same conceptual ground of normative pluralism. 1  Normative plu-
ralism proposes an explanation of religious experiences worldwide and argues 
against reducing religious experience to physical states with naturalistic causes. 
Descriptive religious pluralism simply records and illustrates the plain empirical 
fact that if you put the teachings of all world religions in a list, that list of proposi-
tions would contain many logically incompatible doctrines. Normative religious 
pluralism is an answer to what we should think—how we should understand—
that fact in a way in which no religion is wrong. What follows gives an account of 
much of the content of normative religious pluralism as Hick presents it. 
 Hick’s Purposes 
 John Hick’s normative pluralism has two aims: to argue that the materialist 
view of the mind (that it is the brain) and the epiphenomenalist view of the 
mind (that mental states are completely determined by physical states and have 
no effects) are mistaken, and that his normative religious pluralism is cor-
rect. He understands by ‘materialism’ the thesis that, whatever matter turns 
out to be, it is all there is. Epiphenomenalism is the view that while there are 
conscious states, they never have effects. Consciousness and causality never 
meet. The reason he wishes to accomplish the ﬁ rst goal is to protect the sec-
ond. He holds that all of the major religions are incompatible with materialism 
and epiphenomenalism—what they teach is incompatible with materialism or 
epiphenomenalism being true. This claim seems safe enough regarding many 
doctrines central to religious traditions, but it is a bit puzzling that Hick makes 
it. The scope within which the claim of incompatibility is safest is the scope of 
religious traditions as one ﬁ nds them, not as Hick construes them. By the time 
Hick has trimmed the doctrinal sails of the various traditions that he discusses, 
 Religious Pluralism 
 6 

54 Philosophy and Religion
the metaphysical views of these traditions—their teachings as to what exists 
and what signiﬁ cance their existence has—are treated as non-literal. So Chris-
tianity is not, for Hick, to be construed as teaching that there is an omnipo-
tent, omniscient God who created the world, loves us, and became incarnate in 
Christ. All of that is supposedly problematically “anthropomorphic” and thus 
to be rejected as a childish misunderstanding of what Christianity is all about. 
In the spirit of equal reductionism for all, the other religious traditions also 
have their views about what there is and what signiﬁ cance their existence has, 
read non-literally. One way—not necessarily successful—to respond to this 
would be to claim that, read non-literally, religious traditions after all are not 
anti-materialistic. (There is a close similarity to a couple of religions that seem 
not to need any non-literal reading that seem much less affected by Hick’s plu-
ralism than the others, and we will consider this in more detail.) In any case, 
in Hick’s view, religious doctrines, understood in a non-literal fashion, will 
remove any truth-relevant inconsistency they might have were they read as 
typically understood. So none of them have to be false. 
 Anthropomorphism 
 Appeal to anthropomorphism as a critique of monotheism plays a role in reject-
ing literal monotheistic concepts. The assumption is that literal claims about 
God objectionably describe God in terms applicable to anthropoids (humans). 
While this view has also been held as a sign of humble reverence within some 
monotheistic sub-traditions, it has been held as removing any claim to saying 
anything true or false on the part of monotheistic traditions. Often appeal is made 
to uses of analogy to leave some propositional content—something still sayable 
about God—in monotheistic traditions. This apparent joining of some parts of 
monotheistic traditions with those who deny that the central claims of the variety 
of monotheisms have any literal content—an agreement that seems to be like 
an agreement between carrot-haters and carrot-lovers that the haters won’t eat 
any carrots if the lovers agree not to plant any—will be considered in a later 
chapter. For now, of course monotheistic traditions agree that in many ways to 
be anthropomorphic is to ascribe to God features that are tied inextricably to 
everyday human life as lived by humans, and only by humans. Such things as 
preferring pink shoes, maroon capes, pepperoni pizza, or Chicago Cub baseball 
caps share the feature that if we ascribe such things to God, we are being objec-
tionably anthropomorphic. That much is clear. Given certain assumptions about 
emotions—that they cloud the intellect, that they can be felt only by embodied 
beings, and that having them makes their subject inferior to others like them save 
for not feeling emotions—can be reasons for thinking having emotions to be a 
defect. But to altogether lack feelings is typically taken to be a serious defect. The 
view of the ultimate value of human emotions differ among religious traditions. 
Some religious traditions preach human detachment to be central to enlighten-
ment. Other traditions preach a doctrine of salvation that requires gratitude and 
humble worship. The Hebrew Bible or Old Testament writers, on this view, were 

Religious Pluralism 55
highly anthropomorphic about God. A negative view regarding emotions has 
been held in the history of the church, underwritten by the inﬂ uence of similar 
(not universal) Greek thought. By the time we get to emotions, the question 
arises whether God having them really is anthropomorphic in any demeaning 
sense. Even ascribing omnipotence, omniscience, and moral perfection to God 
counts as objectionable anthropomorphism on Hick’s view. Any such description 
of God, which entails that God is a self-aware agent, is rejected in favor of such 
terms as Ground of Being, the Ultimate, the Transcendent, the Unlimited, (in 
Hick’s case) the Real, or the like. This replaces a more determinate concept by 
some less determinate one, though each involves some property being ascribed 
to God or whatever replaces God. To the degree that this is so, Hick’s Rule that 
no non-formal concept be applied to his replacement for God is broken. The 
terms ‘ground’ (source? basis? that on which all else depends?), ‘ultimate’ (inde-
pendent?), ‘transcendent’ (transcending space and time?), ‘unlimited’ (including 
everything?)—whether or not understood in the ways suggested as possibilities—
replace determinate conceptions by way of applying other non-formal concepts, 
and therefore ascribing non-formal properties, to whatever (if anything) is being 
referred to. Applying vague concepts to a supposed something breaks Hick’s 
Rule as much as applying clearer concepts does. This of course raises questions 
about the term ‘Real’ (which at least suggests that there is something to which the 
term applies (it exists and is non-illusory, neither of which are non-formal). The 
“Big It” would have similar problems, and not carry the emotional overtones that 
“the Real” carried when it was used in connection with such non-formal proper-
ties as independently existing and being of ultimate importance. Hick’s version 
of normative religious pluralism retains the emotional associations of the Real 
that are tied to the non-formal properties ascribed to the Real while leaving the 
non-formal properties that elicit the associations (which make the associations 
understandable) behind. 
 There isn’t much of an argument for Hick’s view, simply the assumption that 
regarding God as personal is objectionable because it is anthropomorphic. At this 
point normative religious pluralism sides with Advaita Vedanta Hinduism and 
Absolutist Buddhism, and opposes the bulk of Semitic Monotheism, Theistic Hin-
duism, and Pure Land Buddhism. 
 Incompatible with Materialism? 
 We have noted Hick’s claim, central to his program, that the reality-describing 
claims of the world’s religious traditions should be treated non-literally (that is, 
in this case, as not ascribing any properties to reality). To have a term to use for 
treating the practice of reading the descriptions of reality in all religious tradi-
tions as non-literal, we will say that a religion so interpreted has been “Hickized.” 
Then a basic question is:  Why think that a Hickized religion is incompatible with 
materialism?  If the metaphysical claims of the world religions are treated as 
non-literal—as not intended to tell us what there is and what their signiﬁ cance 
is—how can they be incompatible with materialism?  

56 Philosophy and Religion
 Truth 
 Hick continues to speak of religious truth, but redeﬁ nes the word. For Hick, a 
religion is not true in virtue of being accurate concerning God, the cosmos, human 
beings, or anything else. To be true is understood as something like “succeeding 
in producing people who are making progress in becoming the sort of person that 
receives normative pluralism’s approval.” (The controversial assumption is that 
all religions—except the ones that are not morally acceptable—share the same 
ethical views.) It bears no relation to describing anything correctly. It, too, is not 
used literally in the usual sense. It is widely (and correctly) held that a proposition 
is true if the world is as it says it is, and a proposition is false if the world is not 
as it says it is. In this sense, for Hick there is very little religious truth available. 
 The Real 
 The idea behind talk of the Real is that there is a causal, or at least an accessible, 
inﬂ uence that breaks through (or is broken through) the concepts, institutions, 
and practices of every culture to cause the religious traditions of the world. The 
aspects deﬁ nitive of each culture shape how the inﬂ uence is perceived by those 
who belong to it. Nonetheless, each religious tradition comes to be due to the 
inﬂ uence, and our quite varied religious experiences have the same source. This 
obviously invests the Real in having causal properties, or at least properties in 
virtue of which it is accessible, as well as whatever properties these properties 
presuppose. This completely ignores the denial that any non-formal concept is 
true of the Real, and hence of any non-formal property being ascribed to it. This 
denial is used when convenient and not when it is not. When dealing with the fact 
that different religious traditions have incompatible beliefs, it is central as provid-
ing motivation for removing literal content from these beliefs. When formulating 
a thesis intended to explain the diversity of religious traditions and experiences, 
the denial is highly inconvenient and thus must be set aside. Sadly, in the acad-
emy, various contradictions have had wide support:  All beliefs are determined by 
the culture that one is in, and any belief determined by one’s culture is rendered 
irrational (except this one). It is wrong to impose one’s values on someone else, 
since any way of life is “equally valid” with every other (all moral values are 
relative except the one that says it is wrong to impose one’s values on another). It 
is unreasonable to believe anything that is not learned from science (though sci-
ence does not teach this) . Hick’s pluralism has added another. 
 The Incompatibility Question Again 
 Back to our question: Is the (purely hypothesized) Real such that if it exists, then 
materialism is false? Well, if we play his game without breaking Hick’s own rules, 
“being material” is not true of his Real. But then neither is “being immaterial” 
or “being mental.” For any proposition one asserts about the supposed Real, if 
that proposition ascribes any substantial property (any non-formal property) to 

Religious Pluralism 57
the Real, then that proposition is not true of the Real. So for any metaphysical 
proposition you afﬁ rm about the Real, it is false, including materialism but also 
all of its competitors. Why is materialism worse, on Hick’s view, than any other 
metaphysic? The fact is that every metaphysical view is out of court, not just 
materialism, which is no more incompatible with Hick’s view than any other. Nor 
are we offered any logically consistent religious position to contrast to material-
ism, since appeal to the Real as Hick conceives it (the “no non-formal concept” 
claim) leaves no room for any opposing theory that ascribes non-formal proper-
ties to something—any such theory will be read non-literally. 
 Religious Neutrality 
 Hick’s position, insofar as there is such a thing, is supposed to be religiously 
neutral—that is, to be equal in its denial of literalness to the doctrines of all 
religions. In fact, it is not religiously neutral. Advaita Vedanta Hinduism and 
some varieties of Buddhism insist that what they regard as ultimate is literally 
ineffable. That is, they hold a view that can be put like this: There is an X such 
that, for no concept C is it the case that C is true of X. Then replace ‘X’ by 
‘qualityless Brahman’ or ‘nirvana’ (whatever term is used to refer to what the 
religion thinks of as ultimate) and you have the doctrine as that religion holds it. 
So it turns out that Hick’s position is very much like Advaita Vedanta Hinduism 
and some varieties of Buddhism as well as very different from any variety of 
monotheism. The source of religious experience is not God and how it does the 
causing (or what makes it accessible) is not explained. But his views are near 
enough to the ones just referred to that religious neutrality is left far behind. 
The strategy of trying to eliminate incompatibilities among religious doctrines 
by removing the doctrines, which is what his sort of non-literal reading of them 
amounts to, ends up by favoring some very esoteric versions of Hinduism and 
Buddhism. The neutrality claim is false. Accepting the ineffability doctrine sets 
up an inevitably contradictory perspective. If you cannot at all describe what is 
allegedly central to your religion, what do you do next? You cheat. You make 
claims that require that whatever the central being or beings of your religion 
are have properties that are in some way positive toward whatever the religion 
promises. (There is a strand of ineffabilism in Judaism and Christianity—of 
Jewish and Christian thinkers who say that God is ineffable in the sense that 
we have deﬁ ned it here. Those who have, in some sense, accepted the doctrine 
blatantly contradict it in developing their theology. They could not do otherwise 
if they were to present any Christian theology at all. The same goes for every 
religion that proposes a diagnosis and cure, which covers at least a great many 
of the world’s religions.)  
 Religion and Morality 
 Why Hick supposes the supposed Real to be related to morality in any way remains 
unexplained. So does what feature of the supposed Real allows it to inﬂ uence the 

58 Philosophy and Religion
world in any way. It is, in his view, objectionably anthropomorphic to think of 
God as personal. He says: 
  We therefore need a term for the ﬁ nal focus of religious concern which 
encompasses both the theistic and non-theistic understandings of it. 2 
 We need a concept that goes beyond the personal and impersonal. But what does 
this mean? And why should we think whatever it means (if anything) has some-
thing to do with morality? There seems as much reason (none) to think the Real 
is immoral, or favors immorality rather than morality, or cannot possibly care 
one way or the other. (Further, the varieties of naturalism, on Hick’s view, must 
share the epistemic tie [none better evidenced than another] that characterizes 
the religious traditions.) But since they have no place for the Real, if (contrary to 
their being tied in rational support with competitors) they have a more advanta-
geous relation to fact and evidence than normative religious pluralism enjoys, 
there will be excellent grounds for rejecting pluralism. The same holds for any 
non-naturalist perspective. 
 This brings out an important point. If any non-religious tradition, or any reli-
gious tradition, is rationally better supported than normative religious pluralism, 
then an important assumption of pluralism is false. Trying to remove its competi-
tor by pluralism reading it non-literally is a dangerous game for the pluralist to 
play. It can itself be read non-literally (with at least as much plausibility as the 
doctrinal claims to which the pluralist applies his non-literal reading). 
 There remains the fact that Hick’s view of the Real, insofar as there is a view, 
is simply speculation. Given the restriction that only formal concepts apply to the 
supposed Real, whether it is viewed as an active or a passive source of religious 
traditions, it has no explanatory force compatible with the restriction and no state-
able relation to morality. The hypothesis that there is any such thing is an appeal to 
something, I know not what. The determination to favor no religion in normative 
religious pluralism ends up favoring those religions that rely on ineffability most. 
With neither an explanation of religious traditions, nor genuine religious neutral-
ity, to offer, this version of normative religious pluralism is not a success. 
 More Recent Normative Religious Pluralism 
 Paul Knitter has offered a version of religious pluralism that does not appear 
to be riddled with contradictions. 3  Perhaps it will do as a successful version of 
religious pluralism. As is typical for a normative pluralist, he seeks a compara-
tive theology of religions that gives each religion a “valid” voice. This theol-
ogy—hereafter we will use ‘ideology’ rather than ‘theology’ since the idea is to 
include non-theistic traditions as well as theistic—is to include nothing to which 
any religious tradition cannot agree. Indeed, it is to include only that which, at 
least in principle, all humanity can accept. Given this goal, secular perspectives 
as well as religious ones must be considered and included. So each of our four 
religious traditions will be included in an ideology of religions. Then there are 

Religious Pluralism 59
Jewish, Islamic, theistic Hindu, and other Buddhist religions that are equally 
valid sources. 
 The list of religions goes on for some time, and the prospects of including them 
all, even leaving aside secular views, are extremely dim. Hick’s solution involved 
reading doctrinal statements non-literally. Knitter, following suit, proposes read-
ing doctrinal claims as “action language”—as being ethical imperatives, exhorta-
tions, principles, behavior descriptions, and the like. Metaphysics is replaced by 
ethics in order to make a common religious ideology possible. 
 This of course does not accord with the situation found in the traditions them-
selves. Besides offering its diagnoses and cures, often the rationale of a tradi-
tion’s ethic lies in its doctrines. This rationale colors the content and application 
of moral concepts. Put differently, the point is that a tradition’s deepest religious 
values impact how moral concepts and practices are understood. The replacement 
program leaves this rationale behind. The program also assumes the religious tra-
ditions agree on at least a substantial part of ethics. It is by no means clear that 
the prospects for a comparative ethical ideology of religions are as promising as 
normative religious pluralism hopes. 
 But they seem better than the prospects for a doctrinal ideology, which Hick 
nor Knitter seem to share. 
 It seems fair to characterize their common position as assuming the following: 
  RP1.  The basic point and value of any religion is to make its adherents better 
people. 
 RP2.  The criteria for better people contain only virtues on which the religions 
agree. 
 RP3.  Whether or not the distinctive doctrines of a religion are true is not impor-
tant to whether those who adhere to a religious tradition are thereby better 
people. 
 RP4.  The doctrinal statements of all religious traditions are to be read 
non-literally. 
 A sentence or two commentary on each of these claims may serve to bring out 
their problematic nature, for Knitter as well as Hick. The ﬁ rst proposed principle 
ignores the diagnosis and cure proposed by a religious tradition, and takes all 
religions as means to an end—as having, at best, extrinsic worth. The core of 
tradition after tradition is to be set aside in terms preferable to the religious plural-
ist. The second principle supposes that one will ﬁ nd substantial moral agreement 
across the traditions. This is a large topic, but it is by no means evident that moral 
differences do not arise from deep differences between traditions about what has 
intrinsic worth. The third principle downgrades the diagnoses and cures proffered 
by religious traditions as having no signiﬁ cance for what the purpose of religions 
is all about. To see this, combine principles 1–4. Principle 4 chimes in with a ratio-
nale for dismissing what religious traditions ﬁ nd most central. The motto applied 
to all is “Read it non-literally.” (There is also the question as to why the non-literal 
reading must always be moral.) 

60 Philosophy and Religion
 The religious pluralist justiﬁ es such core statements of its view of religions on 
the grounds that everyone should have an equally valid voice at the dialogue table. 
The hope is that religions like Thuggee can be kept out. Thuggee was a mixture of 
elements taken from indigenous Indian religious sources and Moslem and Chris-
tian religions. The idea was straightforward. During the dry season when travel 
is possible, groups of thugs would pose as merchants traveling India’s roads who 
would join other merchants (there was apparent safety in numbers against attacks 
by robbers) on a geographically shared route. After the merchants got to know 
the merchant thugs well enough to trust them, they would sit around a campﬁ re 
resting. At a prearranged signal, the thugs would spread themselves one on one 
behind the merchants, take the sacred thread, and strangle the merchants. They 
would then bury the bodies according to ritual worship of the goddess Kali (the 
one who is represented with a necklace of skulls); the thugs would have concluded 
business in a proﬁ table matter. It is not clear exactly on what grounds Thuggee, 
or religions of human sacriﬁ ce and temple prostitution, are eliminated from those 
whose morals count in coming to terms with the universal ethical agreement sup-
posedly found in all religions. It is not as if religious pluralists have done enough 
serious moral philosophy to justify them in adjudicating moral differences. The 
morality is largely, if not entirely, to be simply assumed. 
 Knitter’s project of textual interpretation is made explicit in these terms: 
  Recognizing the primacy of orthopraxis over orthodoxy can be used pasto-
rally to enable Christian believers to understand the nature of New Testament 
language and what it means to be faithful to that language . . . the christologi-
cal language and titles of the New Testament had as their primary purpose not 
to offer deﬁ nitive, ontological statements about the person or work of Jesus 
but to enable men and women to feel the power of Jesus’ vision. . . . It would 
be more accurate and pastorally effective, I think, to call the New Testament 
claims about Jesus as “action language.” 4 
 Thus his interpretive program has a highly controversial historical assumption 
regarding the use of language and titles of Jesus as they appear in the New Testa-
ment. 5 This assumption joins that of ethical agreement among traditions in deﬁ n-
ing the foundations of his religious pluralism. It is no more easy to see how the 
beliefs whose acceptance is said to be essential to becoming enlightened in Jain-
ism (the immateriality of the immortal soul), Theravada (the lack of an endur-
ing self and the nature of persons being their consisting of ephemeral states), or 
Advaita (identity of Atman with qualityless Brahman) are properly to be read as 
“action language” than it is to see how belief in the deity or resurrection of Jesus 
is to be so read. Knitter’s desire to replace Jesus by “the vision of Jesus” faces 
analogous difﬁ culties in the case of each of the others of our four traditions. 
 The difﬁ culties of universal neutrality are illustrated by examples besides that 
of Thuggee. Consider the conditions laid down for the sort of dialogue approved 
by Knitter: dialogue must be “genuinely pluralistic—one that will avoid preestab-
lished absolutist or deﬁ nitive positions in order to allow that all the participants 

Religious Pluralism 61
have an equally valid voice.” 40  Along these lines, we are told that “the absolute, 
that which all else must serve and clarify is not the church, or Christ, or even God, 
but rather the kingdom and its justice.” 41  This gives us two absolutes deﬁ nitive 
of genuine dialogue—one concerning appropriate participants and one concern-
ing its purpose. The former leaves convinced believers out—a curious feature 
of an inclusivist perspective. The latter expresses a view of ethics that seems to 
distinguish between God and the kingdom of God in a manner perhaps necessary 
for a religious pluralist ethic but problematic for some religious traditions. This 
illustrates some of the problems faced by those who wish to construct and apply a 
comparative ethic that leaves no one out. 
 Conclusion 
 We have argued that Hick’s religious pluralism is incoherent on its own terms. It 
cannot make the use of the supposed Real to explain anything about the source 
of religious experiences. In spite of the claim to equally respect (at least the nice) 
religions, both Hick and Knitter pronounce on the question as to what religions 
are for. Many, perhaps most, religious traditions ground their moral views in their 
core doctrines, which are taken to be true and to provide justiﬁ cation for their 
morality. Given RP4, this element of religious morality is gone. Despite the sur-
face equal respect for religious traditions, what the religions themselves ﬁ nd most 
important is eliminated by applying a theory on which the language in which 
what the tradition values most is excised by talk of its not being intended literally. 
For a position supposed to deeply respect all religious traditions equally, holding 
them to have instrumental value and so interpreting them as to leave out what they 
make most central this is both surprising and problematic. The basic idea, if we 
extrapolate, is to replace each religion by a religious pluralist understanding of it 
by reading the Hebrew Bible, the New Testament, the Koran, Pali Canon, Jaina 
Sutras, the Upanishads, and so on, after Knitter’s example—as “action language.” 
As a massive interpretational task, it is hard to believe that anyone who has read 
any of these texts will think that it would somehow expose their real meaning, 
particularly since there are plainly sections that deal with morality and sections 
that deal with doctrine. While these sections are not unrelated, neither reduces 
in meaning or truth conditions to the other. The proposal is in fact for a massive 
revisional enterprise. The idea that it would be welcomed by all the world’s reli-
gious leaders has precious little plausibility. The price of no one being wrong in 
religious matters is that then no one is right in them either. 
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
 1. 
What is pluralism? 
 2. 
How does Knitter’s religious pluralism differ from Hick’s? 
 3. 
Is religious pluralism itself a religion? 

62 Philosophy and Religion
 Notes 
 1.  John Hick (2005)  An Interpretation of Religion: Human Responses to the Transcendent 
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press) (second ed.) and John Hick (2010)  The New 
Frontier of Science and Religion: Religious Experience, Neuroscience, and the Trans-
cendent (Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan). 
 2.  Hick,  An Interpretation of Religion , p. 36. 
 3.  Paul Knitter (2002)  Introducing Theologies of Religions  (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis);  The 
Myth of Religious Superiority (Marknoll, NY: Orbis, 2005). 
  4.  John Hick and Paul Knitter (2005)  The Myth of Christian Uniqueness: Toward a Plural-
istic Theology of Religions (Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock), p. 196. 
 5.  For a very different view, see Larry Hurtado (2005)  Lord Jesus Christ: Devotion to 
Jesus in Earliest Christianity (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans). 
  6.  John Hick and Paul Knitter (2005)  The Myth of Christian Uniqueness: Toward A Plu-
ralistic Theology of Religions (Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock), p. 181. 
 7.  Ibid., p. 190. 
 Suggested Readings 
 D’Costa, Gavin (1980)  Theology and Religious Pluralism (Oxford: Basil Blackwell). 
 Hewitt, Harold (1991)  Problems in the Philosophy of Religion  (New York: St Martin’s 
Press). 
 Hick, John (1980)  God Has Many Names (London: Macmillan). 
 Knitter, Paul, ed. (2004)  The Myth of Religious Superiority  (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis). Lead-
ing exponents of the idea of religious parity seek dialogue to develop a world theology. 
 Knitter, Paul and D’Costa, Gavin (2011)  Only One Way? Three Christian Responses to the 
Uniqueness of Christ in a Religiously Pluralistic World  (Norwich, UK: SCM). Conser-
vative and liberal Catholic and evangelical Protestant views on the uniqueness of Christ, 
with a proponent presenting his own view and interacting with the others. 
 McKim, Robert (2012)  Religious Diversity  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). An analysis 
and challenge to the current classiﬁ catory concepts in use in describing and analyzing 
religious diversity with an account of how this opens the way to exploration of com-
monalities between different traditions. 
 Netland, Harold A. (2015)  Christianity and Religious Diversity: Clarifying Christian Com-
mitment in a Globalizing Age  (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic). Defends Christian 
commitment to uniqueness in a changing and challenging world. 
 Sharma, Arvind (1993)  God, Truth, and Reality (New York: St Martin’s Press). 
 Smith, Wilfred Cantwell (1979)  Faith and Belief  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press). 
 ——— (1981)  Towards a World Theology (Philadelphia: Westminster Press). 
 4. Is one who accepts Hick’s pluralism entitled to make the claims that 
he does concerning the Real, given the other claims included in the 
position? 
 5. 
How important is it for the religious pluralist that at least all the 
“major” religions agree on basic morality? 

Religious Pluralism 63
 Stewart, Robert B., ed. (2013)  Can Only One Religion Be True? Paul Knitter and Harold 
Netland in Dialogue  (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress). Religious pluralism meets Evangeli-
cal orthodoxy. 
 Wainwright, William J. (1984) “Wilfred Cantwell Smith on faith and belief,”  Religious 
Studies , Vol. 20, pp. 353–366. 
 Yandell, Keith E. (1993) Some varieties of religious pluralism, in Kellenberger, James, ed. 
 Inter-religious Models and Criteria (New York: St Martin’s Press) pp. 187–211.    

This page intentionally left blank

 Part II 
 Religious Conceptions of 
Ultimate Reality 

This page intentionally left blank

 Generic Philosophical Monotheism 
 For monotheism, God is ultimate reality. 1  We can call what is common between vari-
ous types of monotheism  generic philosophical monotheism , characterized as fol-
lows. The claim  X is God  is to be understood as entailing each of the following claims: 
 1. 
 X is necessarily ontologically independent  [i.e., X exists, and it is logically 
impossible that X depend for existence on anything]. 
 2. 
 X is God  entails  X is self-conscious  [i.e., is conscious and aware of himself or 
herself as such; thus X is a person]. 2 
 3. 
 X is God  entails  X is transcendent  [i.e., X is not identical to the world and 
God does not depend on the world for existence or powers]. 
 4. 
 X is God entails  X is the highest being  [i.e., the most valuable, greatest, or best]. 
 Greek, Semitic, and Hindu Monotheism 
 One signiﬁ cant religious difference between diverse sorts of monotheism con-
cerns whether, and   to what extent, God acts in human history. We can say that 
God exercises  strong providence  if and only if God acts in such a way as to bring 
about particular public historical events, and does so not only by causing private 
revelations or events; God brings about both public events and private events, and 
does not do the former only by doing the latter. By contrast, God exercises  weak 
providence  if and only if, save for creation of the world, God acts in such a way 
as to bring about particular public historical events, but only by causing private 
revelations or events; God brings about both public events and private events, and 
does the former only by doing the latter. Alternatively, one might be monotheistic 
and not think of God as providentially active at all. 
 Greek Monotheism 
 Greek, 3 understood as including generic, monotheism can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 1. 
The world has always existed. 
 2. 
God exercises neither strong nor weak providence. 
 Monotheistic Conceptions of 
Ultimate Reality 
 7 

68 Religions and Ultimate Reality
 3. 
The world does not exist because God wants it to. 
 4. 
Whatever is  everlastingly true is  necessarily true. 
 5. 
That God exists is necessarily true. 
 6. 
That the world exists is necessarily true. 
 Nonetheless, the world depends on God in two ways. First, God is viewed as 
immutable, unchanging, and perfect; the world is mutable, changing, and imper-
fect.  There being mutable things  is a state of affairs dependent on  there being an 
immutable thing . There is one-way dependence but no creation, not merely in the 
sense that the world did not begin to exist but also in that  there being a world is 
not something that God chose to be the case or could have prevented. Second, 
God is perfect, having no potential the realization of which would bring about 
divine improvement or self-realization. By contrast, the world is imperfect; it has 
unrealized potential the proper realization of which would improve the world. 
The things in the world are also imperfect, and they have unrealized potential the 
proper realization of which would improve them. Anything that exists has a nature 
or essence, a set of properties that make it the kind of thing that it is. The essence of 
a thing in turn determines the sorts of other properties a thing can have and hence 
the sorts of events in which it may participate. What something can be an effect 
of, or a cause of, is a function of what properties it has. Mutable things have 
essences. An essence deﬁ nes a natural kind, and members of a natural kind can 
be better or worse exemplars of that kind. Some bananas and some beavers 
are better—better  as bananas  and  as beavers— than others. Some bananas are 
bruised, fragile, overripe; some are not. Some beavers are crippled, ill, or brain-
damaged; others are not. Any thing has potentialities, accessible ways of chang-
ing realization of which will further or frustrate the degree to which it is a good 
example of its kind. Each mutable thing strives by nature to be the best something 
of its kind that it can be—to magniﬁ cently exemplify what something of its sort 
can be. In this respect, it is as if each thing tries to be as like God (viewed as the 
perfect member of the kind  unmoved mover  or  immovable cause of motion ) as it 
can be, given the sort of thing that it is. 
 This view has a curious result. On it, the world can depend for its existence 
on God, and seek its fullest realization as a thing of its sort, without God even 
knowing that there is a mutable world let alone knowing about any individual 
thing in the world. No providence occurs, no historical persons or events bear 
ultimate religious signiﬁ cance, and no worship or prayer has any point. This sort 
of monotheism is abstract; it will seem cold if not dead to any Semitic or Hindu 
monotheist. Yet many of the arguments offered within Judaism, Christianity, and 
Islam, come historically from Greek monotheism. Hindu monotheism, perhaps 
untouched historically by Greek natural theology, nonetheless contains similar 
arguments. 
 There can be evil if Greek monotheism is true. There can be defective things, 
things that are poorly realized members of their kind that are incapable of becom-
ing better realized members. There can be wrong human choices, instances in 
which persons voluntarily go against their knowledge of what is right. But these 

Monotheism and Ultimate Reality 69
evils cannot be evidence against the existence of God, as God is construed in 
Greek monotheism. This sort of deity, as we have noted, does not even know 
that particular persons exist. No truths that might have been false are objects of 
divine knowledge, and all historical claims, biological accounts, all descriptions 
of physical or psychological reality, have in common the feature that even if they 
are true, they might have been false. A Greek deity is not culpable for lacking such 
knowledge; it is logically impossible that the deity of Greek monotheism have 
any knowledge of what might have been true. Nor can the God of Greek mono-
theism bring about occurrences in space or time; no divine action is possible. So 
while there can be natural evils (“monsters” or strongly defective members of spe-
cies) and moral evils (wrong human actions), these evils cannot be evidence that 
Greek monotheism is false. This points to an interesting feature of monotheisms. 
A monotheism without any doctrine of creation or providence can offer neither 
God’s help in salvation nor God’s answer to prayer, God’s forgiveness or God’s 
aid, and neither is it possible for such a monotheism that the existence of evil be 
offered as any evidence against its truth. A monotheism with a doctrine of cre-
ation or providence can offer God’s help in salvation or God’s answer to prayer, 
God’s forgiveness or God’s aid, and it is possible that for such a monotheism the 
existence of evil be offered as evidence against its truth. Whether evil really is 
evidence against monotheism is another matter; the point is that only for certain 
sorts of monotheism does the question even arise. 
 There being things that might not have existed is something to be explained. 
There might not have been any human beings, any lions, any trees, any rocks, 
any atoms. There are all of these things. There being these things has an explana-
tion. A common strategy, ﬁ ne so far as it goes, explains the existence of larger 
things by reference to the existence of smaller things of which the larger things 
are made. But perhaps sooner or later one gets to things so small that they are not 
in turn made of still smaller things; call these things  simple units . There might 
not have been any simple units, so their existence too has an explanation. But 
simple units cannot be explained by reference to the things they are composed 
of; they are simple, not composite. So their existence has to be explained in a dif-
ferent way. Alternatively, suppose that, so to speak, things are composite all the 
way down—everything is made up of some things that are also made up of some 
things, and so on forever. Then the question arises as to why there is this dizzying 
series of composites of composites. 4  Either way, the idea is, we must appeal to 
something whose non-existence is not an option, something that  exists necessar-
ily . So if there is anything at all, something exists necessarily. It is obvious that 
things do exist; so something exists necessarily. This thought plays an important 
role in monotheism, with Greek monotheism offering one sort of explanation and 
Semitic and Hindu offering an explanation of a different sort. 
 What, then, is it for something to exist necessarily? It is at least this: some-
thing exists necessarily only if is not possible that it depend for existence on 
anything else. Further, on a Greek monotheistic notion of necessity, it will be 
impossible that it change; only immutable things can exist necessarily. The items 
in our immediate environment change; they gain some qualities and lose others. 

70 Religions and Ultimate Reality
They also come to be and pass away. The class of things that change and come 
and cease belong to  the realm of generation and corruption . What exists in this 
realm depends for its existence on something that exists necessarily, but nothing 
that exists necessarily can be part of this realm. 
 Besides existing necessarily, the deity of Greek monotheism is self-conscious. 
He, she, or it is also omniscient relative to logically necessary truths. But he, she, 
or it has no feelings and no knowledge of logically contingent truths. Whatever 
might have been false lies beyond its range of thought. Indeed, the only thing of 
which it is aware is itself and the contents of its own mind. Thus the Greek Deity 
does not create the world, or even know that there is a world. The Greek Deity 
does not know that you exist or that you have needs; it is not an appropriate target 
for prayer of any sort. There is no prayer that it could hear. Nor does the Greek 
Deity bring about any events in history; there is no notion of providence in Greek 
monotheism. 
 Being a being that exists necessarily, is immutable, self-conscious, and knows 
all necessary truths  is regarded as the best sort of thing to be. The Greek Deity is 
thought of as being as magniﬁ cent, valuable, and glorious as it is possible to be. 
Other things have positive worth insofar as they resemble this Deity and defective 
insofar as they lack such resemblance. God is the perfect paradigm, the standard 
of worth; in this sense, morality rests on God—God provides the criterion for 
positive worth. There can be evil in the world as Greek monotheism conceives 
it. That this is a religion, of course, is highly questionable. It is not easy to see 
what ceremonies, rituals, practices, or the like are appropriate to its core claims. 
Nonetheless, it is of interest here for two reasons. Understanding it provides a nice 
comparison and contrast to varieties of monotheism that plainly are religions; and 
much of Semitic monotheism has tried to introduce much of Greek monotheism 
into its own perspective. 
 Semitic Monotheism 
 Semitic monotheism—Judaism, and Christianity and Islam which build on Jew-
ish foundations—also includes generic monotheism and in addition embraces the 
following claims. 
  1. 
The world has not always existed [it was created  in  time, or time was created 
 with it]. 5 
 2. 
God exercises strong providence. 
 3. 
The world exists because God wants it to. 
 4. That the world exists is not necessarily true [i.e., it is false that it is impossible 
that the world not exist]. 
 Here, God could have chosen that there be no world. The world is not everlasting. 
Either God created time in the same act as that by which God created a world, 
or God created the world after a time when there was no world. God sustains the 
world in existence and at times brings it about that particular individuals are born 

Monotheism and Ultimate Reality 71
or are chosen for speciﬁ c religious roles and that speciﬁ c events occur. A religious 
tradition with no Abraham, Sarah, Moses, David, Ruth, Isaiah, Micah, or any of 
the prophets, no exile in Egypt, no Passover, no era of judges or of prophecy, no 
Hebrew people chosen by God, is not Judaism. If there have been none of these 
people and events, Judaism is false. If Jesus did not live, or died a peaceful death 
in his own bed, or remained in the grave, then Christianity is false. If Moham-
med never existed, or was always an atheist, or was a wealthy merchant entirely 
uninterested in religion and never claimed to receive any revelation, then Islam 
is false. With room for debate about exactly the scope of the claims, the Semitic 
monotheisms have in common that their core doctrines refer to particular persons 
and particular events. 
 The deity of Greek monotheism cannot act, unless everlasting contemplation 
of necessary truths is acting. The deity of Semitic monotheism can act. The God 
of Semitic monotheism acts in history; it is unthinkable for Greek monotheism 
that the deity be able to so behave, and unthinkable for Semitic monotheism that 
the deity not be able so to behave. The deity of Greek monotheism is not the God 
of history; that would be beyond her power and beneath her dignity. The deity of 
Semitic monotheism is the God of history, not by necessity but by choice; this is 
not beyond his power or beneath his dignity. 
 Within Semitic monotheism, Jewish and Moslem monotheisms assert that God 
creates and providentially rules the world; God acts in history, ordains proph-
ets, and gives revelations. Christian monotheism agrees, but also claims that God 
has become incarnate in the person of Jesus Christ. That God become incarnate, 
according to Jewish and Islamic monotheism, is beyond God’s power and beneath 
God’s dignity—that God be incarnate in a human being who is cruciﬁ ed is, if 
possible, even more impossible and even more against the divine status. Christian 
monotheism asserts that  becoming incarnate is within the power of an omnicom-
petent God, and provides the supreme instance of God’s wisdom and love. 
 Hindu Monotheism 
 Hindu monotheism, in addition to accepting generic monotheism, accepts these 
claims. 
 1. 
The world has always existed. 
 2. 
God exercises weak providence. 
 3. 
The world exists because God wants it to. 
 4. 
It is not the case that whatever is  everlastingly true is  necessarily true. 
 5. 
That the world exists is not necessarily true. 
 Hindu monotheism embraces both a beginningless world and a doctrine of cre-
ation. Here the idea that God (Brahman with qualities) creates the world teaches 
that while the world is everlasting toward the past, having no ﬁ rst moment of 
existence, it depends at each moment of its existence on the sustaining activity 
of God. God could cease sustaining the world in existence, at which point God 

72 Religions and Ultimate Reality
would continue to exist but the world would not. There is an asymmetrical depen-
dence relation between God and the world: the world depends for its existence on 
God’s activity, but God’s existence does not depend on there being a world. 
 The relationship between God and history, as seen by Hindu monotheism, is 
complex. Hindu monotheism is a religion of reincarnation and karma with karma 
being viewed as under God’s control. In response to a person’s repentance and 
faith, God can remit punishment, cancelling negative karma. Escape from the 
reincarnation cycle comes by God’s grace. There are incarnations of a sort—God 
causes theophanies or appearances. For example, Krishna is said to appear to 
a devotee and to instruct him or her to build a temple on the site on which the 
appearance occurred. Temple traditions include stories that trace the temple’s his-
tory back to such appearances. But Hindu monotheism does not include any claim 
to the effect that God is uniquely incarnate in any human being or provides a 
means for redemption in such a manner. God is capable of controlling the mind 
of a particular person in as extended a way and period as God wishes, and God 
is capable of causing whatever visions, auditory or visual, God wishes to bring 
about. Further, gods or goddesses, who exist dependent on God and under God’s 
control, may take upon themselves human form. But nowhere is there unique and 
deﬁ nitive incarnation in which God is incarnate in order to redeem the world. If 
nothing else, this is precluded by the fact that Hindu monotheism is not trinitarian. 
 There are other possibilities. Neo-Platonism, for example, is a form of mono-
theism distinct in various ways from those sketched here. I make no pretense to 
being exhaustive. My claim is only that the considerations that apply to the sorts 
of monotheism we shall discuss apply as well to those we do not. 
 Monotheisms and Atheisms 
 Two Different Kinds of Monotheism 
 Monotheisms can be distinguished on different criteria from those discussed previ-
ously. Coming to clearly grasp this requires learning some distinctions that will be 
useful, even crucial, to later discussions. Consider the difference between (NG)  It is 
a logically necessary truth that God exists  and  (CG) It is a logically contingent truth 
that God exists . What (NG) says is (i)  God does not exist  is self-contradictory, (ii) 
there is  no  possible world in which God does not exist, (iii) there is  no  way things 
might have been such that God did not exist. What (CG) says is: (i*)  God does not 
exist  is  not  self-contradictory, (ii*) there  is  a possible world in which God does not 
exist, (iii*) there  is a way things might have been such that God did not exist. 
 It may appear that a monotheist should much favor (NG) over (CG), and indeed 
some monotheists think this is so. But other monotheists do not think this; after 
all, what (ii) and (iii) do is just say what (i) says, putting it in different terms. 
They are not  further  differences between the two sorts of monotheist beyond their 
difference regarding (i) versus (i*). 6  A monotheist who accepts (CG) typically 
will also accept  (CG*) It is logically impossible that God depend for existence 
on anything else . Since she thinks that  God exists is true, she will think both that 

Monotheism and Ultimate Reality 73
God exists and that God exists with perfect independence. The difference between 
types of monotheism—between a monotheism to which (NG) is essential and a 
monotheism to which (CG) is essential—is not unimportant. Here is why. 
 Suppose that Tim thinks that there are frogs and Tom thinks that there are not. 
Tom is wrong, and Tim is right. Suppose that Tex agrees that there are frogs, but 
also thinks that  Necessarily, there are frogs  is true. This is a remarkable belief on 
Tex’s part. It entails that under any logically possible condition, there are frogs; 
frog extermination is logically impossible. Not even God could get rid of frogs. 
Tim thinks that there are frogs all right, but he denies that there would be frogs no 
matter what, that it is logically impossible that frogs be exterminated; he supposes 
that God could create a frogless world—all of which Tex denies. 
 Just as one or the other of Tim (who thinks there are frogs) and Tom (who thinks 
there are not) is right, so one or the other of Tim (who thinks there might not have 
been frogs) and Tex (who thinks it is logically impossible that there not have been 
frogs) is right. Again, of course, Tim wins. But notice the difference between the 
Tim/Tom and the Tex/Tim disagreements. We can represent them as follows: 
 TIM/TOM: 
 TIM: There are frogs. [F] 
 TOM: There are no frogs. [not-F] 
 TEX/TIM: 
 TEX:  It is a logically necessary truth that there are frogs. [Necessarily, F] 
 TIM: It is not a logically necessary truth that there are frogs. [Not-(Necessarily, F)]  
 Tim and Tom hold contradictory beliefs. So do Tex and Tim. What Tex believes 
to be logically necessary, Tim believes not to be logically necessary. We can also 
put the dispute between Tex and Tim this way: 
 TEX/TIM*: 
 TEX: It is self-contradictory that there be no frogs. [Necessarily, not(not-F)] 
 TIM: It is not self-contradictory that there be no frogs. [Not-(Necessarily, 
not(not-F)] 
 Tex thinks something logically impossible that Tim thinks logically possible. 
 Logical necessity  and  logical possibility are  modalities . We can put the differ-
ence between the disagreements in yet another way: the Tim/Tom disagreement 
is about the  truth of  There are frogs ; the Tex/Tim dispute is about the  modal-
ity of  There are frogs . Disputes about whether there are frogs has, of course, no 
religious content. But the pretend disputes about frogs are paralleled by disputes 
about God. 
 The NN Principle 
 A ﬁ nal point will place us in position to complete our discussion. A  modal propo-
sition is a second-order proposition 7  that says about some ﬁ rst-order proposition 

74 Religions and Ultimate Reality
that it is necessarily true, necessarily false, or logically contingent. Here is a bit of 
the logic of modal propositions. 8 Where P is any proposition: 
 1. 
Necessarily, P [= It is not possible that P be false] 
 2. 
Necessarily, not-P [= It is not possible that P be true] 
 3. Contingent, P [= It is not impossible that P be true and it is not impossible that 
P be false] 
 express the possible modalities regarding P. They entail, respectively, 
 4. 
Possibly, P 
 5. 
Not-(Possibly, P) 
 6. 
Possibly, P 
   where “possibly” means, not “maybe” but “it is logically possible that” or “P is 
not self-contradictory.” 
 A proposition of the form expressed in 1 through 6 is a second-order proposition; 
it says of a ﬁ rst-order proposition that it is necessary, contingent, or possible. 
 What the NN thesis tells us is this: 
 NN: Every true modal proposition is necessarily true, and every false modal 
proposition is necessarily false; it is logically impossible that there be a con-
tingently true or a contingently false modal proposition . 
 This applies to any order of modal propositions—Np, N[Np], N[N(Np)], and so 
on, as well as Cp, N[Cp], Possibly p, N[Possibly p], and so on. 
 Regarding Kinds of Monotheism and Atheism 
 A little reﬂ ection suggests that, since a monotheist thinks that  God exists  is true, 
she can either take it to be a logically necessary truth or take it to be a logically 
contingent truth. She cannot remain a monotheist and think it false. Similarly, 
since an atheist thinks that  God exists  is false, she can take it to be a logically 
necessary falsehood or a logically contingent falsehood. 
 Thus there are exactly four alternatives here: 
 1. 
(NG): it is a logically necessary truth that God exists. 
 2. 
(CG): it is a logically contingent truth that God exists. 
 3. 
N(not-G): it is a necessary truth that God does not exist. 
 4. 
C(not-G): it is a logically contingent falsehood that God exists. 
 What (NG) amounts to is this:  Necessarily, it is true that God exists . What (CG) 
amounts to is:  It is true that God exists, and it is false that Necessarily, it is true 
that God exists . Hence one sort of monotheism—that which accepts (NG) or that 
which accepts (CG)—is false. Further, given the NN thesis, whichever sort is 

Monotheism and Ultimate Reality 75
false is  necessarily  false. Similarly, either N(not-G) or C(not-G) is false, so one 
sort or the other of atheism is false. Further, whichever sort of atheism is false is 
 necessarily false. 
 Ultimate reality, then, according to monotheism, consists in the existence of an 
omnipotent, omniscient, morally perfect self-conscious Being that cannot depend 
for its existence on anything else. This being either is such that  Necessarily, God 
exists  is true or else such that  God exists is true, and it is logically necessary that 
God does not depend for existence on anything . The difference between kinds of 
monotheism will come up again when we consider argument, pro and con, regard-
ing monotheism. 9 , 10 
 There are, then, different varieties of monotheism, some of which we have 
described. There are different monotheistic notions regarding what has ultimate 
reality in the sense of depending for its existence on nothing else. 
 A Few Comments Regarding Monotheism 
and Non-Ultimate Reality 
 Typically, monotheists have commonsensically held that there are persons and 
there are physical objects. Monotheism typically holds that  If there are persons 
then God created persons  and  If there are physical objects then God created 
physical objects . The term ‘physical objects’ here should be so understood as 
to include not only artifacts (cars, chairs, pens) but also natural objects (car-
rots, zebras, and galaxies). God created the latter and the things from which 
the former are made. Monotheism typically adds that among the things created, 
those most like God are persons—self-conscious agents capable of acting rightly 
and wrongly, loving and hating, worshipping God and rebelling against God. 
There are different views within monotheism about even the broad details of 
how exactly to understand the relations between God and the world, some of 
which will come up later—in particular, those regarding determinism, freedom, 
and agency. 
 There are different views of what laws of nature are, and different accounts 
of how laws of nature are related to God. Roughly, a physical theory is a sys-
tematized attempt to explain observed physical phenomena. Such a theory will 
assume that certain sorts of things—say,  A-type-things— exist and behave 11  in cer-
tain ways, and that certain general statements (laws) are true, and that one can 
then explain the existence and behavior of other types of things given that there 
are A-type-things and that the laws are true. Suppose simply for convenience 
that all the other natural sciences reduce to physics, and that somehow we have 
discovered the entirely correct physics. Then what the entirely correct physics 
included as basic laws would constitute the actual laws of nature. How should 
those laws be thought of? 
 On one account, they are abstract objects—propositions of some such form as 
(L1)  If A-type-things exist and condition C obtains, then B-type things will exist 
or (L2)  If A-type things behave in way W1, and condition C* holds, then B-type 
things will behave in way W2 . On this view, true statements of forms (L1) and 

76 Religions and Ultimate Reality
(L2) will be necessary truths. God’s role in creation will not be deciding what 
laws are true, but rather of deciding whether A-type and B-type things shall 
exist, and whether conditions C and C* will obtain. Thus if it is a law that  Water 
freezes at 32 degrees 12 (if I may oversimplify) then, on the present account,  If 
there is water then it freezes at 32 degrees  is a necessary truth, and what is up 
to God is whether  There is water and  It is 32 degrees where water exists are 
ever true. 
 On another account, laws of nature are truths about the dispositions of natural 
objects. If water is what this glass contains, then—the idea is—it is an essential 
feature of the stuff in this glass that it freezes at 32 degrees. 13  Natural laws reﬂ ect 
the essential properties of natural objects and what happens to things with such 
properties in various environments. But on this account too  If there is water then 
it freezes at 32 degrees is a necessary truth. If God creates water, God creates 
something that freezes at 32 degrees. 
 On either account, there might be considerable choice of what universe, if any, 
is created. The laws in question are expressed as  conditionals  or statements of the 
form  If A then C . What holds that  A  place is the  antecedent  and what occupies 
the  C  place is the  consequent . On the ﬁ rst view described, there might be various 
ways of putting individual laws together into logically consistent groupings such 
that a universe could be created containing the things referred to in the anteced-
ents of these particular laws. There would be as many choices between orderly 
worlds as there were such sets of laws. On the second way of putting things, a 
similar result arises. The  essence  of some object is the set of properties necessary 
and sufﬁ cient for its existence: the set of properties it cannot exist without and 
the existence of which in an object sufﬁ ces to make that thing. 12  Let an  essence 
description  be a description of a universe in which one or more logically compat-
ible kinds of things coexisted. Every essence description would pick out a differ-
ent world that God might create. 
 There are other conceptions of laws, or perhaps of conceptions on which there 
really aren’t any laws. On another view, for example, what we call laws are only 
generalizations that we may discover to be strictly false though still fairly accu-
rate, and that there is no more to a law than that—a typically accurate generaliza-
tion which may well be false, and in any case is as explanatorily deep as things 
get. On this view, explaining why some generalizations are accurate and others 
are not is not going to be possible—not at any rate for the class of generalizations 
that have the widest scope. 
 There seems to be good reason to think that there are basic laws that are proba-
bilistic—laws of the form (L1*)  If A-type-things exist, and condition C obtains, 
then the probability of a B-type-thing existing is .987  or (L2*)  If A-type things 
behave in way W1, and condition C* holds, then the probability of B-type things 
behaving in way W2 is between .997 and .999 . 
 The philosophical interest of such matters, insofar as they relate to monothe-
ism, has to do with how different notions of the relations between God and the 
world, and of God and laws of nature. They relate to questions about creation, 
determinism, freedom, and responsibility—matters for later reﬂ ection. 

Monotheism and Ultimate Reality 77
 Notes 
   1.  It is logically consistent with monotheism that there exist abstract objects that possess 
logically necessary existence. Abstract objects have no causal powers, are not self-con-
scious or even conscious, and exercise no creation or providence. They are of little if 
any  religious  interest. It is a necessary truth that  If X has logically necessary existence 
then there is nothing Y such that Y is distinct from X and X depends on Y for X’s exist-
ence . So if  There are abstract objects that have logically necessary existence  is true, it 
is also true that  There exists something whose existence does not depend on God . 
 
  God’s status as creator, and any coherent notion of divine sovereignty, does not 
require that something that cannot depend for its existence on anything else depend for 
its existence on God or deny that the existence of such things is logically possible. But 
the only candidates for being something of this sort would seem to be things that exist 
with logical necessity. 
  2.  Trinitarian monotheists speak in this fashion, though typically holding that God is 
three persons in one substance; other monotheists speak of God as personal while add-
ing that it is proper to speak in this way because God is more like a person than God is 
like anything else. The latter claim rests in part on views concerning the alleged limits 
of descriptions of God. For a monotheistic tradition to make even the comparatively 
weak religious claims central to Greek monotheism, God must be self-conscious. For a 
monotheistic tradition to make the more robust religious claims characteristic of Juda-
ism, Christianity, Islam, or Hindu monotheism, God must be a self-conscious agent—
one who knowingly and purposively acts. A self-conscious agent is a person. 
  3.  Roughly Aristotelian in content. 
   4.  If the point isn’t clear, consider a parallel case. If I want to know why the explanation 
of the existence of this very duck that walks the shore in front of me, the answer is that 
it had parents. But if I want to know the explanation of there being any ducks at all, 
I cannot properly be told about there being duck parents; there being duck parents is 
(part of) what I want explained. 
  5.  Arguably, this claim is  typical of but not essential to Semitic monotheism. 
   6.  The Exodus, Chapter Two passage in which God, in standard translations, makes self-
reference by using the terms “I am” seems not to require a stronger philosophical read-
ing than that expressed by something like  God exists, and it is logically impossible that 
God depend on anything else for existence . 
   7.  Of course N[Np]—Necessarily, Necessarily, p—is a third-order modal proposition, 
and one can on up the ladder. We will go to third-order in a moment. 
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
  1. What are the tenets of our stylized Greek monotheism? Is it a religion? 
 2. What are the tenets of Hindu monotheism? Is the claim that the uni-
verse has always existed incompatible with a doctrine of creation? 
 3. 
What are the tenets of Semitic monotheism? 
 4. 
What is a modal proposition? 
 5. Why are there, modally speaking, just two types of monotheism and 
two types of atheism? 

78 Religions and Ultimate Reality
   8.  Here is a little more: (1) P  entails  proposition Q if and only if it is logically impossible 
that P be true and Q be false (i.e., if  P, but not Q  is a contradiction); (2) No necessary 
truth entails a necessary falsehood; (3) No logically contingent proposition entails a 
necessary falsehood; (4) No necessary truth entails any logically contingent proposi-
tion; (5) Every necessary falsehood entails any proposition whatever [this assumes the 
rules  If P then (P or Q)  and  If (P or Q) and not-P, then Q  or their equivalent]; (6) Every 
logically contingent proposition entails every necessary truth; (7) Every logically con-
tingent proposition entails some, but not all, other logically contingent propositions. 
   9.  The logical relations between these views go as follows. Where NT=necessarily true; 
NF=necessarily false; CT=contingently true; CF=contingently false, the relationships 
are: 
 1. If  NG is the case, then  CG ,  N(NOT-G) , and  C(NOT-G) are NF. 
 2. If  N(NOT-G) is the case, then  NG ,  CG , and  C(NOT-G) are NF. 
 3. If  CG is the case, then  NG and  N(NOT-G) are NF and  C(NOT-G) is CF. 
 4. If  C(NOT-G) is the case, then  NG and  N(NOT-G) are NF and  CG is CF. 
  10.  These matters are relevant to arguments to be considered later. It is the case that (A) 
A proof of a necessary truth can contain only necessary truths as premises, and (B) 
A proof of a logically contingent proposition must contain at least one logically con-
tingent proposition among its premises. It is also, of course, true that (C) No false 
proposition can be proved, and (D) No argument that contains a false premise is a 
proof, even if its conclusion is true. 
  11.  “Behave” here is an anthropomorphism that unfortunately is seldom recognized as such. 
 12.  That this is approximate, and not a basic law, does not matter. Anyone who wants more 
sophisticated examples is free to supply them. 
 13.  Or a feature that follows from its essential features. 
  14.  Strictly, essences typically are thought of as deﬁ ning  kinds  of things; the view that 
there are, in addition to essences of kinds of things, also essences of individuals is 
much more controversial. 
 Suggested Readings 
 Bartley, C. J. (2002)  The Theology of Ramanuja: Realism and Religion (New York: Rout-
ledge). Places the thought of the great monotheistic Hindu theologian in the context not 
only of his own tradition but by identifying his opponents in the larger context of Hindu 
thought. 
 Cohn-Sherbok, Daniel (1996)  Medieval Jewish Philosophy  (Surrey: Curzon). Brief, good 
discussion of perhaps the most ﬂ ourishing period of Jewish philosophy. 
 Davidson, Herbert (1987)  Proofs for Eternity, Creation, and the Existence of God in 
Medieval Islamic and Jewish Philosophy  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Detailed 
discussion of Jewish and Islamic Medieval philosophers on arguments concerning the 
dependence and duration of the created world and arguments for God’s existence, with 
some reference to Christian philosophers. 
 ——— (1992)  Alfarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes on Intellect  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press). Fine discussion of theories of the mind held by three leading Islamic philosophers. 
 Drozdek, Adam (2007)  Greek Philosophers as Theologians  (Farnham, Sussex, UK: Ash-
gate). Argues that Greek philosophers, despite lack of theological language, discussed 
the attributes of God in terms different from popular conceptions. 

Monotheism and Ultimate Reality 79
 Erickson, Millard (2013)  Christian Theology  (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic). 
A comprehensive treatment of the central topics of Christian belief. 
 Frank, Dan and Leaman, Oliver, eds. (2000)  The Jewish Philosophy Reader (New York: 
Routledge). A comprehensive anthology covering the central topics of Jewish beliefs. 
 Kellner, Menachem (1986)  Dogma in Medieval Jewish Thought  (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press). Good discussion of the systems of Jewish thought that are more doctrinally 
oriented than others. 
 Kroner, Richard (1956)  Speculation in Pre-Christian Philosophy (Philadelphia: Westmin-
ster Press). This book, and the next two, discuss the development of Christian thought in 
interaction with ancient, Medieval, and modern philosophy. 
 ——— (1959)  Speculation and Revelation in the Age of Christian Philosophy (Philadel-
phia: Westminster Press). See previous reference. 
 ——— (1961)  Speculation and Revelation in Modern Philosophy (Philadelphia: Westmin-
ster Press). See Kroner (1956) comment. 
 Leaman, Oliver (1985)  An Introduction to Medieval Islamic Philosophy  (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press). Fairly brief, good discussion of perhaps the most ﬂ ourishing 
period of Islamic philosophy. 
 Lipner, Julius (1986)  The Face of Truth  (Albany: SUNY Press). Fine explanation of the 
thought of the Hindu theologian–philosopher Ramanuja. 
 Lott, Eric (1976)  God and the Universe in the Vedantic Theology of Ramanuja (Madras: 
Ramanuja Research Society). Another ﬁ ne discussion of Ramanuja. 
 ——— (1980)  Vedantic Approaches to God  (London: Macmillan). Excellent discussion 
of the three major ﬁ gures of Hindu Vedantic thought: Shankara, Ramanuja, Madhva. 
 McGrath, Alister (1994)  Christian Theology  (Oxford: Blackwell). Good historical discus-
sion of the types and themes of Christian thought. 
 Sharma, B. N. K. (2014)  Philosophy of Sri Madhvacarya (Delhi: Motilal Barnsidass). 
Deals with Madhva’s epistemology and metaphysics and the views based on them, and 
ﬁ nds parallels with Aquinas. 
 Watt, W. Montgomery (1973)  The Formative Period of Islamic Thought  (Edinburgh: Edin-
burgh University Press). Good discussion of early Islamic philosophy.    

 Jainism has basically one account of ultimate reality; there are (and always 
have been) persons and there are (and always have been) the physical elements 
of which observable physical things are composed. There is no Deity on which 
either depends for existence or arrangement. The Jain tradition is doctrinally 
homogenous, so there is no need to say that it is this rather than that type of Jain-
ism that is being described. 
 The Buddhist traditions range from the Theravada view, described here, through 
the Absolutism that is part of Mahayana and the at least nearly monotheistic per-
spective of Pure Land. For the moment, let us leave nirvana out of the account. 
Theravada Buddhism holds that (besides nirvana) what there is encompasses only 
momentary, dependent things. These things are 1  momentary states, some mental and 
some physical (some involving consciousness, some not). Much of later Buddhism 
accepts only mental states. These two claims 2  are as nearly orthodoxly Buddhist as 
anything; those who denied them were regarded as heretics: everything is radically 
impermanent, transitory, ﬂ eeting; nothing exists independent of other things. 
 Advaita Vedanta Hinduism is itself a variety of Absolutism, which we will 
describe in contrast to the non-Absolutist views of two other varieties of Vedantic 
Hinduism. Advaita Absolutism holds that all that exists is qualityless Brahman. 
There is one thing, not many, and this one thing of course stands in no relation to 
any other thing. Nor does this one thing have any qualities whatever. 
 The task before us in this chapter, then, is to come to understand these three 
quite different, but all nonmonotheistic, accounts of what there is. Since Advaita 
Vedanta is perhaps best understood by contrast with the other varieties of Vedanta, 
which are monotheistic, beginning with it provides the easiest transition from the 
discussion of the previous chapter. 
 Advaita Vedanta Hinduism 
 Three major philosophers of Vedantic persuasion, with generally suggested 
dates, are Shankara (788–820 a.d.), Ramanuja (1017–1137 a.d.), and Madhva 
(1197–1276 a.d.). Shankara holds to Advaita Vedanta or unqualiﬁ ed non-dualism; 
Ramanuja holds to Visistadvaita or qualiﬁ ed non-dualism; Madhva holds to 
Dvaita or unqualiﬁ ed dualism. 
 Nonmonotheistic Conceptions of 
Ultimate Reality 
 8 

Nonmonotheism and Ultimate Reality 81
 It may be helpful to understand Shankara’s views in contrast with those of 
Ramanuja and Madhva. Let  the world  be all bodies and all minds other than 
God. Ramanuja holds that God and the world are in a relationship of asymmetric 
dependence—the world depends on God but not God on the world. He then takes 
the world to be God’s body in a somewhat technical sense of  body . The world is 
God’s body in the sense that God can affect any part of the world without having 
to do so by affecting some other part of it. One might think of one’s own body as 
the part of the physical world that one can move without having to move anything 
else in order to move it; in order to otherwise affect the physical world, one has to 
move one’s body. All dependent minds and bodies are related in this way to God; 
for any mind or any body, God can affect it without having to make use of some 
other mind or body in order to do so. Madhva rejects the notion that the world is 
God’s body, thinking that this makes it sound as if God were dependent for exis-
tence and/or action on the world, whereas he holds that God exists independently 
and is capable of thought without needing any world for his self-conscious activi-
ties. Strictly, the disagreement between Ramanuja and Madhva here seems to lie 
in how one is to understand the notion of God’s body; understood as Madhva 
takes it, Ramanuja too would reject the idea. 
 What Ramanuja and Madhva have in common—the notion that there exists 
an independent God and a dependent world—Shankara rejects. What exists for 
Shankara is nirguna or qualityless Brahman, though what  appears  to exist is a 
multiplicity of physical objects and persons and a personal God. Shankara some-
times explains his view by using analogies with sensory perception. For example, 
suppose it is the case that: 
 (i) There is no man in the shadows. 
 (ii) Bimal (a typical perceiver) sincerely reports, based on his sensory experi-
ence, “I see a man in the shadows.” 
 (iii) What really is in the shadows is only a coat hanging on a hook. 
 Then: 
 (iv) There is something that Bimal sees. 
 (v) What Bimal sees does not have the nature and properties that Bimal sees it as 
having. 
 The standard Indian examples are seeing a conch shell and mistaking it for sil-
ver and seeing a rope and mistaking it for a snake; each of these follows the (i) 
through (v) pattern. Analogously, then, the Advaita Vedantin claims, when one 
reports, based on her sensory experience that there is an experience-independent 
physical thing, it is nonetheless true that there exists nothing sensory. As there 
was no man that Bimal saw, but only a coat hanging on a hook, so there is no tree 
or table (or any other object) that anyone senses, but only qualityless Brahman. 
Strictly, the analogy does not work;  taking one thing for another  is very different 
from  sheer hallucination . But the negative idea is clear—it is denied that there is 

82 Religions and Ultimate Reality
a mind-independent physical world. This by itself would yield only idealism—the 
view that there are minds and experiences with sensory content, but no mind-
independent objects of sensory experiences. Shankara’s view is much more radi-
cal. He claims that there are neither minds nor experiences; there is only Brahman 
without qualities. All experience of physical objects or of self is illusory. It is not 
an illusion caused by Brahman; that would require that there be effects that were 
not identical to Brahman. Of course Brahman itself cannot be subject to illusion 
(that would be a limitation). 
 One should not suppose that Shankara is unaware of the very considerable dif-
ﬁ culties of his view. Consider these passages by Shankara: 
 (1) To refute the self is impossible, for he who tries to refute it is the self. 3 
 (2) Only a deluded man could entertain the idea that he does not exist. 4 
 The idea is that while it may be possible without self-refutation to deny that there 
are physical objects distinct from one’s sensory experience, it is not possible with-
out self-refutation to deny that one exists oneself. 5  Shankara then turns to the task 
of developing a perspective that he regards as fully consistent with certain central 
 Upanishadic  texts, particularly one that says simply “Thou art that” (the indi-
vidual person is identical to Brahman). Taking this and other texts literally, Shan-
kara opts for the view that  only  Brahman-without-qualities exists. He holds that 
if I exist, then—contrary to all sorts of powerful considerations—I am Brahman. 
The  Vedas and  Upanishads , along with traditional commentaries on these docu-
ments, are the sacred texts of Hinduism.  Vedanta  means “end of the Vedas”—the 
late part that is taken to provide the interpretation of what precedes it.  Advaita 
means “non-dual” and contrasts with  Dvaita  (“dual”) and Visistadvaita (“quali-
ﬁ edly non-dual”), these being terms that refer to three distinct Hindu traditions, 
each sharing texts in common which each interprets differently and incompatibly. 
 The core religious dispute among these three versions of Vedanta concerns the 
proper interpretation of the relevant authoritative texts concerning the nature of 
Brahman—that being whose existence does not depend on anything else. The 
Advaita reading is Absolutistic (non-dualist), the Dvaita and Visistadvaita (dualist 
and qualiﬁ edly dualist) readings are monotheistic. 
 At issue are various texts, some of which express the view that the soul or indi-
vidual human person is literally identical to Brahman, others of which express the 
view that the human soul is more like Brahman than are other things. The core 
issue is which texts—the monotheistic or the Absolutistic—are to be read literally 
and which read non-literally. 
 Here is the monotheistic reading of such passages. 
  Only on account of having for his essence qualities similar to those of Brahman 
is the soul spoken of as Brahman, as in the case of the all-wise Brahman. Since 
the essence, i.e. the very nature of the soul, consists only of wisdom, bliss, and 
other qualities similar (in some degree) to those of Brahman, there proceeds the 
statement that the soul is one with (like) Brahman; just as in the text, “All this is 

Nonmonotheism and Ultimate Reality 83
indeed Brahman.” 6  Brahman is spoken of as “identical with all (the world) on 
account of there being qualities in Brahman which are predicated of the whole 
world.” The following is in the  Bhavishyat Purana : “The souls are separate, the 
perfect Lord is separate, still owing to the similarity of intelligent nature they 
are spoken of as Brahman in the various Scriptural disquisitions.” 7  
 In sum: like Brahman, who is a self-conscious Person, all-wise, ﬁ lled with bliss, 
human persons also are self-conscious, capable of possessing some wisdom and 
some bliss. They are similar in ways that make both persons, one an Independent 
Person on whom everything else depends, one a dependent person who has sinned 
and thus both owes her existence to, and needs gracious forgiveness from, the One 
on whom she depends. This, again, is monotheism. Nonmonotheistic or Absolut-
ist Advaita Vedanta rejects this reading of such passages. 
 Here is the nonmonotheistic reading. 
  The difference between God and the individual soul is due to these differing 
limiting adjuncts [namely, the mind and the senses]. When these are abso-
lutely negated . . . then there is no God and no individual, but there remains 
only the eternal, absolute, and pure Brahman. . . . Scripture [ Upanishads ] 
says that the limiting adjuncts are accidental, and superimposed on Brahman; 
reasoning based on Scripture must negate them both. 8 
 To thought and perception, there appear to be a multiplicity of persons and things. 
On an Advaita reading, the  Upanishads  deny this; so thought and perception must 
be “negated” in the sense that what appears to them to be so is rejected. 
 What exists, then, for Shankara is nirguna or qualityless Brahman, though what 
 appears  to exist is a multiplicity of physical objects and persons and a personal 
God. Until we get to the distinction between appearance and reality, he is a realist 
regarding objects, minds, and God; he holds that, “at the level of appearance,” such 
things exist. Indeed, he argues strongly for their existence. But he also holds, on 
 Upanishadic  authority, that only qualityless Brahman exists “at the level of reality.” 
 How are we to understand this claim? Plainly not in terms of the level of 
appearance being the set of things that exist dependently and Brahman being their 
independently existing Source. That is the position of Ramanuja and Madhva. The 
levels cannot be levels of reality distinguished by presence or absence of depen-
dence. The levels presumably are in some manner levels of knowledge or belief, 
appearance being how things look and reality being how things are. How are we 
to understand this notion? 
 A Two-Theories Account 
 Taking a cue from Spinoza, a favorite among Advaita Vedantins, one might try 
interpreting Advaita Vedanta along the lines of saying that there are two theories 
related in certain ways as follows. Suppose we have two theories, each of which 
has its own vocabulary; then we will have two theoretical languages, replete with 

84 Religions and Ultimate Reality
their conceptual perspectives or worldviews. Each, let us suppose, is exhaustive—it 
describes, or attempts to describe, all there is, not of course in concrete detail but 
in terms of general properties and kinds and the like. In each, whatever can be 
explained is explained. What one theory refers to is the same as what the other 
theory refers to, though of course each describes what it refers to very differently 
from of the other. No descriptive term is common between or shared by both theo-
ries. 9 Thus on the current account there are two theories or theoretical languages that 
have parity of description and parity of explanatory power. The entities referred to 
in one language are identical to those of the other, and the explanatory connections 
alleged in the one will be paralleled by explanatory connections alleged in the other. 
 According to one of these theories, individual persons, physical objects, and 
a personal God exists. Since the Vedantic term for person is Atman, we can all 
this  the Atman theory . According to the other of these theories, all that exists is 
Brahman without qualities; we will call this  the Brahman theory . We then get 
something along these lines: 
 BT. The Brahman Theory 
 1. 
Brahman exists and has no qualities at all. 
 2. 
Nothing but Brahman exists. 
 3. 
Every Atman that exists is identical to Brahman. 
 AT. The Atman Theory 
 4. 
There are individual Atmans (dependent persons). 
 5. 
There is a personal Brahman and so Brahman has qualities. 
 6. 
No Atman is Brahman. 
 7. 
Each Atman has mental qualities. 
 8. 
There are physical objects. 
 9. 
Physical objects have physical qualities. 
 There are problems with this as an account of Advaita Vedanta. The Brahman 
theory has almost no descriptive content, and no explanatory content. One cannot 
use terms from AT to shore up BT since this mixes the theories; it would remove 
the alleged purity of the theoretical languages, causing each to be tainted by the 
another. The account requires descriptive and explanatory parity of two logically 
independent theories or theoretical languages. BR and AT lack such parity. Fur-
ther, the account requires that the theories be equally justiﬁ ed. But according to 
Advaita Vedanta, BR and AT are not equally justiﬁ ed or equally accurate. Thus 
this seems not a successful program for stating Advaita. 
 A Causal Theory of Perception Account 
 Perhaps one can approach matters in this way. Consider the sort of causal account 
of perception that John Locke offered. 10 On this view, a veridical perception of a 

Nonmonotheism and Ultimate Reality 85
tree is analyzed like this. Suppose it is true that  Manindra sees a tree . What makes 
this true is there being a tree that causes certain images in Manindra’s mind. These 
images represent, and in limited ways resemble, the tree. Perception occurs when 
a perceivable object has the right sort of causal impact on a perceiver. 
 Then whittle the account down. Locke himself held that, for example, color qual-
ities were the product of interaction between object and perceiver; the tree itself has 
no color properties. But the tree itself does have shape properties, and the shape 
properties of the image must resemble the shape properties of the tree if Manindra, 
by virtue of having the images, is seeing the tree. But suppose one thinks that there 
is no tree, and indeed nothing with shape properties that caused Manindra’s images. 
Suppose Manindra’s images are caused by another mind or spirit. Then all of per-
ception is illusory in the sense that there are no objects that cause our perceptual 
images. Now, one might suggest, this gives us what we might call a minimally 
informative causal theory of perception. It may be that this theory, while it has little 
to commend it philosophically, is the one to use in trying to explain Shankara’s 
theory if we wish to use sensory analogies. Even this is dubious. On this account, 
which goes further than Locke’s,  Manindra sees a green tree  will be true only if 
there is no green tree that Manindra sees. In fact, all analogy with perception has 
vanished. Further, in order to come to Shankara’s view, one must somehow keep 
whittling away until neither Manindra’s mind nor the mind that caused the images 
in Manindra’s mind is thought of as having any properties. One wonders if one is 
then offering any account of anything. Further, Brahman is not construed as the 
cause of anything, and so is not conceived as the cause of perception. The most 
sensible procedure, then, would seem to be to leave perceptual analogies alone. In 
effect, this is what does happen when the Advaitin appeals to levels of being or to 
levels of truth or to the appearance/reality distinction construed in an Advaitin way.  
 Reductionism and Eliminativism 
 Advaita accepts the claim, relative to each individual person or Atman that it is 
identical to 
 Brahman. How is this to be understood? 
 Consider a simple identity statement: 
 Ia. Cicero is identical to Tully. 
 What this means is simply: 11 
 Ia*. ‘Cicero’ designates the same person as ‘Tully’ designates. 
 Shankara intends: 
 IIa. The Atman is identical to Brahman. 12 
 to entail: 
 IIa*. ‘Atman’ designates what ‘Brahman’ designates. 
 But this tells us only a little. Idealism regarding physical objects contends that 
a physical object is identical to a collection of sensory images. This can be 

86 Religions and Ultimate Reality
understood in either of two quite different ways as follows, using a cat named 
“Oscar” as our sample physical object: 
 IIIa. ‘Oscar’ designates what ‘this collection of catty images’ 13 designates.  
 So far, so good. Are we then to go on to IV or to V: 
  IV. All true statements about Oscar can be translated without remainder into 
(reduced to) statements about this collection of catty images. 
 V. Statements about Oscar should 14  be dropped from our speech and replaced by 
sentences that speak only of this collection of catty images. 15 
 What IV recommends is reduction; what V commends is replacement. It seems 
clear that the idealist, at least of Bishop Berkeley’s sort, wants V. Berkeley takes 
statements about physical objects to be true only if there are exactly the sort of 
experience-independent extended objects it is the purpose of his theory to reject. 
Statements to the effect that there are such things, being in principle false, should 
be banned from our theories. The idea is that the truths cat-sentences aim at and 
miss, collection of catty images sentences hit. 
 More formally, a statement A reduces without remainder to a statement B only 
if it is logically impossible that A and B differ in truth value. Statements about 
physical objects can differ in truth value from statements about collections of 
catty images. So IV recommends a logical impossibility. Further, given the condi-
tions for reduction, if the recommended reduction could be carried out, it would 
import talk of objects into idealistic theory. Berkeleyian idealism is a replacement 
theory. It is eliminativist, not reductionist. 
 So is Advaita Vedanta, and for analogous reasons. Consider the difference 
between: 
  IV*.  All true statements about any Atman can be translated without remainder 
into (reduced to) statements about Brahman. 
 V*.  Statements about any Atman should be dropped from our speech and 
replaced by sentences that speak only of Brahman. 16 
 Suppose that  This Atman is tired [i.e., I am tired]  is true. It has as truth conditions 
that I exist as the sort of being that can tire; if  Atman is Brahman  is treated as IV* 
requires, it will be true that  Brahman is tired . This Shankara rejects. It is V* that 
his view requires. His view is eliminativist, not reductionist. It is in that context 
that we should understand his view that only Brahman without qualities exists. 17 
 Advaita Vedanta will receive further description when we come later to ask 
what considerations have been offered on its behalf. In philosophy, understand-
ing a view and understanding what can be said for and against it are not separate 
enterprises; they are intrinsically related, part of a single enterprise of understand-
ing. What can be concluded thus far is that analogies to perception and theories 
of perception seem not helpful in coming to terms with the core of the philosophy 
of Advaita Vedanta. 

Nonmonotheism and Ultimate Reality 87
 Jainism and Buddhism 
 A Radical Substance View (Jainism) and a Non-substance 
View (Theravada Buddhism) Compared and Contrasted 
 Jainism and Buddhism agree that our great need is to escape the circle of rebirths 
and achieve enlightenment and release. But they differ in what the enlightened 
person ﬁ nds at the end of her search, and they disagree about what the nature of 
the searcher is. This difference is both religious and philosophical, and will be 
explained in both its religious and its philosophical contexts. 
 The Religious Context 
 Jainism and Persons: Persons Are Substances 18 
 For Jainism, consciousness is always someone’s consciousness. There can no 
more be consciousness without persons than there can be triangles without angles. 
 A Jain text tells us the following: 
  The distinctive characteristic of a substance is being. Being is a simultane-
ous possession of coming into existence, going out of existence, and per-
manence. Permanence means the indestructibility of the essence of the 
substance . . . substance is possessed of attributes and modiﬁ cations . . . attri-
butes depend upon substratum and cannot be the substratum of another 
attribute. Modiﬁ cation is change of attribute. 19 
 We are told that there are things (substances) that have qualities (attributes, prop-
erties) without themselves being qualities. These qualities are inherently ﬁ rst-
order qualities (qualities of things that are not themselves qualities) and they 
begin and cease to be—they come into existence and go out of existence. For a 
quality to come into existence is for a thing that did not have it to come to have it; 
for a quality to go out of existence is for a thing that did have it to come to have it 
no longer (this is what it is for substances to undergo modiﬁ cations). When things 
undergo modiﬁ cation (change of attribute) in the sense that they gain and lose 
qualities, they remain the same things (enjoy permanence) throughout the modi-
ﬁ cations that they undergo. Change presupposes that something is changed, and 
hence that something endures through the change. In sum: numerically identical 
things undergo change of qualities; change of one thing (quality) presupposes 
permanence of another thing (substance). 
 The same text adds that: 
  The self’s essence is life. . . . The distinctive characteristic of self is atten-
tion. . . . Those with minds are knowers. 20 
 Among things or substances are some whose essence is  being alive and being 
capable of being liberated  or  being alive and being incapable of being liberated . 21 

88 Religions and Ultimate Reality
Any such thing is conscious or capable of giving attention to objects of experi-
ence, and self-conscious or aware of itself as agent and as being affected by other 
things. These remarks serve as background to the religious point of the doctrines 
just noted: 
  That which should be grasped by self-discrimination is “I” from the real point 
of view. 22 
 The soul has the nature of knowledge, and the realization of this nature 
is Nirvana; therefore one who is desirous of Nirvana must meditate on 
self-knowledge. 23 
 According to Jainism, knowledge of the nature of the self or person is achievable 
through meditative self-awareness; such knowledge is constitutive of achieving 
enlightenment. The most desirable modiﬁ cation—namely, enlightenment—nei-
ther changes the nature of the self or person or jiva nor removes his capacity for 
awareness or her status as a knower: 
  After the soul is released, there remain perfect right-belief, perfect right-
knowledge, perfect perception, and the state of having accomplished all. 24 
 Here, persons are enduring self-conscious substances, retaining numerical iden-
tity over time and retaining identity as individual persons in their enlightened 
state. Thus in the  Jaina Sutras 25  one reads that when the Venerable Ascetic Maha-
vira had become enlightened, he was 
  omniscient and comprehending all objects; he knew and saw all conditions 
of the world, of gods, men, and demons: whence they come, whither they 
go, whether they are born as men or animals . . . or become gods or hell-
beings . . . the ideas, the thoughts of their minds, the food, doings, desires, the 
open and secret deeds of all living beings in the whole world; he the Arhat, 
for whom there is no secret, knew and saw all conditions of all living beings 
in the world, what they thought, spoke, or did at any moment. 
 Mahavira—founder of Jainism and achiever of enlightenment—is conceived as 
being the same person post-enlightenment as he was pre-enlightenment. Nor does 
post-mortem achievement of full and ﬁ nal enlightenment/nirvana alter this. 
 Buddhism and Persons: Persons as Bundles 26 
 A Buddhist text tells us that: 
  Whether Buddhas arise, O priests, or whether Buddhas do not arise, it remains 
a fact and the ﬁ xed and necessary constitution of being that all its constitu-
ents are transitory. This fact a Buddha discovers and masters, and when he 
has discovered and mastered it, he announces, teaches, publishes, proclaims, 

Nonmonotheism and Ultimate Reality 89
discloses, minutely explains, and makes it clear, that all the constituents of 
being are transitory. . . . Whether Buddhas arise, O priests, or whether Bud-
dhas do not arise, it remains a fact and the ﬁ xed and necessary constitution 
of being, that all its elements are lacking in an ego (substantial, permanent 
self-nature). This fact a Buddha discovers and masters, and when he has dis-
covered and mastered it, he announces, teaches, publishes, proclaims, dis-
closes, minutely explains, and makes it clear, that all the elements of being 
are lacking in an ego. 27 
 A longer and more familiar passage reads as follows: 
  Just as the word “chariot” is but a mode of expression for axle, wheels, char-
iot-body, pole, and other constituent members, placed in a certain relation 
to each other, but when we come to examine the members one by one, we 
discover that in the absolute sense there is no chariot; and just as the word 
“house” is but a mode if expression for wood and other constituents of a 
house, surrounding space in a certain relation, but in the absolute sense there 
is no house; and just as the word “ﬁ st” is but a mode of expression for the 
ﬁ ngers, the thumb, etc. in a certain relation; . . . the word “tree” for trunk, 
branches, foliage, etc. in a certain relation, but when we come to examine 
the parts one by one, we discover that in the absolute sense there is no tree; 
in exactly the same way words “living entity” and “ego” are but a mode of 
expression for the presence of the ﬁ ve attachment groups, but when we come 
to examine the elements of being one by one, we discover that in the absolute 
sense there is no living entity there to form a basis for such ﬁ gments as “I am” 
or “I”; in other words, that in the absolute sense there is only name and form. 
The insight of him who perceives this is called knowledge of the truth. 28 
 We are told here that there are constituents that are transitory. Further, there are col-
lections of simultaneous constituents (call these simultaneous bundles) and there 
are collections of successive constituents (call these successions of bundles). Suc-
cessions of bundles are made up of sequential simultaneous bundles and so-called 
physical objects are successions of bundles. 29 More importantly for our purposes, 
so-called persons are successions of bundles. There are no constituents that endure; 
each moment sees an entirely new constituent population. Successions of bundles 
are the only candidates for possessing numerical identity over time.  
 Review, Comparison, and Contrast 
 1. Reincarnation and Karma 
 The Jain and Buddhist traditions share belief in reincarnation and karma. Rein-
carnation doctrine teaches that each person beginninglessly lives one life after 
another, and will do so endlessly unless he becomes enlightened. Karma doc-
trine (in its nonmonotheistic version, which is the version relevant to Jainism and 

90 Religions and Ultimate Reality
Buddhism) teaches that one inescapably receives the merit or demerit due; right 
or wrong actions not disinterestedly done yield weal or woe, and no one escapes 
their due recompense. Embedded in these doctrines is a  justice requirement : the 
recipient of the recompense must be the doer of the deed for which recompense 
comes—she, and not another. 
 2. Change 
 On the Buddhist perspective described above, collections of simultaneous constit-
uents are replaced by new collections of simultaneous constituents. No changes 
occur; replacement occurs. 
 A further Jain text reads: 
  There cannot be a thing which is devoid of its modiﬁ cations of birth and 
decay. On the other hand, modiﬁ cations cannot exist without an abiding 
or eternal something—a permanent substance, for birth, decay, and stabil-
ity (continuance)—these three constitute the characteristic of a substance or 
entity. 30 
 “Birth and decay” refers to the comings and goings of qualities, “stability or con-
tinuance” to substances. Change requires permanence. 31 
 3. Simplicity 
 Jain persons lack constituents. They have no elements and are incomposite. A Jain 
person at a time T is a self-conscious substance that exists at T. If she is embodied 
at T, her body is not  part  of her at T. Her thoughts at T are thoughts but not parts; 
her qualities at T are qualities but not parts. A person that exists at times T1 and 
T2 does not have a T1-part and a T2-part. One might say:  All of her exists at T1 
and all of her exists at T2—she is not temporally scattered . She has a life, and that 
life (in some sense, at least) can have parts—say, one part where she is a student 
in Delhi and another part where she is a professor in Benares. Her life can have 
parts or segments; she cannot. She is an incomposite substance, a self-conscious 
mind. While  being alive  (not to be confused with  being embodied ) is essential to 
a person, a person is not identical to any particular life or series of lives. A person 
could have lived lives other than the one he did live, and he  has  a life, and a long 
series of lives, without  being  any or all of those lives (whatever exactly that might 
amount to). 
 Buddhist persons have constituents. They have elements and are composite. 
A Buddhist person at a time T is a simultaneous bundle that exists at T. 32 Her 
thoughts at T are thoughts that are parts of her at T; her qualities at T are quali-
ties that are parts of her at T. A person that exists at times T1 and T2 does have 
a T1-part and a T2-part, the former being a bundle of elements-simultaneously-
existing-at-T1 and the latter a bundle of elements-simultaneously-existing-at-T2. 
One might say:  At no moment of a person’s existence does all of her exist at 
once—she is temporally scattered . If a person could exist at just two moments, 

Nonmonotheism and Ultimate Reality 91
half of her would exist at each moment. If a life is composed of one simultaneous 
bundle followed by another followed by another, a person  is  a life, and that life 
has as many parts are there are moments at which some simultaneous bundle or 
other occurs in the life-series. While  being alive  (not to be confused with  being 
embodied ) is essential to a person, a person is identical to the particular series of 
lives that she lives. 33 
 A Basic Difference between the Jain Doctrine 
and the Buddhist Doctrine of Persons 
 The difference between the Jain and the Buddhist accounts of what it is to be 
a person is important but it can be difﬁ cult to grasp. Here is another way of 
putting it. 
 Consider an atom of the sort that Isaac Newton believed in. In his physics, an 
atom in effect was a tiny pellet—a billiard ball shrunk to miniscule proportions. 
An atom was as small as anything can get, and was composed of no parts what-
ever. Homogenous and ultimately tiny, atoms (Newton taught) are the things of 
which larger physical items are composed. 
 Suppose that at time T1 there is just one atom; call it Alice1. Suppose that at 
time T2 there is also just one atom; call it Alice2. Then ask: Is Alice1 identical 
to Alice2? The answer is “Yes” provided Alice1 has stayed in existence from T1 
through T2. Otherwise, Alice2 is a new atom. 
 Now suppose that instead of being a material atom, Alice1 is   a person, a self-
conscious immaterial mind, and the same for Alice2. Then ask: Is Alice2 identical 
to Alice1? The answer is “Yes” provided Alice1 has stayed in existence from T1 
through T2. Otherwise, Alice2 is a new person. 
 Suppose Alice1 exists only at T1 and Alice2 exists only at T2; then they are 
not identical. This is the Buddhist answer to the identity of any incomposite thing 
over time. If there is such a thing as an Alice, it is simply a matter of there being 
a series composed of Alice1 at T1 and Alice2 at T2 (and perhaps Alice3 at T3 and 
so on). An Alice over time is a series of momentary Alices-at-one-time. 
 The difference, then, is that on a Jain account a person is one incomposite thing 
that exists over time—that endures through a series of times—whereas on a Bud-
dhist account a person is a series of composite things no one of which exists over 
time. 
 The Importance of the Accounts of Persons 
 To one trained in contemporary academic contexts, it may seem unlikely if not 
wildly implausible that issues in metaphysics, and disputes about such issues, be 
taken to be of central religious importance—to be viewed as matters centrally 
affecting salvation or enlightenment versus damnation or ignorance. But of course 
we do not get to decide how these things are viewed; the indigenous authors and 
interpreters of normative texts, and the participants in the relevant rites and insti-
tutions related thereto, decide them. Thus on both Jain and Buddhist accounts of 

92 Religions and Ultimate Reality
the matter, getting these metaphysical matters right 34  is central to becoming, and 
constitutive of being, enlightened. Further, from a Jain perspective, the Buddhist 
account ascribes too little (essentially, nothing) to  being a person  for any enlight-
enment to be possible, and from a Buddhist perspective the Jain account ascribes 
too much to  being a person for enlightenment to be possible. One might say: the 
Buddhist thinks the Jain soul is too heavy to safely ride in the Great Vehicle and 
the Jain thinks the Buddhist (non)soul too frail to get in the boat. 
 Some Consequences 
 1. Action 
 Suppose that, as we would ordinarily say, Jamie ﬁ res three shots at Josie in order 
to scare her into revealing where her parents have hidden their life savings—shot 
1 at time T1, shot 2 at time T2, shot 3 at time T3. On the bundle account, what 
ﬁ red shot 1 was a simultaneous bundle that exists only at T1; similarly for shot 2 
and a simultaneous bundle that exists only at T2 as well as shot 3 and a simulta-
neous bundle that exists only at T3. One “element” ﬁ res shot 1, another ﬁ res shot 2, 
another ﬁ res shot 3. No simultaneous bundle ﬁ res all three shots. A succession of 
bundles ﬁ res shots only insofar as its simultaneous-bundle members ﬁ re shots; 
it  just is  those members. On a Jain account, a self-conscious substance ﬁ res the 
three shots—Jamie is numerically the same at T1, T2, and T3, and at each time 
he ﬁ res a shot. 
 2. Memory 
 Suppose that, as we would ordinarily say, Jamie is arrested for ﬁ ring shots at 
Josie, and sadly remembers his wickedness toward her. On the Jain account, 
numerically the same self-conscious being who ﬁ red the shots thinks of himself as 
having done so. Memory 35 of performing an action involves numerically the same 
self-conscious substance who performed it thinking about himself having done 
so. On a Buddhist account, (reliable) memory is a matter of a later simultaneous 
bundle containing a state that represents an earlier simultaneous bundle acting in 
a certain manner, where it is true of the earlier simultaneous bundle that it did so 
act, and where the earlier and later simultaneous bundles are elements in the same 
succession of bundles. 
 As we have noted, the doctrines of reincarnation and karma require that appro-
priate recompense (weal or woe) come to each person for her own previous 
actions—actions not atypically in some lifetime prior to the one previously being 
lived. 36  Not only Mahavira but also the Buddha is represented as remembering, 
upon becoming enlightened, all of his past reincarnational life. 
 The Jaina and Buddhist traditions, then, provide us with a sharply contrasting 
account of what a person is—a person  at  a time and a person  over  time. For the 
Jaina traditions, a person at a time is a self-conscious substance and over time is 
a self-conscious substance that exists continuously. For the Buddhist traditions, 
a person at a time is a bundle of momentary states and over time is a sequence of 

Nonmonotheism and Ultimate Reality 93
such bundles. So we have two quite different views of what a person is, and thus 
two quite different views of what it is for a person to be the same person at one 
time as at another. 
 Conclusion 
 Three nonmonotheistic views of ultimate reality have been described. For one, 
what exists is simply and only a qualityless being, nirguna Brahman. 37  For another, 
what exists are minds and physical elements. On both views, what is  ultimate is 
 incomposite  (not made of parts) and  independent  (not depending for its existence 
on anything). For a third view, what is ultimate is physical and mental states, each 
momentary, transitory, and impermanent. Here  ultimate  bears the sense of  incom-
posite  but not of  independent , as each state is conceived as existing dependently 
on other states. Nothing is thought to have existential independence. 
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
  1. 
Why, in the end, do analogies to perceptual experience, whether simple 
or complex, fail to communicate the core of Advaita Vedanta doctrine? 
 2. 
What does Advaita Vedanta doctrine afﬁ rm? What does it deny? 
 3. 
For Advaita, what is it that suffers constant illusion and what does 
Advaita say can be done about it? 
 4. 
Consider and assess this brief argument: (i) John has illusions. (2) 
John’s apparent awareness of himself is illusory (part of an illusion). 
(2) If John’s apparent awareness of himself is illusory, then John him-
self is an illusory. (3) You have to be real in order to have illusions. (4) 
John is real. 
 5. Explain the Jain account of persons, and its implications for action, 
memory, and personal identity. 
 6. Explain the Buddhist account of persons, and its implications for 
action, memory, and personal identity. 
 Notes 
 1. Subject to a philosophical qualiﬁ cation noted in a later chapter.
 2 . Technically, impermanence and co-dependent arising. 
  3.  Commentary on the Brahma-Sutra , II, 3, 7. 
  4.  Pancandasi , III, 23–24. 
   5.  Further, Shankara’s writings contain a sophisticated version of the view that there are 
experience-independent physical objects. 
  6.  Chandogya Upanishad , 3.14.1. 
   7.  The passage is from S. Subba Rao (1904)  Vedanta Sutras  (Madras: Sri Vaisa Press), 

94 Religions and Ultimate Reality
3.3.29, p. 141; cited in J. Estlin Carpenter (1977)  Theism in Medieval India (New 
Delhi: Oriental Books Reprint Corporation); ﬁ rst published by Williams and Norgate, 
London, 1921, with quotations embedded in the text as indicated. 
  8.  K. Satchidananda Murty (1974)  Reason and Revelation in Advaita Vedanta (Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass), pp. 3–4. First published by Ahndra University Press and Colum-
bia University Press, 1959. 
  9.  Strictly, no term more determinate than, say,  substance . 
  10.  Strictly, it is the  Essay concerning Human Understanding , Book II (not the later Book 
IV) account. 
 11.  Allowing for a particular historical context. 
  12.  Where “the Atman” refers to each “individual person”—the view, of course, entails the 
remarkable consequence that there is at most only one individual person. 
  13.  We can ignore here whether idealistic Oscar is one collection of present images or a 
temporally sequenced series of collections. 
 14.  At least for serious purposes in science and metaphysics. 
  15.  I leave “collections of catty images” vague; in fact, there is no replacement for this 
phrase that satisﬁ es the idealist desiderata of (i) being phenomenologically adequate to 
our sensory experience and (ii) not referring to what, if it exists, if a physical object. 
 16.  Again, for purposes of metaphysics and high religion. 
  17.  The question remains, of course, as to what can properly replace such sentences as  I 
am tired , a topic to which we will return when we come to assess Advaita Vedanta’s 
claims. 
  18.  Jain doctrine is classically expressed in the  Jaina Sutras . Jain tradition is doctrinally 
far more homogeneous than Buddhist tradition. 
 19.  Tattvarthadhigama Sutra , Chapter V, Sections 29, 30, 31, 38, 41, 42; Sarvepalli Rad-
hakrishnan and Charles A. Moore, eds. (1952)  A Sourcebook in Indian Philosophy 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press), p. 256. The  Sourcebook  is probably still 
the most accessible source for the passages that it contains. 
 20.  Loc. cit ., Chapter II, Sections 7, 8, 29;  Sourcebook , p. 254. 
  21.  This is a Jain analogue of the doctrine of double predestination (some to salvation, 
some to damnation), albeit without a predestinator. 
 22 . Samayasdra , 325. 
 23.  Atmanusasna , 174. 
 24.  Loc. cit. , Chapter X, Section 4;  Sourcebook , p. 260. 
  25.  Herman Jacobi, tr. (1962)  Jaina Sutras  (New York: Dover Publications; originally 
published, 1896) Vol. I, p. 264. 
  26.  Buddhist tradition is far less homogeneous than Jain tradition. While the doctrine that, 
nirvana aside, nothing is permanent, everything is momentary, and the related thesis 
that no momentary thing exists independently, come near to being Buddhist orthodoxy, 
even within Indian Buddhism there is signiﬁ cant doctrinal variety. My focus here is 
on Theravada Buddhism. The same issues arise for non-Absolutist Mahayana tradi-
tions. Absolutist Mahayana tradition is a philosophical sibling, if not twin, to Advaita 
Vedanta and lies outside the present discussion. 
 27.  Anguttara-nikaya , iii, 134;  Sourcebook , p. 273, 274; the text is Theravadin. 
 28.  Visuddhi-magga , xviii;  Sourcebook , pp. 284–285; the text is Theravadin. 
 29.  Or, for Buddhist idealism, sensory contents of elements of simultaneous bundles. 
 30.  Sanmati Tarka , 1.12;  Sourcebook , p. 269. 
 31.  Strictly, change requires  that the item that changes retain numerical identity 
over time . Whether this is a matter of  permanence , in the sense of the inherent 

Nonmonotheism and Ultimate Reality 95
indestructibility that Jainism ascribes to persons, or a beginningless but nonetheless 
dependent numerical identity over time that persons enjoy according to Visistadvaita 
and Dvaita, or a non-beginningless dependent numerical identity over time that per-
sons enjoy according to the Semitic monotheisms, is irrelevant here. I use the quoted 
term “permanence” for convenience; let it stand in for something like “numerical iden-
tity over time” of any of the sorts just mentioned. 
  32.  For non-idealist Buddhism, there are bundles that contain no states of consciousness 
(these being the referents of typical physical object terms) and bundles that contain 
states of consciousness (these being the referents of typical person terms). For the 
idealist Buddhist, there are only the latter, and typical physical object terms refer to 
subsets of bundles of states of consciousness (those containing sensory content). 
  33.  If metaphysical identity is necessary, a Buddhist person could not have lived lives 
other than the one she did live. This raises questions about any alleged freedom such a 
person could possess. 
 34.  “Getting them right” of course involves more than being able to pass a true-false exam 
in metaphysics. It involves deep convictions, basic and ﬁ rmly held beliefs, associated 
feelings and practices, and the like—“heart knowledge as well as head knowledge” as 
some would say. But “getting them right” does include getting them right—believing 
what is true. 
  35.  I use “memory” here as a “success term” without denying that one can think one 
remembers when one does not (a view quite open to Jainism). If one prefers, let him 
for “memory” substitute “reliable memory.” 
 36.  If you want to think of various reincarnation “visits” as all comprising a single lifetime, 
think of the actions as having been done on earlier “visits” than those in which the 
recompense comes. 
 37.  The role alleged ineffability plays in this notion will be discussed in a later chapter. 
 Suggested Readings 
 Basham, A. L. (1951)  History and Doctrine of the Ajivikas  (London: Luzac Press). Good 
discussion of the doctrinal content and historical development of the Jain tradition. 
 Carpenter, Amber (2014)  Indian Buddhist Philosophy  (New York: Routledge). Wide 
coverage—ﬁ fth century b.c. through eighth century a.d.—of Buddhist metaphysics, epis-
temology, and moral psychology. 
 Chatterjee, Satischandra and Datta, Dhirendramohan (1950)  An Introduction to Indian Phi-
losophy  (Calcutta: University of Calcutta Press). A good general treatment of the various 
Indian philosophical systems; goes into more detail than a typical introduction. 
 Jaini, P. (1979)  The Jaina Path of Perfection  (Berkeley: University of California Press). 
A comprehensive account of Jain thought. 
 Jaini, Padmanabh S. (2000)  Collected Papers on Jain Studies  (Delhi: Motilal Banarsi-
dass). Papers by an accomplished Jain scholar on reality, karma, salvation, rebirth, and 
omniscience. 
 Jayatilleke, K. N. (2013)  Early Buddhist Theory of Knowledge  (New York: Routledge). 
Deals with the epistemological, metaphysical, and logical-linguistic content of the 
Pali canon. 
 Mookerji, Satkari (1944)  The Jaina Philosophy of Non-Absolutism  (Calcutta: Bharati 
Mahavidyalaya). Good account of Jain doctrine with emphasis on one interpretation of 
Jain thought on which it sees claims as relative to perspectives; it is controversial as to 
whether this reading is correct. 

96 Religions and Ultimate Reality
 Phillips, Steven (1995)  Classical Indian Metaphysics  (La Salle, IL: Open Court). Nice 
discussions of issues and systems. 
 Radhakrishnan, S. and Moore, C. A. (1952)  A Sourcebook in Indian Philosophy (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press). While much of the material is philosophical only in a 
very loose sense, this is a useful anthology of some passages by Indian philosophers. 
 Rambachan, Anantanand (1991)  Accomplishing the Accomplished :  The Vedas as a Source 
of Valid Knowledge in Sankara (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press). Good discus-
sion of the view that Hindu Scripture, along with perception, inference, and so on is a 
source of genuine knowledge. 
 Ram-Prasad, Chakravarthi (2002)  Advaita Epistemology and Metaphysics: An Outline of 
Indian Non-Realism  (New York: Routledge). Based on basic Advaita texts, and relating 
views to European philosophy, argues that there is no proof of an external world. 
 Sharma, Arvind (2008)  The Philosophy of Religion and Advaita Vedanta: A Comparative 
Study in Religion and Reason  (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press). 
Uses John Hick and Advaita philosophers, including Shankara, as a basis for comparison. 
 Warder, A. K. (1990)  A History of Indian Buddhism  (Honolulu: University of Hawaii 
Press). Standard history of Buddhism in the land of its origin. 
 Wood, Thomas (1990)  The Mandukya Upanishad and the Agama Sastra: An Investigation 
into the Meaning of the Vedanta  (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press). A lucid and 
excellent account of Advaita. 
 ——— (1991)  Mind-Only  (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press). An excellent account 
of Theravada doctrine, lucidly argued. 
 

 Part III 
 Arguments concerning 
Monotheistic Conceptions 

This page intentionally left blank

 Three Questions 
 A theodicy is an explanation of the role that evil plays in God’s overall plan. A defense 
regarding evil is an argument that evil does not provide evidence that God does not 
exist. An argument from evil is an attempt to show that the existence of evil does 
provide evidence that God does not exist. So there arise three questions regarding 
God and evil: Is there an adequate theodicy? Is there a successful defense regarding 
evil? Is there a successful argument from evil? While the issues that come up in the 
attempt to develop a theodicy are of signiﬁ cant philosophical and religious interest, 
they typically occur within the context of a fairly detailed theology, and we will not 
try to develop one here. With one exception, we will set the ﬁ rst question aside. 
 Reincarnation, Karma, and Evil 
 The doctrine of reincarnation claims that each person is embodied in a newly born 
body, lives a human life for however long that body lives, and when that body dies 
the person who has been embodied in it becomes embodied in another newly born 
body. 1  This process is, for each person other than Brahman or God, beginningless 
and ends only if the person becomes enlightened or is saved. The doctrine of karma 
says that the physical, social, economic, political, and so on conditions under which 
a person is embodied and lives a given lifetime are the conditions rendered appro-
priate by the person’s actions in previous lifetimes. The two claims together yield a 
third: what evils occur to a person in a given lifetime are morally proper, being the 
appropriate consequences of what the person has previously done. 
 At least from some monotheistic standpoints, there is an attractiveness to this 
doctrine. All evils are just punishments. For example if an infant is stillborn or has 
severe birth defects, these things happen not to a person just coming to be, but to a 
person who has a long and intricate series of lifetimes in which he has behaved so 
viciously as to deserve this treatment. Bad things happen to good people because 
they were not always good people. This view entails, then, that: 
  (EN) For any evil E that occurs to a person in lifetime N, E is the just conse-
quence of wrong actions by that person in lifetime N or in her lifetimes prior 
to N. 
 Arguments Against Monotheism 
 9 

100 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 Whether (EN) is true or not, it is logically consistent. Thus it is relevant 
to a use of the Consistency Strategy that we will consider shortly. Since 
there is little if any solid evidence in favor of the truth of the doctrines 
of reincarnation and karma, it would be intellectually risky to offer them 
as part of a theodicy of which they formed an essential part or a defense 
regarding evil.  
 To begin by offering a defense regarding evil would be premature. One would 
need ﬁ rst to have reason to suppose that evil is evidence against the existence 
of God. Unless there is good reason to think this, there is no need for a defense 
regarding evil. While it is often assumed that the religious believer should provide 
evidence that God exists and also provide a defense regarding evil, the idea that 
the religious believer should always be the one who offers arguments is without 
justiﬁ cation. The place to start in considering God and evil is by asking whether 
there is any successful, or at least initially plausible, argument from evil. There 
are quite a variety of attempts to offer a successful argument from evil. It is time 
to consider some of them. 
 The Problem of Evil 
 What philosophers call the problem of evil concerns whether or not the existence 
of evil counts against the existence of God, makes belief that God exists unreason-
able, or the like. The pastoral problem of evil—how one is to deal with the evil that 
one faces in one’s own life and the lives of those one loves—is obviously impor-
tant, but it is not the (philosophical) problem of evil. A theodicy is an account of 
why God allows, or even causes, evil—of the role evil plays in the great scheme 
of things, how it relates to divine providence, how God can bring good from 
evil, how God’s love can triumph over evil, and the like. It is understandable that 
someone want a theodicy. But offering a theodicy is not necessary in order to deal 
with the problem of evil, and it is a large topic all by itself. Here, the concern is 
with the problem of evil, itself quite enough to occupy one’s attention. 
 The existence of evil is the most inﬂ uential consideration against the existence 
of God. The fact is that there is evil in the world, and the fact is that this is at least 
initially puzzling if the world is created and providentially guided by a morally 
perfect and omnicompetent (omnipotent and omniscient) God. In this chapter, 
then, versions of this consideration are examined. It is often taken to be obvious 
that the existence of evil is at least evidence against the existence of God. Even if 
other, stronger considerations vote “Yes” regarding God’s existence, it is claimed 
that evil obviously votes “No” in that election. This is questionable. The existence 
of evil is evidence against the existence of God only if there is some sound and 
valid argument in which  There is evil  is a essential premise (one without which 
the argument is invalid) and  God does not exist  is the conclusion. It is not obvious 
that there is any such argument. Anyone who claims there is such an argument 
may be challenged to produce it. This chapter considers various arguments that 
have been offered to meet this challenge. 

Arguments Against Monotheism 101
 Is the Existence of Evil Evidence against the Existence of God? 
 That there is evil seems to many a feature of the world that God would not have 
allowed. Thus they argue that since evil does exist, God does not. This inference 
is cogent if and only if (E)  There is evil and (G)  God exists are logically incompat-
ible, or if (E) plus some set S of discernible truths is logically incompatible with 
(G). 2  Thus arguments from evil to the non-existence of God either claim that (E) 
and (G) are logically incompatible or seek some set S of discernible truths which, 
together with (E), is incompatible with (G)—or, if you prefer, a set S of discern-
ible truths that, together with (E), entail the denial of (G). It is possible to consider 
several arguments from  (E) is true to  (G) is false within a brief scope, thereby 
gaining a good sense of how likely to succeed this enterprise is. 
 Failed Escapes 
 No typical version of monotheism can deny (E). Semitic and Hindu monothe-
isms hold that our basic religious problem is sin from which we need forgiveness 
and deliverance. But to sin is to act in a way that is evil. Typical monotheisms 
are religions of redemption from evil. So they cannot deny that (E) is true. Nor 
can monotheism consistently embrace the notion of a ﬁ nite god—a Deity who, 
for reasons of lack of knowledge, power, or goodness, does not prevent evil. If a 
supposed Deity is not perfectly good, it is not the Deity of typical monotheism, so 
that route is closed. An omnicompetent but morally imperfect being would not be 
God. Suppose, then, that a being is morally perfect but limited in either knowledge 
or power in such a way that, for certain evils at least, it would prevent them if it 
could but it cannot prevent them. This being also would not be God in any typical 
monotheistic sense. To see this, consider a being limited in knowledge; suppose 
that God lacks the knowledge to prevent evil, though God has the power to do so. 
Suppose also that I, walking alongside my friend Jon, know that if he does not 
stop walking now, he will be hit by a car. Then except under really extraordinary 
circumstances I am wicked if I do not stop him if I know how, and except under 
really extraordinary circumstances I will know a variety of ways to stop him. But, 
by one version of the present hypothesis, God lacks that knowledge. So relative to 
preventing the evil of Jon’s being hit by a car, I am smarter than God. But no being 
that I am smarter than, relative to preventing evil, is worthy of the name “God.” 
Hence limiting divine knowledge to “solve” the problem of evil is no more suc-
cessful than denying divine goodness. 
 Suppose instead that God’s power is limited relative to preventing at least 
certain evils—God knows how to prevent them but lacks the ability to put that 
knowledge to work. But suppose Sharon’s doctor knows that if she is getting a 
migraine, the appropriate strength pain pill plus strong sweet tea will prevent it, 
and typically the doctor has the power to provide both pill and tea. (There is no 
claim here that this treatment is successful other than hypothetically in an imagi-
nary case.) On another version of the present hypothesis God lacks the power 
to so act, even though so acting would prevent evil. But no being that, relative 

102 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
to preventing an evil, has less power than the doctor does is worthy of the name 
“God.” Things do not change materially if we grant God vastly more knowledge 
than any human has. The point to keep in mind is that for any evil God allows, on 
the ﬁ nitist view, God may lack the knowledge to prevent it. On any account, given 
the evils that there are, this amounts to a very considerable degree of ignorance. 
Nor is it clear where to begin to claim that evils exist due to divine ignorance 
rather than God having some sufﬁ cient reason for allowing them. Similar remarks 
apply to limitations in divine power. A being appropriately limited in either or 
both ways is far different from God. Hence limiting divine power as a “solution” 
to the problem of evil is no more successful than is limiting divine knowledge. 
 More formally, we could follow a strategy of allowing that God could prevent 
any evils we could prevent but that God cannot prevent any evils we could not 
prevent, or any evil that required more knowledge than K or more power than P, 
where K represents some degree of knowledge way above what Einstein had but 
short of omniscience and P represent some degree of power way above that pos-
sessed by the world’s strongest person but short of omnipotence. A condition of 
there being point to attempting some such distinction is that we have some reason 
to think that God could be justiﬁ ed in allowing the evils that can be prevented 
by someone who has knowledge up to degree K or power up to degree P but not 
be justiﬁ ed in allowing evils whose prevention would require more knowledge 
or power. So far as I know, no attempt has been made to do this, and there is no 
reason to think it a promising enterprise. Making the view more formal seems not 
to have any real advantage. 
 Summary Regarding a Finite Deity and Evil 
 The motivation to take refuge in the idea of a ﬁ nite God—one limited in power 
and/or knowledge—can be motivated by this general assumption: the existence of 
an evil E is evidence against the existence of God unless it is the case that either 
(i) God lacks the power to prevent E or (ii) God lacks the knowledge to prevent 
E. Considering all the evil there is, the consequent limitation on divine power or 
divine knowledge is enormous. No being so limited in power or knowledge is 
God. It can also be motivated by a more nuanced assumption: the existence of an 
evil E is evidence against the existence of God unless it is the case that (i) God 
lacks the power to prevent E, (ii) God lacks the knowledge to prevent E, or (iii) 
God has a morally sufﬁ cient reason for allowing E. The actual evils that can be 
prevented by a being with power of degree P or degree of knowledge K are evils 
God has a morally sufﬁ cient reason for allowing; the actual evils that God has 
no morally sufﬁ cient reason for allowing are all evils whose prevention would 
require a degree of power beyond P and/or a degree of knowledge beyond K and 
God’s power and knowledge end at P and K. The distinctions involved in this 
assumption are arbitrary; there is no reason to suppose that they correspond to any 
actual differences in evils, knowledge, and power. 
 Denying that there is evil, or so restricting one’s notion of God so that God 
is morally imperfect or so limited in power or knowledge that preventing evil 

Arguments Against Monotheism 103
exceeds divine capacities, all are dead ends for monotheism. These “answers” to 
the claim that evil is evidence against monotheism are thinly disguised admis-
sions to the charge. Monotheism has been right in ﬁ rmly resisting these moves. 
 If the existence of evil is evidence against God’s existence, this does not settle 
the issue as to whether God exists or as to whether it is reasonable to believe 
that God exists. There might, for example, be equally strong or stronger evidence 
in favor of God’s existence. But the notion that the existence of evil actually is 
evidence against God’s existence should not itself be accepted without careful 
examination. As we have noted, evil is evidence against there being a God only 
if (a) (E)  There is evil  and (G)  God exists  are logically incompatible or (b) if (E) 
plus some set S of discernible truths is logically incompatible with (G). But is 
either (a) or (b) true? 
 The Consistency Issue 
 Straightforward Inconsistency 
 One might claim that (E) and (G) are obviously logically incompatible. This claim 
is false. The Consistency Strategy tells us that if any three propositions A, B, and 
C are logically compatible, then any pair from that trio is also logically consistent 
provided none of A, B, or C itself is self-contradictory. Note that what a use of the 
Consistency Strategy can show is simply the logical compatibility of two proposi-
tions. A proper use of this strategy with regard to two propositions A and B will 
prove  Possibly, both A and B  are true. It will not, and is not intended to, prove that 
A is true or that B is true. With this limitation goes an advantage; one using the 
strategy need not prove that any of A, B, or C is true. 
 Consider, then, these propositions: 
 A1. God exists. 
 B1. If God allows an evil, then God has a morally sufﬁ cient reason for allowing it. 
 C1. There is evil. 
 None of A1, B1, or C1 appear to be self-contradictory. Nor does the trio A1, 
B1, C1 appear to be an inconsistent set. But if none of A1, B1, and C1 is self-
contradictory, and if [A1, B1, C1] is a consistent trio, then no pair of propositions 
from that trio are logically incompatible. One such pair is [A1, C1]. So A1 and 
C1 are not logically incompatible. But A1 is simply (G)  God exists  and C1 is 
simply  There is evil . So  God exists  and (E)  There is evil  are not logically incompat-
ible. Hence (a) is false. So if evil is evidence against God’s existence, (B) must 
be true. Another use of the Consistency Strategy goes like this. Consider these 
propositions: 
 (G) God exists. 
 (EN) For any evil E that occurs to a person in lifetime N, E is the just consequence 
of wrong actions by that person in lifetime N or in her lifetimes prior to N. 

104 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 (E) There are evils. 
 What was true regarding the A1, B1, C1 trio seems also true of the G, EN, E 
trio, so it too seems to provide the basis for a successful use of the Consistency 
Strategy. 
 Problems with This Use of the Consistency Strategy? 
 There is a simple rule of logical inference that says this: If a proposition A plus 
some necessary truth N entails proposition B, then A by itself entails B. One 
who doubts the success of the use made of the Consistency Strategy in the pre-
ceding reasoning may try to ﬁ nd some necessary truth N that, together with 
(E), entails the denial of (G). Finding such a necessary truth would show that 
(G) and (E) are logically incompatible after all. Various candidates are avail-
able. Here are two: 
  N1.  Necessarily, if God creates at all, God will create the best possible world, 
and the best possible world will contain no evil. 
 N2.  Necessarily, a perfectly good being prevents evil insofar as it can, and an 
omnipotent and omniscient being can prevent any evil. 
 Will either of these do? (N1) or (N2) will do only if it is a necessary truth. Is (N1) 
a necessary truth? Is (N2) a necessary truth? 
 (N1) uses the notion of a best possible world—a world that contains as much 
moral worth as it is logically possible that a world contain. 3  Several questions 
arise regarding (N1). First, is the notion of a best possible world itself consistent, 
or is it like the notion of a highest possible integer? “I think the highest possible 
integer should be named Charlie” sounds ﬁ ne until one remembers it is a neces-
sary truth that  For any integer I, there is an integer I* such that I* is higher than I ; 
it is logically impossible that there be a highest integer. Anyone appealing to (N1) 
owes us an account of “best possible world” on which it is logically possible that 
there be such a thing. One that would not do, for example, is this: world W is the 
best possible world only if the number of good persons in that world is the same 
number as the highest possible integer. Second, (N1) requires that a best possible 
world contain no evil; according to (N1), the presence of evil in a world will rule it 
out as being the best possible. It isn’t at all obvious that this is right. Suppose, for 
example, that any world possessed of great moral value will have virtuous agents 
in it—agents who are honest, brave, compassionate, and the like. But necessarily 
virtue is earned; one becomes virtuous of character by acting rightly again and 
again. For some virtues, at least, the relevant occasions of acting rightly require 
conquering one or another evil. Bravery requires that one have fear that one con-
quers; fortitude requires than one bear pain well, and hence that one bear pain; 
compassion presupposes suffering, and various saints offer the experiential report 
that so does moral and religious maturity. Perhaps some virtues require conquer-
ing evil, and some do not. But perhaps also one who has a full quiver of virtues 
has among them the ones that require that they been earned through conquered 

Arguments Against Monotheism 105
evil, and in the best possible world everyone’s quiver of virtues will be ﬁ lled with 
all virtue’s varieties. So maybe the best possible world would contain evil after all. 
Third, suppose the best possible world will contain moral agents who act only freely 
and rightly, and that if an agent acts freely then that agent is not merely acting in the 
way God has built into her that she act. In the strictest sense, to create a world W is to 
ﬁ at W—to so act that W obtains simply as a result of one’s having so acted. But then 
the free actions of a created moral agent cannot themselves be created by God; if God 
ﬁ ats that Eve speaks truly, Eve does not freely speak truly. So perhaps, even should 
there be some notion of a best possible world that is not self-contradictory, that world 
is one that God cannot ﬁ at—cannot, strictly speaking, create—because it is logically 
impossible that this be done. But then it is false that, strictly speaking, if God creates 
then God creates the best possible world. Fourth, there is an argument to the effect 
that there being a best possible world is not compatible with God being omnicom-
petent. The idea is that God is omnicompetent entails  No world God created would 
exhaust God’s competence or  For any world W that God created, God could create 
a world W* such that W* was better than W . There is reason, then, to be dubious 
about the claim that (N1)  Necessarily, if God creates at all, God will create the best 
possible world, and the best possible world will contain no evil is a necessary truth . 
 Perhaps things will go better if we appeal to: 
  N2.  Necessarily, a perfectly good being prevents evil insofar as it can, and an 
omnipotent and omniscient being can prevent any evil. 
 Reﬂ ection about (N2) brings us back to at least one of the considerations already 
raised regarding (N1). If a best possible world can contain evil, why think that a 
perfectly good and omnicompetent God would not permit evil? 
 There are other problems with (N2). Let the partial description of a possible 
person [a PDPP] be a description of a set of fully determinate properties such 
that, were God to, strictly speaking, create—i.e., ﬁ at—something having those 
properties, God would have ﬁ ated a person. To each PDPP X, one might say, there 
will correspond a person if God chooses to follow the recipe that X contains. Sup-
pose that for each PDPP X there is a truth about how the corresponding person 
would act if she was created. Whatever the truth is, if there is one, about whether 
there is any PDPP whose corresponding person would always freely act rightly, 
that truth is not a necessary truth. Suppose, ﬁ nally, that the logically contingent 
fact of the matter is that there is no PDPP whose corresponding person, were she 
created, would always freely act rightly. A world possessing the highest possible 
moral worth, or any reasonable facsimile, will contain moral agents; if the truth 
is as assumed, then in creating moral agents to populate the best possible world, 
God is creating agents whose choices will introduce evil into that world. Since it 
is logically possible that the truth be as we have assumed, and logically necessary 
that the best possible world contain moral agents, it is logically possible that the 
best possible world contain agents who act wrongly, thereby introducing evil into 
that world. Hence it is not a logically necessary truth that the best possible world 
contains no evil. Nor is it a necessary truth that a morally perfect omnicompetent 
being cannot permit evil. But then neither (N1) nor (N2) is true; hence neither is 

106 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
the logically necessary truth that the critic sought to pair off with (E)  There is evil 
for the purpose of deriving the denial of (G)  God exists . Nor is either the basis for 
a successful challenge to the Consistency Strategy. 4 
 The Evidential Issue 
 Logical Consistency with Evidential Conﬂ ict 
 It is not logically inconsistent of one to believe that almost no residents of 
Madison, Wisconsin, would vote for Prince Charles as President of the United 
States, that Kim is a resident of Madison, and that Kim would vote for Prince 
Charles as President. But if one has no particular reason to think that Kim rel-
evantly differs from her fellow Madisonians, one believes against the evidence 
when one picks her as a Prince Charles supporter.  Proposition A is logically 
consistent with proposition B and  The truth of proposition A is evidence that 
proposition B is false  are not themselves logically incompatible claims. We 
have found no reason to think that the existence of evil is logically incompat-
ible with God’s existence. The remaining question concerns whether nonethe-
less the existence of evil is evidence against the existence of God. If there 
being evil counts against there being a God only if either (a) (E)  There is evil 
and (G)  God exists  are logically incompatible, or (b) if (E) plus some set S 
of discernible truths is logically incompatible with (G), and (a) is false, there 
remains (b). The discernible truths added to (E) need not be necessary truths; 
any old truths will do. Are there any? 
 Those who answer afﬁ rmatively take it that the existence of evil is something 
not to be expected if a morally perfect and omnicompetent God created the 
world. If Aunt Lucy is an exquisite housekeeper, and one must choose whether 
she is staying in guest room 21 that is neat as a pin or in guest room 22 whose 
ﬂ oor is invisible under dirty clothing, while it is logically possible that she is 
staying in 22, odds are Aunt Lucy is staying in 21. If God created the world, 
perhaps it is logically possible that there be evils in it; but odds are there won’t 
be. So (roughly) the assumption goes. Is the assumption right? There is at least 
this much to be said for the assumption. For typical monotheisms, the present 
state of the world is not such as to make God overly pleased; the prayer “Thy 
will be done, on earth as it is in heaven” has not exactly received a full answer 
yet. Critic and theist agree that things are not as a morally perfect and omni-
competent being would wish them to be. In Judeo-Christian terms, our world is 
a “fallen” world. The question remains whether the existence of evil is evidence 
against the existence of God. 
 Those who follow the strategy of seeking some set of non-necessary or logi-
cally contingent truths that, together with (E)  There is evil , entail not-(G)  God 
does not exist , tend to appeal to claims about our knowledge and what is reason-
able to accept in its light. The following argument provides a simple illustration. 
Let an evil whose purpose, if any, is unknown to us be an apparently pointless 
evil. 

Arguments Against Monotheism 107
 A Simple Argument 
 1. 
There are apparently pointless evils. 
 2. 
The Apparently Pointless Evil Claim: If there are apparently pointless evils, 
then God does not exist. 
 3. God does not exist. [from 1, 2] The ﬁ rst premise is patently true. The con-
clusion follows from the premises. So the question is whether the second 
premise—The Apparently Pointless Evil Claim—is true. The idea behind this 
claim apparently is this:
  2a. The Actually Pointless Evil Claim: God would not allow actually point-
less evils. 
 2b. The We Would Know Claim: If an evil has a point, it will be apparent to us.    
 Then it follows that: 
 2c. God would not allow any evils that are apparently pointless. 
 And from 2c and 1 we can infer 3—the claim that God does not exist. Suppose, 
then, that the truth of 2a and 2b is intended as the necessary and sufﬁ cient condi-
tions of the truth of The Apparently Pointless Evil Claim—that 2a and 2b provide 
both background assumptions and presuppositions of it. Then if either 2a or 2b is 
false, 2 will lack justiﬁ cation. If we have no reason to think 2a (The Actually Point-
less Evil Claim) is true, or no reason to think 2b (The We Would Know Claim) true, 
then we will have no reason to think The Apparently Pointless Evil Claim true. 
 In our discussion of these matters, we will focus almost entirely on The We 
Would Know Claim. The question as to whether God would allow actually point-
less evils is very difﬁ cult to answer, and we will not argue either for or against it. 
The critic obviously needs it for his argument to succeed. We will suspend judg-
ment here regarding its truth, and discuss its meaning only to the degree that this 
is helpful in getting clear about The We Would Know Claim. 5 
 Let us begin, then, with The We Would Know Claim. Would we know it if an 
evil has a point? The purposes of an omnicompetent being might well be beyond 
our comprehension. Hence there is no reason whatever to think that if God allows 
an evil E in the light of E’s having a certain point P, we will know what P is. So 
there is no reason whatever to think The We Would Know Claim is true. Hence 
there is no reason whatever to suppose that The Apparently Pointless Evil Claim is 
true. Since we have no reason to accept The We Would Know Claim, we have no 
reason to think that The Apparently Pointless Evil Claim is true. Hence the Simple 
Argument fails. There is, however, a more sophisticated argument right next door.  
 A More Sophisticated Argument 
 It is true that, for lots of evils, we have no idea what their point, if any, actually 
is. What point does someone’s having a migraine, a stomach ulcer, cancer, or the 
inability to speak have? Even if we are able to say in general what might serve as 
a rationale for a morally perfect omnicompetent being allowing evils, and even 

108 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
for allowing certain speciﬁ c kinds of evils, we are not in a position to say things 
that would result from ﬁ lling in sentences like this with the names of actual 
persons and actual evils in this schema: the reason why person X experienced 
evil Y is that the point of evil Y is Z. Doing so would presuppose a degree of 
knowledge we do not have. There are also evils that it is hard to say even what 
their point might be. 
 Suppose, then, we divide evils into two broad and admittedly ill-deﬁ ned 
classes: those kinds of evils for which we can at least imagine some point, and 
those for which we cannot. Call these very loosely deﬁ ned classes of kind of evil, 
respectively, imaginably pointful and unimaginably pointful. Perhaps suffering 
that turns a miserably selﬁ sh person into a person of compassion falls into the for-
mer class; perhaps so does even a miserably selﬁ sh person being allowed to suffer 
as a way of providing her an opportunity to become compassionate. Perhaps an 
accident that renders irrevocably comatose a loving wife and mother whose com-
munity activities alleviated much suffering falls into the class of unimaginably 
pointful evils. 
 The class of imaginably pointful evils can be further divided into those where 
nothing we know about a particular case renders it unavailable for being pointful 
in the imagined way, and cases where this is ruled out by what we know. Suppose 
two stingy hoarders face death by freezing and are discovered just in time to save 
their lives. The one becomes generous and charitable, but the other has been so 
completely conditioned to be mean about money that even his being rescued by 
Red Cross workers does not make him any more willing to be charitable. One 
might think of the suffering the ﬁ rst hoarder endured as having a point in its 
positive results on his character, but the latter hoarder was so set in his ways that 
changing was not an option, even if he nearly froze to death. Let the former sort of 
case be imaginably and contextually pointful and the latter sort of case be imagin-
ably, but not contextually, pointful. A rough informal characterization of the sense 
of these terms is this: an imaginably and contextually pointful evil is one that, so 
far as we know, may occur to a person under conditions in which the evil serves 
some morally sufﬁ cient point—some point such that a perfectly good being who 
allowed the evil to occur in order that the point be served at least arguably acted 
rightly in so doing. An imaginably, but not contextually, pointful evil is one that 
might occur to a person under conditions in which the evil serves some morally 
sufﬁ cient point—some point such that a perfectly good being who allowed the 
evil to occur in order that the point be served acted rightly in so doing, but we 
know something about the circumstances in which the evil occurred that prevents 
them from being conditions of this sort. An evil is unimaginably pointful if after 
considerable effort we still cannot think of any condition under which the occur-
rence of that sort of evil might serve some morally sufﬁ cient point—some point 
such that a perfectly good being who allowed the evil to occur in order that the 
point be served acted rightly in so doing. (We leave aside the possible consider-
ation that this hoarder is owed a chance to reform even if it is known that he will 
not proﬁ t by it.) 

Arguments Against Monotheism 109
 A more formal characterization of these rough distinctions can be expressed 
along these lines: 
  D1.  An evil E is imaginably and contextually pointful relative to person S if and 
only if (a) we can describe a condition C such that if S is in C and endures 
E, it is possible that her doing so will be a necessary condition of S coming 
to have property Q, where S’s having Q is a sufﬁ ciently good state of affairs 
that one who allowed S to endure E for the sake of S coming to have Q 
would be morally justiﬁ ed in so doing, and (b) nothing we know about S is 
incompatible with S’s actually being in C when S endured E. 
 D2.  An evil E is imaginably but not contextually pointful relative to person S 
if and only if (a) we can a describe condition C such that if S is in C and 
endures E, it is possible that her doing so will be a necessary condition of S 
coming to have property Q, where S’s having Q is a sufﬁ ciently good state 
of affairs that one who allowed S to endure E for the sake of S coming to 
have Q would be morally justiﬁ ed in so doing, and (b) something we know 
about S is incompatible with S’s actually being in C when S endured E. 
 By contrast: 
 D3.  An evil E is unimaginably pointful relative to person S if and only if we 
cannot describe a condition C such that if S is in C and endures E, it is pos-
sible that her doing so will be a necessary condition of S coming to have 
property Q, where S’s having Q is a sufﬁ ciently good state of affairs that 
one who allowed S to endure E for the sake of S coming to have Q would 
be morally justiﬁ ed in so doing. 
 Imaginably and contextually pointful evils are the least plausible candidates for 
use in an attempt to derive not-(G)  God does not exist  from (E)  There is evil . Thus 
we will consider arguments that deal with the notions of the other sorts of evils. 
One might begin, then, with these reﬂ ections and offer either of the following 
arguments. 
 The “Imaginably but Not Contextually Pointful” Argument 
 1*. There are imaginably but not contextually pointful evils. 
 2*. If there are imaginably but not contextually pointful evils then there are actu-
ally pointless evils. 
 3*. There are actually pointless evils. [from 2*, 3*] 
 4*. If there are actually pointless evils, then God does not exist. 
5*. God does not exist. 
 The key premises in this argument are (2*) and (4*); we will ﬁ rst consider (2*). 
It assumes that some restricted version of The We Would Know Claim is true—it 
requires only that there are some evils—at least one—such that we could tell that 
if it was contextually pointful, we could discern this, and we can tell that some 
evil lacks this feature. Even if, as we argued above, the unrestricted version is 
false, this restricted version might be true. Since it approves the inference from 

110 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
‘There are imaginably but not contextually pointful evils’ to ‘There are pointless 
evils,’ what it says is tantamount to ‘Evils that are not contextually pointful are 
actually pointless.’ Is that true? 
 The other, similar argument is: The “Unimaginably Pointful” Argument 
 1**. There are unimaginably pointful evils. 
 2**. If there are unimaginably pointful evils then there are actually pointless 
evils. 
 3*.  There are actually pointless evils. [from 1**, 2**] 
 4*.  If there are actually pointless evils, then God does not exist. 
 5*.  God does not exist. [from 3*, 4*] 
 The key premises of this argument are (2**) and (4**); we will ﬁ rst consider 
(2**). It assumes that at least for some evil—at least one—we can via imagina-
tion tell what point, if any, an evil has, and we can discern it has none. It is a dif-
ferently restricted version of The We Would Know Claim. Even if, as we argued 
above, the unrestricted version is false, this restricted version might be true. Since 
it approves the inference from  There are unimaginably pointful evils  to  There are 
pointless evils , what it says is tantamount to  Evils that are unimaginably pointful 
are actually pointless . Is that true? 
 Concerning premise 2* of the Imaginably but Not Contextually Pointful Argument, 
 Evils that are not contextually pointful are actually pointless , consider the following: 
 Suppose, for the sake of the argument, that premise 1* is true. This helps the 
critic only if premise 2* is also true. Granting premise 1* grants this: there are 
evils that may have some point, but no point we can think of that they might have 
is compatible with what seems true about the circumstances in which they occur. 
What premise 2* says is that if there are evils that may have some point, but no point 
we can think of that they might have is compatible with what seems true about the 
circumstances in which they occur, then there is no point that they do serve. 
 Suppose a man wears a paper bag on his head. While either the man has a 
mustache, or he does not, so long as the bag is over his head it is neither appar-
ent that he does nor apparent that he does not; we just can’t see. Similarly, while 
either an evil has a point or it does not, it is possible that we cannot tell which is 
the case. Competitive to premise 2*, then, is (2a*)  If there are imaginably but not 
contextually pointful evils then there are evils regarding which we should suspend 
judgment as to whether or not they actually have a point . The relevant point is that 
the claim that we know, concerning at least one sort of, or even one, evil is such 
that no context in which it would make it pointful that actually obtains is highly 
implausible. The appeal here is not to mystery. Consider the claim that there are 
now exactly three people, neither more nor less, that are eating exactly .0031 
ounces of dark chocolate before drinking exactly .33 of an ounce of Builder’s 
tea. Whether this is so is not a mystery. But we are not going to tell if it is true. 
Or consider an area X in which dinosaurs once roamed and the claim that a baby 
Triceratops weighing exactly ninety pounds slept for six hours on point P within 
X on what we would date a Tuesday beginning at three a.m. Lack of data does not 

Arguments Against Monotheism 111
a mystery make. Nor do probability matters arise. For one thing, the critic’s argu-
ment assumes a necessary connection between God existing and there being no 
pointless evils. For another, that there are so many Xs is not by itself evidence that 
some Xs are Ys, and the implausibility of our being able to identity lack of context 
pointfulness even it exists has been noted. Still further, there are hosts of counter-
examples to the ‘so many Xs, some are Ys’ idea, even where it is logical that an X 
be a Y. Let N be the height of the tallest person who ever exists. Then it is possible 
that some person grow to N plus .01 inches, but no one will be. Where premise 
(2*) counsels a speciﬁ c conclusion (there are pointless evils), its competitor (2a*) 
commends suspense of judgment regarding that conclusion.  Not surprisingly, the 
same issue comes up again regarding the unimaginably pointful argument. 
 Concerning premise 2** of the Unimaginably Pointful Argument,  Evils that 
are unimaginably pointful are actually pointless , consider this argument: 
 2**. If there are unimaginably pointful evils then there are actually pointless evils.  
 What this premise tells us is that if we cannot even imagine what point an evil of 
a certain kind might have, then it has no point. Competitive to 2** is: 
 2a**. If there are unimaginably pointful evils then there are evils regarding which 
we should suspend judgment as to whether or not they actually have a point.  
 Whereas (2**) counsels a speciﬁ c conclusion (there are pointless evils), its competi-
tor (2a**) commends suspense of judgment regarding that conclusion. Strictly, all 
that a defense requires here is that the “suspense of judgment” claim be as reason-
ably believed as the “actually has no point” claim, and the same goes for the pre-
ceding pair of competing claims. That there is equity of reasonability seems highly 
plausible. An essential element in one inﬂ uential attempt to move from (E)  There is 
evil  to not-(G)  God does not exist  is premise (2*) (as against 2a*), and premise (2**) 
(as against 2a**), or some closely analogous claim. Is it (2*) or (2**), rather than 
(2a*) or (2a**), that are true? Perhaps the best way to decide is to consider the sort 
of case that makes premises like (2*) and (2**) plausible if anything does. We have 
argued that the scales here are not weighted in the critic’s favor. 
 There is another argument that approaches our topic from a different angle. Its 
conclusion is that monotheists are inconsistent in their moral judgments. It rests 
on some such claim as: 
  (J) If one person judges another person to be acting wrongly in a given cir-
cumstance, but judges another person as not acting wrongly even though she 
acts in a way not morally relevantly different and in a circumstance not mor-
ally relevantly different, then she judges inconsistently. 
 This is a necessarily true claim. Then the idea is that monotheists do exactly this. 
If you can rescue a drowning child without danger to yourself, and simply stand 
aside and watch, you are guilty of failing to do what is right. But if you fail to 
do what is right, and monotheism is true, God too fails to do what is right. Yet 
monotheists do not judge God as having failed to do God’s duty. (We assume here 
that God has duties to God’s creatures in virtue of having created them in God’s 
image.) So they are inconsistent in the moral judgments that they make. The reply 

112 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
to this objection is to make a necessary revision to (J) as follows: 
  (J*) If one person judges another person to be acting wrongly in a given 
circumstance, but judges another person as not acting wrongly even though 
she acts in a way not morally relevantly different and in a circumstance not 
morally relevantly different, then she judges inconsistently, provided the rel-
evant knowledge and powers of both persons fall within the range available 
to human agents. 
 The child is beyond all inﬂ uence on our part once it has drowned. If monotheism 
is true, it is not beyond God’s power. This simple case illustrates various fea-
tures relevant to our discussion. The critic is very likely to accuse the believer of 
cheating by bringing in assumptions for which no justiﬁ cation has been offered. 
The believer will view herself as simply referring to features of her view of the 
world that are relevant to the charge against her, and point out that the critic, in 
using (J) against her, has assumed that those features of her view are false. Each 
argues from the place at which she begins to her conclusion. Given her belief 
in God’s knowledge and power, the believer is not inconsistent in making the 
judgments she makes. Remove that—that is, ceasing to be a monotheist—the 
believer would become inconsistent in her judgments. But then, no longer being 
a monotheist, she presumably would not make any judgments concerning God 
and God’s duties. While there are other ways of putting the objection from to 
theism from evil, the ones canvassed here are representative. None of them seem 
successful. 6  
 Another argument has recently been offered that is different from those already 
considered in that it rests on something being absent from the world rather than 
there existing evils in it. We close this chapter by considering it. J. L. Schellen-
berg, in  The Wisdom to Doubt writes: 
 What we ﬁ nd, then, through careful reasoning and consideration of the heart 
and soul of love, in the context of more general considerations about God and 
creation and the need for thinking unrestricted by traditional theology, is that 
the existence of non-resistant belief  shows the non-existence of God . 7 
 When it comes to unjustiﬁ ed belief his target is Ultimism—the view that there is 
something ontologically basic and maximally valuable, proper relation to which 
constitutes our highest good. What prevents us from rationally having any Ulti-
mist or anti-Ultimist belief is the presence in human history and contemporary 
life of four “modes.” 
 Subject Mode: We are ﬁ nite, prone to pride, intellectual greed, insecurity, and 
a host of other foibles that incline us to overrate evidence for claims we like, and 
to disregard alternatives. Our ﬁ nitude and foibles make for evidential distortion, 
especially regarding propositions that are precise, detailed, profound, and attrac-
tive. This mode alone “can make short work of the claim that religious belief, or 
that irreligious belief, is justiﬁ ed” (47). 

Arguments Against Monotheism 113
 Object Mode: The proposed Ultimate would be “inﬁ nitely profound” and thus 
“beyond belief.” (51). The depth and complexity of the ultimate, if it exists, are 
grounds for skepticism as to purported knowledge thereof. 
 Retrospective Mode: Humanity has had only a relatively short period in which 
to (in some sense) investigate Ultimism. Even that has been characterized by nar-
row loyalties, intellectual hubris, partisan violence, mistaken values, authoritarian 
institutions, emotional attractions that have no positive relation to evidence or 
truth seeking, and poor intellectual practices. 
 Prospective Mode: Even if our present evidence supported one sort of Ultimism, 
this would not justify the claim that our present evidence was representative. 
 Consider two principles of proper belief: 
  B1.  S properly believes that proposition P is true if and only if S has evidence 
for P, and no evidence against P—if she goes along with the evidence she 
has. 
 B2.  S properly believes that proposition P is true if and only if S has evidence for 
P, no evidence against P, and knows her evidence for P is representative of the 
overall evidence regarding P, knows that P has no alternatives that may have 
evidence that may have unrecognized evidence on their behalf, which evi-
dence may be known but its relevance unnoted, accessible now but unknown, 
is inaccessible now but accessible in the future, or is inaccessible in the future.  
 Then ask the obvious question: How, given the modes, is one to justiﬁ ably hold B2 
rather than B1? Even if one claims that we cannot justiﬁ ably decide between them, this 
leaves Schellenberg without B2, which is an essential element in his argument. While 
this point is worth pursuing, by itself it leaves the proposed skepticism unjustiﬁ ed. 
 Our primary concern here, however, is with his claim to have refuted theism, 
and Christianity in particular. He begins with a premise that a Christian is likely 
to grant, and continues to his atheistic conclusion: 
  1. 
If God exists, then God will efﬁ caciously will that every person who does not 
reject God has a loving personal relationship with God. 
 2. Not every person who does not reject God has a loving personal relationship 
with God. 
 Therefore: 
 3. 
God does not exist. 
 The argument has a simple, valid form. Thus the question concerns the truth of 
the premises. 
 It also concerns whether 2 is known to be true—whether, that is, that the fol-
lowing is known: 
 S.   Schellenberg knows that not everyone who does not reject God has a per-
sonal, loving personal relationship with God—that is he has evidence for this 

114 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
claim, no evidence against it, knows his evidence for it is representative of the 
overall evidence regarding it, knows that it has no alternatives that may have evi-
dence that may have unrecognized evidence regarding this claim, which evidence 
may be known but its relevance unnoted, accessible now but unknown, inacces-
sible now but accessible in the future, or inaccessible in the future. 
 Schellenberg raises an issue relevant to 2 when he argues from divine hiddenness. 
The idea is that were a loving God to exist, God would make the divine existence far 
more evident than it is. God’s not being more evident is reason to think God is not there. 
 This objection has interested Paul K. Moser, 8  and while he is not speciﬁ cally 
answering Schellenberg, his position is relevant. 9  Moser agrees with premise 1. 
He rejects premise 2 and challenges the claim that God is objectionably hidden. 
Moser’s view requires there to be genuine good and obligations, there indepen-
dent of our opinions. Schellenberg has no quarrel with this. Moser holds that the 
natural theology arguments for God are not of great religious interest. At best, 
they justify spectator belief. Suppose one or more of them does prove that God 
exists. One can then think  Well, that is one philosophical question settled; what is 
next? without having been challenged to make any religious commitment what-
ever. The God of Christianity is not centrally to be found through spectator knowl-
edge. God is primarily if not only to be found through experience that existentially 
challenges its subject to change—to become more loving, even to the point of 
loving one’s enemies. The idea is that in moral experience, one can have the sense 
of being bound by an obligation not of one’s own making, of being called to obe-
dience to an authority with the right to command. God’s revelations to us should 
be seen in terms of their purpose, namely to lead us into a relationship with God 
that changes us. This comes largely through the conscience, not through abstract 
reﬂ ection. Gains in knowledge come through obedience. How explicit the sense 
of the presence of a person need be at the outset does not greatly matter so long 
as, in the long run, a personal relationship is established. But failing to respond 
favorably to conscience prevents the relationship from developing. Moser’s view 
is that Christianity has a built-in epistemology: God is knowable via experience 
that requires positive response, not merely intellectual assent. If this epistemology 
is ignored, then God’s hiddenness in spectator terms will seem a powerful objec-
tion, but that is to approach Christianity on assumptions that already misconstrue 
what can rightly be expected of a Christian God. 
 The dispute over the hiddenness of God, then, has epistemological dimen-
sions—is 2 true or justiﬁ ably believed? It has an ethical dimension—what is 
proper to expect of a loving God? It has a theological dimension—how is hid-
denness related the nature of God? But given what has been said here, it seems 
fair to say that it is dubious that we should be conﬁ dent that premise 2 in the 1–3 
argument for atheism is either true or justiﬁ ably believed, either given the modes 
(and so as part of Schellenberg’s overall argument) or as part of a more limited 
argument from hiddenness (given the difﬁ culty of knowing what can legitimately 
be claimed concerning how someone has responded and will respond to one’s 
moral experience). To appeal to a tiny bit of one Schellenbergian mode, we are 
most apt to deceive ourselves about ourselves in such matters. 

Arguments Against Monotheism 115
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
 1. 
What makes offering a very fully ﬁ lled out theodicy so difﬁ cult? 
 2. Are any of the attempts to show that it is logically inconsistent to 
believe that God exists and there is evil successful? 
 3. 
Is the notion of a best possible world coherent? What hangs on the 
answer to this question? 
 4. Is there a clear victor in the debate over evils whose point, if any, we 
cannot discern? 
 5. 
Is the theist inconsistent in her moral judgments regarding God and 
human beings? 
 Notes 
1. Reincarnation and karma are not part of Semitic monotheism. In Hindu monotheism 
they operate under divine will, and karma can be broken by divine forgiveness.
  2.  There seems no way to guarantee that one has considered even every type of anti-
theistic argument from evil, let alone every argument of every type. The best one can do 
is take representative examples. The same is true for arguments for God’s existence. 
  3.  For two reasons we leave aside other sorts of value, for example aesthetic. First, for sim-
plicity. Second, it seems to the author at least that for a consistent monotheism, moral 
considerations considerably outweigh aesthetic. 
4.    It is, one hopes, obvious that the Consistency Strategy is a truth of logic quite independ-
ent of the issues to which it is applied. 
  5.  The crux of the matter here lies in making clear what the conditions of pointlessness are. 
That an event occur that God did not plan for, supposing this to be possible, it only follows 
that God did not have a plan in mind for allowing that evil, not that God cannot give point 
to the evil’s occurrence. Of course it would be widely denied that God could be surprised. 
  6.  One approach to the topic of this chapter is to ﬁ nd it offensive to even consider. What 
would be offensive would be to offer the arguments of this chapter to any but the rarest 
of sufferers as of any real help in their suffering. That would, in almost any conceivable 
circumstance, be an instance of the problem we have discussed. The present author once 
gave a lecture on the problem of evil to an audience of college students where one coed 
had just lost her beloved husband, and she left the lecture in tears. Philosophy has its 
uses. I do not believe it is insensitive to offer the arguments of this chapter. I do believe 
it would be insensitive to offer them in place of compassion. 
 7.  The Wisdom to Doubt: A Justiﬁ cation of Religious Scepticism  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell, 2012), 
p. 206 (my italics). Strictly, Schellenberg offers two relevant claims: that religious (and 
naturalistic) belief are unjustiﬁ ed, and that theism is false. We will deal with both here. 
  8.  See Daniel Howard Snyder and Paul K. Moser (2001)  Divine Hiddenness (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press); J. L. Schellenberg (2006)  Divine Hiddenness and Human 
Reason  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell); J. L. Schellenberg (2009)  The Will to Imagine: A Justiﬁ cation 
of Skeptical Religion (Ithaca, NY: Cornell). 
  9.  Paul K. Moser (2012)  The Elusive God: Reorienting Religious Epistemology (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press). 

116 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 Suggested Readings 
 Adams, Marilyn McCord (2000)  Horrendous Evils and the Goodness of God (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell). Focuses on what God might bring out of horriﬁ c evils that would make sense 
of their existence in a world created and governed by a God who could prevent them. 
 Grifﬁ ths, Paul (1983) “Notes toward a critique of Buddhist karmic theory,”  Religious Studies , 
Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 277–291. Argues that Buddhist karmic doctrine is incompatible with 
what we learn from contemporary physics. 
 Herman, Arthur (1976)  The Problem of Evil in Indian Thought  (Delhi: Motilal Barnasidas). 
A consideration of the idea that karmic theory allows one to solve the alleged problem 
of evil. 
 Leaman, Oliver (1995)  Evil and Suffering in Jewish Philosophy  (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press). A ﬁ ne discussion of Jewish approaches to the alleged problem of evil. 
 Mackie, J. L. (1982)  The Miracle of Theism (Oxford: Clarendon Press). A clear general 
critique of monotheism; the “miracle” is that anyone is a theist. 
 McBrayer, Justin and Howard-Snyder, Daniel (2003)  The Blackwell Companion to the 
Problem of Evil  (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell). Excellent selections, including a section 
on religion-speciﬁ c theodicies—as good an anthology is you are going to ﬁ nd. 
 Ormsby, Eric (1984)  Theodicy in Islamic Thought  (Princeton: Princeton University Press). 
A ﬁ ne discussion of Islamic approaches to the alleged problem of evil. 
 Pike, Nelson, ed. (1964)  God and Evil  (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall). A good 
collection of articles that helped frame contemporary discussions. 
 Plantinga, Alvin (1977)  God, Freedom, and Evil  (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans; reprint 
of 1974 edition). A detailed clear discussion of the relevance of human freedom to the 
alleged problem of evil. 
 Reichenback, Bruce (1990)  The Law of Karma  (Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii Press). 
An account and critique of the doctrine of karma. 
 Rowe, William, ed. (2001)  God and the Problem of Evil  (Hoboken, NJ: Blackwell). 
A collection of excellent papers on main aspects of the problem. 
 Stump, Eleonore (2012)  Wandering in Darkness: Narrative and the Problem of Suffering 
(Oxford). Arguing that some philosophical problems are best approached through narrative, 
updates the theodicy of Aquinas. 
 Trakakis, Nick (2006)  The God Beyond Belief: In Defense of William Rowe’s Evidential 
Argument From Evil  (Berlin, Germany: Springer). A vigorous defense of Rowe’s argument 
that there is no theistic solution to the problem of evil that takes into account the considerable 
literature on the topic. 
 Van Inwagen, Peter (2008)  The Problem of Evil  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Explaining what makes a philosophical argument that inferences from suffering to the 
falsehood of theism are failures.    

 10  Arguments for Monotheism 
 Proof 
 Proof is a complex notion. In simplest terms, a proof is a valid argument with true 
premises. This is the standard notion of ‘proof’ in logic. An argument consists of 
premises intended to provide support for a conclusion. An argument is valid if it 
is logically impossible that the premises be true and the conclusion be false. 1 Any 
argument of the form  If A then B; A, therefore B , for example, will be valid. An 
argument is sound if it has all true premises. 
 Given this basic notion of a proof, the contemporary philosopher George 
Mavrodes has noted that one of the following arguments is a proof and the other 
is not: 2 
 Argument A 
 1. 
Either God exists or nothing exists. 
 2. 
Something exists. 
 So: 3. 
God exists. 
 Argument B 
 1*. Either God does not exist or nothing exists. 
 2. 
Something exists. 
 So: 3* God does not exist. 3 
 Premises 1 and 1* are disjunctions—they have the forms, respectively,  Either G 
or N  and  Either not-G or N . It is false that nothing exists, so the  N  disjunct is 
false. Necessarily, either God exists or God does not exist; either  G  is true or else 
 not-G  is true. A disjunction is true so long as at least one of its members is true. 
So either 1 is true or else 1* is true. Premise 2, which appears in both arguments, 
is true. Both arguments are valid. Argument A has the form: (1) Either G or N; 
(2) Not-N; so G. Argument B has the form: (1*) Not-G or N; (2) Not-N; so (3*) 
Not-G. Thus either Argument A is valid and has only true premises or Argument 
B is valid and has only true premises. Exactly one of these arguments is a proof 
in the sense of  proof  in logic—one of these arguments not only is valid but also 
has only true premises. 

118 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 The problem is that unless we know, independently of these arguments, 
whether God exists, we cannot tell which argument is a proof. While the notion 
of a logical proof is perfectly proper for some purposes, having a proof in that, 
and no stronger, sense for some conclusion C is of no help in deciding whether 
C is true. What one needs is sufﬁ cient reason for taking argument A rather than 
argument B, or B rather than A, to be sound. Mavrodes notes that we need a 
notion of  a proof that extends our knowledge , perhaps along these lines.  Argu-
ment A is an argument that extends our knowledge relative to its conclusion C 
only if: (i)  A  is a proof in logic; (ii) we know that  A  is valid (that its premises 
entail its conclusion); (iii) we know that  A  is sound (that its premises are true); 
(iv) for each premise P of  A , we can know whether or not P is true without 
having to know whether  C  is true (our knowledge of each of the argument’s 
premises is independent of our knowing whether the argument’s conclusion is 
true); (v) for the conjunct of all of the premises of  A  (premise one  and premise 
two  and  premise three, etc.) we can know whether or not that conjunct is true 
without having to know whether  C  is true (our knowledge of all of the argu-
ment’s premises together is independent of our knowing whether the argument’s 
conclusion is true); (vi) for each premise P of  A , our knowledge of P is better 
founded than our knowledge of  C ; (vii) for the conjunct of all of the premises of 
 A  (premise one  and  premise two  and  premise three, etc.), our knowledge of that 
conjunct is better founded than our knowledge of  C . This, or something much 
like it, is the sense of “proof” in which we seek proofs that religious beliefs are 
true. In what follows, we will consider some of the more interesting of the many 
attempts to provide such proofs. 
 Types of Propositions 
 Something  has truth value  if and only if it is  either true or false . Anything that 
has truth value is a  proposition . Declarative sentences, typically used,  express 
propositions; the same proposition can be expressed by various sentences in the 
same language or by various sentences in different languages. Thus ‘The man is 
old and asleep, and the woman is reading’ and ‘The old man is asleep, and the 
woman is reading’ are different sentences that typically express the same proposi-
tion. A proposition is either: 
 1. 
 Necessarily true  (P is a necessary truth if and only if not-P is a contradiction—
e.g.,  Nothing has logically incompatible properties is a necessary truth.) 
 2.  Necessarily false  (P is necessarily false if and only if P is a contradiction—
e.g.,  Bill Russell is exactly 6’9” tall, and is not exactly 6’9” tall  is a necessary 
falsehood.) 4  
 3. 
 Logically contingent  (P is logically contingent if and only if it is neither nec-
essarily true nor necessarily false; a logically contingent proposition may be 
true or it may be false—e.g.,  Bill Russell is exactly 6′9″ tall  is a logically 
contingent proposition.) 

Arguments for Monotheism 119
 Further: 
  4. A proposition P is  possibly true  if and only if P is not a necessary falsehood—
every necessary truth, and every logically contingent proposition, is possibly true.    
 Logical Necessity 
 Since there are different views about logical necessity, and different meanings 
assigned to the words ‘logically necessary proposition,’ a brief explanation is in 
order as to how logical necessity is understood here. 5 
 Logical necessity is a feature of propositions, not sentences; it is not an artifact 
of our language or thought, and coming to see that a proposition is necessarily 
true is a discovery, not an invention or a discovery about our inventions. The rea-
son for this is that necessary truths are not possibly false. Anything whose truth 
depends on our language or our conventions is possibly false, for our language 
and our conventions might never have existed at all. So neither the necessity nor 
the truth of necessary truths depend on our language or our conventions. Such 
truths are true under all conditions, and hence true in all possible worlds and 
across all possible cultures. 
 The prime example of a necessary truth in the history of philosophy is the princi-
ple of non-contradiction, which as Aristotle said is a principle both of thought and 
of things. It can be expressed as  Necessarily, no proposition is both true and false 
or as  Necessarily, no thing can have logically incompatible properties . These ways of 
putting the principle are mutually entailing; if something could have incompatible 
properties then propositions could be both true and false and if propositions could 
be both true and false then the proposition that a thing had incompatible properties 
could be true and so a thing could have incompatible properties. 
 Many contemporary philosophers, using the language of some Medieval phi-
losophers, distinguish between  necessity de dicto  and  necessity de re— necessity 
in speech and necessity in things. Suppose that Tony is a local barber and consider 
two sentences about him: 
 A. Necessarily, Tony is a person. 
 B. Tony is necessarily a person. 
 These sentences express different propositions. What A says is this: 
 A1. Tony is a person, and it is logically impossible that Tony not be a person. 
 This entails: 
 A2. Necessarily, Tony exists. 
 Of course A2 is false; however much he and his skills might be missed, Tony does 
not enjoy logically necessary existence. There are possible conditions in which, 

120 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
or possible worlds in which, Tony would not exist. No doubt for a very long time 
our own world was Tonyless. 
 What B says is this: 
 B1.  Tony is a person, and anything that is a person is a person so long as it exists 
at all;  being a person  entails  being a person necessarily  because  being a 
person  (unlike  being a Democrat  or  having false teeth ) is an essential prop-
erty of anything that has it. 
 To embrace the idea that there are  necessities de re  one must think that there are 
essential properties or essences. B1, and hence B, is true if this idea is true; if there 
are essential properties or essences,  being a person is among them. 
 Unfortunately (something its users do not intend) the language that contrasts 
 de dicto  (of speech) and  de re  necessity can easily suggest that there is one 
thing—say, logical necessity—and another thing—say, metaphysical necessity—
and that the former is relative to language and the latter, if it exists at all, is a 
human-mind-independent thing. In fact, those philosophers who favor the view 
that there are both  necessities de dicto  and  necessities de re  view things very dif-
ferently. To speak of the necessity of a dictum is to speak of the necessity not of 
an asserted declarative sentence but of what is asserted by that sentence—of a 
proposition. Necessarily true propositions, on their view, are human-mind-inde-
pendently necessary and human-mind-independently true. They no more depend 
for their necessity or their truth on us than do  necessities de re . There are  neces-
sities de re  only if there are essences. One can summarily put the point like this: 
there are necessarily true propositions, and if there are essences, some of those 
necessarily true propositions will be necessarily true about essences, including 
some conditional necessary truths about things that have those essences to the 
effect that they necessarily have them if they have them at all. For example, it is 
true of Tony that: 
 B. Tony is necessarily a person. 
 and that: 
  A*.  If Tony is necessarily a person, then the proposition  If Tony exists then Tony 
is a person is a necessary truth. 
 Proposition B expresses a  de re  necessity. Proposition A* expresses a  de dicto 
necessity. 
 If something X lacks logically necessary existence, then even if it has an 
essence E, it is not a logically necessary truth that X has E, because it is not a 
logically necessary truth that X exists. What is necessarily true is this: if thing X 
exists, and if the essence of an X is E, then X necessarily has E. 
 Assuming they exist at all,  necessity de dicto  is no less metaphysical than  neces-
sity de re— no less language-and-convention independent, no less human-mind 

Arguments for Monotheism 121
independent, though how it is expressed is language-and-convention dependent. 
There being  necessities de dicto  does not require that there are essences; there are 
 necessities de re  only if there are essences. If they exist at all,  de re necessities 
are logical necessities among things—things including but not limited to proposi-
tions. If they exist at all,  de dicto  necessities are logical necessities only of things 
that are propositions. 
 A ﬁ nal point on this topic. Suppose that  Water is essentially H20  is true. Then 
 If water exists it necessarily is H20  pairs up with  Necessarily, if water exists, it is 
H20 . To each  necessity de re  there corresponds a  necessity de dicto expressible 
in a corresponding conditional statement. If things have essences, then insofar as 
our concepts of things are accurate regarding their essences, those concepts will 
enable us to see  de dicto as well as  de re necessities. 
 This account of necessity is controversial and a defense of it would be lengthy 
and complex, 6  and though I think it is also successful the purpose of presenting it 
is simply to explain what is meant here by logical necessity. It is an appropriate 
meaning for use in discussing the Ontological Argument. 
 Two points need to be added. One is that necessity as truth in all possible 
worlds is not the same as, though it includes, formally necessary truths. A for-
mally necessary truth has a formally necessary falsehood as its contradictory. 
Thus  There is nothing that is round and not round at the same time and in the 
same respect  is symbolized roughly as  There is no x that is both R and not-R 
and its denial as roughly  There is an x that is R and not-R . The former is true, 
and the latter false, in all possible worlds. But  No right angle is an alligator  is a 
necessary truth expressible as  For all x, if Rx then not Ax  the denial of which is 
 For some x, Rx and Ax  which is false in all possible worlds, so its contradictory 
is true in all possible world, and hence necessarily true. But necessity in these 
cases does not lie in logical structure. If one objects that  There is an x such that 
x is both fully feline and fully canine  is meaningless, reﬂ ecting on the facts that 
 No x is both fully feline and fully canine  is true, and the denial of a truth is not 
meaningless, but false is the proper reply. 
 The return of the Ontological Argument to serious discussion in philosophy 
largely awaited the redevelopment of a logic that allowed one to express sen-
tences of the form  Necessarily, P ,  Necessarily, not-P ,  Contingent, P , and  Possibly, 
P , which the Ontological Argument needs if it is to be expressed. 
 Purely Conceptual Proofs and 
the Ontological Argument 
 A purely conceptual proof of God’s existence is an argument that is valid, has only 
necessary truths as premises, and has  God exists  as its conclusion. Such a proof 
that extends our knowledge—which of course is what is sought—will satisfy (at 
least something like) the other conditions noted previously. 
 The most famous attempts to provide such a proof constitute various variet-
ies of the  Ontological Argument— an argument offered by (among many oth-
ers) St. Anselm in Medieval times, Descartes in the modern period, and Alvin 

122 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
Plantinga in contemporary philosophy. In coming to understand this sort of argu-
ment, we begin with two deﬁ nitions: 
 Deﬁ nition 1.  X is a logically necessary being  =  X exists  is necessarily true ( X 
does not exist is self-contradictory). 
 Deﬁ nition 2.  X is a causally necessary being  =  X exists  is true and logically 
contingent, and  X is caused to exist is self-contradictory. 
 A logically necessary being has, not causally, but logically necessary existence—
it exists and it is not possible that it not exist. 
 Four Objections to the Notion of Logically Necessary Existence 
 There are various objections to the very idea of logically necessary existence. 
Here are four of the most common: 
  1. All necessary propositions are conditional—they have a structure properly 
expressed in an  If A then B form. 
 2. 
No necessary propositions are existential—none entails that anything actu-
ally exists. 
 3. All necessary propositions are tautological—they have a sense property 
expressed in (something like) an  All A is A or  All AB is B form. 
 4. 
No necessary statements provide genuine information. 
 We can take these objections in pairs. Objection 1 tells us that all necessary state-
ments are of the form “if A then B,” which neither asserts that A exists nor that 
B exists. Objection 2 tells us that no necessary statement asserts that anything 
exists. Both 1 and 2 are false, since  There are prime numbers larger than seven-
teen  and  There is a successor to two  obviously are necessary truths but do assert 
that something exists. Objection 3 tells us that all necessary statements are true by 
virtue of the meanings of the words they contain, like  All uncles are uncles and 
 Any aunt has a niece or nephew . (It is allowed that there be a rule to the effect that 
“A” means “B or C” so that a proposition expressible in the form  All A is A  also is 
expressible in the form  All A is B or C .) Objection 4 tells us that necessary truths 
provide no genuine information. But both  If proposition P is necessarily true, then 
it is necessarily true that P is necessarily true  and  If proposition P is necessarily 
false, then it is necessarily true that P is necessarily false are necessary truths, and 
they are not tautological and they do provide genuine information. So both 3 and 
4 are false. 7  None of these common objections show that the notion of logically 
necessary existence is incoherent. 
 The Ontological Argument 
 The Ontological Argument is an attempt to state a series of necessarily true propo-
sitions that serve as premises that entail the conclusion  God exists . A successful 

Arguments for Monotheism 123
argument of this sort would prove its conclusion to be necessarily true—it would 
show that God has logically necessary existence. Were any of the four objections just 
discussed to have succeeded, it would have undermined the Ontological Argument. 
 In constructing perhaps the most interesting version of the Ontological Argu-
ment, 8 we need some further deﬁ nitions, as follows: 
 Deﬁ nition 3. Proposition P  entails  proposition Q if and only if  P, but not Q is 
a contradiction. 
 Deﬁ nition 4. Proposition P is a  maximal proposition  if and only if, for any 
proposition Q, either P entails Q or P entails not-Q. 
 Deﬁ nition 5. Each maximal proposition deﬁ nes an entire  possible world . 9 
 Deﬁ nition 6. A being has  maximal excellence  if and only if it is omnipotent, 
omniscient, and omnibenevolent in some possible world. 
 Deﬁ nition 7. A being has  maximal greatness  if and only if it has maximal 
excellence in every possible world. 
 Deﬁ nition 8. A proposition is  true in all possible worlds  if and only if it is 
necessarily true. 10 
 There are various versions of the Ontological Argument. Here is one: 
 A. God is a perfect being. 
 B. A perfect being has all perfections. 
 C.  Having logically necessary existence is a perfection. 
 D. God has  logically necessary existence . [from A, B, C] 
 E. If God has  logically necessary existence then  God exists is necessarily true. 
 F. 
 God exists is necessarily true. [from D, E] 
 While it has played a signiﬁ cant role in the history of philosophy it remains true 
that the notion of a perfection is hard to deﬁ ne with any precision. If the argument 
can be stated without appeal to this notion, so much the better. In fact, it can be so 
stated, and if the argument stated without the notion of a perfection fails, then so 
does the argument stated with that notion. 
 The Ontological Argument without the Notion of Perfection 
 Here is a formulation that makes no appeal to the notion of a perfection, though 
it does include certain central concepts that express what the tradition plausibly 
thinks are qualities that a perfect being would have. 
 1. 
 God has maximal greatness [has maximal excellence in every possible world] 
is true unless it is self-contradictory. 
 2. 
 God has maximal greatness is not self-contradictory. So: 
 3. 
 God has maximal greatness is true. [from 1, 2] 
 4. 
If  God has maximal greatness is true then God exists. So: 
 5. 
God exists. [from 2, 3] 

124 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 The argument is plainly valid. Its form is: 
 1. 
P unless necessarily not-P. 
 2. 
Not necessarily not-P. So: 
 3. 
P. 
 4. 
If P then G. So: 
 5. 
G. 
 and that form is logically impeccable. If there are any problems with the argument, 
then, it is that one or more of its premises are false. 
 Premise 1 is true.  Having maximal greatness  is a matter of  having maximal 
excellence in every possible world ;  having maximal excellence every possible 
world  is tantamount to  necessarily having maximal excellence . It is not hard to 
see this provided we keep in mind what the notion of maximal greatness involves, 
namely having  being omnicompetent in all possible worlds . For any quality Q, to 
say that something has Q in all possible worlds is to say that it is logically neces-
sary that it has Q. This claim is, as premise 1 says, true unless it is a necessary 
falsehood. Any proposition of the form  Necessarily, P  is necessarily true if true and 
necessarily false if false.  Necessarily, God has maximal greatness  is either true or 
false; so it is necessarily true or necessarily false. Thus, if it is not necessarily false 
(i.e., self-contradictory), then it is necessarily true; that is what premise 1 claims. 
 Premise 3 follows from premises 1 and 2; since God cannot have maximal great-
ness without existing, premise 4 is true; premises 3 and 4 entail premise 5. Every-
thing depends, then, on whether premise 2 is true. Is it true? The argument for 2, and 
for its siblings in the arguments to follow, is essentially this: after careful reﬂ ection 
on 2, we can discover no reason to think it contradictory. It is not formally contra-
dictory as expressing it in symbols shows:  For all W, there is an x such that x is 
omnicompetent in W . Nor does it seem to be informally contradictory—no semantic 
inconsistency seems present. The problem will be that the siblings of 2 are also not 
formally contradictory nor do they seem to be informally or semantically incon-
sistent. To argue that for one of 2 and its siblings along the lines indicated—no 
formal inconsistency and no apparent informal consistency—must be honest about 
whether the same may not be true of the siblings of 2. Until all of the siblings of 2 
are shown to be inconsistent and 2 alone stands triumphant over its competitors do 
not we have an ontological proof that extends our knowledge.  So, again, is 2 true? 
 In considering this question, it is helpful to consider some arguments that are 
analogous to the current version of the Ontological Argument. 
 The X Argument 
 1x.  Necessarily, God does not exist is true unless it is self-contradictory. 
 2x.  Necessarily, God does not exist is not self-contradictory. So: 
 3x.  Necessarily, God does not exist is true. 
 4x. If  Necessarily, God does not exist is true then God does not exist. So: 
 5x. God does not exist. 

Arguments for Monotheism 125
 This argument is also valid, and premise 1x is true for reasons exactly analogous 
to those noted regarding premise 1. Premise 4x is obviously true. So if premise 2x 
is true, then the argument is a proof. Is premise 2x true? 
 The Y Argument 
 1y.  God exists is logically contingent is true unless it is self-contradictory. 
 2y.  God exists is logically contingent is not self-contradictory. So: 
 3y.  God exists is logically contingent is true. 
 4y. If  God exists  is logically contingent  is true then  Necessarily, God exists  is false. 
 5y.  Necessarily, God exists is false. 
 (Remember that ‘ Contingent, P = The modality of P  is that it is logically contin-
gent, and a proposition that ascribes a modality to another proposition is either nec-
essarily true or necessarily false.) This argument is also valid. Premise 1y is true for 
reasons exactly analogous to those that favor 1 and 1x. If it is true that   God exists 
is logically contingent then  God exists is logically necessary is false. (So then is 
the proposition  God has maximal greatness , which entails   God exists  is logically 
necessary .) So if   God exists  is logically contingent  is true, then  God has maximal 
greatness  is false, and that is what premise 4y says. So if premise 2y is true, then 
the Y Argument is sound and valid, and thus its conclusion is true. Is 2y true?  
 The Z Argument 
 1z.  God does not exist  is logically contingent  is true unless it is self-contradictory. 
 2z.  God does not exist is logically contingent is not self-contradictory. So: 
 3z.  God does not exist is logically contingent is true. 
 4z. If  God does not exist  is logically contingent  is true then  Necessarily, God 
exists is false. 
 5z.  Necessarily, God exists is false. 
 This argument is also valid. Premise 1z is true for reasons exactly analogous to 
those that favor 1, 1x, and 1y. If it is true that   God does not exist  is logically 
contingent  then   God exists  is logically necessary  is false. (So then is  God has 
maximal greatness , which entails   God exists  is logically necessary .) So if   God 
does not exist  is logically contingent  is true, then  Necessarily, God exists  is false, 
and that is what premise 4z says. So if premise 2z is true, the Z Argument is sound 
and valid, and its conclusion is true. Is 2z true? 
 Summary Regarding the Ontological Argument (Version 1) 
and the X, Y, and Z Arguments 
 A. Each argument is logically valid. 
 B. In each argument, the ﬁ rst premise is true. 
 C. In each argument, the fourth premise is true. 

126 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 D. In each argument, only the ﬁ rst, second, and fourth premises are indepen-
dent; the ﬁ rst and second entail the third, and the third and fourth entail the 
conclusion. 
 E. In each argument, if the second premise is true, the argument is sound. 
 F. 
Premise 2y is true if and only if premise 2z is true, so we need concern our-
selves only with one of them; we will use 2y. 
 G. It is logically impossible that  more  than one (or that  less  than one) of these 
three premises be true: premise 2 of the Ontological Argument, premise 2x, 
premise 2y. 
 What is crucial in evaluating the Ontological Argument is that this argument does 
not establish which of these three premises is true. It leaves that issue completely 
open. Hence the Ontological Argument fails as a proof that extends our knowledge. 
Given the discussion thus far, the point can be put succinctly as follows. Consider: 
 0. Either  God exists is (a) necessarily true, (b) necessarily false, (c) logically 
contingent and true, or (d) logically contingent and false. 
 The Ontological Argument requires that (a) be the right alternative. But that argu-
ment contains the thesis that (a) is the right alternative—that is what premise 2 of 
the argument says. No argument is given to the effect that (a) is the right alterna-
tive. Granted, (a) does not seem self-contradictory, but neither do any of (b), (c), 
or (d), each of which is incompatible with (a). So we are left without any reason 
for picking (a) as the truth. 
 Another Look at the Ontological Argument 
  1. It is logically possible that God has maximal greatness if the concept of God 
is not contradictory. 
 2. 
The concept of God is not contradictory. So: 
 3. 
It is logically possible that God has maximal excellence. 
 4. If it is logically possible that God has maximal greatness, then God has 
maximal excellence. So: 
 5. 
God has maximal greatness. 
 6. 
If God has maximal greatness, then God exists in all possible worlds. So: 
 7. 
God exists in all possible worlds. 
 8. 
If God exists in all possible worlds, then necessarily God exists. So: 
 9. 
Necessarily, God exists. 
 Exposition of Ontological Argument 
 From 3 on, the argument is correct. You might object to 4, but what 4 says is this: 
 Possibly, God has maximal greatness  entails  God has maximal greatness . What 
you need to keep in mind is that  God has maximal greatness  entails  God exists 

Arguments for Monotheism 127
in all possible worlds  (=  Necessarily, God exists) . Thus  God has maximal great-
ness  ascribes the modality necessarily true to the proposition  God has maximal 
greatness . Thus, given that necessary truths are necessarily necessarily true and 
necessary falsehoods are necessarily necessarily false, it follows that  God has 
maximal excellence is either necessarily true, or else is a necessary falsehood.  
 Further Discussion of Ontological Argument 
 There is a problem with the argument, and it starts earlier. It lies exactly in prem-
ise 1 (in contrast to Version 1, where the problem arises with premise 2). Suppose 
what is true is  The proposition that God exists is logically contingent . Then the 
following things are true: (i)  God exists  is not a contradiction; (ii)  God does not 
exist  is not a contradiction, and (iii)  Necessarily, God exists  is a contradiction; and 
(iv)  Necessarily, God does not exist  is a contradiction. If (iii) is true, then prem-
ise 1 of the Ontological Argument is false. Thus if it is true that  The proposition 
that God exists is logically contingent is true , premise 1 of the argument is false. 
Nothing in the argument shows that  The proposition that God exists is logically 
contingent is not true. So the argument fails. 
 A Proof That Something Has Logically Necessary Existence 
 Consider this brief argument: 
  1. Necessarily, if it is possible that something have logically necessary exis-
tence, then something has logically necessary existence. 
 2. 
It is possible that something have logically necessary existence. 
 So: 
 3. 
Something has logically necessary existence. 
 In other terms: 
  1*. Necessarily, [Possibly, something has logically necessary existence] entails 
[Something has logically necessary existence]. 
 2*. [Possibly, something has logically necessary existence]. 
 So: 
 3*. [Something has logically necessary existence]. 
 The reasoning here is simple: 1 and 1* are necessary truths. Premises 2 and 2*, 
being modal claims, are either necessarily false or necessarily true. Neither 2 nor 
2* is necessarily false. So 2 and 2* are necessarily true. The inferences  1 and 2, 
hence 3  and  1* and 2*, hence 3*  are obviously valid. Hence conclusions 3 and 3*, 
being entailed by necessary truths, are themselves necessary truths. Something 
has logically necessary existence. 

128 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 If the Ontological Argument is sound and valid, then this argument must be 
sound and valid; its soundness and validity is a necessary, but not a sufﬁ cient, 
condition of the soundness and validity of the Ontological Argument. The sim-
ple argument is powerful; perhaps it is a proof that extends our knowledge. But 
even if this is so, the Ontological Argument itself is not a proof that extends our 
knowledge. 
 Empirical Proofs, Argument Strategies, and 
Principles of Sufﬁ cient Reason 11 
 In contrast to a purely conceptual proof of God’s existence, an empirical proof 
of God’s existence is an argument that is valid, has at least one logically contin-
gent truth among its premises, has only true premises, and has  God exists  as its 
conclusion. Such a proof that extends our knowledge—which of course is what 
is sought—will satisfy the other conditions noted previously. There are various 
starting points for such arguments, and various strategies for going on from the 
beginning. For example, one might begin with the fact that there is a universe 
though it is logically possible that there might not have been, or that there is 
some particular thing (say, oneself) though it is logically possible that there not 
have been that particular thing, or the fact that the universe is intelligible (sci-
ence is possible) though it is logically possible that there be a universe that is not 
intelligible. Suppose one begins with the fact that there is a universe though it is 
logically possible that there not have been. Then there are at least these strategies 
for continuing. 
 1. 
The  everlasting world  strategy: prove that the world is everlasting and depen-
dent, then infer to a necessarily independent being on which the dependent 
everlasting world depends. 
 2. 
The  world-has-a-beginning  strategy: prove that the world is not everlasting 
past, then infer to a cause of the world beginning to exist. 
 3. 
The  inclusive  strategy: prove that  either  the world   is everlasting and depen-
dent or that the world is not everlasting past; then infer to there being either 
a necessarily independent being on which the dependent everlasting world 
depends or a necessarily independent cause of the world beginning to exist.  
 Which strategy a philosopher chooses may, but need not, depend on what her 
religious beliefs are. A Christian, like Augustine, who believes that God created 
time and the universe together (that God’s creating a universe is both necessary 
and sufﬁ cient for there being time) will suppose that the universe is everlasting 
in one sense—there is no time at which there was no universe—but will also 
suppose that it is impossible that there be a time T1 at which the universe was 
not created and then another later time T2 at which the universe was created. We 
might call this  universe-time-together creation  view. In another sense, in holding 
this view, she will deny that the world is everlasting; on her view, there will have 

Arguments for Monotheism 129
been a ﬁ rst time—time will go back so far, and no further. But a Jewish, Chris-
tian, or Moslem monotheist might perfectly well hold that time has no beginning 
and that God created the world at some time prior to which time ﬂ owed but no 
universe existed. We can call this the  creation-in-time view . A monotheist might 
even hold that the universe has always existed, and the doctrine that God created 
the universe entails that the universe always depends on God for its existence, 
has always done so, and will do so as long as it exists at all. We can call this the 
 beginningless creation  view. On this view,  God created the universe  entails  The 
universe has always existed in such a way that it depends on God, God does not 
depend for God’s existence on there being a universe, and were God to cease 
sustaining the universe in existence, it would not exist but God would still exist . 
But there being a ﬁ rst time, or a ﬁ rst moment at which the universe began to exist, 
will not be entailed. A monotheist can accept any of these alternatives. Typically 
Jewish, Christian, and Moslem monotheists have accepted either a universe-time-
together or a creation-in-time perspective. Hindu monotheism, by contrast, holds 
to a beginningless creation perspective. This largely has to do with their interpre-
tations of their religious texts. 
 A philosopher might think that one could not decide between these alternatives 
by appeal to anything other than Scripture, and wish to base his arguments only 
on what he thought was philosophically accessible. In this case, the third strategy 
may well seem attractive. 12 In any case, each strategy will require its own version 
of the general thesis that whatever can be explained has an explanation—its own 
formulation of the Principle of Sufﬁ cient Reason (PSR). 
 Principles of Sufﬁ cient Reason 
  1. 
The Everlasting World Strategy requires something like this: (PSR1)  If it 
is logically possible that something depends for its existence on something 
else, then it does depend for its existence on something else  or  What can 
depend for its existence on something else does depend for its existence on 
something else . 
 2. The World Has a Beginning Strategy requires something like this: (PSR2) 
 What begins to exist must have a cause of existence  or  Nothing can simply 
begin to exist without being caused to do so . 
 3. 
The Inclusive Strategy requires something like this:  (PSR1) and (PSR2) . 
 Crucial Premises 
 The different strategies will also require somewhat different premises along these 
lines. 
  1. The Everlasting World Strategy requires some such premise as this:  It is logi-
cally impossible that everything that exists, exists dependently . 

130 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 2. 
The World Has a Beginning Strategy requires some such premise as this: 
 It is logically impossible that everything that exists has had a beginning of 
existence . 
 3. 
The Inclusive Strategy requires something like this:  (a) It is logically impos-
sible that everything that exists, exists dependently and (b) it is logically 
impossible that everything that exists has had a beginning of existence . 
 The idea is that if the world is beginningless past, it does not exist independently 
[because of the truth of (a)] and if the world has a beginning it does not exist inde-
pendently [because of the truth of (b)]. 
 The inclusive strategy is safer with respect to its required premises (its core 
premise is weaker in what it claims)—one who uses it need not care whether the 
world ever began to exist or not. But it is riskier with respect to its version of the 
Principle of Sufﬁ cient Reason (it requires both PSR1 and PSR2). 
 Differences in Conclusions 
 The strategies, of course, will also yield somewhat different conclusions. Aristo-
tle wants to infer from the world’s existence to God’s existence in a way that does 
not require that God have made any choices or performed any actions. Semitic 
and Hindu monotheists want to infer from the world’s existence to God’s exis-
tence in a way that does require that God have chosen to create and that God cre-
ated (the choice and the act may be the same). Even if a monotheist does not think 
that you can successfully infer from the world’s existence to God’s existence, she 
typically will have a view about how the world is related to God. Ramanuja, for 
example, rejects any inference from the world’s existence to God’s existence, but 
holds that the world is everlastingly dependent for its existence on God. Among 
the most famous and inﬂ uential of arguments for monotheism are Aquinas’s 
Five Ways.   
 Arguments by Thomas Aquinas 
 Aquinas’s arguments are of considerable historical interest. For present purposes, 
however, three questions matter: (i) Do any of his arguments prove their intended 
conclusion? (ii) If not, can one learn from them how to frame a more powerful 
argument for their intended conclusion or something much like it? (iii) Do his 
arguments suggest some other approach to the question of the truth or falsity 
of monotheism? Questions (i) and (ii) are considered in this chapter; the third 
receives attention in the later chapter on Faith and Reason. 
 Aquinas asks whether the existence of God can be proved and answers in the 
afﬁ rmative. He then offers ﬁ ve arguments for God’s existence followed by an 
argument that the being referred to in the conclusion of the ﬁ rst argument is the 
same as that referred to in the conclusion of each of the other arguments. Here, 
too, beginning with a few deﬁ nitions will enable us to state complex arguments 
with much greater simplicity than we could without them. 

Arguments for Monotheism 131
 Reﬂ exive and Irreﬂ exive Relations 
 Aquinas’s arguments deal with certain relationships he takes to hold between one 
thing in the world and another thing in the world, or between the world and God. 
Here are some fundamental features of relations: 13 
 Deﬁ nition 1: Relation R, holding between X and Y, is  reﬂ exive  if  X has R to 
Y entails  Y has R to X . 
 If Jack is the same height as Jill, then Jill is the same height as Jack;  being the 
same height as is a reﬂ exive relation. 
 Deﬁ nition 2: Relation R, holding between X and Y, is  irreﬂ exive if  X has R to 
Y entails  Y does not have R to X . 
 If Tim is Tom’s father, then Tom is not Tim’s father;  being a father, being a mother, 
being a parent are irreﬂ exive relations. 
 It will be useful to have two further ways of talking about relations. Let us say 
that if  X has R to Y  then X has R  forwardly  to Y, and that Y has R  backwardly to 
X. Reﬂ exive relations between X and Y are had both forwardly and backwardly 
by both X and Y. Irreﬂ exive relations between X and Y are had only forwardly by 
X and only backwardly by Y. 
 General Structure 
 The general structure—the logical skeleton, as it were—of Aquinas’s argu-
ments, typically called the “Five Ways,” as we will see, can be expressed 
either as: 
 1. 
There is an X and a Y such that X bears relation R to Y. 
 2. 
Either (a) there is an inﬁ nite series of items such that each member has R both 
forwardly to something and backwardly to something, or (b) there is some 
item that has R only forwardly. 
 3. 
Not-(a). 
 So: 
 4. 
(b) 
 or as: 
 1. 
There is an X and a Y such that X has R to Y. 
 2. 
Either (a) there is an inﬁ nite series of items such that each member has R both 
forwardly to something and backwardly to something, or (b) there is some 
item that has R only forwardly. 
 3. 
If (a) then (b). 
 4. 
If not-(a) then (b). 

132 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 So: 
 5. 
(b). 
 Chronological versus Concurrent Causes 
 If we are to understand Aquinas, it is important to distinguish between what we 
will call chronological versus concurrent causes. 
 Deﬁ nition 3: X is a  chronological  cause of Y if and only if X’s doing some-
thing or having some quality at some time  before  T is necessary for Y at T.  
 Putting the water over the ﬁ re, causing it to boil; turning the key in the igni-
tion, causing the car to start; throwing the ball, causing the window to break, are 
chronological causes. 
 Deﬁ nition 4: X is a  concurrent  cause of Y if and only if X doing something or 
having some quality  at T is a necessary condition of Y at T. 
 Holding a door to keep it open; holding one’s breath to keep one’s lungs full; 
pushing the bell to keep the bell ringing, are cases of concurrent causation. It is 
typically cases of concurrent, not chronological, causation that Aquinas has in 
mind in offering his arguments. Thus criticisms based on the assumption that he 
has chronological causation in mind will be off target. 
 Themes of the Arguments 
 Each of Aquinas’s ﬁ ve arguments concerns a different relationship as follows. 
 Argument 1: something moving/changing something else 
 Argument 2: something causing something to come to exist 
 Argument 3: X can cease to exist by becoming Y 
 Argument 4: things having different degrees of worth 
 Argument 5: something behaving at least as if it were seeking a goal 
 Domains, Forwardness, and Backwardness 
 A ﬁ nite domain is a collection having a ﬁ nite number of members; a pile of forty 
rocks, a ﬂ ock of seventy geese, a galaxy of a million stars, are ﬁ nite domains. 
Suppose that we have a domain of three things—Al, Bob, and Carl. Suppose that 
an irreﬂ exive relationship—say,  being a father— relates Al and Bob, and Bob and 
Carl. Within this domain, Al stands in the relation  being a father  only forwardly, 
Carl stands in the relation  being a father  only backwardly, and Bob stands in the 
relation  being a father  forwardly toward Carl and backwardly toward Al. If this 
domain is all there is, Al has no father and Carl has no children. This is a domain 

Arguments for Monotheism 133
 ordered by  an irreﬂ exive relationship. Each member of the domain is related to 
every other by an instance of the same irreﬂ exive relationship—in the case just 
described, by  being a father . 
 Consider a different domain—a domain deﬁ ned in terms of its members being 
ordered by a particular sort of dependence relationship. The sort of dependence in 
question is  nonreciprocal dependence  where  B nonreciprocally depends for exis-
tence on A if and only if B depends for its existence on A and A does not depend 
for its existence on B . Suppose, then, that there exists a domain of things each of 
which stands in a non-reciprocal dependence relation to something, and that this 
domain is ﬁ nite. Then it follows that some member of this domain stands in the 
relationship of non-reciprocal dependence only forwardly. The only alternatives 
are that the domain is inﬁ nite (which we have stipulated is not so) or that there 
is a circle of non-reciprocal dependence, which is impossible. If B non-recipro-
cally depends on A and C non-reciprocally depends on B and A non-reciprocally 
depends on C, then the relationship between A and B is  reciprocal dependence, 
not non-reciprocal. A circle of non-reciprocal relationships is logically impos-
sible. So some member of the domain must stand in the relationship of non-recip-
rocal dependence only forwardly 14 —i.e., must exist independently of the other 
members of the domain ordered by the irreﬂ exive relationship of non-reciprocal 
dependence. 
 Aquinas takes this relationship of non-reciprocal dependence to be one involv-
ing concurrent causation—if the existence of A fully explains the existence of B, 
then so long as B exists it must be the case that A is causing it to exist. 
 It is not obvious that the world of physical things and non-divine minds is a 
ﬁ nitely large domain of things ordered by the relationship of non-reﬂ exive depen-
dence. But that it is such a domain is something that at least the ﬁ rst three of 
Aquinas’s arguments require. 
 Change, Potentiality, Actuality 15 
 Aquinas deﬁ nes  change in a way reminiscent of Aristotle’s philosophy. 
 Deﬁ nition 5. X is in actuality with respect to some property Q if and only 
if X has Q. 
 Deﬁ nition 6. X is in potentiality with respect to some property Q if and only 
if (i) X does not have Q, but (ii) X is the sort of thing capable of having Q.  
 Elk cannot be prime numbers, eggs cannot run faster than hares, and pigs cannot 
ﬂ y, so these things are not in potentiality with regard to these properties. Elk can 
be dyed pink, eggs can be swallowed whole, and pigs can be dressed in tuxedoes, 
so they are in potentiality with respect to these properties. Elk have legs, eggs have 
shells, and pigs have ears, so they are in actuality with regard to these properties. 
 Deﬁ nition 7. X changes with respect to property Q if and only if X moves from 
potentiality to actuality, or from actuality to potentiality, with respect to Q. 16 

134 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 Deﬁ nition 8. Y causes X to change with respect to property Q if and only if Y 
causes X to move from potentiality to actuality, or from actuality to potential-
ity, with respect to Q.  
 The First Way 
 The First Way concerns things being caused to move, in the usual sense of going 
from one place to another but also in the more general sense of simply changing, 
in position or some other way. It is assumed that  X changing Y with respect to Q is 
a relationship that is non-reciprocal—is analogous to  non-reciprocal dependence . 
Thus the idea is that it cannot be the case that  X’s changing Y with respect to Q 
causes  Y’s becoming Q  only if  Y’s becoming Q  causes  Y’s causing Z to become 
Q  and  Z’s becoming Q  causes  X’s causing Y to become Q . The argument goes as 
follows. 
 1. 
Some things change. 
 2. 
If X changes at time T then there is something Y that changes X at T [under-
stood as that Y is something different from X]. 
 3. Either (a) there is an inﬁ nite series of changed and changing beings (i.e., a 
series each member of which is both a changed and a changing thing) or (b) 
there is some being that is a changing being (a cause of motion/change) but is 
 not a changed being (something that changes). 
 4. 
Not-(a). 
 So: 
 5. 
(b). 
 Aquinas offers a subsidiary argument for premise 2: 
  2a. For all times T, and all X, X is in actuality with respect to moving at T or X 
is in potentiality regarding motion at T. 
 2b. If X is in potentiality regarding motion at T, then X is not moving at T. 
 2c. If X is not moving at T, then X cannot cause motion at T. 
 2d. Nothing can cause its own motion at T (since in order to do so it would have 
to both be in actuality regarding motion at T and in potentiality regarding 
motion at T, and that is impossible). 
 2e. No motion can be uncaused. 
 Hence: 
  2. If X changes at time T then there is something Y that changes X at T 
(so understood that Y is something different from X). 
 The issue of whether there can be self-moving or self-changing things was hotly 
disputed in the Medieval period. Scotus, for example, offered powerful arguments 

Arguments for Monotheism 135
against Aquinas in this regard. But there is to be a replacement for premise 2 that 
restricts its basic idea to cases of which it is true, and we will follow this strategy.  
 Self-Change 
 The First Way, if successful, would establish the existence of a cause of change 
that did not change. 17  Premise 2—the denial of self-motion—is apparently prob-
lematic. There seem to be cases of self-movement—one’s walking to the store, 
for example—and of self-caused change that does not involve movement from 
place to place—deliberately stopping thinking about one thing in order to reﬂ ect 
on another. But there are lots of changes in which something is caused to change 
by something else, and the best strategy for defending Aquinas here seems to be 
this: argue that, with respect to the sorts of qualities with which the arguments 
are concerned, self-change is not an option. Something depending for existence 
on itself—a physical object or a human mind, for example, having some feature 
by virtue of which it existed independently of anything else—is not a promising 
notion. Perhaps the simplest defense of Aquinas here is to argue as follows: we 
know that every physical thing, and that every human mind 18  in fact depends for 
its existence on the existence of other things. But  being dependent  is an essen-
tial property of everything that has it;  X is dependent for existence on something 
else  entails  Necessarily, X is dependent for existence on something else . Further, 
 Nothing can cause its own existence is a necessary truth; in order for something 
to cause its own existence, it must do so at some time T. Then, at some time T, 
something that causes its own existence must both not exist in order to be caused 
and exist in order to do the causing—a feat that is logically impossible to perform. 
 Even if one provides this line of reasoning on Aquinas’s behalf however—even 
if one grants that a version of, or replacement for, premise 2 that is restricted to 
some such quality as  non-reciprocally causing change  will serve his purposes 
even if some instances of self-change are possible—his case is not made. Con-
sider this pair of claims: 
  T1.  For any time T1, everything that exists at T1 depends for its existence on 
something else that exists at T1. 
 T2.  For any time T2, everything that exists at T2 was caused to come into exis-
tence at T2 by something that existed at T1. 
 The sort of dependence that T2 describes is non-reciprocal and consecutive. The 
sort of dependence that T1 describes is reciprocal and concurrent. The First Way 
requires that there be a sort of dependence that is non-reciprocal and concur-
rent. Suppose that T1 and T2 are true and describe the only sorts of dependence 
there are. Then the First Way fails. Nothing in the First Way proves that T1 and 
T2 are not true and descriptive of the only sorts of dependence that there are. 
So the First Way is not a proof that extends our knowledge. Perhaps there is the 
sort of non-reciprocal dependence that Aquinas requires, but we have no proof 
of it here.  

136 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 Inﬁ nite Series 19 
 It is not obvious why there cannot be an inﬁ nite series of changed and changing 
things, whether we have chronological or concurrent cases of causation in mind. 
We have seen why premise 4—the rejection of an inﬁ nite series of things chang-
ing one another regarding quality Q—is needed. Aware of this, Aquinas offers a 
subsidiary argument for premise 4: 
 4a. An inﬁ nite series has no ﬁ rst (earliest?) member. 
 4b. If a series has no ﬁ rst (earlier?) members, it has no later or succeeding members. 
 4c. If a series has neither earlier nor later members, it has no members. 
 4d. No series can have no members. 
 So: 
 4. Not-(a)—there is  not  an inﬁ nite series of changed and changing beings 
(i.e., a series each member of which is both a changed and a changing thing).  
 Aquinas 20  admits that there can be a temporally beginningless causal series; 
so presumably it is concurrent, not chronological, causality that Aquinas has 
in mind in this argument (and elsewhere in the Five Ways). The argument for 
the fourth premise is puzzling. There were sharp disputes among Medieval phi-
losophers as to whether an inﬁ nite series was possible. Perhaps the sub-proof 
rests on the idea that, in constructing a series, one has to begin somewhere, 
and if one does not start with a ﬁ rst thing one will never construct even a two-
member, let alone an inﬁ nitely membered, series. Then the argument is correct 
but irrelevant, since to ﬁ rmly contend that there are series that are inﬁ nite does 
not contend that we have to construct them. One can reply that any actual series 
must be one that could in principle be constructed by someone, and an inﬁ nitely 
membered series could not be. But then we need another argument that any 
inﬁ nite series must be one that could in principle be constructed, and another 
to show that an inﬁ nitely membered series does not ﬁ t this description. Plainly 
nothing in the argument of the First Way, in either its main or its subsidiary lines 
of reasoning, provides anything like this. Thus the First Way seems not to be a 
proof of its conclusion.  
 Second Way 
 Again we begin with a couple of deﬁ nitions. 
 Deﬁ nition 9: X is in motion  per accidens  if and only if X moves only because 
X is part of or is located in Y and X moves only because Y moves . 
 A cup of coffee set in the cup holder of a moving car moves  per accidens; the car 
moves per se . 

Arguments for Monotheism 137
 Deﬁ nition 10. X moves  per se  if and only if X moves and X does not move 
 per accidens . 
 The Second Way runs as follows; it takes  coming to be  or  coming to exist  as a 
change. 
 1. 
If X comes to be at T then X’s coming to be at T is caused. 
 2. Nothing can cause its own coming to exist (it would have both to exist to do 
the causing and not exist to be caused to come to be). 
 3. 
If X comes to be at T then X is caused to come to be at T by something other 
than X. 
 4. 
Either (a) there is an inﬁ nite series of beings that come to be and are caused to 
come to be by other beings that were caused to come to be, or (b) there is a being 
that causes others things to come to be but is not itself caused to come to be. 
 5. 
Not-(a). 
 So: 
 6. 
(b) 
 Aquinas argues for premise 5 in this manner: 
 5a. An inﬁ nite series has no ﬁ rst member. 
 5b. If a series has no ﬁ rst member, then it has no later members. 
 5c. A series having neither a ﬁ rst nor later members has no members; a series 
without members cannot exist. 
 So: 
  5. There is not an inﬁ nite series of beings that come to be and are caused to 
come to be by other beings that were caused to come to be. 
 The argument for premise 5 here is identical to the argument for premise 4 of the 
First Way, and hence has exactly the same problems. Further, coming to exist is 
not a change in the thing which comes to exist; hence on the deﬁ nition of change 
offered above, it is not a change—non-existent things have neither potentiality 
nor actuality.  It is possible that X, which does not exist at time T, come to exist 
at time T1  does not entail  X, which does not exist, has the potentiality to exist ;  X 
has some potentiality or other entails  X exists . So the Second Way is not a proof. 
 Third Way 
 Two simple deﬁ nitions are helpful here. 
 Deﬁ nition 11. X is  generable if and only if X can be caused to come to be. 
 Deﬁ nition 12. X is  corruptible  if and only if X can be caused to change and 
can be caused to cease to exist. 

138 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 Aristotle and Aquinas seem to assume  X can be caused to change  entails  X can be 
caused to cease to exist , and conversely, so that necessarily anything that meets 
one of the conditions of being generable also meets the other. It is not at all obvious 
that this is so. In any case, the Third Way goes like this: 
 1. If X is generable and corruptible then X’s non-existence is possible. 
  2. There are corruptible and generable things. 
 So: 
  3. There are things whose non-existence is possible. [from 1, 2] 
  4. Assume for the sake of showing it to be false that for all X, X’s non-existence 
is possible. 21 
  5. If for all X, X’s non-existence is possible then there is some time T such that 
nothing exists at T. 
  6. There is some time T such that nothing exists at T. [from 4, 5] 
  7. It is impossible that anything comes to exist without its being caused to do so 
by something that already exists. 
  8. If there is some time T such that nothing exists at T then for any time T* later 
than T, nothing exists at T*. 
  9. Nothing exists at T*. [from 5 through 8] 
 10. If there is some time T such that nothing exists at T, T has already occurred. 
 So: 
 11. T has already occurred. 
 12. If T has already occurred, then nothing exists now. 
 So: 
 13. Nothing exists now. [from 10 through 12] 
 14. If for all X, X’s non-existence is possible then nothing exists now. [from 4 
through 12] 
 15. It is false that nothing exists now. 
 So: 
 16. It is false that for all X, X’s non-existence is possible. 
 17. If it is false that for all X, X’s non-existence is possible, then something exists 
whose non-existence is impossible. 
 So: 
 18. Something exists whose non-existence is impossible. [from 16 and 17] 
 Aquinas’s Third Way is read in different ways. Aquinas is read as saying either: 
  (a) It is impossible that all generable things exist at every single time. [Necessar-
ily, every generable thing at some time or other does not exist.] 

Arguments for Monotheism 139
 or: 
  (b) It is impossible that, at every time whatever, some generable thing exists. 
[Necessarily, at some time or other, no generable thing exists.] 
 Compare  Necessarily, every elk passes on sooner or later ; this is analogous to (a). 
Consider  Necessarily, at some time there are no elk at all ; this is analogous to (b). 
What Aquinas needs is (b); (a) will not help him. Aquinas also needs: 
 (c) It is impossible that everything that exists is a generable being. 
 This indication of what he requires is relevant to two fallacious inferences he is often 
charged with making in the Third Way; either would, of course, invalidate the argument.  
 Inference One: From A to B 
 Consider 
 A . For all X, it is possible that X corrupt. 
 B . It is possible that everything (simultaneously) corrupt. 
 A world  W of which  A is true might be one of which it was also true that: 
 C . It is not possible that W be entirely unpopulated.  
 But a world of which  B  was true is a world of which  C  could not be true. Hence 
inferring from A to B is fallacious. 22  Inferring from (a) to (b) is tantamount to 
inferring from  A  to  B . If Aquinas either inferred from (a) to (b), or simply did not 
adequately distinguish between them, the argument fails. 
 Inference Two: From D to E 
 D . Everything at some time fails to exist. 
 E . Sometime, everything fails to exist. 23 
 Everything is green at some time or other  does not entail  At some time or other, 
everything is green . Similarly,  D  does not entail  E . Again, the inference from 
(a) to (b) is tantamount to inferring from  D  to  E . If Aquinas either inferred 
from (a) to (b), or simply did not adequately distinguish between them, the 
argument fails. 
 The gist of these criticisms is that even if at some time or other, each thing that 
exists will pass out of existence, it does not follow that they will all pass out of 
existence at the same time, and so long as earlier members can generate later ones, 
things will go on. If Aquinas is not entitled to infer from (a) to (b), then even if he 
is entitled to infer from (b) to (c) this will not help, since he has no legitimate way 
to get to (b). 

140 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 Aquinas is also criticized for claiming that the alleged time at which everything 
would simultaneously pass away would already have occurred; why not regard 
the proof as (if it succeeds) proving that at some future time there will not be any 
generable things? His answer is that if there have been generable things for only a 
ﬁ nite time past, then there had to be a cause of there coming to be generable things 
and so there is something that is not itself a generable thing, and if there have 
always been generable things then an inﬁ nite time has passed and in any inﬁ nite 
time we would have reached the time at which every thing has passed away. We 
can afford not to enter into this controversy. 24 
 The ﬁ rst three of Aquinas’s Five Ways begin by reference to the fact that things 
exist that might not have existed and that depend for their existence on something 
else, and that things change. They then require some such claim as  What can 
depend for its existence on something else does depend for its existence on some-
thing else  and  What changes is changed by something else , as well as such claims 
as  If there are things that exist that depend for their existence on something else, 
then there is something that exists independent of anything else  and  If things are 
caused to change by something else, then there is something that causes change 
without itself ever changing . In part for reasons given as we explained these argu-
ments, none of them constitutes a proof that extends our knowledge. Thus the 
results of examining these arguments have not been very positive; none seems 
even close to a proof that God exists. But rearrangement and revision of the materials 
these arguments contain provide something stronger. 
 Some Further Deﬁ nitions 
 If these materials do yield a stronger—even a successful—argument, perhaps they 
do so via the following argument. Once again, some deﬁ nitions will make it pos-
sible to state the argument less complexly than otherwise. Further, the way the 
premises are stated is intended to keep them from being open to various standard 
objections. Note that nothing in the following argument requires that there not be 
various sorts of self-motion or self-change and it requires no assumptions about 
whether there is an inﬁ nite series of anything. 
 By way of reminder: 
 Deﬁ nition 1. P is a  logically contingent proposition = neither P nor not-P is 
self-contradictory. 
 Deﬁ nition 2. P is a  logically necessary proposition = not-P is self-contradictory. 
 Further: 
 Deﬁ nition 3. P is an  existential proposition  = P entails a proposition of the 
form  X exists . 
 Deﬁ nition 4. It is  logically possible that P’s truth be explained  = There is some 
proposition Q such that  Q’s truth explains P’s truth  is not self-contradictory.  
 To give an analysis, if it is logically possible that the existence of something X 
be explained, then it is logically possible that X  not  exist, and if it is logically 

Arguments for Monotheism 141
possible that the truth of a proposition P be explained, it is logically possible that 
it  not be true. 
 Given these deﬁ nitions, we can state another version of the cosmological 
argument. 
 Cosmological Argument, Stage One 
   1. If it is logically possible that the truth of a logically contingent existential 
proposition be explained, then there actually is an explanation of its truth 
(whether we know what it is or not). 
 Premise 1 is a version of the Principle of Sufﬁ cient Reason. 
 2.  There exist things whose existence it is logically possible to explain  is a true 
logically contingent existential proposition. 
 There are rose bushes, there might not have been rose bushes, and there is an 
explanation of there being rose bushes; hence premise 2 is true. 
   3. There is an explanation of the truth of  There exist things whose existence it is 
logically possible to explain . [from 1, 2] 
 Premise 3 obviously follows from premises 1 and 2, so if they are true, so is it. 
The success of Stage One depends on what is true regarding the ﬁ rst premise.  
 Cosmological Argument, State Two 
   4. The truth of  There exist things whose existence it is logically possible to 
explain  cannot be explained by there being things whose existence it is logi-
cally possible to explain (the existence of  those things is just what is to be 
explained). 
 Suppose that Pat wants to know why there now are Golden Retriever puppies. 
She is told that there are Golden Retriever parents. She asks why there are 
Golden Retriever parents. She is told about Golden Retriever grandparents. Pat 
then wants to know why there are any Golden Retrievers at all. She cannot 
now be told about Golden Retriever parents, grandparents, great-grandparents, 
or the like; these will all be things she wants to know about—why have any 
Golden Retrievers at all existed? Here, one either refuses to answer, claims that 
there being Golden Retrievers is just a fundamental feature of the world, or 
explains that there were non-Golden-Retrievers that caused there to be Golden 
Retrievers. 
 If Pat asks why there have ever been any possibly explicable things at all that 
exist though they might not have existed, she cannot properly be told about there 

142 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
being possibly explicable things that exist but might not have existed; those are 
the things she asks about. So one can refuse to answer, claim that there being 
possibly explicable things that exist but might not have existed is a fundamental 
feature of the universe, or refer to something that is  not such as to exist and be 
possibly explicable though it might not have existed. This line of thought is cor-
rect, and is what premise 4 says. 
   5. That a logically contingent existential proposition is true can only be 
explained by some other existential proposition being true. 
 If, in the relevant sense of explanation, P’s truth entails Q’s truth, then P entails Q. 
No existential proposition is entailed by a set of propositions that does not contain 
any existential propositions. 
   6. If an existential proposition does not concern something whose existence it is 
logically possible to explain, it concerns something whose existence is logi-
cally impossible to explain. 
 These exhaust the possibilities. 
   7. The truth of  There exist things whose existence it is logically possible to 
explain  can only be explained by a true existential proposition concerning 
something whose existence it is logically impossible to explain. 
  8. Some existential proposition concerning something whose existence it is log-
ically impossible to explain, and whose existence can explain the existence 
of things whose existence it is logically possible to explain, is true. 
 Premise 4 is plainly true; whatever Xs are,  there being Xs  cannot explain  there 
being Xs . Neither can the existence of something that might not have existed be 
explained other than by reference to things that exist; the existence of contingent 
things can only be explained by reference to something that exists, not by refer-
ence to something that doesn’t exist. So premise 5 is true. Necessarily, for any-
thing X that exists, either it is logically possible that X’s existence be explained or 
it isn’t; that is what premise 6 says. If (i) X’s existence can be explained, and 
(ii) can be explained only by the truth of a type A proposition or by the truth of a 
type B proposition, and (iii) cannot be explained by the truth of a type A proposi-
tion, then it follows that (iv) X’s existence can be explained by the truth of a type 
B proposition. Premise 7 applies this reasoning to the notions of propositions con-
cerning the existence of things whose existence can be explained and propositions 
concerning the existence of things whose existence cannot be explained. Premises 4, 
5, 6, and 7 entail proposition 8; if they are true (and they are) so is it. Hence Stage 
Two is successful. 

Arguments for Monotheism 143
 Cosmological Argument, Stage Three 
 9. If some existential proposition concerning something whose existence it is 
logically impossible to explain, and whose existence can explain the exis-
tence of things whose existence it is logically possible to explain, is true, 
then something exists whose existence it is logically impossible to explain 
and whose existence can explain the existence of things whose existence it is 
logically possible to explain. 
 10. Something exists whose existence it is logically impossible to explain and 
whose existence can explain the existence of things whose existence it is 
logically possible to explain. [from 8, 9] 
 Premises 8 and 9 entail step 10, and premise 9 is, I take it, a necessary truth. So 
Stage Three succeeds. The conclusion thus far— Something exists whose existence 
it is logically impossible to explain and whose existence can explain the existence 
of things whose existence it is logically possible to explain— is interesting all by 
itself. Its crucial premise is its ﬁ rst: 
 If it is logically possible that the truth of a logically contingent existential prop-
osition be explained, then there actually is an explanation of its truth (whether we 
know what it is or not). 
 Premise 1 is a version of the Principle of Sufﬁ cient Reason. Call it PSR*. 
 Suppose one claims the truth of every logically contingent proposition has 
an explanation, and that it cannot be the case that the truth of every logically 
contingent proposition is explicable by reference to the truth of other logically 
contingent propositions. Then one will be claiming that there is some logically 
contingent proposition whose truth is explicable by reference to some true but 
not logically contingent proposition—some logically necessary truth. If  P’s 
truth explains Q’s truth  entails  P entails Q , then one is claiming that a necessary 
truth entails a logically contingent truth. This is necessarily false—if Q is a logi-
cally contingent proposition, it is possibly false. No necessary truth is possibly 
false. Were a necessary truth to entail a logically contingent proposition, then 
it would be possibly false. Hence no necessary truth can entail a logically con-
tingent proposition. If there are any true logically contingent propositions—and 
there plainly are—then either every one of them is explicably true by reference 
to some other, whose truth is explicable by reference to some other, and so on, 
or some among them is true but its truth cannot be explained. PSR* is compat-
ible with all this. It requires no attempt to explain contingent propositions only 
by reference to necessary truths, and it is compatible with there being an inﬁ nite 
number of contingent truths, each explained by some other contingent proposi-
tion. It is also compatible with the fact that, if there are any logically contingent 
propositions—and there plainly are—then some must be true: if Q is a logically 
contingent proposition, so is not-Q, and of [Q and not-Q] one must be true. 
 What it does require is that  there being logically contingent true existential 
statements  is possibly explicable—as it is—and hence that it has an actual 

144 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
explanation. If it does have an explanation, it seems that the cosmological 
argument has the right sort of explanation. Obviously no necessary truth will 
explain it, and no possibly explicable contingent proposition will explain it, 
and no non-existential statement will explain it. What is left, since necessary 
falsehoods and contingent falsehoods explain nothing, is a logically contin-
gent existential statement whose truth is necessarily inexplicable. While it is 
true that of any pair composed of a logically contingent existential statement 
and its denial, one must be true, it might always be that it was the denial that 
was true. So it is not a logical necessity that there be true logically contingent 
existential statements. There remains, then, this question: Is it contingently 
inexplicable that there are true logically contingent existential statements? 
That there are such statements is possibly explicable, so if there is no expla-
nation of there being such, there is a perfectly intelligible question— Why 
are there any logically contingent existential propositions? —that might per-
fectly well have had an answer, but that in fact has none. What PSR* denies 
is that this is possible—the possibly explicable is actually explicable. 
 Is PSR* true? There does not seem to be anything more obviously true than 
PSR* from which it follows. PSR* does not seem to be contradictory, and if it is 
true, it is necessarily true. So it is, if not contradictory, then necessarily true. But 
(I)  It is contingently inexplicable that there are logically contingent true existen-
tial statements seems not contradictory, and it is, if true, then necessarily true. So 
if it is not contradictory, then it is necessarily true. Nothing in the cosmologi cal 
argument shows that it is PSR* rather than (I) that is true. So the cosmologi-
cal argument is not a proof that extends our knowledge. 
 There is a bit more to be said regarding PSR*. A standard objection to weaker 
formulations of the cosmological argument is that if one infers from the world to 
God, and it is logically possible that God not exist, then one might as well have 
stopped with the world. A cosmological argument with PSR* as an essential premise, 
assuming the remainder to be crafted in line with PSR*’s content, will be subject to no 
such objection. Further, if one rejects PSR* one is left with an ultimate mystery, an 
intelligible and basic question to which there might have been an answer, but is not. 
Reject PSR* and mystery lies on your side of the fence, not on the monotheist’s side.  
 Cosmological Argument, Stage Four 
 It is at least not unreasonable to accept PSR*, and it is worth seeing how the argu-
ment that requires it continues. A few additional deﬁ nitions will serve the familiar 
service of simplifying the statement of the argument. 
  D4.     Being X has necessary existential security = X exists, and  X is caused to 
exist or depends for its existence on something else is self-contradictory. 
 D5.  Q is a basic property of X = X has Q, and X has no property Q* such that  X 
has Q* explains the truth of  X has Q . 

Arguments for Monotheism 145
 D6.  Q is a non-basic property of X = X has Q, and X has some property Q* such 
that  X has Q* explains the truth of  X has Q . 
 D7.  X has logically necessary existence = X exists, our concept of X is accurate 
relative to X’s existence and  X does not exist is self-contradictory. 
 D8.  X has logically contingent existence = X exists, our concept of X is accu-
rate relative to X’s existence, and neither  X exists  nor  X does not exist is 
self-contradictory. 
 Note that: 
 (i)  X has necessary existential security  does not entail  X has logically necessary 
existence ; 
 (ii)  X has logically necessary existence  does entail  X has necessary existential 
security ; 
 (iii) whatever exists has either logically necessary or logically contingent 
existence; 
 (iv) while if it is logically possible that the existence of something be explained, 
it follows that it is logically possible that the thing  not  exist, it is not true that 
if it is logically possible that it  not  exist, then it is logically possible that its 
existence be explained; 
 (v) while it is true that if it is logically possible that the truth of a proposition be 
explained, it is logically possible that the proposition  not  be true, it does not 
follow that if it is logically possible that a proposition  not be true, then it is 
logically possible its truth be explained. 
 11.  X’s existence is logically impossible to explain and its existence can explain 
the existence of things whose existence it is logically possible to explain is 
true only if  X has necessary existential security is true. 
 12. If something exists whose existence it is logically impossible to explain 
and whose existence can explain the existence of things whose existence 
it is logically possible to explain, something has necessary existential 
security. 
 13. Something has necessary existential security. 
 14. Both  explaining the existence of things whose existence it is logically possible 
to explain  and  having necessary existential security  are non-basic properties 
of anything that has them. 
 15. If  having necessary existential security  is a non-basic property of anything 
that has it, then the something that has necessary existential security has some 
other property whose possession explains its  having necessary existential 
security . 
 16. The something that has necessary existential security has some other prop-
erty whose possession explains its  having necessary existential security . 

146 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 17. The only properties that something might have that would explain its  having 
necessary existential security are A:  having logically necessary existence or 
B:  being omnipotent, omniscient, and morally perfect . 
 18. Something has A or B. 
 19. The concept of something that has A but lacks B is the concept of an abstract 
object, and since abstract objects lack causal powers they cannot explain 
the existence of anything whose existence it is logically possible to explain; 
thus  having A  will not explain anything having the property  explain-
ing the existence of things whose existence it is not logically impossible to 
explain . 
 20. The concept of a being that has B but lacks A is the concept of a being that 
has causal powers and whose existence can explain the existence of anything 
whose existence it is logically possible to explain; thus  having B  will explain 
anything having the property  explaining the existence of things whose exis-
tence it is logically possible to explain . 
 21. The concept of a being that has B and also has A is also the concept of a being 
that has causal powers and whose existence can explain the existence of any-
thing whose existence it is logically possible to explain; thus  having A and B 
will explain anything having the property  explaining the existence of things 
whose existence it is logically possible to explain . 
 22. Something exists that has B. 
 23. The concept of something that has B is the concept of God, conceived either 
as having logically necessary existence or as having logically contingent 
existence, but in either case as possessing necessary existential security and 
causal powers that can explain the existence of anything whose existence it is 
logically possible to explain. 
 24. God exists. 
 Suppose that God exists, and is omnipotent and omniscient. Then God will 
lack no power, and no knowledge, failure to have which would allow some 
enemy to do God in. God’s existence is utterly safe; it is logically impossible 
that this being be destroyed from without. Suppose God is also perfectly good. 
A perfectly good being won’t commit suicide or deicide. There are no condi-
tions under which a perfectly good being who is omnipotent and omniscient on 
which that being’s destruction of itself would be a good thing for it to do. It is 
logically impossible that such a being, while remaining perfectly good, cause 
itself to implode. 
 God’s moral perfection is conceived by monotheists in two different ways. 
On one account, what is true is  Necessarily, God is morally perfect ; on the 
other, what is logically contingent and true is  God is morally perfect . 25 On 
the former account, it is logically impossible that God commit deicide. On the 
latter account, it is not logically impossible that God commit deicide, though 
one may properly trust God not to do so. On neither account of divine moral 
perfection is it logically possible that God depend on any thing for God’s 
existence.  

Arguments for Monotheism 147
 Two Points Relevant to the Cosmological Argument 
 Consider two claims: 
 1. 
 Possibly, X is contingent  entails  X is contingent  if  contingent  means  logically 
contingent (= neither necessarily true nor necessarily false). 
 2. 
 Possibly, X is contingent does not entail  X is contingent if  contingent means 
 depends for existence on something distinct from itself . 
 The cosmological argument requires that both of these claims be true. 
 Argument for 1 
 A proposition has its modality necessarily; thus whatever modality a proposition 
lacks, it lacks necessarily. Logical contingency is a modality; hence whatever 
has it, has it necessarily, and whatever lacks it, lacks it necessarily. Hence if it is 
possible that a proposition is contingent, then it is.  
 Argument for 2 
 It is not logically impossible that X have logically contingent existence and yet it 
be false that X depends for existence on something else—a logically contingent 
and necessarily independent being would ﬁ t this description, for example. 
 Hence both 1 and 2 are true. 
 Conclusion 
 Besides requiring PSR*, this version of the cosmological argument is strongest 
if it can be shown that  Necessarily, God exists  is false. Only then (if at all) can 
one infer to the cause of possibly explicable logically contingent beings having 
the properties that a logically contingent being must have if its existence is to be 
necessarily inexplicable. 
 A Supplementary Argument 
 An argument distinct from the cosmological argument that nonetheless dwells in 
the same conceptual neighborhood is the following: 
 10a.  It is logically possible that an omnicompetent deity exists. 
 10b. If it is logically possible that an omnicompetent being exists, then it is logi-
cally possible that an omnicompetent being destroy everything material.  
 So: 
  10c. It is logically possible that an omnicompetent being destroy everything 
material. [from 10, 10b] 

148 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 10d. If it is logically possible that an omnicompetent being destroy everything 
material, then nothing material has necessary existential security. 
 So: 
 10e. Nothing material has necessary existential security. [from 10c, 10d] 
 Thus far, the argument is obviously sound and the independent (non-inferred) 
premises seem to be true. If this is correct, it is a useful supplement to the cosmo-
logical argument. A natural off-shoot is this argument: 
  10e1. If nothing material has necessary existential security, then something exists 
that is not material. 
 So: 
 10e2. Something exists that is not material. 
 10e3. If something exists that is not material, then materialism is false. 
 So: 
 10e4. Materialism is false. 
 The truth of 10e1 requires the conclusion of Stage Three of the cosmological 
argument—i.e., premise 10—and is exactly as secure as that premise is. 
 Aquinas’s Fifth Way 
 The Fifth Way is one version of the Argument from Design. To say that some-
thing  seeks its own end  is to say that  it seeks its own ﬂ ourishing as a member of 
its kind . The following characterization of the Fifth Way reads it as asserting that 
each generable body seeks its own end, not that all generable bodies together seek 
some  universal  end or some end that characterizes the universe as a whole (e.g., 
universal orderliness). 26 
   1. We observe generable bodies that lack awareness typically seek their own 
ﬂ ourishing. 
 2. What happens typically does not happen accidentally. 
 So: 
   3. Generable bodies typically seeking their own ﬂ ourishing does not happen 
accidentally. [from 1, 2] 
  4. Generable bodies typically seeking their own ﬂ ourishing, if it does not 
happen accidentally, occurs only because they are caused to do so by an 
agent that intends that this occur.  

Arguments for Monotheism 149
 So: 
   5. Generable bodies typically seeking their own ﬂ ourishing occurs only because 
they are caused to do so by an agent that intends that this occur. [from 3, 4] 
  6. If they are caused to do so by an agent that intends that this occur, then there 
is an agent that intends that this occur. 
 So: 
 7. There is an agent that intends that this occur. [from 5, 6] 
 A different way of putting the argument invokes the distinction, but also the simi-
larity, between artifacts and natural objects. Artifacts are made by humans; their 
parts are made and organized so as to produce some end or other. They are made 
to do something, and insofar as they are well made, they do that thing. Call the 
feature of having parts that were made to be organized so as to produce speciﬁ c 
results  being operationally functional . Then the argument goes: 
  1. Artifacts are operationally functional things. 
 2. Natural objects are operationally functional things. 
  3. Operational functionality in artifacts is adequately explicable only by reference 
to intelligence. 
 4. If artifacts are operationally functional things, natural objects are operationally 
functional things, and operational functionality in artifacts is adequately expli-
cable only by reference to (human) intelligence, then operational functionality 
in natural objects is adequately explained only by reference to intelligence.  
 So: 
   5. Operational functionality in natural objects is adequately explained only by 
reference to intelligence. [from 1–4] 
 6. Operational functionality in natural objects is not caused by human intelligence. 
  7. What is caused by intelligence other than human is caused by non-human 
intelligence. 
 8. If operational functionality in natural objects is adequately explained only 
by reference to intelligence, and operational functionality in natural objects 
is not caused by human intelligence, and what is caused by intelligence other 
than human is caused by non-human intelligence, then operational functionality 
in natural objects is adequately explained only by reference to non-human 
intelligence. 
  9. Operational functionality in natural objects is adequately explained only by 
reference to non-human intelligence. [from 5–8] 
 10. If operational functionality in natural objects is adequately explained only by 
reference to non-human intelligence, then there is strong evidence that there 
is non-human intelligence. 

150 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 11. There is strong evidence that there is non-human intelligence. [from 9, 10] 
 The conclusion is neither uninteresting (a newspaper editor convinced of its truth 
would put it in her headlines) nor as strong as  Monotheism is true . Its religious 
relevance becomes obvious if one thinks what sorts of powers a being would have 
to have in order to cause operational functionality in natural objects. 
 The Hindu monotheist Ramanuja offers the following objections to the argu-
ment from design. Reacting to Indian versions of the argument from design, 
Ramanuja says: 
  (1) There is no proof to show that the earth, oceans, etc., although things pro-
duced, were created at one time by one creator. Nor can it be pleaded in favor 
of such a conclusion that all those things have one uniform character of being 
effects, and thus are analogous to one single jar, for we observe that various 
effects are distinguished by difference of time of production, and difference 
of producers . . . for experience does not exhibit to us one agent capable of 
producing everything. 27 
 That is, if we take our experience with artifacts as the clue to operational func-
tionality in natural objects, often various humans cooperate in the production 
of an artifact, or make changes in it; the evidence cited by the argument from 
design suggests a committee as much as it does a single intelligence. A standard 
response is that one is justiﬁ ed in positing no more intelligences than is necessary 
to explain the data. 
  (2) Experience further teaches that earthen pots and similar things are produced 
by intelligent agents possessing material bodies, using implements, not 
endowed with the power of a Supreme Lord, limited in knowledge, and so 
on; the quality of being an effect therefore supplies a reason for inferring an 
intelligent agent of the kind described only. 28 
 That is, if we take our experience with artifacts as the clue to operational func-
tionality in nature, its intelligent causes are embodied 29  and possess limited intel-
ligence and power. 
  (3) Consider the following point also. Does the Lord produce His effect with His 
body or apart from His body? Not the latter, for we do not observe causal 
agency on the part of any bodiless being; nor is the former alternative admis-
sible, for in that case the Lord’s body would be permanent or impermanent. 
The former would imply that something made up of parts is eternal; and if 
we say this was may as well admit that the world itself is eternal, and then 
there is no reason to infer a Lord. And the latter alternative is inadmissible 
because in that case there would be no cause of the body different from it 
(which would account for the origination of the body). Nor could the Lord 
Himself be assumed as the cause of the body, since a bodiless being cannot be 

Arguments for Monotheism 151
assumed as the cause of a body. Nor could it be maintained that the Lord can 
be assumed to be “embodied” by means of some other body; for this leads us 
into a regress in inﬁ nitum. 30 
 Here, the reply is more complex. Suppose that God, like human artiﬁ cers, must 
have a body in order for God to produce operational functionality in anything. 
Then God, able to produce operational functionality only through use of a body 
that is already is operationally functional, did not produce operational functional-
ity in  that  body. God’s own body, construed on the analogy with human artiﬁ cers, 
has an operational functionality not produced by God. But then why not simply 
view all bodies as having some such intrinsic not-produced-by-God operational 
functionality? Ramanuja, then, concludes that “the inference of a creative Lord 
which claims to be in agreement with observation is refuted by reasoning which 
itself is in agreement with observation, and we hence conclude that Scripture is 
the only source of knowledge with regard to a supreme soul that is the Lord of all 
and constitutes a highest Brahman.” 31 
 David Hume, in his famous  Dialogues concerning Natural Religion , offers 
criticisms similar to those of Ramanuja. 32  He views the argument from design as 
an inductive argument. The property relevant to the inductive inference is some-
thing like  orderliness  or  behaving in speciﬁ able, predictable ways always or for 
the most part . The things relevant to the inference are artifacts, like clocks, and 
natural objects, like apples or sheep. One is invited to infer from a sample class of 
which one has had experience (artifacts having been produced by an observable 
designer by an observable process) to a reference class of which one has had only 
partial relevant experience (one has observed natural objects though one has not 
observed them being caused to possess  orderliness  by a non-human intelligence). 
So the premises concern there being artifacts and natural objects, and both having 
orderliness. The conclusion is that natural objects are caused to have orderliness 
by a non-human intelligence. 
 The connecting premises point to the cause of orderliness in artifacts, namely 
human intelligence. The core idea is that one infer that orderliness in natural 
objects should be taken to have the same sort of cause—an intelligent mind—and 
obviously human minds do not cause orderliness in apples and goats. 33 
 Hume makes these objections, among others: 
  (a) There are other explanations of orderliness in natural objects than that they 
were designed—for example, natural objects might have a sort of intrinsic 
order, being by nature organisms or natural machines produced by natural 
processes. 
 (b) We cannot in principle observe natural objects being caused to have order-
liness by non-human intelligence nor can we in principle observe natural 
objects being caused to have orderliness by something else; observing an 
apple grow or a goat give birth are examples of orderliness, not explanations 
of orderliness of the sort disputers regarding the argument from design are 
concerned with. 

152 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 (c) There is no lawlike connection that we can know of between  natural objects 
possessing orderliness and  natural objects being caused to have orderliness 
by X , whether “X” is ﬁ lled in by reference to intelligence, natural processes, 
or anything else, and legitimate inductive inferences ride the rails of natural 
laws. 
 The argument from design is, in effect, an argument to the best explanation—an 
argument that is intended to establish that, if we follow the sorts of procedures we 
typically follow in making probabilistic inference, we shall come to the conclu-
sion that there is a designer. But there obviously are other explanations of opera-
tive functionality in natural objects—for example, that material particles evolved 
over a long period in such a manner as to produce such items. All that is required, 
the proposal is, is particles of the right sorts, laws, and time. This sort of expla-
nation of operative functionality in natural objects is intended as well to explain 
there being human intelligence capable of causing operative functionality in arti-
facts. Thus most of the philosophically interesting issues raised by arguments 
from design have to do with how to decide which, among a group of explanations, 
is best, and how exactly to understand the relevant data and formulate the theories 
relevant to explaining them. This sort of issue comes up again in the ﬁ nal chapter 
on Faith and Reason. 
 The Teleological Argument 
 Another argument in the same family as the argument from design, but different in 
what it begins with—the intelligibility of nature or the possibility of science—and 
its straightforwardness as an argument to the best explanation—is the teleological 
argument. As construed here, it is a supplement to the cosmological argument. 
Here is one more objection to the cosmological argument: what the conclusion of 
the cosmological argument does (roughly) is to say that the universe of dependent 
things is caused by the act of an intelligent divine agent; it says that God, who 
might not have created anything, acted to create dependent things. But then God’s 
action of creating might not have occurred. So we are left, not with a being that 
might not have existed but whose existence it is not impossible to explain, but 
with an action that might not have occurred; what’s the gain?—either way we 
stop our explanation arbitrarily. One way of construing   the teleological argument, 
it is not an independent argument but rather is an answer to this objection to the 
cosmological argument. 
 The teleological argument is often stated as an independent argument. As stated 
here, it is a continuation of the cosmological argument, and offers an answer to the 
present objection to that argument. Again, some beginning deﬁ nitions simplify 
the overall presentation. 
 D1.  R is S’s  sufﬁ cient reason  for doing A = S does A for reason R, there is no 
better reason for doing A than R, there is nothing better that S might do 
than A, and S’s doing A is right (note that  being right  does not entail  being 

Arguments for Monotheism 153
obligatory ; if there is more than one right way of acting in a given circum-
stance, one’s obligations in that circumstance are simply to act in one of 
those ways). 
 D2.  R is S’s  proper ultimate reason  for doing A = R is S’s sufﬁ cient reason for 
doing A, there is no true moral proposition from which R follows in any 
way that justiﬁ es R, R is true, and S knows that R is true (every proposition 
follows from other propositions—any proposition P follows from [(Q or P) 
and not-Q]—but not every proposition follows from others in a way that 
proves it true; if we cannot have some knowledge without proving it, we 
cannot prove anything). 
 D3.  S is  completely rational  in doing A = S has a proper ultimate reason for 
doing A. 
 D4.  E is an  ultimate existence explanation  = E explains the truth of a logically 
contingent existence proposition by reference to the truth of an existence 
proposition whose truth it is logically impossible to explain. 
 Statement of the Teleological Argument 
  1. If an ultimate existence explanation has a teleological explanation as an 
essential component, then the agent referred to in that teleological explana-
tion is completely rational in acting as that explanation says she acts. 
 2. If an agent is completely rational in acting in a certain way, then there can be 
no further teleological explanation of her acting in that way. 
 3. 
If there can be no further teleological explanation of an agent’s acting in a 
certain way, then unless the existence of that agent can be explained, there is 
nothing relevant that is left unexplained. 
 4. 
If God created the world, God was completely rational in doing so. 
 According (roughly) to the conclusion of the cosmological argument: 
 5. 
God created the world. 
 Hence, from 4 and 5: 
 6. 
God was completely rational in doing so. 
 Hence, from 2 and 6: 
 7. 
There can be no further explanation of God’s creating the world. 
 But: 
 8. 
It is not possible to explain the existence of God. 

154 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 Hence, from 3, 7, and 8: 
 9. 
There is nothing relevant that is left unexplained. 
 Hence the objection fails. One is not left with something explicable that is 
unexplained. 
 Conclusion 
 The combination of the cosmological and teleological arguments considered is 
one of the stronger versions of one sort at least of natural theology—the effort to 
present arguments that are plainly valid, have premises that are discernibly nec-
essarily true or contingently true propositions, and infer to the existence of God. 
Even it, however, does not yield a proof that extends our knowledge. 
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
  1. 
What is the difference between a logically necessary and a logically 
contingent proposition? 
 2. 
Consider this argument:
 Possibly, something has necessary existence. (= The concept of a necessar-
ily existing thing is not inconsistent.) 
 If [Possibly, something necessarily exists] then it is true that [Something 
necessarily exists]. 
 So: 
 Something necessarily exists. (This is to be contrasted with [Necessarily, 
something or other exists]). 
 If this argument is correct, then the sort of argument that the Ontological 
Argument is, one that goes beyond pure thought to extra-mental existence, 
is possible. Is this argument correct? 
 3. Does the concept of having a cause apply to, as well as within, the 
cosmos? 
 4. 
What sort of argument extends our knowledge? 
 5. Is a version of the cosmological argument that allows for there being 
a beginningless series of caused and causing beings stronger than one 
that does not? 

Arguments for Monotheism 155
 Notes 
 1.  Proposition P  entails  proposition Q if and only if  P, but not Q  is a contradiction (e.g., 
 There are two whales in the bay  entails  There is at least one whale in the bay , since to 
assert the former and deny the latter is to contradict yourself). Another way of putting 
this is: P  entails Q if and only if  P, therefore Q is a necessary truth. 
 2.  George Mavrodes (1970)  Belief in God: A Study in the Epistemology of Religion (New 
York: Random House), Chapter Two. 
   3.  These examples are due to George Mavrodes (1970)  Belief in God: A Study in the 
Epistemology of Religion (New York: Random House). 
   4.  For those not aware of the history of the basketball franchise the Boston Celtics, Bill 
Russell was the center for the Celtics’ teams that won eleven of thirteen champion-
ships, and the greatest defensive center (arguably, the greatest player) ever to play 
the game. 
 5.  Defending this understanding goes beyond the scope of this book. For a beginning, 
see Arthur Pap (1959)  Semantics and Necessary Truth  (Yale: Yale University Press), 
Chapter Seven, “The Linguistic Theory of the Apriori” and Alvin Plantinga (1974)  The 
Nature of Necessity (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
 6.  For an accessible review of different relevant views, see Michael Loux (1998)  Meta-
physics (London: Routledge). 
   7.  If you want another counter-example and are willing to have it more complicated than 
our other examples, here are two:  For any formal S, if S is adequate for number theory 
(e.g., if its axioms are strong enough to entail Peano’s postulates) there will be some 
formula F that is both expressible in S and undecidable in S and its corollary  For any 
formal system S, if S is adequate for number theory, there can be no proof within S of 
the claim  S is consistent  . These are hardly uninformative or mathematically trivial. 
 8.    Due to Alvin Plantinga; see  The Nature of Necessity  and  God, Freedom, and Evil (New 
York: Random House, 1974). The former contains the fulldress, and the latter a stream-
lined, version of the argument. 
   9.  Note that, on the principle  For all X, if X is actual then X is possible  that the actual 
world is (also) a possible world. 
 10.  Note that to be  true in all possible worlds and to be  included in every maximal proposi-
tion are the same. 
 11.  I am using ‘empirical’ here very broadly. 
  12.  This strategy may also seem attractive if one wishes to hedge one’s bet regarding the 
interpretation of Scripture on how God and the universe are related. 
  13.  Medieval theories of relations is an interesting topic all by itself—one that would take 
us far aﬁ eld from our current concerns. Mark Henning (1989)  Relations: Medieval The-
ories  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) provides an excellent introduction. 
 14.  Some member of the domain must also stand in this relationship only backwardly—
must depend on something else but nothing else depends on it. 
 15.  At  De Caelo XII 258 Aquinas offers a series of claims relevant to his Five Ways. It 
seems worth including them here. Again, we begin with deﬁ nitions: 
 Deﬁ nition A: X has  non-derivative necessary existence  if and only if  X does not exist 
is self-contradictory. 
 Deﬁ nition B: X has derivative necessary existence if and only if X cannot naturally 
(without the action of an omnipotent being) cease to exist. 

156 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 Deﬁ nition C: X cannot naturally cease to exist if and only if X contains no matter or 
the matter that X contains cannot have any essence other than the one that it has. 
 Deﬁ nition D: X has the power of not existing if and only if X is such that X exists only 
if X has the essence it has but it is possible that the stuff that X is made of come to 
have some other essence. 
 Deﬁ nition E: X generates from Y at T if and only if there is a Y that exists at T – 1 and 
X at T contains the matter that was in Y at T. 
 Deﬁ nition F: X corrupts at T if and only if there is a Y such that Y exists at T + 1 and 
the matter that was in X at T is in Y at T + 1. 
 Deﬁ nition G: X is a natural body only if X is capable of generation and corruption. 
 Aquinas tells us: 
 1. If X always exists, then X has the power always to exist. 
 2. If X has the power always to exist, then X lacks the power not to always exist. 
 3. If X always exists then X lacks the power not to always exist. [from 1, 2] 
 4. If X lacks the power not to always exist then X does not generate or corrupt. 
 5. If X generates or corrupts then X does not lack the power not always to exist. 
 6. If X has the power not always to exist then X does not always exist. 
 7. If X generates or corrupts then X does not always exist. 
 Also involved seems the idea that, in some sense,  Necessarily, in any inﬁ nite time all pos-
sibilities are realized , though it is difﬁ cult to think of any reading of this claim on which it 
is true. 
  16.  More fully: For X to change or move is for X to go from potentiality to actuality or 
from actuality to potentiality regarding quantity, quality, or place. 
  17.  The existence of something with causal powers—the actual capacity to bring about 
changes in other things—that was not itself changed in so doing—might, by itself, 
have slight religious relevance, but of course Aquinas has no intention of limiting 
himself to this one conclusion. 
 18.  And animal mind, if such there be—we need not enter into that matter here. 
 19.  The notion of inﬁ nity is of course complex. A nice introduction to various relevant 
notions is A. W. Moore (1991)  The Inﬁ nite (London: Routledge). 
 20.  At  Summa I a46 2ad7. 
 21.  The strategy here is called Conditional Proof. You assume that P, show that P plus a set 
of truths entails Q, and conclude  If P then Q . 
  22.  Let *P = possibly, P; Cx = x corrupts. Then another way of stating the criticism is this: 
Aquinas shifts quantiﬁ ers illegitimately, going from:  A = (x)*Cx to  B = *(x)Cx. 
 23.  Let Ex/t = x exists at t; (Et) = there is a t. Then the criticism is that Aquinas illegiti-
mately goes from:  D = (x)(Et) not-Ex/t to  E = (Et)(x) not-Ex/t. 
  24.  The Fourth Way is a variety of the moral argument for God’s existence, and we will 
look at it brieﬂ y when we consider religion and morality. 
 25.  Here, ‘God’ is being used as a name, not a deﬁ nite description. 
 26.  ST Ia 15 2 suggests the possibility of the reading that we do not give here. 
 Aquinas is criticized for making an inference from  A to  B below: 
 A . Every generable thing is such that an intelligent agent directs it to seek its own ﬂ ourishing. 
 B . There is an end that all generable beings together are directed to seek. 

Arguments for Monotheism 157
 On the present reading, no such inference is required. 
27.  Sacred Books Volume 48, pp. 170–171. 
  28.  Ibid., 165—cf. p. 171 that notes that intelligent agents whom we observe to cause 
things also have emotions— “are connected with pleasure and the like.” 
  29.  Ramanuja thinks of the world as God’s body, but a body that depends on God for its 
existence. 
 30.  Ibid., p. 173. 
 31.  Ibid., p. 173. 
 32.  After an introductory ﬁ rst section, sections two through eight of the  Dialogues deal 
with a dialogue concerning the argument from design. Section nine deals with an argu-
ment that is a mix of the ontological and cosmological arguments, sections ten and 
eleven with the problem of evil, and section twelve with natural religion. The present 
author has discussed all of these issues in Hume’s philosophy in  Hume’s “Inexplicable 
Mystery”: His Views on Religion (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1988). 
  33.  Two points: there is also a version of the argument that has as a premise the orderliness 
of the physical world as a whole, rather that the orderliness of particular sorts of natu-
ral objects; the fact that we can change the sort of order we ﬁ nd in nature by selective 
breeding in no way discounts the fact that we did not bring about the order that makes 
such breeding possible. Both varieties of the argument are discussed further in  Hume’s 
“Inexplicable Mystery.” 
 Suggested Readings 
 Burrell, Donald, ed. (1967)  Cosmological Arguments  (Garden City, NY: Anchor Books). 
An excellent collection of historical and recent discussions of the argument. 
 De Cruz, Helen and DeSmet, Johan (2014)  A Natural History of Natural Theology: The 
Cognitive Science of Theology and Philosophy of Religion  (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press). Argues that the ideas developed in theistic arguments articulate our sense of 
beauty, order, and design, which are universal. 
 Flew, Anthony (1966)  God and Philosophy  (London: Hutchinson). Philosophy of religion 
done on the presumption of atheism. 
 Haldane, J. J. and Smart, J. J. C. (1996)  Theism and Atheism  (Oxford: Blackwell). An athe-
ist and a Catholic theist argue their cases. 
 Hallett, Garth (2008)  A Middle Way to God  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Argues that 
a sound argument for minds other than one’s own is paralleled by a sound argument for 
theism. 
 Hick, John and McGill, Arthur, eds. (1967)  The Many-faced Argument  (New York: Macmillan). 
An excellent collection of historical and recent discussions of the Ontological Argument. 
 Leftow, Brian (2015)  God and Necessity  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Offers a new 
view of possibility and necessity that provides the basis for an argument for theism. 
 Manson, Neil, ed. (2003)  God and Design: The Teleological Argument and Modern Sci-
ence (New York: Routledge). An excellent introduction followed by strong papers on 
issues essential to the success of the argument. 
 O’Connor, Timothy (2008)  Theism and Ultimate Explanation: The Necessary Shape of 
Contingency  (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell). Offers an account of necessity and con-
tingency that leads to a new formulation of the cosmological argument of Leibniz. 

158 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 Plantinga, Alvin, ed. (1974)  The Ontological Argument  (New York: Harper and Row). An 
excellent collection of traditional, and some recent, treatments of the argument. 
 Rowe, William (1975)  The Cosmological Argument  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press). Probably the best discussion of the argument. 
 Swinburne, Richard (1979)  The Existence of God  (Oxford: Clarendon Press). Argues for 
the existence of God from a perspective in which the controversial idea of a priori sim-
plicity is important.    

 Our next question is whether apparent experiences of God provide evidence for 
God’s existence. Even if the answer is afﬁ rmative, that does not settle the issue. 
There are various relevant considerations, among them arguments for and against, 
other sorts of religious experience, the status of appeals to sacred texts, and his-
torical evidence in those cases where the truth of certain historical claims is a 
necessary condition of the truth of central religious doctrines. So our inquiry con-
cerns only a part of the overall evidential question. 
 Phenomenologically Thick Experiences 
 Phenomenological Content and Description 
 Subject-consciousness-object experiences have phenomenological content—
there is a way things seem to the subject to be, given the experience. A phenom-
enological description of an experience is a description that tells us how things 
appear to the person who has it. Consider these sentences, each of which uses the 
word ‘seems’ in a different sense: 
  1. Kim seems less capable than she is. (Here, ‘seems’ contrasts appearance to 
reality.) 
 2. 
It seems to Kim that she left the oven on. (Here, ‘seems’ reports a shaky belief 
on Kim’s part.) 
 3. 
There seems to Kim to be a chair in front of her. (Here, ‘seems’ expresses how 
Kim is “appeared to”; whether there is a chair there or not, it remains true that 
if things are as they perceptually appear to Kim, a chair is in front of her.  
 So there are at least three senses of ‘seems’—a contrastive sense (in 1), an opin-
ionative or belief-expressive (in 2), and an experiential and perceptual sense (in 3). 
Our concern is with the experiential, perceptual sense. Suppose Kim is in a room 
that she knows that was set up by majors in psychology and physics. There seem 
to be twice as many chairs in the room as there are—half of the “chairs” are in fact 
holograms of chairs. Not having been in the room before, but knowing that half of 
 Monotheism and Religious Experience 
 11 

160 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
what seem to be chairs are not, Kim nonetheless properly says: 
  4. It seems to me that there is a chair in front of me, though I have no idea 
whether I am seeing a chair or a hologram of a chair. 
 The ‘seems’ here is experiential and perceptual; it is also  phenomenological— it 
describes how things perceptually seem, whether they are that way or not. Using 
phenomenological descriptions, an atheist and a theist can agree that experiences 
occur in which it at least seems to the subject that she is experiencing a powerful, 
holy being 1  distinct from herself. They disagree over whether there is such a being 
that she perceives. 
 Thin Description versus Thick Description 
 Members of monotheistic religious traditions report what they will describe as 
experience of God. Sometimes the phenomenologies of these experiences is quite 
thin, for example a matter of feeling forgiven, only if one reasonably already takes 
monotheism to be true does one have reason to take such experiences as reliable, 
and even then only with various qualiﬁ cations (e.g., is one planning to do the same 
thing again tomorrow?). These seem to be experiences toward which one likely 
must be disposed to interpret theistically for them to be taken as pro-theistic evi-
dence, and they are not typically offered as pro-theistic evidence in philosophical 
disputes. In contrast, subject-conscious-object experiences that have fuller theistic 
phenomenologies more typically appear in such discussions. After considering a 
more general issue, we will return to the topic of thicker phenomenologies. 
 Since sensory perception is more familiar than religious experience, we will start 
with examples of sensory experience in developing a satisfactory principle of experi-
ential evidence—a principle relevant to assessing the evidential force of experiences. 
We start with this basic idea: an experience that is subject-consciousness-object in 
structure, where the apparent object, if the experience is reliable, exists distinct from, 
and independent of, the subject, is evidence for the existence of that object. Seeming 
to see a dog on the couch is evidence that a dog is on the couch. Then the question 
is whether the principle needs to be qualiﬁ ed, and if so how. The result should be at 
least a defensible principle of experiential evidence. Then it needs to be seen whether 
that principle, as it stands or with further revision, is suitable for use relative to reli-
gious experience. We will lay out the discussion by means of questions and answers, 
using vision as our example, and neglecting other senses.  
 Experience as Direct Evidence 
   Question One: Are there other approaches to religious experience as evidence 
than the one pursued here?  
 Yes. Here are two examples. One approach asks what the best explanation 
is of the occurrence of religious experience, arguing that theism supplies this. 

Monotheism and Religious Experience 161
This requires an account of what is meant by explanation, how one decides 
among competitors, and why a theistic explanation is the best. Another appeals 
to doxastic (belief-forming) practices. They are based on particular foundational 
propositions that provide a framework for thinking that sets the context in which 
the interpretations of experiences are offered. One familiar practice concerns 
forming beliefs about physical objects. The practice is widespread but its foun-
dational propositions are not necessary truths and the success of the practice 
depends on the degree to which those who follow it survive and ﬂ ourish. Fur-
ther, a practice can be evaluated in terms of the logical consistency and mutual 
coherence of the beliefs that arise from interpreting relevant experiences along 
the lines supplied by the foundations. It is also relevant to ask how well the over-
all view composed by the foundations and the beliefs gained from interpreting 
experiences as they suggest fares in terms of resolving problems and paradoxes 
that arise in following the practice. What is not clear is the degree to which, if 
at all, this interesting view escapes relativism. Practices—particularly religious 
ones—tend to produce incompatible views. The foundational propositions in 
one practice will not only be different but, in various cases, incompatible. There 
must then be some propositions, presumably practice-neutral, to which to appeal 
when one tries to assess competing practices in terms of consistency, coherence, 
and success in untying conceptual knots. (And, if there are such assessment-
relevant propositions, in virtue of what are they epistemically more secure than 
the competing propositions in practice foundations? If the response is that the 
assessment-relevant items are procedures rather than propositions, this simply 
raises the question as to what propositions justify the use of these principles.) 
Appeal to what we have called phenomenologically thin experiences is in accord 
with a doxastic practice theory, depending on which propositions are included in 
the foundations. By contrast, here we take it that there are principles of experien-
tial evidence to which we can appeal in deriving conclusions about the evidential 
force of religious experiences. 
 Question Two: What makes some experiences “thicker” than others?  
 Some experiences viewed as experiences of God are, as it were, phenomeno-
logically thicker in that the subjects report, not of feeling forgiven, but an aware-
ness of a being of majestic power, profound holiness, overwhelming purity, and 
deep love. Responses include worship, reverence, a sense of dependence, and a 
sense of one’s sinfulness. Such experiences are reported in various formal and 
informal mystical traditions in Catholic, Orthodox, and Protestant contexts, in 
all of the Semitic monotheisms, and in Hindu monotheism. Similar reports are 
given by persons not associated with any mystical or religious tradition, some-
times by persons not religious by any monotheistic standard. Sometimes these 
experiences are sought and sometimes they simply occur. An earlier chapter lists 
a few descriptions of such experiences. The present question is whether the oc-
currence of these phenomenologically richer experiences provides any evidence 
that God exists. This question of experiential evidence can be answered with 

162 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
any care only if we ask and answer some other questions ﬁ rst. Here is a series of 
relevant questions and answers. Throughout these questions and answers, but not 
elsewhere, ‘religious experience’ will simply mean “experiences that, given their 
phenomenology, are, if reliable, experiences of God.” 
 The relevant experiences are subject/consciousness/object in structure; they in-
volve a person having an experience that, providing that the experience is reliable, 
involves being aware of something or someone that is not dependent for its exist-
ence on being experienced. In that respect, such experiences resemble experiences 
of shrubs and worms (these being typically reliable, and shrubs and worms exist-
ing independent of one’s experiencing them) or of ghosts (if experiences of ghosts 
were reliable, then ghosts would have experience-independent existence). They 
have the sort of content described previously in the ﬁ rst part of our series of de-
scriptions of religious experiences. They are also experiences in which the at least 
apparent object is not oneself, one’s body, or one’s mental states; they are (if reli-
able) experiences of something other than oneself or one’s body or one’s states—a 
being that exists distinct from and independent of oneself. 
 Question Three : Can any experience be evidence for just any old claim?  
 Distinguish between direct evidence and indirect evidence. An experience is 
direct evidence for a claim that something exists only if it is true that the ex-
perience in question, if reliable, just is an experience of that thing. We take it 
that we have exactly that sort of experience of cats and computers. An expe-
rience is indirect evidence for the existence of something only if it is, if re-
liable, experience of something else, where if the something else exists, then 
the thing in question exists. Suppose that Ralph and Mabel are hosting Mabel’s 
sloppy brother Jim, whom they know to be the only person in the world who 
eats peanut butter and mustard sandwiches. Arriving home, Ralph is hopeful 
that his brother-in-law may have ended his visit, but is chagrined to ﬁ nd on the 
kitchen table two peanut butter and mustard sandwiches waiting to be devoured; 
he infers that Jim is still around, and will soon be having a snack. Seeing the 
sandwiches provides direct evidence of their existence, and indirect evidence 
of Jim’s continued presence. Our concern in this chapter will be with direct 
evidence only, and our concern with it focuses on the conditions under which 
experience provides direct evidence for the existence of something. Not every 
experience can be direct evidence for the existence of just anything. Its at least 
seeming to Mary that there is tea in her cup, bread on her table, and music com-
ing over the radio will not provide her with direct evidence that the Alps are 
still around, there are trolls, or that God exists. Mountains, trolls, and God are 
not among the things she even seems to directly experience. An experience is 
direct evidence only for what exists provided that experience is reliable—pro-
vided things are as that experience represents them as being. How an experi-
ence represents things as being is a function of its phenomenological content. 
Our concern here is with, and only with, experience as potential evidence for 

Monotheism and Religious Experience 163
claims to the effect that things are as the experiences that are potential direct 
evidence for them represent things as being 2 —with the cases of experiences and 
claims where the claims match up with the phenomenological content of the ex-
periences. Experiences will not be direct evidence for any other claims.   
 A Principle of Experiential Evidence 
   Question Four: How do we tell what an experience can be direct evidence for 
the existence of?  
 An experience can be direct evidence for the existence of something only if it is 
an experience in which it experientially seems to the subject to be an encounter 
with—a perception of—that thing. An experience in which one at least seems to 
perceive a coat in the closet provides one with evidence for the existence of a coat 
and a closet. There may not be: it is logically possible that she only seems to see 
a coat in the closet and there be neither or just one. The basic idea, then, is this: if 
Mary has an experience that, if reliable, is a matter of experiencing a coat in her 
closet, then she has experiential evidence in favor of things being just that way. 
More formally: 
 (P) If a person S has an experience E that, if reliable, is a matter of being aware 
of an experience-independently existing item X (whose phenomenological content 
represents there being an X), then S’s having E gives S evidence that X exists. 
 Question Five: Can’t such experiences go wrong in various ways?  
 Yes. If Mary is drinking a special tea that always produces coat hallucinations, it will 
appear to her that there is a coat, whether there is one or not. This circumstance, let us 
say, will cancel the evidential force of the experience relative to there being a coat in 
the closet. She has seemed to see a coat under circumstances where she would seem 
to see one whether there was one or not. So we need to revise (P) via: 
 (P1) If a person S has an experience E which, if reliable, is a matter of being 
aware of an experience-independently existing item X, and E is not canceled, then 
S’s having E gives S good evidence that X exists. 
 If Mary learns that her tea has its unusual feature, she is justiﬁ ed in drawing no 
inference regarding the coat. 
 Suppose Mary looks in her messy desk drawer and seems to see the pen she 
got for her birthday. She closes the drawer, opens it again, and does not seem to 
see the pen. She is suddenly called away but cannot get the pen off her mind. She 
reﬂ ects that her original evidence has been counterbalanced, and if she goes by the 
evidence she suspends judgment. So we need a further revision: 
 (P2) If a person S has an experience E that, if reliable, is a matter of being 
aware of an experience-independently existing item X, and E is not canceled  or 

164 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
counterbalanced , then S’s having E gives S good evidence that X exists. 
 Suppose Mary succumbs to a rare disease the result of which is that she cannot 
see coats and she always seems to see a pen. Then her not seeming to see a coat is 
not evidence there is none, and her seeming to see a pen is not evidence that there 
is one. Relative to coats and pens, her experience is  compromised . She cannot 
conﬁ rm or disconﬁ rm that there is a coat in the closet or a pen in the drawer. So 
we need to add this revision: 
 (P3) If S has an experience E such that, if reliable, it is evidence that there 
is a mind-independent X, then unless S’s experience is cancelled, counterbal-
anced, or compromised, S’s having E is good evidence that there is an X that S 
experiences. 
 Here we need to change our strategy, since the needed qualiﬁ cation is more 
obviously applicable to religious experience than to sensory. 
 Suppose one discovers a discernibly powerful argument for God’s non-exist-
ence, perhaps a complex but lucid demonstration that every theologically satis-
factory concept of the divine attributes we have been able to form is logically in-
consistent. Then the possibility of the existence of the apparent object of religious 
experience is seriously conceptually challenged. 
 Thus we need: 
 (P4) If a person S has an experience E that, if reliable, is a matter of being aware 
of an experience-independently existing item X, and E is not canceled or counter-
balanced or compromised or conceptually challenged, then S’s having E gives S 
positive evidence that X exists. 
 This gives at least an idea of what is meant by a principle of experiential evi-
dence. It is hard to see how one could be sure that one had included the entire 
range of possible ways in which subject-consciousness-object experiences can 
“go wrong.” All one can do is put in all the ways one can think of and be ready to 
add others if they are found. 
 We can add a principle to the effect that: 
 (P4*) If S (non-culpably) believes that S’s experience E satisﬁ es (P4) she is 
rational in taking E to be evidence that X exists. 
 There has been something of a shift in philosophy of religion toward asking 
whether religious belief is reasonable rather than pressing a claim about truth. 
While the truth question is more basic, the reasonability question is also impor-
tant, and relative to religious belief based on subject-consciousness-object experi-
ence (P4) provides a response. 
  Question Six: It is hard to see how the certainty religious belief requires is 
going to be achieved given what you have said; isn’t that a problem?  
 Descartes pointed out that it was logically possible, in any case of apparently suc-
cessful sensory perception, that one be mistaken. While it does not follow from 
this being possible in  any  case, it is possible in  every  case. Descartes noted that 
every one of our sensory perceptions could be unreliable. So if what we mean by 

Monotheism and Religious Experience 165
‘certainty’ regarding a belief is that it is logically impossible we believe it and it 
be false, we can have no certain sensory knowledge. Similarly, it does not follow 
from someone’s having an apparent experience of God that she cannot be wrong 
about its reliability. It is not a necessary truth that apparent experiences of God are 
reliable in the sense of genuinely being what they seem. It is also logically possible 
that your friends and family are ﬁ ctions of your imagination. The thing to do after 
knowing that is to remember that it is logically possible that they are not ﬁ ctions. So 
far as sheer logical possibilities go, things are tied. Descartes held that we can know 
necessary truths, that we exist, that we are in certain mental states, and how things 
sensorily appear to us. Even that short list has been challenged. Note that it does 
not include knowing any historical truths, that you have brown hair or have feet, 
and so on through pretty much everything in life. It is plausible that most religious 
believers would be content if justiﬁ ed religious conﬁ dence compared favorably with 
their belief that the objects that occupy their physical environment are actually there 
and much like they seem. The point is that, for any proposition the truth of which 
is not entailed by your believing it, you can be mistaken in believing it. (Remember 
every necessary truth is entailed by every proposition.) A psychological certainty 
often comes with salvation and enlightenment experiences. Whether this certainty is 
justiﬁ ed is a function of the degree to which the relevant traditions are true. 
  Question Seven: What about the claim that God is ineffable, or that religious 
experience is ineffable?  
 To say of something X that it is seriously and literally ineffable is to say that 
(I)  For any concept C, C does not apply to X . Since the concept of ineffability is 
a concept, to make the claim that anything is seriously and literally ineffable is 
to assert something that is necessarily false. So neither God, nor religious experi-
ence, can be literally ineffable. It is possible to revise the thesis and say some-
thing like (Ia)  For any concept C save the concept of ineffability, C does not apply 
to X . But X is ineffable entails X exists, so the concept of existence applies to X 
and thus (Ia) is false. One can then try (Ib)  For any concept C save the concepts 
of ineffability and existence, C does not apply to X . But X exists and X has no 
properties is also necessarily false. One can then try (Ic)  For any concept C save 
the concepts of ineffability, existence, and having properties, C does not apply to 
X . If the concept  having properties applies to X, then so does the concept  having 
only consistent properties, not being both prime and not prime, being either good 
or not  and so on. By the time one has ﬁ nally reached a non-contradictory thesis, 
serious and literal ineffability has been left far behind. It is only serious and literal 
ineffability that would raise a problem for our argument. 
  Question Eight: Isn’t the sort of criticism just made merely verbal, superﬁ cial, 
intellectual cleverness without substance, and so worthless?  
 No. If one claims that nothing said in English can be true, what one says can-
not be true. If one says that all sentences of more than four words are gibberish, if 

166 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
what one said were true one would have said nothing. If one claims that the state 
of Washington is a prime number, one asserts that a concrete object is identical to 
an abstract object, that something spatially located is identical with something that 
cannot be spatially located, that something that might never have existed is identical 
to something that (if it exists at all) has logically necessary existence. All of these 
claims are discernibly intellectually disreputable in the light of what they entail. The 
same goes for the claim that something is ineffable. 
 The claim that something is ineffable, while it is (like all claims) made by the 
use of language, is not about language—it is about God, or religious experience, 
or whatever is said to be ineffable. Any claim that God, religious experience, or 
anything else is ineffable, as it turns out, is self-defeating. If one claims in-
stead that God cannot be described  in physical terms  or that we cannot com-
pletely describe God, 3  these claims are true. But they have nothing to do with 
ineffability. 
  Question Nine: Can’t we always “explain away” any religious experience 
without any reference to God?  
 Consider some person Tom and some experience E that Tom has. To give a 
social science explanation of Tom’s having E is to refer to some science phenom-
enon (SSP)—some institution, practice, community membership, phobia, desire, 
economic status, political role or perspective, social standing, unconscious moti-
vations, or whatever—and to claim that Tom’s having SSP is the cause of Tom’s 
experience E. Suppose some such explanation is true. Does it disqualify E from 
being reliable? Suppose E is a conceptual experience—Tom’s belief that social 
science is not simply a superstition that unscrupulous academics have developed 
in order to bilk money from students and government agencies. Is that conceptual 
experience of Tom’s rendered unreliable, or at least somehow evidentially neu-
tralized, by its being social science explicable? Suppose instead Tom’s experience 
is that of appreciating the love of his family, respecting the environment, hoping 
studying hard will enable him to pass his social science course, or being shocked 
at the number of conspiracy theories people accept. If there are social science 
explanations, as there seem to be, these experiences are going to be explained by 
them in whatever sense social science explanations do explain anything. But their 
being social science explicable in no way discredits the evidential value of such 
experiences, if they have any in the ﬁ rst place. After all, the development of the 
social sciences themselves, their procedures of inquiry and standards of research 
and methods of theory testing, are all themselves social science explicable. If be-
ing social science explicable renders unreliable what is explained, social science 
itself is a crock. 
 Two things are necessary for what might be called social science debunking. 
The ﬁ rst is that the thing—the experience, belief, practice, or whatever—has 
been shown to be unreliable, false, unsuccessful, or otherwise defective. Then 
some social science explanation is appealed to in order to explain how anybody 

Monotheism and Religious Experience 167
could accept an unreliable experience, a false belief, an unsuccessful practice. But 
all of the critical intellectual work involved in the debunking has already been 
done by the time social science is appealed to. Of course what typically happens 
is that opponents of a view simply offer the social science explanation without 
bothering to offer actual arguments and evidence against what they oppose, and 
then claim to have debunked the view they dislike, hoping that no one will notice 
that their own view is also social science explicable and that they haven’t actually 
refuted anything. The assumption is that the strategy can be successful without 
entering in dispute as to whether the belief in question has evidential support in 
that whatever can be explained by appeal to natural phenomena alone is not in any 
respect supernatural. 
 The tighter argument against religious experience being evidence is this: if one 
can specify some set of conditions C under which religious experience R oc-
curs—say an apparent experience of God—and explain C’s obtaining in purely 
naturalistic terms, then—by transitivity of explanation—one has explained R in 
naturalistic terms. If one can reproduce R when one wants, or at least often, by 
bringing about a condition like C, then one is even better off regarding showing R 
to be part of the nexus of naturalistic cause and effect. Of course the causes of R 
may be subtle, and the attempt to produce it only sometimes successful, but this 
matters little since one has already shown that R can be caused in a fashion that 
makes no reference to God. Hallucinations are subject-consciousness-object in 
structure but are not evidence for the existence of the reality of what just seems 
to be there. If one can explain a subject-consciousness-object experience without 
reference to its apparent object, one has removed any reason to think that the ex-
perience gives reason to believe that object exists. 
 This is obviously a forceful argument. It deserves careful examination. The fact 
that it is possible to produce subject-consciousness-object experiences that seem to 
be awareness of some item does not discredit cases in which items of that sort are 
actually experienced. Further, for any experience of any human being, there pre-
sumably is some physical state such that having that experience is, or is correlated 
with, that state. There is some physical condition that is, or is sufﬁ cient condition 
for, the experience. One common monotheistic belief is that everything that exists 
that can be caused is held in existence by God. This is not an observable feature 
of things. Neither particle nor partridge carries with it an observable created-by-
God feature. This does not refute the monotheistic claim, which is not empirically 
conﬁ rmable or disconﬁ rmable. Its reasons lie in philosophy and theology. But the 
appeal to religious experience as evidence for God’s existence obviously is a dif-
ferent matter as it makes an explicit claim of experiential conﬁ rmation. Mention 
of the monotheistic doctrine of creation and conservation nonetheless makes a 
relevant point. The fact that religious experiences at least involve the occurrence 
of physical states that are social (and natural) science explicable is not logically 
inconsistent with there being a religious explanation. 
 The next question is why anyone should think there is one. It will be useful to 
discuss this in connection with a look at some of the differences between sensory 
evidence and evidence, if any, from religious experience. 

168 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
  Question Ten: Aren’t there crucial differences between sensory experience and 
religious experience?  
 There certainly are differences. They are crucial for some matters, and not cru-
cial for others. Let such experiences as  seeing that identity is transitive, recog-
nizing that no contradiction can be true, discerning that arguments of the form 
[P or Q, and not-Q; therefore P] are valid but arguments of the form [P or Q, 
and Q; therefore P] are invalid conceptual experiences . There are crucial differ-
ences between sensory experiences and conceptual experiences; that fact casts 
no aspersions on either sort of experience and gives no reason for supposing that 
either is evidentially suspect. Suppose that Tara and Todd sit beside one another 
at morning worship. Tara and Todd both at least appear to see a stained glass win-
dow and Tara has a religious experience whereas Todd does not. If Tara were to 
seem to see a window and Todd were not, given that both are sighted and looking 
in the same place, either Tara is window-hallucinating or Todd is window-blind. 
But Todd’s not having a religious experience does not call into question Tara’s 
having one, nor does it raise doubts about the religious experience that Tara has. 
This difference sometimes is put by saying that sensory experience is public in a 
way that religious experience is not. Further, if one wants to see the window, sim-
ple procedures will allow this, whereas experiences of God are not producible 
by following a procedure. Sensory experiences typically are  controllable where 
religious experiences are not. Further still, if one sees the window, one can pre-
dict that if one reaches out, one will touch it; if one raps it gently, one will hear a 
sound; if one tastes it, one will get a cold, smooth sensation; were one to strike it 
sharply with a hammer, it would break; and so on. Sensory experiences typically 
ground predictions and are testable by comparison with experiences from other 
sensory modalities. Typically, religious experiences do not ground predictions 
nor do there seem to be multiple religious modalities. 4  
 These differences are crucial only if they underlie this difference: it is pos-
sible to cross-check sensory experiences but it is not possible to cross-check 
religious experiences. Since this is not so, these differences are not crucial rela-
tive to the question of whether religious experience provides evidence that God 
exists. 
 Question Eleven: How can one check religious experiences?  
 In exactly the ways one might expect. First, any experience that satisﬁ es (P4) 
is evidence by virtue of that fact. There isn’t any point in checking, say, one 
sensory experience against another unless each such experience has some pre-
sumptive evidential force. If it looks like my computer screen has turned solid 
gold, there is no point in checking unless my looking again has some evidential 
punch all on its own; but then the ﬁ rst look has evidential punch too. If there 
isn’t any conﬂ ict among one’s sensory experiences, as there very often is not, 
then comparison will have no negative results regarding their reliability. To the 

Monotheism and Religious Experience 169
degree that there are religiously relevant similarities this counts in favor of their 
having evidential force. Second, one appeals to other things one knows or rea-
sonably believes in sorting out what experiential conﬂ icts one ﬁ nds in sensory 
experience. If an experience is reliable only if something is false that we have 
good reason to believe, its reliability is properly questioned. The same holds for 
religious experiences. Third, if religious experiences occur, as they do, in various 
cultures, at various times, to people in various sorts of social, economic, political, 
and psychological situations, that is all to the good—it broadens the base of pos-
sible comparison of experience with experience, removes concern that religious 
experience is somehow tied to one culture or another, and the like. 
 Being Evidence versus Providing Evidence 
 If (P4) is true, any experience not disqualiﬁ ed by it  is  evidence. It does not follow 
that any such experience  provides  evidence to anyone who did not have it. Being 
evidence is a necessary but not sufﬁ cient condition for  providing evidence . What 
else is required? One obvious thing is this: in order for an experience to provide 
evidence to one, one must believe it to be evidence, as well as its being evidence. 
But what else? 
 If one considers the logical possibilities regarding sensory experience as evidence, 
they turn out to include: 
 L1. No sensory perception is reliable. 
 L2. All sensory perceptions are reliable. 
 L3. Some sensory perceptions are reliable and some are not. 
 Descartes considered the possibility that there is an evil deceiver who has and 
uses the power to make sure that there never is what we seem to perceive. Given 
this, and the thesis that if it is possible that my current perception is unreliable 
(what I seem to see is not there), it follows that I can never be justiﬁ ably certain 
that I correctly perceive. But it is also possible that there is a good perceiver who 
has and uses the power to guarantee that every sensory perception is reliable, 
and from this and the thesis that my sensory perception is evidence as to the way 
things are (plus there being no reason to think my perception is unreliable), it is 
reasonable for me to think my sensory perceptions are reliable. What makes it 
unreasonable to think that they always are is that if one proposes that all percep-
tions are reliable, one will encounter cases of perceptual conﬂ ict (the stick out 
of the water is straight, partially submerged is bent, so that one who requires all 
perception to be reliable should hold the view that the stick changes shape when 
partially submerged).  
 Another, and opposite, perspective says that Mary only need (non-culpably) to 
have no reason to think that the experience is unreliable. If a matter is of enough 
importance, and there are considerations relative to whether an experience is reli-
able, these considerations are accessible without great effort, then it is at least 

170 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
arguable that one basing a belief on the evidence that his experience seems to 
provide should see if it does so in the light of those considerations. If he does 
not do so, under some circumstances, his belief is arguably unreasonable; he has 
not checked out what he should. The various notions involved here—matter of 
enough importance, relevant considerations, accessibility—are hardly lucid. For 
our purposes, only two things need be noted: (i) since our concern is centrally 
with whether religious experiences  are evidence, and so  can provide evidence , for 
religious belief, we need not enter deeply into a discussion as to exactly when a 
particular person is reasonable in accepting them as evidence, and (ii) if an experi-
ence does not run afoul of any of the factors mentioned in our principle of expe-
riential evidence, or there isn’t any good reason to think that they do, that greatly 
reduces the plausibility of claiming that one who takes them to provide evidence 
is unreasonable in virtue of doing so. 
   Question Twelve: Can you falsify—even in principle—the claim that an appar-
ent experience of God is reliable? And if you can’t, does that show that such 
experiences are not evidence?  
 You seem to have in mind the idea that if an experience can count as evidence for 
a proposition, then not having such an experience, in the same or similar circum-
stances, is evidence against that proposition. This is often true. If your seeing a car 
parked by a ﬁ re hydrant, your experience is not evidence for it being there unless, 
were it not there, you would still (seem to) see it. Otherwise, you are car-halluci-
nating. It is typical to test a hypothesis by ﬁ nding some circumstance in which, if 
the hypothesis is true, a certain event will occur. If it does not, the hypothesis has 
been falsiﬁ ed. But in the theistic case, there is no such case—no circumstance in 
which failing to have an experience of God is evidence that God does not exist. 
The typical belief is that God cannot be made to offer experience of God, and that 
if there is none God has a good reason for not having caused one. So it looks as 
if the answer to your ﬁ rst question is that there is no case in which the failure to 
experience God is evidence that God does not exist, at least none consistent with 
standard theistic belief. 
 This, however, assumes that if experience E is evidence for proposition P, 
then E failing to occur is evidence for not-P. The assumption is false. Consider 
this claim: someone alive today will be alive tomorrow. Tomorrow, you can 
have conﬁ rming direct experiential evidence for it, but not disconﬁ rming. So 
the  If an experience can vote for a proposition, it can vote against it premise 
is false. 
 If you prefer a different example, suppose there is a hypothetical particle that 
behaves completely randomly and thus unpredictably. It is viewed suspiciously 
by the scientiﬁ c community. Nonetheless, there is knowledge of what one would 
have to observe if one were to experimentally run across it. 
 If there are any of these particles, there is just one. One day scientists in vari-
ous countries are running the same new experiment and get exactly the results 

Monotheism and Religious Experience 171
they would get were the single special particle to interfere with the experiment. 
After carefully sifting the data, the scientists at every location where the experi-
ments were run come to the same conclusion: the only available explanation of 
their results is that there actually is the hypothesized particle. For years scientists 
run the same experiment, and never again do they get results different from the 
typical ones. Assuming the instruments used in the new experiment are carefully 
checked and their readings veriﬁ ed, one sensible conclusion to draw is that the 
hypothesized particle is real. Yet its not being discerned in no matter how many 
experiments are run in which it makes no appearance, this produces no evidence 
that there is no such particle. (Here, it may help to remember the gambler’s fal-
lacy—the gambler reasons that if he bets ten times on horses on which the odds 
are ten-to-one that it will lose, and has lost nine times, that he is sure to win when 
he does the same thing a tenth time.) The point is that whether the claim that if 
there can be positive evidence from X occurring in circumstance C, X’s not occur-
ring in C is evidence against that proposition is true depends on the details of the 
context in which the claim is made. The claim is not a necessary truth, and seems 
false concerning experiential evidence for theism. 
 The Evidential Argument from Religious Experience 
 Another point is worth notice. One might argue in this manner: concerning reli-
gious experiences that are at least apparently experiences of God, the best expla-
nation of the occurrence of these experiences is that God causes them, so it is 
more reasonable than not to believe that God causes them; if God causes them, 
then God exists; thus it is more reasonable than not to believe that God exists. This 
is an  inferential argument from religious experience. It is compatible with the 
argument offered here that this inferential argument succeeds. But the argument 
here is not an inferential argument from religious experience. 
 An  evidential  argument from religious experience has a different shape. It goes 
like this: 
 Experiences occur that at least seem to be experiences of God; if these satisfy 
a correct principle of experiential evidence, they are reasonably taken to be 
reliable; they do satisfy a correct principle of experiential evidence, they are 
hence reasonably taken to be reliable; if they are reasonably taken to be reli-
able, then they provide evidence that God exists; hence they provide evidence 
that God exists. The argument presented here is an  evidential  argument from 
religious experience, not an  inferential argument from religious experience. 5 
 Here is a basic version of the evidential argument from religious experience: 
 1. 
Experiences occur that are a matter of their subjects at least seeming to expe-
rience God. 

172 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 2. If the subjects of experiences of this sort (non-culpably) have no reason to 
think that these experiences are canceled or counterbalanced or compromised 
or conceptually challenged, then their occurrence provides them with evi-
dence that God exists. 
 3. 
The subjects of experiences of this sort typically have no reason to think that 
these experiences are canceled or counterbalanced or compromised or con-
ceptually challenged. 
 Hence: 
 4. 
These experiences provide evidence that God exists. [from 1–3] 
 The Principle of Experiential Evidence Applied 
 The ﬁ rst premise is an empirical truth. The argument of course also requires that 
premise 2 is true. Here is an argument for that premise. Premise 2 says that reli-
gious experience is not disqualiﬁ ed by any of the considerations included in: 
 (P4) If a person S has an experience E that, if reliable, is a matter of being aware 
of an experience-independently existing item X, and S (non-culpably) has no rea-
son to think that E is canceled or counterbalanced or compromised or conceptu-
ally challenged, then S’s having E provides S evidence that X exists. Promise 3 is 
an empirical truth. 
 Suppose, then, that Mary has what is an at least apparent experience of God. 
The ﬁ rst two relevant terms in (P4) are deﬁ ned, relative to an experience provid-
ing evidence, as follows: 
  1. Mary’s experience is  cancelled  as evidence if she has reason to think that she 
would seem to experience God whether or not God exists (or at least whether 
God caused the experience).
  (Strictly, so far as evidence goes, it presumably would not matter whether God 
“built it into” the world at creation or was the immediate cause of the experience.)  
 2. 
Mary’s experience is  counterbalanced as evidence if she has reason to believe 
that it is just as likely that she seems to experience God if God exists as it is 
if God does not exist.
  Suppose, then, that Mary has a religious experience in which she at least ap-
pears to encounter a majestic, holy, powerful, loving being—an experience 
similar to those described earlier as central to monotheistic traditions. It is 
very likely that Mary will have no reason to think that she would seem to ex-
perience this being even if it did not exist. This is made more likely if she has 
not been taking drugs that might cause such an experience. If (as was argued 
earlier) social (and natural) science explanations do not typically “explain 

Monotheism and Religious Experience 173
away” religious experience, Mary’s experiential evidence is not cancelled. 
She is also unlikely to have any reason to think that it is just as likely that she 
have the experience if the being in question does not exist as it is that she will 
have it if that being does exist. In the light of the truth of the basic idea of our 
principle of experiential evidence—that one’s at least seeming to experience  X 
is evidence that  X  exists unless we have some good reason to think otherwise—
one claiming that Mary’s experience is counterbalanced owes us some particular 
reason for thinking so. An argument that God does not exist, even if it had some 
force, would provide evidence one way; this would not entail that Mary’s expe-
rience did not provide evidence the other way. If Mary knows of an apparently 
successful proof that any monotheistically satisfactory concept of God is self-
contradictory, then her experience is conceptually contradicted, but that there 
is any such argument is far from obvious, and a point much disputed. If Mary’s 
experience is counterbalanced, say by some version of the problem of evil, then 
it is still evidence for theism, even if, given a broader perspective, that evidence 
faces counter-evidence.    
 It seems fair to claim that the 1–4 argument makes at least a plausible case for 
its conclusion. Any such conclusion, for or against monotheism, is part of a long, 
complex dispute—one that we are partly describing. 
   Question Thirteen: Can you give me an example or two of experiential evi-
dence such that, if it occurred, it would be evidence against God’s existence?  
 Here are two. One concerns a post-mortem experience. 
 One : If everyone, upon dying, were to go to a place where everyone was ex-
quisitely happy, civilized, and glad to be alive, or to a place where everyone was 
devastatingly unhappy, crude and violent, and devoutly wishing for their annihila-
tion; those in the happy habitat are without exception those who have opposed the 
idea of God, been atheists or at least agnostics, been hostile to monotheism of any 
kind, and enjoyed nothing so much as committing blasphemy; those in the miser-
able habitat are without exception those who have, as they thought, worshipped 
and served God, been sincere monotheists, prayed, sang hymns, and tried to live 
lives in accord with monotheistic morality; societies for psychical research com-
municate with both habitats and receive convincing evidence that this is indeed 
how things are in the afterlife; scientists working in the happy habitat discover 
that there are fundamental laws of nature that will keep those in the happy habitat 
there, and those in the miserable habitat there, forever. 
 The other is pre-mortem. 
 Two : If most apparent experiences of a non-human intelligence was of a 
powerful being who enjoys wickedness, encourages rape and murder and 
torture, excruciating suffering accompanies all such experiences and those 
who have them become exceedingly violent and dangerous, and the only 
remaining religious experiences are those in which the subjects are ﬁ rst given 

174 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
experiences with phenomenologies like those of monotheistic experiences and 
then followed by phenomenologies in which it is explained that monotheistic 
experiences were given to religious fools to deceive them.  
 Were experiences of the ﬁ rst sort to occur, we would have experiential evi-
dence against the existence of God, perhaps of the same kind as are Mary’s 
own experience and possibly not. (Given the looseness of the notion of a  kind of 
experience, one could dispute the claim that they would be of the same kind. 
It does not seem to matter. If the sort one experiences are not of the same kind 
as Mary’s at least apparent experience of God, it may also be the case that the 
requirement that they be of the same kind is too unclear to give any force to 
the idea that relevant possibly conﬁ rming and possibly disconﬁ rming experi-
ence be of the same kind.) Were experiences of sort two to occur, we would 
have experiences more clearly of the same kind as Mary’s—experiences at 
least apparently of a powerful, overwhelming non-human being who was not 
holy and loving but wicked and hateful; these experiences would be expe-
riential evidence against  God exists . It is logically possible that such experi-
ences occur. So it is not logically impossible that there be experiential evidence 
against God’s existence. 
 Evidence Only for the Experiential Subjects? 
 Suppose one learns that explorers in northern Minnesota have discovered black 
squirrels, hitherto thought to inhabit only the East with their center on the Princ-
eton University campus, though the Minnesota variety thrive on pine cones and 
ﬁ sh as well as nuts and weigh as much as forty pounds. The explorers’ squirrel-
spotting and squirrel-weighing experiences satisfy (P4  ), and so are evidence for 
there being the squirrel giants. They also satisfy (P4*) and so provide the explor-
ers with evidence for their conclusions. There is nothing to prevent one from 
learning from all this that northern Minnesota is blessed with giant black squirrels 
without oneself making a trip there. Similarly, if religious experiences occur that 
satisfy (P4), and so are evidence, and satisfy (P**) relative to their subjects who 
accept the experiences as evidence, they provide evidence for the claim that God 
exists. There is no reason why one cannot learn of the occurrence of such expe-
riences, consider (P4) and (P4*) relative to one’s own situation, and conclude 
that these experience, had by others, provide one with evidence that God exists. 
Indeed, there would be nothing unreasonable in taking them to be such evidence, 
even if their subjects did not, provided one had no reason to think that those sub-
jects were anything other than mistaken in whatever reasons they might have for 
not accepting their own experiences as evidence that God exists. 6  It is an extreme 
skepticism regarding testimony and historical evidence to simply set aside the 
widespread evidence of people having at least apparent experiences of God, and a 
point rightly granted by most critics of theism. 

Monotheism and Religious Experience 175
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
  1. 
What, if anything, can be learned by comparing religious with non-
religious experience? 
 2. 
What is a principle of experiential evidence? 
 3. 
How does one evaluate such principles? 
 4. 
How effective are social science explanations in debunking apparent 
experiences of God as evidence? 
 5. 
How important is the fact that religious experiences have occurred 
over time and cross-culturally? 
 Notes 
   1.  Using “a holy, powerful being” as a brief description of the content of monotheistic 
religious experiences. 
 2.  And, of course, claims logically entailed by those claims. 
   3.  To completely describe something is to state every truth about that thing. There is 
nothing whatever such that any human person can completely describe it. Other than 
the unsurprising fact that we are not omniscient, it is hard to say that anything of par-
ticular philosophical interest follows from this. 
   4.  For what it is worth, conceptual, moral, and aesthetic experiences are more like reli-
gious experiences in these respects than like sensory experiences. 
 5.  Here is an extension of an evidential argument from religious experience: 
 1. Experiences occur that are a matter of their subjects at least seeming to experience God. 
 2. If experiences of this sort are not canceled or counterbalanced or compromised or 
conceptually challenged, then their occurrence is evidence that God exists. 
 3. Experiences of this sort are not canceled or counterbalanced or compromised or 
contradicted or confuted or logically consumed or empirically consumed. 
 Hence: 
 4. These experiences are evidence that God exists. [from 1–3] 
 It continues: 
 5. If these experiences occur in various cultures, and at various times, to people of 
various backgrounds and socio-economic status, their evidential force is increased. 
 6. These experiences occur in various cultures, and at various times, to people of 
various backgrounds and socio-economic status. 
 Hence: 
 7. Their evidential force is increased. 
 
 While the claims that appear in the premises of this argument are interesting, controversial, 
and—in the present author’s view—entirely defensible, discussing them in detail would take 
far aﬁ eld—into discussions, for example, of the similarity or otherwise of at least apparent 
experiences of God as these occur in different times and places and religious traditions. 

176 Arguments and Monotheistic Conceptions
 
 A ﬁ nal issue should be mentioned. If one sees a cup on the table and not unreasonably 
comes to believe that  There is a cup on the table , in all strictness one believes more 
than one’s current experience tells. The cup one believes is on the table, if it exists at 
all, is an enduring thing; one’s current experience is momentary. It is not a matter of 
pure report of sensory experiences if one looks again and has an experience with the 
same sensory phenomenology that one says that the same cup is still there; it is logi-
cally possible that the old cup has passed away and been replaced by a new one. Cups 
have other sides, and one sees only this side; perhaps one sees only a cup facade. The 
point is not to provide a basis for skepticism about cups, but simply to note that even 
a very modest claim about an ordinary object strictly goes beyond the experiential 
information one currently possesses. 
 
  Underdetermination looms larger in scientiﬁ c theory where there will always be 
more that one possible way of explaining what is observed, so that claims that various 
sorts of theoretical entities exist are underdetermined by the data on the basis of which 
such claims are made. Even religious experiences of a phenomenologically think 
sort—Isaiah in the temple in the presence of an awesome holy being in whose presence 
he senses his own sinfulness and need for forgiveness, for example—underdetermine 
the claims, for example, that God is omnipotent and omniscient. In religion and theol-
ogy, as in everyday sensory experience and scientiﬁ c theory, conceptual experiences 
join with sensory or religious experiences in more fully determining the concepts used 
to describe the objects of experience. How this goes in any given case is likely to be 
complex and fascinating. The next step would be to ask what reasons monotheism can 
supply for claiming that God is omnipotent and omniscient. But that is another story. 
 Suggested Readings 
 Alston, William (1991)  Perceiving God  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press). Argues 
that the practice of belief formation within which Christians claim to experience God is 
reliable; considers a host of epistemological views. 
 Broad, C. D. (1953)  Religion, Philosophy, and Psychical Research  (London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul). Contains a standard, rather favorable discussion of religious experi-
ence by an agnostic. 
 Davis, Carolyn Franks (1989)  The Evidential Force of Religious Experience  (Oxford: Clar-
endon Press). Argues that religious experience provides evidence for God’s existence. 
Its strength is its detailed discussion of social science theories; supposes that there is 
only one kind of religious experience. 
 Fales, Evan (2010)  Divine Intervention: Metaphysical and Epistemological Puzzles (New 
York: Routledge). Considers the question of religious experience from the perspective 
of laws of nature, causality, and time. 
 Gellman, Jerome (2002)  Mystical Experience of God: A Philosophical Enquiry (Alder-
shot: Ashgate). Presentation of religious experience as evidence for God’s existence and 
defends it against traditional and feminist objections. 
 Hardy, Alister (1979)  The Spiritual Nature of Man: A Study of Contemporary Religious 
Experience  (Oxford: Clarendon Press). Presents reports of religious experiences by 
“ordinary people.” 
 Martin, C. B. (1989)  Religious Experience  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press). Argues 
that religious experience does not provide evidence that God exists. 

Monotheism and Religious Experience 177
 McNamara, Patrick (2014)  The Neuroscience of Religious Experience  (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press). An excellent way into the literature on brain correlates to reli-
gious experience. 
 Rowe, W. L. (1982) “Religious experience and the principle of credulity,”  International 
Journal for the Philosophy of Religion , Vol. 13, pp. 85–92. Argues that religious experi-
ence does not provide evidence for religious belief. 
 Wainwright, William J. (2006)  Reason and the Heart: A Prolegomenon to a Critique of 
Passional Reason  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell). Seeks a middle ground between detached rea-
son and subjectivity via emotion-guided reason and discusses Newman, James, and 
especially Edwards. 
 ——— (2015)  Reason, Revelation, and Devotion: Inference and Argument in Religion 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). Makes a cross-cultural case that sheer logi-
cal skill and ability needs to be supplemented by proper “habits of the heart” in order for 
our judgments to be sound. 
 Yandell, Keith E. (1993)  The Epistemology of Religious Experience  (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press). Full-dress presentation of the argument of this chapter.     
 

This page intentionally left blank

 Part IV 
 Arguments concerning 
Nonmonotheistic 
Conceptions 

This page intentionally left blank

 Appeals to Argument and Appeals to Experience 
 Three views are relevant here: Advaita Vedanta’s claim that (i) only Brahman 
without qualities exists, Jainism’s contention that (ii) persons are independently 
immortal existing beings, and the typical Buddhist view that (iii) persons are com-
posite entities, made up of other things that are not persons and that comprise 
the basic constituents of the universe. These are obviously logically incompatible 
claims; all could be false, but not more than one could be true. If only quality-
less Brahman exists, persons and non-person constituents of persons, which have 
qualities if they exist, do not exist—if (i) is true, (ii) and (iii) are false. If persons 
are not composed of non-person constituents, and of course have properties, they 
are not identical to Brahman; thus if (ii) is true then (i) and (iii) are false. If per-
sons are made up of non-person constituents, then these constituents have proper-
ties and persons are composite—if (iii) is true, then (i) and (ii) are false. 
 These claims are defended and attacked by appeal to argument and appeal to expe-
rience. By ‘appeal to argument’ is meant use of arguments whose premises do not 
contain reports of non-conceptual experiences people have or are alleged to have 
had; by ‘appeal to experience’ is meant use of arguments that do contain reports of 
non-conceptual experiences people have, or are alleged to have had, or simple appeal 
to those reports. A conceptual experience is one in which, without appeal to sensory 
or introspective experience, one comes to see the meaning, and perhaps the truth 
value, of some proposition; seeing that nothing can have incompatible properties, 
noticing that it cannot be known that no one knows anything, seeing that if there 
are tables then there are physical objects, are examples of conceptual experiences. 
Highly undervalued, and often ignored, such experiences are experiences without 
whose possession ordinary life, let alone philosophy, would be impossible. The pres-
ent chapter will be concerned with appeal to argument using contents of conceptual 
experiences; the next chapter will deal with appeal to non-conceptual experiences.  
 Advaita Vedanta 
 It looks as though Advaita wants to hold logically inconsistent theses. In particu-
lar, it begins with the claim that something exists but altogether lacks properties, 
and that something that altogether lacks properties can be identical to a variety of 
 Arguments concerning 
Nonmonotheistic Conceptions 
 12 

182 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
things that have properties and are distinct from one another. To exist and to have 
properties are not alternatives. Each entails the other—anything that has proper-
ties exists and anything that exists has properties. We have the concept of Santa 
Claus, not because Santa exists or has properties, but because—given that we 
have a concept of Santa—we know (to some degree) what properties Santa would 
have were he to exist. So we do not have a counter-example here of the to-exist-is-
to-have-properties-and-to-have-properties-is-to-exist necessary connection. The 
idea of something that has no properties is the idea of nothing. 
 The identity claim is dealt with by distinguishing between the level of appear-
ance from the level of reality—how things appear and how things are. But appear 
to whom? Appearances cannot appear to appearances. But the appearance/real-
ity distinction requires that there be some reality to which things appear. Brah-
man is qualityless and so cannot experience appearances, and the reception of 
appearances is a state of ignorance that cannot with any propriety be ascribed to 
Brahman, which has no defects. So there is nothing left to which appearances can 
appear. 
 The Advaita claim that Nirguna Brahman is ineffable has its own enormous 
problems. The idea that Brahman is identical to each individual soul, which is 
central to Advaita, is incompatible with Brahman being ineffable. If everything 
at the level of appearance is identical to Brahman, then Brahman is identical to 
everything at the level of appearance, from which it follows that everything at 
the level of appearance is identical to Brahman. This inference will of course be 
rejected on the grounds that an appearance need not have the properties possessed 
by that of which it is the appearance. The problem is that if everything at the level 
of appearance is an appearance of Brahman, then this is true of Brahman, which 
is hence not ineffable. Further, if Brahman is ineffable, then we are left with the 
claim that  Brahman is . . .  with no sanctioned way of ﬁ lling out the sentence. Even 
claiming that Brahman is ineffable applies a concept to Brahman, which breaks 
the rule that it asserts. To put the point differently, halfway toward symbolic logic, 
we have  There is an X such that, for any property Q, it is not the case that X has 
Q . But it is also supposed to be the case that any Atman (soul) A is identical to 
Brahman, so Brahman has the property  being identical to A . Then it follows that 
however many individual souls there may be, there are that many cases of Brah-
man having the property of being identical to each. (I leave aside the idea of Brah-
man being identical to anything else.) If one replies that Brahman is identical to 
A in the sense that Brahman appears to be, or as, A, then Brahman has the property 
 appearing as A . Further, moksha—enlightenment experience—is supposed to 
conﬁ rm Brahmanic doctrine via one having a pure consciousness experience. But 
even supposing that there can be a subjectless and contentless experience, why 
should this be taken to be—and how could it be—evidence for anything? How 
could one tell by experience that one thing was identical to everything? Insofar as 
Advaita doctrine rests on experience, it seems to ﬁ nd no possible support that does 
not come from experience had by some subject who is herself only appearance. 
The suggestion that the bridge between the Atman (soul) of Chandra and Brah-
man without qualities comes by way of philosophical or theological theory. But 

Arguments and Nonmonotheism 183
since Brahman without qualities is said to be ineffable, this leaves the theoretical 
bridge attached only at one end (the Atman) with nothing at the other end to which 
it can be attached, 
 Other Vedantins have pressed these sorts of problems with Advaitan. For one 
example, Ramanujan, 1    a Visistadvaitan  , for example, held that it was contradic-
tory to hold that  There is an X such that for every property P, X lacks P . (Or, if 
existence itself is a property,  There is an X such that for any property P other than 
existence, X lacks P .) One way of putting a Ramanuja-like point is to note that to 
claim that Brahman, or anything else, is qualityless is to claim that it exists and 
deny an entailment of that very claim. Hence Advaita Vedanta metaphysics is not 
even possibly true. Ramanuja’s critique seems decisive, and there is no point in 
lingering over logical impossibilities. 
 Jainism and Buddhism on Persons 
 Three Exclusive but Non-exhaustive Alternatives 2 
 Three alternatives regarding the nature of mind and body are idealism, material-
ism, and dualism. Idealism holds that having a mental property is kind-deﬁ ning 
relative to the only kind of substances there are; materialism gives that status 
to having a physical property; dualism holds that having a mental property and 
having a physical property are kind-deﬁ ning relative to two distinct kinds of sub-
stances. 3  Thus each of these views is substantival and essentialist: each holds 
that there are substances that belong to a kind and hence have essences. Among 
mind-body dualists, some suppose minds or souls to exist without depending on 
anything else whatever, and so are inherently immortal; others take souls to exist 
dependent upon God and as immortal by grace since God could cease to support 
them in existence at any time. For example, the Jain view is that it is impossible 
that a soul cease to exist; Christianity, insofar as it accepts dualism, holds to the 
less radical version.  
 Property Dualism versus Substance Dualism 
 Jain dualism is one version of mind-body dualism. Insofar as religious traditions 
are dualistic concerning mind and body, they hold to a dualism of substances, not 
merely a dualism of properties. Property dualism concerning mental and physi-
cal properties holds that being a mental property deﬁ nes one kind of property 
and being a physical property deﬁ nes another kind of property, and it is logically 
impossible these properties belong to the same thing. A property Q is a mental 
property if and only if  X has Q  entails  X is conscious , or, on a higher standard, 
self-aware. Not every non-mental property is a physical property; “being prime” 
is not a physical property, nor is “having only consistent properties.” Without pre-
tense of precision, let us refer to such properties as “abstract properties” and then 
suggest that property Q* is a physical property if and only if Q* is neither mental 
nor abstract. There are more concrete deﬁ nitions of being a physical property; 

184 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
for example, one can say that Q* is a physical property if and only if  X has Q 
entails  X is spatially located  or  X is a property referred to or expressed by some 
predicative term used in some contemporary theory in natural science or some 
similar successor . But the more concrete examples raise problems; it is not clear 
that there is any univocal sense in which both chairs and elementary particles are 
“spatially located” and “similar” in “similar successor” means “physicalistic” (or 
something less clear). 4 
 Philosophical dislike or disdain of substance dualism will, in the current aca-
demic climate, suggest to even the most convinced property dualist, of which 
there are many, that they should not go further and embrace substance dualism. 
A substance dualist concerning mind and body holds that not only are ‘being men-
tal’ and ‘being physical’ deﬁ nitive of different kinds of properties, but each is a 
kind-deﬁ ning property relative to a sort of substance—‘being mental’ constitutes 
one kind or essence and ‘being physical’ constitutes another kind or essence, it 
being logically impossible that any one substance belong to both kinds. Some-
thing is a substance if it has properties, is not itself merely a bundle of properties, 
has an essence, and (if it is temporal) can remain the same over time and through 
change of nonessential properties. For a substance dualist, persons are mental 
substances. Typically for a dualist, human beings are persons embodied in geneti-
cally homo sapiens bodies. Substance dualism, and its associated view of persons, 
has a highly distinguished history. For example, Plato, Augustine, Anselm, Des-
cartes, Samuel Clarke, and Thomas Reid all held it. It also has some distinguished 
contemporary advocates. 5  Its popularity currently is at low tide, this arguably (if a 
pun be allowed) being more a matter of fashion than of substance. 
 Identity 
 Symmetry and Transitivity of Identity 
 The proposition  A is identical to B  entails the proposition  B is identical to A . The 
propositions  A is identical to B and  B is identical to C entail the proposition  A is 
identical to C . These two simple facts about identity are expressed by logicians by 
saying that identity is reﬂ exive and transitive. Whether A, B, and C are wombats, 
kumquats, tuxedos, numbers, angels, or galaxies, identity among them is reﬂ exive 
and transitory. To deny this is to deny that there is any such thing as identity as 
applied to them, which is the same as denying that there are any such things. 
 Numerical versus Qualitative Identity 
 In considering competing views of persons, and of personal identity, it is crucial 
to keep ﬁ rmly in mind the distinction between numerical identity and the quite 
different matter of qualitative (so-called) identity or close resemblance. Suppose 
Tim has a penny in each hand, each minted in Philadelphia in 1998, both bright 
and unscratched. He names the one in his left hand “Cop” and the one in his right 
hand “Per.” Cupping his hands together, he shakes the pennies and then again 
grasps one in one hand and one in the other. Neither he nor we were able to keep 

Arguments and Nonmonotheism 185
track of either penny during the shaking. In these simple circumstances, we know 
that Cop is still in Tim’s left hand or else Cop is now in Tim’s right hand, and that 
either Per is still in Tim’s right hand or else Per is now in Tim’s left hand. But we 
do not know which. 
 This simple example illustrates various important concepts. Both Cop and Per 
retain numerical identity over time. Cop’s (and Per’s) having numerical identity 
over time is a fact about it independent of our knowledge of it. Cop and Per are 
(nearly) qualitatively identical; that is why we cannot, at the end of the shaking, 
tell which penny is which. But each retains numerical identity over time and each 
remains numerically distinct from the other, independent of our knowing which 
is which. 
 Any substance is self-identical, identical to itself at each moment of its exis-
tence; identity in this sense is numerical identity. If substance X exists at time T1 
and continues to exist at the next moment T2, then the X that exists at T2 is identi-
cal to the X that existed at T1; here, too, identity is numerical identity. 
 Numerical identity, strictly speaking, is identity; qualitative identity is a matter 
not of identity but of resemblance. For a dualist, personal identity is numerical 
identity of a person—a self-conscious substance—identity to itself at a time, and 
to its continuingly existing self over each of various times. 6 Temporal endurance 
of a simple substance is sufﬁ cient for its continuing numerical identity. For a 
simple substance X to endure from T through T* is for it to be the case that exists 
at each time from T through T*, and for any property Q such that Q is essential 
to X, X has Q. Especially when it comes to persons, the endurance of a single 
substance through time versus a series of things of momentary duration that runs 
from T through T*, is highly signiﬁ cant. 
 Personal Identity 
 General Criteria for Theories of Personal Identity 
 A theory of personal identity should consist of elements none of which is itself 
self-contradictory that are also logically consistent with one another, each of 
which coheres with the others in such a way as to yield a plausible account of 
what it is to be a person, where the account is compatible with, and explanatory 
of, the things we know about persons. 
 An Exclusive Disjunction 
 These are two basic sorts of views held regarding persons: persons are simple or 
complex. If they are simple, they are substances. 7  If they are complex, they are 
composed of substances or qualities or states or whatever. If they are substances, 
they are either mental or physical. If they are not substances, they are complex 
and composed of mental and/or physical qualities or states or whatever. It is logi-
cally impossible that both views be true. There are various substantival views 
about persons other than the Jain view (for example, that persons are material 

186 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
substances, that persons are created, that persons are not inherently immortal). 
There are other non-substantival views about persons other than the Theravada 
view (for example, that rather than states, it is qualities, events, processes, or the 
like that make up persons). 8  But the claims  Persons are simple substances , essen-
tial to Jainism, and  Persons are not simple substances , essential to Buddhism, are 
obviously exclusive. What does each entail? 
 Bundle Theory 
 A Non-substantival View of Persons 
 The sort of complexity account of persons that concerns us here holds that (i) per-
sons are not substances; (ii) a person is composed of elements that are not them-
selves persons; (iii) these elements, whatever they are, exist only momentarily; 
and (iv) what makes a bundle of elements that compose a person at one time (part 
of) the same person as another bundle at a later time is some relation R that holds 
between the bundles. There is a constraint on what relation R can be. It cannot 
be numerical identity over time, since R is supposed to explain—to state the suf-
ﬁ cient conditions for—numerical identity of persons over time. 
 The idea, then, is that a person at a time is a bundle B1 of momentary apersonal 
elements, that a person at another time is another bundle B2 of momentary ele-
ments. No element in one bundle can be identical to an element in another bundle. 
Over time, a person is a series of bundles. Our deepest concern here is with the 
structure of this type of view, not with its content. There are different accounts 
of what the alleged elements are that make up a person at a time; they may be 
viewed as physical, as mental, or as some of each. There are different notions of 
what relation R allegedly relates bundles over time into one person: resemblance, 
temporal continuity, memory, causality, a combination of these, and so on. 
 Earlier Buddhist bundle theories tell us that the bundles are composed of both 
mental and physical states, later theories include only mental states. For simplic-
ity we will focus on the latter. Since the contents of a person’s mind may vary con-
siderably from moment to moment, it is entirely possible that bundle B at time T2 
in series S2 may resemble bundle A at time T1 in series S1 more than the bundle 
that follows A in S1. The results of making resemblance the ground of linkage 
between bundles will shift personal identity from series to series in a random 
manner, its not being in reality required that Tom endures for T through T1 only if 
the states that compose Tom at two different times resemble one another to some 
high degree. Temporal continuity is important, but for any bundle that exists at T 
there will be an enormous class of other bundles that occur at T1. Memory as the 
key to linkage presupposes personal identity—one can remember doing only what 
one did or observed. Causality is a better choice, and it is the one chosen. One can 
put the Buddhist view this way. Persons are composite in three respects. First, they 
are composed of bundles. Second, the bundles are composed of momentary states. 
Third, the bundles compose a causal series that is all there is to a person. Talk of 
a series of bundles is a more economical way of speaking of bundles collectively 

Arguments and Nonmonotheism 187
and does not refer to some entity above and beyond the bundles themselves. All 
there is to a person at a given time simply is a bundle of conscious states, and all 
there is to a person over time is a series of bundles. Since each state is momentary, 
each bundle is momentary; no state belongs to as many as two bundles. No bundle 
outlasts, or is anything more than verbally beyond, its constituents. For some 
person—say, Amy—to perform some action at time T involves a bundle or series 
of bundles in a series named Amy to bring about effects. Amy’s action typically 
will not all occur at one time; few actions take only a moment. The effects that 
Buddhist doctrine regards as karmic occur over a later time. If all the karmic 
effects happened right away, then, contrary to Buddhist doctrine, karmic effects 
would not lead to reincarnation. Karmic consequences, positive or negative, 
would be instantaneously paid out. After the action ends, the action-causing series 
is forever gone. Hence no karmic effects shall accrue to that series. 
 The Buddhist idea is that the justice requirement be met as follows: a series 
of bundles other than those included in the action-causing bundles will receive 
the relevant karmic effects, and the action-causing bundles must be a part of the 
series to which the effect-receiving bundles belong. The idea is that so long as 
action and karmic consequence occur in the same series then justice is done. But 
the series just is one bundle after another that are sequentially causally connected. 
The bundles that successively cause one another do not give rise to a third sort of 
thing—a series in addition to states and bundles. If a sequence of forty bundles 
occurs in a causal series, talk of a series simply saves one the trouble of making 
forty separate references in order to tell what happened. There aren’t forty bundles 
plus a series. The net result then is that the karmic-consequence-receiving bundles 
are numerically distinct from the action-performing bundles, linked to those ear-
lier bundles by a causal chain that may contain a great many bundles since it may 
be that karmic consequences occur in a different lifetime than the action for which 
they are recompense. The point is that all there is that receives the recompense is 
a series of bundles that may be temporally and causally far distant form the series 
of bundles that caused the action for which recompense is due. 
 The fact is that on the Buddhist view of persons that we have been discussing 
it is not the same item (an earlier series of bundles) that receives the karmic con-
sequences of what an earlier item (a previous series of bundles long since gone) 
caused. The Buddhist ambition to make sure that persons are not primitive entities 
in the universe—with components that exist barely long enough to be there or 
all—yields a view in contradiction to the justice requirement that is basic to the 
law of karma (that which performs the action must receive the consequences that 
are due). On the Buddhist view of persons, the justice requirement that the agent 
of the deed be the recipient of the karmic consequences of the action is not met. 
 Perhaps contrasting Buddhist and Jain perspectives on karma—what claims 
each is entitled make given its metaphysical views—will aid clarity. The Buddhist 
doctrine can be put formally in this fashion: 
  (B1) If Lucy at T1 receives recompense for something A done by a person 
at time T, then Lucy at T1 is composite nonendurers that are members of 

188 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
(an element of or a constituent in) a composite (conventional) endurer—
a series—in which the composite nonendurers that did A at T are earlier 
members. 9 
 In contrast, the Jain view put equally formally is this: 
  (J1) If Lucy at T1 receives recompense for something A done by a person at 
time T, then Lucy at T1 is a noncomposite endurer who is numerically identi-
cal to the person (the noncomposite endurer) who did A at T. 
 Given (B1), the justice requirement is not met, and given (J1) it is. One of course 
can reject the justice requirement in favor of the Buddhist doctrine of persons. 
Nonetheless, the requirement is a signiﬁ cant element in karmic doctrine and an 
important part of the treatment of the problem of evil in which it arises relative to 
any tradition in which karmic doctrine plays an essential role. 
 An External Critique of the View That Persons Are Bundles 10 
 There are external criticisms of Buddhist-type views—criticisms that appeal to 
claims that are not part of a Buddhist-type account of persons or otherwise ele-
ments in a Buddhist perspective. There is nothing intrinsically philosophically 
problematic in the notion of such a critique or in various of its instances. If I for-
ward the hypothesis that Mahavira was a Buddhist, I am not thereby licensed to 
dismiss appeals to the contrary historical evidence by noting that such evidence is 
not part of my perspective; in fact, the evidence should be. There is no more rea-
son to despise external philosophical criticism than to despise external historical 
criticism. If I maintain that a rule of inference is valid if and only if everyone who 
is asked about it accepts it, thereby proposing to turn logic into a sort of sociol-
ogy, I cannot justiﬁ ably simply reply to the objection that the view assumed by the 
criticism is not part of the view being criticized. The criticism, though external, 
may be entirely correct, and the fact that I don’t agree is irrelevant. 
 Suppose that Rita is a series of bundles of conscious states. The bundles are 
connected by causation. Up until time T, the series that Ruth is runs along with-
out problems. Then suppose the following occurs at T1: bundle B in the Ruth 
series causes bundles B1 and B2, each of which then goes its own way. What 
happens to Ruth? If Ruth is identical to anything at T2, it is the new B1 series or 
the B2 series. Each series has, so to speak, equal right to claim to be the continua-
tion of Ruth. But since the B1 series is not numerically identical to the B2 series, 
it cannot be that both series continue Ruth, and if not both then neither. The B1 
series and the B2 series, each without the other, would continue Ruth. So double 
causation prevents Ruth from continuing whereas single causation would have 
preserved her. 
 Suppose the series B1 and the series B2 are twin states. Then the existence 
of two persons just like Ruth would have been prevents Ruth from continuing 
to exist. The suggestion that Ruth has then given birth to twins ignores that B1 

Arguments and Nonmonotheism 189
and B2 replace Ruth in the sequence. The suggestion that the B1 series continues 
Ruth and the B2 series is Ruth’s child ignores the fact that each, in the absence 
of the other, would be a continuation of Ruth herself, not a child of Ruth. These 
consequences are the result of Ruth being construed as occurring in time slices or 
temporal stages related as members of a causal series rather than as one substance 
enduring over time. 
 An Internal Critique of the View That Persons Are Bundles 
 Internal critiques of the sort relevant here claim the Buddhist-type account is inter-
nally inconsistent, or an argument to the effect that a Buddhist-type account is 
inconsistent with other Buddhist claims. Jain and Buddhist doctrines now diverge 
on two further points. In order to express them precisely, let us adopt a bit of tech-
nical terminology, but in order to express them clearly, let it be only a tiny bit. The 
Jain view of persons, we have noted, entails that for any person Lucy, all of Lucy 
exists at each moment at which Lucy exists. Lucy contains no elements; she is 
incomposite; she enjoys numerical identity over time. She is, then, a noncompos-
ite endurer. On the Buddhist view, there are no noncomposite endurers. Instead, 
there are noncomposite nonendurers. These are single momentary constituents. 
There are composite nonendurers. These are bundles of noncomposite nonendur-
ers. There would be composite endurers were a series of bundles more than the 
bundles that compose it. These are successions of composite nonendurers. But 
talk of composite endurers is metaphysically loose, since the composite endurers 
are conventional entities, being in sober fact just their composing bundles. 
 If issues concerning justice arise in comparison between Jain and Buddhist 
traditions, so do issues arise regarding memory. Both stem from their contrasting 
views of persons and account of personal identity. The claims can again be put 
formally and in so doing note the parallel structure of the issues. First, the Jain 
doctrine: 
  (J2) If Lucy at time T1 remembers performing action A at time T, then Lucy 
is a noncomposite endurer who is numerically identical at T and T1. 
 It is necessarily true that no Buddhist person/recompense pair ever satisfy (J1) 
(above) and that no Buddhist person/memory pair ever satisfy (J2). 11 The formal 
statement of the Buddhist view follows: 
  (B2) If Lucy at time T1 remembers performing action A at time T, then Lucy 
at T1 is composite nonendurers that are members of (an element of or a con-
stituent in) a composite (conventional) endurer in which the composite non-
endurers that did A at T are an earlier members. 
 The idea is that all is well regarding justice and memory so long as the series of 
bundles that caused the action are earlier members of a series in which the conse-
quence-receiving bundles and the action-remembering bundles are later members. 

190 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
 Reincarnation 
 Given what has already been said concerning memory and karmic justice, it is 
natural to wonder about reincarnation, which after all is closely connected to the 
justice requirement. Appeal to memory of past lives, sometimes offered in defense 
of the doctrine of past lives, is not nearly as central to Buddhist (or other rein-
carnation-including) traditions as the doctrine of reincarnation itself. Something 
similar holds regarding the doctrinal centrality of theistic proofs in theistic tradi-
tions: unless there are composite endurers who are things in addition to composite 
nonendurers (and who are persons), there will be no such thing as reincarnation 
as well as no recompense, or memories. But it seems that, on the Buddhist-type 
account, there cannot be any such thing as composite endurers save in the insipid 
sense in which ‘composite endurers’ refers to one composite nonendurer and then 
to another and then to another, which of course is not a sense of there being com-
posite endurers in addition to there being composite nonendurers. Thus the very 
idea of reincarnation is threatened. (Not all Buddhist traditions accept the idea; 
Mahayana Absolute Idealism does not.) 
 A series of bundles linked causally at time T is constituted by bundle B. B 
then causes two bundles: B1 and B. Here is no feature of a bundle theory that 
prevents this from occurring, and adding such a feature would be ad hoc. Sup-
pose, if this matters, that the content of B1 and B2 is properly related in terms 
of resemblance to B to be a continuing of the B-series. For simplicity I will 
assume that the content of B1 and B2 is nearly qualitatively identity.  As I noted 
earlier, the existence of a certain degree of resemblance seems irrelevant to 
whether one bundle belongs to the same series as another. But if one supposes 
that it is, the argument here anticipates even that consideration.  Suppose a sep-
arate series is caused by each of B1 and B2. In the absence of the other, each of 
B1 and B2 would constitute a continuation of the series in which B occurs. As 
it is, both the series started by B1 and the series started by B2 have equal claim 
to continue the series in which B occurs. Since the B1-series and B2-series are 
not identical, the B-series cannot be identical to both. Hence the B-series is 
identical to neither. Thus the existence of someone just like Vasabhandu at T1 
would prevent the continued existence of Vasabhandu at T1. So this constitutes 
a feature of the bundle theory of persons incompatible with what is true of per-
sons, namely that the existence of someone just like Vasabhandu at T1 would 
prevent his existence at T1. 
 In sum: Theravada Buddhism holds a complexity view of persons. The Jain 
tradition holds a substantival view. The complexity view does not support the 
occurrence of karmic justice, memory over or even within lifetimes, and removes 
an essential part of the doctrine of reincarnation. If there are only the substantival 
view and the complexity view, then the substantival view has the advantage in 
terms of being part of a worldview that includes reincarnation and karma doctrine 
or even provides for memory within or over lifetimes. 12  It does not follow that it 
is true in the Jain version thereof. 13 

Arguments and Nonmonotheism 191
 On There Being a Fact of the Matter 
 There is a reply to the criticisms just raised that goes as follows: suppose that 
there is a person—Sam, let’s say—at time T. Then at time T1 there come to be 
two persons—Sam1 and Sam2—each of whom bears R (whatever relation the 
complexity theory takes to constitute being the same person) to Sam. Then we can 
say what we like—that Sam 1 is identical to Sam, that Sam2 is identical to Sam, 
that Sam has ceased to exist and been replaced by Sam1 and Sam2, that Sam1 is 
identical to Sam on even numbered days and Sam2 is identical to Sam on odd 
numbered days, or whatever. The claim is that there would be no fact of the mat-
ter about whether Sam continues to exist if Sam is followed by Sam1 and Sam2. 
What we say, if anything, in answer to  Is either Sam1 or Sam2 identical to Sam? 
is conventional, arbitrary, or at most pragmatic; there is no true answer. 
 One can respond that there are contradictory answers to the question, and the 
complexity theory—as we have seen—entails them. What entails a contradic-
tion is necessarily false. This critique is not something that can be successfully 
responded to by saying, “Well, I accept the complexity theory but when it comes 
to what it entails I just dismiss those entailments that are false.” The question is 
not about what someone who holds the complexity theory feels comfortable about 
doing, but about whether the theory is true, and if it entails falsehoods, it isn’t true. 
This line of reasoning is correct providing there is a fact about the relevant matter. 
But since the criticism denies precisely that, simply assuming there is a fact of the 
matter gives no real response to the criticism. 
 The criticism has as its target the criticism of the arguments against the Buddhist 
view. It is not a defense at all of the Buddhist view. That view requires that there 
be a fact of the matter as to questions of personal identity—that  Is the person who 
receives the karmic consequences of an action the same person as the one who per-
formed it? ,  Is this person in lifetime B the same person as was incarnate in lifetime 
A (has reincarnation occurred)? , and  Is this person who achieves enlightenment 
at time T* that same person as sought it at earlier time T? . There being no fact of 
the matter as to how these questions should be answered—if the fact of the matter 
is that there is no fact of the matter—then this result is just as unacceptable to the 
Buddhist tradition under discussion as was the result yielded from the arguments at 
which the no-fact-of-the-matter criticism is targeted. The earlier arguments against 
the Buddhist view under review assumed that there is some fact of the matter, and 
the view entails that the facts are incompatible. It is not better for the complexity 
theory described earlier if there is no fact to be entailed. One could easily offer an 
argument that begins  Either there is a fact of the matter or not  and then offer ﬁ rst 
the argument that the complexity account either entails inconsistency or else there 
is no answer, either result being sufﬁ cient to show that the complexity account fails. 
 If it is a fact that the criticism of the earlier arguments is made, then it is a fact 
that someone made it. Offered criticisms do not stalk the world unchaperoned by 
someone who makes them. So if there is a fact of the matter about whether a criti-
cism is made, and the fact is that it was made, then there is also a fact of the matter 
as to who made it. But the criticism, at its strongest, is that on the complexity view 

192 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
there is no fact of the matter, and if the view entails inconsistent answers this can 
be the starting point for an argument that on the complexity view there is no fact 
of the matter. 
  But here is another way of seeing the problem. Consider Sam and the way 
things ordinarily go—Sam exists at time T and Sam exists at time T1 and 
no Sam1 and Sam2 crop up. If Sam-at-T is identical to—is the same person 
as—Sam-at-T1, then necessarily Sam-at-T is identical to—is the same per-
son as—Sam-at-T1. The Principle of the Necessity of Metaphysical Identity 
(PNI): If [A = B], then Necessarily, [A = B]. 14 
 We can offer a possible worlds argument for (PNI). Consider two possible 
worlds W1 and W2.  
 Deny (PNI). Suppose that A, B, and C all exist in possible worlds W1 and W2. 
Suppose also, as is possible if identity is contingent rather than necessary, that in 
W1, A is identical to B, and C is distinct from A and B. Suppose also, as is possible 
if identity is contingent rather than necessary, that in W2 A is identical to C, and 
B is distinct from A and C. If identity is contingent rather than necessary, W1 and 
W2 are possible as described. Now A-in-W1 is identical to A-in-W2, B-in-W1 is 
identical to B-in-W2, and C-in-W1 is identical to C-in-W2. But A-in-W1 is dis-
tinct from C-in-W1 and A-in-W2 is identical to C-in-W2; since C-in-W1 is identi-
cal to C-in-W2, it follows that A-in-W2 is identical to C-in-W1. Since A-in-W1 
is identical to A-in-W2, it follows that “both” A-in-W1 and A-in-W2 are, and also 
are not, identical to “both” C-in-W1 and C-in-W2. So again metaphysical identity 
is necessary. (As Saul Kripke noted, the terms ‘A,’ ‘B,’ and ‘C’ must have “rigid 
designation”—that is, have the same referents in all possible worlds.) 
 Here is another way of developing the argument against the complexity view. 
The complexity view entails that personal identity over time is logically contin-
gent, and that view is self-contradictory. Thus on a complexity view, there is no 
such thing as personal identity—were personal identity what a complexity view 
says it is, there would be no such thing. There would be a fact of the matter about 
Sam-at-T and Sam-at-T1 being the same person; he would not be, because there 
would be no such thing as being the same person over time. 
 Put differently, on the complexity view, with or without Sam1-and-Sam2-type 
scenarios, there aren’t any persons—talk of persons is “conventional” is a sense in 
which talking about persons is a way of speaking to which nothing that is a person 
corresponds. This, of course, is not an account of what persons are. It is a denial 
that there are any persons. 
 Substance Theory 
 Jain Dualism 
 There are a variety of arguments for mind-body dualism of the sort Jainism 
embraces. Some of them are clear failures. Epistemological arguments for mind-
body dualism infer from something about the way in which we know minds and 

Arguments and Nonmonotheism 193
bodies to the conclusion that the mind is distinct from the body. Let X = my mind’s 
existing, or that my mind exists, as grammatical structure dictates; let Y = my 
body’s existing, or that my body exists, as grammatical structure dictates. 
  Argument 1: I can think of X without thinking of Y; if I can think of X without 
thinking of Y, then not(X = Y), so: not(X = Y). 
 Argument 2: I cannot be mistaken with respect to X but I can be mistaken with 
respect to Y; if I cannot be mistaken with respect to X but I can be mistaken 
with respect to Y, then not(X = Y), so not(X = Y). 
 Argument 3: I cannot doubt X but I can doubt Y; if I cannot doubt X but I can 
doubt Y then not(X = Y), so not(X = Y). 
 Argument 4: I can be directly aware of X but I cannot be directly aware of 
Y; if I can be directly aware of X but I cannot be directly aware of Y then 
not(X = Y), so not(X = Y). 
 The problem with this sort of argument is that, in each case, the middle premise is 
false. ‘Can’ here means “it is logically possible that.” Consider these objections: 
  Reply to Argument 1: I can [it is logically possible that I] think of the cat Socks 
without thinking of the Clintons’ favorite cat, because it is logically possible 
that Socks is not the Clintons’ favorite cat. But it does not follow from this 
that Socks is not the Clintons’ favorite cat. 
 Reply to Argument 2: I cannot be mistaken if I think that two is greater than one, 
and I can be mistaken if I think that your favorite number is greater than one, 
but it does not follow that your favorite number is not two. 
 Reply to Argument 3: I cannot doubt that I exist but I can doubt that I am the one 
who is supposed to take out the garbage, but it does not follow that I am not 
the one who is supposed to take out the garbage. 
 Reply to Argument 4: I can be directly aware of my being in pain and I can-
not be directly aware of my feeling worse than ever before, but it does 
not follow that my being in pain is not my feeling worse than ever before.  
 Epistemological arguments such as these fail to prove their conclusions. The 
question remains as to whether other sorts of arguments are better. 
 Arguments for Jain Dualism 
 Philosophers James W. Cornman and Keith Lehrer remark that: 
  Mind-body dualism seems to be essential to most religions. The body will 
disintegrate after death, but according to the doctrines of many religions, the 
soul, the immaterial part of us which is quite distinct and different from the 
body, will live on eternally. . . . The primary philosophical problem is to ﬁ nd 
out whether dualistic interactionism or some other position is the most plau-
sible view about the nature of a person. 15 

194 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
 This remark ﬁ ts at least Jainism. 
 Aristotle took the Law of Non-contradiction to be a law of thought and of 
things. The law can be expressed in two sentences. 
  L1. No thing can both exist and not exist at the same time, or have and lack the 
same property at the same time. 
 L2. No true proposition can assert and deny the same thing. 
 The idea is that these are mind-independent claims—not true because of the way 
we use language, or the way we think, or anything else that might be otherwise. 
The idea, then is also that L1 and L2 are metaphysical principles, true in (and 
constraint on) all possible worlds—all the ways a world might be. Connected to 
these claims is an epistemological perspective to the effect that while mistakes 
are certainly possible, often one can see the truth of propositions whose denials 
are contradictory and recognize them as stating how things must be. One example 
may help. There is a simple rule of logic called conversion: 
 Conversion: If [if P then Q] then [not-Q then not-P] 
 For example, if ‘ There are three chairs in the room  entails  There are at least 
two chairs in the room  the  There are not at least two chairs in the room entails 
 There are not three chairs in the room . 
 Consider this less-than-thrilling exercise. Discern whether there are two people 
or just one person in the room: everyone in the room is 36, works in a factory, is 
left-handed, and a theology student. So far, you cannot tell. Further, while no one 
in the room will ever be in Chicago, the person or persons in the room could both 
be and not be in Chicago at the same time. This allows one to tell that there are 
two people in the room. The reasoning relies on the principle  A possible difference 
entails an actual difference . That is: 
  1.  If there is a possible difference between A and B, then A is not identical 
to B.  
 By conversion: 
 2.  If A is identical to B, then there is no possible difference between A and B. 
 This gives us another argument for the Principle of the Necessity of Metaphysical 
Identity (PNI). That principle is used in an argument that many dualists accept. It 
can be stated as follows. Consider some person Manindra. Then: 
  1.  It is logically possible that Manindra is self-aware and Manindra is in no 
bodily states (of any sort). Premise 
 2.  If it is logically possible that Manindra is self-aware and Manindra has no 
bodily states then Manindra’s being self-conscious is not identical to Manin-
dra’s being in any bodily states (of any sort). Necessary Truth 

Arguments and Nonmonotheism 195
 So: 
  3. Manindra’s being self-aware is not identical to Manindra’s being in bodily 
states (of any sort). [From 1, 2] 
 So: 
 4. 
Necessarily, Manindra’s being self-aware is not identical to Manindra’s hav-
ing bodily states (of any sort). [From 3 plus PNI] 
 The argument is plainly valid. The crucial premise is premise 1. What should 
be said about it? It rests on our seeing that it is possible to have a world with 
minds and no physical states—our conceiving a world, say, with unembod-
ied minds. The proposition  Manindra is self-aware and in no bodily states 
involves no structural contradiction. It also seems to involve no semantic con-
tradiction. But the same, in both cases, is true of the contradictory proposi-
tion to premise 1. Not surprisingly, philosophers differ regarding premise 1. 
We face here a problem familiar to us from our discussion of the Ontological 
Argument. There seems nothing contradictory in the claim that God is that 
being who is omnipotent, omniscient, and morally perfect in every possible 
world. Neither does there seem to be anything contradictory in the denial of 
this claim. Yet, for reasons stated earlier, one or the other is (broadly) neces-
sarily false. Similarly, there seems nothing contradictory about the claim that 
minds are numerically distinct from bodies—that a world exist in which there 
are minds but not bodies. But if this is so, then by the Principle of the Neces-
sity of Metaphysical Identity, minds and bodies are necessarily non-identical. 
Correspondingly, there seems nothing contradictory in the view that minds are 
identical to brains, or perhaps more of the central nervous system. Arguments 
to the contrary will point to proposed properties that minds have that bodies 
cannot have and conversely. 
 The dispute concerns essences—if they have essences, what are the essences of 
mind and of body? Descartes took the essence of mind to be that it is a thinking 
thing (self-aware and capable of a range of mental states, introspective, percep-
tual, and abstract) and the essence of body to be location in space—strictly, to be 
extended. It seems that one could amend the view of Descartes so that it says that to 
be physical is to be located in space or a constituent of something that is. It seems 
beyond dispute that the meaning or sense of mental terms cannot be reduced to the 
meaning or sense of physical terms—for example, mental descriptions. 
 Tom has thought out a Theory of Everything  cannot be restated without 
remainder into any statement describing any set of physical states.   The mean-
ings will not be the same. The physicalist typically will take there to be an 
identity of reference between the subject terms of the mentalistic sentence 
and the physicalistic sentence offered as its parallel, and between the predi-
cate terms of the sentences. 

196 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
 For a simpler example, consider  Tom is in pain  and  Tom’s C-ﬁ bers are 
ﬁ ring . The physicalist will insist on identity of reference, so that “pain” and 
“C-ﬁ bers ﬁ ring” occur, respectively, in everyday discourse and scientiﬁ c 
discourse, and correspond to the same physical state or states. Part of the 
dispute is due to the fact that there is something it is like to be in pain, and 
it is anything but obvious that this is something physical. Property and sub-
stance dualists take “being in pain” to be a mental property and physicalists 
take it to be a physical property. Identity theory physicalists hold that the 
phenomenological property (feeling of pain) and the indisputably physical 
property C-ﬁ bers ﬁ ring, while they do not seem to be the same, really are. 
The grounds for this, to keep things simple, is the discovery that when the 
subject reports pain, an appropriately equipped observer observes C-ﬁ bers 
ﬁ ring.  
 This (plus the assumption of physicalism) yields the conclusion that this is a case 
of identity. The property dualist and the substance dualist takes this as showing 
correlation and is not surprised that pain can be created by producing its cor-
related physical state. The physicalist is equally unsurprised when this happens, 
explaining the production of pain by the pain being the same as the physical state. 
 There being lots of embodied minds is no objection to premise 1. It is perfectly 
compatible with all the minds we ever encounter being embodied. What the ﬁ rst 
premise says is that being embodied is neither a necessary nor a sufﬁ cient con-
dition for having or being a mind—that having bodily states is not an essential 
feature of beings that are or have minds. The oft-made comment to the effect that 
all the minds one has encountered have been embodied is simply not to the point 
as to whether minds are necessarily embodied. 
 Rationalist philosophers can be characterized as rejecting two theses that 
empiricist philosophers embrace. First, that all our concepts are derived from sen-
sory or introspective experience. Second, that all necessarily true propositions are 
trivial—they are expressible in sentences of the form  All A are A or  All AB are A 
or  If P then P  or more sophisticated logical structures. The ﬁ rst empiricist claim 
bears the slogan ‘all our descriptive concepts are empirical’ or ‘all our concepts 
are abstracted from sense experience.’ But one can abstract out of experience 
only what is already there. For the empiricist claim to have clear enough sense 
for it to be assessed, something more must be said about the content of sensory 
experience. On one account, the contents of sensory experience are secondary 
qualities (accessible to one sense only) and primary qualities (accessible to more 
than one sense). A rationalist response will point to concepts like ‘theory,’ ‘expla-
nation,’ ‘conﬁ rm,’ ‘necessity,’ and the like as not abstractable from sensory or 
introspective elements of our experience. They are concepts that we get in some 
other way than abstraction from such experience. The second empiricist claim 
is that necessary truths are trivial, giving us no information as to the content of 
the world. Rationalist philosophers will point to such things as PNI, fundamental 
principles in ethics, Goedel’s theorem, and the like as counter-examples to the 
necessary = trivial claim. 

Arguments and Nonmonotheism 197
 This very general description of two fundamental “camps” of philosophers, 
though it greatly simpliﬁ es things and is nothing like adequate to the two com-
plex traditions involved, may be helpful in seeing a difference relevant to our 
discussion. Rationalists grant that we cannot discern the essence of water, oat 
meal, iodine, or poison ivy (if, as many philosophers hold, and many deny, there 
are essences) by sheer reﬂ ection. These are empirical matters to be decided by 
experiment. But they also typically hold that in some cases, we can discern 
essences of things in our world by careful reﬂ ection. (Note that the term ‘non-
conceptual experience’ does not mean experiences to which no concepts apply, 
there being none of these, but rather sensory and introspective experiences.) 
Thus while an empiricist will almost certainly insist that we should draw our 
conception of mind only from science, a rationalist may well insist that we 
can discern the essence of mind by philosophical reﬂ ection, while taking into 
account whatever is relevant in data presented in science. Thus rationalists and 
empiricists in contemporary philosophy will generally view claims like prem-
ise 1 from very different perspectives that tend to predispose empiricists to be 
unimpressed by the source of premise 1 in philosophical reﬂ ection whereas 
this feature of that premise is not nearly so likely to look suspicious by more 
rationalistic thinkers. (There is no intention here to disparage reﬂ ection on the 
nature of the mind by empiricist philosophers or consideration of relevant sci-
entiﬁ c data by rationalist philosophers.) 
 Being self-aware is a property with deep ramiﬁ cations. A being that has it 
would be radically different if it irretrievably lost it; its causal powers would be 
greatly diminished and its causal patiencies   (what could be done to it) would be 
signiﬁ cantly altered. Being self-conscious is a very plausible property for being 
a kind-deﬁ ning property or being an essential property of anything that has it. 16 
This reﬂ ection, plus introspective experience, strongly supports the view that self-
awareness is essential to personhood. 
 In spite of the fact that mind-body dualism, which holds that there are two 
kinds of substances, is not subject to the sorts of critique to which complexity 
accounts of persons are subject, it is widely rejected and often despised in the 
contemporary academy. What is favored instead is materialism, the view that 
there are material substances but not substances of any other kind. 17 The mate-
rialism/dualism controversy is complex and fascinating. There do not seem to 
be such powerful arguments for materialism that dualism should be ruled out as 
a viable position.  
 Arguments against Dualism 
 There are widely accepted arguments against dualism. One such argument 
contends that materialism is simpler, positing less kinds of substance, though 
why having two sorts of material substance, one capable of self-consciousness 
and one not, is in any signiﬁ cant way simpler is as unclear as why appeal to 
simplicity of kinds of substances should carry the day (or favor materialism, 
since idealism is simpler than dualism in the same sense as that in which 

198 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
materialism is). The most frequent criticism is that the only version of dualism 
that is plausible is interactionism, the position that mental events cause physi-
cal events and physical events cause mental events. But mind-body interaction, 
we are told, is impossible—how could such different things as an immaterial 
substance and a material substance interact? This is perhaps the only time in 
contemporary philosophy in which the causal likeness principle is invoked—
the claim that in order for X to affect Y with respect to some property Q, X 
must have Q or something like Q. There is neither criterion for what degree 
of similarity is required nor reason to accept the principle. Dualists ﬁ nd it 
unclear why color experience being caused by non-colored things, colds and 
ﬂ u by bacteria and viruses, pain by unfeeling things, and the like somehow 
are unproblematic whereas mind-body interaction is problematic, save on an 
assumption of materialism already in place. Added to the ﬁ rst objection is 
the claim (as made by many dualists) that minds, being immaterial, are non-
spatial, and if there is anything non-spatial it cannot interact with anything in 
space. Some dualists deny this and some hold that immaterial things can be in 
space. Another objection is that if something immaterial did affect something 
material this would introduce energy into the spatial system and this would 
be ruled out by the very basis principle in physics that energy is conserved. 
The dualist reply is that the principle says that energy is conserved in closed 
physical systems, not in physical systems, full stop. Dualists deny that all 
physical systems are closed. But perhaps the basic issue lies deeper. It seems 
that the basic reason for the rejection of dualism as a live option in much of 
the contemporary academy has to do with what might be called the mapping 
problem: How does one relate the description of the physical world, insofar as 
we can provide this, to the descriptions true of everyday choices and actions? 
Roughly, how does one map our descriptions of the mental world onto our 
descriptions of the physical world? 
 It is tempting to deny that there is a mapping problem by suggesting that our 
descriptions of the physical world, cast in natural science terms, and our descrip-
tions of persons and their freedom of thought and action, are incommensurable in 
the sense that they do not bear logical relations to one another—that they do not 
have relations of consistency, inconsistency, entailment, and the like. The prob-
lem is that the suggestion is false; given that a description of the physical world 
is true, there are hosts of actions not available that would be available were the 
physical world otherwise. For example, if the correct description D1 of the physi-
cal place of an orange is that it is at place P at time T, then at T it is not possible 
to bring the orange to P—it is already there. If the correct description included the 
information that the orange was elsewhere than P, bringing it to P would (given 
other features of things) be possible. In such ways, and much more complex ones, 
what makes a particular description of the physical world at a given time true also 
constrains what can be done in that world at and after that time. 18  So the incom-
mensurability tactic fails. 
 Eliminative materialism, which denies that there are any mental properties, 
dismisses the mapping problem by denying that there is anything that mental 

Arguments and Nonmonotheism 199
descriptions describe. It thereby dismisses the possibility of distinguishing 
between good science and bad, and between science and superstition, since 
on its terms such claims at  Einstein’s thought changed Newtonian physics is 
not an acceptable type of claim since it is a mental description. The assump-
tion that all mental descriptions can be dismissed without loss is of course 
accompanied by the claim that when physics has become sufﬁ ciently mature 
this will provide a satisfactory discourse without reference to mentality. This 
claim draws a check on the future that is, to say the least, controversial. Those 
who claim that the distinction between the mental and the physical captures 
not substances or properties but ways of talking fail to both solve the map-
ping problem and give no account of the phenomenological and explanatory 
differences between the mental and the material. Property dualists grant that 
there are both mental and physical properties, but are no better at dealing 
with the mapping problem than are substance dualists. Insofar as its roots are 
intellectual, the current disposition to dismiss dualism seems to lie in the hope 
that if one embraces property dualism, one can grant the phenomenological 
and explanatory differences between the mental and the physical and have the 
best chance, some day, of solving the mapping problem. If, as argued earlier, 
being self-conscious has strong credentials as a kind-deﬁ ning property, prop-
erty dualism is a longer step toward substance dualism than most property 
dualists would like. 
 Mounting a full-scale defense of a substantivalist and dualist view of persons 
would require more space than is available here. What has been done is this: 
we have argued that while epistemological arguments for dualism fail, there are 
metaphysical arguments of much more power in its favor, and the objections 
against it have much less force than is usually assumed. What follows is that, 
insofar as Cornman and Lehrer are right about what many religions take to be true 
about persons, their perspective is far more defensible than it currently is usually 
thought to be. 
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
  1. 
What is the difference between an appeal to argument and an appeal to 
experience? 
 2. Explain and argue for and against the complexity view of persons 
(i.e., that they are composed of conscious states). 
 3. Explain and argue for or against the simplicity view of persons 
(i.e., that they are enduring substances that have or are in states of 
which they are not composed). 
 4. 
According to Theravada, how is reincarnation possible? 
 5. Is the Jain account of how karma works any more, or any less, coherent 
than the Theravada account? 

200 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
 Notes 
   1.  See, for example, the selections from Ramanuja in Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan and 
Charles Moore,  Sourcebook in Indian Philosophy  (Princeton: Princeton University 
Press) or Ramanuja,  Scared Books of the East , ed. Max Mueller (Delhi: Motilal Bar-
nasidass). 
   2.   That is, no more than one of the alternatives can be true, and (as we shall see) there are 
other relevant views besides these three. 
   3.  A bit more fully: I take dualism to hold that X is a person if and only if X is a self-
conscious being, where X is a self-conscious being if and only if X is sometimes self-
conscious and X when not self-conscious nonetheless has to capacity to become so. 
Further, X continues to be a person only if X is a person and X shall be self-conscious 
in the future. Dualism, then, holds that  being self-conscious  is not a physical property, 
that persons are self-conscious mental substances whose essence is (or includes)  hav-
ing self-consciousness , and that no mental substance is a physical substance or an 
abstract object. 
   4.  Philosophers often talk as if the notion of a mental property is obscure and the notion 
of a physical property is lucid. But when one comes to actual deﬁ nitions of ‘physical 
property’ the supposed clarity of the idea becomes shy and hides. Some philosophers 
talk as if the notion of being self-conscious were itself somehow deeply obscure. There 
are views (and so much the worse for them) on which it is hard to see how anything 
could be or become self-conscious, but  being self-conscious  is a clearer notion than is 
 being physical . 
  5. C. J. DuCasse (1951)  Nature, Mind, and Death  (Chicago: Open Court); Alan Dona-
gan (1999)  Reﬂ ections on Philosophy and Religion (Nicholas Perovich, ed.) (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press); Alvin Plantinga, “Against Materialism,”  Faith and Philoso-
phy  (2006), pp. 3–32; Howard Robinson (2016)  From the Knowledge Argument to 
Mental Substance: Resurrecting the Mind  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press); 
John Foster (1991)  The Immaterial Self (New York: Routledge). 
   6.  If the relationship between qualitative so-called identity and numerical identity are not 
clear, one might consider some relevant necessary truths. 
 
  Some Necessary Truths 
  It is helpful, in understanding qualitative “identity” and numerical identity to see how 
these concepts are related; a bit of reﬂ ection should be sufﬁ cient to see that each of the 
following claims is true (indeed, not possibly false, and so necessarily true). 
 N1. X  is nearly fully identical to  Y does not entail X is numerically identical to Y. 
(Identical twins are possible.) 
 N2.  X at T is numerically identical to Y at T1  does not entail  X at T is fully qualita-
tively identical to Y at T1 . (It is logically impossible that anything at one time 
can be fully qualitatively identical to anything at another time; the deﬁ nition of 
full qualitative identity, including as it does spatial and temporal properties, rules 
that out.) 
 N3.  X at T is numerically identical to Y at T1  does not entail  X at T is nearly fully 
qualitatively identical to Y at T1 . (A thing can remain the same thing and yet 
undergo non-essential change.) 
 N4.  X at T is fully qualitatively identical to Y at T1 entails  X at T is numerically identi-
cal to Y at T1  and entails  X at T is numerically identical to Y at T1.  (The claim 
that things that exist at different times are fully qualitatively identical is self-
contradictory; see comment after N2.) 

Arguments and Nonmonotheism 201
 N5.  X at T is nearly fully qualitatively identical to Y at T1  does not entail  X at T is 
numerically identical to Y at T1 . (Something at one time can be very, very similar 
to something at another time without being identical to it.) 
 N6.  For all X, X at T is fully qualitatively identical (and hence nearly fully qualitative 
identical) to X at T . (Anything at a time T is qualitatively identical to itself at T.) 
 N7.  For all X, if X at T is numerically identical to Y at T then X at T is fully qualita-
tively identical to (and hence nearly fully qualitatively identical to Y at T) . (See 
comment after N6.)  
   7.  Other possibilities are sometimes proposed—e.g., Bertrand Russell’s neutral monism 
on which mental and physical properties are somehow reducible to other properties 
that are neither mental nor physical. I doubt that this particular view is defensible. 
Nonetheless, the discussion deals with the views most relevant to Jainism and Thera-
vada Buddhism, and does not pretend to be a comprehensive discussion of all logically 
possible accounts of minds and bodies. 
   8.  Indeed, one can intelligently argue about which of these alternative  is the Theravada 
view. Our arguments will be concerned with the  structure  of the view, and not depend 
on which of these alternative accounts of what makes up that structure is the right read-
ing of the Theravada account. 
   9.  I assume for convenience that the act was itself momentary, otherwise there will also 
be a problem about the identity of the original agent of the action. 
  10.  ‘Critique,’ of course, need not mean “refutation, or attempt to refute;” it does mean that 
here. 
 11.  Save, perhaps, for the unorthodox, extremely minority-status Buddhist Personalists. 
  12.  I think that there are only two logically possible accounts of the metaphysical structure 
(so to say) of persons. This is argued brieﬂ y in  A Defense of Dualism , forthcoming in 
 Faith and Philosophy , in an issue that includes all of the main papers read at the 1994 
Notre Dame Conference on the Philosophy of Mind. 
  13.  For example, the Jain view, ﬂ eshed out, includes the implausible claims that  Every per-
son is inherently omniscient, though exercise of this capacity is frustrated by our being 
embodied  and  It is impossible that anything cause a person to cease to exist, though a 
person can be caused not to be embodied in the body she presently occupies (or in any 
body at all) . That our existence involves latent omniscience and necessary ontological 
independence are claims quite independent of anything discussed here, and I should 
not like to have to defend them. 
  14.  That is, if Sam at T is identical to Sam at T1, then necessarily, Sam at T is identical 
to Sam at T1—which is to be distinguished from  Sam at T enjoys logically necessary 
existence, as does Sam at T1 . 
  15.  James W. Cornman and Keith Lehrer (1974)  Philosophical Problems and Arguments: 
An Introduction (New York: Macmillan), pp. 238–239. 
 16.  Materialists who are property dualists are often willing to grant that physical things 
come in at least two kinds—those capable of self-consciousness and those not (or at 
least those capable of consciousness and those not—though if the  not capable of con-
sciousness/capable of consciousness distinction is kind-deﬁ ning or essential, it is hard 
to see why the same should not be said regarding the  not capable of self-consciousness/
capable of self-consciousness distinction). 
  17.  Some philosophers have embraced the view that there are abstract objects (immaterial 
substances not capable of consciousness) as well as material substances. But they have 
continued to reject the idea that there are any mental substances. 

202 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
 18.  This is, of course, perfectly compatible with determinism being false. 
 Suggested Readings 
 Betty, L. Stafford (2014)  Vadiraja’s Refutation of Sankara’s Non-Dualism: Clearing the 
Way for Theism  (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass). Insightful critique of Advaita view by a 
theistic Vedantist. 
 Chau, Bhikshu Thich Thien (1999) (tr. Sarah Boin-Webb),  Literature of the Personalists of 
Early Buddhism  (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass). Personalist Buddhism, rejecting the no-
self view, constituted part of the Indian Buddhist tradition for centuries and was declared 
heretical by a Buddhist council, a rare event. 
 Donagan, Alan (1987)  Choice: The Essential Element in Human Action (London: Rout-
ledge and Kegan Paul). Argues for a view of persons as enduring free agents. 
 Hiriyanna, M. (2009)  Outlines of Indian Philosophy  (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass). Reprint 
of an older excellent work. 
 ———— (2015)  The Essentials of Indian Philosophy  (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass). Again, 
reprint of an older excellent work. 
 Hoffman, Joshua and Rosenkrantz, Gary S. (1994)  Substance among Other Categories 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). Discusses various views of what a substance 
is, objections to these views, and arguments for them. 
 ———— (1997)  Substance: Its Nature and Existence  (London: Routledge). See previous 
reference. 
 Lowe, E. J. (1989)  Kinds of Being  (Oxford: Basil Blackwell). Discusses substance theories 
and competing theories, arguments for and against each. 
 ———— (1996)  Subjects of Experience  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). See 
previous reference. 
 Parﬁ t, Derek (1984)  Reasons and Persons  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Defends a 
Buddhist-type account of persons. 
 Yao, Zhihua (2009)  The Buddhist Theory of Self-Cognition  (New York: Routledge). Explores 
the origin and development of the Buddhist view of self-awareness in external disputes 
and on into internal developments using original texts in four languages.     

 Enlightenment-Based Arguments 
and Nonmonotheistic Conceptions 
of Ultimate Reality 
 13 
 Appeals to Enlightenment Experience 
 Appeals to religious experience as evidence for religious belief are not, of course, 
limited to consideration of experiences that are taken by their subjects to be experi-
ences of God. Appeals are made to enlightenment experiences as well. While, as 
noted earlier, the psychological features (detachment, calm, bliss, and the like) of 
Advaita, Jain, and Buddhist enlightenment experiences are very similar, the pro-
posed doctrinal signiﬁ cance of the experience is quite different. Enlightenment 
experiences are not viewed by religious traditions in which they are prized primarily 
because they are believed to cure one’s psychological illness. The ills they are said 
to cure are not depression, but the basic illness common to us all, as each particular 
religious tradition perceives it. If a devotee of Advaita Vedanta appeals to Advaita 
enlightenment experience as evidence for religious belief, it will be Advaita beliefs 
that are said to be supported by the experience—and analogously, of course, for Jain 
or Buddhist appeals to Jain or Buddhist enlightenment experiences. 
 The Exact Nature of the Appeals to Experiential Evidence 
 An appeal to experience as evidence typically involves, as we have seen, refer-
ring to a description of the experience and explicitly or implicitly assuming some 
conceptual connection between the occurrence of an experience that ﬁ ts that 
description and the proposition for whose truth that occurrence is said to provide 
evidence. The core idea is: 
 1. 
An experience that ﬁ ts description D has occurred. 
 2. If an experience that ﬁ ts description D has occurred, that fact is evidence that 
proposition P is true. 
 So: 
 3. 
That fact is evidence that P is true. 
 One who wishes to make a claim like 3 regarding some religious doctrine 
requires that some claims like 1 and 2 are true when one replaces  D  by a relevant 

204 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
description and  P  by a statement of a relevant doctrine. The role of the connecting 
premise may be implicit, necessary for the appeal to experience but unstated. The 
connecting premise typically will simply be an assumed principle of experiential 
evidence. 
 Generally, Advaita, Jain, and Buddhist enlightenment experiences are called, 
respectively, moksha, kevala, and nirvana experiences. We can expect, then, 
appeals to experience of the following sort. 
 Advaita Vedanta 
  A1. Moksha experiences (in which one realizes one’s identity with qualityless 
Brahman) have occurred. 
 A2. If moksha experiences have occurred, that fact is evidence that  We are iden-
tical to qualityless Brahman is true. 
 So: 
  A3. That fact is evidence that  We are identical to qualityless Brahman is 
true.  
 Jainism 
  J1. 
Kevala experiences (in which one realizes one’s existential independence or 
ontological security and one’s omniscience) have occurred. 
 J2. 
If kevala experiences have occurred, that fact is evidence that  We have 
existential independence or ontological security and are omniscient is 
true.  
 So: 
  J3. 
That fact is evidence that  We have existential independence or ontological 
security and are omniscient is true. 
 Theravada Buddhism 
  T1. Nirvana experiences (in which one realizes one’s nature as composed at a 
time of momentary elements and over time of a series of bundles of such 
elements) have occurred. 
 T2. If nirvana experiences have occurred, that fact is evidence that  We are com-
posed at a time of momentary elements and over time of bundles of such 
elements is true. 
 So: 
  T3. That fact is evidence that  We are composed at a time of momentary elements 
and over time of bundles of such elements is true. 1 

Enlightenment-Based Arguments 205
 Further, in treating these appeals to experience in the same sort of way as we 
treated appeals to numinous experience, the ﬁ rst premise of each triad must be 
read phenomenologically; thus we will have: 
  A1*. Moksha experiences (in which one  at least appears to  realize one’s identity 
with qualityless Brahman) have occurred. 
 J1*. Kevala experiences (in which one  at least appears to  realize one’s existential 
independence or ontological security and one’s omniscience) have occurred. 
 T1*. Nirvana experiences (in which one  at least appears to  realize one’s nature 
as composed at a time of momentary elements and over time of a series of 
bundles of such elements) have occurred. 
 These will replace A1, J1, and T1, and the beginning (the antecedent) of A2, J2, 
and T2 will be modiﬁ ed accordingly.  
 Two Counterbalancing Considerations 
 It is sometimes suggested that those who have had religious experiences are the 
real experts as to what those experiences show—as to what they are evidence for. 
This claim is often made regarding enlightenment experiences. While perhaps, just 
by virtue of having them, persons who have enlightenment experiences are experts 
about what it is like to have the sort of religious experience they have had, this does 
not tell us that they are experts about whether such experiences are self-authenti-
cating relative to religious claims based on them, or that they have expertise as to 
whether these experiences provide evidence for the beliefs based on them. 
 If some have claimed that religious experiencers—those who have had religious 
experiences—are thereby experts about the reliability or veridicality of those expe-
riences (about whether or not they correctly represent the world), it should be noted 
that others have claimed that religious experiencers are the last people one should 
expect to have any such expertise. They have argued that the very having of such 
experiences—experiences that are often emotionally very powerful and that some-
times result in instantaneous conversions or redirections of a life—renders them in 
no position to objectively evaluate the cognitive signiﬁ cance of such experiences. 
Further, particularly in the traditions that center around enlightenment experience, 
the investment in having such experiences (walking for years in a loin cloth from 
one end of India to the other, begging for one’s bread, or spending years learning 
the meanings of ancient arcane texts under the relentless guidance of demanding 
gurus, or a near lifetime of good works—in each case instead of devoting oneself 
to seeking pleasure, wealth, and power) plus the status given to those who alleg-
edly have had them (being elevated to a semi-divine status where others bow in 
your presence or dare not even look you in the face) is just too great for anyone 
who claims to have had any such experience to be trusted to be at all rational in his 
reasoning or judgment regarding its cognitive signiﬁ cance. 

206 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
 Whatever weight either sort of consideration has is balanced by the other 
sort, and neither sort justiﬁ es concluding either that religious experiencers are 
the experts regarding what their experiences evidentially justify, or that if those 
experiences serve as evidence they can only do so for those who have them. The 
degree to which religious experiencers in a tradition have expertise in assessing 
the evidential value of their experience will come out in what they say that is 
relevant to the issue. The inﬂ uence of a secular community can be just as bias-
producing as that of a religious community. 
 Self-Authentication 
 Religious experiences are often said to be self-authenticating or self-guarantee-
ing, so that appeal to them gives one a uniquely secure source of experiential 
conﬁ rmation. If this is so, it is obviously an important fact about religious experi-
ences. It would be particularly relevant to their status as evidence for religious 
beliefs. What exactly, then, is it for some experience to be self-authenticating? 
 Self-authentication  is a three-term relation; there is a person to whom an experi-
ence authenticates, an experience that does the authenticating, and a belief or 
proposition that is authenticated. Further, the idea is, the belief or proposition 
in question is evidenced or authenticated in a particularly strong way—in such 
a way, in fact, that the person cannot be mistaken in accepting that belief or in 
believing that proposition if they base accepting or believing on having had the 
experience. Formally, the idea can be put in this fashion: 
  Chandra’s experience E is  self-authenticating  regarding proposition P if and 
only if Chandra has experience E, it is logically impossible that Chandra have 
an experience phenomenologically of sort E and proposition P be false, and 
Chandra rests his acceptance of P on his having had E. 2 
 If there are experiences that satisfy these conditions regarding persons and beliefs, 
the most obvious examples do not concern religious beliefs. Suppose that Wendy, 
perhaps feeling philosophical, reﬂ ects that, in contrast to Santa Claus and uni-
corns but like salamanders and her dog, she exists. Reﬂ ection is, after all, a kind 
of experience, and if Wendy reﬂ ects at time T that she exists at T (a reﬂ ection that, 
she notes, includes her believing that she exists), then she is fully justiﬁ ed if she 
also notes that her reﬂ ecting that she exists is impossible unless she does exist; 
Wendy’s experience of believingly reﬂ ecting on the fact of her existence is such 
that it is logically impossible that she do so and her belief be false. So if she rests 
her belief that she exists at T on the experience of believingly reﬂ ecting that she 
exists at T, her experience of believingly reﬂ ecting that she exists at T can be self-
authenticating regarding her belief that she exists at T. If we ask, then, what sorts 
of beliefs there are that can receive self-authentication from experience, it seems 
clear that among them are: one’s belief that one now exists, that one is now con-
scious, that one now has at least one belief, and the like. Perhaps if one believes 
that one is now in pain, then it is true that one is now in pain (though one can be 

Enlightenment-Based Arguments 207
wrong about the pain’s cause and its location). These sorts of experiences and 
beliefs represent the least controversial cases of self-authentication. 
 Consider claims central to Advaita Vedanta, Jainism, and Theravada Buddhism: 
 AV.  We are identical to qualityless Brahman . 
 J.  We have existential independence or ontological security and are omniscient . 
 TB.  We are composed at a time of momentary elements and over time of 
bundles of such elements . 3 
 Each of these claims, if they are true at all, are—as their adherents insist—true 
whether we know them to be true, and true independent of anyone having any enlight-
enment experience. 4  Further, each tradition holds that one can believe two of these 
three claims, and have the experience that the tradition in which it is alleged that the 
experience conﬁ rms that claim, without that claim being true. It seems plain that it 
is logically possible that one believe any of  We are identical to qualityless Brahman , 
 We have existential independence or ontological security and are omniscient , or  We 
are composed at a time of a bundle of momentary elements and over time of a series 
of bundles of such elements and believe falsely, just as it is logically possible that 
one believe oneself to be more courageous than one is, or free from illness while a 
disease silently takes its toll, or devoid of pride while enamored of one’s humility. 
It also seems possible that one have an experience that has a phenomenology that 
justiﬁ es its subject in believing it to be an experience of God and believe mistakenly, 
just as it seems possible that one has an experience that has a phenomenology that 
justiﬁ es its subject in believing that it is a genuine enlightenment experience, and 
hence that she is identical to qualityless Brahman, or is inherently immortal, or is but 
a bundle of momentary states at the moment and just a series of bundles over time, 
and be mistaken. It is not logically impossible that one have an experience in virtue 
of which one accepts a religious belief and that experience is not self-authenticating. 
Thus it may well be that in all three cases, one can have an experience that seems 
to be a relevant enlightenment experience, believe the corresponding doctrine, think 
the experience conﬁ rms the doctrine, and be mistaken on all counts. Each tradition 
holds views that entail that the “enlightened” members of the other two traditions 
are in exactly this position. For example, my having no sense of self at time T is not 
evidence that I really am not a self—to whom or what would it be evidence? One’s 
having no awareness of the passing of time or of being in time does not entail that 
one is not or was not in time. The same holds for lack of awareness of being spatially 
located and in fact not being in space. 
 None of this is denied by even the strongest proponents of the self-authenticating 
character of enlightenment experiences. 5  What is claimed is not that it is logically 
impossible that one believe the preferred doctrine and that doctrine nonetheless be 
false, but that (i) it is logically impossible that one have an enlightenment experi-
ence that self-authenticates a doctrine and the doctrine nonetheless be false, and 
(ii) enlightenment experiences (of the right kind) are self-authenticating regarding 
(the right) doctrine. While (i) is true by deﬁ nition of “self-authentication,” (ii) is a 
substantial claim that we will explore. 

208 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
 Descriptions 
 In exploring it, we begin with this question: What sort of descriptions will be 
true of an enlightenment experience that is self-authenticating regarding, say, a 
Jain religious doctrine? To put the same question in a different way, what sort 
of phenomenology or observable features must such an experience have? Since 
what it is said to self-authenticate is  We have existential independence or onto-
logical security and are omniscient , it must have a phenomenology appropriate 
to conﬁ rming that claim. The simplest description will be something like  at least 
apparently recognizing one’s existential independence or ontological security and 
one’s omniscience . There are various problems with offering this as the descrip-
tion relevant for the appeal to experience as evidence. 
 Suppose that you and I are looking at an ancient coin. You claim it is Roman, 
and I claim it is Greek. I say  I see it is Greek  and regard the case as closed. You 
claim  I see it is Roman  and regard the case as closed. But at least one of us is 
wrong, and neither of us has provided any evidence by describing the experience 
in a way that simply assumes that our claim is true. It is not that I express my 
evidence by saying  I see it is Greek ; I do not thereby recite any evidence what-
ever, I merely repeat my claim. If your experience is to be evidence that the coin 
is Roman, 6 it must be the case that there are features that the coin at least seems 
to have such that, if the coin has those features, it is at least probably Roman. So 
to speak, the phenomenology of your coin-experience must be Romanesque. For 
example, it may bear the likeness of a Roman emperor rather than a Greek states-
man. If I am to have evidence, the coin must at least appear to me to have some 
feature such that, if the coin has that feature, that fact supports its Greekness. 
For example, it may bear the likeness of a Greek statesman rather than a Roman 
emperor. 
 The case of enlightenment experience is analogous. To simply assert, for some 
religious claim C, that one has an experience in which one recognizes or realizes 
its truth, with no speciﬁ cation of what it is about the experience that conﬁ rms C, 
is pointless so far as evidence is concerned. 
 Evidence about What? 
 Enlightenment experience is supposed to teach one about one’s nature—about 
what one is—insofar as one is anything. For Advaita Vedanta the goal is identity 
with qualityless Brahman. For Jainism the goal is recognizing that one is an inde-
structible, all-knowing, self-aware substance. It is typical of Buddhist traditions to 
deny that anything has a “same-nature” or essence. Nonetheless, it is also typical 
of Buddhist traditions to hold that every item that we commonsensically regard as 
an enduring thing is really composed at a time of a bundle of momentary elements 
and over time of a series of momentary bundles of elements. Whether or not one 
calls this a doctrine of the nature of persons or not, 7  the idea is that this is what 
persons really are. For each of these traditions, the goal is the truth about (what 
there is of) oneself. 

Enlightenment-Based Arguments 209
 If, however, any of these claims is true, it is true about everyone, not just about 
oneself; the idea is that if anyone then everyone is identical to qualityless Brah-
man or is an indestructible enduring mind or is composed only of momentary 
elements. Further, these claims can be true only if various other things are false. 
For example, if monotheism is true, God is ultimate and has qualities (so there is 
no qualityless Brahman), persons are created and endure by divine courtesy (they 
are not indestructible), and God is neither transient nor composed of transient ele-
ments (it is false that everything is impermanent). 
 Particular Experiences, Universal Claims 
 The various doctrines about persons are universal in scope; the experiences 
occur to particular individuals. When we ask whether these particular experi-
ences provide evidence for claims that are universal in their scope, we get dif-
ferent results depending on the case. Suppose that enlightenment experience 
provides evidence that one is identical to qualityless Brahman. Will this also 
provide evidence that everyone else is? The question is peculiar in a way that 
arises from the doctrine itself. If A is identical to B and C is identical to B, then 
A is identical to C. So if you are identical to qualityless Brahman and I am too, 
we are identical to one another; so there isn’t “anyone else.” If there is anyone 
else, the doctrine is false. 
 Suppose that enlightenment experience provides evidence that one is an inde-
structible mind or is composed of momentary elements. Will this also provide 
evidence that everyone else is? It will do so in the presence of a doctrine to the 
effect that the subject of the experience is a person and what makes her a person 
is the same as what makes everyone else a person, assuming that one is justi-
ﬁ ed in taking these additional claims to be true. Discussing these issues in any 
detail would take us too far away from our basic concerns here. Thus we simply 
note that it is widely assumed that these sorts of additional claims are true. 8  It is 
unsurprisingly typical that Jain and Buddhist believers take themselves to have 
the same nature, or lack of nature, as all other people. They share this perspective 
with common sense and the monotheistic traditions. Jainism does hold that some 
souls are not capable of enlightenment—a sort of election to lack of salvation 
without an Elector. 
 Phenomenologies That Fit the Claims 
 The right sort of phenomenology seems to be of this sort: for Advaita enlighten-
ment experience,  appearing or seeming to be identical with qualityless Brahman ; 
for Jainism,  appearing or seeming to be an indestructible and highly knowledge-
able mind ; for Buddhism,  appearing or seeming to be only a bundle of transitory 
states . One might question whether these are, strictly speaking, possible phenom-
enological features of an experience. They seem, like  being a Roman coin , to be 
features something could have only by virtue of other features also had by that 
thing. In the case of a Roman coin,  bearing the image of an emperor  is one such 

210 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
feature. In the enlightenment cases, presumably the relevant further features are 
such qualities as  having no sense of possessing qualities ,  feeling indestructible , 
and  being aware only of states of mind . It is, however, logically possible that one 
possess qualities that one has no sense of having, feel indestructible while being 
dependent for existence on something else, and be aware of nothing but one’s cur-
rent mental states without being identical to those states even at the time at which 
one has them. Further, that one has no sense of having qualities is possible only 
if one does have qualities—to have no qualities at all is simply not to exist at all, 
and not existing gets very much in the way of having experiences. Having a sense 
of being indestructible is perfectly compatible with not being indestructible, and 
having a sense of being momentary is perfectly compatible with being an endur-
ing thing. 
 One way of putting the problems with the notion that enlightenment experi-
ences are self-authenticating with regard to Advaita, Jain, or Buddhist doctrinal 
claims is this: 
  (i) The claims are, if true of one at all, true of one so long as one exists, whereas in 
the least controversial cases of self-authentication the claims that are authen-
ticated have to do with one’s existence right now or one’s current, momentary 
states of awareness; the claims in cases where claims to self-authentication 
is plausible are about a time span that corresponds, and is limited, to the time 
during which the authenticating experience occurs. 
 (ii) The quality or state ascribed to oneself by the claim is an observable 
quality—like being in pain—or is entailed by any quality anything has—like 
existing. 
 By contrast, the Advaita, Jain, and Buddhist claims concern times not limited 
to the duration of the enlightenment experience or entailed by the content of the 
relevant enlightenment experience. Such states as  seeming to oneself to be qual-
ityless ,  seeming to be indestructible , and  seeming to be momentary  are states that 
can easily be mistaken—one may seem to oneself to be qualityless, indestructible, 
or momentary without these things being in fact true. 
 It is important to remember here that we are not asking what sort of phenom-
enological features an experience might have were one’s having it to lead one to 
accept a particular religious doctrine, especially if one had it in a context in which 
it was expected that such experiences might occur—for example, within a medi-
tative tradition the very purpose of which was the preparation for having such 
experiences whose interpretation was built into the institutional context within 
which the meditative practice occurred. We are not seeking to give a psychologi-
cal explanation of enlightenment experiences, but asking whether these experi-
ences provide self-authentication for certain religious beliefs. 
 What follows from our discussion is that they do not. Not only is it the case that 
Advaita Vedanta, Jainism, and Theravada Buddhism each can claim self-authen-
tication for a claim that is logically incompatible with the claims for which the 

Enlightenment-Based Arguments 211
other traditions assert that same privilege. But then the beliefs embraced by at 
least two of the traditions will be mistaken, so that appeal to self-authentication is 
insufﬁ cient to show that a doctrine for which it is clamed is true. In addition, none 
of the enlightenment experiences possess a phenomenology that self-authenti-
cates the beliefs in question. It is not logically impossible that one have an enlight-
enment experience—whether Advaita Vedanta, Jain, or Buddhist—that possesses 
the relevant phenomenological features and it also is the case that the correspond-
ing Advaita, Jain, or Buddhist doctrine be false. So enlightenment experiences do 
not self-authenticate doctrines based on them. The argument showing this can be 
made fully explicit as follows: 
  1. One’s enlightenment experience is  self-authenticating  regarding a proposi-
tion expressing the core Advaita, Jain, or Buddhist doctrinal claim only if 
one seems (respectively) to be qualityless, indestructible, or momentary, and 
it is logically impossible that one seem to oneself to be qualityless, indestruc-
tible, or momentary, and one not be qualityless, indestructible, or momentary, 
and that one rests one’s acceptance of core Advaita, Jain, or Buddhist doc-
trine on one’s having seemed to oneself to be qualityless, indestructible, or 
momentary. 
 2. It is not logically impossible that one seem to oneself to be qualityless, inde-
structible, or momentary and one not be so. 
 Hence: 
  3. One’s enlightenment experience is not self-authenticating relative to Advaita, 
Jain, or Buddhist doctrine. 
 We have argued that enlightenment experiences are not self-authenticating regard-
ing these claims. That they are not self-authenticating regarding the religious 
claims often based on them does not entail that these experiences are not evidence 
for those claims. Evidence need not be self-authenticating. We have argued that 
the same is true for monotheistic claims. So the next question is: Do enlighten-
ment experiences provide evidence for religious beliefs? 
 What Principle of Experiential Evidence Is Relevant? 
 The previous chapter explained and defended principles of experiential evidence. 
They are examples of claims that can provide support for premises like the sec-
ond steps of the brief three-step arguments sketched early in this chapter. These 
principles were: 
 (P*) If a person S has an experience E that, if reliable, is a matter of being 
aware of an experience-independently existing item X, and E is not canceled or 
counterbalanced or compromised or contradicted or confuted or logically con-
sumed or empirically consumed, then S’s having E is evidence that X exists.  

212 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
 and: 
  (P**) If a person S has an experience E that, if reliable, is a matter of being 
aware of an experience-independently existing item X, and S (non-culpably) 
has no reason to think that E is canceled or counterbalanced or compromised 
or contradicted or confuted or logically consumed or empirically consumed, 
then S’s having E provides S evidence that X exists. 
 Some experiences, we have noted, are matters of someone’s at least seeming to 
perceive something that,  if it exists at all , exists independent of its being expe-
rienced. These have a particular structure—subject-consciousness-object. Other 
experiences are matters of someone’s feeling a certain way. These also have 
a particular structure—subject-content. Seeing an apple tree is of the former 
sort; so is merely seeming to see an apple tree. Feeling nauseous or dizzy and 
experiencing generalized anxiety or euphoria are examples of the latter sort. It is 
important to keep in mind the differences between experiences that are subject-
consciousness-object in structure and experiences that are subject-content in 
structure.  
 Subject/Content Experience and a Principle 
of Experiential Evidence 
 Treating subject-content experience as evidence requires a principle of expe-
riential evidence different from (P*) and (P**), which refer to evidence for 
the existence of experience-independent things and apply to subject-conscious-
ness-object experiences. Enlightenment experiences are construed as aware-
ness of states, conditions, or structure of oneself as a person, or of what is 
commonsensically taken to be a person. Thus Advaita Vedanta proposes an 
enlightenment experience that is an awareness of the existence of a qualityless, 
undifferentiated state—if we may so put it without disrespect, an analogue of 
cosmic tapioca without lumps that lacks spatial and temporal properties—with 
which the person having the experience is identical. (One cannot say “is a part” 
since it has no parts.) The Jain proposal is that one is a mental substance that 
has no, or no essential, physical properties and has no parts of any sort, and 
in enlightenment experience recognizes to be the full nature of oneself as a 
person. That nature has a substance-property structure in which the substance 
is simple or incomposite. Buddhism claims an enlightenment experience in 
which one sees that the structure of what we take to be persons is collections 
of momentary conscious states that occur in a series, with ‘collections’ and 
‘series’ being conventional terms that do not refer to something over and above 
their momentary constituents. These proposed experiences are not subject-con-
tent in the way that one’s being aware of one’s pain or fatigue are. The latter 
sort of experiences are ones in which one’s subjective states are open to aware-
ness, and no idea as to everyone else being in those states is either explicit or 
implicit in the experience. 

Enlightenment-Based Arguments 213
 Regarding subject-content states whose content is sensations—pains, general-
ized anxiety, generalized euphoria, dizziness, and the like, something like this 
seems right if not overly cautious. 
  (P***) If a person S has an experience E that, if reliable, is a matter of S being 
aware of being in an experience-dependently existing state X of S, then S’s 
having E is evidence that S is in state X. 
 But enlightenment experiences are viewed as a different sort of animal. We need a 
principle of experiential evidence that will ﬁ t these cases. Where we allow  being 
in a state  to be broadly construed (so as to cover things like  having a quality , 
 being an event , and the like), consider: 
  (P****) If a person S has an experience E that, if reliable, is a matter of S 
being aware of being in an experience-independently existing state X of S, 
then S’s having E is evidence that S is in state X. 
 (Note the shift from “experience-dependently” in (P***) to “experience-
independently” in (P****).) 
 Experiencing pain, euphoria, or anxiety is evidence that one is in a state of pain, 
euphoria, or anxiety. 9  (We waive questions of incorrigibility.) Religious claims 
do not typically concern such private, momentary psychological states, and no 
religion bases its core doctrines on their occurrence. Being identical to Brahman 
or being qualityless, being indestructible or a soul that exists independently, and 
being a momentary being or a being whose constituents are momentary, are not 
features or qualities or states that are experience-dependent. What makes one a 
person or what we view as a person—the metaphysical structure of what deter-
mines whether we are or not—apparently can be easily confused. Descartes, Jain-
ism, and Advaita Vedanta regarding the level of appearance take the side of our 
being substances with properties. Hume and generally the Buddhist tradition take 
the side of bundles in a series. Happily, neither philosophers nor leaders in the 
traditions (who sometimes overlap and sometimes do not) have not drawn the 
conclusion that persons belong to two species, a sustance species   and a series 
species. Assuming they are right in avoiding this rather desperate tactic, one can 
be quite mistaken in what one’s person-making metaphysical structure is. This 
is a central the point of dispute between Jainism and Buddhism. Advaita Vedan-
ta’s place in the conversation between the three traditions is harder to state. As 
noted, the level of appearance, according to Advaita sides with Jainism. So, for 
that matter, does the Buddhist account of common sense. But the Buddhist view 
of common sense, speaking generally, is that it is mistaken in this crucial regard, 
and Buddhist enlightenment experience shows this. Shankara, the most famous 
representative of Advaita, was accused of being a cryto-Buddhist   for adopting his 
view of the level of reality, which on a plausible understanding of what is meant 
by Buddhist nirvana is nirvana by another name. Without getting into interpretive 
disputes, we will simply take the Advaita account of the level of appearance as it 

214 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
is given without worrying about its historical source. Our question is what sort of 
phenomenological   content should be speciﬁ ed as providing experiential evidence 
for the Jain and Buddhist, and then the Advaita, doctrines. 
 The answer regarding the Jain and Buddhist cases is obvious. It would have to 
be, in each case, a description of the structure ascribed to persons by those reli-
gious traditions. The Jain claims to be aware of herself as a mental substance not 
dependent on anything physical and inherently immortal. (We waive discussion 
of the claim to omniscience.) The Buddhist claims to be aware of himself as only 
a collection of conscious states. This raises the question of how this awareness is 
possible without a subject. Something or other must be aware in the required fash-
ion. Perhaps the bundle possesses reﬂ exive consciousness or contains some one-
or-more-membered class of conscious states that are aware of the rest? Then we 
need some good reason to think that this sort of reﬂ exive awareness is provided 
in some manner that does not involve their being uniﬁ ed by being experiences of 
a subject, and why whatever has the reﬂ exive consciousness must be momentary. 
 Sticking to the issue of whether having an experience the phenomenology of 
which is Buddhist in content, we have an experience in which there is awareness 
whose scope is only conscious states. 
 In the Jain case, the phenomenological requirement is that the subject seems to 
himself to be indestructible and completely non-physical. 
 To go back a step, and be as concrete as possible, the Buddhist experience must 
be—in the case of pain—one of feeling pain, and the Jain experience—in the case 
of pain—must be one of feeling oneself being in pain. For the Jain, one is aware 
of the pain as one’s pain, of oneself being in pain, of pain as being a state one is 
in. These ways of putting the point converge on the idea that one’s experience is 
not simply pain, but rather I-am-in-pain, that pain awareness is one among a great 
many instances of self-awareness. As an account of everyday experience the Bud-
dhist has no quarrel, but goes on to maintain that everyday experience misleads 
in this regard. 
 There are, of course, a great many properties that one can have to which one has 
no introspective access. One can introspectively seem to oneself to be qualityless, 
indestructible, or momentary in the sense that one has an experience in which 
one believes this to be so, but what would make this so is not some introspect-
able property. It is a state of affairs that is not itself introspectively observable. 
Whatever security introspection provides regarding experience-dependent states 
does not belong to them. We are dealing with states such that, if they exist, they 
are not metaphysically experience-dependent. We turn to our three cases directly.  
 Advaita 
 Appearing to be qualityless seems a non-starter. What would justify one in claim-
ing to have such an experience? Supposing one had such an experience, what 
would justify one in thinking it was oneself that was qualityless? Having an expe-
rience is a property, so if one manages to have an experience, one is not without 
properties. Doing so not only is not evidence that one is qualityless but is sufﬁ cient 

Enlightenment-Based Arguments 215
evidence for possession of qualities; it is logically impossible that one have any 
experience at all and not exist, and logically impossible that one exist without 
having qualities. Indian critics of Advaita Vedanta, the most famous of whom is 
Ramanuja, have pressed this decisive objection with great force and clarity. 10 
 Jainism and Buddhism 
 Appearing to oneself to be indestructible is not evidence that one is indestructible. 
Claims of indestructibility, of course, are not made regarding the body; Jain phi-
losophers know as well as anyone that the human body is not indestructible. What 
they claim, along with Plato and Platonists, is that the mind or soul or person is 
indestructible. The point remains, however, that the mind or soul or person having 
an experience in which it seems to itself to be indestructible is not evidence that 
it is indestructible. Not only is it logically possible that one have an experience 
in which it seems to one that one is indestructible though in fact one is not; it is 
also that having such an experience is not any evidence that one is indestructible, 
any more than having an experience in which one seems to oneself to be destruc-
tible is evidence that one is destructible. Similarly, a sense of one’s existence as 
momentary, or as composed of momentary items is one thing, and one’s being 
a momentary existent or being composed of things that exist only for an instant 
is another, and having a sense of one’s momentariness is not evidence that one 
is merely momentary or that one is composed of momentary constituents. The 
claim that one was composed of only momentary states would require a continu-
ing observer who watched the states come and go. But then something capable of 
observing and remembering what one observed would have to endure throughout 
the period of observation. One could try claiming that there was an observer at 
each moment that caused an observer at the next moment to remember what the 
previous observer had observed as well as doing its own observation of a new set 
of momentary states, but this appeals to a theory that goes well beyond anything 
that can be experientially conﬁ rmed in a world of momentary states. Further, the 
momentary observers seem to be momentary subjects of experience, and once 
one admits momentary subjects of experience, one needs argument that they are 
momentary and an explanation of how momentary subjects can learn that there 
are momentary subjects. 
 The argument can be stated along the following lines. Consider three claims, 
each of which is true: 
  1. 
There are states, like being in pain, feeling happy, worrying about one’s 
health, and the like, where one’s having the sense that one is in pain, happy, 
or worried, justiﬁ es one’s belief that one is in pain, happy, or worried—
such states involve phenomenological awareness of the actual state that one 
ascribes to oneself and one’s being aware of being in such a state is evidence 
that one is in it. 11 
 2. There are other states, like thinking that one can wave one’s arms and ﬂ y, 
that one has grown a lion’s head, or that one’s head is made of glass, where 

216 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
one’s having the sense that one can ﬂ y, has grown a lion’s head, or one’s head 
is made of glass, does not involve a phenomenological awareness of one’s 
actually ﬂ ying, actually having a lion’s head, or actually having a head made 
of glass, and one’s having such a sense is not evidence that one is in the state 
that one ascribes to oneself. 
 When one believes on the basis of introspection that one is in one of the sorts of 
states that 1 describes, one typically is right. When one believes on the basis of 
introspection that one is in one of the sorts of states that 2 describes, one typically 
is wrong. Consider: 
  3. 
There are still other states, like thinking that one is the brightest member of 
one’s class, the most talented actor in one’s school, an immortal soul, some-
one who will die today, and the like, where one’s having the sense that one 
is brightest, most talented, immortal, or will die today, does not involve a 
phenomenological awareness of one’s actually being brightest, most talented, 
immortal, or dying today, and one’s having such a sense is not evidence that 
one is in the state that one ascribes to oneself. 
 In these cases, in contrast to those described in 2, it is not just obvious that one 
is not in the state mentioned. But the cases are similar in this respect: the state 
in question, unlike those mentioned in 1, is not a state that is introspectively 
accessible or discernible. One cannot, so to speak, read off of one’s introspective 
awareness that one is in the sort of states described in 2 and 3. Nor is there any 
entailment between  seeming to be in the state  and  being in the state  or any rela-
tion such that  seeming to be in the state  renders it more likely than not that one is 
in the state. 
 Consider, then, this way of putting the argument: 
  A.  
Enlightenment experiences are senses of being in a certain state and they 
fall into either class 2 or class 3. 
 B.  
Senses of being in a certain state that fall into either class 2 or class 3 are not 
evidence that the person who has that sense is in that state. 
 Thus: 
  C.  
Enlightenment experiences are not evidence that the person who has them 
is in the state she thinks she is in. 
 Hence appeal to enlightenment experience will not conﬁ rm Advaita, Jain, or 
Buddhist doctrine. 
 A Caveat 
 While the arguments presented thus far have a certain force, and are eminently 
defensible, they do not sufﬁ ciently discuss the actual contexts in which one ﬁ nds 

Enlightenment-Based Arguments 217
the other side presented. In discussing these matters still further, it will be useful 
to consider ﬁ rst the Advaita Vedanta appeal to experience as evidence, and then 
the Jain and the Buddhist appeals. The critique of the Advaita appeal that one 
ﬁ nds readymade in Indian thought is straightforward and decisive. The latter two 
appeals in particular are very like positions taken outside of any religious context, 
and are best seen in a cross-cultural context. 
 Advaita Appeal to Enlightenment Experience 
 Shankara rightly held that we do know that we exist and that we have certain 
properties. Chandra can know that he now exists, and that he is conscious now—
and thus he can know that  For all X, if X lacks properties, then X is not me . 
Further, Chandra can know that there are things that he does not know, and if 
there cannot be things that Brahman does not know (and this is supposed to be a 
necessary truth—at least it is supposed to be a necessary truth that “not knowing 
something” cannot be properly ascribed to Brahman) then Chandra can know that 
he is not identical to Brahman. If one knows both  I exist, and have P  and  There 
is an item—namely, X—that (if it exists) lacks P then one can properly infer to  I 
am not X . Hence the Advaita Vedanta claim—its reading of the  Upanishadic pas-
sage “Thou art That”—is not true. Similarly, on Shankara’s own view, if Chandra 
sees an elephant, Chandra sees a mind-independently existing large gray or albino 
mammal, so there are mind-independently existing large gray or albino mammals. 
But Brahman is not any sort of mammal at all, and so even if Brahman exists, 
Brahman does not exist alone. 
 Shankara is of course aware of such objections, and while Ramanuja, Mad-
hva, and other Vedantins make them because they believe that Shankara has no 
adequate answer, the answer that he has should be noted. The answer 12  is that 
enlightenment experience trumps or “sublates” all other sorts of experience, and 
enlightenment experience is self-authenticating. Further, each sensory or intro-
spective experience is self-defeating, because it is either subject-consciousness-object 
or else subject-content in structure—it includes “the making of distinctions”—
and any such experience is (it is claimed) inherently unreliable. Such later critics 
as Ramanuja and Vadarija turn the latter claim against its author. In moksha or 
enlightenment experience, one is supposed to learn that one is identical to qual-
ityless Brahman. While this is not viewed as being like learning that seven and 
ﬁ ve are twelve, or that Alaska and Hawaii are U.S. states—it is an experience 
said to be life-changing, transforming, accompanied with calm and bliss and free-
dom from desire, and the like—still it is a matter of coming to see some alleged 
truth. Enlightenment experience is supposed to conﬁ rm core Advaita doctrine. 
Suppose it does so; then it is a matter of someone learning something—a subject-
consciousness-object or else a subject-content experience. If all experiences with 
such structures are unreliable, so is enlightenment experience. On the other hand, 
if enlightenment experience is reliable, then other experiences possessing a simi-
lar structure can be reliable, and all sensory and introspective experience provides 
evidence against the claim that only qualityless Brahman exists. Should it be 

218 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
replied that enlightenment experience has no object and no content, then it cannot 
be the case that it conﬁ rms some doctrine rather than some other. “Contentless and 
objectless experience” describes no possible experience, and if it did describe any 
experience, such an experience would not be evidence for Advaita versus Jain, 
Buddhist, monotheistic, or other religious claims. Without even apparent object 
or content, it would favor none of the traditions. 
 Jain-type Appeals to Experience 
 Both Jain and Buddhist traditions appeal to introspective experience as evidence 
for, or conﬁ rmation of, their particular doctrines of what a person is. From a Jain 
perspective—since for Jainism there is a self to have experiences—“introspective 
experience” here means “self-awareness” or “awareness of one’s mental states,” 
irrespective of how those states are elicited or understood. Jain enlightenment 
experience is taken to have the same structure, and to reveal the same substan-
tival being, that is encountered in ordinary everyday self-consciousness. The 
Buddhist tradition typically takes ordinary self-awareness to be deceptive and 
restricts its appeal to enlightenment experiences and experiences that occur to 
the type achieved by those trained in Buddhist meditative traditions. Philoso-
phers—of whom David Hume is the most famous—claim that the most ordinary 
of introspective experiences conﬁ rm the same view as that which the Buddhist 
derives from esoteric experiences. In what follows, then, we will simply speak 
of introspective experiences, not limiting ourselves to those that are meditative 
or religious. As the dispute is cross-cultural, we may as well see it in that context, 
quoting both European and Indian representatives of both positions. One posi-
tion is propounded by Descartes, various Jain texts, and Ramanuja, and the other 
asserted by David Hume and various Theravada Buddhist texts. 
 The dispute here concerns, then, whether or not persons are self-conscious and 
enduring substances. This matter, at least, Descartes, Ramanuja, Jainism, Bud-
dhism, and Hume think can be settled by appeal to introspection. They disagree 
as to what the introspective evidence conﬁ rms. We begin with the position that 
claims that introspection and enlightenment experience clearly and incontrovert-
ibly shows that persons are enduring mental substances, and follow with the 
position that introspection and/or enlightenment experience clearly and incontro-
vertibly shows that persons at a time are but bundles of momentary states, so that 
over time a person can be nothing more substantial than a series of such bundles. 
 Descartes 
 Descartes writes: 
   . . .   of a surety I myself did exist since I persuaded myself of something 
(or merely because I thought of something). But there is some deceiver or 
other, very powerful and very cunning, who ever employs his ingenuity in 
deceiving me. Then without doubt I exist also if he deceives me, and let him 

Enlightenment-Based Arguments 219
deceive he as much as he will, he can never cause me to be nothing so long 
as I think that I am something, so that after having reﬂ ected well and care-
fully examined all things, we must come to the deﬁ nite conclusion that this 
proposition:  I am, I exist , is necessarily true each time that I pronounce it, or 
that I mentally conceive it. 13 
 The claim is that  Necessarily, the fact that I think includes the fact of my existence 
and that I can know without danger of error that I am a thinking being and that 
I exist. Descartes does not make the false claim that  Descartes exists is, if true, 
then necessarily true. In his investigations of self-consciousness he “was merely 
investigating these properties of which I able to attain to sure and evident knowl-
edge” 14 —in particular such properties as pertain to the nature of Descartes as a 
sample person. He claims that he, as a person, is a self-conscious substance, and 
that this is introspectively evident. It is logically impossible that he exist without 
being a self-conscious being, and hence being a self-conscious being is at least 
part of his essence. He adds that since this is true of him as a representative per-
son, what it is to be a person is to be an enduring self-conscious substance. 
 Two sorts of claims are represented here. One sort is introspective, strictly 
speaking; Descartes is aware of his thinking of the nature of persons rather than 
reﬂ ecting about triangularity, logical necessity, the nature of matter, or the pros-
pects of his completing a letter to Elizabeth. Discerning what one is thinking 
about is a matter of being aware of one’s thoughts—a matter of introspection. 
Another sort is conceptual and metaphysical—he is considering the nature of per-
sons rather than wondering how his mother is doing or considering what to have 
for dinner, and by doing such conceptual thinking he can discern the nature of 
persons—just as, in thinking about triangles, he can discern their essence. In this 
special case, he holds that he has (as anyone can have) a unique advantage—what 
he considers the essence of is also an object of direct awareness, and thus the con-
cept of this essence can be compared with something that has the essence the con-
cept expresses. Thus his claim is that these two sorts of thinking—introspective 
and conceptual—to some degree coalesce in the case of his deliberate use of self-
awareness as a source of knowledge regarding his nature as a person. He observes 
in himself not only his thinking and his existence but also a necessary connection 
between the property  Descartes thinking now  and the property  Descartes exist-
ing now  that eliminates any need for inference from the fact that he has the one 
property to his having the other (though of course that inference is proper). He is 
able to reﬂ ect that he exists only if he is a self-conscious thing—permanent loss 
of self-consciousness is also cessation of his existence, and he is directly aware of 
himself as a self-conscious substance. 
 Put differently, Descartes is often aware of his being in certain introspec-
tive states. Some of these states are states of abstract thought, and among these 
are reﬂ ections concerning the nature of persons. When he thinks of triangles, 
bluebirds, or wafﬂ es, Descartes is thinking of kinds of things to which he does 
not himself belong. Not so when he thinks of persons. When he thinks about 
the nature of a triangle—what it is to be one, or of a bluebird or a wafﬂ e, he 

220 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
does not think about his own nature; not so when he thinks of what it is to be 
a person. His view is that he can learn what it is to be a person by (i) noting 
what sorts of properties he himself has—something introspectively accessible 
to him, and (ii) reﬂ ecting about what properties he could exist without having 
and what properties he could not exist without having—something conceptually 
accessible to him. 
 Explaining his position in reply to an objection, Descartes says: 
  Everything in which there resides immediately, as in a subject, or by means 
of which there exists anything that we perceive, i.e. any property, quality, or 
attribute, of which we have a real idea, is called a Substance. 15 
 Since he is aware of himself as having various qualities and being in various 
states, he is introspectively aware of being a substance. Since allegedly he knows 
that it is his essence to be self-conscious—any other features not identical to or 
entailed by self-consciousness, he could survive without; without self-conscious-
ness 16  he does not exist—he concludes that it is his nature as a person (and hence 
the nature of persons) to be a self-conscious substance. 
 Jainism 
 A Jain text tells us the following: 
  The distinctive characteristic of a substance is being. Being is a simul-
taneous possession of coming into existence, going out of existence, 
and permanence. Permanence means the indestructibility of the essence 
of the substance.  . . . Substance is possessed of attributes and modiﬁ ca-
tions.  . . . Attributes depend upon substratum and cannot be the substratum 
of another attribute. Modiﬁ cation is change of attribute. 17 
 A substance, we are told, has attributes—properties or qualities, if you please. No 
attribute can exist that is not the attribute of some substance. Things come into 
existence in the sense that substances come to have qualities they did not have and 
to lose qualities they did have; through such changes, substances continue to exist 
and of course retain their essential qualities. 
 Further: 
  The self’s essence is life.  . . . The distinctive characteristic of self is atten-
tion.  . . . Those with minds are knowers. 18 
 “Selves are substances” 19  and their deﬁ nitive characteristic or essence is described 
as “life” and “attention.” Further: 
  That which should be grasped by self-discrimination is I from the real point 
of view. 20  The soul has the nature of knowledge, and the realization of this 

Enlightenment-Based Arguments 221
nature is Nirvana; therefore one who is desirous of Nirvana must meditate on 
self-knowledge. 21 
 Jainism sometimes uses ‘nirvana’ rather than ‘kevala’ to refer to enlightenment 
experience. Self-realization involves self-knowledge, and it “has the nature of 
knowledge.” This obviously comes very close at least to Descartes’s view of the 
person, mind, or soul as being a self-conscious substance. In both introspective 
and enlightenment experience, one appears to oneself as a thinking thing, a sub-
stance that possesses cognitive mental qualities. 
 Ramanuja 
 In a passage that expresses the same sort of view as that of Descartes and Jainism, 
the Hindu monotheist Ramanuja writes: 
  The judgement “I am conscious” reveals an “I” distinguished by conscious-
ness; and to declare that it refers only to a state of consciousness—which is a 
mere attribute—is no better than to say of the judgement “Devadatta carries 
a stick” is about the stick only. 22 
 He adds: 
  Consciousness is the illuminating, in the present moment, to its own sub-
strate, by its own existence alone.  . . . Or else, it is the establishing of its own 
subject by its own existence alone.  . . . A conscious act is the illumination of 
a particular object to its own substrate by its own existence alone.  . . . The 
nature of consciousness is to make something into an object of experience of 
its own substrate through its own being alone. 23 
 According to Ramanuja, a person can be directly aware of herself as the subject 
of her experiences, including an awareness of herself. Seeing a lamp, one can be 
aware of oneself as so seeing. One need not infer from  Someone is seeing a lamp 
to  I am someone or I am seeing a lamp . The same experience yields the informa-
tion that both of these sentences express, and it is  Someone is seeing a lamp that 
requires inference if anything does, for it abstractly expresses a consequence of 
one’s concrete ﬁ rst-person experience. 
 Ramanuja makes his allegiance to a Cartesian doctrine of the person plain when 
he writes: 
  Now the permanence of the producer [of conscious acts], and the origina-
tion, duration, and cessation, as for pleasure and pain, of what is known 
as the conscious act, which is an attribute of the producer, are directly 
perceived. The permanence of the producer is established by recognition 
from such judgments as  This is the very same thing previously known 
by me . 24   

222 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
 The ﬁ rst sentence of this passage appeals to direct perception. Only in the sec-
ond sentence is there appeal to argument, and the argument infers from reliable 
memory to the endurance of oneself as a substance. 25 
 Nor, in Ramanuja’s view, is this nature as a self-conscious being lost in 
enlightenment. 
 Ramanuja waxes eloquent on the point: 
  To maintain that the consciousness of the “I” does not persist in the state 
of ﬁ nal release is again altogether inappropriate. It, in fact, amounts to the 
doctrine—only expressed in somewhat different words—that ﬁ nal release is 
the annihilation of the self. The “I” is not a mere attribute of the self so that 
even after its destruction the essential nature of the self might persist—as it 
persists on the cessation of ignorance; but it constitutes the very nature of 
the self. Such judgments as :“I know,” “Knowledge has arisen in me,” show, 
on the other hand, that we are conscious of knowledge as a mere attribute of 
the self.—Moreover, a man who, suffering pain, mental or of other kind—
whether such pain be real or due to error only—puts himself in relation to 
pain—“I am suffering pain”—naturally begins to reﬂ ect how he may once 
for all free himself from all these manifold afﬂ ictions and enjoy a state of 
untroubled ease; the desire of ﬁ nal release thus having arisen in him he at 
once sets to work to accomplish it. If, on the other hand, he were to real-
ize that the effect of such activity would be the loss of personal existence, 
he surely would turn away as soon as somebody began to tell him about 
“release.”  . . . Nor must you maintain against this that even in the state of 
release there persists pure consciousness;  . . . No sensible person exerts him-
self under the inﬂ uence of the idea that after he himself has perished there 
will remain some entity termed “pure light”!—What constitutes the “inward” 
self thus is the “I,” the knowing subject. 26 
 A similar theme is expressed in this passage: 
  “May I, freeing myself from all pain, enter on free possession of endless 
delight?” This is the thought which prompts the man desirous of release to 
apply himself to the study of the sacred texts. Were it a settled matter that 
release consists in the annihilation of the “I,” the man would move away as 
soon as release were only hinted at. “When I myself have perished, there 
persists some consciousness different from me,” to bring this about nobody 
truly will exert himself. 27 
 The “permanence” referred to here, like that of the Jain doctrine, is inherently 
everlasting, unlike the Cartesian doctrine (for whom it comes from God). Unlike 
the Jain, Ramanuja holds the permanence to be possessed only by divine courtesy 
and dependent on divine grace. In addition to an insistence on the distinctness, 
endurance, and value of the individual person or self, Ramanuja refers us to the 

Enlightenment-Based Arguments 223
nature of conscious experience as a basis for the view that a person is a mental 
substance in yet another passage: 
  Some things—e.g., staffs and bracelets—appear sometimes as having a 
separate, independent existence of their own; at other times they present 
themselves as distinguishing attributes of other things or beings (i.e., of the 
persons carrying staffs or wearing bracelets). Other entities—e.g., the generic 
character of cows—have a being only insofar as they constitute the form of 
substances, and thus always present themselves as distinguishing attributes 
of those substances.  . . . The assertion, therefore, that the difference of things 
is refuted by immediate consciousness is based on the plain denial of a certain 
form of consciousness, the one namely—admitted by every one—which is 
expressed by the judgment “This thing is such and such.” 28 
 The gist of this passage is that experiences that we all have are properly reported 
by statements of the form  I experience an X that has Q  where  X  refers to some 
thing and  Q to some quality. 
 Descartes, Jainism, and Ramanuja—a French Catholic, an atheistic religious 
tradition, and a Hindu Visistadvaita Vedanta monotheist—hold that introspective 
(and for Jainism and Ramanuja, enlightenment) experience conﬁ rms that persons 
are self-conscious substances that endure through time. In briefest scope, the idea 
is this:  I am what I appear to be in introspective and enlightenment experience; 
what I appear to be in introspective and enlightenment experience is this: a men-
tal substance; hence I am a mental substance . 
 Buddhist-type Appeals to Experience 
 Hume 
 David Hume writes concerning “all of our particular perceptions” that: 
  All these are different, and distinguishable, and separable from each other, 
and may be separately consider’d, and may exist separately, and have no 
need of any thing to support their existence. After what manner, therefore, do 
they belong to self; and how are they connected with it? For my part, when 
I enter most intimately into what I call myself, I always stumble on some 
particular perception or other, or heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, 
pain or pleasure. I never can catch myself at any time without a perception, 
and never can observe any thing but the perception. When my perceptions are 
remov’d for any time, as by sound sleep; so long am I insensible of myself, 
and may truly be said not to exist. And were all my perceptions remov’d by 
death, and cou’d I neither think, nor feel, nor see, nor love, nor hate after the 
dissolution of my body, I shou’d be entirely annihilated, nor do I conceive 
what is farther requisite to make me a perfect non-entity. If any one upon seri-
ous and unprejudic’d reﬂ exion, thinks he has a different notion of himself, 

224 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
I must confess I can reason no longer with him. All I can allow him is, that 
he may be in the right as well as I, and that we are essentially different in 
this particular. He may, perhaps, perceive something simple and continuous, 
which he calls himself; tho’ I am certain there is no such principle in me. 29 
 Hume’s claim is that all his introspection yields is awareness of independent 
states—say, a state of being in pain and a state of wondering where the aspirin 
went. At another later time, introspection may reveal, say, a desire for ﬁ sh and 
wine and a regret that one forgot to buy either. What there is, so far as persons go, 
is such states, and nothing else. In briefest scope, his line of reasoning goes:  I am 
what I appear to be in introspective experience; What I appear to be in introspec-
tive experience is this: individual states; hence I am individual states . 
 Theravada Buddhism 
 It is well known that this Humean view is shared by various Buddhist perspectives. 
 A Buddhist text tells us that: 
  Whether Buddhas arise, O priests, or whether Buddhas do not arise, it remains a 
fact and the ﬁ xed and necessary constitution of being that all its constituent are 
transitory. This fact a Buddha discovers and masters, and when he has discov-
ered and mastered it, he announces, teaches, publishes, proclaims, discloses, 
minutely explains, and makes it clear, that all the constituents of being are tran-
sitory.  . . . Whether Buddhas arise, O priests, or whether Buddhas do not arise, 
it remains a fact and the ﬁ xed and necessary constitution of being, that all its 
elements are lacking in an ego (substantial, permanent self-nature). This fact a 
Buddha discovers and masters, and when he has discovered and mastered it, 
he announces, teaches, publishes, proclaims, discloses, minutely explains, and 
makes it clear, that all the elements of being are lacking in an ego. 30  
 A longer and more familiar passage reads as follows: 
  Just as the word ‘chariot’ is but a mode of expression for axle, wheels, char-
iot-body, pole, and other constituent members, placed in a certain relation 
to each other, but when we come to examine the members one by one, we 
discover that in the absolute sense there is not chariot; and just as the word 
‘house’ is but a mode of expression for wood and other constituents of a 
house, surrounding space in a certain relation, but in the absolute sense there 
is no house; and just as the word ‘ﬁ st’ is but a mode of expression for the 
ﬁ ngers, the thumb, etc. in a certain relation; and the word ‘lute’ for the body 
of the lute, strings, etc.; ‘army’ for elephants, horses, etc.; ‘city’ for fortiﬁ ca-
tions, houses, gates, etc.; ‘tree’ for trunk, branches, foliage, etc.; in a certain 
relation, but when we come to examine the parts one by one, we discover that 
in the absolute sense there is no tree; in exactly the same way words ‘living 
entity’ and ‘ego’ are but a mode of expression for the presence of the ﬁ ve 

Enlightenment-Based Arguments 225
attachment groups, but when we come to examine the elements of being one 
by one, we discover that in the absolute sense there is no living entity there 
to form a basis for such ﬁ gments as “I am” or “I”; in other words, that in the 
absolute sense there is only name and form. The insight of him who perceives 
this is called knowledge of the truth. 31 
 In briefest scope, the line of reasoning is this:  I am what I appear to be in enlight-
enment experience; what I appear to be in enlightenment experience is this: 
individual states; hence I am individual states . Buddhism typically holds that 
everyday experience seems to give awareness of a self, and thus supports the 
enduring self view. For precisely this reason, enlightenment experience is neces-
sary to escape the sort of view that Jainism accepts. 
 The Duration Problem 
 It is impossible that one tell by immediate awareness at time T that one is, or is 
not, something that does, or does not, endure beyond T. Descartes emphasizes 
this: he knows by immediate awareness that he exists  now— that “ I am, I exist , 
is . . . true each time that I pronounce it, or that I mentally conceive it.” Appeal to 
memory (as in the Ramanuja passage noted earlier) is required. There are obvious 
problems in appealing to memory to establish one’s own lack of endurance, but 
for present purposes we shall simply set aside reference to duration and lack of 
duration and consider only the idea that either the Jain sort of appeal to experience 
can establish that persons are mental substances or the Buddhist sort of appeal to 
experience can conﬁ rm that persons are individual states. (The question arises as 
to whether ‘states’ is the right word—don’t states have to be  states of something ? 
But similar questions arise about such terms as ‘qualities’ (of what?), ‘events’ 
(aren’t events matters of substances coming to gain and/or lose qualities?), ‘pro-
cesses’ (don’t these occur to something?), and so on.) 
 These Buddhist passages express the doctrine that Hume claims to derive 
from introspective experience and that Theravada (and other) Buddhist traditions 
believe to be conﬁ rmed in meditative and enlightenment experience. The gist of 
the passages is put more succinctly via the terse claim “Consciousness is sou-
less .” 32  Hume takes each mental state—each perception, or impression and idea, 
as he says—to exist independent of every other. The Buddhist traditions hold that 
each mental state depends for its existence on other states. But this difference 
aside, they agree—persons at a time are bundles of momentary states, over time 
are a series of such bundles, and introspective and/or enlightenment experience 
teaches us this sort of view. 
 The Contrasting Arguments 
 The enduring-mental-substance view and the bundle-of-momentary-states 
view do agree on an important and controversial claim, namely that what we 
appear to be in introspective, meditative, or enlightenment experience is what 

226 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
we are. It is not obvious that this is so. John Locke, in Book Two of his  Essay 
concerning Human Understanding , offers an interesting third view. He agrees 
with Hume and Buddhism that what we are aware of is momentary states. He 
holds that momentary states can exist only as states of enduring substances. 
So he accepts the description of introspective data given by the momentary-
mental-state theorist and the conclusion held by the enduring-mental-substance 
theorist, and there is at least nothing obviously incoherent about this view. 
It is incoherent if one thinks that what we are is exactly what introspection 
(etc.) reveals, but Locke does not hold that. Further, of course the view that 
we are simply what appears to or in our introspective, meditative, or enlight-
enment experience is not something that is introspectively (etc.) conﬁ rmable, 
and if one denies that we are only what appears to or in our introspective 
(etc.) experience one does not embrace a self-contradictory doctrine. Further, 
we have lots of tendencies, habits, dispositions, and properties that are not 
introspectively (etc.) available to us—some (like our ability to make logical 
inferences) are not always introspectively accessible, since we are not always 
making inferences; some, like either our being indestructible or our not being 
indestructible, are not ever introspectively available. Since the view that we 
are what we introspectively seem to be is common to both sides of the dispute, 
and an important part of their appeal to experience, both are—to that important 
degree at any rate—mistaken. That assumption is false. One could replace it 
by the view that our tendencies, dispositions, habits, and so on are—at least 
broadly speaking—properties we have, each is introspectable, even if not all 
are in fact introspected. But most of these properties are not introspectable 
at every moment and some will not be introspectable in any given introspec-
tive experience, so that part of what properties one has will not be present 
introspectively in any enlightenment experience. Thus not all of what we are 
is present. One might revise the claim regarding introspection (etc.) to claim 
merely that whatever structure the (real or illusory) self seemed to introspec-
tion (etc.) to have, or whatever fundamental sort it seemed to introspection to 
belong, was the structure it had or the kind to which it belonged. But  belong-
ing to a kind  is not the sort of property that is introspectively discernible; if 
persons are  essentially self-conscious , and  to be self-conscious  is the nature of 
persons, it still does not follow that  self-consciousness being the nature of per-
sons  is somehow introspectively accessible. Similarly, if one has a triangular 
image before the mind’s eye, and  being closed and three-sided  is essential to 
a triangle, it does not follow that  being closed and three-sided is essential to a 
triangle  are part of one’s image. Neither  self-consciousness being the nature of 
persons  nor  being closed and three-sided  is an introspectively (etc.) accessible 
quality. Neither will it be reliably introspectable whether there is or seems to be 
a subject of experience over and above the experience since even the enduring 
self theorist admits that awareness of oneself can be at most at low ebb when 
one’s experiential content is captivating, but will not be disturbed by this since 
one normally has no trouble, say, identifying whose pain, hope, fear, anxiety, 
or euphoria one is experiencing. 

Enlightenment-Based Arguments 227
  It is crucial here that Descartes used both introspective report and conceptual 
considerations . 
 So did Locke; so also do Ramanuja, Hume, and the Jain and Buddhist traditions. 
The substantivalists—Descartes, Ramanuja, and the Jain tradition—take it to be 
true that it is logically impossible that there be mental states that are not the states 
of some person in the sense of being states of some mental substance. Here Locke, 
who describes his experience in Humean and Buddhist terms, agrees with Des-
cartes, Ramanuja, and the Jains in virtue of holding to the conceptual claim that 
 Necessarily, every experience is someone’s experience . For Jainism, Descartes, 
and Ramanuja, what introspection yields is not a pain, but  one’s being in pain ; not 
a or the thought that Abraham Lincoln was once U.S. president, but  one’s thinking 
that Lincoln was president ; not hunger, but  one’s being hungry . It is  oneself-in-
some-state  that is introspected. The Buddhist tradition typically takes this to be a 
correct account of ordinary introspection, and to that extent agrees with the sub-
stantivalists against Hume. Hence their appeal to meditative and enlightenment 
experience, which they take to be different. 
 Hume takes persons to be, at a time, merely bundles of states. He takes intro-
spection to reveal this, whereas the Buddhist tradition agrees with Hume’s doc-
trine while taking his description of introspection to be true only of meditative and 
enlightenment experiences—experiences that have been, on the Buddhist view, 
puriﬁ ed from mistaken notions and, from the Jain view, rendered evidentially 
worthless by importation of Buddhist assumptions and made unnatural and non-
representative of reliable human experience. 
 It is tempting to offer this explanation of the differences. Each perspective 
offers its reports of what experience teaches on report forms constructed in their 
own shops, substantival forms from the Jain shop and non-substantival forms 
from the Buddhist shop. What makes this possible regarding introspective expe-
rience and the dispute at hand is a variety of things we have noted already—the 
dispute is not a dispute about introspectively accessible properties or states, and 
it is a dispute inherently involving contrary philosophical theses. The Buddhist 
tradition is unwilling to rest the case on appeal to introspective or sensory expe-
rience because it thinks that this would refute its own position. It thus appeals 
to experiences that occur in meditative and enlightenment contexts of the right 
sort—e.g., not of the Jain sort. This involves a move not unlike the Advaita appeal 
to moksha experience as trumping others, unless Hume is right about introspec-
tive experience after all. 
 The problem with both the appeal-to-experience of the substantivalists and of 
the non-substantivalists is this: it marks out the dispute on ground that appar-
ently cannot offer sufﬁ cient experiential evidence regarding it. The problem is 
not merely that there is no neutral way of describing introspective experience to 
which one can appeal for evidence that is of any use—though that is true. The 
awareness only of mental state view can be accommodated by the substance theo-
rist by following Locke’s approach. The problem is that the sorts of properties or 
states experience of which would be evidence are not accessible to introspective 

228 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
experience.  Being a substance  and  being only a bundle of states  are not more 
properties or features that are more introspectively accessible than are  being inde-
structible  or  being destructible ; both sorts of features differ in that regard from 
 being fatigued or worried or elated . Equally intelligent and careful introspectors 
report different results. To posit two species   of human being, one of the has-a-self 
and one of the has-no-self type has no precedent and conﬂ icts with the universal-
problem universal-cure perspectives of the religious traditions. 
 One stubborn fact prevents us from having a Principle of Introversive Experience: 
those who appeal to it do not agree on its phenomenological; description. If appeal 
to introspectibly   accessible features are relevant to the dispute, as of course they are, 
they are relevant by virtue of their connection to competing theories of the self or per-
son. The dispute then switches to the competing theories themselves—to the internal 
consistency, the coherence, the explanatory power, and so on, of substantival versus 
non-substantival theories of persons. But that is a different matter from appeal to intro-
spective, meditative, or enlightenment experience as evidence for religious belief. It 
is a matter of which theory—substantivalist or non-substantivalist—can best explain 
memory, responsibility, self-consciousness, unity of consciousness, and the like. 33  
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
  1. 
Why, in the end, does the perceptual analogy not work as a way of 
expressing Advaita Vedanta? 
 2. 
What does Advaita Vedanta afﬁ rm? 
 3. 
What does Advaita Vedanta deny? 
 4. 
Explain the Jain doctrine of persons and its implications for memory. 
 5. Explain the Theravada doctrine of persons and its implications for 
memory.  
 Notes 
   1.  In fact, the terminology used to refer to the relevant experiences is not as neat as 
these characterizations suggest. For example, Jainism not infrequently used ‘nirvana’ 
to refer to kevala experiences. 
   2.  One might add something along the lines of  S has seen both that he had E and that it is 
logically impossible that he have E and P be false . Nothing argued here will depend on 
whether we add this last consideration or not, so long as it is not the case that Chandra 
has E but believes P, not on the basis of his having had E, but on some other basis. Even 
if E is self-authenticating regarding a proposition P, and person S has E, E does not self-
authenticate P to S if the only reason that S accepts P is not that S had E and E ﬁ ts a 
description such that if E occurs then this is (conclusive) evidence for P. For example, if S 
would otherwise not accept P unless his great-grandfather had asserted P, and would have 
accepted P on that basis even without having had E, then even if E is conclusive evidence 
for P, S does not accept P on that basis and so E is not for S self-authenticating regarding P. 
 
  One might put self-authentication along these lines: E is self-authenticating to Shandra 
regarding P if and only if Chandra cannot be mistaken about a belief B that P, Chandra 

Enlightenment-Based Arguments 229
evidentially rests his belief that P on his experience E, P cannot be false if Chandra has 
E, it is logically impossible that Chandra be wrong about whether Chandra has E, and 
Chandra believes that he had E. Again, nothing we say here would be changed if we 
characterized self-authentication along these lines. 
   3.  These are only one way of putting these views, and do not exhaust the views central 
to these traditions. But they are accurate and representative, fully fair for illustrative 
purposes here. 
   4.  Even if some claim is knowable only by someone who has an enlightenment experi-
ence it does not follow that it is true only if someone has an enlightenment experience. 
In fact, the relevant notion of enlightenment experience requires that such experiences 
essentially involve discovering what has been true all along. 
   5.  Not at any rate so long as they think the doctrines they favor to be logically contingent 
truths. 
  6. I assume that we both have sufﬁ cient evidence that we are seeing a coin of some sort. 
  7. With the addition, of course, of claims about consciousness and memory. 
   8.  I think that they are also  reasonably  accepted, save by Advaita Vedantins who claim 
that all of what could be said on their behalf in “sublated” and so trumped by enlighten-
ment experience. 
   9.  We will not worry here about second-order conscious states—e.g., one’s being aware 
that one at least seems to perceive a tree or is having a headache similar to the one she 
had yesterday. 
 10.  See, for example, the work by L. Stafford Betty, cited at the end of this chapter. 
  11.  Philosophers who agree with the rest of what is said here may think that putting the 
matter in terms of evidence is not quite correct; it won’t matter for our purposes 
whether speaking of evidence is exactly right here. For example, those who think we 
cannot be wrong about such states will want to talk about something stronger than 
evidence, which will not affect our basic point. 
  12.  Another answer is that claims that a multiplicity of persons and physical objects exist 
are somehow self-contradictory, all relational claims are self-contradictory, the notion 
of a substance (physical or mental) is self-contradictory, or the like. But there seem to 
be no very good arguments for such accusations. 
 13.  Of the Nature of the Human Mind , Meditation II, Haldane and Ross, eds. (1931) (Dover 
Publications), p. 150. 
 14.  Ibid. , p. 30. 
 15.  Argument Demonstrating the Existence of God and the Distinction between Soul and 
Body, Drawn Up in Geometrical Fashion , Deﬁ nition V; p. 53. 
  16.  One sort of dualism will take  being self-conscious  to be the nature of a person; others 
opt for  being capable of self-consciousness, and sometimes being so . 
  17.  Tattvarthadhigama Sutra, Chapter V, Sections 29, 30, 31, 38, 41, 42;  Sourcebook , 
p. 256. 
 18.  Ibid. , Chapter II, Sections 7, 8, 29;  Sourcebook , p. 254. 
 19.  Ibid. , Chapter II, 10. 
 20.  Samayasdra , 325. 
 21.  Atmanusasna , 174. 
 22.  Sourcebook , p. 547. 
 23.  G. Thibaut, tr. (1962)  The Vedanta-Sutras with the Commentary by Ramanuja (Delhi: 
Motilal Barnasidass Reprint; originally published by Oxford University Press, 1904), 
p. 48, 55, 56. 
 24.  Ibid ., p. 56. 

230 Arguments and Nonmonotheism
  25.  Ramanuja also takes self-awareness to occur in sensory experience—a view that Jain-
ism and (with qualiﬁ cations) Descartes share. 
 26.  Thibaut, I, i, p. 1;  Sourcebook , p. 547. 
 27.  Ibid. , p. 58. 
 28.  Ibid. , p. 43. 
 29.  A Treatise of Human Nature , Book One, Part IV, Section VI, of Personal Identity, 
p. 252. 
 30.  Anguttara-nikaya, iii, 134;  Sourcebook , p. 273, 274; the text is Theravadin. 
 31.  Visuddhi-magga xviii;  Sourcebook , pp. 284–285; the text is Theravadin. 
 32.  Sangutta-nikaya iii, 66;  Sourcebook , p. 280. 
  33.  Substantivalists nonetheless have two advantages in the dispute. Hume admits that 
we believe that there are enduring substances and has to offer a painfully distended 
account of our having that belief. There is reason to take the substantivalist report 
form as the natural one—the one we in fact use in describing such experience. Further, 
even if it were to be proved that the non-substantivalist report form should be used, 
this—because of Locke’s point—would not establish, or even provide any evidence 
for, the non-substantivalist point. So if there is a way around the objections offered 
here to appeals to introspective (etc.) experience, the advantage lies with the substanti-
valists. Still, the weight falls on the results of asking which view can explain memory, 
responsibility, self-consciousness, and the like. Appeal to enlightenment and medita-
tive experience is made by both sides, as we have noted. 
 Suggested Readings 
 Braddon-Mitchell, David and Jackson, Frank, eds. (1996)  Philosophy of Mind and Cogni-
tion (Oxford: Blackwell). A good survey of contemporary philosophy of mind. 
 Chisholm, Roderick (1976)  Person and Object  (LaSalle, IL: Open Court). Defends a sub-
stance account of persons. 
 Collins, Steven (1990)  Selﬂ ess Persons: Imagery and Thought in Theravada Buddhism 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). An excellent account of the Buddhist no-self 
doctrine. 
 Descartes, Rene,  Meditations on First Philosophy  (multiple editions). The classic presenta-
tion of mind-body dualism. 
 Hume, David,  A Treatise of Human Nature  (multiple editions). The classic expression of 
a no-self view. 
 Lavazza, Andrea and Robinson, Howard, eds. (2013)  Contemporary Dualism: A Defense 
(New York: Routledge). State-of-the-art defense of a currently unpopular position. 
 Loux, Michael (1997)  Metaphysics  (London: Routledge). Contains a good discussion of 
substance-theories and bundle-theories. 
 Lowe, E. J. (2006)  Subjects of Experience  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Defends a view on which subjects having experiences is metaphysically correct. 
 Siderits, Mark (2015)  Personal Identity and Buddhist Philosophy: Empty Persons (Alder-
shot: Ashgate). Analytic philosophy is used to express and defend Buddhist no-self theory. 
 Yandell, Keith E. (1990)  Hume’s “Inexplicable Mystery,”  (Philadelphia: Temple Univer-
sity Press). Contains a detailed discussion of Hume’s views.    

 Part V 
 Religion, Morality, Faith, 
and Reason 

This page intentionally left blank

 14  Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 
 One obvious factor in considering religion and morality is how morality is being 
conceived. It is controversial to suppose that moral rules are basic to morality. 
For example, some hold that what is basic is the sense or recognition of the good 
or the obligatory on a particular occasion. None the less I will assume that what 
is basic in ethics as a discipline is ethical theory, that ethical theories contain one 
or more basic moral principles, and differ most fundamentally in the principles 
from which those who hold the theories reason and endeavor to properly apply to 
speciﬁ c cases. If there is nothing closer to ethics than mores—customs adopted 
by a community to govern communal and individual living and having no deeper 
roots than the culture-relative status this gives them—then there is no such thing 
as morality. Put in other terms, unless there are things good in themselves or bad 
in themselves, ways that are right or wrong to behave, independent of the beliefs 
of any person or group, there is no such thing as morality. What there is, is human 
convention. 
 One way to discuss religion and morality is to start with morality. This is 
to start with moral theories. In principle there are a great many ethical theo-
ries, among them the view that only spiders have intrinsic worth and the view 
that it is always obligatory to increase the paperclip population of your home. 
We will consider, in any detail, three rather more plausible, and certainly more 
widely held, ethical theories. One ethical theory is strict egoism. Its only ethi-
cal principle is that my own interest ought to be furthered, since it alone has 
intrinsic goodness or is good for its own sake. Your interests have worth only 
if they serve my own. If they do not serve my own purposes, they are neutral, 
unless they harm my interests, in which case they are bad. One problem with 
this theory is that you can make that claim about your interests as well as I can 
make it about mine. Then we face the task of justifying the idea that it is only 
your, or my, interests that have the proposed exalted status. Anyone can claim 
this favored status for her interests, and there seems no good reason for one per-
son to be seen as doing so with unique justiﬁ cation. One move to make at this 
point is to grant intrinsic worth to the interests of everyone. But if something’s 
interests have intrinsic worth, then the something itself has intrinsic worth, so 
the something itself must have intrinsic worth.  

234 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
 The view that persons themselves have great worth—that as contemporary 
environmentalists afﬁ rm that landscapes have great inherent worth, persons have 
great intrinsic worth—has this general sort of grounding. Persons have reason, 
self-awareness, are capable of abstract and concrete reasoning, ﬂ ourish best in 
relation to others in the same community, can anticipate the future and plan for it, 
along with many other capacities. But what sort of worth is this? 1 
 The traditional, and often the contemporary, answer is that it is metaphysical 
worth, a gift to its owner. One can be praised for having it, but not for getting it. 
One’s human nature was not something earned over time by some sort of deeds 
that one deliberately performed. As Kant puts it, persons have dignity rather than 
price. If your friend loses your new copy of Plato’s  Republic , she can buy you a 
new one and no harm done. If she takes your son for a walk, and loses him, she 
cannot make it right by going to an orphanage and ﬁ nding a boy that looks almost 
the same as he does; this will not make things right. Persons are not properly 
replaceable in this manner. This rests on, and illustrates, Kant’s dignity-versus-
price distinction. 
 Another part of Kant’s concept of persons is that they are moral agents, capa-
ble of recognizing right versus wrong action, and deciding what to do. Choices 
regarding such matters over time produce moral character, good or bad. One’s 
moral character is, at least to a signiﬁ cant degree, the product of one’s choices, 
and so to one’s credit or blame, in a way that one’s being human is not. For mono-
theistic traditions, it is the fact that, of all earth’s creatures, persons most resemble 
God that is the foundation of their metaphysical worth, and the properties in vir-
tue of which there is this resemblance include properties on which being a moral 
agent rests. 
 Divine Command Ethics 2 
 Surprisingly, there is a variety of monotheistic ethics that maintains, at least in its 
most radical form, that nothing has intrinsic moral worth, and hence that persons 
have none. We look brieﬂ y at some of its varieties in discussing a famous dilemma 
for those who wish to relate religion and morality. At its most radical, divine 
command theory is voluntarist and proposes that God arbitrarily chooses what is 
good and bad or right and wrong. Had God chosen that people like Hitler be good 
and people like Mother Teresa be bad, they would be. Had God chosen that tor-
ture was mandatory and binding wounds was forbidden, they would be. One can 
object along these lines: this is not worrisome, since God has not turned good and 
bad, and duty to do and being forbidden, upside down. Divine command theory of 
the most radical sort in fact does not offer this comfort. There is no serious obli-
gation on the part of a God who arbitrarily chooses what is morally positive and 
morally negative to stick with decisions already made. Since any decision about 
such matters is arbitrary, God can decide that there are seven theories of what is 
thought to be good, and seven theories of what is thought to be obligatory, each 
with its own account of what is bad and what is forbidden. God arbitrarily decides 
that each theory will be the correct one for one day of the week, judges people in 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 235
the way supported by that day’s theory, and keeps secret what theory goes with 
what day. None of this is inconsistent with radical divine command theory. More 
simply, God could decide to command nothing and then nothing would be good 
or bad, right or wrong. Or in a genuinely arbitrary context, one could make com-
mands with an explicit restriction allowing for reversal at any time. 
 Another problem for the theory is that theism typically holds that God is the 
highest being—the one possessing more inherent worth that any other possibly 
could. But then things with signiﬁ cant likeness to God should have worth in virtue 
of that resemblance, and do so non-arbitrarily. So a theist need not accept radical 
divine command theory and hence is not saddled with its problems. 
 One could hold that God chose to have highest metaphysical worth and that 
this choice was arbitrary. Then metaphysical value is also arbitrary; all it would 
mean for God to be good was that, without reason, God approved of God. The 
most radical version of divine command theory has not been widely accepted 
within monotheism. Radical divine command theory makes the notions of divine 
omnipotence and sovereignty central for morality. Milder divine command theo-
ries include other divine attributes, such as love and justice, as equally central. 
 Euthyphro Dilemma 
 According to a famous argument, religion and morality are separated by an 
unpassable   gulf. The argument is a simple dilemma posed in one of the Platonic 
dialogues. Euthyphro, the character after whom the dialogue is named, states the 
dilemma in polytheistic terms. We will recast it so that it is relevant to monothe-
ism. Given this recasting, Euthyphro asks whether what is good is good because 
God approves of it or whether God approves of it because it is good. The idea is 
that both alternatives are unfriendly to monotheism. On one horn of the dilemma, 
God determines what is good without any moral reasons for doing so—there 
aren’t any moral reasons to which to appeal until God declares what is moral. On 
the other horn, God—so to speak—has to look things up in a book God did not 
write that tells God what the correct answer is to the question  In virtue of what 
is something good?  So morality is based on an arbitrary divine decision—one 
irrationally made by drawing answers out of a heavenly hat—or God has nothing 
to do with determining the foundations of morality. Not a pretty picture for the 
monotheist, and the basis for many declarations of the autonomy of ethics from 
religion. 
 A dilemma-based argument is intended to show that there are two or more alter-
natives, each of which is for some reason unacceptable. Thus such an argument 
must be exhaustive regarding the relevant alternatives; if it leaves one out, it is at 
best inconclusive. 3  This problem plagues the Euthyphro argument. Suppose good-
ness is, so to speak, built into God’s nature—that God is good by nature, necessar-
ily good. Then there is no need for God to invent goodness—it is already in place. 
God’s nature is the standard of goodness, and any created thing is good insofar as 
it relevantly resembles God or is in accord with the will of a perfectly good God. 
The former is so whether or not God makes commands. So while radical divine 

236 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
command theory is highly problematic, one can develop an account that closely 
relates God and morality on which God gives no commands. Further, on this view, 
any commands God gave would not be arbitrary; they would be consistent with, 
and derive from, the necessarily good nature of God. 
 It needs to be made clear that the question is not whether, if God commands 
that something be done in certain circumstances—for example, that one should 
bind the wounds of an injured person—it is good or obligatory that this be done. 
It is whether the divine command constitutes the goodness or the obligation. 
One way of putting this is: Would the action be good or right had it not been 
commanded? 4  The question here is not epistemological—it does not concern 
whether we would know what the right thing to do was were it not commanded. 
It concerns metaphysics—is binding the wounds something that is good to do? 
If we could not tell that it is, and were not culpable in our ignorance, it might 
well not be something we were obligated to do, though it would be a good thing 
to do it. An individual’s obligations typically are relative to knowledge that we 
do (or ought to) have, in a way in which what is good is not. 5  There is nothing 
contradictory in the view that binding the wounds is good whether or not is it 
commanded. This is a problem with any theory that makes the goodness of a 
thing or the rightness of an action always to be constituted by a divine com-
mand. But the Euthyphro dilemma fails on the ground of being incomplete—of 
leaving out at least one relevant alternative, namely that the divine nature is 
inherently good and the standard for goodness, so that nothing arbitrary enters 
the picture. 
 There is a more controversial view regarding the dilemma. Suppose there 
are abstract objects—items not located in space, either eternal or everlasting, 
changeless, lacking causal powers, non-conscious, and existing no matter what. 
Whether or not there are other varieties of abstract objects, suppose there are 
propositions—the things that are, in the basic sense, true or false. Among these 
will be necessary truths, such as  Nothing has incompatible properties . Among 
the necessary truths are moral principles—things like  Persons ought always to 
be respected . (If it is needed, we could add “unless they have so acted as to give 
up that right” as is arguably the case of a sniper who has already killed several 
students and faculty by ﬁ ring from a tower on campus and can only be stopped by 
being shot by another marksman.) The idea is that moral principles that are true 
are necessarily true. It can be stated as a conditional, namely  If there are persons 
in a world, they ought always to be respected  so it is vacuously true in a world 
composed only of rocks. Another feature abstract objects are often held to have 
is that they cannot be created. From there the view adds that there is a feature of 
things that God knows but did not create that states the truth about what is good 
or bad, right or wrong. Since abstract objects have no causal powers, they consti-
tute no threat to anything. But God cannot create or destroy them. The Christian 
doctrine of creation, if is to accommodate abstract objects, has to be put in some 
such terms as these:  For all X that is not God, or exists and cannot need creation 
in order to exist, if X exists then God created X  or  If X is not God, and X might 
not have existed, God created X . Monotheists disagree as to whether this way of 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 237
putting the doctrine of creation in acceptable. If it is, then one horn of Euthyphro’s 
dilemma is not problematic after all. 
 Ultimate Values: Buddhism 
 The ultimate values of a religious tradition will ramify throughout its moral 
perspective. For the Buddhist tradition there are two elements that are central. 
First, there is the unsatisfactoriness of human life, at least under reincarnation 
and karma conditions. Second, there is the fact that we cling to, are attached to, 
the things and states available in life under those conditions. Attachments are 
the “causal risings” of unsatisfactoriness, which is a function of the ephemeral 
nature of everything in this life, its unsatisfactoriness (that which is difﬁ cult to 
bear) and no-self (the doctrine that experience has no enduring subject, indeed no 
subject period—where a subject is something that has conscious states rather than 
is constituted by such states). Third, we need to end this attachment, and escape 
from those conditions to some other condition. Fourth, we can do so by following 
the Noble Eightfold Path. These are the Four Noble Truths of Buddhism: the fact 
of unsatisfactoriness, the fact that it has causes, the fact that unsatisfactoriness 
can be escaped by detachments, and the fact that there is a road to nirvana. The 
Noble Eightfold Path is that road. It includes right view (understanding the nature 
of things as expressed in the four truths), right attitude (acting out of compas-
sion), right speech (speaking truth clearly, never harmfully), right action (avoid-
ing exploitation of others), right livelihood (one based on non-exploitation), right 
awareness (being motivated by non-exploitation and avoiding harming others), 
right mindfulness (if you hold yourself dear, watch yourself well—do not return 
to attachment), and right meditation (beginning with the mind focused on a single 
object, and then expanding its scope). This brief description covers a great many 
things in a very short scope, but it illustrates the focus of some central Buddhist 
doctrines and practices. There is a metaphysic and an ethic, with the former lead-
ing directly to the latter. The path may be seen as having three elements—ethics 
(truths 1–3), concentration (truths 4–6), and wisdom (truths 7, 8). However this 
is viewed, the core idea is to move from attachments to things you will lose to 
a detachment that allows an enlightenment experience in which one comes to 
understand the nature of the cosmos, especially to “see” the emptiness (absence) 
of the self, and to free you from the cycle of rebirth. The diagnosis and cure set 
the framework for all of this. 
 Nirvana, the goal of the path, is conceived in various ways. Two such ways 
are the cessation of the sufferer and absorption into an undifferentiated peace, 
consciousness, and bliss that, as undifferentiated, is not anyone’s peace, con-
sciousness, or bliss. On one plausible understanding, these two ways are com-
plementary—the sufferer as sufferer, as an individual, ceases and what was the 
suffered “blends into” a state that reminds one of the level of reality of Advaita 
Vedanta. (This is not to say that the Buddhist tradition borrowed from a Vedantic 
tradition.) Nirvana is often said to be beyond space and time and ineffable, which 
conﬂ icts with descriptions of it as consciousness and bliss (and being beyond 

238 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
space and time) if ineffability entails total inexpressibility. The crucial question 
as to whether morality applies to nirvana is whether there are moral agents in that 
state (nirvana is not a place). If there are not, it does not. It seems clear that in 
nirvana it does not. 
 What we call a person is, after all, held to be but a series of momentary bundles 
composed of conscious states that lack a subject to experience them, where the 
series is not ontologically more than the bundles and the bundles are not onto-
logically more than the states. The existence of any one element—one conscious 
state—is ephemeral and dependent on the existence of other like states. (Adding 
momentary non-conscious states does not change the basic ontological structure.) 
Nirvana is changeless, so a series “entering into” nirvana that was not “there” 
before seems impossible, though perhaps in the case of unindividuated states, 
assuming it is possible that there be such a thing, this concern for some reason 
does not arise. 
 If it is possible for a bundle to be compassionate—for there to be subjectless 
compassion—this is viewed as a state valuable to achieve. At least as valuable 
is detachment from everything. Consider a scenario in which a loving couple 
are married, live at a comfortable economic level, are in excellent health, and 
look forward to living a long peaceful life blessed by children and grandchildren. 
There are a thousand and more ways in which their dreams may not be realized 
and their lives may be nasty, brutish, and short. Better, then, that there not be 
attachment to the things of which their dreams are made. Only those who achieve 
detachment will escape the otherwise endless round of rebirths under the iron law 
of karma that is part of the metaphysical structure of things. The state of having 
escaped has the tradition’s ultimate (non-moral) value. 
 Ultimate Values: Jainism 
 To Mahavira, an early Jain who became enlightened in a fashion described in the 
Jaina Sutras, are ascribed ﬁ ve basic concepts and associated principles. One is 
non-violence, corresponding to the rule of never taking life or harming anything. 
The range of possible violence is very wide. It is always wrong to deprive living 
things of life, or to otherwise harm them. Even atoms can be ensouled, and hence 
living. The most scrupulous wear masks to ﬁ lter out insects that might other-
wise enter the mouth, and carry brooms by which to clear the ground on which 
one is about to step. This is followed by the concepts of truthfulness and never 
stealing, the corresponding principles being easy to provide. The next concept is 
non-possessiveness, corresponding to avoiding the practice of being attached to 
possessing and acquiring things. The ﬁ fth concept is chastity—abstinence for the 
unmarried and the monks, marital faithfulness for the wed. The Jain “worship” 
service involves reﬂ ecting on, and then following, the example of Mahavira and 
earlier Jains who are believed to have attained enlightenment. Karma is thought 
of as dirt that collects on the soul, and it prevents enlightenment, keeping one in 
the cycle of rebirth. Ethics is cut to the pattern of preparation for enlightenment. 
Escape is possible only through having an experience in which one sees that one 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 239
is not identical to, or dependent for existence on, one’s body, but is in fact an 
immaterial soul with great knowledge. Thus, as with Buddhism, there is a moral 
path to be followed in seeking the highest good. Since personal identity is retained 
in enlightenment, the moral character of the achiever is retained. 
 For Advaita Vedanta, given the nature (or lack thereof) ascribed to the “level 
of reality,” ethics has no application there. It applies to the level of appearance. 
The goal of life is the realization of one’s identity with qualityless Brahman. This 
contrasts with the theistic Vedanta of Ramanuja and Madva, where the goal, in 
effect, is to be with God in heaven. For Advaita, there are three paths to enlight-
enment (recognition of one’s identity with Brahman): knowledge (philosophical 
reﬂ ection on scriptures, typically with a guru), works (good deeds and perfor-
mance of rituals), and devotion (worship, and service). Doing the right things with 
detachment is important, since doing it any other way yields karmic debt. Escape 
from the cycle of rebirth (samsara) is the goal and correct knowledge the content, 
along with consciousness and bliss. For Shankara, the goal is to realize that all 
along you have been identical to qualityless Brahman. (It follows that if Chandra 
is identical to Bimal, and both are identical to qualityless Brahman, then Chandra 
is identical to Bimal, and of course conversely.) A conception of morality that has 
no application to the level of reality is so conceived as to provide opportunity to 
reach that level from the level of appearance. (We previously discussed the prob-
lems with interpretations of the levels.) 
 In each of our non-theistic cases, escape from samsara (the cycle of birth and 
rebirth under the law of karma) sets the framework in which life is lived. 
 Morality without Religion? 
 There remains the question as to whether you can have ethics without religion. 
The question is not whether a non-religious person can be ethical. That clearly is 
possible. Most people know people like that. The question is whether a person 
can consistently accept an ethical realist position—a position that believes that 
there are (human) mind-independent true moral principles, ways of acting that 
are objectively right or wrong, persons who are either good or bad independent 
of what anybody thinks—without believing that morality has a religious basis. 
The religion that usually comes into the discussion is monotheism: Can there be 
morality without God? 
 A more general question is whether there can be morality without metaphys-
ics—whether a moral view of the world can be rationally justiﬁ ed unless some 
sort of metaphysical propositions are true. There is good reason to hope that the 
answer is afﬁ rmative. Metaphysics is a challenging area, chock full of interesting 
views and arguments. The same is true of ethics. It would be nice to be able to do 
one without the other. But one cannot, though it is possible to do ethics without 
noticing the metaphysical commitment one has made. 
 An example of a secular morality may be helpful at this point. Jeremy Ben-
tham started classical utilitarianism. His version was Hedonistic. It should be 
stressed that there are non-Hedonistic versions of utilitarianism, but it was the 

240 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
view Bentham chose. Hedonism locates intrinsic goodness only in pleasure and 
intrinsic badness only in pain. On one philosophical view, persons have pleasures 
and pains, but are not composed of pleasures and pains. Conscious states are 
states, but not parts, of persons. Were Bentham to hold this view of persons, his 
view would entail that persons would have extrinsic worth, being conditions of 
there being items (certain conscious states) that possess (positive or negative) 
worth for their own sake. (Strictly, Bentham includes the conscious states of all 
sentient beings.) But on his view (shared for example with Hume) persons just are 
collections of conscious states, some of which possess positive, and some nega-
tive, intrinsic worth. Besides a doctrine of intrinsic worth, utilitarianism needs a 
principle of its distribution. It found this in the Utility Principle: 
  UP. The right action for agent A at time T in circumstance C is the one that 
will bring about the greatest amount of pleasure over pain of any open to the 
agent, considering all sentient beings affected, in the long run. 
 (It may be that the best the agent can do is perform an action that brings about 
the least balance of pain over pleasure). Suppose there are ten thousand mice and 
one person in a room in which a ﬁ re starts. The person, or all the mice, can be 
rescued. It may well be that the mice, if they are rescued, will have sufﬁ cient plea-
sure so that their rescue brings about a greater balance of pleasure over pain than 
would rescuing the person. Then this is the best, and hence right, action. 
 (An agent’s obligations may depend on what she knows; if so, assume the agent 
knows how the pleasure will be distributed.) Note that, on Benthamite grounds, 
one cannot object that this does not respect the rights of the person. For one thing, 
for Bentham a person just is a set of conscious states, the only ones of which 
have intrinsic (positive or negative) worth being ones that are pleasurable or pain-
ful. Second, to so appeal would be an appeal to rights. Rights would restrict the 
authority of the Utility Principle, which reigns supreme. 
 One can always develop the mice and men story more fully. Perhaps the story is 
broadcast worldwide and the result will be that a great many people are disturbed 
and saddened by the person not being rescued instead of the mice. Then the rescue 
of the person may be justiﬁ ed on utilitarian grounds. Of course the example can 
be broadened in a different way: the story never makes the paper, the person not 
rescued has no relatives, is a social outcast, is deeply depressed, and suffers severe 
migraine headaches. Then, on utilitarian grounds, perhaps rescuing the mice wins 
out. Bentham (in contrast to John Stuart Mill, his utilitarian disciple) does not 
distinguish between higher- and lower-level conscious states. The result is that 
only appeal to pleasure and pain serves to render decisions about actions, since 
they alone have intrinsic worth. As noted, there is no appeal possible to persons 
themselves (or mice themselves) as the subjects of those states, there being no 
such subject to which to appeal. Persons, as conceived in monotheistic, Jain, and 
Pudgala Buddhism (one school of Buddhism that was once numerous in India) 
views, are not reducible to bundles of conscious states, as they are in most of the 
Buddhist tradition. Given the deep non-violence of Jainism, plus the breadth of its 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 241
view as to what is living, plus the karmic consequences of not rescuing the mice, 
there are more considerations relevant to the choice than is typical in at least the 
Semitic monotheisms. The point here is that metaphysical doctrines concerning 
the nature of persons are relevant to moral considerations. There is also the issue 
of determinism and libertarianism, since on the latter view there are no moral 
agents if the former view is true. Further, if nothing is either good or bad, there 
is nothing good to seek or bad to avoid. There being a right or wrong way to act, 
or an obligation to do or not do some sort of thing, presupposes there is some-
thing good or bad. In a world where nothing has metaphysical value, nothing has 
moral worth. So in that important sense morality depends on metaphysics—on 
there being things possessing intrinsic worth. (It should be remembered here that 
by morality we mean objective values—values discovered rather than invented.) 
So issues concerning human nature (the good for anything depends on what that 
thing’s nature is), freedom of choice, and mind-independent moral facts, are all 
relevant to morality and involve metaphysical considerations. 
 A morality presupposes a metaphysic. But need it be religious? For example—
in order to be reasonably believed and followed—must morality have a monothe-
istic basis? It is clear that it can have a monotheistic basis. The Semitic religions 
offer two commandments: Love the Lord your God, and love your neighbor as 
yourself. The commandments can be broken in three ways: by not loving God, 
not loving your neighbor, and not loving yourself. The parent who so loves her 
children that she is permanently lost when they grow up and leave home has failed 
to respect herself, and self-respect is part of legitimate love of self. Always plac-
ing one’s interest as one perceives them over the interests of others does not show 
them respect. Again, lack of respect is lack of healthy love. This is but the begin-
ning of (one way of understanding) the basis of monotheistic morality. 
 Those who maintain that morality without God is logically inconsistent may 
have in mind various reasons. They may be assuming that morality requires moral 
laws, and moral laws require a law-giver. They may believe that if all we are is 
complex biological organisms produced by a process that has nothing in mind, so 
we are alone in the universe for so long as material conditions allow life to last 
for the race, and far less time for an individual, life has no purpose. All our plans 
amount to nothing in the end. 
 Depth, Breadth, and Length 
 The view that mores is as close as we get to ethics, stated in brief scope, goes 
like this. The appearance of human beings is recent, given how long the universe 
managed to get along without us. The evolutionary process with no foresight 
or purpose, developed biological things with sufﬁ cient complexity to support 
human life, and then the race moved from primitive to sophisticated culture, 
in the process developing means of destroying ourselves. Always survival ori-
ented, enough of us came to see that warfare, plundering, and attempting to 
dominate was often not conducive to survival, and thus consider more peaceful 
alternatives. We came to have some limits on what we were willing to do to one 

242 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
another unless we felt really insecure. Since those who got together in groups 
and helped one another tended to live longer, we made up rules that were to 
hold societies together. After a while following these rules became something 
like second nature. The rules we somewhat internalized became accepted pat-
terns for behavior, and we had mores—survival rules and rules to take off the 
sharp edges of life. Stories about a moral law are ﬁ ction. Morality has no place 
in a world in which this (and other things consistent with it) gives the whole 
story about felt obligations and duties. These are just feelings we have due to 
our history, to which no transcendent signiﬁ cance attaches. We can call this the 
Just Mores world. 
 There are secular moral realists—people who accept no religion but believe 
that there are items that are good and bad, right and wrong, independent of what 
anybody thinks. What might be added to the there-are-at-most-mores view to 
promote it to moral realism? Perhaps this. In the history of the development of 
humanity, there was a point at which non-living thing developed a new sort of 
property, that of being alive. If you have twenty pounds of rocks and add ten 
more, after the added weight, you can break glass meant to hold only twenty-
ﬁ ve pounds. The causal properties of the heavier load are greater than that of the 
lighter. But the addition was just additive—more weight. If when the extra weight 
was added the result was a living thing, then the addition would be more than 
additive. An emergent property would have appeared—a property that invested 
its owner with being a new kind of thing. The same holds for going from living 
to conscious, and from conscious to self-aware. In each case, a new kind of thing 
has appeared. There is reason to claim that the new kind of thing is intrinsically 
“higher,” of more metaphysical worth, than the old. This was in effect Aristotle’s 
view, and much of the current environmental movement ascribes more worth to 
living things. Adding this perspective to the view described in the previous para-
graph at least makes sense of contending for moral realism. We can call this a 
Moral Realist world. 
 Thus far the things to which intrinsic worth is ascribed—living things—are 
short-lived in cosmic terms. All things being equal, if it is good for Mary to live 
for seventy years, it is good for Mary to live seventy years and a day. Of course 
things may not be equal—they may be worse. But while some have thought that 
living for a thousand years, or forever, would of necessity be boring, many oth-
ers have not agreed. There are additions to one’s life one would turn down if 
offered—say, every added day ﬁ lled with agony. But there are life extensions, 
even forever, that many would ﬁ nd attractive. Without trying to state criteria for 
life extensions being better for those who lived them, even forever, life after death 
has been something to be desired by most people. So greater longevity for Mary 
(and others) under good conditions would add to the moral desirability of a world 
in which it occurred. It would make the world a better world. Arguably, it would 
give more metaphysical worth to Mary. We can call this a Moral Realist Plus 
Afterlife world. 
 The idea of an afterlife in which the scales of justice are balanced is also attrac-
tive, so long as repentance and forgiveness are allowed as one way of balancing. 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 243
Further, the existence of a good God, as typically conceived by much of mono-
theism, would secure the continued life and the justice, and complete the picture. 
A monotheist will properly complain that we have pictured things in reverse—the 
actual sequence will be God, world, persons—but reversing the order is consistent 
with what has been said. We can call this a Moral Realist Plus Afterlife Plus Moral 
Providence world. 
 It seems clear that in the Moral Realist world described, morality does not cut 
deep into the world. Waiving the question of alien life far aﬁ eld, the very much 
larger part of the cosmos is untouched by morality. Nothing deep in the universe 
favors it. Locally at least, its tenure is not long-lived. One can appeal to a moral 
realism that holds true moral principles to be necessarily true and grounded in 
abstract objects, namely propositions whose content is precisely those laws. Then 
the sense in which there will be morality without moral agents will be the sense 
that there are abstract truths about persons, all of the form  If there are persons, 
then . . . But this sense will mean nothing to us. 
 In a monotheistic context Moral Realism has depth—it is, so to speak, spon-
sored by an Omnicompetent Creator. It has breadth in that it applies to all moral 
agents. It has length in that it applies to moral agents who live forever. It may be 
that the sense that morality requires monotheism is the recognition that the status 
of morality is most secure in a monotheistic universe. 
 There is also depth for morality in a universe governed by an impersonal 
law of karma that applies with rigid necessity and, being (like?) a natural law 
has no place for mercy. In Jainism, where personal identity is clearly said to 
be retained after enlightenment, and persons are held to be beginningless, it 
has breadth and length. For Advaita Vedanta, it seems to have similar depth, 
breadth, and length given the level of appearance, but that is trumped (sub-
lated) by the distinctionless level of reality in which there is no morality at all. 
For those Buddhist traditions that accept a law of karma view, morality has 
depth, but the law operates on bundles that last barely long enough to exist 
at all and nirvana is often said to be either ineffable or a distinctionless state, 
neither of which allows continued personal identity. In sum: one of the most 
promising perspectives for being a metaphysically based morality comes from 
a view that ascribes intrinsic worth to persons. Aristotle’s virtue ethics and 
Jainism are obvious examples. Neither view is theistic. A central contrast here 
is that persons are viewed as having great intrinsic worth without any appeal to 
God as having created them in God’s image. In Aristotle there is resemblance 
to an Unmoved Mover who reﬂ ects on necessary truths and never changes. 
There is nothing analogous in Jainism even to the Unmoved Mover. On the 
other hand, in Jainism persons live forever and, if enlightened, do so in favor-
able circumstances, whereas in Aristotle there is little if any basis for belief 
in personal afterlife. (In Jainism, some persons are too defective to become 
enlightened.) In Jainism, persons are part of the fundamental, non-derivative 
features of the universe. In another jargon, they are ontologically primitive, 
not composed of or dependent on any other sort of thing. Aristotle’s persons 
are not ontologically primitive, fundamental, non-derivative, or independent. 

244 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
In both views, persons are rational, moral agents. At least arguably, a person 
being ontologically primitive grounds the value of persons more deeply in the 
nature of things than does its absence, but even if this is not granted, it does not 
follow that the worth of persons is annihilated. 
 There is the argument that since human persons simply are the product of blind 
forces with no foresight of their result, simply composed of material particles, a 
somewhat more complex animal than at least most other mammals, there is no 
value difference in kind between us and other animals—no metaphysical basis 
for granting humans any unique value. Whatever force this argument has, it goes 
against basing morality on the intrinsic worth of persons. Whatever force the 
argument has, with a little change in formulation, also goes against granting wider 
intrinsic worth to, say, mammals, ﬁ elds of ﬂ owers, or landscapes. 
 As we noted, there are crucial leaps in evolutionary history to which emergen-
tists draw attention, in particular from non-living to living, from living to con-
scious, and from conscious to self-awareness. This sort of hierarchy, a bit more 
detailed in Aristotle, led him to think in terms of a hierarchy of being and a cor-
responding hierarchy of value or worth. The two hierarchies corresponded to one 
another, the lowest rung on one corresponding to the lowest rung on the other, and 
the pattern following on through to the highest. 
 In monotheistic views, typically God is viewed as enjoying the highest possible 
metaphysical worth. Whether divine command theory is true, God is the cause 
and sustainer of moral agents in this life and the next, where justice and mercy are 
properly adjusted. On some views, morality does not apply to heaven, where there 
are no temptations to deal with. But this neglects the consideration that persons in 
heaven, even if their goodness is no longer tested, can be possessed of the proper-
ties that make for good moral persons. 
 If God is conceived as a moral agent, as is frequent but not universal among 
monotheists, then God’s existence is the highest moral value and the core of 
morality relative to created persons is their being made in the image of God 
and their achieving their positive potential by imitation of God. A highly plau-
sible view of morality takes moral principles to be, if true, then necessarily 
true. Monotheists who suppose God exists to be a logically necessary truth 
can take the necessary truth of true moral principles to be grounded in divine 
cognitive states; monotheists who view God exists as contingently true can 
ground necessarily true moral principles in abstract objects that possess logi-
cally necessary existence. On both views, if a moral principle is true, it is true 
whether God creates or not; a moral principle, being conditional—of the form 
possessed by  If X is a person then X ought to be respected , for example—will 
be true under all possible conditions, including those in which God does not 
create. On both views, there will be persons 6  to whom moral principles apply 
only if God creates them. 
 It is sometimes argued that God cannot be said to be morally good in the same 
sense in which human beings—say, St. Paul—are said to be good. Two arguments 
often given for this view are: 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 245
 Argument 1 
 1. 
God is good is a necessary truth. 
 2. 
St. Paul is good, even if true is a contingent truth. 
 3. 
If  X  in  Y is X  is used in a sentence expressing a necessary truth, and  X  in  Z is 
X  is used in a sentence expressing a contingent truth, then  X  as used in the one 
sentence bears a different meaning than does  X  as used in the other sentence.  
 Hence: 
  4. 
‘Good’ as used in  God is good  has a different meaning than does ‘good’ in 
 St. Paul is good . 
 The problem with this argument is that the principle expressed in premise 3 is 
false. Consider the sentences  Three is odd  and  The number of coins on the table 
is odd . The proposition expressed by the ﬁ rst of these sentences is a necessary 
truth, and the proposition expressed by the second of these sentences is, if true at 
all, a contingent truth. But ‘odd’ means the same in both cases. Hence premise 3 
is false. 
 The other line of reasoning is that if God is good, still God can do things, and 
allow things, without ceasing to be good that no human being could do, or allow, 7 
without ceasing to be good. Jill, if she allows a person to suffer terribly when she 
could easily stop it, or causes someone to die even though her family needs her 
desperately, is not a good person. God, if God exists, at least allows such things all 
the time without ceasing to be called good. So ‘good’ must mean something else 
in heaven than on earth. This argument ignores the fact that ascriptions of good-
ness ultimately rest on motives, intentions, ends, and—in the end—character. 
Two persons, of equally good character, can act differently if their knowledge and 
powers differ, and greatly differently if their knowledge and powers differ greatly. 
A man on a train who is in sudden need of a delicate operation will rightly react 
differently to the idea of a skilled surgeon performing the operation immediately 
and a sincere lawyer with a knife and good intentions attempting to perform the 
same operation. Presumably the surgeon may, and perhaps ought, to operate; the 
lawyer ought to go get help. The claim that God is good is the claim that God’s 
motives, ends, intentions, and character resemble those of a good human person, 
allowing for difference in knowledge and power. The range of things that God 
can allow and bring good out of thus vastly exceeds those available to any human 
being. Especially relevant in this regard is the monotheistic view that while a 
person’s death ends our ability to affect them, for monotheism that makes no dif-
ference to God’s power to affect them. 
 Thus in terms of depth, breadth, and length of morality, views of the world dif-
fer signiﬁ cantly as to the status they ascribe to morality. The differences ﬁ nd their 
source in competing metaphysical doctrines. To this point, we have considered 
the values treasured by our traditions and connections between metaphysical and 
moral worth. It is time to turn to responsibility. 

246 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
 Responsibility 
 Religious traditions are also concerned with responsibility—for example, to 
what degree can one act so as to become saved or enlightened? If one holds a 
reincarnation view, the matter is complex—for each lifetime one lives, there are 
previous ones that determine one’s karmic condition. If this is complete deter-
minism between lives, whether one ever becomes enlightened has always been 
determined, since one’s lifetimes have never begun. If we have a monotheis-
tic tradition with or without reincarnation, then God can determine what occurs 
down to the minutest detail. If so, can one be free in any sense in which one is 
morally responsible for one’s actions? These questions raise a series of issues 
relevant to religion.  
 Deterministic Views 
 Fatalism: Determinism Based on Logical Necessity 
 Fatalism is the view that these two things are true: 
 1. 
Every truth is a necessary truth. 
 2. 
Every falsehood is a necessary falsehood. 
 If one holds that God exists, and is a fatalist, one will think that God exists is a 
necessary truth and also that it, plus various necessary truths about God’s nature, 
will explain other necessary truths about the existence and history of the world. In 
one sense, there can be no such thing as explaining why a particular necessary truth 
is true rather than false—its having been false is logically impossible and there is 
no need to eliminate a non-possibility. One can put the point here by contrasting a 
necessary truth like  Even an omnipotent being cannot ﬁ at the actions of a libertari-
anly free person  and a contingent truth like  Boston’s National Basketball franchise 
is named the Celtics . The necessary truth concerning omnipotence and freedom 
can be explained by making its meaning clear; a detailed explanation of libertarian 
freedom is offered later in this chapter. But explaining the truth of a necessary truth 
amounts either to giving an account of its sense or offering an account of necessary 
truth generally—a theory of necessity such as  Necessary truths are grounded in 
abstract objects . The contingent truth about the Celtics can be explained in terms 
of the history of the franchise; what makes it true is a series of events that might 
never have occurred, so this explanation is a matter of accounting for the fact that 
it is true rather than false. Consider a monotheistic version of fatalism. On this 
view,  Necessarily, God exists  is true, as are each of the following:  Necessarily, God 
has all those properties deﬁ nitive of God’s nature ;  Necessarily, God’s choices are 
entirely determined by God’s nature ;  Necessarily, whatever is true is true because 
God chose that it be true . Then consider the consequences. 
 One consequence is that God’s existence and nature entirely determine God’s 
choices, which in turn determine everything else. But it is, by hypothesis, logi-
cally impossible that God not exist or that God not have the nature that God 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 247
has. So it is logically impossible that any true proposition not be true or that any 
proposition that is not true have been true. The right way to think of the sort of 
scenario described is in terms of an axiomatic system in which all the theorems 
follow by rules of inference from the axioms; the axioms are necessary truths, the 
rules of inference truth preserving, and so the theorems are also necessary truths. 
A consequence would be that the actual world is also the only world possible. 
 Another consequence is that there would be at most one agent. Suppose that 
Tess and Tricia are related as follows. Tess has her own thought life, but Tricia 
thinks only when and what Tess deliberately, speciﬁ cally causes her to think. Tess 
can act without Tricia, but Tricia acts only if Tess causes her to act. In fact, every 
feeling, mental image, dream, movement, attitude, pain, or pleasure Tricia expe-
riences, Tess deliberately, speciﬁ cally causes her to experience. Tess knows her 
power over Tricia, but Tricia is ignorant of it. Finally, this relationship between 
Tess and Tricia is one neither can break; its roots lie deep in the laws of nature. 
It is logically possible that Tess and Tricia not be so related, but only logically 
possible. Under these circumstances, however things seem to Tricia, she is not 
an agent; she does not act on her own, think on her own, feel on her own. But 
on the scenario with which we began, God is related to whatever persons there 
are as Tess is related to Tricia, only more so; here the roots of the relationship lie 
deep in the nature of a necessarily existing God and in the laws of logic. It is not 
even logically possible that God not be so related to any persons there may be. 
If persons must be moral agents, and moral agents must be libertarianly free, on 
the scenario being considered there is at most one person. In fact, God also lacks 
libertarian freedom. On this view, God is related to Tess in such a manner that her 
existence as well as her thoughts, feelings, and actions are entirely determined 
by God’s existence and nature. It is no more logically possible that God exist and 
Tess not than it is logically possible that Tess exist and God not; that God exists, 
on the scenario in question, entails that Tess exists, and since the former is, by 
hypothesis, a necessary truth, so is the latter. 8  Thus that Tess exists also entails 
that God exists. Tess is not a person distinct from God; she is at most, as Spinoza 
would put it, a mode—a state—of God’s. 9  It is not logically possible that “her” 
existence and “her” properties, thoughts, and actions exist without God’s existing 
and having the nature that God possesses; the divine existence and nature deter-
mine “her” existence and properties in such a way that it is logically impossible 
that they be otherwise than as they are. In such a world, morality would be impos-
sible. Even if we suppose that Tess is a person, it would be logically impossible 
that she or anyone act other than as they did, think other than as they did, feel 
other than as they did. Any suggestion to the effect that anyone might have acted, 
thought, or felt at some time other than as they did think, act, or feel at that time 
would be self-contradictory. If all truths were necessary truths, there would be no 
way things could be other than the way things were. The notions of responsibility 
and obligation, guilt and innocence, freedom and agency, all presuppose at least 
the logical possibility of alternatives.  Logical fatalism is true  and  There are moral 
agents  are logically incompatible propositions; while there is not much contro-
versy concerning this point, there is considerable controversy regarding what sort 

248 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
of world it is within which agents can exist who are free in the sense required if 
they are to be morally responsible for their choices and actions. 
 This discussion of monotheistic fatalism raises some interesting questions 
regarding what is to come. If it is clear that the absence of logically possible 
alternatives entails the absence of freedom, is there any good reason to think the 
absence of all but counterfactual alternatives—alternatives available in other pos-
sible worlds but not in the real world, alternatives “available” only in a sense 
compatible with the actions actually performed being in fact inevitable—does 
not also entail the absence of freedom? If it is true that there is but one agent in a 
fatalistic monotheistic world, is there any good reason to think that there is more 
than one agent in a monotheistic deterministic world? 
 Determinism Not Based on Logical Necessity 
 Let a tensed universal description [TUD] be an accurate statement of every-
thing that is contingently true in the world at a given time. Each such description 
should be viewed as tensed to some speciﬁ c time that is speciﬁ ed in the descrip-
tion. Let LN be a correct account of all of the laws of nature, and LL a correct 
account of all of the laws of logic. Then determinism holds: for any TUD tensed 
earlier than time T, that TUD plus LN plus LL, entails any TUD tensed to time T 
or later. Thus, if determinism is true, the past determines a unique future. There 
are logical possibilities alternative to what happens at any given time; it is simply 
not compatible with the laws of logic, the laws of nature, and what has happened 
in the past that they be realized. So they will not happen, and there is no more that 
we can do about that than there is we can do about the truth of the laws of logic, 
the laws of nature, or what happened in the past.  
 Compatibilism and Incompatibilism 
 Compatibilism holds that it is logically possible that determinism be true and that 
persons have the sort of freedom that is required for them to be morally responsi-
ble for their choices and actions. The opposite position to compatibilism is incom-
patibilism, which holds that it is not logically possible (non-contradictory) that 
determinism be true and that persons have the sort of freedom that is required for 
them to be morally responsible for their choices and actions. Incompatibalism is 
part of Libertainism. 10 
 Libertarianism holds that incompatibilism is true and determinism is false; in 
order for persons to have the sort of freedom that is required for them to be mor-
ally responsible for their choices and actions they must have genuine freedom, not 
compatibilist so-called freedom, regarding those choices and actions. Libertarians 
hold that persons do have this sort of freedom. Compatibilists are dubious that 
there is even possibly any sort of freedom beyond that which they afﬁ rm. The 
notion of libertarian freedom, often called categorical freedom, runs as follows. 
  (CF) Jane is categorically (or libertarianly) free with respect to lying at T 
entails that Jane’s lying is within her power at T and that Jane’s refraining 
from lying is within her power at T. 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 249
 In turn: 
  (CFa) Jane’s lying is within her power at T entails that Jane’s lying at T does 
not require that Jane falsify some total universal description (TUD) tensed to 
a time earlier than T, make some law of nature false, or make some law of 
logic false. 
 and 
 (CFb) Jane’s refraining from lying is within her power at T entails that Jane’s 
refraining from lying at T does not require that Jane falsify some TUD tensed 
to a time earlier than T, make some law of nature false, or make some law of 
logic false. 
 (CF) is to be understood as containing the deﬁ nitions provided by (CFa) 
and (CFb). 
 Relations between the Positions 
 It may be helpful in understanding these alternatives to see some of their relation-
ship laid out. 
 1. 
One can consistently be a determinist and an incompatibilist. 
 2. 
One can consistently be a determinist and a compatibilist. 
 3. 
One cannot consistently be a determinist and a libertarian. 
 4. 
One cannot consistently be an incompatibilist and a compatibilist. 
 5. 
Being a libertarian entails being an incompatibilist. 
 6. 
Being an incompatibilist does not entail being a libertarian. 
 7. 
Being a compatibilist does not entail being a determinist. 
 Monotheistic Determinism and Monotheistic Libertarianism  
 A fundamental dispute within monotheism concerns whether possession of com-
patibilist freedom yields a world sufﬁ ciently different from (monotheistic) logi-
cal fatalism to allow for there to be human agents who are morally responsible 
for their thoughts and actions. Libertarian monotheists think that if the only sort 
of freedom human persons have is so-called compatibilist freedom then God is 
cause of whatever evils our thoughts and actions involve. Or they think that God 
is the only agent, and that human personhood is mere appearance. Compatibilist 
monotheists disagree. If compatibilism is false, then of course monotheists ought 
to reject it. There is an interesting and powerful argument against compatibilism. 
 An Argument against Compatibilism 
 Consider the TUD that is tensed to the time just before the last dinosaur died; 
let that be TUDdino. Then suppose that you will decide to have a cup of coffee 
at 3:00 this afternoon; let the TUD tensed to that time be TUDcup; TUDcup, of 

250 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
course, includes a statement to the effect that you decide to have a cup of coffee 
at 3:00. If determinism is true, then: 
  1. TUDdino and LL and LN entails TUDcup. 
  2. One is not responsible for anything that one has no control over. 
  3. One has no control over anything that is entailed by what one has no control 
over. 
  4. One is not responsible for anything that is entailed by what one has no control 
over. [from 2, 3] 
  5. You have no control over what is true in TUDdino. 
  6. You have no control over what the laws of logic are. 
  7. You have no control over what the laws of nature are. 
  8. You have no control over TUDdino and LL and LN. [from 5–7] 
  9. You have no control over what TUDdino and LL and LN entails. [from 4, 8] 
 10. You have no control over TUDcup. [from 1, 9] 
 11. TUDcup entails that you decide to have coffee at 3:00. 
 12. You have no control over whether you decide to have coffee at 3:00. 
[from 10, 11] 
 Note that you and your decision/action “stand in” here for everyone and every one 
of everyone’s decisions/actions. So what follows is that if determinism is true then 
no one is ever responsible for any decision/action. Hence compatibilism, which 
claims otherwise, is false. 11  Central to controversy over the success of this argu-
ment is whether premise 3— One has no control over anything that is entailed by 
what one has no control over —is true. This claim is sometimes called the control 
principle. (One could challenge 9 as well, though it seems secure.) 
 Explanation and Determinism 
 If determinism is true, then for any TUD true at time T1 it is not merely the case 
that the TUD true at T1 plus the laws of logic plus the laws of nature entail the 
TUD true at any later time but that the TUD true at time T1 plus the laws of logic 
and the laws of nature also explain the truth of the TUD true at time T2, and so 
on. Even if it is a necessary element in explanation, entailment is not sufﬁ cient for 
explanation. The proposition  Either 1 and 3 are 7 or Oklahoma is a state, and 1 
and 3 are not 7  entails the proposition  Oklahoma is a state , but Oklahoma’s state-
hood has not been explained. 
 The notion of an explanation is notoriously difﬁ cult, but this much can be said 
about it. Let us say that  If X obtains then Y obtains  is true and expresses a law, then 
there is an X/Y lawlike connection; let us also say that if there is a true non-lawlike 
proposition of the form  If X obtains then an agent with the power to do so typically 
will choose to bring about Y  then there is an X/Y teleological connection. In order 
that X obtains explain that Y obtains it must be the case that X does indeed obtain, 
and the case that there is a true proposition that expresses a lawlike or a teleological 
X/Y connection. Determinism assumes that for every state B that obtains, there is 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 251
another state A such that A obtains and such that there is a lawlike A/B connection. 
In order for determinism to be true, the past must not only entail, but also explain, 
the future by virtue of there always being such lawlike connections. 12  
 The Control Principle 
 What is most interestingly controversial about the argument, stated above, against 
compatibilism concerns the third premise, which states a version of the Control 
Principle: 
 (CP) One has no control over anything that is entailed by what one has no 
control over. 
 Is (CP), or some appropriate replacement, true? (CP) tells us this: one 
may properly infer from  Sam has no control over whether A obtains and 
 That A obtains entails that B obtains  to  Sam has no control over whether B 
obtains . There are two sorts of objection to (CP). 
 One is that there are analogous inferences that are not proper. For example, 
neither of these arguments is valid: 
  Example One. Sue is obligated to do A; doing A entails doing B; hence Sue is 
obligated to do B. [Sue is obligated to wash her dog; washing her dog entails 
making a mammal wet; hence Sue is obligated to make a mammal wet. Mak-
ing just any mammal wet is not among her obligations.] 
 Example Two. Sue believes that P; that P is true entails that Q is true; hence 
Sue believes that Q. [Sue believes that ﬁ gure F is a triangle; that F is 
a triangle entails that F’s interior angles sum to 180 degrees; hence Sue 
believes that F’s interior angles sum to 180 degrees. Sue can believe that F 
is a triangle but have learned no geometry sufﬁ cient for believing anything 
about what F’s interior angles sum to.] 
 On the other hand, there are analogous inferences that are entirely proper. 
 Example Three: Necessarily, P entails Q; necessarily P; hence necessarily Q. 
 Example Four: P entails Q; P is true; hence Q is true. 
 Both example 3 and example 4 are valid inferences. Is it with these, or with the 
previous examples, that the Control Principle is properly compared? That is just 
the question all over again as to whether the Control Principle is true. No real 
progress is likely along these lines, either in favor or against the Control Principle. 
Each party to the dispute will simply put forward examples that exhibit their view 
of the matter, and claim—neither more nor less cogently than the other—that 
these are the genuinely parallel cases. 
 The other and better strategy involves looking very closely at what the Control 
Principle says. What it tells us is this. Hold LL and LN ﬁ xed. Let WT be the TUD 

252 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
true at time T. Let WT1 be the TUD true at T1. Then let WT entail WT1. What is 
the possibility of a person controlling whether WT is true if T has already past? 
The typical answer, quite plausibly, is  None at all . 
 One thing that comes to mind is that one might travel back in time to T-minus-1 
and do something that made T relevantly different. One problem is that we are not 
now in fact able to do this, even if it is theoretically possible. Suppose it is theoreti-
cally possible. Since we do not know how to do it, what difference does that make to 
anyone’s responsibility? The usual sense of a compatibilist “could have done other-
wise” is that doing otherwise was within the power of the agent in the sense that—to 
be brief—the agent was able in the actual situation not to do what she did given the 
abilities and knowledge she actually had, not some ability or knowledge she lacked. 
 But then knowing how to time travel is irrelevant, even if it is theoretically possible. 
One could claim that some at least of the fundamental natural laws yield only prob-
abilities—are of the form  Given X, in circumstance C, y is N probable  where N is less 
than one. But then determinism has been abandoned and we have a new ball game. 
 The general idea of there being a problem with (CP) is that the laws of nature 
contain at least one contingent proposition that we could alter or time travel is 
possible so that one could tinker with the relevant TUD. Then one could alter 
things so that one controlled things determined by things over which it seems we 
have no control. The gist is that LN or a relevant TUD are really not beyond our 
control. But then the principle will be irrelevant, not false. 
 Further, we can replace (CP) by something along these lines: 
 (CP*) Even if LL, LN, and TUDdino are not in principle beyond our control, 
they are in fact now beyond our control, and if LL, LN, and TUDT entail 
TUDT1, what happens at T1 is not under our control. 
 (CP*) will do nicely as a replacement for (CP). 
 It is helpful, in approaching compatibilist accounts of freedom, to highlight 
three relevant concepts—logical inevitability, in fact inevitability, and causal 
impossibility: 
  Logical inevitability: State of affairs A is logically inevitable if and only if 
that A obtains is a logically necessary truth. 
 In fact inevitability: State of affairs A is in fact inevitable if and only if that 
A obtains is entailed by the truth about the past, the laws of nature, and the 
laws of logic. 
 These notions contrast to: 
  Causal impossibility: State of affairs A is causally impossible if and only if 
A obtains only if some law of nature is false. 
 Compatibilists take it to be possible that a bit of behavior be in fact inevitable 
and one that one is morally responsible for performing. Compatibilists and 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 253
incompatibilists typically agree that human beings never perform actions that are 
logically inevitable or causally impossible. Libertarians deny that human actions 
are typically in fact inevitable and add that were they, no one would ever be 
responsible for them. 13 
 Compatibilism and Actions versus Nonactions 
 The compatibilist thinks that whether determinism is true or not, and hence even if 
it is true, we can have the sort of freedom required for moral responsibility. Hence 
it holds that this sort of freedom regarding some thought or action is compatible 
with that thought or action being in fact inevitable. One may be responsible for 
what one does, but also for what one does not do. A friend who could easily have 
stopped your progress and knew what would happen if he did not, but nonethe-
less allowed you to walk into the path of a moving vehicle, is not innocent merely 
because she did not push you into its path. For simplicity, however, focus here will 
be on responsibility for what one does. Regarding such responsibility, Karen is 
responsible for action A entails that Karen performed A. 
 Let Karen’s states at time T refer to all of the physical states Karen’s body is 
in at T and all of the mental states her mind is in at T. If determinism is true, each 
of those states is in fact inevitable, given the content of the past. Let us say that 
a causal chain passes through Karen at T if and only if at least one of its mem-
bers is also one of Karen’s states at T. If some action by Karen is a member of 
a causal chain—a chain whose earlier members result in Karen performing that 
action—let us call it an action chain relative to Karen; for short, an action chain. 
Any action chain relative to Karen must pass through Karen. 
 Consider the various sorts of mental states that one can be in that are relevant 
to how one acts—intentions, purposes, goals, preferences, likes, dislikes, desires, 
wants, choices, and so on. Let these be action-inclining states. Action-inclining 
states relative to chewing a stick of gum will include desiring to chew it, intend-
ing to chew it, having chewing it as a purpose or a goal, and the like. If a chain 
passes through Karen but contains no action-inclining state of Karen’s, then even 
if it results in some motions of her body, it is dubious that it is an action chain 
regarding her. There is a difference between Karen’s teeth gnashing and Karen 
gnashing her teeth, and if determinism being true is compatible with making that 
distinction between actual cases, presumably the difference will be one between a 
causal chain passing through that contains none of Karen’s action-inclining states 
(Karen’s teeth gnashing) and a causal chain passing through Karen that does con-
tain some action-inclining state of her where the target of that state is her teeth 
being gnashed together (Karen gnashing her teeth). An action chain relative to 
Karen’s performing action A must pass through Karen in such a way that it con-
tains action-inclining states that are at least partial causes of A. This is one way, 
perhaps the most natural, for a determinist to endeavor to distinguish between 
what is, and what is not, an action: actions are the products of action-chains that 
pass through the person who acts in such a manner that the person’s action-inclin-
ing states are at least among the action’s causes. 

254 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
 Suppose Sam decides to commit murder. If determinism is true, this decision is 
in fact inevitable given things that occurred in the distant, pre-Sam past. The com-
patibilist will note that the causal chain that yields Sam’s decision “runs through 
Sam,” so to speak, whereas other causal chains do not do so. The earlier portion 
of the causal chain that yields the pre-Sam events whose occurrence, if determin-
ism is true, render his choice in fact inevitable has not yet run through Sam. The 
compatibilist will add that there are logically possible worlds in which Sam’s 
decision does not obtain; the events that render Sam’s decision in fact inevitable 
would not obtain if one of those worlds was the actual world. This is the dif-
ference between Sam’s decision being logically inevitable and its being in fact 
inevitable. Presumably, if determinism is true, it is not logically possible that the 
events that render his decision in fact inevitable occur without his decision also 
occurring—not unless one could have the same events but different causal laws. 
The core of the compatibilist’s position will lie in the development of a notion of 
“is under the control of” where something is under one’s control provided one 
could have done otherwise had things been different. Thus compatibilist freedom 
invites our attention. 
 Compatibilist Freedom 
 One suggestion regarding what this sort of freedom amount to is this: let D be 
a description of what has occurred up to time T, 14  LN a statement of the laws of 
nature, and LL a statement of the laws of logic. Let their conjunct be the whole 
past package. Jane wonders whether or not to lie to John. It turns out that  Jane 
lies to John is compatible with the whole past package, and  Jane does not lie to 
John  is not compatible with the whole past package. 15  The idea is to leave room 
for Jane’s being free even though what Jane will do must be compatible with the 
whole past package and only one of the logically possible alternatives is com-
patible with that package; on this view, whatever sort of freedom responsibility 
requires is constrained by this condition. Given the conditions described, Jane 
will lie to John, her lying to John is in fact inevitable, and Jane is morally respon-
sible for lying to John is compatible with Jane’s not lying to John is incompatible 
with the whole past package. Jane’s lying, on this account, follows from what has 
happened prior to her lying, given the laws of logic and the laws of nature. 16 
 The range of what can be said to give this alleged freedom content should be 
explored. If Jane’s lying is an action on Jane’s part, it must be related to Jane 
in certain ways—this, we might say, is the positive story regarding Jane’s freely 
lying. The positive story is the story of the conditions regarding Jane’s actually 
lying, the story of a causal chain that runs through Jane and presumably contains 
an action-inclining state. Further, if she is free in performing that action, her not 
performing it must have been available to her in certain ways—this, we might 
say, is the negative story regarding Jane’s freely lying. The negative story is the 
story of the conditions regarding the availability to Jane of refraining from lying. 
The combination of the positive story and negative story, where both are told with 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 255
compatibilist constraints, will be the whole compatibilist story regarding her freely 
lying. There is no universal agreement among compatibilists as to how this story 
goes, and we will give a very full account that captures a good many of the ele-
ments that compatibilists include in that story. What we say about the version of the 
story here can also be said about other compatibilist accounts.  
 Constraints 
 For an account of free action to be compatibilist, it must be the case that it can be 
a true account even if determinism is true. Hence that Jane’s action is in fact inevi-
table, where ‘in fact inevitable’ is understood as we have deﬁ ned it, and that Jane’s 
action is free and she is morally responsible for so acting are logically compatible. 
Our formulation of the compatibilist account will endeavor to give as broad a deﬁ -
nition as this constraint allows—to include as many elements as it allows. 17  
 The Positive Story 
 Jane’s lying to John at time T obviously entails that Jane lied to John at T. We have 
already noted that, on a compatibilist account, it entails that an action chain that 
includes Jane’s lying to John at T passes through Jane. 
 A classic analysis of this sort of freedom goes like this: 
  Jane is free in lying to John at time T if and only if (i) Jane lies to John at 
T, (ii) Jane wanted to lie to John at T, and (iii) Jane’s lying is caused by her 
wanting. Let us say that if Jane and her lying are related as (i) through (iii) 
indicate, Jane’s lying is congenial. This serves to emphasize that the relevant 
action chain contains states of Jane that are at least a partial cause of Jane’s 
lying to John, where those states on the whole incline toward rather than 
against lying. 
 Here, then, is part of one compatibilist positive story regarding Jane’s freely lying 
to John at time T: 
  Jane’s lying to John at time T is a free action entails that Jane lied to John at T, 
that an action chain that includes Jane’s lying to John at T passes through 
Jane, and that Jane’s lying to John at T is (in the sense deﬁ ned) congenial to 
Jane. This is compatible with Jane’s not liking to do it, but liking any other 
alternative still less. If Jim has hypnotized Jane to lie, puts a gun to her head 
to make her lie, or the like, John coerces Jane to lie. If Jane is related to her 
lying as a kleptomaniac to stealing, Jane is a compulsive liar. Suppose neither 
of these is the case; then Jane’s lying is neither coerced nor compulsed. Thus 
far we have at least a fairly complete positive story—one that includes at least 
a great deal of what is available to such an account. 

256 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
 So we have: 
 Jane’s lying to John at T is a free action entails that Jane lied to John at T, 
an action chain that includes Jane’s lying to John at T passes through Jane, 
Jane’s lying to John at T is (in the sense deﬁ ned) congenial to Jane, and at T, 
Jane is neither coerced nor compulsed to lie to John. 
 The Negative Story 
 If this is (one compatibilist version of) the positive story, there is also a compati-
bilist account of the availability to Jane of not lying to John at time T. If her not 
lying just plain is not available to her, then her lying isn’t a free action. Jane’s 
not lying is not logically impossible; it is, in that sense, logically available. It 
is not against the laws of nature; it is, in that sense, naturally available. It is 
within her capacity in the sense that she knows what a lie is and what she will 
say to John if she lies and she knows how to say those words; she is not dumb 
or paralyzed; she has whatever range of cognitive, psychological, and physical 
capacities are required by not lying. Thus Jane’s not lying is, in that sense, com-
petently available. Perhaps it is true that if she had chosen not to lie, she could 
have refrained from lying; then, in that sense, Jane’s not lying is counterfactu-
ally available. Even if all this is so, either her choosing to lie or her not choosing 
to lie is incompatible with the whole past package. 18  Since she lies, her lying 
is in fact inevitable—it is in fact inevitable that she does not choose not to lie. 
So even if it is true that if she had not chosen to lie she would not have lied, it 
is also true that it was in fact inevitable that she not choose not to lie. Thus on 
one version, then, of the compatibilist account, Jane’s lying to John at T is a free 
action entails Jane’s not lying to John at T is logically, naturally, competently, 
and counterfactually available to Jane at T. Perhaps there is more. Perhaps this 
should be added. Suppose that Jane ordinarily has a set of only true beliefs about 
what one can expect from ordinary computers, but that one morning her col-
leagues discover her trying to fry eggs on her keyboard. Jane is, in this respect, 
irrational in the sense that, given beliefs anyone familiar with computers has, 
she should know that the result of her keyboard-and-egg behavior will not be 
breakfast. 19  A compatibilist may wish to add that actions that are irrational on 
Jane’s part are not free actions. If so, we then get: 
  Jane’s lying to John at T is a free action entails Jane’s not lying to John at T is 
logically, naturally, competently, and counterfactually available to Jane at T, 
and Jane’s not lying to John at T would not be irrational. 
 It should be noted that being irrational here involves such things as having 
wildly implausible beliefs or reasoning in a chaotic fashion or the like; it is 
not a sense of irrational in which, for example, acting wrongly is inherently 
irrational. 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 257
 Finally, perhaps lack of irrationality in the rough sense broadly characterized 
should also be added to Jane’s act of lying. If we do this, and put the resultant 
positive and negative stories together, we get this result: 
  Jane’s lying to John at T is a free action entails that Jane lied to John at T, 
that an action chain that includes Jane’s lying to John at T being congenial 
passes through Jane, Jane’s lying to John at T is (in the sense deﬁ ned) con-
genial to Jane. At T, Jane is neither coerced nor compulsed to lie to John, 
and Jane’s lying to John at T is not irrational in the sense of resulting from 
her having wildly implausible beliefs or reasoning chaotically, and Jane’s 
not lying to John at T is logically, naturally, competently, and counterfactu-
ally available to Jane at T, and Jane’s not lying to John at T would not be 
irrational.  
 Perhaps there remains something that we must add in order to fairly express this 
sort of analysis of the freedom responsibility requires. But somewhere not too far 
along the road we have been traveling, presumably one gets to that point without 
having gotten to the point where both Jane’s not lying and Jane’s lying are com-
patible with the whole past package. We have come close at least to that point. For 
a compatibilist, to reach that point is to have gone too far. 
 The sort of freedom, if it is such, that we have been describing is a fairly 
complete rendering of compatibilist freedom. One could contest various ele-
ments included and perhaps contend for some additions. But it is a fair account 
of various elements that compatibilists have included in their accounts of com-
patibilist freedom, and that is all that we need. Is it true that compatibilist 
freedom is the sort of freedom a moral agent has if she is responsible for her 
actions?  
 The Control Principle Says: 
  (CP) One has no control over anything that is entailed by what one has no control 
over. 
 The corresponding compatibilist claim is: 
 (CC) One has control over what one has compatibilist freedom concerning. 
 The compatibilist will claim that in (CP) “having control of” is the sense of “has 
categorical or libertarian freedom regarding” and is thus a claim the compatibilist 
will reject in favor of (CC). Further, the compatibilist claims, being categorically 
or libertarianly free is not a necessary condition of being morally responsible. The 
libertarian response is that one can be neither free nor morally responsible regard-
ing any action that is in fact inevitable. The compatibilist account of freedom may 
be ﬁ ne as far as it goes, but it leaves out a crucial element—genuine alternatives 
that cannot coexist with in fact inevitable actions. The central principle in dispute 
here has been called the Principle of Alternative Possibilities. 

258 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
 The Principle of Alternative Possibilities 
 The libertarian typically embraces the Principle of Alternative Possibilities, which 
says that one is responsible for performing an action A on a given occasion only 
if on that occasion one has categorical freedom regarding performing A as well as 
categorical freedom regarding refraining from performing A. This principle has 
met with great resistance of late on grounds worth investigating. 
 Alleged Counter-examples to the Principle 
of Alternative Possibilities 
 Recent philosophy has seen a variety of alleged counter-examples to the claim 
that anyone lacking categorical freedom cannot properly be held morally respon-
sible for anything. The basic idea of the objector is to present cases in which 
an agent who lacks categorical freedom is nonetheless morally responsible for 
what she does. Once one sees the relevant recipe, one can construct one alleged 
example after another; a couple of simple cases will convey the core idea. Sup-
pose that in each case there is a morally right thing to do, and that ‘responsible’ 
means “morally responsible.” 
 Case One. John sits in his room. He has a big chemistry exam tomorrow and 
can either study for it or go out to the Sherlock Holmes Movie Festival. He loves 
Holmes ﬁ lms and hates chemistry. Yet he decides to stay at his desk and study. 
Unknown to him, his parents in any case locked his door from the outside, so has 
could not have left anyway. Yet John is responsible for his choice to stay at his desk. 
 Case Two. Mary sits reﬂ ecting as to whether to send a bitter letter to her aunt, 
who has angered her greatly. But she also knows her aunt meant well and that 
it would be wrong to send the letter. Unknown to Mary, her sister Ann, a doc-
tor, inserted a microchip into Mary’s brain that allows Ann to monitor Mary’s 
thoughts and control them if she wishes. Ann loves her aunt deeply and is moni-
toring Mary’s thoughts; if Mary decides not to send the letter Ann will do nothing, 
but if Mary decides to send the letter Ann will make her reverse her decision. 
Mary decides on her own not to mail the letter, so Ann does nothing. 
 The argument then goes as follows: in Case One, John is responsible for having 
chosen to stay and study, even though he could not have left had he tried; in Case 
Two, Mary does not send the letter, even though she could not have sent it had she 
tried. Neither John nor Mary, in the cases described, possess categorical freedom, 
but both are praiseworthy for their actions. If they are praiseworthy, then they are 
responsible. So possessing categorical freedom is not a logically necessary condi-
tion of being responsible for what one does. Hence compatibilism is true. 
 Here is another way to put the argument. Since to make a choice is to act (an 
action need not be overt), reference to actions covers choices as well. Consider 
one version of the Principle of Alternative Possibilities: 
  (PA) If person S is morally responsible for having performed action A at time 
T in context C, then S could have refrained from having performed action 
A at time T in context C. 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 259
 According to (PA), if John is responsible for having stayed in his room, he could 
have left it; if Mary is responsible for not having sent the letter, she could have 
sent it. The point of the cases is that in them (PA) is false and John and Mary 
are responsible anyway. The alleged truth of (PA) is what justiﬁ es the claim that 
only possessors of categorical freedom are morally responsible for what they 
do. Since (PA) is false, that claim is not justiﬁ ed. But that claim is essential to 
incompatibilism. So incompatibilism is false. The core idea of this argument is 
this: if (PA) is false of a case in which an agent acts, it is also false of that agent 
in that case that he possesses categorical freedom, and there are cases in which 
an agent acts and is morally responsible for so acting even though (PA) is false 
of that agent.  
 Reply to the Objections 
 Regarding Case One, there are various moves open to an incompatibilist. Here 
are two: 
  Move One. She can say that strictly what John is responsible for is not stay-
ing in the room (he could not have done otherwise) but choosing not to try 
to leave and deciding to study (he could have chosen to try to leave, or not to 
study). This is what he is responsible for, and (PA) is true of this. 
 Move Two. While Move One is correct so far as it goes, there is an addi-
tional consideration. Suppose that a person is categorically free regarding 
whether she does something A at time T and in circumstance C, and she 
knows that, at T and in C, doing A is sufﬁ cient for the occurrence of B. Given 
this knowledge, she does A in order that B may occur. Then she is responsible 
for B occurring, even if B would have occurred had she not done A. John’s 
deciding to stay in is sufﬁ cient for John’s staying, and John has categorical 
freedom regarding trying to leave. He is also properly held responsible for 
what he knows his deciding to stay in is sufﬁ cient for, namely his studying. 
(He has ﬁ rmly decided that if he stays, he studies.) 
 Move Two is neither problematic nor uncommon. Suppose a father knows that 
if he does not promise to pay for his daughter’s tuition, her uncle will, but since 
she is his daughter and he loves her, he wants the tuition to be his gift to her, not 
anyone else’s. What is in the father’s power is whether he pays the tuition, but 
not whether it is paid. He is responsible for the tuition being paid, and his doing 
so is rightly taken, unless there is special reason to the contrary, as an action he 
could either have performed or refrained from performing. This ﬁ ts the pattern 
described in Move Two. Move Two does suggest a clariﬁ cation of (PA), which 
may now read: 
  (PA*) If person S is morally responsible for having performed action A at 
time T in context C, then (i) S could have refrained from having performed 
action A at time T in context C, or (ii) there is some action B that S performed 

260 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
such that S could have refrained from performing B, and S’s performing B 
is, at T and in C, sufﬁ cient for S’s performing A. The incompatibilist is in no 
danger from these cases. 
 Part of what has unfortunately made some philosophers think more of the 
alleged counter-examples than they should is their focusing only on the contrast 
between such things as freely choosing to send the letter versus freely choosing 
not to send the letter while ignoring such things as freely choosing to send the 
letter versus not freely choosing to send the letter. The alleged counter-examples 
are cases in which the subject does not know it, but must choose whether or not 
to be coerced regarding an action. This is a plausible candidate for describing a 
case in which an agent’s freedom is minimal. The consequences regarding study-
ing and the latter being sent will be the same whatever the agent does. But there 
will be an important difference regarding the agent who will either make the right 
choice freely or be coerced. The sort of person the agent becomes is a product of 
such choices—choices where he or she can do what is right uncoerced. Saying 
that Ann will cause Mary to choose not to send the letter if Mary does not choose 
not to send it on her own is misleading. Ann has access to a way of controlling 
Mary—if she must use it the proper way of describing things is that Ann decides 
that Mary does not send the letter. Mary is simply Ann’s agent in carrying out 
Ann’s wishes. Mary can escape coercion regarding sending the letter by choosing 
rightly on her own. Her character will be determined by what she does on this and 
similar occasions. 
 The difference between a libertarian and a compatibilist view of freedom is 
deep. The libertarian will distinguish between what we can call an aesthetic view 
of good character and a moral view of good character. If a painting is beautiful, it 
did not bring about its beauty; credit for that goes to the artist. If determinism is 
true, then if one has good character, the credit should go to the ultimate causes of 
the character. A person is unlike a painting in that she has mental states and those 
states are parts of a causal chain that leads to the way she thinks and acts, and her 
dispositions, which constitute her character. But the ultimate causes in the chain 
lie outside her mental, and for that matter her physical, states. They lie buried in 
the past before she was born. 
 Thus the person is like a living painting—one whose states play a causal role 
in determining her character. For monotheistic determinism, there is an artist to 
whom credit goes for her character. 
 (Theologically, the role of compatibilist freedom is to block the inference that 
God is responsible for what is bad in her character.) For atheistic determinism, 
there is no literal artist. Either way, the person is not the artist—not the determiner 
of her character. To say that she is the determined determiner of her character 
is a fancier way of saying that her character is to be viewed aesthetically—its 
ultimate causes lie elsewhere than with she herself. For the libertarian, her char-
acter—however similar in appearance to a good moral character it may be—is not 
the genuine article. The compatibilist will of course disagree. One way to focus 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 261
the disagreement is to note that virtuous moral character is gained by voluntary 
actions known to be right and done because they are right, and the compatibilist 
glosses “voluntary” in one way and the libertarian in another. 
 Divine Knowledge and Human Freedom 
 Here is a standard argument to the conclusion that divine foreknowledge is incom-
patible with human freedom; it (and the analogous argument presented here) are 
concerned only with logically contingent statements. If successful, this argument 
would show that (i) libertarian monotheism is logically inconsistent, or (ii) that 
future tense statements are neither true nor false and so cannot be foreknown, or 
(iii) that for some other reason God does not know the future. Since (ii), as we will 
see, seems plainly false, we would be left with (i) and (iii). 
  1. If God knows today what Sally will do tomorrow, then Sally is not free 
regarding what Sally does tomorrow. 
 2. 
If God is omniscient, then God knows today what Sally will do tomorrow. 
 3. 
God is omniscient. 
 So: 
 4. 
God knows today what Sally will do tomorrow. [from 2, 3] 
 So: 
 5. 
Sally is not free regarding what Sally does tomorrow. [from 1, 4] 
 First, note that God knows that P entails that P is true, but God knows that P 
does not entail God makes P true. An omnipotent God can create a world in which 
things are true that God did not cause to be true. An omniscient God can know 
things to be true that God did not cause to be true. 
 Second, we should distinguish between direction of entailment and direction of 
truth determination. Entailment is deﬁ ned this way: proposition P entails proposi-
tion Q if and only if  P is true but Q is false is a contradiction. Truth determination 
is deﬁ ned this way: A’s obtaining determines B’s truth if and only if the explana-
tion that B is true is that A obtains. (To “obtain” is “to be the case” or “to be a 
fact”.) 
 Third, suppose that Sally will be tempted to lie tomorrow, but will ﬁ nally 
decide to tell the truth. Then it is true that (S) Sally will tell the truth tomorrow. 
Consider that claim, plus (G) God knows that Sally will tell the truth tomorrow. 
Note two things: (i) the direction of entailment goes from (G) to (S)—to get from 
(S) to (G) one would have to add that God is omniscient; (ii) the direction of truth 
determination goes from (S) to (G)—what makes (G) true is that (S) is true, not 
the other way round. 
 Fourth, given that the directions of truth determination goes as noted, it 
is perfectly compatible with (S) being true, and with (G) being true, that the 

262 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
explanation of Sally’s telling the truth tomorrow is that tomorrow she freely 
chooses to tell the truth. Sally can be a libertarianly free moral agent whose 
decision to tell the truth explains the truth of (S). The explanation of (G)’s being 
true is just that God is omniscient and (S) is true. This is perfectly compatible 
with (S) being true because of a free choice by Sally. If this is so, then divine 
foreknowledge is compatible with human freedom. Hence divine foreknowl-
edge is compatible with human freedom. The argument, then, fails to establish 
the intended incompatibility. 
 How Not to Understand God knows today 
what Sally will do tomorrow 
 1. As inferential knowledge. If X knows today that Sally will do B tomor-
row, and X must infer Sally will do B tomorrow, then X must know some-
thing like this: X must know that A obtains now and that it is a law that if 
A obtains now then Sally does B tomorrow. Then something obtains now 
the obtaining of which is sufﬁ cient for Sally’s doing B tomorrow. An omni-
scient being will have no need to make such inferences in order to know 
anything. 
 2. As a probability grid or its product. It is possible to think along these lines: 
if Sally does B freely tomorrow then her doing B is unpredictable other 
than probabilistically; if her doing B tomorrow is unpredictable other than 
probabilistically, then there is some chance that she not do B tomorrow; if 
X knows now that Sally will do B tomorrow, it follows that Sally will do 
B tomorrow; so if X knows now that Sally will do B tomorrow, then her 
doing B tomorrow is not to be understood probabilistically; so if X knows 
now that Sally will do B tomorrow, her doing B tomorrow is not free. But a 
monotheist who holds both that God has foreknowledge of human actions 
and that those actions are free is not thinking along these lines nor would or 
should she think in terms of a probability grid. That S does A freely does not 
entail that S does A is in principle unpredictable or S’s doing A is only very 
probable or the like. Nor is an omnipotent being in the position of having to 
be content with probabilistic knowledge. Perhaps a being who learned what 
would happen in the future would suffer this limitation, but an omniscient 
being has no learning to do. 20    
 Truth and the Future 
 Since it does not appeal to the idea that God causes whatever is true to be true, 
what force the above argument has for the incompatibility of divine foreknowl-
edge and human freedom is also captured by this argument. 21 
 1. 
Every true future tense statement is now true. 
 2. 
If every true future tense statement is now true, then determinism is true. 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 263
 So: 
 3. 
Determinism is true. 
 This argument could in principle be given at any time, regarding all future time. If 
it was always sound and valid, then determinism would be true. 
 An Argument Regarding Premise 1 
 The ﬁ rst premise assumes that (1*) future tense statements can be true. This claim 
can be defended as follows: 
  1a. 
It is now true that (i) either (ii) the next president of the United States will 
be a former Celtic center or (iii) the next president of the United States will 
not be a former Celtic center. 
 1b. 
(i) is of the form [(ii) or (iii)] 
 1c. 
A proposition of the form [(ii) or (iii)] is true only if its components—
i.e., (ii) and (iii)—are 
 either true or false. 
 So (from 1a–1c): 
 1d. (ii) and (iii) are either true or false. 
 1e. (iii) = not(ii). [obvious] 
 1f. If (ii) and (iii) are either true or false and (iii) = not(ii), then either (ii) is 
true or (iii) is true. 
 So (from 1d–1f): 
 1g. Either (ii) is true or (iii) is true. 
 1h. If (ii) is true, then some future tense statement is true. 
 1i. If (iii) is true, then some future tense statement is true. 
 So (from 1g–1i): 
 1j. Some future tense statement is true. 
 1k. If some future tense statement is true, then future tense statements can 
be true. 
 So (from 1j and 1k): 
 1*. Future tense statements can be true. 
 Further, if some future tense statements are now true, it seems arbitrary to deny 
that the true ones are now true. But does this entail determinism? 
 That depends on what makes future tense statements true. Had Aristotle 
stopped lecturing one day and laconically commented that in the future a human 
being would stand on the surface of the moon, what he said would have been true. 

264 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
What would have made it true was some human being standing on the surface of 
the moon at some time later than that at which Aristotle offered his comment. If 
instead Aristotle had said that sometime in the future someone would freely steal 
a pear, that would be made true by someone freely stealing a pear at some time 
later than that at which Aristotle’s comment was made. There seems no more 
problem in this case than in the case of the human being standing on the surface 
of the moon. That a proposition is true at some time T does not entail that what 
makes it true obtains at T. 22 
 Conclusion 
 After considerable searching, no genuine counter-example to the principle of 
alternative possibilities has surfaced. Suppose that Tricia is related to God as con-
sidered previously. If God creates a world in which the initial conditions come 
from God’s hand and everything that comes afterward is in fact inevitable, it is 
hard to see why the fact that a causal chain passes through Tricia, or that in a 
world with different initial conditions different behavior by Tricia would have 
been causally inevitable, provides any reason to think that Tricia possesses any 
sort of freedom that makes her responsible for anything. What Tricia’s possess-
ing compatibilist freedom relative to an action comes down to is simply that a 
causal chain runs through Tricia’s cognitive makeup and that in a world with 
different initial conditions different behavior by Tricia would have been causally 
inevitable. The libertarian seems right in thinking that this is not enough to make 
Tricia a free and responsible agent. If determinism and monotheism are both true, 
it is dubious that there can be more than one agent. If this is correct, consistent 
monotheists will be libertarians. 
 Compatibilism: An Authorial View 
 Suppose an agent S, who has ample time to reﬂ ect, performs a dangerous action 
A at great personal risk, and pulls it off. It is the structure of the situation that 
concerns us, so we can leave concrete details aside. That A has been done is 
known, and S remains anonymous. As the details become clear, however, S is 
identiﬁ ed as the agent and proudly owns the deed as his own—not only did he do 
it, he is proud of doing it; it ﬁ ts his values, lifestyle, purposes, and goals. Further, 
he wrote down every argument he could think of for not doing it, and rejected 
them all. So he is surely responsible for doing A—what more could we want to 
establish that? Here the agent has, before and after, identiﬁ ed himself with A. 
 The libertarian will not be satisﬁ ed. The strength of the compatibilist case 
likely rests on our common sense assumption that S was libertarianly free at least 
at some point prior to doing A. The compatibilist proudly notes that all the condi-
tions noted are compatible with determinism being true. This is precisely, for the 
libertarian, the problem. It is compatible with the whole story that the propositions 
that compose it are all entailed by L, N, and a set P of propositions true a million 
years ago. 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 265
 Authorialism proposes three conditions sufﬁ cient for responsibility without 
denying that less might do: 
 1. 
S did A knowing what she was doing. 
 2. S owns up to doing A, happy to drape it with her approval as revelatory of 
what and who she is. 
 3. 
S would have done A had she considered every plausible argument against it.  
 The third element is important as making the action at least descriptively rational 
for S. 
 If S is rational, then (given 1–3) 5 is free. 
 The common sense assumption of libertarian freedom may well play a signiﬁ -
cant role in the apparent plausibility of the case as one of responsibility. Each of 
1–3 is compatible with determinism being true. In none of 1–3 need there be more 
than counterfactual freedom. S could have done otherwise had things been different 
because S had all the resources for doing so, though given L, N, and P it followed 
that the proposition that she did otherwise could not be made true under prevail-
ing conditions. There is plainly a causal sense in which S is responsible—she is a 
signiﬁ cant element in a causal series of iron necessity of sheer entailment from L, 
N, and P to  S does A . The members of L are necessary truths, the members of N 
more difﬁ cult to settle but they are true, and the members of P largely if not entirely 
contingent truths about events. But the connection between [L, N, P] and  S does A 
is entailment, as strong a relation as you can imagine. It is not one that S can break. 
 So the authorialist will put forth his view as the peak of compatibilist plausibil-
ity and the libertarian will ﬁ nd, not a position closer to her own than others of its 
kind, just across the border if not spanning it, but yet another view that raises for 
the libertarian an old question. Assume (LF)  For any proposition P, if P is true it 
is necessarily true and if P is false, then P is necessarily false . Suppose S* wants 
chocolate and is told by a reliable authority that she can have it only if she makes 
a contradiction true. S* recognizes that she will not get her candy. If 1–3 are true 
of S* in a world of which (LF) is true, then the rest of the truths in that world will 
entail that S* remains chocolateless. But if things were different, S*could have 
chocolate. They just can’t be different. Suppose S* is in our world in which, alas, 
[L, N, and P] entail that S* does not get chocolate. Things could be different but 
they are not. Consider whether S* is practically better off regarding chocolate 
than she would be in an (LF) world—ask if S* is freer regarding getting a choco-
late in our world than in the (LF) world. Suppose the reliable authority tells S* she 
can have chocolate one if she makes one of [L, N, P] false. How much practical 
difference does not living in an (LF) world make to S* and her chocolate? Then 
generalize to every case in which [L, N, P] entail what happens at any time, given 
the appropriate tensing of P. The libertarian sees no practical difference. Either 
way, S* lacks chocolate. S*’s actual alternatives, in any given case, are limited to 
one—and that things could have been different changes nothing about responsi-
bility in the case at hand. One’s freedom is always conditional on what could be 
true elsewhere and elsewhen. That is, it never arrives. 

266 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
   1. How can one tell whether moral values are fundamental within a par-
ticular religious tradition? 
  2. Does it make any difference to morality whether God exists or not? 
Why or why not? 
  3. Explain determinism, compatibilism, and libertarianism. 
  4. Suppose that God exists, determinism is true, and compatibilism is 
true. Does anything different follow regarding morality that would not 
follow if God didn’t exist? 
  5. Suppose that God exists, determinism is true, and compatibilism is 
false. Does anything different follow regarding morality than would 
follow if compatibilism were true? 
  6. Sometimes religious believers claim that if there were no God, there 
would be no morality. Sometimes critics of religion claim that all reli-
gion perverts morality. Are either right? 
  7 . Explain the notion of metaphysical value. Must the ultimate, funda-
mental value for a religious tradition be a moral value? 
  8. Explain and illustrate “The difference between compatibilist and 
incompatibilist notions of freedom relate to other basic concepts in an 
overall view.” 
  9. Do moral claims need a metaphysical basis? 
 10. Does a person depending for existence on God prevent her from having 
libertarian freedom? (If you prefer: What exactly does it mean for a 
person to depend on God for her existence?) 
 11. What are the basic values embraced by our four traditions? 
 Notes 
   1.  It is worth noting that something can have metaphysical worth in virtue of the sort 
of thing it is—of its nature—in a sense that makes it wrong to wantonly destroy it—
without ascribing rights to it since it cannot take an interest in anything, nor can any 
member of its species do so. 
   2.  There are various versions of divine command theory. One strong version holds that 
what is good is decided by God’s nature and what is obligatory rests on God’s com-
mands, made in the light of what is good. We only touch the surface here in considering 
replies to the Euthyphro dilemma. 
  3. The Euthyphro dilemma thus is not properly stated in the form of  Either A or not-A . 
   4.  It is at this point that the conviction that moral law requires a lawgiver enters centrally 
into the theory. 
   5.  This is not relativism in the sense that entails that there are no absolute obligations. It 
means only that where a person is not culpable in her ignorance of what is right, she is 
not blameworthy in not doing it. 
  6. Other than God. 

Religion, Morality, and Responsibility 267
   7.  Strictly, one needs to add here “without morally sufﬁ cient reason.” It is left to the 
reader to consider the relevance to the argument of adding this needed qualiﬁ cation. 
   8.  Indeed, any two necessary truths mutually entail one another. Further, since each truth 
about Tess’s thoughts, by hypothesis, follows from a necessary truth, it is necessarily 
true, and so entails every truth about every thought that God has. So construed, God’s 
existence, nature, and thought seems as much determined by Tess’s as the reverse. 
   9.  One need not put logical fatalism in somewhat monotheistic dress; it is the doctrine 
that all truths are necessary and all falsehoods contradictions, and  God exists , for all 
logical fatalism cares, can be among the latter. 
 10. This is  metaphysical  libertarianism, to be distinguished from political views that use 
the same term. 
  11.  For the argument’s origin, see Peter Van Inwagen,  An Essay on Free Will , referenced 
in the Suggested Readings at the end of this chapter. 
  12.  Strictly, of course, sentences like  The past entails the future  are shorthand for sentences 
like  True propositions about the past entail the true propositions about the future . 
  13.  In fact, incompatibilists often hold that were determinism true, no one would, strictly 
speaking,  act  at all, since  Necessarily, if A is an action by Karen, then Karen is free 
relative to performing A . 
 14. Thus D is an enormous set of TUDs. 
 15. There are problems with this sort of claim, to be noted later. 
 16. Strictly, given a set of propositions for which the laws are truth conditions. 
  17.  Or at least to approximate this goal—sufﬁ cient ingenuity can ﬁ t a lot into this scope, 
and we may have left something interesting out. Fortunately, if the account is not quite 
as inclusive as it might be, it remains true that the account includes many important 
elements, and the inclusion of some other element of the same sort will not make any 
difference to our conclusion. 
  18.  For convenience, let “choosing to do A” be a success term—that Jane can choose to lie 
only if, given that she so chooses, she lies. 
  19.  Compatibilists sometimes suggest that actions out of character are unfree, though this 
would make most heroic action unfree. There are other possible ﬁ ne-tunings, but by 
now the general compatibilist strategy should be clear. 
  20.  The temptation to think so arises from noting that if  S  lives in a deterministic world, 
then what  S  does is both non-probabilistically predictable and unfree, so if what  S 
does is free than it is probabilistically predictable. But the reasoning is fallacious. It 
is exactly parallel to this. Consider a world in which this is a law:  S eats chocolate at 
time T if and only if S eats peanut butter at time T . Let this be a Reese’s world (RW). 
If  S lives in a Reese’s world, and  S eats peanut butter at  T then  S eats chocolate at  T . 
Suppose that  S  moves from a Reese’s world to a non-Reese’s world (one where it is 
not a law that one eats peanut butter at a time if and only if one also eats chocolate at 
that time). Then  S  can eat chocolate without also eating peanut butter (and conversely). 
What temptation there was to deny this would go as follows. Let the law whose pres-
ence makes a world be a Reese’s world be  LCPB . Let  eating chocolate at T  be  CT and 
 eating peanut butter at T  be  PBT . Then the reasoning would be: since when  LCPB 
holds, every  CT  is also a  PBT , every  CT  is a  PBT  whether  LCPB  holds or not. But of 
course this is fallacious. Having moved,  S  can now eat her chocolate by itself. 
  21.  One might argue that knowledge requires justiﬁ ed true belief so if God knows that 
something is true in the future, God must know something now from which this justi-
ﬁ cation comes, and so the future is determined now. One can appeal to the highly con-
troversial view that God is eternal here. Or one can simply say that divine omniscience 

268 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
is an essential property of God and thus is, for a monotheistic view, a given in need of 
no further explanation. 
  22.  This claim should be distinguished from the false claim that  A proposition that says 
that X will obtain at T can be true even if A does not obtain at T . 
 Suggested Readings 
 Dundas, Paul (2002)  The Jains  (New York: Routledge). Discusses the history of Jainism in 
its doctrinal and social context. 
 Fischer, John Martin (2007)  My Way: Essays on Moral Responsibility  (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press). A sophisticated, nuanced version of compatibilism. 
 Frankfurt, H. G. (1988)  The Importance of What We Care About (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press). A very inﬂ uential contemporary defense of compatibilism. 
 Hare, John E. (2016)  God’s Command  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Argues that 
what is good is determined by God’s nature and becomes obligatory by divine com-
mand, thereby uniting natural law theory with divine command theory. 
 Harvey, Peter (2000)  An Introduction to Buddhist Ethics: Foundations, Values, and Issues 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). Draws on traditional texts and contemporary 
practices to explore what Buddhist traditions have in common as well as where they 
differ. 
 Honderich, T. (1993)  How Free Are You? (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Another 
defense of compatibilism. 
 Kane, Robert (2005)  A Contemporary Introduction to Free Will  (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press). A sophisticated, nuanced version of libertarianism. 
 Keown, Damien (2001)  The Nature of Buddhist Ethics  (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan). 
An effort to see Buddhist ethics in terms not dominated by enlightenment. 
 Lemos, John (2013)  Freedom, Responsibility, and Determinism: A Philosophical Dialogue 
(Indianapolis, IN: Hackett). An introduction to contemporary arguments and issues 
regarding its title topics, on their own and in relation to science and religion. 
 Molina, L. (1988)  On Divine Foreknowledge  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, trans. 
Alfred Fredoso). The standard presentation of the view that God knows what free per-
sons, created or not, will or would do. 
 Perrett, Roy W. (1998)  Hindu Ethics: A Philosophical Study  (Honolulu: University of 
Hawaii` Press). Presents the structure of Hindu ethics. 
 Rowe, William L. (1991)  Thomas Reid on Freedom and Morality  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press). An excellent discussion of Reid’s libertarian views. 
 Van Inwagen, Peter (1983)  An Essay on Free Will  (Oxford: Clarendon Press). A powerful 
critique of compatibilism. 
 Watson, G., ed. (1982)  Free Will (Oxford: Oxford University Press). An excellent collec-
tion of essays concerning libertarianism. 
 Zagzebski, Linda (1991)  The Dilemma of Freedom and Foreknowledge  (New York: Oxford 
University Press). A detailed discussion of divine foreknowledge.    

 15  Faith and Reason 
Faith
 To have faith involves belief; it cannot exist in a conceptual vacuum. Christianity 
talks about ”the faith once delivered”—the central doctrines of the religion. All of 
our religions obviously have propositional content, things belief in which is essen-
tial to acceptance of their religion. The acceptance of these beliefs involves faith 
that what the texts say is true, and in particular true concerning diagnosis and cure. 
In turn this requires faith in those persons assigned central religious importance by 
those texts. (The role of oral tradition in the development and continuance of many 
religious traditions has been enormous; an oral tradition may develop into a textual 
one. This is a large topic and we can only mention it here. Oral tradition, in song or 
narrative, also has propositional content.) If there is no propositional content, there 
is no religion. Even religions that trade on paradox and contradiction, thinking that 
genuine religion can be found only after dismissing reason and rationality, preach 
doctrine of the need to do that in order to ﬁ nd what they believe is enlightenment or 
salvation. One needs propositional belief even to think there is any point to attempt-
ing to reject reason and to seek and follow a method for doing so. We have seen 
the signiﬁ cance of doctrine and belief in the religious traditions we have discussed. 
 In Shakespeare’s phrase, “the unkindest cut of all” in critiques of religion is that 
religion’s supposed beliefs are literally nonsense—that they are not true, nor do 
they even manage to be false. 1  The familiar tactic of critics of religion is to offer 
some theory of meaning, and then argue that the target of their criticism does not 
satisfy the theory’s standard. Here, to be meaningful is to be either true or false. 
Thus “Buttercups created the world” and “Monkeys run congress”—taking both 
claims literally—are false, and hence meaningful, and their denials, being true, 
are also meaningful. As a sop thrown to religions being criticized it is some-
times suggested that their beliefs have emotive meaning, that is they may have the 
sort of sense that groans have. Religious phrases may elicit responses, so “God 
blesses us all” may elicit from a congregation “Amen” even though God-talk may 
be sheer nonsense. After all, the congregation could be trained to say “Amen” 
(roughly, “Let it be so”) in response to “Wumba bunba,” which the critic believes 
to be on a par with “God blesses us all” so far as being true or false goes. 2 
 From the outside looking in, the proposal that for centuries millions of people 
have used monotheistic language to apparently say things they thought true, and 

270 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
all along were utterly misled—even the brightest and best who seemed to be bril-
liant thinkers—is surprising. The expectation given will be that the arguments in 
favor of this accusation must be incredibly powerful. Our tour of the arguments 
will endeavor to make clear the criticisms offered, and to see what can be said 
about the truth or falsehood of their conclusions. A theory of meaning will at least 
give what it takes to be a necessary condition of being true or false, and typically 
will suggest a sufﬁ cient condition. Only if these arguments fail with there be any 
possibility of religious faith. 3 
 As good a place to start as any is the theories of meaning offered by David 
Hume, the immensely inﬂ uential Scottish philosopher who wrote  A Treatise of 
Human Nature . 4  He offered two theories of meaning, one for words and one for 
sentences. He called experiences with sensory content impressions of sensation 
and their copies in memory ideas of sensation. Experiences with introspective 
content he called impressions of reﬂ ection and their copies in memory ideas of 
reﬂ ection. He denied that we have any awareness of a self who has such experi-
ences. Given that small background, here is his theory of meaning for words. 
  (W) A sound or mark is a word if and only if it is associated with (rarely he 
says “names”) an impression or an idea. 
 A Humean will need to ﬁ nd a way of granting meaning to such terms as these: 
and, not, some, all, none, or, contradiction, consistent, entails, if-then, true, false. 
That task alone is unpromising—to what sensory or introspective contents do 
their terms correspond? Presumably, if a theory of meaning is offered, it should be 
meaningful on its own criterion. But to what sensory or introspective content does 
either “theory” or “meaning” correspond? For that matter, if  There is no self that 
is the subject   of sensory or introspective experience  is true, it must be meaning-
ful, and to what items of sensory or introspective experience does it correspond if 
there is no self of which to be aware? After all, on Hume’s view, one must under-
stand what the word ‘self’ means in order to tell that no such thing is experienced. 
His theory of meaning for sentences is: 
  (S) A string of words composes a sentence if and only if it, or its denial, is 
conﬁ rmable by reference to some sensory or introspective experience. 
 In addition there are sentences true or false by deﬁ nition, a class supposed to 
contain all necessary truths and all necessary falsehoods, and to be trivial. A little 
reﬂ ection on (S) raises the obvious question as to what sensory or introspective 
experience conﬁ rms (S), and of course there is none. If it seems unlikely that 
these sorts of problems arise with an argument offered by an astute philosopher, 
perhaps the fact that it all happened again will be convincing. In the 1920s a group 
of philosophers, logicians, and scientists met informally in Vienna and came to 
be known as the Vienna Circle. They developed a view called Logical Positiv-
ism. The core of their program was a theory of meaning called the Veriﬁ cation 
Principle (VP).This theory dominated the Anglo-American philosophical scene 

Faith and Reason 271
for decades. In the exchange of arguments for and against the VP it underwent 
various subtle changes, but one example of its formulations will be sufﬁ cient to 
make our point. 
 VP. A string of words comprises a sentence if and only if 
 (1)  it describes a sensory or introspective experience; or 
 (2)  it is true or false by deﬁ nition; and 
 (3) it can be conﬁ rmed or disconﬁ rmed, in principle, by reference to some sen-
sory or introspective experience; or 
 (4)  it follows from sentences that fall under (1), (2), or (3). 
 The idea behind (3) is that if there is some possible sensory or introspective expe-
rience that would conﬁ rm or disconﬁ rm what is expressed by a string of words, 
then that string of words is a sentence. It is not necessary that such an experience 
be available. For example, consider an area where dinosaurs are known to have 
roamed. Pick some place in that area, and offer the hypothesis that a dinosaur once 
slept there. Since we know what we would have to have seen in order to conﬁ rm 
the hypothesis, the sentence that expresses the hypothesis is meaningful. Hume’s 
theory of sentence meaning is captured by the four conditions of (VP). 
 The ﬁ rst question to ask is where (VP) itself—a complex declarative sentence—
ﬁ ts into the four categories. It certainly is not a report of any sensory or introspec-
tive experience. On veriﬁ cationist terms, any sentence falling under (2) is trivial. It 
does not ﬁ t under (3)—what sensory or introspective experience would conﬁ rm or 
disconﬁ rm it? But (4) remains. Russell and Whitehead developed a system of logic 
published as  Principia Mathematica  (1907–1911), which contained the rule [If P, then 
(P or Q)]. The unpardonable sin for a rule of inference is that it sanction an inference 
from a truth to a falsehood. Consider an inference from P to (P or Q), with the ‘or’ 
being understood so that if either P or Q or both are true, then (P or Q) as a whole is true. 
 Suppose P is false. Then inferring (P or Q) from P will not involve inferring a 
falsehood from a truth—the premise is false. Suppose P is true. Then whatever 
one decides Q shall be, (P or Q) will be true since P is true. So we have the rule 
Addition: from P you may infer (P or Q). Then you replace (P) by something like 
 The sun is shining  and infer to  The sun is shining or the VP is true  and you have 
ﬁ tted VP into (4), so the VP does not rule itself out. Then imagine this dialogue: 
 Theist: Thank you! Now I see how to ﬁ t  God exists  under the VP fence; all 
I need to do is to infer  The sun is shining or God exists from  The sun is shining . 
 Critic: But that won’t do. You have used Addition in your argument, and it only 
covers truths and falsehoods.  God exists is neither. 
 Theist: Thank you again! You have assumed that the VP is true or false and that 
 God exists  is not true or false—you need the latter assumption to deny my infer-
ence. But you were supposed to argue from VP to the conclusion that  God exists 
is not true or false, not to just assume it as part of your argument, as you have 
done here. So you have assumed that VP is true so that it comes under the rule 
called Addition, and assumed that  God exists  is neither true nor false. You have 
not shown either assumption to be true. 

272 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
 In any case, VP was just offered as a criterion of meaning, and then applied. 
There was no argument for it in the ﬁ rst place. It was crafted to include natural 
science, logic, and mathematics and rule out metaphysics, ethics, and religion. 
Toward the end of the dispute the suggestion was ﬂ oated that the VP was really a 
piece of advice. Those who accepted claims in metaphysics, ethics, and religion 
declined to follow it. 
 There is no lack of other sources of conclusions that radical empiricists favor. 
One is the claim that God is ineffable. 5  One use of the term is for emphasis “Her 
beauty is ineffable.” There are quite different uses that can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 A.  X is ineffableA if and only if, for any concept C, C does not apply to X. 
 B.  X is ineffableB if and only if, for any concept C, C does not ﬁ t X.  
 Concept C ﬁ ts X if and only if C is true of X. Concept C applies to X if and only 
if C is true of X or C is false of X. Thus “is an elephant” ﬁ ts an elephant but not 
a rose, but “is an elephant” applies to a rose since it is false of roses that they are 
elephants. So the claim that God is ineffable is either the claim that no concept ﬁ ts 
God or the claim that no concept applies to God. 
 The claim that God is ineffableB—that claim that no concept ﬁ ts God—is 
self-defeating, since “is ineffable” is a concept. A second problem concerns 
what reason there could be for saying that it is God who is said to be ineffableB. 
There is nothing that can be offered as a reason here—not that God is inﬁ nite, 
or not in space or time, or different in kind from anything else. Any of these 
reasons supposes that certain concepts—being inﬁ nite, not being in space or 
time, being different in kind—ﬁ t God, and that goes directly against the idea 
that God is ineffableB. The question as to why we should think it is God who is 
ineffable suggests another line of thought. To be God is to be omnipotent, omni-
scient, holy, sovereign, and the like, and an ineffable item can be none of these 
things. So how does God come into any of this? Further, presumably even an 
ineffable item must exist, and if anything exists, then the concept of existence 
ﬁ ts it. Necessarily, to exist includes having properties and so the concept “has 
properties” ﬁ ts an allegedly ineffable being. The notion of ineffabilityB, if one 
actually tries to draw out the idea as applying to God, turns out to be an acid 
that eats away the content of one’s monotheism. The idea that God is ineffableB 
is incoherent. The claim that God is ineffableA entails the claim that God is 
ineffableB—if no concept even applies to God, then no concept ﬁ ts God. What 
entails some incoherent claim is itself incoherent. Divine ineffability, as deﬁ ned 
here, is not defensible. 
 That no proposition can be literally true of God but this does not empty the-
ology of its content can be based on the view that all propositions that are true 
of God are to be understood analogically. The idea is that if two statements of 
the form  God is A  and  Socrates is A  are both true, then whatever the predicate 
term ‘A’ stands for means one thing when applied to Socrates and another thing 
when applied to God. Then the conclusion can be drawn that all predicates held 
to be true of God are used analogically. Actually, the conclusion does not follow. 

Faith and Reason 273
Consider the propositions  God is omnipotent  and  Socrates is omnipotent . They 
use ‘omnipotent’ in the same sense. More generally, the ideas are: 
  1. If statements of the form  God is A  and  Socrates is A  are both true, then ‘A’ is 
used analogically in the statement about God to that in which it is used in the 
statement about Socrates. 
 2. If statements of the form  God is A  and  Socrates is A  are such that one is true 
and the other false, then ‘A’ may be univocal (have the same sense) in both 
statements. 
 Thus in  Socrates is a citizen of Athens  and  God is not a citizen of Athens , ‘citizen 
of Athens’ is used univocally. An easy extension allows  God does not weigh a 
hundred pounds  and  Socrates does not weigh a hundred pounds  to have univocal 
predicates, though both are true. This point deserves reinforcement. 
 There is still the idea that if two statements ascribe the same property to God 
and Socrates rather than both denying that property to God and Socrates, the pred-
icates cannot be univocal and the properties ascribed cannot be the same. This too 
is dubious. Consider the properties  being able to raise ten pounds ,  knowing that 
Rhode Island is closer to New York than is California , and  being self-aware . The 
average citizen of Rhode Island and God have these properties, and there seems 
no reason to think that the properties are not the same in both cases. 
 One core of the doctrine that all predication of God must be merely analogous 
rather than literal is the idea that God belongs to no genus, and the meaning of a 
predicate differs as one applies it to things that differ in genus. Supposedly God 
belongs to no genus because there cannot be two Gods and every genus must 
be possibly shared by more than one thing. It is not clear why there cannot be 
a necessarily one-membered genus. There can be only one ﬁ rst person to climb 
Pike’s Peak, but that is not a genus-deﬁ ning feature. So just because there are 
properties necessarily had by only one thing if they are had by anything does 
not show that there cannot be a one-membered genus. God, however, is held to 
have an essence. Without getting into detail concerning how this essence should 
be stated, we will take one candidate for deﬁ ning the divine essence as repre-
sentative of others. We can put this brieﬂ y: being omnipotent, omniscient, and 
omnibenevolent. This deﬁ nes a kind of being just as well as being H2O deﬁ nes 
water as a kind. 
 Why then does it not deﬁ ne a genus? Relative to genus membership, the impos-
sibility of multiple membership seems trumped by God having an essence. Even 
if it is not, the dictum that a term changes meaning when applied to members 
of different genuses does not follow. It is plainly false of number concepts, for 
example. It is false of many terms. You can have a dog that eats, drinks water, 
and sleeps in the same sense of these terms as they apply to you, and a rock can 
hold down a blanket in the same sense as you can. Your thumb can plug up a hole 
and then be replaced by a stick that plugs up the hole just as well and in the same 
sense, even though your thumb belongs to one genus and the stick to another. The 
 Meaning changes when used of a member of one genus and then of a member of 

274 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
another  is a dogma proclaimed without paying attention to the number and variety 
of cases where it is false. 
 The doctrine that all predicates ascribed to God, when the ascription is true, 
are used analogically dies hard. The point of analogical predication is to note a 
similarity. A typical pattern is  A is to B as C is to D —for example,  Strength is to 
the body as intelligence is to the mind . A simpler pattern involves the use of ‘like.’ 
 God is a rock  is not an intrusion of theology into geology. It means  God is like a 
rock . Among the many properties that rocks have, God has at least one. The usual 
meaning of the comparison is that God is strong and reliable. 
 You are better off building your house on rock than on sand, and your life on 
God rather than riches.   Whatever the pattern used, the analogy fails if one can-
not identify the property on which resemblance is based. Part of what God being 
reliable means is that God will keep God’s promises. Whatever one thinks of the 
theology, ‘promise-keeping’ is being ascribed to God and is meant literally.  As 
the author is to the novel so God is to the world  uses the more complex pattern. 
Two questions should be distinguished here. What resemblance has the speaker 
in mind? 
 When that is settled—when the resembling property is speciﬁ ed—can the 
ascription of that property to God be literal? A plausible candidate is  being a nec-
essary condition for . No author, no novel; no God, no world.  Being a necessary 
condition for the existence of  is a univocal term—the novelist bears the property 
it designates to the novel and God bears it to the world.  God is like oatmeal appar-
ently plays no role in monotheistic thought since it is opaque what the point of 
comparison might be. No doubt one could be supplied—as oatmeal is to physical 
health, so God is to spiritual health. That is lame at best. But even in cases that 
push the envelope, intelligibility of the analogy requires identiﬁ cation of the pro-
posed resembling property. To claim that the property cannot be one that both God 
and humans have challenges the claim that anything can be said about God, and 
ignores numerous counter-examples. 
 Another related doctrine tells us that: 
  3. 
For any property Q and substance S, if S’s essence precludes S from having 
Q, the ascription of Q to S (that is, statements of the form  S has Q  or their 
equivalent) is meaningless (neither true nor false). 
 Thus  All cats are dogs  is meaningless, which is obviously false.  The number seven 
dances  is meaningless if 3 is true, since dancing is beyond the range of its natural 
skills. But precisely for that reason, a different tradition regards the statement as 
false. After all, the reason for regarding it as meaningless is that numbers are not 
the kind of thing that can dance. So it is true that (N)  Numbers are not the kind of 
thing that can dance . This is logically incompatible with (D)  Numbers can dance , 
since (N) entails not-(D). In giving the reason why (D) is meaningless, one relies 
on (N), which entails (D)’s denial. So if (N) has truth value, so does not-(D), 
and hence (D) does as well. The denial of a necessary truth is a necessary false-
hood. So it turns out that the proposition that ascribes to something a property 

Faith and Reason 275
incompatible with its nature is false rather than meaningless. Not surprisingly, 
 God is a number is false. 
 It is commonly said that God is inﬁ nite. The strict sense of inﬁ nite is this: a set 
S is inﬁ nite if and only if S contains subset S* such that each of the members of 
S* can be paired one-and-one with the members of S. Not being a set, God can-
not be inﬁ nite in that sense. The looser sense those who ascribe  is inﬁ nite  to God 
is  unlimited . But of course God is limited in all sorts of ways—God is not blue in 
color, round in shape, taller than six feet, younger than ten years, or the elected 
mayor of Cleveland. It can then be suggested that having properties limits what-
ever has them, since it then cannot have other properties that are incompatible 
with (contradictories or contraries to) the properties it already has. If having 
limitations is supposed to be negative, it is odd to think of having no properties as 
positive, since it entails not existing. Divine omnipotence is sometimes glossed 
as “inﬁ nite power,” which is misleading, since it is so easily rendered as “can 
do anything” as if God could write your autobiography as autobiography (which 
would require that you be God). It is arguable that describing God as inﬁ nite 
is nothing like the best way of putting the various divine attributes or essential 
properties. 
 Monotheism is often accused of relying on anthropomorphism as essential to 
expressing its core content. Anthropomorphism, broadly construed, is describing 
God in terms of properties possessed by human beings. God is described as lov-
ing, just, and merciful. Anthropomorphic description is obviously a mistake if 
the properties ascribed to God are overtime parking, theft, or error on an exam. 
The properties in question are such properties as being self-aware, thinking, and 
acting—thinking of God as a person. The notion of a God who makes covenants 
with human beings created in God’s image (an ascription often understood in 
terms of our volitional and rational capacities) is personal, and the idea that God 
cannot have personal properties is at best controversial. The objection to God 
being described in any terms at all of course is incompatible with any ascription 
of personal qualities to God. But we have argued that, at least when defended on 
the grounds discussed previously, this objection is not justiﬁ ed. The dictum that 
all language is non-literal long dominated departments of English in spite of its 
ﬂ agrant falsehood. The dictum itself is literal. 
 Those who complain about monotheistic anthropomorphism prefer terms like 
The Inﬁ nite, The Real, The One, Ground of Being, The Force, The Ultimate, and 
the like. Ground of Being suggests an independent existence on which all else 
depends, and thus has some use regarding God as conceived in the monotheistic 
traditions. The others suggest questions: The inﬁ nite what? The real what? The 
one what? The ultimate what? And which force? They are vaguer than ‘God’ 
in monotheistic traditions, though that need not be any advantage. A supposed 
advantage is that one can thereby describe various religious traditions using such 
terms. What that amounts to is that these terms serve as a blank into which various 
religious terms can be put. The project of reducing religions to their least common 
denominator is hardly obviously a good thing. It leaves out what each religion 
treasures most. The policy of doing so does not typically arise from concerns 

276 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
about the nature of religious language, though it is common in contemporary dis-
cussion of religious traditions and typical to treat religious claims non-literally. 
 The thesis that there can be no literal truths about God, even if monotheism is 
true, appears in much of monotheistic thought. It too seems mistaken. God is said 
to be omnipotent, omniscient, and morally perfect. It seems to follow that God 
can lift not only a mountain but also a feather, knows that twice two is four, and 
know that torturing for pleasure is wrong. We also can lift a feather, and know that 
twice two is four, and know that torture is wrong. In what respect is the meaning 
of  can lift a feather  not the same in God’s case and the case of a human being? 
The way it is done may be different without the sense of the words being differ-
ent. An immaterial omnipotent being will not have to touch a feather in order to 
move it upward from the ground. We will not have to touch it either—we can use 
tongs. But whatever means God uses to lift the feather and whatever means we 
use, we have both lifted the feather. If God knows that twice two is four, in what 
respect is the meaning of  knows twice two is four not the same in God’s case and 
in the case of a human being? It is true that an omniscient being will know all of 
mathematics and hence understand an enormous context of mathematical propo-
sitions in which the modest mathematical truth is included. One can then say that 
God knows it better than you do. But knowing better and knowing less well are 
still cases of knowing. 
 These are no doubt not profound religious truths, but if monotheism is true, 
they are truths. The importance of this small fact is evidence; in philosophy counter-
examples are important. Further, if there can be literal trivial truths about God this 
raises the question as to why there cannot be signiﬁ cant literal truths as well. We 
have found no reason to think religious claims cannot be true or false. So far as 
these objections go at any rate, there can be religious faith. But what is that? And 
what is reason? 
 Reason and Rationality 
 Reasoning is an ability we have. In its full range, it is a very rich ability, includ-
ing the capacity to believe, know, infer, imagine, remember, anticipate, plan, 
develop and test theories, offer explanations, develop and assess arguments, 
identify and reidentify thoughts and persons and things, and so on. Since atti-
tudes and feelings can be irrational, there is not the grand divide between thought 
and feeling that is sometimes advertised. Without capacity to reason, irrational-
ity is impossible. Parenthetically, there are circumstances in which one can be 
reasonable while nonetheless knowing one has contradictory beliefs. There is a 
paradox of authorship to this effect: Jeff writes a philosophy book in which he 
believes everything he said—he was honest in what he claimed. He is not arro-
gant, and so believes that the book contains some falsehood. If the book contains 
some falsehood, it follows that something he believes is false. If everything he 
believes is true, then at least one of his beliefs is false. But Jeff is not unreason-
able in holding both of the incompatible beliefs. Notice he has (we will assume) 
good reason to think what he says in the book is true, and good reason to think 

Faith and Reason 277
that his book has not offered license for reasonable people to start believing 
contradictions, much less for pretending that contradictions are just paradoxes. 
The rule  If it is reasonable to believe that P is true and reasonable to believe 
that Q, then it is reasonable to believe that ‘P and Q’ is true  is false. Jeff, if he 
is reasonable, does not believe [There are no falsehoods in my book and there 
are falsehoods in my book]. He (let us suppose) has excellent reason to think 
that every argument in his book is sound and valid, so that every conclusion in 
his book is true. He has massive evidence that if not absolutely every, then very 
close to every, philosophy book contains some falsehood. (Perhaps a few short 
logic texts are exceptions.) He realizes they cannot be true together. But he also 
has what he rightly takes good reason in each case for belief. He does not try to 
imagine a world in which both are true. There are no such worlds. But he has not 
become irrational if he can shake neither belief so long as he knows that both 
claims cannot be true. The paradox of the author is not rariﬁ ed. For each of us, 
it is almost certain that if we went into some impressive ediﬁ ce where they put 
our heads in a comfortable hat connected to a sophisticated machine and thereby 
produced a list of every proposition we believe, it is hard to believe that there 
will be no incompatible beliefs on the list. But this is no rationale for ignoring 
inconsistencies that we discover. 
 Reasonable Belief 
 The focus in philosophy of religion now tends to be on whether religious belief 
can be reasonably held. This raises the question of what has to be true if someone 
is reasonable in holding a religious belief. The belief does not have to be true. It is 
possible to have superb evidence for a belief, and yet the belief is false. Evidence 
is truth-favoring but not truth-entailing. 
 W. K. Clifford became famous among philosophers for asserting that it was 
always wrong to believe on insufﬁ cient evidence. 6  This sounds like a high stan-
dard for belief, but before we worry about whether we sin if we go against this 
dictum, we should ask if it is true as a principle of proper belief. Of course what 
exactly the right criterion is for “sufﬁ cient evidence” is not clear, but suppose one 
is found. Then is the principle true? What evidence have we for: 
 (W) One ought never believe anything without sufﬁ cient evidence. 
 One problem concerns regress. If  You cannot believe P without sufﬁ cient evi-
dence provided by Q, and cannot believe Q without sufﬁ cient evidence provided 
by R, and cannot . . .  then any belief you have will require support for another, 
which requires support for another, and you are like the man who will be let out 
of his cage so long as he always uses a key to unlock the door, which must always 
be unlocked by yet another key. The regress must end somewhere if one is to 
properly have a belief, but (W) suggests no stopping point. One way to escape 
this is to say that one accepts a foundationalism that notes that some beliefs are 
self-evident, belief-entailed, or evident to the senses. These classes are exempli-
ﬁ ed, respectively, by  No one can be taller than herself ,  I believe I exist ,  The computer 
screen is white . Then the suggestion will be that there is sufﬁ cient evidence for 

278 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
these sorts of beliefs, as well as any belief that they entail or make probable. 
Only necessary truths are entailed by necessary truths, so no contingent truth can 
be derived from them. The set of contingent truths entailed or made probable 
by  I believe I exist  and its kin ( I believe I am conscious ,  I believe I have beliefs , 
etc.) will not get us to other persons or external objects.  Propositions entailed 
or made probable by propositions that are evident to the senses  is a more tricky 
class than it appears. In perception am I simply having conscious states with 
sensory content, or am I having those states that are caused by external objects, 
or am I directly aware of those objects? Propositions from the ﬁ rst two classes 
will not help in deciding between these alternatives. The unclarity of “insufﬁ -
cient evidence” and the complexity of the epistemology of perception make the 
question as to how to deal with  is evident to the senses or is entailed or made 
probable by what is  a demanding one. A Cliffordian can hold this sort of foun-
dationalism  . Then the question concerns where (W) ﬁ ts in the foundationalist 
scheme of things. It is not evident to the senses or belief entailed. A Cliffordian is 
likely to suggest self-evidence. (W) is not formally necessary—its denial lacks a 
contradictory structure and if it is not informally necessary it will lack the status 
claimed for it. 
 Religious doctrines are not likely to appear in a list of formally necessary 
truths—propositions that have self-contradictory denials, propositions whose log-
ical structure is captured in such forms as  P and not-P ,  If Q then not-Q , or the like. 
The most plausible relevant example of a proposition that is informally necessary 
is the familiar example already discussed, namely the claim that God is omnipo-
tent, omniscient, and omnibenevolent in all possible worlds, which we discussed 
earlier, ﬁ nding it to be controversial. Propositions that are belief-entailed are also 
unlikely to be a home to religious doctrines. The same seems to hold for propo-
sitions that are evident to the senses. But then where do religious doctrines ﬁ t? 
Considering this requires some examples. We can use our familiar examples. 
 G. God—an omnipotent, omniscient, omnibenevolent being—exists. 
 J. The essential nature of a person is that she is inherently everlasting and 
immaterial. 
 A. Ultimate reality is a qualityless being or state. 
 B. What we think of as persons are bundles of conscious states at a time and 
a series thereof over time. 
 Beginning with the conﬂ icting J and B, we can note that the traditions that accept 
them agree that common sense sides with J. We seem to be enduring subjects of 
experience who are the same person at bedtime as we were upon waking, who 
once learned to read with focus on every word and later read sentences easily. 
Enlightenment experience conﬁ rms and supplements what common sense tells us 
regarding J. But we also commonsensically take our bodies to be essential to us 
if they are not simply us. We take our range of knowledge to be very limited. In 
enlightenment experience we recognize that we are distinct from and independent 

Faith and Reason 279
of our bodies, and enjoy a tremendous range of knowledge. For the tradition that 
embraces B, enlightenment experience corrects common sense. It reveals that 
we are not enduring beings but are subjectless causally connected states, each 
being related to other in one ephemeral bundle after another and every state being 
momentary. All of this is radically impermanent and causally dependent. So we 
have two radically different metaphysical views. Assuming all persons to belong 
to the same metaphysical kind with the same metaphysical structure, it is possible 
that experiences accepted as giving enlightenment be in error. The Jain can refer 
to common sense support, each will appeal to sacred texts, and each will refer 
to philosophical arguments. Neither view seems to ﬁ t nicely into the three-fold 
foundationalist division for basis propositions properly used in the foundations of 
knowledge and as premises from which conclusions can be produced by deduc-
tive, and perhaps inductive, arguments. 
 Turning to A, A obviously goes directly against common sense. Every percep-
tual and introspective experience in the history of humanity testiﬁ es against it. 
Shankara and other Advaitans   know this. Their view is that sacred texts teach A. 
Other Vedantists interpret these texts differently, mainly theistically. Discussing 
the level of appearance, Shankara argues strongly for the reality of subjects of 
experience, the existence of mind-independent physical objects, and the general 
reality of the everyday world. He contrasts the level of reality—an undifferenti-
ated being or states—on the basis (besides the texts) of enlightenment experience 
that is the goal of Advaita. Deriving A from foundationalist assumptions seems a 
hopeless enterprise. 
 The history of discussion of G includes efforts to base it on foundationally 
approved propositions. Central among these propositions is one or another ver-
sion of a causal principle, such as: 
 1. 
Whatever has a beginning has a cause. 
 2. 
If X exists, might not have existed, and can be caused to exist, then X has a 
cause of existence. 
 3. 
There cannot be an inﬁ nite series of caused and causing beings. 
 Relative to foundationalism, the proposal is that 1–3 are self-evident. None of 
them appear to have self-contradictory denials. If so, then if they are necessary 
truths, they are informally necessary. The basic idea behind these claims is that 
nothing can come from nothing. Alternatively, no item can just pop into existence. 
The claim that something exists ﬁ ts into the “evident to the senses” basket if you 
think of perception and the “belief-entailed” basket if you think of introspection. 
Causal claims 1 and 3 are related in that both are relevant to whether the universe 
has a beginning. If 1 is to be used in a theistic argument, it must be supplemented. 
It is compatible with there being a beginningless series in which each item has a 
cause of existence. Thus it needs to be supplemented by something like 3. Claim 
2, as noted when we discussed the cosmological argument, is neutral as to whether 
the universe has a beginning. 

280 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
 There is another theistic argument that, in one version, involves probability. It 
is the argument from design. It can be stated in these terms. 
  1. Artifacts behave in particular, repeated ways that we can anticipate. (Evident 
to the senses) 
 2. Nature (or natural objects) behave in particular, repeated ways that we can 
anticipate. (Evident to the senses) 
 3. Artifacts have that feature due to being designed by intelligent agents. (We 
know this by having seen them made, so evident to the senses.) 
 Probably: 
  4. Natural objects have that feature due to being designed by one or more intel-
ligent agents. 
 5. 
Human intelligent agents did not design natural objects. 
 Probably: 
 6. 
One or more non-human intelligent agents designed natural objects. 
 The crucial issue regarding this argument concerns what justiﬁ cation there is for 
making the two probability inferences. One cannot claim to have observed any 
non-human agents design any natural objects, let alone universes. (The argument 
could be run by talking about an entire universe as well as by talking about natural 
objects.) There are lots of disanalogies between the two types of cases, and one 
who offers the argument will have to explain which are relevant and which are 
not, and then show that the relevant ones do hold between artifacts and natural 
objects. The conclusion is intended to concern only one designer, not many, and 
that must be justiﬁ ed (parsimony?). The list continues for some time, but ulti-
mately the fundamental issue comes down to the degree to which mechanistic 
versus personal explanation has a right to claim ultimacy, not to claims about 
self-evidence. 
 We have explored some of the territory surrounding attempts to be foundation-
alists in thinking about attempting to assess religious belief. The motivation is to 
escape skepticism and have beliefs that are certainly true or highly probable—
obviously of particular interest in the case of religious belief. Much of the history 
of attempts to do this, on both side of the fence, have followed this strategy. But 
the epistemic security of foundationalism itself is not great. It is not clear that it 
satisﬁ es the very criterion it offers for proper belief. It is time to consider a differ-
ent approach. We can do this by brieﬂ y considering two competing perspectives 
in the philosophy of science. 
 Conﬁ rmationism 
 The core of conﬁ rmation is the idea that the ability of a single proposition or a set 
of propositions S to explain some phenomena, the evidence for whose occurrence 

Faith and Reason 281
is strong, is a vote for S’s truth. This favorable consideration can be countered by 
equal consideration against, for example, discovery of a defect in the explanation, 
the presentation of competitive theory at least as well supported that also explain 
the phenomena, and so on. The need for a framework in which to continue to 
work can keep a theory aﬂ oat even if there is good reason to doubt it, at least until 
a better is offered, so as to have a framework within which to work. There is an 
apparent glaring weakness to conﬁ rmationism as so far described. The logical 
structure of the argument seems to be: 
  Theory T predicts (entails or makes probable) that if X is in circumstance C, 
then Y will occur. 
 In C, Y occurs. 
 Therefore, T is true or probably true. 
 Unfortunately, this is also the logical form of: 
 If I have a million dollars, then I have at least one dollar. 
 I have at least one dollar. 
 Therefore I have a million dollars. 
 This is a fallacy with a long and unsavory history that has earned it the name 
“fallacy of afﬁ rming the consequent” (the proposition that follows ‘then’). If 
that were part of a fair description of scientiﬁ c reasoning, science would not 
be a rational enterprise. Of course things are more complex. There are lots of 
explanatory theories that are non-starters. The explanation of a building falling 
is not that someone frowned at it. A theory has to pass muster in terms of being 
consistent with present knowledge. (This does not rule out new scientiﬁ c para-
digms, but these typically come when a deep ﬂ aw in current theory is discov-
ered  .) This requirement is typically implicit and automatically applied. Second, 
having passed this test, the theory must be such that if it is true, the phenomena 
it is offered to explain are in fact explained. Explanation is more than entail-
ment. That either three and seven are eleven or the water boils, and that three 
and seven are not eleven, entail that the water boils. It also offers no explanation 
whatever of the water boiling. Roughly, what connects the proposed explaining 
phenomenon PE and the phenomenon EP to be explained is a proposed law of 
the form  If PE then (at least probably) EP . The law must ﬁ t into the nexus of 
laws already accepted. Broadly stated, the reasoning is:  We have two theories, 
one that entails that in condition C, X will occur or will probably occur. The 
other entails that in C, X won’t or probably won’t occur. Both theories would ﬁ t 
into our scientiﬁ c picture of things. So we create condition C. If X occurs, the 
former theory is conﬁ rmed. If it does not, the latter theory is conﬁ rmed. Either 
way we have some reason to think that one of the theories is true. With apolo-
gies for this very general and rough account, it should at least be enough to 
indicate how inadequate the afﬁ rming the consequent account is as a statement 
of conﬁ rmationism. 

282 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
 A contrasting perspective is offered by falsiﬁ cationism. Falsiﬁ cationism shares 
with conﬁ rmationism the respect due to Modus Tollens, the argument form  If P 
then Q, and not-Q; then not-P . Finding a naturally black swan shows that the 
claim that all swans are white is false. Falsiﬁ cationism is more cautious about 
the force of the positive feature made central by conﬁ rmationism. Being able 
to explain a phenomenon is by itself not much to brag about. That the powerful 
leprechaun Queen of the Irish wanting it to be so might do nicely as an explana-
tion of there being many four-leaf clovers in Ireland, but it is unlikely to become 
a respected law in botany. Roughly, typically a plausible candidate for being a 
scientiﬁ c theory must ﬁ t into what is already established in the ﬁ eld to which it is 
relevant and be subject to the testing techniques currently available. It must have 
explanatory power relative to phenomena in the ﬁ eld in which it is offered. It 
must explain some phenomenon that is currently puzzling. The practice of offer-
ing deductive arguments is not much pursued in assessing explanations, though 
the question of what an explanation entails or makes probable in speciﬁ ed cir-
cumstances is central. Scope matters—the more phenomena that fall within the 
class of what the explanation gives plausible account, the better the explanation. 
The falsiﬁ cationalist is conservative in her claims. Suppose a theory has passed 
the primary elections, and there have been multiple attempts to falsify it, all of 
which have failed. So far, so good—other things being equal, we should include 
the theory in our tentative view of how the world is. Being strongly tested without 
falsiﬁ cation is the best we get in a theory so far as proof goes. The wider the range 
of phenomena a theory explains, and the more lower-level laws that fall under its 
laws, the more useful the theory is. But it is wisest to talk about one theory being 
better than another than to pronounce a conﬁ rmed theory true. Conﬁ rmation is 
essentially lack of disconﬁ rmation. 
 The point here is not to go on to argue for conﬁ rmationism or falsiﬁ cationism. 
It is rather to note the shift of procedure. The beginning is a description of some-
thing to be explained. The methods are similar if not identical. The conclusions 
are different—less or more conservative. The shift of focus to explanations is 
signiﬁ cant. The central question is not whether one or more propositions ﬁ t into 
one of four categories. Of course one could use only propositions that do so as 
providing conﬁ rmation or lack of disconﬁ rmation, but there is no inherent limita-
tion of this sort. 
 The falsiﬁ cations method suggests something like the following. A good theory 
is one that has explanatory power regarding some phenomenon we have good rea-
son to think exists, and has not been falsiﬁ ed after serious effort to do so. A theory 
has explanatory power relative to a phenomenon P only if, should the theory be 
true, it follows deductively that, or is probable that, P occurs. A theory with no 
explanatory power is not worth offering. Being conﬁ rmed is nothing more than 
having explanatory power and not having been falsiﬁ ed. If a theory has explana-
tory power, has not been falsiﬁ ed, and has no competitors with the same advan-
tages, it is reasonable to believe that theory. Two theories are competitive if one 
entails or makes probable that under the same experimental conditions something 
will happen and the other theory entails or makes probable that something else 

Faith and Reason 283
(including nothing) will happen. Conﬁ rmationism differs only in its view of the 
signiﬁ cance of true predictions. One signiﬁ cant feature of both perspectives is that 
the focus is on theory assessment, which allows for assessment of sets of related 
propositions. 
 Religious traditions are not usually thought of as constituted by theories. If one’s 
model for theories is scientiﬁ c theories, this is altogether understandable. But they 
are partly and signiﬁ cantly constituted by explanation of what they regard as data 
desperately needing attention and response. They ﬁ nd us all in dire straits due to 
circumstances they describe in such a way as to make the distraught see their own 
condition, and describe a way out of those straits. All of this amounts to the core 
of a view of the world into which the relevant diagnosis and cure ﬁ t well, as they 
should as the worldview in part is developed from the content of the diagnosis 
and cure themselves. Thus religions centrally contain theories. Arguments for and 
against religious views often appeal to what are proposed as counter-examples 
to the core views of a tradition. Arguments for religious views often begin with 
phenomena that are viewed as well known and asserted to be well explained by 
the view. Monotheistic arguments from there being something rather than noth-
ing, dependent things, moral values, natural order, and the like, are easily cast as 
arguments to best explanation. The varieties of arguments from evil are obviously 
falsiﬁ cations in structure. Judgments regarding the reasonability of holding par-
ticular religious beliefs rest in part on the perceived results of such applications of 
conﬁ rmationism and falsiﬁ cationism. 
 Consider the doctrine of the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. There 
are at least ﬁ ve layers of claim here. One is that Jesus was an historical person 
who lived in the historical setting and time frame ascribed to him in the Gospels. 
The second is that he was cruciﬁ ed, dead, and buried. The third is that on the 
third day, his dead body returned to life. The fourth is that God caused this to 
happen. The ﬁ fth is that this event evidences the status of Jesus Christ as Jewish 
Messiah and Son of God. Each level is presupposed by the next highest. Each 
level that has a preceding level depends on it. Historical evidence is required, 
available, and disputed, for the ﬁ rst- and second-level claims. When we come to 
the third through ﬁ fth level we have a clear example of religious claims to which 
historical considerations are relevant. From a secular perspective, and from many 
religious perspectives, these claims have no plausibility. This would be expected 
from non-theistic views, secular and religious, since levels three through ﬁ ve are 
intimately connected in Christian theology. The doctrines are also rejected by 
Judaism and Islam. From a Christian perspective, while a resurrection claim about 
the Roman ofﬁ cial Pilate would have a plausibility rating about that assigned to 
the resurrection of Jesus from secular and non-theistic viewpoints, it makes an 
enormous difference when the claim is made concerning Jesus, given the (con-
tested) data we have concerning his life, teachings, and claims. There is thus a 
cluster of inter-related claims involved in the doctrine of the resurrection. There is 
the further claim that we are free moral agents, with disagreement as to whether 
we have compatibilist or libertarian freedom, and the further teaching that we are 
all sinners, morally wrong actions being violations of God’s law. Thus we need to 

284 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
repent and ask for God’s forgiveness, which is freely offered. Thus moral claims are 
added to historical claims as well as metaphysical claims starting with theism itself. 
The claims are interconnected and whether they are thought of as constituting an 
explanation, they are, if true, explanatory of much of the human condition and the 
prospects of its radically changing. The descriptions of the phenomena for which 
explanation is offered must be made carefully. Strictly, sin is falling short of divine 
requirements, so if sin occurs, then God exists. So the relevant phenomena must be 
described as morally wrong actions. That assumes that there is objective morality. 
Like other religious traditions, Christianity centers around a small number of claims 
that have wide metaphysical content and yet are focused on human salvation. 
 The Buddha is not related to Buddhism as Christ is to Christianity. Strictly, in 
the earlier parts of the complex tradition, the Buddha is a crucial ﬁ gure because he 
found the path to enlightenment, fully followed it, and left the description with his 
followers. The texts recording this are viewed as authoritative because the Bud-
dha was reporting his own experience and reciting a path that others could follow. 
Strictly, then, someone else following the prescribed path could have reached 
the same goal, and have recorded the prescription, and played a similar role had 
the Buddha not done so. But if one takes into account the history of Buddhism’s 
developing doctrine regarding the Buddha, this scenario becomes less and less 
a possibility. In Theravada, we have a world in which everything is ephemeral 
save for nirvana, while in Mahayana Absolutism we have a view quite similar to 
Advaita. Whatever the sociological and psychological effects would be, at least 
were there good reasons to doubt that there was an historical ﬁ gure, it would be 
logically possible that Theravada Buddhism be true. What the actual effect on 
the tradition would be is another matter beyond our argument. (No suggestion 
is being made that there was not an historical Buddha. The point I am making 
concerns the logic—in the strict sense—of early Buddhist thought.) There is the 
assertion that suffering—unsatisfactoriness in life—has its source in our attach-
ments to this life and its contents. There is, as we have seen, a path described, 
the following of which will lead to release from attachments. These themes are 
woven into a metaphysic that includes reincarnation, karma, and a view of per-
sons in which they are one time stage after another, each momentary stage ﬁ lled 
by collections of physical and mental states, or just mental states. The fact that life 
is often, or at least seems to be, unsatisfactory is indisputable. The Buddhist view 
is that it is sufﬁ ciently so to make its end desirable. This is, as we have seen, a 
common theme in Indian philosophy, accompanied by the view that there is a state 
into which entry, of oneself or what there was of oneself, is far better. 
 Jainism is not a theistic religion and it does not ascribe to Mahavira properties 
similar to Catholic saints or God, save as he, like all enlightened Jains, is viewed as 
immortal and omniscient. Self-awareness is regarded as self-evidence so far as the 
existence of an enduring subject possessed of mental properties goes but it leaves 
out the part about immateriality, immortality, and omniscience. This further infor-
mation is regarded as crucial features in escaping samsara, the cycle of rebirth. 

Faith and Reason 285
 While it is not obvious, it is true that that the central disagreement between 
Jainism and Buddhism concerns a philosophical dispute much discussed in con-
temporary metaphysics. The topic for our purposes concerns persons. Consider 
Geisha, who exists for 2 million seconds. For endurantism, all of Geisha is present 
at each of those seconds. For perdurantism, a time slice of Geisha is present—a 
temporally minimal bit that joins one million nine hundred thousand nine hun-
dred ninety-nine more bits in a series. As is obvious, Jainism is endurantist and 
much of the Buddhist tradition is perdurantist. The arguments for and against 
these philosophical views are very relevant to the Jain and Buddhist doctrines. 
In addition, there are two views of time. One is the A-series perspective. The key 
temporal relations are past, present, and future. Time ﬂ ows—an event that occurs 
now becomes past and what was present is replaced by the future. The other is a 
B-series view. The key temporal relations are before and after. One is to think of 
time as very much analogous to space. Think of a very long ﬁ lm strip stretched 
out full length, each frame representing one massive event (the state of things 
that obtain or exist at that slice of time). The frame goes on and on spatially, and 
as one observes the time slices, the ones that one viewed before remain in their 
place. Nothing goes out of existence. What happens is that as you observe, say, an 
Olympics race, the race is represented only in a limited number of frames so that 
as you move forward you move beyond the frame that represents the end of the 
race. Every thing that ever exists, every event that ever happens, also is there in its 
time frame, and the frames never go out of existence. Every time frame’s contents 
are as real as every other’s. Nero ﬁ ddles as Rome burns, Buzz Aldrin walks on the 
moon, cell phones are invented, Abraham Lincoln is elected president, and you 
take your ﬁ rst step—these contents of really existing time frames represent things 
that exist with tenure. Now end the story with two revisions. The time frames 
are really times, and there is no human observer. The view is neither theistic or 
non-theistic. Suppose that the B-series view of time is true. Then if Geisha exists 
for many lifetimes, Geisha still lingers in those unenlightened moments. Geisha 
still steals if he ever stole, and still saves a life if he ever saved a life. The Buddha 
still leaves wealth and comfort to seek enlightenment and still sits under the tree 
where he is believed to have been enlightened. So there is always a part of the 
Buddha that remains ever unenlightened. Mahavira still is enlightened as he still 
seeks enlightenment, though at different times, some before and some after each 
other. There is no past that falls away and no future that comes to pass. All of it, 
so to speak, is always there. 
 There are some interesting issues if either Jainism or Buddhism were to 
embrace the view that the B-series is right. In one respect, it is easier for much of 
the Buddhist tradition to do so, since on its view a person is a series of ephemeral 
bundles. A consequence of this Buddhist view, with or without a B-series view, is 
that nothing suffers or ﬁ nds life unsatisfactory for more than a moment. Even the 
worst suffering accompanied by a memory of equally bad misery comes in very 
short bits. One can argue that on this view there is little motivation to care more 

286 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
about the bundles that occur some many thousands of bundles later in one’s own 
series than one does about what happens thousands of bundles later in another 
series, and so leads to greater compassion. There is of course another way of 
viewing things. An equally possible result is the one not care about either. There 
is also the emphasis on lack of attachment. One is supposed to do one’s charity 
without emotional investment in the outcome, and there is the short duration any 
one bundle exists to experience whatever degree of satisfactoriness or unsatisfac-
toriness occurs. The B-series ﬁ ts very naturally with the bundle series in a manner 
that makes it quite dubious that it be acceptable to Jainism. There is a further con-
sequence that is unfortunate from either a Jain or (much of) the Buddhist tradition. 
Consider a seeker for either Jain or Buddhist enlightenment to have lived many 
lifetimes. Suppose our seeker lives a thousand lives in the reincarnation-karma 
cycle. On a B-series view, every second of those lifetimes is written in stone in 
the tenured status of the pastless, presentless, futureless universe. Unless the Bud-
dhist downplays the signiﬁ cance of the suffering of one bundle after another, the 
idea that reaching nirvana leaves all the bundles permanently in one unsatisfac-
tory condition after another, unendingly. There is no remedy for them. Assuming 
that a B-series view requires a time slice view of persons—that a person-slice in 
time slice T1 cannot be numerically identical to a person-slice in time slice T2—
then the consequence would be the same for Jainism after the core Jain doctrine 
regarding persons has been abandoned. But if the B-series view does require a 
time-slice view of persons, Jainism is logically incompatible with that view of 
time. 
 The point here has not been to argue for or against part of the Jain or part of the 
Buddhist tradition, but rather to point out some connections between doctrines of 
religious traditions and disputes in contemporary philosophy. These connections 
refute facile assumptions that religious traditions are immune to philosophical 
assessment, positive and negative. 
 Advaita is theistic in its view of what holds at the level of appearance and 
non-theistic concerning the level of reality. Shankara no more exists as a dis-
tinct individual who transcends appearance than anyone else. The same holds 
for gods, goddesses, and God. Even if one showed that the account of the 
world as the level of appearance was riddled with contradictions, there would 
remain what Shankara in his description of the level of appearance regards 
as an intractable fact—the existence of a subject who discovers and displays 
the contradictions. The Advaita view of the level of reality is reminiscent of 
the radical view that what there is “under” or “beyond” our conceptions of a 
world already ﬁ lled with distinct items is an unindividuated “stuff” and that 
“our world” or “the external world”—made, not discovered, by us. The rough 
idea is that the ultimate stuff of the world can be “cut up or divided” into 
various ontologies—various objects in various relations, various worlds of 
perceptual content. Ultimate reality itself escapes us save for the knowledge 
given in enlightenment experience. There is plenty of discussion in the context 
of Indian philosophy, even within the Vedantic tradition. Another Vedantin, a 
following of Madhva who with Shankara and Ramanuja are central ﬁ gures in 

Faith and Reason 287
monistic (Shankara) and theistic (Ramanuja and Madhva) Vedantic tradition, 
is also an impressive critic of Advaita. Vadiraja offers this argument, which is 
a more detailed version of a criticism offered earlier. Advaita’s core doctrine is 
the identity of every Atman with Brahman, the latter being construed as undif-
ferentiated blissful consciousness. There seems to be a world of objects and 
persons, and even God, but this is the way that Brahman appears rather than 
really is. According to Advaita, each Atman (the Atman is real) is associated 
with a jiva, a mind and body that seems to experience the world we all seem to 
experience. This experience gives us illusions. It is “within” this illusory world 
that suffering occurs and the reincarnation and karma cycle “occurs.” This jiva, 
with its experiences, will cease forever upon enlightenment. The Atman then 
will no longer seem to be distinct from Brahman. One problem is that to seem 
to suffer is to suffer. (For Dvatin   Vedantan   Madhva there is no undifferentiated 
Brahman, but instead there is a personal God. There is no Atman in the Advaita 
sense, but instead there are real jivas, which are what gets enlightened.) The 
criticism is simple. The jiva is unreal and hence cannot have experiences. In 
the Advaitan view, there are only Atman and Brahman left, and they are iden-
tical. One can approach the issue in either of two ways. Going from Atman 
to Brahman, since Brahman cannot experience appearances, the Atman does 
the experiencing of appearances and hence is distinct from Brahman after all. 
Going from Brahman to Atman, Brahman cannot experience appearances, and 
since Atman is all that is left to have them, and hence must have them, Atman 
cannot be identical to Brahman or there cannot be a level of appearance. This 
is part of a long history of philosophical dialogue within Vedantin traditions 
that provides ample evidence that assessment of religious traditions is avail-
able in philosophy. The same holds for the rich philosophical traditions found 
in Buddhism. (There is also the fact that the philosophy/religion distinction is 
not traditionally Indian.) 
 Enlightenment traditions in effect treat what is, on their views, regarded as 
revealed by enlightenment experience as self-evident. Self-evidence does not 
merely mean, though it typically includes, being impossible for the subject not 
to believe. It includes the subject being entirely justiﬁ ed in accepting what is 
revealed in the experience (a revelation without a revealer in our non-theistic 
traditions). Each tradition, and each sub-tradition, has its own closely related 
cluster of doctrines, mutually related and aimed at a speciﬁ able end. They deﬁ ne 
at least part of a worldview. They include claims as to what, if anything, exists 
independently of everything else (is existentially dependent on nothing),what the 
fundamental kinds of things in the world are, what (if anything) is the meaning 
of life, what future (if any) awaits persons, what (if any) fundamental religious 
problem we all face, and what (if any) solution there is to it. There are views as 
to what is and isn’t without beginning and what does and does not have an end-
ing; what is morally positive and what is morally negative. While obviously it is 
possible to consider their constitutive propositions, one can also view them as a 
whole. As assessment that does both is most informative concerning the object of 
assessment. 

288 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
 The fact, then, is that religious traditions are subject to philosophical assess-
ment. We have tried to offer various examples of this, the bulk of which are taken 
from arguments actually given by proponents and critics of the religious traditions 
discussed. This completes our agenda—our argument that religious traditions are 
not safely walled off from rational assessment. Religious faith is not inherently 
unreasonable. The practice of accepting religious doctrines and living the lifestyle 
associated with them, accompanied by worship and trust of God in the monothe-
istic traditions, is reasonable to the degree that the doctrines are rational to accept. 
The process of trying to discover that regarding one or more traditions is complex. 
But there are religious truth-claims to assess and a long history of examples from 
which to learn. 
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
 1. 
Distinguish between ‘faith that’ and ‘faith in.’ 
 2. 
What sort of faith is possible in a nonmonotheistic religious tradition? 
 3. 
Is it possible for a person to have faith in even if he has excellent reason 
for faith that? 
 4. 
What new possibilities does the notion of “argument to best explana-
tion” introduce into the discussion in philosophy of religion? 
 5. 
Is the thesis that theories of meaning for which apparent claims central 
to religious traditions are neither true nor false, and hence not claims at 
all, at least insofar as they are discussed in this chapter, in fact failures 
to be true or false on their own terms? 
 Notes 
  1.  This was the verdict of Logical Positivism, which was highly inﬂ uential in its long heyday, 
roughly from the 1930s through the 1960s. Its classic expression came in A. J. Ayer (1952) 
 Language, Truth, and Logic (New York: Dover). It was originally published in 1936. 
  2.  Two sources of perspectives on the alleged problem of religious language are Ronald 
E. Santoni, ed. (1968)  Religious Language and the Problem of Religious Knowledge 
(Indiana) and William P. Alston (1989)  Divine Nature and Human Language: Essays in 
Philosophical Theology (Ithaca, NY: Cornell). 
 3. God and Other Minds  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell, 1990—Sec. Ed.), Chapter Seven, provided 
a powerful 1967 response to Logical Positivism. No doubt it played a role in the almost 
universal demise of the view. 
 4. Available in many editions, it was published in parts from 1738–1740 and has become 
a classic empiricist text. 
 5. See Alston, William P. “Ineffability,”  Philosophical Review , Vol. 65, No. 4, 1956, 
pp. 506–522 for a good discussion of ineffability. Written in dialogue form, this essay 
probes various ways in which ineffabilist theses can be developed; each is found inad-
equate. 
 6. W. K. Clifford (1999)  The Ethics of Belief and Other Essays  (Amherst, NY: Pro-
metheus). This book was originally published in 1947. 

Faith and Reason 289
 Suggested Readings 
 Audi, Robert (2011)  Rationality and Religious Commitment  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press). An account of rationality followed by faith as an attitude including but not reduc-
ible to belief and conduct, with moral, political, social, and aesthetic dimensions of 
life; closes with a discussion of natural and moral evil and an account of the nature of 
persons. 
 Callahan, Laura Frances and O’Connor, Timothy, eds. (2014)  Religious Faith and 
Intellectual Virtue  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Various questions are raised 
as to whether, and if so how, one’s religious faith can be compatible with intellectual 
virtue in some defensible sense of the latter—e.g., can belief without evidence so 
count (cf. Reformed Epistemology)? 
 Evans, C. Stephen (1998)  Faith Beyond Reason: A Kierkegaardian Account  (Grand Rap-
ids, MI: Eerdmans). A presentation of three kinds of “responsible ﬁ deism” favoring 
Kierkegaardian ﬁ deism, which is in part characterized by reason justifying a view of its 
own limitations. 
 Helm, Paul, ed. (1999)  Faith and Reason  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). A superbly 
wide-ranging selection from the classical period through the twentieth century—unlike 
any other in print. 
 Mavrodes, George, ed. (1970)  The Rationality of Belief in God  (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall). A good collection of essays on the reasonableness of monotheistic belief. 
 Mitchell, Basil (1981)  The Justiﬁ cation of Religious Belief  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press). A clear presentation of the cumulative-case argument for monotheism. 
 Penelhum, Terence (1983)  God and Skepticism  (Dordrecht: D. Reidel). Clear discussion of 
monotheism and skepticism about monotheism. 
 Swinburne, Richard (1981)  Faith and Reason  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
A detailed account of faith and reason by a philosopher who thinks that one ought to 
have reasons for one’s religious beliefs. 
 Wilkens, Steven, ed. (2014)  Faith and Reason: Three Views (Downers Grove, IL: IVP 
Academic). Reason and faith in tension, cooperation, and subordination. 
 Yandell, Keith E. (1986)  Christianity and Philosophy  (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans). 
A systematic exploration of issues relevant to monotheistic belief.    

 16  Some Further Vistas 
 Much of contemporary epistemology is divided into two camps regarding knowl-
edge. One, called internalism, holds that for a person to know something she must 
be in possession of some consideration favoring its truth—that it is self-evident, 
evident to the senses, follows from propositions from one or both of these cat-
egories, is made highly probable by data known to be sound (in which case it is 
known to be highly probably true), is plain to introspection, or the like. The other, 
called externalism, holds that in order for a person to know some proposition to 
be true, his belief must have been caused in the proper way. The former position, 
allowing self-evidence to count as evidence, is properly thought of as eviden-
tialist. The latter is not. Not surprisingly, both views are taken toward proposed 
religious knowledge. Neither requires that a known religious truth be a necessary 
truth, any more than a known truth about apples must be a necessary truth. The 
natural thing to think about when one turns to the idea of a religious internal-
ist evidentialist is the theistic arguments, and we have considered that approach. 
A different approach from this is offered by Paul Moser, who offers a particularly 
clear appeal to moral experience as evidence for monotheistic belief. It is perhaps 
equally natural to expect a religious externalist non-evidentialist to favor ﬁ de-
ism, the view that belief in God is to be held without, and perhaps without any 
consideration of, evidence. This is held to be true of the reformed epistemology 
of Alvin Plantinga. Moser and Plantinga are the most inﬂ uential proponents of 
their particular views, and it is to those views we now turn. Each is sensitive to 
the issue of evidence contrary to Christian belief, which is their common interest. 
Moser holds that the explanation of the sort of experience that he makes central is 
that it is caused by God must be at least as reasonable as any competitive expla-
nation, and Plantinga holds that the belief (religious or not) that is caused in the 
proper manner is knowledge only if it faces no undefeated defeater (no contrary 
evidence that is not successfully rebutted. These are not typical ﬁ deist views. That 
said, we turn to their positive presentations. While both philosophers are Chris-
tian, a non-Christian monotheist could accept at least much of their perspectives. 
Many moral realists are not Christians. The status of properly basic belief can be 
assigned and defended for other beliefs besides Christian ones. There are multiple 
religious doxastic practices. 

Some Further Vistas 291
 Moser 1 
 Moser notes that the arguments of natural theology such as we have considered 
earlier, whatever else their merits or defects, share the common feature that one 
can follow them and, even if one accepts them, respond with indifference. One 
can take the attitude that, at least for now, one has answered one of a great many 
philosophical questions, and turn to whatever is next on one’s list. Basing his 
view on his reading of Biblical texts, he holds that God is little if any interested in 
one’s ability to answer a true-false question  Does God exist?  on an examination. 
He proposes moral experience, particularly the sense of an obligation to act or not 
act in a certain manner, as the focal point of religious experience. In such experi-
ence, one has a sense, which Moser regards as veridical, of being encountered by 
a personal will other than one’s own. While the subject of such an experience may 
not think of its apparent object in strictly monotheistic terms, feeling an obligation 
to act favorably to its content is, in Moser’s view, the beginning of a reasonable 
faith. This requires a belief in objective morality—an acceptance of moral truths 
not simply based on conventions we have adopted. (Alternatively, it could be used 
as part of a case for moral objectivity.) Moral experiences Moser takes to provide 
evidence for and knowledge that God exists. His view raises issues discussed 
previously concerning monotheism and religious experience. 
 Plantinga 2 
 A properly basic belief is one reasonably held without deriving it from some 
other belief. Examples are memory beliefs, introspective reports, and statements 
about one’s physical environment. Such beliefs make use of clusters of concepts 
related to those used forming the beliefs—that there is a past, a self, an external 
world, for example. Plantinga’s suggestion is that belief in God is a properly 
basic belief. This ties into his externalist account of knowledge. It comes along 
with its own bit of natural theology. Plantinga develops a cluster of concepts 
relevant to his non-evidentialist externalism as follows. We come to form beliefs, 
and thus we have a belief-forming mechanism. A belief-forming mechanism has 
the function of forming beliefs of a certain kind, description of which will vary 
from theory to theory. The term ‘function’ here is used neutrally as to whether 
having a function is built into what has it by a designer—atheists and theists can 
agree that it is the function of the heart to pump blood. According to evolution-
ary theory, Plantinga argues, it is the function of our belief-forming mechanism 
to deliver beliefs that promote survival, whether they are true or not. Plantin-
ga’s claim is that for your typical survival scenario—a tiger has you in mind for 
lunch—there are ever so many more false beliefs that will promote survival than 
there are true ones. For example, believing that tigers love to play games with 
humans but play too roughly, that the tiger is a human enemy in disguise, that 
the tiger’s presence is a sign of enemy activity in the neighborhood, and so on. 
In Plantinga’s view, if God created our belief-forming mechanism, it would be 
aimed at true belief. Hence, on theistic assumptions, we are the more reasonable 

292 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
in accepting our beliefs. The point here in adding this feature of Plantinga’s view 
is not to argue for or against it. It has the dual purpose of noting a different sort of 
natural theology argument than the ontological and cosmological arguments, and 
correspondingly a new range of issues regarding its success, and of indicating 
more fully what his actual view is. If Plantinga is right, for example, the theist 
is more reasonable in believing pure evolutionary theory, simply as a theory in 
biology and without its frequently added metaphysical assumptions, than is the 
atheist. His account of knowledge goes as follows. If a person forms a belief 
due to her belief-forming mechanism, which is aimed at truth, functioning in an 
environment in which it functions well, the belief is true, and the belief faces no 
undefeated defeater, then the person has knowledge. Note that this is not offered 
as an independent test for knowledge—it cannot be since it requires that the rel-
evant belief be true. Insofar as it favors Plantinga’s own religious views, it does 
so to the degree that this is true: if the monotheist’s belief is true, then if it is 
properly caused and faces no undefeated defeaters (no evidence that is unrebut-
ted) it is knowledge.  
 Alston 3 
 A third alternative is offered by William Alston. He makes the notion of a dox-
astic (belief-forming) practice central to his account in the sense that it is focus 
of assessment, not particular beliefs. The idea is that a community or culture will 
have belief-forming practices. An obvious example is sensory practice. We form 
beliefs about our observable physical environment, learning to do so from very 
early life. We learn what sorts of behavior are approved or disapproved, what 
sort of activity yields foodstuff, what sorts of economic doings are available, and 
so on, and thus acquire beliefs about these matters. There will also be religious 
belief-forming practices. A belief-forming practice will have at its core some set 
of fundamental beliefs assumed by those who follow it—for example, the belief 
in the mind-independent physical environment. Another example is belief in some 
sort of spiritual environment. Monotheists assume that God exists and come to 
have beliefs as to how God relates to the world. Since there are competing spiritual 
as well as other sorts of practices, the question arises as to how to compare them, 
if one can, in terms of their success. One question here concerns the consistency 
(lack of contradiction), coherence (mutual relevance), and empirical ﬁ t (accuracy 
to the content of relevant experience) of the comprising core beliefs. Another is 
the ability to change in response to new situations and accommodate new infor-
mation and intrusions into the culture. Another is success at furthering survival 
and adequate living standard measured in some defensible manner. One result of 
this approach is to greatly broaden the considerations relevant to assessment of 
religious beliefs. It raises such questions as these, among many others: If one set 
of beliefs grounds a practice that serves a better life for its practitioners than does 
another, assuming some objective standard for being a better life, is this reason to 
think the former more likely true? Are there objective standards for being a better 
life? Is adaptability to new information a reliable guide to truth? Does adaptability 

Some Further Vistas 293
mean more than simple logical consistency, and if so what more? These are only 
a few of the issues that Alston’s suggestion raises. 
 Questions for Reﬂ ection 
  1. 
Is Moser’s Internalist Evidentialism appeal to moral experience as evi-
dence self-standing or in need of appeal to argument for an objective 
morality? 
 2. 
Is Plantinga right that at least typically there will be more false sur-
vival-promoting beliefs than true? 
 3. Is an internalist or an externalist account of moral knowledge more 
defensible? 
 4. 
Would the result of using Alston’s sort of approach be a focus on justi-
ﬁ able belief in a sense relatively unrelated to true belief (contrary to its 
author’s intent), and would it (equally against its author’s intent) lead 
to an incoherent conceptual relativism? 
 5. Can Alston’s suggestion be well integrated with either or both of the 
perspectives sketched just before it? 
 Notes 
  1.  Moser, Paul K. (2009)  The Evidence for God: Religious Knowledge Reexamined (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press). Presents the view that the evidence for God’s exist-
ence comes in personal terms in moral experience rather than in third-person evidence 
that leaves the subject unchallenged to change her life and commitments. 
 2. Plantinga, Alvin (2000)  Warranted Christian Belief  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
The deﬁ nitive statement of his externalist epistemology of Christian belief. 
 3. Alston, William P. (1993)  Perceiving God  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell). A thorough presenta-
tion and defense of Alston’s religious epistemology for which it is possible to experi-
ence God, set in the context of a successful belief-forming practice. It still sets the 
standard. 
 Suggested Readings 
 Beilby, James (2002)  Naturalism Defeated?  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell). Plantinga’s argument 
against the combination of naturalism and evolutionary theory is self-defeating is sub-
jected to scrutiny by a large number of philosophers. 
 Moser, Paul K. (2013)  The Severity of God: Religion and Philosophy Reconceived (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press). Argues that while God’s gift of love is free, its 
reception involves stress and severity. 
 Plantinga, Alvin (2015)  Knowledge and Christian Belief  (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans). 
A popular version of  Warranted Christian Belief . 

294 Religion, Morality, Faith, and Reason
 Schellenberg, J. L. (2015)  The Hiddenness Argument: Philosophy’s New Challenge to 
Belief in God  (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Presents Schellenberg’s anti-theistic 
argument in its most streamlined and persuasive terms. 
 Tooley, Michael and Plantinga, Alvin (2008)  Knowledge of God (Oxford: Wiley-Black-
well). A high-level debate between an articulate non-believer and an articulate believer.   

 Glossary 
 This glossary deﬁ nes some key philosophical and religious terms, giving them the sense 
they bear when used in this book. Not all of these terms, however, always have the same 
sense when they appear in other publications, and thus there is no claim that the deﬁ nitions 
provided here are always inclusive. 
 Advaita (non-dual) Vedanta —the monistic religious tradition whose roots lie in the 
Vedas (Hindu Scriptures) and hold that all pluralism of objects, properties, and relations 
belong to how things appear rather than how they are 
  Alston’s doxastic practice epistemology  —the view that belief-forming practices are basic 
in the formation of religious belief and also in questions of the reasonability of such belief  
 appearance —the ways things seem 
 argument —a set of claims (premises) from which another claim (the conclusion) is sup-
posed to follow in such a way that evidence has been provided for the conclusion’s truth 
  argument to best explanation  —reasoning in favor of the explanation of a phenomenon 
being the truth of some proposition or propositions offered 
 basic belief —a belief not based on propositional evidence 
 Brahman (with qualities) —God in Hindu philosophy and most forms of Hinduism 
 bundle —a collection of causally linked qualities or states 
 bundle reductionism  —the view that a bundle is neither more nor less than its composing 
members 
 bundle theory  —the view of persons on which a person at a time is a collection of momen-
tary states and over time is a series of such collections 
 categorical system  —an integrated set of claims composed of propositions formed by the 
use of categories 
 category —basic concept 
 causally necessary being —a being the existence of which cannot be caused 
 Christianity —a monotheistic religious tradition, the roots of which lie in Judaism and that 
afﬁ rms the deity, cruciﬁ xion, and resurrection of Jesus Christ 

296 Glossary
 compatibilism —the view that even if determinism is true, we are responsible for our 
actions 
 compatibilist freedom —the sort of freedom one can have if determinism is true 
 cosmological argument —an argument to the effect that there being things that might 
never have existed and/or depend for existence on something else is best explained by 
reference to a being that cannot depend on anything else and has the power to create them; 
more brieﬂ y stated, an argument intended to prove that God is the sufﬁ cient cause of the 
world 
 counter-example —an example whose existence is incompatible with the truth of a 
proposal 
 creator —a being in virtue of whose activity there exists a world of things that might not 
have existed 
 criterion  —a measure by which to determine distinct types by reference to a tradition’s 
doctrines regarding diagnosis and cure 
 cure —the teaching of a religious tradition as to the means of curing the spiritual disease 
it posits 
 descriptive religious pluralism —the view that religious traditions differ by way of offer-
ing incompatible teachings 
 determinism —the view that the past determines a particular unique future 
 diagnosis —the teaching of a religious tradition as to the universal spiritual disease it is the 
religion’s purpose to cure 
 doctrine —a teaching propounded by a religious tradition as part of its diagnosis or cure 
 doxastic practice —a procedure or method of belief-formation, in particular when it is 
embedded in a group 
  empiricist theory of meaning  —the view that a non-deﬁ nitional proposal is true or 
false only if it can in principle be conﬁ rmed or disconﬁ rmed by sensory or introspective 
experience 
 enlightenment experience —an experience in which one cognitively and existen-
tially recognizes the truth of the core doctrines of one’s religious tradition and escapes 
reincarnation  
 enlightenment requirement —that if person A begins to seek enlightenment at T and ﬁ nds 
it at time T, then the ﬁ nder at T must be metaphysically identical to A 
 enlightenment-based argument —an argument based on an enlightenment experience 
 Euthyphro dilemma —either God decides what has value arbitrarily, or what has value 
has it independent of divine choice 
  evidential problem of evil  —the claim that the existence of evil is evidence against the 
existence of God 
 evidentialism —the view that in order to know that a proposition is true one must believe 
it in the light of evidence for it (allowing for self-evidence to count) 

Glossary 297
 externalism —the view that in order to know a proposition is true one’s belief that the 
proposition is true must have been caused in right manner 
 faith  —the acceptance of religious doctrine and the endeavor to live in accord with it; an 
essential element in faith is trust if the doctrine claims the existence of a cosmic person 
 faith in —personal trust 
 formal logical necessity  —a proposition is formally necessary if and only if its denial is 
formally contradictory, as is any proposition of the form [P and not-P] 
 free will defense  —the claim that at least much of the evil that exists is due to the free 
choices of agents, the value or whose existence as such counterbalances or outweighs the 
evil that they do 
 God —an omnipotent, omniscient, perfectly good being who creates the world 
 Greek monotheism —a set of ideas collected from Plato and Aristotle that view God as 
eternal, designer rather than creator, without providential rule over the world 
 Hindu monotheism —a variety of monotheism that holds that God everlasting creates 
the world, that reincarnation doctrine is true, and that salvation comes when one has an 
enlightenment experience 
 incompatibilism —the view that responsibility and determinism cannot coexist 
 indeterminism —the denial of determinism 
 ineffable —not describable, altogether beyond our concepts 
 informal logical necessity —a proposition is informally logically necessary if it is logi-
cally necessary (there are no possible conditions under which it would be false) but not 
formally logically necessary (it is not of the form  P and not-P  and it entails no proposition 
of this form);  If William draws a rectangle then William draws a ﬁ gure  is informally logi-
cally necessary 
 inner-directed experience —an experience in which it at least seems to the subject that she 
is aware of something not distinct from and not independent of herself 
 Islam  —a religious tradition that is monotheistic, holding that God gave a revelation to 
Mohammed in Arabic, the Koran, through which it interprets the Christian and Jewish Bibles  
 Jainism —an atheistic religious tradition that has its roots in the Jaina Sutras (Jain scrip-
tures) and teaches that there are two kinds of substance, mental and physical, the mental 
ones being persons (jivas) 
 Judaism —a monotheistic religious tradition holding that God gave the law to Moses and 
called Abraham and made him the father of a chosen people; its sacred scriptures, the 
Hebrew Bible, includes the books of the Christian Old Testament. 
 karma —the doctrine of karma claims that one receives good consequences for good 
actions and bad consequences for bad actions, some of the consequences typically coming 
in a different lifetime than the deed from which they arise 
 kevala —Jain enlightenment experience in which one is said to recognize that one is 
distinct from and independent of one’s body and unlimited in knowledge and escapes 
reincarnation  

298 Glossary
 libertarian freedom  —freedom to act in alternative ways, or to act or not act in a given 
way, on an actual condition of choice and not merely were things otherwise 
 libertarianism —the view that we have freedom of choice, and that compatibilism and 
determinism are false 
  logical problem of evil  —the claim that the existence of God and the existence of evil are 
logically incompatible 
 logically necessary being —a being that exists under all possible conditions and so cannot 
not exist 
 memory requirement  —that if person A remembers doing (seeing . . .) X then A must be 
metaphysically identical to the one who did (saw . . .) X 
 (metaphysical) personal identity —the non-conventional identity of a person at a time or 
over time 
 metaphysical value —the intrinsic worth a thing has due simply to its nature 
 moksha —Advaita enlightenment experience in which one is said to recognize one’s iden-
tity with qualityless Brahman 
 monism —the view that the number of things there are is exactly between none and two 
 monotheism —the view that there exists one God, in contrast to atheism, which holds 
that there is no God, and polytheism, which holds that there are many gods but not one 
God  
 moral value  —the dignity or worth inherent in being a self-conscious libertarianly free 
agent capable of making choices that are right or wrong 
 Moser’s moral evidentialism —the view that moral experience of obligation is experience 
of God and that those who respond afﬁ rmatively to its challenge at least begin a positive 
relationship with God 
 (Nirguna) Brahman —the qualityless one thing there is 
 nirvana  —Buddhist enlightenment experience in which one is said to recognize that one is 
merely a bundle of momentary states and achieves a condition that guarantees ﬁ nal nirvana 
at the end of one’s current reincarnation 
  non-dualist view of experience  —all experience that is of subject-consciousness-object or 
subject-consciousness structure is in error 
 normative religious pluralism —a view as to what to do about the fact that descriptive 
religious pluralism is true if one simply takes religious traditions as they stand—namely to 
understand the doctrines of the traditions non-literally  
 omnipotent —able to do anything that is not logically impossible 
 omniscient —knowing with regard to every proposition whether it is true or false 
 Ontological Argument —a line of reasoning intended to prove that God exists under all 
possible conditions 
 outer-directed experience —an experience in which it at least seems to the subject that she 
is aware of something distinct from and independent of herself 

Glossary 299
 phenomenological description —a description of an experience based on the way things 
at least appear to the subject 
 Plantinga’s reformed epistemology —the view that belief in God is properly basic and 
can be knowledge if it is caused in the right way and true 
 possible world —a total way a world might be 
  principle of experiential evidence  —a criterion by which one can judge whether or not an 
experience is evidence for a claim 
 principle of sufﬁ cient reason  —a proposition to the effect that whatever exists and can 
have a cause does have one 
 proposition  —a proposition is anything that is either true or false; we use declarative sen-
tences to express propositions, but the same proposition can be expressed by using differ-
ent strings of words in one or more languages, so propositions are not sentences 
 providential —involving divine foresight or intervention especially in inﬂ uencing the 
course of history 
 reality —the way things are 
 reincarnation  —the series of birth after birth of every person that has no beginning and, 
without enlightenment, has no end 
 religious faith that —acceptance of a proposition due to acceptance of a religious 
authority  
 Semitic monotheism —a variety of monotheism including Judaism as source, Christianity, 
and Islam, that holds that God is creator and providential judge of humanity, right relation-
ship to whom constitutes salvation 
 series of bundles —a temporal sequence of bundles, each causally related to its predecessor  
 series reductionism  —a bundle series is neither more nor less than its composing 
bundles  
 subject-consciousness-object experience —an experience whose structure makes it 
outer-directed 
 subject-content experience —an experience whose structure makes it inner-directed 
 substance —a bearer of properties that is not a property or a bundle of properties and 
retains its identity in change of properties over time 
  teleological argument (argument from design)  —an argument from the orderliness of 
nature to the existence of a non-human design 
 the Real —the proposed transcultural source of at least the major religious traditions 
 theistic inconsistency charge —the claim that theists are inconsistent when they judge 
God innocent in allowing preventable evils and judge humans guilty when they do the 
same 
  Theravada (tradition of the elders, the immediate followers of the Buddha) Bud-
dhism —an Indian religious tradition that denies the existence of substances and teaches 
that what we think of as substances are really only causally connected properties 

300 Glossary
 veriﬁ cation principle  —an empiricist theory of meaning inﬂ uential in twentieth century 
philosophy 
 virtue defense —the claim that there are virtues whose existence is worth the price of the 
evil that must exist in order for them to be achieved 
 

 Bibliography  
 
 Adams, R. M. (1999)  Finite and Inﬁ nite Goods (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Anthony, Louise (2011) The mental and the physical, in Le Poidevin, Robin, Peter 
Simons,  et al. , eds.  The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics  (New York: Routledge) 
pp. 555–568 
 Athanassiadi, Polymnia and Michael Frede, eds. (1999)  Pagan Monotheism in Late Antiquity 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Audi, Robert (2010)  Epistemology: An Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge (New 
York: Routledge) 
 Audi, Robert (2015)  Rational Belief: Structure, Grounds, and Intellectual Virtue (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press) 
 Audi, Robert (2015)  Reasons, Rights, and Values  (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 
 Audi, Robert (2016)  Means, Ends, and Persons: The Meaning and Psychological Dimen-
sions of Kant’s Humanity Principle (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Baker, Lynn Rudder (2000)  Persons and Bodies: A Constitution View  (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 
 Bartley, Christopher J. (2002)  The Theology of Ramanuja (London: Routledge-Curzon) 
 Bastow, David (1997) Rationality in Buddhist thought, in Deutsch, Eliot and Ron Bontekoe, 
eds.  A Companion to World Philosophies (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell), pp. 410–419 
 Beebee, Helen (2010) Hume, in Benecker, Sven and Duncan Pritchard, eds.  The Routledge 
Companion to Epistemology (New York: Routledge) pp. 730–739 
 Ben-Menaham, Yemina (2006)  Conventionalism  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
 Bergmann, Michael and Jeffrey Brower, eds. (2016)  Reason and Faith: Themes from Rich-
ard Swinburne (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Bernstein, Mark (2002) Fatalism, in Kane, Robert, ed.  The Oxford Handbook of Free Will 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 65–81 
 Berofsky, Bernard (2002) Ifs, cans, and free will: The issues, in Kane, Robert, ed.  The 
Oxford Handbook of Free Will (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 181–201 
 Berofsky, Bernard (2012)  Nature’s Challenge to Free Will  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) 
 Bharadwaja, Vijay (1997) Logic and language in Indian philosophy, in Carr, Brian and Indira 
Mahalingam, eds.  Companion Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy  (London: Routledge) 
pp. 230–250 

302 Bibliography
 Bigelow, John (2011) Truth-makers and truth-bearers, in Le Poidevin, Robin, Peter 
Simons,  et al. , eds.  The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics  (New York: Routledge) 
pp. 389–400 
 BonJour, Laurence (2002) Internalism and externalism, in Moser, Paul K., ed.  The Oxford 
Handbook of Epistemology (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 234–263 
 BonJour, Laurence (2010) A priori knowledge, in Benecker, Sven and Duncan Pritchard, 
eds.  The Routledge Companion to Epistemology (New York: Routledge) pp. 283–293 
 Boyer, Pascal (2001)  Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origins of Religious Thought 
(New York: Basic Books) 
 Brockington, John (1997) The origins of Indian philosophy, in Carr, Brian and Indira 
Mahalingam, eds.  Companion Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy  (London: Routledge) 
pp. 97–113 
 Burton, David (2011) A Buddhist perspective, in Meister, Chad, ed.  The Oxford Handbook 
of Religious Diversity (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 321–336 
 Burton, David (2012) Buddhism, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds.  Routledge Com-
panion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 7–27 
 Byrne, Peter (2011) A philosophical approach to religious diversity, in Meister, Chad, ed.  The 
Oxford Handbook of Religious Diversity  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 29–41 
 Byrne, Peter (2012) Theology and religious language, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds. 
 Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 581–592 
 Campbell, John (2011) The self, in Le Poidevin, Robin, Peter Simons,  et al. , eds.  The Rout-
ledge Companion to Metaphysics (New York: Routledge) pp. 569–577 
 Carr, Brian (1997) Śaṅkarācārya, in Carr, Brian and Indira Mahalingam, eds.  Companion 
Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy (London: Routledge) pp. 189–210 
 Carr, Brian (1999) Shankara, in Arrington, Robert L., ed.  A Companion to the Philosophers 
(Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 613–620 
 Carr, Indira Mahalingham (1999) Ramanuja, in Arrington, Robert L., ed.  A Companion to 
the Philosophers (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 609–612 
 Carr, Indira Mahalingham and Brian Carr (1999) Madhva, in Arrington, Robert L., ed.  A 
Companion to the Philosophers (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 592–594 
 Carson, T. L. (2000)  Value and the Good Life (Notre Dame: Notre Dame Press) 
 Casullo, Albert (2006)  A Priori Justiﬁ cation (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Casullo, Albert (2012)  Essays on A Priori Knowledge and Justiﬁ cation  (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) 
 Casullo, Albert and Josh Thurow, eds. (2013)  The A Priori in Philosophy  (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) 
 Chakrabarti, Arindam (1997) Rationality in Indian Philosophy, in Deutsch, Eliot and Ron 
Bontekoe, eds.  A Companion to World Philosophies  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell), 
pp. 259–278 
 Chennakesavan, Sarasvati and K. Vasudeva Reddy (1997) Morals and society in Indian 
philosophy, in Carr, Brian and Indira Mahalingam, eds.  Companion Encyclopedia of 
Asian Philosophy (London: Routledge) pp. 266–280 
 Clarke, Desmond M. and Catherine Wilson (2011)  The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy in 
Early Modern Europe  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Clarke, Randolph (2002) Libertarian views: Critical survey on noncausal and event-
causal accounts of free agency, in Kane, Robert, ed.  The Oxford Handbook of Free Will 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 356–385 

Bibliography 303
 Clayton, J. (2006)  Religions, Reasons and Gods: Essays in Cross-Cultural Philosophy of 
Religion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
 Collins, Robin (2012) The teleological argument, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds. 
 Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 411–421 
 Comans, Michael (1997) Later Vedānta, in Carr, Brian and Indira Mahalingam, eds.  Com-
panion Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy (London: Routledge) pp. 211–229 
 Corcoran, Kevin (2001)  Body, Soul, and Survival (Ithaca: Cornell University Press) 
 Crisp, Thomas M. (2003) Identity, in Loux, Michael J. and Dean W. Zimmerman, eds.  The 
Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 211–245 
 Dasti, Matthew (2013) Asian philosophy, in Taliaferro, Charles, Victoria S. Harrison, and Stew-
ard Goetz, eds.  The Routledge Companion to Theism (New York: Routledge) pp. 23–37 
 Davidson, Herbert A. (2005)  Moses Maimonides: The Man and His Work  (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) 
 Davies, Brian (2006)  The Reality of God and the Problem of Evil (London: Continuum) 
 Davies, Brian and Eleonore Stump (2014)  The Oxford Handbook of Aquinas (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press) 
 D’Costa, Gavin (2012) Inter-religious dialogue, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds. 
 Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 261–270 
 Della Rocca, Michael (2002) Rene Descartes, in Nadler, Steven, ed.  A Companion to Early 
Modern Philosophy (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 60–79 
 Dicker, George (1999) Descartes, in Arrington, Robert L., ed.  A Companion to the Philoso-
phers (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 209–216 
 Dickson, Owen Grifﬁ ths (2012) Religious experience, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds. 
 Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 765–744 
 Divers, John (2011) Possible worlds and  possibilia , in Le Poidevin, Robin, Peter Simons,  et al. , 
eds.  The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics (New York: Routledge) pp. 335–345 
 Dombrowski, D. (2006)  Rethinking the Ontological Argument  (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 
 Dore, Clement (1997) Ontological arguments, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, 
eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 323–330 
Dougherty, Trent and Justin P. McBrayer (2016) Skeptical Theism: New Essays (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press)
 Dougherty, Trent and Jerry L. Walls (2013) Arguments from evil, in Taliaferro, Charles, 
Victoria S. Harrison, and Steward Goetz, eds.  The Routledge Companion to Theism 
(New York: Routledge) pp. 369–382 
 Dreyfus, Hubert and Charles Taylor (2015)  Retrieving Realism (Harvard: Belknap Press) 
 Evans, C. S. (2013)  God and Moral Obligation (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Everitt, Nicholas (2004)  The Non-Existence of God (London: Routledge) 
 Fischer, John Martin (2002) Introduction: The contours of contemporary free will debates, 
in Kane, Robert, ed.  The Oxford Handbook of Free Will  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) pp. 281–308 
 Fischer, John Martin (2006)  My Way (New York: Oxford University Press) 
 Fischer, John Martin, Robert Kane, Derk Pereboom, and Manuel Vargas (2007)  Four Views 
on Free Will (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers) 
 Flew, Antony (2007)  There Is a God: How the World’s Most Notorious Atheist Changed 
His Mind  (New York: HarperOne) 
 Flint, Thomas (1998)  Divine Providence (Ithaca: Cornell University Press) 

304 Bibliography
 Foster, John (2004)  The Divine Lawmaker: Lectures on Induction, Laws of Nature, and the 
Existence of God (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Frasca-Spada, Marina (2002) David Hume, in Nadler, Steven, ed.  A Companion To Early 
Modern Philosophy (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 483–504 
 Gale, Richard (2008)  God and Metaphysics (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books) 
 Gale, Richard (2012) The problem of evil, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds.  Rout-
ledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 457–468 
 Gallagher, Shaun (2013)  The Oxford Handbook of the Self  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) 
 Gannsle, Greg and David Woodruff (2002)  God and Time: Essays on the Divine Nature 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Garcia, Laura L. (1997) Teleological and design arguments, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles 
Taliaferro, eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) 
pp. 338–345 
 Gaukroger, Stephen (2010) Rene Descartes, in Benecker, Sven and Duncan Pritchard, eds. 
 The Routledge Companion to Epistemology (New York: Routledge) pp. 678–687 
 Gendler, T. and J. Hawthorne, eds. (2002)  Conceivability and Possibility  (Oxford: Clar-
endon Press) 
 Gertler, Brie, ed. (2003)  Privileged Access: Philosophical Accounts of Self-Knowledge 
(Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing) 
 Gertler, Brie (2011)  Self-Knowledge (London: Routledge) 
 Ginet, Carl (2002) Reasons explanations of actions: Causalist versus noncausalist accounts, 
in Kane Robert, ed.  The Oxford Handbook of Free Will  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) pp. 386–405 
 Ginet, Carl (2003) Libertarianism, in Loux, Michael J. and Dean W. Zimmerman, eds. 
 The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 587–612 
 Goetz, Stewart and Charles Taliaferro (2008)  Naturalism (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans) 
 Gould, Paul, ed. (2014)  Beyond the Control of God? Six Views on the Problem of God and 
Abstract Objects (New York: Bloomsbury) 
 Green, Adam and Eleonore Stump (2016)  Hidden Divinity and Religious Belief: New Per-
spectives (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
 Grifﬁ ths, Paul J. (1997) Buddhism, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, eds.  A Com-
panion to Philosophy of Religion (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 15–24 
 Grifﬁ ths, Paul J. (1997) Comparative philosophy of religion, in Quinn, Philip L. and 
Charles Taliaferro, eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (Cambridge, MA: 
Blackwell) pp. 615–620 
 Grifﬁ ths, Paul J. (2001)  Problems of Religious Diversity (London: Wiley Blackwell) 
 Grifﬁ ths, Paul J. (2011) The religious alien, in Meister, Chad, ed.  The Oxford Handbook of 
Religious Diversity (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 115–126 
 Haji, Ishtiyaque (2002) Frankfurt-type examples and semi-compatibilism, in Kane, Robert, 
ed.  The Oxford Handbook of Free Will  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 202–228 
 Hampton. Jean (1998)  The Authority of Reason  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
 Hankey, Wayne J. (2012) Aquinas, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds.  Routledge Com-
panion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 130–139 
 Hare, John (2006)  God and Morality: A Philosophical History (Oxford: Blackwell) 
 Harris, H. and C. J. Insole, eds. (2005)  Faith and Philosophical Analysis: The Impact of 
Analytical Philosophy on the Philosophy of Religion (Aldershot: Ashgate) 

Bibliography 305
 Harvey, Peter (1999) The Buddha, in Arrington, Robert L. ed.  A Companion to the Philoso-
phers (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 568–573 
 Hasker, William (1999)  The Emergent Self (Ithaca: Cornell University Press) 
 Hasker, William (2005) Analytic philosophy of religions, in Wainwright, William J., ed. 
 The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Religion  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
pp. 421–446 
 Hasker, William (2008)  The Triumph of God over Evil: Theodicy for a World of Suffering 
(Downer’s Grove: IVP Academic) 
 Hasker, William, David Basinger, and Ed Dekker, eds. (2000)  Middle Knowledge: Theory 
and Applications (Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang Publishers) 
 Haslinger, Sally (2003) Persistence through time, in Loux, Michael J. and Dean W. Zim-
merman, eds.  The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
pp. 315–354 
 Hawthorne, John (2003) Identity, in Loux, Michael J. and Dean W. Zimmerman, eds.  The 
Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 99–130 
 Hayes, Richard P. (2013) Philosophy of mind in Buddhism, in Emmanuel, Steven, ed.  A 
Companion to Buddhist Philosophy (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 395–405 
 Heim, Maria (2013) Mind in Theravada Buddhism, in Emmanuel, Steven, ed.  A Compan-
ion to Buddhist Philosophy (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 377–394 
 Helm, Paul (2000)  Faith and Reason (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Hick, John (1997) Religious pluralism, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, eds.  A 
Companion to Philosophy of Religion (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 607–614 
 Hick, John (2012) Religious pluralism, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds.  Routledge 
Companion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 240–249 
 Hill, D. (2005)  Divinity and Maximal Greatness (London: Routledge) 
 Hochberg, Herbert (2011) Particulars, in Le Poidevin, Robin, Peter Simons,  et al. , eds.  The 
Routledge Companion to Metaphysics (New York: Routledge) pp. 286–295 
 Hoffman, Joshua and Gary S. Rosenkrantz (2002)  The Divine Attributes (Oxford: 
Blackwell) 
 Honderich, Ted (2002) Determinism as true compatibilism and incompatibilism as false, 
and the real problem, in Kane, Robert, ed.  The Oxford Handbook of Free Will (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press) pp. 461–476 
 Howard-Snyder, Daniel and Jeff Jordan, eds. (1996)  Faith, Freedom, and Rationality (Lanham, 
MD: Rowman and Littleﬁ eld) 
 Hudson, Hud (2001)  A Materialist Metaphysics of the Human Person  (Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press) 
 Humber James M. (1999) Hume, in Arrington, Robert L., ed.  A Companion to the Philoso-
phers (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 309–317 
 Idziac, Janine Marie (1997) Divine command ethics, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles 
Taliaferro, eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) 
pp. 453–459 
 Inada, Kenneth K. (1997) Buddhist reality and divinity, in Deutsch, Eliot and Ron Bontekoe, 
eds.  A Companion to World Philosophies (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell), pp. 392–399 
 Jackson, Frank and Michael Smith, eds. (2005)  The Oxford Handbook of Contemporary 
Philosophy (New York: Oxford University Press) 
 Jackson, Frederick (2000)  From Metaphysics to Ethics: A Defense of Conceptual Analysis 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press) 

306 Bibliography
 Jacobsen, Knut A. (1997) Humankind and nature in Buddhism, in Deutsch, Eliot and Ron 
Bontekoe, eds.  A Companion to World Philosophies  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell), 
pp. 381–391 
 Kane, Robert (1996)  The Signiﬁ cance of Free Will (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Kane, Robert (2002) Introduction: The contours of contemporary free will debates, in Kane, 
Robert, ed.  The Oxford Handbook of Free Will  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 3–41 
 Kane, Robert (2002) Some neglected pathways in the free will labyrinth, in Kane, Robert, 
ed.  The Oxford Handbook of Free Will  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 406–437 
 Kapitan, Tomis (2002) A master argument for incompatibilism?, in Kane, Robert, ed.  The 
Oxford Handbook of Free Will (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 127–157 
 Kapstein, Matthew (1997) Buddhist perspectives on ontological truth, in Deutsch, Eliot 
and Ron Bontekoe, eds.  A Companion to World Philosophies  (Cambridge, MA: Black-
well), pp. 420–433 
 Kasulis, Thomas P. (1997) The Buddhist concept of self, in Deutsch, Eliot and Ron 
Bontekoe, eds.  A Companion to World Philosophies  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell), 
pp. 400–409 
 Kerr, Gaven (2015)  Aquinas’s Way to God: The Proof in De Ente et Essentia (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press) 
 Kim, Jaegwon (2003) Supervenience, emergence, realization, reduction, in Loux, Michael 
J. and Dean W. Zimmerman, eds.  The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press) pp. 556–584 
 Koller, John M. (1997) Humankind and nature in Indian philosophy, in Deutsch, Eliot and 
Ron Bontekoe, eds.  A Companion to World Philosophies  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell), 
pp. 279–289 
 Koller, John M. (2012) Shankara, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds.  Routledge Com-
panion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 99–108 
 Koons, Robert A. (2000)  Realism Regained: An Exact Theory of Causation, Teleology, and 
the Mind (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Koons, Robert A. and George Bealer, eds. (2010)  The Waning of Materialism (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press) 
 Koons, Robert A. and Timothy Picavance (2015)  Metaphysics: The Fundamentals (Lon-
don: Wiley Blackwell) 
 Kretzmann, Norman (2002)  The Metaphysics of Creation: Aquinas’s Natural Theology in 
Summa Cortra Gentiles I (Oxford: Clarendon) 
 Kretzmann, Norman (2002)  The Metaphysics of Creation: Aquinas’s Natural Theology in 
Summa Cortra Gentiles II (Oxford: Clarendon) 
 Kvanvig, Johnathan L. (2010) Epistemic justiﬁ cation, in Benecker, Sven and Duncan Pritchard, 
eds.  The Routledge Companion to Epistemology (New York: Routledge) pp. 25–36 
 Kwan, Kai-Man (2012) The argument from religious experience, in Craig, William Lane 
and J. P. Moreland, eds.  The Blackwell Companion to Natural Theology (Oxford: 
Blackwell) pp. 498–552 
 Kwan, Kai-Man (2013) Religious experience, in Taliaferro, Charles, Victoria S. Harrison, 
and Steward Goetz, eds.  The Routledge Companion to Theism  (New York: Routledge) 
pp. 383–397 
 Larson, Gerald James (1997) Indian conceptions of reality and divinity, in Deutsch, Eliot 
and Ron Bontekoe, eds.  A Companion to World Philosophies  (Cambridge, MA: Black-
well), pp. 248–258 

Bibliography 307
 Laumakis, Stephen J. (2013) The philosophical context of Gotama’s thought, in Emman-
uel, Steven, ed.  A Companion to Buddhist Philosophy (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 13–25 
 Lawrence, David Peter (2013) Hindu theism, in Taliaferro, Charles, Victoria S. Harrison, 
and Steward Goetz, eds.  The Routledge Companion to Theism  (New York: Routledge) 
pp. 77–87 
 Leftow, Brian (2005) The ontological argument, in Wainwright, William J., ed.  The Oxford 
Handbook of Philosophy of Religion (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 80–115 
 LePoideven, Robin, Peter Simons,  et al. , eds.  The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics 
(New York: Routledge) pp. 131–141 
 Libet, Benjamin (2002) Do we have free will?, in Kane, Robert, ed.  The Oxford Handbook 
of Free Will (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 551–564 
 Linville, Mark (2012) The moral argument, in Craig, William Lane and J. P. Moreland, 
eds.  The Blackwell Companion to Natural Theology (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 391–438 
 Lowe, E. J. (2001)  The Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity, Time (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press) 
 Lowe, E. J. (2002)  A Survey of Metaphysics (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Lowe, E. J. (2003) Individuation, in Loux, Michael J. and Dean W. Zimmerman, eds.  The 
Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 75–95 
 Lowe, E. J. (2007)  The Four-Category Ontology: A Metaphysical Foundation for Natural 
Science (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Lowe, E. J. (2009)  Truth and Truth-Making (Montreal: McGill-Queens University Press) 
 Lowe, E. J. (2012) The ontological argument, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds.  Rout-
ledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 391–403 
 Lowe, E. J. (2013)  Forms of Thought: A Study in Philosophical Logic  (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press) 
 Lycan, William (2010) Epistemology and the role of intuition, in Benecker, Sven and Dun-
can Pritchard, eds.  The Routledge Companion to Epistemology  (New York: Routledge) 
pp. 313–322 
 MacDonald, Scott (1997) The Christian contribution to medieval philosophical theology, 
in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion 
(Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 80–87 
 Mann, William E. (1997) Necessity, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, eds.  A 
Companion to Philosophy of Religion (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 264–270 
 Mann, William E. (2005) Divine sovereignty and aseity, in Wainwright, William J., ed. 
 The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Religion  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
pp. 35–58 
 Markham, Ian S. (2012) Truth in religion, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds.  Routledge 
Companion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 212–227 
 Martin, Michael (1997) The veriﬁ cationist challenge, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles 
Taliaferro, eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) 
pp. 204–212 
 Martinich, A. P. and David Sosa, eds. (2001)  A Companion to Analytic Philosophy (Oxford: 
Blackwell) 
 Matilal, Bimal Krishna (2015)  Ethics and Epics: The Collected Essays of Bimal Krishna 
Matilal Volume II (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Matilal, Bimal Krishna (2015)  Mind, Language and World: The Collected Essays of Bimal 
Krishna Matilal Volume I (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 

308 Bibliography
 McInerny, Ralph (1997) Thomism, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, eds.  A Com-
panion to Philosophy of Religion (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 158–165 
 McInerny, Ralph (1999) Aquinas, in Robert L. Arrington, ed.  A Companion to the Philoso-
phers (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 124–129 
 McInerny, Ralph (2004)  Aquinas (Cambridge: Polity Press) 
 McLaughlin, Brian, Ansgar Beckermann, and Sven Walter (2011)  The Oxford Handbook of 
Philosophy of Mind (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Meister, Chad V. (2010)  The Oxford Handbook of Religious Diversity  (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) 
 Mele, Alfred R. (2006)  Free Will and Luck (New York: Oxford University Press) 
 Mele, Alfred R. and Piers Rawling (2004)  The Oxford Handbook of Rationality (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press) 
 Merenbon, John (2011) Medieval metaphysics II: Things, non-things, God and time, in Le 
Poidevin, Robin, Peter Simons,  et al. , eds.  The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics 
(New York: Routledge) pp. 58–67 
 Merricks, Trenton (2007)  Truth and Ontology (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Miller, Alexander (2011) Hume: Necessary connections and real existences, in Le Poidevin, 
Robin, Peter Simons,  et al. , eds.  The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics (New York: 
Routledge) pp. 131–141 
 Misak, Cheryl (2011) Anti-metaphysics II: Veriﬁ cationism and kindred views, in Le 
Poidevin, Robin, Peter Simons,  et al. , eds.  The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics 
(New York: Routledge) pp. 201–208 
 Mittag, Daniel M. (2010) Evidentialism, in Benecker, Sven and Duncan Pritchard, eds.  The 
Routledge Companion to Epistemology (New York: Routledge) pp. 167–175 
 Mohanty, J. N. (1997) A history of Indian philosophy, in Deutsch, Eliot and Ron Bontekoe, 
eds.  A Companion to World Philosophies (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell), pp. 24–48 
 Mohanty, J. N. (1997) The idea of the good in Indian thought, in Deutsch, Eliot and Ron 
Bontekoe, eds.  A Companion to World Philosophies  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell), 
pp. 304–323 
 Mohanty, J. N. (2000)  Classical Indian Philosophy  (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁ eld) 
 Moreland, James Porter (2012) The argument from consciousness, in Craig, William 
Lane and J. P. Moreland, eds.  The Blackwell Companion to Natural Theology (Oxford: 
Blackwell) pp. 282–343 
 Moreland, James Porter (2013) Arguments about human persons, in Taliaferro, Charles, 
Victoria S. Harrison, and Steward Goetz, eds.  The Routledge Companion to Theism 
(New York: Routledge) pp. 398–411 
 Moreland, James Porter, Khaldoun A. Sweis, and Chad V. Meister (2013)  Debating Chris-
tian Theism (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Moser, Paul K. (2005)  The Oxford Handbook of Epistemology  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) 
 Moser, Paul K. (2011) Religious exclusivism, in Meister, Chad, ed.  The Oxford Handbook 
of Religious Diversity (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 77–88 
 Moser, Paul K. (2012) Christianity, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds.  Routledge Com-
panion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 67–75 
 Murdoch, Dugold (2011) Descartes: The real distinction, in Le Poidevin, Robin, Peter 
Simons,  et al. , eds.  The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics  (New York: Routledge) 
pp. 68–76 

Bibliography 309
 Murphy, Mark C. (2003)  An Essay on Divine Authority (Ithaca: Cornell University Press) 
 Murphy, Mark C. (2012)  God and Moral Law: On the Theistic Explanation of Morality 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Murray, Michael J. and David E. Taylor (2012) Hiddenness, in Meister, Chad and Paul 
Copan, eds.  Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (New York: Routledge) 
pp. 368–377 
 Nerlich, Graham (2003) Space-time substantivalism, in Loux, Michael J. and Dean W. 
Zimmerman, eds.  The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) pp. 281–314 
 Netland, Harold A. (2012) Inclusivism and exclusivism, in Meister, Chad and Paul 
Copan, eds.  Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (New York: Routledge) 
pp. 250–260 
 Nielsen, Kai (1997) Naturalistic explanations of theistic belief, in Quinn, Philip L. and 
Charles Taliaferro, eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (Cambridge, MA: 
Blackwell) pp. 402–409 
 O’Connor, Timothy (2000)  Persons and Causes: The Metaphysics of Free Will (New York: 
Oxford University Press) 
 O’Connor, Timothy (2002) Libertarian views: Dualist and agent-causal theories, in Kane, 
Robert, ed.  The Oxford Handbook of Free Will  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
pp. 337–355 
 Oderberg, David S. (2007)  Real Essences (New York: Routledge) 
 Oderberg, David S. (2012) The cosmological argument, in Meister, Chad and Paul 
Copan, eds.  Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (New York: Routledge) 
pp. 391–400 
 Oppy, Graham (2006)  Arguing About Gods (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
 Pande, G. C. (1997) Causality in Buddhist philosophy, in Deutsch, Eliot and Ron Bontekoe, 
eds.  A Companion to World Philosophies (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell), pp. 370–380 
 Pandeya, R. C. and Manju (1997) Pūrva Mīmāṁsā and Vedānta, in Carr, Brian and Indira 
Mahalingam, eds.  Companion Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy  (London: Routledge) 
pp. 172–188 
 Parsons, Keith M. (2012) Problems with theistic arguments, in Meister, Chad and Paul 
Copan, eds.  Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (New York: Routledge) 
pp. 460–469 
 Penelhum, Terence (1997) Fideism, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, eds.  A Com-
panion to Philosophy of Religion (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 376–382 
 Penelhum, Terrence (2012) David Hume, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds.  Routledge 
Companion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 161–170 
 Pereboom, Derk (1997) Early modern philosophical theology, in Quinn, Philip L. and 
Charles Taliaferro, eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (Cambridge, MA: 
Blackwell) pp. 103–110 
 Pereboom, Derk (2001)  Living Without Free Will  (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 
 Peterson, Michael L. (1997) The problem of evil, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, 
eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 393–401 
 Peterson, Michael L. (2011) Religious diversity, evil, and a variety of theodicies, in Meis-
ter, Chad, ed.  The Oxford Handbook of Religious Diversity  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) pp. 154–168 

310 Bibliography
 Peterson, Michael L. and Robert van Arragon, eds. (2004)  Contemporary Debates in 
Philosophy of Religion (Oxford: Blackwell) 
 Pike, N. (2002)  God and Timelessness (Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock Publishers) 
 Plantinga, Alvin (1997) Reformed epistemology, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, 
eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 383–389 
 Plantinga, Alvin (2011)  Where the Conﬂ ict Really Lies: Science, Religion, and Naturalism 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Potter, Karl H. (1997) Knowledge and reality in Indian philosophy, in Carr, Brian and 
Indira Mahalingam, eds.  Companion Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy (London: 
Routledge) pp. 251–265 
 Premasiri, P. D. (1997) Ideas of the good in Buddhist philosophy, in Deutsch, Eliot and 
Ron Bontekoe, eds.  A Companion to World Philosophies  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell), 
pp. 349–359 
 Pruss, Alexander R. (2006)  The Principle of Sufﬁ cient Reason  (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 
 Pruss, Alexander R. and Richard M. Gale (2005) Cosmological and design arguments, in 
Wainwright, William J., ed.  The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Religion (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press) pp. 116–138 
 Quinn, Philip (2002) Epistemology in philosophy of religion, in Moser, Paul K., ed.  The 
Oxford Handbook of Epistemology (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 513–538 
 Ram-Prasad, Chakravarthi (2002)  Advaita Metaphysics and Epistemology  (London: Rout-
ledge Curzon) 
 Rea, Michael C. (2003) Four-dimensionalism, in Loux, Michael J. and Dean W. Zimmer-
man, eds.  The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
pp. 246–280 
 Rea, Michael C. (2009)  Oxford Readings in Philosophical Theology  (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) 
 Reppert, Victor (2012) The argument from reason, in Craig, William Lane and J. P. 
Moreland, eds.  The Blackwell Companion to Natural Theology  (Oxford: Blackwell) 
pp. 344–390 
 Rist, John (2008)  What Is Truth?: From the Academy to the Vatican (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 
 Robb, David (2011) Substance, in Le Poidevin, Robin, Peter Simons,  et al. , eds.  The Rout-
ledge Companion to Metaphysics (New York: Routledge) pp. 256–264 
 Robinson, Howard (2003) The ontology of the mental, in Loux, Michael J. and Dean W. 
Zimmerman, eds.  The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) pp. 527–555 
 Rowe, William L. (1997) Cosmological arguments, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, 
eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 331–337 
 Rowe, William L. (2004)  Can God Be Free? (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Roy, A. (1997) Contemporary Indian philosophy, in Carr, Brian and Indira Mahalingam, 
eds.  Companion Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy (London: Routledge) pp. 281–299 
 Rundle, Bede (2004)  Why There Is Something Rather Than Nothing  (Oxford: Clarendon Press) 
 Ruse, Michael (2012) The sociobiological account of religious belief, in Meister, Chad and 
Paul Copan, eds.  Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Rout-
ledge) pp. 511–522 

Bibliography 311
 Russell, Paul (2016)  The Oxford Handbook of Hume (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Scanlon, T. M. (1998)  What We Owe to Each Other  (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press) 
 Scanlon, T. M. (2008)  Moral Dimensions: Permissibility, Meaning, Blame (Cambridge, 
MA: Belknap Harvard Press) 
 Schloss, J. and Murray, M., eds. (2009)  The Believing Primate: Scientiﬁ c, Philosophical, and 
Theological Reﬂ ections on the Origins of Religion  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Sharma, Arvind (2011) A Hindu perspective, in Meister, Chad, ed.  The Oxford Handbook 
of Religious Diversity (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 309–320 
 Sharma, Arvind (2012) Hinduism, in Meister, Chad and Paul Copan, eds.  Routledge Com-
panion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) pp. 7–17 
 Sider, Theodore (2001)  Four-Dimensionalism: An Ontology of Persistence and Time 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Sider, Theodore (2003) Reductive theories of modality, in Loux, Michael J. and Dean W. Zim-
merman, eds.  The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
pp. 180–208 
 Skilton, Andrew (2013) Theravada, in Emmanuel, Steven, ed.  A Companion to Buddhist 
Philosophy (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 71–85 
 Smart, Ninian (1997) A survey of Buddhist thought, in Deutsch, Eliot and Ron Bontekoe, 
eds.  A Companion to World Philosophies (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell), pp. 78–98 
 Smart, Ninian (1997) Hinduism, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, eds.  A Com-
panion to Philosophy of Religion (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 7–14 
 Sobel, J. (2004)  Logic and Theism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
 Strawson, Galen (2002) The bounds of freedom, in Kane, Robert, ed.  The Oxford Hand-
book of Free Will (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 441–460 
 Stroll, Avrum (2011) Metaphysics reviviﬁ ed, Le Poidevin, Robin, Peter Simons,  et al. , eds. 
 The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics (New York: Routledge) pp. 209–218 
 Stump, Eleonore (2003)  Aquinas (London: Routledge) 
 Swinburne, Richard (2004, Sec. Ed.)  The Existence of God (Oxford: Clarendon) 
 Swinburne, Richard (2013)  Mind, Brain, and Free Will  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Taliaferro, Charles (1997) Incorporeality, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, eds.  A 
Companion to Philosophy of Religion (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 271–278 
 Taliaferro, Charles (2005)  Evidence and Faith: Philosophy and Religion Since the Seven-
teenth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
 Taliaferro, Charles (2011) A Christian perspective, in Meister, Chad, ed.  The Oxford Hand-
book of Religious Diversity (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 381–392 
 Taliaferro, C. and Meister, C. (2010)  The Cambridge Companion to Christian Philosophi-
cal Theology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
 Taylor, Charles (2007)  A Secular Age (Harvard: Belknap Press) 
 Timpe, Kevin and Daniel Speak (2016)  Free Will and Theism: Connections Contingencies 
and Concerns (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 Trakakis, Nick and Daniel Cohen, eds. (2008)  Essays on Free Will and Moral Responsibility 
(Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing) 
 Tuske, Joerg (2013) The non-self theory and problems in philosophy of mind, in Emmanuel, 
Steven, ed.  A Companion to Buddhist Philosophy  (Oxford: Blackwell) pp. 419–428 
 Vahid, Hamid (2010) Externalism/Internalism, in Benecker, Sven and Duncan Pritchard, 
eds.  The Routledge Companion to Epistemology (New York: Routledge) pp. 144–155 

312 Bibliography
 van Inwagen, Peter (2002) Free will remains a mystery, in Kane, Robert, ed.  The Oxford 
Handbook of Free Will (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 158–177 
 van Inwagen, Peter (2003) Existence, ontological commitment, and ﬁ ctional Entities, in 
Loux, Michael J. and Dean W. Zimmerman, eds.  The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 131–157 
 van Inwagen, Peter (2008)  The Problem of Evil (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
 van Inwagen, Peter (2014)  Existence: Essays in Ontology  (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press) 
 Wainwright, William J. (1997) Christianity, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, eds. 
 A Companion to Philosophy of Religion (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 56–63 
 Wainwright, William J. (2005)  Religion and Morality (Aldershot: Ashgate) 
 Wainwright, William J. (2013) Christianity, in Taliaferro, Charles, Victoria S. Harrison, 
and Steward Goetz, eds.  The Routledge Companion to Theism  (New York: Routledge) 
pp. 54–65 
 Walls, J. L., ed. (2007)  The Oxford Handbook of Eschatology  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) 
 Ward, Keith (2011) Religion and revelation, in Meister, Chad, ed.  The Oxford Handbook of 
Religious Diversity (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 169–184 
 Warﬁ eld, Ted (2003) Compatibilism and incompatibilism: Some arguments, in Loux, 
Michael J. and Dean W. Zimmerman, eds.  The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 613–630 
 Watson, Gary (2004)  Agency and Answerability (New York: Oxford University Press) 
 Werner, Karel (1997) Non-orthodox Indian philosophies, in Carr, Brian and Indira Mahal-
ingam, eds.  Companion Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy  (London: Routledge) 
pp. 114–131 
 Westphal, Merold (1997) The emergence of modern philosophy of religion, in Quinn, 
Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion (Cam-
bridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 111–117 
 Widerker, David (2002) Responsibility and Frankfurt-type examples, in Kane, Robert, ed. 
 The Oxford Handbook of Free Will (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 323–334 
 Widerker, David and Michael McKenna, eds. (2003)  Moral Responsibility and Alternative 
Possibilities (Aldershot, UK: Ashgate Press) 
 Wiggins, David (2001)  Sameness and Substance Renewed  (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press) 
 Wippel, John (2000)  The Metaphysical Thought of Thomas Aquinas  (Washington, DC: 
Catholic University of America Press) 
 Wolterstorff, Nicholas (1997) The reformed tradition, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles 
Taliaferro, eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) 
pp. 165–170 
 Wolterstorff, Nicholas (2008)  Justice: Rights and Wrongs  (Princeton: Princeton University 
Press) 
 Wolterstorff, Nicholas (2014) Terrence Cuneo, ed.  Inquiring About God: Selected Essays, 
Series I (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
 Yandell, Keith E. (1997) Religious experience, in Quinn, Philip L. and Charles Taliaferro, 
eds.  A Companion to Philosophy of Religion  (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell) pp. 367–375 
 Yandell, Keith E. (2011) The diversity of religious experience, in Meister, Chad, ed.  The 
Oxford Handbook of Religious Diversity  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp. 89–101 

Bibliography 313
 Yandell, Keith E. (2012) Religious traditions and rational assessments, in Meister, Chad and 
Paul Copan, eds.  Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion (New York: Routledge) 
pp. 228–239 
 Yandell, Keith E. (2013) Religious language, in Taliaferro, Charles, Victoria S. Harrison, 
and Steward Goetz, eds.  The Routledge Companion to Theism  (New York: Routledge) 
pp. 355–368 
 Zagzebski, Linda Trinkaus (2002) Recent work on divine foreknowledge and free will, 
in Kane, Robert, ed.  The Oxford Handbook of Free Will  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) pp. 45–64 
 Zagzebski, Linda Trinkaus (2004)  Divine Motivation Theory  (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press) 
 Zagzebski, Linda Trinkaus (2005) Morality and religion, in Wainwright, William J., ed. 
 The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Religion  (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
pp. 344–365 
 Zimmerman, Dean W. (2003) Material people, in Loux, Michael J. and Dean W. Zimmer-
man, eds.  The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
pp. 491–526 

Index
Absolutist Buddhism 55
action language 59–61
Advaita Vedanta 1, 16–17; appeal to 
enlightenment experience 217–18; 
arguments concerning 181–3; Atman 
theory 84; Brahman theory 84; 
causal theory of perception 84–5; 
compatibility 20–2; doctrines speciﬁc 
to 18; experience 181, 204; level of 
reality 19, 22, 27, 36, 83, 182, 213, 
237, 239, 243, 279, 286; metaphysics 
46; morality 46, 243; philosophers 
80–3; reductionism and eliminativism 
85–6; religious experience 27, 34, 
36; religious neutrality 57; religious 
pluralism 55; religious traditions 
49; self-authentication 207, 209–11, 
214–15; two-theories account 83–4
Aldrin, Buzz 285
Alston, William 292–3, 293n3
anthropomorphism 54–5, 78n11, 275
Aquinas, Thomas 7; arguments by 130–54; 
change, potentiality, actuality 133–4; 
chronological vs. concurrent causes 
132; cosmological argument (stage 
four) 145–8; cosmological argument 
(stage one) 141; cosmological argument 
(stage three) 143–4; cosmological 
argument (stage two) 141–2; domains, 
forwardness and backwardness 132–3; 
Fifth Way 148–52; First Way 134–5; 
Five Ways 130–1, 136, 140, 155–6n15; 
general structure of arguments 131–2; 
inﬁnite series 136; Second Way 136–7; 
self-change 135; teleological argument 
152–4; Third Way 137–45
Argument from Design 148–52
Aristotle 1, 7, 16, 119, 130, 133, 138, 194, 
242–4, 263–4
atheism 48, 74–5, 114, 298
Atman: individual person 43, 60, 85–6, 
94n12; real self 18–20, 34, 287; soul 
182–3; theory 84
Augustine 128, 184
being, truth and goodness 13n3
belief-forming practice 161; Alston 292–3, 
293n3; Plantinga 291–2
Berkeley, George (Bishop) 7, 86
Brahman 34, 151; Advaita Vedanta 181–3, 
204–5, 217–18, 239, 287, 298; doctrine 
39–40, 43, 46; enlightenment experience 
207–9, 213, 217–18; experience 181–3; 
Hindu monotheism 71; nirguna 93, 
182, 298; perception 85; qualityless 1, 
16, 20–1, 27, 40, 46, 57, 60, 80–4, 93, 
217–18, 239, 287, 298; reductionism 
and eliminativism 85–6; reincarnation 
99; theory 84; ultimate reality 18, 19
Buddha: Buddhism 88–9, 92, 224, 284–5, 
300
Buddhism: appeals to experience 223–5; 
Buddha 88–9, 92, 224, 284–5, 300; 
change 90, 94–5n31; Jainism vs. 
87–93; memory 92–3; metaphysics 
285–6; persons 88–9, 91–2, 183–4; 
reincarnation and karma 89–90, 190; 
self-authentication 207, 209–11, 
215–16; simplicity 90–1; ultimate 
values 237–8
bundle theory: external critique of persons 
as bundles 188–9; fact of the matter 

Index 315
191–2; internal critique of persons as 
bundles 189; non-substantival view of 
persons 186–8; reincarnation 190
change: Jainism and Buddhism 90, 
94–5n31
Christianity 1; compatibility 20–2; faith 
269–70; ineffabilism 57; metaphysics 
45–6; morality 46; religious experience 
28–30; resurrection doctrine 283–4; 
Semitic monotheism 15–16, 70–1
Circle of Births 39
Clarke, Samuel 184
Clifford, W. K. 277–8
compassion 23, 104, 108, 115n6, 237–8, 
286
compatibilism: actions vs. nonactions 253–4; 
argument against 249–50; authorial view 
264–5; control principle 251–3, 257–8; 
freedom 254–5; incompatibilism and 
248–50; negative story 256–7; positive 
story 255–6; replying to objections 
259–61
conﬁrmationism 280–3
consistency issue: problems with 
consistency strategy 104–6; 
straightforward inconsistency 103–4
Consistency Strategy 104–6
Cornman, James W. 193, 199
cosmological argument 296; stage four 
145–8; stage one 141; stage three 
143–4; stage two 141–2; see also 
monotheism, arguments for
Creator 15, 16, 45–6, 77n1, 150, 243, 296
cycle of rebirth (samsara) 16, 18, 239, 284
Descartes, Rene 7, 121, 184, 195; appeal 
to memory 225; essence of mind 195; 
Jainism 28, 213, 218–21, 223, 227, 
230n25; Ramanuja 221, 223; sensory 
perception 164–5, 169; substantivalists 
227
determinism 241, 246, 248, 252, 
264–5, 267n13, 296; atheistic 260; 
compatibilism 253–4; explanation and 
250–1; monotheistic 249, 260; truth 
262–3
diversity: doctrinal and functional 49; 
functional, on high standards 48–9; 
religious traditions 49; tolerance and 
respect 47–8
divine command theory 234–5, 238, 244, 
266n2
divine knowledge: human freedom 261–2; 
truth and future 262–4, 267–8n21
doctrine 39–42; ideology 59; importance 
of 39–41, 47, 49–50; persons 91, 188, 
218; reincarnation, karma and evil 
99–100; relativity of religious problems 
41–2; resurrection of Jesus Christ 283–4
doxastic (belief-forming) practice 161, 
290, 292, 295, 296
dualism 200n3; arguments against 197–9; 
mind-body 183, 192–3, 197; property 
vs. substance 183–4
Dvaita 80, 82, 95n31
enlightenment 2, 39
enlightenment experience: Advaita 
Vedanta 204; appeals to 203–6; Advaita 
appeal to 217–18; Buddhist-type 
appeals to experience 223–5; contrasting 
arguments 225–8; counterbalancing 
considerations 205–6; Jainism 204; 
Jain-type appeals to experience 
218–23; nature of experiential evidence 
203–4; subject/content, and principle 
of experiential evidence 212–14; 
Theravada Buddhism 204–5
epiphenomenalism 53
epistemology 1, 11, 35, 114, 278, 290
ethics 1, 11, 13n3, 45, 48, 239, 272: 
Buddhism 237; divine command 
234–5; Jainism 238–9; metaphysics 46; 
monotheistic religion 15; morality 233; 
religious pluralism 59, 61
Euthyphro dilemma 235–7, 266n2, 296
everlasting world strategy 128, 129
evidence: argument from religious 
experience 171–2; being vs. providing 
169–71; experience as direct 160–3; 
experiential subjects 174; nature of 
appeals to experiential 203–4; principle 
of experiential 163–9, 172–4
evidentialism: Moser’s moral 293, 298
evidential issue: Apparently Pointless 
Evil Claim 107; Imaginably but Not 
Contextually Pointful Argument 108, 

316 Index
109–10; logical consistency with 
106; object mode 113; prospective 
mode 113; retrospective mode 113; 
simple argument 107; sophisticated 
argument 107–14; subject mode 112; 
Unimaginably Pointful Argument 
108–11; We Would Know Claim 107, 
109–10
evil: doctrine 99–100; existence of 101; 
failed escapes 101–2; ﬁnite deity and 
102–3; problem of 100–103
experience: Advaita appeal to 
enlightenment 217–18; Buddhist-type 
appeals to 223–5; Jain-type appeals 
to 218–23; see also enlightenment 
experience; religious experience
faith: Christianity 269–70
falsiﬁcationism 282–3
falsity-claims 42–3
fatalism 246–9, 267n9
Flat earth Society 43
freedom: compatibilist 254–5; divine 
knowledge and human 261–2
Gettier, Edmund 12
God: anthropomorphism 54–5; Greek 
monotheism 67–70; Hindu monotheism 
71–2; providence 67; Semitic 
monotheism 70–1
Greek monotheism 16, 67–70, 71, 77n2, 297
Hebrew Bible 54, 61, 297
Hick, John 53; incompatibility question 
55, 56–7; normative pluralism 53–8; the 
Real 56; religious neutrality 57; truth 56
Hindu 1: monotheism 67, 71–2, 297; 
reincarnation and karma 99, 115n1; 
religious experience 28–30
Hume, David 7, 28, 151, 157n32–3, 213, 
218, 230n33, 240; Buddhist perspective 
224–7; Buddhist-type appeals to 
experience 223–4; theories of meaning 
270–1
identity: common themes 45; content 
43–4; doctrines 45; function 43–4; 
high standards for 44; low standards 
for 44; metaphysics 45–6; morality 
46–7; numerical vs. qualitative 184–5, 
200–201n6; personal 185–6; symmetry 
and transitivity of 184
ideology: religious pluralism 58–9
inclusive strategy 128, 129, 130
individuating religions: criteria for 19–22
internalism 290
Islam: Semitic monotheism 15–16, 70–1
Jaina Sutras 32, 39–40, 61, 88, 94n18, 
238, 297
Jain dualism: arguments for 193–7; 
substance theory 192–3
Jainism 1–2; appeals to experience 
218–23; arguments against dualism 
197–9; arguments for Jain dualism 
193–7; Buddhism vs. 87–93; change 90, 
94–5n31; compatibility 20–2; doctrine 
19, 94n18; enlightenment experience 
204, 220–1; importance of account 
of persons 91–2; Jain dualism 192–3; 
memory 92–3; metaphysics 46, 285–6; 
morality 46, 243; nonmonotheistic 
religion 16; persons 87–8, 91, 183–4; 
reincarnation and karma 18, 89–90, 
190; religious experience 27, 31–3, 
36; religious traditions 49; self-
authentication 207, 209–11, 215–16; 
self-awareness 28, 88, 214, 218, 
230n25, 234, 284; simplicity 90–1; 
ultimate reality 80; ultimate values 
238–9
Jesus Christ 39, 71, 283–4
jiva 19–20, 36, 43, 88, 287, 297
Judaism 1, 13n4, 283, 297, 299: 
ineffabilism 57; morality 46; religious 
experience 28–30; Semitic monotheism 
15–16, 70–1, 77n2
Kant, Immanuel 7, 15, 234
karma 2; doctrine 17–18, 99–100; Jainism 
and Buddhism 89–90, 187–8
kevala 16, 21, 32–3, 39, 40, 43, 46, 204–5, 
221, 228n1, 297
Knitter, Paul 59–61
Koran 61
Law of Non-contradiction 119, 194
Lehrer, Keith 193, 199

Index 317
libertarianism 241, 248–9, 266, 267n10, 
298
Lincoln, Abraham 227, 285
Locke, John 7, 84–5, 226–7, 230n33
logical necessity: monotheism 119–21
Logical Positivism 270, 288n1, 288n3
Madhva 1; Advaita Vedanta 80–1, 83, 
286–7; experience 217
Mahavira: enlightenment 284–5; founder 
of Jainism 31–2, 88, 92, 188; ultimate 
values 238
Mahayana 80, 94n26, 190, 284
Marx, Karl 10
materialism 53, 148; alternative 183; 
incompatibility 55, 56–7; materialism/
dualism controversy 197–8
Mavrodes, George 117–18
memory 92–3, 95n35
metaphysics 1, 11; Jainism and Buddhism 
285–6; religious experience 45–6
mind-body dualism 183, 192–3, 197
moksha 16, 18, 39, 43, 46, 182, 204–5, 
217, 227, 298
monotheism: atheism and 74–5; different 
kinds of 72–4, 78n9; experience 28–30; 
generic 67; Greek 67–70; Hindu 71–2; 
NN principle 73–4; non-ultimate reality 
and 75–6; religion 15–16; Semitic 70–1; 
trinitarian 72, 77n2
monotheism, arguments against: 
consistency issue 103–6; evidential 
issue 106–14; problem of evil 100–103; 
reincarnation, karma and evil 99–100; 
three questions 99
monotheism, arguments for: Aquinas’s 
arguments 130–54; argument strategies 
128–30; empirical proofs 128–30; 
logical necessity 119–21; principle of 
sufﬁcient reason (PSR) 128, 129, 130, 
141, 143–4, 147, 299; proof 117–19; 
see also Aquinas, Thomas
morality 241–4; actions vs. nonactions 
253–4; Buddhism values 237–8; 
compatibilism 253–4, 264–5; 
compatibilism and incompatibilism 
248–50; compatibilist freedom 
254–5; compatibilist negative story 
256–7; compatibilist positive story 
255–6; control principle 251–3, 
257–8; deterministic views 246–8; 
divine command ethics 234–5; divine 
knowledge and human freedom 261–2; 
Euthyphro dilemma 235–7, 266n2, 296; 
explanation and determinism 250–1; 
Jainism values 238–9; principle of 
alternative possibilities 258–9; religion 
and 57–8, 233–4; religious experience 
46–7; reply to objections 259–61; 
responsibility 246; truth and future 
262–4; without religion 239–41
moral realists 26, 242–3, 290
Moser, Paul K. 114, 290, 291, 293
natural theology 154; Moser 114, 291; 
Plantinga 291–2
neutrality: religious 57
New Testament 39–40, 60, 61
nirguna Brahman 93, 182, 298
nirvana 40, 43, 46; Buddhism 2, 19, 21, 
31, 57, 80, 94n26, 204–5, 213, 237–8, 
243, 284, 286, 298; Jainism 16, 31, 33, 
88, 221, 228n1
nonmonotheistic conceptions: Advaita 
Vedanta 181–3; appeals to argument 
181; appeals to enlightenment 
experience 203–6; appeals to experience 
181; bundle theory 186–92; identity 
184–5; Jainism and Buddhism on 
persons 183–4; personal identity 185–6; 
self-authentication 206–17; substance 
theory 192–9
nonmonotheistic religion 16–19; 
reincarnation and karma doctrine 17–18
normative pluralism: Hick’s 53–8
objectivity: philosophy 9–10
Old Testament 54, 297
omnipotent being/God 30, 35–6, 54, 75, 
100, 104–5, 123, 146, 155, 176n6, 195, 
246, 261–2, 272–3, 276, 278, 297, 298
omniscient being/God 32, 35–6, 54, 70, 
75, 88, 100, 104–5, 123, 146, 175n3, 
176n6, 195, 201n13, 204, 207–8, 261–2, 
272–3, 276, 278, 284, 297, 298
ontological argument 195, 298; exposition 
of 126–7; God does not exist 124–5; 
God exists 125; monotheism 121, 

318 Index
122–3, 125–8; without notion of 
perfection 123–4; X argument 124–5; 
Y argument 125; Z argument 125
Otto, Rudolph 45
Pali Canon 61
personal identity 185–6
persons: Buddhism 88–9, 183–4, 190; 
bundle theory 186–92; doctrine 91, 
188, 218; importance of account 91–2; 
Jainism persons 87–8, 91, 183–4; 
non-substantival view of 186–8
philosophy 7–9; objectivity 9–10
philosophy of religion 11–12
Plantinga, Alvin 12n2, 121–2, 290, 291–2, 
293
Plato 1, 7, 16, 184, 215, 234
pluralism: religious plurality 53
principle of alternative possibilities 258–9
principle of experiential evidence 163–9; 
application of 172–4; relevance of 
211–12; subject/content experience and 
212–14
principle of sufﬁcient reason (PSR) 128, 
129, 130, 141, 143–4, 147, 299
Principle of the Necessity of Metaphysical 
Identity (PNI) 192, 194–6
Pure Land Buddhism 55, 80
Ramanuja 1, 183, 200n1, 225, 227; 
Advaita Vedanta 80–1, 83, 215, 239, 
286–7; argument from design 150–1; 
experience 217–18, 221–3, 229n25; 
God’s existence 130, 157n29
rationality: reasonable belief 277–80; 
reason and 276–80
Real 56
reason: rationality and 276–80
rebirth cycle (samsara) 16, 18, 239, 284
Reid, Thomas 184
reincarnation 2, 17–18; doctrine of 99–100; 
Jainism and Buddhism 89–90, 190
relativism 51n12
relativity: religious problems 41–2
religion: “all religions are the same” 
51n12; common features 22–3; criteria 
for individuating 19–22; cure 11; 
deﬁnition of 10–11; diagnosis 11; 
diversity 47–50; doctrine 39–42; faith 
269–70; identity 43–7; monotheistic 
15–16; morality without 239–41; 
nonmonotheistic 16–19; philosophy of 
11–12; relativity 41–2, 51n12; truth-
claims 42–3
religious experience: Advaita Vedanta 
34; being evidence vs. providing 
evidence 169–71; direct and indirect 
35–6; evidential argument from 171–2; 
experience as direct evidence 160–3; 
Jainism 31–3; monotheism 28–30; 
phenomenologically thick experiences 
159–60; principle of experiential 
evidence 163–9; self-authentication 
206–17; sensory experiences 168, 
176n6; structure and content 26–8; 
Theravada Buddhism 30–1
religious pluralism: anthropomorphism 
54–5; Hick’s normative pluralism 53–8; 
Knitter’s 59–61; materialism 55, 56–7; 
morality 57–8; the Real 56; religious 
neutrality 57; truth 56
religious traditions: functional diversity 
48–9; responsibility 246
respect: diversity 47–8
responsibility: religious traditions 246
Restricted Tolerance Balance Policy 
(RTBP) 48
Russell, Bertrand 201n7
Russell, Bill 118, 155n4
samsara (cycle of rebirth) 16, 18, 239, 284
Santa Claus 182, 206
Schellenberg, J. L. 112–14, 115n7
scientiﬁc theory 176n6, 282–3
self-authentication 206–17, 228–9n2; 
Advaita Vedanta 207, 209–11, 214–15; 
enlightenment experience 208–9; 
Jainism and Buddhism 207, 209–11, 
215–16; phenomenologies ﬁtting 
claim 209–11; principle of experiential 
evidence 211–12; universal claims 209
self-awareness: Jainism 28, 88, 214, 218, 
230n25, 234, 284
self-lessness 23
self-transcendence: source of 22–3
Semitic monotheism 15–16, 55, 67, 70–1
Shankara 46, 239, 279, 286–7; Advaita 
Vedanta 1, 39, 80–3, 85–6, 213; 

Index 319
enlightenment experience 217–18; 
writings of 93n5
Socrates 272–3
Spinoza, Baruch 7, 83, 247
subject-consciousness-object experience 
26–8, 30, 299; enlightenment experience 
217; experiential evidence 164, 167, 
212; thin vs. thick description 160
substance theory: arguments against 
dualism 197–9; arguments for Jain 
dualism 193–7; Jain dualism 192–3
substantivalists 46, 183, 185–6, 190, 199, 
218, 227–8, 230n33; non-substantival 
view of persons 186–8
theodicy 99–100, 115
theory of meaning 269–70, 296; 
Veriﬁcation Principle (VP) 270–2
Theravada Buddhism 2; appeals to 
experience 224–5; compatibility 20–2; 
doctrines speciﬁc to 19; enlightenment 
experience 204–5; metaphysics 46; 
morality 46; nonmonotheistic religion 
16–17; reincarnation and karma 18, 
89–90, 190; religious experience 27, 
30–1, 36; religious traditions 49
Thuggee 60
tolerance: diversity 47–8
Tolerance Balance Policy (TBP) 48
trinitarian monotheists 72, 77n2
truth: religious 56, 262–4; truth-claims 
42–3
ultimate reality: atheism 74–5; Greek 
monotheism 67–70; Hindu monotheism 
71–2; Jainism 80; monotheism 67, 72–6; 
Semitic monotheism 70–1
Upanishads 17, 34, 61, 82–3, 217
value theory 1
Veriﬁcation Principle (VP) 270–2
Vienna Circle 270
Visistadvaita 80, 82, 95n31, 183, 223
world-has-a-beginning strategy 128, 129, 
130

