
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science 
General Editors 
Dov M. Gabbay 
Paul Thagard 
John Woods 
Cover: "bust of Silenus", Courtyard of Peter Paul Rubens House, Antwerp, Belgium. 
Photograph by Dale Jacquette 
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD 
PARIS . SAN DIEGO . SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE . SYDNEY . TOKYO 
ELSEVIER 
North-Holland is an imprint of Elsevier 

North-Holland is an imprint of Elsevier 
Radarweg 29, PO Box 211, 1000 AE Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB, UK 
First edition 2007 
Copyright © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system 
or transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher 
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Science & Technology Rights 
Department in Oxford, UK: phone (+44) (0) 1865 843830; fax (+44) (0) 1865 853333; 
email: permissions@elsevier.com. Alternatively you can submit your request online by 
visiting the Elsevier web site at http://elsevier.com/locate/permissions, and selecting 
Obtaining permission to use Elsevier material 
Notice 
No responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons 
or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use 
or operation of any methods, products, instructions or ideas contained in the material 
herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in particular, independent 
verification of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
ISBN-13: 978-0-444-51541-4 
ISBN-10: 0-444-51541-0 
For information on all North-Holland publications 
visit our website at books.elsevier.com 
Printed and bound in The Netherlands 
07 08 09 10 11 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

GENERAL PREFACE
Dov Gabbay, Paul Thagard, and John Woods
Whenever science operates at the cutting edge of what is known, it invariably
runs into philosophical issues about the nature of knowledge and reality. Scientiﬁc
controversies raise such questions as the relation of theory and experiment, the
nature of explanation, and the extent to which science can approximate to the
truth. Within particular sciences, special concerns arise about what exists and
how it can be known, for example in physics about the nature of space and time,
and in psychology about the nature of consciousness. Hence the philosophy of
science is an essential part of the scientiﬁc investigation of the world.
In recent decades, philosophy of science has become an increasingly central
part of philosophy in general. Although there are still philosophers who think
that theories of knowledge and reality can be developed by pure reﬂection, much
current philosophical work ﬁnds it necessary and valuable to take into account
relevant scientiﬁc ﬁndings. For example, the philosophy of mind is now closely
tied to empirical psychology, and political theory often intersects with economics.
Thus philosophy of science provides a valuable bridge between philosophical and
scientiﬁc inquiry.
More and more, the philosophy of science concerns itself not just with general
issues about the nature and validity of science, but especially with particular issues
that arise in speciﬁc sciences. Accordingly, we have organized this Handbook into
many volumes reﬂecting the full range of current research in the philosophy of
science. We invited volume editors who are fully involved in the speciﬁc sciences,
and are delighted that they have solicited contributions by scientiﬁcally-informed
philosophers and (in a few cases) philosophically-informed scientists. The result
is the most comprehensive review ever provided of the philosophy of science.
Here are the volumes in the Handbook:
Philosophy of Science: Focal Issues, edited by Theo Kuipers.
Philosophy of Physics, edited by Jeremy Butterﬁeld and John Earman.
Philosophy of Biology, edited by Mohan Matthen and Christopher Stephens.
Philosophy of Mathematics, edited by Andrew Irvine.
Philosophy of Logic, edited by Dale Jacquette.
Philosophy of Chemistry and Pharmacology, edited by Andrea Woody and
Robin Hendry.

vi
Dov Gabbay, Paul Thagard, and John Woods
Philosophy of Statistics, edited by Prasanta S. Bandyopadhyay and Malcolm
Forster.
Philosophy of Information, edited by Pieter Adriaans and Johan van Ben-
them.
Philosophy of Technological Sciences, edited by Anthonie Meijers.
Philosophy of Complex Systems, edited by CliﬀHooker and John Collier.
Philosophy of Earth Systems Science, edited by Bryson Brown and Kent
Peacock.
Philosophy of Psychology and Cognitive Science, edited by Paul Thagard.
Philosophy of Economics, edited by Uskali
Philosophy of Linguistics, edited by Martin Stokhof and Jeroen Groenendijk.
Mark Risjord.
Philosophy of Medicine, edited by Fred Giﬀord.
Details about the contents and publishing schedule of the volumes can be found
at http://www.johnwoods.ca/HPS/.
As general editors, we are extremely grateful to the volume editors for arranging
such a distinguished array of contributors and for managing their contributions.
Production of these volumes has been a huge enterprise, and our warmest thanks
go to Jane Spurr and Carol Woods for putting them together. Thanks also to
Andy Deelen and Arjen Sevenster at Elsevier for their support and direction.
¨a
M ki.
Philosophy of Anthropology and Sociology, edited by Stephen Turner and

CONTENTS 
General Preface 
v 
Dov Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods 
Preface 
xi 
List of Contributors 
xiii 
Introduction: Philosophy of Logic Today 
1 
Dale Jacquette 
What is Logic? 
13 
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu 
The Scope and Limits of Logic 
41 
Wilfrid Hodges 
Logic in Philosophy 
65 
Johan van Benthem 
Informal Logic and The Concept of Argument 
101 
David Hitchcock 
On the Relation of Informal to Symbolic Logic 
131 
Dale Jacquette 
Vagueness and the Logic of Ordinary Language 
155 
Roy A. Sorensen 
Logic and Semantic Analysis 
173 
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone 
Justificatory Irrelevance of Formal Semantics 
205 
Charles F. Kielkopf 
A Brief History of Truth 
227 
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic 
Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
325 
JC Beall 

viii 
Contents 
Hilbert's Program Then and Now 
411 
Richard Zach 
Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy 
449 
Herbert Hochberg 
Classical Logic's Coming of Age 
497 
John W. Dawson, Jr. 
Infinity 
523 
Peter Fletcher 
Ldwenheim-Skolem Theorems 
587 
Heinz-Dieter Ebbinghaus 
The Mathematics of Skolem's Paradox 
615 
Timothy Bays 
Objectual and Substitutional Interpretations of the Quantifiers 
649 
Michael Hand 
Many-Valued Logics 
675 
Siegfried Gottwald 
Relevance Logics 
723 
Katalin Bimbo 
Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency 
791 
Newton C. A. da Costa, Decio Krause and Otavio Bueno 
Extensional vs. Intensional Logic 
913 
Jaroslav Peregrin 
Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal 943 
Logic 
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz 
Modal Realism and its Roots in Mathematical Realism 
997 
Charles S. Chihara 
Free Logics 
1023 
John Nolt 
Fictions and their Logic 
1061 
John Woods 

Contents 
ix 
Counterfactuals, Causation, and Preemption 
1127 
John Collins 
Logic, Mathematics, and the Natural Sciences 
1145 
Neil Tennant 
Default Reasoning 
1163 
Nicholas Rescher 
Index 
1173 


PREFACE
It was a great pleasure to be invited by Dov Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John
for
the
Handbook of the Philosophy
of
Science
The
contributors to this collection of newly commissioned essays on contemporary phi-
losophy of logic have done superb work in covering a wide range of topics in
mathematical and philosophical logic in great depth and with exemplary technical
expertise.
The papers taken as a whole represent state of the art research in contemporary
logic and philosophy of logic. The book serves two purposes. It provides essential
background to major developments in philosophical logic for students and profes-
sional researchers, and it brings together new perspectives, new challenges and
recent developments in logic and its philosophy as a sampling of current logical
practice and a weathervane of logic’s bright future. While no selection of writings
that will ﬁt between two covers on a library shelf can possibly hope to do full
justice to a ﬁeld of investigation as rich, far-reaching, and constantly changing as
philosophy of logic, the present edition of papers with its particular choice of topics
and illustrations of problems and methods typiﬁes some of the most exciting work
that is currently being done in some of the most important subdisciplines of formal
symbolic logic. The philosophical issues surrounding new theoretical discoveries
and applications of logic have implications that go far beyond mathematics. They
touch base with fundamental concepts of metaphysics, theory of knowledge, philos-
ophy of science, philosophy of language, and the values, especially aesthetic norms,
that are reﬂected in the ways logical systems are constructed and evaluated.
An editor can only create a space in which a talented group of authors can
present their ideas. I am delighted now to share the results with a readership that
I hope will ﬁnd their discussions as insightful as I have. If the papers collected here
are deemed useful to others interested in the interplay of contemporary logic and
philosophy, then the book will have achieved its purpose. All credit then is due
individually to the logicians and philosophers with whom it has been my privilege
to collaborate. I am grateful, therefore, in the ﬁrst instance, to the authors for
their excellent work. Special thanks are due to Jane Spurr, at the Department
of Computer Science, King’s College, London, for her professional assistance in
bringing this project to publication. I am indebted to John and Carol Woods
for timely and meaningful help with logistics diﬃculties in the early production
phases of the book when I was away from my oﬃce overseas. Finally, I wish to
thank the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study in the Humanities and Social
Sciences (NIAS), Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW), for
Woods
to
edit
this
volume
of
Philosophy
of
Logic
at
North-Holland
Elsevier.

xii
Preface
a Research Fellowship in Residence in 2005–2006 that funded this among related
research projects in the philosophy of logic and mathematics. I dedicate this book
with love to my wife Tina and our new grandbaby David Owen Templeton.
Dale Jacquette
The Pennsylvania State University
Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study (NIAS)

CONTRIBUTORS
Timothy Bays
Department of Philosophy, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556,
USA.
bays.5@nd.edu
JC Beall
Department of Philosophy, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-2054,
USA.
jc.beall@uconn.edu
Katalin Bimb´o
School of Informatics, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47408 , USA.
kbimbo@indiana.edu
Ot´avio Bueno
Department of Philosophy, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL 33124-4670,
USA.
otaviobueno@mac.com
Stewart Candlish
M207: Philosophy, The University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway,
Crawley WA 6009, Australia.
candlish@arts.uwa.edu.au
Charles S. Chihara
Department of Philosophy, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-2390,
USA.
charles1@socrates.berkeley.edu
John Collins
Department of Philosophy, Columbia University, 1150 Amsterdam Avenue, New
York, NY 10027, USA.
jdc9@columbia.edu
Nic Damnjanovic
The University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309-0232, USA.
damnjano@colorado.edu
John W. Dawson, Jr.
Penn State University, 1031 Edgecomb Avenue, York, PA 17403, USA.
jwd7@psu.edu

xiv
Newton CA da Costa
Department of Philosophy, Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florian´opolis,
SC 88040-900, Brazil.
ncacosta@usp.br
Heinz-Dieter Ebbinghaus
Albert-Ludwigs-Universit¨at Freiburg, Mathematisches Institut, Abteilung f¨ur math-
hde@math.uni-freiburg.de
Peter Fletcher
School of Computing and Mathematics, Keele University, Keele, Staﬀordshire,
ST5 5BG, UK.
p.ﬂetcher@maths.keele.ac.uk
Siegfried Gottwald
Institut f¨ur Logik und Wissenschaftstheorie, Universit¨at Leipzig, Beethovenstraße
15, 04107 Leipzig, Germany.
gottwald@uni-leipzig.de
Michael Hand
Department of Philosophy, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-
4237, USA.
mhand@tamu.edu
Jaakko Hintikka
Boston University Department of Philosophy, 745 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.
hintikka@bu.edu
David Hitchcock
Department of Philosophy, McMaster University, 1280 Main Street West, Hamil-
ton, Ontario, L8S 4K1, Canada.
hitchckd@mcmaster.ca
Herbert Hochberg
Department of Philosophy, The University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Sta-
tion, Austin, TX 78712, USA.
hochberg@mail.utexas.edu
Wilfrid Hodges
School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary, University of London, Mile End
Road, London E1 4NS, UK.
w.hodges@qmul.ac.uk
Dale Jacquette
Department of Philosophy, The Pennsylvania State University, 246 Sparks Build-
ing, University Park, PA 16802, USA.
dlj4@psu.edu
Contributors
ematische Logik, Eckerstraße 1, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Contributors
xv
Charles F. Kielkopf
Department of Philosophy, The Ohio State University, 350 University Hall, 230
North Oval Mall, Columbus, OH 43210-1365, USA.
kielkopf.1@osu.edu
Marcus Kracht
Department of Linguistics, UCLA, 405 Hilgard Avenue, 3125 Campbell Hall, Box
951543, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1543, USA.
kracht@humnet.ucla.edu
D´ecio Krause
Department of Philosophy, Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florian´opolis,
SC 88040-900, Brazil.
dkrause@click21.com.br
Oliver Kutz
School of Computer Science, The University of Manchester, Kilburn Building, Ox-
ford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK.
kutz@cs.man.ac.uk
Ernest Lepore
Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science (RuCCS), Rutgers University - New Brunswick,
152 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854-8020, USA.
lepore@ruccs.rutgers.edu
John Nolt
Department of Philosophy, 801 McClung Tower, University of Tennessee, Knoxville,
Tennessee, 37996-0480, USA.
nolt@utk.edu
Jaroslav Peregrin
Filozoﬁck´a fakulta n´am, Jana Palacha 2, Praha 1, 116 38 Czech Republic.
jaroslav.peregrin@ﬀ.cuni.cz
Nicholas Rescher
Department of Philosophy, University of Pittsburgh, 1012 Cathedral of Learning,
Pittsburgh PA 15260, USA.
rescher@pitt.edu
Gabriel Sandu
Department of Philosophy, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland.
sandu@mappi.helsinki.ﬁ
Roy A. Sorensen
Department of Philosophy, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.
roy.sorensen@dartmouth.edu

xvi
Matthew Stone
Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science (RuCCS), Rutgers University - New Brunswick,
152 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854-8020, USA.
matthew.stone@rutgers.edu
Neil Tennant
Department of Philosophy, Ohio State University, 350 University Hall, 230 North
Oval Mall, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
tennant.9@osu.edu
Johan van Benthem
Institute for Logic, Language & Computation, (ILLC), University of Amsterdam,
Plantage Muidergracht 24, 1018 TV Amsterdam, Netherlands.
johan@science.uva.nl
and Department of Philosophy, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
johan@csli.stanford.edu
John Woods
Department of Philosophy, University of British Columbia, 1866 Main Mall E370,
Vancouver BC Canada V6T 1Z1.
jhwoods@interchange.ubc.ca.
Richard Zach
Department of Philosophy, University of Calgary, 2500 University Drive NW, Cal-
gary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada.
rzach@ucalgary.ca
Contributors

INTRODUCTION:
PHILOSOPHY OF LOGIC TODAY
Dale Jacquette
LOGIC AND PHILOSOPHY
It is standard in works dedicated to topics in philosophy and logic to distinguish
between philosophy of logic and philosophical logic. There is no universally agreed
upon way of dividing up these categories, and some authors prefer to conﬂate the
two and treat the two phrases as more or less synonymous.
I do not have particularly strong reasons for distinguishing or running these
concepts together. If pressed, I favor a terminology in which philosophical logic
involves applications of any recognized methods of logic to philosophical problems
or for purposes of advancing philosophical discussions, whereas philosophy of logic
is the consideration of philosophical problems that arise in relation to work in any
recognized branch of logic. By this stipulation, all of the papers in this volume
belong squarely in the category of philosophical logic, and thereby also fall under
the category of philosophy of logic so deﬁned. The essays all raise problems for
philosophical reﬂection at the same time that they illustrate the methods of logic
in particular applications. By addressing the nature and limits of logic from both
a theoretical and practical point of view, in the context of explaining the wide
variety of diﬀerent types of logic that have emerged in the recent proliferation of
formal logical systems, the papers directly and indirectly engage central issues in
the philosophy of logic while commenting on the principles of logic and its uses
primarily in philosophy, mathematics and science.
Logic, like any other subject, depends on philosophical presuppositions. It raises
conceptual and especially foundational questions that can only be proﬁtably en-
gaged by thinkers with rigorous philosophical training. The fact that so many
logicians have also been philosophers, and that the motivation for so many im-
portant innovations in logic have derived from philosophical concerns about the
clariﬁcation of concepts, problems and distinctions, means that logic and philoso-
phy of logic are historically at least if not also thematically inseparably intertwined.
It is only by understanding the complex justiﬁcations for formal logical apparatus,
for the exact expression of ideas and deductively valid inference of sentences, that
we can hope to fathom the explosion of logical systems that have appeared since
the late nineteenth century through the latter half of the twentieth and continuing
now into the twenty-ﬁrst century. With every new addition to the vocabulary and
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

2
Dale Jacquette
mechanisms of formal symbolic logic there arise an exponentially greater num-
ber of philosophical questions about the meaning and implications of what logic
introduces to the realms of mathematics and science.
IN THE LOGIC CANDY STORE
I want to introduce this handbook of essays in the philosophy of logic by raising
a problem that I think holds a vital key to understanding the nature of logic in
contemporary philosophy and mathematics. Not all of the papers in this volume
do not directly address the question, but they provide ample raw material for
reﬂecting on the kinds of answers that might be given.
The puzzle in a nutshell is to understand how it is that so many diﬀerent kinds
of formal systems can all deserve to be called logics.
Another way to put the
problem is to ask how in the ﬁrst place there can possibly be a multiplicity of
logical systems as opposed to just one universal logic. If we can explain what
makes all of these systems logics, why each is a logic, we should have a good
handle on the question of what logic itself is, what constitutes a logic and what is
meant by the concept of logic.
For many centuries, in Western thought, there was essentially only one logic.
One system of logic only was recognized as properly so-called. Kant, in the Critique
of Pure Reason, Preface to the Second Edition, famously remarks: ‘That logic has
already, from the earliest times, proceeded upon this sure path is evidenced by
the fact that since Aristotle it has not required to retrace a single step, unless,
indeed, we care to count as improvements the removal of certain needless subtleties
or the clearer exposition of its recognized teaching, features which concern the
elegance rather than the certainty of the science. It is remarkable also that to
the present day this logic has not been able to advance a single step, and is
thus to all appearance a closed and completed body of doctrine’ (Bviii). Kant in
the mid-eighteenth century, after more than two thousand years after Aristotle’s
time, could still truthfully maintain that there was only one logic —Aristotelian
syllogistic. Yet it took only approximately another one hundred years for logicians,
including George Boole, William Hamilton, Bernard Bolzano and Franz Brentano
to recommend signiﬁcant corrections, amendments and improvements to syllogistic
logic. The beginnings were modest. First on the scene was a recognition of the
need for arguments to contain four terms rather than only three.
The use of
syllogistic logic was always a Procrustean bed, stretching, or, more often, lopping
oﬀparts of arguments expressed informally in natural language in order to ﬁt
the regimented structure of the neo-classical syllogism. Accuracy and generality
was always a problem in Aristotelian logic, and the need for a more ﬂexible and
adaptable logic, one that had no speciﬁc limitations as to number of terms, number
of assumptions or conclusions, with provisions for diﬀerences in the scope of logical
connectives, started to make itself felt at many levels once the grip of syllogisms
on the logical and philosophical imagination started to decline, and another way
of thinking about the logic of deductive inference eventually took its place.

Introduction: Philosophy of Logic Today
3
When we stop to consider its history, today, with our understanding of logic
as it has evolved, it seems strange that Aristotelian syllogistic logic should ever
have been developed in the ﬁrst place. It does not appear natural or inevitable in
anything like the way that basic arithmetic or elementary geometry do. Despite
the evolution of notations and methods, these staples of formal reasoning appear
obvious and intuitively suited as formal methods of expression and calculation for
their respective ﬁelds of application. They have also stood the test of time much
better than syllogistic logic, even if they are no longer regarded with the same
apodictic respect they once enjoyed, and even if they have been supplemented by
new mathematical techniques, new algorithms and alternative axiom schemata. In
the case of syllogistic logic, there are certainly inferences that conform exactly to a
three-term three-sentence deduction in a particular mood and ﬁgure, with a major
and minor premise, middle term and the like, exactly as prescribed by Aristotle’s
Prior Analytics. What, however, could have compelled Aristotle, not generally
formalist in his thinking, to suppose that all arguments had to adhere to just the
15 valid forms (assuming the denial of existential import) of the total 256 forms
combinatorially available to the syllogism under its classical restrictions? Why
would anyone have agreed that all of reasoning could be reconstructed within the
limited forms of the syllogism?
We need not answer these questions here.
The point is only to understand
syllogistic logic as ﬁrmly entrenched in the scientiﬁc-philosophical curriculum, with
no competitors in the marketplace of ideas to dispute its monopoly for more than
a thousand years. With this picture in mind, we turn next to the developments of
the late nineteenth century, beginning with the publication in 1874 of Boole’s The
Mathematical Analysis of Logic, and in 1879 of Gottlob Frege’s Begriﬀsschrift as
major watersheds in the history of logic. In these seminal works, we witness the
replacement of Aristotle’s rigid syllogistic logic with a more expressively ﬂexible
and deductively transparent graphic language for exhibiting logical structures. It
was a long time coming and a welcome new development on the symbolic logic
landscape. It is surely no accident, in view of the comparison between classical
mathematics and syllogistic logic that Boole and Frege should have independently
found inspiration for their revisionary formulations of logic respectively in algebra
and arithmetic. It still does not account for the cacophony of diﬀerent and distinct
logics that seem to have replaced the search for the one and only logic as the
uniﬁed single formal theory of deductive thinking. For, as we move from Frege’s
Begriﬀsschrift to Whitehead and Russell’s Principia Mathematica and beyond to
the situation in logic today, we ﬁnd ourselves with an embarrassment of logical
riches.
How we got from Frege to the current state of things is an interesting historical
question.
One possibility is the following.
I think that the most likely expla-
nation must weave together at least three factors. One is the parallel discovery
of non-Euclidean geometries by Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky (1829) and Georg
Friedrich Bernhard Riemann (1854) that opened the door to the possibility of
alternative axiom systems for the same apparently objective body of relations in

4
Dale Jacquette
mathematics. The existence, ﬁrst, and, ﬁnally, the dramatically successful applica-
tion of Reimannian non-Euclidean geometry in Einstein’s theory of relativity, freed
the imagination of many mathematicians and logicians, who began rethinking the
concept of a formal system as any self-consistent axiom system whose implications
can be rigorously investigated. This paved the way for logicians to reﬂect in the
same expansive terms about the possibilities of experimenting with diﬀerent logic
systems and thinking of non-Aristotelian and eventually non-Fregean and non-
Russellian logics. By itself, however, the emergence of non-Euclidean geometries
does not seem adequate to explain the development of alternative logics. After
all, it would have been possible philosophically for many logicians to have drawn
a sharp distinction between logic and mathematics, or between logic and arith-
metic on the one hand, and geometries on the other, such that logic or logic and
arithmetic unlike geometry are not subject to deviant axiomatizations.
What seems to have added further impetus to the onset of so many diﬀer-
ent kinds of nonstandard nonclassical logics are several philosophical motivations.
These include the study of modal logics in the ﬁrst third of the twentieth century,
gaining momentum especially beginning in the late 1950s, and of relevance logics
to overcome the paradoxes of material and strict implication in the 1960s and
1970s, all to the present day. The formalization of model set theoretical semantics
for modal logics in particular opened the door to today’s expansive proliferation
of logical systems. It did so, moreover, in several speciﬁc ways. First, the formal
semantics developed for multiple modal systems was already in itself a pluraliza-
tion of logical axiomatizations. The diﬀerences in theorems and valid inference
structures for diﬀerent permissible iterations and inferences from iterated quanti-
ﬁed modal logics immediately swelled the ranks of logic with a host of new formal
systems. Second, the existence and exact interpretation of distinct modal logics
encouraged logicians and philosophers to expand their horizons with respect to
other areas of discourse that had resisted analysis in classical logic. This included
most notably the development of relevance logics. From an altogether indepen-
dent direction and with its own particular motivations, eﬀorts to better understand
entailment relations in such a way as to avoid trivial implications involving contin-
gently or necessarily false assumptions and true or necessarily true conclusions, in
eﬀect, investigating the logic of relevant implication, resulted in the formalization
of another burgeoning family of logics. The same can be said for intuitionistic
logics, beginning with L.E.J. Brouwer’s work in 1907 and continuing especially
from the 1930s to today.
The signiﬁcance of these early deﬁning moments in the recent history of sym-
bolic logic is that philosophical considerations have driven a desire to extend the
palette of formal logical systems. These have taken root because of a perceived
need to make logic more expressively adapted to speciﬁc areas of linguistic usage
inadequately served by existing classical logics, or in order to overcome formal or
epistemic scruples about the proper modeling of deductive inference. Innovations
from a related direction have also come from the desire to determine exactly the
scope and limits of logical symbolisms in formal metatheory and metamathemat-

Introduction: Philosophy of Logic Today
5
ics. A notable example, of which many might be given, is the discovery of the
arithmetization of logical syntax in Kurt G¨odel’s 1931 proof of the deductive in-
completeness of classical ﬁrst-order logic. All such trends, it should be needless to
say, are not only justiﬁed but commendable and even indispensable to the health
and vitality of mathematical logic as a living evolving tradition in the formal
sciences.
UNDERSTANDING THE PLURALITY OF LOGICS
The more recent extensive growth of symbolic logics makes it harder than ever
to sustain the attitude that logicians are in search of a single formalization that
will stand as the logic of all thought and discourse. What is suggested in the
spirit of modern specialization is a plethora of diﬀerent logics, many of which are
deductively incompatible with one another, some of which are at most overlapping
in their theorems and algorithmic methods or in some of their results, and some
that are so distant from one another that it is hard to see the sense in which they
can all claim to be logics.
This, of course, returns us to the problem at hand. How is it that all of these
formal systems can rightly claim to be logics?
What can we learn about the
concept of logic itself that for the ﬁrst time in its history is so diverse in its
formulations across the board in mathematics and philosophy? There are several
possibilities that immediately come to mind, and it may be worthwhile to display
them systematically for the sake of comparison.
1. There is a universal logic. The alternative formalisms that are currently on
oﬀer as logics are in fact something other than logic. These formal languages
may eventually ﬁnd a distinct name and separate category. The proliferation
of what are presented as diﬀerent logics can accordingly be understood as
a sometimes deliberate and sometimes subconscious attempt on the part of
logicians to identify the one and only correct logic that has yet to emerge as
the legitimate successor of syllogistic logic.
2. All of the various systems of logic that seem so disjoint today will eventu-
ally or can potentially be uniﬁed and integrated as a single super-system.
Some systems that do not lend themselves to such incorporation may fall by
the wayside as faux logics. The contemporary proliferation of distinct log-
ics is comparable to the prior systematization of other mathematical disci-
plines like Euclid’s geometry, that developed out of a hodgepodge of practical
methods of measurement and calculation recipes that were ﬁnally brought
together under a single set of axioms. We are, speaking historically, currently
in a pre-systematization phase in the development of symbolic logic, work-
ing piecemeal on the fragments of what will eventually emerge as a grand
synthesis in a future logic of enormous power and comprehension.
3. There is no universal logic, but there is a universal concept of logic that

6
Dale Jacquette
underlies one and all of the many diﬀerent logical formalisms that have been
advanced. On this view, it becomes the task of the philosophy of logic to
analyze and deﬁne the concept of logic in terms of its necessary and suﬃcient
conditions in such a way that all of the logics properly so-called will properly
ﬁt within its conditions.
4. There is a universal logic and a universal concept of logic, but we can never
fully or conﬁdently come to know what it is. We are thus in a situation
that is similar to that of Socrates in Plato’s early aporetic dialogues, in
which a concept persistently eludes us as we try to nail down its necessary
and suﬃcient conditions. What we do instead, as the next best choice, is
to propound many diﬀerent formal systems, each of which purports to be
a logic, and some of which may purport to be the logic, but without any
conceptual guidance as to how closely or distantly any chosen formalism
might be approximating the ideal. The proliferation of ‘logics’ is thus itself
a symptom of our lack of a conceptual polestar. The best approximation
might then be regarded as the one, if any, that gains the most widespread
acceptance or turns out to have the most fruitful applications.
5. There is no universal logic or universal concept of logic, but something rather
like a later Wittgensteinian family resemblance among disparate logics. The
overlappings of one logical system with respect to another in the entire net-
work of logics must then be carefully mapped out so that we can understand
the conceptual interrelations between diﬀerent kinds of logic, in addition to
grasping their historical-genealogical and thematic interconnections. Logics,
as Wittgenstein said of mathematics, and no doubt also with symbolic logics
in mind, are in that case rather like a city with a central core and suburbs
burgeoning in various directions to serve a variety of diﬀerent kinds of ex-
pressive and inferential needs, with no prospect of uniﬁed integration into a
single super-system.
6. There is no universal logic, universal or family resemblance concept of logic
that can hope to incorporate all of the disparate systems of logic. These
systems are rightly called logics only nominalistically, in that they are formal
systems developed and referred to institutionally as logics by professional
logicians.
There is no possibility of such logics being integrated, and no
prospect of understanding any deeper connections by virtue of which they
are related. They are all logics simply because they are given that name by
persons who are part of a professional scientiﬁc and philosophical community
with the institutional authority to designate them as such. In the past, there
was only one logic because logicians were too limited in their imaginations
or too hidebound by tradition to venture out in diﬀerent directions. The
idea of a uniﬁed integrated logic or overlapping family resemblances among
logics is a myth lacking any practical foundation.

Introduction: Philosophy of Logic Today
7
We need not assume that these are the only possibilities. They nevertheless repre-
sent a reasonable place to begin in thinking about the problems posed for philoso-
phy of logic, given the ﬂourishing today of so many apparently diﬀerent logics. If
we try to take stock of some of the most conspicuous diﬀerences that divide these
logics, we might be struck at once by the fact that new logics have not only sought
to ﬁll in some of the gaps left by the early pioneering formalisms of Frege and
Whitehead and Russell, but have developed as a response to the desire to better
understand the nature of deductive inference.
Thus, it is one thing to supplement a generically Principia-style mathematical
logic with provisions for modal operators, alethic, deontic, temporal, and others,
or with devices for formalizing indexicals and dealing with anaphoric reference in
colloquial language, to provide for a logic of imperatives or interrogatives modeled
on that of the logic of declarative propositions, or the like. Other logical systems,
however, have expressly been designed with the intention of addressing philosophi-
cal concerns about the logic of deductive inference in its purest most general terms.
Here we may naturally think of intuitionistic logics, relevance and paraconsistent
logics, along with a spectrum of nonstandard philosophically motivated semantics
for standard predicate-quantiﬁcational logics, including substitutional semantics,
probability and game theoretical semantics, intensional systems, free logics, logics
of nonexistent objects, logics of beingless objects, independence friendly logics,
and many others besides, with no obvious limit to their proliferation.
What is fascinating about these logics is the ways in which they challenge our
understanding of what is and is not required for deductive validity. It is one thing
to claim that a deductively valid inference is one in which if the assumptions
are true then the conclusions must be true, or such that it is impossible for the
assumptions to be true and the conclusions false. It is quite another matter to
specify how we are to handle situations in which the assumptions cannot be true
or the conclusions cannot be false, even if the assumptions have no shared content
or point of contact with the conclusions. It is another matter yet again to decide
in exactly what sense the conclusions of a deductively valid argument must be
true, or such that it is impossible for them to be false, when the assumptions are
true. What sort of modality is involved in deductive validity, and what is its logic?
Does the modal logic in turn require a concept of deductive validity with the same
or a diﬀerent modality governing the semantic possibilities of modal assumptions
and modal conclusions? These are among the many still unanswered questions in
philosophy of logic. Nor can we simply take it for granted that received wisdom
about semantic categories of truth and falsehood carry over straightforwardly into
symbolic logic. There are multiple conceptions of truth and falsehood, with dis-
tinct implications for the syntax and semantics of alternative logical symbolisms.
There are systems that contrive to tolerate syntactical contradictions without clas-
sical inferential explosion, or that try to conﬁne intuitively irrelevant inferences to
limited parts of the range of a deductive consequence relation. There are systems
that seek to avoid truth- or validity-challenging deductive paradoxes by introduc-
ing nonclassical truth values or truth value gaps, and others again that model

8
Dale Jacquette
truth value assignments on fuzzy probability coeﬃcients. The possibilities some-
times appear to be endless, and yet all are at least popularly considered to be
logics. Whether and in what sense they are rightly classiﬁed as such depends very
much on arriving at a satisfactory answer to the question we have posed for the
philosophy of logic.
Nevertheless, there are constraints operating within each logical system. Eﬀorts
to construct logical formalisms run into limitations, regardless of their starting
places; there are always things they can reasonably be made to do, and things
they cannot do.
It is tempting as a result to suppose that logic after all has
something to do universally with the limitations encountered in diﬀerent ways and
in diﬀerent places by all of these symbolisms. The study of alternative logical
systems could then be instrumental after all in touching base with a universal
concept of logic. We can begin in this way to grasp a sense of what is meant
by logic, even if no single formalization of logical reasoning can be expected to
explicate what is common to all deductively valid inference. It might nevertheless
be objected that if in fact there are diﬀerent concepts of deduction, then there
must be diﬀerent concepts of deductive logic, and hence diﬀerent concepts of logic.
Does this mean that there cannot be a grand synthesis of logic or an underlying
uniﬁed integrated universal logic? Not necessarily; it all depends on whether or not
ostensibly diﬀerent concepts of deductive logic can or cannot be brought together
as multiple aspects of a single notion of deduction. This, of course, is an unresolved
issue, but we learn more from eﬀorts to develop the individual logics that pose the
problem and from attempts, even when they spectacularly fail, to bring order and
system to the diversity of formalisms that continue to ﬂood the market. Whether
or not such projects in the philosophy of logic have any chance of succeeding is
currently unclear. It is easy to imagine many logicians and philosophers not being
particularly interested in the problem, but keeping their noses to the grindstone
and working exclusively on the individual challenges posed by hammering out the
details of particular logics dedicated to particular analytic tasks.
The variety of logical systems under development contribute in diﬀerent ways
to understanding the nature of logic, even when they are not undertaken with
any philosophical agenda or interest in the philosophy of logic on the part of their
authors. They provide the unselfconscious raw material of philosophical logic, for
explicating the concept of deductively valid inference in previously undreamed of
ways. In the ﬁeld of symbolic logic today, with so many diﬀerent formal systems
from which to choose, we can revel like children turned loose in a shop selecting
their favorite sweets. If that is the new disjoint, decentralized model for research
in logic, if we do not have to worry about whether or how a preferred logic relates
to logic or to the one and only true system of logic, then the philosophy of logic
needs to take account of these developments and try to learn what it can about
the concept of logic from the surfeit of logical systems originating during this time
of extensive exploration and experimentation.

Introduction: Philosophy of Logic Today
9
FUTURE DIRECTIONS IN PHILOSOPHICAL LOGIC AND PHILOSOPHY
OF LOGIC
The present volume oﬀers a snapshot of contemporary developments in philosoph-
ical logic.
The philosophy of logic, like the philosophy of art or philosophy of
science, takes its bearings from the best work in the ﬁeld.
The handbook includes exemplars of new ﬁndings in logical theory and its ap-
plications, and provides a valuable compendium of resource materials. It includes
studies relating to the background of informal logic, semantic analysis, logical para-
doxes, formal explications of the concept of truth, deductive validity and logical
entailment, deductivism and Hilbert’s program in mathematical logic, the theo-
rems of classical metatheory, cardinalities of semantic domains for the objectual
interpretation of quantiﬁers, objectual versus substitutional interpretations of the
quantiﬁers in predicate logic, many-valued logics, relevance logics, paraconsistent
logics, free logics, extensional versus intensional logics, the logic of ﬁction and
reference in logic to nonexistent and beingless objects, analysis of vagueness and
the relation of symbolic logic to ordinary colloquial language, models of modality,
logically possible worlds, transworld identity and counterpart semantics for modal
logic, the controversy surrounding the ontology of logically possible worlds, modal
realism versus modal actualism and modal ﬁctionalism, the logic of counterfac-
tuals and analysis of the concept of causation and causal relations, the history
and continuing prospects of logicism in the reduction of all of mathematics to
logic, the concept of inﬁnity and transﬁnite domains in logic and mathematics,
the practical uses of logic in mathematics, epistemology, and the natural sciences,
and general philosophical reﬂections on the nature of logic, its scope and limits
and philosophical applications.
A handbook is meant to be of such size that one can take it up and hold it in
the hand, to ﬂip through its pages and browse its chapters for subjects of interest
and refer to it for essential information. Within these limitations, the guiding
idea of the present handbook has been to provide an overview of contemporary
research in logic for future directions in its philosophy. Where will philosophy
of logic go next? We have presented some possible lines of inquiry, suggested by
the puzzle of trying to understand the nature of logic in light of the abundance
of logical systems. The lack of universal agreement about even the most basic
logical concepts, reﬂected in alternative logics of deductive inference and incom-
patible interpretations of fundamental semantic concepts around which diﬀerent
logical formalisms have been devised, pose an interesting analytic challenge for
the philosophy of logic. We can imagine that some of its future directions might
stem ultimately from a desire to clarify the concept of logic itself and to come
to terms with the vast plurality of formal logical systems. We might expect that
some thinkers will try to eliminate what they deem as excesses among logical for-
malisms, leading toward a new austerity in philosophical logic, trimming down its
ambitions in response to a more circumscribed conception of what is to count as
logic, logical deduction, and the proper ambit of deductive reasoning. Others will

10
Dale Jacquette
further elaborate platonistic, conceptual, constructivistic, intuitionistic, or simi-
lar traditional ontologies for philosophical logic, with implications for what is to
count as a genuine system of logic and how interrelations among logical formalisms
should be understood. Still others will develop latitudinarian Wittgensteinian or
nominalistic philosophies of logic that embrace all or virtually all work ostensibly
in the area of logic as exemplifying genuine logical systems, and testifying to the
impossibility of identifying any meaningfully universal characteristics of logic.
All this, it will be said, is already known. The question is, Are there discernible
trends that are beginning to emerge in current logical theory that the essays col-
lected in the present volume help to exemplify or to which they contribute? Here
I think that the only responsible thing to say is that the jury is still out and
that no clear indication of a verdict is yet to be divined. If the essays collected
in the present volume encourage any predictions about the future course in the
philosophy of logic, the following might be the most that can responsibly be pro-
jected, subject to revision. Reading the tea leaves, one possibility strongly suggests
itself. This is that logic will continue to diversify itself in many diﬀerent direc-
tions, that there will be a ﬂowering of new systems of logic formulated in order
to explore and test the viability of philosophical concepts of deductive inference
and the semantics of thought and language, while continuing to address areas of
discourse considered to be inadequately served by logical systems currently avail-
able. There will be no dramatic integration or uniﬁcation of these disparate logics
for the foreseeable future, although linkages and conceptual connections, shared
formalisms and algorithms may continue to suggest the possibility of drawing all
of these logics together into one comprehensive system. At best, we might look
forward to a process of coalescence and aﬃnity recognition that will only occur
in limited ways for speciﬁc parts of logic. Constellations of logical systems will
then begin to take shape and separate themselves into distinct clusters of related
logics. The semantics, analysis of the concepts of truth and falsehood, and accom-
panying metaphysics for such diverse logics will begin to diverge from the purely
extensionalist semantics that have held sway since the time of Bertrand Russell
and W.V.O. Quine, and start increasingly, as with Donald Davidson, to return
to a more Fregean combined intensional and extensional theory, favoring interpre-
tations based on the possibilities of combinations of properties to constitute the
sense of referring terms and sentences, and to stand in relation to the referents to
object terms to which properties are predicated in true and false sentences.
If a sweeping integration of the plurality of logics is to be eﬀected, it will most
likely occur in part at least, like the solution to the four-color problem in topol-
ogy, through the mechanization of logical syntax and inference rules in automated
reasoning systems. Computers are capable of comparing astronomical numbers of
theorems of astronomical numbers of diﬀerent logics with heuristics for identifying
commonalities. As a tool for investigating the diversity of logics, computerized
comparisons and taxonomies of formal languages may increasingly reveal under-
lying structures or the lack thereof that in turn can help to answer fundamental
problems in the philosophy of logic.
The mere fact that the syntax of logical

Introduction: Philosophy of Logic Today
11
systems can be automated by itself in the meantime will not answer deeper ques-
tions in the philosophy of logic concerning the semantics and ontology of logic,
nor will it help us better to understand the nature of logic itself, whether pla-
tonistic, nominalistic, intutionistic, pragmatic, or something altogether diﬀerent,
previously unknown on the horizon.
Although computers cannot answer these questions for us, they can nevertheless
provide valuable instruments to aid in the task. We can use information processing
machines to assemble and analyze data in order to focus attention on aspects of
longstanding philosophical questions that would never be possible relying entirely
on human brain power. We need all the mechanical help we can get in assessing the
interrelations among formal logical systems from a variety of standpoints, in order
to uncover and investigate properties of logics that would otherwise remain invis-
ible to the plodding eﬀorts, limited memories and cognitive workspace of human
inquirers. Ongoing eﬀorts to automate reasoning are likely, therefore, to play an
increasingly important role in this type of research. Such projects are worthwhile
for their own sake in numerous applications of symbolic logic in technology and
the information sciences. They provide a powerful adjunct in the eﬀort to gain
perspective on outstanding problems in the philosophy of logic — problems that
in some ways have been with us since the time of the ancient Greeks, and that
in other ways arise uniquely only today in the contemporary logic candy store. It
is clear that in this work, if we are not to fall victim to a kind of vicious circu-
larity, we will need to pay careful attention to the kinds of logic embodied in the
hardware and software built into automated systems, and the presuppositions and
limitations of those logics, insofar as they are used to evaluate the interrelations
among symbolic logical systems generally. Could this then be the path toward a
universal logic, developing a single computer logic for the purpose of electronically
comparing intersystemic logical formalisms? Will computers in turn be needed
to devise an automated logical system for purposes of comparing, evaluating, and
seeking out similarities among other logical systems? What we will potentially
gain from the future automation of the wide diversity of logics, developed by hand
in the time-approved manner that began with Aristotle, is a unique window on
the nature of logic, if, indeed, logic has an underlying nature, and on the concept
of logic itself, or, alternatively, on the hard-won insight that there is after all no
universal nature of logic, nothing whatsoever in common between the variety of
formal systems that are authoritatively designated as systems of formal symbolic
logic, beyond the fact that they are so designated.
It is with an eye toward these possible future developments in the philosophy of
logic that the present volume has in part been organized. The handbook, if it is to
be useful not only immediately, but for generations of logicians and philosophers
to come, must reﬂect a vision of the current state of research in philosophical and
mathematical logic that is compatible with an open-ended sense of how things
are likely to proceed in the indeﬁnite future. Like most interesting questions in
philosophy, the topics investigated in the philosophy of logic, as logic and philoso-
phy continue to mature together in symbiotic interrelation, are certain to remain

12
Dale Jacquette
hotly disputed, and, to many minds, indeﬁnitely unresolved. The longevity of such
philosophical challenges does not in the least detract from the importance of the
topics explored, but adds an element of open-endedness to the inquiry that con-
tinues to contribute to the production of new insights, new meanings, and even to
unanticipated distinctions and technical innovations. That itinerary, in any case,
is a (virtually) guaranteed implication for philosophy of logic in the future.

WHAT IS LOGIC?
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
1
LOGIC AND INFERENCE
It is far from clear what is meant by logic or what should be meant by it. It is
nevertheless reasonable to identify logic as the study of inferences and inferential
relations. The obvious practical use of logic is in any case to help us to reason
well, to draw good inferences. And the typical form the theory of any part of logic
seems to be a set of rules of inference.
This answer already introduces some structure into a discussion of the nature of
logic, for in an inference we can distinguish the input called a premise or premises
from the output known as the conclusion. The transition from a premise or a
number of premises to the conclusion is governed by a rule of inference. If the
inference is in accordance with the appropriate rule, it is called valid. Rules of
inference are often thought of as the alpha and omega of logic. Conceiving of logic
as the study of inference is nevertheless only the ﬁrst approximation to the title
question, in that it prompts more questions than it answers. It is not clear what
counts as an inference or what a theory of such inferences might look like. What
are the rules of inference based on? Where do we ﬁnd them? The ultimate end
one tries to reach through a series of inferences is usually supposed to be a true
proposition. Frege [1970, 126] wrote that “the word ‘true’ characterizes logic.” But
how does this desideratum determine the rules of inference? A few distinctions
will illustrate the embarrassment of riches covered by the term “logic” and at the
same time sharpen the issues.
Inferences can be either deductive, that is, necessarily truth preserving, or am-
pliative, that is, not necessarily truth preserving. This distinction can be identiﬁed
with the distinction between such steps in reasoning as do not introduce new in-
formation into one’s reasoning and such as do not do so. For if that information is
genuinely new, its truth cannot be guaranteed by the old information. Or, rather,
we could thus identify deductive inferences as uninformative ones if we had a vi-
able notion of information at our disposal. Unfortunately, the viability of a notion
of information that could be used to make the distinction has been challenged by
philosophers, notably by W.V. Quine [1970, 3-6, 98-99], as a part of his criticism
of what he calls the analytic-synthetic distinction [Quine, 1951]. A closer exami-
nation shows that we have to distinguish from each other two kinds of information,
called depth information and surface information [Hintikka, 1970; forthcoming (c)].
A valid deductive inference cannot introduce new depth information, but it can
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

14
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
increase surface information. Quine’s scruples can be best understood as being
based on the diﬃculty of separating depth information and surface information
purely behaviorally.
Philosophers generally consider deductive reasoning as the paradigmatic type of
inference. However, there is a widespread view among nonphilosophers that might
be called the Sherlock Holmes view. According to it all good reasoning including
ampliative reasoning, turns on “deductions” and “logic”. (Cf. [Hintikka, 2001].)
2
DEDUCTIVE INFERENCE AND INFORMATION
Being truth-preserving, deductive inference is essentially cumulative or, to use a
more common term, monotonic.
In recent years, spurred largely by studies of
automated reasoning of diﬀerent kinds, there has mushroomed a wide variety of
nonmonotonic logics. (See e.g. [Antoniou, 1997; Gabbay et l., 1993-1996, vol.3].)
They are all obviously modes of ampliative reasoning, and should be studied as
such. They will be commented on in §17 below.
If a deductive inference does not introduce new information, it is in some sense
uninformative or tautological. Such uninformativeness of deductive inference was
maintained by among others by the early Wittgenstein and by the logical posi-
tivists. (See [Hempel, 1945; Dreben and Floyd, 1991].) Such a view is unsatisfac-
tory, for it leaves unexplained what the reasoner gains by drawing such allegedly
uninformative conclusions. Something important can obviously be gained through
deduction. This air of unintuitiveness can be dispelled by means of the distinc-
tion between depth information and surface information mentioned in §1. Surface
information can be characterized as the information that can be read oﬀfrom
a sentence without any nontrivial deductive ado, while depth information is the
totality of (surface) information that can be extracted from it by deductive logic.
The emergence of new surface information explains why purely deductive inference
can be experienced as informative and even productive of surprises.
The noninformativeness (in the sense of depth information) of deductive infer-
ence is a presupposition of one of the most important kinds of application of logic.
This application is axiomatization. The leading idea of this method, vividly em-
phasized by David Hilbert, is to summarize our knowledge of some model or class
of models, for instance certain physical systems, in an axiomatic theory [Hilbert,
1918]. That model or those models can then be studied by deducing theorems from
the axiom system. Such a summation is not possible if new information about the
subject matter can be introduced in the course of the deduction.
3
ANALYTIC INFERENCES
A distinction within deductive inferences can be made between those that depend
only on the meaning of logical concepts, expressed in language by what is known
as logical constants, and those that depend also on the meaning of nonlogical

What is Logic?
15
constants. Deductive logic in the narrow sense is restricted to the former. Truth-
preserving inferences that are not purely logical in this narrow sense are often called
analytic. This distinction presupposes a distinction between logical and nonlogical
concepts, expressed by logical and nonlogical terms. It is not obvious how such
a distinction can be drawn, except perhaps by merely enumerating the logical
constants of the given language. (Cf. here [Etchemendy, 1983; 1990; Hintikka,
2004b].) (Concerning the diﬀerent meanings of “analytic” in logic and its history,
see [Hintikka, 1965; 1973].)
Deductive inferences involving nonlogical words are studied among other places
in what is known tendentiously as philosophical logic. (This label is misleading
because it suggests that deductive logic in the narrower sense is not philosophically
important.) Historically studies in such earliest “philosophical” logic were logics
calculated to capture such notions as necessity and possibility. They are known as
modal logics. (See e.g. [von Wright, 1951a; Carnap, 1947; Kripke, 1963; Lemmon
and Scott, 1977; Shapiro, 1998; Blackburn et al., 2001].) Later, attempts have
been made to capture such related notions as entailment and relevance.
(Cf.
e.g. [Anderson et al., 1992].) Philosophical logic also comprises among its other
branches epistemic logic, that is, the theory of inferences that depend on the
meaning of epistemic terms (see [Hintikka, 1962; 2003]), deontic logic (theory of
normative discourse (see [von Wright, 1951b; 1983; Hilpinen, 1971])), and tense
logic (theory of inferences turning on the meaning of temporal terms (see [van
Benthem, 1982; Gabbay et al. 1993–1996, vol. 4])).
The logical behavior of many terms that do not overtly deal with truth-preserving
inferences can still be studied by the same method and often partly reduced to
the theory of truth-preserving logics. Cases in point are the logic of questions
and answers (erotetic logic) which can be considered an aspect of epistemic logic.
This is made possible by the fact that questions can be construed as requests
for information and their behavior can be studied by reference of the statement
(known as the desideratum of a question) which speciﬁes the epistemic state that
the questioner wants to be brought about. Similar things can be said of the logic
of commands.
Borderline cases are logics that depend on the meaning of probabilistic terms
(probability logic [Adams, 1998]), or the behavior of the membership relation
(set theory), or on the part-whole relation (mereology (see [Husserl, 1913; Fine,
1995; Smith, 1982])). Indeed, attempts have been made, among others by Rudolf
Carnap [1950; 1952], to interpret probability (in at least one of its senses) as a
purely logical concept. An especially diﬃcult question concerns set theory. Some
of the most characteristic axioms of set theory, for instance the axiom of choice,
can be construed as logical truths of higher-order logic (see below). Yet in set
theory models are sometimes studied in which the axiom of choice is not true. In
the usual foundations of set theory the axiom of choice is not treated as a part
of the logic used but as an additional mathematical assumption. Thus currently
both probability theory and set theory seem to reside in a limbo between logic and
special mathematical theories.

16
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
4
AMPLIATIVE INFERENCE
Ampliative reasoning includes prominently inductive reasoning, in which the
premises are particular propositions and the conclusion either a generalization
or a new particular proposition [Skyrms, 1966]. It is to be noted, however, that
induction or epagoge originally included and sometimes simply meant a diﬀerent
kind of inference, viz. the extrapolation and interpolation of partial generalizations
[Hintikka, 1993]. The logic of inductive inference in this historical sense is quite
diﬀerent from that of the ordinary induction which might be labelled “Humean
induction”. Inductive inference in this sense can be either qualitative or proba-
bilistic. Qualitative induction can depend on the elimination of alternatives to the
conclusion (eliminative induction). Probabilistic induction is sometimes thought
to subsume inductive inference to probabilistic inference.
Even though induction was earlier thought of as the only alternative to deductive
reasoning, an abundance of other kinds of ampliative modes of reasoning have
recently been studied.
They include the theories of rational belief change and
various forms of nonmonotonic reasoning. They will be discussed below in §17.
Besides the usual so-called classical logics there are also logics that do not
involve nonlogical concepts but which are supposed to be grounded on a nonstan-
dard interpretation of logical notions themselves. They include intuitionistic and
constuctivistic logics. (See [Heyting, 1956; Dummett, 1977] and [Bishop, 1967].)
Some logics are supposed to be applicable to special subject matters, as e.g. the
so-called quantum logics. (See [Hooker, 1975–77].)
5
LOGICAL VS. EXTRALOGICAL SYSTEMATIZATION
Instead of thinking of logic as the study of inferences, it is sometimes construed as
a study of logical truths. The two conceptions are closely interrelated. In order for
a deductive inference from F to G to be valid, the conditional sentence If F, then
G (in symbols (F ⊃G)) must be logically true. Whether the converse relation
holds depends on whether the validity of (F ⊃G) guarantees the existence of a
rule of inference that mandates a move from F to G. Indeed, more may be required
for the validity of an inference from F to G than the logical truth of (F ⊃G). For
instance, it may be required that the rule takes us from a way of verifying F to a
way of verifying G.
Speaking of logical truths can be misleading, however, for logical truth need
not and perhaps should not be considered as a variant of plain ordinary truth.
Truth is relative to one model (scenario, possible world), whereas logical truth is
on this conception truth in all possible models (scenarios, possible worlds). This
distinction is reﬂected in a parallel distinction between axiomatizations of ordinary
substantial theories and axiomatizations of this or that part of logic. What are
known as formal systems of logic are systematizations of logical truths.
They
are formulated in a partial analogy with substantial axiomatic theories. A few
formulas or types of formulas are designated as axioms from which theorems are

What is Logic?
17
derived according to purely formal rules. This has been the standard format of
formal systems of logic since Frege.
There are nevertheless important diﬀerences between the two kinds of axiomati-
zations. What an ordinary axiom system accomplishes (if successful) is to capture
all the truths about the relevant system or systems, as deductive consequences of
the axioms. In other words, what an ordinary non-logical axiom system is cal-
culated to do is to help us to study some aspect of reality or some mathematical
structure (or class of structures) by examining the logical consequences of an axiom
system. In contrast, what a formal system of some part of logic is calculated to do
is in the ﬁrst place merely to list mechanically all the logical truths of that part of
logic. This is a substantial diﬀerence. It is for instance not always the case that
logical consequence relations can be captured by purely formal (mechanical) rules
of deductive inference. Furthermore, the so-called rules of inference of a logical
axiomatization need not ever be truth-preserving, unlike the real rules of inference
of a substantial axiom system. They are not necessarily intended as guidelines for
actually drawing inferences. In a sense, only the rules of inference of a nonlogical
(substantial) axiom system are genuine rules of logical inference. Hence the role
of logic as a system of rules of inference is in a sense more prominent in nonlogical
axiomatizations than in logical ones.
Likewise, the exhaustiveness of the enumeration, known as completeness of the
axiom system, is diﬀerent in the two kinds of axiomatization. In the case of logical
axiomatization, the term “semantic completeness” is typically used, whereas in
the case of substantial axiom systems one usual term is “deductive completeness.”
6
SYNTAX VS. SEMANTICS
The concept of logical truth becomes useful when we begin to develop an explicit
logical theory, maybe even an axiomatic one. Such a systematic logical theory
can be implemented in two main ways. One leading idea in the early development
of modern logic was to try to invent a notation or symbolism so explicit and so
ﬂexible that the criteria of valid inference and of logical truth could be captured
by reference to the formal features of this symbolism, without referring to their
meaning. In other words, the application of these criteria happens by a calculation
with symbols.
This idea is what the term “symbolic logic” was calculated to
highlight.
Such a study of the purely formal features of a language is usually
referred to as its syntax.
In systematic logical studies this approach includes
what is known as proof theory, and is sometimes referred to as such. This idea
is somewhat similar to the project of transformational grammarians like Noam
Chomsky to capture what are essentially semantical notions, such as ambiguity,
co-reference and logical form, in purely syntactical terms [Chomsky, 1975].
In contrast, a study of the relations of a language to the reality it can be
used to represent is known as its semantics. In logic, it includes what is known
as model theory, even though this term usually refers to the particular kind of
studies launched largely by Alfred Tarski [1935; 1944, 1956].
Sometimes these

18
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
two are distinguished from pragmatics, which is supposed to be the study of the
uses of language. This distinction is not well deﬁned, however, for the language-
world relations studied in semantics can be constituted by rule-governed uses of
language, as for instance in Wittgenstein’s language games or in game-theoretical
semantics [Wittgenstein, 1953; Hintikka and Sandu, 1997].
One of the most important semantical concepts is that of truth.
Since the
validity of a deductive rule of inference means that is is necessarily truth preserving,
the theory of deductive logic must have its foundation in a theory of semantics
(model theory). At the earlier stages of the development of modern logic, the need
of such a basis was usually denied or at least neglected. The hope was that in
an appropriate symbolism all the important semantical properties and relations
between propositions would have syntactical counterparts that could be studied
proof-theoretically, for instance by means of suitable formal systems of logic.
7
THE LIMITS OF SYNTACTICAL APPROACHES
This hope was in the case of logical notions shattered by the incompleteness the-
orems of Kurt G¨odel and the impossibility theorems of Alonzo Church and Alfred
Tarski. (See [Davis, 1965].) G¨odel showed that any ﬁrst-order system of elemen-
tary arithmetic is inevitably incomplete in that some arithmetical propositions in
it are true but unprovable. He also showed that the consistency of a system of
elementary arithmetic cannot be proved in the same system. Church showed that
the decision problem for ﬁrst-order logic is undecidable, that is, that the set of
logical truths of this part of logic is not recursive. Tarski developed techniques
of deﬁning the concept of truth for suitable logical languages, but at the same
time showed that such deﬁnitions can only be formulated in a richer metalan-
guage [Tarski, 1935]. Since our actual working language presumably is the richest
one we have at our disposal, the concept of truth cannot according to Tarski be
consistently applied in what Tarski called the “colloquial language”. In particular,
Tarski showed that the concept of truth for any ﬁrst-order axiom system cannot
be deﬁned in the same system.
These results are also relevant to the question of the relationship of syntactically
explicit (“formalized”) logic and the logic implicit in natural languages and in
ordinary discourse. Earlier it was often thought and said that the logical symbolism
is little more than a streamlined and regimented version of an ordinary language.
The main advantage of a symbol language was seen in its freedom of ambiguities
and other obscurities.
This idea lives on in a modiﬁed form in that some theorists of language consider
the notion of logical form, expressible in the logical symbolism, as playing an
important role in grammatical theory.
There is strong evidence, however, to suggest that logical symbolism and ordi-
nary language are more radically diﬀerent than was assumed by the earliest “sym-
bolic logicians”, For instance, the presuppositions of ﬁrst-order language examined
in SS11–12 below are fairly obviously not satisﬁed by our ordinary language. Like-

What is Logic?
19
wise, the notion of independence discussed in §12 is not expressed in most natural
languages in a uniform way, even though it turns out to be quite prevalent in their
semantics.
The wisest course appears to be to consider formal logical languages as alter-
natives to one’s own natural language in the same sense in which one’s second
language oﬀers an alternative way of expressing oneself.
What can be hoped
is that there might be a privileged kind of logical language that would express
the true logical forms underlying all languages, formal and natural. This ideal
language would be a true “language of thought” alias Frege’s Begriﬀsschrift or
conceptual notation [1879]. Whether our actual logical languages can claim to be
approximations to such a language of thought, and if so to what extent is a moot
question.
8
THE LIMITS OF SEMANTICAL APPROACHES
The need of a semantical basis of a theory of deductive logic has nevertheless been
denied for diﬀerent reasons. One reason is the view which was strongly represented
among the early major ﬁgures of contemporary logic (Frege, early Russell, early
Wittgenstein etc.) and which was still current recently (Quine, Church etc.) to the
eﬀect that the semantics of a language cannot be expressed in the same language.
This kind of view has been strongly encouraged by the result of Alfred Tarski
[1935] according to which the central semantical notion of truth can be deﬁned for
a ﬁrst-order language (see below) only in a richer metalanguage. In so far as this
result applies to our actual working language, it suggests that the notion of truth
cannot play a role in our “colloquial language” as Tarski called it, for it cannot
have any richer metalanguage above it.
If this impossibility really prevails, there cannot be any general semantical foun-
dation of logic understood as a theory of inference.
How conclusive are these negative results in a general perspective? This ques-
tion will be revisited below. In any case, some parts of logic allow for a complete
axiomatization. For one thing, G¨odel proved the semantical completeness of the
received ﬁrst-order logic in 1930. Since this logic is often taken to be the central
area of logic — and even taken to exhaust the purview of symbolic logic —, this
has created the impression that the dream of purely symbolic deductive logic is
indeed realizable and that the negative results pertain only to impure extensions
of the proper province of deductive logic. In any case, the questions whether dif-
ferent parts of logic admit of a semantically complete axiomatization and whether
diﬀerent mathematical theories admit of a deductively complete axiomatization
are crucial in establishing the prospects and the limits of symbolic (syntactical)
methods in logic. This is why G¨odel’s ﬁrst incompleteness theorem is so important,
in that it shows that elementary arithmetic cannot be completely axiomatized in
the sense of deductive completeness.
The question of axiomatization should not be confused with the question whether
logic is formal discipline. By one commonly used deﬁnition, in deductive logic a

20
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
sentence is logically true if and only if its truth depends only on the way in which
logical terms occur in it.
If so, logical truths of deductive logic are all formal
independently of the question of whether they can be mechanically enumerated by
means of a formal axiom system.
9
STRATEGIC VS. DEFINITORY RULES
An important further distinction between diﬀerent aspects of logical studies derives
from the nature of logical reasoning (inference-drawing) as a goal-directed activity.
In practically all such activities a distinction can be made between diﬀerent two
kinds of rules. This distinction is especially clear in the case of games of strategy.
(Cf. [von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1944].) In them, we can distinguish the
deﬁnitory rules which specify what may happen in the game from the strategic
rules which tell how to play the game better or worse. For instance, the deﬁnitory
rules of chess determine what moves are possible, what counts as checking and
checkmating etc., whereas following the strategic rules of chess is what makes a
player better or worse.
Strategic rules are not merely heuristic.
They can in
principle be as precise as the deﬁnitory rules, even though they are quite often so
complicated as to be impossible to formulate explicitly.
Logical theory involves the study of both deﬁnitory rules and strategic rules of
the “game” of logic. (See [Hintikka, 2001].) It is important to realize that what are
called rules of inference must be considered as deﬁnitory rules. They do not tell
what inferences one should draw from the available premises or what inferences
people in fact draw from them always or usually. They are neither descriptive nor
prescriptive rules; they are permissive ones. They tell what one can do without
committing a logical mistake. They tell one how to avoid logical mistakes, known
as fallacies. The study of fallacies has been part of logic ever since Aristotle. In
so far as fallacies are violations of rules of inference in the narrow sense, the study
of fallacies is not an independent part of logical studies. Many of the traditional
fallacies are in fact not mistakes in applying deductive rules of inference, but either
violations of the rules of other parts of logic or else strategic mistakes. For instance,
the fallacy of begging the question did not originally mean circular reasoning, as
it is nowadays viewed, but the mistake of asking directly the principal question of
an interrogative inquiry. This question is supposed to be answered by putting a
number of “small” questions to suitable sources of information.
This deﬁnitory vs. strategic distinction provides an interesting perspective on
logical studies. In logical theorizing, a lion’s share of attention has been devoted
to deﬁnitory rules at the expense of strategic rules, even though the latter ones are
what deﬁnes good reasoning. One historical reason for this may be the crisis in
the foundations of mathematics in the early twentieth century which prompted an
emphasis on the soundness of rules of logical inference. Yet for actual applications
of logic strategic rules are incomparably more important.
There also prevails a confusion as to how certain types of human reasoning
should be modeled by means of a logical system. Are the principles of such hu-

What is Logic?
21
man reasoning to be captured by means of deﬁnitory rules or of strategic rules of
reasoning? The latter answer is the more promising one, even though many devel-
opments in logic are apparently predicated on the former answer. For instance, it
is fairly obvious that the principles of rational belief change should be captured by
strategic rules rather than deﬁnitory rules, contrary to what many theorists are
trying to do.
A characteristic diﬀerence between the two kinds of rules is that deﬁnitory rules
normally concern particular moves, whereas strategic evaluation pertains in the
last analysis to entire strategies in the sense of game theories. (Such strategies
prescribe what a player should do in all the possible situations that he or she or
it might encounter in a play of the game.)
These observations help us to understand what can correctly be meant by logical
necessity. Contrary to what the dominating view of most philosophers was for a
long time, there is no necessity about actually drawing logical inferences. Even
when G is a logical consequence of F, one does not have to think of G as soon
as one thinks of F. What is the case is that G must be the case as soon as F is
true. You cannot bring it about that F without ipso facto bringing it about that
G. Hence it is permissible in truth-preserving reasoning to move from F to G.
The deﬁnitory vs. strategic distinction also throws some light on the idea of non-
monotonic reasoning. The aim of logical reasoning manifesting itself in the form
of a series of inferences, is normally a true ultimate conclusion (if for a moment we
look away from probabilistic inferences). Hence it might seem as if the very idea of
logical inferences that do not always preserve truth were an oxymoron. A solution
to this problem is to point out that a sequence of inferences may ultimately lead to
a true ultimate conclusion even if some of the individual inferences in the sequence
are not truth preserving. This observation can be taken to vindicate the possibility
of non-monotonic logics. At the same time it shows that a satisfactory theory of
nonmonotonic logic must contain a strategic component, for rules of individual
inferences cannot alone guarantee the truth or the probability of the conclusion
of an entire sequence of nonmonotonic inferences. Such a strategic component is
nevertheless missing from most nonmonotonic logics.
10
WHAT IS FIRST-ORDER LOGIC?
One way of trying to answer the title question of this article is to examine what
has generally been taken to be the core area of logic. This is the logic of propo-
sitional connectives and quantiﬁers, known as ﬁrst-order logic, predicate logic or
quantiﬁcation theory. (Cf. [Smullyan, 1968].) Since these are logical notions par
excellence, in the light of the distinctions just made, this core area should be the
study of deductive logic based on the meaning of logical concepts, studied pri-
marily from the vantage point of correctness (deﬁnitory rules). Now the central
logical concepts are generally recognized to be the (standard) quantiﬁers, that
is, the notions expressed by “all” and “some” and propositional connectives like
“and”, “or”, “if-then”, and “if and only if”. Some of the features of the behavior

22
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
of quantiﬁers were studied already in the Aristotelian syllogistic which dominated
logic until the nineteenth century. Gottlob Frege and C.S. Peirce, by removing the
restriction to one-place predicates as distinguished from relations, overcame many
of the limitations of syllogistic logic. The result, codiﬁed in the Principia Math-
ematica (1910-13) by Bertrand Russell and A.N. Whitehead, is a general theory
of quantiﬁers and propositional connectives. Slowly, this theory was divided into
ﬁrst-order logic, in which the values of quantiﬁed variables are individuals (partic-
ulars) and higher-order logic, in which they can be entities of a higher logical type,
such as sets, properties and relations. It is this ﬁrst-order logic that is generally
considered as the core area of logic.
What ﬁrst-order logic is like is most directly explained by identifying the struc-
tures that can be discussed by its means. In an application of ﬁrst-order logic, we
are given a class of individuals, known variously as the domain of the model or its
universe of discourse. In the inference rules for ﬁrst-order logic, they are thought
of as particular objects. They are represented by individual constants (names of
individuals). On that domain, a number of properties and relations are deﬁned,
represented by predicates of one or more argument places. The central notions are
the two quantiﬁers, viz. the existential quantiﬁer (∃x) and the universal quantiﬁer
(∀y), each of which has a variable attached to it facilitating a later reference to the
same individual. They express the notions of at least one and every as applied to
the domain of individuals. Furthermore, the logical notation includes a number of
propositional connectives, for instance negation ∼, conjunction &, disjunction ∨,
and conditional (“if – then”) ⊃. In classical logic, they are assumed to be charac-
terized by their truth-tables. Atomic formulas are formed by inserting individual
constants and/or individual variables into the argument-places of predicates. The
rest of the formulas are formed by repeated uses of quantiﬁers and propositional
connectives. Often, the notion of identity is also included, expressed by = with
individual constants and/or variables ﬂanking it. Formulas without free variables
are called sentences. They express propositions about the universe of discourse.
First-order logic has a regular model theory. Among its metatheoretical prop-
erties there are compactness, the L¨owenheim-Skolem properties, and separation
properties. Most importantly, ﬁrst-order logic admits of a semantically complete
axiomatization, as was ﬁrst shown by G¨odel in 1930. These features of ﬁrst-order
logic are sometimes taken to be characteristic of logical systems in general. First-
order logic was often considered by earlier philosophers as the logic, and even later
their idea of what logic is, is modeled to a considerable extent on ﬁrst-order logic.
11
PRESUPPOSITIONS OF THE RECEIVED FIRST-ORDER LOGIC
The central role of ﬁrst-order logic is illustrated by the fact that it is widely used
as a medium of representing the semantical (logical) form of natural-language sen-
tences, including philosophical theses. Even Chomsky at one time [1986] consid-
ered his LF structures, which are the basis of semantical interpretation of English
sentences, have a structure closely similar to the forms of a ﬁrst-order (quantiﬁ-

What is Logic?
23
cational) formula. This practice is not without problems, however. One of the
most prominent features of the notation of received ﬁrst-order logic is a diﬀerence
between it and the way natural language apparently operates. Natural-language
verbs for being do not have a single translation into the logical notation, but
have to be expressed in it diﬀerently in their diﬀerent uses. (Cf. here [Hintikka,
1979].) A verb like is must on diﬀerent occasions be treated as expressing identity,
predication, or existence. On still other occasions, it may help to express class-
inclusion, location or assertion (veridical is). Does this show that verbs like is
are ambiguous? Only if the received notation of ﬁrst-order logic is assumed to be
the uniquely correct framework of semantical representation. Even though some
linguists are in eﬀect making this assumption, it is not at all obvious. It is not
diﬃcult to devise a semantic representation for English quantiﬁers that does not
incorporate the ambiguity assumption and to formalize such a representation. In
philosophy, no thinker before the nineteenth century assumed the triple ambiguity
of verbs for being, that is, the alleged identity-predication-existence ambiguity.
One of the critical ingredients of ﬁrst-order logic is the notion of the domain of
individuals. This is a genuine novelty of modern logic. Earlier logicians admittedly
used quantiﬁers, but for them these quantiﬁers were expressed by what Russell
called denoting phrases (like “some Greek” or “every European”) which meant
that each quantiﬁer ranged only over a deﬁnite restricted class of values. In order
to understand such a denoting phrase, aka quantiﬁer phrase, one did not have to
know what the entire universe of discourse was. This in eﬀect made the notion
of a universe of discourse redundant. Moreover, for Aristotle, the idea of a mind-
independent universe of discourse would have not made any sense also because
he considered realizations of forms in the soul on a par with their realizations in
external reality.
Some philosophers have thought that there is only proper application of logic,
viz. the actual world. For them, the determination of the basic objects of reality
becomes a major philosophical problem. A more realistic view takes the appli-
cations of logic to concern suﬃciently isolated parts of some actual or possible
world, in analogy with probability theorists’ sample space points or physicists’
“systems”. (See [Hintikka, 2003a].) Some philosophical logicians use chunks of
the actual world called “situations” as individuating applications of logic. (See
[Barwise, 1981; 1989].)
The truly important novelty of ﬁrst-order logic (or more generally, logic of quan-
tiﬁers) does not lie in the ambiguity thesis, but in its power to express functional
dependencies (dependencies between variables). Indeed, the entire ﬁrst-order logic
is equivalent with a quantiﬁer-free system where all variables are universal and in
which the job of existential quantiﬁers is done by function constants.
12
THE MEANING OF QUANTIFIERS
But is ﬁrst-order logic in its received form fully representative of what logic is? The
answer must turn on the meaning of the logical constants of ﬁrst-order logic, es-

24
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
pecially of quantiﬁers and of identity. The common assumption is that quantiﬁers
receive their meaning from their “ranging over” a class of values. An existential
quantiﬁer (∃x) preﬁxed to an open formula F[x] says that the class of such values
x satisfying F[x] is not empty, and (∀x)F[x] says that all such values x satisfy
F[x]. This assumption is among others made by Frege, who proposed that quan-
tiﬁers be interpreted a higher-order predicates expressing the nonemptyness or
exceptionlessness of a lower-order predicate. This is admittedly an important part
of what quantiﬁers express. However, it is important to realize that quantiﬁers
have another semantical role. By means of the formal dependence of quantiﬁer
of (Q2y) on (Q1x), we can express that the variable y depends on the variable x,
in the sense of concrete factual dependence. This function of quantiﬁers is highly
important, and it can be reduced to the “ranging over” idea only on restrictive
further conditions. (See here [Hintikka, 1996; 2002a].)
But how is the formal dependence of (Q2y) on (Q1x) expressed? In the received
logic, by the fact that (Q2y) occurs in the syntactical scope of (Q1x). Now in
the received ﬁrst-order logic these scopes are assumed to be nested. Since this
nesting relation is transitive and antisymmetric, it cannot express all possible
patterns of dependence and independence between variables. Hence the received
ﬁrst-order logic is not fully representative of the function of logical constants.
This representative role is best served by the result of removing the restrictions
on the patterns of formal dependence between quantiﬁers. The result is known
as independence-friendly (IF) logic. By the same token as the received ﬁrst-order
logic used to be considered the core area of logic, IF logic must now be assigned
that role.
If so, it is in fact terminologically misleading to use any qualifying
word in its name. It is the received ﬁrst-order logic that deserves a special epithet
because of the limitations it is subject to. In spite of this inbuilt bias, the term
“IF logic” will be used in the following.
The semantics for this new basic logic is straightforward.
The most central
semantical concept is that of truth. A ﬁrst-order sentence is true when there exist
suitable “witness individuals” vouchsaﬁng this truth. Thus e.g. (∃x)F[x] is true
if and only if there exists individual b satisfying F[x], and (∀x)(∃y)F[x, y] is true
if and only if for any individual a there exist b which together satisfy F[x, y]. As
the latter example shows, such witness individuals may depend on others. The
natural truth condition for a quantiﬁcational sentence S is therefore the existence
of all the functions which produce these witness individuals as their values. (In the
extreme case of initial existential quantiﬁers these functions become constants.)
These functions are known as Skolem functions, and the natural deﬁnition of truth
for S therefore requires the existence of a full array of Skolem functions for S. Such
arrays of Skolem functions can be interpreted as winning strategies in certain games
of veriﬁcation and falsiﬁcation called semantical games, thus throwing some light
on how language-world relations are implemented. This “game-theoretical” truth
deﬁnition is more elementary than Tarski-type ones.

What is Logic?
25
13
SEMANTICAL GAMES
This interpretation of the all-important Skolem functions as codifying winning
strategies in certain games opens interesting lines of thought concerning logic in
general. The games in question are called semantical games. (See [Hintikka, 1968;
Hintikka and Sandu, 1997].) The games in question are called semantical games.
Does this interpretation mean that logical theory is part and parcel of the general
theory of diﬀerent kinds of games? The main answer is no. The reason is that the
range of games relevant to the semantics of logic is fairly restricted. As an example
we may consider how the information sets are determined that are presupposed
in semantical games. The information set of a player making the move connected
with a certain node of the game tree is the set of nodes in which the player in
question can be at that time to the best of that player’s knowledge. In semantical
games the only important information sets are those due to the relevant player’s
knowledge and ignorance of what has happened at earlier moves in the same play
of the game. Allowing such ignorance is the only thing needed to move from the
semantics of the received ﬁrst-order logic to the semantics of IF ﬁrst-order logic.
Semantical games admit in fact a simple interpretation. When there is perfect
information, such a game (for instance, the game G(S) connected with a sentence
S) can be thought of as a kind of game of veriﬁcation and falsiﬁcation, albeit not
in the most literal sense of the expressions. From the point of the veriﬁer, it is
an attempt to ﬁnd some of the “witness individuals” that would verify S. The
falsiﬁer tries to make this task as hard as possible or even impossible. From this
idea, the game rules can be gathered without any diﬃculty. For instance, the ﬁrst
move in G((∃x)F[x]) is the veriﬁer’s choice of an individual a from the domain.
The game is then continued as in G(F[a]). The ﬁrst move in G((S1&S2)) is the
falsiﬁer’s choice of S1 or S2, say So. The game is then continued as in G(So).
Speaking of the veriﬁer’s choice of an individual is somewhat misleading here,
for in an actual play of a game a successful move would require possibly quite
elaborate searching for a right individual. Hence semantical games can also be
considered as games of seeking a ﬁnding.
In spite of the natural structure of semantical games they are not devoid of
subtleties. The veriﬁer wins a play of a semantical game if and only if the play
ends with a true atomic sentence. The falsiﬁer wins if it ends up with a false
one. However, the truth of a sentence cannot be deﬁned as the veriﬁer’s win in
the game G(S). Rather, it must be deﬁned as the existence of a winning strategy
for the veriﬁer. This distinction can be compared with the distinction between a
sentence’s being veriﬁed and being veriﬁable.
A philosophical perspective is obtained here by considering semantical games
in the same way Wittgenstein considered his language-games, viz., as the basic
semantical links between language and reality. If this idea is combined with a
transcendental idea reminiscent mutatis mutandis of Kant, our knowledge of logic
an be thought of as knowledge the structure and characteristics of semantical
games. [Hintikka, 1973, chapter 5.]

26
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
Be this as it may, game-theoretical semantics is thus a candidate for the role of a
semantical foundation of logic. In such a perspective, logic amounts to something
like the study of the structure of the language-games that connect language with
reality in the case of logical words.
The role of semantical games as the basic link between language and reality is
also illustrated by the fact that game-theoretical semantics can be used to interpret
some of the most prominent alternatives to the usual ﬁrst-order logic. This can
happen by restricting the set of strategies that the veriﬁer may use, which means
restricting the range of variables for Skolem functions. If they are restricted to
constructive functions, we obtain an interpretation of constructivistic logic. If they
were restricted to functions that are known in some reasonable sense, the result
should be an interpretation of intuitionistic logic.
Game-theoretical semantics thus suggests in any case interesting perspectives
relevant to the question, “What is logic?”
14
THE IMPLICATIONS OF INDEPENDENCE-FRIENDLY LOGIC:
AXIOMATIZABILITY
These suggestions are reinforced and made more speciﬁc by what happens in
the showcase of game-theoretical semantics, independence-friendly logic. As was
pointed out, G¨odel’s completeness theorem for the received ﬁrst-order logic en-
couraged the idea that our real basic logic is semantically complete. This in turn
led some thinkers to consider logic as a general study of formal systems.
If independence-friendly logic really is the authentic basic logic, such ideas must
be rejected. For independence-friendly logic is not complete in the sense of there
existing a formal proof procedure that in the limit produces all logical truths and
only them.
At ﬁrst sight, the question of axiomatizability might seem to aﬀect only the
computational implementation of diﬀerent logics and more generally also of dif-
ferent mathematical theories. Such appearances notwithstanding, the question of
complete axiomatizability makes a diﬀerence to our ideas about the nature of logic
in relation to mathematics. The currently prevalent view seems to envisage an un-
derlying logic which is semantically complete but too weak to capture all modes
of mathematical reasoning. Hence the creative element in mathematics lies not
in logic, but in mathematics. Furthermore, stronger principles that are needed in
mathematical reasoning are typically thought of as new mathematical axioms, the
ﬁrst place perhaps set-theoretical axioms.
This picture is now being challenged.
The alternative view suggested by
independence-friendly logic is that a suitable logic can capture all the forms of
mathematical reasoning. (What this suitable logic might be is discussed later in
this article; see SS16–17.)
This is connected with the fact that independence-
friendly logic incorporates several important modes of inference that were impos-
sible to express in the received ﬁrst-order logic and likewise makes it possible to
capture mathematically important concepts that would not be deﬁned in the earlier

What is Logic?
27
ﬁrst-order logic. These concepts include equicardinality, inﬁnity and topological
continuity. The modes of inference in question include the axiom of choice.
However, IF logic is not completely axiomatizable. Hence creativity is needed
for the discovery of increasingly intricate logical truths, and no longer a monopoly
of mathematicians as distinguished from logicians. This question aﬀects our ideas
about the relation of mathematics and logic and hence our ideas about logic. An
important research project known as reverse mathematics is calculated to uncover
the set-theoretical assumptions on which diﬀerent mathematical results are based.
(See [Friedman, 1970].) However, the main thrust of this project has been to ask
which sets have to exist for a mathematical proof to be able to go through rather
than to ask directly what stronger set-theoretical axioms are needed in the proofs.
Now the existence of a set implies the possibility of applying the logical principle
of tertium non datur to its deﬁniens. Hence the project of reverse mathematics
can also be viewed as a study of what applications of logical principles like tertium
non datur are needed in actual mathematical proofs.
15
NEGATION AND ITS SIGNIFICANCE
Another feature of independence-friendly logic has likewise important implications
for our ideas about logic in general. This feature is the behavior of negation. (See
here [Hintikka, forthcoming (b)].) The semantical game rule (or rules) for negation
in independence-friendly logic are the same as in the received logic of quantiﬁers.
Yet the resulting negation turns out not to be the contradictory negation that
is often thought of as being the negation.
Instead, we receive a stronger dual
negation that does not obey the law of excluded middle.
From a game-theoretical viewpoint this is only to be expected, for the law
of excluded middle amounts to assuming that semantical games are determinate.
And of course there are plenty of perfectly natural games that are not determinate.
Many philosophers will react to this by saying that what it shows is that inde-
pendence friendly logic is a “nonclassical” logic. But what is their criterion of a
logic’s being classical? In view of the “classical” character of the game rules for
negation in independence-friendly logic, it appears quite as natural to maintain
that this logic shows that the law of excluded middle is not part and parcel of the
classical conception of logic.
The absence of tertium non datur means that independence-friendly logic is in
some ways closer to intuitionistic logic than the received ﬁrst-order logic, in spite
of its greater expressive power.
Of course we have to introduce also a contradictory negation ¬ into the
independence-friendly logic over and above the dual negation ∼in order to reach
an adequate basic logic.
The result will be called the extended independence-
friendly ﬁrst-order logic. The contradictory negation cannot be characterized by
game rules however, for the “classical” ones yield the dual one. Hence ¬ can occur
in extended independence-friendly logic only sentence-initially.

28
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
The extended independence-friendly logic has an interesting structure. Alge-
braically, it has the structure of a Boolean algebra with an operator in Tarski’s
sense. (See [J´onsson and Tarski, 1951; 1952].) In a sense, this structure is there-
fore the true algebra of logic. By Tarski’s results, the extended independence logic
admits to a set-theoretical (“geometrical”) interpretation. In this interpretation
the strong negation turns out to express a generalization of the notion of orthog-
onality. In terms of orthogonality, we can even deﬁne such notions as dimensions,
coordinate representation etc. for purely logical spaces. (See [Hintikka, 2004c;
forthcoming (b)].)
In suﬃciently strong languages, there must thus be two diﬀerent notions of
negation present, the strong dual negation and a contradictory one. This presum-
ably applied also to natural languages even though in them there usually is but
one grammatical construction for negation. This puts the notion of negation in
natural languages to a new light.
If we make suitable further assumptions concerning the logical spaces with two
negations, we obtain more elaborate algebraic structures which largely remain to
be examined. By using game-theoretical ideas, we can also introduce in a natural
way probability measures on logical spaces. Whether, and if so in what sense, this
makes probability a logical concept remains to be examined.
16
HIGHER-ORDER LOGICS
These developments throw new light also on second-order logic and other higher-
order logics. First, however, it is in order to see what these logics are like.
First-order logic is characterized by the fact that all quantiﬁers range over all the
individuals in the given universe of discourse. Second-order logic is obtained when
quantiﬁers are admitted that range over sets and other predicates-in-extension of
individuals. They are known as second-order quantiﬁers and their values second-
order entities. Third-order quantiﬁers range over sets and predicates-in-extensions
of second-order entities, and so on. Instead of such extensional entities, the con-
cepts that deﬁne them are sometimes employed in higher-order logics as values
of higher-order variables. We can thus distinguish extensional and intensional in-
terpretations of higher-order logics. When the diﬀerent orders are separated from
each other, the result is also known as a theory of types in a broad sense.
Within extensionally construed higher-order logics we can distinguish two dif-
ferent interpretations. If the higher-order quantiﬁers range over all extensionally
possible entities of the appropriate lower type, we obtain what is known as the
standard interpretations. If they range over some designated subset of such en-
tities, we are dealing with a nonstandard interpretation.
The most prominent
such nonstandard interpretation is the one in which higher-order quantiﬁers range
over entities deﬁnable in the language that is being used. Often, the term “non
standard interpretation” is restricted to this one.
The distinction was ﬁrst formulated and the terms “standard” and “nonstandard”
introduced by Leon Henkin in 1950. However, the distinction was clear to Frank

What is Logic?
29
Ramsey who proposed transforming the intensional higher-order system of Rus-
sell’s and Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica into a form in which it can be given
a standard interpretation. (See [Ramsey, 1925].)
Even earlier, a special case of the standardness idea had played an important
role in the foundations of mathematics in the form of the notion of an arbitrary
function. The class of all such functions is nothing but the standard range of the
function variables of the appropriate type.
The important development in the
history of mathematics of the idea of an arbitrary function is in eﬀect the devel-
opment of the standard interpretation of function variables. Applied to functions
from natural numbers to integers the notion of arbitrary function becomes the
idea of an arbitrary sequence of integers that has played an important role in the
general theory of functions, especially in their representations as series of diﬀerent
kinds.
For most mathematical conceptualizations and modes of reasoning, second-order
logic with standard interpretation is amply suﬃcient. Such a logic is not seman-
tically complete, however.
Higher-order logics are in a certain sense parallel to set theory. An axioma-
tized set theory is like a higher-order logic without type restrictions. The logical
principles that are normally used in set theory are those of ﬁrst-order logic, not
of higher-order logic. The question of the adequacy of such ﬁrst-order axioma-
tizations of set theory must still be considered as being open.
(See [Hintikka,
forthcoming (a)].)
The diﬃculties in this direction are in the ﬁrst instance due to the fact that
the standard interpretation cannot be imposed on the models of a system of set
theory by ﬁrst-order axioms. Hence the idea of a model of an axiomatic ﬁrst-order
set theory can be understood in two diﬀerent ways. On one interpretation, the
would-be membership relation ∈is interpreted like any ﬁrst-order predicate. But
we can also require that it be actually interpreted as the membership relation.
One source of diﬃculties here is revealed by the question whether an axiomatic
set theory can have models that can be interpreted in the latter way even locally.
The question of the existence of higher-order entities depends on their mode
of existence and on their knowability (or lack thereof). Several philosophers have
been suspicious of such entities and would rather dispense with them altogether.
W.V. Quine among others has for this reason preferred set theory to higher-order
logic. This is a questionable position, however, for an attempt to interpret the
ﬁrst-order quantiﬁers of an axiomatized set theory set-theoretically leads to serious
diﬃculties. (See [Hintikka, 2004a; forthcoming (a)].)
In any case, in either approach assumptions are needed that go beyond ﬁrst-
order logic, either higher-order principles of reasoning or axioms of set existence.
A typical example is the axiom of choice which unsurprisingly has been a bone of
contention in the foundations of mathematics. Hilbert’s epsilon-calculus can be
viewed as a large-scale attempt to reduce the axiom of choice to the ﬁrst-order
level. (See [Hilbert and Bernays, 1934–1939].)

30
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
17
A DISTINCTION WITHOUT ONTOLOGICAL DIFFERENCE?
Certain recent advances in logic have disturbed the neat distinction between ﬁrst-
order and higher-order logic, however. (See [Hintikka, forthcoming (b)].) For one
thing, independence-friendly logic captures on the ﬁrst order level several impor-
tant concepts and modes of reasoning that earlier were thought of as being possible
to capture only by second-order means. As was noted they include the notions
of equicardinality and inﬁnity, the axiom of choice, K¨onig’s lemma and topolog-
ical continuity. In the extended independence-friendly logic we can add to the
list among others the notions of well-ordering and mathematical induction. Their
availability means that we can on the ﬁrst-order level (that is, without quantifying
over higher-order entities) carry out enormously more reasoning, including math-
ematical reasoning, than was previously thought of as being possible to do on this
level. Moreover, this is possible not only without quantifying over higher-order
entities but also without evoking the principle of excluded middle, in the sense
that this principle is not assumed in independence-friendly logic. However, there
are modes of logical reasoning that cannot be so captured and propositions that
cannot be expressed in extended independence-friendly logic. The prime exam-
ples are oﬀered by prima facie propositions in which the contradictory negation
¬ occurs within the scope of a quantiﬁer. Such formulas cannot be assigned an
interpretation by means of game-theoretical semantics. They can only be inter-
preted by reference to the totality of substitution-instances of their non-quantiﬁed
part, the substitution-values being of course the names of all the members of the
domain. When this domain is inﬁnite, this involves an application of tertium non
datur to inﬁnite sets as closed totalities. The resulting meanings are as a con-
sequence nonelementary (“inﬁnitistic”) in a sense in which independence-friendly
logic is not. (Semantical games do not involve inﬁnite sets as closed totalities.)
At the same time the resulting inﬁnitistic logic is ﬁrst-order in the sense that no
quantiﬁcation over second-order or higher-order entities is involved. It nevertheless
turns out that the resulting logic — that is, extended independence-friendly logic
reinforced by contradictory negation which is allowed to occur within the scope
of quantiﬁers and moreover allowed to be arbitrarily nested — is as strong as the
entire second-order logic. Since second-order logic with standard interpretation is
as strong a logic as anybody is likely to need in science or classical mathematics,
it is thus seen that all logic we reasonably may need can be done ontologically
speaking on the ﬁrst-order level. Quine has said that to be is to be a value of
a bound variable. If that is the case, we don’t need the existence of any second-
order (or other higher-order) entities. In any case it is true that we need not worry
about what the existence of higher-order entities means or which of them must be
assumed to exist.
Instead, what distinguishes the kind of reasoning that is now discussed in the
context of higher-order logics from elementary reasoning is the unrestricted use
of tertium non datur. Such use was in fact considered as the mark of inﬁnitistic
reasoning by the likes of David Hilbert and L.E.J. Brouwer [1923]. Whether this

What is Logic?
31
means that the contrast between ﬁrst-order logic and higher-order logic disappears
is a mere matter of terminological preference.
18
ALTERNATIVE LOGICS?
All this leaves in the dark the status of the many “alternative logics” that have
sprung up in recent years. (See [van Benthem, forthcoming; Ginsberg 1987].) Since
they are typically non-monotonic, they cannot be truth-preserving or deductive.
But if so, how can they be claimed to be alternative to the traditional systemati-
zations of deductive logic? And if they embody ampliative inference, what is the
new information that is brought in and where does it come from? And if they are
(as inductive logic was argued to be) dependent on unspoken assumptions, what
are those assumptions?
In order to answer such questions, we can consider as an example one of the
most clear-cut “alternative logics”, developed initially by John McCarthy [1980]
and called “inference by circumscription”. Its basic idea is clear. The inferences
considered in the theory of circumscriptive inference are based not only on their
explicit premises in the usual sense, but also on the tacit assumption that these
premises constitute all the relevant information. It is amply clear that such in-
ferences are common in ordinary discourse. It is also amply clear that such tacit
assumptions of exhaustive relevance are not unavoidable. For instance, a typical
tactic in solving run-of-the-mill recreational puzzles is to bring in information that
is not contained in the given premises. However, there are no overwhelming reasons
in evidence to show that the reasoning itself that is required for circumscriptive
inference is diﬀerent from our ordinary ways of reasoning. Hence it seems that we
can simply pidgeonhole circumscriptive inference as a chapter in the theory of en-
thymemic reasoning, that is, in the theory of reasoning from partly tacit premises.
And if so, circumscriptive inference can scarcely be claimed to be alternative to
our normal logical inferences — or so it seems.
However, this is not the end of the story. The most important peculiarity of
the tacit circumscriptive assumption is that it is not expressible in the language
in which the inferences are carried out. This language is normally some familiar
logical one not unlike a ﬁrst-order language. However, the exhaustiveness of the
given premises obviously cannot be expressed in such a language.
This shows both the interest of circumscriptive inference and the equivocal
status of an attempt to formulate such inferences on a ﬁrst-order level. The theo-
retically satisfactory approach would be to develop a logical language in which the
tacit premise can be explicitly formulated. Only then could it be decided whether
inferences from such premises require a logic diﬀerent from our well-known modes
of inference. It is also reasonable to expect that the logic of such richer languages
would be an extension of, rather than an alternative to, the established logics
One can in fact view many other kinds of ampliative reasoning in the same
way. This provides an interesting perspective on a number of “alternative logics”.
And this perspective is not restricted to recently developed “alternative logics”.

32
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
The hidden assumptions on which applications of inductive logic can be argued to
depend cannot be formulated in ﬁrst-order languages even after simple probability
measures are added to it. The theoretical situation hence seems to be the same
as in the logic of circumscription, even though no one has tried to label inductive
logic an “alternative” logic.
Similar situations occur also in mathematics. An interesting example is oﬀered
by maximality assumptions. Hilbert tried to make his axiomatization of geom-
etry categorical by means of a maximality assumption that he called the axiom
of completeness. ([Hilbert, 1899]; this axiom was actually introduced only in the
second edition.) G¨odel surmised that maximality assumptions not unlike Hilbert’s
axiom are what is needed in axiomatic set theory. Such assumptions are neverthe-
less hard to express in the usual logical languages like ﬁrst-order languages. The
reason is that the propositions of such a language work by imposing conditions
on their models one model at the time, whereas maximality assumptions involve
comparisons of diﬀerent models with each other. This situation diﬀers from the
alternative logics in that Hilbert tried to formulate the additional axiom explicitly.
However, such a formulation is impossible on the level on which most of the other
reasoning is in Hilbert’s book.
One can perhaps view ﬁrst-order axiomatic set theory in the same light. The
logic used there is precisely the traditional ﬁrst-order logic. However, the charac-
teristically set-theoretical modes of inference, such as the axiom of choice, cannot
be adequately captured in traditional ﬁrst-order logic. Hence the set theory in-
corporates only Ersatz versions of these principles of inference in the forms of
axioms.
Why have logicians not developed richer languages in which such tacit assump-
tions could be expressed explicitly? Part of an answer was in the diﬃculty of such
an enterprise. But perhaps part of the reason is that logicians have entertained
too narrow a conception of what logic is. For one cannot help suspecting that
somehow logicians have assumed that the familiar languages like ﬁrst-order lan-
guages are capable of expressing all logical inferences. If so, we have here a telling
example of the hegemony of traditional ﬁrst-order logic as an answer to the title
question of this article. Even logics that are calculated to be alternatives to the
traditional ﬁrst-order logic have been unwittingly colored by a belief in its unique
role.
It nevertheless appears that the right project is to develop richer logical lan-
guages rather than devise diﬀerent sets of special-interest modes of reasoning. If
and when this is done, the result is likely to be a richer idea of what logic is – or
of what it can be.
19
AMPLIATIVE INFERENCE AND ACQUISITION OF INFORMATION
In a diﬀerent direction one can still ask for a uniﬁed perspective on ampliative
inference. Such an overview on nondeductive inference must be connected with
the notion of information, for the greatest common denominator of all ampliative

What is Logic?
33
inferences is that new information enters into an ongoing argument. A general
theory of such inferences will have to focus on the source of the new informa-
tion in comparison with alternative sources. For one thing, the reliability of the
new information depends on the reliability of its source. Likewise, the evaluation
of a new item of information depends on a comparison with the other items of
information that might have been available instead of the actually introduced one.
One way of trying to reach such a general theory is to consider the reception of
any new items of information as an answer to a (usually tacit) question. Indeed,
if we know the source of an item of information and know what other items might
be available from the same source or from others, etc., we conceptually speaking
might as well consider such acquisition of the information as the reception of an
answer to a question. From such a point of view, the theory of questions and
answers assumes the role of a general framework for diﬀerent kinds of ampliative
inference. (See [Hintikka, 1999; Hintikka, Halonen and Mutanen, 1999].)
The theory of questions and answers is in turn based on epistemic logic, for a
question is essentially a request of information [Hintikka, 1976; 2003b]. As was
indicated in §3 above, a suitable interrogative logic can be developed as being
determined largely as the logic of the declarative propositions that specify the
epistemic state of aﬀairs that a questioner asks to be brought about.
Such a
proposition is called the desideratum of the question in question. Needless to say,
both the notion of a question and the idea of a source of answers must then be
taken in a very general sense. The answerer need not be a human being or a
database. It can be nature, one’s environment, memory or even a questioner’s
imagination. Likewise, the act of asking a question may for instance take the form
of an experiment or observation, or perhaps even a guess.
Such an “interrogative model of inquiry”, as it has been called, is especially
useful in the study of the strategic aspects of information seeking. For such a
search amounts to a question-answer sequence interspersed naturally by deductive
inferences. Strategies of inquiry will then amount to diﬀerent methods of choosing
the questions.
The possibilities of theorizing opened by this perspective have
not yet been used very widely. It is nevertheless clear that for instance some of
the traditional “fallacies” are not breaches of the deﬁnitory rules of inference but
violations of the reasonable principle of questioning, among them the so-called
fallacy of petitio principii. (Cf. [Hamblin, 1970; Hintikka, 1987].)
Such interrogative inquiry is more closely related to the theory of the deduc-
tive inference than perhaps ﬁrst meets the eye. This relationship in fact throws
interesting light on the nature of logic in general. Formally, interrogative inquiry
is partly analogous to deductive inquiry. In order to be in a position to ask a
question, an inquirer must have established its presupposition. A step from the
presupposition of a question to its answer (whenever available) is formally similar
to a step from the premise (or premises) of a deductive inference to its conclusion.
As a consequence, strategies of questioning govern the choices of presuppositions
from the set of available propositions while strategies of deduction govern the
choices of premises from the same pool of propositions.

34
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
In neither case can the optimal strategies be expressed in the form of recursive
(mechanical) rules. However, there is a deep connection between the two kinds
of strategies. In a context of pure discovery, that is, when all available answers
are true and known to be true, the optimal strategies of interrogative inquiry
coincide with the optimal strategies of deductions except for deviations caused by
the possible unavailability of some answers. (Actually, another discrepancy may
arise when the answers happen to deal with previously known entities.)
In other (somewhat looser) words, in a context of pure discovery interrogative
inquiry is guided in eﬀect by the same strategies as deduction. This result throws
important light on what logic in general is, in particular what the place of deductive
logic is in a wider schema of epistemological ideas. It suggests looking at deductive
logic as a kind of systematic study a priori of what can happen in an actual
empirical enterprise of information acquisition. It also goes a long way toward
vindicating the old and still “Sherlock Holmes view” of logic as the gist of all
good reasoning mentioned in §1 above.
More generally speaking, it shows the
relationship between deductive and ampliative reasoning.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Comprehensive surveys of diﬀerent aspects of logic are Jon Barwise, editor, 1977, Handbook of
Mathematical Logic, North-Holland, Amsterdam; D. Gabbay and F. Guenther (eds.), Handbook
of Philosophical Logic, second ed., Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 2004; and D. Gabbay, C.J.
Hogger and J.A. Robinson (eds.), 1993–1996, Handbook of Logic in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Logic Programming 1-5, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Other literature listed here pertains to particular subjects covered in this article even though not
all of them are referred to in so many words in the text. They are not intended to exhaust the
subject, only to provide initial clues to the relevant literature.
[Anderson et al., 1992] A. Anderson, N. Belnap and M. Dunn. Entailment: The Logic of Rele-
vance and Necessity II. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992.
[Antoniou, 1997] G. Antoniou. Nonmonotonic Reasoning. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT
Press, 1997.
[Barwise, 1981] J. Barwise. Scenes and other situations. Journal of Philosophy, 77: 369-397,
1981.
[Barwise, 1989] J. Barwise. The Situation in Logic. Stanford: CSLI, 1989.
[Beth, 1947] E.W. Beth. Hundred years of symbolic logic: a retrospect on the occasion of the
Boole-De Morgan centenary. Dialectica, 1: 331-345, 1947.
[Beth, 1953] E.W. Beth. On Padoa’s method in the theory of deﬁnition. Nederl. Akad. Weten-
sch. Proc. Ser. A, 56: 330-339, 1953.
[Beth, 1962] E.W. Beth. Formal Methods. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1962.
[Bishop, 1967] E. Bishop. Elements of Constructive Analysis. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967.
[Blackburn et al., 2001] P. Blackburn, M. de Rijke and Y. Venema. Modal Logic. Cambridge,
2001.
[Boole, 1958] G. Boole. The Laws of Thought. New York: Dover, 1958 (original 1854).
[Boole, 1997] G. Boole. Selected Manuscripts on Logic and its Philosophy. I. Grattan-Guiness
and G. Bornet (eds.), Basel: Birkh¨auser Verlag, 1997.
[Boolos, 1975] G. Boolos. On second-order logic. Journal of Philosophy, 72: 509-527, 1975.
[Boolos and Jeﬀfrey, 1989] G. Boolos and R. Jeﬀrey. Computability and logic. Third edition,
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
[Brower, 1923] L.E.J. Brouwer. On the signiﬁcance of the principle of excluded middle in math-
ematics (1923). In J. van Heijenoort (ed.), From Frege to G¨odel, Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Harvard University Press, 334-345, 1967.

What is Logic?
35
[Buss, 1998] S. Buss (ed.). Handbook of Proof Theory. Amsterdam and New York: Elsevier,
1998.
[Carnap, 1947] R. Carnap. Meaning and Necessity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1947.
[Carnap, 1950] R. Carnap. Logical Foundations of Probability. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1950.
[Carnap, 1952] R. Carnap. The Continuum of Inductive Methods. Chicago:
University of
Chicago Press, 1952.
[Chang and Keisler, 1990] C.C. Chang and J. Keisler. Model Theory. Amsterdam:
North-
Holland, 1990.
[Chomsky, 1975] N. Chomsky. The Logical Structure of Linguistic Theory. New York: Plenum
Press, 1975.
[Chomsky, 1986] N. Chomsky. Knowledge of Language. New York: Praeger, 1986.
[Church, 1956] A. Church. Introduction to Mathematical Logic. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1956.
[Chang and Keisler, 1991] J.A. Coﬀa. The Semantic Tradition from Kant to Carnap. L. Wessels
(ed.), Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
[Davis, 1965] M. Davis (ed.). The Undecidable. Hewlett, N.Y.: Raven Press, 1965.
[Dreben and Floyd, 1991] B. Dreben and J. Floyd. Tautology: How not to use the word. Syn-
these, 87: 23-49, 1991.
[Dummett, 1977] M. Dummett. Elements of Intuitionism. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977.
[Ebbinghaus and Flum, 1999] H.D. Ebbinghaus and J. Flum. Finite Model Theory. Second edi-
tion, New York: Springer, 1999.
[Etchemendy, 1983] J. Etchemendy. The doctrine of logic as form. Linguistics and Philosophy,
6: 319-334, 1983.
[Etchemendy, 1990] J. Etchemendy. The Concept of Logical Consequence. Cambridge, Mass-
chusetts: Harvard University Press, 1990.
[Fine, 1985] K. Fine. Reasoning with Arbitrary Objects. Oxford: Blackwell, 1985.
[Fine, 1995] K. Fine. Part-whole. In B. Smith and D.W. Smith (eds.), The Cambridge Compan-
ion to Husserl, Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 463-485, 1995.
[Frege, 1879] G. Frege. Begriﬀschrift (1879). In J. van Heijenoort (ed.), From Frege to G¨odel,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press 1967.
[Frege, 1970] G. Frege. Posthumous Writings. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970.
[Friedman, 1970] H. Friedman. Higher set theory and mathematical practice. Annals of Math-
ematical Logic, 2: 325-357, 1970.
[Gabbay, 1976] D. Gabbay. Investigations in Modal and Tense Logics. Dordrecht: D. Reidel,
1976.
[Gabbay et al., 1993–1996] D. Gabbay, C. J. Hogger and J. A. Robinson, eds. Handbook of
Logic in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Logic Programming, 5 Volumes. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1993–1996.
[Gabbay, 1994] D. Gabbay (ed.). What is a Logical System? Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994.
[Gabbay and Guenthner, 2001-2005] D. Gabbay and F. Guenthner (eds.) Handbook of Philo-
sophical Logic (13 volumes), New York: Springer, 2001- 2005.
[Ginsberg, 1987] M. Ginsberg (ed.). Readings in Nonmonotonic Reasoning. Los Altos, Califor-
nia: Morgan Kauﬀman, 1987.
[Goldfarb, 1979] W. Goldfarb. Logic in the twenties, the nature of a quantiﬁer. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 44: 351-368, 1979.
[G¨odel, 1930] K. G¨odel. The completeness of the axioms of the functional calculus of logic
(1930). In J. van Heijenoort (ed.), From Frege to G¨odel, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press, 582-591, 1967.
[Gurevich and Harrington, 1984] Y. Gurevich and L. Harrington. Trees, automata, and games.
In H.R. Lewis (ed.), Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, ACM,
San Francisco, 171-182, 1984.
[Hacking, 1979] I. Hacking. What is logic? Journal of Philosophy, 76: 285-319, 1979.
[Halpern, 2003] J.Y. Halpern. Reasoning About Uncertainty. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The
MIT Press, 2003.
[Hamblin, 1970] C. Hamblin. Fallacies. London: Methuen, 1970.
[Hansen and Pinto, 1995] H.V. Hansen and R.C. Pinto (eds.). Fallacies: Classical and Contem-
porary Readings, University Park, Pennsylvania: Penn State Press, 1995.

36
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
[Hempel, 1945] C.G. Hempel. On the nature of mathematical truth. American Mathematical
Monthly, 24: 543-556, 1945.
[Henkin, 1950] L. Henkin. Completeness in the theory of types. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 15:
81-91, 1950.
[Heyting, 1956] A. Heyting. Intuitionism: An Introduction. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1956.
[Hilbert, 1899] D. Hilbert. Grundlagen der Geomatrie. Teubner, Leipzig, 1899. (Second ed.,
1902.)
[Hilbert, 1918] D. Hilbert. Axiomatisches Denken. Mathematsche Annalen, 78: 405-420, 1918.
[Hilbert, 1926] D. Hilbert. ¨Uber das Unendliche. Mathematische Annalen, 95: 161-190, 1926.
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann. Grundz¨uge der theoretischen
Logik. Berlin: Springer, 1928.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1934-1939] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Grundlagen der Mathematik 1-2,
Heidelberg: Springer, 1934-1939.
[Hilpinen, 1971] R. Hilpinen. Deontic Logic: Introductory and Systematic Readings. Dordrecht:
D. Reidel, 1971.
[Hintikka, 1962] J. Hintikka. Knowledge and Belief: An Introduction to the Logic of the Two
Notions. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1962.
[Hintikka, 1965] J. Hintikka. Are logical truths analytic? Philosophical Review, 74: 178-203,
1965.
[Hintikka, 1968] J. Hintikka. Language-games for quantiﬁers. In N. Rescher (ed.), Studies in
Logical Theory, Oxford: Blackwell, Oxford, 46-73, 1968.
[Hintikka, 1970] J. Hintikka. Depth information vs. surface information. In J. Hintikka and P.
Suppes (eds.), Information and Inference, Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 263-297, 1970.
[Hintikka, 1973] J. Hintikka. Logic, Language-Games and Information: Kantian Themes in the
Philosophy of Logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973.
[Hintikka, 1976a] J. Hintikka. A new approach to inﬁnitary languages. Annals of Mathematical
Logic, 10: 95-115, 1976a.
[Hintikka, 1976b] J. Hintikka. The Semantics of Questions and the Questions of Semantics.
(Acta Philosophica Fennica, 28(4), Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1976b.
[Hintikka, 1979] J. Hintikka. ‘Is’, semantical games and semantical relativity. Journal of Philo-
sophical Logic, 8: 433-468.
[Hintikka, 1983] J. Hintikka. Semantical games, the alleged ambiguity of ‘is’, and Aristotelian
categories. Synthese, 54: 443-469, 1983.
[Hintikka, 1987] J. Hintikka. The fallacy of fallacies. Argumentation, 1: 211-238, 1987.
[Hintikka, 1993] J. Hintikka. The concept of induction in the light of the interrogative approach
to inquiry. In J. Earman (ed.), Inference, Explanation and other Frustrations, Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 23-43, 1993.
[Hintikka, 1995] J. Hintikka. The games of logic and the games of inquiry. Dialectica, 49: 229-
249, 1995.
[Hintikka, 1997] J. Hintikka. No scope for scope? Linguistics and Philosophy, 20: 515-544, 1997.
[Hintikka, 1999a] J. Hintikka. Inquiry as Inquiry: A Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery (Selected
Papers vol.5). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic, 1999a.
[Hintikka, 1999b] J. Hintikka. Is the axiom of choice a logical or a set-theoretical principle?
Dialectica, 53: 283-290, 1999b.
[Hintikka, 2001] J. Hintikka. Is logic the key to all good reasoning?
Argumentation, vol.15:
35-57, 2001.
[Hintikka, 2002a] J. Hintikka. Hyperclassical Logic (a.k.a IF Logic) and its implications for
logical theory. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 8: 404-423, 2002a.
[Hintikka, 2002b] J. Hintikka. Quantum logic as a fragment of independence-friendly logic. Jour-
nal of Philosophical Logic, 31: 197-209, 2002b.
[Hintikka, 2003a] J. Hintikka. A distinction too few or too many? In C. Gould (ed.), Construc-
tivism and Practice, Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 47-74, 2003a.
[Hintikka, 2003b] J. Hintikka. A second-generation epistemic logic. In V. Hendricks et al. (eds.),
Knowledge Contributors, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic, 33-55, 2003b.
[Hintikka, 2004a] J. Hintikka. Independence-friendly logic and axiomatic set theory. Annals of
Pure and Applied Logic, 126: 313-333, 2004a.
[Hintikka, 2004b] J. Hintikka. Logical versus nonlogical concepts: An untenable dualism? In
S. Rahman et al. (eds.), Logic, Epistemology and the Unity of Science, Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic, 51-56, 2004b.

What is Logic?
37
[Hintikka, 2004c] J. Hintikka. What is the true algebra of logic? In V. Hendricks et al. (eds.),
First-Order Logic Revisited, Logos, Berlin, 117-128, 2004c.
[Hintikka, forthcoming (a)] J. Hintikka. Truth, axiom of choice and set theory: what Tarski
never told us. Forthcoming.
[Hintikka, forthcoming (b)] J. Hintikka. Truth, negation, and other basic notions of logic. In J.
van Benthem (ed.), The Age of Alternative Logics. Forthcoming.
[Hintikka, forthcoming (c)] J. Hintikka. Who has kidnapped the notion of information? Forth-
coming.
[Hintikka et al., 1999] J. Hintikka, I. Halonen and A. Mutanen. Interrogative logic as a general
theory of reasoning. In D. Gabbay et al. (eds.), Studies in Logic and Practical Reasoning,
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic, 1999.
[Hintikka and Hintikka, 1982] J. Hintikka and M. Hintikka. Sherlock Holmes confronts modern
logic: Toward a theory of information-seeking through questioning. In E.M. Barth and J.L.
Martens, J. Benjamins (eds.), Argumentation: Approaches to Theory Formation, Amsterdam,
55-76, 1982.
[Hintikka and Sandu, 1997] J. Hintikka and G. Sandu. Game-theoretical semantics. In J. van
Benthem and A. ter Meulen (eds.), Handbook of Logic and Language, Amsterdam, Elsevier,
361-410, 1997.
[Hintikka and Suppes, 1970] J. Hintikka and P. Suppes (eds.), Information and inference, Dor-
drecht: D. Reidel, 1970.
[Hodges, 1985] W. Hodges. Building Models by Games. Cambridge:
Cambridge University
Press, 1985.
[Hodges, 1993] W. Hodges. Model Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
[Hodges, 2001] W. Hodges. Elementary Predicate Logic 25:
Skolem Functions. In D. Gab-
bay and F. Guenthner (eds.), Handbook of Philosophical Logic I, second edition, Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic, 86-91, 2001.
[Hooker, 1975-1977] C.A. Hooker (ed.), The Logico-Algebraic Approach to Quantum Mechanics
1-2, D, Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1975-1977.
[Husserl, 1913] E. Husserl. Logische Untersuchungen. T¨ubingen: Max Niemeyer, 1913.
[Japaridze, 2003] G. Japaridze. Introduction to computability logic. Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 123: 1-99, 2003.
[Jeﬀrey, 1983] R. Jeﬀrey. The Logic of Decision. Second edition, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1983.
[Jeﬀrey, 1992] R. Jeﬀrey. Probability and the Art of Judgment. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1992.
[J´onsson and Tarski, 1951] B. J´onsson and A. Tarski. Boolean algebras with operators I. Amer-
ican Journal of Mathematics, 73: 891-939, 1951. Also in Tarski 1986, vol.3, 369-419.
[J´onsson and Tarski, 1952] B. J´onsson and A. Tarski. ibid. II. American Journal of Mathemat-
ics, 74: 127-162, 1952. Also in Tarski 1986, vol. 3, 421-458.
[Keisler, 1974] J. Keisler. Model Theory for Inﬁnitary Logic. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1974.
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press, 1962.
[Knnuuttila and Hintikka, 1986] S. Knnuuttila and J. Hintikka (eds.). The Logic of Being, Dor-
drecht: D. Reidel, 1986.
[Kripke, 1963] S. Kripke. Semantical Considerations on Modal Logic. Acta Philosophica Fen-
nica, 16: 83-94, 1963.
[Kyburg, 1974] H. Kyburg. The Logical Foundations of Statistical Inference. Dordrecht:
D.
Reidel, 1974.
[Lemmon and Scott, 1977] E.J. Lemmon and D. Scott. An Introduction to Modal Logic. Oxford:
Blackwell, 1977.
[Levi, 1977] I. Levi. Direct Inference. Journal of Philosophy, 74: 5-29, 1977.
[Lewis, 1973] D. Lewis. Counterfactuals. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press,
1973.
[Lewis, 1980] D. Lewis. A Subjectivist’s Guide to Objective Chance. In R.C. Jeﬀrey (ed.), Stud-
ies in Inductive Logic and Probability, vol. 2, Berkeley: University of California Press, 263-293,
1980.
[Lycan, 1984] W. Lycan. Logical form in natural language. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The
MIT Press, 1984.

38
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu
[May, 1985] R. May. Logical Form: Its Structure and Derivation. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
The MIT Press, 1985.
[McCarthy, 1980] J. McCarthy. Circumscription — a form of non-monotonic reasoning. Artiﬁcal
Intelligence, 13: 27-39, 171-172, 1980.
[McCarthy, 1981] T. McCarthy. The idea of a logical constant. Journal of Philosophy, 78: 499-
523, 1981.
[Mendelson, 1987] E. Mendelson. Introduction to mathematical logic. Third edition, Princeton:
van Nostrand, 1987.
[Mostowski, 1957] A. Mostowski. On a generalization of quantiﬁers. Fundamenta Mathematicae,
44:12-36, 1957.
[Mostowski, 1966] A. Mostowski. Thirty Years of Foundational Studies, Oxford: Basil Black-
well, 1966.
[Parikh, 1985] R. Parikh. The logic of games and its applications. In M. Karpinski and J. van
Leeuwen (eds.), Annals of Discrete Mathematics, 24: 111-140, 1985.
[Peirce, 1885] C.S. Peirce. On the Algebra of Logic; A Contribution to the Philosophy of Nota-
tion. American Journal of Mathematics, 7: 180 – 202, 1885.
[Peirce, 1992] C.S. Peirce. Reasoning and the Logic of Things: The Cambridge Conferences Lec-
tures of 1898. Kenneth Laine Ketner, editor, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University
Press, 1992.
[Prawitz, 1985] D. Prawitz. Remarks on some approaches to the concept of logical consequence.
Synthese, 62: 153–171, 1985.
[Preyer and Peters, 2002] G. Preyer and G. Peters (eds.). Logical Form and Language. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2002.
[Quine, 1950] W.V.O. Quine. Methods of Logic. New York: Henry Holt, 1950.
[Quine, 1951] W.V.O. Quine. Two dogmas of empiricism. Philosophical Review, 60: 20-43, 1951.
[Quine, 1970] W.V.O. Quine. Philosophy of Logic. Cambridge Massachusetts, Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1970.
[Ramsey, 1925] F.P. Ramsey. The foundations of mathematics. Proceedings of the London Math-
ematical Society, Ser. II, 25: 338-384, 1925.
[Ray, 1996] G. Ray. Logical Consequence: A Defense of Tarski. The Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 25: 617-677, 1996 .
[Restall, 2000] G. Restall. An Introduction to Substructural Logics. Routledge, 2000.
[Sainsbury, 1991] M. Sainsbury. Logical Forms. Oxford: Blackwell, 1991.
[Scott, 1965] D. Scott. Logic with Denumerably Long Formulas and Finite Strings of Quantiﬁers.
In J. Addison, L. Henkin and A. Tarski (eds.), The Theory of Models, Amsterdam: North-
Holland, 329-341, 1965.
[Shapiro, 1998] S. Shapiro. Logical consequence, models and modality. In M. Schirn (ed.), Phi-
losophy of Mathematics Today, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 131-156, 1998.
[Smith, 1982] B. Smith. Parts and Moments: Studies in Logic and Formal Ontology. Munich:
Philosophia Verlag, 1982.
[Smullyan, 1968] R. Smullyan. First-Order Logic. Heidelberg and New York: Springer, 1968.
[Sher, 1991] G. Sher. The Bounds of Logic. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1991.
[Skyrms, 1966] B. Skyrms. Choice and Chance: An Introduction to Inductive Logic. Belmont
California: Dickenson, 1966.
[Stalnaker, 1984] R. Stalnaker. Inquiry. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1984.
[Stalnaker, 1994] R. Stalnaker. Nonmonotonic consequence relations. Fundamenta Informaticae,
21: 7-21, 1994.
[Tarski, 1935] A. Tarski. Der Wahreitsbegriﬀin den formalisierten Sprachen. Studia Philosoph-
ica, 1: 261-405, 1935.
[Tarski, 1941] A. Tarski. On the Calculus of Relations. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 6: 73 – 89,
1941.
[Tarski, 1944] A. Tarski. The Semantic Conception of Truth. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 4: 341-75, 1944.
[Tarski, 1956] A. Tarski. Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics: papers from 1923 to 1938. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press, 1956.
[Tarski, 1965] A. Tarski. Introduction to Logic and the Methodology of Deductive Sciences. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1965.
[Tarski, 1986a] A. Tarski. Collected Papers, edited by S.R. Givant and R.N. McKenzie, Basel:
Birkh¨ausen Verlag, 1986a.

What is Logic?
39
[Tarski, 1986b] A. Tarski. What are logical notions? History and Philosophy of Logic, 7: 143-
154, 1986b (original 1966).
[Tharp, 1975] L. Tharp. Which logic is the right logic? Synthese, 31: 1-21, 1975.
[van Benthem, 1982] J. van Benthem. The Logic of Time. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1982.
[van Benthem, 2001] J. van Benthem. Correspondence Theory. In D. Gabbay and F. Guenthner,
(eds.), Handbook of Philosophical Logic III, second edition, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic,
2001.
[van Benthem, forthcoming] J. van Benthem. Introduction. In J. van Benthem et al. (eds.), The
Age of Alternative Logics. Forthcoming.
[van Heijenoort, 1967a] J. van Heijenoort (ed.), From Frege to G¨odel: A Source Book In Math-
ematical Logic 1879-1931. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1967a.
[van Heijenoort, 1967b] J. van Heijenoort. Logic as calculus and logic as language. Synthese, 17:
324-330, 1967b.
[von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1944] J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern. Theory of Games
and Economic Behavior. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1944.
[von Wright, 1951a] G.W. von Wright. An Essay in Modal Logic. Amsterdam: North-Holland,
1951a.
[von Wright, 1951b] G.W. von Wright. Deontic logic. Mind, 60: 1-15, 1951b.
[von Wright, 1983] G.W. von Wright. Practical Reason: Philosophical Papers, Volume 1. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1983.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1912] A.N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica. Cam-
bridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1912.
[Wittgenstein, 1922] L. Wittgenstein. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Translated by C.K. Og-
den, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd, 1922.
[Wittgenstein, 1953] L. Wittgenstein. Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell, 1953.
[Zeman, 1973] J. Zeman. Modal Logic. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1973.


THE SCOPE AND LIMITS OF LOGIC
Wilfrid Hodges
The cistern contains, the fountain overﬂows.
William Blake, Proverbs of Hell.
1
THE BROAD SWEEP
Some features of logic have stayed remarkably constant from Aristotle in the fourth
century BC to modern times. We can divide the subject into three broad areas.
(1) Theory of inference. Here we study arguments that are used to
justify one statement on the basis of others. Many of these arguments
fall into standard argument-patterns, and we classify the patterns.
This is the content of Aristotle’s Prior Analytics, Ibn S¯ın¯a’s Qiy¯as, sections of
various Latin medieval texts, the Dialectica of Ramus, Boole’s Laws of Thought
and any number of ﬁrst courses in logic today. Proof theory takes the subject to
research level.
(2) Theory of deﬁnition. Here we study the use of words or symbols to
identify or characterise things; the things can be concrete or abstract.
Again there are some standard forms that depend on the kind of thing
being characterised.
Deﬁnitions were a standard tool of medieval logicians both East and West. We ﬁnd
them discussed by Pascal and Leibniz in the 17th century and by Frege and Peano
in the 19th. The subtitle of Barwise’s Admissible Sets and Structures (1975) is
‘An approach to deﬁnability theory’. Set theory and model theory revolve around
questions of deﬁnability. Formal semantics belongs here too.
(3) Applied logic. Here we apply (1) and (2) as tools for analysing or
solving practical problems.
For Aristotle the main applications were in scientiﬁc explanation and in debate.
There are modern counterparts for both of these applications. Proof search (meth-
ods for constructing arguments on the ﬂy in order to prove given conclusions) was
a major part of logic for Boethius in the 6th century; today it forms one of the
main mechanisms of logic programming. Today we also apply logic to teach skills
of persuasive writing, and in the design of embedded logic chips.
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

42
Wilfrid Hodges
The Ny¯aya logic of India clearly belongs within this general pattern, though
there is some debate about whether to place it with (1) as a theory of deduction
or with (3) as a theory of scientiﬁc explanation. Matilal [Matilal, 2001] presents it
as the study of arguments and inference patterns involving the physical location
of properties. I know too little about Chinese cultural history to comment on the
place of logic in that tradition.
Academic subjects identify themselves partly by social links and sharing of
methods. Within the last hundred years statistics has developed its own charac-
teristics and communities, and nobody now places it inside logic. Computability
theory has strong links with other parts of mathematical logic and is normally
reckoned a part of logic, but this might change if the subject took a swing towards
combinatorics. At present cognitive science is set clearly apart from logic by its
methods, but some topics of common interest between the two are likely to become
more accessible during the next century.
2
DEFINITIONS OF LOGIC
If we want a snappy deﬁnition of logic in a few words, it would be hard to improve
on Kilwardby’s deﬁnition from around 1250 [Kilwardby, 1976, para. 523]:
(1)
The subject [of logic] is reasoning (ratiocinatio).
Kilwardby [Kilwardby, 1976, para. 524] reckoned that this also includes the theory
of deﬁnition, because reasoning needs deﬁnitions.
One might want to add that logic studies good reasoning, not bad. Maybe that
goes without saying; piano teachers teach you to play the piano well, not to play
it badly. But in any case many logicians have studied bad arguments. Aristotle
lectured [Aristotle, 1955] on the skill of producing arguments that are invalid but
plausible enough to fool at least some people.
Schopenhauer wrote but never
published a book [Schopenhauer, 2004] in the same vein. In §5 we will see why
modern textbooks of logic no longer have a section on fallacies; the topic is still
relevant but it has moved sideways.
Bolzano ([Bolzano, 1837] §7) asks ‘Does the question whether coriander im-
proves one’s memory belong to logic?’ He expects the answer No, and certainly
I wouldn’t expect to see the question discussed in any logical treatise today. It
would be an isolated question with no surrounding theory.
Its proper context
seems to be the workings of the hippocampus. But logical treatises certainly do
discuss equally physiological questions about the parietal lobes, as we will see in
§9(b). In the parietal case we have some conscious access to the relevant facts. As
our knowledge of the workings of our brains increases, I expect to see closer links
between logic and brain science, and I’m not placing bets on how coriander will
ﬁgure.
There will always be people who denounce parts of logic as ‘not real logic’, or
‘corrupt’, or ‘charlatan’. To leave my contemporaries at peace I cite Kant, whose
Logik ([Kant, 1800], written up by J¨asche) starts with a spree of excommunications.

The Scope and Limits of Logic
43
Mathematics is excluded from logic because logic ‘may not borrow any principles
either from any science or from any experience’ [Kant, 1800, p. 529]. Common
sense logic ‘is not really logic but an anthropological science that has only empirical
principles’ [Kant, 1800, p. 532]. ‘Applied logic really ought not to be called logic’
[Kant, 1800, p. 533]. Of the art of producing specious arguments to win a debate,
Kant says ‘Nothing can be less worthy of a philosopher . . . than the cultivation of
such an art’ [Kant, 1800, p. 531].
Kant’s attitude is deplorable. If he wants to single out an area within logic for
special consideration, ﬁne; there are many good reasons for doing such a thing.
But to reserve the word ‘logic’ for this selected part is a needless slur on other
parts of the subject. There can be shallow or incompetent work done in any area
of logic, and most areas allow work of high quality. Much of the rest of this chapter
will be a deconstruction of various attempts to narrow down the range of logic.
3
CONCEPTS THAT BELONG TO LOGIC
The phrase ‘concepts that belong to logic’ appears in Bolzano [Bolzano, 1837,
§148]. But a time-honoured way to describe a discipline is to say what its ba-
sic concepts are. With logic there is a special problem: we study reasoning, and
reasoning is done with concepts.
So it’s necessary to distinguish between the
logician’s language with its concepts, and the reasoner’s language with its con-
cepts. For convenience let’s call the logician’s language the metalanguage and the
reasoner’s language the object language.
Various logicians at various times have oﬀered lists of concepts belonging to
logic. Sometimes these were lists of metalanguage concepts:
(2)
. . . the logician or dialectician can argue in every special science and in
every subject matter, since common concepts, which the dialectician is
concerned with, for example genus, species etc., and modes of knowledge
and argument, are found in every subject matter.
(The Aristotelian Boethius of Dacia, around 1270, [Boethius of Dacia,
1969, p. 34].)
(3)
As the ground of all this procedure is the possibility of our forming the
conception of Class the Logic which determines the forms and laws of such
procedure, may be said to be the scientiﬁc development of the notion of
a class.
(Boole in about 1860, [Boole, 1997, p. 127].)
Sometimes they were object language concepts:
(4)
Just as the concept point belongs to geometry, logic likewise has its own
concepts and relations . . . For example the following belong to logic: nega-
tion [i.e. ‘not’], identity [i.e. ‘equals’], subsumption [i.e. ‘is a’], subordina-
tion of concepts [i.e. ‘every A is a B’].
(Frege in 1906, [Frege, 1906, p. 428].)

44
Wilfrid Hodges
There are also medieval lists of words that play roles in arguments.
Debates about the relation between object language and metalanguage concepts
go back a long way. In the debate between the Aristotelian Matt¯a ibn Y¯unus and
the Islamic scholar As-S¯ır¯af¯ı before the visier Ibn Al-Fur¯at in 930 (Elamrani-Jamal
[1983, p. 153ﬀ]), one of S¯ır¯af¯ı’s points against Matt¯a is that a logician has to be
prepared to study the concepts that reasoners use in their arguments. He gives
as an example the word ‘and’ (Arabic wa); he mentions its roles as a conjunction
and as a temporal operator. Matt¯a is reported as maintaining that Aristotle’s
metalanguage concepts are adequate for describing all inferences; this was the
standard Aristotelian position, as we will see in the next section.
Most object language concepts are unlikely to attract the attention of logicians,
because they are not related to any particular argument forms.
As Elizabeth
Anscombe says [1957, p. 58]:
(5)
. . . no one has ever pointed out the mince pie syllogism: the peculiarity
of this would be that it was about mince pies, and an example would
be ‘All mince pies have suet in them — this is a mince pie — therefore
etc.’
On the other hand, if an object language concept does play a distinctive role in
the structure of arguments, then logicians need to be able to name it in their
metalanguage too. Those logicians who have tried to prescribe in advance the
‘concepts belonging to logic’ (either object language or metalanguage) were unwise;
who can say what concepts might be found to play a distinctive role in arguments?
This doesn’t prevent logicians from adopting a particular limited object language
for a particular purpose.
One common feature of twentieth century logic has been the use of metalan-
guage arguments to reach conclusions in the object language. Abraham Robinson’s
nonstandard analysis is one of the most striking examples of this. Some of the
arguments of Hilbert’s metamathematics have this form too, though with a dif-
ferent style of metalanguage argument. We will see a further example in §8 below
(G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem). Generally for arguments of this kind it was
essential to choose a limited object language and formalise it precisely.
When we discuss the use of metalanguage arguments to reach object language
conclusions, we are passing to a meta-metalanguage. This is one illustration of the
extraordinary conceptual richness of logic. To try to draw a deﬁning circle around
the concepts of logic seems just sad.
4
THE SYLLOGISM CLAIM
Immediately after his statement (1), Kilwardby added that one can also take the
subject matter of logic to be ‘syllogisms’, because [Kilwardby, 1976, para 523]
(6)
All modes of reasoning get their force from syllogisms and are reducible
to syllogisms.

The Scope and Limits of Logic
45
We can call this the syllogism claim. Aristotelian logicians generally accepted it.
As a result they took the (metalanguage) concepts of logic to be those needed for
describing syllogisms.
Syllogisms are inferences in one of a small number of forms described by Aris-
totle in his Prior Analytics [Aristotle, 1989]. The archetypal syllogistic form is:
(7)
If every M is a P and every S is an M, it follows that every S is a P.
Since the middle ages this form (7) has been known as barbara. See Thom [1981]
for a reliable modern account of syllogisms.
Aristotle himself said [Aristotle, 1989, 68b9–13]:
(8)
But now, it should be explained that not only dialectical and demonstra-
tive deductions come about through (g´ınontai dia) the [syllogistic] ﬁgures
previously mentioned, but also rhetorical ones, and absolutely any form
of conviction whatever, arising from whatever discipline.
The passage is a little obscure, like much in Aristotle. But it allows Kilwardby’s
interpretation, that all inferences are reducible to syllogisms though they may not
be syllogisms as they stand.
Maddeningly, neither Kilwardby nor anybody else ancient or medieval tells us
in what sense all valid inferences are ‘reducible to syllogisms’. If at least they had
oﬀered a proof of the syllogistic claim, we could see what they thought they were
proving. But for that we have to wait for C. S. Peirce.
In 1867 Peirce oﬀered a proof that ‘the general form of every argument’ is a
syllogism in barbara [Peirce, 1867, I §4 with II §3]. He repeated the proof in 1898,
in a series of lectures at Harvard [Peirce, 1992, p. 131f]. The following summary
is in my words, not Peirce’s.
(9)
A valid argument is about a subject S, and its conclusion states something
about this subject: S is a P. The inference must be warranted by some
information about S: S is an M. If M does contain everything about S
that is needed to warrant the conclusion, this can only be because of a
‘leading principle’ relating M and P: Every M is a P.
This reduces the argument to the form
(10) S is an M. Every M is a P. Therefore S is a P.
The form (10) is not exactly barbara, but we can bring it to barbara by replacing
S by the class S′ of things that are identical with S. This is a triviality compared
with the leaps that Peirce has already made in (9).
Let me make some numbered comments on Peirce’s reduction.
(i) Looking back at Leibniz’s paper Elementa Calculi [Leibniz, 1903, 6] from
1679, we can see in it enough of Peirce’s argument to allow the following comments.
The more we know about the subject S, the more trivial the clause ‘Every M is a

46
Wilfrid Hodges
P’ can be. The limiting case is where we can deﬁne S in enough detail to specify all
its properties. For geometry the moral is that we should aim to deﬁne geometric
structures; with adequate deﬁnitions, all further mathematical treatment of these
structures becomes logic. In support of this picture Leibniz notes that Archimedes
eliminated one of Euclid’s axioms by deﬁning the relevant notion.
It was shortly after publishing a book on the philosophy of Leibniz that Bertrand
Russell gave what we now recognise as a model-theoretic description of geometry
[Russell, 1903, ch. xiv]. This was a test case for Russell’s claim that ‘Pure Mathe-
matics is the class of all propositions of the form “p implies q”, where p and q are
propositions containing one or more variables, the same in the two propositions,
and neither p nor q contains any constants except logical constants.’
[Russell,
1903, p. 3]. So even in all its crudity, Peirce’s analysis can support real insight
into the relationship between mathematics and logic.
(ii) Obviously Peirce’s reduction is not the whole truth about logic. But what
has he missed? Again Leibniz puts his ﬁnger on one essential point [Leibniz, 1962,
p. 479]:
(11)
It should also be realized that there are valid non-syllogistic inferences
which cannot be rigorously demonstrated in any syllogism unless the
terms are changed a little, and this altering of the terms is the non-
syllogistic inference. (My italics)
Exactly so. The same applies in elementary logic when we validate an argument
in English by translating it into ﬁrst-order predicate calculus notation. The trans-
lation itself is a non-ﬁrst-order inference. We can formalise more inference steps
in ﬁrst-order logic than we can in syllogisms. But this is a diﬀerence of degree,
not of kind.
(iii) Peirce himself [Peirce, 1992, p. 131f] points out another important reser-
vation. The problem lies in the ‘leading principle’. Before reduction, the original
argument inferred that S is a P from the information that S is an M. If this is
a sound inference, says Peirce, then there must be a general principle endorsing
inferences of this kind, and this general principle is what we write as ‘Every M is
a P’. But is it clear that we are only entitled to infer from being an M to being
a P when every M is a P? Peirce tells us to read the leading principle not in a
narrow sense (i.e. literally), but as expressing that some general relation between
M and P warrants the passage from premise to conclusion.
No need to spell this out today; default arguments and probabilistic arguments
are familiar, not to mention various kinds of scientiﬁc inference. Deductive logic
is a special case where we can read the leading principle literally.
Comparing himself with Archimedes, Peirce described his analysis of the syl-
logism claim as the fulcrum ‘from which to start a doctrine of inference’ [Peirce,
1992, p. 131]. I think it deserves further study.

The Scope and Limits of Logic
47
5
PATTERNS OF REASONING
No academic subject can survive on a diet of isolated facts. Even in history we have
to set facts in their proper context and discern the broader picture. Happily the
raw material of logic meets us halfway: some patterns of reasoning keep recurring.
Take for example the transitivity of ‘If . . . then’:
(12) If P then Q. If Q then R. Therefore if P then R.
At ﬁrst approximation it seems that when we replace P, Q and R by sentences in
this schema, the result must be a cogent argument.
Unfortunately it’s not that simple.
A famous example goes back to Walter
Burley’s shorter De Puritate Logicae [Burleigh, 1955, p. 203]:
(13)
If I say you are a donkey then I say you are an animal.
If I say you are an animal then I say the truth.
Therefore if I say you are a donkey then I say the truth.
So having the syntactic form (12) is not a guarantee of cogency.
The temptation is very strong to say that (12) is obviously a valid argument
form, so that in spite of ﬁrst appearances, Burley’s argument (13) is not really of
this form. This forces the corollary that valid argument forms are not syntactic
but — either in whole or in part — semantic.
Now the syntactic form of an argument is visible for all to see, but the semantic
form is not. This opens the door to a line of research in which we identify the
semantic requirements for a valid inference. The Latin logicians of the middle
ages scoured the examples of bad arguments in Aristotle’s Sophistical Refutations
[Aristotle, 1955], and devised other bad arguments of their own, to see what se-
mantic faults they contained. The outcome was a sophisticated collection of tools
for breaking superﬁcially sound arguments. One could claim that the same word
stood for diﬀerent things in diﬀerent parts of the argument — for example in one
place it stood for the objects falling under it, in another place it stood for its mean-
ing and in another it stood for itself. One could claim that quantiﬁers ranged over
diﬀerent sets in diﬀerent parts of the argument: here over actual objects, there
over possible ones. And so on. (De Rijk [1962].) Burley himself broke the infer-
ence (13) by claiming an ambiguity in ‘you are an animal’; the words could stand
either for a proposition or for themselves [Burleigh, 1955, p. 205].
This could have been a very fertile time for logic, but somehow the energy
drained away in the late fourteenth century. Setting aside plagues and politics,
there seem to be three reasons internal to logic itself. First, the Latins were ex-
traordinarily naive about speaker’s intention and context of utterance. This made
it easy to oﬀer several equally plausible refutations of one and the same argument,
and even to construct refutations of perfectly good arguments. Renaissance hu-
manists could complain with justice that the scholastics had lost the ability to
recognise a valid argument. Thus Thomas More in 1515 [Rogers, 1947, p. 54],
after giving pages of examples to support his case:

48
Wilfrid Hodges
(14)
When heretics are prepared with the same devices as [scholastic theolo-
gians], and trained to play the same games, when will they concede? Not
quickly, I’ll bet, if they show the same contempt for a bunch of twigs as
they do for massed arrays of syllogisms.
The moral is that you can’t hope to assess the validity of reasoning without some
appreciation of the workings of the language in which the reasoning takes place.
This is one reason why semantics is an essential tool for logicians.
At this point the second reason for the medieval failure kicked in. Despite the
best eﬀorts of the late 13th century modists, the Latin medievals never created
a successful theory of syntax. Without a systematic syntax you don’t have the
basis for a systematic semantics. The writings of Ockham in the early fourteenth
century are full of semantic observations, but they don’t join up; there is no way
you can work through Ockham’s text to build up the meanings of complex phrases
from those of words.
The third catastrophe followed in turn. While the modists were struggling to
explain the syntax of the phrase ‘Socrates and Plato’ [Covington, 1984, p. 83ﬀ],
the nominalists attacked them with a barrage of catch-22 metaphysical questions.
A typical example, from Aurifaber around 1330, was ‘Every possible thing is either
a substance or an accident; so is a mode of signifying a substance or an accident?’
[Pinborg, 1967, p. 216]. The science wasn’t strong enough to withstand the on-
slaught. Part of the nominalist case was that all logically signiﬁcant structure
in sentences is at the level of ‘mental words’. A thick haze of mental-language
logic settled over Europe from the mid fourteenth to the mid nineteenth centuries.
Leibniz and a very few other logicians bucked the trend.
Leibniz saw a wholly novel way to deal with problem cases like Burley’s (13):
invent a language in which they don’t happen.
It’s by no means obvious that this strategy can work.
The problem is the
semantics.
How can we use English, with its tainted semantics, to deﬁne the
faultless semantics of the new language?
I believe Kreisel once compared this question with the problem of getting clean
dishes by combining dirty dishes and dirty dishwater. Against one’s natural expec-
tations, it can be done. The solution was found by generations of mathematicians,
honing their English, French or German for precision. One key idea was to take
expressions as names of classes wherever possible. Then we need only one prim-
itive relation, namely the relation of class membership; this is the ‘subsumption’
of Frege’s list (4). The ﬁrst logician to carry out this strategy systematically was
Boole in 1847 [Boole, 1847]. For him the English sentence ‘No virtuous man is
a tyrant’ translates into an algebraic sentence saying that X is disjoint from Y ,
where ‘X’ and ‘Y ’ are names for the class of virtuous men and the class of tyrants
respectively. The reference of ‘X’ is ﬁxed throughout an argument, and ‘X’ plays
no role except through its reference. Boole noted that the veriﬁcation of syllogistic
arguments, and more besides, becomes routine in the resulting algebra of classes.
For example the class-theoretic statement

The Scope and Limits of Logic
49
(15) If X ⊆Y and Y ⊆Z then X ⊆Z.
takes the place of barbara (6).
In Boole’s algebraic language there is no room for the kind of fallacy-chopping
we met in the medievals. Simply, there are no fallacies. The schematic sentence
(15) becomes true whatever classes we choose for X, Y and Z. (Tarski [1936b]
refers to this feature of a sentence schema as ‘infallibility’ (niezawodnowo´s´c).) But
the medieval problems surface again where Leibniz (11) told us to expect them:
in the translation between English and the algebraic language. To see that the
translation of an English sentence is correct, we need to understand the semantics
of the English sentence. To this problem Boole has contributed nothing at all.
Nevertheless Boole’s algebraic language, and the further developments by Jevons,
Peirce, Frege, Peano etc., created a revolution in logic. The revolution was math-
ematical logic. During my own career I remember for example Tony Martin’s use
of games on the Turing degrees to show ω1 is measurable under the axiom of de-
terminacy, and Ehud Hrushovski’s deﬁnition of inﬁnite abelian groups in modular
strongly minimal sets. In terms of imagination and sophistication, either of these
results beats anything proved in logic before 1900 by many orders of magnitude.
For mathematical arguments the problem of translation into a formal language
of logic is often minimal, because modern mathematics is already semi-formal.
(Granted, a translation from one formal language to another can still be several
years’ mathematical research.) In the excitement of mathematical logic one easily
forgets the older problems of analysing natural language arguments. But for a
variety of reasons, some logicians found themselves revisiting these older problems
in the second half of the twentieth century. It would be a tragedy if these researches
fell into the same traps that ensnared the medieval eﬀorts. But the situation seems
altogether healthier this time round.
First, syntactic theory is a diﬀerent animal today from the sorry thing it was
in the middle ages. Tarski said in 1933 that it would be impossible to handle the
semantics of colloquial languages by ‘exact methods’ without ﬁrst imposing on
these languages ‘the characteristic features of the formalized languages’ [Tarski,
1983, p. 267]. Today we can take our choice between a range of natural language
grammars that largely meet Tarski’s requirement.
Second, today’s natural language logicians are altogether more realistic about
the relevance of context to interpretation. The problems here are still severe, but
at least they are being addressed head-on.
Computer-based semantic theories,
now spreading fast to the web [Fensel et al., 2003], give a kind of reality check:
the programs have to work!
Third, today’s metaphysicians can still mount a priori demolitions of scientiﬁc
work, but the research funding bodies and the editors of journals are unlikely to
take much notice. This could change in a less friendly political climate. But it
will be harder to force this particular genie back into its bottle a second time.

50
Wilfrid Hodges
6
REDUCTION TO LOGIC
In a series of works, Frege argued that we can know the truths of arithmetic on the
basis of (a) sound deﬁnitions, starting from concepts with no empirical content,
(b) truths known directly (he called these Urwahrheiten, [Frege, 1884, p. 4]), and
(c) undeniably correct inference steps. In fact he claimed to demonstrate all this
within the (almost) formal language Begriﬀsschrift [Frege, 1879]. This established,
he said, that arithmetic needs no proof grounds from either experience or intuition
[Frege, 1893, p. 1].
That’s quite a mouthful, and of course people abbreviated it.
Frege’s own
abbreviation was that ‘Arithmetic is a branch of logic’ [Frege, 1893, p. 1].
A
later abbreviation described Frege’s programme as logicist. These slogans had one
regrettable consequence, that some discussion of Frege’s programme has turned
on the proper use of the word ‘logic’. If it’s just a matter of a name, then why
should one care? If there is a real issue behind the label, then it would be better
to say what the issue is without using the contentious word. This is why in the
previous paragraph I stated Frege’s claim without mentioning ‘logic’.
Thanks to the Zermelo-Russell paradox, we know today that not all Frege’s
Urwahrheiten were in fact true. So strictly his argument failed. But other logi-
cians proposed similar ways of deriving arithmetic, which broadly seem to work:
Whitehead and Russell in Principia Mathematica, Zermelo in set theory, Lawvere
and Tierney in toposes. For the sake of clarity let me stay with Frege.
In his own words, Frege’s aim was epistemological [Frege, 1893, p. vii]:
(16)
The absence of any gaps in the chain of demonstrations has the eﬀect
of bringing to light every axiom, presupposition, hypothesis, or whatever
you like to call it, that the proof calls on. This gives us a basis for judging
the epistemological nature of the law that has been proved.
Of course we can ask the same question ‘How do we know?’ about any discipline,
whether it be microeconomics or cosmology. But in other disciplines we can throw
the question back to logic by saying ‘We know this by the following reasoning . . . ’.
In logic there is nowhere else to throw back to. We have the bare reasoning.
Actually Frege makes no contribution (to the best of my knowledge) to the
question ‘How do we know?’ about any particular basic assumption or basic step
in reasoning. Instead he sets out the reasoning in a form that he claims is broken
down to its atoms. The philosophers of logic can examine the atoms. The fact
that his Urwahrheiten can’t all be true still leaves the question ‘How do we know
that Axiom V is the wrong one?’ So for epistemological purposes his failure is far
from total.
It seems to me that Frege’s atoms are not at all homogeneous, and they raise
diﬀerent epistemological questions. In a moment I will list a few. Conceivably some
philosopher will come to this material with a general explanation of a large class
of basic units of reasoning which happens to include all those that are correct
in Frege.
There might then be some temptation to say that genuine ‘logic’ is
what is covered by this philosopher’s explanation. I think we should resist this

The Scope and Limits of Logic
51
temptation vigorously. There is no case for the epistemologists of logic to foist
their classiﬁcations on the rest of us. But in any case I don’t believe that any
convincing global explanations of this kind are available yet, so the question is
premature.
I mention it only because some attempts to single out something
‘deserving the unqualiﬁed name “logic” ’ (Feferman [1999, p. 32]) have at least a
hint of this motivation behind them.
Frege did in fact try hard to impose some homogeneity on his atoms of reasoning,
by the choice of concepts that he made available in Begriﬀsschrift. He criticised
Dedekind for relying on ‘concepts that are not customary in logic and are not
reducible to recognised logical concepts’ [Frege, 1893, p. viii], presumably implying
that the concepts in Begriﬀsschrift escape this criticism. That looks like the worst
sort of appeal to tradition, and it must surprise people who reckon that Frege
made fundamental innovations in his choice of logical notions. But I think we
can serve Frege better by reading between his lines. He often talks of reduction
to logic, but when he is being careful he says that the laws of Begriﬀsschrift are
‘pure logical’ (rein logische, e.g. [Frege, 1879, ix]; [Frege, 1893, p. vii] or ‘universal
logical’ (allgemein logische, [Frege, 1884, pp. iv, ix, 4]).
These terms ‘pure’ and ‘universal’ hark back to Kant. Kant’s explanations seem
to me terminally confused (I defy anyone to make sense of [Kant, 1787, p. B84]
without special pleading). But Frege himself gives some hints of his meaning. At
[Frege, 1879, p. ix] he explains ‘pure logical’ as meaning ‘disregarding the individual
features (besondern Beschaﬀenheit) of things’. His logical notions don’t quite meet
this condition, because he does systematically distinguish between objects and
concepts. But the broad aim is clear even if the details are a little untidy: he will
use only notions that can properly be applied to any subject matter whatever.
(And now we can ask the epistemologist: what is the basis for acquiring such
concepts? Or we can ask the brain specialist: how are such concepts built into us,
Hurford [2003], Marcus [2001]?)
The least satisfactory part of Frege’s scheme is probably his treatment of the
Urwahrheiten. He seems to assume that if a proposition p uses only subject-free
concepts, and we know that p is true, then the ground of our knowledge of p is
also subject-free. This is a non sequitur. To illustrate the point, take the second
of the basic laws of Begriﬀsschrift, in modern notation:
(17) ⊢(c →(b →a)) →((c →b) →(c →a)).
How do we know the truth of this law?
Answer: by reading the truth-table
deﬁnition of ‘→’ and then writing out a truth table. This justiﬁcation uses notions
not available in Begriﬀsschrift itself; Begriﬀsschrift has expressions that name
truth, but it doesn’t express the concept of truth. And even if it did, the proof by
truth tables shows that the grounds of our knowledge of the law lie in other laws;
it is not an Ur-wahrheit.
What has gone wrong here is that we justiﬁed (17) by passing to a diﬀerent sys-
tem of representation, moving up into a metalanguage. Logicians (G¨odel [1958])
and cognitive scientists (Stenning [2003]) have rightly emphasised that we can in-

52
Wilfrid Hodges
crease our reasoning power by moving from one representation to another. Frege’s
scheme ignores this issue — or perhaps he hides it from himself by his distinction
between how we discover a fact and the grounds of its proof [Frege, 1884, §17].
When we turn to more contentious axioms, for example comprehension axioms
or axioms of inﬁnity, then the question ‘What concepts are we entitled to use in
justifying this axiom?’ becomes very pressing.
A similar point applies to Frege’s rules of inference.
There are things to say about the justiﬁcation of Frege’s deﬁnitions.
Frege
himself raises a crucial issue in a posthumous paper on ‘Logic in Mathematics’
[Frege, 1979, p. 208]:
(18)
When something that looks like a deﬁnition really makes it possible to
prove something which could not be proved before, then it is no mere
deﬁnition but must conceal something which would have either to be
proved as a theorem or accepted as an axiom.
This applies to Frege’s deﬁnition of ‘number’. On one reading, his deﬁnition is
a declaration that he is going to use the word ‘number’ as an abbreviation for a
longer expression of Begriﬀsschrift. In that case the deﬁnition is redundant, and
nothing has been said about the concept of number.
This is clearly not what
Frege wanted. The alternative is that the deﬁnition is a true statement expressing
a logical analysis of the concept of number. In that case, says Frege [Frege, 1979,
p. 209f.],
(19)
We cannot prove [that the analysis is correct].
The most one can be
certain of is that as far as the form of words goes we have the same
sentence after the analysis as before.
But that the thought itself also
remains the same is problematic. . . . I believe that we shall only be able
to assert that [this is so] when this is self-evident. And then what we have
is an axiom.
In short, the epistemological question arises for Frege’s deﬁnitions just as much as
for his logical axioms, though in a diﬀerent form.
Both the question of shift of representation in proofs and the question of the
self-evidence of logical analyses seem to me enormously perplexing. I hope that
closer interactions between logicians and cognitive scientists will throw light on
both of them. Rigour in the formalisation will be essential.
7
QUINE’S ‘SCOPE OF LOGIC’
‘The scope of logic’ is the title of Chapter 5 of Quine’s Philosophy of Logic [Quine,
1970].
Quine’s chapter has a context. Earlier in the book Quine has shown how to
set up a formal language with a set-theoretic semantics. He has explained how
to deﬁne the notions of logical implication and logical incompatibility in terms of
the notion of logical truth, and he has suggested a way of deﬁning logical truth

The Scope and Limits of Logic
53
in terms of the grammar and semantics of the formal language: ‘A logical truth is
a sentence that cannot be turned false by substituting for lexicon’ ([Quine, 1970,
p/ 58], his italics). It remains to pin down which expressions of the language are
lexical. He concentrates on predicates, and he asks which predicates are ‘proper
to logic’ and which are ‘extra-logical’ (i.e. lexical).
Quine is picking out a certain area of enquiry within logic as a whole. Unless
his selection happens to be interesting for some accidental reason, the ﬁrst sensible
question about it is whether it meets the purpose he had in making it. Sadly he
never tells us that purpose, so we have to infer it from the arguments that he uses.
What counts in favour of a predicate P being proper to logic?
(a) Counting P as proper to logic doesn’t prevent our having a complete proof
calculus for the logical truths [Quine, 1970, pp. 62, 72, 82f].
(b) Counting P as proper to logic doesn’t commit us to logical truths that express
‘staggering existential assumptions’ [Quine, 1970, p. 68]. In the same vein,
counting P as proper to logic doesn’t give us logical truths ‘expressible by
direct quantiﬁcation in the object language’ [Quine, 1970, p. 61].
(c) Counting P as proper to logic doesn’t prevent a consensus on what sentences
are logical truths [Quine, 1970, p. 72] ‘competing doctrines’).
(d) The predicate P ‘treats of all objects impartially’ [Quine, 1970, p. 62].
In his next chapter Quine describes the disadvantages of using a ‘deviant logic’.
He argues against deviant logics on the grounds that they lack ‘simplicity’ and
are less ‘familiar’ [Quine, 1970, p. 86]. These criteria could also be relevant to
choosing what predicates are proper to logic.
Item (d) is familiar from §6 above. But where do the other criteria come from?
When I ﬁrst read Quine I was bewildered by them. I think I suggested in print
somewhere that the cash value of Quine’s question was ‘What formal system of
logic should we teach to undergraduate logic classes?’ Only later I came across
Bolzano’s deﬁnition of logic as ‘the science that shows us how to present the
sciences in adequate textbooks (Lehrb¨uchern)’ [Bolzano, 1837, §1].
Knowing more of the history of logic than I used to, I think I can put Quine’s
question into a context where his criteria make sense, but I can’t guarantee this is
the only way of solving the jigsaw puzzle.
Around the beginning of the twentieth century, various trends converged into a
consensus about the proper methodology for deductive disciplines. For the sake of
a name I call this consensus the logistic paradigm. Each discipline should have its
own primitive concepts and its own axioms; these should be expressible in some
suitable formal language. The discipline should be developed by adding concepts
through formal deﬁnitions and adding theorems through formal derivations. In
this form the discipline was called a deductive theory. One can ﬁnd descriptions of
this methodology in Hilbert [1918], Weyl [1928], Tarski [1936a] and Church [1956,
§07].

54
Wilfrid Hodges
What should the formal proof calculus be? Tarski in [1933b] left this open;
each formal theory should come equipped with its own logical axioms and infer-
ence rules, and these need not be the same in all systems. For one particular
formal theory Hilbert [1931] proposed a proof rule with inﬁnitely many premises.
In another direction, several authors stressed the advantages of having a notion
of derivation which is eﬀective, in the sense at least that the set of deducible
theorems is eﬀectively enumerable.
For example Church [Church, 1956, p. 52]
argued that ‘to the extent that requirements of eﬀectiveness fail, the purpose of
communication is defeated’, because the formal theory fails to communicate its
theorems to its users. A more technical argument with the same conclusion was
that Hilbert’s metamathematics could only be applied to theories with a proof
system of a standard type.
There would be obvious advantages if all deductive scientists could agree to use
the same logic, so that the diﬀerences between one deductive theory and another
lay in the primitive concepts and the non-logical axioms. It would also be helpful
if the logical consensus included only things that all theories have to assume, so
that special claims from one discipline don’t creep into others by stealth.
In the context of the logistic paradigm, all of Quine’s criteria make perfect sense.
Quine supposes that we are in the business of setting up formal systems to cope
with any branch of knowledge that we want to formalise. The logic should be
kept small and uncontroversial, and the set of logical truths should be computably
enumerable. Simplicity, familiarity and avoidance of controversial issues are all
merits in a logic that the community is going to agree to use for all sciences.
The snag is, by 1970 everybody except Quine had abandoned the logistic para-
digm. I don’t think it collapsed under one particular assault, like the walls of
Jericho. But Stegm¨uller points out the impracticality of the paradigm [Stegm¨uller,
1979, p. 5]:
(20)
But suppose that Bourbaki had made up his mind to use, as a universal
language of mathematics, formalized set theory instead of informal set
theory for his intended reconstruction of modern mathematics in precise
terms.
The Bourbaki volumes would then look like, for example, the
last chapter of Shoenﬁeld’s Mathematical Logic.
I really fear that the
Bourbaki volumes would not exist, at least not yet, since instead of having
published more than 20 volumes, Bourbaki would still be working on his
ﬁrst volume.
Informal ﬁrst-order Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory survives as the agreed foundations
for most mathematicians who care about foundations. (I wrote this on 5 March
2005.) Where one needs a formal theory for a particular purpose — for example
for some Hilbert-style metamathematics like quantiﬁer elimination — one can do
the job within the universe of sets; but most of Quine’s criteria will be irrelevant
to the choice of logic for the theory.
And of course there are the textbooks of logic. Quine’s criteria of familiarity
and simplicity have a lot going for them in undergraduate classes. The choice of

The Scope and Limits of Logic
55
classical ﬁrst-order logic as the logic to teach students owes as much to Gerhard
Gentzen’s limpid proof methods as to anything else.
In short, Quine’s question about the scope of logic is dead in the water. But
before we leave the logistic paradigm, we should look at some things that Tarski
said in the same connection.
8
LOGICAL NOTIONS
In 1936 Tarski published a paper [Tarski, 1936b] that proposed a way of deﬁn-
ing ‘logical consequence’ in the context of deductive theories (i.e. the logistic
paradigm).
Tarski’s paper distinguishes at various points between three notions of logi-
cal consequence. Notion One (my name) is ‘colloquial’ (potoczny) or ‘common’
(¨ublich), and Notion Two is the formalisation of this colloquial notion within the
logistic paradigm. (He draws this contrast also in the last two pages of [Tarski,
1933a].) Notion Three is his own proposal for making Notion One precise. Today
Notion Two is recognisable as proof-theoretic consequence; strictly it may diﬀer
from one deductive theory to another, but there was some consensus at least about
the rules for second-order logic. Notion Three is today’s semantic consequence.
Thanks largely to Tarski’s own work, this notion is now just as formalised as the
proof-theoretic one.
Tarski claimed that Notion Two failed to exhaust the content of Notion One.
His most telling piece of evidence for this was G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem
(though his account of it is rather laconic). Consider pure second-order logic L,
presented as a formal system. In this system we can deﬁne the natural numbers
and prove all the axioms of ﬁrst-order Peano arithmetic. So by G¨odel’s results,
assuming the truth of the axioms of L, we can use a metalanguage argument to
establish the truth of a statement in the language of L that is not formally provable
in L. This shows an ambiguity in the notion of a ‘provable statement of L’; in a
narrow sense, it means a proof-theoretic consequence of the axioms of L, whereas
in a stronger sense it includes statements of L proved in the metatheory. This
stronger sense is open-ended; other arguments that nobody has yet thought of
might establish still further truths in L. In Tarski’s view, the stronger sense is
included in Notion One; so Notion One is broader than Notion Two, and it needs
to be made precise independently from Notion Two.
Tarski took as his starting point the notion of ‘infallible’ schemas that we met
in §5 above. Suppose K is a class of sentence schemas and X is a sentence schema,
and suppose that every possible assignment of references to the schematic letters
making all of K true also makes X true. Today we express this by saying that X
is a semantic consequence of K. A universally agreed requirement on a proof rule
for a deductive theory was that its conclusion must be a semantic consequence of
its premises. With one important rider, Tarski’s proposal in [Tarski, 1936b] was to
shift the name ‘logical consequence’ from proof-theoretic consequence to semantic
consequence.

56
Wilfrid Hodges
The rider was that in deductive theories the sentences are not schemas; they are
fully meaningful sentences. Tarski’s proposal was that a deductive theory should
include a distinction between those of its expressions or concepts that are ‘logical’
and those that are not. (He already followed this practice in his own work of this
period.) Then a sentence X should be regarded as a ‘logical consequence’ (in his
revised sense) of the set of sentences K if replacing all the non-logical expressions
of K and X systematically by variables turns them into a set of schemas K′ and
a schema X′ such that X′ is a semantic consequence of K′.
This rider dropped out of use around 1950, when model theory (mostly using
ﬁrst-order languages with built-in schematic letters) replaced the logistic paradigm.
For ﬁrst-order languages proof-theoretic consequence coincides with semantic con-
sequence, thanks to the completeness theorem. There are formal theories in various
application areas, with their own languages and logics. For example there are for-
mal theories of processes; these theories are in languages with expressions that
stand for general features of processes (e.g. an operator on sentence φ, expressing
that an action of a certain type takes the present state to one in which φ holds).
These expressions are declared to be ‘logical’, and the result is ‘process logic’. This
approach vindicates Tarski’s decision to leave it open which concepts are ‘logical’,
though probably not in a way that he foresaw in 1936.
Tarski described Notion One as ‘colloquial’, ‘common usage’ and as having an
‘intuitive content’. Some readers of [Tarski, 1936b], ﬁfty years later, inferred that
he was talking about a common intuition and oﬀering his own conceptual analysis
of this intuition. If that were true, it would be highly relevant to the topic of this
chapter. We could all introspect our common intuition of logical consequence and
compare our analyses of it with Tarski’s.
But of course there is not and never has been a common intuition of logical
consequence, any more than there is a common intuition of inductive deﬁnition or
a common intuition of subatomic physics. To me it’s extraordinary that readers
who thought Tarski meant there is such an intuition never challenged him on this.
Where was Tarski’s evidence of the existence of this intuition? Whatever did they
think they were introspecting?
Tarski’s meaning is not entirely clear. In places he speaks of Notion Two as ‘new’
in contrast with Notion One, or as ‘old’ relative to Notion Three, suggesting that
the Notion One he has in mind is older than the formal notions of consequence
within deductive theories. On the other hand his invocation of syntactic form
suggests a fairly recent notion. My guess is that he meant the notion (whatever it
was) that the founders of the logistic paradigm had in mind when they formulated
their proof rules. This notion may only have been ‘common usage’ within the
community of logicians, and it was never ‘colloquial’ except in the sense that as
an informal notion it had to be expressed in colloquial language.
Tarski doesn’t cite his evidence for Notion One. The historical record seems thin
— the phrase ‘logical consequence’ hasn’t much of a pedigree. When Frege talked
of a ‘logische Folge’ in the introduction to Begriﬀsschrift [Frege, 1879], he was
referring to the sequence of natural numbers. Weyl’s [1928] notion of a ‘logische

The Scope and Limits of Logic
57
Folge’ of a set of axioms seems to be a statement derivable from the axioms by
normal mathematical methods of deduction. Hilbert and Ackermann [1928, p. 1]
in 1928 speak of a sentence in a deductive theory being a ‘logical consequence’
(logische Folgerung) of other sentences if it’s derivable from the other sentences by
formal proof rules of the deductive theory. This is already Notion Two. Neither
Weyl nor Hilbert and Ackermann provide much support for Tarski’s claim to be
explicating Notion One.
By 1967, when Tarski proposed a deﬁnition of ‘logical’ notions, he expressed
himself more cautiously [Tarski, 1986, p. 145]:
(21)
Let me tell you in advance that in answering the question ‘What are
logical notions?’ what I shall do is make a suggestion or proposal about
a possible use of the term ‘logical notion’. This suggestion seems to me
to be in agreement, if not with all prevailing usage of the term ‘logical
notion’, at least with one usage which actually is encountered in practice.
I think the term is used in several diﬀerent senses and that my suggestion
gives an account of one of them.
I would rather Tarski had chosen a name less likely to suggest that he was solving
a substantive philosophical problem. But maybe his earlier paper [Tarski, 1936b]
forced this name on him.
9
HOW WE OUGHT TO THINK?
Kant said [1800, p. 529 of the translation]:
(22) In logic, however, the question is not about contingent but about neces-
sary rules; not how we do think, but how we ought to think.
Unless Kant is being unpleasantly moralistic, his point here must be that a know-
ledge of logic equips us to think in ways that are necessary for achieving some goal
that we all share. Compare the nutritionist. Her expertise qualiﬁes her to say that
if we want to stay healthy, we ought to eat this and avoid that.
What is to thinking as health is to eating? I have no idea. There are so many
things we can achieve by thinking: ﬁnding our way around, avoiding predators,
impressing members of the opposite sex. The question is complicated by the fact
that we can build machines to think for us, for any purpose we choose. In view
of all this I can’t oﬀer any very systematic discussion of the question, but let me
make a few points.
(a) We can start at the other end and ask what we can do better as a result
of a training in logic. Luce in the introduction to his Aristotelian Teach Yourself
Logic [Luce, 1958, p. vii] says:

58
Wilfrid Hodges
(23)
In lecturing on Logic to University men and women, over and over again
I have seen the same door swing open, the same step forward taken,
the same marked development. The nerveless, juvenile letter written to
the College Tutor twelve months previously, has now turned into a logi-
cal, well-knit communication, its subject-matter thought out, its phrasing
clear and concise. Logic can do this for you.
I’m no more qualiﬁed to pronounce on these things than Luce was, but I’m highly
sceptical of his last sentence.
True, a training in syllogisms might well be better for learning transferable rea-
soning skills than a course in ﬁrst-order logic. In both cases the particular skill of
manipulating the formalism is extremely specialised and probably doesn’t transfer
to anything else at all. The general educational beneﬁt probably comes from the
part that Leibniz (11) emphasised, the translation between English arguments and
the formal system. Since the syllogistic forms are cruder than those of ﬁrst-order
logic, students of syllogisms will spend a larger proportion of their time on the
useful translations and less on the useless symbol manipulation. This seems to
accord with the thinking of ‘informal logicians’ who use logic as a framework for
teaching communication and discussion skills. They tend to use only simple argu-
ment forms (not necessarily syllogisms), and their ‘logical’ concepts are almost all
at metalanguage level. (See for example Groarke [].)
I hasten to add that for mathematics and computer science students, the formal
manipulations of ﬁrst-order logic are much closer to their daily business, and so
the formal skill is closer to the applications. I teach a second-year undergraduate
course [Hodges, 2004] that uses logic as a framework for mathematical writing; the
course is built around an informal use of the rules of natural deduction together
with some items in the theory of deﬁnition.
(b) The safest assumption might be that the goal Kant has in mind is close to
home, and he means that logic can teach us how to think if we are going to think
well.
Two marks of thinking well are accuracy and speed. Both requirements come to
the fore when one is designing safety-critical devices, for example programmable
logic devices for a critical system. The UK Ministry of Defence used to require
safety-critical systems to be validated by formal methods of logic; this caused
problems because the formal methods were too slow unless one took short cuts
that threatened their reliability. The latest UK standard [Def, 2004] has a dif-
ferent emphasis. The contractor is now required (9.1f) to produce a ‘structured
argument, supported by a body of evidence’ to show that the system is safe for
the intended use; nothing is said about the form of the argument. The contractor
is also required to estimate risks, and to keep a log of failures and near-misses.
If we move from chips that think to humans who think, then we are talking
about the behaviour of the cerebral hemispheres. I conﬁne myself to the question
of speed here. One reason that Euler diagrams appear in some logic texts is that
they allow extremely fast visual processing. Almost certainly the explanation lies
in the parietal lobes. Logicians also discuss how to make symbolic calculations

The Scope and Limits of Logic
59
fast and eﬃcient on the page; for example the ‘fell swoop’ in Quine’s Methods of
Logic ([Quine, 1952, p. 35], noting his remark about what is ‘visibly veriﬁable’).
(c) Under (b) I talked mainly about reasoning of a technical kind. Some people
have argued that there is no need to teach logic of the kind that we use in everyday
inferences, because we never make mistakes of logic in this kind of reasoning. Thus
Descartes [Descartes, 1966, §2]:
(24)
[For pure deductions] I see little to be gained from those shackles by which
the Logicians reckon to control human reason, though I wouldn’t deny
that they are highly suitable for other applications. In fact all the errors
that people are subject to (I’m not speaking of dumb animals) are in every
case the result not of faulty inference, but of inadequate understanding
of the observed facts, or of hasty and unjustiﬁed judgement.
It has turned out to be surprisingly hard to establish what if anything goes wrong
when people are invited to reason and seem to do something diﬀerent. Did they
misunderstand the instructions, or the sentences, or were they not trying to do
what they were asked, or what? To sort out these questions needs a delicate appre-
ciation both of logical principles and of the realities of an experimental situation.
I commend Stanovich [1999]; his conclusion is that people do make mistakes of
propositional logic (‘there were reliable deviations from normative responding’,
[Stanovich, 1999, p. 208], but he is right to go cautiously.
Where Descartes sees ‘hasty’ judgement, Stanovich points to ‘computational
limits’. These are just as relevant to everyday reasoning as they are to safety-
critical software. It’s unhelpful to say we ‘ought’ to think in a certain way if that
way of thinking is beyond our capacity in the time available.
A few years ago an American cognitive scientist invited me to join her in a
project on the use of working memory space in arguments from assumptions. It
would have involved MRI scans of people who ﬁnd it diﬃcult to carry out such
arguments. I very much regret not having had the time to take up this oﬀer.
(d) The study of how people actually do reason helps to nail some misdescrip-
tions of logic. It used to be common to say that the chief aim of logic is to bring
us to true beliefs. But consider this report of an exchange between an Exper-
imenter from Moscow State University and an illiterate Kashgar peasant called
Abdurahman ( Luria [1976, p. 108f.]; I compressed it a little):
E. In the Far North, where there is snow, all bears are white. Novaya
Zemlya is in the Far North and there is always snow there. What
color are the bears there?
A. We always speak only of what we see; we don’t talk about what
we haven’t seen.
E. But what do my words imply?
A. Well, it’s like this: our tsar isn’t like yours, and yours isn’t like ours.
Your words can be answered only by someone who was there, and
if a person wasn’t there he can’t say anything on the basis of your
words.

60
Wilfrid Hodges
You can make your own analysis of this dialogue.
But it’s clear which of the
participants is aiming at truth, and it’s not the Experimenter. The Experimenter
is aiming at valid deduction. Obviously there are connections between reaching
truth and deducing validly, but they are indirect and easily misunderstood.
(e) One often reads that Frege and Husserl eliminated psychology from logic
through their attacks on psychologism. This description obscures the facts.
Frege attacked the use of psychology in logic throughout his Grundlagen [Frege,
1884] and in other places. Generally his main target is bad logic. The Grundlagen
is about how to deﬁne ‘number’. Frege rightly points out that before we tackle
questions of content, a deﬁnition of ‘number’ must at least have an appropriate
format. That format should show how the concept ‘number’ ties in with other
concepts in propositions that use it.
So at least it must show the (linguistic)
argument structure of the concept. He is clearly correct that we can’t read oﬀ
the argument structure from a mental picture.
[Frege, 1884, §§45–48, 58–60].
But against Frege, this is a fact about pictures, not about minds. A children’s
dictionary that deﬁnes words by pictures won’t tell us the argument structures
any better than a mental image. And conversely we do have the concept ‘number’
in our minds, argument structure and all; there is more to our minds than mental
pictures.
In short, there is no reason of principle why a competent psychological investiga-
tor of the meanings of words should disagree with Frege’s analysis of the argument
structure of ‘number’. Frege’s target was a type of mentalistic logician, and it
has to be said that the track record of mentalistic logicians from Peter of Ailly to
Sigwart is unimpressive. One of the worst features of their work was their inappro-
priate appeal to introspection. I mentioned in §8 above that some philosophical
logicians today make equally unacceptable appeals to introspection, though the
issues in their case are not those discussed by Frege.
On the other hand G¨odel had no hesitation in appealing to introspection as a
source of concepts and evidence in logic. Nobody is going to describe G¨odel’s track
record in logic as poor. So perhaps the most signiﬁcant question raised by Frege’s
critique is a methodological question about the proper use of introspection.
Husserl came at this question more directly than Frege did. For Husserl the
subject matter of logic consists of some things that we do with our minds [Husserl,
1900, §18]:
(25)
Concepts, judgements, syllogisms, deductions, inductions, deﬁnitions,
classiﬁcations etc. — all psychology, except that they are selected and
arranged from normative and practical points of view.
His problem is how to use our introspective evidence of these operations of our own
minds, as grounds for knowledge of ‘ideal, necessary connections’ (e.g. [Husserl,
1900, §56]. Things have moved on since Husserl’s time. For example Chomsky
insists that language is a mental phenomenon, and he has constantly used intro-
spective evidence to support his linguistic theories. In his view, false empiricist
methodologies have done more harm than use of any particular source of evidence.
(Chomsky [1986], particularly Ch. 2 ‘Concepts of Language’.)

The Scope and Limits of Logic
61
As a working logician I’m happy to leave these foundational questions to deeper
minds than mine.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Anscombe, 1957] G. E. M. Anscombe. Intention. Blackwell, Oxford, 1957.
[Aristotle, 1955] Aristotle. Sophistical Refutations. Trans. E. S. Forster. Loeb Classical Library.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass., 1955.
[Aristotle, 1989] Aristotle. Prior Analytics, trans. Robin Smith. Hackett, Indianapolis IN, 1989.
[Bolzano, 1837] B. Bolzano. Wissenschaftslehre: Versuch einer ausf¨uhrlichen und gr¨osstentheils
neuen Darstellung der Logik mit steter R¨ucksicht auf deren bisherige Bearbeiter.
Seidel,
Sulzbach, 1837.
Partial translation as Theory of Science, ed. Rolf George, University of
California Press, Berkeley 1972.
[Boole, 1847] G. Boole. The Mathematical Analysis of Logic, being an Essay towards a Calculus
of Deductive Reasoning. Macmillan, Barclay and Macmillan, Cambridge, 1847.
[Boole, 1997] G. Boole. Logic. In Ivor Grattan-Guinness and G´erard Bornet, editors, George
Boole: Selected Manuscripts on Logic and its Philosophy, pages 126–153. Birkh¨auser, Basel,
1997.
[Boethius of Dacia, 1969] Boethius of Dacia.
Modi Signiﬁcandi sive Quaestiones Super
Priscianum Maiorem. In Joannes Pinborg and Henricus Roos, editors, Boethii Daci Opera,
vol. iv part 1. Gad, Copenhagen, 1969.
[Burleigh, 1955] W. Burleigh. De Puritate Artis Logicae, Tractatus Longior. Ed. Philotheus
Boehner. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure, New York, 1955.
[Chomsky, 1986] N. Chomsky. Knowledge of Language, its Nature, Origin, and Use. Praeger,
New York, 1986.
[Church, 1956] A. Church.
Introduction to Mathematical Logic vol. I.
Princeton University
Press, Princeton, 1956.
[Covington, 1984] M. A. Covington. Syntactic Theory in the High Middle Ages: Modistic Mod-
els of Sentence Structure. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1984.
[de Rijk, 1962] L. M. de Rijk.
Logica Modernorum i: On the Twelfth Century Theories of
Fallacy. Van Gorcum, Assen, 1962.
[Def, 2004] Defence Procurement Agency, Glasgow. Safety Management Requirements for De-
fence Systems Part 1: Requirements, 2004.
[Descartes, 1966] R. Descartes. Regulae ad Directionem Ingenii, ed. G. Crapulli. Nijhoﬀ, The
Hague, 1966.
[Elamrani-Jamal, 1983] A. Elamrani-Jamal.
Logique Aristot´elicienne et Grammaire Arabe.
J. Vrin, Paris, 1983.
[Ewald, 1996] W. Ewald. From Kant to Hilbert, Vol. II. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996.
[Feferman, 1999] S. Feferman. Logic, logics, and logicism. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic,
40:31–55, 1999.
[Fensel et al., 2003] D. Fensel, J. Hendler, H. Lieberman, and W. Wahlster. Spinning the Se-
mantic Web: Bringing the World Wide Web to its Full Potential. MIT Press, Cambridge
Mass., 2003.
[Frege, 1879] G. Frege. Begriﬀsschrift: Eine der Arithmetischen Nachgebildete Formelsprache
des Reinen Denkens. Nebert, Halle, 1879.
[Frege, 1884] G. Frege. Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik. Koebner, Breslau, 1884.
[Frege, 1893] Gottlob Frege.
Grundgesetze der Arithmetik Begriﬀsschriftliche Abgeleitet, I.
Pohle, Jena, 1893.
[Frege, 1906] G. Frege. ¨Uber die Grundlagen der Geometrie III. Jahresbericht der Deutschen
Mathematiker-Vereinigung, 15:423–430, 1906.
[Frege, 1979] G. Frege.
Logic in mathematics.
In Hans Hermes, Friedrich Kambartel, and
Friedrich Kaulbach, editors, Gottlob Frege, Posthumous Writings, pages 203–250. Blackwell,
Oxford, 1979. Translation of unpublished notes ‘Logik in der Mathematik’, 1914.
[G¨odel, 1958] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber eine bisher noch nicht ben¨utzte Erweiterung des ﬁniten Stand-
punktes. Dialectica, 12:280–287, 1958. Reprinted with translation in Kurt G¨odel: Collected
Works II, Publications 1938–1974, ed. Solomon Feferman et al., Oxford University Press,
New York 1990, pp. 240–251.

62
Wilfrid Hodges
[Groarke, ] L. Groarke. Informal logic. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, plato.stanford.
de as of 9 March 2005.
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann. Grundz¨uge der Theoretischen
Logik. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1928.
[Hilbert, 1918] D. Hilbert. Axiomatisches Denken. Mathematische Annalen, 78:405–415, 1918.
Translated as ‘Axiomatic Thought’ in [Ewald, 1996] pp. 1107–1115.
[Hilbert, 1931] D. Hilbert. Die Grundlegung der Elementaren Zahlenlehre. Mathematische An-
nalen, 104:485–494, 1931.
Translated as ‘The grounding of elementary number theory’ in
[Ewald, 1996] pp. 1148–1157.
[Hodges, 2004] W. Hodges. An experimental course in mathematical writing. MSOR Connec-
tions, 4:29–31, 2004.
[Hurford, 2003] J. R. Hurford. The neural basis of predicate-argument structure. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 26:261–316, 2003.
[Husserl, 1900] E. Husserl. Logische Untersuchungen I: Prolegomena zur Reinen Logik. Max
Niemeyer Verlag, T¨ubingen, 1900.
[Kant, 1787] I. Kant. Kritik der Reinen Vernunft. Hartknoch, Riga, 1787.
[Kant, 1800] I. Kant. Logik: Ein Handbuch zu Vorlesungen herausgegeben von Gottlob Ben-
jamin J¨asche. Friedrich Nicolovius, K¨onigsberg, 1800. Trans. as The J¨asche Logic in Immanuel
Kant, Lectures on Logic, ed. J. Michael Young, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1992.
[Kilwardby, 1976] R. Kilwardby. De Ortu Scientiarum, ed. Albert G. Judy. British Academy,
London, 1976.
[Leibniz, 1903] G. W. Leibniz.
Elementa Calculi.
In Louis Couturat, editor, Opuscules et
Fragments In´edits de Leibniz, pages 49–57. Alcan, Paris, 1903.
[Leibniz, 1962] G. W. Leibniz. Nouveaux Essais sur l’Entendement Humain, ed. Andr´e Robinet
and Heinrich Schepers. Akademie-Verlag, Berlin, 1962.
[Luce, 1958] A. A. Luce. Logic. Teach Yourself Books. English Universities Press, London, 1958.
[Luria, 1976] A. R. Luria. Cognitive Development: Its Cultural and Social Foundations. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge Mass., 1976.
[Marcus, 2001] G. F. Marcus. The Algebraic Mind: Integrating Connectionism and Cognitive
Science. MIT Press, Cambridge Mass., 2001.
[Matilal, 2001] B. K. Matilal.
Introducing Indian logic.
In Jonardon Ganeri, editor, Indian
Logic: a Reader, pages 183–215. Curzon, Richmond, Surrey, 2001.
[Peirce, 1867] C. S. Peirce.
On the natural classiﬁcation of arguments.
Proceedings of the
American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 7:261–287, 1867. Reprinted in Writings of Charles
S. Peirce, Vol. 2, 1867–1871, ed. Edward C. Moore et al., Indiana University Press, Bloom-
ington IN 1982, pp. 23–48.
[Peirce, 1992] C. S. Peirce. Reasoning and the Logic of Things, ed. Kenneth Laine Kettner.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass., 1992.
[Pinborg, 1967] J. Pinborg. Die Entwicklung der Sprachtheorie im Mittelalter. Aschendorﬀsche
Verlagsbuchhandlung, Munster, 1967.
[Quine, 1952] W. V. O. Quine. Methods of Logic. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1952.
[Quine, 1970] Willard Van Orman Quine. Philosophy of Logic. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs
NJ, 1970.
[Rogers, 1947] E. F. Rogers. The Correspondence of Sir Thomas More. Princeton University
Press, Princeton NJ, 1947.
[Russell, 1903] B. Russell. The Principles of Mathematics. George Allen and Unwin, London,
1903.
[Schopenhauer, 2004] A. Schopenhauer. The Art of Always Being Right: Thirty Eight Ways to
Win When You are Defeated. Gibson Square Books, London, 2004.
[Stanovich, 1999] K. E. Stanovich. Who is Rational? Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah NJ, 1999.
[Stegm¨uller, 1979] W. Stegm¨uller. The Structuralist View of Theories. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1979.
[Stenning, 2003] K. Stenning. Seeing Reason. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003.
[Tarski, 1933a] A. Tarski. Einige Betrachtungen ¨uber die Begriﬀe der ω-Widerspruchsfreiheit
und der ω-Vollst¨andigkeit.
Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, 40:97–112, 1933.
Reprinted in Alfred Tarski, Collected Papers vol. 1 1921–1934, ed. Steven R. Givant and
Ralph N. McKenzie, Birkh¨auser, Basel 1986, pp. 621–636.

The Scope and Limits of Logic
63
[Tarski, 1933b] A. Tarski. Poj¸ecie Prawdy w J¸ezykach Nauk Dedukcyjnych, volume 34 of Prace
Towarzystwa Naukowego Warszawskiego. Wydzial- III Nauk Matematyczno-Fizycznych, War-
saw, 1933.
Reprinted [Tarski, 1995, pp. 13–172]; translated as ‘The concept of truth in
formalized languages’ in [Tarski, 1983] pp. 152–278.
[Tarski, 1936a] A. Tarski.
O Logice Matematycznej i Metodzie Dedukcyjnej, volume 3–5 of
Biblioteczka Mat. Ksi¸a˙znica-Atlas, Lw´ow and Warsaw, 1936. Translated as Introduction to
Logic and to the Methodology of the Deductive Sciences, translation and revision of [Tarski,
1936a], Oxford University Press, New York 1941.
[Tarski, 1936b] A. Tarski.
O poj¸eciu wynikania logicznego.
Przegl¸ad Filozoﬁczny, 39:58–68,
1936. Reprinted [Tarski, 1995; pp. 186–202]; translated by Tarski as ‘¨Uber den Begriﬀder
logischen Folgerung’, in Actes du Congr`es International de Philosophie Scientiﬁque 7, Herman
et Cie, Paris 1936, pp. 1–11; translated as ‘On the concept of logical consequence’ in [Tarski,
1963b, pp. 409–420].
[Tarski, 1983] A. Tarski.
Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics:
papers from 1923 to 1938,
ed. John Corcoran. Hackett Publishing Company, Indianapolis IN, 1983.
[Tarski, 1986] A. Tarski. What are logical notions? History and Philosophy of Logic, 7:143–154,
1986.
[Tarski, 1995] A. Tarski. Pisma Logiczno-Filozoﬁczne, Tom 1 ‘Prawda’, ed. Jan Zygmunt.
Wydawnictwo Naukowe PWN, Warsaw, 1995.
[Thom, 1981] P. Thom. The Syllogism. Philosophia, Munich, 1981.
[Weyl, 1928] H. Weyl.
Philosophie der Mathematik und Naturwissenschaft.
Leibniz Verlag,
Munich, 1928.


LOGIC IN PHILOSOPHY
Johan van Benthem
1
THE CENTURY THAT WAS
Logic has played an important role in modern philosophy, especially, in alliances
with philosophical schools such as the Vienna Circle, neo-positivism, or formal
language variants of analytical philosophy. The original impact was via the work
of Frege, Russell, and other pioneers, backed up by the prestige of research into
the foundations of mathematics, which was fast bringing to light those amazing
insights that still impress us today. The Golden Age of the 1930s deeply aﬀected
philosophy, and heartened the minority of philosophers with a formal-analytical
bent. As Brand Blanshard writes in Reason and Analysis [1964] — I quote from
memory here, to avoid the usual disappointment when re-reading an original text:
“It was as if a little band of stragglers, in disarray after a lost battle,
suddenly found Napoleon’s legions marching right alongside of them...”
In the 1940s and 1950s, people like Carnap, Reichenbach, Quine, and their stu-
dents made logic-based methodology a highly visible modus operandi in the ﬁeld.
Then, in the 1960s, what came to be called ‘philosophical logic’ began to ﬂourish,
and logicians like Hintikka, Geach, Dummett, Kripke, Lewis, and Stalnaker came
to prominence, not just in an auxiliary role as logical lawyers (Prior’s phrase),
but even setting the agenda for philosophical discussions that were now suddenly
considered mainstream.
It seems fair to say that this age of logical inﬂuence has waned. Many philo-
sophical circles have no live contact with logic any more, and basic logical skills
seem scarce in the current canon of ‘what every philosopher should know’. Even
technically inclined philosophers often feel that probability or game theory or dy-
namical systems are more versatile tools than logic for making formal points and
relevant distinctions. And for their part, many logicians have gone elsewhere, to
areas with more lively interactions, in departments of computer science, linguis-
tics, or even further astray in the social sciences. Indeed, the bulk of logic research
today is done in computer science, as can easily be checked in terms of numbers
of publications, journals, organizations, and sheer variety of research topics.
Reactions to this situation vary. One is a turn to writing the history of the
glory days of the foundational era, often with the concomitant fundamentalist
view that everything would be better nowadays if we just returned to the purity
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

66
Johan van Benthem
— largely mythical — of that lost golden age. A response with which I feel much
more sympathy is the activist stance of reintroducing logical ideas into philosophy
— contemporary ones, to be sure. Indeed, the gap between current philosophical
practice and modern logic may be more apparent than real. Many themes still
run on parallel lines, and some diﬀerences just arise for practical reasons, viz. the
absence of textbooks explaining modern logic to a philosophical audience, or of
inﬂuential publications in philosophy showing modern logic at work. But take any
informal gathering, and it soon turns out that philosophers and logicians are still
on speaking terms, and sometimes even more than that!
In this chapter, we do not take a particular stand, but just try to approach the
whole issue in a way that is somewhat diﬀerent from the usual approaches.
Four dead-end streets
In setting out this role of logic in philosophy, however, there are some situations
to be avoided that obstruct an impartial view.
One are broad philosophized histories of what took place. A good example is the
recent popularity of schematic views of the history of logic which claim that the
ﬁeld has been heading to a ‘meta-level’ self-understanding in the 1960s, occupied
mostly with the study of logical calculi and their meta-properties. While this may
be true for some areas of mathematical logic, this inward turn has been counter-
balanced, throughout the second half of the 20th century, by new contacts with
other areas, and ‘object-level’ logical analyses of new notions. The philosophized
eschatology of some of my good academic friends just does not match up with
what really took place.
A second barrier are divisions of philosophy into ﬁxed subdisciplines such as
epistemology, metaphysics, ethics, philosophy of language — and why not? —
logic. There is some sense to such clustering. But, even in a formal discipline
like mathematics, a geography in terms of diﬀerent countries ‘algebra’, ’geome-
try’, ‘analysis’ hides as much as it reveals — and creative mathematicians think
in terms of themes and methods rather than rigid subﬁelds. It is themes and their
metamorphoses across subdisciplines that provide the coherence of a ﬁeld. Here
is the worst that can happen. Some atlases of philosophical logic even copy un-
questioned philosophical geography (epistemic logic, deontic logic, alethic modal
logic), leading to a bad copy of a bad map of reality.
The third trap to be avoided is system imprisonment [van Benthem, 1999b].
Many logicians see the structure of logic as a family of formal systems: proposi-
tional logic, ﬁrst-order predicate logic, higher-order logic, modal logics, etc. The
formalists may not have won with their philosophy, but their world-view has in-
sidiously inserted itself into the subconscious of the ﬁeld. This systems view rep-
resents a dramatic change from thinking in terms of broad logical themes, such as
Negation, Implication, or Validity, which may be studied using particular ‘logics’,
but are not exhausted by them. The formal systems way of perceiving the ﬁeld
has led to a host of ‘system-generated issues’, which are then touted (often even

Logic in Philosophy
67
successfully) as philosophically relevant. Examples include Quine’s view of onto-
logical commitment as an issue of ranges for ﬁrst-order variables, the never-ending
discussion about compositionality, or the elusive search for the ﬁrst-order/higher-
order boundary. It is only with great eﬀort that some modern logicians are trying
to break out of this mold, realizing that many notions that we study transcend
particular formal systems, even though we lack the optimal vocabulary to say what
a general ‘monotonicity inference’, or a general ‘recursive deﬁnition’ is.
A fourth and ﬁnal barrier to seeing things for what they are is the term ’appli-
cation’. Logic is not applied to philosophical problems the way an engineer might
apply some technique for computing stress in a bridge. Its role seems much more
indirect. Logic oﬀers a technical language with relatively precise meanings as an
enhancement of philosophical discourse, and an aid to precise communication. This
is as useful as having mathematical language around in other disciplines: perhaps
not just the Book of Nature, but also the Book of Ideas is written in mathematical
language. Also, logical tools can sometimes be used to analyze arguments from
the philosophical tradition, and throw new light on them.
But again, there is
usually no counterpart to ‘solution’ in the engineering sense. The problem gets
illuminated: it may go away, but it may also acquire new nuances, and it may
even become more urgent than ever! Analysis in logical form also helps bring out
analogies between diﬀerent notions or problems that were not observed before.
Finally, on the more activist side, logic can sometimes help make philosophical
argumentation more precise, and it can help the philosopher construct new con-
ceptual frameworks. And yes, sometimes, meta-theorems about logical systems in
the foundational mode have some bearing on philosophical issues — even though
this particular use seems greatly over-rated in practice.
Tracking themes through time
This chapter will not state a priori what the role of logic in philosophy is, or should
be. Our plan is to just look at some themes as they developed through the 20th
century. The richness, and surprising plot twists, of the resulting stories speak for
themselves. This way of writing history was tried out in a Stanford course ’Logic
in Philosophy’ [2003d], and it will be the basis for a new textbook in philosophical
logic. Our ﬁrst two themes show how some of the core ideas of pre-modern logic
survived the Fregean revolution, returning in modern forms:
1. Logical form and monotonicity: from syllogistics to generalized quantiﬁers
2. Reasoning styles: from Bolzano to conditional logic and AI
The next theme shows how formal systems, when viewed with some creative dis-
respect for authority, are indeed useful ‘laboratories’ for experimenting with new
philosophical ideas:
3. Mechanisms of semantic interpretation: from Tarski to ‘dynamics’

68
Johan van Benthem
Our ﬁnal two themes address the modern topic of placing actions at logical center
stage, relating them to much earlier traditions:
4. Theories and belief revision: from neo-positivism to computer science
5. Dynamic logic, communication, action, and games
In each case, we brieﬂy trace a historical development of ideas up to the present
time, without going into details. The references provide further depth, while §9
lists a few further themes. All our story lines involve other ﬁelds, mainly computer
science. Indeed, conﬁning these things to just philosophy and logic would distort
the intellectual history. It would also do a disservice to philosophy, whose themes
often cross over into other ﬁelds, and then return in new forms — a win-win
scenario for everyone involved.
Finally, the references in this paper are meant to be illustrative, but they are not
an oﬃcial historical record. Also, documents mentioned need not be the original
sources for a theme described here: they are sometimes later surveys. Indeed, the
Handbook of Philosophical Logic [Gabbay and Guenthner, 1983] and later extended
versions) as well as the Companion to Philosophical Logic [Jacquette, 2002] are
good general sources.
2
A JOY-RIDE THROUGH HISTORY
For a start, we provide some further historical perspective. To dispel dogmatic
slumbers, it is good to realize that there is no stable ex cathedra deﬁnition of the
discipline of logic! Throughout the centuries, there have been many changes in
the agenda of logic, its interdisciplinary environment, and the guiding interests
of its leading practitioners. The entrenched fundamentalists of today are often
the invaders of earlier periods. Classical pre-19th century logic goes back to the
dialectical tradition in Antiquity, which realized that success in debate involves
ﬁxed patterns of valid, or invalid, reasoning that can be studied as such.
For
instance, Modus Tollens is a wonderful ‘attacking move’ against one’s opponent,
by pointing out some false consequence of what she says. Here is a sobering point
about human imagination. It took until the mid-20th century before the logician
Paul Lorenzen [Lorenz and Lorenzen, 1978] gave the ﬁrst game-theoretic account
of argumentation, doing justice to the fact that the dialectical tradition is about
dialogue between diﬀerent agents instead of lonesome arm-chair deduction, and
about winning debates in interaction with other participants. Debate was still
very much a feature of logical disputations in the Middle Ages [Dutilh-Novaes,
2003], but medieval logic as a whole took logic in the direction of what we would
now call ontology and philosophy of language. Logic was then reinterpreted in a
more epistemological manner in Kant’s famous Table of Categories for the basic
forms of judgment. The same august author also proclaimed the ‘end of history’
for logic — always a dangerous type of prediction...

Logic in Philosophy
69
In the 19th century, leading logicians like Bolzano and Mill saw the subject on a
continuum with general methodology, and what we now call philosophy of science.
Gradually, inﬂuences from mathematics — already present with Leibniz — became
prominent, witness the work of Boole and de Morgan on algebraic mathematical
methods improving on earlier systems in the syllogistic paradigm. Toward the
end of the 19th century, it was no longer a case of mathematics helping logic, but
rather the other way around. Frege developed his logical systems for the purpose
of securing the foundations of mathematics. Even so, Frege’s contemporary Peirce
still had a much broader view of what logic is about, including not just deduc-
tion, but also inductive and abductive reasoning. It is interesting to see that the
’fundamentalists’ won the day with their narrower agenda, making mathematical
proof the shining example of logical reasoning — instead of an extreme case of
normal reasoning, found only under very rare circumstances. About a century
had to elapse before Peirce became a source of inspiration again, now in more
computational-logical circles.
Around 1900, modern logic also came to have philosophical impact. Russell’s
misleading form thesis posited that linguistic form, the philosophers’ analytical
tool until then, can be systematically misleading. One must ﬁnd the underlying
logical forms to express the real meanings and keep argumentation lucid.
On
this view, logic becomes the ‘calculus’ of philosophy. Thus, until the 1940s, sev-
eral logic-inspired programs existed for philosophy. There were the foundations of
mathematics with its broad philosophical positions of logicism, formalism, and in-
tuitionism. This research had the Popperian advantage of working with a refutable
claim, viz. Hilbert’s Program for ﬁnding conclusive proofs of consistency, complete-
ness, and decidability were around the corner. G¨odel’s Theorems refuted this, but
in the interesting way that mathematical impossibility results normally do. They
leave us sadder, but above all: wiser, and full of new directions to pursue. The
same was true for Turing’s analysis of computation: it showed that many natural
computational questions are undecidable, but the fall-out gave us the foundations
of computer science. The second, broader line of logic-inspired philosophy is con-
nected with Russell, the early Wittgenstein, and the Vienna Circle, a program
for a logic-based renewal of methodology, philosophy of science, and philosophy in
general. This program, too, had its refutable components, and these were indeed
refuted by Quine in ‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism’ — though Popper later claimed
he had helped put in a dagger from behind. Again, the more interesting point
are the enduring insights from this second logical line, such the seminal work by
Carnap, Reichenbach, and others on methodology and meaning.
These golden years produced the basic modus operandi in modern logic, of un-
questioned importance even to those who would now like to broaden the agenda
again.
First-order logic, the modern notion of a truth deﬁnition and seman-
tic validity, completeness theorems, proof theory, and many other basic notions
go back to work in the foundationalist logic of those early days.
Over time,
the broader philosophical repercussions of these notions and insights about them

70
Johan van Benthem
started penetrating, witness Tarski’s semantic conception of truth, or Turing’s
analysis of computability and intelligence.
Nevertheless, some originally ‘logical’ topics did drop by the wayside, as com-
munities started forming with their own subcultures. Carnap is now considered
a ‘philosopher of science’ — and during the 1950s philosophers of science took
care of topics that had no place on the foundationalist agenda, such as inductive
reasoning, explanation, or scientiﬁc theory structure. At the same time, the 1950s
also saw the ﬁrst challenges to the logical way of doing philosophy. Of course,
mainstream philosophers perhaps ignored logic, and only a few traditionalist lo-
gicians were still bewailing the Fregean Coup — sometimes for very legitimate
reasons [Wundt 1880/3; Blanshard, 1964]. But now, criticism came from within
the analytical tradition, with the Wittgenstein-Austin ‘natural language turn’. In-
formal linguistic analysis could serve just as well for the purposes of philosophy,
or, as Austin said about common usage: “There is gold in them there hills”. New
appealing paradigms such as ‘language games’ arose, and there were even attempts
to replace logic in philosophical curricula by courses in game theory, the upcoming
formal paradigm of the day. Just try to imagine another possible world, where
Wittgenstein, Nash, and Aumann are the heroes of formal philosophy!
But there was enough vigor in the logical tradition to survive all this. Indeed the
1960s/1970s became the heighday of an emergent milieu called philosophical logic,
providing new formal tools for looking at long-standing philosophical problems.
This was often triggered by taking a much closer look at natural language and our
natural reasoning practices than what had been usual in the foundationalist tradi-
tion. It suﬃces to mention a brief list of eminent authors emerging in that period,
whose work has sparked a lively follow-up which continues until today: Hintikka,
Prior, Geach, Kripke, Rescher, Lewis, Montague, and Stalnaker. Their work was
concerned with what may be called modal logic in a broad sense: including time,
knowledge, duty, action, and counterfactuals. Many of these logicians wrote in-
ﬂuential publications which started philosophical research lines, witness famous
book titles like Knowledge and Belief, Naming and Necessity, Counterfactuals, or
Formal Philosophy.
Incidentally, around 1970, logic was heavily attacked inside psychology in [Wa-
son and Johnson-Laird, 1972], a publication which convinced many psychologists
that logic was spectacularly unsuited for describing the human reasoning with
which we really solve our problems and get by in life. Not many logicians will
have cared about this threat in the distance, especially since they may have felt
that psychologists were not quite people one would want to associate with any-
way, given Frege’s famous ‘anti-psychologism’. But there may be more to this in
a modern light: see below.
At the risk of oﬀending some, I would say that the Golden Age of philosophical
logic was over by 1980, and this new stream entered into steady state, just as
mathematical logic had done, with technical depth taking over from the original
intellectual passion. But at the same time, the ﬂame of logic carried over to other
ﬁelds. Logic gained importance in disciplines beyond philosophy and mathemat-

Logic in Philosophy
71
ics, such as linguistics, computer science, AI, and economics — and these are still
ﬂourishing interfaces today, often with their own communities, publications, and
gatherings. Many topics from the mathematical and philosophical heartland ac-
quired new lives in these settings, witness new theories of meaning, information
update, belief revision, communication, and general interaction. One of the most
surprising developments has been the design of logic systems of programming,
performing various intelligent tasks (cf. the program of ‘Logical AI’ [McCarthy,
2005], or Reiter’s [2001] book Knowledge in Action. Even if logics do not com-
pletely capture all of our natural cognitive habits, they may at least be consistent
with them, and then — gently inserted — enrich our repertoire of behavior! Thus,
contemporary logic ﬁnds itself in a much more diverse interdisciplinary environ-
ment, perhaps closer to the richer agenda of logicians from earlier centuries.
At the same time, challenges persist. In both computer science and game theory,
and indeed philosophy itself, statistical and probabilistic methods have gained
importance, dealing with phenomena where logic has little to oﬀer. Indeed, modern
evolutionary approaches to games and methodology rely on dynamical systems
rather than logic. Combining logic and probability seems a major challenge today.
An even aggressively anti-logical stance surfaced in the computational paradigm of
massive parallellism, replacing the Turing machine view of cognitive behavior. At
the central AI conference on Knowledge Representation in Toronto around 1990, a
keynote speaker felt we were like the French Ancien Regime in our ballroom, while
teeming masses of neural netters were shouting “A la laterne, les aristocrates”.
But again, history has its own ways. By now, it is becoming clear that neural
nets and logics can live in harmony [d’Avila Garcez et al., 2002; Leitgeb, 2004;
Smolensky and Legendre, 2005], and that dynamic logics and dynamic systems
are a match. Thus, the current interface between logic and cognitive science is in
ﬂux again [Hodges, 2005], and doom scenarios have not materialized — so far.
Role models
Another way of high-lighting an intellectual development looks at typical repre-
sentatives. A Dutch professor of linguistics once produced, when challenged about
a logical turn in his work, the following syllogism: “Linguistics is that work which
is being done by prominent linguists. I am one of this country’s most prominent
linguists. Therefore, what I am doing is linguistics”. Role models for a person-
oriented line would include philosophers/logicians like Peirce, Ramsey, Carnap,
Geach, Dummett, Hintikka, Grice, Kripke, Lewis, Stalnaker, Belnap, Kamp, and
Barwise — and a very interesting chronicle might result. What did these leaders
consider the most pressing themes, and why? Nevertheless, in the rest of this
paper, we will consider themes rather than people.

72
Johan van Benthem
3
LOGICAL FORM AND NATURAL LOGIC: FROM SYLLOGISTICS TO
GENERALIZED QUANTIFIERS
Natural logic
Is natural language unsuitable as a vehicle for logical inference? Frege thought so,
and cited its ‘prolixity’ as a reason for designing the formal language of Begriﬀss-
chrift. In opposition to this, a tiny band of traditionalist critics defended classical
syllogistics as staying much closer to natural inferences that people actually make
[Sommers, 1982; Englebretsen, 1981].
This debate was reopened in the 1980s
under a foreign inﬂuence, viz. the penetration of logic into linguistic semantics.
Richard Montague’s earlier work [Montague, 1974] — inﬂuenced to some extent by
Donald Davidson’s critical stance toward the Tarskian formal logic of his day —
was seminal in this development, in being two-edged. It used formal logic to ana-
lyze natural language expressions — but in doing so, it also showed that natural
language did have a respectable structure that supports impeccable meanings and
inferences. The modern theory of generalized quantiﬁers spawned by Montague
Grammar has replaced Misleading Form antagonism by concrete questions about
the actual interactions of reasoning encoded in natural language and formal logic.
Traditional logic
A brief account of logical form runs as follows (cf. GAMUT [1991]). Traditional
logic used the subject predicate format S is P, reﬂecting the structure of natural
language sentences. Even so, this was not really a logic of sentence forms, but of
intensional relations between concepts denoted by the terms ‘S, P’ — as is still
clear in Kant’s famous Table of Categories. The inference engine for this reasoning
about concepts was Aristotle’s syllogisms for the basic quantiﬁer expressions all,
some, no, not all, forming the classic Square of Opposition. In the Middle Ages,
the coverage of syllogisms was extended by the ingenious doctrine of distribution.
This uses the fact that quantiﬁed premises allow for inference in deep sentence
position, providing we use universal relationships to replace only occurrences of
predicates that are ‘about all objects’ (in modern terms: downward monotonic
ones), or their positive monotonic counterparts. This allows inferences that go
beyond the traditional syllogism, such as
If all men are mortal, and no rich mortal’s son escapes Judgment Day,
then no rich man’s son escapes Judgment Day.
If all men are mortal, and Judgment Day is hard on many men,
then Judgment Day is hard on many mortals.
In this way, traditional logic could and did deal with many forms of judgment and
reasoning — and even Leibniz felt it needed perfecting, rather than demolishing.

Logic in Philosophy
73
The critics win the day
In the 19th century, progressive waves of critics stormed the bastion. Boole’s attack
was implicit, in showing how at least propositional reasoning could be dealt with
in a perspicuous algebraic manner owing nothing to Aristotle. Later historians
found analogues in the work of the Stoic logicians — but it was Boolean insights
that rehabilitated Stoic logic [Mates, 1953], rather than Stoicism supporting Boole.
Famous examples of the ‘inadequacy’ of traditional logic still taught today include
De Morgan’s non-syllogistic forms:
All horses are animals. Therefore, horse tails are animal tails
This purported knock-down objection is actually well within the scope of the me-
dieval theory of Distribution. The fact that a binary relation occurs (“animal x
possesses tail y”) is completely immaterial, as the modern equation of the Syllo-
gistic with a fragment of monadic predicate logic is a highly uncharitable later
construal. Frege’s later examples of the inadequacy of traditional logic concern
more essential uses of relations:
from “The Greeks defeated the Persians at Plataeae,
to “The Persians were defeated by the Greeks at Plataeae”.
Like most conservatives, Frege preferred high-lighting the aristocratic Spartan vic-
tory at Plataeae over the prior democratic Athenian one at Salamis. But his logical
point is a strong one. Moreover, his anti-intensional compositional treatment of
quantiﬁers (see the compelling story of Dummett [1973]) was a startling innova-
tion. A sentence like “Everybody walks” now stood for a multitude of individual
instances, such as “Mary walks”, “John walks”,... This extensional view derived
complex sentence meanings recursively from properties and relations over some
given domain of individual objects. And like all creative simpliﬁcations in science,
it paved the way for new insights and concerns.
Why the quick collapse?
It is an intriguing question why the traditional bastion crumbled so fast. Some
modern historians (cf. [Barth, 1974]) tried to paint an image of an Old Guard
defending itself to the bitter end, and evil forces pitted against the Russelian
and Wittgensteinian forces of Light (cf. the ‘Kingdom of Darkness’ in [Geach,
1972]). But what they mainly managed to drag into the open were some pitiful
traditional logicians, looking bewildered as the walls were tumbling around them.
Indeed, the complaints of the old guard about unfairness were often on the mark.
Van Benthem [1981] discusses two so-called ‘crude errors’ of traditional logic: its
reduction of binary predicates to unary ones, and its use of generic objects, and
shows how both still make a lot of sense, when viewed with some mathematical
sensitivity. Still, the bastion did crumble, largely because the critics had a more
dynamic agenda of research — and also, because bastions crumble, not so much

74
Johan van Benthem
because of the vigor of external onslaughts, but because of the internal dry-rot of
stagnation and boredom.
From misleading form to Montague’s Thesis
As we saw, the Misleading Form Thesis made logic a favored calculus for philos-
ophy. Even so, natural language refused to go away in philosophical practice and
theory. Indeed, the very success of Montague’s work around 1970 on logical gram-
mar and semantics of natural language cast the issues in a completely new light.
Montague retained the subject-verb form of natural language sentences, with its
basic pattern S ⇒NP V P. To do so, he treated noun phrases as generalized
quantiﬁers, i.e., second-order properties of predicates. Thus, “Every bird sings”
says that the property of singing holds for all birds — and to make “Tweety sings”
come out in the same way, an individual bird like Tweety was ‘lifted’ to become
the set of all her properties. This generalized quantiﬁer view can also deal with
iterated quantiﬁed expressions, as in “Every bird sings a song”. The success of
this approach motivated what became known as Montague’s Thesis:
‘There is no diﬀerence of principle between natural
and formal languages’.
This is the Misleading Form Thesis reversed!
From then on, the story shifted
to linguistics, where Montague semantics became a powerful paradigm, and even
computer science [Janssen, 1981; de Roever et al., 2001], as programming lan-
guages, too, allow for the same sort of compositional logical treatment.
Fine-structure: generalized quantiﬁer theory
The NP VP format for quantiﬁed NP expressions has a three-part structure (Det
A) B, where Det stands for a determiner expression: “(Every bird) sings”. Thus,
quantiﬁers themselves may be viewed a binary relations between extensional pred-
icates A, B.
E.g., every stands for inclusion between the sets of “birds” and
“singers”, and some for overlap. This account also works for non-ﬁrst-order quan-
tiﬁers. E.g., most AB says that the size of the set A ∩B is greater than that of
the set A −B. With this view, many new issues have come to light over the past
two decades [Keenan and Westerst˚ahl, 1997; Peters and Westerst˚ahl, to appear].
Of relevance to us here is the inference pattern of monotonicity, describing sta-
bility under shifts in predicates. E.g., a true statement every AB remains true
after replacement of its A-argument by a predicate denoting a subset, and after re-
placement of its B-argument by a superset. In technical terms, every is downward
monotone in A, and it is upward monotone in B. The other classical quantiﬁers in
the Square of Opposition exemplify the other three types: e.g., some AB is upward
monotone in both its arguments. Modulo some mathematical assumptions, this
can even be reversed: making the classical quantiﬁers the only ‘doubly monotone’
ones (a theorem in [van Benthem, 1986]).

Logic in Philosophy
75
Monotonicity reasoning
Now, it turns out that this monotonicity behavior can be described completely
generally for any occurrence of a linguistic predicate inside any linguistic expres-
sion, simply by interleaving it with grammatical sentence construction in some
logic-friendly paradigm like categorial grammar [van Benthem, 1986; Sanchez Va-
lencia, 1991; van Benthem, 1991]. This categorial ‘monotonicity calculus’ has been
rediscovered several times over the past few years for its elegance and naturalness,
and with hindsight, it can be discerned in the traditionalist manifesto [Sommers,
1982]. Today, it even serves as a platform for cognitive experiments [Geurts and
van der Slik, 2004]. This vindicates the medieval doctrine of Distribution, and
it accounts for perhaps the majority of the ‘fast inferences’ that language users
make. Indeed, similar systems of light but pervasive quantiﬁer inference also turn
up in computer science, with fast algorithmic tasks in handling data bases.
Co-existence of natural logic and formal logic
Monotonicity is just one form of ‘natural reasoning’.
Other principles include
systematic restriction of ranges for quantiﬁers (already described by Peirce), or
‘context shifting’ across time and space (cf. [van Benthem, 1987]). A complete
system of all aspects of natural logic still remains to be formulated. Even so, it
seems clear that ﬁrst-order logic is by no means the only inferential standard. It
rather seems a sort of formal laboratory for deﬁning and studying certain notions
(including monotonicity), which we can then use to describe actual inferential
phenomena, if only in the form of a contrast. The general idea behind this view
also reﬂects current computational realities — as computer scientists populate the
world with an ever-growing arsenal of semi-formal languages, artiﬁcially designed
but used in practice. There is a fruitful co-existence of natural and formal lan-
guages, and their mutual inﬂuences are probably the best way of laying earlier
all-or-nothing discussions about misleading form, or about the ‘impossibility’ of a
systematic theory of meaning for natural language, to a well-deserved rest.
But what about philosophy?
The moral of this story is that the traditional debate about wholesale choices
between natural or formal language as the philosopher’s tool are misguided. Log-
ical languages are an enhancement of philosophical practice — and in that light,
philosophy is precisely one of the mixed settings that we advocated.

76
Johan van Benthem
4
REASONING STYLES: FROM BOLZANO TO CONDITIONAL LOGIC
AND AI
Styles of reasoning
Most textbooks deﬁne ‘validity’ of an inference once and for all, as truth of the
conclusion in all models where the premises hold. I still remember my ﬂash expe-
rience as a student ﬁnding Bolzano’s Wissenschaftslehre [1837] in our library, and
seeing how, long before Tarski, someone had looked at what logic is about, and
made some crucial decisions diﬀerently. Bolzano’s best-known notion of logical
consequence is indeed like Tarski’s [van Benthem, 1985], be it that nothing, rather
than everything, follows from inconsistent premises. But beyond that, Bolzano
describes the aim of logic as charting the varieties of reasoning styles that we
apply to diﬀerent tasks. These are deductive in mathematics, often inductive in
daily life, or — in his view – strictest of all in philosophical argumentation, where
drawing relevant conclusions is of the essence. Bolzano then lists formal properties
distinguishing such reasoning styles. E.g., he points out — in modern terms —
that some are monotonic (adding new premises does not aﬀect earlier conclusions),
while others are not. This idea of a variety of reasoning styles returns with Peirce,
the neo-positivists, and again in modern AI, when nonmonotonic logic arrived on
the scene in the 1980s as an account of how people actually solve puzzles and go
about practical planning tasks [McCarthy, 1980]. It was only in the 1990s that
what may be called Bolzano’s Program came into its own with the broad spectrum
of nonmonotonic reasoning styles that we know today, based on a wide variety of
motivations, including default reasoning, resource-sensitive reasoning, and neural
computation. And we still have not explored its full depth, which also includes a
more dynamic view of the role of changing vocabulary in reasoning [Rott, 2001b;
van Benthem, 2003b].
Logic and methodology
Bolzano’s book combines what we would call logic today with methodology of
science.
This was quite common in earlier days.
Tarski’s own basic textbook
of the 1940s was called Logic and Methodology of the Exact Sciences, and when
Tarski and Beth started world conferences in what they saw as their ﬁeld [Van
Ulsen, 2000], they initiated the still existing tradition of joint meetings in “Logic,
Methodology, and Philosophy of Science”. In the meantime, the diﬀerent com-
ponent communities have drifted apart — but there are also conﬂuences again,
partly through the intermediary of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Diﬀerent functions of reasoning
Valid semantic consequence φ ⊨ψ in predicate logic says that all models of φ
are models for ψ. Or, in terms of proof, φ ⊨ψ says that there is a derivation
consisting of elementary steps from φ to ψ. By G¨odel’s completeness theorem,

Logic in Philosophy
77
the two notions are extensionally equivalent for ﬁrst-order logic, and the same
holds for many other logical systems. Either way, consequence can serve very dif-
ferent reasoning purposes. In a forward direction, one derives new conclusions,
like a mathematician proving new theorems. But in a backward direction, one
refutes a hypothesis by deriving some false conclusion: a process of hypothetical
reasoning and falsiﬁcation. A ﬁrst connection with methodology here is Popper’s
insistence on the backward process of refutation as more fundamental than ac-
cumulating truth. Variety of functions even increases when we consider actual
reasoning practices. E.g., in a juridical procedure, the prosecutor must show that
a given assertion, guilt of the accused, follows from the evidence on the table. But
in the same setting, the lawyer must show that the accused’s innocence is consis-
tent with that evidence. Thus, inference is deeply intertwined with ‘consistency
management’. Perhaps the richest view of logical tasks is found with Peirce as
early as the 19th century. His distinctions between deduction (forward-looking
derivation), induction, and abduction (backward-looking search for premises for
given conclusions) ﬁt remarkably well with the many inferential processes that
humans engage in [Aliseda-Llera, 1997; Flach and Kakas, 2000].
Hypothetico-deductive explanation
With this broad view of uses, the methodology of science becomes relevant at once,
with its further natural varieties of reasoning such as explanation or conﬁrmation.
These notions occur in science, but they also resonate with ordinary practice. A
concrete case is the Hempel–Oppenheim view of explanation. Given a theory T,
certain facts F explain a given observation O if
T + F ⊨0, not T ⊨0, not F ⊨0.
This is the sense in which the lighting of a match in a gasoline-saturated garage
explains the explosion of the car, given the laws of physics. This simple formu-
lation still suppress a third ingredient in the inference, the ‘auxiliary hypotheses’
which make sure that the situation described is a ‘normal one’, ﬁt for standard
explanations. E.g., we assume that oxygen is present in a normal garage, and that
the car does not run on wood. The new notion is no longer classical consequence.
In particular, it is nonmonotonic: stronger premises F may no longer explain O in
T, as they imply O by themselves — and stronger theories T may no longer need
F for deriving O. What is interesting here from a logical point of view are two
things. We work with structured premises, whose parts play diﬀerent roles. And
we mix logical consequence with non-consequence. But is there any logic here?
And is the notion of interest? Carnap worried that any fact O with an explanation
F in T also has the trivial explanation T →F. So, is genuine explanation an art
beyond logic? At least there is more to the pattern of explanation.
As for other notions studied in methodology, we note that Hempel [1965] ex-
plained conﬁrmation of a law as truth of the lawlike proposition in a minimal
model of the evidence so far. This is the sense in which successive observations

78
Johan van Benthem
Qd1, Qd2, . . . would conﬁrm the universal regularity that ∀xQx, even without log-
ically implying it. Again we see a divergence from classical consequence, as we
now look at just the smallest models of the premises, rather than all of them, to
check for the conclusion.
Counterfactuals
One very fruitful strand in the philosophy of science has been the analysis of
counterfactual conditionals. In thinking about what makes a statement a law, as
opposed to just an arbitrary generalization, Goodman observed in the 1940s that
a genuine law supports counterfactual assertions about situations that did not
actually occur, such as, “if this match had not been lit, no explosion would have
occurred”. Carnap observed in the same vein in the 1950s that scientiﬁc theories
with laws often support dispositional predicates, such as ‘fragile’: a fragile object
‘would break if hit’, even if it stays whole forever. Counterfactuals are clearly
unlike ordinary logical conditionals. In particular, again, they are nonmonotonic.
If this match had not been lit, but a hand-grenade was thrown, an explosion would
have occurred after all. By the 1960s, the time was ripe for a generalization behind
these notions.
Conditional logic
An early appealing account of nonclassical conditionals A ⇒B comes from Ram-
sey [1931]. It says this: “add A to your stock of beliefs T, make the minimal
adjustment to T to keep the addition of A consistent, and then see if B follows.”
At the time, this seemed far outside of the logical tradition, but things changed in
the 1960s when Lewis and Stalnaker initiated conditional logic. Here is their basic
idea [Lewis, 1973]. Assume that situations or models come ordered by some rela-
tion ≤of relative similarity. Its source can be a variety of considerations: relative
plausibility in one’s judgment, objective likeness, and so on. Now we say that
A ⇒B is true at s iﬀB is true in all A-worlds ≤-closest as seen from s.
This scheme generates a true logic of valid principles for reasoning with this
notion.
These include Reﬂexivity, Conjunction of Consequents, Disjunction of
Antecedents, and Upward Monotonicity for Consequents. What fails is, of course,
Downward Monotonicity for Antecedents. Instead, on a minimal view of the com-
parison ordering ≤, the only thing that does hold for conditional reasoning is a
substitute, called Cautious Monotonicity:
A ⇒B, A ⇒C
implies A&B ⇒C.
This phenomenon of ‘modiﬁed rules’ would become signiﬁcant in the 1980s.
Conditional logics have been used for many purposes in philosophy, including
Lewis’ own counterfactual account of causality, and the counterfactual account

Logic in Philosophy
79
of knowledge in Nozick [1981]. In each case, counterfactual statements express
the robustness in inference that a natural epistemic notion like ‘law’, ‘cause’ or
‘knowledge’ is supposed to support.
Nonmonotonic logic in AI
The idea that reasoning styles depend on the task at hand returned in strength in
AI around 1980. McCarthy [1980] argued that our ordinary processes of problem
solving make all sorts of systematic additional assumptions, in particular, the use
of minimal models (in some suitable sense) for the given premises, representing
the fact that we are assuming a ‘closed world’ setting for the task at hand, without
surprises. Thus, in circumscription (cf. [Shoham, 1988]), we say that
the conclusion must hold in all minimal models of the premises.
Note the similarity with Hempel’s view — though Circumscription is much more
powerful and sophisticated.
Other examples of such styles have come up ever
since, including abduction in expert systems and logic programming. Thus, at last,
Bolzano’s pluralistic view was vindicated, be it not by logicians and philosophers
(yet), but by computer scientists. Here ‘minimality’ is one of the constants of
research into logics for a variety of reasoning tasks. It returned in accounts of
practical default reasoning (defeasible rules of thumb; [Reiter, 2001; Veltman,
1996; Shanahan, 1997], and again in the theory of belief revision [G¨ardenfors,
1987], which will be the topic of §6.
Structural rules
Summarizing two decades of research on all the new-fangled logical systems that
have been proposed for dealing with circumscription, default reasoning, and be-
lief revision, it seems fair to say that the core logic of minimality is conditional
logic. Bolzano’s observations about formal properties of diﬀerent reasoning styles
then have their correlate in the deviant properties of classical consequence versus
that expressed in conditional logic. The locus of these diﬀerences is often put in
the so-called structural rules governing the over-all properties inference without
any special logical operators. Complete packages of structural rules have been
found for many new notions of inference, including Bolzano’s own [van Benthem,
1996a; 1996b; 2003b; 2003e]. Deviant structural rules also occur for reasons very
diﬀerent from minimality, however, witness their role in relevant logic, and in the
thriving area of ‘substructural logics’ of syntactic combination, dynamic update,
or interaction [Dosen and Schroeder-Heister, 1994].
Tricky issues
Given all this, is there just proliferation, or can we now begin to chart a neat
landscape of natural reasoning styles? No simple map has emerged yet, and some

80
Johan van Benthem
people feel the only way of constraining the options is by asking some external
authority like cognitive science which nonmonotonic logics match realities in the
mind, or the brain.
Another problem is this.
Notions that deviate from clas-
sical consequence are often more complex in their cost of computing validity or
satisﬁability. On top of predicate logic, they often become non-axiomatizable, or
worse. This seems strange, given their motivation in ordinary practice — and the
phenomenon is still not totally understood.
Migrations
Even so, our story across logic, philosophy of science, and computer science shows
that topics like reasoning styles and conditionality migrate across borders without
any problems. This continues until today. Van Rooy and Schultz [2004] apply
circumscription to the semantics of questions in linguistics (cf.
[van Benthem,
1989]), suggesting that the natural logic of §3 may also include nonmonotonic
mechanisms in information exchange. More generally, through these migrations
the distinction between scientiﬁc method and common sense — once thought so
iron-clad — is evaporating. There is just one form of rationality, whether displayed
in our home kitchen or the Halls of Minerva. And often, it is computer science
that brings the viewpoints together in one single perspective [McCarthy, 2005].
Indeed, computer science plays a role in the development of about every logical
theme in the last century. And perhaps this is not so strange. When all is said and
done, computer science and its more pregnant form of Artiﬁcial Intelligence are
just — in Clausewitz’ happy phrase — ‘the continuation of philosophy by other
means’. And the relative neglect of computation and information as fundamental
categories in mainstream philosophy (cf. [Floridi, 2004]) mainly seems a case of
rejecting that which is closest to us.
5
MECHANISMS OF SEMANTIC INTERPRETATION: FROM TARSKI TO
‘DYNAMICS’
First-order predicate logic may not be a very realistic description of our natural
logic, but it is an amazing model for studying a tightly interwoven set of issues at
the same time. The formal language has a clear inductive grammatical structure,
and the mechanism of semantic interpretation capitalizes on this in a composi-
tional manner. Thus, it explains the most complex forms of assertion by repeating
a small number of elementary truth conditions for separate operators. This setting
made it possible to study issues of deﬁnition and expressive power in logical model
theory. This format of interpretation has been very inﬂuential in philosophy, in-
ﬂuencing theories of truth through Tarski’s classic “Der Wahrheitsbegriﬀin den
Formalisierten Sprachen” from the 1930s (cf. [Tarski, 1956]), and innovative later
extensions by [Davidson, 1967; Kripke, 1975], and others. Even so, the laboratory
is still capable of generating new ideas!

Logic in Philosophy
81
Standard semantics
The key notion in ﬁrst-order semantics is that of truth of a formula φ in a model
M under some variable assignment s:
M, s ⊨φ.
The key compositional clause uses the assignment in an essential manner:
M, s ⊨∃xφ
iﬀ
for some object dM, s[x := d] ⊨φ.
In this way, pulling apart the diﬀerent ingredients in this scheme, truth is a re-
lation between an expression in a formal language and some language-independent
structure of objects with their properties and relations. The relation is mediated
by means of two links. One is an interpretation function I assigning ﬁxed de-
notations to predicate letters and other expressions whose meaning is considered
constant in the current setting. The other is the variable assignment s, providing
an auxiliary denotation for variable parts of the expression, which may change in
the process of evaluation. Logicians look at this scheme from various angles. Given
a formula φ, one can study its models MOD(φ). Conversely, given a model M,
one can study its theory Th(M): the sentences made true by it. Or, less common
but quite possible, given a formula and a structure, one can study interpretation
functions making the formula true in that structure.
Basic features of the set-up
This scheme embodies several historical steps, and nontrivial conceptual issues. Its
decoupling of formal syntax and semantic evaluation is a major abstraction, as our
natural language wears its interpretation on its sleeves, leaving only some freedom
in interpreting pronouns and other variable ‘lice of thought’ — as Italo Calvino
once described them. Next, the notion of a model brings its own issues, as ﬁrst-
order models are a representation of reality, not reality itself — except perhaps in
some parts of abstract mathematics. Indeed, decades before Tarski, de Saussure
proposed his famous Semiotic Triangle of language, representation, reality. First-
order semantics ignores the latter — but issues of ‘ﬁt’ to reality do not go away.
Indeed, a three-part scheme of interpretation may be found in the work of Church
and other logicians. With much more impact, this perspective returned in the
1980s, with the work by Kamp and Heim on discourse representation theory (cf.
the survey in [van Eijck and Kamp, 1997]). Of the many further features of the
scheme, let us just note the compositionality once more. Dummett [1973] called
this Frege’s major insight — though modern scholarship has cast some doubt on
Frege’s paternity for this principle. Instead, he did place a lot of emphasis on a
principle of Contextuality, stating that meanings of expressions are never to be
studied in isolation from their context. Hodges [2001] is a delightful analysis of
the connections between the two principles.

82
Johan van Benthem
Philosophical and linguistic aspects
An amazing amount of philosophical literature is tied directly to the logical seman-
tics for which the above scheme is a paradigm. Some classics are [Davidson and
Harman, 1972; Putnam, 1975; Field, 1972], while more modern perspectives are
in [Etchemendy, 1990; Zalta, 1993]. Some of these philosophical issues returned
more concretely in the semantics of natural language, such as Montague’s pioneer-
ing work that was mentioned in §3. E.g., concerns with compositionality haunt
that literature until today, with discussions fed by the study of concrete ‘non-
Fregean’ quantiﬁer combinations that resist easy iterative decomposition [Keenan
and Westerst˚ahl, 1997]. Also, the status of the models becomes more pregnant
here, as we need to take ontological decisions. An unresolved case is the ubiquitous
co-existence of ‘count’ and ‘mass quantiﬁers’, and thus, the interplay of discrete
and continuous objects in discourse and reasoning.
Proliferation of frameworks
In the 1980s and 1990s, the reign of classical semantics was challenged by a host of
new semantic frameworks. Situation semantics [Barwise and Perry, 1983] empha-
sized that meaning involves many situations, rather than just one model M: includ-
ing a situation of utterance, a described situation, and a resource situation. Thus,
a true account of semantics involves a network of small contexts. This perspective
is coming to the fore these days in many disciplines. Modern interdisciplinary
conferences on context [CONTEXT, 2005] bring together philosophers, linguists,
and computer scientists with overlapping agendas.
Next, the above-mentioned
discourse representation theory is still a major paradigm for meaning in linguis-
tics and computer science, as discourse representation structures are the natural
format for computational processing. In particular, the emphasis now shifts to
the dynamics of interpretation: we understand a sentence, not by evaluating it
in some given model, but rather by constructing some sort of representation of
the described situation. Dynamics of interpretation is also crucial to other com-
putational paradigms, such as ‘parsing as deduction’ [Pereira and Warren, 1983],
or ‘interpretation as abduction’ [Hobbs et al., 1990]. The Handbook of Logic and
Language [van Benthem and ter Meulen, 1997] documents this amazing outburst
of semantic creativity, little of which has yet penetrated to philosophical discus-
sions of truth and meaning. There are even other new approaches — of which we
discuss one in a little more detail. It demonstrates the proper use of the ‘ﬁrst-order
laboratory’: not as a source of orthodoxy, but as a source of dissent.
Dynamic semantics
An idea common to many newer semantic frameworks is that semantics is really
about dynamic procedures of evaluation, rather than just static relationships be-
tween formulas and models. Can we make these actions themselves an explicit part
of the logical apparatus? A well-known proposal of this sort is dynamic predicate

Logic in Philosophy
83
logic (DPL; [Groenendijk and Stokhof, 1991]). The motivation is provided by the
phenomenon of anaphora, i.e., how we give coherence to what we say. We study
this in a simple ﬁrst-order laboratory setting. In the grand tradition of ‘mislead-
ing form’, students are usually taught some translation folklore to make ﬁrst-order
formulas ﬁt natural language forms. Consider the following statements:
1 A man came in. He whistled.
The two underlined phrases can co-refer.
2 He whistled. A man came in.
The two underlined phrases cannot co-refer.
3 I f a man came in, he whistled.
The two underlined phrases can co-refer.
A direct translation ∃x Cx&Wx for 1 does not give the intended scope, and so
we use a bracketing trick to get ∃x(Cx&Wx). A translation Wx ∧¬∃xCx for 2
does give the right scope, and hence no tricks need be used here. But again, a
direct translation ∃xCx →Wx for 3 does not work, and so students are taught
a bracketing trick plus a quantiﬁer-change to ∀x(Cx →Wx). This seems terribly
unprincipled and ad-hoc. By contrast DPL changes the mechanism of ﬁrst-order
semantics, reading formulas φ as procedures, whose meanings are transition rela-
tions between variable assignments s, viewed as temporary states of the evaluation
process. This can be done entirely compositionally, without changing either the
ﬁrst-order language or its models.
This illustrates the more complex semantic
world since Montague, where ideas can travel between philosophy, linguistics and
computer science. The procedural view comes from the semantics of imperative
programming languages. In that setting, expressions in programs are instructions
for successive changing of states, viewed as assignments of data-objects to vari-
ables. Think of registers ﬁlled with transient objects. Executing an imperative
instruction x := 2 replaces the current content of register x with a value 2. More
precisely, DPL records traces of successful executions in the following format:
M, s1, s2 ⊨φ iﬀthere exists some successful evaluation of φ in M
starting from input state s1 and ending in output state s2
The semantic clauses treat atomic formulas as tests on the current assignment,
conjunction becomes composition of actions, negation is a failure test, and the
real dynamics of state change is in the clause for the existential quantiﬁer, which
looks for a witness:
M, s1, s2 ⊨∃x iﬀs2 = s1[x := d] for any object d in the domain
When read in this dynamic way, the direct translations of all three examples above
come out just as they should without re-bracketing tricks. While this may look like
just a new way of doing natural language semantics, the scheme really challenges
many presuppositions in logic and philosophy. For instance, meaning and inference
now reﬂect an algebra of procedures. E.g., the scope widening in ∃xCx & Wx is
just associativity of composition. Or with a universal quantiﬁer ∀xφ = ¬∃x¬φ,
evaluation procedures for ∃xCx →Wx and ∀x(Cx →Wx) turn out algebraically
equivalent. Indeed, DPL comes with its own notion of dynamic consequence in
which processing the successive premises validates the conclusion. This is again a

84
Johan van Benthem
nonstandard, and nonmonotonic reasoning style (cf. §3) — for which we refer to
the literature.
More radical dynamics: interactive games
The general idea of dynamic semantics is that meaning involves information change,
an idea also known in discourse representation theory as ‘context change poten-
tial’. A more radical version of this is game-theoretic semantics [Hintikka and
Sandu, 1997]. Now, evaluation is no longer just a procedure for one ‘checker’, but
a two-person game between a Veriﬁer and a Falsiﬁer with opposing roles concern-
ing the given formula. The former tries to show that it is true, the latter that
it is false. In that way, interaction becomes essential to understanding meaning
and inference. In his many publications on the subject, starting from the 1960s,
Hintikka has spelled out a wide range of philosophical implications of taking this
stance. Even more radically game-theoretic views of interpretation, partly along
the lines of Grice [1975], are coming up these days, as semantic research focuses on
interpretative equilibria sought by speakers and hearers in actual communication
[Lewis, 1969; Parikh, 2001; van Rooy 2004].
Languages again
Contemporary semantic frameworks involve ideas from logic, linguistics, and com-
puter science — again demonstrating the unity of perspective across natural, for-
mal, and programming languages. What we have said so far by no means exhausts
this potential.
For instance, [van Benthem, 1996; 1999a] proposes yet another
procedural reinterpretation of ﬁrst-order semantics! It uncovers a decidable modal
base logic of compositional evaluation, which includes all the monotonicity rea-
soning of §3. On top of this, further validities express geometrical constraints on
the ﬂow patterns of assignment change. The undecidability of ﬁrst-order logic,
often taken as an inevitable hallmark of reasoning with quantiﬁers, then becomes
a side-eﬀect of working with special computation spaces.
In the light of these
modern developments, many philosophical discussions of ﬁrst-order logic and the
import of its classical meta-theorems seem outdated, and hopelessly conservative.
An interesting issue is what all this says about our understanding of natural
language, the vehicle of both common sense and technical philosophy. Changing
information states of readers and hearers is deﬁnitely a major purpose of any type
of discourse, including philosophical dialogue. If we take this dynamic perspective
seriously, some people feel it may be the computer science perspective that should
have the last word: by viewing natural language as the programming language of
cognition. Or, if this slogan is too crude for serious philosophy, here is another
way of phrasing the point of this section. Meaning is not just how things are, it
also essentially involves — as Wittgenstein already said — what we do.

Logic in Philosophy
85
6
THEORIES AND BELIEF REVISION: FROM NEO-POSITIVISM TO
COMPUTER SCIENCE
The dynamic turn
A computational stance involves a tandem view. Representations should always
be constructed with some process in mind, while processes should be designed
with some data structure in mind. In a sense, this happened even in the early
days of logical analysis (cf.
§4).
After all, words like ‘explanation’ denote a
dynamic activity as much as a static proposition or relation between propositions.
One conspicuous development over the past few decades has been a Dynamic
Turn [van Benthem, 1996], moving beyond static relations between propositions
on the pattern of logical consequence to activities like proving, testing, learning,
or changing one’s mind, as independent objects of study.
In this perspective,
traditional interfaces between logic and philosophy acquire a double aspect: what
are the activities involved, and what representations do they work with?
The
dynamic semantics of §5 is one concrete illustration of such a move, but there
are many others. In this section, we apply this style of thinking to the scientiﬁc
theories that brieﬂy surfaced in §4.
Theory statics
The simplest logical view of a theory is just as a set of sentences. This, of course,
will not do as an account of any plausible notion of theory in the empirical sciences
— and not even as an account of the ‘structured opinions’ which people have in the
realm of common sense. Richer views of theories developed in the philosophy of
science, witness the work of Ramsey [1931], Beth [1949], and Przelecki and Wojci-
cki (cf. [Przelecki, 1969]). There is a lucid summary of all this in the Introduction
to Suppe [1977], which covers both syntactic views in the neo-positivist tradition,
and more semantic ones in the style of Suppes and Sneed. Kuipers [2000] is an up-
to-date exposition of modern notions of theory, including an account of the major
inter-theory relations that have been of interest to philosophers, such as various
kinds of extension and reduction. Theory structure is an excellent theme by itself
as a running interface between logic and philosophy (cf.
[Pearce and Rantala,
1984; van Benthem, 1982]). In line with all our topics so far, it has surprising
connections to computer science, in particular the area of ’abstract data types’
[van Benthem, 1989] — but we forego this particular story here. For, theories
by themselves are just static representations of concepts and information at the
disposal of individuals or communities. In line with our main interest, we want to
see how such theories grow, and more generally: change.
Theory dynamics
Some of the most spectacular philosophy of science is about ways in which theories
change. Sometimes, there is cumulative piece-meal growth, but occasionally, there

86
Johan van Benthem
are more drastic paradigm shifts, as described in Kuhn [1962]. Processes of theory
change were made into serious objects of logical study in the work of [Alchourron
et al., 1985; G¨ardenfors, 1987; Rott 2001a]. The simplest process is update with
consistent new information, obtaining a new theory T + φ. This adds the new
formula φ to the current theory T, and then closes the result deductively. Alter-
natively, viewing the theory as a set of models MOD(T), it forms the intersection
MOD(T) ∩MOD(φ). But when the new information φ is in conﬂict with the cur-
rent theory T, this no longer works, and we must form a possibly more complex
revision T ∗φ. The latter process is quite common, also in ordinary life. When
engaged in nonmonotonic reasoning, we may have drawn a temporary conclusion
on the basis of just reasoning about minimal models representing some ‘normal’
scenario. Now something abnormal occurs, and we must accommodate this. Then
some of the earlier conclusions no longer hold, and we seek a new equilibrium.
Intuitively, revision seems a much more complex process than update, and also, it
seems less deterministic. What the new theory will look like depends on what we
wish to preserve from the old theory.
Belief revision theory
AGM -style belief revision theory is an abstract postulational account of three
basic operations on theories: update, revision, and contraction T −φ. The latter
removes a proposition from a given theory, and tries to keep the resulting theory
as much like the original as possible. The three operations are intertwined:
T ∗φ = (T −¬φ) + φ
Levi Identity
T −φ = T ∩(T ∗¬φ)
Harper Identity
Whether these are all plausible operations on theories remains an interesting ques-
tion. But even with just these three, a large literature has sprung up on plausible
postulates and concrete mechanisms for performing these operations. Also, the
framework has been re-described in various ways, e.g., in terms of Quinean ‘en-
trenchment relations’ encoding an agent’s willingness to give up one proposition
in T rather than another. Similar views of ‘structured theories’ have come up
in computer science when dealing with data bases that may need to be revised
in some systematic manner [Ryan, 1992].
The idea that the three operations
{+, ∗, −} should yield a unique output may seem strange, as there are usually
diﬀerent options for accommodating conﬂicting evidence. Accordingly, nondeter-
ministic relational alternatives have been proposed in [Lindstr¨om and Rabinowicz,
1992]. At the least, intuitively there should be room for diﬀerent belief revision
policies, corresponding to types of behavior: ranging from more ‘radical’ to more
‘conservative’ in hanging on to what was there in the old T.
Conditional logic again
Again, there is a remarkable continuity in ideas. The above Ramsey test for con-
ditionals already contained an element of belief revision, as antecedents conﬂicting

Logic in Philosophy
87
one’s current stock of beliefs needed to be ‘accommodated’. The applicability of
the Ramsey test for belief revision has been questioned, but it has become clear
that there is nothing wrong with it — pace the ‘impossibility results’ of G¨ardenfors
and others (cf. [Leitgeb, 2005]). Indeed, Ramsey-style axioms are a key ingredient
in designing modern logics of belief change [Gerbrandy, 1999], without doing any
harm in that setting. The connection with conditional logic becomes even clearer
in the semantic account of belief revision in Grove [1988]. Viewing a theory as
its set of models MOD(T), forming a revision T ∗φ means passing to the set of
T-closest worlds in MOD(φ), with closeness given by some Lewis-style ordering
of theories — or underneath: a similar ordering of worlds. One easily recognizes
the key minimality clause underlying the semantics of conditionals. Indeed, con-
ditional statements may be viewed as parts of our current theory, ‘pre-encoding’
our tendencies to revise our beliefs when confronted with new evidence.
Computer science and AI
Concrete instances of belief revision occur in computer science, with data base
maintenance, or belief update in multi-agent systems. Not just conditional logic,
but nonmonotonic reasoning in general requires belief revision as a necessary anti-
dote to its ‘jumping to conclusions’. Further topics that have been introduced
along these lines are the mixture of belief revision and factual update about real
changes that have taken place in the world [Katsuno and Mendelzon, 1991].
Learning theory
Belief revision, in its guise of belief adaptation, is actually close to a broader recent
stream in the philosophy of science. Perhaps the key activity tied up with theory
change is learning, whether by individuals or whole communities. Modern learn-
ing theory [Osherson et al., 1988; Kelly 1996] describes learning procedures over
time, as an account of scientiﬁc methods in the face of steadily growing evidence,
including surprises contradicting one’s current conjecture. In this perspective, up-
date, revision, and contraction are single steps in a larger process, whose temporal
structure needs to be brought out explicitly [Kelly, 2002; Hendricks, 2002]. Learn-
ing theory is itself a child of recursion theory, and hence it is one more illustration
of a computational inﬂuence entering philosophy.
Further sources of dynamics
There are many other aspects to update and revision.
In particular, another
fundamental aspect of the Dynamic Turn is the social interactive character of many
relevant activities: dialogue, communication, or — for that matter — scientiﬁc
research. We will look at some of these in §7. To conclude, we return to the
simple world of common sense and natural language described in §3. Both update
and revision occur all the time in natural discourse. But even this simple setting
shows that more is the matter than just automatic AGM operations. If I hear

88
Johan van Benthem
some φ which contradicts my beliefs so far, then I will need to decide whether to
accept the information φ, or reject it, or reinterpret it. And a typical way of doing
that is to enter a dialogue with φ’s source, whether a person or Nature. Belief
revision usually involves communication and even negotiation. Processes of the
latter sort are, again, the subject of §7 below. Another basic feature of revision in
common sense settings is the phenomenon of language adjustment. The medieval
adage was already that “in case of a contradiction, make a distinction”.
We
resolve contradictions either by retracting previous beliefs, or by changing their
formulation. New parameters may occur, or new distinctions in the domain of
objects. Perhaps you are rich in spirit, while not being rich in material goods.
Perhaps Cantor’s comprehension axiom creates classes, but not sets. Weinberger
[1965] contains an excellent historical and logical survey of basic responses to
new information contradicting existing beliefs. In particular, the idea of language
change goes beyond standard theories of belief revision. It seems closer to the more
dramatic shifts in conceptual frameworks of scientiﬁc theories under pressure from
recalcitrant facts, as described by Kuhn. Rott [2001b] has a discussion of belief
revision in the presence of language change.
From secure foundations to intelligent repair
Belief revision is one more current arena where philosophy meets with logic, lan-
guage, and computation. Add modern theories of learning to the picture, and we
have one of the liveliest interfaces today. In the light of all this, the original em-
phasis in the foundations of mathematics may have been misguided. Frege wanted
absolute security, otherwise “mathematics will come down like a house of cards”.
G¨odel’s results show that such security cannot be had, except in tiny corners. But
the key phenomenon in understanding rational behaviour does not seem to lie here
anyway. Nobody believes that the discovery of a contradiction in a mathematical
theory is the end of the world. In fact, every time this has happened (and it does
happen), a misunderstanding was exposed, a better and richer theory was found,
and a deeper understanding resulted.
What seems crucial about us is not the
use of infallible methods, but reasoning with whatever means we have, plus an
amazing facility for belief revision, i.e., coping with problems as they arise. It is
this dynamic feature of human rationality which logicians and philosophers should
try to understand better. Logic is not some vaccination campaign eradicating all
diseases once and for all. It is rather the immune system of the mind!
7
DYNAMIC LOGIC, COMMUNICATION, ACTION, AND GAMES
A logical consequence is often described as involving a conclusion which ‘adds no
new information to the premises’. Indeed, logic is deeply tied up with extracting
and modifying information, as well as knowledge and other epistemic attitudes
arising in these informational processes. Deﬁning a precise notion of ‘information’
serving all logical purposes is no trivial task (cf. [Adriaans and van Benthem,

Logic in Philosophy
89
2005], Handbook of the Philosophy of Information). There are several diﬀerent
strands in the logical literature (cf. [Carnap, 1947; Barwise and Seligman, 1995]),
whose connections are not always obvious [van Benthem, 2005b]). The story line
in this section follows one of these, viz.
information as a range of options for
the actual world that are still compatible with what agents know. This was the
original idea in Carnap’s Meaning and Necessity, and it became central later on
in the classical work on epistemic logic [Hintikka, 1962]. Epistemic logic is an
interesting place to start a story line, since many people consider it a typical case
of a dead-end as an interface between logic and philosophy. This is as far from the
truth as it gets, and we give a short summary of [van Benthem, 2005a].
Statics: epistemic logic and information states
Epistemic logic started as an account of the philosophical notion of ‘knowledge’,
for which we have famous accounts by Plato or Descartes. The second half of the
20th century added a host of interesting alternatives, including contributions by
Gettier [1963], Hintikka [1962], Dretske [1981], and Nozick [2001]. Hintikka’s main
idea was this. An agent knows those propositions which are true in all situations
compatible with what she knows about the actual world:
M, s ⊨Kiφ iﬀfor all t ∼i S : M, t ⊨φ.
New information will tend to shrink this range, perhaps until the actual world
is all that is left open to our scrutiny. There are similar accounts of belief, and
other epistemic attitudes. The power of this formalism shows in simple scenarios.
Consider the simplest case of genuine information ﬂow between agents:
Q asks a question “P?”, and A gives a true answer “Yes”.
If this is all honest Gricean communication, then the question itself indicates that
the Q does not know the answer (base-level factual knowledge), but also, that she
thinks A might know (knowledge about other people’s information). The answer
conveys that that Answerer knows that P, and its public announcement in the
group {Q, A} makes sure that Q now also knows that P, that both agents know
this about each other, and so on. In terms of Lewis [1969], following the episode,
the agents have achieved common knowledge of P. Epistemic logic as it stands
can describe all relevant epistemic properties at the three stages of this process:
before, during, and after. And of course, it can do a lot more, witness the further
literature on this subject [Hendricks, 2005].
Now, in this area, one of the most spectacular ‘crossings’ took place. First, in
the mid-1970s, epistemic logic emerged independently in game theory [Aumann
1976; Osborne and Rubinstein, 1994], as economists developed epistemic scenarios
for justifying the usual Nash equilibria of strategies. The idea was to ‘lock’ players
‘into’ equilibria in terms of mutual expectations (via knowledge or belief) con-
cerning each other’s rationality. Also, by the 1980s, epistemic logic crossed over to
computer science [Fagin et al., 1995]. Here it was the evident power of human-style

90
Johan van Benthem
models for understanding protocols in distributed systems that started a vast liter-
ature at the interface of computer science, philosophy, and game theory. It is about
agents who (want to) know things, and communicate accordingly. The TARK con-
ferences (Theoretical Aspects of Rationality and Knowledge) have brought together
these three communities since 1983, and the new interdisciplinary journal Knowl-
edge, Rationality, and Action show that the contact is still very much alive.
In this section, we just sketch one particular strand in this story, tying it up
with the logical dynamics that emerged in §6. Knowledge of a proposition comes
about by certain actions, be it an inference, asking or answering a question, or
performing an observation of some event in general. As before, the static structure
of the knowledge and the dynamic nature of those actions are intertwined. Thus, to
really get at what happened in our question-answer scenario, we must ‘dynamify’
standard epistemic logic!
Updating information
Speech act theory in the philosophy of language tells us that linguistic commu-
nication triggers systematic changes in information states of language users. For
instance, the above question-answer episode might start from the following simple
epistemic model, where the line between the two alternative worlds indicates my
uncertainty of the questioner Q:
Q
P
¬P
Since you have no uncertainty lines in either world, you know whether P through-
out, and I actually know that you know, as it is true in both of my alternatives.
Now, your aﬃrmative answer to my question updates this model, ruling out the
¬P-world, to obtain:
P
Here both you and I know that P, and we know this about each other, and so
on to arbitrary further mutual stages: P has become common knowledge between
the two of us.
Notice what happened here in more general terms: epistemic logic now has to
deal with dynamic actions, while there is also an irreducible multi-agent ‘social’
character to the setting.
Dynamic-epistemic logic
Both social and private epistemic actions can be described as ﬁrst-class citizens in
dynamiﬁed epistemic logics that take a leaf from computer science. Our epistemic

Logic in Philosophy
91
actions that eliminate worlds are really model-changers, and this process involves
constant changes in truth value for relevant assertions. Similar phenomena occur
with computer programs, recipes, or any sort of structured action. Such phenom-
ena have been studied in dynamic logics (Hoare, Dijkstra, Pratt), whose languages
involve mixed assertions with action expressions and propositions. In particular,
a dynamic modality [a]φ says that, after every successful execution of action or
program a from the current state of the world, or our device, φ is the case. In this
style, we would get
[A!]φ
after public announcement of A, formula φ holds.
This mixed proposition/action language can express epistemic eﬀects such as
[A!]KjB
after public announcement of A, agent j knows that B
[A!]CGA
likewise, A has become common knowledge in the group of agents G.
There are complete and decidable dynamic-epistemic logics of this kind, allowing
us to reason systematically about the epistemic eﬀects of assertions. Here is an
example of a valid ‘update law’ — which is as central to dynamic-epistemic logic
as an introspection principle would be to static epistemic logic:
[A!]Kiφ ↔(A →Ki[A!]φ)
#
Note the complex intellectual history concentrated in formulas like this. Speech
acts come from the philosophy of language and linguistics, epistemic logic from
epistemology, and their combination in a dynamic logic comes from computer
science. This harmonious encounter is a perfect illustration of the story lines of this
paper, and the axiomatic calculus suggests new contacts between these ﬁelds. E.g.,
philosophers of action will note that the axiom # expresses an interchange between
knowledge that we have beforehand about an action and knowledge that we have
after the action. This is a nontrivial feature, which a game-theorist would call
Perfect Recall: public announcements are epistemically transparent. By contrast,
e.g., an action like drinking would not satisfy this commutation axiom. I know
that drinking will make me boring — but after drinking, alas, I do not know that
I am boring.
Thus, the dynamic turn in epistemic logic greatly enriches the agenda of in-
teresting issues for philosophers, allowing them to move beyond worries about
Omniscience, Introspection, and the other usual suspects.
More complex communication over time
Dynamic-epistemic logics do not just deal with single assertions. They can also
handle complex conversational instructions involving typical sequential program
structures, such as “First say this, then that”, “Say ‘Thanks’ if you are grate-
ful, and ‘No thanks’ otherwise”, “Keep saying nice things until the dean grants
your promotion”, or even a parallel program structure like “Answer all together”.

92
Johan van Benthem
Finally, current systems can deal with much more complex, and realistic, commu-
nicative actions which involve hiding of information, or partial observation. This
includes whispering in lecture rooms, looking at your hand in a card game, or
many further informational moves in games that people play. Some basic sources
are [Baltag et al., 1998; van Ditmarsch et al., 2005; van Benthem 2002b; 2005e]. In
particular, dynamic-epistemic logic can deal with misleading actions (hiding, lying,
cheating) as well as truthful ones — leading to a classiﬁcation of epistemic action
as to expressive power and thresholds of complexity. Also, the framework links up
with belief revision, learning, probabilistic update, as well as inﬁnite processes and
evolution over time.
Philosophy again
Update logic may seem new-fangled, but it connects up with well-established issues
in philosophy. Van Benthem [2004] discusses the age-old Moore-sentences of the
possibly true but pragmatically infelicitous form “p, but I do not know it”. These
turns up in a surprising new setting in epistemic dynamics. It seems evident at
ﬁrst that public announcements of true propositions. A lead to common knowledge
of A. Indeed, this seems to be the purpose of public announcements, as described
by speech act theorists. But now consider an assertion like
“you don’t know if p, but p is true”.
This can be perfectly true, and yet its announcement makes p common knowledge,
thereby invalidating the ﬁrst conjunct. Thus, this proposition is ‘self-refuting’.
This failure may seem like a trick, but announcements of uncertainty leading
eventually to knowledge occur quite often in famous puzzles, such as The Wise Men
or the Muddy Children. True but self-refuting assertions are also at the heart of
current discussions of the Fitch Paradox [Brogaard and Salerno, 2002] threatening
the Veriﬁcationist Thesis that “everything which is true can be known”.
More generally, dynamic-epistemic logics shift the traditional boundary between
semantics and pragmatics in interesting ways. This demarcation issue is on the
agenda in both linguistics and philosophy of language these days. Another in-
terface issue concerns the topic of theory change in §7. The internal information
ﬂow of a scientiﬁc community can be analyzed now, not just the public theories
produced by that community. What are the systematic relationships between the
short-term multi-agent dynamics of scientiﬁc debate and the long-term dynamics
of theory change?
Games
In its current manifestations, logical dynamics is making one more move to-
ward game theory. Both knowledge and communication really make sense only
against the background of goal-directed interactive social processes between ratio-
nal agents. Van Benthem [1999-present; 2005d] provide an extensive panorama

Logic in Philosophy
93
of how games interface with logic. This includes ’logic games’ for argumentation
[Lorenz and Lorenzen, 1978] and semantic evaluation [Hintikka, 1973], showing
how these core tasks of logic may be cast as interactive processes between diﬀer-
ent agents. But the interface also involves modern ‘game logics’ that have been
used to throw light on the rationality of players in general games [Aumann, 1976;
Stalnaker, 1999] and earlier publications, [Pauly, 2001; de Bruin, 2004]. In these
game logics, many of our earlier systems come together: dynamic logic, epistemic
logic, but also logics of counterfactuals, and belief revision. Games started in phi-
losophy with Wittgenstein’s language games, and they were advocated vigorously
by Hintikka through his ‘game-theoretic semantics’ and ‘IF-logic’ [Hintikka and
Sandu, 1997]. But it seems we have only seen the beginning of their true impact
in a broader sense (cf. [Hendricks, 2005] on interactive epistemology).
Thus again, we see how the current philosophical agenda could be enriched by
fully absorbing the fundamental nature of multi-agent information and interaction.
8
FURTHER THEMES
The themes in this paper are just a selection from a much longer list, including
several survey papers written by this author in other volumes. Other story lines
through the last decades linking logic, philosophy and computer science for which
the material lies at hand include the following.
The references given are just
pointers — not a complete portal to these areas:
(a) structure of scientiﬁc theories (cf.
the list of ‘Semantic Parallels’ in van
Benthem [1989], which is still only partially explored)
(b) knowledge and belief [van Benthem, 2005a])
(c) information and computation [van Benthem, 2005c]
(d) probability
(e) temporal logic [van Benthem, 1995]
(f) deontic logic, norms and obligations [van Hees and Pauly, 2004], as well as
the Proceedings of the DEON conferences, operating since the late 1980s at
the interface of computer science and logic)
(g) philosophy of action [Belnap et al., 2001]
(h) inﬁnite processes and dynamical systems [Skyrms, 2004]
(i) optimality and evolutionary games [van Rooy, 2004].
Thus, the number of strands connecting logic and philosophy is large, and the
fabric of the interface is hard to tear accordingly.

94
Johan van Benthem
9
CONCLUSION: LOGIC AND PHILOSOPHY ONCE MORE
The upshot of this paper is simply this. The history of interfaces between logic
and philosophy is rich and varied, especially when we describe it through themes,
rather than formal languages or systems. Our story lines are just sketchy ﬁrst
illustrations, but they demonstrate the broad spirit.
Before we can have any
considered opinion of the current state of aﬀairs between logic and philosophy, we
need such a rich view of their past and present interactions. The resulting picture
may not be quite like received opinions as to what are the most crucial topics —
but it seems deﬁnitely much richer than what would be found in any standard text
book. It may even help get rid of some internal research programs in ‘philosophical
logic’ that seem to have run their course.
As for more practical conclusions, past meetings between logic and philosophy
have been successful, and there seems every reason for pursuing these contacts.
Moreover, these contacts are often enhanced through a third party, viz. computer
science, which acts as a laboratory for continuing philosophy ‘by other means’.
Lively interdisciplinary conferences like TIME, CONTEXT, or TARK lead the
way in this menage `a trois.
Still, we should freely admit that we have not provided any clear demarcation
of ’logic’ in our present perspective. What we have in mind is broader than many
current deﬁnitions; but still, not anything goes. If pressed right now, we would
say that ’logic’ is better described as a certain rigorous style of working than any
very precisely demarcated subject matter. And in any case, the spirit of this essay
is that deﬁnitions should follow realities, rather than the other way around.
But perhaps most of all, we have written on purpose in a nonconventional
style. Much intellectual history seems to make what happened Platonic, heroic,
inevitable, and thus: hard to identify with. But our founding fathers were just
ordinary people like us, with all sorts of options open to them, including chance
encounters, and outside events — and mathematical logic or philosophical logic,
though shining with the halo of time, are still open to signiﬁcant changes, both
in terms of interpretation and in terms of real change. Just read Stelzner [1996]
on how the optical ﬁrm of Carl-Zeiss Jena sponsored Frege’s tenure case (with the
physicist Ernst Abbe as a guardian angel), and your view of the birth of modern
logic, the genesis of Begriﬀsschrift, and its famous metaphor of Microscope versus
Eye, will never be the same again!
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank Hannes Leitgeb, Gabriel Sandu, Frank Veltman, and Dag
Westerst˚ahl for their useful and congenial comments.

Logic in Philosophy
95
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Adriaans and van Benthem, 2005] P. Adriaans & J. van Benthem, eds., 2005, Handbook of the
Philosophy of
Information, Elsevier, Amsterdam, to appear.
[Alchourron et al, 1985] C. Alchourron, P. G¨ardenfors & D. Makinson, 1985, On the Logic of
Theory Change: Partial Meet Contraction and Revision Functions, Journal of Symbolic Logic
50, 510–530.
[Aliseda-Llera, 1997] A. Aliseda-Llera, 1997, Seeking Explanations: Abduction in Logic, Philos-
ophy, and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Dissertation, Department of Philosophy, Stanford University
& ILLC, University of Amsterdam.
[Aumann, 1976] R. Aumann, 1976, Agreeing to Disagree, Annals of Statistics 4, 1236–1239.
[d’Avila Garcez et al., 2002] A. d’Avila Garcez, K. Broda & D. Gabbay, 2002, Neural-Symbolic
Learning Systems: Foundations and Applications, Springer, London.
[Baltag et al., 1998] A. Baltag, L. Moss & S. Solecki, 1998, The Logic of Public Announce-
ments, Common Knowledge and Private Suspicions, Proceedings TARK 1998, 43–56, Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, Los Altos.
[Barth, 1974] E. Barth, 1974, The Logic of the Articles in Traditional Philosophy, Reidel, Dor-
drecht.
[Barwise and Perry, 1983] J. Barwise & J. Perry, 1983, Situations and Attitudes, The MIT Press,
Cambridge (Mass.).
[Belnap et al., 2001] N. Belnap, M. Perloﬀ& M. Xu, 2001, Facing the Future, Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
[van Benthem, 1981] J. van Benthem, 1981, Historische Vergissingen? Kanttekeningen bij de
Fregeaanse Revolutie (Historical Errors? Marginal comments on
the Fregean Revolution in
Logic), Kennis en Methode 5:2, 94–116.
[van Benthem, 1982] J. van Benthem, 1982, The Logical Study of Science, Synthese 51, 431–472.
[van Benthem, 1985] J. van Benthem, 1985, The Variety of Consequence, According to Bolzano,
Studia Logica 44:4, 389-403.
[van Benthem, 1986] J. van Benthem, 1986, Essays in Logical Semantics, Reidel, Dordecht.
[van Benthem, 1987] J. van Benthem, 1987, Meaning: Interpretation and Inference, Synthese
73, 451-470.
[van Benthem, 1989] J. van Benthem, 1989, Semantic Parallels in Natural Language and Com-
putation, in H-D Ebbinghaus et al., eds., Logic Colloquium. Granada 1987, North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 331-375.
[van Benthem, 1991] J. van Benthem, 1991, Language in Action, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Reprinted 1995, The MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
[van Benthem, 1995] J. van Benthem, 1995, Temporal Logic, in D. Gabbay, C. Hoggar & J.
Robinson, eds., Handbook of Logic in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Logic Programming, Volume
4, Oxford University Press, 241–350.
[van Benthem, 1996a] J. van Benthem, 1996A, Exploring Logical Dynamics, CSLI Publications,
Stanford.
[van Benthem, 1996b] J. van Benthem, 1996B, Inference, Methodology and Semantics, in P.
Bystrov & V. Sadofsky, eds., Philosophical Logic and Logical Philosophy, Essays in Honour
of Vladimir Smirnov, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 63–82.
[van Benthem, 1999a] J. van Benthem, 1999A, Modal Foundations for Predicate Logic, in E.
Orlowska, ed., Logic at Work, To the Memory of Elena Rasiowa, Physica Verlag, Heidelberg,
39–54.
[van Benthem, 1999b] J. van Benthem, 1999B, Wider Still and Wider: resetting the bounds
of logic, in A. Varzi, ed., The European Review of Philosophy, CSLI Publications, Stanford,
21–44.
[van Benthem, 1999–present] J. van Benthem, 1999–present, Logic in Games, Electronic lecture
notes, ILLC University of Amsterdam & Department of Philosophy, Stanford University.
http://staff.science.uva.nl/∼johan/Teaching
[van Benthem, 2002a] J. van Benthem, 2002A, Mathematical Logic and Natural Language, in
B. L¨owe, W. Malzkorn, & T. Rasch, eds., Foundations of the Formal Sciences II: Applications
of Mathematical logic in
Philosophy and Linguistics, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 25–38.

96
Johan van Benthem
[van Benthem, 2002b] J. van Benthem, 2002B, One is a Lonely Number, ILLC Report 2002-07,
University of Amsterdam. To appear in P. Koepke & W. Pohlers, eds., Colloquium Logicum,
ASL Publications, New Providence.
[van Benthem, 2003a] J. van Benthem, 2003A, Fifty Years: Changes and Constants in Logic,
in V. Hendricks & J. Malinowski, eds., Trends in Logic, 50 Years of Studia Logica, Kluwer,
Dordrecht, 35–56.
[van Benthem, 2003b] J. van Benthem, 2003B, Is there still Logic in Bolzano’s Key?, in E.
Morscher, ed., Bernard Bolzanos Leistungen in Logik, Mathematik und Physik. Beitr¨age zur
Bolzano-Forschung, Bd.16, Academia Verlag, Sankt Augustin 2003, pp.11-34.
[van Benthem, 2003c] J. van Benthem, 2003C, Logic and the Dynamics of Information, in L.
Floridi, ed., Minds and Machines 13:4, 503–519.
[van Benthem, 2003d] J. van Benthem, 2003D, Logic in Philosophy, electronic course notes,
http://staff.science.uva.nl/∼johan/Teaching/ , Stanford University.
[van Benthem, 2003e] J. van Benthem, 2003E, Structural Properties of Dynamic Reasoning. in
J. Peregrin, ed., Meaning: the Dynamic Turn, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2003, 15-31.
[van Benthem, 2003f] J. van Benthem, 2003F, The Categorial Fine-Structure of Natural Lan-
guage, Tech Report PP-2003-20, ILLC Amsterdam. In C. Casadio, P.J. Scott, R.A.G. Seely,
eds., Language and Grammar: Studies in Mathematical Linguistics and Natural Language,
CSLI Publications Stanford (2005), 3–29.
[van Benthem, 2004] J. van Benthem, 2004, What One May Come to Know, Analysis 64 (282),
95–105.
[van Benthem, 2005a] J. van Benthem, 2005A, Epistemic Logic and Epistemology. The State of
their Aﬀairs, to appear in V. Hendricks, ed., special issue of Philosophical Studies on Bridges
between Formal and Mainstream Epistemology.
[van Benthem, 2005b] J. van Benthem, 2005B, Information as Correlation and Information as
Range, Working Paper, ILLC, University of Amsterdam. To appear in L. Moss, ed., Memorial
Volume for Jon Barwise.
[van Benthem, 2005c] J. van Benthem, 2005C, Information Is What Information Does, draft
editorial, Handbook of Philosophy of Information, ILLC University of Amsterdam.
[van Benthem, 2005d] J. van Benthem, 2005D, Open Problems in Logic and Games. In We
Will Show Them! Essays in Honour of Dov Gabbay, Volume 1, S. Artemov, H. Barringer,
A. d’Avila Garcez, L. Lamb and J. Woods, eds. pp. 229–264. College Publications, 2005.
[van Benthem, 2005e] J. van Benthem, 2005E, Open Problems in Logical Dynamics, ILLC
Preprint:, Institute for Logic, Language and Information, University of Amsterdam, DARE
electronic archive 148382. To appear in D. Gabbay, S. Goncharov & M. Zakharyashev, eds.,
Mathematical Problems from Applied Logic, Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk &
Springer, New York.
[van Benthem and ter Meulen, 1997] J. van Benthem & A. ter Meulen, eds., 1997, Handbook of
Logic and Language, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
[Beth, 1949] E. Beth, 1949, Towards an Up-to-Date Philosophy of the Natural Sciences, Metho-
dos1, 178–185.
[Blanshard, 1964] B. Blanshard, 1964, Reason and Analysis, Open Court Publishers, La Salle
(Ill.).
[Bolzano, 1937] B. Bolzano, 1837, Wissenschaftslehre, Buchhandlung Seidel, Sulzbach. Trans-
lated as Theory of Science by R. George, University of California Press, Berkeley & Los
Angeles, 1972.
[Brogaard and Salerno, 2002] B. Brogaard & J. Salerno, 2002, Fitch’s Paradox of Knowabil-
ity, Stanford Electronic Encyclopedia of Philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/
fitch-paradox/.
[de Bruin, 2004] B. de Bruin, 2004, Explaining Games, Dissertation 2004-03, ILLC Amsterdam.
[Carnap, 1947] R. Carnap, 1947, Meaning and Necessity, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
[CONTEXT, 2005] CONTEXT, 2005, 5th International and Interdisciplinary Conference on
Modeling and Using Context, July 5-8, Paris, France, www.context-05.org.
[Davidson, 1967] D. Davidson, 1967, Truth and Meaning, Synthese 17, 304–323.
[Davidson and Harman, 1972] D. Davidson & G. Harman, eds., 1972, Semantics of Natural
Language, Reidel, Dordrecht.
[van Ditmarsch et al., 2005] H. van Ditmarsch, W. van der Hoek & B. Kooi, 2005, Dynamic
Epistemic Logic, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, to appear.

Logic in Philosophy
97
[Dosens and Schr¨oeder-Heister, 1994] K. Dosen & P. Schr¨oder-Heister, eds., 1994, Substructural
Logics, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
[Dretske, 1981] F. Dretske, 1981, Knowledge and the Flow of Information, Chicago University
Press, Chicago .
[Dummett, 1973] M. Dummett, 1973, Frege, the Philosophy of Language, Duckworth, London.
[Dutilh-Novaes, 2003] C. Dutilh-Novaes, 2003, Medieval Obligationes as Logical Games of Con-
sistency, Philosophical Institute, University of Leiden.
[Englebretsen, 1981] G. Englebretsen, 1981, Three Logicians, van Gorcum, Assen.
[Etchemendy, 1990] J. Etchemendy, 1990, The Concept of Logical Consequence, Harvard Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
[Fagin et al., 1995] R. Fagin, J. Halpern, Y. Moses & M. Vardi, 1995, Reasoning about Knowl-
edge, The MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
[Field, 1972] H. Field, 1972, Tarski’s Theory of Truth, Journal of Philosophical Logic 69, 347-
375.
[Flach and Kakas, 2000] P. Flach & A. Kakas, eds., 2000, Abduction and Induction. Essays on
their
Relation and Integration, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
[Floridi, 2004] L. Floridi, ed., 2004, The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of
Computing and
Information, Blackwell, Oxford – New York.
[Gabbay and Guenthner, 1983–1988] D. Gabbay & F. Guenthner, eds., 1983–1988, Handbook
of Philosophical Logic, Reidel, Dordrecht. Second revised and enlarged edition starting from
1996, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
[GAMUT, 1991] GAMUT, 1991, Logic, Language and Meaning, Chicago University Press.
[G¨ardenfors, 1987] P. G¨ardenfors, 1987, Knowledge in Flux. Modeling the Dynamics of
Epis-
temic States, The MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
[G¨ardenfors and Rott, 1995] P. G¨ardenfors & H. Rott, 1995, Belief Revision, in Handbook of
Logic in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Logic Programming, Volume 4, ed. by D. M. Gabbay, C.
J. Hogger, and J. A. Robinson, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[Geach, 1972] P. Geach, 1972, Logic Matters, Blackwell. Oxford.
[Gerbrandy, 1999] J. Gerbrandy, 1999, Bisimulations on Planet Kripke, dissertation DS-1999-
01, Institute for Logic, Language and Computation, University of Amsterdam.
[Gettier, 1963] E. Gettier, 1963, Is Justiﬁed True Belief Knowledge?, Analysis 23, 121–123.
[Geurts and van der Slik, 2004] B. Geurts & F. van der Slik, 2004, Monotonicity and Processing
Load, Journal of Semantics 22, 97-117.
[Gillies, 2004] A. Gillies, 2004, New Foundations for Epistemic Change, Synthese 138, 1–48.
[Grice, 1975] H. Grice, 1975, Logic and Conversation, in P. Cole & J. Morgan, eds., Syntax and
Semantics III, Academic Press, New York, 41–58.
[Groenendijk and Stokhof, 1991] J. Groenendijk & M. Stokhof, 1991, Dynamic Predicate Logic,
Linguistics
& Philosophy 14, 39–100. Also in The Philosopher’s Annual, 1992.
[Grove, 1988] A. Grove, Two Modelings for Theory Change, Journal of Philosophical Logic,
157-170, 1988.
[van Hees and Pauly, 2004] M. van Hees & M. Pauly, 2004, Logical Constraints on Aggregating
Judgments, Department of Philosophy, University of Groningen & INRIA Toulouse. To appear
in the Journal of Philosophical Logic.
[Hempel, 1965] P. Hempel, 1965, Aspects of Explanation and Other Essays in the
Philosophy
of Science, The Free Press, New York.
[Hendricks, 2002] V. Hendricks, 2002, Active Agents, PHILOG Newsletter, Roskilde. In J. van
Benthem & R. van Rooy, eds., special issue on Information Theories, Journal of Logic, Lan-
guage and Information 12:4, 469–495.
[Hendricks, 2005] V. Hendricks, 2005, Mainstream and Formal Epistemology, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, New York.
[Hintikka, 1962] J. Hintikka, 1962, Knowledge and Belief, Cornell University Press, Ithaca.
Reprint 2005, V. Hendricks & J. Symons, eds., King’s College Publications, London.
[intikka, 1973] J. Hintikka, 1973, Logic, Language Games and Information, Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
[Hintikka and Sandu, 1997] J. Hintikka & G. Sandu, 1997, ‘Game-Theoretical Semantics, in J.
van Benthem & A. ter Meulen, eds., Handbook of Logic and Language, Elsevier, Amsterdam,
361–410.
[Hobbs et al., 1990] J. Hobbs, M. Stickel, D. Appelt & P. Martin, 1990, Interpretation as Ab-
duction, SRI Technical Note 499, SRI International, Menlo Park, California.

98
Johan van Benthem
[Hodges, 2001] W. Hodges, 2001, Formal Features of Compositionality, Journal of Logic, Lan-
guage and Information 10, 7–28.
[Hodges, 2005] W. Hodges, 2005, Opening Two Windows: Arabic Logic and Cognitive Science,
Department of Mathematics, Queen Mary and William’s College, London. To appear in D.
Gabbay, S. Gontcharov & M. Zakharyashev, eds., Logics for the XXIst Century: Mathematical
Problems From Applied Logic, Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk & Kluwer/Plenum
Publishers, New York.
[Janssen, 1981] Th. Janssen, 1981, Foundations and Applications of Montague Grammar, Dis-
sertation, Mathematical Institute, University of Amsterdam.
[Jacquette, 2002] D. Jacquette, ed., 2002, A Companion to Philosophical Logic, Blackwell, Ox-
ford.
[Kamp and Reyle, 1993] H. Kamp & U. Reyle, 1993, From Discourse to Logic, Kluwer, Dor-
drecht.
[Katsuna and Mendelzon, 1991] H. Katsuno & A. Mendelzon, 1991, ”Propositional Knowledge
Base Revision and Minimal Change, Artiﬁcial Intelligence 52, 263–294.
[Keenan and Westerst˚ahl, 1997] E. Keenan & D. Westerst˚ahl, 1997, Quantiﬁers, in J. van Ben-
them & A. ter Meulen, eds., Handbook of Logic and Language, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 837–893.
[Kelly, 1996] K. Kelly, 1996, The Logic of Reliable Enquiry, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[Kelly, 2002] K. Kelly, 2002, Knowledge as Reliably Inferred Stable True Belief, Department of
Philosophy, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh.
[Kripke, 1975] S. Kripke, 1975, Outline of a Theory of Truth, Journal of Philosophy 72, 690–716.
[Kuipers, 2000] Th. Kuipers, 2000, From Instrumentalism to Constructive Realism, Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
[Kuhn, 1962] Th. Kuhn, 1962, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
[Leitgeb, 2004a] H. Leitgeb, 2004A, Carnap’s Logischer Aufbau Revisited, Department of Phi-
losophy, University of Salzburg.
[Letigeb, 2004b] H. Leitgeb, 2004B, Inference on the Low Level. An Investigation into Deduc-
tion, Nonmonotonic Reasoning, and the Philosophy of Cognition, Springer, Berlin.
[Leitgeb, 2005] H. Leitgeb, 2005, G¨ardenfors’ Impossibility Argument Defused, working pa-
per, Department of Philosophy, Stanford University & Fachbereich Philosophie, Universit¨at
Salzburg.
[Lewis, 1969] D. Lewis, 1969, Convention, Harvard University Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
[Lewis, 1973] D. Lewis, 1973, Counterfactuals, Blackwell, Oxford.
[Lindstr¨om and Rabinowicz, 1992] S. Lindstr¨om & W. Rabinowicz, 1992, Belief Revision, Epis-
temic Conditionals and the Ramsey Test, Synthese 91,195-237.
[Lorenz and Lorenzen, 1978] K.
Lorenz
&
P.
Lorenzen,
1978,
Dialogische
Logik,
Wis-
senschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt.
[Mates, 1953] B. Mates, 1953, Stoic Logic, University of California Publications, Berkeley & Los
Angeles.
[McCarthy, 1980] J. McCarthy, 1980, Circumscription – A Form of Nonmonotonic Reasoning,
Artiﬁcial Intelligence 13, 27–39.
[McCarthy, 2005] J. McCarthy, 2005, The Philosophy of AI and the AI of Philosophy, Depart-
ment of Computer Science, Stanford University. To appear in P. Adriaans & J. van Benthem,
eds., Handbook of the Philosophy of Information, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
[Montague, 1974] R. Montague, 1974, Formal Philosophy, Selected Papers of Richard Montague,
R. Thomason, ed., Yale University Press, New Haven.
[Nozick, 1981] R. Nozick, 1981, Philosophical Explanations, Harvard University Press, Cam-
bridge (Mass.).
[Osherson et al., 1988] D. Osherson, M. Stob & S. Weinstein, 1988, Systems that Learn, The
MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
[Parikh, 2001] P. Parikh, 2001, The Use of Language, CSLI Publications, Stanford.
[Pauly, 2001] M. Pauly, 2001, Logic for Social Software, dissertation DS-2001-10, Institute for
Logic, Language and Computation, University of Amsterdam.
[Pearce and Rantala, 1984] D. Pearce & V. Rantala, 1984, A Logical Study of the Correspon-
dence Relation, Journal of Philosophical Logic 13, 47–84.
[Pereira and Warren, 1983] F. Pereira & D. Warren, 1983, Parsing as Deduction, Proceedings
of the 21st Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 137–144.

Logic in Philosophy
99
[Peters and Westerst˚ahal, to appear] S. Peters & D. Westerst˚ahl, to appear, Quantiﬁers in Lan-
guage and Logic, Philosophical Institute, University of Gothenburg & Department of Linguis-
tics, Stanford University. To appear with Oxford University Press.
[Przelecki, 1969] M. Przelecki, 1969, The Logic of Empirical Theories, Routledge and Kegan
Paul, London.
[Putnum, 1975] H. Putnam, 1975, Mind, Language, and Reality, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
[ramsey, 1931] F. Ramsey, 1931, The Foundations of Mathematics and Other Essays, Kegan
Paul, London.
[Reiter, 2001] R. Reiter, 2001, Knowledge in Action. Logical Foundations for Specifying and
Implementing Dynamical Systems, The MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
[de Roever et al., 2001] W-P de Roever, F. de Boer, U. Hannemann, J. Hooman, Y. Lakhnech,
M. Poel & J. Zwiers, 2001, Concurrency Veriﬁcation: Introduction to Compositional and
Noncompositional Methods, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
[van Rooy, 2004] R. van Rooy, 2004, Signalling Games Select Horn Strategies, Linguistics and
Philosophy 27, 493-527.
[van Rooy and Schultz, 2004] R. van Rooy & K. Schultz, 2004, Pragmatic Meaning and Non-
Monotonic Reasoning: The Case of Exhaustive Interpretation, Working Paper, ILLC Univer-
sity of Amsterdam. To appear in Linguistics and Philosophy.
[Rott, 2001] H. Rott, 2001A, Change, Choice, and Inference, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
[rott, 2001b] H. Rott, 2001B, Theoretical Concepts in Flux: Conceptual Knowledge and Theory
Change, in R. Eckardt, K. von Heusinger & Ch. Schwarze, eds., Words in Time – Diachronic
Semantics from Diﬀerent Points of View, FB Sprachwissenschaft der Universit¨at Konstanz,
279–301.
[Ryan, 1992] M. Ryan, 1992, Ordered Presentations of Theories: Default Reasoning and Belief
Revision, Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computing, Imperial College.
[Sanchez Valencia, 1991] V. Sanchez Valencia, 1991, Studies in Categorial Grammar and Nat-
ural Logic, Dissertation, ILLC, University of Amsterdam. To appear with MIT Press.
[Shanahan, 1997] M. Shanahan, 1997, Solving the Frame Problem, The MIT Press, Cambridge
(Mass.).
[Shoham, 1988] Y. Shoham, 1988, Reasoning about Change. Time and Causation from the
Standpoint of AI, The MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
[Skyrms, 2004] B. Skyrms, 2004, The Stag Hunt and the Evolution of Social Structure, Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge.
[Smolensky and Legendre, 2005] P. Smolensky & G. Legendre, 2005, The Harmonic Mind. From
Neural Computation to Optimality-Theoretic Grammar, The MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
[Sommers, 1982] F. Sommers, 1982, The Logic of Natural Language, Clarendon, Oxford.
[Stalnaker, 1999] R. Stalnaker, 1999, Extensive and Strategic Form: Games and Models for
Games, Research in Economics 53:2, 93–291.
[Stelzner, 1996] W. Stelzner, 1996, Gottlob Frege. Jena und die Geburt der Modernen Logik,
Verein zur Regionalforderung von Forschung, Innovation und Technologie, Jena.
[Suppe, 1977] F. Suppe, ed., 1977, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Theories, University of Illinois
Press, Urbana.
[Tarski, 1956] A. Tarski, 1956, Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics, Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
[van Ulsen, 2000] P. van Ulsen, 2000, Evert Willem Beth als Logicus, Dissertation, Institute for
Logic, Language and Computation, University of Amsterdam.
[Veltman, 1996] F. Veltman, 1996, Defaults in Update Semantics, Journal of Philosophical
Logic 25, 221–261. Also appeared in The Philosopher’s Annual, 1997.
[Wason and Johnson-Laird, 1972] P. Wason & P. Johnson-Laird, 1972, Psychology of Reason-
ing. Structure and Content, Batsford, London.
[Weinberger, 1965] O. Weinberger, 1965, Der Relativisierungsgrundsatz und der Reduktions-
grundsatz – Zwei Prinzipien des Dialektischen Denkens, Czechoslovakian Academy of Sciences,
Prague.
[Wundt, 1880–3] W. Wundt, 1880/3, Logik. Eine Untersuchung der Prinzipien der Erkenntniss
und
der Methoden Wissenschaftlicher Forschung, Ferdinand Enke, Stuttgart.
[Zalta, 1993] E. Zalta, 1993, A Philosophical Conception of Propositional Modal Logic, Philo-
sophical Topics 21:2, 263–281.


INFORMAL LOGIC AND
THE CONCEPT OF ARGUMENT
David Hitchcock
According to its namers, informal logic “is best understood as the normative
study of argument. It is the area of logic which seeks to develop standards, criteria
and procedures for the interpretation, evaluation and construction of arguments
and argumentation used in natural language.”
[Blair and Johnson, 1987, 148];
similarly, [Johnson and Blair, 2000, 94] The name “informal logic” is somewhat
unfortunate.
For those who use “logical” as a synonym of “formal”, it is an
oxymoron. In any case, the research programme of informal logic does not preclude
the use of formal methods or appeal to formal logics. Its distinctiveness consists
in its consideration of a set of questions that are not addressed in the specialist
journals of formal logic, such as the Journal of Symbolic Logic and the Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic, or in such histories of formal logic as that by William
and Martha Kneale [1962]. It might in fact better be called “theory of argument”.
Its questions have however traditionally been regarded as part of logic, broadly
conceived. The name can thus be taken to refer to that part of logic as traditionally
conceived that is not covered by contemporary formal logic.
Johnson and Blair [2000, 99–100] group the questions investigated by informal
logic under the headings of argument identiﬁcation, argument analysis, argument
evaluation, and argument criticism. In accordance with the deﬁnition quoted in the
opening sentence of this chapter, one should add argument construction as a ﬁfth
heading. Because of limitations of space and time, this chapter deals intensively
with just one question within informal logic, the question: What is an argument?
A postscript lists other questions about arguments investigated within informal
logics, and refers to the relevant literature.
TECHNICAL AND EVERYDAY SENSES OF “ARGUMENT”
In western philosophy, an argument is traditionally deﬁned as “a system composed
of premisses and a conclusion” (Diogenes Laertius 7.45, citing a Stoic deﬁnition).
The plural of “premisses” is a Stoic idiosyncrasy: few other philosophers have
accepted the Stoic denial (Sextus Empiricus 2.443) that there are one-premissed
arguments. But, even with an amendment to allow for one-premissed arguments,
the deﬁnition is not very satisfactory, for two reasons: it requires a further explana-
tion of what a premiss is and what a conclusion is, and it forecloses by stipulation
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

102
David Hitchcock
alternative conceptions of the components of an argument. It is therefore use-
ful to develop a more informative and less question-begging conception, starting
from everyday usage of the word “argument” and sharpening that usage so as
to circumscribe a class of entities that is an appropriate subject for theoretical
reﬂection.
In English, the word “argument” and the corresponding verb “argue” are used
in two quite clearly distinguishable senses.
One sense is that in which we say such things as “John Searle argued that
no computational system can have a semantics” or “the Summa Theologica of
Thomas Aquinas contains ﬁve arguments for the existence of God”. In this sense,
arguing requires only one arguer (who in cases of collaboration in the production
of an argument can be a group of people). The arguer expresses a point of view
on a question, and oﬀers as support for this position one or more reasons. The
expression of the point of view and the provision of one or more reasons in its
support constitute a complex of speech acts. The arguer addresses these speech
acts to one or more readers, listeners or observers, who need not reply. Arguing in
this sense is typically (though not always) emotionally neutral, and typically not
accompanied by hostility.
The other sense is that in which we say such things as “they were arguing with
one another” or “they had a bitter argument” or “she argued with him”. In this
sense, arguing requires at least two arguers; if one argues with oneself in this sense,
then one sequentially takes two diﬀerent roles. The arguers express to each other
divergent opinions on some question. Each attempts to get the other(s) to accept
their point of view, not necessarily by oﬀering reasons in support of it. Emotional
intensity and even hostility often accompany such disputes, though not always.
For ease of reference, I shall call these the reason-giving and the disputational
senses of “argument” and “argue”. Informal logic studies arguments in the reason-
giving sense. It is worth noting that English is apparently unique in using the same
word for these two senses. In classical Greek, for example, the reason-giving sense
is expressed by the word logos (e.g.
in Plato’s Phaedo, at 90b–91c) in one of
its many senses, whereas the disputational sense is expressed by the word am-
phisbˆetˆesis or antilogia, “dispute” or “controversy”. In Latin, the reason-giving
sense is expressed by the word argumentum, “proof” or “evidence”, the disputa-
tional sense by the word disputatio, “debate” or “dispute”. In French, as Plantin
[2003, 174] points out in detail, the reason-giving sense is expressed by the verb ar-
gumenter (“to argue [that]”) and its cognates, the disputational sense by the verb
discuter (“to discuss”, in an aggressive way). In Spanish [Claudio Duran, personal
communication], the reason-giving sense is expressed by the word argument, and
the disputational sense by the words discusi´on (discussion) or controversia (con-
troversy) or disputa (dispute). In Russian, the reason-giving sense is expressed by
the word dovod (supporting reason), the disputational sense by the word spor or
ssora. In German, the reason-giving sense is expressed by the word Argument, the
disputational sense by the word Disput. The reader is invited to check how other
languages handle the distinction.

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
103
Reason-giving and disputation can of course coincide in a particular case. But
not all reason-giving occurs in disputes; in fact, most of it occurs outside the con-
text of disputes, or at least outside explicit ones. And not all disputes involve
reason-giving; typically they do, but typically as well they involve other compo-
nents that are intrinsic to the dispute. Productive disputation requires reason-
giving. But if reason-giving and disputing were shown in an Euler diagram, the
circles would overlap.
ARGUMENT AS DISCOURSE SUPPORTING A POINT OF VIEW BY
OFFERING ONE OR MORE REASONS
An argument in the sense studied by informal logic can thus be conceived initially
as a type of discourse in which the author expresses a point of view and oﬀers one
or more reasons in support of that point of view. We can make this conception
more precise by considering in the ﬁrst place what it is to oﬀer a supporting reason
for a point of view, and how one can do so. A typical means of doing so is to utter
a sentence of a language, or something equivalent to a sentence. Searle [1979]
has proposed a taxonomy of the illocutionary acts that people perform in uttering
sentences, a classiﬁcation based on diﬀerences in the point of the act.
Assertives have as their point to commit their utterers to the truth of an ex-
pressed proposition p; they include not only stating that p but also hypothesizing,
suggesting, boasting, and deducing that p [Searle, 1979, 13]. Directives have as
their point to get the addressee to do something; they include requesting, advising
and asking [13–14]. Commissives have as their point to commit the utterer to do
something; they include promising and contracting [8, 14]. Expressives have as
their point to express a psychological attitude of the utterer to the state of aﬀairs
speciﬁed by the proposition expressed; they include apologizing, congratulating
and thanking [15–16]. Declaratives have as their point to make something the
case by the very utterance of the sentence; they including declaring war, christen-
ing, delivering judicial verdicts and stipulating how one is going to use a certain
expression [16–20].
As Van Eemeren and Grootendorst point out [1984, 43], only an assertive (or
something reconstructible as an assertive, such as a rhetorical question) can count
as the oﬀering of a supporting reason for a point of view. We can test this claim by
considering examples of other sorts of illocutionary acts followed by “so” followed
by an arbitrary sentence. If we consider a directive followed by “so” followed by a
directive, such as:
* What time is it? So you must go home.
we ﬁnd it diﬃcult to make sense of such discourse, except by supposing that the
speaker assumes that a correct answer to the question implies that it is past time
for the addressee to go home. It is easier to make sense of a commissive followed
by “so” followed by an assertive, such as:

104
David Hitchcock
? I promise to pick up some milk on the way home. So you don’t need
to get it.
But we can only make sense of such discourse because to make a commitment
to do something in the future is implicitly to predict that one will do it. The
argument would be more straightforward if one made the prediction explicitly by
means of an assertive:
I will pick up some milk on the way home. So you don’t need to get it.
We strain to make sense of an expressive followed by “so” followed by an assertive,
such as:
* Congratulations on your anniversary. So you are married.
The act of congratulating a couple on their anniversary implies that they are
married, but congratulating them is an awkward way of supporting the claim that
they are married. It would be much more straightforward to say something like:
I congratulated them on their anniversary. So they are married.
Similar problems arise in making sense of a declarative followed by “so” followed
by an assertive:
* I hereby sentence you to two years less a day in prison. So the guards
will now take you to prison.
As with directives, we need to suppose an intermediate step in which the speaker
expresses a commitment to the existence of the state of aﬀairs brought about by
the declarative:
You have just been sentenced to two years less a day in prison. So the
guards will now take you to prison.
Thus to oﬀer a supporting reason by uttering a sentence, or something equivalent
to a sentence, is to perform some sort of assertive, i.e. to commit the utterer to
the truth of the expressed proposition. The word “truth” needs to be understood
broadly as applying to normative and evaluative propositions as well as descriptive
ones, for the following discourses make sense as arguments:
One must not cause unnecessary harm. So it is wrong to give someone
distressing news that the person does not want to hear.
All things considered, this car is the best model of the type we want
that is in our price range. So let’s buy it.
It is possible, however, to oﬀer a supporting reason without uttering a sentence.
Drawings, ﬁgures, photographs, paintings, gestures, body language and other non-
linguistic communicative devices can serve as premisses of an argument. Groarke

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
105
[1996] urges the recognition of visual arguments. Gilbert treats verbalized or ver-
balizable premiss-conclusion structures as one of four possible modes of argument,
deﬁned as “any exchange of information centred on an avowed disagreement”
[Gilbert, 1997, 104]; italics in original). He calls this mode the “logical-critical”
mode. Emotional arguments rely on the use and expression of emotion, and can be
communicated without language [83]. Visceral arguments rely on physical activity,
such as touching or body language [84].“Kisceral” arguments rely on the intuitive
or the imaginative [86]. Although Gilbert uses the disputational rather than the
reason-giving sense of argument, he gives convincing examples of reason-giving
that is not verbalized. What is common to these various types of reason-giving is
that their authors express to one or more addressees a commitment to the truth
of a proposition.
Having speciﬁed a necessary condition for oﬀering a supporting reason — namely,
expressing to one or more addressees a commitment to the truth of a proposition
— and indicated a variety of ways in which one may satisfy this necessary con-
dition, we can gain further precision on the reason-giving sense of argument by
considering what sorts of points of view can function as conclusions supported by
the reason or reasons oﬀered. Again, we can use the “so” test, this time focusing
on what comes after the word “so” rather than what comes before it. Clearly we
can express the conclusion of an argument by means of an assertive:
The whale suckles its young. So it is a mammal.
But, as Pinto [2001a] points out, the arguer’s endorsement of a point of view may
be a directive, such as a request for information (you were there, so what was it
like?) or a recommendation to do something (there is a forecast of thundershowers,
so let’s cancel the picnic or I’m feeling cold, so please close the door). It can also be
a commissive (I know how diﬃcult it will be for you to get the milk, so I promise you
that I will pick it up on the way home), an expressive (my conduct was inexcusable,
so I apologize most sincerely), or a declarative (the evidence establishes beyond a
reasonable doubt that you committed the crime of which you are accused, so I
hereby ﬁnd you guilty as charged).
As with supporting reasons, conclusions can be expressed not only by uttering
sentences of a language, or things equivalent to a sentence, but also by producing
visual images, using “body language” including facial expressions, or performing
physical actions like touching someone. Such non-verbalized conclusions are typi-
cally implicit in the communicative activity, and thus somewhat indeterminate.
ARGUMENTS AS INVITATIONS TO INFERENCE
What is crucial to an argument is the claim that the reasons collectively support
the conclusion. The addressee of an argument is invited to accept the conclusion
on the basis of the reasons oﬀered.
In Pinto’s happy phrase, “Arguments are
invitations to inference” [Pinto, 2001b, 37], where “inference” means “the mental

106
David Hitchcock
act or event in which a person draws a conclusion from premisses, or arrives at a
conclusion on the basis of a body of evidence” [32]. In inferring, a person adopts or
reinforces an attitude towards the proposition embedded in the conclusion. These
attitudes include a range of doxastic attitudes, from being convinced of it through
being inclined to believe in it and suspecting it to considering it possible and
having no idea about it [Pinto, 2001a, 12]. They also include such non-doxastic
attitudes to propositions as fearing, desiring, intending and hoping [2001a, 16].
The condition that an argument is an invitation to an inference from the oﬀered
reasons to the conclusion applies even in suppositional reasoning and argument
where the conclusion drawn shares the suppositional status of a premiss; the con-
clusion may in fact be an absurdity whose derivation will subsequently be used, in
conjunction with an acknowledgement of its absurdity, to reject that premiss. It
also applies, obviously, to arguing purely dialectically, from the assumptions of an
interlocutor that one does not oneself share.
The claim that the oﬀered reasons support the conclusion can be marked lin-
guistically, by means of an illative expression governing the conclusion or a reason.
Let us use the expression premiss indicator for an illative like “since” which (in
its illative use) indicates that the immediately following assertive is oﬀered in di-
rect support of the speech act performed by uttering the main clause to which
the “since” clause is subordinate, and the expression conclusion indicator for an
illative like “therefore” which (in its illative use) indicates that the immediately
preceding assertive is oﬀered in direct support of the immediately following speech
act. To introduce a reason by a premiss indicator is to perform a special type of
assertive, which we might call premissing: to premiss a proposition is to put it
forward as a (perhaps partial) basis for inferring a conclusion. Similarly, to intro-
duce a conclusion by a conclusion indicator is to perform a special type of speech
act (whether assertive, directive, commissive, expressive or declarative), which we
might call concluding: to conclude a proposition is to put it forward for acceptance
on the basis of one or more assertives oﬀered as supporting reasons. Note that
acceptance does not always mean adopting a doxastic attitude to the proposition;
accepting an apology, for example, means believing that the apologizer bears some
responsibility for the act for which the apology is oﬀered and that this act was
wrong and that the apologizer is sincerely sorry for this act, but it also means
forgiving the apologizer, in the sense of not demanding further acts of contrition,
reparation or penitence.
Arguments do not always include illatives, and even those that do include illa-
tives typically attach them to only one component of the argument, a reason or
the conclusion. But components of an argument not introduced by an illative are
nevertheless premissed or concluded. Thus an argument is a claim-reason complex
consisting of an act of concluding (which may be of any of the ﬁve main types
in Searle’s taxonomy of speech acts) and one or more acts of premissing (each
of which is an assertive). These acts are correlative; the act of concluding is an
act of concluding from the reasons, and each act of premissing is an act of oﬀer-
ing support for the conclusion. To capture this relationship, it is appropriate to

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
107
conceive of an argument as a sequence consisting of a set of reasons followed by
a conclusion indicator followed by a conclusion, or equivalently as a conclusion
followed by a premiss indicator followed by a set of one or more reasons. In such
a sequence, the illative does the work of premissing each reason and concluding
the conclusion; hence, we do not need to mention these acts in characterizing the
reason and conclusion. Arguments with no explicit illative can be regarded as
having one implicitly.
EXTENSIONS: POTENTIAL ARGUMENTS AND EQUIVALENCE CLASSES
OF ARGUMENTS
So far I have been talking about actual arguments, actually advanced by peo-
ple who speak, write or otherwise communicate them to one or more addressees.
For the purposes of this chapter, I propose to extend the concept of argument
further, in two respects. First, I propose to count as arguments discoursal claim-
reason complexes that are merely entertained in thought, such as the pros and
cons considered by people trying to come to a decision about what to do. The
example ﬁts ordinary usage, since we do talk about such people as considering
the relevant arguments. But the general characterization goes beyond it, since it
includes reasoning by oneself to a conclusion (tomorrow is garbage day, so I had
better put out the garbage), whose content is not usually described as an argument.
The reason for this extension is that the same considerations of acceptability of
the supporting reasons and suﬃciency of the support relation between reasons
and conclusion apply to such solo reasoning as apply to other-directed arguments.
Second, for the same reason, I propose to count as arguments merely potential
discoursal claim-reason complexes never uttered or even mentally entertained by
anyone.
In this extended sense, a simple argument is a sequence of three objects: a
speech act c of any type concerning some proposition, an illative such as the word
“since” (in its inferential sense), and a set P of one or more assertives. Expressed
in this canonical form, the following would count as arguments:
<express admiration for Picasso’s Guernica, since, {assert that Pi-
casso’s Guernica brings home in a vivid way the horrible consequences
for the innocent of aerial bombing in contemporary warfare}>
<suspect that Goldbach’s conjecture is correct, since, {assert that
mathematicians have found no counter-example in 200 years of trying}>
These sequences may be purely possible ones, never articulated by anyone. The
ﬁrst could be expressed by saying, “What a wonderful painting is Picasso’s Guer-
nica. It brings home in a vivid way the horrible consequences for the innocent of
aerial bombing in contemporary warfare.” The second could be expressed by say-
ing, “Goldbach’s conjecture is probably correct, since mathematicians have found
no counter-example in 200 years of trying.”

108
David Hitchcock
General as it is, this deﬁnition is still less general than our ordinary usage of the
word “argument”. For the same argument can be expressed in diﬀerent ways, and
even in diﬀerent languages. To accommodate this fact, we can extend the above
deﬁnition to the equivalence class of all sequences with the same meaning as a
given sequence. If ⟨c, ∵, P⟩is the given sequence, we may label its equivalence class
[⟨c, ∵, P⟩]. It will include sequences with one or more constituents with the same
meaning as the corresponding constituent of ⟨c, ∵, P⟩, as well as corresponding
sequences in the reverse order with a conclusion indicator in place of the premiss
indicator, such as ⟨P, ∴, c⟩. Then a simple argument may be deﬁned as follows:
Simple argument =df a class of those triples of the form ⟨c, ∵, P⟩or
⟨P, ∴, c⟩that are equivalent in meaning to one another, where c is a
speech act of any type, ∵is a premiss indicator, ∴is a conclusion
indicator, and P is a set of one or more assertives.
Following traditional terminology, we will refer to an assertive in such a set P as
a premiss and to such a speech act c as a conclusion. Our usage is however non-
traditional in this respect, that a premiss is neither a sentence nor a proposition
nor a statement, but an assertive; and a conclusion is neither a sentence nor a
proposition nor a statement, but a speech act of some type. Further, it should
be noted that, in actual thinking, speaking, signing and writing, arguments often
lack an inference indicator, the force of the illative being communicated by a
combination of semantic and contextual factors.
The deﬁnition of a simple argument just proposed is vague, since it is indeter-
minate in some cases whether two linguistic expressions of an attitude have the
same meaning. The vagueness is similar in degree to, and has the same source
as, the vagueness in the concept of a proposition as the eternal object signiﬁed
by the utterance of a sentence. A more precise conception of argument could be
obtained by treating each linguistic variation in the formulation of an argument as
a new argument. Someone who adopted this approach would confront vagueness
at another place, in considering whether two distinct arguments have the same
force.
COMPLEX DIRECT ARGUMENTS
So far we have been considering arguments in which one or more reasons are oﬀered
in direct support of a conclusion. A comprehensive conception of argument should
allow for complex arguments, in which one or more of the reasons oﬀered in direct
support of a conclusion is in turn argued for. Such complex arguments can be
analysed into component simple arguments. Anselm’s ontological argument for
the existence of God in the second chapter of his Proslogium, for example, is a
tightly structured chain of inter-linked simple arguments.
We can extend our
deﬁnition to complex arguments, with the help of the concept of subordination,
deﬁned as follows:

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
109
Subordinate argument =df an argument whose conclusion is a premiss
of another argument.
Subordinate arguments are commonly referred to in the informal logic literature
and textbooks as subarguments.
We need also the concept of superordination,
which is the converse relation:
Superordinate argument =df an argument with a premiss that is the
conclusion of another argument.
We can now deﬁne a complex argument as a set of two or more simple arguments,
with a hierarchy of subordination between them:
Complex argument =df a set of two or more simple arguments, each of
which is either superordinate to or subordinate to at least one other
argument in the set, and one of which (the main argument) is not
subordinate to any other argument in the set.
We can illustrate this deﬁnition with the concluding part of the ﬁrst book of
Plato’s Republic, where Socrates argues, with the agreement of Thrasymachus at
each step, that injustice is never more proﬁtable than justice:
. . . a just soul and a just man will live well, and an unjust one badly.
Apparently so, according to your argument.
And surely anyone who lives well is blessed and happy, and anyone
who doesn’t is the opposite.
Of course.
Therefore, a just person is happy, and an unjust one wretched.
So be it.
It proﬁts no one to be wretched but to be happy.
Of course.
And so, Thrasymachus, injustice is never more proﬁtable than justice.
Let that be your banquet, Socrates, at the feast of Bendis.
(Plato, Republic I. 353e-354a, Grube-Reeve translation)
This excerpt is the concluding part of a single extremely complex argument, in
which attitudes are expressed to about 50 diﬀerent propositions. The excerpt can
be represented in the standard notation for sets and sequences as follows:
{<{assert that a just soul and a just man will live well and an unjust
one badly, assert that anyone who lives well is blessed and happy and
anyone who doesn’t is the opposite}, ∴, assert that a just person is
happy, and an unjust one wretched>, <{assert that a just person is
happy and an unjust one wretched, assert that it proﬁts no one to
be wretched but to be happy}, ∴, assert that injustice is never more
proﬁtable than justice>}

110
David Hitchcock
In a standard box-arrow system of diagrammatic representation, the argument
is as follows:
S: A just person is happy, and an
unjust one is wretched.
S and T: Anyone who lives well is blessed
and happy and anyone who doesn’t is the
opposite
S and T: It profits no one to be wretched
but to be happy
S: Injustice is never more
profitable than justice.
live well, and an unjust one badly.
S: A just soul and a just man will
Thus this text is a complex of two simple arguments, each with two premisses,
with the conclusion of the subordinate argument identical to one premiss of the
main argument. Both Socrates and Thrasymachus independently aﬃrm each of
the ultimate premisses. It is noteworthy that Thrasymachus gives only grudging
acknowledgement of the conclusions that Socrates draws in each simple argument,
including the conclusion of a previous argument with which the quoted excerpt
begins. It is also noteworthy that the argument is reported, not advanced in his
own name by its author (Plato). This fact adds an additional level of complexity
to the text.
SUPPOSITIONAL ARGUMENTS
The preceding deﬁnition covers direct arguments to a conclusion. It needs to be ex-
panded to cover as well reductio ad absurdum arguments, suppositional arguments
with a conditional conclusion, and other arguments in which a conclusion is drawn
on the basis of an argument. The easiest way to accommodate such arguments is
to expand the concept of a premiss so that it includes not only assertives whose
content is a proposition but also arguments (which are complexes of illocutionary
acts). Consider for example Euclid’s proof that there are more than any given
[ﬁnite] number of primes:
The prime numbers are more numerous than every given number of
prime numbers.

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
111
Let the given prime numbers
be A, B, C.
I say that there
are more prime numbers than
A, B, C.
For let the least number mea-
sured [i.e.
divisible — DH] by
A, B, C be taken and let it be
DE, and let a unit DF be added
to DE. Then EF either is prime
or not.
A
B
C
D
F
E
First, let it be prime. Therefore A, B, C, EF are prime numbers dis-
covered to be more numerous than A, B, C.
Next, let EF not be prime. Therefore it is measured by some prime
number. (VII. 31) Let it be measured by the prime number G. I say
that G is the same as none of A, B, C. For if it is possible, let it be
so. A, B, C measure [i.e. are factors of — DH] DE, and therefore G
will measure DE. And it measures EF. And being a number G will
measure the unit DF, which is absurd. Therefore G is not the same
as one of A, B, C. And therefore it is supposed that G is not the same
as one of A, B, C; and it is supposed prime. Therefore A, B, C, G are
prime numbers discovered to be more numerous than A, B, C; which
it was necessary to prove. (Euclid, Elements IX.20; translation by the
present author)
Euclid’s proof is a simple argument with several layers of embedding. It can be
represented in the standard notation for sets and sequences as follows:
<assert that the prime numbers are more numerous than every given
number of prime numbers, ∵, {<{suppose that the given prime num-
bers are A, B, C; suppose that the least number measured by A, B, C
is taken; suppose that the least number measured by A, B, C is DE;
suppose that a unit DF is added to DE}, ∴suppose that EF either is
prime or not>, <{suppose that EF either is prime or not, <{suppose
that EF is prime}, ∴, suppose that A, B, C, EF are prime numbers
discovered to be more numerous than A, B, C >, < {{ <{suppose that
EF is not prime, assert VII.31}, ∴, suppose that EF is measured by
some prime number>, <{suppose that EF is measured by some prime
number}, ∴, suppose that EF is measured by the prime number G >,
<{suppose that G is the same as one of A, B, C, suppose that A, B, C
measure DE}, ∴, suppose that G will measure DE >, <{suppose that
EF is measured by the prime number G, suppose that G will measure
DE, suppose that G is a number}, ∴, suppose that G will measure the
unit DF >}, assert that it is absurd that G measures the unit DF}, ∴,

112
David Hitchcock
suppose that G is not the same as one of A, B, C >, <suppose that G is
not the same as one of A, B, C}, ∴, suppose that A, B, C, G are prime
numbers discovered to be more numerous than A, B, C >}}, ∴, suppose
that the prime numbers are more numerous than A, B, C >}}>
The outermost argument supports a universal generalization with an argument
that an arbitarily chosen instance has the property of interest. This embedded
argument is an argument by cases, whose premisses are a supposition about what
the two cases are (supported by a sub-argument) and two embedded arguments
reaching the desired conclusion for each case. The argument for the ﬁrst case is
very simple. The second is complex, with a main premiss supported by a reductio
ad absurdum argument which is the heart of the proof. We can diagram the whole
argument as in the diagram on the next page.
Thus allowing arguments to be premisses permits one to represent in a uni-
form way generalizations from a result proved for an arbitrarily chosen instance,
proofs by cases, and reductio ad absurdum arguments. Similarly one can represent
proofs by conditional reasoning, as in Saint Anselm’s ontological argument for the
existence of God:
Truly there is a God, although the fool has said in his heart,
There is no God.
AND so, Lord, do you, who do give understanding to faith, give me,
so far as you knowest it to be proﬁtable, to understand that you are
as we believe; and that you are that which we believe. And indeed,
we believe that you are a being than which nothing greater can be
conceived. Or is there no such nature, since the fool has said in his
heart, there is no God? [Psalms xiv, 1]. But, at any rate, this very
fool, when he hears of this being of which I speak — a being than
which nothing greater can be conceived — understands what be hears,
and what he understands is in his understanding; although he does
not understand it to exist.... Hence, even the fool is convinced that
something exists in the understanding, at least, than which nothing
greater can be conceived. For, when he hears of this, he understands
it. And whatever is understood, exists in the understanding.
And assuredly that, than which nothing greater can be conceived, can-
not exist in the understanding alone. For, suppose it exists in the un-
derstanding alone: then it can be conceived to exist in reality; which
is greater. Therefore, if that, than which nothing greater can be con-
ceived, exists in the understanding alone, the very being, than which
nothing greater can be conceived, is one, than which a greater can be
conceived. But obviously this is impossible.
Hence, there is no doubt that there exists a being, than which nothing
greater can be conceived, and it exists both in the understanding and
in reality. ([Anselm, Proslogium 2], Deane’s translation; paragraphing
altered to facilitate understanding)

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
113
The prime numbers are more numerous than every given number of prime numbers.
Suppose that EF 
either is prime or not.
Suppose
numbers
given 
that the
are
Suppose that
are prime numbers
discovered to be 
more numeruous
Suppose
is prime.
Suppose
that a 
is added
Suppose
that the
least
number
measured
is taken.
Suppose
that the
least
number 
measured
Suppose that G is not the
same as one of A, B, C.
Suppose that
measured by 
the prime
Suppose
measure 
Suppose
measures
Suppose that
measured
by some
prime number.
Suppose
the same as
one of
Suppose
is a 
number.
Suppose
not prime.
VII. 31 (Every
composite number
is measured by some
prime number.)
Suppose that the prime numbers are more numerous than A, B, C.
Suppose that A, B, C, G  are prime numbers
discovered to be more numerous than A, B, C
It is absurd that G measures the unit DF.
Suppose that G will measure the unit DF.
that E F 
than A, B, C.
A, B, C, EF 
unit DF
to DE.
A, B, C.
by A, B, C
by A, B, C
is DE.
EF is 
number G.
that G 
DE.
DE.
that A, B, C
that G
that G is
A, B, C.
that EF is
E is 

114
David Hitchcock
Anselm’s argument can be represented in the notation of sets and sequences as fol-
lows: {<{assert that God is a being than which nothing greater can be conceived,
assert that the fool has said in his heart there is no God, assert that when he hears
of this he understands it, assert that whatever is understood exists in the under-
standing}, ∴, assert that something exists in the understanding, at least, than
which nothing greater can be conceived>, {<{<{suppose that that than which
nothing greater can be conceived exists in the understanding alone}, ∴, suppose
that that than which nothing greater can be conceived can be conceived to exist
in reality as well as in the understanding>, assert that it is greater to exist in
reality than to exist in the understanding alone}, ∴, assert that if that than which
nothing greater can be conceived exists in the understanding alone the very being
than which nothing greater can be conceived is one than which a greater can be
conceived>, <{assert that if that than which nothing greater can be conceived
exists in the understanding alone the very being than which nothing greater can
be conceived is one than which a greater can be conceived, assert that it is im-
possible that the very being than which nothing greater can be conceived is one
than which a greater can be conceived}, ∴, assert that that than which nothing
greater can be conceived cannot exist in the understanding alone>}, <{assert that
something exists in the understanding, at least, than which nothing greater can
be conceived, assert that that than which nothing greater can be conceived cannot
exist in the understanding alone}, ∴, assert that there exists a being than which
nothing greater can be conceived and it exists both in the understanding and in
reality>}.
Diagrammatically, Anselm’s argument looks as in the diagram on the next page.
The main argument has two premisses, each an assertion. The ﬁrst main premiss
is supported by a simple argument with four premisses, each an assertion. The
second main premiss is supported immediately by two premisses, one an assertion
of a conditional and the other an assertion of the impossibility of its consequent.
The assertion of the conditional is in turn supported by two premisses, one of
them an argument from the supposition of the antecedent of the conditional to a
suppositional conclusion and the other an assertion.
The approach of allowing arguments as premisses also permits one to represent
proofs by mathematical induction in the same uniform way.
FIRST SUMMARY
In summary, one can integrate the foregoing considerations into a single recursive
deﬁnition of an argument, as follows:
1. Any set of the form {⟨c, ∵, P⟩} or {⟨P, ∴, c⟩} is an argument, where the
conclusion c is a speech act of any type, ∵is a premiss indicator, ∴is a
conclusion indicator, and the set P of premisses is a set of one or more
assertives.

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
115
There exists a being than which nothing greater can be conceived, 
and it exists both in the understanding and in reality.
That than which nothing greater 
can be conceived cannot exist in 
the understanding alone.
Something exists in the 
understanding at least than which 
nothing greater can be conceived.
God is a being
than which 
nothing greater
can be 
conceived.
The fool has
said in his
heart there
is no
God
When the fool
hears that 
there is no 
God he 
Whatever is
understood
exists in the
understanding.
It is impossible that the very
being than which nothing 
greater can be conceived is
one than which a greater 
can be conceived.
If that than which nothing greater can be
conceived exists in the understanding
alone, the very being than which nothing
greater can be conceived is one than
which a greater can be conceived.
Suppose that that than which nothing greater
can be conceived  can be conceived to exist
 in reality as well as in the understanding. 
Suppose that that than which nothing greater
alone.
can be conceived exists in the understanding
understands it.
It is greater to exist
in reality than in
the understanding.

116
David Hitchcock
2. Any set equivalent in meaning to a set of the form described in clause 1 is
an argument.
3. If a conclusion in an argument A is a premiss in an argument B, then A ∪B
is an argument.
4. If {⟨P, ∴, c⟩} is an argument, and A is an argument, then so are {⟨A ∪P, ∴, c⟩}
and {⟨A, ∴, c⟩}. Similarly for {⟨c, ∵, P⟩}.
5. Nothing is an argument unless it can be constructed in a ﬁnite number of
steps using the above rules.
COMPETING CONCEPTIONS OF ARGUMENT
To appreciate the force of the preceding deﬁnition, one can compare it to recent
thematic discussions of the concept of argument.
Charles Hamblin in his classic chapter “The concept of argument” [1970, 224–
252] develops an account of what an argument is from the generally agreed con-
ception of an argument as “whatever it is that is typically expressed by the form
of words ‘P, therefore Q’, ‘P, and so Q’, ‘P, hence Q’; or, perhaps, ‘Q, since
P’, ‘Q, because P”’, and cites Whately’s Elements of Logic [1848] for the stan-
dard terminology of “premisses” for whatever is expressed by P in such forms and
“conclusion” for whatever is expressed by Q [228]. He approaches indirectly the
task of saying what is typically expressed by such forms of words, through the
question of what constitutes a good argument. This question he addresses dialec-
tically, ﬁrst enunciating a set of “alethic” criteria based on the concept of truth,
then overcoming their inadequacy by shifting to a set of epistemic criteria based
on the concept of knowledge, and then in turn overcoming the inadequacy of the
epistemic criteria by shifting to the following set of dialectical criteria based on
the concept of acceptance (by a single person or by a group of persons):
(D1)
The premisses must be accepted.
(D2,3) The passage from premisses to conclusion must be of an ac-
cepted kind.
(D4)
Unstated premisses must be of a kind that are accepted as omis-
sible.
(D5)
The conclusion must be such that, in the absence of the argu-
ment, it would not be accepted. [Hamblin, 1970, 245], italics in original)
Hamblin does not say in so many words what account of argument these criteria
imply. If we assume that the criteria for a good argument, like the criteria for
a good pruning knife or for a good eye, are those that are jointly suﬃcient and
individually necessary for it to do its work well, then Hamblin’s criteria imply
that an argument has as its function to secure acceptance of its conclusion by its
addressee(s) on the basis of acceptance of its premisses. Thus we may attribute
to Hamblin a deﬁnition of an argument as an attempt to get one or more people

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
117
to accept an expressed conclusion Q by adducing in its support some premisses
P. This deﬁnition is more restrictive than the conception advanced by the present
author in this chapter, in at least three respects.
First, it covers only simple
arguments, not complex ones. Second, it does not explicitly allow an argument
to be a premiss. Third, and most importantly, it restricts arguments to a single
function: considerations for and against a certain decision that one rehearses to
oneself do not count as arguments, nor is there any allowance for arguments de-
signed to prove or justify their conclusion, where acceptance is not enough and
perhaps not even necessary. Hamblin’s deﬁnition diﬀers from the preceding con-
ception in at least two additional respects. Rather curiously, he does not treat a
linguistic communication of the form “P, therefore Q” as an argument; rather, an
argument for him is what such a form of words expresses, i.e. some sort of abstract
object, whose components and ontological status he does not specify. In addition,
he makes no allowance for modal qualiﬁcation of premisses and conclusions, e.g.
in suppositional arguments.
Douglas Walton [1990, 411] proposes to deﬁne argument as
a social and verbal means of trying to resolve, or at least contend with,
a conﬂict or diﬀerence that has arisen between two (or more) parties.
An argument necessarily involves a claim that is advanced by at least
one of the parties.
This deﬁnition ﬁts the disputational sense of “argument” much better than the
reason-giving sense. It includes among arguments verbal exchanges of conﬂicting
claims (A: Yes, you did. B: No, I didn’t.) in which the parties give no supporting
reasons.
It excludes written texts whose authors provide reasons to support a
claim that nobody has ever questioned or rejected, for example, mathematical
proofs of theorems which nobody has previously thought about. It also excludes
discourses in which a speaker makes a case for a claim that the listeners already
accept, as a way of reinforcing the adherence of the audience to the claim (as in
preaching to the converted). There may be a point to focusing theoretically on
verbal expressions of conﬂict, but it would be less confusing to use some other
word than “argument” for them. Perhaps “disputation” would be a better word.
Robert Pinto [2001b], as already noted, distinguishes inference, “the mental
act or event in which a person draws a conclusion from premisses, or arrives at
a conclusion on the basis of a body of evidence” [32], from argument, initially
characterized as “a set of statements or propositions that one person oﬀers to
another in the attempt to induce that other person to accept some conclusion”
[32]. The success of such an attempt, he points out, is not just a matter of its
causing its addressee(s) to accept its conclusion; for example, if someone concedes
the conclusion merely out of exhaustion from an argument’s overwhelming length
and complexity, then the argument has not persuaded this addressee to accept
its conclusion. What is crucial is that the addressee make the mental inference
that corresponds to the move in the argument from premisses to conclusion. Thus
“arguments are invitations to inference” [Pinto, 2001b, 37]. This conception of

118
David Hitchcock
argument has been central to the development of the deﬁnition proposed in this
chapter. But Pinto’s conception diﬀers from the present deﬁnition in that it treats
arguments as products with a particular purpose (to get the addressee to accept
the conclusion) rather than as abstract objects that might be used for various
purposes.
Ralph Johnson proposes the following deﬁnition:
An argument is a type of discourse or text — the distillate of the
practice of argumentation — in which the arguer seeks to persuade the
Other(s) of the truth of a thesis by producing the reasons that support
it. In addition to this illative core, an argument possesses a dialectical
tier in which the arguer discharges his dialectical obligations. [Johnson,
2000, 168]
The practice of argumentation to which Johnson refers in this deﬁnition he deﬁnes
as “the sociocultural activity of constructing, presenting, interpreting, criticizing,
and revising arguments.” [Johnson, 2000, 12, 154] The present author has argued,
and Johnson has apparently accepted [Johnson, 2002, 313], that his intention is
best captured by adding to this deﬁnition of the practice the qualifying phrase “for
the purpose of reaching a rationally shared position on some issue” [Hitchcock,
2002, 291]. Further, to avoid the circularity of deﬁning arguments in terms of
argumentation and argumentation in terms of arguments, Johnson must recognize
explicitly in his deﬁnition of argument (as he does implicitly elsewhere in his
book) that arguments occur in contexts other than that of argumentation. The
following revision of Johnson’s deﬁnition of argument, intended to meet this and
other diﬃculties, is one that Johnson apparently accepts [Johnson, 2002, 313]:
An argument is a spoken discourse or written text whose author (the ar-
guer) seeks to persuade an intended audience or readership (the Other
or the Others) to accept a thesis by producing reasons in support of it.
In addition to this illative core, an argument possesses a dialectical tier
in which the arguer discharges his dialectical obligations. [Hitchcock,
2002, 289]
The dialectical obligations to which Johnson refers are obligations to address ob-
jections to and criticisms of the illative core and to consider alternative positions.
In response to criticism of his controversial requirement that arguments must have
a dialectical tier, Johnson has clariﬁed his position: not all arguments have a di-
alectical tier, but “the paradigm case of an argument — the one that we should
base our theories on and make policies over — is that in which there is both illative
core and dialectical tier” [Johnson, 2002, 316]. The deﬁnition of argument pro-
posed in the present chapter clearly diﬀers from Johnson’s deﬁnition in treating
arguers’ discharge of their dialectical obligations as extrinsic to their actual argu-
ment. The exclusion of such dialectical material from arguments proper conforms
to our ordinary usage of the term “argument”, and is compatible with Johnson’s

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
119
insistence that arguers have a responsibility to discharge their dialectical obliga-
tions. It might be better to use the word “case” for the whole complex consisting
of an argument and its dialectical penumbra.
Johnson’s deﬁnition diﬀers from the deﬁnition proposed in this chapter in at
least two additional respects. It restricts arguments to actual discourses or texts
rather than considering them as abstract objects that may be unexpressed. And it
requires that their authors have as their purpose to persuade an intended recipient
to accept a thesis on the basis of the reasons supplied, whereas the deﬁnition pro-
posed in the present chapter leaves undetermined the purpose for which someone
might express an argument. In defence of the latter position, one might point out
that it is possible to include an argument as part of a joke, or that scholars and
scientists who make a case for some position in academic writing may be more
concerned to get on the record a solid justiﬁcation of the position than to actually
persuade any particular person or persons to accept it. In general, then, there is
a variety of purposes for which people express arguments.
J. Anthony Blair [2004] construes arguments as reasons for something: for be-
liefs or for believing, for attitudes or for emotions, or for decisions about what to
do. A set of propositions is a reason for something if and only if they actually
support it. Blair justiﬁes his abstract conception by pointing out that arguments
as we ordinarily understand them have many uses — not just persuasion, but
also quasi-persuasion, inquiry, deliberation, justiﬁcation, collaboration, rationale-
giving, ediﬁcation, instruction and evaluation. Hence it distorts our ordinary un-
derstanding of arguments to build into the deﬁnition of argument some particular
purpose such as persuasion or the resolution of a conﬂict of opinion.
Blair’s general approach of treating an argument as an abstract object that can
be used for various purposes corresponds to the approach of the present chapter, as
does his catholicity about the types of objects that can serve as conclusions of an
argument. It diﬀers from the approach of the present chapter in that it requires
that the premisses of an argument actually support its conclusion, and indeed
that none of the premisses is superﬂuous. He recognizes that people sometimes
oﬀer as a reason some consideration that does not in fact support the conclusion
drawn from it.
On his view, such people take themselves to be advancing an
argument, but in fact they are not doing so. The term “argument” thus acquires
a normative force, something like the force that the term “art” or “music” has in
some people’s usage. Blair’s restriction of arguments to structures in which the
premisses actually support their conclusion clearly departs from our actual use of
the term “argument”. Further, it is theoretically awkward, since informal logic
deals with the identiﬁcation, analysis, evaluation and criticism of inferentially bad
arguments as well as inferentially good ones. What name then will Blair use for its
subject-matter? The restriction of arguments to inferentially good ones appears to
be motivated by Blair’s treatment of an argument as a set, one of whose members
is the conclusion and the rest of which are the premisses. Without a requirement
that the premisses actually support the conclusion, every set of propositions would
count as an argument — a classiﬁcation clearly at odds with our ordinary usage.

120
David Hitchcock
The present chapter avoids such an overly broad conception by treating a (simple)
argument as a sequence, with an illative as well as premisses and conclusion. It
also diﬀers from Blair’s conception in allowing complex arguments and in allowing
an argument to be a premiss.
EXCLUSIONS FROM THE CLASS OF ARGUMENTS
Further clariﬁcation of the force of the deﬁnition of argument proposed in the
present chapter should emerge from a consideration of the sorts of objects that
the deﬁnition excludes as not being arguments.
First, not all persuasive communication counts as an argument in the sense
deﬁned. Students of persuasion commonly accept the distinction already pointed
by Aristotle (Rhetoric I.2.1356a1-20) of a variety of means of persuasion: char-
acter, emotion, argument (in Greek ˆethos, pathos, logos). Presentation of oneself
as having a certain character may enhance the credibility of what one says, but
it is not an argument in the sense deﬁned in the present chapter, since it lacks
a premiss-conclusion structure. For the same reason, stirring up the emotions of
one’s audience is not in itself an argument, even though it may be more eﬀective
than argument at moving them, and even though it can be combined with argu-
ment. Talk of “ethotic argument” and “pathetic argument” blurs an important
distinction among diﬀerent means of persuasion.
Similarly, not all advertising
contains arguments. Some advertising, for example legal advertising, is purely in-
formative. But even persuasive advertising often works by presenting the product
or service in an appealing manner, by creating associations through visual imagery,
or by providing detailed information about it. Only advertising with an explicit
premiss-conclusion structure counts as an argument according to the deﬁnition of
the present chapter.
Second, insinuation is not argument. Although someone who insinuates some-
thing invites the hearer or reader to draw a conclusion from their words, the words
themselves do not draw that conclusion. One can of course identify and discuss the
argument that the insinuator invites us to construct for ourselves. Typically, how-
ever, this argument is rather indeterminate, precisely because insinuation merely
suggests.
Third, some visual, emotional, visceral and kisceral communication is argumen-
tative. But some is not, even if it has a persuasive function. Images can supplement
written words as part of an argument. The drawings of lines that accompany Eu-
clid’s proof that there are more primes than any given number of primes enhance
one’s understanding of the suppositions he makes and of the construction that is
at the heart of the proof; they can be interpreted as a visual repetition of what
is written in words.
A diagram of an experimental apparatus serves a similar
function of supplementing a parallel verbal description in the methods section of
a scientiﬁc paper. Visual images can also function as ineliminable components of
an argument. A poster with a giant photograph of a starving emaciated child and
the words “make poverty history” can reasonably be construed as an argument

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
121
in the sense deﬁned in this chapter; its premiss is the situation exhibited in the
photograph, whose information content has components that no purely verbal de-
scription can supply, and its conclusion is the directive of the written text. But
visual images that merely suggest a conclusion to be drawn by the viewer are
not arguments in the sense deﬁned in this chapter, because they do not contain a
conclusion. Similarly, emotional expressions can have a persuasive eﬀect without
being part of an argument; for example, a conciliatory tone of voice may help per-
suade someone to calm down, but it is not part of an argument unless the speaker
in so many words urges the addressee to calm down and states some reason for
her or him to do so. Likewise with visceral communication; a threatening gesture
may persuade someone to accede to some implied request, but it becomes part of
an argument only when the gesturer says, “Your money or your life”, or words to
that eﬀect. As for Gilbert’s “kisceral” mode, it is debatable whether the intuitions
or hunches to which it refers are communicative devices, as opposed to a type of
evidence analogous to direct observation. Of course, persons may cite their intu-
itive feeling as a reason for a certain belief or decision, but in that case the premiss
is the assertion that they have this feeling, rather than the feeling itself.
SECOND SUMMARY
To sum up, this chapter has proposed a deﬁnition of an argument as a set of one
or more interlinked premiss-illative-conclusion sequences. Such sequences can be
interlinked either through chaining together, when the conclusion of one sequence
is a premiss of another, or through embedding, when one sequence is a premiss
of another. A premiss is an assertive, conceived as not necessarily asserted by
anyone, and a conclusion is a speech act of any type, conceived as not necessarily
performed by anyone or urged upon any addressee. In other words, arguments
are abstract structures. When expressed, whether in language or in images or in
physical behaviour, an argument invites its addressees to accept each conclusion on
the basis of the acceptance of the assertives in its immediately supporting reasons.
POSTSCRIPT
The following is a list of some questions about arguments investigated within
informal logic, with some references to the relevant literature:
1.
On argument identiﬁcation
How can one determine whether there is an argument in a spoken discourse, written
text or other human communication?
In particular, what is the diﬀerence between an argument and a causal explana-
tion? How can one tell in particular cases whether an indicator word like because
or hence is being used inferentially or causally or both?
2.
On argument analysis

122
David Hitchcock
What are the components of an argument? The standard view, incorporated in
the deﬁnition of argument in this chapter, is that a simple argument has two types
of components, the premisses and a conclusion, possibly linked by an illative. An
alternative to this view, widely adopted in the ﬁeld of speech communication, is the
model of Stephen Toulmin for the “layout of arguments” [Toulmin, 1958], accord-
ing to which a simple argument has six components: claim, data (later grounds),
warrant, backing, modal qualiﬁer, rebuttal. Another proposal, advanced by Rolf
George [George, 1983] on the basis of Bolzano’s conception of consequence in his
1837 Wissenschaftslehre, is that a fully speciﬁed simple argument has three com-
ponents: premisses, conclusion, and variands; the variands are those parts of the
premisses and conclusion that are subject to variation in determining whether the
conclusion is a consequence of the premisses. Still another proposal, due to Ralph
Johnson [2000], is that an argument has not only the premisses and conclusion
of its “illative core” but also a dialectical tier in which the arguer responds to
objections to and criticisms of the illative core and addresses alternative positions.
In what ways can two or more premisses oﬀer direct support to a single conclu-
sion? What test should be used to determine how the premisses of a multi-premiss
simple argument support the conclusion? Beardsley introduced the concept of a
convergent argument as one where “several independent reasons support the same
conclusion” [Beardsley, 1950, 19]. For Beardsley, however, a reason could consist
of several premisses working together. To mark an argument with such a multi-
premiss reason, Thomas introduced the concept of a linked argument, deﬁned as
one that “involves several reasons [i.e. premisses — DH], each of which is helped
by the others to support the conclusion” [Thomas, 1973]. Although the distinction
seems intuitively clear, diﬀerent authors have proposed diﬀerent tests for deter-
mining whether a multi-premiss simple argument is linked or convergent, and these
tests give diﬀerent results from one another and in some cases from our intuitive
judgements about particular arguments. Walton [1996a, 109–150] distinguishes
ﬁve types of tests and skilfully displays the diﬀerent classiﬁcations that they pro-
duce for a number of cases of argument and the diﬃculties for each type of test.
For simplicity, he deﬁnes these tests for a two-premiss simple argument, but the
deﬁnitions can easily be extrapolated to simple arguments with more than two
premisses. The (necessary and suﬃcient) conditions for a two-premiss argument
to be linked are as follows:
Falsity/no support: Each premiss by itself gives no support to the conclusion if
the other premiss is false.
Suspension/insuﬃcient proof : Each premiss by itself gives insuﬃcient support to
prove the conclusion if the other premiss is suspended, i.e. taken as not proved or
not known to be true.
Falsity/insuﬃcient proof : Each premiss by itself gives insuﬃcient support to prove
the conclusion if the other premiss is false.
Suspension/no support: Each premiss by itself gives no support to the conclusion
if the other premiss is suspended, i.e. taken as not proved or not known to be

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
123
true.
Degrees of support: The premisses together make the overall strength of the argu-
ment much greater than they would considered separately.
A sixth test not mentioned by Walton is due to Vorobej [1994]:
Type reduction upon elimination (TRUE): The argument is of a diﬀerent type,
with weaker support for the conclusion, if a premiss is eliminated.
A particularly diﬃcult type of argument to classify as linked or convergent is
what Walton [1996a, 130–134] calls an “evidence-accumulating” argument, where
each premiss by itself gives some support to the conclusion but the combination
of premisses gives more support. An example is the accumulation of symptoms
and signs supporting a physician’s diagnosis of a particular patient. On some tests
such arguments come out linked, on others convergent. Some authors (e.g. Snoeck
Henkemans 1992) distinguish the cumulative support exhibited by such arguments
as a third type distinct from either linked or convergent support. Vorobej [1995]
notes that some two-premiss simple arguments come out linked if a given test is
applied to one premiss and convergent if the test is applied to the other premiss;
he calls these hybrid arguments.
What standard forms can be used to represent the structure of complex ar-
gumentation? One method, carried out in detail by Maurice Finocchiaro in his
analysis of Galileo’s Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems [Finoc-
chiaro, 1980] and found with variations in many textbooks, is to use a numbering
system that indicates the support relationships claimed in the text — for example,
C for the main conclusion; 1, 2 and so on for premisses oﬀered in direct support
of C; 1.1, 1.2 and so on for premisses oﬀered in direct support of 1; and so on.
Such numbered components can be indented to exemplify visually the support
relationships, as in the following “standardization” of the argument quoted earlier
in this chapter from the end of Book I of Plato’s Republic:
1.1 A just soul and a just man will live well, and an unjust one badly.
1.2 Anyone who lives well is blessed and happy, and anyone who doesn’t
is the opposite.
1. Therefore, a just person is happy, and an unjust one wretched.
2. It proﬁts no one to be wretched but to be happy.
C. Therefore, injustice is never more proﬁtable than justice.
Such numbering systems can be extended to accommodate structures where an
argument is a premiss. Another method is to use diagrams such as the box-arrow
diagrams used in the present chapter or the diagrams in Toulmin’s The Uses of
Argument [1958]. Software is available for constructing such diagrams: for exam-
ple, Araucaria [Reed and Rowe, 2005], Athena Standard [Rolf and Magnusson,
2002] and Reason!able [Van Gelder, 2004].

124
David Hitchcock
What principles should be followed in extracting arguments from human com-
munications and putting them in a standard form or diagram? In what respects
can an analyst alter the content of an argument component, and why? What com-
ponents in the text, e.g. repeated components, can an analyst delete, and why?
What components can an analyst add, and why? In particular, under what cir-
cumstances does a communicated argument have an unstated “gap-ﬁlling” [Ennis,
1982] premiss which the analyst can add? How is it to be determined what exactly
is the unstated premiss in such a case?
Can the traditional division of arguments into deductive arguments and induc-
tive arguments be defended, and if so on what basis? Are there arguments that
ﬁt into neither category, such as arguments by analogy, balance-of-considerations
arguments (also known as pros and cons reasoning or conductive arguments [Well-
man, 1971; Govier, 1987]), means-end reasoning, abductive reasoning (also known
as inference to the best explanation), and the dozens of other types distinguished
in the literature on argumentation schemes [Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca, 1958;
1969; Ehninger and Brockriede, 1963; Hastings, 1963; Van Eemeren and Grooten-
dorst, 1992, 94–102; Kienpointner, 1992; Walton, 1996b; Grennan, 1997, 151–219]?
An inﬂuential tradition within informal logic construes arguments as advanced
in dialogue, even when there is no actual intervention by an interlocutor. What
types of dialogues are there? What is the function of each type, and what rules
govern its participants? Hamblin [1970] proposed a discipline of “formal dialectic”,
within which he thought that the fallacies tradition could be made intellectually
respectable. Van Eemeren and Grootendorst [1984; 1992; 2004] construe all argu-
ments according to the normative model of what they call a “critical discussion”.
Walton and Krabbe [1995, 66] distinguish six main pure types of dialogue, each
with its own goals: persuasion, negotiation, inquiry, deliberation, information-
seeking, eristic. They propose detailed rules for two sub-types of persuasion dia-
logues: permissive persuasion dialogues and restrictive persuasion dialogues [Wal-
ton and Krabbe, 1995, 123–172].
3.
On argument evaluation
What are the criteria for a good argument?
Hamblin [1970, 224–252] usefully
distinguishes alethic, epistemic and dialectical criteria. To these alternatives, one
should add rhetorical criteria, focused on eﬀective persuasion [Wenzel, 1980].
What objections can be raised to alethic criteria? Is truth of an argument’s
premisses even a necessary condition for it to be a good argument, let alone a
suﬃcient one?
What objections can be raised to epistemic criteria? Is there a defensible set
of epistemic criteria for a good argument? One epistemic approach, adopted by
Goldman [1999], is to adopt a “veritistic” criterion for the goodness of arguments,
according to which arguments are good insofar as they tend to lead to true con-
clusions; this approach of course applies only to arguments whose conclusions are
assertions. Another epistemic approach, adopted among others by Feldman [1994]
and by Siegel and Biro [1997], is to adopt a justiﬁcatory criterion, according to
which an argument is good insofar as its premisses justify its conclusion.

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
125
What objections can be raised to dialectical criteria? Does mere acceptance by
an interlocutor of an argument’s starting-points and inferences make the argument
a good one?
What objections can be raised to rhetorical criteria? Can one defend a basically
rhetorical approach to the evaluation of arguments?
On the deﬁnition of argument proposed in the present chapter, an argument is
an abstract structure that can be used for diﬀerent purposes. If the evaluation of
an artefact is relative to the purpose for which it is being used, then the evaluation
of an argument will also be relative to its use in a given context. What are the
diﬀerent uses to which human beings put arguments, and what criteria for a good
argument does each such use imply [Blair, 2004]?
On the argumentation schemes approach, each argumentation scheme has as-
sociated with it a set of “critical questions” that must be answered positively in
order for an argument conforming to that scheme to be a good argument. How
are these critical questions determined? What are the critical questions for each
argumentation scheme? Does a satisfactory answer to the critical questions for
a given argumentation scheme imply that the argument in question conclusively
establishes its conclusion? Or is there still room for defeat of the argument by
further information? For a given argumentation scheme, to what extent is there
a burden on the author of an argument conforming to that scheme to show that
there are positive answers to the critical questions for that scheme?
What types of defeaters are there? How is the status of an argument to be
adjudicated as a sequence of various types of defeaters, defeaters of defeaters, and
so on, is noticed?
To what extent is the author of an argument obliged to consider in a “dialectical
tier” objections, criticisms and alternative positions?
What is a fallacy? As Hamblin [1970] correctly reports, the logical tradition
assumes that it is a type of argument that merely seems valid. Hamblin himself
proposed that the study of fallacies be made part of a new discipline that he
called “formal dialectic”. A fallacy would then be a violation of the rules of a
formal dialogue game. This conception of a fallacy has been adopted in various
formulations by Van Eemeren and Grootendorst [1984; 1992; 2004], Hintikka [1987]
and Walton (e.g. [1998]). Walton has noted that fallacies often involve an illicit
shift from one type of dialogue to another, typically into a quarrel where “anything
goes”. Krabbe has extended the consideration of a fallacy as a violation of the rules
of a type of dialogue in which interlocutors are engaged, by developing “proﬁles of
dialogue” that indicate among other things the way in which charges of committing
a fallacy can be advanced and responded to [Krabbe, 1992; 1999]
How are fallacies to be classiﬁed? If a fallacy is a mistake in argumentation
of a certain type, presumably one’s taxonomy of fallacies will correspond to one’s
criteria for a good argument; for example if the individually necessary and jointly
suﬃcient conditions for a good argument are acceptability of each premiss, rel-
evance of each premiss to the conclusion drawn from it and suﬃciency of the
premisses in combination to support the conclusion [Johnson and Blair, 1993;

126
David Hitchcock
Freeman, 1991; Govier, 2005], then there will be three main types of fallacies:
fallacies of unacceptability, fallacies of irrelevance, and fallacies of insuﬃciency.
How are individual fallacies to be analysed? In particular, are argumentative
moves that have traditionally been stigmatized as fallacious sometimes legitimate?
If so, under what circumstances? In a series of papers published between 1972 and
1982, and collected in [Woods and Walton, 1989], John Woods and Douglas Wal-
ton used the tools of formal logics other than classical ﬁrst-order logic to explain a
number of argumentative moves traditionally thought to be always fallacious (argu-
mentum ad verecundiam, petitio principii, argumentum ad baculum, argumentum
ad hominem, composition, division, post hoc ergo propter hoc, ad ignorantiam,
argumentum as populum, equivocation, many questions) and to work out under
what circumstances if any they in fact amounted to a fallacy. More recently, in a
series of monographs and articles far too numerous to cite in full, Walton has used
the approach of argumentation schemes and critical questions to distinguish legit-
imate from fallacious occurrences of such moves as arguing in a circle, appealing
to popularity, and arguing against the person (see for example [Walton, 1998]).
A ﬁne selection of contemporary work on fallacies, along with some classic
historical papers, can be found in Hansen and Pinto [1995].
4.
On argument criticism
What principles should govern the expression of one’s evaluation of an argument
in the form of argument criticism? Johnson [2000, 217–248] has proposed and
argued for the following principles:
Principle of vulnerability: To be legitimate, an argument must be vulnerable to
criticism.
Principle of logical neutrality: The critic should be clear about the nature of the
criticism and should not pass oﬀsubstantive criticism as logical criticism.
Principle of parity: Any line of reasoning or argument that is legitimate for one
party to use is legitimate for the other.
Principle of discrimination: Criticisms of an argument should be balanced, kept
in perspective, and integrated. Balance requires assessment of both strengths and
weaknesses. Perspective requires that the discussion of an argument’s problems
focuses on the most important problems. Integration requires giving greatest em-
phasis to major criticisms.
5.
On argument construction
What principles should govern argument construction?
What practical advice can be given for constructing good arguments?

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
127
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am deeply grateful for comments on an earlier version of this chapter to Lilian
Bermejo-Luque, J. Anthony Blair, Inga B. Dolinina, Frans H. van Eemeren, Robert
H. Ennis, Bart Garssen, Dale Hample, Ralph H. Johnson, Mike Metcalfe, Leah E.
Polcar, Harvey Siegel and John Woods. They saved me from some embarrassing
errors, and made useful suggestions. The responsibility for errors that remain is
mine. Nor would they all agree with everything asserted in this chapter.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Anselm, 1903] Anselm, St. Proslogium; Monologium: An Appendix In Behalf Of The Fool By
Gaunilo; And Cur Deus Homo. Translated from the Latin by Sidney Norton Deane, BA, with
an introduction, bibliography, and reprints of the opinions of leading philosophers and writers
on the ontological argument. Chicago: Open Court, 1903.
[Aristotle, 1984] Aristotle. The Complete Works of Aristotle, 2 vols., the revised Oxford trans-
lation edited by Jonathan Barnes. Bollingen Series LXXI: 2. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1984.
[Austin, 1975] J. Austin. How to Do Things with Words, 2nd edition edited by J. O. Urmson and
Marina Sbis`a. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1975. First edition ﬁrst published
in 1962.
[Beardsley, 1950] M. C. Beardsley. Practical Logic. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1950.
[Blair, 2004] J. A. Blair. Argument and its uses. Informal Logic 24, 137–151, 2004.
[Blair and Johnson, 1987] J. A. Blair and R. H. Johnson. The current state of informal logic.
Informal Logic 9, 147-151, 1987.
[Bolzano, 1985–89] B. Bolzano. Wissenschaftslehre, ed. Jan Berg. In his Schriften (Stuttgart-
Bad Cannstatt: Frommann), vols. 11-13, 1985–1989. First published in 1837.
[Diogenes, 1925] Diogenes. Lives of Eminent Philosophers, with an English translation by R.
D. Hicks. 2 vols. Loeb Classical Library numbers 184 and 185. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1925. First published in the 3rd century CE (c. 210-240 CE).
[Eemeren and Grootendorst, 1984] F. H. van Eemeren and R. Grootendorst. Speech Acts in
Argumentative Discusssions: A Theoretical Model for the Analysis of Discussions Directed
towards Solving Conﬂicts of Opinion. Dordrecht-Holland / Cinnaminson-USA: Foris Publi-
cations, 1984.
[Eemeren and Grootendorst, 1992] F. H. van Eemeren and R. Grootendorst. Argumentation,
Communication and Fallacies: A Pragma-Dialectical Perspective. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, 1992.
[Eemeren and Grootendorst, 2004] F. H. van Eemeren and R. Grootendorst. A Systematic The-
ory of Argumentation: The Pragma-Dialectical Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge Universsity
Press, 2004.
[Ehninger and Brockriede, 1963] D. Ehninger and W. Brockriede.
Decision by Debate. New
York: Dodd, Mead, 1963.
[Ennis, 1982] R. H. Ennis. Identifying implicit assumptions. Synthese 51, 61-86, 1982.
[Euclid, 1969–73] Euclid. Elementa, vols. 14, ed. E. S. Stamatis (post J.L. Heiberg), 2nd edition.
Leipzig:
Teubner, 1969–1973.. First published ca. 300 BCE. Accessed via the Thesaurus
Linguae Graecae.
[Feldman, 1994] R. Feldman. Good arguments. In Frederick F Schmitt (ed.), Socializing Epis-
temology: The Social Dimensions of Knowledge, Lanham, MD, Rowman and Littleﬁeld, pp.
159–188, 1994.
[Finocchiaro, 1980] M. A. Finocchiaro. Galileo and the Art of Reasoning: Rhetorical Founda-
tions of Logic and Scientiﬁc Method. Boston: Reidel, 1980.
[Freeman, 1991] J. B. Freeman. Dialectics and the Macrostructure of Arguments: A Theory of
Argument Structure. Berlin: Foris, 1991.

128
David Hitchcock
[Galilei, 1967] Galilei, Galileo. Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, Ptolemaic
& Copernican, 2nd. edition, translated by Stillman Drake, foreword by Albert Einstein. Berke-
ley: University of California Press. 1967.
[Gelder, 2004] T. J. van Gelder. Reason!Able, 2004. Available at http://www.goreason.com/.
Visited 3 July 2005.
[George, 1983] R. George. Bolzano’s consequence, relevance, and enthymemes. Journal of Philo-
sophical Logic 12, 299-318, 1983.
[Gilbert, 1997] M. A. Gilbert. Coalescent Argumentation. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum As-
sociates, 1997.
[Goldman, 1999] A. I. Goldman. Knowledge in a Social World. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1999.
[Govier, 1987] T. Govier. Problems in Argument Analysis and Evaluation. Studies of Ar-
gumentation in Pragmatics and Discourse Analysis, 5. Dordrecht, Holland:
Mouton de
Gruyter/Foris, 1987.
[Govier, 2005] T. Govier. A Practical Study of Argument, 6th edition. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth,
2005. Previous editions published 1985, 1988, 1992, 1997, 2001.
[Grennan, 1997] W. Grennan. Informal Logic: Issues and Approaches. Montreal & Kingston:
McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1997.
[Groarke, 1996] L. Groarke. Logic, art and argument. Informal Logic 18, 116-131, 1996.
[Hamblin, 1970] C. L. Hamblin. Fallacies. New York: Methuen, 1970.
[Hansen and Pinto, 1995] H. V. Hansen and R. C. Pinto. Fallacies: Classical and Contemporary
Readings. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1995.
[Hastings, 1963] A. C. Hastings. A Reformulation of the Modes of Reasoning in Argumentation,
Ph.D. dissertation, Northwestern University, 1963.
[Hintikka, 1987] J. Hintikka. The fallacy of fallacies. Argumentation 1, 211-238, 1987.
[Hitchcock, 2002] D. Hitchcock. The practice of argumentative discussion. Argumentation 16,
287–298, 2002.
[Johnson, 2000] R. H. Johnson. Manifest Rationality: A Pragmatic Theory of Argument. Mah-
nwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2000.
[Johnson, 2002] R. H. Johnson. Manifest rationality reconsidered: reply to my fellow symposi-
asts. Argumentation 16, 311-331, 2002.
[Johnson and Blair, 1993] R. H. Johnson and J. A. Blair. Logical Self-Defense, 3rd edition.
Toronto: McGraw-Hill Ryerson, 1993. First edition published 1977, 2nd edition 1983, 1st
U.S. edition 1994.
[Johnson and Blair, 2000] R. H. Johnson and J. A. Blair. Informal logic: an overview. Informal
Logic 20, 93-107, 2000.
[Kienpointner, 1992] M. Kienpointner. Alltagslogik: Struktur und Funktion von Argumentation-
smustern. Stuttgart: FrommannHolzbog, 1992.
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W. C. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1962.
[Krabbe, 1992] E. C. W. Krabbe. So what? Proﬁles for relevance criticism in persuasion dia-
logues. Argumentation 6, 271–283, 1992.
[Krabbe, 1999] E. C. W. Krabbe. Proﬁles of dialogue. In Jelle Gerbrandy, Maarten Marx,
Maarten de Rijke, and Yde Venema (eds.), JFAK: Essays Dedicated to Johan van Ben-
them on the Occasion of his 50th Birthday, III, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press,
pp. 25–36, 1999.
[Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca, 1958] C. Perelman and L. Olbrechts-Tyteca. La nouvelle
rh´etorique. Trait´e de l’argumentation. Bruxelles: Editions de l’Universit´e de Bruxelles, 1958.
[Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca, 1969] C.
Perelman
and
L.
OlbrechtsTyteca.
The
New
Rhetoric: A Treatise on Argumentation, trans. John Wilkinson and Purcell Weaver. Notre
Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1969.
[Pinto, 2001] R. C. Pinto. Argument, Inference and Dialectic: Collected Papers on Informal
Logic with an Introduction by Hans V. Hansen. Dordrecht / Boston / London: Kluwer, 2001.
[Pinto, 2001a] R. C. Pinto. Generalizing the notion of argument. In Pinto 2001, pp. 10-20.
First published in Frans H. van Eemeren, Rob Grootendorst, J. Anthony Blair and Charles
Willard (eds.), Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Argumentation, vol.
1A (Amsterdam: SICSAT, 1991), pp. 137-146, 2001.

Informal Logic and the Concept of Argument
129
[Pinto, 2001b] R. C. Pinto. The relation of argument to inference. In Pinto 2001, pp. 32-45. First
published in Frans H. van Eemeren, Rob Grootendorst, J. Anthony Blair and Charles Willard
(eds.), Perspectives and Approaches: Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Argumentation, vol. 1 (Amsterdam: SICSAT, 1995), pp. 271-286. 2001.
[Plantin, 2003] C. Plantin. Argumentation studies in France: a new legitimacy. In Frans H. van
Eemeren, J. Anthony Blair, Charles A. Willard and A. Francisca Snoeck Henkemans (eds.),
Anyone Who Has a View: Theoretical Contributions to the Study of Argument (Dordrecht /
Boston / London: Kluwer), pp. 173–187, 2003.
[Plato, 1997] Plato. Complete Works, edited, with introduction and notes, by John Cooper,
associate editor, D. S. Hutchinson. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1997.
[Reed and Rowe, 2005] C. Reed and G. Rowe. Araucaria Version 3.0, 2005. Available at http:
//aravcaria.computing.dundee.ac.uk/. Visited 3 July 2005.
[Rolf and Magnusson, 2002] B. Rolf and C. Magnusson. . Athena Standard 2.5, 2002. Available
at http://www.athenasoft.org/sub/software.htm. Visited 3 July 2005.
[Searle, 1969] J. R. Searle. Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language. London:
Cambridge University Press, 1969.
[Searle, 1979] J. R. Searle. Expression and Meaning: Studies in the Theory of Speech Acts.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979.
[Sextus Empiricus, 1935] Sextus Empiricus. Against the Logicians, trans. R. G. Bury. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1935. First published c. 180-200 CE.
[Siegel and Biro, 1997] H. Siegel and J. Biro. Epistemic normativity, argumentation, and falla-
cies. Argumentation 11, 277-292, 1997.
[Snoeck Henkmans, 1992] A. F. Snoeck Henkemans. Analyzing Complex Argumentation. PhD
dissertation, University of Amsterdam, 1992.
[Thomas, 1973] S. N. Thomas. Practical Reasoning in Natural Language, 1st edition. Englewood
Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1973.
[Toulmin, 1958] S. Toulmin. The Uses of Argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1958.
[Vorobej, 1994] M. Vorobej. The TRUE test of linkage. Informal Logic 16, 147-157, 1994.
[Vorobej, 1995] M. Vorobej. Hybrid arguments. Informal Logic 17, 289–296, 1995.
[Walton, 1990] D. N. Walton. What is reasoning? What is an argument? Journal of Philosophy
87, 399-419, 1990.
[Walton, 1996a] D. N. Walton. Argument Structure: A Pragmatic Theory. Toronto: University
of Toronto Press, 1996.
[Walton, 1996b] D. N. Walton. Argumentation Schemes for Presumptive Reasoning. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1996.
[Walton, 1998] D. N. Walton. Ad Hominem Arguments. Tuscaloosa and London: University of
Alabama Press, 1998.
[Walton and Krabbe, 1995] D. N. Walton E. C. W. Krabbe. Commitment in Dialogue: Basic
Concepts of Interpersonal Reasoning. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1995.
[Wellman, 1971] C. Wellman. Challenge and Response: Justiﬁcation in Ethics. Carbondale, IL:
Southern Illinois University Press, 1971.
[Wenzel, 1990] J. W. Wenzel. Three perspectives on argument: Rhetoric, dialectic, logic. In
J. Schuetz & R. Trapp (eds.), Perspectives on argumentation: Essays in honor of Wayne
Brockriede (Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland), 9–26, 1990.
[Whately, 1848] R. Whately. Elements of Logic, 9th edition. London: Longmans, 1848. First
edition published 1826.
[Woods and Walton, 1989] J. Woods and D. N. Walton. Fallacies: Selected Papers 1972-1982.
Dordrecht, Holland and Providence, RI: Foris, 1989.


ON THE RELATION OF INFORMAL
TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
Dale Jacquette
The distinction between formal and informal logic is clariﬁed as a prelude to
considering their ideal relation.
Aristotle’s syllogistic describes forms of valid
inference, and is in that sense a formal logic. The square of opposition and rules
of middle term distribution of positive or negative propositions in an argument’s
premises and conclusion, in contrast, are generally understood as devices of so-
called informal logic and critical reasoning. I propose a more exact criterion for
distinguishing between formal and informal logic, and then defend a model for
fruitful interaction between informal and symbolic methods of investigating and
critically assessing the logic of arguments.
1
A STRANGE DICHOTOMY
In the history of logic a division between formal and informal methods has emerged.
The distinction is not always sharply drawn, and there are theoretical disagree-
ments with practical implications about the logical techniques that should be clas-
siﬁed as formal or informal, and about the scope and limits and paradigms of each
of these two main categories of logic.
The distinction arises because of unresolved questions about how logical rela-
tions are best expressed. At its furthest extremes, the distinction manifests itself
as a diﬀerence of ideology and methodology between practitioners of the most
highly formalized symbolic mathematical logics and the purely informal treatment
of logical inference in the rhetoric of argumentation, using primarily the discur-
sive resources of ordinary language while avoiding formal logical or mathematical
symbolisms.
The polemics associated with disputes between formal and informal logicians
are instructive even when they are not especially worthy of imitation. Formal lo-
gicians of a radical stripe often dismiss informal logical techniques as insuﬃciently
rigorous, precise, or general in scope, while their equally vehement counterparts in
the informal logic camp typically regard algebraic logic and set theoretical seman-
tics as nothing more than an empty formalism lacking both theoretical signiﬁcance
and practical application when not informed by the informal logical content that
formal logicians pretend to despise. Anyone who has spent time working in formal
or informal logic, and certainly those who have crossed over from time to time to
try their hand at both styles of logic or associated with outspoken members of
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

132
Dale Jacquette
each side should have direct anecdotal experience of the polarization among some
formal and informal logicians.
I do not insist that the antagonism between formal and informal logicians can-
not be friendly and respectful, although I suspect that unfortunately it is often
something less. There is no reason for example why a healthy intellectual rivalry
between formal and informal logicians should not be fostered. A properly man-
aged division of labor might promote advances on both sides in the sort of free
market competition of ideas that can help logic to ﬂourish. Such is evidently the
case with respect to the tolerance among logicians and mathematicians of diﬀer-
ences between classical and intuitionistic and other nonstandard logics, Euclidean
and non-Euclidean geometry, and even more prosaic distinctions of method such
as that between axiomatic and natural deduction techniques in symbolic logic.
The impression is inescapable, however, that the current situation in logic with its
deep-seated bifurcation between formal and informal methods is in this regard far
less than ideal. The division is something more like that described by C.P. Snow
in his landmark discussion of The Two Cultures.1 The analogy is appropriate in
so many ways that the distinction between formal and informal logic may turn
out to be just a special instance of the bifurcation of science and the humanities
described by Snow, with formal logicians falling on the same side as the exact
sciences, and informal logic ﬁnding its natural home among the humanities.
Now I am struck by the division between formal and informal logic as constitut-
ing a strange dichotomy. Since I consider myself to be both a formal and informal
logician, I see the formal and informal logical extremes as two complementary poles
along a continuum that insensibly grade oﬀinto one another without a deﬁnite
boundary, and hence as oﬀering no clearcut basis for partisanship. I agree with
the informal logicians’ claim that symbolic logic by itself is an empty formalism
that needs to have a content supplied by informal reasoning. But I also agree
with formal logicians when they complain that purely informal logic is often too
blunt an instrument to handle sophisticated problems involving complex logical
relations, and that informal reasoning can sometimes overlook logical problems
and solutions that formal logic is uniquely able to reveal. I am inclined on prag-
matic grounds, therefore, to accept whatever logical methods are best suited for
my analytic purposes in trying to understand diﬀerent types of logical problems. I
think it is only reasonable, as a result, not to stand on any exclusionary principle
in confronting the logic of arguments, but to adopt a style of doing logic that ap-
pears to work best in formulating ideas and testing inferences, in expressing and
critically analyzing concepts and arguments, and generally speaking as a guide to
good thinking.
I assume that just as there are adversaries who gravitate toward one side of
the formal-informal logic distinction in dialectical opposition to the other, so there
must also be many others like myself who prefer a principled compromise between
the two extremes, who hope that formal and informal logic can work together in
a productive partnership. It is to give substance to this potential for integrating
1[Snow, 1964].

On the Relation of Informal to Symbolic Logic
133
formal and informal logic that I propose ﬁrst to oﬀer a more exact criterion of the
distinction between formal and informal logic, and then to defend a model for the
fruitful interaction between formal and informal logical methods.
2
TOWARD A DEFINITION OF FORMAL AND INFORMAL LOGIC
If the attempt to ﬁnd middle ground between exclusionary formal and informal
logic programs is to succeed, then the ﬁrst task is to clarify the concepts of formal
and informal logic themselves. Then it may be possible to describe a way of recon-
ciling formal and informal logical techniques in a more comprehensive philosophy
of logic.
The concepts of formal and informal logic are best approached by beginning with
some faulty attempts at deﬁnition, and trying to understand exactly how and why
they go wrong. We have already observed that Aristotle’s logic of syllogisms with
its rules for valid inferences and square of opposition is a kind of formal logic, even
though it is usually classiﬁed as a branch of informal logic.
The same is true of Beardsley argument diagramming and Venn, Euler, and
Lewis Carroll diagramming. These methods of representing the structure and as-
sessing the deductive validity especially of syllogistic arguments involving Boolean
relations as set theoretical inclusions or exclusions of entities in the extensions
of predicates intuitively concern the formal logical properties of propositions and
arguments. The use of schematic variables, mathematically regimented syntax,
and graphic or set theoretical semantic techniques, moreover, are not necessary to
distinguish formal from informal logics. A formal logic in one sense can always be
presented in ordinary albeit stinted English. The connections are explicit at least
in simple cases. We see this clearly in the eﬀort to formulate in symbolic logic an
expression such as (∃x)(F = λy[□(y = x)]), and in articulating in nonsymbolic but
still formal terms the equivalent proposition that ‘There exists an entity such that
a certain property is identical to the abstract property of being necessarily iden-
tical to the entity’. In the English paraphrase there is no ‘formalism’ or symbolic
notation as usually understood; yet the phrase as much describes formal relations
as does the more straightforwardly ‘formal’ symbolism containing the existential
quantiﬁer, identity sign, lambda operator, modal necessity operator, parentheses
and brackets. All such elements are legitimately part of formal logic insofar as
they involve logical forms of relations and logical forms of arguments, regardless
of whether they are written in a special symbolic notation or in modiﬁed English.
It is tempting in light of these conclusions to consider eliminating the distinc-
tion between formal and informal logic altogether. This is an attractive option
if we interpret all of logic as involving the forms and structures of syntax, se-
mantic relations, and argumentive patterns. Then, while the term ‘logical form’
remains to designate a special kind of form, the phrase ‘formal logic’ is technically
redundant. It may then be preferable to substitute the terminology of symbolic-
nonsymbolic logic for the formal-informal logic distinction. The disadvantage of
such an approach is that the distinction between formal and informal logic is well-

134
Dale Jacquette
entrenched in logicians’ parlance.
Arguably, we do less violence to established
usage if in good linguistic conscience we maintain the formal-informal logic vo-
cabulary by providing acceptable deﬁnitions of ‘formal’ and ‘informal’ logic. The
trouble is that I am not at all sure that there can be a satisfactory deﬁnition of
the distinction between formal and informal logic that is both intuitively correct
and fully in agreement with current terminology. The reason for this skepticism
is that established linguistic practice among logicians is itself not entirely correct.
I shall accordingly try to negotiate a commonsense compromise that distinguishes
between formal and informal logic in a way that does not exactly conform to the
standard convention, but that I think many and perhaps even most logicians on
both sides of the distinction may ﬁnd acceptable.
My suggestion is to distinguish between formal and informal logic by apply-
ing the arguably less controversial because criteriologically better-deﬁned distinc-
tion between specialized symbolic versus nonspecialized nonsymbolic logic. More
speciﬁcally, I propose that a logical theory or procedure is formal if and only if
it adopts a specialized symbolism for representing logical forms that does not oc-
cur in ordinary nonspecialized nonsymbolic thought and language. Although I
acknowledge that all of logic has to do with logical form, I do not agree that all
expressions of logical form must themselves be formal. This distinction captures
much of the received concept, since it includes all of symbolic logic and excludes
nonsymbolic evaluations of validity or invalidity. As we might expect, formal logic
by the proposed distinction will roughly include everything belonging to what has
become the de facto criterion for formal logic in relations expressed by means
of standard and nonstandard notational variations and extensions of the proposi-
tional and predicate-quantiﬁcational calculus. The deﬁnition additionally includes
schematic and graphic treatments of syllogistic logic that have traditionally been
regarded as more properly within the aegis of informal logic and critical reasoning.
Informal logic by contrast on the present proposal is limited to the consideration
of a proposition’s or argument’s logical form by discursive reconstruction within
natural language, the use of counterexamples to discredit inferences, identiﬁcation
of arguments as committing any of the so-called rhetorical fallacies, and the like.
The relegation of syllogistic logic, square of opposition, and argument diagram-
ming methods to the genus of informal logic can now be seen as a kind of historical
accident. Were it not for the emergence of more powerful algebraic methods of
formal logic with the discovery of formal logical techniques in Frege’s Begriﬀss-
chrift and C.S. Peirce’s proto-quantiﬁcational logic, there is little doubt that the
logic of syllogisms, Venn and other styles of diagramming, etc., would constitute
the whole of formal logic as opposed to purely informal nonspecialized nonsym-
bolic logical methods. Logic would then still be today as if it had never advanced
beyond the point concerning which Kant in the late eighteenth century was able
to declare that no signiﬁcant advances had been made since the time of Aristo-
tle.2
Why, then, should such logical techniques be displaced as informal given
2[Kant, 1965, Bviii]: “That logic has already, from the earliest times, proceeded upon this
sure path is evidenced by the fact that since Aristotle it has not required to retrace a single step,

On the Relation of Informal to Symbolic Logic
135
the development of contemporary algebraic and rigorously algorithmic methods of
mathematical logic?
On this proposal, it is more appropriate to classify syllogisms and the tools
of logic that have standardly been turned over to the informal logic and critical
reasoning textbooks as less powerful, general, and technically advanced, but ev-
ery bit as formal as symbolic mathematical logics. As a consequence, I include
Aristotelian syllogistic and all related graphic and diagramming paraphernalia as
part of genuinely formal logic.
I am therefore committed to saying that these
methods are properly part of formal logic despite their usually being included in
what are called informal logic texts as adjuncts to what is standardly presented as
the informal logic curriculum. If this is true, then it may be time for logicians to
admit that insofar as they use syllogistic logic and argument diagramming they are
doing formal logic, frequently under the mistaken rubric of informal logic. It may
equally be time in that case for formal logicians to admit that there are weaker
less universal methods of logic that are just as formal as the algebraic methods
of formal symbolic logic, which they may prefer to use, but which do not for that
reason alone have exclusive title to the category of formal logic.
What, then, is to be said about the English translation of (∃x)(F = λy[□(y =
x)])? The natural language equivalents of any such expression are strictly informal
by my criterion. Yet I imagine that ordinary language translations of expressions
in symbolic logic are unlikely to ﬁnd application in practice as a workable re-
placement for mathematical logic. The reason quite obviously is that the ordinary
language equivalents while available in principle are simply too cumbersome, as
they would be in the parallel case of trying to develop an informal mathematics
for the purpose of formulating and solving quadratic polynomial equations. With
regard to another problem of the practical implications of the distinction, I have
no deﬁnite pedagogical recommendations to make with respect to the division of
logical methods according to the traditional distinction between formal and infor-
mal logic. Thus, I see nothing wrong with continuing to teach syllogistic logic and
Venn diagramming, to mention two conspicuous examples, as part of nonmathe-
matical logic, critical reasoning, or what is popularly called informal logic. It is
just that by my characterization of the distinction between formal and informal
logic I ﬁnd it misleading to refer to such techniques as informal.
I do not claim that my deﬁnition of formal and informal logic could not be
improved. I have already indicated that I regard the proposal as a tradeoﬀbetween
conﬂicting jointly unsatisﬁable desiderata. For present purposes, I want to explore
the proposed criterion by investigating the implications of distinguishing between
formal and purely informal logic alternatively as the analysis of logical form by
means of specialized symbolisms versus the study of logical form by means of
ordinary language.
unless, indeed, we care to count as improvements the removal of certain needless subtleties or the
clearer exposition of its recognised teaching, features which concern the elegance rather than the
certainty of the science. It is remarkable also that to the present day this logic has not been able
to advance a single step, and is thus to all appearance a closed and complete body of doctrine.”

136
Dale Jacquette
3
FORMAL AND INFORMAL LOGIC IN PARTNERSHIP
There are many ways in which formal and informal logic interact.
There are
situations in which formal and informal logic can proﬁtably cooperate in order to
critically evaluate arguments.
Formal symbolic logics are always accompanied by and presented within a dis-
cursive framework of informal metalanguage introductions and explanations, or
can be traced back through a genealogy of formal conventions to an informal con-
text. Without grounding in ordinary language and a relation to informal ideas,
even the formalisms most familiar to practicing logicians lack meaning and ap-
plication. If symbolic logic is not always needed, if it can be an impediment to
understanding, and if it cannot function eﬀectively entirely on its own for theo-
retical purposes in the explication of logical connections and deductive proof of
consequences, then the use of specialized formalisms must be justiﬁed by a philo-
sophical rationale. Informal logic is useful and often essential in working through
a preliminary heuristic analysis of a problem before it can be decided whether
and if so what kind of formal logic to apply in modeling a given choice of logical
relations or in solving a logical problem. Sometimes informal methods provide a
better, easier, or more understandable conceptual analysis of the logic of a propo-
sition or argument.
Accordingly, I want to propose a pragmatic principle that allows informal and
formal logical methods to be used individually or in combination to achieve the
best analysis of the logic of arguments as determined by the speciﬁc requirements
of each situation. The ideal is for logicians to cultivate proﬁciency in as many
formal and informal logical methods as may be available, not excluding eﬀorts
to discover or invent new techniques as each task may demand. The exigencies
of each analytic problem should be considered independently on its own terms
as a challenge for logical investigation in its own right. I illustrate the potential
gains from this partnership between formal and informal logic with two exam-
ples. The ﬁrst application demonstrates the importance of informal reasoning as
a preparation for formalization in the informal analysis of logical problems. The
preliminary informal consideration of a logical paradox when properly done can
sometimes avoid the need for formalization altogether, while in other cases it may
demarcate the extent to which a minimal partial formalization may be useful.
Alternatively, informal evaluation can provide a set of parameters by which the
crucial concepts and relations to be formalized can ﬁrst be identiﬁed and an ex-
act purpose and justiﬁcation for formalization determined. The problem I have
chosen is the Epimenides or liar paradox, a famous logical puzzle with interesting
implications for our understanding of the nature of truth, the limits of sentence
meaning in a language, and the semantics of reference, for which many diﬀerent
elaborate formal logical solutions have been suggested.

On the Relation of Informal to Symbolic Logic
137
The liar paradox
The liar paradox is the implicit logical inconsistency entailed by a sentence that
asserts its own falsehood. There are several diﬀerent formulations of liar sentences,
which for convenience can be represented by a simpliﬁed expression of sentential
self-denial:
(L)
This sentence is false.
Assuming a classical bivalent truth value semantics, the liar paradox is supposed
to follow by dilemma from the constructibility of L. This is the orthodox informal
explanation of the liar paradox dilemma. Suppose L is true. Since L says of itself
that it is false, then, if L is true, it is false. Now suppose that L is false. Then, again
because of L’s self-denial, it is not the case that L is false, from which it follows that
L is true. The conclusion seems inescapable that liar sentence L is true if and only
if it is false.3 The contradiction is intolerable in classical bivalent propositional
logic and semantics. There are two main categories of responses to the liar paradox
within standard logic. The force of the liar paradox is often understood to exert
pressure on the concept of truth and the bivalent truth value semantics in which
the paradox arises. Alternatively, the truth-valuability or meaningfulness of the
liar sentence or its constructibility in an ideal language is challenged.
Many solutions have been proposed. Historically, these have included introduc-
ing nonstandard many-valued or truth-value gap logics to replace the ordinary two-
valued structure, and legislating against self-reference, or self-(non)-application of
indexicals, demonstratives, or truth value predications within a language. The
former strategy has been shown by Brian Skyrms in “Return of the Liar: Three-
Valued Logic and the Concept of Truth” to be ineﬀective by itself against strength-
ened liar paradoxes that can be constructed for any enlargement of truth-value
semantics. The idea is to deﬁne a new truth function that collapses n ≥2 truth
values into two, by mapping onto falsehood whatever truth value negation receives
in the n-valued system.4 The latter strategy is at the heart of Alfred Tarski’s in-
ﬂuential theory of truth, in which formal languages are stratiﬁed into object- and
3An excellent introduction is [Martin, 1970]. See also [Barwise and Etchemendy, 1987; Martin,
1984]. The most complete historical discussion of the Epimenides paradox (Paul, Epistle to Titus
1 verses 12-13) is [R¨ustow, 1987].
4See [Skyrms, 1970, 153–161]. If we try to forestall the liar paradox dilemma by introducing
a third truth value and assigning it to the liar sentence, then we can deﬁne a new truth table
and reformulate the liar paradox in this way. For nonstandard trivalent negation with a third
undetermined (U) truth value, we might have:
p
¬p
T
F
F
T
U
U
Now we deﬁne:
p
@p
T
F
F
T
U
F

138
Dale Jacquette
metalanguages, and truth value predications are forbidden within any given lan-
guage in the hierarchy. Truth value predications can then only be made about
a lower-level in a higher-level metalanguage in an indeﬁnitely ascending order
of object- and metalanguages in which it is possible to make meaningful pro-
nouncements only about the semantic properties of lower-level languages.5 Saul
A. Kripke’s “Outline of a Theory of Truth” combines both truth-value gaps and a
modiﬁed Tarskian stratiﬁcation of object- and metalanguages, permitting trans-
ﬁnitely ramiﬁed occurrences of metalanguages within each level of the original
Tarskian hierarchy. Kripke diagnoses the logical ailment of the liar sentence as
a failure of ‘grounding’, since the sentence seems indeﬁnitely to ﬂip-ﬂop between
truth and falsehood without reaching any settled stable state representing a single
ﬁxed semantic value.6
What is common to a certain widely shared response to the liar sentence is the
assumption that the mere constructibility of the liar sentence is suﬃcient to entail
the liar paradox — that the liar sentence is true if and only if it is false. The infer-
ability as opposed to the mere constructibility of the liar sentence would be quite
another thing. No one, however, has attempted to prove that the liar sentence
can be deduced from an otherwise logically consistent set of sentences, such as a
scientiﬁc or philosophical theory. Logicians and philosophers who fret about the
liar sentence often assume that the only way to avoid the paradox is by preventing
the construction of the liar sentence. The attitude is typically that, unless ap-
propriate precautions are taken, the liar sentence can be formulated, after which
the liar paradox inevitably follows. To forestall outright logical contradiction, we
must either prevent its construction or take steps, sometimes amounting to the
abandonment of classical propositional logic, to ameliorate its disastrous eﬀects.
The liar sentence exists or can be uttered, so we had better do something about
it. It is precisely this otherwise reasonable conventional assumption that I now,
informally, want to question.7
If the mere constructibility of the liar sentence in a language entails the liar
paradox, then the following dilemma inference must hold for some sentence S:
The strengthened liar paradox then presumably holds when we construct a strengthened liar
sentence L∗that says ‘@(This sentence is true)’ (instead of this equivalent of the standard
formulation, ‘¬(This sentence is true)’), and then subject the strengthened liar sentence L∗to
a modiﬁed dilemma that takes as its basis the disjunction L∗∨@L∗instead of L ∨¬L. The
method is generalizable to any expanded many-valued truth value matrix involving any number
of truth values.
5[Tarski, 1956, 152–278].
6[Kripke, 1975, 690–716].
7A typical statement of the orthodox account by which the constructibility of the liar sentence
alone entails the liar paradox appears in [Tarski, 1956, 158]: “The source of this contradiction
is easily revealed: in order to construct the assertion (β) [‘c is not a true sentence’ is a true
sentence if and only if c is not a true sentence] we have substituted for the symbol ‘p’ in the
scheme (2) [x is a true sentence if and only if p] an expression which itself contains the term
‘true sentence’. . . Nevertheless no rational ground can be given why such substitutions should be
forbidden in principle.”

On the Relation of Informal to Symbolic Logic
139
(D)
L ∨¬L
S ∧¬S
Within the standard semantic framework in which the liar paradox and its
solutions are considered, the inference presumably involves a valid deductive in-
ference from a logically consistent, even logically necessary, sentence to another
self-contradictory sentence.
If the liar sentence L is constructible, then a sen-
tence of the form S ∧¬S, such as ‘L is true and it is not the case that L is true’
(that is, where S = L), is thought paradoxically to be logically forthcoming in
the dilemma by excluded middle from the disjunctive tautology L ∨¬L, given the
self-truth-denying content of L.
Another way to express the dilemma as follows:
L
True
False
False
True
True if and only if False
True and False
We now need to ask whether the dilemma inference D is itself logically valid
or invalid. There is a dilemma that proves a semantic metaparadox about the
liar paradox from the same classical semantic assumption that D is either valid
or invalid. Let us consider the possibilities in opposite order. Suppose that D
is deductively invalid. Then the liar paradox is not entailed by the mere con-
structibility or truth or falsehood of liar sentence L. For, in that case, the liar
sentence whether true or false by hypothesis does not logically imply an explicit
syntactical contradiction of the form S ∧¬S for any sentence S. If there is to
be a liar paradox engendered by the constructibility of the liar sentence L, then
dilemma inference D must on the contrary be deductively valid. If D is valid,
however, then, since the conclusion of the inference S ∧¬S is standardly false,
and, indeed, deductively invalid, it follows that the liar sentence dilemma based
on the disjunction L∨¬L itself must be logically necessarily false. This is a rather
extraordinary, but, I think, unavoidable conclusion, which to my knowledge has
nowhere been acknowledged in the extensive philosophical literature on the liar.
If the liar sentence dilemma or excluded middle involving the liar sentence cannot

140
Dale Jacquette
be true in order to entail the liar paradox, then there simply is no liar paradox
even on the assumption that the liar sentence L is true. The reason is that the liar
sentence entails the liar paradox by dilemma inference D only if the liar sentence
is both true and false, or such that it is true if and only if it is false. We might not
be satisﬁed to have the liar sentence turn out to be necessarily false in this way,
but our discomfort cannot be understood as a result of the entailment of a logical
paradox from the mere constructibility of the liar sentence.
We can represent the liar metaparadox by a similar dilemma structure as above
for the liar paradox:
D
Valid
Invalid
L ∨¬L False
No Liar Paradox
We are not yet out of the woods. The metaparadox I have informally described
is not oﬀered as in any sense a ‘solution’ to the liar paradox. We cannot con-
clude on the basis of the metaparadox that the liar sentence is simply logically
necessarily false. For without special provision, that seems to just put us back
on the standardly semantically problematic false →true, true →false loop. If a
sentence expressing its own falsehood is false or even and especially if it is logically
necessarily false, then, apparently, it is true. This is no progress over the usual
presentation of the liar paradox. The point I am trying to make is not that the
liar sentence is false, but rather that the liar paradox is not standardly entailed by
the mere constructibility of the liar sentence. If the liar paradox is not entailed by
the mere constructibility as opposed to the inferability of the liar sentence, then
the mere constructibility of the liar sentence poses no threat to classical bivalent
truth value or validity semantics, nor to the naive folk theory of truth. Hence,
the mere constructibility of the liar sentence in a language provides no adequate
philosophical motivation for the elaboration of a special formal semantic policy or
revision of the naive theory, such as that represented by a semantics of truth value
gaps or Tarskian hierarchy of object- and metalanguage truth value predications,
or Kripkean hybrid of these earlier proposals.
There is a semantic confusion that remains to be untangled. We must recall the
over-arching assumption in which the necessary falsehood of the liar sentence is

On the Relation of Informal to Symbolic Logic
141
considered. It has not been suggested that the liar sentence L is false simpliciter,
but only that the liar is standardly logically necessarily false if or on the assump-
tion that dilemma inference D is standardly logically valid. If L is true if and
only if it is false if or on the assumption that dilemma inference D is classically
deductively logically valid, then there is only one possible conclusion, which is that
dilemma inference D is classically deductively invalid. We can, and, as a matter of
fact, we must proceed in this way. If we do, however, then we are back in the ﬁrst
liar metaparadox horn, according to which, where dilemma inference D is logically
invalid, the liar paradox once again is not entailed by the mere constructibility of
the liar sentence. If dilemma inference D is logically valid, then liar sentence L
is logically necessarily false, from which it seems to follow that L, which ostensi-
bly says of itself that it is false, is also logically necessarily true. This conclusion
again holds not in any absolute sense, but only conditionally on the assumption
that dilemma inference D is logically valid. What follows therefore is rather that
dilemma inference D is not logically valid, and that the liar paradox is not entailed
by the mere constructibility of the liar sentence.
The semantic metaparadox about the liar paradox shows that whether the liar
dilemma is deductively valid or invalid, the liar paradox is not logically entailed by
the mere constructibility of the liar sentence. The dissolution of the liar paradox
via the liar semantic metaparadox shows that the liar paradox cannot be intel-
ligibly formulated as entailed by the mere constructibility of the liar sentence in
languages powerful enough to express truth-self-denials.
The liar metaparadox
suggests that something is wrong with the usual description of how the liar sen-
tence is supposed to entail the liar paradox by way of the liar paradox dilemma
— but what? What hidden fallacy invalidates the liar paradox argument?
An interesting question remains unanswered if we grasp the invalidity horn of
the liar metaparadox dilemma. Here we confront the problem of what makes the
liar paradox dilemma in D deductively invalid. From an intuitive point of view,
it seems inadequate to say merely that the inference is invalid because the liar
sentence dilemma L ∨¬L as a tautology of propositional logic is necessarily true,
while the conclusion S ∧¬S as a contradiction or inconsistency of propositional
logic is necessarily false. This naturally makes the paradox dilemma deductively
invalid. A deeper diﬃculty nevertheless remains to challenge our understanding
of the content of liar sentence L. It requires of any dissolution of the liar paradox
by semantic metaparadox a reasonable explanation of why in particular it is de-
ductively invalid in the second liar paradox dilemma horn to make use of either or
both of the following inferences (or to validly detach the consequents from their
respective material conditional counterparts): L ∨¬L
(i)
L is true ⊢L is false (L is true →L is false) (L →¬L)
(ii) L is false ⊢L is true (L is false →L is true) (¬L →L)
Why, we must ask, do these inferences not go through? Given the apparent content
of sentence L as denying its own truth, why does the falsehood of sentence L not

142
Dale Jacquette
validly deductively follow from its truth, or its truth from its falsehood, as the
colloquial description of the liar paradox seems to require?
It may be worthwhile at this juncture to take notice of some of the standard
and nonstandard reactions to the content of the liar sentence in relation to the
liar paradox. Some logicians have concluded that both the liar sentence L and
its negation ¬L are meaningless, and hence neither true nor false. This maneuver
blocks the valid inferences or true material conditionals in (i) and (ii) standardly
needed to derive the liar paradox from the constructibility of the liar sentence.
Wittgenstein in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus dismisses the liar sentence as
meaningless because of the picture theory of meaning. He argues that no mean-
ingful sentence can ‘get outside itself’ or include within itself a picture of itself
with the same logical form or mathematical multiplicity of one-one corresponding
elements under analysis. This he claims any construction per impossibile must do
in order to picture an existent or nonexistent fact about itself.8 Tarski, in “The
Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages”, argues that the liar paradox moti-
vates an indeﬁnitely ascending hierarchy of object-languages and metalanguages
to implement the formation principle by which no meaningful sentence in a for-
malized language can express the truth or falsehood of other sentences belonging
to the same language.9 More recently, paraconsistent logics that in diﬀerent ways
tolerate syntactical contradictions allow the liar sentence and its negation to be re-
garded as both true and false. This strategy accommodates the intuitive sense by
which the liar paradox is supposed to follow from the content of the liar sentence
in the orthodox informal characterization. Graham Priest, for example, in Beyond
the Limits of Thought (without reference to the liar in this immediate context),
maintains that: “. . . if α is both true and false, so is ¬α, and so is α ∧¬α. Hence,
a contradiction can be true (if false as well).”10
I do not strongly feel the need to refute any of these resolutions, each of which
in my opinion has some merits and some disadvantages. Instead, I shall brieﬂy
remark some of the diﬃculties I ﬁnd in each. The sustained criticism Wittgen-
stein oﬀers of the picture theory of meaning in the ﬁrst third of his Philosophical
Investigations constitutes good grounds for preferring an alternative semantics.11
I pass without further comment on the most trenchant criticisms frequently raised
against Tarski’s theory of truth. These are that by refusing to permit truth pred-
ications to be made of sentences within the same language Tarski throws out the
baby with the bathwater, and that the indeﬁnite hierarchy of object- and meta-
languages for truth value predications never achieves a ﬁnal characterization of
the concept of truth. Tarski’s metalinguistic restrictions on truth predications not
8[Wittgenstein, 1922], 2.174; 3.332-3.333 (concerning Russell’s theory of types).
In 3.332
Wittgenstein writes: “No proposition can say anything about itself because the propositional
sign cannot be contained in itself. . . ”, and in 4.442: “A proposition cannot possibly assert of
itself that it is true.”
9[Tarski, 1956, 157–165 and passim].
10[Priest, 1995, 156-161]. For indications of dialethic intutions about the proper response to
the liar paradox, see also [Priest and Routley, 1989, 12-13, 22-23, 36-44, 48].
11[Wittgenstein, 1958], especially §§1-64.

On the Relation of Informal to Symbolic Logic
143
only disallow diagonal constructions like the liar sentence, to the relief of those
who are concerned about its mere constructibility entailing semantic paradox, but
also all logically harmless truth value pronouncements, such as ‘This sentence
is true’. The indeﬁnitely ascending stratiﬁcation of metalanguages in which the
truth or falsehood of sentences is permitted only for lower tiers of the hierarchy
never reaches an endpoint at which the theorist can say that truth has ﬁnally
been deﬁned. The Tarskian semantic hierarchy furthermore is self-consciously ad
hoc, supported by no independent justiﬁcation other than its apparent usefulness
in solving the liar paradox.12 Kripke’s solution mentioned earlier, involving truth
value gaps in truth predications transﬁnitely iterated within each tier of a Tarskian
structure of metalanguages seems unnecessarily complicated. The paraconsistent
analysis of the liar, despite the appeal of its frank avowal of the liar sentence as
dialethically both true and false, strikes me as bizarre. If the liar sentence is both
true and false, then the liar dilemma inference to the liar paradox would appear
to be both valid and invalid.13
As an alternative to these received resolutions of the liar, I now want to extend
the liar metaparadox previously explained to provide semantic considerations that
eliminate the paradox altogether in a new and distinctively deﬂationary way. The
liar sentence L in the account I favor is itself a disguised contradiction. It therefore
standardly validly supports the derivation of any other contradiction, as we see in
the ﬁrst horn of the liar paradox dilemma, necessitating the trivially valid deduc-
tion or default logical truth of the inference or counterpart material conditional
in (i) that takes us from L to S ∧¬S (and in particular from L to ¬L). This
is an interesting result only in revealing the contradiction concealed within L, in
somewhat the manner of the Moore pragmatic paradox sentence, ‘It is raining,
but I don’t believe it’.14
The liar paradox in contrast can be seen to fail in the second dilemma horn.
For, standardly, if the liar sentence L is judged to be a disguised contradiction
12See [Priest, 1995, 167–171; 1987, 23–28].
13The dialethic logician need not blink at such a contradiction. Yet even [Priest, 1987, 104–
105], writes: “...a necessary condition for entailment is truth-preservation from antecedent to
consequent...Hence we may say that an entailment is false if it is possible for the antecedent to
be true and the consequent false.” Where a liar sentence is dialethically both true and false, it
is not only possible but actually the case that the assumption (the liar sentence itself) of the
liar dilemma inference is true (and false) while the conclusion (any contradiction) is both true
and false. If by Priest’s deﬁnition the liar paradox dilemma inference is deductively invalid (full
stop), then the paradox is blocked. But if the inference works by virtue of matching the truth
(not the falsehood) of the assumption with the truth (not the falsehood) of the conclusion, or by
matching the (necessary) falsehood of the assumption and the truth or (and) falsehood of the
conclusion, then the paradox goes through by deductively valid dilemma, though the true (and
false) contradiction it entails may be semantically harmless. I can only conclude that I do not
suﬃciently understand the concept of deductive validity or entailment in a dialethic context to
be able to assess its role and therefore to be able to endorse this type of paraconsistency solution
to the liar paradox.
14The name ‘Moore’s Paradox’ was given by Wittgenstein in response to a series of problems
G.E. Moore mentioned in a paper delivered to the Moral Science Club at Cambridge University
in 1944. Wittgenstein reportedly was more impressed by the paradox than Moore, who dismissed
it as a psychological rather than logical absurdity. See [Monk, 1991, 544–547].

144
Dale Jacquette
that validly implies any other contradiction, then the negation of the liar sentence
¬L must be a disguised tautology. I shall ﬁrst try to justify these interpretations
of L and ¬L, paying special attention to the intuitive rationale for regarding ¬L
as tautologous. Then I shall explain how this interpretation of the negation of
the liar sentence in ¬L blocks the standard valid inference from ¬L to S ∧¬S
(and in particular from ¬L to L) in the second liar paradox dilemma horn. By
the same analogy, I conclude that the negation of the liar sentence is logically
no more problematic and in many ways comparable to the pragmatic tautologous
redundancy of the negation of the Moore sentence, ‘Either it is not raining, or I
believe that it is’.
The negation of the liar sentence, ‘It is false that this sentence is false’, is
standardly interpreted as logically equivalent to the aﬃrmation, ‘This sentence is
true’. It is clear that the content of the liar sentence in denying its own truth is
self-contradictory, for what the sentence says about itself implies that it is true
if and only if it is false.15 This analysis should entail that the negation of the
contradictory liar sentence is a tautology. In what further intuitive sense, if any,
is the negation of the liar sentence, ‘This sentence is true’, tautologous?
The
negation of the liar like any other sentence is (classically) either true or false.
The negation of the liar sentence, on the other hand, cannot be false on pain of
contradiction. For then it is logically equivalent to the liar sentence itself, ‘It is
false that this sentence is true’ or ‘This sentence is false’, which by the above
standardly implies an explicit logical contradiction. Hence, the negation of the
liar sentence must be true. This is to say that the negation of the liar sentence is
a disguised tautology in the same sense and ultimately for the same reason that
the liar sentence is a disguised contradiction. That there can be such disguised
contradictions and tautologies in natural language should not astonish anyone. To
interpret the negation of the liar sentence in ‘It is false that this sentence is false’
or ‘This sentence is true’ as a tautology moreover engenders no further paradox,
beyond surprising the uninitiated with the conclusion that a sentence that asserts
its own truth in a kind of limiting case is necessarily trivially vacuously true.16
Although L as a disguised contradiction standardly validly implies S∧¬S, ¬L as
a disguised tautology standardly implies only other tautologies, and consequently
implies no contradictions. The liar paradox is stymied in this way at the second
paradox dilemma horn. There is a confusion in the orthodox informal character-
ization of how the liar paradox is supposed to follow from the constructibility of
the liar sentence. The semantic analysis of the content of the liar and its negation
which has been sketched reveals the fallacy in the inference. The ﬁrst part of the
dilemma relying on inference or material conditional (i) above goes through well
15The problem is not just that in the ﬁrst liar paradox dilemma horn we obtain the conditional
L →¬L. If we assume (that) L (is true) and from its content validly deduce or detach its negation
¬L via inference or counterpart material conditional (i), then we derive the outright syntactical
inconsistency L ∧¬L.
16Other examples abound: ‘John has been a married bachelor for the last ﬁfteen years’; ‘Russell
was the greatest philosopher of the 20th Century, and so was Wittgenstein’; ‘First order logic
with arithmetic is both syntactically consistent and deductively complete’.

On the Relation of Informal to Symbolic Logic
145
enough ((i) is valid or true). If the liar sentence is true, then undoubtedly it is
false. If, on the contrary, the liar sentence is false, then it does not validly follow
that the liar sentence itself is not true; rather, what follows logically is the literal
negation of the liar sentence, which simply states, ‘This sentence is true’. This
sentence, the negation of the liar, is a tautology, and therefore (necessarily) true.
The assumption in the second liar paradox dilemma horn that the liar sentence
is false, in applying the inference or material conditional in (ii), does not make
the liar sentence itself true ((ii) is invalid or false). There is manifestly nothing
paradoxical to be validly derived from the necessary truth of the disguised tautol-
ogy in the negation of the liar sentence, ‘It is false that this sentence is false’ or
‘This sentence is true’. The liar dilemma is avoided by grasping the second horn,
which produces only the potentially unexpected result that a sentence asserting
its own truth is a tautology, and does not imply any logical antinomy by itself or
in conjunction with the contradiction or necessary falsehood of the liar sentence.17
I conclude that all the fuss made about the liar sentence and liar paradox is
logically exaggerated. The liar sentence is not validly deducible in any otherwise
sound application of language. If we want to avoid what we may perceive as a
contradiction in the liar, despite the metaparadox conclusion that no such contra-
diction is validly entailed by the mere constructibility of the liar, then we should
take pains not to utter it. Should philosophical semantics adopt a special pol-
icy to prevent us from lying? I do not think so; no more than semantics should
legislate against the constructibility of just plain false sentences,
or even more
explicitly less controversially outright contradictory sentences such as S ∧¬S, or,
say, the Moore sentence. There is a family of what might be called semantically
degenerate constructions in languages, which include at one end of the spectrum
explicit contradictions like S ∧¬S, with the liar and the Moore sentence situated
somewhere closer to the other extreme. If we are interested in clarity of thought
and language, and if we are interested in truth, then we should make an eﬀort
to avoid using these sentences. Similarly, if we are interested in making signiﬁ-
cant assertions, then we should avoid using disguised tautologies, like the negation
of the liar sentence or pragmatically the negation of the Moore sentence. The
mere fact that a given language is rich enough to permit the construction of these
17This method of resolving the liar paradox is not intended to provide a panacea for logical and
semantic paradoxes generally. Compare Russell’s paradox in set theory, which validly deduces
an explicit contradiction from two propositions that from a naive set theoretical viewpoint are
apparently true by stipulation. The inference has this form:
(D)
R = {x | x ∈x}
R′ = {x | x ̸∈x}
R′ ∈R ↔R′ ̸∈R
The dissolution of the liar paradox by contrast is blocked because the concept of validity is itself
standardly deﬁned in terms of truth. The necessary falsehood of the liar paradox conclusion
reﬂects back on the content of the liar sentence as the premise of the attempt to deduce the liar
paradox from the mere constructibility of the liar. This is not typically a feature of logical or
semantic paradox, as the Russell paradox shows. But it is a requirement of the liar paradox that
in particular renders the eﬀort to deduce the liar paradox from the liar sentence logically invalid
in the second liar paradox dilemma horn, and hence logically and semantically innocuous.

146
Dale Jacquette
oddities as limiting cases does not seem to constitute a good enough reason to
prohibit them or to impose any special semantic restrictions on their formulation
or interpretation.
The use of largely informal and dispensably quasi-formal logic in this analysis of
the liar sentence shows the extent to which complicated formal symbolic notations
and semantic relations can be avoided in the treatment of some of the most diﬃcult
problems in logic. The paradox disappears when we subject it to a thorough-going
critical analysis using only the most modest and informal logical apparatus. To
the extent that this is possible with other logical problems, the pragmatic principle
I have proposed recommends that informal rather than formal logical methods be
employed. That this is not always the most expedient use of logic is indicated by
the second example I shall introduce. Here with respect to a notorious argument in
philosophical theology it turns out to be more advantageous to use formal symbolic
logic to discover a hidden logical fallacy in St. Anselm’s ontological proof for the
existence of God.
Anselm’s ontological proof
Anselm’s ontological proof for the existence of God has a precise modal structure.
By formalizing the argument, it is possible to identify the intensional modal fal-
lacy it contains. The deductive invalidity of Anselm’s inference embodied in the
fallacy defeats his argument, even if, contrary to Kant’s famous objection, exis-
tence is included as a ‘predicate’ or identity-determining constitutive property of
particulars.
Norman Malcolm in “Anselm’s Ontological Arguments” distinguishes two forms
of Anselm’s inference.18 Malcolm acknowledges that “There is no evidence that
[Anselm] thought of himself as oﬀering two diﬀerent proofs.”19 Some commenta-
tors have understood what Malcolm refers to as the second ontological proof as
Anselm’s oﬃcial or ﬁnal formulation, interpreting the ﬁrst version as a preliminary
attempt to express or preparatory remarks for the demonstration’s later restate-
ment.20 Anselm presents the so-called second ontological proof in Proslogion III:
For there can be thought to exist something whose non-existence is
inconceivable; and this thing is greater than anything whose non-
existence is conceivable. Therefore, if that than which a greater cannot
be thought could be thought to exist, then that than which a greater
cannot be thought would not be that than which a greater cannot be
thought — a contradiction. Hence, something than which a greater
cannot be thought exists so truly that it cannot even be thought not
to exist.
18[Malcolm, 1960, 41–62].
19[Malcolm, 1960, 45]. Malcolm explicitly states that Anselm does not separate the inferences,
but maintains that the ontological argument can be better understood and defended if the two
versions are distinguished.
20See [Schufreider, 1978, 40–45; Brecher, 1975, 140-146; Bencivenga, 1993, 113–123].

On the Relation of Informal to Symbolic Logic
147
And You are this being, O Lord our God. Therefore, Lord my God,
You exist so truly that You cannot even be thought not to exist.21
This passage contains what I regard as the heart of Anselm’s proof. For present
purposes, I want to avoid the controversy of whether the text oﬀers one or two
distinct arguments. I shall therefore concentrate on this formulation of Anselm’s
argument, without trying to decide whether it is essentially the same as or rele-
vantly diﬀerent than related inferences about God’s existence appearing elsewhere
in Anselm’s writings. I shall also follow Charles Hartshorne’s recommendation in
The Logic of Perfection by referring to the second statement of Anselm’s ontolog-
ical argument as a kind of modal proof, and of the ‘irreducibly modal structure’ of
this form of Anselm’s argument.22 I nevertheless diﬀer sharply from Hartshorne
in interpreting the modality of Anselm’s proof as intensional rather than alethic.
Where q abbreviates (∃x)Px, that a perfect being or perfection exists, Hartshorne
attributes this form to Anselm’s proof:
Hartshorne’s Formalization of Anselm’s Alethic Modal Proof
for the Existence of God
1.
q →□q
Anselm’s principle
2.
□q ∨¬□q
Excluded middle
3.
¬□q →□¬□q
Becker’s postulate
4.
□q ∨□¬□q
(3 logical equivalence)
5.
□¬□q →□¬q
(1 modal form of modus tollens)
6.
□q ∨□¬q
(4,5 dilemma and detachment)
7.
¬□¬q
Perfection not logically impossible
8.
□q
(6,7 disjunctive dilemma)
9.
□q →q
Modal axiom
10.
q
(8,9 detachment)
This is an elegant but defective derivation. Hartshorne presents Becker’s Pos-
tulate in proposition (3) as though it were a universal modal truth. The principle
in fact holds at most only in modal systems like S5 with latitudinarian semantic
transworld-accessibility relations.23 There is furthermore a logical diﬃculty in a
key assumption of the proof that renders the entire inference unsound.24
21[Anselm, 1974, I, 94].
[Anselm, 1945–51, I, 102–103], writes: “Nam potest cogitari esse
aliquid, quod non possit cogitari non esse; quod maius est quam quod non esse cogitari potest.
Quare si id quo maius nequit cogitari, potest cogitari non esse: id ipsum quo maius cogitari
nequit, non est id quo maius cogitari nequit; quod convenire non potest. Sic ergo vere est aliquid
quo maius cogitari non potest, ut nec cogitari possit non esse. Et hoc es tu, domine deus noster.
Sic ergo vere es, domine deus meus, ut nec cogitari possis non esse.”
22[Hartshorne, 1962, 49–57]. I have converted Hartshorne’s necessity operator ‘M’ to what is
nowadays the more conventional symbol ‘□’. See [Hartshorne, 1965]. [Plantinga, 1974], oﬀers
another approach to the formal modal structure of Anselm’s ontological argument.
23The principle Hartshorne identiﬁes as Becker’s Postulate, ¬□q →□¬□q, is logically equiv-
alent to the characteristic axiom of modal S5, more usually formulated as ♦α →□♦α.
See
[Purtill, 1966, 398].
24Hartshorne’s proposition (1) is criticized by John Hick in [Hick and McGill, 1967, 349–352].

148
Dale Jacquette
Proposition (5), which Hartshorne says follows from (1) as a modal form of
modus tollens, is clearly false. Hartshorne glosses the assumption by maintaining
that: “...the necessary falsity of the consequent [of (1)] implies that of the an-
tecedent...”25 The principle Hartshorne applies to proposition (1) to obtain (5)
is thus: (α →β) →(□¬β →□¬α). This conditional is not generally true, as
an obvious counterexample shows. Let α = Snow is red, and β = 2 + 2 = 5.
Then the instantiation of α →β in Snow is red →2 + 2 = 5 is true by default,
if the →conditional is interpreted classically, since it is false that snow is red.
It is false that □¬β →□¬α in the instantiation □¬(2 + 2 = 5) →□¬(Snow is
red), however, because although it is true that □¬(2 + 2 = 5), it is false that
□¬(Snow is red). If Hartshorne tries to avoid the counterexample by interpret-
ing the conditional →nonstandardly in a relevance logic, then the proof is either
deprived of excluded middle in proposition (2), or logically disabled in its crucial
inference from the disjunction in (2) to the conditional in (3).26
The problem is magniﬁed in Hartshorne’s application of this ‘modal form of
modus tollens’ to proposition q in proof step (5). Consider that if it is necessary
that it is not necessary that snow is white, it by no means follows that it is
necessary (particularly because a fortiori it is not actually the case) that snow is
not white. This refutes the general truth of (5) along with the general principle
on which it is supposed to depend. What about proposition (5), in Hartshorne’s
speciﬁc interpretation, according to which q means (∃x)Px, that a perfect being
or perfection exists? After all, proposition (1) is also not generally true, but at
most, Hartshorne only believes, when q abbreviates (∃x)Px. Here is a dilemma.
By Hartshorne’s appeal to excluded middle, either proposition q or its negation
is true, q ∨¬q. If ¬q, then Anselm’s ontological argument is logically unsound
on any interpretation.
If q, then, given Hartshorne’s other assumptions in his
formalization, the following inference holds:
Classical Logical Triviality of Hartshorne’s
Modal Principle (5)
1.
q
Assumption
2.
q →□q
Anselm’s principle (Hartshorne)
3.
□q →♦□q
Modal axiom (α →♦α)
4.
♦□q →¬□¬□q
Modal duality (♦α ←→¬□¬α)
5.
q →¬□¬□q
(1-4 hypothetical syllogism)
6.
¬□¬□q
(1,5 detachment)
If q is true, as Hartshorne’s conclusion (10) states, that a perfect being or that
perfection exists, then Hartshorne’s proposition (5) is logically trivial. For then
See also [Brecher, 1976, 140–146; Plantinga, 1961, 93–101. Hartshorne, 1967, 290–309], replies to
Purtill on the proper modal logical concept of necessity as it pertains to Anselm’s eﬀorts to prove
the existence of God. Another kind of informal criticism is oﬀered by [Nelson, 1963, 235–242].
25[Hartshorne, 1962, 51].
26On the unavailability of excluded middle and disjunctive syllogism in relevance logic, see
[Read, 1988, 60].

On the Relation of Informal to Symbolic Logic
149
the antecedent of (5) is false, making □¬□q →□¬q an empty truism on the
classical interpretation of the conditional →. This makes it equally (classically)
uninterestingly true both that □¬□q →¬□¬q and □¬□q →□q. Since, however,
Hartshorne’s formalization relies on proposition (5) in its derivation of (6) from
(4) and (3), it follows that the conclusion of Anselm’s proof that God exists is true
only if Anselm’s proof for the conclusion as Hartshorne interprets it is (classically)
logically trivial.
If Hartshorne has correctly represented Anselm’s modal ontological argument,
then the proof is clearly in bad shape. Hartshorne’s reconstruction makes no use
and takes no notice of Anselm’s idea about the conceivability of God as a being
that than which none greater can be conceived, nor does Hartshorne construe
Anselm’s proof as the reductio ad absurdum Anselm intends when he argues as
above: ‘. . . if that than which a greater cannot be thought could be thought to
exist, then that than which a greater cannot be thought would not be that than
which a greater cannot be thought — a contradiction’.27 The principle of charity
therefore requires an eﬀort to identify an alternative formalization of Anselm’s
modal argument that avoids Hartshorne’s commitment to the manifestly unsound
principle in proposition (5).
I now want to apply some of the symbolizations Priest recommends in formaliz-
ing the argument from Anselm’s discussion of God’s inconceivability to Anselm’s
ontological proof for God’s existence. Like Priest, I use an indiﬀerently deﬁnite
or indeﬁnite description operator δ, and I adopt an informal ontically neutral in-
terpretation of the quantiﬁers, expressing existence by means of a predicate, E!
(E-shriek). I also follow Priest in symbolizing Anselm’s relation of ‘being greater
than’ by the convenient predicate ‘>’. However, I revise Priest’s conceivability
operator to extend its scope. I allow the τ-operator to range over a greater-than
relation to express the conceivability that the relation holds between two objects,
instead of merely attaching to an individual object term as a way of expressing
the corresponding object’s conceivability. Then I can logically represent Anselm’s
deﬁnition of God as that than which none greater is conceivable by the expression
τ(y > x) in g = δx¬∃yτ(y > x).28
In contrast with Hartshorne, I will not emphasize the proof’s alethic modality
in the proposition that if a perfect being exists then it necessarily exists. Instead, I
wish to call attention to the proof’s hitherto neglected intensional modality implied
by Anselm’s reliance on the concept of God as a being than which none greater is
conceivable. This formalization more accurately reﬂects Anselm’s thinking in the
27See [Henry, 1967, 143].
28The diﬀerence is not trivial, but concerns whether Anselm is to be understood as saying
merely that God is that than which there is nothing conceivable that is greater, or that than which
it is not conceivable that there be anything greater. Compare Priest’s deﬁnition in [1995, 62, n.
2]: “Let τx be ‘x is conceived’. Then God (g) may be deﬁned as δx¬∃y(τy∧y > x). (Quantiﬁers,
note, are not existentially loaded.) Let ϕ(x) be the second-order condition Ex ∧∀P(P ̸= E →
(Px ↔Pg)), where E is existence. Then the claim is ∀x(¬Eg∧ϕ(x) →x < g).” See [Priest, 1979,
5–21]. I make a similar plea for the ontic neutrality of the quantiﬁer in noncircular reconstructions
of Anselm’s proof in [Jacquette, 1994, 231–240].

150
Dale Jacquette
ontological proof, which I take to be an improvement over Hartshorne’s. I argue
that the intensional modality implied by wide-scope conceivability in Anselm’s
deﬁnition of God renders the ontological argument deductively invalid. For as such
it requires a violation salva non veritate of the extensionality of Priest’s deﬁnite
or indeﬁnite description operator. Then, even if Kant’s objection that existence
is not a ‘predicate’ or identity-determining constitutive property is overturned,
the logical structure of Anselm’s argument on the most charitable reconstruction
nevertheless fails by virtue of instantiating an intensional modal fallacy.
The ontological proof is formalized by the following inference, in which two
new principles are adduced. The ﬁrst thesis maintains the extensionality of δ,
stating that anything identical to a deﬁnitely or indeﬁnitely described object has
whatever properties are attributed to the object by the description. The second
is a conceivable greatness thesis, which states that there is always an existent
or nonexistent object that is conceivably (if not also in fact actually) greater
in Anselm’s sense than any nonexistent object. Anselm’s argument can now be
symbolized in this way:
Anselm’s Intensional Modal Proof
for the Existence of God
1.
g = δx¬∃yτ(y > x)
Deﬁnition g
2.
∀x(δy . . . y . . . = x →. . . x . . .)
Extensionality δ
3.
∀x(¬E!x →∃yτ(y > x))
Conceivable greatness
4.
¬E!g
Hypothesis for reductio
5.
¬E!g →∃yτ(y > g)
(3 instantiation)
6.
∃yτ(y > g)
(4,5 detachment)
7.
¬∃yτ(y > g)
(1,2 instantiation)
8.
E!g
(4,6,7 reductio ad absurdum)
As in Hartshorne’s formalization, Anselm is interpreted as drawing inferences
from propositons containing modal contexts. Here, as opposed to Hartshorne’s
rendition, the modal contexts in question are intensional rather than alethic, ex-
pressing the intentionality of wide-scope conceivability in the interpolated conceiv-
able greatness principle.
The proof has several advantages over previous attempts to symbolize Anselm’s
ontological argument. The argument as reconstructed is extremely compact, re-
ﬂecting approximately the same level of complexity as Anselm’s original prose
statement. Anselm’s deﬁnition of God as that than which none greater is conceiv-
able is explicit in proposition (1). The punctum saliens of Anselm’s proof, that if
God does not exist, then there is after all something conceivably greater than God,
is featured prominently in proposition (5), derived via instantiation from the more
general conceivable greatness thesis in (3). Finally, unlike Hartshorne’s version,
the proposed formalization explicitly represents Anselm’s proof as a reductio. To
deﬁne God as that than which none greater is conceivable, and to suppose that
God does not exist, is to be embroiled in logical contradiction, if, as Anselm seems

On the Relation of Informal to Symbolic Logic
151
to assume, we can always conceive of something greater than anything that does
not actually exist.
The proposed method of formalizing Anselm’s argument makes it easy to dis-
cover the proof’s logical weakness. The problem arises in proposition (7). The
conceivability context, τ⟨
⟩, is modal, because it represents an intensional mode
of whatever sentence or proposition is inserted. The context’s intensionality is
seen in the fact that coreferential singular denoting terms and logically equivalent
propositions cannot be freely intersubstituted in the context salva veritate. Thus,
whereas virtually any short and sweet tautology is conceivable, not every inﬁnitely
long or monstrously complicated tautology logically equivalent to it is also thereby
conceivable.
The intensionality of conceivability invalidates the inference from (1) and (2)
to (7), by requiring the substitution of g in deﬁnition (1) for the deﬁnitely or in-
deﬁnitely description-bound variable x by the extensionality of δ in principle (2).
The Kantian objection to Anselm’s proof can also be pinpointed in this symbol-
ization by linking it to the conceivable greatness thesis in proposition (3). Kant
refutes the ontological argument in the section on ‘The Ideal of Pure Reason’ in
the Critique of Pure Reason A599/B627-A600/B628. Kant’s claim that existence
has no part in the identity-determining constitutive properties of 100 real or un-
real gold Thalers challenges the principle in (3) that we can always conceive of
something greater than any nonexistent object. Anselm’s ontological argument
cannot succeed if relative greatness is judged only by a comparison of the consti-
tutive properties that make two or more objects the particular objects they are, to
the exclusion of all extraconstitutive properties that categorize such objects’ ontic
status as existent or nonexistent.
Kant is undoubtedly right to draw this conditional conclusion. The important
question is whether Kant is entitled to claim that existence is not a ‘predicate’
or identity-determining constitutive property. There are intriguing proposals for
avoiding Kant’s 100 gold Thalers criticism in the philosophical literature, and for
reconciling ourselves to accepting existence as a ‘predicate’ in the one special log-
ically unique case of God.29 Without entering into the merits of these replies to
Kant, it is worth remarking that even if Kant’s objection to the assumption in
(3) is forestalled, the intensional modal structure of Anselm’s argument remains
deductively invalid.30 The intensional fallacy arises in Anselm’s proof because of
its attempt to apply the description context extensionality principle in assump-
tion (2) at inference step (7) to the deﬁnition of God in assumption (1). Since
Kant’s conceptual-metaphysical or grammatical refutation of the ontological argu-
ment is controversial, the deductive logical invalidity entailed by the argument’s
committing the intensional fallacy may now appear to be the more fundamental
and decisive objection to Anselm’s ontological proof. Anselm might avoid venially
29See [Shaﬀer, 1962, 307–325; Engel, 1963, 20–35; Plantinga, 1966, 537–546].
30An inference in this same style of logical notation that is subject to Kant’s objection can
also be formalized. Instead of relying on the extensionality of δ, the method appeals to what
Priest calls the Characterization Principle. The argument takes the following form:

152
Dale Jacquette
transgressing Kant’s injunction against treating existence as a ‘predicate’. The
intensional fallacy in Anselm’s modal ontological argument for the existence of
God is nevertheless its more deadly cardinal sin. The logical error in Anselm’s
proof has been overlooked in the history of purely informal discussions of the in-
ference. It is only by formalizing the logical structure of Anselm’s argument that
it becomes possible to identity its deductive invalidity.
4
CONCLUSION
The examples I have considered are not intended as the only applications of the
pragmatic principle I have endorsed for a partnership between informal and sym-
bolic logic. They are meant to be illustrative only in an area where many other
solutions or attitudes are possible. The general point is partly to voice a plea
for tolerance in logical investigations, to recognize and take full advantage of the
continuum of methods available in logic, any of which might be useful and none
of which should be overlooked because of ideological or methodological prejudice.
In criticizing intelligent but faulty arguments, it is often necessary to combine
complementary informal with symbolic logical techniques in cooperative analytic
partnerships.31
1.
ϕδx(ϕx))
Characterization
2.
g = δx¬∃yτ(y > x)
Deﬁnition g
3.
∀x(¬E!x →∃yτ(y > x))
Conceivable greatness
4.
¬E!g
Hypothesis for reductio
5.
¬E!g →∃yτ(y > g)
(3 instantiation)
6.
∃yτ(y > g)
(4,5 detachment)
7.
λz[z = ¬∃yτ(y > z)]δx¬∃yτ(y > x)
(1 instantiation)
8.
¬∃yτ(y > δx¬∃yτ(y > x))
(7 λ-equivalence)
9.
¬∃yτ(y > g)
(2,8 Substitution of identicals)
10.
E!g
(4,6,9 reductio ad absurdum)
Kant’s 100 gold Thalers criticism balks at the attempt in step (3) to give an instantiation of
the Characterization Principle. The problem is that nonexistence like existence for Kant is not a
‘predicate’, which is to say that nonexistence is not a constitutive identity-determining property.
There is moreover a sense in which this alternative method of formalizing Anselm’s proof falls
back into the same problem as symbolizations involving the extensionality of descriptor δ. By
itself, ¬∃yτ(y > x) with its unbound variable is not well-formed, and does not designate a prop-
erty or even a relational property term. To obtain a substitution instance of Characterization as
in (8) above, it is necessary to resort as in (7) to instantiation via λ-conversion. Yet there is a
logical equivalence between λ-abstractions and descriptions, as expressed in this untyped state-
ment intuitively equating a formal abstraction with the or a deﬁnitely or indeﬁnitely described
property satisfying certain conditions: (∀x)(λy[. . . y . . .]x ↔δz(∀y)(zy ↔(. . . y . . .)x)). Applying
λ-equivalence to proposition (7) to deduce step (8) thereby again presupposes the extensionality
of δ. I was led to consider this version of Anselm’s proof in responding to questions raised by
Priest in personal correspondence.
31A version of one main part of this essay was presented at the Conference on Truth, sponsored
by the Inter-University Centre of Dubrovnik, Croatia, held in Bled, Slovenia, June 3–8, 1996,
see [Jacquette, 1997]. I am grateful to John Biro and Brian McLaughlin for useful comments
and criticisms. The essay appeared subsequently as [Jacquette, 2000]. The material on Anselm
is extracted with revisions from my essay on “Conceivability, Intensionality, and the Logic of
Anselm’s Modal Argument for the Existence of God”, International Journal for Philosophy of

On the Relation of Informal to Symbolic Logic
153
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am grateful to the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study in the Humani-
ties and Social Sciences (NIAS), Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences
(KNAW), for supporting this and related research in philosophical logic and phi-
losophy of mathematics during my Resident Research Fellowship at the Institute
in 2005-2006.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Anselm, 1945–51] Anselm of Canterbury. Opera omnia, ad ﬁdem codicum recensuit Franciscus
Salesius Schmitt. Edinburgh: Nelson & Sons, 1945-51, 6 vols.), I. 1945-51.
[Anselm, 1974] Anselm of Canterbury. Anselm of Canterbury. Trans. Jasper Hopkins and Her-
bert Richardson. Toronto and New York: Edwin Mellen Press, 4 vols., I. 1974.
[Barwise and Etchemendy, 1987] . Barwise and J. Etchemendy. The Liar: An Essay on Truth
and Circularity. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1987.
[Bencivenga, 1993] E. Bencivenga. Logic and Other Nonsense: The Case of Anselm and his
God. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 1993.
[Brecher, 1975] R. Brecher. Hartshorne’s modal argument for the existence of God. Ratio, 17,
140-146. 1975.
[Engel, 1963] S. Morris Engel. Kant’s ‘refutation’ of the ontological argument, Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 24, 20-35. 1963.
[Hartshorne, 1962] C. Hartshorne. The Logic of Perfection and Other Essays in Neoclassical
Metaphysics. LaSalle: Open Court Publishing Co. 1962.
[Hartshorne, 1965] C. Hartshorne. Anselm’s Discovery: A Re-Examination of the Ontological
Proof for God’s Existence. LaSalle: Open Court Publishing Co. 1965.
[Hartshorne, 1967] C. Hartshorne. Necessity, Review of Metaphysics, 21, 290-309. 1967.
[Henry, 1967] D. P. Henry. The Logic of Saint Anselm. Oxford: The Clarendon Press. 1967.
[Hick and McGill, 1967] J. Hick and A. C. McGill, ed. The Many-Faced Argument:
Recent
Studies on the Ontological Argument for the Existence of God. New York: The Macmillan
Company. 1967.
[Jacquette, 1994] D. Jacquette. Meinongian logic and anselm’s ontological proof for the existence
of God, The Philosophical Forum, 25, 231-240. 1994.
[Jacquette, 1997] D. Jacquette. Conceivability, intensionality, and the logic of anselm’s modal
argument for the existence of God, International Journal for Philosophy of Religion, 42,
163-173. 1997.
[Jacquette, 2000] D. Jacquette. Liar paradox and metaparadox, Sats: Nordisk Tidsskrift for
Filosoﬁ, 1, 93–104. 2000.
[Kant, 1965] I. Kant. Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. Norman Kemp Smith. New York: St.
Martin’s Press. 1965.
[Kripke, 1975] S. A. Kripke. Outline of a theory of truth, The Journal of Philosophy, 72, 690-
716. 1975.
[Malcolm, 1960] N. Malcolm. Anselm’s ontological arguments, The Philosophical Review, 69,
41-62. 1960.
[Martin, 1970] R. L. Martin, ed. The Paradox of the Liar. New Haven: Yale University Press.
1970.
[Martin, 1984] R. L. Martin, ed. Recent Essays on Truth and the Liar Paradox. Oxford: The
Clarendon Press. 1984.
[Monk, 1991] R. Monk. Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius. New York: Penguin Books. 1991.
[Nelson, 1963] J.O. Nelson. Modal logic and the ontological proof of God’s existence, Review of
Metaphysics, 17, 235-242. 1963.
[Plantinga, 1961] A. Plantinga. A valid ontological argument?, The Philosophical Review, 70,
93-101. 1961.
Religion, 42, 1997, pp. 163-173.

154
Dale Jacquette
[Plantinga, 1966] A. Plantinga. Kant’s objection to the ontological argument, The Journal of
Philosophy, 63, 537-546. 1966.
[Plantinga, 1974] A. Plantinga. The Nature of Necessity. Oxford: The Clarendon Press. 1974.
[Priest, 1979] G. Priest. Indeﬁnite descriptions, Logique et Analyse, 22, 5-21. 1979.
[Priest, 1987] G. Priest. In Contradiction:
A Study of the Transconsistent. Dordrecht and
Boston: Martinus NijhoﬀPublishers. 1987.
[Priest and Routley, 1989] G. Priest and R. Routley. First historical introduction: a preliminary
history of paraconsistent and dialethic approaches, 12-13, 22-23, 36-44, 48. In Priest, Routley
and Jean Norman, Ed. Paraconsistent Logic: Essays on the Inconsistent. Munich and Vienna:
Philosophia Verlag. 1989.
[Priest, 1995] G. Priest. Beyond the Limits of Thought. Cambridge:
Cambridge University
Press. 1995.
[Purtill, 1966] R.L. Purtill. Hartshorne’s modal proof, The Journal of Philosophy, 63, 397-408.
1966.
[Read, 1988] Stephen Read. Relevant Logic: A Philosophical Examination of Inference. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell. 1988.
[R¨ustow, 1987] A. R¨ustow. Der L¨ugner: Theorie, Geschichte und Auﬂ¨osung. New York: Gar-
land Publishing, Inc. 1987.
[Schufreider, 1978] G. Schufreider. An Introduction to Anselm’s Argument. Philadelphia: Tem-
ple University Press. 1978.
[Shaﬀer, 1962] J. Shaﬀer. Existence, predication and the ontological argument, Mind, 71, 307-
325. 1962.
[Skyrms, 1970] B. Skyrms. Return of the liar:
three-valued logic and the concept of truth,
American Philosophical Quarterly, 7, 153-161. 1970.
[Snow, 1964] C.P. Snow. The Two Cultures: And a Second Look. New York: New American
Library. 1964.
[Tarski, 1956] A. Tarski. The concept of truth in formalized languages, 152-278. In Tarski, Logic,
Semantics, Metamathematics: Papers from 1923 to 1938. Trans. J.H. Woodger. Oxford: The
Clarendon Press. 1956.
[Wittgenstein, 1922] L. Wittgenstein. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Ed. C.K. Ogden. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 1922.
[Wittgenstein, 1958] L.
Wittgenstein.
Philosophical
Investigations,
3rd
ed.
Ed.
G.E.M.
Anscombe. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc. 1958.

VAGUENESS AND THE LOGIC OF
ORDINARY LANGUAGE
Roy A. Sorensen
Suppose that “some mathematical creature from the moon” surveys the human
body. The alien moves from the left foot to the right foot, from the left hand to the
right hand, from the left lung to the right lung. Such symmetry! Upon reaching
the heart, the alien infers that there is also a right heart. G. K. Chesterton draws
a moral:
The real trouble with this world of ours is not that it is an unreasonable
world, nor even that it is a reasonable one.
The commonest kind
of trouble is that it is nearly reasonable, but not quite. Life is not
illogicality; yet it is a trap for logicians. It looks just a little more
mathematical and regular than it is; its exactitude is obvious, but its
inexactitude is hidden; its wildness lies in wait. [1927, 148]
The sorites paradox seems to be one of the traps about which Chesterton warns.
When a logician looks at a mountain, he reasons:
Base step: It is safe to ascend one meter.
Induction step: If an ascent of n meters is safe, then so is an ascent of n + 1
meters.
Conclusion: It is safe to ascend all the way up the mountain.
As the light fades and the wind begins to howl, the logician ﬁnds himself stranded.
Where did he go wrong?
1
THE EPISTEMIC DIAGNOSIS
Socrates said we should follow the argument wherever it leads. But the mathe-
matician’s ﬁrst rule for checking his calculation is to see whether the conclusion
is plausible. If it is not, he reviews his logic. The above argument is an instance
of the valid argument form of mathematical induction.
Only the truth of the
premises remains to be checked. The base step is obviously true. Therefore, the
induction step must be false. Epistemicists [Sorensen, 2001; Williamson, 1994]
conclude that there must have been a last safe meter.
Which was it? There is no way to know. The near perfect symmetry of ‘An
ascent of n meters is safe’ and ‘An ascent of n+1 meters is safe’ make it impossible
to aﬃrm one while denying the other.
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

156
Roy A. Sorensen
Most checking procedures only tell you that there is an error somewhere. Often
we can go on to specify the mistake.
The epistemicist admits that he has no
prospect of singling out the last safe step of the mountain climbing sorites. Happily,
such speciﬁcity is not needed to solve the sorites paradox. The epistemicist has
disproved the induction step by means that satisfy mathematical standards of
rigor. What more could you want?
“Sanity!” answer most philosophers. They reject epistemicism as a fanatical
overextension of classical logic. In the following pages I will review their reasons
for restricting or revising or rescinding classical logic. Most of these challenges
either spring from insights about vagueness or prompt such insights. Those who
wish to learn how logic relates to language can do little better than to explore
such confrontations between theory and practice. However, my overarching thesis
is negative: vagueness provides no grounds to restrain classical logic. I believe that
our best prospect for understanding ordinary language is through a resolute appli-
cation of classical logic. I leave it to the reader to judge whether the epistemicist
crosses the unclear line between persistence and dogmatism.
2
DOES LOGIC APPLY TO THE ORDINARY WORLD?
In “Vagueness” Bertrand Russell [1923] declared that logic applies to the Platonic
heavens, not to the terrestrial world. Plato regards the ordinary world as a shadow
of the world of the Forms. This picture accords with the fact that ‘vague’ is a
pejorative term while ‘precise’ is honoriﬁc.
Fredrich Nietzsche agreed that logic is only suited to the forms but he also
regarded the Platonic realm as a rationalist fantasy:
Logic, too, also rests on assumptions that do not correspond to any-
thing in the real world, e.g., on the assumption that there are equal
things, that the same thing is identical at diﬀerent points in time: but
this science arose as a result of the opposite belief (that such things
actually exist in the real world). And it is the same with mathemat-
ics, which would certainly never have arisen if it had been understood
from the beginning that there is no such thing in nature as a perfectly
straight line, a true circle, and absolute measure. [1878, section 11].
The Romantics who preceded Nietzsche believed that the logician projects cate-
gories and boundaries on nature.
The projection of speciﬁcity is deeply rooted and not restricted to intellectuals.
The neuroscientiﬁc term ‘pareidolia’ denotes the brain’s penchant for interpreting
vague images as speciﬁc images. In 1976 the Viking Orbiter radioed back many
images from Mars. Among those from the Cydonia region, one depicted a rock
formation that strongly resembled a human face staring straight up into the heav-
ens. The public interpreted this as evidence of intelligent life on Mars. NASA was
pressured to take more photographs on the next mission.

Vagueness and the Logic of Ordinary Language
157
The Romantics believed that mountains are vague objects. Why is there no
way to tell where the mountain ends and the countryside begins? Because there is
nothing to tell! Ordinary language is vague because reality is vague. Since Mount
Everest lacks a boundary, so does the name ‘Mount Everest’.
If anything, ordinary language is too precise. It fabricates boundaries so that
we can have terms for our syllogisms. The colors of the rainbow are continuous
but ordinary language imposes a conceptual scheme of discrete color terms. We
mistake this artiﬁcial grid as a natural feature of the landscape.
The Romantics’ favorite musical instrument was the Aeolian harp (the “wind
harp”) because it is played without human intervention. The audience hears na-
ture directly. The Romantics believed that a receptive poet lets nature’s message
stream through his lips.
And what do the Romantic poets tell us? That reality is continuous rather than
discrete, that it is holistic rather than piecemeal, that things blur into each other.
There is enough regularity to hypnotize generalizers. But the line, the square, and
the cube cannot domesticate the coast, the sea, and the sky.
3
VAGUENESS IN THE PLATONIC HEAVENS
Russell, Nietzsche, and the Romantics overestimate the tameness of abstractions.
Mathematics teems with perverse exceptions to elegant rules.
It has to be a
reservoir of broken patterns to model rational disappointments. Johannes Kepler
initially believed that the orbit of Mars is circular because that was the simplest
model. When the data did not quite ﬁt, Kepler recovered by acquiescing to the
added complexity of an ellipse. Kepler may have ﬁrst felt that Mars was being
obstreperous. But that was just a projection of his frustration.
I once cursed the inexactitude of an old set of wrenches because none of them
would snugly ﬁt the bolts of my new bicycle. My anger was ill founded: the old
wrenches were in the imperial system while the new bicycle bolts were in the metric
system. ‘Exact’ is relative. When Chesterton speaks of the subtle inexactitude of
nature, he mischaracterizes nature as intrinsically inexact.
As the level of speciﬁcity increases, there are more potential counterexamples.
We should expect simple models to choke on ﬁne-grained input. Even Kepler’s
hypothesis of an elliptical orbit must be revised for the purpose of planetary explo-
ration. After all, the sun and Mars are not point-masses (as Newton understood
when he derived Kepler’s laws of planetary motion from the inverse square law of
gravitational attraction).
The wildness of nature cannot be the sole source of sorites arguments.
For
sorites arguments apply to abstract entities. Take Wang’s paradox: 0 is a small
number. If n is a small number, then n + 1 is a small number. Therefore, a billion
is a small number.
The culprit is vagueness rather than concreteness. Every sorites argument has
a vague inductive predicate. This vagueness does not cause any trouble when the
induction sticks to clear instances of the vague predicate. After all, the following

158
Roy A. Sorensen
argument is sound: A billion is a large number. If n is a large number, then n + 1
is a large number. Therefore, a trillion is large number.
Mathematicians do not try to separate good but vague mathematical inductions
from sorites arguments. They ignore the whole lot by invoking their traditional
ban on vagueness in proofs. The ban began in Greek mathematics and contributes
to the decisiveness of the Western mathematical tradition. The poetical mathe-
maticians of ancient India have ﬂashes of brilliance but do not consolidate their
gains.
Statements that appear in proofs do not exhaust the set of truths about math-
ematical entities. Teachers who study arithmetical reasoning in children apply
many psychological principles about numbers: Small numbers are easier to add
than large numbers, Hindu-Arabic numerals let us reason about large numbers more
eﬃciently than the Roman numerals, and so on. These relational statements are
as much about numbers as they are about children.
Since contemporary mathematicians expurgate vague predicates from proofs,
they purchase precision at the price of completeness. Plato did not have this op-
tion because his theory of Forms was presented as a comprehensive answer to ‘How
do we use general terms?’ Consequently, vague predicates apply to Plato’s abstract
entities. In his middle period, at least, (before worries about the third man argu-
ment in the Parmenides) Plato maintains that the Forms are self-predicational:
Goodness is itself good. Largeness is itself large. Plato also uses vague vocabu-
lary to describe how the Forms relate to particulars and how Forms relate to one
another. For instance, he arranges Forms on a scale from lower to higher Forms.
Chesterton assumes that near misses of orderliness are always contingent. The
human body could have been perfectly symmetrical. The earth could have been
perfectly round instead of bulging at the equator. The solar cycle could have been
an integral multiple of the lunar cycle.
But some near misses are necessary truths. The Pythagoreans believed that
numbers governed the universe. So they assumed that the sides of a triangle were
always commensurable. They were frustrated by the isosceles right triangle. They
could ﬁnd ratios that ever more closely approximate the relationship the sides
bear to the hypotenuse. But the sequence of nearer and nearer misses never hit
the target.
In 1974 advances in aperiodic tiling refreshed the theme of subtle inexactitude.
If an inﬁnite surface is covered with Roger Penrose’s “kites” and “darts”, every
ﬁnite region is contained somewhere inside every other pattern.
But the pat-
tern never quite repeats. Martin Gardner [1989, 9] cites the continuation of the
Chesterton quotation: “Everywhere there is a silent swerving from accuracy by
an inch that is the uncanny element in everything . . .a sort of secret treason in
the universe.” [1927, 149] But the aptness of the quotation is imperfect because
the “treason” committed by Penrose’s tiles is a necessary truth. The swerve is
predictable by a priori reasoning. It is not an a posteriori stab in the back.
Philosophers who posit two worlds exaggerate the diﬀerences between residents
of those worlds. They neglect entities that bridge the worlds. For instance, some

Vagueness and the Logic of Ordinary Language
159
abstract entities, such as the set that contains just Mt. Everest, depend on concrete
individuals for their existence. Since this set exists contingently, not all abstract
objects are necessary beings. If there were no Mt. Everest, there would not be the
singleton set containing Mt. Everest. If Mt. Everest were a vague object, then
{Mt. Everest} would be a vague object. Whatever vagaries aﬀect Mt. Everest
echo with {Mt. Everest}, and {{Mt. Everest}} and so on.
4
DOES LOGIC APPLY TO ORDINARY LANGUAGE?
There is no diﬀerence in how well logic applies to abstract objects and concrete
objects, However, a determined critic of classical logic could still conclude that
logic applies to neither.
There is a way of interpreting this radical position so that it comes out techni-
cally correct: Logic applies to propositions rather than things. Logic is a theory
of entailment and that is a relationship between propositions.
Once we make this semantic ascent, anti-epistemicists can reframe the initial
asymmetry in linguistic terms: Logic applies to the precise language of mathe-
maticians, not the vague language of ordinary speakers.
However, it is self-stultifying to deduce that logic does not apply to any reason-
ing. Meta-reasoning is reasoning. Inapplicability arguments use vague predicates
such as ‘inapplicable’ and ‘vague’.
To avoid self-defeat, we must assume that logic does apply ordinary reasoning.
The new question is this: How do the perfectly round wheels of logic get traction
in the mud of ordinary language?
5
VAGUENESS AS A PRE-LOGICAL PHENOMENON
Susan Haack’s [1974, ch. 6] answer is that classical logic only applies to vague
predicates after they have been precisiﬁed. This preparation is standard operating
procedure in the case of ambiguity.
If vagueness is hyper-ambiguity, then we can directly apply the maxim ‘Dis-
ambiguation precedes logic’. However, vagueness diﬀers from ambiguity in key
respects [Sorensen, 1998]. Concepts can be vague but cannot be ambiguous (since
words are disambiguated by concepts). There could be vagueness in the language
of thought even though there could not be any ambiguity. One cannot wittingly
believe a sentence with an unresolved ambiguity. However, one can wittingly be-
lieve a statement with unresolved vagueness. Ambiguity confers discretion over
what one means. Vagueness does not. Lastly, the identiﬁcation of vagueness with
ambiguity is undermined by the fact that there is higher order vagueness but no
higher order ambiguity. (Ambiguity about ambiguity collapses into ambiguity.)
‘Vague’ is vague but ‘ambiguous’ is not ambiguous, so vagueness cannot be ambi-
guity.

160
Roy A. Sorensen
The amount of vagueness in a natural language exactly equals the amount of
vagueness of any other natural language. This follows from the inter-translatability
of languages. You cannot resolve a borderline case by translation into a diﬀerent
language. The constancy of vagueness also follows from the psychological premise
that there is a single language of thought, “mentalese”, underlying all natural
languages.
The amount of ambiguity does vary across languages and within stages of a
language. Consequently, translation can remove an ambiguity. Surprisingly, the
speech of children becomes more ambiguous as their speech matures into adult
form.
For they master irregularities of omission.
After a boy learns the –ed
rule for past tense, he overregularizes verbs. He says ‘On Thursday I putted the
trash out’. After he stops overregularizing, he says ‘On Thursday I put the trash
out’. But notice that this “improvement” is ambiguous. It could mean that last
Thursday he took the trash out or next Thursday he will take the trash out or
mean that he habitually takes the trash out every Thursday. English has about
twenty-ﬁve irregular verbs (put, cut, set) that don’t change their forms in the past
tense. When children become suﬃciently exposed to the irregular usage, their
used of the –ed rule is blocked and their speech becomes more ambiguous.
Granted, disambiguation and precisiﬁcation are salient features of scientiﬁc lan-
guage. Scientists replace qualitative terms (hot) with comparative terms (hotter
than) and comparative terms with degree terms (n degrees centigrade). Rudolph
Carnap [1950] looked forward to the day when language was so precise that the
sorites paradox could no longer be expressed.
Are precisiﬁcations cumulative? Often they do promote peace and stability.
Legislators prevent disputes over borderline cases by imposing sharp cut-oﬀs for
adulthood, death, and citizenship. Law accumulates deﬁnitions because they pro-
mote predictability.
However, the stabilizing eﬀect is not universal.
Discord is sharpened when
indeﬁnite borderline cases are precisiﬁed into deﬁnite borderline cases. Hundreds
of islets in the Aegean Sea were not mentioned by name in the Treaty of Lausanne
(or by later treaties that ceded the eastern islands to Greece). The Greeks regard
the islets as dependent on the major islands and so part of their territory. The
Turks only recognize Greek sovereignty over the islands speciﬁcally named in the
Treaty. The Turks were vague about which islets were part of the named islands
and which islets were in “the grey zone’. This changed in 1998 when the Turkish
prime minister speciﬁed that Agathonisi, Farmakonisi, Fourni, and Pserimos were
borderline cases. He asked the European Union not to fund environmental projects
until the sovereignty of those islets was settled.
One may complain that the Aegean example is unfair because the precisiﬁcation
was incomplete. Further precisiﬁcation, perhaps by the negotiation proposed by
the Turks, would bring about the peace promised by precisiﬁcation.
So let me mention a case that does not turn on the unearthing of underlying
borderline cases. In 1910, residents of Taﬀ’s Well were outraged when cartogra-
phers classiﬁed Garth Mountain as a hill. The villagers had taken pride in it being

Vagueness and the Logic of Ordinary Language
161
the ﬁrst mountain inside of Wales — especially since the English have no moun-
tains. The two representatives of His Majesty’s Ordnance Survey explained that a
mountain must have an elevation of 1000 feet. They measured Garth Mountain at
986 feet. The locals detained the cartographers and built a twenty-foot mound at
the summit. The incident became the basis for the 1995 movie “The Englishman
Who Went Up a Hill But Came Down a Mountain”.
The type of precisiﬁcation practiced by scientists and administrators is vague-
ness reduction, not the total elimination of vagueness. Consider all the residual
vague terms in the deﬁnition “A mountain is an area of land that stands up at
least 1000 feet from the surrounding countryside.” If cartographers tried to excise
all the vague terms, the concept would be disﬁgured beyond recognition. However,
only complete precisiﬁcation makes a term invulnerable to the sorites.
Scientists and administrators are not trying to solve the sorites paradox so the
residual vagueness does not frustrate their goals. The incompleteness is a problem
for philosophers who want to solve the sorites paradox with these precisiﬁcations.
Carnap also underestimates our success at reasoning with vague terms. The
original sense of ‘mountain’ co-exists with its precisiﬁed oﬀspring. If we were not
able to reason with ‘mountain’ we would not be able to construct precisiﬁcations
of ‘mountain’.
Consider the dictum ‘A precise conclusion cannot be deduced from vague
premises’. This can be refuted. The disjunction of vague statement, V , and a
precise statement, P, is either precise or vague. If ‘P or V ’ is precise, then the
counterexample is the argument: V therefore P or V . If ‘P or V ’ is vague, then
the counterexample is: P or V , not V , therefore, P.
Since precise conclusions can be deduced from vague premises, vague predicates
can deﬁne precise predicates. For instance, 105 is precisely denoted by conjoin-
ing ‘integer somewhat greater than 104’ and ‘integer somewhat less than 106’
[Sorensen, 1988].
Vagueness does not collect over conjunction; a genus term can be precise where
its species terms are vague. Consider the genus Larus. It contains ring species. In
Britain, herring gulls are white and breed with the herring gulls of eastern America.
American herring gulls are also white and breed with Alaskan gulls. Alaskan gulls
breed with Siberian gulls. But as the specimens progress from Alaska and Siberia,
they get smaller and have more black markings. When the series reaches back to
Britain, they have become Lesser Black-Backed Gulls — which do not interbreed
with herring gulls. Cases that are borderline between ‘herring gull’ and ‘lesser
black-backed gulls’ are clear cases of Larus.
Vagueness also fails to collect under relationships that have resisted formaliza-
tion. ‘Color’ is not the genus of ‘red’ and ‘blue’. ‘Red’ and ‘blue’ are primitive
terms; they cannot be deﬁned as conjunctions of a genus and diﬀerentia. ‘Red’
and ‘blue’ are determinates of the determinable ‘color’ because they are mutually
exclusive [Johnson, 1921, 176]. Cases that are borderline between red and blue
are not borderline cases of color. Thus a precise determinable can have vague
determinates.

162
Roy A. Sorensen
The reverse holds as well: A determinable can be vague even though each of
its determinates is precise. For there might be indeterminacy as to whether the
determinates exhaust the range of the concept. Consider ‘number’. Each type of
number is precise (natural numbers, negative numbers, rational numbers, irrational
numbers, etc.) but there is still unclarity about whether there might be further
types of numbers.
Vagueness also fails to collect meta-linguistically. There are vague predicates
that denote all and only precise predicates.
For instance, the vague predicate
‘precise predicate’ picks out all and only precise predicates.
The failure of vagueness to collect spells success in applying logic to vague pred-
icates. That success is manifested in several ways that go beyond toy deﬁnitions.
Historically, scientiﬁc predicates develop from ordinary language. Just as ordi-
nary language disambiguates itself, ordinary language precisiﬁes itself.
Developmentally, vagueness precedes precision. The child’s innate stock of con-
cepts is mostly vague, so even if a completely precise language were devised, chil-
dren would not speak it. Parents need to communicate with their children, so
the children would “corrupt” their parents. Only in the last stages of linguistic
development do they master words for numbers and geometrical ﬁgures.
Linguistically, the applicability of logic to ordinary language is presupposed
by the productivity of language.
Instead of parroting back what parents said,
children usually utter sentences that have never been spoken before. Children are
systematic. Once they understand a sentence they understand all sentences of
that sort. That understanding is reﬂected in their inferences. Children calculate
the meaning of new sentences from the meaning of their components.
Logically, the topic neutrality of deduction ensures that classical logic applies
to vague predicates. If an argument is formally valid, then uniform substitution
of other predicates yields another valid argument. For what makes an argument
formally valid is its structure, not its content. Therefore, if an argument with
precise predicates is formally valid, uniform substitution with vague predicates
will yield another valid argument.
6
DOES LOGIC ONLY APPLY LOOSELY?
According to Max Black, we can only apply geometrical principles to the extent
that the objects do not signiﬁcantly sag or bend. Logic presupposes sharp bound-
aries in the way geometry presupposes rigid boundaries.
What are the speciﬁc implications of this analogy for the sorites paradox? In
“Reasoning with Loose Concepts” Black says that the sorites is valid but claims
the induction step lacks a truth-value. This is a revision of standard logic rather
than special handling of it. For Black is saying that an argument can be valid,
have no false premises and yet have a false conclusion.
Black says the induction step lacks a truth-value because it quantiﬁes over
borderline cases.
It “bundles together proper and improper instances” of the
vague inductive predicate.

Vagueness and the Logic of Ordinary Language
163
Black’s bundling requirement is too strong.
It rules out remarks about the
relationship between clear cases and borderline cases. For instance, “If a man is
clearly tall, then he is not a borderline case for ‘tall”’. This is true, rather than
neither true nor false. Indeed, it is just the sort of remark Black makes in the
course of his analysis.
Perhaps Black could substitute another explanation of why the induction step
lacks a truth-value. If he succeeds, he will still need to provide principles that
govern inferences from statements that lack truth-values. So although Black only
wished to restrict the application of classical logic, he is committed to the more
formidable enterprise of devising a separate logic for vague statements.
7
TRUTH-VALUE GAPS
Might this logic be supervaluationism? Supervaluationists drop the requirement
that all statements have truth-values. If a compound statement would have the
same truth-value regardless of how truth-values were distributed to its components,
then the statement actually has that invariant truth-value.
This preserves all
theorems of classical logic. The induction step of the sorites comes out false under
all precisiﬁcations of the inductive predicate. Thus supervaluationism suggests an
elegant solution to the sorites paradox.
Supervaluationism also harmonizes with the use theory of meaning. Words get
their meaning from the intentions of speakers. These intentions are incomplete
so our terms are not fully deﬁned.
As we go along, we ﬁll in the meaning in
accordance with new information and interests.
Supervaluationism diﬀers from classical logic in not being truth-functional. One
cannot calculate the truth-value of a compound statement from the truth-values of
its components. It also requires rejection of inference rules such as contraposition,
conditional proof and reductio ad absurdum. For now it is fallacious to infer that
a statement is false from the premise that it is not true.
The meaning of the supervaluationist’s rejection of the induction step is elusive.
When the supervaluationist says ‘There is an n such that it is safe to climb n
meters up the mountain but not n + 1 meters’, he warns us not to interpret him
as agreeing with the epistemicist who thinks there is some speciﬁc number that is
the last safe distance in meters. This seems like an ontologically dishonest use of
the existential quantiﬁer.
There is also obscurity in the supervaluationist’s aﬃrmation of the base step of
the induction step. When he says ‘It is safe to ascend one meter up the mountain’,
his logic construes this as the claim that the statement comes out true under all
precisiﬁcations of ‘safe’.
But that seems diﬀerent from calling something safe.
The supervaluationist seems to be refusing to aﬃrm that anything ﬁts the vague
predicate ‘safe’. This makes supervaluationism resemble the nihilist solution that
vague predicates do not apply to anything. For instance, Peter Unger [1979] denies
that there is any ordinary thing but agrees that precise predicates apply to the
world. He also agrees that vague predicates can be fruitfully applied (because of

164
Roy A. Sorensen
their relations with precise predicates). Thus there is less distance between the
supervaluationists and the nihilist than ﬁrst appears.
8
LOGICAL PLURALISM
Interest in a separate logic of vagueness goes beyond philosophers. The psycholin-
guist Stephen Pinker [1999] says we have a precise style of reasoning that is reg-
ulated by rules and a vague style of reasoning that is governed by similarity and
memory. The precise style of reasoning is epitomized by Euclid’s geometry. The
vague style was ﬁrst articulated as principles of association by the British empiri-
cists. Ironically, the principles founded on introspection survived the behaviorist
revolution and ﬂourished as principles of conditioning.
Pinker uses irregular words to illustrate the strengths and weaknesses of the
two cognitive subsystems. The rule for expressing the plural by adding the suﬃx
−s is a compact mechanism for generating indeﬁnitely many nouns. However,
the ending is sometimes hard on the tongue.
Witness sixths. Or consider the
dilemma over how to pluralize sorites. The rule says you need add the suﬃx −s.
But this suﬃx is hard to hear in words that end in s so considerations of clarity
militate against the s. You are damned if you do and damned if you don’t. (Most
writers prefer to be damned if they don’t.) Irregular nouns are much easier on the
grammatical superego; they use vowel changes (goose, geese), which are always
easy on the ear.
The appropriateness of making exceptions is an issue in ethics. Generalists think
morality is rule-based. Particularists think it is more akin to perception. There
are extremists on both sides. Kant says you should never lie. Situation ethicists
deny that there are any moral principles. The situationist has some wiggle room
here because he could admit there are useful rules of thumb. Psychologists may
contribute to this debate by gauging how well we perform when following rules and
how well we perform opportunistically. Recent epistemologists are impressed by
how simple rules (when based on actuarial reasoning) far outperform deliberation
that seeks out the nuances of the situation [Bishop and Trout, 2005].
Physiologists may also have something to say. Mountaineering guides divide
between the situationalists and the legalists [Boukreev, 1997, 155]. The legalists
emphasize rules such as ‘If you are not in sight of Mt. Everest’s summit by noon,
then turn back’. Situationalists say that such rules are not ﬂexible enough and
contradict the spirit of adventure. Legalism strengthens with altitude. The higher
you go, the greater the eﬀect of oxygen deprivation. The judgment of hypoxic
individuals is impaired so they are best oﬀfollowing rules.
So what is the nature of language?
Psycholinguists stress that speech is a
reﬂex. There is no time to deliberate about your next phoneme. Speech, at the
ﬁne-grained level, must be automatic. That means rules will dominate. However,
there is still room for memory and association to intercede when the performance
of rules is weak.

Vagueness and the Logic of Ordinary Language
165
There is much division of labor between rules and rote learning. There is also
some competition in the overlap areas. Pinker conjectures that this duality un-
derlies legal and social issues. In law, the drive for rules collides with the need to
respect precedent and the quirks of human nature [Solan, 1999].
Epistemicists do not concede that classical logic has trouble with reasoning that
relies on memory and association. An arbitrarily constituted set behaves just as
logically as a set whose membership is dictated by a tidy rule. Some mathematical
problems are solved by checking each case without any interest in subsuming the
cases under a category. The logic of brute force is clear.
Like other human beings, logicians are slow to recognize randomness. They
tend to read in more order than there is. But this fondness for order springs from
our humanity not our logic. We like logic because we like order, not the other way
around. Our logic must be powerful enough to represent our defeats as well as our
victories. (The simple logical operation of negation goes a long way here.) So it
has no problem with randomness and heart-breaking deviations from simplicity.
Epistemicists agree that there should be additional logics such as modal logic,
epistemic logic, and mereology. After all, many valid arguments are not validated
by classical logic. But a failure to validate is not the same as a verdict of invalidity.
Classical logic is too weak in that it fails to validate arguments that owe their
validity to terms conveying necessity, belief, part-whole relations, and other terms
that are, arguably, logical constants.
To correct this omission, logicians have
developed supplemental logics that add inference rules or theorems.
However, the sorites argument raises the graver issue that classical logic commits
an error of commission. Instead of saying nothing, classical logic validates sorites
arguments. If the sorites argument is not valid, classical logic is too strong. The
only cure would be a deviant logic, one that rejects a theorem or some inference
rules of classical logic.
9
DEVIANT LOGIC
Instead of changing words to ﬁt logic, the deviant logician changes logic to ﬁt
words. Most deviant logicians think the classical logician is a victim of his own
success. Classical logic performs well in the arena (mathematical proof) for which
it was designed.
(The founding intuitionists are exceptions: the constructivist
Brouwer thinks classical logic is ﬁne for ordinary language but inadequate for
mathematics.)
Since the deviant logicians characterize classical logic as an overextension from
a local victory, they design their logics to agree with classical logic for the special
case in which predicates are precise. Deviant logicians will say that their logic
stands to classical logic as Einstein’s physics stands to Newton’s.
But this stills the leaves the question of which deviant logic is the right one for
ordinary language. To say that a logic is right is to say that it accurately models
the entailment relation. Considered narrowly, a logic is just a formal system in
which strings of symbols are transformed into other strings of symbols. A formal

166
Roy A. Sorensen
system is neither right nor wrong. Interpretations of that system can be right or
wrong. Interpretation takes us beyond formal logic into semantics, psychology,
and metaphysics. That is where the philosophical action is and that is where I
will focus.
10
MANY-VALUED LOGIC
Jan Lukasciewicz developed the ﬁrst deviant logic.
He proposed many-valued
logic as a solution to Aristotle’s problem of logical fatalism. According to the
law of bivalence, every proposition has one of two truth-values, true or false.
That includes propositions about the future such as ‘There will be a sea-battle
tomorrow’. If the proposition is true now, then the sea-battle is inevitable. If
the proposition is false now, then the sea-battle is impossible. Thus the law of
bivalence seems to imply fatalism.
Lukasiewicz’s solution is that future contingent propositions only have a de-
gree of truth. He gives truth-functional rules for calculating the truth-values of
compound statements from the truth-values of their component statements. The
truth-value of ‘Not p’ equals one minus the truth-value of p. Disjunctions get the
highest truth-value possessed by a disjunct. So when p has an intermediate truth-
value, ‘p or not p’ has an intermediate truth-value. The law of excluded middle is
not a theorem. In particular ‘Either there will be a sea battle tomorrow or not’ is
not fully true, so the fatalist loses a key premise.
Lukasiewicz’s solution has been criticized. For instance, he says conjunctions
get the same value as their lowest conjunct. So when p has an intermediate value,
then ‘p and not p’ gets an intermediate value. Arthur Prior [1967] says this is too
lenient. All contradictions should be false.
Such problems led to the invention of other variations of many-valued logic.
Some add a fourth truth-value. Some add a ﬁfth. Others add inﬁnitely many.
Some tinker with the rules for calculating truth-values. Some overhaul the rules
wholesale [Edgington, 1996].
Others drop the truth-functionality altogether to
preserve the theorems [Sanford, 1975].
Lukasiewicz’s application of many-valued logic to fatalism was compromised by
the strong performance of modal logic. The argument for fatalism in Aristotle’s De
Interpretatione appears to commit syntactic fallacies with the necessity operator
such as inferring ‘Necessarily p or necessarily not p’ from ‘Necessarily p or not p’.
When a supplemental logic can cure the disorder we forego the deviant logician’s
surgery.
J. Goguen [1969] suggested that many-valued logic has stronger prospects as
a logic of vagueness.
He interprets borderline propositions as partially true.
Goguen’s rules suggest that the sorites argument is not perfectly valid. Although
each conditional in the chain of reasoning is nearly fully true, they are not fully
true. These departures from full truth are insigniﬁcant for short chains of reason-
ing. That is why classical logic looks ﬁne. Indeed, classical logic is a special case
of fuzzy logic where all the truth-values equal full truth or full falsehood.

Vagueness and the Logic of Ordinary Language
167
11
FAMILY RESEMBLANCE
Those who say fuzzy logic is more applicable to ordinary language than classi-
cal logic often appeal to Ludwig Wittgenstein’s doctrine of family resemblance.
In Plato’s dialogues, Socrates takes the ability to deﬁne to be the criterion of
knowledge. To know something is to grasp its form. That form is expressed by
a deﬁnition. A deﬁnition states a property that is common and peculiar to the
concept in question. For instance, a geometer knows what a triangle is because he
can deﬁne ‘triangle’ as an enclosed ﬁgure composed of three straight lines.
Although Socrates questions much, he does not question his presupposition that
each word has a condition that is both necessary and suﬃcient for its application.
Wittgenstein objects that many important terms (number, art, consciousness,
knowledge, religion) instead get their unity from a family resemblance between
cases. He illustrates with ‘game’:
Look for example at board-games, with their multifarious relationships.
Now pass to card games; here you ﬁnd many correspondences with the
ﬁrst group, but many common features drop out, and others appear.
When we pass next to ball-games, much that is common is retained,
but much is lost. . . is there always winning and losing, or competition
between players? Think of patience [i.e., solitaire, in which there is
no competition]. In ball games there is winning and losing; but when
a child throws his ball at the wall and catches it again, this feature
has disappeared. . . Think now of ring-a-roses; here there is the element
of amusement, but how many other characteristic features have disap-
peared!. . . And the result of this examination is: we see a complicated
network of similarities overlapping and criss-crossing; sometimes over-
all similarities, sometimes similarities in detail. [sect. 66]
The positive aspect of Wittgenstein’s proposal is that family resemblance is a
suﬃcient condition for extending a term.
However, Wittgenstein does not say
which kinds of similarity are family resemblances. The fortuneteller examining
tarot cards resembles the solitaire player but fortune telling is not a game. To
ordinary people, dolphins seem similar to ﬁsh. To biologists, dolphins seem more
similar to mammals. Here we relativize to experts. Should we go on to relativize
to botanists and classify tomatoes as fruits? Some similarities are only heuristic
(using gray hair to identify grandmothers) and are devoid of semantic import.
Which are the semantically signiﬁcant resemblances?
Most attention has been concentrated on a negative aspect of the family resem-
blance proposal: the absence of essential features. This challenge is not unprece-
dented. Medieval nominalists attacked realism about universals with a theory of
analogy. W. E. Johnson [1921] contrasts the determinables/determinates distinc-
tion with the genus/diﬀerentia distinction by emphasizing that the former does
not involved shared properties.
The positive side of the family resemblance doctrine is sketchy. Renford Bam-
brough suggested that the details be ﬁlled in along the lines of the following model.

168
Roy A. Sorensen
Suppose O1 to O5 are ﬁve objects and ABCDE are ﬁve properties:
O1
O2
O3
O4
O5
ABCD
ABCE
ABDE
ACDE
BCDE
Each object shares 75% of its properties with each other object but none of the
listed properties is common between all the objects.
Other passages from the Philosophical Investigations associate family resem-
blance with the continuity of a slippery slope.
And we extend our concept of number as in spinning a thread we twist
ﬁbre on ﬁbre. And the strength of the thread does not reside in the
fact that some one ﬁbre runs through its whole length, but in the
overlapping of many ﬁbres. (PI 67)
Each bundle of properties changes like the Ship of Theseus. All common elements
are gradually lost:
O6
O7
O8
O9
O10
ABCD
ABCE
ABEF
AEFG
EFGH
Each object has a 75% resemblance with its immediate neighbors but not all of
its neighbors. For instance, objects O6 and O10 have nothing in common. They
are instead linked by their intermediate cases.
There certainly are many vague transitions in language. Lewis Carroll [1880,
31] has a word ladder in which he changes GNAT to BITE in six steps: GNAT,
GOAT, BOAT, BOLT, BOLE, BILE, BITE. (Fred Madden cites this word ladder
to explain why Through the Looking Glass has a gnat in a railway carriage along-
side a goat.)
Historical linguists document some linguistic changes as slippery
slope transformations. Semanticists have noted the existence of sense spectra (a
counterpart to ring species) in which a word changes its sense imperceptibly.
Wittgenstein admits that there are suﬃcient conditions for applying ‘game’; all
team sports are games. He also admits that there are necessary conditions; all
games have rules. At most, Wittgenstein is denying that there is a condition that
is both necessary and suﬃcient.
But Wittgenstein does not quite deny that either.
From a logical point of
view, there is always something common and peculiar to any set of things. In
Bambrough’s quota model, each object satisﬁes the following disjunction: ABCD
or ABCE or ABDE or ACDE or BCDE. We can shorten the condition to (A &
B) ∨(A & C) ∨(B & C). The common property can be expressed as a quota: the
object must have 80% of the following properties: ABCDE.
When the extension is ﬁnite, we can state the necessary and suﬃcient condition
as a long disjunction draw from the members of the predicate’s extension. Often
we can devise a rule that compresses the statement of this essential property. But
not always. If the shortest rule used to summarize the items is as long as the list,
then we might as well rely on the list.

Vagueness and the Logic of Ordinary Language
169
The vast majority of numerical sequences are not compressible. In the termi-
nology of computer scientists, they have high algorithmic complexity and so are
random. However, the limits of human memory ensure that speakers do not use
predicates with large, uncompressible extensions.
Wittgenstein dismisses the list technique as a verbal trick: “One might as well
say: ‘Something runs through the whole thread — namely the continuous overlap-
ping of those ﬁbres” (PI 67). The logician is being more clever than wise because it
is implausible that people follow such complex, abstract rules. Thus Wittgenstein
is only denying that our usage is explained by condition that is both necessary and
suﬃcient for our usage.
Socrates would accept the requirement that the necessary and suﬃcient condi-
tion be explanatory. For he believes we are guided by the deﬁnition of ‘virtue’ in
the way a geometer is guided by the deﬁnition of ‘triangle’. He is committed to
more than the mere existence of the necessary and suﬃcient condition. Socrates
thinks the knower must have the right psychological connection to the deﬁnition.
The nature of this connection might be more complicated than Socrates antic-
ipated. Children rely heavily on a variety of heuristics (height, density, volume,
item size) to judge whether one group has more items than another group: This
makes them vulnerable to numeroisty illusions. As children mature, they learn to
ignore these features when the task requires abstract reasoning.
Even a mathematician who knows the deﬁnition of ‘greater than’ might use
memory or heuristics to judge whether there is more. People answer questions by
applying a number of techniques simultaneously. When one of the techniques yields
an answer, they stop. Thus, there is a race between methods. The mixed nature of
the winners ensures psychological heterogeneity in the data. The bridge between
the deﬁnition and human usage is paved with memory, encyclopedic knowledge,
association, and rules of thumb.
Wittgenstein’s second reply to the clever logician is that family resemblance
terms are typically open-textured. Speakers are constantly adding to the meaning
of the word. Think of all the diﬀerent kinds of numbers (negative numbers, irra-
tional numbers, etc.) that have been added to the extension — so far. This open
frontier is part of the meaning of ‘number’. Since there is no stable set of things
to which the term applies, the logician cannot perform his trick of disjoining all
the members of the extension.
Speakers do not always agree about whether to extend a term to a novel case.
There is often no fact of the matter. Competent speakers can disagree.
This “faultless disagreement” [Wright, 2001] creates an interesting tension with
Wittgenstein’s theme that language depends on agreement. To be speakers of the
same language, we must apply the same rules and judge the world in a similar
enough fashion to give a point to the execution of those rules.
Socrates treats his failure to ﬁnd deﬁnitions as a failure of ingenuity. The fact
that one has not discovered the deﬁnition does not show that it does not exist.
Admittedly, the argumentum ad ignorantiam seems less fallacious if the search has
gone on fruitlessly since 399 BC. But the Meno’s doctrine of reminiscence suggests

170
Roy A. Sorensen
the outline of a rejoinder: Speakers have an impoverished knowledge of deﬁnitions.
They are like students who can recognize the correct answers to a multiple-choice
question but who cannot spontaneously answer (and so dread an essay exam).
This impoverished knowledge is a stepping-stone to the richer sort of knowledge
that goes with the explicit statement of deﬁnitions.
12
PROTOTYPES
The doctrine of family resemblance inspired Eleanor Rosch’s [1978] research on
prototypes. She reports that people perceive category membership as a matter
of degree rather than a clear-cut yes-no matter. Reaction time studies show that
people quickly and reliably judge central members. Flies are deﬁnitely insects.
Robins are deﬁnitely birds.
Their judgments are stable about whether cancer
is a disease or whether apples are fruits. The story is diﬀerent with peripheral
members of categories. People are slow to judge whether a stroke is a disease or
pumpkins are fruits. When re-tested a month later, many change their minds.
In fuzzy set theory, membership comes in degrees.
Thus the fuzzy logician
seems poised to consolidate Rosch’s research. For instance, George Lakoﬀ[1974]
uses fuzzy logic to model predicate modiﬁers such as somewhat, sort of, and loosely
speaking.
Fuzzy logic was given a further boost in the 1980s by the connectionist revolu-
tion in cognitive science. Classical systems of information are inspired by formal
languages and the digital computers that instantiate those formal systems. They
manipulate symbols by means of explicit rules in a serial manner. Connectionist
systems are inspired by the brain. Their basic building block is the neuron. Con-
nectionist systems are neural nets that rely on parallel processing of sub-symbols.
They use statistical properties instead of all-or-nothing rules to transform infor-
mation.
But the epistemicist acknowledges that statistical generalizations are often bet-
ter than universal generalizations. We associate classical logic with universal quan-
tiﬁers because simple syllogisms use universal quantiﬁers. But even Aristotle is
careful to stress the role of the quantiﬁer ‘some’. There are puzzles about how
to model quantiﬁers such as ‘most’. The problem here is the vagueness of the
quantiﬁer, not its statistical aspect.
The last line of Peter Strawson’s “On Referring” was intended as rebuke to
Bertrand Russell’s theory of deﬁnite descriptions: “Neither Aristotelian nor Rus-
sellian rules give the exact logic of any expression of ordinary language; for ordinary
language has no exact logic.” [Strawson, 1971, 27]. Russell later said this was their
only point of agreement! But what would they be agreeing to? There are several
ways to interpret Strawson’s remark. Strawson might be saying that classical logic
does not apply to ordinary language. He might be saying it applies only in some
loose fashion or that a special logic is needed for vague language. Or Strawson
might be saying that a deviant logic is needed. Our investigation has produced

Vagueness and the Logic of Ordinary Language
171
reasons to reject all three interpretations. Thus we are justiﬁed in continuing to
apply classical logic to vague propositions.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Bishop and Trout, 2005] M. A. Bishop and J.D. Trout. Epistemology and the Psychology of
Human Judgment New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
[Boukreev and Dewalt, 1997] A. Boukreev and G. Weston Dewalt. The Climb: Tragic Ambi-
tions on Everest New York: St. Martin’s Press.
[Carnap, 1950] R. Carnap. Logical Foundations of Probability, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1950.
[Carroll, 1880] L. Carroll. Doublets: A Word Puzzle New York: Macmillan, third edition. 1880.
[Chesterton, 1927] G. K. Chesterton. The paradoxes of christianity. In his Orthodoxy New York:
Dodd, Mean and Company, 1927.
[Edgington, 1996] D. Edgington. Vagueness by degrees. In Vagueness: A Reader ed. Rosanna
Keefe and Peter Smith (Cambridge: MIT Press): 294–316, 1996.
[Fine, 1975] K. Fine. Vagueness, truth, and logic Synthese 30: 265–300, 1975.
[Gardner, 1989] M. Gardner. Penrose tiling. In his Penrose Tiles to Trapdoor Cipers New York:
W. H. Freeman, 1989.
[Goguen, 1969] J. Goguen. The logic of inexact concepts, Synthese, 19: 325-73, 1969.
[Haack, 1974] S. Haack. Deviant Logic London: Cambridge University Press, 1974.
[Johnson, 1921] W. E. Johnson. Logic, Part I, Cambridge: Cambridge U. P, 1921.
[Nietzsche, 1878] F. Nietzsche. Human, All-Too-Human, 1878. Trans. Helen Zimmern. (New
York: Russell & Russell Inc., 1964.
[Prior, 1967] A. Prior. Past, Present and Future Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1967.
[Russell, 1923] B. Russell. Vagueness Australasian Journal of Philosophy 1: 297–314, 1923.
[Sanford, 1975] D. Sanford. Borderline logic American Philosophical Quarterly 12/1: 29–39,
1975.
[Solan, 1999] L. Solan. Why laws work pretty well, but not great: words and rules in legal
interpretation, Law & Social Inquiry 26: 243–270, 1999.
[Sorensen, 1987] R. Sorensen. The vagueness of knowledge Canadian Journal of Philosophy
17/4: 767–804, 1987.
[Sorensen, 1988] R. Sorensen. Precisiﬁcation by means of vague predicates Notre Dame Journal
of Formal Logic 29/2: 267–275, 1988.
[Sorensen, 1991] R. Sorensen. Vagueness within the language of thought Philosophical Quarterly
41/165: 389–413, 1991.
[Sorensen, 1998] R. Sorensen. Ambiguity, discretion, and the sorites Monist 81/2 (1998): 217–
235, 1998.
[Sorensen, 2001] R. Sorensen. Vagueness and Contradiction Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2001
[Strawson, 1971] P. Strawson. On referring. In his Logico-Linguistic Papers Methuen: 1–27,
1971.
[Unger, 1979] P. Unger. There are no ordinary things Synthese, 4: 117–54, 1979.
[Williamson, 1994] T. Williamson. Vagueness, London: Routledge, 1994.
[Wright, 2001] C. Wright. On being in a quandary Mind 110/437: 45–98, 2001.


LOGIC AND SEMANTIC ANALYSIS
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
1
INTRODUCTION
When we wish to frame or to communicate a precise and nuanced argument, we
should ﬁrst clarify whatever meaningful distinctions our reasoning exploits. That’s
why every good paper begins by deﬁning its terms. A tiger is a large and ferocious
predatory cat, yellow with black stripes. A bachelor is an unmarried man. Freedom
is the capacity to choose one’s actions for oneself, independent of causal forces in
the outside world. Knowledge is justiﬁed true belief. Getting clear on our concepts
is the process of analysis. It is such a fundamental part of philosophical practice
that the preponderance of contemporary philosophical writing in English today is
described as ‘analytic’.
Analysis issues in statements that seem to equate ideas. When we agree on
these statements, we seem to do so in advance of any argument. When we dispute
them, we seem to argue not about what’s true or false, but about what’s worth
discussing at all. These observations naturally lead to a particular interpretation of
philosophical practice: When we do analysis, we ask ourselves about the meanings
of our sentences or the contents of our thoughts.
The meanings and contents
we discover are inherent in our sentences and thoughts, and could not have been
otherwise. And our introspection comes with the subjective authority with which
we know our own minds. So when we practice analysis, the statements we derive
are ‘analytic’.
Traditionally, this has been understood to mean that they are
necessarily true, purely in virtue of the meanings of our terms, and that they are
knowable a priori, independently of any experience.
If there were any analytic statements in this sense, it would be a boon for phi-
losophy. We could argue against a skeptic about the real world, for example, by
constructing an incontrovertible analysis of our concepts and reasoning from it to
derive the knowledge we hope to attribute to ourselves from the incorrigible evi-
dence of our senses. We could also argue against a skeptic about intersubjectivity
— someone who contested the idea of public truth or falsehood on the grounds
that our ideas are private and even language does not oﬀer public means for us to
share them. If we share the terms with which we frame our arguments, and know
their meanings a priori, we can be conﬁdent that we agree on the questions, and
so can be conﬁdent that our disputes contest the answers.
We shall follow Quine [1953] in thinking that there are no analytic statements
in this broad sense.
When we do semantic analysis, we cannot hope to infer
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

174
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
statements that have a special status in philosophy. We explicate his reasoning in
this chapter, and suggest that while developments in the philosophy of mind and
language over the more than ﬁfty years since Quine may have superceded much
of his perspective, they continue to support his conclusion. However, although we
agree that there are no a priori truths that describe linguistic meaning, we do not
believe semantic analysis should be abandoned. On the contrary, the enterprise of
semantics in linguistics and in the philosophy of language depends on our ability
to articulate and formalize precise statements that specify and explicate linguistic
meaning. Such statements serve as crucial hypotheses in the scientiﬁc enterprise of
accounting for linguistic behavior. Only such general laws of meaning can explain
the productive capacity that we all have in order to use and to understand the
potential inﬁnity of statements in our native language.
Our view reﬂects the belief that the laws of meaning are not knowable a priori.
As speakers, we learn them or ﬁx them in our interactions with our linguistic
community and the environment; as theorists, we hypothesize them to explain our
linguistic competence. Thus, it is not a logical consequence of our knowledge of
meaning that we share the meanings of our terms with others in our community;
it is an assumption that we make but that a skeptic might deny. Moreover, it
turns out that the semantic facts we need to explain language use are profoundly
boring for philosophy more generally. Here is a typical example: If Kim kissed
Sandy, then there was a kissing. Such facts do not bridge sensory and categorical
vocabulary. They will not allow us to relate our knowledge of the world to the
evidence of our senses; so they will not underpin our epistemology. Analysis, again,
has clear limits, and we will have to ﬁght the skeptic the hard way. Yet, all in
all, we oﬀer an optimistic view about analysis. If you already believe we have a
broadly shared language to discuss an accurately perceived world, then semantic
analysis points to a good explanation for how that could be.
Since Quine [1960], and especially since Montague [1974], formalism has be-
come central to the practice of semantic analysis. Logic oﬀers us an appealing,
lightweight notation while nevertheless forcing us to be completely explicit and
completely consistent in the ontology and concepts we appeal to in theorizing.
When our arguments become diﬃcult, this discipline becomes indispensable. The
use of logic also anticipates the place for semantic analysis in a cognitive science
of language and the world mediated by mental representations. Semantic analysis
interprets linguistic meaning in terms of something fundamentally nonlinguistic:
relationships in the real world. Here the nonlinguistic metalanguage of formal logic
serves as a useful reminder that we have moved outside the realm of grammatical
knowledge and communicative convention, into a system that holds its meaning
through standards and mechanisms fundamentally diﬀerent to those of language.
In this chapter, then, we will also emphasize how formalism can be exploited (es-
pecially ﬁrst-order logic but also higher-order logic and intensional logic), both to
craft particular analyses more precisely and to think more generally about what
analysis is.

Logic and Semantic Analysis
175
2
SOME CLASSIC ARGUMENTS.
We begin with a review of three philosophical perspectives on knowledge of mean-
ing.
First, we present Quine’s view of meaning as a theoretical interpretation
of a speaker’s present dispositions to assent to, or to dissent from, utterances in
context. Quine’s empiricism helps to make clear the intuition that there are no
a priori truths about meaning. In fact, Quine argues that a theoretical inter-
pretation is unable in principle to distinguish between facts about meaning and
other empirical truths. Then, we discuss a diﬀerent view of meaning, particu-
larly one associated with Kripke and Putnam. Here the project of semantics is
not to interpret a speaker’s current behavior but to explain it; this kind of se-
mantics will show how a speaker’s thoughts and utterances can be meaningfully
grounded in his prior experience, particularly his interactions with members of his
community. This view predicts that there are truths about meaning: we can ﬁnd
statements that, just because of the meanings of the terms they contain, could not
have been false. But on this view there still are no a priori truths about meaning,
for truths about meaning are knowable only a posteriori. Finally, we link these
considerations to the architecture of contemporary semantic theory, drawing on
the interpretive truth-theories of Davidson [1967b; 2001], as ﬂeshed out, for exam-
ple, in [Larson and Segal, 1995]. Linguistic methodology challenges us to explain
the systematicity and productivity of meaning in language. One response to this
challenge follows Kripke and Putnam, but of course not Quine, in appealing to
explicit knowledge of meaning.
On this account, we formulate novel sentences
and recognize the meanings of others’ novel sentences by reasoning directly from
facts we have learned about the meanings of expressions of our language — and
our mental apparatus stores these semantic facts and computes them with a non-
linguistic formal system — ‘a language of thought’ [Fodor, 1975], for which logic
provides an attractive model.
2.1
Quine on analysis
Quine [1960] developed his arguments about analysis as part of a larger project to
make sense of commonsense mentalistic descriptions of behavior within a rigorous,
scientiﬁc framework. Like many philosophers before and since, Quine was deeply
skeptical about the constructs and explanations of commonsense psychology. In-
deed, in his philosophy, Quine generally regarded all knowledge as incomplete,
provisional, and open to revision. To describe an agent’s beliefs, Quine dispensed
with theoretical constructs such as mental representations and abstract objects
such as meanings and propositions. He focused instead on characterizing the sen-
tences which an agent will assent to and the circumstances in which the agent
will do so. In this way, Quine sought to refer mentalistic descriptions straight-
forwardly to observable distinctions; our psychological theories could then exploit
these distinctions to interpret the statements and actions of others against our
own theoretical picture of the world.

176
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
Against this background, Quine argued that meaning is indeterminate. There
could be many, equally valid schemes to render the content of another’s beliefs in
our own terms. Each of these schemes would be holistic, in that it would aim to
provide a consistent overall interpretation of a body of beliefs in terms of our own.
The key to such an interpretation would be its overall coherence; as far as possible,
it would have to interpret true sentences as true and false sentences as false. To
judge another to be systematically in error would undercut our claim to understand
his sentences. Quine saw this holism of interpretation in mental explanation as
continuous with the holism of other kinds of scientiﬁc theorizing. For Quine, talk
of hypothesized entities in science, like electrons, derives its content from its role
in a network of principles that ultimately leads to empirical predictions.
Quine’s famous ‘Gavagai’ thought experiment illustrates both his holistic view
of meaning and his empirical, a posteriori, understanding of the attribution of se-
mantic content. He invites us to consider a ﬁeld linguist working with speakers of
an isolated language without access to any interpreters. The task of this linguist is
to arrive at translations from the speaker’s language into his own for heard utter-
ances. Quine calls this project ‘radical translation’. Of course, the linguist must
consult speakers as informants, so she ﬁrst discovers how they signal agreement
and disagreement. Now to get a handle on what a particular utterance means, she
determines the situations that prompt informants’ agreement with it, and those
that prompt their disagreement with it.
She settles on a good translation by
ﬁnding a statement in her own language for which her judgments match those of
her informants. She discovers, for example, that ‘Gavagai!’ can be translated as
‘Look, a rabbit!’ by seeing that informants accept ‘Gavagai!’ in more or less the
situations where she would accept ‘Look, a rabbit!’ — in short, when there is a
rabbit around.
Can translations so discovered be regarded purely as facts about meaning?
Quine argues they cannot. The linguist’s procedure yields translations that in-
evitably summarize and reﬂect a broad swath of informants’ empirical knowledge.
An informant’s assent to ‘Gavagai!’
will be grounded perceptually, in his own
experience of the appearance of rabbits and the contexts where rabbits are found,
and it may also be grounded socially in information provided by his companions
or simply in the shared background of his broader culture. In arriving at a transla-
tion, the linguist must locate a sentence in her own language that approximates the
entire network of factors which determine her informant’s judgment. She cannot
narrow the scope of translation by ruling out some of these factors as extrinsic to
meaning. After all, she aims to discover her informant’s meanings; if she rules out
potential aspects of meaning in advance, she abandons science for mere prejudice.
Moreover, in construing some information as extrinsic to meaning, she worsens
the ﬁt between her informant’s judgments about his utterances and her judgments
about the translations. In this sense, she really does less faithfully capture what
her informant means.
For Quine, a child learning her native language is in the same situation as a
scientist translating an exotic new language. She must construct a radical inter-

Logic and Semantic Analysis
177
pretation of the utterances of her community. Her conclusions take the form of an
overall theory about how people act in her community, and this theory must be
assessed holistically against all her empirical evidence. The theory must allow her
to understand the sentences members of her community accept as true, and those
members of her community reject as false. When she evaluates her interpretation
this way, she can make no principled distinction between what ‘rabbit’ means in
her community, and what rabbits are to her community. If members of her com-
munity had assented to other sentences involving the word ‘rabbit’, her theory
would have done better to interpret ‘rabbit’ diﬀerently. This is why Quine sug-
gests that a theoretical interpretation is unable in principle to distinguish between
facts about meaning and other empirical truths. No sentences are true solely in
virtue of meaning. A fortiori, there can be no ‘analytic’ sentences that are true
solely in virtue of meaning, that are necessarily true, and that can be known a
priori.
2.2
Kripke, Putnam, and the necessary a posteriori
Quine conceived of interpretation as our eﬀort to understand one another. Inter-
pretation is charitable. In constructing an interpretation, we primarily aim to ﬁnd
points of agreement between our perspective and another’s. A diﬀerent project in
semantics is to try to explain one another. An explanation gives meaning to an-
other person’s thoughts and sentences by describing his relationship to the world
around him. Explanation need not be as charitable as interpretation. Indeed, the
appeal of explanatory semantics springs from thought experiments where we are
prepared to judge another to be systematically in error, and yet we refrain from
reinterpreting his sentences.
Here is a clear case. With Putnam [1975], imagine a planet exactly like Earth,
except that where Earth has water, this other planet, Twin Earth, has another,
mysterious substance, XYZ. To human senses, this substance seems exactly the
same as water; nevertheless, it has a fundamentally diﬀerent chemical structure.
Imagine further that it’s still the year 1700, and chemical structure has yet to be
discovered. Still, we judge that the English word ‘water’, on Earth, means water,
whereas the Twin English word ‘water’, on Twin Earth, means XYZ. Moreover,
if an Earthling were suddenly teleported to Twin Earth, he would still speak
English, and his word ‘water’ would still mean water — this despite the fact that
he might have exactly the same dispositions as Twin Earthers have to accept or
reject statements about his new surroundings. In short, the unfortunate Earthling
would think he was surrounded by lots of water, and he would be completely
wrong.
You can, perhaps, take Putnam’s Twin Earth thought experiments to illus-
trate why Quine thought translation was indeterminate. When you look at how a
speaker is disposed to respond to sentences of English, you can interpret ‘water’
equally well as water, XYZ, or the disjunction of the two. These interpretations
are diﬀerent, and they would assign diﬀerent truth values to English statements

178
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
in meaningful (but ultimately inaccessible) situations. In fact, though, when we
say that ‘water’ in English means water, we are applying a diﬀerent standard than
Quine’s. Kripke’s [1972; 1980] suggestion is that our standard is based on our un-
derstanding that English speakers intend to pick out a particular kind of stuﬀin
their own environment. As a community, English speakers have encountered this
stuﬀand named it ‘water’. And as a community, English speakers work together
to ensure ﬁrst that the community maintains the referential connection between
the word ‘water’ and that stuﬀ, and only secondarily that individuals in the com-
munity can themselves recognize examples of the stuﬀin particular situations.
When as observers we recognize that ‘water’ means water, we aren’t summarizing
the epistemic abilities of particular speakers. Rather, we are summarizing social
commitments and causal connections in the community that have worked across
speakers to hook the word ‘water’ up with the stuﬀ, and keep it that way. What
we do, ultimately, is to explain how speakers can use language to refer in shared
ways to aspects of the world.
Kripke motivates his view with an analogy between words for kinds, such as
‘water’, and proper names, such as ‘Richard Feynman’.
In the case of proper
names, we can point to the social practices that initially ﬁx the reference of a
name and transmit that reference within the community.
Someone, let’s say, a baby, is born; his parents call him by a certain
name. They talk about him to their friends. Other people meet him.
Through various sorts of talk the name is spread from link to link as
if by a chain. A speaker who is on the far end of this chain, who has
heard about, say, Richard Feynman, in the market place or elsewhere,
may be referring to Richard Feynman even though he can’t remember
from whom he ﬁrst heard of Feynman or from whom he ever heard of
Feynman. He knows that Feynman is a famous physicist. A certain
passage of communication reaching ultimately to the man himself does
reach the speaker. He is then referring to Feynman even though he
can’t identify him uniquely. He doesn’t know what a Feynman dia-
gram is, he doesn’t know what the Feynman theory of pair production
and annihilation is. Not only that: he’d have trouble distinguishing
between Gell-Mann and Feynman. [Kripke, 1980, 91]
The result is that we can judge a speaker’s reference with a proper name inde-
pendent of the sentences that the speaker would assent to or reject.
In the case of common nouns like ‘water’, the word has had its reference since
time immemorial.
Nevertheless, new speakers still link themselves into chains
of reference that participate in and preserve the connection between ‘water’ and
water. So analogously, we take an English speaker’s word ‘water’ to refer to water,
independent of the sentences that the speaker would accept or reject.
Most philosophers ﬁnd this new view of semantics more satisfying than Quine’s
in key respects. The new view oﬀers a close ﬁt to our intuitive understanding
of ourselves. It seems that we really do commit to use our words with the same

Logic and Semantic Analysis
179
reference as our community. And when others make claims about the world, it
seems that we really do assess and dispute those claims with respect to the common
standard in the community, not just with respect to our interpretation of others’
personal theories of the world. Moreover, the new view suggests speciﬁc grounds to
critique the motivations behind the Quinean interpretation. For example, on this
new view, we will inevitably focus on certain aspects of an agent’s verbal behavior
and not others when we assign meanings to his utterances. We do so because we
locate semantics as part of a broader science of the mind, which combines a theory
of language with a theory of action (including an account of our intentions and
social relationships) and a theory of perception (including an account of the limits
and failings of our observation). Semantics in itself explains only so much — and,
not surprisingly, just because we understand the meaning of someone’s sentences,
we do not ipso facto understand them.
Crucially, this new view of semantics predicts that some statements are neces-
sarily true, solely in virtue of the meanings of the words involved. We’ve already
seen that it is a fact about meaning that ‘Richard Feynman’ names Richard Feyn-
man, or that ‘water’ names water. We can go further. ‘Hesperus’ names the planet
Venus, ‘Phosphorus’ names the planet Venus, ‘is’ names the identity relation. So
sentence (1) follows, just as a matter of meaning:
1. Hesperus is Phosphorus.
Given that ‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’ are both names for the planet Venus,
(1) has to be true. There is no way that that planet could have failed to be that
planet. Like sentence (1), the other facts that follow from the meanings of our
language are necessarily true.
However, these facts about meaning are not knowable a priori. We discovered
them. To illustrate the point, imagine that, early on, the Ancient Greeks were in
an epistemic situation that left it open whether the bright object that sometimes
appeared in the morning sky was the same as the bright thing that sometimes
appeared in the evening sky. They could not distinguish themselves from their
doubles on a Twin Earth where the morning star and the evening star actually
were distinct objects (alien satellites, we might suppose). These Twin Earthers
would speak a language in which (1) translates into a false sentence — indeed, a
necessarily false sentence. For the Ancient Greeks, however, the translation of (1)
was necessarily true. Eventually, the Ancient Greeks advanced their science, and
improved their epistemic situation. They realized that in our case there is only
one celestial object. At the same time, then, they discovered that (1) is necessarily
true.
When we reﬂect on the generality of the Twin-Earth thought experiments, it is
clear that semantic facts are knowable a posteriori. We can imagine being quite
wrong about what our world is like. In these imaginary situations, our empirical
errors extend to errors we make about what our words mean. And, of course, we
can also imagine disagreeing with others about what the world is like. Though
we are committed to use our words with the shared reference of our community,

180
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
we must be prepared to resolve our dispute by relinquishing facts that we think
are necessarily true — facts we think characterize the meanings of our words and
the contents of our thoughts. Thus, the situation for philosophy generally remains
much as Quine understood it.
Contra Quine, we can pursue semantic analysis, and attempt to discover state-
ments that are necessarily true in virtue of the meanings of the terms. But any
insights we derive about meaning are a posteriori. So, as Quine concluded, they
are hypotheses that we make and test like other empirical statements; they do not
have a special status in our arguments in virtue of the fact that they characterize
meaning.
2.3
Knowledge of meaning and linguistic competence
The development of linguistic semantics as a subﬁeld of cognitive science has con-
fronted philosophical views of meaning with new evidence of the richness and
sophistication of speakers’ semantic judgments about their native language. To
start, speakers are able to understand and produce indeﬁnitely many sentences
— sentences neither they nor anyone else in their community has uttered before.
This shows their knowledge of language must be productive; it must go beyond a
ﬁxed lexicon of predeﬁned static elements, and must include a generative system
that actively composes linguistic knowledge so as to describe arbitrarily complex
structures. The hallmark of productivity in language is recursion. Recursive pat-
terns of complementation, as in (2), and recursive patterns of modiﬁcation, as in
(3) and (4), allow phrases to be nested indeﬁnitely many times within a single
sentence.
2. Chris thinks that Kim thought that Robin wanted Sandy to leave.
3. Chris bought a gorgeous new French 3-quart covered copper saucepan.
4. Chris is writing a book that describes inventors that have built machines
that changed the world that we live in.
Speakers’ capacity to formulate and recognize an open-ended array of possible
sentences shows how acute a problem it is to coordinate meaning across speakers.
When we learn the meaning of our native language, we must generalize from
the ﬁnite record of our previous experience to an inﬁnity of other sentences and
situations. If we thereby arrive at a common understanding of the meanings of
sentences, it must be because language is structured by substantive and inherent
constraints that we are able to exploit. The same goes for theoretical projects in
semantic analysis. We should expect that our discoveries about the meanings of
sentences will generalize to an indeﬁnite array of cases, and that they will respect
and illuminate linguistic constraints. More generally, if our discoveries in semantics
are to help explain how speakers can use language meaningfully, we should expect
that the generative mechanisms we postulate as theorists will be compatible with
the psychological mechanisms that underlie speakers’ abilities.

Logic and Semantic Analysis
181
A straightforward way to explain productivity in semantics is to assume that
the meanings of particular sentences can be calculated by inference from general
facts about meaning in the language. For example, consider the theory presented
in examples (5)–(7).
5. ‘snow’ is a noun phrase and refers to the stuﬀsnow.
6. ‘white’ is an adjective phrase and refers to the property whiteness.
7. If N is a noun phrase and refers to the stuﬀS and A is an adjective phrase
and refers to the property P, then ⌜N is A⌝is a sentence and is true if and
only if S is P.
From this theory, we can derive (8) as a logical consequence.
8. ‘Snow is white’ is true if and only if snow is white.
We can take (8) as a characterization of meaning, because it links up a sentence,
in this case the sentence ‘Snow is white’, with a condition in the world stated
in objective terms, in this case, the condition that snow is white. As semantic
theorists, we can use this kind of theory, which Davidson [1967b; 2001] calls an
interpretive truth-theory, to provide a general account of how sentences link up
with conditions in the world. We use atomic formulas to axiomatize the semantics
for the elementary structures in the language and use conditional formulas to
describe the semantics of complex structures in the language as a function of
the semantics of their constituents. We then reason logically from the axioms to
associate particular sentences with conditions in the world. As in (5)–(7), this
inference will be compositional, in that the conclusions we derive will be inferred
through a logical derivation that mirrors the syntactic derivation of the sentence.
There are two ways to view interpretive truth-theories such as (5)–(7).
We
can use an interpretive truth-theory to formulate a semantic theory for a new
language. For example, we could be pursuing radical translation. In this case, we
are interested in systematically articulating translations for sentences in the object
language in terms of sentences in our own; we understand these translations to
be derived by inference from the axioms of the theory. This is compatible with
a holistic, interpretive view of meaning like Quine’s — indeed, Davidson himself
subscribed to such a view.
Another way to view interpretive truth-theories such as (5)–(7) is as ingredients
of speakers’ psychology. On this view, we regard axioms such as (5)–(7) as gener-
alizations that native speakers know tacitly about their language. When speakers
formulate or recognize particular utterances, they reason tacitly from this implicit
theory to derive conclusions such as (8), about speciﬁc new sentences. On this
understanding, interpretive truth-theories oﬀer an explanation of how speakers’
knowledge of meaning and their inferential abilities together underlie their seman-
tic competence.

182
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
This psychological understanding of interpretive truth-theories meshes better
with an explanatory view about truth about meaning than with Quine’s conceptual
framework. For this psychological understanding commits us to a representational
theory of mind, in which psychological processes involve the tokening of symbolic
structures and these structures are locked on to content about the world through
causal or informational mechanisms. (For more, see [Fodor, 1975] or [Fodor, 1987].)
To see this, let us return to (8):
8. ‘snow is white’ is true if and only if snow is white.
As cognitive scientists, we expect that speaker knowledge of linguistic meaning
will place words and sentences in correspondence with represented regularities in
the world. In this case, the correspondence links the sentence ‘snow is white’ with
an answer as to whether snow is in fact white: a distinction you have a handle
on some other way. Theories of mental content that postulate causally-grounded
nonlinguistic structured representations give you a way to make sense of this idea.
A speaker’s mental representation of the distinction whether snow is white is com-
posed from mental symbols SNOW for the stuﬀsnow and WHITE for the property
of whiteness. The meaning of these symbols follows from their intrinsic role both
in the speaker’s mental life and in his interactions with his environment. Fur-
ther symbols, again with a suitable interpretation, represent the property of truth
(TRUE) and the logical biconditional (↔). On a representational theory of mind,
these symbols can now be assembled into representation (9) corresponding in form
and meaning to (8):
9. TRUE(‘snow is white’) ↔WHITE(SNOW)
For an individual speaker, the tacit derivation of this symbolic structure can ﬁx
the meaning of the sentence ‘snow is white’. That is, (9) represents a hypothesis
about the meanings of sentences in the speaker’s language that the speaker is
committed to. At the same time, it shows how the speaker’s sensitivity to the
meaningful connection between language and the world can be founded directly
on the natural intentionality of the speaker’s concepts and thoughts.
The willingness to appeal to the representational theory of mind as part of a
scientiﬁc reconstruction of commonsense psychological explanation is one of the
signal departures from Quine that motivates analysis in contemporary philoso-
phy.
On Quine’s behavioristic perspective, we capture mental content directly
through a network of beliefs, circumstances and behaviors. We must assign mean-
ing to agents sentences without recourse to intermediate representations. And that
means statements such as (9) are not special; they are known to be true only as
part of a holistic explanation of all the empirical evidence — a speaker does not
know that they are true in virtue of meaning. For Quine, (9) can summarize the
meaning of ‘snow is white’ but it cannot establish it. In this sense, the represen-
tational theory of mind is essential if we want to explain speakers’ knowledge of
meaning by appeal to their tacit knowledge of a theory of truth.

Logic and Semantic Analysis
183
3
DOING SEMANTIC ANALYSIS BY ANALOGY TO LOGIC
In §2, we sketched some arguments for the position that semantic analysis is both
possible and philosophically important in characterizing speakers’ rule-governed
knowledge of linguistic meaning. This view invites an analogy between the seman-
tics of natural languages and the semantics of the artiﬁcial languages of formal
logic.
The analogy goes back to Frege [1879; 1967], who took logic to clarify
the features of natural language essential for correct mathematical thought and
communication. Davidson’s [1967b; 2001] interpretive truth-theories, exhibited in
(5)–(7), are built on Tarski’s [1935; 1956] ideas about the semantics of formal lan-
guages. The work of Montague in the 1960s and 1970s took the analogy further
[Montague, 1974]. Montague explicitly advocated an exact parallel between the
semantic analysis of English — what ordinary speakers actually know about their
language — and the semantics of intensional higher-order logic. In fact, many
techniques originally developed for giving semantics to logical languages turn out
to be extremely useful in carrying out semantic analysis.
We can brieﬂy describe two notable examples that illustrate this.
The ﬁrst
comes from the semantics of ﬁrst-order logic, where Tarski [1935; 1956] introduced
assignment functions to give semantics to occurrences of variables. The problem
is to explain the truth conditions of complex logical formulas such as (10) in terms
of their constituent logical formulas, such as (11). In eﬀect, we have to answer
what x means.
10. ∀xFx.
11. Fx.
Of course ‘x’ is a variable — it means whatever we want it to mean.
Our
semantics should simply make this precise. One way to do this is to use a function
from the set of variables to the set of values—this function then represents a speciﬁc
set of choices about what the variables correspond to. Such functions are called
assignment functions; we use g to name a representative assignment function. Thus
(11) is not simply true or false; it is true or false with respect to a set of choices
about the variables. Speciﬁcally, (11) is true with respect to an assignment g just
in case the individual picked out by g(x) has the property represented by F. This
framework allows us to understand (10) intuitively in terms of (11): if (11) comes
out true for every choice we make for the value of x, then (10) is also true. More
precisely, (10) is true with respect to an assignment g just in case (11) is true for
any assignment g′ exactly like g except possibly that g′(x) diﬀers from g(x).
This treatment of variables and quantiﬁers provides a useful tool for approach-
ing the analogous meanings of corresponding constructions in natural language,
such as quantiﬁed noun phrases, bound pronouns and traces. For instance, con-
sider sentence (12). Linguists understand (12) as composed through a syntactic
derivation that makes the scope of the quantiﬁer explicit but still indicates that
the quantiﬁer supplies the reference for the subject of the sentence and for the
pronoun her.

184
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
12. Every student ﬁnished her homework.
The logical form (or LF) in (13) represents these relationships by one common
convention: the quantiﬁer is indexed, or associated with a variable i; it is moved,
so that it brackets a sentence that indicates its scope (just like a logical quantiﬁer);
it leaves a trace, written as ti, a variable in the subject position of ﬁnished; and
the pronoun her is also indexed with the same variable i.
13. Every studenti (ti ﬁnished heri homework).
14. ti ﬁnished heri homework.
This LF representation invites us to specify the semantics of (13) in terms of
the semantics of (14), and the formalism of assignment functions originally de-
veloped for logical languages works beautifully for this. (13) and (14) are related
just as (10) and (11) are. For a philosophically-accessible tutorial of the use of
assignment functions and other logical techniques to interpret natural language
quantiﬁers, see [Pietroski, 2006]. Analogies between pronouns and variables in
formal languages continue to provide fertile grounds for semantic exploration. For
example, dynamic semantics is an approach to the analysis of pronouns in natural
language that manipulates assignment functions using formal tools originally de-
veloped to account for the meanings of variables in the formal languages used to
specify computer programs; see for example [Groenendijk and Stokhof, 1990] or
[Muskens, 1996].
A second arena where techniques originally developed in the semantics of formal
languages provide instructive tools for natural language is in the treatment of time
and possibility. Temporal and modal logics feature sentential operators that say
when or in what hypothetical conditions a sentence is true. For example, in modal
logic, the formula ♦p says that p is possibly true. Here the semantic problem is to
specify how a formula that says that p is possibly true can get its semantics in terms
of a constituent formula p, which says that p is actually true. Again, we need to be
more precise about the contribution that constituent formulas make to the truth
conditions of larger formulas. In ♦p, we don’t use p to say that the proposition is
actually true; we only say that the proposition is true in a hypothetical possibility
that is under consideration. We need to relativize our formal deﬁnition of truth
accordingly.
Suppose then that we have a set of possible points of evaluation, corresponding
to the diﬀerent times, possible worlds, or other situations our logic describes. We
use w as a variable ranging over these points of evaluation. The semantics for
the logic will then describe whether a formula is true at a particular point of
evaluation. Thus, for example, ♦p is true at a point w if there is some other point
w′ that is possible from w and p is true at w′. Normally, we distinguish one of the
possible points of evaluation as the present one. A formula is simply true if it is
true at this present point. See [Fitting and Mendelsohn, 1998] for a philosophical
presentation of the resulting logics.

Logic and Semantic Analysis
185
Of course, natural languages have constructions that seem to depend on times
and possibilities in ways analogous to the formal languages. We list a couple in
(15) and (16).
15. It’s possible that Sandy left.
16. Whenever it rains, Chris brings an umbrella.
To describe the contribution ‘Sandy left’ makes to (15), or ‘Chris brings an
umbrella’ makes to (16), it is natural to appeal to a notion of truth at a point of
evaluation that includes temporal and modal information. (15) is true at a point
w if there is some point possible from w where ‘Sandy left’ is true. (16) is true at
a point w if every temporal point comparable to w where ‘it rains’ is true is also
one where ‘Chris brings an umbrella’ is true.
As in the case of pronouns, pursuing this analogy in detail leads to a rich
and proﬁtable interplay between logic and linguistics. When we explore natural
language semantics systematically, we ﬁnd that the tenses of natural languages
have some of the properties of operators in temporal logic, but they also have
some of the properties of pronouns [Partee, 1975]; [Hinrichs, 1985]; [Webber, 1986].
Modality in natural language is similar [Roberts, 1989]. Logically, this behavior
ﬁnds a match in hybrid logics [Areces et. al., 2001] — formal extensions of modal
logic that allow formulas to mark the points visited in evaluating a formula and
to return to those points elsewhere to describe them further.
While progress in formal semantics for natural language has often been sup-
ported by parallels between language and logic, it remains true that philosophical
argument often requires us to appreciate the diﬀerences between everyday language
and idealized uses of formulas in familiar logics. Language depends on context.
Logic, by contrast, is so useful in part because it doesn’t depend on context: we
use logic to present our reasoning in a form whose correctness is intrinsic to its
explicit structure and can be determined once and for all. As we explain in more
detail in §§3.1-3.2 formal methods for the treatment of context-sensitivity in nat-
ural language complicate the picture familiar from logic. Accordingly, we need
more nuanced distinctions to describe semantic relationships in languages with
context-sensitivity than in languages without it.
Another important distinction is that logical formulas are regimented with spec-
iﬁed semantics so that they wear their meanings on their sleeves. By contrast, as
we emphasized in §2, natural languages must be learned. We can be uncertain
about the meanings of sentences, and we can be creative in how we use them. As
we explain in more detail in §3.2, formal accounts of the interpretation of natu-
ral language must take this ﬂexibility into account. Again, we ﬁnd that we need
more nuanced distinctions in natural language to describe the relationship between
the meaning of a sentence and the way we understand it than logical languages
typically call for.

186
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
3.1
Indexicals, demonstratives, and context sensitivity1
English has two kinds of terms that are not typically included in the languages of
formal logic: demonstratives and indexicals. Demonstratives are words like ‘that’,
‘there’, or ‘he’. Paradigms of indexicals are ‘I’, ‘now’, and ‘here’ (at least on one
of its senses).2 What a token of any of these terms refers to depends crucially on
the context in which it is tokened. A token of a demonstrative word requires an
associated demonstration to ﬁx its referent. Typically, but not always, a demon-
stration is a visual presentation of a salient local object discriminated by a pointing
gesture. The token of a demonstrative expression refers to whatever its accompa-
nying demonstration demonstrates — what we shall call a demonstratum. Unlike
a demonstrative, a token of an indexical requires no accompanying demonstration
to secure its reference. The reference of an indexical is determined directly by
information about the situation in which it is tokened.
Context sensitivity is a challenge to the analogy between the natural language
and logic. As we shall see, context sensitivity requires us to depart from the for-
malism of logic; this is neither a surprise nor, in itself, a worry. More signiﬁcantly,
context sensitivity requires us to make distinctions in analyzing utterances that
we do not need when we describe logical statements. These new distinctions are
signiﬁcant. Chief among them is the distinction between linguistic meaning and
utterance content.
The linguistic meaning of an expression is what competent language users learn
when they learn that expression. Learning the linguistic meaning of an indexical
expression is learning how to adjust its reference across contexts of use. The lin-
guistic meaning of ‘tomorrow’ determines what that word picks out across varying
contexts of its use, as in the designation rule (T).
(T) In each context of use, ‘tomorrow’ refers to the day after the day
of that context of use.
The same goes for demonstratives.
Anyone who comprehends the linguistic
meaning of a demonstrative expression knows that a satisfactory use of it requires
the speaker to make an accompanying demonstration, so, e.g., anyone who un-
derstands the demonstrative word ‘that’ must know its linguistic designation rule
(D).
(D) A token of ‘that’ refers to the object demonstrated by whoever
uses that token.
Linguistic meaning underwrites translation.
Suppose that Mike utters (17)
yesterday:
17. The Yankees will win tomorrow.
1This section is largely a summary of the important work of Kaplan [1989].
2‘here’ is a indexical in ‘I am in here’, but a demonstrative in ‘In two weeks I will be here’
(pointing at a city on a map).

Logic and Semantic Analysis
187
(18) is the translation of (17) into Italian. The reference of ‘domani’ is ﬁxed in
Italian by a rule like (T) analogously to ‘tomorrow’ in English.
18. Gli Yankees vinceranno domani.
If Massimo utters (18) on the same day that Mike utters (17) then the two have
said the same thing. Thus, in one sense, two sentences with the same linguistic
meaning say the same thing.
However, there is another sense in which two sentences with the same linguistic
meaning can say diﬀerent things. What you express in this sense is the content of
your utterance. Distinct utterances of ‘That’s a ﬂower’ can disagree in truth-value
because the objects demonstrated might be diﬀerent. If your two tokens of ‘that’
demonstrate distinct objects, obviously you were not discussing the same object on
both occasions. But if your topic of conversation changes, then what you say (or
express) on these distinct occasions cannot remain the same. This might be so even
though the distinct circumstances surrounding your two tokens might go unnoticed
by you (and your audience). The lighting in the room, the sorts of gestures that
you make, and every other aspect of your accompanying demonstrations might
be indistinguishable to both you and your audience. Demonstratives are quite
special linguistic devices in this way: we can token the same words with the
same linguistic meaning in contexts that are indistinguishable to the speaker and
auditor, and yet, unwittingly, say (or express) diﬀerent things because diﬀerent
things are referenced.
We can also use diﬀerent words with distinct linguistic meanings to say (or
express) the same thing. Should we say, ‘He is a very nice person’ pointing at
Bill, and you speaking to Bill say, ‘You are a very nice person’, then we agree in
what we say about Bill, even though our words ‘you’ and ‘he’ diﬀer in linguistic
meaning. In sum, the same context-sensitive expression can be used on diﬀerent
occasions to say something diﬀerent, and diﬀerent context-sensitive expressions
distinct in linguistic meaning can be used on the same (or diﬀerent) occasions to
say the same thing. These sorts of considerations recommend that we distinguish
two sorts of meaning contributions demonstrative expressions can make.
This distinction has pervasive consequences for semantic analysis. We have to
cash the distinction out formally, by specifying the meaning of utterance in terms
of an occasion of use distinct from its circumstances of evaluation. And we have
to follow the distinction conceptually, particularly when we think about whether
what we say is a priori or metaphysically necessary.
Earlier we observed the usefulness of describing the temporal and modal inter-
pretation of utterances by analogy to the interpretations of modal and temporal
logics. Sentence (19) is a sentence in future tense without an (explicit) indexical
noun.3
19. The earth will be destroyed by a large asteroid.
3We say ‘no explicit’, since tense itself introduces an indexical element.

188
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
An utterance of (19) is true at a time t just in case at some later time t′ sentence
(20), which is in present tense, is true.
20. The earth is destroyed by a large asteroid.
Sentence (6) is also in future tense, but unlike (19), (21) has in it an explicit
context sensitive expression, namely, the word ‘now’.
21. Everything now red will be blue.
(or, ‘It will be the case that everything now red is blue’.)
Were we to reason by analogy with (19), we would have to conclude that (21) is
true at time t just in case its present tense counter-part (22) is true at some time
t′ later than t.
22. Everything now red is blue.
But that’s impossible, since (22) is true at a time t′ just in case everything
that is red at time t′ is also blue at t′, and such circumstances are not physically
possible. Now since an utterance of (21) can be true, it follows that the truth of
(21) at a time t cannot require the truth of (22) at a time t′, later than t.
Why does the analogy between (19) and (21) break down? It does so on account
of the indexical expression ‘now’ in (21). In evaluating an utterance of (21), we
simply cannot ignore that the word ‘now’, by virtue of its linguistic meaning alone,
must pick out the time at which (21) is tokened (used, uttered): so (21) is true
at a particular time t just in case (23), which lacks any context sensitive noun, is
true at some time t′ later than t,
23. Everything (that is) red at t is blue.
where, let’s assume, ‘t’ is a proper name that refers to a particular time t, namely,
the time at which (21) was uttered. And these conditions seem to get things just
right. An utterance of (21) is true at a time t just in case (23) is true at some
later time t′, i.e., just in case those red objects at t have changed color to blue at
t′. The indexical expression ‘now’ tokened at t, by virtue of its linguistic meaning
alone, must pick out the time of its utterance, in this case, t.
When evaluating an utterance of a sentence in future tense, obviously, the rel-
evant circumstances for its evaluation (those circumstances that the utterance is
about) are in the future. (21), by virtue of its future tense, is about circumstances
after any of its utterances. Likewise, when evaluating a sentence in past tense, the
relevant circumstances of evaluation for any of its utterances (those circumstances
that utterance is about) are in the past; and so on.
What makes indexical expressions special is that the references of their tokens
cling to the occasions on which they are tokened, and these occasions need not
be the relevant circumstances for evaluating the truth or falsity of an utterance
of sentences in which the indexicals occur. So even though a context in which

Logic and Semantic Analysis
189
someone utters (21) cannot by itself determine whether that utterance is true, that
context and that context alone, and not, e.g., any future circumstances, suﬃces
to determine the referent of its indexical expression ‘now’.
Turning from tense to modality, the same sort of disanalogy arises for sentences
about non-actual circumstances. Consider the modal sentence (24) with its context
sensitive noun ‘I’.
24. It is possible that I do not exist.
(or, ‘I might not have existed’.)
An utterance of (24) does not claim that its non-modal counterpart (25) can
possibly be uttered truthfully.
25. I do not exist.
(25) can never be uttered truthfully. The linguistic meaning of ‘I’ is given by
the designation rule (R).
(R) In each context of use, a token of ‘I’ refers to the agent of that
context.
So (25) is false if ‘I’ has a referent in that circumstance, because the speaker
exists, and it lacks any truth value otherwise, because if ‘I’ fails to secure a referent.
Therefore, if an utterance of (24) is true only if its non-modal counterpart (25) is
true in a possible circumstance, then it follows that every utterance of (24) is false.4
But our intuitions tell us otherwise; every utterance of (24) is true (assuming no
necessary beings exist).
Again, we must distinguish between occasion of use and point of evaluation.
For any utterance of (24), its token of ‘I’ picks out the speaker of that utterance.
So, in evaluating an utterance of (24), it doesn’t matter whom the word ‘I’ can
pick out in a possible circumstance. Instead, we ﬁx as the referent of a token of ‘I’
the actual speaker, and, and ask of this actual speaker whether she exists in some
possible circumstance of evaluation. So, if the circumstances are ones in which the
speaker’s parents failed to reproduce; or circumstances in which the universe came
to an end before the speaker was born, then in those circumstances the speaker
in question obviously does not exist. Since such circumstances fail to include this
speaker, it follows that, unless the speaker is a necessary existent, (24) is true in
every context of utterance.
Understanding context sensitivity and its consequences for semantic analysis
gives technical insight to philosophical problems. For example, they show how we
can learn from statements that are metaphysically necessary. Suppose that we
are indirectly watching someone moving about a room on a live video while, at
the same time, we are unwittingly watching him directly moving about in front
4Or, at least not true, since in some circumstances no agent exists, as at the center of the sun
or on earth before life formed.

190
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
of us. After a lapse of time, we come to notice the strong similarity of the two
individual’s actions, and we might thereupon begin to wonder whether that guy
[pointing to the man in the video] is the same as that guy [pointing directly at the
same man]. After a while, let’s suppose, we come to assert (26).
26. He is identical to him.
What may not yet be clear to you is that (26), indexed to the context so
described, expresses a necessary truth. There are no possible circumstances under
which what is said by the utterance of (26) so described might be false. Yet isn’t it
obvious that something informative was said with this utterance of (26), since we
can wonder about truth of the utterance without incurring a charge of linguistic
incompetence? This means that whatever an utterance of (26) expresses, it cannot
be that we know it to be true a priori. So, we see how necessity and apriority can
come apart. We return to such cases in §3.2 below.
But ﬁrst we illustrate the complementary point that necessity and apriority
can come apart the other way. Here is an example of a priori knowledge of a
contingent truth, which has a Cartesian ﬂavor. Anyone who understands sentence
(27) knows that no utterance of it can be false.
27. I am here now.
Yet no utterance of this sentence or ‘I exist’ is necessarily true. Clearly, any
one of us might have been somewhere other than where he currently is; or, he
might have been there at a diﬀerent time; or he might have been replaced there
at that time by someone else, or he might not have existed at all. However, a
speaker’s knowledge that every utterance of (27) is true is a priori knowledge.
Contrast (27) with sentence (28). (28) is true under exactly the same conditions
as Lepore’s utterance of (27).
28. Ernie Lepore is in New Brunswick at 10 a.m. on Thursday, January 27th,
2000.
His knowledge or anyone else’s of it is not a priori. Internal reﬂection alone
can’t help him decided whether he is Ernie Lepore. He might be deluded. Nor can
it help me determine whether his current location is in New Brunswick or what
date it currently is.5
5The more puzzling aspects of this sort of a priori knowledge might be eased if one thinks
about the worlds in which these sorts of indexical statements would be false. As Descartes con-
vincingly argued, the minimal experience required in order to consider whether these statements
are true will require that you know them to be true. Those circumstances in which these sorts
of statements are false are circumstances in which someone obviously cannot form the beliefs in
question since he does not exist.

Logic and Semantic Analysis
191
3.2
What sentences mean and what we understand
One of the goals of semantic analysis, as we have seen, is to show how speakers’
knowledge of natural language allows them to use utterances meaningfully. Thus
far, we have addressed this point only in a very preliminary way: if speakers know
recursive truth conditions for their language, then they can use these rules to
calculate the truth conditions for arbitrarily complex new sentences. But even if
speakers can infer the new truth conditions, how exactly does this knowledge help
in communication?
A preliminary, approximate answer can be found in the analogy between lan-
guage and logic. We begin by idealizing the information mutually available to the
interlocutors in a conversation as their common ground [Stalnaker, 1973]. The
common ground settles questions whose answers are uncontroversial, in that inter-
locutors know the answers, know they know the answers, and so forth. Meanwhile,
the common ground leaves open a set of possibilities about which there is not yet
agreement: maybe there is a matter of fact that could turn out (for all the inter-
locutors know) to be one of various ways, or maybe the interlocutors actually do
know how it turns out but do not realize the knowledge is shared — so it could be
that the others know, and it could be that they don’t — and so forth. Drawing
on the model theory of modal logic, we might represent the possibilities in the
common ground as a set of possible worlds.
The model theory of modal logic
likewise oﬀers a set of possible worlds to represent the proposition associated with
any formula. These are the worlds where the formula is true.
If we adopt this logical picture, we can formalize the eﬀect that asserting a
formula has on the common ground. When interlocutor A asserts a formula f, A
introduces into the conversation the information that f is true. Beforehand the
common ground is some set of worlds C. Afterwards the common ground also
takes into account f. This formula f restricts the live possibilities by requiring
the worlds in the common ground to make true a further proposition p. So the
change that happens when A asserts f is that the common ground goes from C to
C ∩p. This concise model forms the basis of a range of research characterizing the
relationship between truth-conditional semantics and conversational pragmatics in
formal terms; see Beaver [2001] for a recent overview.
This idealization has limits.
And it’s easy to come up with strange puzzles
when one moves (perhaps inadvertently) beyond the limits of these idealizations.
Here is such a puzzle.
Why is it that a speaker would ever assert an identity
statement like ‘Hesperus is Phosphorus’, sentence (1)? The trigger for this puzzle
comes from Kripke’s arguments, reviewed in §2.2, that sentence (2.3) is analytic:
it is true in all possible worlds. If that is the case, consider what happens when
A asserts (2.3). We update the common ground C by intersecting it with the set
of all possible worlds — the proposition expressed by ‘Hesperus is Phosphorus’ —
leaving the same set C. A has done nothing; the interlocutors’ information has
not changed at all! This result is absurd. What has gone wrong?

192
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
In fact, in assuming that assertions update the context with the proposition they
express, we have implicitly assumed that the participants in the conversation have
certain and complete knowledge of their language. For example, interlocutors can
calculate that ‘Hesperus is Phosphorus’ expresses a necessarily true proposition
only if they can calculate that ‘Hesperus’ names Venus and ‘Phosphorus’ names
Venus. Of course, under such circumstances, they don’t learn anything from the
sentence. But it is also easy to see how this assumption could go unnoticed in
extrapolating from logic to language. When we do logic, we are typically interested
in inferential relationships that hold no matter what our terms refer to. We assume
that the reference of our terms — precisely what matters in the ‘Hesperus is
Phosphorus’ case — is not at issue.
Let us consider how to formalize uses of sentences in more realistic situations.
As we do so, we have to be very careful to respect the intuitions of Kripke and
Putnam’s thought experiments [Stalnaker 1978].
Suppose interlocutor B does not know that Hesperus is Phosphorus. Recall
from our discussion of (2.3) in §2.2 that what that really means is that B cannot
distinguish between two possible situations. In the ﬁrst, there is only one heavenly
body out there, and B and B’s community speak a language English1 where both
Hesperus and Phosphorus are rigid designators for that body. In the second, there
are two distinct heavenly bodies, and B speaks a language English2 where Hesperus
is a rigid designator for one of them and Phosphorus is a rigid designator for the
other. Since these possibilities are open for B, they must both also be represented
in the common ground.
Now, we need a correspondingly expressive notion of assertion. When interlocu-
tor A says something, A is committed that it is true according to the standards
for reference that prevail in the community. Any assertion that A makes should
turn out to be true in the language A speaks. What we have just seen is that any
point of evaluation w in the common ground could potentially have its own lan-
guage Englishw with relevant diﬀerences from English as spoken in the real world.
Adapting Stalnaker’s [1978] terminology,6 we can associate any utterance u with
a diagonal proposition: this proposition is true at a point w if the proposition
that u expresses in Englishw is true in w. In the case of Hesperus is Phosphorus,
the eﬀect of A’s assertion is to intersect the common ground with this diagonal
proposition. Concretely, we retain in the common ground worlds of the ﬁrst kind,
6Stalnaker’s presentation of the idea is rather more complicated. Stalnaker’s idea is to use pos-
sible worlds as representations of the context of an utterance, and to treat the reference of proper
names as a kind of context-sensitivity. We think it’s better to distinguish between interlocutors’
epistemic context, which describes the information they share, and their linguistic context, which
describes the state of their interaction. For example, the interaction could have a well-deﬁned
state that only one of the participants knows about; this would be part of the linguistic context
but not the epistemic context. Analogously, we think it’s better to distinguish between interlocu-
tors’ uncertainty about their language and the context-sensitivity of terms within their language.
Stalnaker concludes that it is a kind of Gricean repair when an utterance conveys the diagonal
proposition in his sense of factoring out all kinds of context-dependency; but we see no reason
why an utterance should not always convey the diagonal proposition in our sense of factoring
out dependence on the language spoken.

Logic and Semantic Analysis
193
where English1 is spoken, Hesperus and Phosphorus are necessarily the same and
A’s assertion is necessarily true. However, we discard from the common ground
worlds of the second kind, where English2 is spoken, Hesperus and Phosphorus
are necessarily diﬀerent and A’s assertion is necessarily false.
There is substantially more to be said about the relationship between utterance
meaning and the information that interlocutors convey. Speakers are rational, so
they can communicate indirectly through the choices they make about what in-
formation to give and how to present it [Grice, 1975]. And language use is collab-
orative, so speakers can often count on hearers to accommodate information they
implicitly presuppose [Lewis, 1979]; [Thomason, 1990] and to recognize projects
they indirectly suggest [Searle, 1975]. The element of strategy continues to inform
ﬁne-grained accounts of linguistic phenomena at the boundary between semantics
and pragmatics — for everything from the resolution of pronouns [Beaver, 2004] to
the use of vague language [Kyburg and Morreau, 2000]; [Barker, 2002]. Through-
out this research, as in the example from Stalnaker presented above, the need to
consider the knowledge and choices of actual speakers remains a central theoretical
construct that distinguishes semantic analysis from logic.
4
DOING SEMANTIC ANALYSIS IN LOGIC
Logic oﬀers more than an analogy for doing semantics for natural language. Logic
is a tool that makes semantic analysis easier to do, to present and to understand.
It allows us to be precise about the ontology that our semantics presupposes —
what knowledge of diﬀerent kinds of entities and relationships best explains our
ability to use language.
It allows us to hook up that ontology precisely with
the syntax. And it allows us to use the mathematics of logical consequence to
describe the semantic relationships among sentences.
This mathematics shows
how our judgments might be grounded in computations over representations of
knowledge of meaning. In §4.1, we describe one of the most inﬂuential theories
of the sort, Davidson’s [1967a; 2002] use of events to specify the logical form of
verbs of change.
Such philosophical analyses are important to semantics, but,
as we emphasize in §4.2, these analyses are most successful when they are most
banal. We are generally skeptical that semantic analyses that explain how word
meanings compose to yield sentence meanings will lead to substantive insights
about the internal structure of word meanings themselves. Thus, the project of
semantic analysis needs to be clearly distinguished from the broader project of
using logical formalisms to model mental representations and cognitive processes
in general.

194
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
4.1
Verbs of change and their modiﬁers7
Verbs of change are verbs that correspond to events, processes or actions which
occur, go on, or take place. For example, the verbs ‘to leave’ and ‘to kiss’ are
verbs of change. Such verbs can be modiﬁed by prepositional phrases, as in ‘John
left for the store’ or ‘Frank kissed Mary in Tompkins Square’. This sort of modi-
ﬁcation seems productive, since there is no obvious limit to how many modifying
prepositional phrases we can modify a verb of change with, as the sequence of
sentences (29) through (33) suggests.
29. Mary kissed John.
30. Mary kissed John in Tompkins Square.
31. Mary kissed John in Tompkins Square after midnight.
32. Mary kissed John in Tompkins Square after midnight behind his left ear.
33. Mary kissed John in Tompkins Square after midnight behind his left ear on
August 24, 1999.
If this process of expansion can be continued indeﬁnitely, then English can
express an open-ended set of propositions just by virtue of adding prepositional
phrases to a sentence that modify the verb.
Interpreting (29)–(33) thus requires reaching into our bag of learned expressions
in order to compose their meanings into meaningful complexes. One promising
proposal for how to do this is provided by what we shall call the event analysis.
According to this proposal, (29) and (30) are best understood to be synonymous
with (34) and (35).
34. There is an event that was a kissing by Mary of John.
35. There exists an event that was a kissing by Mary of John and that was in
Tompkins Square.
That is, events ﬁgure explicitly in the rules and computations English speakers
use to formulate and understand sentences like (29) and (30).
This is a substantive discovery about the meaning of English. Given their sur-
face form, you might have thought that (29) involved a two-place predicate ‘kissed’
relating Mary and John, and you might have thought that (30) involved a three-
place predicate ‘kissed in’ relating Mary, John and the park. However, the analyses
in (34) and (35) urge us not to give ‘kissed’ these surface semantics. Instead, the
analyses use the same underlying three-place predicate, ‘ was a kissing by
of
’, both for (29) and for (30). This predicate makes the event of kissing explicit.
The prepositional phrase ‘in Tompkins Square’ on this account contributes the
predicate ‘ was in Tompkins Square’; the prepositional phrase ‘after midnight’
7This section is largely a summary of Davidson [1967a; 2002].

Logic and Semantic Analysis
195
contributes the predicate ‘it was after midnight’ and so on. The event approach
solves the problem of productivity by introducing events about which indeﬁnitely
many things can be said.
Another distinctive feature of the event analysis is that it describes the semantics
of action sentences in terms of an existential quantiﬁer phrase — ‘there is an event’
in (34) and (35). This quantiﬁer takes scope over the entire action description,
containing the verb and all its modiﬁers. This quantiﬁcational structure correctly
predicts that the verb and all its modiﬁers describe one and the same event, while
no constituent in the sentence explicitly identiﬁes or names that event. As we
shall see, the event analysis also draws on this added structure to explain what
inferences the resulting sentences support, and how they function in connected
discourse.
The formal implementation of this event analysis provides a good illustration
of some of the contributions of logic to the practice of semantic analysis. To start,
suppose we use the formalism of higher-order logic as a meta-language for doing
natural language semantics: then we can start to capture the event analysis of
(34) and (35) in the formalism by introducing the symbolism kissed(E,X,Y) to
indicate that event E was a kissing by X of Y .
This mnemonic is useful not
only because it is short, but also because it highlights one of the claims of the
theory, namely that whenever the verb ‘kissed’ appears in English it expresses a
relationship that underlyingly characterizes an event. The notation suggests, in
a way that paraphrases like (34) and (35) might not, that the events need to be
made explicit to give any systematic semantics for sentences with the verb ‘kissed’.
Letting M be Mary, J be John and T be Tompkins Square, we now have these
symbolic representations for the truth conditions of (29) and (30):
36. ∃E (kissed(E,M,J)).
37. ∃E (kissed(E,M,J) ∧in(E,T)).
By symbolizing the contribution of ‘in Tompkins Square’ using the logical term
in(E,T) we are able to concisely indicate that the kissing event is what is being
described and that what is being said is that the event was in the park. Again,
the notation emphasizes the claimed analysis, namely that ‘in’ always expresses a
relationship between a thing (in this case an event) and a spatial landmark that
locates it.
We can develop the formalism further to show how the event analysis explains
why we can keep adding prepositional phrases to modify verbs of change without a
loss of grammaticality; it does so by treating such additions through the mechanism
of predicate conjunction. Predicate conjunction is a ubiquitous semantic operation
[Partee and Rooth, 1983; Chung and Ladusaw, 2003]; you can clearly see the need
for it in examples such as (38)–(40).
38. Felix is a round table.
39. Felix is a brown round table.

196
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
40. Felix is a wooden brown round table.
We could continue to add adjectives without a loss of grammaticality indeﬁ-
nitely. It is standard to treat this sort of modiﬁcation as conjunctive. (38) is true
just in case Felix is both round and a table. So even though grammar legislates
that ‘round’ in (38) is an adjective that modiﬁes ‘table’, since (41) paraphrases
(38),
41. Felix is a table and Felix is round.
where ‘table’ and ‘round’ overtly describe Felix in (41), they must do so covertly
as well in (38). If you understand ‘round’ and ‘table’, all you need to learn to
understand ‘round table’ is that it applies to an object just in case both the
simpler component expressions apply to it as well. The general rule from which
this speciﬁc case derives is (PA).
(PA) A complex common noun devised by prefacing a common noun
(itself possibly complex) with an adjective applies to an object just in
case both the adjective and the common noun apply to that object.
So (PA) applies to (40) three times, and tells us that overall (40) is true just
in case ‘wooden’ and ‘brown’ and ‘round’ and ‘table’ all apply to Felix. The same
kind of mechanism applies in composing (36) and (37). We ﬁrst build a complex
predicate characterizing an event — that it was a kissing by Mary of John, that it
was in Tompkins Square — and ﬁnally derive the sentential condition that there
is some event that satisﬁes this complex predicate.
Using a logical vocabulary also helps us demystify these compositional deriva-
tions. A complex conjunctive statement — ‘John is tall and Mary is happy’ —
is true if and only if its simpler conjuncts — ‘John is tall’, ‘Mary is happy’— are
true. Letting tall(J) and happy(M) represent the content of the individual con-
juncts allows us to represent the content of the conjunctive statement by tall(J)
∧happy(M). Formalism in our meta-language here highlights our commitment to
ordinary logical conjunction. For example, it allows us to carry out inferences on
our representation using the deductive operation of conjunction reduction. From
the fact that a sentence of the form ⌜P ∧Q⌝is true, we can infer that ‘P’ is true
and we can infer that ‘Q’ is true.
Analogously, a complex conjunctive predicate — ‘is tall and happy’— is true
of an object if and only if its conjuncts — ‘is tall’, ‘is happy’— are as well. Now,
higher-order logic lets name predicates using the formalism of λ-abstraction: λ X.
tall(X) names the predicate that is true of an object X if X is tall. In general
λX.C names the function which gets its result on argument A by evaluating C
on the assumption that X = A. This equivalence is embodied in the λ-calculus
equivalence (λX.C)(A) ≡C[X ←A]. For example, (λ X. tall(X))(f) ≡tall(f).
With this notation, we can represent the conjunctive predicate with the λ-
term λ X. tall(X) ∧happy(X). In general, we can represent the conjunction of

Logic and Semantic Analysis
197
the predicates F and G by the λ-term λX.F(X) ∧G(X).
Thus this notation
allows us to rewrite (PA) compactly in a way that shows its close similarity to the
interpretive rules illustrated in (5)–(7). We give this new rule as (PAL).
(PAL) If N is a (complex) common noun that refers to the predicate
G and A is an adjective that refers to the predicate F, then ⌜AN⌝
is a complex common noun that refers to the predicate conjunction
λX.F(X) ∧G(X).
This formalism again allows us to highlight our commitment to ordinary logical
conjunction.
Ultimately the same meaning of ‘and’ is at play whether we are
conjoining sentences or predicates. For example, the expected inferences follow:
If a complex predicate ⌜λX.P ∧Q⌝is true of some object A, in other words
⌜(λX.P ∧Q)(A)⌝is true, then ⌜P[X ←A] ∧Q[X ←A]⌝follows (by λ-calculus
equivalence) and so both ⌜P[X ←A]⌝and ⌜Q[X ←A]⌝follow (by conjunction
reduction) and thus both ⌜λX.P⌝is true of A and ⌜λX.Q⌝is true of A (by λ-
calculus equivalence, again).
Now, according to the event analysis, the conjunctive predicate ‘was a kissing
by John of Mary and was in Tompkins Square’ is true of an event just in case
its simpler component predicates ‘was a kissing by John of Mary’ and ‘was in
Tompkins Square’ are both true of that event as well. Formally, we represent the
conjoined predicate as λ E. kissed(E,M,J) ∧in(E,T) and derive it by predicate
conjunction from λ E. kissed(E,M,J) and λ E. in(E,T).
Another key ingredient of the proposal is the existential quantiﬁcation over
events (in both (34) and (35)) in their main verb and (in (35)) in its preposition.
The latter two sentences tell us to treat the former two as existentially quantifying
over an event. An initial response to this suggestion might be doubt, since (29)
and (30) do not seem to assert the existence of an event; i.e., they don’t seem to
harbor any existential quantiﬁer. But in fact, the patterns of inference of action
sentences are exactly what you would expect from the existential analysis. For
example, (42) does not entail (43), but (43) does entail (42):
42. Mary kissed John in Tompkins Square and Mary kissed John on Wednesday.
43. Mary kissed John in Tompkins Square on Wednesday.
This is just what you would expect if the meaning of (42) is represented with
two existential quantiﬁers as in (44) and the meaning of (43) is represented with
one as in (45).
44. ∃E (kissed(E,M,J) ∧in(E,T)) ∧∃E (kissed(E,M,J) ∧on(E,W))
45. ∃E (kissed(E,M,J) ∧in(E,T ∧on(E,W))).
Patterns of discourse connectivity are also exactly what you would expect from
the existential analysis. The familiar pronoun ‘it’ in (46) seems to be about some-
thing, presumably an action.

198
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
46. John buttered his toast and he did it after midnight.
It is reasonable to ask whether the pronoun ‘it’ in (46) anaphoric or deictic?
Since (46) is intelligible without a concomitant pointing gesture or any other sort
of demonstration, ‘it’ must be anaphoric. But what is ‘it’-s anaphor? The other
noun phrases in (46) are ‘John’, ‘his toast’, ‘he’ and ‘midnight’, but these are not
actions, and so ‘it’ neither refers back to nor is bound by any of them. Since
nothing else is explicitly referenced in (46), we must understand its pronoun ‘it’
to be anaphoric. But what can its anaphor be? The event approach provides a
simple answer: it interprets the verb ‘butter’ in (46) as having a place quantifying
over events. (46) is understood as (47).
47. Some event was a buttering of the toast by John and it (i.e., the event)
occurred after midnight.
(47) explains why ’it’ in (46) is intelligible. It is an anaphoric pronoun whose
anaphor is ‘some event’. The event approach posits an implicit position in verbs
and the behavior of ‘it’ in (46) provides the right evidence for this posited place.
The support is unexpected and intuitively pleasing. Data of the sort provided by
(46) reminds us that part of what we learn in learning the meaning of a verb of
change (indeed, any verb) is its adicity, and what sorts of entities the expressions
which ﬁll these places are true of. Verbs of change, it turns out, have an event
place.
As explanatorily rich as the event account is it still faces problems. As developed
thus far it yields unwanted inferences if applied generally. To see this, consider the
distinction between the modiﬁers ‘quickly’ and ‘allegedly’. The adverb of manner
‘quickly’ in (48) is modifying the verb ‘drove’.
48. Frank drove quickly.
The manner in which the adverb modiﬁes the verb in (48) renders it impossible
for (48) to be true and (49) false.
49. Frank drove.
This sort of inference from a sentence with adverbial modiﬁcation to one without
it holds in general. The inference is not only valid but valid in virtue of its form,
much like inferential relations among (29) through (33).
By contrast, if we symbolize (50) along the lines recommended by the event
approach, it winds up logically implying (51).
50. Clinton allegedly lied under oath.
51. Clinton lied under oath.
The interpretation of (50), according to the event approach, is (52).

Logic and Semantic Analysis
199
52. There is an event e such that e was a lying under oath by Clinton and e was
alleged.
But alleging that something is all by itself doesn’t make it so. This may be
a problem for the event approach, for it focuses on a somewhat special class of
modiﬁers, ‘quietly’ as opposed to ‘allegedly’, ‘in Tompkins Square’ as opposed to
‘in a dream’.
Should we ditch the event approach on this basis and seek a more general
approach? Before sacriﬁcing it, a closer look at so-called ’problem’ modiﬁers, for
example, ‘allegedly’, suggests a non-ad hoc way of distinguishing problem cases
from non-problem ones.
We can move from (53) to (54) without a change in
meaning.
53. Oedipus allegedly married his mother.
54. It has been alleged that Oedipus married his mother.8
Since (53) and (54) are synonymous, we can infer that ‘allegedly’ is not modi-
fying the verb ‘married’ in (53), but rather, as in (54), ‘it has been alleged that’
is predicated of a statement. This makes sense, since it is statements that are
alleged. And, so this transformation works, because a modiﬁer like ‘allegedly’ is
not an adverb modifying a verb, but instead it modiﬁes whole sentences. To take
another example, when you say ‘John clearly studied for this exam’ you are not
attributing clarity to his extended event of studying for this exam. Rather, you
are asserting ‘It is clear that John studied for this exam’. What is clear is the
statement that John studied for this exam. In this regard, adverbs like ‘allegedly’
and ‘clearly’ diﬀer from ’quickly’ and ‘quietly’. Transforming (48) into (55) does
not preserve grammaticality.
55. *It has been quick that Frank drove.
If correct, we may have a principled distinction between adverbs the event ap-
proach accommodates and those it cannot. What we do not know yet is, if not
as conjoined predicates attributed of events, what sort of contribution do adverbs
like ‘allegedly’ and ‘clearly’ make to sentences in which they occur. Whatever
contribution it is, it will be distinct from the sort of contribution an adverb like
‘quickly’ makes, for suppose that Frank is identical to your uncle, then if Frank
drives quickly, so too does your uncle. But even though Oedipus’ mother was Jo-
casta, no one alleged that Oedipus married Jocasta. If this is right, then adverbs
like ‘allegedly’, ‘clearly’, ‘intentionally’, ‘on purpose’ cannot be treated as predi-
cates of events or actions at all. What, then, is their contribution to meaning?
We cannot hope to settle all these issues here.9
8‘Supposedly John left’ (‘It is supposed that John left’), ‘John killed Bill in Fred’s dream’
(‘Fred dreamt that John killed Fred’).
9For further discussion see [Parsons, 1990].

200
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
4.2
Limits to analysis
It is unchallengeable that the event approach is a paradigm of a substantial anal-
ysis about a systematic compositional meaning theory for natural language. Even
though these gains are nothing to sneer at, it is an unsettling exchange we have
transacted — one that highlights the holistic, scientiﬁc character of our inves-
tigation into meaning. In eﬀect, we have bargained that if the event approach
explains various logical relations and accounts for linguistic productivity, we will
ignore our intuitions about the sentences in question. We will ignore our intuition
that the seemingly two-place verb ‘ kissed ’ in (29) through (33) is elliptic for a
three-place verb ‘ was a kissing by
of ’. Granted, this consequence is not as
bad as the discredited proposal that left the adicity of each verb of change as an
open-ended aﬀair. But even though on the event analysis there is a ﬁxed number
of places for each verb of change, the number that the approach posits is not what
we pre-theoretically think it is. Also, whatever contribution prepositions make to
the meaning of sentences in which they occur, we do not pre-theoretically think
that it’s the same sort of contribution that predicates make. Yet, on this proposal,
prepositions in (29) through (33) turn out to be two-place predicates (’in’ in (30)
through (33) is elliptic for the two-place predicate ‘ is in ’; and so forth). And,
lastly, prior to encountering the event approach, it would never have occurred to
an English speaker to conclude that (29) through (33) harbor hidden existential
quantiﬁers. So in order to endorse the event approach we had to defend these three
surprising and unintuitive consequences. In the end, we can muster a wide variety
of evidence in support of these consequences of the event analysis — despite its
surprises, the event analysis oﬀers the best account available.
Many proposed analyses in semantics are not such clear wins. For example,
analyses that purport to give logical equivalents for lexical meanings are particu-
larly problematic. Paradigmatic examples of such analyses include the hypothesis
that (56) is synonymous with or elliptical for (57), that (58) is synonymous with
or elliptical for (59), and that (60) is synonymous with or elliptical for (61).
56. Chris used stain to darken the wood.
57. Chris used stain to cause the wood to become darker.
58. Kim boiled the water.
59. Kim caused the water to boil.
60. The tiger killed the elephant.
61. The tiger caused the elephant to die.
At ﬁrst, these analyses might seem to oﬀer comparable advantages to the event
analysis. For one thing, these analyses immediately account for some important in-
ferential relationships among sentences. It’s clear, for example, that (56) deﬁnitely
entails (57), that (58) deﬁnitely entails (59), and that (60) deﬁnitely entails (61).

Logic and Semantic Analysis
201
For another thing, these analyses, like the event analysis, explain apparently pro-
ductive processes in language. In English, the ‘-en’ suﬃx that appears on ‘darken’
works more generally to turn an adjective X into a verb meaning, roughly, ‘make
more X’. It applies to lots of adjectives (though only to short Anglo-Saxon roots
ending in consonants of low sonority). Similarly, a wide variety of verbs describing
processes things undergo, like ‘boil’, can also be used in a diﬀerent sense meaning,
roughly, to cause something to undergo the process.
On balance, however, we don’t think the preponderance of the evidence favors
these analyses.
The productivity of these constructions is limited.
There is a
qualitative diﬀerence between the inﬁnite productivity of open-ended modiﬁcation
and the vast but still ﬁnite productivity of a lexical derivation that applies to any
root word in the language. Speakers have to learn each root form — root forms are
arbitrary pairings of sound and meaning, after all — so it’s certainly possible that
speakers could learn something about each derived form, too. In fact, it’s common
for complex words to have motivated meanings that are related to the meanings of
the parts but not predictable from them. The noun ‘wheelchair’ is a particularly
clear case: the word contains the words ‘wheel’ and ‘chair’, and, as you might
expect, all wheelchairs are chairs on wheels. Yet ‘wheelchair’ doesn’t just mean
chair on wheels: it refers to a speciﬁc common kind of chair with wheels. It is a
reasonable hypothesis that the verb meanings for ‘darken’ in (56) and ‘boil’ in (58)
are motivated in this sense: they contain a morpheme that expresses causality, but
have a more speciﬁc meaning that reﬂects this causality in this semi-compositional
way. You can cause something to be darker without darkening it. Turning down
the dimmer switch on a light bulb makes the bulb darker but we don’t call that
‘darkening the bulb’ in English. Lowering the pressure in a container of water can
make the water boil but isn’t boiling the water. And it is also possible to cause
something to die without killing it; Romeo’s suicide causes Juliet to die, but she
kills herself.
These mismatches are reminders that providing analyses in terms of covert
logical structure is generally a counterintuitive business.
Intuitively, killing is
killing and dying is dying — diﬀerent kinds of things, though certainly related.
The same goes for the boiling that you do and the boiling the water does, or
the darkening that you do and the dark wood that results — these are diﬀerent
kinds of things, though certainly related. In many cases, such relationships can
be captured in lots more transparent ways than by analyses that assume that
language contains complex hidden structure.
5
OPEN PROBLEMS AND FURTHER READING
In this chapter, we have suggested that philosophy has a place for truths about
meaning, and have explored logic as a tool for developing these truths. Through-
out, our discussion we have emphasized both the strong points of this program
and its limitations.

202
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
On our view, truths about meaning can play an important role in the philosoph-
ical description of language. We can use our knowledge of meaning to understand
sentences and to communicate with one another. However, truths about meaning
may have rather less import for the rest of philosophy — for questions in episte-
mology or metaphysics, for example — because facts about meaning won’t come
with a priori certainty. Of course, the particular ways in which we discover these
facts may help us clarify our philosophical arguments, and while such possibili-
ties are beyond the scope of this chapter, ongoing debates certainly explore them.
A case in point is the contextualist semantics for know where uses of the verb
attribute knowledge not absolutely but only with respect to prevailing epistemic
standards [Lewis, 1996].
On our view, logic provides an important collection of tools that we can take
as models for the semantic analysis of natural language. The logical treatment
of sentential operators, functions and arguments, variables, quantiﬁers and scope,
tense and modality have all inspired research in natural language semantics. There
are many good introductions to the overlap between logic and language, particu-
larly [Gamut, 1991], [Kamp and Reyle, 1993], and [Larson and Segal, 1995]. There
is even a Handbook of Logic and Language [van Benthem and ter Meulen, 1997].
Technical sophistication comes in particularly handy when the theorist aims to
establish a direct correspondence between ﬁne-grained linguistic structure and a
compositional theory of truth; so logic is a mainstay of formal linguistic semantics.
At the same time, however, we have seen how pragmatic dimensions of language
use — context dependence and context change — may motivate extensions to or
departures from mathematical logic in semantic analysis. The Handbook of Prag-
matics [Horn and Ward, 2004] provides an entr´ee into the diverse phenomena that
characterize language in use.
Finally, however, we emphasize that semantic analysis is an empirical discipline
that aims to reconcile our intuitions about meaning with our abilities to use lan-
guage, draw inferences, evaluate arguments and communicate ideas. Philosophy
of language provides a framework for this science and logic provides a tool — in
many respects, this is where the action ﬁnally starts. Fundamental issues remain
controversial: what kinds of entities are required for semantic theory? How do
these entities get hooked up with our words and utterances? What constraints
must a semantic theory for natural language respect? And what is the role of
these constraints and our own experience in allowing us to acquire our knowledge
as speakers of our native language? We have highlighted the opportunities and
the challenges of these questions in semantic analysis here, with the example of
action verbs. But they are as open-ended as language itself.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Areces et al., 2001] C. Areces, P. Blackburn, and M. Marx. Hybrid logic: Characterization,
interpolation and complexity. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 66(3): 977–1010, 2001.
[Barker, 2002] C. Barker. The dynamics of vagueness. Linguistics and Philosophy, 25(1): 1–36,
2002.

Logic and Semantic Analysis
203
[Beaver, 2001] D. Beaver. Presupposition and Assertion in Dynamic Semantics. CSLI Publica-
tions, Stanford CA, 2001.
[Beaver, 2004] D. Beaver. The optimization of discourse anaphora. Linguistics and Philosophy,
27(1): 3-56, 2004.
[van Benthem and Meulen, 1997] J.F.A.K. van Benthem and G.B.A. ter Meulen (eds.). The
Handbook of Logic and Language. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, and North-Holland, Amster-
dam, The Netherlands, 1997.
[Chung and Ladusaw, 2003] S. Chung and W. Ladusaw. Restriction and Saturation. MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass, 2003.
[Davidson, 1967a] D. Davidson. The logical form of action sentences. In N. Rescher (ed.),
The Logic of Decision and Action, 81-95. University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, 1967.
Reprinted with discussion in Davidson [2002], 105-148.
[Davidson, 1967b] D. Davidson. Truth and meaning. Synthese, 17: 304-323, 1967. Reprinted in
Davidson [2001], 16-36.
[Davidson, 2001] D. Davidson. Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation. Second Edition, Claren-
don Press, Oxford, 2001.
[Davidson, 2002] D. Davidson. Essays on Actions and Event, Second Edition. Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 2002.
[Frege, 1879] G. Frege. Begriﬀsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des
reinen Denkens. Halle: L. Nebert, 1879. Translated as Begriﬀsschrift, a Formula Language,
Modeled upon that of Arithmetic, for Pure Thought. In From Frege to G¨odel, edited by J. van
Heijenoort. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1967. Also as Conceptual Notation
and Related Articles. Edited and translated by T.W. Bynum. London: Oxford University
Press, 1972.
[Fitting and Mendelsohn, 1998] M. Fitting and R.L. Mendelsohn. First-order Modal Logic.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 1998.
[Fodor, 1975] J.A. Fodor. The Language of Thought. Crowell, New York, 1975.
[Fodor, 1987] J.A. Fodor. Psychosemantics. MIT Press, Cambridge Mass, 1987.
[Gamut, 1991] L.T.F. Gamut. Logic, Language, and Meaning, Vol. 1: Introduction to Logic,
and Vol. 2: Intensional Logic and Logical Grammar. University of Chicago Press, 1991.
[Grice, 1975] H.P. Grice. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and J. Morgan (eds.), Syntax and
Semantics III: Speech Acts, 41–58. Academic Press, New York, 1975. Reprinted in Grice
[1989], 22-40.
[Grice, 1989] H.P. Grice. Studies in the Way of Words. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Mass, 1989.
[Groenendijk and Stokhof, 1990] J. Groenendijk and M. Stokhof. Dynamic predicate logic. Lin-
guistics and Philosophy, 14: 39–100, 1990.
[Hinrichs, 1986] E. Hinrichs. Temporal anaphora in discourses of English. Linguistics and Phi-
losophy, 9(1): 63–82, 1986.
[Horn and Ward, 2004] L.R. Horn and G. Ward (eds.), Handbook of Pragmatics. Basil Blackwell:
Oxford. 2004.
[Kamp and Reyle, 1993] H. Kamp and U. Reyle. From Discourse to Logic. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 1993.
[Kaplan, 1989] D. Kaplan. Demonstratives. In J. Almog, J. Perry, and H. Wettstein (eds.),
Themes from Kaplan, 481-566. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1989.
[Kripke, 1972] S.A. Kripke. Naming and necessity. In D. Davidson and G. Harman (eds.), Se-
mantics of Natural Language, 253–355. Reidel, 1972. Reprinted as Kripke [1980].
[Kripke, 1980] S.A. Kripke. Naming and Necessity. Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass,
1980.
[Kyburg and Morreau, 2000] A. Kyburg and M. Morreau. Fitting words: Vague words in con-
text. Linguistics and Philosophy, 23(6): 577–597, 2000.
[Larson and Segal, 1995] R. Larson and G. Segal. Knowledge of Meaning: An Introduction to
Semantic Theory. MIT Press, 1995.
[Lewis, 1979] D. Lewis. Scorekeeping in a language game. In R. B¨auerle, U. Egli, and A. von
Stechow (eds.), Semantics from Diﬀerent Points of View, 172–187. Springer Verlag, Berlin,
1979.
[Lewis, 1996] D. Lewis. ‘Elusive Knowledge’. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 74. Reprinted
in Papers in Metaphysics and Epistemology, 549–67, 1996.

204
Ernest Lepore and Matthew Stone
[Montague, 1970] R. Montague. English as a Formal Language. In B. Visentini et al. (eds.),
Linguaggi nella societ`a e nella tecnica. Milan: Edizioni di Comunit`a. 189-224, 1970. Reprinted
in Montague [1974], 188-221.
[Montague, 1973] R. Montague. The proper treatment of quantiﬁcation in ordinary English.
In K.J.J. Hintikka, J.M.E. Moravcsik, & P. Suppes (eds.) Approaches to Natural Language.
Dordrecht: Reidel. 221-242, 1973. Reprinted in Montague [1974], 247-270.
[Montague, 1974] R. Montague. Formal Philosophy. Selected Papers of Richard Montague.
Edited and with an introduction by R.H. Thomason. New Haven/London: Yale University
Press, 1974.
[Muskens, 1996] R. Muskens. Combining Montague semantics and discourse representation the-
ory. Linguistics and Philosophy, 19(2): 143–186, 1996.
[Parsons, 1990] T. Parsons. Events in the Semantics of English: A Study of Subatomic Seman-
tics. MIT Press, Cambridge, 1990.
[Partee, 1973] B.H. Partee. Some structural analogies between tenses and pronouns in English.
Journal of Philosophy, 70: 601–609, 1973.
[Partee, 1984] B.H. Partee. Nominal and temporal anaphora. Linguistics and Philosophy,
7(3):243–286, 1984.
[Partee and Rooth, 1983] B.H. Partee and M. Rooth. Generalized conjunction and type ambi-
guity. In R. Bauerle, C. Schwarze and A. von Stechow (eds.), Meaning, Use and Interpretation
of Language, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, 361-383, 1983.
[Pietroski, 2006] P. Pietroski. Logical form and LF. In E. Lepore and B. Smith (eds), Oxford
Handbook to Philosophy of Language. , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
[Putnam, 1976] H. Putnam. The Meaning of ‘Meaning’. In Philosophical Papers II: Mind, Lan-
guage, and Reality, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 215-271, 1975.
[Quine, 1953] W.V.O. Quine. Two Dogmas of Empiricism. In From a Logical Point of View,
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 20-46, 1953.
[Quine, 1960] W.V.O. Quine. Word and Object. Cambridge, Mass.: The Technology Press of
M.I.T; New York, 1960.
[Robert, 1989] C. Roberts. Modal subordination and pronominal anaphora in discourse. Lin-
guistics and Philosophy, 12(6): 683–721, 1989.
[Searle, 1975] J.R. Searle. Indirect speech acts. In P. Cole and J. Morgan (eds.), Syntax and
Semantics III: Speech Acts. Academic Press, New York, 59–82, 1975.
[Stalnaker, 1973] R. Stalnaker. Presuppositions. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 2(4): 447–457,
1973.
[Stalnaker, 1978] R. Stalnaker. Assertion. In P. Cole (ed.), Syntax and Semantics 9: 315-332.
Academic Press, New York, 1978. Reprinted in Stalnaker [1999], 78-95.
[Stalnaker, 1999] R. Stalnaker. Context and Content. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1999.
[Tarski, 1935] A. Tarski. Der Wahrheitsbegriﬀin den formalisierten Sprachen, Studia Philosoph-
ica, I: 261-405, 1935. Translated into English and published under the title ‘The Concept of
Truth in Formalized Languages’ in Tarski [1956].
[Tarski, 1956] A. Tarski. Logic, Semantics and Metamathematics. Oxford University Press,
1956.
[Thomason, 1990] R.H. Thomason. Accommodation, meaning and implicature. In P.R. Cohen,
J. Morgan, and M.E. Pollack (eds.), Intentions in Communication, 325–363. MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass, 1990.
[Webber, 1988] B.L. Webber. Tense as discourse anaphor. Computational Linguistics, 14(2):
61–73, 1988.

JUSTIFICATORY IRRELEVANCE OF
FORMAL SEMANTICS
Charles F. Kielkopf
1
BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW
The stimulus for this essay was an invitation from Professor Dale Jacquette to
submit a paper on validity and entailment for this volume on “Philosophy of
Logic.” I welcomed the invitation as an opportunity to strengthen a case for system
E of Entailment as the correct formal sentential logic. In 1977, I had published
a survey of several systems of formal sentential logics along with semantics, or
notions of validity, associated with the systems.1 In that book I defended system E
of entailment as the correct formal sentential logic. I tried to show that a natural
language reading of the formulas of E best preserved widely held intuitions, or
prejudices, about what ought to be accepted and rejected as legitimate deductive
inference. Despite following the fashion of the 1960s and 70s by comparing many
competing systems of logic, I did not, and still do not, accept that there can be
a plurality of correct logics. Logic consists of our practices for settling disputes
about correct inferences. If reasonable people can argue about the correctness of
the practices the practices are not logic even if they are useful and philosophically
supported formalized practices for rigorously drawing inferences from premises. In
this essay I focus exclusively on sentential logic.
I was uneasy with my case for system E because it appealed to the implicit
semantics we use in understanding the sentences of our natural languages. Such
appeals seem so similar to appeals to prejudices. Still, I believed that a case that
a particular use of logical terms such as ‘or,’ ‘and,’ ‘not,’ ‘if then ,’ etc., conforms
to how these terms ought to be used would require an appeal to semantics of some
type. I had an inchoate hope that somehow recourse to formal semantics with
a formal notion of validity would make the case rigorous. In a ﬁrst response to
Professor Jacquette’s invitation I made a vain eﬀort to realize that hope. I tried to
interpret the axioms for E model structures as true claims about entailment and
the associated notion of validity as expressing what we really mean by ’validity.’
Unfortunately, acceptance of these notions of validity as the sole proper notion
of validity becomes as much a matter of dispute, and prejudice, as acceptance of
the axioms of the system read simply as rules for the sole proper system of infer-
ences. So here I submit a negative conclusion that formal semantics are not useful
1[Kielkopf, 1977].
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

206
Charles F. Kielkopf
for deciding which system of formal logic is the correct system; in eﬀect, formal
semantics are part of the system to be justiﬁed. This negative conclusion should
have been immediately obvious to me long ago. Fortunately, the formal semantics
can be used, within limits, to make conclusive metalinguistic determination about
what is proved or, on occasion what is not provable, in a system such as E of
entailment, I of intuitionism, C of classical logic, etc. So here, I propose that we
change, at least for philosophical discussions about the right or correct logic, the
notion of the fundamental logic for formal reasoning. Fundamental, or genuine
logic, is constituted by those metalinguistic practices with which we determine the
correctness of reasoning within a system by reference to the standards proposed
for the system. Ideally rational people will not disagree about the application of
these practices to evaluate formal reasoning and deﬁnitely these practices must not
require justiﬁcation by appeal to semantic intuitions about the logical constants.
Exhibition of some of these practices support labeling them with the vague term
“strict ﬁnitistic.”
On my proposal, truths of fundamental sentential logic are claims about what
is formally provable in various formal systems for sentential logic.
If a proof
has been presented in a system S of Ψ from Γ, i.e., Γ ⊢s Ψ and the sequence
of formulas comprising the proof is surveyable, typical people who know about
formula proofs can determine whether or not Γ ⊢s Ψ is true. If the system has
a decision procedure, then if the application of the decision procedure is not too
complicated, we can make a metalinguistic determination that certain claims of
the form Γ ⊢s Ψ cannot be true. For some systems without a decision procedure,
such as E, a surveyable matrix can occasionally be used to show that an Γ ⊢E Ψ
cannot be true.
We shall see how E model structure semantics are heuristics
for constructing reasonably small matrices. My methodology is Wittgensteinian
by virtue of following the maxim that philosophy is assembling reminders for a
particular purpose. Work with a few procedures in formal semantics remind us
that these procedures are irrelevant to justifying as the correct logic the formal
systems associated with them. Secondly, I exhibit what we can accomplish with
these semantics to justify truth claims about formal provability. These second
reminders show that we can frequently say with mathematical precisions what is
and is not provable in various systems.
If we accept the proposal that “fundamental” logic is constituted by the strict
ﬁnitistic claims about the syntax and semantics and classify strict ﬁnitistic claims
as mathematical, then logic becomes mathematics. So instead of a logicistic thesis
that mathematics is logic, this essay proposes what could be called a mathematist
thesis that logic is mathematics.

Justiﬁcatory Irrelevance of Formal Semantics
207
2
THE PROBLEM OF JUSTIFYING A FORMAL LOGIC
I follow an early 20th century practice guided by Hilbert, Carnap2 et al. and use
an idealized formal presentation of science to locate the problem of justifying a
formal logic. I assume familiarity with the syntactical preliminaries for setting up
a formal system and characterize the idealization by citing the types of axioms in
a very rich formal system.
The idealization:
i.
Axioms and rules of proof for sentential logic
ii.
Axioms and rules of proof for predicate logic without =
iii.
Axioms for =
iv.
Axioms and rules for modalities, if used
v.
Axioms for set-theory and other mathematics if not obtainable from set the-
ory.
vi.
Basic principles of non-deductive reasoning, if any
vii. Synthetic aposteriori axioms for the special natural and human sciences
Prima facie the problem of justifying a sentential logic is formulating and address-
ing in the metalanguage the question about the proper system to be used in (i).
Formal semantics are “in the right place” for justifying parts of a formal system,
viz., they are in the metalanguage. But are they of “the right strength ” or do they
say “the right thing?” The semantics may require assumptions as strong, if not
stronger than the principles accepted in the object language. Of more importance
for setting aside the prima facie formulation of the problem as the proper formu-
lation is the fact that the metalinguistic statements of the formal semantics do not
“say” what is needed to justify the axioms in the object language. The statements
of the formal semantics are “is” statements and we need “ought” statements for
justiﬁcation. The metalinguistic claims about provability which I am proposing
as the proper claims to make about justiﬁcation are also “is” claims. However,
the provability claims ﬁt in with a general normative claim that people ought to
do what they say they will do. When people put a particular system of senten-
tial logic in (i) of the above idealization they are promising to draw inferences in
accordance with the rules for that system. The mathematical claims I propose as
the genuine logic serve to point out that certain procedures do, or do not, conform
to what was promised. This paper, then, is the result of an eﬀort to overcome the
prima facie formulation of the problem of justifying a logic.
2My suggestion that the signiﬁcant metalinguistic claims about logic are those about formal
provability has aﬃnities to [Carnap, 1937].

208
Charles F. Kielkopf
Historically and “logically” the prima facie problem arises because of challenges
to so-called classical sentential logic PC. PC was the logic presented by Russell
and Hilbert. PC is a plausible candidate for sentence logic because it is simple and
presents exactly the valid arguments in the clearest sense of validity, viz., those
for which it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false,
with only true and false as the truth values. Readers of this volume are familiar
with the many challenges made against PC such as: it provides no adequate
representation of conditionals, it allows reductio existence proofs. Let us focus on
the challenge that PC notion of validity is too broad because it warrants as valid
inferences in which there is no connection between the premises and conclusion. In
particular, PC warrants as valid A∧¬A ⊢B and B ⊢A∨¬A where the provability
sign ⊢represents logical entailment.
Consequently, much of the mid-twentieth
century work on developing an improved alternative to PC was developing and
justifying systems of sentence logic containing a sentential connective →for logical
entailment in which A ∧¬A →B and B →.A ∨¬A are not theorems. Of course
many systems have been developed to preserve relevance between premises and
conclusion and to prevent derivational chaos in the presence of contradictions. It
is this variety which raises so sharply the problem of selecting a correct system.
Many of the objections to PC’s “broad” notion of validity could be addressed
by simply intervening in applications of logic to say: “We do not want to use that
kind of derivation in this context.” There is, though, a bias that somehow we
should not have to intervene to restrict uses of logic. Intervening to dismiss styles
of argument is ad hoc. The interventions need not be unprincipled even if ad hoc.
Nevertheless, these interventions would be subject to dispute and dispute is what
we want to avoid with logic. Also for artiﬁcial intelligence and reasoning from data
banks in which there may be contradictions we should have a system of reasoning
which does not go “haywire” and prove everything unless we intervene to stop it.
So, I stay committed to the idealization of formalizing principles of inference to
be used. In light of that commitment I present system E as an exhibit for how to
do “genuine” logic for a system of formal logic.
3
SYSTEM E OF ENTAILMENT
The system E of entailment was developed by A.R. Anderson and Nuel Belnap in
1958 by modifying a system  created in 1956 by William Ackermann.
E1. A ∧B →A
E2. A ∧B →B
E3. A →.A ∨B
E4. B →.A ∨B
E5. A ∧(B ∨C) →.B ∨(A ∧C)

Justiﬁcatory Irrelevance of Formal Semantics
209
E6. A →¬¬A
E7. ¬¬A →A
E8. ((A →A) ∧(B →B) →C) →C
E9. A →B →.B →C →.A →C Suﬃxing
E10. A →B →.C →A →.C →B Preﬁxing
E11. (A →A →B) →.A →B Contraction
E12. (A →B) ∧(A →C) →.A →.B ∧C
E13. (A →C) ∧(B →C) →.A ∨B →C
E14. A →B →.¬B →¬A
E15. A ∧¬B →.¬(A →B)
The rules of proof are MP, A →B, A ⊢B, and Adjunction:
A, B ⊢A ∧B.
E-model structures and matrices will be used to show that A ∧¬A →B, B →
.A ∨¬A, and (A ∨B) ∧¬B →A are not theorems. Before presenting a formal
semantics for E, let me illustrate my thesis about the practices which constitute
“genuine logic” by exhibiting a formal proof within E.
I am proposing that genuine formal sentential logic consists of those practices
which we employ to determine with certainty what may and may not be done in
particular systems and whether or not procedures of particular systems have been
correctly followed. We engage in these practice while using a metalanguage to
talk of sentential logic systems. These practices are mathematical because they
concern what can or cannot be done with certain structures. They are ﬁnitistic
because they have the appropriate certainty only when the structures considered
are small enough so that we do not have to make many inferences about what
else might be in the structure. When using a formal logic a basic claim is a truth
claim that such-and-such a sequence is a proof. These are claims of the form Γ ⊢s
Ψ when a sequence of wﬀs. allegedly forming a proof is oﬀered.
Assume Transitivity has been established as a derived rule in E. Consider the
following sequence to support ⊢E A →A
1. (A →A) ∧(B →B) →.A →A E1
2. (A →A) ∧(B →B) →(A →A) →((A →A) →B) →(A →A) ∧(B →
B) →B) Instance of E9
3. (A →A) →B) →(A →A) ∧(B →B) →B MP1,2
4. ((A →A) ∧(B →B) →B) →B E8 with B for C

210
Charles F. Kielkopf
5. (A →A) →B) →B Transitivity 3,4
6. (A →A) →A) →A A for B in 5
7. (A →A) →A =df A System deﬁnition
8. A →A 6,7
It is tedious and often tricky to check a proof. But if the proof is not too long,
we can tell for certain whether or not it is a proof in the system in question —
whether or not the proponents of a system have played by their rules. Strictly
speaking the sequence of formulas is not a proof. The sequence is a pattern we
display in a proof that the end formula of the sequence is properly linked to the
axioms so that it can be called a theorem.
4
ON USE AND INTERPRETATION OF E-MODEL STRUCTURES — Ems
The purpose of introducing E model structures is to collect reminders that the
metalinguistic work with E model structures is insuﬃcient for justifying any sys-
tem of logic; not even the system which they characterize. Even work with the
formal semantics to establish claims about provability and unprovability within
the system of sentential logic are far stronger and hence more controversial than
the sentential inferences they are supposed to justify. Furthermore eﬀorts to read
the postulates for model structures as some type of truths about reasoning are
artiﬁcial and certainly not beyond controversy. However, introduction of model
structures is not irrelevant to my goals for this essay. Model structure work pro-
vides heuristics for constructing ﬁnitistic justiﬁcation procedures; especially small
ﬁnite matrices. The values of these matrices are not plausibly interpreted as truth
values. Nonetheless, use of the matrices to show unprovability is the sort of strict
ﬁnitistic mathematics which I am here proposing as the practices which are genuine
formal sentential logic.
Here I should note that showing a matrix is suitable for a system can be ﬁnitistic
mathematics if mathematical induction is accepted. Mathematical induction is
typically ﬁnitistic, in my judgment. We show by reference to surveyable structures,
taken as one step to the next, that at a next step a counterexample to the theorem
will not occur.
An Ems M is an ordered 4-tuple: ⟨K, P, R, ∗⟩, where K is a nonempty set of
points, P is a unary predicate of Ks, R is a ternary relation among the Ks, and ∗
is a unary operation on the Ks into the Ks, and the following postulates hold for
all a, b, c, d etc., in K. A version of the Ems postulates is as follows.
E1
(∃x)(Px ∧Rxaa)
E2
(∀x)((Px ∧Rxab) ⊃(∃y)(Py ∧Rayb))
E3
(∀x)((Rabx ∧Rxcd) ⊃(∃y)(Racy ∧Rbyd))

Justiﬁcatory Irrelevance of Formal Semantics
211
E4
Rabc ⊃(∃x)(Rabx ∧Rxbc)
E5
(∀x)((Px ∧Rxab) ∧Rbcd ⊃.Racd)
E6
(∀x)((Px ∧Rxab) ∧Rcbd ⊃.Rcad)
E7
a ∗∗= a
E8
Rabc ⊃Rac ∗b∗
E9
Raa ∗a
Presentation of valuation of the postulates on an E model structure provides
an occasion for attempting English readings of Px and Rxyz. I try to interpret
valuations as “data entry” and the postulates as principles of reason for data entry.
I do not have a clear idea of what I want to accomplish when I struggle to ﬁnd an
interpretation of model structure postulates as truth claims about some subject
matter to which inference drawing is relevant. I am here trying to exhibit the
confusion of my thought that if the postulates could be read as truths then using
a system of logic they characterized would somehow be acting in accordance with
the truth and thereby justiﬁed.
A valuation procedure construct sets of formulae Hi for iεK. Hi stands for the
data base formed at i. When there is no attempt to interpret the postulates as
truths, Hi could be called simply ‘set-ups’. The evaluation rules below continue
interpretation of set-ups as data bases. Px tells us: The data base Hx formed
at x contains all logical entailments. Call such data bases “origin data bases” or
simply “origins.” Often origins are designated with o and subscripted o. This
reading for Px raises suspicion that any eﬀort to read the postulates as truths
justifying the logic characterized by them will “beg the question” What are the
logical entailments?
If you are going to draw conclusions from data in a data base which you have
under consideration you might look for principles which tell what is entailed by
data. The ﬁrst place to look for such entailment principles is logic itself. Rabc
tells us: The data base formed at c contains the consequents of all the entailments
in the data base at a whose antecedents are contained in the data base at b. In
formal words, Rabc tells us: If (A →BεHa), (AεHb), then (BεHc).
A data entry on an Ems is started by making an assignment of each variable
of system E at each point in K to get a base of variables V a at each point a in
K. An assignment of variables is a function f() on KXV , where V is the set of
variables of system E, into {1, 0} subject to the following Inclusion Condition.
If (∃x)(Px ∧Rxab) and f(p, a) = 1, then f(p, b) = 1. Given a variable assign-
ment we have variable bases V a at each point V a. V a = {p : f(p, a) = 1}.
Formulas are now entered into the these bases of variables to get data bases or
set-ups at each point a, a ∈K. The data bases are the smallest sets of formulas
developed by the following data entry procedures.
i.
If A is a variable, a ∈Ha iﬀ. A ∈V a

212
Charles F. Kielkopf
ii.
A ∧B ∈Ha iﬀ. A ∈Ha and B ∈Ha. ∧-normality
iii.
A ∨B ∈Ha iﬀ. A ∈Ha or B ∈Ha. ∨-normality
iv.
¬A ∈Ha iﬀ. A /∈Ha∗, where Ha∗is the data base formed from variable
base V a∗. Imperfect Consistency
v.
A →B ∈Ha iﬀ. (∀x)(∀y)(Raxy ∧A ∈Hx ⊃B ∈Hy), Triad Rule
A formula A is valid on an Ems. M if A ∈Hx for all x such that Px for all
data entries on M. A formula is E-valid if it is valid on all Ems.
4.1
Applications of Ems to determine provability in E
Some Lemmas facilitate use of Ems in validity arguments. The lemmas are pri-
marily to support a correctness theorem: If A is provable in E, then a is E-valid.
The converse stating the Ems completeness of E has been proved by R. Routley
and R.K Meyer.3
LEMMA 1. If (∃x)Px ∧Rxab) and A ∈Ha, then A ∈Hb, i.e., Ha ⊆Hb.
Proof is by induction on the length of A. Consider a few steps of the proof
of what is called “the General Inclusion Condition.” These steps remind us
how postulates, E3 and E8, which play a crucial role in a classical logic argument
are suspicious tools for playing a signiﬁcant role in justifying E as the correct
sentential logic.
The inclusion condition for assignment of variables gives the basis. Assume the
lemma holds for formulas shorter than A. Focus on two cases: A has the form
¬B or A has form B →C. Assume for both cases we have a Po1 and Ro1ab. If
¬B ∈Ha, then by Imperfect Consistency, B /∈Ha∗. From E8, Ro1b ∗a∗follows
from Ro1ab. Now the induction assumption tells us that B /∈Hb∗; because if B
were in Hb∗we would have B ∈Ha∗from the induction assumption and Ro1b∗a∗.
Imperfect Consistency now yields ¬B ∈Hb from B /∈Hb∗. For the B →C case
consider the following reductio.
1. B →C ∈Ha with Ro1ab
2. B →C /∈Hb, for reductio
From the Triad Rule applied to B →C /∈Hb, we get an Hc and Hd such that
3a. B ∈Hc with Rbcd
3b. C /∈Hd
From (1) and (3) along with an instantiation of E3 we get:
4. Ro1ab ∧Rbcd
3A version of the completeness proof is on found in [Kielkopf, 1977, 317ﬀ].

Justiﬁcatory Irrelevance of Formal Semantics
213
5. Ro1ab ∧Rbcd ⊃(∃y)(Ro1cy ∧Rayd). Classical Predicate Logic with (4) and
(5) yields (6a) and (6b).
6a. Ro1cy
6b. Rayd.
From the induction assumption on (3a) and (6a) we get:
6. B ∈Hy.
Now the Triad Rule applied to (1), (6b) and (7) gives:
7. C ∈Hd.
Since (8) and (3b) are inconsistent we have the B →C portion of the induction
step by reductio.
LEMMA 2. If (B ∈HaorC ∈Ha) but B /∈Ha, then C ∈Ha.
Call use of Lemma 2 the Elimination argument, EA. We use disjunctive syllo-
gism in our metalanguage even if system E does not have disjunctive syllogism as
a valid inference!
LEMMA 3. If Px, then A →A ∈Hx, Rule of identity.
The General Inclusion Condition permits us to develop some fairly short reductio
arguments about E-validity of an entailment formula A →B in the following
manner. Assume A →B /∈Ho where o is some origin point. By Triad Rule we
have that there are points a, b such that Roab, A ∈Ha but B /∈Hb. However,
Roab tells us that Ha ⊆Hb. So we can directly go to consideration of A ∈Hb
and B /∈Hb.
“First degree entailments, fde,” are entailment formulas with only one →. The
observations of the preceding paragraph show us that when we are testing ﬁrst
degree entailments for E-validity we need only consider two points {o, b} and, in
eﬀect, use only the 4-value Smiley matrix, introduced below. But if we use only
{o, b} we need to set o∗= b and b∗= o which creates a model in which the origin
point can contain contradictions. Ems in which no P point o is such that o∗= o
are called non-normal. For this presentation for fde in Illustrations 6, 7,and 8 I
will consider a normal Ems with {a, b.c} where Pa and a∗= a, b∗= c, c∗= b.
The following illustrations provide reminders for at least two points. The pri-
mary point is that the work with formal semantics is really more work with a
formal system and not closely connected with justifying any formal system. The
secondary point is that formal semantics, which have been proved to characterize
a system do provide tableaux techniques for determining provability in the system
which are simpler and clearer than construction of formal proofs in the system.
I hope the secondary point reminds readers that I am not dismissing the signiﬁ-
cant intellectual achievement of formal semantics simply because I am dismissing
formal semantics as providing a justiﬁcatory role. The ﬁrst two illustrations show

214
Charles F. Kielkopf
steps in proving Ems are suitable for E while the next three show using Ems to
show that certain controversial formulas are not Ems valid and not E theorems
under the provable assumption that Ems characterize E.
ILLUSTRATION 4. ¬¬A →A is E-valid. (E axiom E7 is E-valid)
Assume for reductio ¬¬A →A /∈Ho for some Ho and Roab
1.
(a) ¬¬A ∈Hb
(b) A /∈Hb
2. ¬A /∈Hb∗Imperfect Consistency on (1a)
3. A ∈Hb ∗∗Imperfect Consistency on (1b)
4. A ∈Hb Use of Ems. postulate E7 on 3.
The reductio proof is complete because 4 and (1b) would be a contradiction for
us in our talk about data bases or set-ups.
ILLUSTRATION 5. A →B →.B →C →.A →C, i.e., E9 (suﬃxing) is E-valid.
Assume for reductio
1.
(a) A →B ∈Hb
(b) B →C →.A →C /∈Hb, with Po, Roab
The Triad Rule applied to (1b) gives us:
2.
(a) B →C ∈Hc
(b) A →C /∈Hd with Rbcd
The Triad Rule applied to (2b) gives us:
3.
(a) A ∈He
(b) C /∈Hf with Rdef
Now digress to a “little exercise” in classical predicate logic.
i.
(∀x)(∀z)(∀u)(∀v)(∀w)(Rbcx ∧Rxvw) ⊃(∃y)(Rbvy ∧Rcyw))))))
E3 with explicit universal quantiﬁcation.
ii. Rbcd ∧Rdef From (2b) and (3b)
iii. Rbcd ∧Rdef) ⊃(∃y)(Rbey ∧Rcyf) Universal Instantiation on i.
iv. (∃y)(Rbey ∧Rcyf) MP for ⊃on ii and iii
v.
Rbey ∧Rcyf Existential Instantiation on iv
The Triad Rule with Rbey, (1a), (3a) gives

Justiﬁcatory Irrelevance of Formal Semantics
215
4. B ∈Hy
The Triad Rule with Rcyf, (2a), (4) gives us:
5. C ∈Hf
Since (5) and (3b) contradict one another, the reductio is complete.
The E-validation of E10 requires even more predicate logic manipulation of the
E postulates than did validation of E9. The need to turn to undecidable predicate
logic to validate formulas should make us suspicious about use of Ems as a decision
procedure. Alasdair Urquhart proved the undecidability of system E in 1984.4
Here is a place for a reminder to make one suspicious about the Ems. postulates
as logic justifying truths. The reminder is their use in proofs to show that system
E is characterized by Ems validity. When working through the proofs it is easy
to get the impression that the postulates are selected to get model structures
to characterize system E or whatever system is being considered. For instance,
alternative relevance logics such as system R, which has A →.A →.A →A as
theorem, is shown to be characterized by model structures to which we add the
postulate: Rabc ⊃Rbac.
As we shall see the following tableaux style invalidity arguments correspond
nicely to getting counterexamples on a matrix.
ILLUSTRATION 6. A ∧¬A →B is not E-valid
Consider an Ems : K = {a, b, c}, Pa, a∗= a, b∗= c, c∗= b and R speciﬁed
by the postulates.
We re-label a as o.
Postulate E1 tells us Robb.
Assume
A ∧¬A →B /∈Ho
So we have:
1.
(a) A ∧¬A ∈Hb
(b) B /∈Hb
2.
(a) A ∈Hb
(b) ¬A ∈Hb∧-normality on (1a).
Step (2b) puts a contradiction in data base Hb. But a contradiction in a data base
we are talking about is not a contradiction for us.
3. A /∈Hb∗Imperfect Consistency on (2b).
With b∗= c, (3) gives us:
5. A /∈Hc
The removal of all logical signs from all parts of the formula A ∧¬A →B without
contradicting ourselves shows that we can assume that it is not E-valid.
Here it is interesting to note that corresponding to the inconsistency in Hb we
have an incompleteness in Hc since neither A nor ¬A are in Hc. ¬A ∈Hc iﬀ.
A /∈Hc∗which is Hb. Since, (2a) tells us A ∈Hb we have:
4[Urquhart, 1984, 1059–1073.]

216
Charles F. Kielkopf
5. ¬A /∈Hc.
As we shall see in the matrix section, this analysis of A ∧¬A →B to its basic
parts shows us that we have assigned A a value 110 or 010 on an 8-value world
line matrix while B has been assigned a value 101, 100, 001 or 000 . A look at
the 8-value ∧charts below shows A ∧¬A get −1 for these values and the Smiley
8-value →table shows −1 →any of the four values for B get −3.
ILLUSTRATION 7. B →.A ∨
¬A is not E-valid,
Assume B →.A ∨¬A /∈Ho in an Ems. with same structure as that for Illus-
tration 6.
1.
(a) B ∈Hb
(b) A ∨¬A /∈Hb
∨-normality tells us:
2.
(a) A /∈Hb
(b) ¬A /∈Hb
Imperfect Consistency on (2b) tells us:
3. A ∈Hc
Since we have reduced the formula to simplest parts without contradicting our-
selves we have shown that B →.A ∨¬A need not hold at a P-point in an Ems.
Again it is interesting to note that corresponding to the incompleteness of Hb
exposed in (2) we have an inconsistency in Hb’s ∗image Hc because (2a) tells us
¬A ∈Hc.
ILLUSTRATION 8. (A ∨B) ∧¬B →A is not Ems. valid.
Assume same Ems structure as in previous two illustrations.
1. Assume (A ∨B) ∧¬B →A /∈Ho (where o = a and Pa)
2.
(a) A ∨B ∈Hb ∧-normality and triad rules on 1
(b) ¬B ∈Hb
(c) A /∈Hb
To apply ∨-normality to 2a we cannot set A ∈Hb because that would be a
contradiction for us with 2c. However, we can put a contradiction into Hb by
using ∨-normality on 2a to set
3. B ∈Hb.

Justiﬁcatory Irrelevance of Formal Semantics
217
4.2
Dismissal of eﬀorts to read the E postulates as fundamental
truths
Can the postulates be read as some kind of truths about data bases? Consider
a few eﬀorts to read the postulates in light of the above suggestions that the
postulates are about data bases. What might E1 tell us?
E1: (∃x)(Px ∧Rxaa)
E1 says more than Ha ⊆Ha. There is a data base at x containing all logical
entailments such that for any data base entered at point a if A →B is a logical
entailment and A belongs to the data base entered at point a B will also belong
to the data base entered at point a. I.e., all data bases are closed under logical en-
tailment. Is this true? Does reason require us to close data basis under entailment
if we are to be rational?
E2: (∀x)((Px ∧Rxab) ⊃(∃y)(Py ∧Rayb))
If Ha ⊆Hb then if an item in Ha entails a logical entailment LE, LE ∈Hb.
I do want not to continue trying to read E2, or any of the Ems postulates, in
persuasive ways. These are eﬀorts to try to lead people to accept complicated
claims as plausible rather than pointing out fundamental truths. These eﬀorts
are unpleasant because I have no sense of discovering truth or even “inventing” an
interesting theory; only a sense of pleading. (My original plan for this essay was to
present such a reading as a case for the Ems Postulates.) Here I want reading the
postulates to go far enough to remind us that the postulates are no more persuasive
about what is logically correct than are the axioms read as claims about entailment.
I do not think any reading of these postulates will show that system E which is
characterized by validity on Ems is the correct logic.
Reading the postulates
about model structures is reading them as norms or truths about a subject matter
which is somehow the subject matter of logic.
If the reading showed E to be
the correct logic, the postulates as read should be self-evident norms or necessary
truths about this subject matter of logic. I dismiss the suggestion of nontrivial
self-evident norms. If they were contingent truths their truth would be contingent
upon the type of data bases discussed and would not be general enough for logic.
If contingent truths they should be below logic on the “schema for science.” If
they were necessary truths, they would have to be analytic or synthetic apriori.
An attempt to read them will, I think, show them to be non-analytic. Some are
too hard to understand from the meaning of the terms. Others present, in eﬀect,
controversial claims such as double negation. If they were synthetic apriori, they
are not the right kind to justify a logic. One needs to give too much argument to
make a case for accepting them when alternatives are proposed. Logic, which is
supposed to be used to settle arguments, should not require argument — at least
not too much argument.
However, I wish to conclude this paper by showing that Ems can be guides
for developing ﬁnite matrices. Once we have matrices we can use them to decide

218
Charles F. Kielkopf
ﬁnitistically what is, and what is not provable in a system. Of course, the purpose
of the discussion of matrices is not to inform readers about algebraic semantics.
The purpose is to remind us of the ﬁnitistic character of work with particular
matrices to which the non-ﬁnitistic metamathematical work with formal semantics
can be a guide.
5
ON WORLD-LINE MATRICES FOR TWO AND THREE “POINTS”
The values on the matrices presented are obtained the ways of assigning {1, 0} to
a series of points or worlds. If N is the number of points, the number of matrix.
values is 2N. If there are 2 points {a, b} in the order ⟨a, b⟩the matrix values are
+1, +0, −0, −1 as follows.
A
B
+1
1
1
+0
1
0
-1
0
1
-0
0
0
These values can be charted on the 4-value diamond lattice
+1
11
+0
−0
10
01
−1
00
A world line matrix for an entailment system with sentential connectives
∧, ∨, ¬, →is an ordered sextuple ⟨B, D, ∧, ∨, →, ¬⟩where B is a set world line
values, D is a proper subset of the B considered as the designated values ∧, ∨. →
are binary operations on B into B while ¬ is a unary operation on B into B for
representing the sentential connectives.
Tables show how the matrix operations represent the sentential connectives for
two worlds or points.
The rules for evaluating ∧and ∨are on the tables below.
A/B means A down, B across. To compute A∧B use diamond diagram to ﬁnd
where values for A and B meet below and to compute value for A ∨B ﬁnd where
values of A and B join above.
If Ψ is a formula, use V (Ψ) to show the world matrix value of Ψ. The ∧table
above shows V (A ∧B) = +0 when V (A) = +1 and V (B) = +0.

Justiﬁcatory Irrelevance of Formal Semantics
219
∧
A/B
+1
11
+0
10
-0
01
-1
00
/
∨
A/B
+1
11
+0
10
-0
01
-1
00
+1
11
+1
+0
-0
-1
+1
11
+1
+1
+1
+1
+0
10
+0
+0
-1
-1
+0
10
+1
+1
+1
+0
-0
01
-0
-1
-0
-1
-0
01
+1
+1
-0
-0
-1
00
-1
-1
-1
-1
-1
00
+1
+0
-0
-1
The rules for ∧and ∨are basically the same for all world line matrices. The
values form a lattice and the value for ∧is where values “join below” while values
for ∨are where values “meet above.” Rules for →and ¬ vary. One set of rules
for evaluating →and ¬ are on the tables below.
→
A/B
+1, 11
+0, 10
-0, 01
-1, 00
A
¬A
+1, 11
+1
-1
-1
-1
+1, 11
-1
+0, 10
+1
+1
-1
-1
+0, 10
+0
-0, 01
+1
-1
+1
-1
-0, 01
-0
-1, 00
+1
+1
+1
+1
-1, 00
+1
To compute the value for A →B give it +1 if value of A is included in Value
of B; otherwise give it −1. If arrows on 4-value diamond lattice lead from value
of A to value of B, value of A is included in value of B.
Rationalizing the rule for ¬ requires using the notion of a point or world being
the negation complement of another. For world line matrices there is an operation
∗which maps the set of points into itself. Each point has it’s a∗. For normal
negation a∗= a for all points a.
For negation it is useful to have a more complex
notation specifying the value of a formula A at each point a : v(A, a) = n where
n is 1 or 0.
For instance, when the value of A is +0, viz., V (A) = +0, then
v(A, a) = 1 and v(A, b) = 0 if we have two worlds or points {a, b}. If x is a world
or point, v(¬A, x) = 1 if v(A, x∗) = 0 and v(¬A, x) = 0 if v(A, x∗) = 1. Note: if
x = x∗, v(¬A, x) = 1 iﬀ. V (A, x) = 0.
The basic procedure is to evaluate ¬A in the column under point a by looking
at the a∗column and putting in the opposite value. See the next chart where
a∗= b and b∗= a. To get the values in the a column for ¬A take opposites of the
values in the b column for A; to get values in the b column for ¬A take opposites
of the values in the a column for A. Note columns for A ∧¬A and A ∨¬A.

220
Charles F. Kielkopf
A
A
b
¬A
a
b
A ∧¬A
A ∨¬A
+1
1
1
-1
0
0
-1
+1
+0
1
0
+0
1
0
+0
+0
-0
0
1
-0
0
1
-0
-0
-1
0
0
+1
1
1
-1
+1
If we specify +1, +0 as the designated values the tables for ∧, ∨, ¬ and →give
the Timothy Smiley matrix which was shown in [1975] to be characteristic for the
ﬁrst degree fragment of system E.5
A formula is valid on a matrix if its value is a designated value for all values of
its components. A matrix is suitable for a system if all theorems of the systems
are valid on the matrix. A matrix is characteristic for a system if it is suitable for
the system and all formulas valid on the matrix are theorems of the system.
A 1940 result of J. Dugundji established that no reasonably strong nonclassical
logic such as most modal logics and system E have no ﬁnite characteristic matrix.
Here we can use the Smiley matrix to show the following.
A ∧¬A →B is not a theorem of E. (Nice result)
Set V (A) = +0 and V (B) = −1. Now V (A ∧¬A) = +0. Hence, V (A ∧¬A →
B) = +0 →−1 = −1
B →.A ∨¬A is not a theorem of E. (Nice result)
Set V (A) = +0 but V (B) = +1. Now V (A∨¬A) = +0. Hence, V (B →.A∨¬A) =
+1 →+0 = −1
(A ∨B) ∧¬B →A is not a theorem. (Embarrassing result)
Set V (A) = +0 and V (B) = −0. Now V (A ∨B) = +1, V (¬B) = −0 giving
V (A ∨B) ∧¬B) = +1 ∧−0 = −0. So V for whole formula is −0 →+0 = −1.
A goal is to appreciate model structure semantics as a heuristic for constructing
matrices. E model structures are based on a triadic relation Rabc between points
or worlds. This triadic relation “naturally” suggests using at least three points or
worlds. So it is interesting to consider three point world line matrices. If there are
3 points {a,b,c} we have the eight values, +3,+2,+1,+0, -0,-1,-2,-3 as follows.
The 8 values of a 3 World line matrix form a cube lattice.
5[Anderson and Belnap, 1975].

Justiﬁcatory Irrelevance of Formal Semantics
221
a
B
c
+3
1
1
1
+2
1
1
0
+1
1
0
1
+0
1
0
0
-0
0
1
1
-1
0
1
0
-2
0
0
1
-3
0
0
0
+3
111
+2
+1
110
−0
101
011
+0
100
−1
−2
010
001
−3
000
The cube lattice provides the following matrix tables for ∧and ∨. I present
them because matrices “ought to have arrays of numbers.”
For eight value ∧table use cube lattice diagram and trace arrows back from
each value until you reach the 1st point at which they meet.
For eight value ∨table use cube lattice diagram and trace arrows up from each
value until you reach the 1st point at which they join.
Consider a ¬ table where we have a∗= a, b∗= c and c∗= b. Informally the a
column for ¬A negates the a column for A while the b column for ¬A negates the
c column for A and the c column for ¬A negates the b column for A.
Consider a table for A →B using rule V (A →B) = +3 if V (A) included
in V (B) otherwise it is −3. If an arrow path goes from V (A) to V (B), V (A) is
included in V (B). Call it Smiley 8-value →table.
The Smiley 8-value →table is too generous to invalidate signiﬁcant formulas
which are not E-theorems such as B →.A →A. B →.A →A should not be a
theorem in any relevance preserving logic.

222
Charles F. Kielkopf
∧
+3 111 +2 110 +1 101 +0 100 -0 011 -1 010 -2 001 -3 000
+3
111
+3
+2
+1
+0
-0
-1
-2
-3
+2
110
±2
+2
-3
-3
-1
-1
-3
-3
+1
101
+1
-3
+1
+0
-2
-3
-2
-3
+0
100
+0
+0
+0
+0
-3
-3
-3
-3
-0
011
-0
-1
-2
-3
-0
-1
-2
-3
-1
010
-1
-1
-3
-3
-1
-1
-3
-3
-2
001
-2
-3
-2
-3
-2
-3
-2
-3
-3
000
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
∨
+3 111 +2 110 +1 101 +0 100 -0 011 -1 010 -2 001 -3 000
+3
111
+3
+3
+3
+3
+3
+3
+3
+3
+2
110
+3
+2
+3
+2
+3
+2
+3
+2
+1
101
+3
+3
+1
+1
+3
+3
+1
+1
+0
100
+3
+2
+1
+0
+3
+2
+3
+0
-0
011
+3
+3
+3
+3
-0
-0
-0
-0
-1
010
+3
+2
+3
+2
-0
-1
-0
-1
-2
001
+3
+3
+1
+1
-0
-0
-2
-2
-3
000
+3
+2
+1
+0
-0
-1
-2
-3

Justiﬁcatory Irrelevance of Formal Semantics
223
A
a
b
c
¬A
A
b
c
A ∧¬A
+3 111
1
1
1
-3
0
0
0
-3
+2 110
1
1
0
-1
0
1
0
-1
+1 101
1
0
1
-2
0
0
1
-2
+0 100
1
0
0
-0
0
1
1
-3
-0 011
0
1
1
+0
1
0
0
-3
-1 010
0
1
0
+2
1
1
0
-1
-2 001
0
0
1
+1
1
0
1
-2
-3 000
0
0
0
+3
1
1
1
-3
→
+3 111
+2 110
+1 101
+0 100
-0 011
-1 010
-2 001
-3 000
+3
111
+3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
+2
110
+3
+3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
+1
101
+3
-3
+3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
+0
100
+3
+3
+3
+3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-0
011
+3
-3
-3
-3
+3
-3
-3
-3
-1
010
+3
+3
-3
-3
+3
+3
-3
-3
-2
001
+3
-3
+3
-3
+3
-3
+3
-3
-3
000
+3
+3
+3
+3
+3
+3
+3
+3

224
Charles F. Kielkopf
To get an →table closer to validating only E theorems I use the triadic Rabc
relation of E model structures the next section. With three points {a, b, c} the K8-
value →table is based on the following speciﬁcations for R: These R speciﬁcations
were obtained by ﬁguring out what the E model structure postulates required for
{a, b, c} with Pa, a∗= a, b∗= c, c∗= b.6 Perhaps reading the axioms to determine
what is required to specify R is more an exercise in reading logical formulas than
mathematics. But once a speciﬁcation for P and R is obtained constructing a table
for →is a paradigm of the type of strict ﬁnitistic mathematics I am proposing as
the core of logic. I will close, then, with presenting and commenting a bit on how
I constructed the →for the following speciﬁcation of R. And show B →.A →A
is not valid.
Raaa, Rabb, Racc
Rbbb, Rbab, Rbcb, Rbcc
Rccc, Rcac, Rcbc, Rcbb
→
A/B
+3 111
+2 110
+1 101
+0 100
-0 011
-1 010
-2 001
-3 000
+3
111
+3
-3
-3
-3
-0
-3
-3
-3
+2
110
+3
+2
-3
-3
-0
-1
-0
-3
+1
101
+3
-3
+1
-3
-0
-1
-2
-3
+0
100
+3
+2
+1
+0
-0
-1
-2
-3
-0
011
+3
-3
-3
-3
+3
-3
-3
-3
-1
010
+3
+2
-3
-3
+3
+2
-2
-3
-2
001
+3
-3
+1
-3
+3
-3
+1
-3
-3
000
+3
+3
+3
+3
+3
+3
+3
+3
The program for calculating the values is complicated.
The basic principle
is v(A →B, a) = 0 iﬀ. Rabc, v(A, b) = 1 and v(B, c) = 0, which comes from a
“negative” version of the Triad Rule. If someone developed a computer program for
these computations, as did N. Belnap, the programming is the ﬁnistic mathematics.
Heuristic account of calculation for K 8-value →table
6The
R
speciﬁcations
for
the
Smiley
8-value
→
are
Raaa, Rabb, Racc, Rbbb, Rbaa,
Rbcc, Rccc, Rcba, Rcbb.

Justiﬁcatory Irrelevance of Formal Semantics
225
The goal is to determine how to put 1 or 0 in each of the three a, b, c, places:
1st place, 2nd place, 3rd place. Here “drop” means that the value for A in a place
goes from 1 to a value of 0 for B in the place speciﬁed. There will be three groups
of instructions: Those for Ra
to determine whether A →B ∈Ha, those for
R b to determine whether A →B ∈Hb and those for R c to determine whether
A →B ∈Hc.
Put 0 in 1st place iﬀ.
Drop in 1st place Raaa (eg. 111 →011)
or
Drop in 2nd place Rabb (eg. 111 →101)
or
Drop in 3rd place Racc. (eg. 111 →110)
Put 0 in 2nd place iﬀ.
Drop in 2nd place Rbbb (eg. 011 →101)
or
Drop in 3rd place Rbcc (eg. 011 →010)
or
Drop from 1st to 2nd Rbab (eg. 111 →101)
or
Drop from 3rd to 2nd Rbcb. (eg. 001 →101).
Let me comment on this example. The Triad Rule with Rbcb tells us that A →
B /∈Hb if A ∈Hc but B /∈Hb. The antecedent 001 for A says A ∈Hc while the
consequent value 101 for B shows B /∈Hb.
Put 0 in 3rd place iﬀ.
Drop in 2nd place Rcbb (eg. 010 →001)
or
Drop in 3rd place Rccc (eg. 011 →110)
or
Drop from 1st to 3rd Rcac (eg. 110 →110)
or
Drop from 2nd to 3rd Rcbc. (eg. 010 →110)
An example: To compute +3 →−0, i.e., 111 →011 put 0 in 1st place because a
drop in 1st place but 1 in the next two places because none of for putting in 0 are
met. Result is 011 or −0.
Assuming that it has been shown that K8 is suitable for E with positive values
as designated, it shows that B →.A →A is not a theorem. Set V (B) = +3 and
V (A) = +2 and get result of −3.

226
Charles F. Kielkopf
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Anderson and Belnap, 1975] A. R. Anderson and N. D. Belnap, Jr. The Logic of Relevance and
Entailment, Vol. 1. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 1975.
[Carnap, 1937] R. Carnap. The Logical Syntax of Language. Trans. Amethe Smeaton, Countess
von Zeppelin. London: Kegan Paul Trench, Trubner & Co. 1937.
[Kielkopf, 1977] C. F. Kielkopf. Formal Sentential Entailment. Washington, DC: University
Press of America. 1977.
[Urquhart, 1984] A. Urquhart. The undecidability of entailment and relevant implication. Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic, 49, 1984, 1059-1073. 1984.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF TRUTH
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
BRIEF INTRODUCTION
Broadly speaking, there are three traditions in recent philosophical writing about
truth. First, there is a highly technical literature of interest principally to formal
logicians. Secondly, there is the literature of the so-called “Continental” tradition,
of consuming interest to those for whom obscurity is a reliable mark of profundity.
Thirdly, there is a recognizably interrelated set of writings which give rise to, and
develop, the mainstream work on the topic in English (though these writings are
not themselves always in English). It is more than enough work for an article
such as this to concentrate, as we have decided to do, upon the third — and most
accessible — of these traditions, which in any case overlaps the others.
Pascal Engel begins his recent book Truth by remarking, ‘Truth is a central
philosophical notion, perhaps the central one. Many other important philosophical
notions depend upon it or are closely tied to it ... ’ [Engel, 2002, 1]. He goes on
to give so many examples that someone who proposes to write about truth might
despair at the outset, faced not only with the seeming obligation to say something
about everything but also with the suspicion that truth poses a problem of ﬁrst
philosophy: that, as Michael Dummett once suggested about logic, if we do not
get it right, we shall get nothing else right. But its very ubiquity might make
one suspicious of its importance, on the grounds that it may just be appearing
as a proxy for a range of other, or local, topics. And indeed, one of the main
issues in recent discussion has been just how much of what has commonly been
assumed to be central to the investigation of truth turns out to be really a matter
of indiﬀerence.
So, for example, among the questions we shall be canvassing are the following.
Are the disputes over the nature of truth, and the realism/anti-realism debate,
mutually relevant or not?
Is the theory of meaning relevant to the nature of
truth? Do ontological claims about truthmakers support some accounts of truth
over others? Does the plausible suggestion that truth is a norm of assertion require
us to order rival theories in terms of their respective capacities for giving an account
of it? Does a theory of truth require a theory of justiﬁcation?
One way in which to handle such questions is directly, taxonomizing the various
positions and attempting to map the relations between them. We have chosen,
instead, to approach the subject matter historically, fulﬁlling our editorial brief
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

228
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
by tracing the course of the debates as they developed from the turn of the twen-
tieth century to the turn of the twenty-ﬁrst. This choice is the result of several
commitments that we share. One is a preference for looking at the theories of
real philosophers rather than the abstractions (and sometimes straw men) of the
textbooks, even though this has meant that we have had to make what may seem
invidious and idiosyncratic decisions about who is to be a focus of attention, and
who ignored or marginalized. Another is the belief that a theory, together with its
strengths and weaknesses, is best understood through a developmental account,
for the views of philosophers emerge in response to the various competing demands
made in actual debate. Yet another is the conviction that bad (or, perhaps worse,
time-wasting) philosophy results from amnesia. The history of analytic philosophy
can, as we shall see, look like a tale of increasingly elaborate re-invention of a range
of rectangular wheels. Part of the story we have to tell is one of how often the
taking of sides about truth involves a return to a position already mapped decades
previously.
1
EARLY VIEWS
1.1
Introductory comments
The various claims about truth which were being advocated around the start of
the twentieth century were largely by-products of their proponents’ commitments
in metaphysics, the philosophy of logic, and the philosophy of language (though at
the time this last branch of philosophy was not the self-conscious sub-discipline it
subsequently became). In particular, theories of truth were inextricably entangled
with what were then still often called theories of judgement. Among these views
we ﬁnd some which still look familiar, but others which only philosophers with an
interest in the history of the period would recognize — although, as so often in
philosophy, it is just these half-forgotten and more recondite theories which have,
at the time of writing, most recently reappeared in modern dress.
1.2
Primitivism: Moore, Russell
The close of the nineteenth century witnessed an intellectual rupture which was
to have momentous consequences for the way in which philosophy subsequently
developed. It began with G. E. Moore, who in working on Kant had come to
the view that a basic presupposition of any form of idealism (variants of which
had dominated Britain’s major universities for some decades), that the objects of
human knowledge are in some way mind-dependent, had to be rejected. Moore
reacted with the zeal of the convert, abandoning idealism for an extreme realism,
rejecting the ontological monism which frequently accompanied absolute idealism
in favour of an extreme atomism, and, more signiﬁcantly, persuading Bertrand
Russell to follow him.

A Brief History of Truth
229
Moore’s resultant ontology is diﬃcult even to comprehend, let alone accept. It
begins to emerge in his theories of propositions and truth:
A proposition is a synthesis of concepts; and just as concepts are them-
selves immutably what they are, so they stand in inﬁnite relations to
one another equally immutable. A proposition is constituted by any
number of concepts, together with a speciﬁc relation between them,
and according to the nature of this relation the proposition may be ei-
ther true or false. What kind of relation makes a proposition true, what
false, cannot be further deﬁned, but must be immediately recognised.
[Moore, 1899, 5]
All this may seem consistent with a correspondence theory of truth, but it quickly
becomes clear that Moore does not think of the relation as ‘making’ the propo-
sition true (or false) by arranging the proposition’s concepts to reﬂect (or not)
a corresponding arrangement of existents. One of his reasons, soon to become
familiar in the framing of theories of truth, is the diﬃculty on the correspondence
account of making sense of arithmetical truths. But his main reason is far more id-
iosyncratic. Clearly inspired by the residual inﬂuence of idealism, Moore contends
that meanings cannot be abstracted from the actual things in the world that are
meant. (Moore’s conception of meaning involves rejection of distinctions such as
that between sense and referent.) Consistent with this opposition to abstraction,
and because he holds that meanings are concepts, he goes on to proclaim that
‘the world is formed of concepts’. In consequence, he rejects the correspondence
theory, maintaining that a judgement’s ‘truth or falsehood cannot depend on its
relation to anything else whatever, reality, for instance, or the world in space and
time’,1 and that, while the correspondence theory tries to deﬁne truth in terms of
existence, any deﬁnition should go in the other direction. Since, on this view, the
world cannot be distinguished from the totality of propositions, Moore risks losing
the distinction between truth and falsehood. At ﬁrst it seems that he protects
himself from this consequence by stipulating that truth is one kind of relation
amongst concepts and falsehood another. This view would face the serious objec-
tion that it requires both truth and falsehood to be, each of them, a potentially
inﬁnite number of kinds of relations because of the potentially inﬁnite complex-
ity of propositions. But Moore quickly moves to a diﬀerent protective strategy:
he adds truth and falsehood to the stock of basic properties. (The move occurs
seemingly unawares; this may be the ﬁrst, inchoate, appearance of Moore’s later
idea of supervenient properties.) The idea is a version of what is now generally
called ‘primitivism’: truth is a fundamental, indeﬁnable, irreducible property of
propositions. One of Moore’s arguments for his claim that truth is primitive de-
velops a theme which was also destined for familiarity: that any proposition which
purports to deﬁne truth must, if the deﬁnition is to be correct, itself be true, so
that any such deﬁnition is bound to be viciously circular.
1Moore 1899: 8, 18 respectively.

230
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
Moore’s view, which he soon abandoned, appears little more than an historical
curiosity. Its importance, in hindsight, resides partly in its preﬁguring of later
concerns, but mainly in its impact on Russell, whose own version of this theory
is highly signiﬁcant because of its generation of an extended series of inﬂuen-
tial reactions to its internal diﬃculties. Russell’s version begins with a sketchy
account of judgement which may be called the ‘binary theory’: judgement is a
single primitive binary relation between two entities, a judging mind and a propo-
sition. But whereas Moore had taken the eternal constituents of propositions and
put them into the world, Russell started with objects at least many of which are
commonplace and constructed propositions from them. A proposition does not
consist of words; ‘it contains the entities indicated by words’.2
These Russell
called ‘terms’, and they include, e.g., men, chimaeras, and relations.3 [From now
on, we shall call this the doctrine of real propositional constituents.] The reason
Russell believes that constituents of propositions are the things the propositions
are about appears to be a view which emerges explicitly only later in his writ-
ings: that the sole alternative is to regard them as ideas, which are ‘constituents
of the mind of the person judging’ and ‘a veil between us and outside things’.4
‘Every term’, he says, ‘. . . is a logical subject . . . possessed of all the properties
commonly assigned to substances’.5 This idea that everything is at bottom an
object, and of the same sort, is, Russell thinks, unavoidable: the attempt to deny
it leads to self-contradiction.6
His explanation of the contradiction is unclear,
but it looks to be a version of Frege’s notorious problem concerning the concept
horse,7 namely that if one regards the proposition as composed of both saturated
and unsaturated elements (in Frege’s vocabulary, of objects and concepts), then
it is impossible to talk about the unsaturated ones, for as soon as one puts the
unsaturated, predicative, element into subject position it becomes something else,
something saturated. This not only makes it impossible to talk about concepts,
but certainly looks inconsistent. Had Russell used Fregean terminology, he would
have held the constituents of propositions to be, all of them, saturated.
Why did Russell think that propositions, as well as being composed of entities,
are themselves entities? Because he held that they were unities,8 and he subscribed
to the principle ens et unum convertuntur;9 in addition, it soon became clear that
his early attempts to prove the so-called ‘axiom of inﬁnity’ require the assumption
that propositions are entities10 — without such a proof, he would have been forced
to admit that the theorems of mathematics cannot be derived solely from principles
which are true by logic alone. (That this assumption generates paradox is another
2[Russell, 1903, §51].
3ibid. §47.
4[Russell, 1911, 155].
5[Russell, 1903, §47].
6ibid. §49.
7[Frege, 1892, 45].
8[Russell, 1903, §54].
9ibid. §47.
10[Russell, 1904b].

A Brief History of Truth
231
story.) What makes a proposition a unity? His answer is that its constituents are
related by the proposition’s verb: ‘the true logical verb in a proposition may be
always regarded as asserting a relation’.11 Moreover, the verb, Russell says, ‘when
used as a verb, embodies the unity of the proposition’.12
What, then, is the unity of the proposition? It is what distinguishes a propo-
sition from a list of its constituents, so that unlike a mere list it ‘holds together’
and says something. But this seemingly undeniable unity, when combined with
Russell’s principle that ‘Every constituent of every proposition must, on pain of
self-contradiction, be capable of being made a logical subject’,13 generates a prob-
lem. On pain of contradiction, the verb must itself be a term, something capable
of appearing as a logical subject, i.e. saturated. But it must be a very unusual
kind of term, for while itself being one of the related items it must simultane-
ously be unsaturated too, the source of the proposition’s unity, relating all its
constituents. That is, the verb is unlike other terms in that it has, he says, a
‘twofold nature. . . as actual verb and verbal noun, [which] may be expressed. . .
as the diﬀerence between a relation in itself and a relation actually relating’.14 Yet
as soon as we make the verb a logical subject, we are forced to identify it as ‘a
relation in itself’ rather than as ‘a relation actually relating’, destroying the unity
of the original proposition in which it was the source of that unity. He illustrates
the point like this:
Consider, for example, the proposition “A diﬀers from B.” The con-
stituents of this proposition, if we analyze it, appear to be only A,
diﬀerence, B. Yet these constituents, thus placed side by side, do not
reconstitute the proposition. The diﬀerence which occurs in the propo-
sition actually relates A and B, whereas the diﬀerence after analysis
is a notion which has no connection with A and B. . . .
A proposi-
tion, in fact, is essentially a unity, and when analysis has destroyed
the unity, no enumeration of constituents will restore the proposition.
The verb, when used as a verb, embodies the unity of the proposition,
11[Russell, 1903, §53]. He gets around the apparent exceptions posed by intransitive verbs like
‘breathes’ by claiming that in such cases the verb expresses a complex notion which ‘usually
asserts a deﬁnite relation to an indeﬁnite relatum’ (ibid. §48).
12ibid.
§54.
Russell talks indiﬀerently of ‘verbs’ whether he means words or the ‘entities
indicated by words’, i.e.
terms.
(This explains the frequency of subsequent accusations of
use/mention confusions.) The indiﬀerence results from his inclination to the view that English
grammar gives us — by and large — a transparent window through which to view reality.
Although his inclination was temporary, this fantasy about grammar is surprisingly persistent,
though generally as one or other unexamined presupposition rather than, as here, a doctrine
explicitly embraced. It recurs with numbing frequency in the debate over truth, generally in the
form that, because ‘ ... is true’ is a grammatical predicate we should, prima facie, expect truth
to be a property. (A recent example is [Horwich, 1998a, 37].) Some eﬀort is made at exposing
the fantasy in [Oliver, 1999] and [Candlish, 2001].
13[Russell, 1903, §52].
14ibid. §54.

232
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
and is thus distinguishable from the verb considered as a term, though
I do not know how to give a clear account of the precise nature of the
distinction.
[Russell, 1903, §54]
Russell’s problem, then, is that while he cannot deny propositional unity, he can
ﬁnd no account of the proposition which can do justice to it. Perhaps anxious to
get on with mathematical matters, he left the matter unresolved. Opinions diﬀer
over how serious that problem is.15 But a related diﬃculty is certainly serious:
whether true or false, a proposition is a unity, hence on Russell’s view an entity.
In fact it is a complex entity whose constituents are the things it is about, which
makes it hard to see how it can diﬀer from what in his later vocabulary would
be called a fact. The diﬃculty, in thin disguise, is just the perennial conundrum:
how is false judgement possible? The source of the diﬃculty is the combination
of Russell’s attachment both to the unity of the proposition and to the doctrine
of real propositional constituents. This makes it hard for him to give a sensible
account of truth, and the correspondence theory is noticeably absent from The
Principles of Mathematics. Rather, he turns to primitivism, saying merely that
truth is an unanalysable property: true propositions just have it, false ones just
lack it.16 The world, then, contains both objective falsehoods and objective truths:
‘objective’, here, meaning that they are entities in no sense mind-dependent.
Some interpret these early forms of primitivism as a version of what has subse-
quently come to be called the identity theory of truth, according to which truth
consists in an identity between truth-bearer and truthmaker.17 This vacillation
in recent commentary between the identity theory and primitivism is preﬁgured
in Meinong, at least as described by Findlay.18 Meinong’s ‘objectives’, such as
the being-white-of-snow and the being-an-integer-between-3-and-4, divide into two
sorts, the factual (tats¨achlich) and the unfactual (untats¨achlich). There are no en-
tities between our minds and these objectives, hence no propositions between our
minds and the facts. Truth and falsehood are derivative properties of objectives,
when these are considered as the objects of what we should now call propositional
attitudes. Findlay says of this, ‘Meinong’s theory of truth is therefore a theory
of identity or coincidence. The same objective which is factual . . . reveals itself
in a certain judgement or assumption . . . ; the fact itself is true in so far as it is
the object of a judgement’.19 What is it, though, for an objective to be factual?
15Palmer [1988, passim] thinks it extremely serious. Sainsbury [1979, 20–25] suggests that,
although it is a real diﬃculty for Russell, it just shows that he had a muddled conception of the
construction of propositions.
16[Russell, 1903, §52].
17For example, [Baldwin, 1991; Cartwright, 1987; Dodd, 1995, §3; Hornsby, 1999; David, 2001,
p. 684]. The now-common but then unknown vocabulary of truth-bearer and truthmaker has to
be understood as involving truth-aptness rather than actual truth; a truth-bearer may be false.
18[Findlay, 1933, ch. X sec. IX].
19ibid. 88: italics in the original.

A Brief History of Truth
233
Factuality is, Meinong says, ‘a fundamental property which admits of no deﬁni-
tion’.20 It could hardly be clearer how easy it is to move, without noticing, from
the identity theory into primitivism.
But an identity theory of truth is unavailable to Moore and Russell, for they
give an identity account of all propositions (truth-bearers), true and false, be-
tween which no distinction can be drawn merely by appeal to identity with some
combination of propositional constituents (truthmakers); hence the need for a fur-
ther property to accomplish the task. Russell himself appears to recognize the
diﬀerence between primitivism and an identity theory in a slightly later presen-
tation of his views in which primitivism has mutated from its earlier version, in
which false propositions merely lack the property of truth, into one in which true
propositions have one property and false another (though he gives no attempt to
account for the opposition of truth and falsity).21 In both versions, it is clear that
the idea that truth is a primitive property is imposed by the failure of identity
between representation and represented to provide a distinction between truth and
falsehood.
1.3
Identity and coherence: Blanshard, Bradley, Joachim
The philosopher against whom both Moore and Russell took themselves to be prin-
cipally reacting, and who exempliﬁed in their minds the views they were rejecting
as pernicious, was F. H. Bradley. Bradley is presented in the great majority of
philosophy textbooks as a coherence theorist, and this is certainly how Russell
understood him. He is also often implicitly presented as a metaphysician and no
logician.22 But he wrote a major work on the philosophy of logic, and his views
are mostly ignored now because he, like Mill, attacked the idea that logic could
be both formal and adequate to represent reasoning. In this major work (which
incidentally convinced Russell that the logical form of universal propositions is
hypothetical) he indicates that logic requires a correspondence theory.23
Despite this, he himself did not endorse correspondence, since in characteristic
fashion he regarded logic as an inadequate key to metaphysics. His own account of
truth is reached by a reaction against the correspondence theory (which he calls the
‘copy’ theory). There is a set of problems clustering around the notion of judge-
ment which Bradley sums up succinctly just following his seeming endorsement of
that theory:
How then are ideas related to realities? They seemed the same, but
they clearly are not so, and their diﬀerence threatens to become a dis-
crepancy. A fact is individual, an idea is universal; a fact is substantial,
an idea is adjectival; a fact is self-existent, an idea is symbolical. Is it
20Quoted by Findlay, ibid. 76.
21[Russell, 1904a, 473f].
22He is, for example, lampooned by Ayer in his assault on metaphysics [1936, 36], and ignored
by the Kneales in their magisterial history of logic [Kneale, 1962].
23[Bradley, 1883, 41f].

234
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
not then manifest that ideas are not joined in the way in which facts
are?
Nay the essence of an idea, the more it is considered, is seen
more and more to diverge from reality. And we are confronted by the
conclusion that, so far as anything is true, it is not fact, and, so far as
it is fact, it can never be true.
[Bradley, 1883, 43f]
The word ‘fact’ here indicates a truthmaker, and ‘idea’ a truth-bearer. The sug-
gestion is that, because of the inherent limitations of symbolism, it is impossible
ever to have a true judgement in the sense that it accurately reﬂects the reality
with which it deals. The correspondence theory, applied to symbolic thought and
taken quite literally, commits us to the view that no judgement is ever actually
true.
This train of thought is behind the most important of a string of problems which
Bradley marshals in his consideration of the correspondence theory.24 First, judge-
ments about the past and the future cannot be the result of copying.25 Second,
the very facts whose copying is supposed to give us truth are themselves ‘the imag-
inary creatures of false theory’, whose seemingly independent existence is merely
the result of projecting on to the world the divisions imposed by thought, whereas
if thought is to be capable of truth those divisions must exist independently of
thought itself.26 Third, ‘[d]isjunctive, negative and hypothetical judgements can-
not be taken as all false, and yet cannot fairly be made to conform to our one type
of truth’, and neither can ‘[u]niversal and abstract truths’.27
Bradley then moves on to the pragmatic theory of truth, and suggests a fourth
objection: that at bottom, both theories commit the error of defending the sup-
position of a ‘truth which is external to knowledge’ and a ‘knowledge which is
external to reality’.28 The argument that this is an error seems to turn on the
claim that the supposition involves a vicious circularity: for ‘p’ to be true, it must
be true also that ‘p’ is a copy of p, or that believing ‘p’ is advantageous (and so
ad inﬁnitum); and for ‘p’ to be known to be true, it must also be known that ‘p’
is a copy of p or that believing it is advantageous (and so ad inﬁnitum).
The third of these objections was serious, and required the invention of the
theory of truth-functions for a plausible answer to be provided. The ﬁrst, though,
might be easily dismissed as arising from a misunderstanding.
But Bradley’s
discussion of the correspondence theory is infected by a strain of anti-realism,
which would be expected from one who is committed to idealism. (This helps to
explain why he calls it the copy theory, since he appears to assume that it is a
theory of the genesis as well as of the nature of truth.) In his view, truth cannot be
veriﬁcation-transcendent, and, on the correspondence theory, must be obtained by
24[Bradley, 1907].
25ibid. 107.
26ibid. 108.
27ibid. 109.
28ibid. 111.

A Brief History of Truth
235
a process of copying reality. But the correspondence theory is usually associated
with metaphysical realism. This objection thus rests on a far wider disagreement.
We have already seen Moore making the claim on which the fourth objection
rests. Philosophers divide over whether to take it seriously, either in general (for it
threatens every attempt to give an account of what truth consists in) or in applica-
tion to the correspondence theory.29 But if we take the notions of correspondence
and fact at face value, so that the fact is an independently existing counterpart of
the proposition and there must be a further fact for each true proposition about
correspondence to correspond to in order to be true, then the regress will be vi-
cious.
When one thinks of the elaborate apparatus employed in the Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus to avoid such a regress, in particular the distinction between
showing and saying, one could reasonably wonder whether the correspondence the-
ory’s regress can be dismissed without following that book in making the theory
unstatable.
The second objection is the most foreign to a modern reader, who may be
surprised to learn that these grounds of Bradley’s dissatisfaction with the corre-
spondence theory were shared by that hero of modern logicians, Frege:
A correspondence, moreover, can only be perfect if the corresponding
things coincide and so are just not diﬀerent things. . .
It would only
be possible to compare an idea with a thing if the thing were an idea
too. And then, if the ﬁrst did correspond perfectly with the second,
they would coincide. But this is not at all what people intend when
they deﬁne truth as the correspondence of an idea with something real.
For in this case it is essential precisely that the reality shall be distinct
from the idea. But then there can be no complete correspondence, no
complete truth. So nothing at all would be true; for what is only half
true is untrue. Truth does not admit of more and less.
[Frege, 1918, 3]
Frege follows this initial argument against the correspondence theory with the
consideration of an obvious response, that all that is required is ‘correspondence in
a certain respect’ (loc. cit.). To this, where Bradley would have rejected such talk
of ‘respects’ with his second objection, Frege provides Bradley’s fourth objection,
of vicious circularity, which he supposes gives us, when generalized, and buttressed
by the assumption that truth is not a matter of degree, good reason not only to
reject the correspondence theory but to maintain that truth is ‘sui generis and
indeﬁnable’, a ‘property of a thought’,30 thus apparently abandoning his earlier
29Examples of both sides of the divide are provided by Ralph Walker. In his [1989, 99] he asserts
without argument that the correspondence theory’s regress is non-vicious. In his [2001, 150–1],
he attempts to show that the regress is non-vicious for the correspondence theory while vicious
for the coherence theory. The argument appears to turn on a confusion of the correspondence
platitude (which all theorists of truth can agree to aﬃrm) and the correspondence theory, which
requires some serious account of the nature of the correspondence.
30[Frege, 1918, 4; 6].

236
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
and more well known view that the True is an object named by sentences. Frege,
then, like Moore, thinks that all attempts to deﬁne truth in these kinds of ways
involve a vicious circle, and reverts to primitivism.
But Bradley tried instead
to bring thought and reality together, to do justice to the idea that when we
think truly, what we are thinking is what is the case, and follows his rejection of
correspondence by expounding his own largely unrecognized view of truth:
The division of reality from knowledge and of knowledge from truth
must in any form be abandoned. And the only way of exit from the
maze is to accept the remaining alternative. Our one hope lies in taking
courage to embrace the result that reality is not outside truth. The
identity of truth knowledge and reality, whatever diﬃculty that may
bring, must be taken as necessary and fundamental.
[Bradley, 1907, 112–3]
This view has come to be called the identity theory of truth. But what does this
slogan ‘the identity of truth and reality’ amount to?31 It looks as if Bradley means
that truth consists in the identity of some x with a reality that thereby makes x
true; and the identity theory’s most general form is that we have truth iﬀthe
truth-bearer is identical with the appropriate truthmaker.
We can see that Bradley’s identity theory of truth arose out of his second
objection to the correspondence theory: that its view of facts is based on the
illusion that a proposition can be true by corresponding to part of a situation even
though it rips that part from its background and separates it up into further parts
which are not separate in reality. Because he rejected this fragmented world in
favour of a monistic ontology, not of a Parmenidean sort but one in which reality is
itself a coherent whole of diﬀerentiated but not separate parts, his identity theory
of truth allows him to employ a coherence theory of justiﬁcation, and entails that
coherence is a test of truth.
In fact, in his view, it is the test.32
The result
is that much of his discussion of truth is conducted in coherentist terms (e.g.
‘system’). It is easy to be misled; and when Russell launched his famous attack on
the coherence theory,33 while he focused ostensibly on Harold Joachim’s version of
it, it is clear that his real target was Bradley, whom he took to be an archetypal
coherence theorist. (Russell’s seminal role in the subsequent discussion explains
the already-remarked mistakes of the textbooks.) Russell’s focus on Joachim may
not have been entirely misdirected, however, since Joachim’s theory is obviously
inspired by Bradley’s, and he too features, along with Brand Blanshard, as a
textbook coherence theorist — indeed, the theories of Joachim and Blanshard are
so similar that we may usually treat them as one. And yet, like Bradley’s, their
31The presence of the word ‘knowledge’ in Bradley’s version of the slogan is to be explained
through the already-noted veriﬁcationist element in his idealism. We ignore it here as an unnec-
essary hostage to fortune.
32[Bradley, 1909, 202].
33[Russell, 1907].

A Brief History of Truth
237
theory has an important feature that is either overlooked or underemphasized in
the textbook characterizations of coherence theories of truth. For although, in
contrast to Bradley, they insist that the nature (and not just the test) of truth lies
in coherence, they resemble him in claiming that the genuinely coherent system of
belief will be identical with reality.
However, while Bradley’s appeal to coherence follows from his identity theory,
the direction of entailment seems to ﬂow the other way for Joachim and Blanshard.
They worked their way into a theory of truth through a theory of judgement
that began with the idea that the nature of judgement needs to be understood
teleologically – to understand judgement we need to understand the goal we have
in making a judgement. They concluded that there are two such goals. One is,
as Bradley insisted, that in judging we aim to judge that things are the way they
are. The other, ‘immanent’, goal we have in making a judgement is to put an end
to our inquiry. Of course, neither Blanshard nor Joachim thought that just any
judgement would suﬃce for this. Only a properly justiﬁed judgement can satisfy
our curiosity.34 So we need to understand what it is for a belief to be justiﬁed in
order to understand the nature of judgement.
For the early coherence theorists, a justiﬁed judgement is one that coheres with
the rest of our beliefs. But what, exactly, is it for two things to ‘cohere’? Do
beliefs cohere as long as they are consistent? For both Joachim and Blanshard,
a coherent set of beliefs must not only be consistent, but also form a uniﬁed and
explanatory system.35 Blanshard goes even further and claims that in the perfectly
coherent system, that which lies at the end of all inquiry, each judgement will be
necessitated by the others. The central feature in this account of justiﬁcation,
though, is its holism. For clearly no belief considered on its own could be coherent
in this sense. Instead, it is a whole system of beliefs that is coherent and whether
any particular belief is justiﬁed is a matter of whether the system of belief will be
coherent, remain a system, after the inclusion of the belief. Thus for Joachim and
Blanshard, as for Quine, the primary bearer of epistemic merit is a whole system
of beliefs.
Moreover, this system of beliefs is a teleological whole because it has a unity
that lies, in part, in the fact that its construction has the common goal of putting
an end to the inquiry. As Joachim characterizes it, a teleological whole is ‘. . .
a whole of parts such that each part contributes determinately to constitute the
whole, and that the structural plan of the whole determines precisely the nature
of the diﬀerences which are its parts. . . ’36 Given that the parts of the system are
the beliefs that make it up, this conception of the system implies that the nature
of a belief depends upon the whole of which it is a part. In fact, both Blanshard
and Joachim insist that judgements do not have any determinate signiﬁcance in
isolation.37
34[Blanshard, 1939, vol. 1: 489; Joachim, 1906, ch. 3].
35[Blanshard, 1939, vol. 2: 264; Joachim, 1906, 73–8].
36[Joachim, 1906, 9f].
37[Blanshard, 1939, vol.
2, 266; Joachim, 1906, 73, 93].
Although their overall position
combines epistemological holism with meaning holism, there is no argument provided (as far as

238
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
But what do these claims about justiﬁcation and judgement have to do with
truth? Blanshard argued that the conception of our belief system as a teleological
whole united under the goal of ending inquiry was incompatible with a correspon-
dence theory of truth. He maintained that to suppose truth is correspondence is to
suppose that the goal of establishing the systematic coherence of our beliefs is dif-
ferent from that of apprehending the nature of reality. However, if this is the case,
what reason do we have for supposing that by pursuing the goal of coherence we
are creating a system of thought that corresponds to some external reality? And
if there is no reason to think that we are getting at the truth by constructing such
a system, why should we stick with this method of inquiry? As Blanshard thinks
that this method of inquiry is part of the nature of thought itself he concludes
that the correspondence theory’s failure to justify this procedure (by failing to tie
it to truth) will leave us forever out of touch with reality.38 Furthermore, for the
correspondence theorist to identify the two goals of judging, it would have to be
possible to justify a belief by comparing it to some independent, unconceptualized
fact. But Joachim and Blanshard’s coherence theory of justiﬁcation was based on
the claim that we have no access to unconceptualized facts that on their own could
justify some belief. So there is no way for us to justify our thoughts by comparing
them with such facts.39
Indeed, Joachim and Blanshard agreed with Bradley’s second objection to the
correspondence theory, claiming that both reality and our conception of it are
teleological wholes whose unity would be destroyed, and their nature falsiﬁed,
by what he had called the ‘vicious abstraction’ that such a theory entails.40 As
applied to truth, the idea is that we do not speak the truth if we say less than
the situation we are talking about would justify, just as we do not speak the
truth if we say more, or something entirely diﬀerent. Their hostility to any such
abstraction ensures that, when their views are consistently carried through, at
most one proposition can be true — that which encapsulates reality in its entirety.
The identity theory in this version has the advantage that it can meet a condition
of any theory of truth, that it must make room for falsehood, the condition which
diverted other potential identity theorists in the direction of primitivism; for it can
account for falsehood as a falling short of this vast proposition and hence as an
abstraction of part of reality from the whole. The result is that all three adopted
the idea that there are degrees of truth: that proposition is the least true which is
the most distant from the whole of reality.41 Adopting this doctrine at least allows
some sort of place for false propositions and the possibility of distinguishing worse
we are aware) from one form of holism to the other. They seem to draw their motivation for both
positions from their conception of the goal of thought as the identiﬁcation of thought with reality
and the idea that this identiﬁcation can occur only if the reality has been made intelligible.
38[Blanshard, 1939, vol. 2: 267ﬀ].
39Joachim carefully spells this out in [Joachim, 1906, ch. 2]. The question remains, of course,
as to whether the two goals of judging really do need to be identiﬁed as Joachim and Blanshard
insist.
40[Joachim, 1906, 36ﬀ; Blanshard, 1939, vol. 2: 266–7].
41[Bradley, 1909; Blanshard, 1939 vol. 2, ch. 27; Joachim, 1906, 85–121].

A Brief History of Truth
239
from better.42 However, the consequence of this is that all ordinary propositions
will turn out to be more or less infected by falsehood because they fail to reach
this ideal of inclusiveness. It is also unclear how such a theory can distinguish
between the degrees to which diﬀerent beliefs are false and so explain how we can
be led towards the truth. For his part, Joachim seems to claim that the ground
of falsity and error in particular judgements lies precisely in a failure to see that
all such judgements are only partial truths.43 As Russell was quick to point out,
this suggestion entails that if someone asserts that some birds have wings, while
conﬁdently believing that the assertion is true, the assertion must be false.44
Russell also objected to the coherence theory on the grounds that it would be
easy to create coherent systems of propositions that contain falsehoods.45
For
example, the claim that no birds have wings undoubtedly belongs to some co-
herent system of propositions, though presumably one that is constituted by a
vastly diﬀerent range of propositions from those most of us accept. As we have
seen, although this objection would have been partly directed at Bradley it has
no force against his identity theory of truth. Yet its force against Joachim and
Blanshard’s theory is also questionable. For a start, all these philosophers insisted
that the relevant set of propositions was that of those actually believed.46 And
they insisted further that not just any set of noncontradictory beliefs counts as
coherent. In particular, these coherent systems were called ‘self-fulﬁlling’ in part
because the standards that a belief must reach to become part of the system were
themselves part of the system. These standards could (and do) evolve over time.47
So judgements that cohere must not only be justiﬁed (rather than merely adopted
on a whim) but the standards of justiﬁcation themselves get stronger and our in-
quiries more focused and eﬀective as they progress and we learn more about the
domain in question. Thus it is at least not as easy as Russell suggested to create
a coherent set of beliefs that contain what we would consider falsehoods. Perhaps
it is possible to do so if we start our hypothetical set with diﬀerent standards
for entry into the set than those we actually have. For Joachim and Blanshard,
however, it is not possible to swap our standards of justiﬁcation: they are part of
the nature of thought.
Regardless of whether any or all of Bradley, Joachim and Blanshard can provide
an account of falsehood and avoid the Bishop Stubbs objection, the metaphysical
price of their theories is obviously high. The price has several components. One is
this: it is clear that the idealist metaphysics built into Joachim and Blanshard’s
42Although philosophers have tended to share Russell’s scorn for this idea (see, e.g., the Fregean
argument quoted near the start of this section), variants of it keep turning up. See §4 below.
43[Joachim, 1906, 162].
44[Russell, 1907, 135].
45Because Russell used the example of a coherent system that contained the claim that the
(in fact eminently respectable) Bishop Stubbs was hanged for murder, this objection has become
known as the Bishop Stubbs objection. Russell [1907, 135–9].
46Lengthy investigations of whether this move protects the coherence theory from the Bishop
Stubbs objection can be found in [Walker, 1989; Wright, 1995].
47[Blanshard, 1939, vol. 1: 490; Joachim, 1906, 76f].

240
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
peculiar teleological account of judgement is what ensures that their claims about
the identity of truth-bearer and truthmaker are at least not non-starters. Yet this
metaphysical position on its own is too costly for most philosophers.
Further, Bradley worried that the theory’s sole all-describing proposition will
still be infected by falsehood. For the nature of symbolism demands that it display
reality’s connected aspects by means of separate fragments, and it will itself both
have to be, as an existent, part of reality and yet, as reality’s description, separate
from it. The only resolution of these diﬃculties which he could see was to go
further in the same direction, concluding that the total proposition, to attain
complete truth, would have to cease to be a proposition and become the reality
it is meant to be about. This seems to be what Blanshard had in mind when he
claimed that truth is ‘thought on its way home’.48 While Joachim and Blanshard
agreed to such talk of identity, though, it was not meant to replace the claim that
the nature of truth is coherence. They insisted that theirs is a coherence theory. It
is just that the ideally coherent system of judgements will be identical with reality.
But Bradley drew more extravagant consequences from their shared hostility to
abstraction. While this hostility initially motivates the identity theory, when it
is allowed to remain unbridled, its implications begin to threaten even the theory
itself. For although Bradley, Joachim and Blanshard all described their view of
truth in terms of ‘identity’, and so justify talk of an identity theory of truth, this
title is ultimately misleading in application to Bradley, since his theory ends up as
eliminativist: on his anti-Hegelian view, reality transcends the rational, and turns
out not to have a fact-like structure expressible in any propositional form at all,49
so that when full truth is attained, the point of inexpressibility is reached. Hence
Bradley, despite using the word ‘identity’ to describe his view, says as well that ‘in
the proper sense of thought, thought and fact are not the same’ and talked of the
attainment of complete truth in terms of thought’s ‘happy suicide’.50 In eﬀect, as
the proposition approaches complete truth, it disappears altogether in favour of
reality:
But if truth and fact are to be one, then in some such way thought
must reach its consummation. But in that consummation thought has
certainly been so transformed, that to go on calling it thought seems
indefensible.
[Bradley, 1893, 152]
Bradley’s metaphysical theory of truth, when its consequences are fully explored,
thus turns out to be self-destructive.
His metaphysics is such that he did not
regard this as an objection. But it is likely to seem so to those — surely the
overwhelming majority — unwilling to share his entire metaphysical vision, with
the result that the theory appears to be merely an historical curiosity. However,
48[Blanshard, 1939, vol. 2, 264].
49[Bradley, 1883, 590f].
50[Bradley, 1893, 150, 152].

A Brief History of Truth
241
we shall see that the fundamental ideal of the identity theory — securing truth by
closing the gap between mind and world — has been recently revived and is once
more inﬂuencing discussion.
1.4
Correspondence: Russell, Wittgenstein
Russell’s attack on Joachim signalled a move away from the binary theory of
judgement and its required primitivist account of truth. As early as 1904, he was
articulating worries about primitivism in his long consideration of Meinong:
It may be said — and this is, I believe, the correct view — that there
is no problem at all in truth and falsehood; that some propositions
are true and some false, just as some roses are red and some white;
. . . . But this theory seems to leave our preference for truth a mere
unaccountable prejudice, and in no way to answer to the feeling of
truth and falsehood . . . .
The fundamental objection may be simply expressed by saying that
true propositions express fact, while false ones do not. This at once
raises the problem: What is a fact? And the diﬃculty of this problem
lies in this, that a fact appears to be merely a true proposition, so that
what seemed a signiﬁcant assertion becomes a tautology.
[Russell, 1904a, 473]
After this succinct discussion of issues still surrounding the notion of truth, Rus-
sell reassures himself that primitivism is all right — ‘What is truth, and what
falsehood, we must merely apprehend, for both seem incapable of analysis’ — and
it turns out that ‘our preference for truth’ (which we have since learned to re-label
as the claim that truth is a ‘norm of assertion’) is not ‘a mere unaccountable prej-
udice’ but is justiﬁed by ‘an ultimate ethical proposition’. Still, it is clear that
he is uneasy. By 1907 Russell’s discomfort with the primitivism imposed on him
by the binary theory was great enough for him to end his critique of Joachim
by contemplating replacement of the latter with the multiple relation theory of
judgement; and in 1910 he committed himself to the change.51
The new theory is developed against the background of his criticism of Meinong’s
primitivist account of truth and falsehood as properties of objectives. Falsehood,
he now thinks, is the work of the mind and not an independent property: it is
impossible to believe in the existence of real mind-independent objectives where a
judgement is false, and this provides suﬃcient reason for not believing in them even
where the judgement is true; furthermore, primitivism renders the true/false dis-
tinction a ‘mystery’. In consequence, he opts for a new theory in which judgement
is not binary but ‘a multiple relation of the mind to the various other terms with
which the judgement is concerned’.52 It is clear that most of his dissatisfaction is
51[Russell, 1910b].
52ibid. 122.

242
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
not in fact with primitivism per se. It is rather with the idea that the world con-
tains mind-independent falsehoods; and this is a consequence of the combination
of the unity of the proposition with the doctrine of real propositional constituents,
not of primitivism. Be that as it may, however, propositions, as the truth-bearing
uniﬁed entities which ﬁgured in the binary theory, have disappeared altogether
(although the vocabulary lingers); they have been displaced by propositional acts.
A full account of the theory, together with its version of the correspondence theory
of truth, is given in the last couple of pages of the paper. Using some of Russell’s
own words, it may be summarized thus: When we judge that, say, A loves B, we
have ‘before the mind’ the person A, the person B, and the relation of loving, in
such a way that the relation is not present ‘abstractly’ but as proceeding from
A to B. The judgement is true when there is a corresponding complex object,
A’s loving B, and false when there is not. Russell thus endorses a correspondence
theory of truth, in which the complex object (which Russell was soon to call a
‘fact’) to which a true judgement corresponds is something the theory presents as
quite independent of that judgement itself.
This presentation of the multiple relation theory embroiled Russell in a confu-
sion of the problem of direction (how do we ensure that non-symmetrical relations
like ‘loves’ go in the right direction?)
with the problem of unity (how do we
ensure that we have a proposition, and not a mere collocation of its individual
constituents?), a confusion which was partly responsible for a rapid succession of
diﬀerent versions of the multiple relation theory, whose diﬀerences may be ignored
here,53 for in all its versions the theory is still dogged with the problem which had
forced Russell to adopt primitivism as the suitable theory of truth for the binary
relation theory of judgement.
The multiple relation theory was meant to circumvent the binary theory’s prob-
lematic requirement of the mind-independent existence of all propositions con-
structed from real constituents. But once primitivism’s apparatus for making the
true/false distinction is no longer available, false judgement is rendered impossible,
even on the multiple relation theory. That theory is made necessary by Russell’s
lingering attachment to the doctrine of real propositional constituents and the idea
that a truthmaker is a set of objects uniﬁed by a relation which is itself one of
those objects. But these views, combined with Russell’s recognition of the need
to distinguish between a judgement that A loves B and the mind’s merely being
simultaneously acquainted with A and love and B, are bound to lead to a col-
lapse in the ability to employ the true/false distinction. To see this, suppose that
it is true that aRb, i.e. that this uniﬁed ‘complex object’ exists. Now suppose
that someone S judges that aRb. This judgement consists in the uniﬁcation of
S, a, R and b by the judging relation (call it ‘J’). But on this account, all such
judgements will be false owing to a failure of correspondence, since in the fact a
and b are related by R, whereas in the judgement — according to an essential
component of the multiple relation theory — a and b are not related by R (but
53They are discussed in detail in [Candlish, 1996], from which the current discussion has been
condensed and modiﬁed.

A Brief History of Truth
243
by J). A natural response to this objection is to say that the multiple relation
theory should be modiﬁed so that a and b are related by R inside the judgement,
thus enabling correspondence to hold. But this modiﬁcation has the consequence
that no judgement can be false, since any judgement will unify its components and
create the fact which makes it true. That is, either the judging does not include
a suitable correspondent for the judged, in which case nothing can be true; or it
does, in which case nothing can be false.
A possible defence of Russell’s combination of views at this point would be
to say that all that this objection reveals is a serious unclarity in the notion
of correspondence, and that Russell should have gone on to show how a non-
uniﬁed collection of objects can correspond in the required sense to a complex
object whose components are those objects. Even if this line is taken, however,
the multiple relation theory still relies upon a mysterious power of the mind to
assemble and arrange real objects (and modern versions of the theory which employ
sequences to do the same job are no more than stipulations which merely disguise
the mystery). Furthermore, it does nothing to address the diﬃculty concerning
unity which had partly prompted the replacement of the binary by the multiple
relation theory, that is, Russell’s treatment of relations as substance-like objects
and his consequent requirement that a relation play the inconsistent role of both
the uniﬁer and the uniﬁed: in the new theory this role has merely been transferred
from the judged relation R to the judging relation J.
In 1918, Russell himself eﬀectively conceded the ﬁrst of these criticisms and
admitted the problem of falsehood had not been solved; in 1924 he conceded the
second.54 In fact, within the metaphysics of logical atomism, it is vital for the pos-
sibility of false judgement, and indeed of a correspondence theory of truth, that
there be some distinction between the real objects about which some judgement
is made and the constituents of the judgement. It is thus hardly surprising that,
soon after this concession, Russell abandoned both the doctrine of real proposi-
tional constituents and the multiple relation theory of judgement in favour of a
mentalistic view of the nature of propositional constituents while retaining succes-
sive variants of the correspondence theory of truth.55
A feature of both the multiple relation and the correspondence theories is that
Russell originally explained them only for non-quantiﬁed propositions; he aban-
doned the former before attempting its extension to include quantiﬁcation, but it
is clear that any such extension could not be straightforward, and poses a problem
for the associated extension of the latter, since the nature of correspondence as
originally explained would not apply where quantiﬁers are involved.56 At ﬁrst this
seemed to Russell an advantage, since it opened the possibility of explaining one
54[Russell, 1918, 198f; Russell, 1924, 170–3]. The latter concession is disingenuously presented
as not a change but a clariﬁcation.
55[Russell, 1919; 1959, ch. xv].
56He eventually accommodated the latter by the postulation of ‘general facts’, in addition to
singular facts, to be the truthmakers for quantiﬁed propositions; it is still far from obvious how
this postulation is consistent with the doctrine of real propositional constituents. See [Russell,
1918, 206f].

244
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
of the distinctions required by type theory (and at one stage he tried unsuccess-
fully to use it to solve the Liar Paradox). But it also posed a problem he never
solved: his logic contained unrestricted generalizations about propositions,57 and
these require an inﬁnite realm of propositions which exist independently of their
contingent formulation by ﬁnite minds. A natural solution to the diﬃculty would
be to say that the quantiﬁcation extends over possibilities; but Russell himself
made this solution unavailable by his repeated insistence that possibility is not
fundamental but must be accounted for in terms of actuality.58
In 1913 Wittgenstein had severely criticized the latest version of Russell’s the-
ory of judgement. While there is still argument about the nature of the criticism,
there is no argument about the fact that Wittgenstein’s views in the Tractatus
were often formed in reaction to Russell’s. He follows Russell in adopting a cor-
respondence theory: but his accounts of propositions and truth are distinguished
by their embodying ingenious treatments of the problems with which Russell had
been struggling unsuccessfully.
First, Wittgenstein rejected the doctrine of real propositional constituents; in-
stead, propositional constituents are Names, not Objects. (The expressions are
capitalized in this paragraph to draw attention to the fact that these are no ordi-
nary names or objects, but the end-points of analysis required by a theory.) This
immediately relieved him of the worry that the demand that the proposition be
a unity would make every proposition true, the worry which had driven Russell,
ﬁrst, into primitivism, and then, following his rejection of primitivism, into the
multiple relation theory of judgement. Wittgenstein could allow propositions to be
uniﬁed without risking the creation of their truthmaking facts, whose constituents
are Objects, not Names.
Secondly, Wittgenstein had a coherent account of propositional unity itself (and,
incidentally, of the corresponding unity of the truthmaking fact). To take Russell’s
example, suppose that it is true that A diﬀers from B. Russell had understood this
proposition as consisting of three things, A and diﬀerence and B; as we saw, he
was unable to explain how these saturated objects could form either a proposition,
or, after the abandonment of the binary theory, a fact. (Bradley had seen the
diﬃculty, arguing that if one thinks, as Russell does, of relations as a sort of
object, the demand for propositional unity sets oﬀa vicious inﬁnite regress as one
endeavours vainly to ﬁnd a relation which will not itself need further relating to its
relata.) Part of Wittgenstein’s strategy is obvious enough: it was to reject Russell’s
treatment of relations as saturated objects. But he followed Russell in rejecting too
Frege’s idea that relations are unsaturated constituents of propositions. This left
the problem — a solution to which is vital for a defence of a correspondence theory
of truth — of accounting for the truth of relational statements.59 He unravelled
57Compare the point about the axiom of inﬁnity in §1.2.
58The matters touched on in this paragraph are well explained in [Hylton, 1990, 355f].
59As we saw, for Russell these were all statements, but in fact Wittgenstein’s solution, while
compatible with this Russellian view, does not require it, since, if it works at all, it applies just
as well to monadic propositions treated as fundamentally so.

A Brief History of Truth
245
this tangle by maintaining that both facts and propositions are uniﬁed by relations
which do not ﬁgure in them as constituents.
The crucial remarks in the Tractatus for understanding Wittgenstein’s views on
these matters are these:
The propositional sign consists in the fact that its elements, the words,
are combined in it in a deﬁnite way.
The propositional sign is a fact.
[Wittgenstein, 1921, 3.14]; Ogden’s translation)
Not “The complex sign ‘aRb’ says that a stands to b in the relation
R”, but rather, that “a” stands to “b” in a certain relation says that
aRb.
(ibid. 3.1432; SC’s translation.)
In the Tractatus, then, propositions contain no names of relations, and in particular
the relation which uniﬁes them does not appear as a propositional constituent but
is exhibited by the relation of the names to each other. Correspondingly, in the
truthmaking fact, relations are not a further kind of object demanding to be
related to the other constituents of the fact. The symbolizing of a relational fact
is accomplished by the construction of another relational fact which is isomorphic
in its structure. Propositions, on this account, are a kind of picture.
Along with this solution of the problem of unity we get a deﬁnite account of the
nature of the correspondence involved in truth: a proposition is true just if the
arrangement of its constituent names is isomorphic to an actual arrangement of
objects, with a 1:1 relation of names to objects; it is false when the arrangement
is merely possible but not actual. The pictorial relation is not itself stated, but
shown; in Wittgenstein’s view it cannot be stated, since it involves logical form,
which is presupposed in any proposition at all. In this way, Wittgenstein was able
both to maintain a correspondence theory and to evade the Bradley/Frege argu-
ment that the theory involves a vicious inﬁnite regress: the evasion is accomplished
by making the theory unstatable.
Of course, propositions expressed in natural language look nothing like pictures.
Wittgenstein dealt with this understandable reaction in three stages. First, the
notion of picture is generalized to embrace propositions.60
Second, the claim
that the proposition is a picture is restricted to the fully analysed proposition;
when a proposition’s deep form is revealed, it will be shown to consist of nothing
but Names of Objects. The analysis is accomplished by repeated application of
Russell’s Theory of Deﬁnite Descriptions to everyday names until the real ones
are reached.
Third, the pictorial account is restricted to atomic propositions;
molecular propositions are truth-functions of atomic propositions. This meets one
60This is accomplished in §§2.1–2.19; it is well described in Pears 1977.

246
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
of Bradley’s objections to the correspondence theory: the theory can be restricted
to a base class of atomic propositions from which all others can be generated.
The pictorial account also provided Wittgenstein with a way of dealing with
another problem which had been puzzling Russell, namely, why belief contexts
are not truth-functional despite their appearing to contain propositions. Russell
had concluded that, not being truth-functions of the propositions believed, belief
statements reveal a new kind of atomic fact.61 Wittgenstein, rejecting both the
binary and the multiple relation view of judgements, concluded that they are nei-
ther atomic nor molecular;62 rather, they are not propositions at all, but disguised
deployments of the pictorial relation — the real form of ‘A believes that p’, is “‘p”
says that p’,63 which on the Tractatus account is not a proposition at all but just
an attempt to say what can only be shown.
In this way Wittgenstein deals all at once with a great range of problems sur-
rounding the notion of truth. But the metaphysical price paid is very high, and it
was not long before even he decided that he was not prepared to pay it.
1.5
Pragmatism: Dewey, James, Peirce
At the same time that Russell and Bradley were arguing with each other about
truth, both were arguing with William James. Like other pragmatists, James re-
jected the idea that there are ﬁxed, ideal structures of thought such as we saw (in
§1.3) ﬁguring in the theories of Blanshard and Joachim. Moreover, the pragmatists
denied that thought and reality are such that they could be, even if only ideally,
identical (as Bradley as well as Blanshard and Joachim seemed to maintain). On
the other hand, like these theorists, the pragmatists attacked as false abstractions
the correspondence theory’s twin notions of truth and facts as external to justiﬁ-
cation. Yet despite their combative stance, they shared the common approach of
devising a theory of truth on the basis of a theory of judgement.
The American pragmatists were largely united under a maxim expressed by
Peirce:
Consider what eﬀects, that might conceivably have practical bearings,
we conceive the object of our conception to have. Then, our conception
of these eﬀects is the whole of our conception of the object.
[Peirce, 1878, 258]
This maxim served as a way to ‘make our ideas clear’ and to brush aside metaphys-
ical games of make-believe and philosophical arguments whose resolution could
have no practical signiﬁcance to our lives. Applied to judgements, it obviously
implies that they are to be individuated according to their practical causes and
61[Russell, 1918, 199].
62The rejections of the binary and multiple relation theories are at [Wittgenstein, 1921,
§§5.541–2 and §5.5422 respectively].
63ibid. §5.542.

A Brief History of Truth
247
eﬀects. Yet although the pragmatist theory of judgement originates with Peirce’s
maxim, there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between his pragmatic theory of truth and
the sort of conception of truth found in the works of William James and John
Dewey.64
Peirce applied the pragmatic maxim directly to our concept of truth and argued
that the only experiential and pragmatic concepts we have to guide us here are
the notions of doubt and belief:
But if by truth and falsity you mean something not deﬁnable in terms
of doubt and belief in any way, then you are talking of entities of
whose existence you can know nothing, and which Ockham’s razor
would clean shave oﬀ. Your problems would be greatly simpliﬁed, if,
instead of saying that you want to know the “Truth”, you were to say
that you want to attain a state of belief unassailable by doubt.
[Peirce, 1905, 279]
Thus, truth is the property of those beliefs that are unassailable by doubt and that
therefore register the fact that we have formed a settled opinion. The true beliefs
are those that are held at the end of our inquiry. Like Joachim and Blanshard,
Peirce emphasizes that the immanent goal of inquiry is the suspension of doubt
and identiﬁes the beliefs reached at the end of an ideal inquiry with the set of true
beliefs.
However, it would be a mistake to see Peirce’s theory of truth as a pragmatically
construed coherence/identity theory. Peirce did not think that our ﬁnal set of
beliefs would be identical with reality. Instead, he held the optimistic belief that
only a properly scientiﬁc inquiry would successfully create a stable end to doubt
and inquiry and at the same time reveal the nature of reality. Admittedly, Peirce
gave ‘reality’ a revised deﬁnition. ‘The opinion which is fated to be ultimately
agreed to by all who investigate, is what we mean by the truth, and the object
represented in this opinion is the real. That is the way I would explain reality.’65
It is important to see that although Peirce shares the coherence theorist’s intuition
that reality is just what is ‘represented’ by the set of beliefs at the end of inquiry,
his motivations are entirely diﬀerent.
For Peirce, the pragmatic maxim about
meaning dictates that ‘reality’ be construed so that the real is, ideally, attainable
within the realm of experience. There is no room for a reality that is in principle
epistemically unreachable and plays no role in guiding our inquiry. By redeﬁning
‘reality’ in this way, Peirce has reinterpreted the idea of true beliefs corresponding
to reality. Because reality is what the ultimate set of beliefs will say exists, we
have been given a guarantee that the true beliefs are those that correspond to
reality.
64James and Dewey themselves had slightly diﬀerent theories of truth; in particular, Dewey
seems more willing to straightforwardly equate truth with veriﬁcation (see [Dewey, 1948, 159f]).
However, given the restrictions of space, we have focused on the claims to which they both would
have agreed.
65Peirce 1878: 268.

248
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
Nevertheless, it was these close ties to the coherence theory that led James and
Dewey to develop the pragmatist line further and so abandon Peirce’s theory of
truth. Both denied that there would be some ultimate or ﬁnal point of view that
would contain all and only the truths:
But owing to the fact that all experience is a process, no point of view
can ever be the last one. Every one is insuﬃcient and oﬀits balance,
and responsible to later points of view than itself.
[James, 1904, 55]
In eﬀect, this point from James amounts to a criticism of Peirce’s conception of
inquiry from within pragmatism itself. How are we to understand the notion of an
ideal end to inquiry in pragmatic terms? How are we to tell that we have reached
the end rather than merely fooled ourselves into thinking that we have because
the game has started to get boring and diﬃcult?66
James and Dewey both considered the essential feature of their pragmatism to
be their conception of judgements as tools of our own making that are designed
to help us cope with our surroundings.67
On this view, we should not expect
some endpoint to inquiry. What counts as useful is, of course, interest-relative
and we have no reason to suspect that we have some ﬁxed set of interests that
will determine some ﬁnal, ultimately useful system of beliefs. So, as our interests
endlessly change, new needs and questions will arise and the process of inquiry
will continue on.
This view of the goal of judging leads quite naturally to a theory of truth. If
the goal of judging is to help us cope, then the true judgements are those that
succeed in this goal. James famously deﬁned truth on just these lines.
‘The true’, to put it very brieﬂy, is only the expedient in the way of
our thinking, just as ‘the right’ is only the expedient in the way of our
behaving. Expedient in almost any fashion; and expedient in the long
run and on the whole of course . . . .
[James, 1907b, 222]
Yet, such a theory of truth faces some obvious criticisms and, again, Russell was
one of the ﬁrst to raise them. Russell complained that James’s theory entailed
that we could not work out whether a belief is true until we worked out whether it
would be useful to believe it.68 But James claimed that their theory was not one
of justiﬁcation, not meant to provide us with a criterion for deciding which of our
beliefs are true.69 Even so, Dewey maintained that some belief may be true now,
66[Rorty, 1986, 339].
67For an example of the claim that the pragmatists’ theory of judgement is prior to their theory
of truth see [Dewey, 1910, 165].
68[Russell, 1908, 135f].
69[James, 1908, 106f].

A Brief History of Truth
249
even if we do not now know whether it will turn out to be useful or not. It still
has the ability to work now and this will come to light as it is tested and relied
on.70 To the extent the pragmatist theory does provide criteria for determining
whether a belief is true or not, the criteria would be the same as any of us would
endorse; namely weighing evidence, checking for consistency, inspecting the world
and so on.
James gives us another deﬁnition of truth to help us see this. What, James asks,
is the ‘cash-value in experiential terms’ of the notion of a true judgement? ‘The
moment pragmatism asks this question, it sees the answer: True ideas are those
that we can assimilate, validate, corroborate and verify. False ideas are those that
we can not.’71 The problem with this pragmatist response is that their position
now seems to be pulled in a number of diﬀerent directions. On the one hand,
the true beliefs are those that are expedient. On the other hand, the true beliefs
are those that are or will be veriﬁed. Moreover, the pragmatist faces yet another
obvious criticism, again voiced by Russell. Russell also complained that most of us
do not want to know whether it is useful to believe that God exists, but whether
God really exists.72 In other words, the common understanding of truth, claims
Russell, is one in which the belief that God exists is true if and only if God exists.
How is the pragmatist going to account for this while maintaining both that the
true is the useful and that the true is the veriﬁed or veriﬁable?
To answer this question one must realize that the pragmatists had a much
broader sense of utility in mind than might be at ﬁrst suggested by their deﬁnition
of truth as expediency.
For a belief to pay or be useful, it must cohere with
our other beliefs and the beliefs of others, it must enable us to cope with the
objects the belief is about and it must not lead to perceptual expectations which
have been disappointed. In other words, coping is precisely a matter of unifying
and explaining our experiences and other beliefs.
Moreover, the content of a
belief is to be understood pragmatically and so the meaning of a belief just is the
perceptual expectations it creates, the actions it disposes us to perform and the
inferential relations it has to other beliefs. Construing belief content in this way
means that veriﬁcation, assimilation, corroboration and the rest are signs that the
belief ﬁts into the network of belief, perception and action and helps grease the
mechanisms that make our daily living possible.73 Thus, beliefs which meet all of
these constraints are satisfying to us and so, in a sense, give us what we want.74
Nevertheless, postulating truth as veriﬁcation and utility seems to leave truth
ﬂoating blissfully free from reality. If truth is as the pragmatist says it is, why
70[Dewey, 1910, 163].
71[James, 1907b, 212f].
72[Russell, 1908, 143].
73See, for example, [Dewey, 1948, 157].
74The notion of utility implied here was often emphasized by the pragmatists and puts paid to
a common objection that goes back to G. E. Moore [1907], who criticized the obviously dubious
claim that all and only the true beliefs are useful in getting us what we want. (There are many
cases where it is more useful, in a narrow sense, to have a false belief than a true one.)

250
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
should we think true beliefs let us in on how the world really is? For a start, James
and Dewey agree that ‘getting reality right’ is an essential part of being true.
If the reality assumed were cancelled from the pragmatist’s universe
of discourse, he would straightaway give the name of falsehoods to the
beliefs remaining, in spite of all their satisfactoriness. For him, as for
his critic, there can be no truth if there is nothing to be true about.
[James, 1908, 106]
I am of course, postulating here a standing reality independent of the
idea that knows it. I am also postulating that satisfactions grow pari
passu with our approximation to such reality.
[James, 1907a,: 88]
Reality is independent of experience in that it does not require a belief in it in
order to exist. In fact the pragmatist insists that the existence of certain situations,
such as that the tree in front of me is a eucalypt, is really the only explanation
of why it is useful to hold the belief that the tree in front of me is a eucalypt.75
So, in a sense truth is a correspondence relation between beliefs and reality. As
Dewey argues, the pragmatist merely explains in more concrete detail than is
usual what the nature of this correspondence is. (The Procrustean taxonomies of
the textbooks convert the overlapping views of real philosophers into artiﬁcially
sharp contrasts.) This correspondence relation is constituted by the relations of
veriﬁcation and coping that hold between the belief and reality.76 It is the whole
process of being veriﬁed and validated and generally of ‘agreeing’ with reality.
Yet, both Dewey and James insist that reality cannot go beyond experience. The
real is that which is or can possibly be experienced. This is why the ﬁrst of the two
quotes in the previous paragraph has the proviso ‘from the pragmatist’s universe
of discourse’. Pragmatists do not believe in facts that stand beyond all experience
and that make our beliefs true. They do, however, believe in independent facts
within experience such that when this reality ‘comes, truth comes, and when it
goes, truth goes with it’.77 With reality conceived like this, it makes no sense to
wonder, when we have done all we can to verify, assimilate and corroborate some
belief, whether this belief may still be false. As Peirce would say, to speculate
so would be to engage in a typical philosopher’s make-believe. While it is easy
to sympathize with this hostility to speculation, one can see that it risks, despite
the pragmatists’ express desires, committing them to idealism. However, perhaps
the objection to pragmatism which lingers longest is the sense that, for all their
protestations to the contrary, the pragmatists at bottom identify truth with what
is convenient. While there is clearly a nugget of insight in the pragmatist account,
75[James, 1909, 8].
76[Dewey, 1910, 158f].
77[James, 1908, 106].

A Brief History of Truth
251
what is omitted is a clear view of what it is which makes truth a useful property
of beliefs without being mere usefulness itself, and which also gives a point to the
concept, a point gestured at by later philosophers’ talk of truth’s being a normative
end of assertion. This clear view begins to emerge with the work of Frank Ramsey.
1.6
Redundancy: Ramsey
In his analysis of judgement, F. P. Ramsey agreed with Russell that a judgement
must involve the mind’s being multiply related to a number of objects. However,
he also agreed with Wittgenstein that ‘A judges that p’ is really of the form “‘p”
says p’. This suggested to Ramsey that the whole problem of judgement really
reduces to the question ‘What is it for a proposition token to have a certain
sense?’78 Moreover, he realized that neither Russell nor Wittgenstein had given
an answer to this question.79 Like the pragmatists, Ramsey concluded that it is
the behavioural causes and eﬀects of holding a certain belief that constitute the
fact that it has a certain content. Yet his conclusion was not identical to theirs,
for he seems to have been the ﬁrst to suggest a version of what has since been
labelled ‘success semantics’: the view that a belief has the content that p iﬀp’s
obtaining would result in the success of the actions we perform on the basis of that
belief (together with some desire).80 That is, truth is the property of (full) beliefs
such that if all the beliefs which combine with any desire to cause an action have
it, then that action will succeed in achieving the object of that desire. This is
the kernel of truth in pragmatism. And, importantly, Ramsey thought that only
this theory of content could explain why it is that we want true beliefs — namely,
because true beliefs, more often than false ones, lead to the satisfaction of our
desires.81 The pragmatists, on the other hand, removed the need to explain why
it is that true beliefs are more likely to get us what we want, by combining their
theory of content with an identiﬁcation of truth with utility. Ramsey, however,
took a strikingly diﬀerent approach to the theory of truth.
Ramsey argued that once we have an analysis of judgement there is no further
problem of truth to be solved.
However, this is not because he thought, like
almost all the philosophers we have examined so far, that the correct theory of
truth follows from the correct theory of judgement. Rather, Ramsey seems to have
been the ﬁrst to suggest that the theory of truth can be given independently of
the theory of judgement.
Normally, he claimed, the bearers of truth and falsity are taken to be proposi-
tions. If we focus on propositions, assuming for the moment that we have solved
the question as to why certain sentences express certain propositions and why cer-
78[Ramsey, 1923, 275].
79Russell’s failure is noted on p. 142 of [Ramsey, 1927]; Wittgenstein’s theory is examined in
[Ramsey, 1923, 274–9].
80[Ramsey, 1927, 143f].
For a recent version of success semantics, see [Whyte, 1990].
For
criticism and response, see [Teichmann, 1992; Whyte, 1992; Brandom, 1994; Whyte, 1997; Dokic
and Engel, 2002; Daly, 2003; Mellor, 2003, 217–20].
81[Ramsey, 1927, 148].

252
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
tain mental acts are beliefs that p, then we have two contexts of truth predication
to consider. In the ﬁrst case we know exactly what proposition is being called
true. About this case, Ramsey says, ‘It is evident that “It is true that Caesar
was murdered” means no more than that Caesar was murdered, and “It is false
that Caesar was murdered” means that Caesar was not murdered.’82 Accordingly,
he believed that in this context both ‘true’ and ‘false’ were redundant predicates.
We express the same content when we assert that a proposition is true as we do
when we just assert the proposition itself (and mutatis mutandis for attributions
of falsity).
In the second sort of context, ‘true’ is not eliminable in the same way. Consider
a case where we say ‘Everything Newton says is true’. In this case we mean some-
thing like ‘For all p, if Newton says p, then p is true’ (where the variable ‘p’ ranges
over propositions). If we were to straightforwardly eliminate ‘is true’ from this
sentence, the result, on its most obvious interpretation, would be ungrammatical.
In the sentence ‘For all p, if Newton says p, then p’, the variable ‘p’ in its ﬁnal
occurrence is occupying a position in which only the substitution of a sentence
would make sense. But if the quantiﬁer is given its standard objectual reading,
then a name is required in that position, and the whole sentence makes no more
sense than the sentence ‘If Newton said that snow is white, then Bob’. Never-
theless, Ramsey thought that even in this case we can assert something with the
same content as ‘Everything Newton says is true’ without using a truth-predicate.
For example, if we restrict ourselves to propositions of the form aRb, ‘then “He
is always right” could be expressed by “For all a, R, b, if he asserts aRb, then
aRb”, to which “is true” would be an obviously superﬂuous addition.’83 Ramsey
thought that the sentence he proposed overcame the problems faced by the ap-
proach that merely deleted ‘is true’ because his candidate sentence allows us to
use the verb within the sentence itself, so that the consequent of the conditional
is a sentence that is used rather than mentioned. Thus, he concluded, we need to
discover (through the analysis of judgement) all the diﬀerent forms propositions
take, so that for each form we can construct a universal statement like that oﬀered
for aRb. Having done this we could conjoin all these universal statements, thus
capturing the content of ‘Everything Newton says is true’.
But if we understand quantiﬁcation in the usual objectual way then Ramsey’s
paraphrase does not work. For, on this understanding, when we quantify using
the variables a, R and b we are quantifying into name-position.84 So even if the
ﬁrst occurrence of ‘aRb’ in the sentence Ramsey proposes is in name-position (so
that if we replaced the variable with a name it would be a name for a propositional
form85), the second occurrence must be read the same way and so, again, the sen-
82ibid. 142. Frege had made the same point about sentences some years earlier: “It is also
worth noticing that the sentence ‘I smell the scent of violets’ has just the same content as the
sentence ‘It is true that I smell the scent of violets’.” [Frege, 1918, 6]).
83ibid. 143.
84We follow Ramsey in treating these as variables.
85We shall ignore some notorious problems concerning form.
For Russell’s diﬃculties, see
[Pears, 1977; Hylton, 1990, 344f; Candlish, 1996, 118–24].
For more general treatments, see

A Brief History of Truth
253
tence is ungrammatical. Alternatively, if we treat each of a, R and b as occupying
name-positions, then replacements for ‘aRb’ would be collections of names and not
propositions. Perhaps even more worrying is that Ramsey’s proposed paraphrase
requires us to list an inﬁnite number of propositional forms.
While these problems may seem to undermine Ramsey’s redundancy account of
truth, they can be avoided if we can ﬁnd a way to read the quantiﬁers and their
bound variables that makes sense of statements like ‘For all p, if Newton says that
p, then p’. Later, Ramsey himself suggested that statements with variables in
sentence positions can be grammatical. In fact, he used this idea to put forward
a simple deﬁnition of truth:
A belief is true iﬀit is a belief that p and p.
Ramsey claimed that although this deﬁnition looks ungrammatical any instance of
it will be grammatical because the sentence we substitute for ‘p’ will always have
a verb within it, so that, again, the consequent of the conditional is a sentence
that is used rather than mentioned.86
If this is right, and we can make sense
of Ramsey’s propositional variables, then we would also have an account of the
troublesome generalization contexts like ‘Everything Newton says is true’.
To
elucidate these variables, Ramsey proposed that we see them as akin to pronouns,
except that, instead of occurring in name position, they occur in sentence position.
Remarkably, given the subsequent development of this idea (see §3.3), he made the
explicit terminological suggestion that we think of them as ‘pro-sentences’.87 He
also oﬀered an explanation of why we cannot eliminate the truth-predicate from
the troublesome generalization contexts. Ordinary language treats propositional
variables as pronouns and not prosentences, so where propositional variables would
occur unadorned in logical notation, in ordinary language we need to use the truth-
predicate to turn a name into a grammatical sentence. So even though there is
a deﬁnition of the truth-predicate, the peculiarities of English prevent us from
eliminating ‘true’ from all the contexts in which it occurs.
Ramsey’s account is breathtakingly elegant and highly suggestive. In particular,
his idea that ‘The proposition that p is true’ and ‘p’ are in some strong sense
equivalent seems to identify an important fact about truth. Further, if the sketch
he oﬀered for a way of understanding propositional variables could be made out
in more detail, then a simple deﬁnition of the truth-predicate would be available.
It could only be a matter of time before his ideas were taken up.
[Smiley, 1983; Oliver, 1999].
86[Ramsey, 1927–9, 9-10].
87ibid. 10.

254
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
2
MIDDLE VIEWS
2.1
Introductory comments
Ramsey’s prescience in suggesting a redundancy theory, and separating the ques-
tion of the semantics of belief from that of the nature of truth, is all the more
impressive for coming at a time when the theory of judgement was almost univer-
sally allowed to dictate the terms on which a theory of truth could be constructed.
Despite a change of vocabulary, this underlying approach remained the norm even
through the change in methodology witnessed in the middle years of the century
and later labelled ‘the linguistic turn’. In the theory of truth this change meant
that the focus of debate shifted to questions surrounding the use and meaning of
the truth-predicate. However, despite a common linguistic focus, there was little
consensus during this period about what the purpose of a theory of truth is. In
particular, two important dimensions of disagreement concerning how to theorize
about truth opened up. On the one hand, there was disagreement about whether
theorizing should take the form of an investigation into the formal, logical proper-
ties of the truth-predicate, or that of an investigation into the linguistic practices
in which the use of such a predicate has a home (i.e. ‘fact-stating discourse’). On
the other hand, philosophers disagreed as to whether they should be investigat-
ing our actual truth-predicate or devising some preferable replacement predicate.
Nevertheless, throughout this period, it was almost always a theorist’s conception
of semantics that dictated the framework in which they investigated truth.
2.2
Logical empiricism (I): Ayer, Carnap, Neurath, Schlick
Like Ramsey, the logical empiricists were deeply inﬂuenced by Wittgenstein’s Trac-
tatus and at least in the ﬁrst years of the Vienna Circle, and despite their various
diﬀerences, they adopted a number of that book’s fundamental theses, including
that of extensionality: that the only propositions with sense are either atomic
propositions or those constructed truth-conditionally from them. But they inter-
preted Wittgenstein’s sparse, formal conception of language in the light of pragma-
tist considerations. For example, they usually read him, tendentiously, as claiming
that atomic propositions were in some sense about immediate experience. This
conception of the relation of language to experience, together with the thesis of
extensionality, led the empiricists to their famous slogan that the only meaningful
statements are those that are veriﬁable. They also inherited one of the major ten-
sions of the Tractatus. Both Wittgenstein’s picture theory and the veriﬁcationist
criterion of meaningfulness seem to entail that logical or analytic truths (or false-
hoods) are meaningless and thus neither true nor false. On the other hand, these
propositions are as truth-functional as any proposition and thus seem apt to be
considered true or false.88 This tension made it diﬃcult for them to formulate a
uniﬁed conception of truth.
88For a pellucid description of the tension as it appears in the Tractatus (and Wittgenstein’s
attempt to resolve the tension) see [Fogelin, 1987, 45ﬀ].

A Brief History of Truth
255
The logical empiricists’ conception of meaningfulness as veriﬁability led them
to reject a number of traditional philosophical questions as, at least in some sense,
meaningless. In particular, because they took questions about the nature of extra-
linguistic reality to lead to pointless, irresolvable disputes, semantic questions were
impugned too, on the grounds that they concerned mysterious relations between
language and this extra-linguistic reality. One of their early projects was thus
to create a language suitable for science that would prevent such questions being
formulated. To this end, the fundamental expressions of such languages were to be
words for the description of our immediate experience. The only other allowable
expressions were logical and syntactical expressions and those that could be deﬁned
out of the observational expressions using the logical resources of the language.
To the extent that semantic questions can be asked in these languages, they must
be put in syntactic terms. For example, Carnap suggested that instead of the
question ‘Is this book about Africa?’ we should ask ‘Does this book contain the
word “Africa?”’
[sic].89
In short, for the early logical empiricists the logic of
scientiﬁc languages was to be the object of study for philosophers and the method
was to be purely syntactic.
In the light of this brief characterization, it is not surprising that the popular
view of the logical empiricists’ theory of truth is that they either rejected truth
as a metaphysical pseudo-concept or endorsed a version of the coherence theory
of truth by identifying truth with veriﬁcation or conﬁrmation. The popular view
captures some of the positivistic motivations for their various conceptions of truth.
Truth was obviously an uncomfortably semantic notion for many of them and such
a concept would have to prove both its empiricist credentials and its usefulness in
describing relations amongst sentences of a scientiﬁc language. The most obvious
truth-related concept that met these criteria is veriﬁcation. But in fact the popular
view overlooks the variety of accounts endorsed by the logical positivists.
For
example, Moritz Schlick shared neither of these attitudes to truth.
Schlick saw himself as holding ﬁrm to the Tractarian correspondence theory
despite its involving the sort of metaphysical talk that the logical empiricists were
trying to purge from serious theorizing – in this case an appeal to both facts and a
semantic relation between language and the world. Schlick argued that there was
nothing mysterious about the claim that we compare propositions and facts to see
whether a proposition is true. Doing so is just what it is to verify a proposition:
I have often compared propositions to facts; so I had no reason to say
that it couldn’t be done. I found, for instance, in my Baedeker the
statement: “This cathedral has two spires,” I was able to compare it
with ‘reality’ by looking at the cathedral, and this comparison con-
vinced me that Baedeker’s assertion was true . . . I meant nothing but
a process of this kind when I spoke of testing propositions by comparing
them with facts.
[Schlick, 1935, 400]
89[Carnap, 1935, 65].

256
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
Unlike Wittgenstein’s theory of truth, Schlick’s did not involve the claim that
propositions picture reality.
Instead, like James and Dewey, Schlick explained
the correspondence relation in terms of veriﬁcation. However, for Schlick veriﬁ-
cation was understood according to a foundationalist epistemology whose basic
propositions were veriﬁed by direct confrontation with sense experience. These
are captured in protocol sentences ‘which express the result of a pure immediate
experience without any theoretical addition’,90 so that the experiencer could not
make a signiﬁcant contemporaneous error in judgement. This entails that, once
justiﬁed, a sentence cannot later become unjustiﬁed. According to Schlick, this
view also entailed that veriﬁcation involved directly confronting propositions with
facts. This treatment of veriﬁcation was what the logical empiricists saw as justify-
ing the claim that Schlick’s position was a correspondence theory, on the grounds
that, on this view, being veriﬁed is a stable property that propositions have in
virtue of comparison with facts.91 However, given its appeal to extra-linguistic
facts and the diﬃculty it faces in assigning its claims to either the class of em-
pirical or that of syntactic sentences, Schlick’s theory of truth was not popular
amongst the other members of the Vienna Circle and, with his death in 1936, was
entirely abandoned.
At ﬁrst, Carnap and Neurath shared Schlick’s foundationalism. However, under
the inﬂuence of Duhem and Poincar´e, they came to accept conﬁrmation holism
and thus abandoned the idea that any proposition could be tested or veriﬁed on its
own. Instead, they insisted that statements could only meaningfully be compared
with other statements. On this view, even basic propositions may well be given up
in the face of an inconsistency if this is the simplest way to re-establish a consistent
system of belief. They thus replaced Schlick’s foundationalist epistemology with a
coherence theory of justiﬁcation. As Hempel emphasized, this move to a holistic
view of justiﬁcation also led them to abandon the thesis of extensionality, for no
proposition could be regarded as intrinsically atomic. It also meant that they could
not accept Schlick’s correspondence theory of truth, for it implies that sentences
can change their epistemic status over time and thus contrasts with what they often
called the “absolutist” nature of both correspondence truth and our “ordinary”
conception of truth. However, pace Hempel, their coherence theory of justiﬁcation
does not imply that they were thereby committed to a coherence theory of truth.92
That said, this divergence between the “ordinary” notion of truth and their
conception of conﬁrmation left Carnap and Neurath with a choice: either abandon
the notion of truth altogether, or replace our “ordinary” notion with a notion
deﬁned in terms of conﬁrmation. Neurath chose the latter course and so made the
move from a coherence theory of justiﬁcation to a coherence theory of truth:
90[Hempel, 1935, 11]. See, in particular, Schlick 1934 and 1935.
91This identiﬁcation of what is at issue was anticipated by Bradley [1909, 201–7], in criticism
of [Russell, 1907; Stout, 1907].
92[Hempel, 1935, 14] seems to follow Neurath in seeing this move as virtually automatic.
Walker (1989: ch. IX) is admirably clear that the coherence theory of truth is not implied by
the coherence theory of justiﬁcation.

A Brief History of Truth
257
If a statement is made, it is to be confronted with the totality of existing
statements.
If it agrees with them, it is joined to them; if it does
not agree, it is called ‘untrue’ and rejected; or the existing complex
of statements of science is modiﬁed so that the new statement can be
incorporated; the latter decision is mostly taken with hesitation. There
can be no other concept of ‘truth’ for science.
[Neurath, 1931, 53] his italics)
In this passage, Neurath not only endorses a coherence theory of truth but suggests
that there may be other notions of truth available that have no place in science. In
fact, it is clear that Neurath rejected the ordinary notion of truth because it was
diﬀerent from a coherence notion of justiﬁcation. So while Neurath in a sense oﬀers
a coherence theory of truth, he openly acknowledges that this is not the “ordinary”
conception of truth. Importantly, unlike Joachim’s and Blanshard’s, his coherence
theory was not based on claims about the essential nature of thought. Nor would
Neurath have thought kindly of the metaphysical doctrine that reality is ideally
coherent.
Rather his holistic, coherence theory of justiﬁcation together with a
distrust of metaphysics led him to a position much like that of the pragmatists.
The case of Carnap is rather more diﬃcult and any interpretation of his pre-
Tarski views on truth is bound to be controversial. Many commentators attribute
to him a coherence theory of truth based on his coherence theory of justiﬁcation.93
But while he may have once agreed with Neurath, most of his published writings
on truth in the early thirties present a rather diﬀerent attitude. In The Logical
Syntax of Language, despite the remarkably rich notion of syntax to which he
appealed, Carnap nevertheless assumed that ‘truth’ could not be deﬁned syntac-
tically.94 This was not because he thought that any such deﬁnition would lead
to contradiction via the liar sentences: he explicitly states a way to avoid the liar
paradox by distinguishing clearly between object-languages and metalanguages.
Rather, he is clear that once this problem is resolved we have to admit that ‘truth
and falsehood are not proper syntactical properties; whether a sentence is true or
false cannot generally be seen by its design, that is to say, by the kinds and serial
order of its symbols.’95 Of course, he thought that the truth of some sentences, the
analytic ones, could be discovered merely by observing their syntactical properties
(and one of his ongoing projects was to provide an adequate syntactic deﬁnition
for the analytic truths). Nevertheless, Carnap is obviously right that no syntactic
deﬁnition of truth will be possible such that the deﬁnition will serve to demarcate
the truths from the falsehoods.
Moreover, like Popper,96 Carnap thought that there was no need for a truth-
predicate in logic. He claimed that we could translate the majority of sentences
93See, for example, [Ayer, 1959, 20; Hempel, 1935, 14].
94For helpful discussions of Carnap’s syntactical resources and his claim that truth could not
be deﬁned syntactically, see [Ricketts, 1996; Coﬀa, 1991, 285–306].
95[Carnap, 1934, 216].
96[Popper, 1934, 274f].

258
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
containing ‘true’ into sentences that do not. In particular, “‘p” is true’ can be
translated by ‘p’ and ‘If “p” is true, then so is “q”’ by “‘q” is a consequence of
“p”’. So, for Carnap at this time the truth-predicate was to be avoided primarily
because it could not be given an adequate syntactic deﬁnition and seemed to
lack any legitimate, non-redundant uses.
The idea that the truth-predicate is
redundant bears an obvious resemblance to Ramsey’s redundancy theory of truth.
And although neither Carnap nor Popper refers to Ramsey in this context, it is
clear that Carnap had read Ramsey and that Popper had read Carnap.97 However,
Carnap did not make the claim that our ordinary truth-predicate was redundant,
only that he saw no use for it in logic.
A. J. Ayer, on the other hand, quite explicitly followed Ramsey in claiming
that, owing to the redundancy of the truth-predicate, there was no problem of
truth.98
Ayer, unlike Ramsey, did not turn his mind to the problematic cases
for this theory and so oﬀered no further hint as to how they might be handled.
However, he did go further than Ramsey in concluding that the correct analysis
of truth reveals that there is no property of truth to wonder about the nature of:
There are sentences . . . in which the word “truth” seems to stand for
something real; and this leads the speculative philosopher to enquire
what this “something” is. Naturally he fails to obtain a satisfactory
answer, since his question is illegitimate. For our analysis has shown
that the word “truth” does not stand for anything, in the way which
such a question requires.
[Ayer, 1936, 89]
It is surprising that a theory of truth so amenable to the logical empiricists was
not more generally adopted. In fact, it took the ground breaking logical work of
Alfred Tarski to open the eyes of many of the logical positivists to the availability
of a theory of truth that was as deﬂationary as Ramsey’s.99
2.3
Tarski’s semantic conception of truth
Tarski was well aware that the concept of truth was viewed with suspicion by
many of his contemporaries. He himself was suspicious of the everyday use of
truth-predicates in natural languages. His main concern was that such use led
to inconsistency because of the possibility of formulating liar sentences like ‘This
sentence is false’.100 One of Tarski’s main goals in supplying a deﬁnition for a
97Carnap refers to Ramsey [1931] a number of times in his [1934] and Popper refers to Carnap’s
[1934] in his discussion of truth [1934, 275].
98[Ayer, 1936, ch. 5].
99We do not mean to suggest that Tarski’s deﬁnition obviously amounts to a deﬂationary
theory.
100Amongst the theorists we are considering, Tarski was largely alone at the time in allowing
his concern with the semantic paradoxes to shape his views about truth.
In these days of
paraconsistent logic, it may no longer be as obvious as he assumed that such inconsistencies are
an overwhelming cause for concern.

A Brief History of Truth
259
truth-predicate was to ensure that any such term would avoid these paradoxi-
cal consequences. Thus, based on his diagnosis of the conditions that allow the
liar paradox to be generated for the ‘ordinary’ truth-predicate, Tarski proposed
a number of formal constraints on any adequate deﬁnition of a truth-predicate.
In particular, he claimed that all semantically closed languages are inconsistent,
where a semantically closed language is one that has the means of referring to
its own expressions and itself contains semantic expressions like ‘true’ and ‘false’.
As well as being semantically closed, Tarski thought that natural languages do
not allow us to set up precise formal conditions for the adequate deﬁnition of a
truth-predicate because we cannot exactly specify the formal structures of these
languages (including which of the expressions are meaningful). These two features
of natural languages led him to abandon any attempt to deﬁne either our ordi-
nary truth-predicate or any other truth-predicate for a natural language. Instead,
his project was to deﬁne a truth-predicate (or provide a recipe for deﬁning truth-
predicates) for formal languages. Moreover, Tarski was only interested in deﬁning
the term ‘true sentence’ for these formal languages and not in any notion of truth
as it applies to propositions or beliefs.
To make sure that the predicate he deﬁned was worthy of being called a truth-
predicate, Tarski suggested his famous material adequacy condition, Convention
T. Convention T asserts that any adequate deﬁnition of a truth-predicate, ‘T’,
must entail all instances of the so-called T-schema (T):
(T)
X is T iﬀp
where ‘X’ is replaced by a name or structural description of some sentence and
‘p’ is replaced by that sentence or a translation of it in the meta-language.101
(An instance of the schema would thus be “‘Der Schnee ist weiß’ is T iﬀsnow is
white”, with German as the object- and English as the meta-language.) This is
meant to be an obviously legitimate constraint on adequate deﬁnitions of truth,
as it is meant to be obvious that the related schema (TS) demarcates the set of
true sentences.
(TS)
X is a true sentence iﬀp.
So, if a deﬁnition of ‘T’ entails all instances of (T), then ‘T’ must be at least
materially equivalent to ‘true sentence’. (TS) is similar to the equivalence empha-
sized by Ramsey, Carnap and Ayer. It says, in eﬀect, that attributions of truth
to sentences are equivalent to assertions of the sentence itself. As well as treating
sentences as truth-bearers, however, (TS) also diﬀers in strength from these other
proposed equivalences as it is meant only as a material equivalence.
It is important to note, though, that in ﬁrst oﬀering this condition Tarski rather
cautiously claimed that this was only a condition of adequacy on a particular
conception of truth, namely the semantical conception, according to which ‘a true
sentence is one which says that the state of aﬀairs is so and so, and the state
101[Tarski, 1933, 187–8].

260
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
of aﬀairs indeed is so and so.’102
Tarski claims that this type of statement is
essentially an elaboration on what he calls the ‘classical conception of truth (‘true
— corresponding with reality’).’103 However, despite his suggestions it is not clear
that a semantic deﬁnition of truth (and his deﬁnition in particular) must amount
to a correspondence theory of truth (though it does seem to capture the ‘classical’,
Aristotelian conception).
Finally, it is crucial to Tarski’s enterprise that he not use any undeﬁned semantic
terms in his deﬁnition. Otherwise, the role of primitive concepts would be ‘played
by concepts which have led to various misunderstandings in the past.’ Moreover,
‘it would then be diﬃcult to bring this method into harmony with the postulates
of the unity of science and of physicalism (since the concepts of semantics would
be neither logical nor physical concepts).’104 The inﬂuence and the vocabulary of
the logical positivists are quite plain here: Tarski’s goal was not just to avoid the
antinomies, but also to provide a deﬁnition of truth that would be acceptable to
those with positivistic or empiricist suspicions about semantics. Thus he hoped
to deﬁne semantical concepts ‘in terms of the usual concepts of the metalanguage’
so that they are ‘reduced to purely logical concepts, the concepts of the language
being investigated and the speciﬁc concepts of the morphology of language.’105
Tarski’s aim, and his self-imposed constraints, were accordingly these: to pro-
duce a deﬁnition of ‘true sentence’ for a formal object-language free from semantic
terms and with a precisely speciﬁed structure, such that this deﬁnition entailed all
instances of the T-schema and was formulated in a metalanguage that was about
this object-language and used no semantical terms as primitives.
The most obvious way to construct a deﬁnition that meets these constraints
would be to list all the instances of the T-schema. After all, Tarski himself claims
that these instances are partial deﬁnitions of truth. For any language with an
inﬁnite number of sentences, however, this approach will not provide us with an
explicit deﬁnition of truth.
For such languages the obvious step would be to
generalize (TS) to get something like (T∗):
(T∗)
∀p (‘p’ is a true sentence iﬀp).
But, as Tarski pointed out, (T∗) limits us to naming sentences via quotation
names and a more general approach that gives us an explicit deﬁnition is (TG).
(TG)
∀x (x is a true sentence iﬀ∃p (x = p and p)).
As should be clear from our discussion of Ramsey, however, whether we can do
this depends on how we read quotation marks and the universal quantiﬁer. If
we read the quantiﬁer objectually, then, even if the variables were to range over
102[Tarski, 1933, 155].
103ibid.
153.
Tarski claims that the semantical deﬁnition of truth is an elaboration of this
classical conception (and quotes Aristotle’s famous slogan about truth as an example of the
semantical conception) at 155f.
104[Tarski, 1936, 406].
105ibid.

A Brief History of Truth
261
propositions, the sentence would be ungrammatical. On the other hand, we could
read it substitutionally. Substitutional variables do not range over a set of objects
so that when we instantiate formulas containing them they are replaced with
names of these objects. Instead, they are associated with a class of expressions
(in this case sentences) so that when we instantiate we replace the variable with
an expression and not a name for the expression. However, whether this approach
works will depend on how we read the quotation marks. As Tarski points out, the
approach will not work if we treat “‘p”’ like a syntactically simple name so that
the expression inside the quotation marks is no more in quantiﬁable position than
‘lip’ is in ‘Philip was sleeping’. Rather, we must treat quotation marks as functions
that take an expression as input and create a name for it. This allows us to read
(TG) so that it not only comes out as grammatical but also seems to provide a
deﬁnition of truth that meets Tarski’s constraints.106 The only signiﬁcant reason
Tarski gave for not adopting this deﬁnition is that he thought that it generates
contradiction.107 Yet if he had been as careful in distinguishing between object-
language and metalanguage in this case as he was for his own deﬁnition this
inconsistency would not arise.108
There are other reasons for worrying about
using substitutional quantiﬁcation in this context, but Tarski did not share them
and we shall see that it is anyway far from clear that they are conclusive.109
Yet another option would be to provide a recursive deﬁnition of truth by ﬁrst
deﬁning truth for atomic sentences using the appropriate instances of the T-schema
and then deﬁning the circumstances under which complex sentences built out of
atomic sentences and logical operators are true. For example, one part of such
a deﬁnition would be ⟨(A&B)⟩is true iﬀ⟨A⟩is true and ⟨B⟩is true.110
This
is obviously much like the logical atomist approach of Russell and Wittgenstein
except that the T-schema is used instead of providing a general, correspondence
account of truth for atomic sentences.
However, Tarski rejected the idea that
quantiﬁed sentences should be treated like inﬁnite disjunctions or conjunctions
and so abandoned the idea that one could deﬁne truth for all sentences on the
basis of a deﬁnition of truth for atomic sentences.
To overcome these problems Tarski began with a recursive deﬁnition of a near
substitute of sentence truth, namely satisfaction of sentential functions, and showed
how we could deﬁne sentence truth on the basis of this notion. A sentential func-
106Field oﬀers a similar (but importantly diﬀerent) approach using schematic variables [Field,
2001, 115 and 141ﬀ].
107[Tarski, 1933, 161].
Both Mackie and Soames, for example, agree that this is the only
substantial reason Tarski oﬀers. [Mackie, 1973, 32; Soames, 1999, 89].
108[Marcus, 1972, 246f]. In Marcus’s own words “considerations of deﬁnitional adequacy require
that for the substitution class of sentences the condition on quantiﬁcation be
(Q′)
If A = (x)B(x) then v(A) = T iﬀv(B(t)) = T for each sentence t such that (B(t))
contains fewer quantiﬁers than A.”
109These objections include complaints of circularity (see for example [Platts, 1980, 14f; Hor-
wich, 1998a, 25f], but see also [Camp, 1975; Soames, 1999, 90ﬀ] for responses) and also complaints
that substitutional quantiﬁers are inconsistent with convention T (see, for example, [Wallace,
1971; Kripke, 1976; Camp, 1975] for responses).
110We have used angle brackets as a convenient substitute for corner quotes in this sentence.

262
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
tion is an open sentence, or a formula that contains variables that are not bound
by any quantiﬁers (e.g. ‘x is married to Queen Elizabeth’). To give an idea of
what satisfaction is, we can speak of a sentential function’s being satisﬁed by cer-
tain objects when replacing the variables with names for these objects results in
a true sentence (e.g. Prince Philip satisﬁes ‘x is married to Queen Elizabeth’).
However, given that we want to use the notion of satisfaction to deﬁne truth, we
need some other way to deﬁne satisfaction. Moreover, Tarski’s initial truth deﬁ-
nition concerned languages that do not have names, so we will follow him in this
and then point out the obvious way to extend his deﬁnition. For a ﬁnite number
of predicates and relations, a simple way to deﬁne satisfaction would be merely to
list each predicate and relation and the conditions under which it is satisﬁed (e.g.
for all x, x satisﬁes the predicate ‘is married to Queen Elizabeth’ iﬀx is married
to Queen Elizabeth).
The task of providing a general deﬁnition of satisfaction, however, is harder.
Because open sentences can have more than one variable and because they can
be closed by applying quantiﬁers to bind the variables as well, Tarski adopted
the technique of talking about sentential functions’ being satisﬁed by sequences
of objects. A sequence of objects is basically a potentially inﬁnite list of objects
where the way the objects are ordered in the list is crucial. When considering
whether a sentential function is satisﬁed by a sequence Tarski pairs the variables
in the sentential function with objects in the sequence so that if we have variables
x1, x2, x3, they are paired with the ﬁrst, second and third objects of a sequence.
So, if our sentential function were ‘x1 is the husband of x2’ then it would be
satisﬁed by any sequence of objects that had Prince Philip as its ﬁrst member
and Queen Elizabeth as its second (as well as many other sequences, of course).
Dealing with the quantiﬁers is less straightforward, but the general idea is the
same. We consider sequences of objects such that the variables of the sentential
function are paired with objects in the sequence based on their position in the
list.111
The general pattern (although not the logical machinery) of Tarski’s truth deﬁ-
nition is quite easy to grasp. First, he provides a recursive deﬁnition of satisfaction
of sentential functions by sequences of objects. This crucially involves assigning
free variables to objects in the sequences. For sentences there are no free variables
and so, whatever sequence we are talking about, this sequence will either satisfy
the sentence or not. Once we notice this, the move from a deﬁnition of satisfaction
to a deﬁnition of truth is obvious. True sentences are those that are satisﬁed by
all sequences. False sentences are satisﬁed by none.
With this ingenious approach, Tarski managed to provide a deﬁnition of ‘true
sentence’ that satisﬁed all the constraints he had imposed. Of course, the deﬁnition
he supplied is a deﬁnition of truth relative to a particular formal language, so
111For the few who are interested and yet have not met Tarski’s treatment of the quantiﬁers:
his treatment of the existential quantiﬁer is such that a sequence s1 satisﬁes some existentially
quantiﬁed sentential function ∃xkA iﬀthere is some other sequence, s2, that satisﬁes A and
diﬀers from s1 at most at the kth place.

A Brief History of Truth
263
his approach could never count as a deﬁnition of truth simpliciter. That is, as
Max Black emphasized,112 although his work can be applied to diﬀerent formal
languages, the deﬁnition of ‘true sentence’ is unique to the particular language in
question. If, as it seems, our ordinary notion of truth is not relative to a language
in this way, Tarski has failed to capture the meaning of ‘true’. In particular, if we
change the language for which we have provided a Tarskian truth-deﬁnition by as
much as adding one predicate, the deﬁnition becomes obsolete. The deﬁnition does
not tell us how to incorporate this new vocabulary. Moreover, his deﬁnitions apply
only to a certain sort of formal language. Whether or not a Tarski-style deﬁnition
can be extended to natural languages is of great philosophical signiﬁcance. One
way in which it can be easily extended is to incorporate languages with names.
For a language with a ﬁnite list of names, a deﬁnition of denotation can be given
merely by listing the names and the objects they denote. We can then deﬁne truth
for atomic sentences quite simply along the following lines:
‘Fa’ is true iﬀthe object denoted by ‘a’ satisﬁes the predicate ‘F’.
Of course, as was the case with predicates, any language with an inﬁnite number
of names will resist being treated in this way.
However, there are also many
other types of natural language expressions that resist being treated in a Tarskian
fashion; such as indexical expressions, reported speech, adverbial constructions
and sentences in non-indicative moods.113
So much about Tarski’s goals and the extent to which he achieved them is rela-
tively uncontroversial. What is far more diﬃcult to achieve consensus on is what,
if anything, Tarski’s deﬁnition contributes to the philosophical debate about truth.
In particular, does it serve to rehabilitate the correspondence theory, as he himself
sometimes seems to suggest? Karl Popper certainly thought so, arguing that part
of Tarski’s great contribution was to point out the adequacy conditions on any
correspondence theory of truth.114
Popper quite rightly sees that a correspon-
dence theory needs the capacity to describe truth-bearers, a way of referring to all
the facts described in the object language and an account of the correspondence
relation that holds between truth-bearers and facts. But Popper also reads these
constraints into Tarski’s deﬁnition of truth. As we saw, Tarski insisted that the
meta-language have the resources to describe or name all sentences of the object
language and also to provide translations for all these sentences. For Popper’s char-
acterization of Tarski to be right, this latter translation constraint must amount
to a way of referring to or describing facts. In other words, as Popper says, the
right hand side of the T-schema must state the fact to which the sentence referred
to on the left hand side corresponds.115 However, if we treat facts as whatever is
stated by statements like ‘Snow is white,’ surely we reduce the notion of a fact to
112[Black, 1948].
113Although much work has been done to show how these constructions can be treated in a
Tarskian way by those committed to Davidsonian semantics. For some examples of this work see
[Davidson, 1980; 1984].
114[Popper, 1974, 401].
115[Popper, 1974, 402].

264
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
something that even coherence or pragmatic theories could admit. There is noth-
ing preventing coherence theorists from accepting that ‘Snow is white’ is true iﬀ
snow is white, provided that they read the sentence as an expression of the belief
that snow is white and they commit themselves to the claim that snow is white iﬀ
the belief that snow is white is part of the ideally coherent set of beliefs. This is
not to agree with Black’s claim that Tarski’s theory is philosophically insigniﬁcant
because it is consistent with all philosophical theories. It is simply to point out
that Tarski’s T-schema (which is not his deﬁnition of truth) should be accepted
by all theories of truth.
Of course, this is also not yet to deny that Tarski’s theory might be a corre-
spondence theory. At one time Donald Davidson argued that it was a virtue of
Tarski’s account that it oﬀered a correspondence theory without needing to appeal
to fact-like entities.116 Tarski’s deﬁnition of ‘true sentence’ is that a true sentence
is satisﬁed by all sequences. Davidson thus understood sequences as Tarski’s re-
placement for facts. On this reading of Tarski, it is the world that makes sentences
true, but it is not the case that each sentence corresponds to some part of the world
(a particular fact). It is all the possible sequences of objects taken together that
determines that a sentence is true (together with the semantic facts about the sen-
tence). In a sense, then, it is the entire universe that either does or does not make
a sentence true. For Davidson, this is just as well. According to Davidson, there is
a simple proof, ﬁrst oﬀered by Frege and now generally known as the ‘Slingshot’,
that shows that any attempt to appeal to facts as the referents of sentences col-
lapses into the claim that there is only one Big Fact that makes all true sentences
true.117 A Tarski-style approach to correspondence theories would also have the
rather signiﬁcant virtue of putting an end to annoying questions about negative
facts, general facts, mathematical facts and so on.
However, an appeal to sequences does not on its own constitute a correspondence
theory any more than does Tarski’s appeal to the availability of metalanguage
translations. At a minimum, Tarski’s theory would also need to explain the relation
that holds between sentences and sequences such that the holding of this relation
will constitute the correspondence of the sentence with the world. Davidson and
others have claimed that Tarski’s deﬁnition of satisfaction is precisely what ﬁlls
this role and so completes the correspondence account of truth. On this reading,
Tarski has discovered the relation of satisfaction to be the correspondence relation
that philosophers have been searching for. Correspondence thus turns out to be
a semantic relation between sentences and the world. In calling such a position a
correspondence theory, though, Davidson et al. commit themselves to treating all
theories of the following form as correspondence theories:
A sentence is true iﬀthe sentence means that p and p.
This would mean that even Ramsey’s redundancy theory is automatically a corre-
116[Davidson, 1969].
117There is a large literature concerning the cogency of this argument and the consequences of
its conclusion. For an excellent overview and an extensive bibliography see [Neale, 1995].

A Brief History of Truth
265
spondence theory.118 In fact, it looks as if, in general, treating Tarski’s deﬁnition
as a version of a correspondence account means that Ramsey’s account will need
to be treated as a correspondence theory too. Like Tarski, Ramsey noticed that
the problem of truth would be easy to solve if all occurrences of ‘true’ were of
the form ‘It is true that bitumen is black.’ Also like Tarski, Ramsey saw that
there were grammatical diﬃculties in extending this story to cover all cases and
that the solution lay in uncovering all the diﬀerent logical forms that judgements
could have and then explaining truth recursively. It is diﬃcult to see what parts
of Tarski’s superior logical apparatus could turn such a redundancy theory into a
correspondence theory.119
2.4
Logical empiricism (II): the impact of Tarski
It is worth returning to the logical empiricists to see how the deﬁnition of truth
given by one of their close associates aﬀected their own conceptions of truth. The
diﬀerence between Neurath’s and Carnap’s reactions to Tarski’s work is telling.
Neurath agreed that Tarski had provided a deﬁnition that made sense of our fa-
miliar notion of truth rather than of the veriﬁcationist notion Neurath himself had
been oﬀering. Nevertheless, Neurath continued to worry that this notion of truth
carried with it absolutist implications, i.e., that there was both a reality indepen-
dent of the language in which we describe it and that we could have some sort of
absolute certainty in the truth of propositions about this reality.120 Thus Neurath
retained his scepticism towards ‘true’ until he could be shown that the Tarskian
notion of truth was both a useful notion and did not carry such implications.
Carnap’s reaction could hardly have been more diﬀerent. When Tarski described
his method for deﬁning truth to Carnap he felt that the scales had fallen from his
eyes. Afterwards he embraced semantics and went on to write some of the most
inﬂuential books on semantics of the twentieth century. Surprisingly, it was not the
rather ingenious logical machinery Tarski had used in his deﬁnition that Carnap
felt was so revolutionary. Rather it was use of the seemingly trivial T-schema as
a criterion of material adequacy. For in his [1934] Carnap had most of the logical
machinery required for Tarski’s deﬁnition already in place. Thus in many ways,
the step from syntax to semantics was not a major one for Carnap. Yet, for a
time, Carnap was blind to the possibility of giving a deﬁnition of truth in terms of
the conditions that each sentence had to meet in order for it to be true.121 It took
118Field [1986] argues that Ramsey’s theory is a version of the correspondence theory, based
on reading Ramsey as oﬀering a pragmatic account of what makes it the case that judgements
have the truth-conditions that they do. According to the way of characterizing truth theories
currently under discussion in the text, even if Ramsey had said that there is nothing to say about
what makes judgements have truth-conditions he would still have been oﬀering a correspondence
theory.
119There is much more to be said about the philosophical signiﬁcance of Tarski’s deﬁnition.
Some of this will emerge as we continue.
120See, for example, the last sentence of [Neurath, 1937].
121The exact reason for the blindspot is hotly debated amongst commentators. Coﬀa [1991]
claims that Carnap’s veriﬁcationism led him to look for a syntactic criterion for truth. Ricketts

266
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
Tarski to show him the way truth could be so deﬁned and to make him enforce
the distinction between truth and conﬁrmation.122
The diﬀerence between the reactions of Carnap and Neurath shows both that
Tarski’s T-sentences are helpful in showing which issues are about truth and which
issues are not, and also how diﬃcult it can be to heed the lesson. In this case, the
T-sentences show quite clearly that truth is not the same as conﬁrmation, that we
can abandon the idea of absolute knowledge and yet happily endorse the use of the
truth-predicate. For in claiming that ‘Snow is white’ is true iﬀsnow is white we
maintain only that whatever uncertainty there is in the claim that snow is white
applies also to the attribution of truth to the sentence ‘Snow is white’. Similar
things can be said about the independence of reality from the language we use to
ask it questions.
2.5
Correspondence vs. redundancy: the Austin/Strawson debate
One of the central issues in the extended debate between J. L. Austin and P. F.
Strawson turned on the question of whether yet another issue, namely the theory of
meaning, is in fact properly considered part of the theory of truth.123 As we have
seen, Tarski’s deﬁnition of truth is capable of being turned into a correspondence
theory of truth.
The fact that it can be so developed stems from its basis in
what Tarski calls the semantic conception of truth — a sentence S is true iﬀ
S says that some state of aﬀairs obtains and that state of aﬀairs obtains. We
saw that an attentive correspondence theorist is likely to claim that this meaning
relation which is assumed to hold between the sentence and a state of aﬀairs is
the correspondence relation they have been attempting to articulate. Thus the
crucial question between a redundancy theorist like Ramsey and a correspondence
theorist of this variety is whether an analysis of the meaning relation belongs to
the theory of truth.
Austin’s correspondence theory seems to be a disguised version of the latter,
two-stage, approach to the theory of truth. However, it is important to note that
Austin shared the logical positivists’ taste for attempting to tackle metaphysical
questions through an analysis of language:
We approach [‘truth’] cap and categories in hand: we ask ourselves
whether Truth is a substance . . . or a quality . . . or a relation . . . .
But philosophers should take something more nearly their own size to
strain at. What needs discussing rather is the use, or certain uses, of
the word ‘true’.
[Austin, 1950, 149]
[1996] claims that it was Carnap’s single-mindedness in giving a complete deﬁnition of truth that
led him to overlook a materially adequate deﬁnition.
122See [Carnap, 1949] for the classic attack on the conﬂation. Carnap does not mention his
former self as one of those guilty of making the conﬂation.
123The debate between Austin and Strawson began in 1950. It marks the emergence of the
continuing feud between deﬂationary and correspondence theorists.

A Brief History of Truth
267
For Austin, however, the theory of truth should proceed by giving an analysis of
our ordinary uses of ‘true’. The motivation for such an approach is the idea that
concepts like truth are falsely taken as enigmatic by philosophers who have paid
insuﬃcient attention to the way the word ‘true’ is really used. That said, we will
largely ignore Austin’s linguistic analyses and merely describe the theory of truth
that he ends up endorsing.
Austin complained that previous correspondence theories made two basic mis-
takes. First, they supposed that the correspondence relation was some sort of real
relation between truth-bearers and facts such as an isomorphism or congruence
relation.124
Second, and relatedly, previous correspondence theories incorrectly
populated the world with “linguistic Doppelg¨anger” which could stand in such
real relations to truth-bearers.125 In contrast, he urged, the correspondence rela-
tion is “absolutely and purely conventional.”126 This is because what our words
mean is a matter of convention. Once we appreciate this, Austin claims, there is no
need to posit facts with the same structure as sentences. Instead, we can say that
for a truth-bearer to be true is for there to be some convention that determines
that the truth-bearer means that p and for it to be a fact that p. To understand
Austin’s view in more detail we need to follow him in spelling out the nature of
his truth-bearers and conventional relations.
Austin is quite clear that the bearers of truth are neither sentences nor proposi-
tions nor beliefs but statements. What is less clear is what statements are meant
to be. Austin describes a statement as something that is made (and so is an his-
toric event) in words, but also that one sentence can be used to make diﬀerent
statements (you say ‘It is mine’ and I say ‘It is mine’).127 While it is diﬃcult to be
sure, it seems as if Austin means that a statement is an utterance-as-understood,
or a pair consisting of an utterance and its interpretation.
Central to Austin’s account of the conventional nature of correspondence is
the claim that there are two importantly diﬀerent types of linguistic convention.
Descriptive conventions relate sentence types (not statements) to a certain type of
state of aﬀairs. Demonstrative conventions relate statements to particular, historic
states of aﬀairs. To see the diﬀerence between these two conventions, consider a
stop sign. There are descriptive conventions that tell us that this sign is a stop
sign; that the type of thing this sign is telling us to do is stop. But there is also a
demonstrative convention that tells us where we should do this — namely in the
area that the sign has been planted.128 Austin’s claim is that statements have a
similar duality. On the one hand they refer to a particular state of aﬀairs and on
the other they assert that this particular state of aﬀairs is of a certain type. This
gives us an obvious way of deﬁning truth.
124[Austin, 1950, 154ﬀ].
125ibid. 154.
126loc. cit. Austin’s italics.
127ibid. 151.
128Austin suggests the example of traﬃc signs in [1950, 153, note 10].

268
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
A statement is said to be true when the historic state of aﬀairs to
which it is correlated by the demonstrative conventions (the one to
which it ‘refers’) is of a type with which the sentence used in making
it is correlated by the descriptive conventions.
[Austin, 1950, 152f]
Another way of putting the same point would be to say that a statement is cor-
related with a set of states of aﬀairs and a particular state of aﬀairs and the
statement is true if the latter is a member of the former. This analysis of cor-
respondence truth also makes a simple account of falsity available that avoids
the sort of worries about meaningful falsehoods that Russell struggled with. On
Austin’s account, statements always refer to actual, real states of aﬀairs. False
statements simply assert that they are of a type that they are not.
On the surface, Strawson could hardly have had more to disagree with in
Austin’s theory. He rejected Austin’s account of truth-bearers, truthmakers, the
correspondence relation and the types of linguistic convention. As so often, though,
their diﬀerences were sometimes only apparent.
The key to much of Strawson’s dislike for Austin’s theory lies in Austin’s attempt
to elucidate truth using the words ‘fact’ (or ‘states of aﬀairs’) and ‘statement’.
According to Strawson, along with ‘true’ these words are all part of a linguistic
practice, or a particular way we have of communicating with each other, which we
can call fact-stating discourse. Strawson’s worry is that any attempt to use some
of these words to elucidate the others will result in nothing but vacuous truisms.
The idea seems to be that one grasps the way to use these inter-deﬁnable words
all at once as one is introduced into the practice of fact-stating. Strawson’s claim
is thus that trying to elucidate truth by appealing to these cognate concepts is
really an attempt to elucidate truth through elucidating this whole practice. But
this elucidation cannot get anywhere if we use notions like ‘fact’ and ‘statement’
because if we did so we would ﬁnd that the ‘words occurring in the solution
incorporate the problem.’129
Thus Strawson found it no surprise that Ramsey
discovered that if we have ﬁrst got clear about what a statement (or judgement)
is there is no further problem about truth. Presumably Strawson thought that
getting clear about the nature of making a statement involves understanding that,
within the practice of stating facts, statements aim at the truth.
Strawson’s famous attack on the correspondence account of facts exempliﬁes
these rather abstract claims. He began by urging that, pace Austin, we do not
use statements to refer to facts. If anything, statements state facts. However,
even if Austin were to give up the claim that statements refer to facts, Strawson
argued, there are no such constituents of reality. Facts are just the shadows of true
statements. For one, we have no way of individuating facts except for using the
statements which the correspondence theory claims are made true by the fact: we
can refer to the fact that John is driving only by using the statement that John is
129[Strawson, 1950, 171].

A Brief History of Truth
269
driving. It is thus no more of a surprise that statements correspond to facts than
it is that there is no further problem of truth once we have understood what it is
to make a statement. This is the point of Strawson’s oft-quoted remark ‘Of course
statements and facts ﬁt. They were made for each other.’130 But it is important
to see this claim in the right light. On the one hand, it is meant to suggest the
truistic nature of any claims about true statements’ corresponding to the facts.
But it is also meant to help in throwing doubt on the existence of facts. Because
we have no other way of individuating facts except by using the statements that
they make true, and because they serve no other role than to be ‘the tautological
accusatives’ of true statements,131 it seems gratuitous to suppose that such things
as facts are part of language-independent reality.
It is easy to miss the seriousness of this attack. Austin, for one, complained
that Strawson had been unfair to facts because we can equally well point out that
targets and well-aimed shots are made for each other and yet we do not suppose
that targets are bogus entities.132 In making this parallel Austin rightly argues
that it is not suﬃcient to point out that facts are the internal accusatives of true
propositions in order to conclude that the former are the mere shadows of the
latter. Yet Strawson’s criticism is not meant to rely solely on this point. In the
case of targets and well-aimed shots, targets can be set up as the things at which
to aim because they can be individuated without having to ﬁre a shot. Further,
they can be such that any number of shots are considered well-aimed in virtue of
hitting that target. Strawson’s worry is that neither of these features is shared by
facts. Austin has not shown us how to individuate a fact as the thing to which we
should try to get a statement to correspond; nor has he given us reason to think
that it is not the case that each true proposition has its own fact that makes it true.
However, on this last point, notice that Austin’s statements (unlike Strawson’s)
are historical occurrences and so, as for well-aimed shots and targets, any number
of them could be made true by the same fact. Here the diﬀerence in Austin’s and
Strawson’s choice of truth-bearers seems to have resulted in their talking past each
other. For when Strawson claims that facts are the shadows of true statements,
he does not mean that they are the shadows of historical occurrences.133
This diﬀerence between Austin and Strawson leads to Strawson’s most serious
criticism of the Austinian project. For Strawson claims that Austin’s approach
rests on a basic confusion between, on the one hand, the conditions that must
obtain for our attributions of truth to be true and, on the other, what we actually
assert when we make an attribution of truth. By focusing on the ﬁrst issue, Straw-
son claims that Austin is led to an attempt at elucidating fact-stating discourse by
disclosing the conventional relations between our statements and the world. But,
according to Strawson, the real issue is what we assert in making an attribution
130ibid. 168.
131[Armstrong, 1997, 19].
132Austin 1961: 188.
133Strawson spells out his conception of statement at [1950, 162–5].

270
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
of truth and we do not assert that such conventional relations hold.134 Instead,
Strawson says, we should focus on the role of ‘true’ within fact-stating discourse
and not attempt to step outside this type of discourse to explain truth. In saying
this, Strawson repeats an objection to the correspondence theory that we have
found being made by Joachim, Blanshard, the pragmatists and the logical posi-
tivists – namely, that the correspondence theory attempts to step outside language
or the mind to compare language to the world when the right (and only possible)
approach is to attempt to understand truth from within this discourse. We will
see Quine make the same sort of remark.
Strawson’s conclusion, then, is that Austin has illicitly included claims about
the nature of representation into the discussion of truth.
As such, Strawson’s
attack clearly generalizes to all theories that attempt to explain correspondence by
focusing on representation. Notice, though, that the diﬀerence between Austin and
Strawson on the role of the theory of meaning may well reduce to the diﬀerences
in their choice of truth-bearers.
For if Strawson is right and we should treat
propositions as the bearers of truth, then it seems to be entirely superﬂuous to
add a discussion of how it is that our sentences get to express the propositions that
they do. However, if Austin was focusing on sentences as the bearers of truth then
perhaps a case could be made for the inclusion of such a discussion, as Strawson
appeared to recognize:
If someone wishes to contend that we do not really, or do not fully, know
the meaning of ‘is true’ unless we know what types of conventional
relation obtain between words and things when something true is stated
or otherwise expressed in words, then the contention seems to me by
no means extravagant. . . .
Better, perhaps, let the theory of truth become, as it has shown so
pronounced a historical tendency to become, part of some other theory:
that of knowledge; or of mind; or of meaning.
[Strawson, 1964, 232 and 233]
Here Strawson articulates another common theme, this time that of the deﬂation-
ist. Those who follow Ramsey’s approach to truth see the theory of truth as fairly
straightforward. It is only by mixing up truth with other topics that we come to
see it as problematic.
In fact, Strawson himself championed a Ramsey-style approach to the nature
of truth.
Focusing on how we use ‘true’, Strawson agreed with Ramsey that
to state that p is true is to make no further statement than would be made by
stating that p, but unlike his predecessor Strawson made much of the idea that
we use ‘p’ and “‘p” is true’ diﬀerently.135 He claimed that sentences containing
134ibid. 172ﬀ.
135Ramsey [1923, 142] said only that we use ‘true’ for diﬀerent emotive or stylistic reasons or
to indicate the position of the proposition in an argument. Carnap [1942, 26] also claims that

A Brief History of Truth
271
‘true’ are much like performatives such as ‘I promise to clean the house.’ So that
although we assert nothing more than that p with the statement that p is true,
we do more than just assert that p. We also perform the speech act of endorsing
or conﬁrming someone’s statement. According to Strawson, attributions of truth
require someone to have ﬁrst made the statement to which we are attributing
truth so that we can conﬁrm or endorse it. In his earlier presentations of this view
[1949; 1950] Strawson argued that this fact tempts people to the view that we are
attributing a property to a statement. However, we are not attributing truth to
anything, we merely require an appropriate context, namely someone’s making an
assertion, before we can signal our agreement. This view can look as if it may
be required by any Ramsey-style, or deﬂationary, theory of truth. For if “‘p’ is
true” asserts no more than ‘p’, then, given that ‘p’ is not about a statement, our
“attributions” of truth should not be either.
Austin, for one, rejected the idea that we do not use ‘true’ to say something
about statements. The rejection is prima facie reasonable, as the move from (1)
and (2) to (3) seems natural:
1. John said that Brian is sleeping.
2. It is true that Brian is sleeping.
3. Something John said is true.
But how could we make sense of this style of reasoning if (2) was not about anything
at all? In any event, Strawson backed away from this view in later writings. In his
[1964], for example, he went to some length to argue that deﬂationary theories are
compatible with the claim that attributions of truth are in fact statements about
statements. He suggested that we make the following paraphrases of statements
that attribute truth:
4a. John’s statement that p is true.
4b. As John stated, p.
5a. It is true that p.
5b. As may be urged or objected or . . . , p.
Strawson’s hope in oﬀering these paraphrases was that he could provide us with
statements that (i) did not use ‘true’, (ii) were equivalent to statements that did
use ‘true’ and (iii) were about (in some sense of ‘about’) statements.
(5b) in
particular, however, seems a strange paraphrase of (5a) precisely because (5a)
does not seem to be making a claim about what may be urged or objected or. . .
Yet for Strawson’s performative approach to work, (5a) must be read in such a
while ‘p’ and “‘p’ is true” mean the same in a logical or semantic sense, the two expressions have
‘diﬀerent features and diﬀerent conditions of application; from this point of view we may e.g.
point to the diﬀerence between these two statements in emphasis and emotional function.’

272
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
way because Strawson insists that such attributions, if they are about something,
are about actual or possible acts of stating.
Strawson’s comments about the role of ‘true’ can be seen as a suggestion about
the utility of the truth-predicate. If attributions of truth say no more than the
statement to which they attribute truth, then why do we have a truth-predicate at
all? Strawson’s suggestion is that the predicate is useful as a performative device.
One question that should be asked of any such approach is whether it can do better
than Ramsey’s in dealing with the use of ‘true’ in statements like ‘Everything the
Pope says is true’. If ‘true’ is regarded purely as a performative device, it is diﬃcult
to see how to read such statements. Strawson’s original suggestion was something
like (6):
6. The Pope has made some statements. I conﬁrm them all.
But Strawson’s view is that we do not actually assert that we conﬁrm them; rather
we just conﬁrm them. This entails that the only thing asserted by (6) is that the
Pope has made some statements, which of course is true. But, as Soames points
out, this means that even if some things the Pope says are false, according to
Strawson’s analysis the statement ‘Everything the Pope says is true’ will come
out true.136 In the light of such diﬃculties, Strawson later altered his theory by
de-emphasizing the conﬁrming use of ‘true’ as only one use among others. The
analysis he later gives of these problematic statements seems to follow Quine.
2.6
Quine and disquotation
Like those of the logical empiricists, Quine’s views on truth were shaped by a
distrust of semantic concepts. In particular, Quine is famous for his strong claim
that there is no such thing as objective, interlinguistic synonymy, and that it only
makes sense to compare the meanings of expressions that belong to the same lan-
guage. He was led to this conclusion by his denial of meaning atomism, which, like
Joachim and Blanshard, Quine used to reject the notion of individual propositions
associated with individual sentences. However, if there is no isolable meaning for
each sentence, then the correspondence theory is threatened: we cannot say that
a sentence is true iﬀit represents some particular state of aﬀairs as obtaining and
that state of aﬀairs obtains.
Continuing his agreement with the early coherence theorists, Quine insisted that
only whole theories can be compared with reality.137 This conﬁrmation holism was
a crucial feature of his attack on the distinction between analytic and synthetic
truths.138 No truth, he claimed, was immune to revision in the event of a the-
ory’s being confronted with a recalcitrant experience.
The diﬀerence between
the sort of statements that had been labelled analytic and those that had been
136[Soames, 1999, 236f].
137[Quine, 1970, 1–8], spells this out clearly.
138See [Quine, 1953].

A Brief History of Truth
273
labelled synthetic was thus merely one of degree. Although this attack on the ana-
lytic/synthetic distinction was largely directed at the logical empiricists, removing
this distinction from their theories of truth would have removed a worrying tension
in their views that we remarked on earlier (§2.2, opening paragraph), namely, that
between their truth-functional account of molecular propositions and their claim
that analytic propositions are neither true nor false.
Yet Quine’s denial of meaning atomism also led him to reject epistemic theories
of truth like coherence and pragmatic theories. As we have seen, such theories are
constantly in danger of succumbing to relativism. To avoid this, their proponents
often resort to the idea of an ideal system of beliefs (perhaps the set of beliefs
we would adopt at the end of inquiry or perhaps that ideally coherent set that
is identical with reality).
Any particular belief is then said to be true iﬀit is
a member of this ideal set. As Quine points out, a serious problem arises if we
combine this approach with meaning holism (as Joachim and Blanshard did). For
if we cannot ask about synonymy interlinguistically (intertheoretically), then we
cannot make sense of the idea that a belief that belongs to our current theory
also belongs to some ideal theory.139 For no two beliefs (sentences) that belong
to diﬀerent sets of beliefs (theories) can have the same content. Thus meaning
holism undermines epistemic theories of truth.140
In contrast to both coherence and correspondence theorists, Quine urged that
truth was ‘immanent’. In other words, the truth-predicate can be meaningfully
applied only to sentences within the speaker’s own language.
He argued that
to the extent that we can call foreign sentences true, this is only relative to some
translation scheme that we employ to translate these sentences into sentences of our
language. Yet, once truth is treated as internal to a language and in consequence
(because Quine thought that people with diﬀerent theories thereby speak diﬀerent
languages), as internal to a theory, problems about its nature dissolve in the way
a deﬂationary reading of Tarski would suggest. With an empiricist’s distrust of
propositions, Quine takes sentences as truth-bearers, though, to avoid problems
concerning indexicals and other context-dependent expressions, he is careful to
deﬁne a class of sentences he calls ‘eternal’, which function as the primary bearers
of truth. Eternal sentences are sentence types whose tokens always have the same
truth-value. For example, while ‘I am hungry’ is not an eternal sentence, ‘James
Brown is hungry as at 10.15 p.m. on 13th August 1968’ supposedly is. For these
sentences, Quine claimed that truth is disquotational. An attribution of truth to
a sentence merely undoes the eﬀects of quotation marks that we have used to form
a name for the sentence. As Ramsey noted, this means that in simple contexts the
truth-predicate is redundant. This is seen in Tarski’s T-schema, and more clearly
in what has come to be called the disquotation schema:
(DS)
‘P’ is true iﬀP.
139[Quine, 1960, 23f].
140Of course, a pragmatist or coherentist could accept the charge of relativism and thus accept
both meaning holism and an epistemic theory of truth. Rorty sometimes seems to be happy to
adopt this position, for example.

274
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
Whereas the original T-schema allowed an arbitrary name for the sentence, the
disquotation schema requires that the name be formed by the addition of quotation
marks.
Where Ramsey seems to have gone wrong is in not noticing that the diﬃ-
cult cases for the redundancy view actually show the raison d’ˆetre of the truth-
predicate. For in cases of generalization (like ‘Everything the Pope says is true’
or “All instances of ‘If p, then p’ are true”) we cannot dispense with the truth-
predicate precisely because these are the cases in which it does its work. In these
cases we want to generalize in a way analogous to the generalization from a sen-
tence like ‘Socrates is mortal’ to get ‘For all x, if x is a man, then x is mortal’.
However, we cannot do this because the move from ‘If time ﬂies then time ﬂies’ to
‘For all x, if x then x’ ends with a string of expressions that is incoherent if the
quantiﬁer is read objectually. The beauty of the truth-predicate is that it allows
us to make these generalizations:
We could not generalize as in ‘All men are mortal’, because ‘time ﬂies’
is not, like ‘Socrates’, a name of one of a range of objects (men) over
which to generalize. We cleared this obstacle by semantic ascent: by
ascending to a level where there were indeed objects over which to
generalize, namely linguistic objects, sentences.
[Quine, 1990, 81] his italics)
Because ‘x’ is equivalent to “x’ is true’, ‘If time ﬂies then time ﬂies’ is equivalent
to ‘If ‘time ﬂies’ is true, then ‘time ﬂies’ is true’. But the ﬁnal sentence can be
used to create a coherent generalization: in fact, just the generalization which
seemed at ﬁrst to pose a problem for a disquotational view of truth. According
to Quine it is thus the transparent or disquotational function of ‘true’ that allows
us to make a technical, semantic ascent to talk about sentences, while still talking
about the world. With this suggestion about the utility of the truth-predicate,
Quine’s disquotationalism purports to solve two of the more diﬃcult problems
facing deﬂationary accounts of truth.
On the one hand, it explains why it is
we have a truth-predicate if its uses are often redundant. On the other, Quine’s
explanation of the utility of the predicate explains how ‘true’ functions in precisely
those cases of generalization that proved a stumbling block for both Ramsey and
Strawson.
Thus disquotationalists treat ‘true’ as a meta-linguistic predicate applying to
sentences.
Doing this allows us to explain generalization contexts without ap-
pealing to any nonstandard understanding of the quantiﬁers. However, as Quine
essentially admits by focusing on eternal sentences, disquotationalism has diﬃculty
with a vast range of sentences of natural language. For example, treating “‘I am
hungry’ is true” disquotationally implies that it is equivalent to ‘I am hungry’. Of
course, this implication means that we cannot use the disquotational account to
describe the conditions under which some other person’s utterance of ‘I am hungry’
is true. In attempting to do so, we would be forced to say that their utterance is

A Brief History of Truth
275
true iﬀI am hungry. Another diﬃculty arises if the disquotation schema is treated
as expressing a necessary equivalence, as seems required if disquotationalism is to
be in conﬂict with inﬂationary theories such as correspondence or coherence. This
reading of the schema implies that the truth-conditions of sentences belong to them
necessarily. In other words, in a possible world where we used the sentence ‘Rab-
bits are furry’ radically diﬀerently, and so the sentence’s meaning diﬀered from
that in this world, the sentence would still be true iﬀrabbits are furry in that
world. Intuitively, though, it seems that sentences, as opposed to propositions,
have their truth-conditions contingently. These problems, and the closely related
problems associated with the disquotationalist’s claim that ‘true’ is conﬁned to a
particular language, suggest that the simple disquotationalist account will need to
be modiﬁed if it is to capture the ordinary meaning of ‘true’.141
2.7
Dummett
Michael Dummett, however, raised a number of further diﬃculties for the deﬂa-
tionary approach in the course of mounting a defence of a veriﬁcationist theory of
truth inspired by intuitionist and constructivist accounts of mathematics.142
Dummett expressed his reservations about deﬂationary theories of truth as con-
cerns about the attempt to deﬁne truth in terms of the equivalence thesis:
(ET)
⟨It is true that A iﬀA⟩.143
Each of these concerns has been inﬂuential in the ongoing debate about deﬂation-
ary theories of truth. But each rests on some controversial, though not necessarily
implausible, assumptions. First, Dummett argued that the equivalence thesis runs
into contradiction if we deny the law of bivalence.144 The simple argument is that
if a statement, say A, is neither true nor false, then it is false that A is true.
However, this means that while ⟨A⟩is neither true nor false, ⟨it is true that A⟩is
false, and so ⟨A⟩and ⟨it is true that A⟩are not equivalent. This argument draws
on the obvious inconsistency between the following:
7. Some statements are neither true nor false (Denial of Bivalence)
8. For all statements A, A is true iﬀA (Equivalence Thesis)
9. For all statements A, A is false iﬀnot A.
141See [David, 1994, ch. 5], for a discussion of the more pressing problems facing the disquota-
tionalist.
142[Dummett, 1959]. Although he ends this paper by rather strangely suggesting that he adhered
to a version of the redundancy theory, the commitment ﬁtted badly with much of the rest of
that paper. He later admitted that this way of characterizing his position was misleading. See
his [1978, xxii].
143[Dummett, 1973, 445]. Dummett uses corner quotes to express the thesis. For convenience,
we have substituted angle brackets.
144[Dummett, 1959, 4–7]. See also [Dummett, 1973, 445–446].

276
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
Of course, whether or not someone like Quine should worry about this inconsis-
tency depends on whether one thinks that (9) reﬂects an adequate conception of
falsity and whether one thinks that we should abandon bivalence. We shall explore
Dummett’s veriﬁcationist reasons for abandoning bivalence below.145
Dummett’s second inﬂuential criticism is the now familiar one that the redun-
dancy theory does not account for truth’s being a normative goal of assertion.146
And he insists that the redundancy theory cannot be ﬁxed by simply adding the
claim that in making an assertion we aim at the truth. What he requires by way
of supplementation ‘is a description of the linguistic activity of making assertions;
and this is a task of enormous complexity.’147 In other words, he is demanding
what Strawson denied was the task of a theory of truth, namely the analysis of
fact-stating discourse. However, it is worth recalling from §1.6 that Ramsey had
already oﬀered an explanation of the normative role of truth that is consistent with
a redundancy theory of truth. If one provides a version of a ‘success semantics’
then it is quite clear why we aim at the truth: true beliefs are those that lead to
successful action. Dummett’s demand had been met before it had been made.
Dummett’s concern that the activity of asserting has been neglected leads fairly
directly to his third inﬂuential claim about the redundancy theory. He argued (or
rather claimed it was too obvious to be able to argue) that the redundancy theory
was incompatible with truth-conditional theories of meaning; that is, theories of
meaning that took truth as their fundamental concept. Traditionally, he claimed,
theories of truth have tried to do more than spell out the conditions under which
assertions are true. They have tried to give an account of truth that would serve
as the basis for a theory of meaning. However, if one tries to explain ‘true’ by ap-
pealing to instances of the equivalence thesis, one cannot then use these instances
of that thesis to explain the meaning of the sentences. For one can understand the
explanation of ‘true’ only if one already understands the sentence that is used on
the right hand side of the equivalence thesis:
But in order that someone should gain from the explanation that P is
true in such-and-such circumstances an understanding of the sense of
P, he must already know what it means to say of P that it is true. If
when he enquires into this he is told that the only explanation is that
to say that P is true is the same as to assert P, it will follow that in
order to understand what is meant by saying that P is true, he must
already know the sense of asserting P, which was precisely what was
supposed to be being explained to him.
[Dummett, 1959, 7]
Dummett has argued that this problem is especially apparent if we consider a
Tarskian truth-deﬁnition in which the metalanguage is not an extension of the
145Notice that Dummett only thinks we should abandon bivalence and not deny it. He distin-
guishes between (7) and the rejection of the claim that every statement is either true or false.
146[Dummett, 1959, 2f].
147[Dummett, 1978, 20].

A Brief History of Truth
277
object-language.148 If we do not understand the object-language, then this sort of
truth-deﬁnition will not help us understand its sentences because we will have no
idea what is accomplished by pairing them with truth-conditions: the appeal is to
his second objection, that deﬂationary theories cannot tell us the point of calling
sentences true. Furthermore, these theories seemingly assign truth-conditions to
sentences without basing these assignments on the way each sentence is used.
This purported feature of deﬂationary theories of truth-conditions would make
them implausible theories of meaning.
Dummett’s conception of theories of meaning is crucial to his famous argu-
ment(s) for anti-realism. However, the connections between this conception and
his conception of realism are tortuous; our account must be brutally brief. He
characterizes realism as the belief that statements ‘possess an objective truth-
value, independently of our manner of knowing it: they are true or false in virtue
of a reality existing independently of us.’149 Dummett thus treats realism as a
doctrine about truth, namely, that it is recognition-transcendent. He also urges
that this recognition-transcendence is necessary to guarantee the principle of bi-
valence.
That is, in cases where we have no means of determining whether a
sentence is true or not (where no condition of which we are capable of becom-
ing aware determines whether or not the sentence is true), it is only if there is
some recognition-transcendent condition which, if met, determines that the sen-
tence is true (and if not that it is false) that the sentence must be either true or
false. In other words, without recognition-transcendence, bivalence, and hence the
objectivity of truth, is at risk.150
Without a guarantee for the principle of bivalence, however, so Dummett argues,
we cannot adopt a truth-conditional semantics. He argues at length that the nature
of assertion is such that we only speak of an assertion’s being correct or incorrect
and have no need and no room for the idea that there is a third possibility that
lies between these poles.151 The reason he concentrates on this supposed feature
of assertion is this: if the principle of bivalence cannot be guaranteed, and so when
it comes to truth there can be more than two possibilities to consider, then truth-
conditional semantics cannot be the right approach to the theory of meaning.
(At least, not if truth-conditions are understood recognition-transcendentally.)
Thus, Dummett suggests, realist/anti-realist debates about a particular subject
matter ought to be reformulated as debates about what notion of meaning, and,
because meaning should be understood truth-conditionally, what notion of truth
is appropriate for a particular area of discourse.152 Accordingly, the question as to
148[Dummett, 1978, xxi].
149ibid. 146.
150[Dummett, 1959, 14ﬀ].
151[Dummett, 1959]. This is not to suppose that Dummett rejects outright the possibility of
three truth-values. He claims that we may need to appeal to more than two truth-values to
explain the way the meaning of complex sentences depends on the meaning of atomic sentences.
However, he later [1973, 446f] distinguishes between the “ingredient sense” (the sense relevant to
its contribution to more complex sentences) of a sentence and its content. As far as a sentence’s
content is concerned only two possibilities can be of concern.
152The situation is a bit delicate here.
Dummett argues that if we give up recognition-

278
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
the nature of truth-in-general is better formulated as ‘What is the notion of truth
appropriate for this particular area of discourse?’ We shall see that the pluralism
about the nature of truth implied by this line of thought has been developed more
recently by Crispin Wright and others.
The general structure of Dummett’s argument for anti-realism is that a recog-
nition-transcendent notion of truth-conditions is untenable.153 We have already
seen that he conceives a theory of meaning as a theory that speciﬁes for each
sentence the conditions under which the understanding of the sentence counts as
being manifested. If the obtaining of truth-conditions of a sentence is beyond our
recognitional capacity, he claims, we could never manifest our understanding of
these sentences (the manifestation argument). Moreover, we could never be taught
the meaning of these sentences to begin with (the acquisition argument).154 He
concludes that we should adopt instead a notion of truth that is relative to our
epistemic powers: in short, a veriﬁcationist conception of truth. The right notion
of truth-conditions to use for a theory of meaning is therefore a veriﬁcationist
notion of truth-conditions.155 This allows us to abandon bivalence, because some
statements will be neither veriﬁed nor have their negations veriﬁed. However, an
assertion will still only be either correct or incorrect, because every assertion will
be either veriﬁed or not and we can thus say an assertion is correct if and only if
it has been veriﬁed. The compatibility of these two claims is ensured by the fact
that, unlike truth, veriﬁcation is such that the fact that a statement is not veriﬁed
does not entail that its negation is veriﬁed. For example, although we have not
veriﬁed the claim that there is life on the planet Venus, this certainly does not
entail that we have veriﬁed that there is not life on Venus.
Dummett’s arguments for veriﬁcationism about truth have been repeatedly crit-
icized. It is worth pointing out just a few of the more salient of their controversial
assumptions. For one, his acquisition argument relies on the assumption that to
learn the meaning of a sentence we must be acquainted with the conditions un-
der which it is conclusively veriﬁed.156 Dummett here adopts an extreme version
of veriﬁcationism about meaning that even the logical positivists were forced to
abandon. He himself relinquished this position too,157 but it is unclear how his
argument survives without it. He also rejects Quine’s arguments against meaning
atomism. For it is crucial to Dummett’s manifestation argument that each state-
ment can be treated as having its own veriﬁcation conditions and that a theory
transcendent truth-conditions we must give up the idea that truth is the central notion in a
theory of meaning. However, identifying truth with veriﬁcation still allows us to treat meaning
as truth-conditional in the sense that meaning is identical with veriﬁcation conditions. More on
this below.
153See [Dummett, 1976] for an extended discussion of his conception of theories of meaning.
154A brief version of this line of thought is presented at [1959, 17]. See also [Dummett, 1973,
467f].
155Although Dummett sometimes characterized his claim as being that we should abandon
truth-conditional theories of meaning, he later realized that what he meant was that we need to
shift conceptions of what a truth-condition is because we need to treat truth as veriﬁcation.
156This is made clear at Dummett 1976: 132.
157[Dummett, 1978, xxxviii].

A Brief History of Truth
279
of meaning can spell out the conditions under which understanding of a partic-
ular sentence can be manifested. Whatever the merits of Quine’s arguments in
general, it is diﬃcult to see how one can deﬂect their force once the veriﬁcationist
background is accepted.
Finally, it is worth noting that veriﬁcationists about meaning are not ipso facto
veriﬁcationists about truth. In particular, even if Dummett is right that the mean-
ing of a statement is the conditions under which it is veriﬁed, this entails a claim
about truth only if we take the meaning of a statement to be the conditions under
which it is true. For example, there is nothing preventing a veriﬁcationist about
meaning from following Ayer in rejecting truth-conditional theories of meaning
and embracing a redundancy theory of truth.
Nor is it clear that Dummett’s
arguments for anti-realism should be construed, as he does construe them, as ar-
guments about the nature of truth. Although we cannot argue for it here, it seems
to us, and to many others, that realism (or anti-realism) is a metaphysical addition
to semantics and not built into it.158 This seems to have been Quine’s point when
he claimed that from within the language there is nothing more to say about truth
than to point out its disquotational properties. Perhaps, then, the outstanding
question is whether the right perspective to take on the nature of truth is from in-
side or outside our language. Indeed, this question proved important to a number
of theorists of truth in the latter stages of the century.
3
LATER VIEWS
3.1
Introductory comments
By the early 1970s the linguistic approach to philosophy was beginning to fall
from favour. In consequence, theorists of truth began to lose conﬁdence in the
idea that the everyday behaviour of the predicate ‘true’ is the key to the nature of
truth. Yet, as the matters were separated, both were considered legitimate parts
of a theory of truth. This tolerance is reﬂected in the abundance and diversity of
theories that blossomed in the last decades of the century. And while many of these
accounts are clearly descendants of those already encountered, the evolutionary
distance between them is sometimes large. To further compound the diﬃculty of
providing a succinct, coherent narrative for this era, at this time, more than ever,
philosophy’s characteristically looping method of progression resulted in “earlier”
discussions being regarded by later writers as equally contemporary as those far
closer to them in actual date.
3.2
Correspondence without facts: Field
Most philosophers who wrote on truth in the later twentieth century saw them-
selves as either responding to or developing Tarski’s formal deﬁnition of truth.
In his seminal paper of 1972, Hartry Field aimed to do both. In Tarski’s work
158For a brief and clear argument to this eﬀect see [Soames, 1999, 32–9].

280
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
Field saw the potential for a powerful correspondence theory liberated from the
need to appeal to facts. However, according to Field, Tarski’s deﬁnition of ‘true
sentence’ failed to satisfy two plausible constraints on a theory of truth: ﬁrst, it
should capture the meaning of ‘true’, and second, it should give a physicalistically
respectable account of the nature of truth.159 Because of the language-relative
nature of Tarski’s deﬁnitions, the ﬁrst is not satisﬁed; and the second is not met
because (despite his advertisements to the contrary) Tarski had not managed to
provide a deﬁnition of truth free of semantical terms. Even though Tarski himself
may not have been concerned to be “physicalistically respectable” in Field’s sense,
both objections are serious in ways which he would have had to recognize, and it
is worth looking at Field’s arguments for them.
The two defects of Tarski’s deﬁnition stem from the same source — the list
approach to deﬁning satisfaction (and reference). As we saw (§2.3), basing the
deﬁnition of truth on these lists means that it will not be applicable to new lan-
guages, or even the same language with as little as one new name added. Yet, Field
argued, even if we ignore this defect, the list approach goes against one of the basic
tenets of physicalism.160 To show this, he relied on an analogy with the explana-
tion of numerous chemical facts by appeal to the property of elements known as
‘valency’. Each element has a certain valency which determines how it can combine
with other elements to form molecules. As Field points out, one way to explain
what valency is would be to list each element along with its corresponding valency.
Such an explanation should not satisfy a physicalist looking for an account of the
nature of chemical valency, however, for the explanation does not even hint at the
physical basis of these chemical properties. It merely postulates these properties
as primitives. According to Field, it is only because we learnt that chemical va-
lencies can be reduced to the electron conﬁguration of atoms that these chemical
properties have shown themselves to be physicalistically respectable. Similarly, a
physicalist should not be content with Tarski’s list of names and their referents,
and predicates and their extensions. What is wanted is an explanation of what
physical facts underlie these semantic facts. Without such an explanation, Tarski
has only shown us how to reduce truth to other semantic concepts.
Field accordingly suggests that a satisfactory physicalist theory of truth would
involve two stages. First, we use Tarski’s work to deﬁne truth in terms of reference
and satisfaction, of which we then give a physicalistically respectable theory. In
other words, Tarski’s deﬁnition is to be supplemented with a physicalistic story
about what makes it the case that primitive terms have the semantic values they
do.161 It is important to recognize, however, that Field should have also demanded
159It is characteristic of much late twentieth century analytical philosophy that physicalism is
treated as axiomatically true, so that debates tended to concern merely which version is to be
preferred.
160[Field, 1972, 15–22].
161Field 1972: 19, gives a causal theory of reference based on Kripke 1972 as an example of such
a theory, but it is clear that any theory that explained the physical basis of reference would be
satisfactory. Notice that not just any physicalistically respectable theory of reference will yield
a correspondence theory of truth in Field’s sense, because a theory of reference that paralleled a

A Brief History of Truth
281
that a theory of truth provide an account of what makes it the case that the
elements of the logical vocabulary have the semantic values they do. For it should
be equally anathema to a physicalist to either assume or stipulate that some
syntactic form is a negation as it is to stipulate that some name refers to some
person.162 But though accepting this point may make the position more diﬃcult
to defend, it changes little in the general approach.163
Field claimed that the result would be a correspondence theory. Unsurprisingly
this sort of correspondence theory has proved popular.164 It oﬀers to rehabilitate
a traditional and intuitive account of truth shorn of many of its implausible accre-
tions. Yet although Field hoped to avoid some of the defects of Tarski’s deﬁnition,
he inherits one already mentioned: it is extremely diﬃcult to apply it to many
types of natural language constructions (see §2.3). Further, Field’s fact-free cor-
respondence theory relies on a workable theory of primitive denotation, a theory
that three decades of philosophical research has failed to uncover. Moreover, three
fundamental concerns remain.
First, one might hesitate in considering such a theory to be genuinely one of
correspondence since both facts and any fact/utterance correspondence relation
have been replaced in it by mere word/thing relations. However, Austin’s expla-
nation of the correspondence relation consisted in the elucidation of meaning, i.e.
what makes ‘p’ mean that p. Similarly, Field hoped to use Tarski’s work to turn
an account of reference and satisfaction into an account of what makes it the case
that a sentence has certain truth-conditions. And, of course, a sentence is true
when its truth-conditions are satisﬁed.165
Second, the comparison with Austin’s theory should remind us of Strawson’s
complaint that it is diﬃcult to see why such a theory about meaning and represen-
tation adds anything to the theory of truth, especially if truth-bearers have their
truth-conditions essentially. Although Field has taken sentence-tokens as truth-
bearers, Soames has argued that sentence-tokens are unable to play this role in a
Tarskian truth deﬁnition, pointing out that there is no general principle for deter-
mining, for example, when one sentence-token is a negation of another. Instead,
he urges, we should treat sentence types, abstract entities that belong to abstract
languages and have their truth-conditions essentially, as truth-bearers.166
A third problem for Field concerns his valency analogy. In general, a physicalist
will only require the sort of reduction available in the case of chemical valency when
the property in question plays a causal-explanatory role in our best theories. A
deﬂationary theory of truth would be acceptable to a physicalist.
162[Soames, 1984, 405–8; Stalnaker, 1984, 30f].
163Field has since agreed with Soames and Stalnaker, but downplayed the importance of their
observation. He points out that the general approach merely needs to be supplemented with
a theory of reference for the logical vocabulary. This supplementation can seem impossible to
come by if one assumes that such a theory must be a causal theory, but there is no reason to
assume this. [Field, 2001, 27].
164For a defence of this approach see [Devitt, 1991].
165Field elaborates on this approach to truth in the opening paragraphs of Field 1986.
166[Soames, 1984, 410ﬀ].

282
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
property that does not help to explain anything, or does non-causal explanatory
work, should not be expected to be susceptible to such a reduction. Thus, if Field’s
analogy is to work, then truth must be a causal-explanatory property.167 This
realization led to a search for contexts in which truth plays a causal-explanatory
role in the hope of thereby ﬁnding a motivation for the correspondence theory.
One realm in which truth might be taken to be explanatory is the theory of
meaning. Davidson, for example, saw Tarski’s truth-deﬁnition, because of its re-
cursive character, as the best way to give a theory of meaning for a language.168
Such a truth-deﬁnition tells us that certain utterances are true under certain cir-
cumstances. It was Davidson’s contention that this information gives the meaning
of those utterances, so that knowledge of the theory would give a ﬁnite being un-
derstanding of the language despite the potential inﬁnity of utterances within it.
However, recall that Dummett insisted that Tarski’s original deﬁnition cannot
also be used to explain the meanings of the expressions of the language.
The
deﬁnition relies on our knowing these already. Of course, we can treat Tarski’s
deﬁnition in the opposite way and use it to explain the meaning of the terms of the
language on the assumption that we already grasp the notion of truth that appears
in the theory. Once Davidson realized that one had to choose between these two
projects, he declared that he meant to be using the concept of truth to explain
meaning and thereby the behaviour of those who use the language for which we
have provided a theory of meaning.169 It follows that, if Davidson is right about
the form of theories of meaning, then truth has an explanatory role: it is the (or
a) central concept in the theory that we use to explain behaviour. Unfortunately,
Davidson’s approach is incompatible with Field’s for the reasons just canvassed.
Field wanted to explain truth through providing a theory of content. Davidson
used truth in order to provide a theory of content. Nevertheless, what Davidson’s
theory highlights is that we use content attributions in order to understand and
to explain behaviour. If these attributions are essentially attributions of truth-
conditions, then it looks as if truth is a central notion in an explanatory theory.
Indeed, in Field’s later work on truth, he has regarded the fundamental question
as being whether what is causal-explanatory is, not truth itself, but rather, the
property of possessing a given set of truth-conditions.
A diﬀerent context in which truth seems to play an explanatory role is that
of explanation of success. Whether it be the success of science or of individual
agents in attaining what they want, we often explain success in terms of the truth
of certain hypotheses or beliefs.170 If someone’s attempt is successful because he
had a true belief about how to achieve his goal, then why not say that his success
is due to the truth of his belief? In his original article Field said similar things
167This point has been pressed by Leeds and, following him, Putnam [Leeds, 1978; Putnam,
1978, Lectures I and II].
168[Davidson, 1967].
169[Davidson, 1990, 286].
170[Putnam, 1978; Field 1986]. The view is obviously inspired by Ramsey [1927], but overlooks
the fact that Ramsey’s view is compatible with a redundancy theory: §1.6 above.

A Brief History of Truth
283
about the role of truth in learning from others.171 It seems plausible that, for
many people we interact with, the explanation of why we believe what they say is
that they generally speak the truth. So, even if we do not follow Field in seeing
the debate over the explanatory role of attributions of truth-conditions as relevant,
there is also a prima facie case for supposing that truth plays a causal-explanatory
role. Perhaps, then, the strictures of physicalism will require a reduction of truth
to physical properties parallelling the reduction of chemical valencies to electron
conﬁgurations.
3.3
Redundancy without redundancy: Grover, Leeds, Prior, Williams
A year before Field argued for the substantiality of the property of truth, Arthur
Prior was arguing for an extreme version of the opposite view.
Like Ayer, he
maintained that truth was not a property at all, but added that ‘. . . is true’ should
not be treated like a predicate and that sentences involving ‘true’ are equivalent
to sentences that are ‘true’-free. In this sense, Prior’s treatment of truth, and
Dorothy Grover’s development of it, are redundancy theories. Yet both Prior and
Grover also maintain that constructions involving ‘true’ perform useful functions.
In this sense they do not suppose ‘true’ to be redundant at all. Whatever the
label, their approach has a number of virtues, not least of which is that it suggests
a neat general response to arguments, of which Field’s is an example, that truth
is a substantial property.
Prior begins with the idea that the primary truth-bearers are whatever the
objects of thought are.
As he maintains that it would be an obvious mistake
to suppose that believing is a relation to sentences, the remaining option is that
believing is a relation to propositions. However, Prior argues that propositions are
‘logical constructions’:
‘Propositions are logical constructions’ was ﬁrst said as a summing-up
of this theory [viz. Russell’s multiple relation theory of judgement]. It
meant that statements which appear to be about people and proposi-
tions are really about people and quite other things, so that it is not
necessary to suppose that there really are such things as propositions.
[Prior, 1971, 8]
Although Prior did not follow Ramsey in adopting a weakened version of Russell’s
doctrine of real propositional constituents, he did put forward a theory of belief
statements that would have the like consequence that attributions of belief are
not about propositions.172 Adopting such a position renders the strong Ramseyan
version of deﬂationism, the version that claims that ‘p’ and ‘The proposition that
p is true’ are intensionally equivalent, more plausible than otherwise. The obvi-
ous worry about such a suggestion is that while ‘Computers are useful’ is about
171See also [Schiﬀer, 1981].
172[Prior, 1971, ch. 2].

284
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
computers, ‘The proposition that computers are useful is true’ seems to be about
a proposition. But intensionally equivalent sentences should be about the same
thing. In response, a deﬂationist of this type is likely to claim that, despite ap-
pearances, attributions of truth are not about propositions. Ramsey and Prior
made this view more plausible by arguing that in all other key contexts (such as
belief contexts) statements that seem to be about propositions are really about
something else. Prior did not stop at propositions: he suggested that facts are
logical constructions too, and statements apparently about them are just about
the things mentioned in stating them:
. . .
facts and true propositions alike are mere ‘logical constructions’
. . .
and . . .
they are the same ‘logical constructions’ (to have ‘true
propositions’ and ‘facts’ is to have too many logical constructions).
[Prior, 1971, 5]; his italics
And C. J. F. Williams, who largely followed Prior, adds that it is the appeal to
truth which explains the locution ‘. . . corresponds to the facts’, not the other way
around.
With both facts and propositions out of the picture, the only option seems to be
an extreme redundancy theory according to which ‘true’ is not merely eliminable
but not even a predicate at all. Both Prior and Williams focus their attention
on the uses of ‘true’ that most troubled Ramsey’s account — the cases where the
proposition to which we attribute truth is not transparently speciﬁed.173 They
claim that in saying, for example, ‘What John believes is true’, we are saying (at
least to a ﬁrst approximation) ‘For some p, John believes that p and p’. In taking
this Ramsey-like approach, however, they incur an obligation to explain how the
quantiﬁer is to be understood. We have already seen the diﬃculties in trying to
read it objectually. This problem is all the more pressing for the current view,
for objectual quantiﬁcation is standardly taken to imply ontological commitment
to the entities quantiﬁed over. So, if we suppose for a moment that the variables
stand for propositions, allowing objectual quantiﬁcation would undermine Prior
and Williams’s attempt to do without propositions. But it would also undermine
the claim that truth is not a property. For if objectual quantiﬁcation over proposi-
tions is allowed then we can easily deﬁne the property that true propositions share
as follows:
For all propositions x [x is true iﬀ(∃p) (x = the proposition that p
and p)].174
The usual account of quantiﬁers suggests that the only other way to read them is
substitutionally. Yet this other way relies on its being the case that ‘For some p,
John believes that p and p’ is true if and only if there is a sentence such that if we
173[Williams, 1976].
174We have taken this point and this deﬁnition from [Soames, 1999, 48].

A Brief History of Truth
285
substitute it for ‘p’ and erase the quantiﬁer the result will be a true sentence. And
this condition might not be met simply because there may be no sentence of our
language that expresses John’s true belief. So, Prior and Williams settle for nei-
ther the objectual nor the usual substitutional reading of the quantiﬁer. Instead,
they convert the substitutional reading to one in which the usual biconditional is
replaced with a conditional. In other words, ‘For some p, John believes that p and
p’ is true if there is a sentence such that if we substitute it for ‘p’ and erase the
quantiﬁer the result will be a true sentence. If this is right, then Ramsey’s original
explanation of these contexts has been vindicated. But it leaves the reading of the
existential quantiﬁer looking somewhat mysterious; and in fact it must be treated
as an undeﬁned primitive.175
In order to make the meaning of the existential quantiﬁer here more trans-
parent, even if it remains undeﬁned, Prior suggested that we stop thinking of
the propositional (or sentential) variables in this sentence as if they were nomi-
nal variables (i.e. variables that stand in for names). Rather, in the same way
that nominal variables have their counterparts in ordinary language in the form of
pronouns, propositional variables have their counterparts in expressions that have
since been called prosentences. For example, ‘he’ in (10) receives its reference from
the previously occurring name ‘Jack’.
10. ‘Jack is untied and he is angry.’
Now consider (11).
11. ‘He explained that he was in ﬁnancial straits, said that this is how things
were, and that therefore he needed an advance.’
Parallelling the use of ‘he’, we might see ‘this is how things were’ in (11) as
receiving its reference from the previously occurring sentential clause ‘he was in
ﬁnancial straits’.176 Following this line of thought we can read ‘There is some p
such that John believes that p and p’ as ‘John believes that things are a certain
way, and thus they are’. In such cases, Prior maintains, we simply “extend the use
of the ‘thing’ quantiﬁers in a perfectly well-understood way . . . ”.177 The worry
that these quantiﬁers are not properly understood is thus alleviated by the fact
that we use and understand these types of expressions in ordinary talk.
But the worry can be entirely removed only if we can ﬁnd some more common-
place examples of this type of speech. The leading claim of the prosentential theory
of truth is that such examples are right in front of us. Prosententialists claim that
‘That is true’ and ‘It is true’ often function as what they term ‘prosentences’,
and point out the many parallels between these expressions and pronouns.178 For
175[Williams, 1976, 14f]. Prior outlines the truth-conditions for his quantiﬁers at [Prior, 1971,
35f].
176The example, and Prior’s idea that certain expressions of English function as prosentences,
are taken from [Wittgenstein, 1953, Part I, §134]. Prior makes these points at [Prior, 1971, 38].
177[Prior, 1971, 37].
178The prosentential theory was ﬁrst developed by [Grover, Camp and Belnap, 1975]. It has
been endorsed by Brandom [1988] and reﬁned by Grover. See [Grover, 1992] for a collection of
her essays on the prosentential theory and a useful introduction.

286
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
example, following Geach, we can point out two types of occurrence for each pro-
form.179 Sometimes we use proforms out of laziness, rather than use the original
expression again.
The use of ‘he’ in (10) is an example of this.
But we also
sometimes use proforms in quantiﬁcation contexts, as ‘he’ is used in (12):
12. Mary loves someone and he is a lucky man.
The expression ‘it is true’ can function as a proform both in cases of quantiﬁcation
and of laziness. It occurs as a prosentence of laziness in (13):
13. John believes that Brian has been cuckolded and it is true.
It also occurs as a prosentence of quantiﬁcation in (15) which we can give as a
rough reading, ignoring questions of pragmatics and implicature, of (14):
14. What John believes is true.
15. For some proposition, John believes it is true and it is true.
Like Prior and Williams, prosententialists argue that the propositional variables
in these quantiﬁcation cases should be treated non-objectually and non-nominally.
In treating ‘It is true’ as a prosentence, prosententialists deny that ‘true’ is a
predicate applied to truth-bearers: it is merely part of an expression that picks up
its semantic value from a previously used sentence or sentential clause. Further,
the ‘it’ and ‘that’ of ‘It is true’ and ‘That is true’ are not taken as anaphoric pro-
nouns that refer back to a previously used sentence; rather, the whole expression,
e.g. ‘That is true’, functions as a proform. And although prosententialists do
not claim that ‘true’ is redundant (because anaphoric reference is an important
semantic device) they do maintain that sentences containing ‘true’ are equivalent
to sentences that do not, or that contain ‘true’ only as part of a prosentence.180
Having dispensed with the idea that ‘true’ functions as a predicate, they infer that
there is no property of truth.181
These more sophisticated redundancy theories account for the role of ‘true’ in a
wide range of cases and do so with an impressively parsimonious ontology. They
also defuse a number of concerns philosophers have had about deﬂationary the-
ories in general. For one, it is sometimes thought that deﬂationary theories are
committed to some form of anti-realism by their rejection of facts as an ontological
category. As Prior points out, though, no such conclusion follows (at least not in
any obvious way). ‘That the sun is hot is a fact’ means the same as ‘The sun is
hot’; hence, if the sun’s being hot is language- and mind-independent, so is the
179[Geach, 1962, 124–43].
180This is not quite true. The prosentential account ﬁrst oﬀered by Grover et al. claims that
we also need ‘true’ as part of sentence modiﬁers such as ‘it-is-not-true-that’ or ‘it-was-true-that’.
While it is an important issue as to whether this move succeeds, we must ignore it here.
181Grover struggled with the issue of whether she should maintain that truth is a property
mainly because she felt that one could give an extension for ‘is true’. [Grover, 1992, chapters 6
and 7].

A Brief History of Truth
287
fact that the sun is hot. Redundancy theorists can even claim to capture the ‘cor-
respondence intuition’ that our thoughts and statements, when true, correspond
to the facts, agreeing with Tarski that ‘. . . corresponds to the facts’ amounts to
no more than ‘. . . states that p and p’. As Williams makes particularly clear, the
correspondence intuition does not amount to a correspondence theory.182
Further, prosententialism overcomes various problems with Ramsey’s redun-
dancy theory. Attributions of truth have a pragmatic function ignored in Ram-
sey’s version. They often serve, as Strawson noticed, as endorsements of claims
already made. The prosentential theory makes this pragmatic function the centre
of its account of truth without succumbing to the Strawsonian exaggeration of
supposing that ‘true’ has no other role. In fact, the important contexts of gener-
alization that Strawson’s performative view was unable to deal with can now be
easily handled: unlike earlier redundancy accounts, ‘true’ is deemed to be, precisely
not redundant, but rather, as Quine urged, important in enabling us to express
certain generalizations. The success of this account in explaining these contexts
relies on our pre-existing familiarity with the functioning of proforms in quantiﬁ-
cational contexts. But it should be emphasized that this success depends on the
possibility of an alternative reading of the quantiﬁers that is neither objectual nor
substitutional.
Importantly, having a workable account of these generalization cases provides
deﬂationary theories with an intriguing response to the arguments of Field and
others that truth plays an explanatory role in explanations of success or learning
from others. It was unsurprising, then, that both the disquotationalist Stephen
Leeds and the prosententialists Grover et al. suggested the response at about the
same time.183 While neither Leeds nor Grover considered this particular example,
for ease of exposition suppose we agree to the following generalization:
16. If someone has true beliefs about the location of the library, they are more
likely to be able to ﬁnd it.
The occurrence of ‘true’ in (16) may look as if it provides grounds for supposing
that truth has a causal-explanatory role. But it is not clear that it does so if ‘true’
appears merely as a device of generalization.
And it is plausible that we ﬁnd
ourselves asserting (16) simply because asserting the ‘true’-free (17) is impossible
since it is inﬁnitely long:
17. If someone believes that the library is to the North and the library is to the
North, they are more likely to be able to ﬁnd it, and if someone believes
that the library is behind the Physics building and the library is behind the
Physics building, they are more likely to be able to ﬁnd it ... .
Whether one adopts (as does Leeds) Quine’s explanation, or prefers the prosenten-
tial account of the use of ‘true’ in expressing generalizations, one can explain why
the desire to say something like (17) results in our saying something that involves
182[Williams, 1976, ch. 5].
183[Grover et al., 1975, 112; Leeds, 1978, 120–3].

288
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
the use of the truth-predicate: namely, use of this predicate facilitates the expres-
sion of a claim that fundamentally has nothing to do with truth. And, indeed,
although neither Grover et al. nor Leeds put the point in quite this way, their
discussions of these issues ultimately convinced Field that the appearance of ‘true’
in many of these explanatory contexts was a result, not of the causal-explanatory
power of truth, but merely of the fact that ‘true’ enables the easy expression of
handy generalizations.184
Despite the virtues of prosententialism and the Prior-Williams account, the
implication that ‘true’ is not a predicate and truth not a property makes the
position diﬃcult to accept. As Brandom points out, for example, in denying that
‘true’ is a predicate, prosententialists block oﬀthe possibility of treating ‘The
last thing Bismarck said is true’ as a case of predication. Yet in such cases, a
disquotational account ‘has no greater ontological commitments and stays closer
to the apparent form of such sentences’.185 The apparent logical structure of a
range of our inferences involving ‘true’ also strongly suggests that it is a predicate.
Horwich has often insisted in this context that we infer “from ‘x = that p’ and ‘x is
true’ to ‘that p is true’, and hence to ‘p’.”186 Such inferences are most easily made
sense of if we suppose that ‘true’ is here functioning as a predicate. Moreover,
there is a weak conception of properties according to which, if we accept that
‘true’ is a predicate which determines a set, then truth is a property.187
The
Horwich response appears to have formed the current orthodoxy in deﬂationist
thinking (see §3.8).
3.4
Minimal correspondence: Alston, Mackie, Searle
Around the same time as both Field’s correspondence theory and the new redun-
dancy accounts were being proposed, John Mackie was advocating what he called
‘the simple theory of truth’. The simple theory was largely an attempt to synthe-
size redundancy and correspondence theories to create a moderate, almost trivial,
position. Twenty years later, in the mid-1990s, both William Alston and John
Searle championed views that were very similar.
The minimal correspondence view results from abandoning the idea that corre-
spondence is any sort of mirroring of reality by statements, or that there is some
sort of one-to-one correlation between parts of a truth-bearer and parts of reality.
In developing his own view through a consideration of Austin’s correspondence
theory, Mackie observed that the latter avoids this mistake, but instead falls into
the implication that truth is a ‘wholly non-linguistic, non-semantic relation, a
184See the afterword to ch. 1 in Field 2001.
185[Brandom, 1988, 88]. Brandom suggests the adjustments that a prosententialist can make
to accept this while holding on to the claim that ‘true’ is not a predicate; but, as the quotation
suggests, it seems more plausible to suppose that at least in some cases ‘true’ is functioning as
a predicate.
186[Horwich , 1998a, 125].
187Though examples like ‘grue’ might make one suspicious of this conception.

A Brief History of Truth
289
situation’s being of a certain type’.188 The only way Mackie could see to retain
the spirit of Austin’s theory while avoiding this consequence was to suppose that
‘to say . . .
that [a] statement is true is not merely to say that X is of type Y ,
but to say that as was stated X is of type Y .’189 But once generalized beyond
Austin’s own kinds of examples, this distils into the claim that ‘To say that the-
statement-that-p is true is to say things are as they are stated to be’.190 Minimal
correspondence theories thus admit truth-bearers and hold that truth is a relation.
This makes a contrast with the deﬂationary views of the 1970s which abandoned
the idea that truth is a relation because they abandoned any commitment to a
substantial account of at least one of the relata, that is, of propositions or facts.
Nevertheless, to avoid the mistake of reinstating one-to-one correspondence re-
lations, the minimal correspondence theory usually treats propositions in a recog-
nizably deﬂationary way. Mackie, for example, emphasizes that propositions are
not entities that we have nontrivially postulated in order to do explanatory work:
Statements or propositions are not (as, say, electrons and genes are)
entities by the nontrivial postulating of whose existence we can better
explain (and perhaps even predict) what goes on and is observed. The
words ‘statement’ and ‘proposition’ are just terms that enable us to
speak generally about what is said, what is believed, what is assertible
or believable and so on.
[Mackie, 1973, 21]
Searle says much the same about facts:
The something that makes it true that the cat is on the mat is just
that the cat is on the mat. And so on for any true statement . . . But
we still need a general term for all those somethings, for what makes
it true that grass is green, that snow is white, that 2 + 2 = 4 and all
the rest. ‘Fact’ has evolved to ﬁll this need.
[Searle, 1995, 211]; his italics
On the minimal correspondence view both ‘fact’ and ‘proposition’ are general
terms but they do not pick out a natural kind or entities that can be called on to
do explanatory work.191
With minimal facts and propositions in place there is nothing blocking the way
to treating truth as a relation between these things. The question, of course, is
what this relation amounts to. Both Mackie and Alston, brushing aside as mere
cavils the doubts about objectual and substitutional quantiﬁcation canvassed in
188[Mackie, 1973, 48].
189loc. cit.
190ibid. 49.
191Alston allows that there is work to be done on uncovering the structure of propositions, but
sees this work as unnecessary for the theory of truth he oﬀers.

290
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
the previous section, suggest that the right way to characterize the circumstances
under which propositions are true is by using substitutional quantiﬁcation to gen-
eralize what, following Horwich, is now often called the equivalence schema:
(ES)
It is true that p if and only if p.192
They follow Prior and Williams in arguing that there is no real barrier to un-
derstanding this type of quantiﬁcation or the use of propositional variables. In
characterizing truth in this way, Mackie and Alston think that the nature of corre-
spondence is made clear. Because the same propositional variable occurs on both
sides of the biconditional, to say that a statement corresponds to the facts is just
to say that how things are stated to be is how things are. Mackie says that if
there were any further more complicated relations of correspondence (perhaps of
the Fieldian kind) between language or the mind and the world, these are yet to
be discovered and play no part in our ordinary understanding of ‘true’. Alston,
however, allows that there may be a deeper nature to the correspondence relation
than has so far been uncovered and that if it were found this would be a signiﬁcant
contribution to the theory of truth.
Mackie and Alston agree, though, that it is a virtue of this way of explaining
correspondence that it requires a much tighter relation between facts and true
propositions than is normally allowed for by correspondence theories.
On this
view the two are related, not by mere isomorphism or any other partial similarity,
rather, they share the same content.193 ‘If the best we could achieve was that our
statements should somehow correspond to what is there, we should still be falling
short of having things just as we state them to be’, says Mackie, echoing Frege’s
and Bradley’s rehearsals of the identity theory’s siren song.194 But although he
agrees with much that Prior and Williams say about the similarity in meaning
of ‘fact’ and ‘true proposition’, he insists that these are two things that can be
related and that only one of them, the fact, is in the world. But how the two are
related is diﬃcult to ascertain. Indeed, Mackie claims that any attempt to spell
out the connection would only lead us to think of it as looser than it is.
Searle’s elaboration of the correspondence relation is less equivocal. He makes
central use of the disquotation, rather than equivalence, schema, agreeing with the
disquotationalist that the schema tells us the conditions under which the statement
at issue will be true.
He goes on to claim, though, that facts are just these
truth-conditions’ having been satisﬁed. We thus have conditions associated with
a range of statements; some of these conditions are satisﬁed. We have the word
‘true’ for this sub-class of statements. But we also need a word that relates them
to the satisﬁed conditions. ‘Correspondence’ is a useful expression ‘just empty
enough and vague enough to allow for all the diﬀerent kinds of ways in which true
statements stand in relation to their relevant fact.’195 Because of this thin, ‘trivial’,
192[Horwich, 1998a, 6].
193[Alston, 1996, 38f].
194[Mackie, 1973, 57].
195[Searle, 1995, 213].

A Brief History of Truth
291
reading of correspondence, Searle is able to maintain that ‘both the correspondence
theory and the disquotational theory are true, and they are not in conﬂict’.196
Of course, it is just this congeniality that is likely to arouse suspicion of the
minimal correspondence theory: perhaps it has collapsed into triviality or vacuity.
But then minimal correspondence theorists, like deﬂationists and others, are often
happy to accept this consequence:
I have not said positively in the end any more than it seemed obvious
that we should say at the start. If this discussion has any merit, it is in
the avoidance of traps into which the example of various distinguished
thinkers shows it is all too easy to fall. To give a correct account of
the central ordinary sense of ‘true’ is like walking along a very narrow
path with an abyss on either side.
[Mackie, 1973, 57]
Thus it seems to its proposers that if the minimal correspondence view has merit,
it will lie in its very minimality. But this has left others dissatisﬁed, still nagged
by the suspicion that there must be more to say about truth than this, since the
theory now appears to be mere deﬂationism and not a version of correspondence
at all. The minimal correspondence theory has struggled to ﬁnd the narrow path
between the two abysses of triviality on the one hand and a substantial account
of facts on the other. It was perhaps only a matter of time, then, before the idea
of extra-linguistic entities that make truth-bearers true, or truthmakers, became
part of mainstream philosophy again, but with the radical addition that these
truthmakers may not after all be fact-like entities. Mackie’s simple correspondence
theory, however, may well have been the catalyst that allowed this to occur.
3.5
Truthmakers: Lewis, Mellor
The desire to rehabilitate the correspondence theory was only one of many reasons
that truthmakers were eventually readmitted.197 (As we shall see, closely tied to
this motive, though the connection was rarely articulated clearly, was the desire to
defend metaphysical realism from the sort of attacks levelled by Dummett, Putnam
and Rorty.)
But it was an important one.
For example, Mulligan et al., like
Field, condemned the Tarskian approach on the grounds that it failed to elucidate
the relations between language and reality and so gave no account of truth.198
However, the truthmaker approach allowed one to speak of correspondence as
the relation of making true that holds between truthmakers and truth-bearers
196loc. cit.
197[Mulligan, Simons and Smith, 1984; Fox, 1987] both oﬀer illuminating historical comments
about truthmakers.
It should be recorded that the resurgence of interest in truthmaking in
Australian philosophy, and consequently in the thought of Lewis and Mellor, is at least in part
traceable to C. B. Martin’s convincing D. M. Armstrong of the slogan ‘No truth without a
truthmaker’.
198[Mulligan et al., 1984, 288f].

292
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
without following Field in attempting to elucidate these relations by giving a
‘substantial’ account of reference. Moreover, as in more traditional approaches
to correspondence, the truthmaking approach sees correspondence as an internal
relation; it is part of the nature of the truthmaker that it makes certain truth-
bearers true. The goal of what we can call the truthmaker project, then, is to
give a systematic account of these truthmakers that not only individuates entities
capable of performing the truthmaking role, but tells us which truthmakers make
which truth-bearers true.199
Truthmaker theorists, for the most part, share the intuition that truths are
true in virtue of something extra-linguistic, often quoting David Lewis’s slogan
that truth supervenes on being. Read weakly, as the claim that things being as
they are entails that some truth-bearers are true and others false, this slogan is
harmless.
However, the truthmaker project usually has something stronger in
mind.
Regardless of what truthmakers are taken to be,200 the project usually
relies on some version of what is generally called the Truthmaker Principle.201
Versions of this principle are stronger and weaker claims to the eﬀect that the
truth of truth-bearers is entailed or necessitated by the existence of some thing.202
For example, the strong version of this claim is that every truth requires such a
truthmaker. A more moderate version is reminiscent of logical atomism. Only the
atomic truths require truthmakers, while the truth of molecular truths is accounted
for truth-functionally. A more sophisticated, and more plausible, principle has
been suggested by John Bigelow: ‘If something is true, then there must be, that
is to say, there must exist, something which makes the actual world diﬀerent
from how it would have been if this had not been true’.203 Importantly, it is no
part of any of these principles that each truth has its own unique truthmaker.
Even on the strongest version of the Truthmaker Principle, as long as each truth-
bearer has some truthmaker, it is allowable that some truth-bearers share the
same truthmaker. This allows the truthmaker project to avoid the worry that
truthmakers are the mere shadows of truth-bearers.
If we accept some version of the Truthmaker Principle, it looks as if it is a short
step from there to a correspondence theory of truth. On this view the correspon-
dence relation has become the relation or relations of making true. In discovering
199For reasons of space we are forced to ignore an alternative approach to the truthmaker
project defended by [Taylor, 1976; 1985; Barwise and Perry, 1983; Forbes, 1986]. In contrast to
the metaphysical approach canvassed here, the alternative approach attempts to extend standard
semantic theories so that facts are treated as the semantic values of sentences.
200These things are not necessarily facts, but often facts are taken as what makes at least some
truths true. Other suggested truthmakers include ordinary objects and property tokens (tropes).
Armstrong [1997] is a strong supporter of the role of facts or states-of-aﬀairs as truthmakers.
Mulligan et al. [1984] argue for ‘moments’ or tropes as truthmakers.
201We say ‘usually’ because Mellor, for example, allows that there can be contingent truth-
making and so would not subscribe to any version of the Truthmaker Principle. [Mellor, 2004,
10f].
202We have borrowed this way of introducing the truthmaker project from [Forrest and Khlent-
zos, 2000].
203[Bigelow, 1988, 126].

A Brief History of Truth
293
the truthmakers for diﬀerent truths (and this may well include empirical or scien-
tiﬁc discoveries) we can discover the diﬀerent sorts of relations that hold between
truth-bearers and truthmakers and thus gain insight into the nature of truth.204
In this way, the principle promises to save a rather strong version of correspon-
dence. In particular, after Strawson it seemed that the truth of propositions is a
trivial matter and that if the correspondence theory is to have a chance it must
take sentences as its truth-bearers. Yet the truthmaker project promises to make
correspondence plausible even for propositions. Even better, this approach is in
no way wedded to the idea that truths somehow mirror or are isomorphic with the
things that make them true. All that is required is that, for a truthmaker T and
a proposition p, the proposition that T exists entails p.
But the correspondence theory is not so easily rescued from its historical dif-
ﬁculties, for the truthmaker project still has the worry of negative and universal
truths. D. H. Mellor avoids these problems by abandoning the idea that truthmak-
ers must necessitate the truth of the truth-bearer, and by following the Tractatus,
allowing that truth-functional constructions, including true negations, do not re-
quire complex truthmakers.205 But, as Mellor is aware, such a move severs the
truthmaker project from the correspondence project.206 Bigelow’s version of the
Truthmaker Principle allows for a similar neat answer to the problem of univer-
sal truths, but at the same cost. He suggests that ‘All ravens are black’ is true
not because there is some general fact, but because for that statement to be false
something that does not exist (i.e. a non-black raven) would have had to exist.
The sole alternative account of universal propositions available to a truthmaker
theorist would otherwise appear to be Ramsey’s: they are not propositions, but
rules, and hence not truth-apt at all.207
The truthmaker project also has some diﬃculty accounting for necessary truth
because everything is such that the proposition that it exists necessitates every nec-
essary truth. To prevent these truths being made true by the entire universe, there
will need to be some principle of relevance limiting what can count as truthmakers,
e.g. the project might be restricted to contingent truths. However, the problem
of relevance arises even for these.208 In an argument with the same conclusion as
the slingshot, Greg Restall has shown that, if we think of entailment in the stan-
204[Drew Khlentzos, 2000, 116], following Stephen Read, has suggested a way of getting a
correspondence theory from the Truthmaker Principle: The principle in its strong form says that
if a truth-bearer is true there is some existing thing that makes it true. If some existing thing
makes a truth-bearer true, then the truth-bearer is true. Hence, a truth-bearer is true if and
only if there is some existing thing that makes it true. That is, there is an internal connection
between the truth of the truth-bearer and the existence of the truthmaker.
205The contrast between Wittgenstein and Russell is striking, the latter admitting as truth-
makers negative facts [1918, 187–90] and universal facts (ibid. 207), but drawing the line at
disjunctive facts (ibid. 185).
206Mellor would not be worried by such a consequence. He argues, as we shall, that the truth-
maker project should not be construed as a contribution to the theory of truth [Mellor, 2004,
2].
207[Ramsey, 1929, 237f].
208[Restall, 1996].

294
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
dard way, we can derive the claim that all truths have the same truthmaker. To
avoid this we need to appeal to some other sort of entailment or necessitation, one
that can limit necessitation to relevant truthmakers, if we are to have a plausible
version of the Truthmaker Principle.
But why should we believe the principle in the ﬁrst place? In particular, why
should we suppose that there must always be some thing that makes truths true?
Perhaps truthmaker theorists should reduce the demand for existents by following
Denis Robinson’s slightly weakened version of Bigelow’s expression of the principle:
. . . every contingent truth supervenes on the natures of things, in the
sense that it could not have been false without some diﬀerence, either
in what exists, or in what qualities and relations existing things have.
[Robinson, 2000, 148]
But this version, in eschewing talk of things that make truths true, is acceptable
even to a redundancy theorist and so seems to carry no consequences for the theory
of truth at all. Furthermore, it is not clear why the instances of the equivalence
schema should not provide enough for the theory of truthmakers. After all, they
tell us the conditions under which the truth-bearer will be true; and Mellor claims
that the equivalence principle is ‘the only theory of truth which truthmaker the-
orists need’.209
But, he adds, if we use the equivalence schema to guide us to
truthmakers themselves then we will be led astray. One instance of the schema
will be (20):
20. The proposition that my mirror image is waving is true iﬀmy mirror image
is waving.
However, it surely is not the case that what makes the statement true is that
there is some thing, my mirror image, that is waving. The right hand side of the
biconditional tells us only the truth-conditions of the truth-bearer and mentions
nothing about the metaphysical or physical structure of the world at all.210 But it
is the latter with which the truthmaker project, as Mellor conceives it, is concerned.
If instances of the equivalence schema tell us truth-conditions without telling
us about truthmakers, then Mellor is right to suggest that the truthmaker project
has nothing to do with the theory of truth; and a fortiori on the Field-Davidson
assumption that a theory of truth is a theory of truth-conditions, for, as can be
seen from (20), the theory of truthmaking is separate from, and posterior to, a
theory of truth-conditions. Moreover, Lewis has a further argument to the same
conclusion, in the form of a dilemma for correspondence theorists concerning their
209[Mellor, 2004, 2].
210Though it may misleadingly suggest some such thing. One of us can recall being baﬄed in
a school physics class by being told of a plane mirror, ‘The image is as far behind the mirror as
the object is in front.’ This attribution of (apparent) properties of the imaged object to another
entity, the image itself, is very common; it still bedevils discussion of mental imagery, by both
psychologists and philosophers.

A Brief History of Truth
295
conception of facts.211 On one horn, facts are conceived of as true propositions.
Yet, Lewis argued, such a conception reduces the correspondence relation to some-
thing acceptable to a redundancy theorist. On the other horn is facts conceived
as states-of-aﬀairs, a conception belonging to the approach that conjoins a corre-
spondence theory with the truthmaker project. However, Lewis pointed out, the
Truthmaker Principle has (21) as an instance:
21. It’s true that cats purr iﬀthere exists something such that the existence of
that thing implies that cats purr.
If we accept the equivalence schema then this entails (22):
22. Cats purr iﬀthere exists something such that the existence of that thing
implies that cats purr.
Yet (22) is not about truth. It is about ‘the existential grounding of the purring
of cats’.
But if (22) is equivalent to (21), Lewis argued, then (21) is, despite
appearances, not about truth either. He goes on to say that the appearance of
‘true’ in the various instances of the Truthmaker Principle like (21) seems to be a
result merely of its role as a device of generalization; his argument is accordingly
much like that which Grover et al. and Leeds used against the claim that truth
plays an explanatory role. This general sort of argument puts great pressure on
the claim that the truthmaker project supports a correspondence theory of truth,
suggesting rather it is one of telling us what truthmaking is, what kinds of entities
truthmakers are, and what propositions need them (as Mellor claims). This is
reminiscent of one of Russell’s logical construction programmes, that whose aim
was to show how the truth of everyday propositions is grounded in the restricted
class of entities recognized within the preferred epistemological and metaphysical
framework.
But Lewis’s argument seems to depend on the claim that the equivalence schema
expresses an intensional equivalence. Only on this assumption is it obvious that
the fact that (22) is not about truth entails that (21) is not about truth either.
However, if we accept that the equivalence is intensional, then related arguments
can be constructed that threaten to destroy all theories of truth bar the deﬂation-
ary. For, as Alston and Lewis both point out,212 if a theory of truth is meant as a
conceptual analysis of truth, or is even meant to be an a priori thesis about truth,
then it runs into trouble in the presence of the a priori equivalence schema. This
is particularly obvious in the case of epistemic theories such as that which claims
that it is a priori that a statement is true iﬀit is ideally justiﬁed. The appropriate
instance of the equivalence schema entails that (23) is equivalent to (24):
23. The proposition that cats purr is true iﬀthe proposition that cats purr is
ideally justiﬁed.
211[Lewis, 2001].
212[Lewis, 2001, 275; Alston ,1996, 208–14]. Lewis’s argument has since been challenged (see
Vision 2003, and especially the incisive David 2004).

296
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
24. Cats purr iﬀthe proposition that cats purr is ideally justiﬁed.
So, we are forced to conclude that (24) is also a priori true, when it plainly is
not.213 The same holds, mutatis mutandis, for any a priori correspondence theory
that takes utterances as truth-bearers, as it is surely false that cats purr only
if someone has made an appropriate utterance. The only correspondence theory
capable of avoiding this diﬃculty is one which takes propositions as truth-bearers,
but, if Lewis’s previous argument is correct, such a theory is not one of truth at
all.
3.6
Neopragmatism: Davidson, Putnam, Rorty
For pragmatists, investigating the truthmaking relation, whether as an attempt to
elucidate truth or as part of some other metaphysical project, is a wrongheaded
way of doing philosophy. The hunt for truthmakers seems to them an eﬀort to get
a God’s eye view, from outside all contingent conceptual schemes, of the relations
between language and reality. In the last few decades of the twentieth century
a number of philosophers, most notably Donald Davidson, Hilary Putnam and
Richard Rorty, joined the pragmatists in expressing suspicion about both appeals
to truthmakers and attempts to obtain such a God’s eye view. And while none of
these philosophers, ultimately, endorsed the Jamesian slogan that truth is what
is useful, they shared an approach to, and theses about, the nature of truth that
justiﬁes the label ‘Neopragmatist’. In particular, each pursued the pragmatist goal
of breaking down traditional distinctions which they took to have no pragmatic
signiﬁcance, such as those between subjective and objective, value and fact, ana-
lytic and synthetic, conceptual scheme and reality, justiﬁcation and truth. Their
inherited pragmatist distaste for these distinctions led them likewise to attempt
to simultaneously dissolve the traditional set of problems about realism and truth.
But the neopragmatists (ultimately) tried to achieve this by ﬁnding a way between
correspondence and epistemic theories of truth.214
This scepticism about truthmaking and the truth/justiﬁcation distinction led
them to reject a claim that guided much of the thought about truth in the twentieth
century, including, curiously enough, that of the pragmatists themselves.
The
claim is the familiar one that truth is a norm of assertion or a goal of inquiry.
Davidson has succinctly expressed the divergence from the pragmatists on this
point:
213In eﬀect, this is a formalization of Frege’s and Bradley’s transparency argument to the con-
clusion that any analysis of truth must fail. It is also strongly reminiscent of Russell’s objection
to pragmatism that it implies that in determining the truth of the belief that God exists we
should ﬁnd out whether it is useful to believe that God exists, rather than whether God exists
(see §1.5).
214For reasons of space, we shall focus only on views shared by all of them and note the
diﬀerences of opinion in passing. Also, Davidson and Putnam both changed their minds quite
signiﬁcantly even after they began defending neopragmatism. We have tried to present the most
considered versions of their views, and largely ignore those they abandoned over this period.

A Brief History of Truth
297
From the fact that we will never be able to tell which of our beliefs
are true, the pragmatists conclude that we may as well identify our
best researched, most successful, beliefs with the true ones, and give
up the idea of objectivity . . .
I agree with the pragmatists that we
cannot consistently take truth to be both objective and something to
be pursued. But I think they would have done better to cleave to a
view that counts truth as objective, but pointless as a goal.
[Davidson, 2000, 67]215)
On this view, although truth may be a central concept in our explanations of
others, it plays no role in guiding our actions.216
As we have seen, however,
according to Ramsey’s success semantics, truth can be treated as both objective
and still a goal, in the sense that the utility of true beliefs means that if one wants
a belief about P at all (i.e. ‘P’ or ‘∼P’), one will prefer the true one and will
assess the methods of getting such beliefs accordingly.
Despite this divergence, neopragmatists join the original pragmatists in rejecting
the common correspondentist claim that epistemically ideal theories might nev-
ertheless be false. Davidson, for example, argues that we need to use a principle
of charity in interpreting others which implies that our interpretations must make
as many of their beliefs come out true as possible. Hence, he claims, there is no
possibility of any thinker’s being radically mistaken. Putnam, on the other hand,
argued that for any system of belief which is claimed to be radically mistaken there
is an equally legitimate, alternative interpretation according to which the beliefs
are true. Nor does he allow that we can ﬁx the reference of our terms, and thus
ensure a standard interpretation according to which the beliefs are mostly false,
by ascending to a meta-language to speak of any causal or referential relations
holding between our language and reality. According to Putnam, hoping that we
could make such a move is hoping for an ascent to a God’s eye view; the reason
we cannot so ascend is that our words ‘cause’ and ‘refer’ themselves stand in need
of interpretation and they too can be provided with an innumerable array of satis-
factory interpretations;217 further, these theories of reference are just more theory
requiring an interpretation.
This line of thought lies behind Putnam’s famous model-theoretic argument,
whose aim was to show the incoherence of even Fieldian fact-free correspondence
215As Davidson notes, Rorty strangely seems to be suspicious of both the distinction between
justiﬁcation and truth and the claim that truth cannot be a goal of inquiry. However, we think
that Rorty distinguishes truth from justiﬁcation for some purposes, including those Davidson
himself points out. See [Davidson, 2000, 74, fn. 3].
216Stephen Stich has oﬀered an argument against the idea that truth is worth striving for that
has much in common with the model-theoretic argument discussed below. He argues that if we
agree that there is no standard interpretation of our language, and likewise no standard way of
attributing content to our mental states, then it is hard to see why we would want belief states
that are true according to one interpretation rather than some other interpretation [Stich, 1990,
ch. 5].
217[Davidson, 1979, 234f; Putnam, 1978, 126].

298
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
theories.218 Putnam relied on the idea of a plurality of reference schemes to con-
clude that for any language there are innumerable interpretations that will result
in the same sentences’ being assigned not only the same truth-values, but the same
truth-conditions. Adding the assumption that only the truth-conditions of sen-
tences constrain an interpretation of a speaker leads to the conclusion that there is
no standard interpretation of a language. Putnam thought that this conclusion is
absurd, and that, for reasons that are obscure to us, a semantics based on the idea
that truth is ideal justiﬁcation is the only way to avoid it. Nevertheless, if his basic
line of thought is correct, there cannot be a physicalistically respectable account of
reference of the sort Field was after because there is no standard reference relation
to reduce.219 The model-theoretic argument, however, is as controversial as the
Dummettian anti-realist arguments that inspired it. In particular, Lewis has di-
agnosed the argument’s persuasiveness as depending on overlooking the diﬀerence
between two diﬀerent ideas: one, that constraints on interpretations are merely
more theory, itself requiring interpretation; the other, that they are constraints to
which any overall interpretation of our language must conform.220
However, even if this argument fails, the neopragmatists have a more fundamen-
tal reason for rejecting Fieldian correspondence theories – their meaning holism.
For example, Davidson’s principle of charity is clearly a holistic constraint on in-
terpretation, requiring an interpreter to consider the whole range of beliefs being
attributed to a speaker in attributing any particular belief to them.221 While Put-
nam and Rorty deny that formal, Davidsonian theories of meaning are possible,
they are also committed to meaning holism based on a holism about interpreta-
tion.222 This method of interpretation allows the extension of the reference rela-
tion to fall out in whatever way(s) supports the original attributions of content
to sentences. Consequently, the neopragmatists do not suppose that the concept
of reference need, or could, be reduced to physicalistically respectable concepts.
They see ‘reference’ as a purely theoretical term that gets all its meaning from the
way it contributes to the truth theory.223
On noting their arguments against correspondence, it seems natural to suppose
that the neopragmatists would hold some epistemic theory of truth. Indeed, de-
spite at one time defending correspondence theories of truth, both Putnam and
218Putnam’s [1978] begins with an extended response to Field, and ends with the argument
(pp. 123–38). See also [Putnam, 1980; 1983a, 32–5]. A very similar argument can be found
in Davidson 1979. Putnam is attacking what he calls ‘metaphysical realism’, a combination of
metaphysical and semantic doctrines, but any anti-realist conclusion comes via the following
undermining of the Fieldian notion of correspondence.
219Neopragmatists also claim that this argument undermines realism, but Stephen Leeds [1978]
shows how one could combine the neopragmatist view of reference schemes with realism.
220[Lewis, 1984]. For further criticism on behalf of the realist see [Devitt, 1991]. On behalf of
the anti-realist see [van Fraassen, 1997]. Hale and Wright [1997] provide helpful discussion.
221[Davidson, 1984].
222Putnam 1983b: xvii. Rorty clearly expresses his misgivings about Davidsonian talk of truth-
conditions in [Rorty, 2000].
223Davidson’s [1977] spells this out. The ﬁrst three chapters of [Putnam, 1978] echo the David-
sonian response to Field, as does [McDowell, 1978].

A Brief History of Truth
299
Davidson have professed allegiance to epistemic theories,224 while Rorty once en-
dorsed a Peircean notion of truth. In fact, in the mid 1980s it seemed to many
that the three of them were united by an anti-realist metaphysics and an epistemic
theory of truth. Yet, later, all three either recanted or clariﬁed their position to
avoid such attributions.225 In fact, the neopragmatists have suggested numerous
reasons for rejecting epistemic theories. One such reason is that if truth were an
epistemic notion then truth could be lost. In other words, because sentences or
propositions can be justiﬁed at one time and unjustiﬁed at another, any theory
that built justiﬁcation into its deﬁnition of truth would allow that a truth-bearer
could change in truth-value without changing in meaning. This ﬂies in the face
of another alleged platitude about truth, namely that truth is stable. Such an
argument can be countered, however, by moving, as Putnam did, to a notion of
truth as ideal justiﬁcation.226 A more serious argument ﬂows from the simple and
intuitive claim that statements can be justiﬁed and yet not true, i.e., that truth is
recognition-transcendent. Putnam’s acknowledgement of this point has led to his
abandonment of epistemic views and a return to ‘common-sense realism’.227 Yet,
as Wright has argued, it is not clear that one needs to give up an epistemic view
of truth to agree that truth can be recognition-transcendent.228
It seems that there are in fact two basic reasons that the neopragmatists have
for rejecting epistemic views. The ﬁrst is that they are associated with anti-realism
and the neopragmatists set out to dispel the appearance of a binary choice between
realism and anti-realism by showing that it is based on a mistaken distinction be-
tween conceptual schemes and reality.229
Like the pragmatists, neopragmatists
deny that there is some way in which the world is structured independently of
the language we use to describe it. This is not meant to imply that we are free
to invent the world as we please. That would be to suppose that we are trapped
inside our conceptual scheme with reality forever outside. Against that idea, the
neopragmatists suggest that this idealism is a result not of abandoning the dis-
tinction between scheme and content, but of merely favouring one side of that
distinction.230 What they aim for is a way between these two views, a sort of di-
rect realism that puts us in touch with reality without any representational proxies
or intermediaries such as a conceptual scheme.231 And they see the theory of truth
as a key ground on which to ﬁght this battle. While it is not at all clear that the-
224Contrast [Davidson, 1969] with [Davidson, 1986], and [Putnam, 1960] with [Putnam, 1983a].
225[Davidson, 1990, 302, fn. 40; Putnam, 1994]. Rorty [1982, 165] represents such an endorse-
ment (see Rorty 1986: 328, where he retracts it).
226[Putnam, 1983a, 55].
227Putnam 1994.
228[Wright, 2000].
229Davidson was the ﬁrst of the neopragmatists to attack this distinction [Davidson, 1974].
230[Rorty, 1986, 326]. Rorty rightly insists that Davidson avoids any such epistemic conception
of truth and endorses this stance himself.
231‘In giving up the dualism of scheme and world, we do not give up the world, but re-establish
unmediated touch with the familiar objects whose antics make our sentences and opinions true
or false’ [Davidson, 1974, 198]. Putnam’s ‘internal realism’ is best seen as an attempt to reach a
similar position. Cf., e.g., [Putnam, 1996].

300
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
ories of truth are relevant to this debate, it is clear that they were taken to be so
throughout the century. So, to the extent that the neopragmatists wish to deﬂate
or dissolve this debate, it may well be the right dialectical strategy to undermine
traditional conceptions of the problems surrounding truth.
The other reason neopragmatists have for rejecting epistemic views is that they
endorse the claim that truth cannot be deﬁned. Even as Putnam was putting for-
ward his most epistemic view of truth, he conjoined his remarks with the proviso
that ‘I am not trying to give a formal deﬁnition of truth, but an informal eluci-
dation of the notion.’232 Furthermore, both he and Davidson have often claimed
that Tarski has shown us that we cannot provide a consistent deﬁnition of truth
within our own language. Indeed, Davidson has famously claimed that it is ‘folly’
to attempt any such deﬁnition, as the history of failures to do so bears witness.233
Instead, he thought, the best we can do is draw out the relations between truth
and other semantic and non-semantic concepts. This is what his theory of inter-
pretation is meant to do. By showing how applying a truth-theory to a community
requires attributing beliefs and desires and recognizing causal relations between
their beliefs and the world, he hoped to elucidate the role truth plays in our
explanatory theories of their behaviour.234 In this way, Davidson attempted to
combine the neopragmatist position with primitivism.235
Along with the indeﬁnability thesis, Putnam and Davidson share a deﬂationary
attitude without accepting deﬂationary theories of truth.236 Davidson sees these
theories as yet another attempt to give a deﬁnition of truth. Putnam worries that
they are committed to a veriﬁcationist theory of understanding that cannot allow
for a recognition-transcendent conception of truth. Rorty, on the other hand, is
far more sympathetic to deﬂationary theories, seeing in them the hope of dissolv-
ing a range of traditional metaphysical and epistemological debates. However, it
is not clear that the disagreement here is substantial. Rorty agrees that truth
is a property and he also seems to hold Davidson’s view that it plays an impor-
tant explanatory role in theories of interpretation.237 As will emerge below, and
despite Davidson’s worry that deﬂationists try to deﬁne ‘true’, this means that
Rorty too can accept primitivism. As for Putnam, he has conceded that truth is
not a substantial property while also implying that truth is so variegated that it
will evade deﬁnition. It seems, then, that, despite their internal squabbles, the
neopragmatists combine a deﬂationary attitude towards truth with primitivism’s
232[Putnam, 1983a, 57].
233This is the gist of [Davidson, 1996], and is partly reﬂected in its title.
234See the last section of [Davidson, 1990] for an elaboration of this point.
235[Davidson, 1996, 309 and 320ﬀ].
236Davidson and Putnam explicitly criticized deﬂationism and, in particular, Tarski’s view read
in a deﬂationary way. See [Davidson, 1990, section 1; Putnam, 1988, 60-71].
237The ﬁrst few sentences of the introduction to [Rorty, 1982] make it clear that Rorty is happy
to treat truth as a property. Although in 1986 he insisted that truth was not an explanatory
property, he later retracted this claim, emphasizing that he had never meant to deny that truth
played a role in a Davidsonian empirical theory of meaning [Rorty, 1995, 282, fn. 23].

A Brief History of Truth
301
central claim of its indeﬁnability. We shall see that they share this resting point
with a number of other theorists.
3.7
Functionalism and pluralism: Putnam, Rorty, Wiggins, Wright
Yet there is another strain of thought in the neopragmatists that we have so far
not considered. There are several diﬀerent, and not obviously compatible, con-
clusions one might draw from the purported failure of attempts to discover the
nature of truth. One is that there is no nature that requires discovery (deﬂation-
ism). Another is that truth is unanalysable (primitivism). A third is that there
is no one property or concept of truth to discover (pluralism). Putnam’s turn
to ‘common-sense realism’, for example, was accompanied by an emphasis on the
heterogeneous nature of the range of discourses we go in for (ethical, scientiﬁc,
mathematical, comic . . . ). Moreover, Putnam counselled, we should not hope for
one ‘free-standing’ explanation of truth that would tell us once and for all what
truth is, what a proposition is and what it is for an assertion to be correct.238
Rather, there are many ways to make a correct assertion and so many ways to
correspond to reality.
Rorty, too, has long — indeed, notoriously — urged the pluralist nature of truth.
Crucial to his view that truth is not a goal of inquiry is the claim that there is not
one goal (Truth-with-a capital-‘T’, i.e. correspondence with reality) at which all
discourses aim. Rather, each has its own standards of justiﬁcation and correctness,
and its own way of ‘ﬁtting’ reality.239 This tolerance of diﬀerent discourses is the
basis for Rorty’s notoriety, for it suggests an ‘anything goes’ relativism about both
justiﬁcation and truth. Indeed, he professes a longing for a society that has given
up the obsession with truth.240 Nevertheless, Rorty is attacking merely what he
conceives as bad, old truth-with-a-capital-‘T’: he does not pine for a discourse free
of the predicate ‘true’, a predicate with both an endorsing and a cautionary use (to
warn that even if the proposition that snow is white is justiﬁed it might still be that
snow is not white), and which does not express a substantial property.241 Thus
perhaps he can still allow, and even encourage, the quest to determine whether
snow really is white, a subject which one might be forgiven for supposing is a
matter of obsession with philosophers.
David Wiggins has also expressed sympathy with pluralism, suggesting a way
of developing Davidson’s theory of meaning so that we can obtain some sort of
pluralist truth theory.242 He agreed with Davidson that, because of the way truth
is related to fact-stating discourse, there must be more to truth than a deﬂationary
reading of Tarski can oﬀer. Yet he also felt the force of Strawson’s attack on the
notion of facts. Like Field, Wiggins thus wondered how one could provide the
sort of substantial theory of truth that was required. He began his attempt with
238[Putnam, 1994, 513ﬀ]. His position shows the inﬂuence of [Wittgenstein, 1953].
239See, in particular, the introduction to Rorty 1982.
240[Rorty, 1995, 277ﬀ].
241[Rorty ,1986].
242[Wiggins, 1980].

302
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
the Davidsonian claim that a theory of truth for a language will serve as a theory
of meaning, provided that it meets an anthropological constraint that it make
the best sense of the speakers of the language. Accordingly, he thought that to
discover the nature of truth we should consider what features any property must
have, if it is to serve as the central notion in a theory of meaning so constrained.
Wiggins hoped that he could give a functional analysis of the concept of truth by
uncovering the relations between such a notion and the anthropological constraint.
Inspired by the Ramsey-Lewis approach to deﬁning theoretical terms, he argued
that truth would be whichever property satisﬁed that functional analysis obtained
by considering the role any concept must play if it is to be the central concept in
the theory of meaning.243 Unsurprisingly, we have already met, many times, the
essential ‘marks of truth’ which Wiggins claimed to discover: truth is a norm of
assertion, recognition-transcendent, and satisﬁes the correspondence intuition.244
Thus, like Davidson, Wiggins contented himself with elaborating the connec-
tions amongst truth and other key semantic concepts. He also agreed that one
should not try to step outside our linguistic practices in deﬁning truth. However,
Wiggins’s development of the Davidsonian project lies in the realization that,
despite the holistic nature of interpretation, and even, perhaps, despite the irre-
ducibility of the semantic to the physical, one could use this functional analysis
to oﬀer a deﬁnition of truth. This may not be pluralistic: the functional analysis
may be detailed enough to ensure that there is one unique property that fulﬁls the
job description. But the project is consistent with the thought that a number of
properties might ﬁt the bill. If one attempts to apply the Davidsonian analysis to
a range of discourses, including those that we might doubt are fact-stating, then
the pluralistic conclusion may seem even more likely. Perhaps, as Putnam and
Rorty suggest, diﬀerent discourses relate to reality in diﬀerent ways and so would
each require a diﬀerent property to ﬁll the truth role. Something much like this
view has been championed by Crispin Wright.
Wright was inspired to develop his account of truth by his disenchantment with
the available ways of expressing anti-realism about the subject matters of diﬀerent
types of discourse. He thought it obvious that it was a mistake to suppose, for
example, that anti-realism about the humorous meant that statements about the
comic are not capable of being true or false.
Following Dummett, he argued
that it is not a matter of whether such statements are capable of being true or
false, but whether the point of assigning truth-values would be served by assigning
them to these statements. This idea led him to a ‘minimal’ notion of truth that
he considers metaphysically ‘light-weight’ (Wright’s expressions) and consequently
able to serve as a notion neutral between realists and anti-realists.245 Like Wiggins,
Wright puts forward a number of ‘marks of truth’ that serve to deﬁne the concept.
But he does not ﬁnd these marks by considering the theory of meaning, but by
uncovering platitudes about truth – claims concerning truth that we all know a
243ibid. 203f.
244This is not an exhaustive list of Wiggins’s marks of truth.
245[Wright, 1992, 11f].

A Brief History of Truth
303
priori and thus serve to provide an ‘analytical theory of the concept’.246 Chief
among these is the equivalence thesis. In a deﬂationary spirit, Wright argues that
many of Wiggins’s ‘marks of truth’ (including the correspondence platitude and
the claim that truth is a distinct norm from justiﬁcation) can be accounted for
by any predicate that satisﬁes this thesis.247 The platitudes that are uncovered,
according to Wright, serve to deﬁne a unique concept. Furthermore, he claims, this
concept is so light-weight that any assertoric discourse at all, any discourse with
an appropriate syntax and constraints on assertibility, will be truth-apt. That is,
its declarative sentences will be appropriately assigned truth-values.
One might think that in attempting to show that such a wide range of discourses
are truth-apt, Wright was hoping to support the pragmatist cause of dissolving
the debate between realism and anti-realism. However, he had quite the opposite
goal in mind. Again following Dummett, he argued that this debate is actually
a series of local skirmishes and should be seen as a matter of determining what
sort of truth-predicate is appropriate for a particular discourse. Thus, although
Wright maintains that he can uncover the essential nature of the concept of truth
for all discourses, he insists that there may be diﬀerent properties satisfying the
platitudes for diﬀerent discourses. In particular, he argues that superassertibility
can play the truth role he has demarcated:
A statement is superassertible, then, if and only if it is, or can be, war-
ranted and some warrant for it would survive arbitrarily close scrutiny
of its pedigree and arbitrarily extensive increments to or other forms
of improvement of our information.
[Wright, 1992, 48]
Given that superassertibility is clearly an epistemic property, he concludes that
this can serve as the anti-realist’s notion of truth. Moreover, the burden is now
on the realist to show that in some discourse the property of truth goes beyond
superassertibility, and is in no way evidentially constrained.
Wright is explicit that what accounts for the metaphysically light-weight nature
of truth is not that he relies only on a set of platitudes about truth, but that the
notion can be deﬁned for any assertoric discourse. Yet, by his own admission, he
oﬀers no argument for the claim that truth can be so deﬁned.248 But if one agrees
with Jackson et al. that a minimal theory of truth does not entail a minimal theory
of truth-aptness,249 one is left wondering why we should accept that all these
discourses are truth-apt and thus why we should think of the realist/anti-realist
debate as one concerning which property is the realizer for the truth-predicate
in a discourse. Another cause for hesitation about Wright’s project concerns his
suggestion that his pluralism is the only means by which one can understand
246[Wright, 1999, 228].
247[Wright, 1992, 74, fn 2].
248ibid. 74.
249[Jackson, Oppy and Smith, 1994].

304
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
both sides in the realist/anti-realist debate.
A plausible alternative, however,
is that although there is only one notion and property of truth, which can be
functionally deﬁned, diﬀerent types of statements have diﬀerent types of truth-
conditions. Some of these truth-conditions may be satisﬁed independently of our
existence and constitution, others may not.250 If this is a plausible alternative way
to such understanding, then the necessity of appealing to pluralism evaporates.
3.8
Contemporary deﬂationism: Field, Horwich, Kripke, Soames
Despite the name, Wright’s minimalism is not helpfully categorized as a deﬂation-
ary theory of truth. Although it promises to deliver what he called a light-weight
notion of truth, one neutral between realism and anti-realism, it allows that truth
might be, for some discourses at least, the sort of property correspondence theo-
rists claim it is. Moreover, Wright claims that determining the notion of truth that
is appropriate for a certain discourse is crucial to deciding the realist/anti-realist
debate for that local discourse. None of this looks compatible with the deﬂation-
ary theories so far examined. Nor does Wright’s theory belong with the paradigm
examples of inﬂationary accounts — correspondence and epistemic theories. Yet,
while a number of positions are similar to Wright’s in belonging comfortably in
neither camp, by the early 1990s, there was a growing consensus that the most
important debate in the theory of truth (and content) was the fundamental one
between inﬂationists and deﬂationists.251
The consensus was fuelled, in part, by the powerful defences of deﬂationary
theories oﬀered by Scott Soames, Hartry Field, and Paul Horwich. Their views
depart from most earlier deﬂationary theories in abandoning the claims that ‘true’
is not a predicate and does not express a property. However, they upheld a number
of doctrines which place them squarely in the deﬂationist tradition.
For one,
although both deﬂationists and inﬂationists can agree that ‘... is true’ plays a
certain logical or expressive role, the contemporary deﬂationist maintains that the
only reason for having the concept of truth is to allow us to meet this ‘logical need’,
that is, truth attributions are not descriptive.252 They do not play their important
role by attributing some common characteristic to a truth-bearer, but by serving
as a device of disquotation. Another central feature of contemporary deﬂationism
is its commitment to the claim that there is nothing general to be said about the
property of truth. Rather truth is such that we grasp, in its entirety, what it is
for a particular truth-bearer to be true by grasping the relevant instance of the
equivalence thesis: a thesis that also serves, in some sense, to give the meaning
of ‘... is true’. Finally, it is also worth emphasizing an important conception of
deﬂationary theories. Some have worried (others, like Rorty, have hoped) that they
will have startling philosophical consequences, including the idea that there is no
250[Pettit, 1996] suggests this alternative position.
251For example, [Boghossian, 1990, 165, fn. 17]: ‘Whether truth is robust or deﬂationary is the
biggest decision a theorist of truth must make.’ See also [Field, 1994, 107].
252This way of putting the point is Horwich’s [1998a, 138].

A Brief History of Truth
305
meta-theoretical standpoint from which to assess our theories of reality and so to
decide important metaphysical questions. Contemporary deﬂationists, however,
standardly see their theories as having no deep consequences for metaphysics or
epistemology; these topics must be separated from the task of providing a theory
of truth. As Soames plaintively remarks, ‘Throughout the history of philosophy,
the notion of truth has occupied a corner into which all manner of problems and
confusions have been swept.’253
Field largely based his case for a correspondence theory on the, usually implicit,
premiss that truth plays a causal-explanatory role. However, the deﬂationist re-
sponse developed by Leeds and Grover et al. convinced him that showing that
truth played such a role was exceptionally diﬃcult to do.254 He thus reconceived
the debate about truth as a question of whether, for practical or theoretical pur-
poses, we need to appeal to more than a disquotationalist account. In 1986 he
tentatively came down on the side of correspondence. In 1994, and on a number
of later occasions, he defended disquotationalism against a number of standard
objections, but largely left the issue of truth’s causal-explanatory role to one side.
The reason for this postponement is that, as previously noted (§3.2), Field sees the
crucial issue for a theory of truth as being the question of what determines that
utterances have the truth-conditions they do. This meant that, for him, the most
important issue between inﬂationists and deﬂationists is whether any of our causal
explanations makes an ineliminable appeal to the truth-conditions of utterances
or belief states. But as Field says, it is a ‘big job even to state the worry clearly,
and a bigger job to answer it; I must save this for another occasion.’255 So must
we.
However, Field’s position must be characterized as deﬂationism about mean-
ing and content, which is thereby deﬂationism about truth. Deﬂationism about
content is stipulated as being the position that truth-conditions do not play a
central (and thus causal-explanatory) role in the theory of content. And he holds
that the best way of developing a theory in which neither truth, nor reference
and satisfaction, plays such a central role, is to provide disquotational theories of
all three. At ﬁrst, he championed what he called ‘pure-disquotationalism’ about
truth.256 According to this view, for all utterances p, the assertion of ‘p is true’
is “cognitively equivalent” to the assertion of p. This claim has a number of odd
features that the Field of 1972 would have found repugnant. The ﬁrst is that the
truth-predicate applies only to utterances we can understand. For if we cannot
understand p then, because of the cognitive equivalence, we will not understand ‘p
is true’ either. The second odd feature is also found in Quine’s disquotationalism:
sentence-tokens have their truth-conditions necessarily.257 However, Field argued,
this second characteristic is actually a virtue. If we want to describe the nature
253[Soames, 1999, 255].
254See the postscripts to chs 1 and 4 in [Field, 2001].
255[Field, 1994, 127].
256[Field, 1994].
257Field clearly commits himself to this consequence of pure disquotationalism in his [1986,
56-9].

306
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
of space, we can use a truth-predicate and say, perhaps, that all the axioms of
Euclidean geometry are true of the space we inhabit. In this case, he suggests, we
want, not to make a claim dependent on what certain sentences of English mean,
but rather to speak directly about reality. And only a notion of truth for which
‘p’ and “‘p” is true’ are cognitively equivalent can allow this.258 We will return to
this point below, but it is anyway clear that our ordinary notion of truth does not
share these features. Field, aware of this, proposed that we try to do without the
ordinary notion until it can be shown that it serves some purpose beyond those
which can be served by a purely disquotational substitute.259
Nevertheless, more recently Field has come to accept a more moderate version of
disquotationalism he calls ‘quasi-disquotationalism’, according to which a notion
of translation is built into the understanding of truth; he oﬀers the following
deﬁnition of quasi-disquotational truth:
If S is translatable as ‘p’, then, necessarily, (S is true iﬀp).260
However, he now insists that we individuate sentence-tokens not orthographically,
but computationally. That is, two sentence-tokens are equivalent for an individual
iﬀthey are treated computationally as equivalent by that individual. This means
that sentence-tokens are not capable of being shared across individuals, or within
the same individual across possible worlds. Field’s account can thus now capture
the intuition that sentences have truth-conditions contingently. When we want to
attribute truth-conditions to a sentence we must consider which of our actual sen-
tences (individuated computationally) is its translation. Thus ‘Rabbits are furry’
used by a counterpart me (in another possible world) in a radically diﬀerent fash-
ion from my use of it, might be translated by my computationally-individuated
‘Touch-typing is diﬃcult’ and so share that sentence’s truth-conditions.261 The
account can also allow that, for us, it is indeterminate whether sentences we do
not understand are true. This is an improvement on pure disquotationalism’s con-
sequence that such sentences are not true. Finally, if one follows Field in oﬀering
a linguistic view of meaning attribution, one can convert the above deﬁnition into
something that looks a lot like a fully general version of the semantic conception
of truth:
For any sentence S (of any linguistic community C, in any possible
world u), if S means that p (for C, in world u) then S (as used by C
in world u) is true (at world w) if and only if p (at w).262
The conversion is made possible by supposing that ‘S means that p’ is equivalent
to ‘S can be translated by my actual sentence “p” .’
Field’s trajectory in reaching this point highlights the diﬃculties faced if one
endorses a deﬂationary theory that takes the primary truth-bearers not to be
258ibid. 58f.
259Field proposed that we should be “methodological deﬂationists”. [Field, 1994, 119].
260[Field, 2001, 151f].
261ibid. 158f.
262ibid. 165.

A Brief History of Truth
307
individuated by their meanings. To mimic our ordinary conception of truth we
need to build in to the theory the claim that truth is dependent on meaning. Doing
this, however, means that one will also need to give a theory of meaning that does
not reconstruct the sort of correspondence account he is trying to avoid.
Field himself clearly takes it to be not easy to avoid this error. In fact, he has
even accused Soames, who takes himself to endorse a deﬂationary theory of truth
with propositions as truth-bearers, of succumbing to it.263 Thus although Soames
has not put forward a theory of truth as such, he provides a problematic case for
the distinction between inﬂationary and deﬂationary theories and has also made
a number of suggestions about the form a deﬂationary theory should take. His
alternative model for a plausible (and deﬂationary) theory of truth is found in
Saul Kripke’s inﬂuential ‘Outline of a Theory of Truth’.264
Kripke sought to give a formal construction for a truth-predicate that could deal
with paradoxical cases like liar sentences as well as ‘ungrounded’ statements such
as ‘This sentence is true’. However, motivated by a number of counter-intuitive
consequences of Tarski’s hierarchical arrangement of truth-predicates, he wanted
his construction to be such that the languages involved contain their own single,
univocal truth-predicate. Kripke’s guiding thought for deﬁning such a predicate
was that it should capture the intuitive idea that ‘we are entitled to assert (or
deny) of any sentence that it is true precisely under the circumstances when we
can assert (or deny) the sentence itself’.265 In order to deal with cases where the
sentence itself contains an attribution of truth, he suggests that we can continue to
strip away the truth-predicate until we reach a point at which there are no longer
any occurrences of ‘true’ in the sentence. Having ascertained whether we can assert
(or deny) this sentence, our intuitive conception of truth allows us to ‘re-ascend’ to
assert (or deny) the original sentence containing ‘true’. For many sentences, like
“‘Snow is white” is true’, for example, this technique will yield a determinate truth-
value. Kripke’s intuitive conception therefore provides the truth-predicate with an
extension and an anti-extension. However, for other sentences, including but not
restricted to paradoxical sentences, this technique yields no determinate truth-
value. We simply cannot trace these sentences, which Kripke calls ‘ungrounded’,
back to some ‘true’-free sentence for which we can ascertain that we are entitled
to assert (or deny) it. So the anti-extension and extension of the truth-predicate
do not together contain all sentences of the language. As Kripke points out, this
means that he has only given a partial interpretation for the truth-predicate. There
are a variety of sentences that fall in neither the extension nor the anti-extension
of the truth-predicate and these are deemed neither true nor false.
Regardless of whether such a proposal really does deal adequately with the
paradoxes and related phenomena, 266 Soames sees Kripke’s proposal as embody-
263[Field, 1986, 66].
264[Kripke, 1975].
265ibid. 701.
266The standard view is that the strengthened liar (‘This sentence is untrue’) defeats Kripke-
style treatments.

308
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
ing an important insight: that the problematic cases must be dealt with on the
basis of a prior characterization of the truth-predicate.267 This is not the case
with other deﬂationary proposals. As we shall shortly see, for example, Horwich
simply excludes, without explanation, the paradoxical instances of the equivalence
schema from the set of instances of the schema that constitute our grasp of the
truth concept.
So, the seemingly deﬂationary nature of Soames’s views on truth stems from his
conception of theories of truth as primarily concerned with giving an account of the
meaning of ‘true’ that (a) does justice to the equivalence between an attribution
of truth to a statement and an assertion of the statement itself, and (b) can
also deal adequately with the majority of the uses of the predicate, including
those within paradoxical contexts.
Yet the question remains as to whether he
can prevent his conception of truth from inﬂating under pressure. One source of
pressure is that, as Dummett in eﬀect argued, on pain of circularity deﬂationists
who take propositions as truth-bearers are debarred from accepting any account
of propositions that individuates them by their truth-conditions. This constraint
rules out a wide range of traditional accounts. Further, much that Soames says
about the nature of meaning, in particular, suggests that he endorses what Field
would call a ‘robust’ view of what it takes for a sentence to express a proposition.268
This fact is what led Field to attribute to Soames an inﬂationary conception of
truth. Yet Soames rejects truth-conditional theories of meaning and so rejects
the view that we need a robust theory of what it is for sentences to possess their
truth-conditions. Thus it is hard to see why his robust theory of meaning should
directly entail a robust theory of truth. This is the sort of diﬃcult case which
the usual distinctions between inﬂationary and deﬂationary theories fail to clearly
categorize.
Like Soames, Horwich attempts to avoid disquotationalism’s problems by taking
propositions as the primary truth-bearers. He also agrees with Soames and Field
that he thus needs to give an account of meaning without making essential use
of the notion of truth, so that he cannot provide a truth-conditional theory.269
However, Horwich takes the equivalence schema as the central plank in his minimal
theory. More speciﬁcally, he claims that minimalism has as its axioms the inﬁnity
of instances of that schema. This theory can then be used in his explanation of
the meaning of ‘true’. He claims that someone grasps the meaning of ‘true’ when
they are disposed to accept all non-paradoxical instances of the equivalence schema
267[Soames, 1999, 245f].
268See in particular Soames [1984] and [1989].
269[Horwich, 1998a, 68ﬀand 93-103]. However, the reasons Field and Horwich have for agreeing
with Dummett on this point seem diﬀerent. Horwich agrees with Dummett that deﬂationary
theories use the meanings of sentences to deﬁne truth and so cannot also use truth to explain
meaning. Field, on the other hand, seems motivated by the worry that a truth-conditional theory
of meaning will require us to say what makes it the case that sentences have truth-conditions
and this will spoil a disquotational theory of possessing truth-conditions. Horwich defends a use
theory of meaning in his [1998b].

A Brief History of Truth
309
without evidence.270 Thus he does not oﬀer us a deﬁnition of ‘true’ but instead
spells out what it is for someone to possess the concept of truth. But he does make
a fundamental claim about the property of truth: that there is no more to it than
is spelt out by the instances of the equivalence schema.271 For example, there is
no more to the truth of the proposition that snow is white than that snow is white.
This is a clear denial of a hidden essence view of truth such as Alston’s. Moreover,
he insists that all the explanatory work done by appealing to the property of truth
can be done using the instances of the equivalence schema. But he draws back
from saying that truth is not a property at all; rather, it is not ‘a complex or
naturalistic property’ and so does not have a ‘constitutive structure’ or a ‘causal
behaviour’ or ‘typical manifestations’.272 He suggests that truth might be best
characterized as a ‘logical property’.273
More radically, Horwich agrees with Field that a deﬂationist about truth must
hold parallel views about reference and satisfaction. The reason for supposing
there is such a commitment seems to be that which Field oﬀered in [1972]: namely,
that a theory of reference can be used in combination with a Tarski-style truth
deﬁnition to create a substantial or inﬂationary theory of truth. Both Field and
Horwich also point out that they diﬀer from Tarski in not building compositionality
into their deﬁnition, focusing instead on the instances of the equivalence schema.274
As Field says, this frees deﬂationism from worries about non-compositional natural
language constructions by allowing the logic or syntax of expressions to dictate
when the axioms about truth will entail compositional theorems. It is clear that
the major contemporary forms of deﬂationism are intended as packages of views
about semantics that attempt to deﬂate the truth-theoretic notions and provide
an alternative, non-truth-conditional theory of meaning.
In every such package is the Quinean view that the utility of the truth-predicate
lies in its role in allowing us to express certain generalizations. Field, in particular,
claimed that the cognitive equivalence of ‘p’ and “‘p” is true’ is needed for ‘true’ to
play this role so that even correspondence theorists need a disquotational truth-
predicate. Anil Gupta, however, has put serious pressure on this idea, arguing
that such a cognitive equivalence would be required only if the generalizations
and the conjunction they replace are cognitively equivalent.275
Yet it is clear
that no conjunction, no matter how long and no matter if it exhausts all the
instances being generalized over, is cognitively equivalent to a generalization, even
if the conjunction, per impossibile, is inﬁnitely long. So there is no need for a
cognitive equivalence between ‘p’ and “‘p” is true’. However, Gupta’s criticism
cuts deeper than this. We have also seen that a standard deﬂationist move is to
block assertions of the explanatory power of truth by claiming that when ‘true’
270[Horwich, 1998a, 35].
271ibid. 36f and 135-9.
272ibid. 37f.
273Horwich takes this term from Field’s description of the minimalist position on the nature of
truth [Field, 1992, 321].
274[Field, 1994, 124f; Horwich 1998a, 10].
275[Gupta, 1993, 287-90]. The point is a reprise of [Russell, 1918, 207].

310
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
appears in explanations it does so merely as a device of generalization. Gupta
argued that this move assumes that if we can explain all the instances of some
generalization we have also explained the generalization. But this in turn relies
on the already rejected intensional equivalence.276
Gupta’s point is in fact an
expression of the general worry that deﬂationists will not be able to explain basic
generalizations about truth.277 The problem is particularly worrying for Horwich,
who insists that it is only the instances of the equivalence schema that are needed
to perform all the explanatory work.278
Field oﬀers an obvious and general solution to this worry, one that we have
met before: the equivalence schema can be generalized via substitutional quan-
tiﬁcation and used as the basis for explanations.279 However, Horwich maintains
that the point of the truth-predicate is to enable us to do without substitutional
quantiﬁcation. In other words, if we had a device for substitutional quantiﬁcation
we would not need a truth-predicate at all. Further, Horwich rightly points out
that substitutional quantiﬁcation is usually explained using the notion of truth
and so cannot be appealed to in deﬁning it.280 Although neither point is conclu-
sive, they do suggest that coping with generalizations will not be a trivial matter
for a deﬂationist. Indeed, as Horwich himself observes, there is a basic problem
even in giving a general formulation of the deﬂationist position.
3.9
Primitivism and deﬂationism: Sosa
Contemporary deﬂationists usually distinguish themselves from their predecessors
by emphasizing that truth is a property. As Ernest Sosa has pointed out, however,
this change in the deﬂationist position brings it very close to primitivism. Field and
Horwich both maintain that truth is a property without a constituent structure
and which cannot be analysed by providing necessary and suﬃcient conditions
for its instantiation.
A Moorean primitivist adheres to the same claims.
And
although Moore and Russell did not make anything of the equivalence schema, or
its instances, as in any way deﬁnitional of truth, their version of primitivism looks
compatible with its use:
On this view [Moorean primitivism], what you cannot do either with
good or with yellow or with truth is to deﬁne it, to give an illuminating,
compact, at least surveyable, Moorean analysis of it. It is in this sense
that you cannot philosophically “explain” any such “simple” concept.
And this leaves it open that you should have a priori knowledge of
inﬁnitely many propositions constituted essentially by such concepts.
[Sosa, 1993, 11]
276ibid. 290-5.
277This general point is made by Soames [1999, 247f] in criticism of Horwich.
278It is not at all worrying for prosententialists, as Gupta notes at fn. 7.
279[Field, 1994, 115]. Chris Hill suggests the same move [Hill, 2002].
280[Horwich, 1998a, 25f].

A Brief History of Truth
311
Field and Horwich provide explanations of what it is to grasp the concept of
truth, rather than merely urging that it is too simple to be analysed, but this does
not suﬃce to distinguish them from primitivists. To suggest what it is to grasp
a concept is quite diﬀerent from oﬀering a deﬁnition of the concept. To suppose
otherwise would be like thinking one could not be a primitivist about yellow if
one claimed that fully possessing the concept of yellow involves being disposed to
deploy the concept in the presence of yellow things.
Nor can deﬂationists readily distinguish themselves from primitivists on the
grounds that they point out the supervenience base for the property of truth.
While we can agree that they do indicate, for each proposition or utterance, what
would make it the case for this truth-bearer to be true, there is nothing in common
from one truth-bearer to another summarizable in any sort of analysis or charac-
terization of the property. Primitivists, while not so committed, could accept that
the property has this massively disjunctive nature. But for some philosophers the
possibility of such disjunction counts as a reductio.281 The debate at this point is
retracing Moore’s waverings of [1899] (see §1.2 above).
As Sosa argued, to go beyond primitivism, deﬂationists must commit themselves
to strong versions of their oﬃcial claims. For example, if a deﬂationist said that
there is and can be no theory of truth beyond the instances of the equivalence
schema, they would be making a claim that is quite foreign to primitivism.282
The primitivist can accept these biconditionals as a priori propositions essentially
involving truth, but does not suppose that they are the only such propositions.
Similarly, primitivists show no signs of agreeing to the standard deﬂationist claim
that truth does not play any explanatory role. However, in these cases it may well
seem that primitivism has the upper hand. It is diﬃcult to see why deﬂationists
think these strong conclusions should follow from their basic position, which seems
to be just that of the primitivist. Sosa, accordingly, thinks we should adopt the
more moderate option and endorse primitivism until the strong deﬂationary claims
can be made out.283
These similarities between primitivism and deﬂationism disturb the generally
accepted view that deﬂationism is incompatible with truth-conditional semantics.
In essence, Davidson’s position, which is at least prima facie consistent, is equiv-
alent to the primitivism of the early Moore and Russell plus the added claim that
truth is the central concept in the theory of meaning. Given that the rejection
of truth-conditional semantics is meant to follow from basic deﬂationary claims
about truth, however, and given how similar these seem to primitivism, we suggest
that the arguments for this incompatibility need to be reconsidered.
281[Searle, 1995, 215].
282[Sosa, 1993, 13f].
283ibid. 14.

312
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
3.10
Identity: Dodd, Hornsby, McDowell
It is ironic that the twentieth century (and ur-analytic philosophy itself) began
with a commitment to a primitivist theory of truth that, as we pointed out in our
earlier discussion, is all too easy to confuse with an identity theory. The irony lies
in the century’s ending with the re-emergence of both primitivism and identity
theories which continue to be diﬃcult to keep separate both from each other and
from deﬂationary theories.
The identity theories we have in mind are those oﬃcially endorsed by Julian
Dodd and Jennifer Hornsby, and strongly suggested by the work of John McDowell.
All three are committed to the view that although truth is a property there can
be no deﬁnition of truth.284 They also all profess to be attempting to capture
the truism that ‘When one thinks truly, what one thinks is what is the case.’285
Given this, it does indeed seem as if the identity theory just is primitivism. But
the crucial interpretation put on the truism by identity theorists was, of course,
that truth-bearers are identical with truthmakers.
We have seen the strained
metaphysical assumptions which made this interpretation possible for Bradley and
his followers. Contemporary identity theorists aim to show us diﬀerent ways in
which the initially shocking identity-statement can be made anodyne.286
Dodd’s leading idea is that the mistake of correspondence theories is to suppose
that there is something that makes a truth true.287 In other words, corresponden-
tists go wrong in adopting the truthmaker principle. In particular, Dodd has no
truck with the idea that the world contains states-of-aﬀairs. To rectify the mistake,
he suggests that we do not abandon the intuitive notion of facts, but rather iden-
tify facts with true propositions. To avoid letting states-of-aﬀairs creep in through
the back door, he maintains that propositions must be conceived as Fregean rather
than Russellian. His strategy, then, is to render the identity theory plausible by
following Strawson in suggesting that facts are not in the world. However, Straw-
son’s further point was that if this is right, then claims about truths corresponding
to facts are trivial because there is no way to identify facts independently of iden-
tifying the propositions to which they correspond. The same point can be made,
and has been, about Dodd’s identity theory.288 In response Dodd has emphasized,
as has Hornsby, that it is precisely the point of identity theories that we cannot
identify facts independently of propositions.289 Their positions are maintained in
order to point up the failings of the correspondence theory and not to put forward
positive claims about the nature of truth. These sound remarkably like the words
284[Dodd, 2000, 123; Hornsby, 1997, 2f]. McDowell’s notorious quietism suggests that he would
agree to the indeﬁnability thesis.
285[McDowell, 1994, 27] (his italics). The pull of this idea, and the sense that traditional theories
sell us short, is, as we saw in §§1.3 and 3.4, evident in Frege, Bradley and Mackie. Clearly it is
not a transitory feature of the notion of truth.
286[Candlish, 1999a] explores a range of ways this might be done, some of which resemble the
theories of Dodd, Hornsby and McDowell.
287[Dodd, 2000, ch. 1].
288[Candlish, 1999b, 235f].
289[Dodd, 2000, 125; Hornsby, 1997, 3, fn. 5].

A Brief History of Truth
313
of a deﬂationist. Indeed, Dodd claims that, by ruling out truthmakers, arguing
for his type of identity theory is precisely the ground-clearing that must be done
before one can adopt a deﬂationary theory — as he went on to do.290 But his
position also remains compatible with primitivism. It is thus diﬃcult to see how
his ‘modest identity theory’ is more than deﬂationism (speciﬁcally Horwichian
minimalism) plus an added metaphysical claim that states-of-aﬀairs do not exist.
Rather than conceive of facts as proposition-like, an alternative way to make
an identity theory plausible is to conceive of propositions as fact-like, as the early
Russell and Moore did.291 As Marian David points out in this context, the idea
that some propositions are ‘Russellian’ is once again in favour in the wake of the
work of Kripke, Putnam, Kaplan and others. Even so, this body of work provides
support only for the claim that some propositions are Russellian, not all.292 So,
the identity theory of truth for propositions is diﬃcult to defend whether we see
propositions as fact-like or facts as proposition-like. And yet, as David also notices,
the theory is even more implausible if we treat sentences or belief states as the
bearers of truth.293 Doing so would mean that reality is either linguistic or mental.
Perhaps what is needed to escape these worries is a more radical version of
the identity theory like that defended by Hornsby, who takes her lead from some
of McDowell’s comments in Mind and World. Their strategy, in attempting to
make the purported identity palatable, is to ﬁrst introduce the noun ‘thinkable’
as a way of referring to the contents of our propositional attitudes. Like Dodd,
though, they agree that thinkables belong in the ‘realm of Fregean sense’.294 By
conceiving of content as that-which-can-be-thought, they make the beginnings of
an approach to loosening our grip on the idea that content is radically diﬀerent
from parts of reality. To advance the strategy they ask us to conceive reality as
also within the realm of Fregean sense (or within the space of reasons or, again,
within the sphere of the conceptual). Like the neopragmatists, they ask us to
give up the idea of a reality outside a conceptual scheme. Moreover they do so
in order that we can see ourselves as in direct touch with reality without any
representational intermediaries.295
This, they hope, allows us to suppose that
there is ‘no ontological gap’ between thought and the world.296
Thus, when we think truly we think what is the case because reality itself is
thinkable. But why should we suppose this is so? Why agree with the sort of ab-
solute idealism that posits the rationality of reality? Could there not be parts of
reality that are unthinkable, that will forever resist our attempts to conceptualize
290[Dodd, 2000, chapter 6].
291As [Candlish, 1999a] points out, identity theories can result both from nudging facts towards
propositions and from nudging propositions towards facts. See also [Engel, 2002, 37-40].
292[David, 2001, 692-695].
293Ibid: 691f.
294Hornsby makes her commitment to this thesis clear in her [1999].
295We do not mean to suggest that Hornsby and Dodd are in complete agreement with the
neopragmatists on these matters.
It is part of McDowell’s position, for example, that while
Davidson and Rorty share his goals here, they fail, each in their own way, to carry their projects
to completion.
296[McDowell, 1994, 27]. Hornsby quotes McDowell approvingly at [1997, 1].

314
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
them? There is nothing stopping an identity theorist of this stripe from admitting
that not all reality can be conceptualized provided they limit themselves to the
claim that when a thinkable is true it is identical with an aspect of the world.
But McDowell’s talk of reality being entirely within the conceptual seems to rule
such modesty out. And although Hornsby oﬀers a response to this sort of worry
it is diﬃcult to make out what it amounts to.297 Further, as Dodd points out,
the metaphor of the world being within the realm of sense suggests that the world
is made up of concepts rather than objects.298 At the least, the metaphor needs
to be explained. Although it is unclear whether this can be done successfully,
we think it would be wrong to agree with Dodd that this type of identity theory
is obviously internally incoherent. Dodd bases his claim on the assumption that
Hornsby and McDowell want facts to be both states-of-aﬀairs and propositions.
However, neither part of this assumption is strictly correct. Hornsby has explicitly
asserted that facts are within the realm of sense, states-of-aﬀairs are not.299 On
the other hand, ‘the realm of Fregean sense’ clearly means something quite par-
ticular to McDowell. More speciﬁcally, it is not meant to be the same ‘ontological
category’ as is opposed to the ontological category of ‘the realm of reference’ in the
traditional dichotomy. Again, though, it is unclear what such a position amounts
to and whether it can be defended. The challenge for the identity theorist is the
same as that for the minimal correspondentist: to distinguish their view from
deﬂationism without thereby condemning it to obscurity.
4
BRIEF CONCLUSION
Our historical overview of twentieth century analytic philosophy’s thinking about
truth shows both how diverse this thinking has been and yet how often older
theories have been abandoned and forgotten, only to be taken up again. For, on
the one hand, theories that share the same name have often proved to be vastly
diﬀerent. Yet, on the other, many of the positions adopted at the close of the
century, in an attempt to discover new directions for the philosophy of truth,
turned out to be remarkably similar to the theories oﬀered at the beginning of the
century which had been largely ignored in the quest for novelty.
Despite the range of diﬀerent theories of truth that have been, and are still being,
endorsed, there appears to be a growing consensus about a number of important
claims about truth. The majority of contemporary theorists we have mentioned
agree, for example, that there is less to say about truth, and that theories of
truth are less central to philosophy, than was once thought.
Even those, like
Davidson, who see truth as an essential concept for the possibility of thought, do
not suppose that the attempt to analyse this concept is a worthwhile philosophical
project. While the resulting consensus might be called a deﬂationary attitude to
truth, it should be carefully distinguished from a commitment to what are usually
297[Hornsby, 1997, §§2.3 and 2.4].
298[Dodd, 1995, 163]. McDowell attempted to head oﬀthis sort of criticism in his [1994, 179f].
299[Hornsby, 1999, 241f].

A Brief History of Truth
315
called deﬂationary theories of truth. The latter are speciﬁc theories that embody
a number of controversial commitments about truth and related topics, whereas
the former is a general feeling that the best we will do when it comes to truth is to
spell out a number of truisms and avoid the many mistakes that our brief history
has shown it is all too easy to make.
Perhaps part of the explanation for the apparent consensus is that there is a
more fundamental, and genuine, consensus that many of the historical debates
about truth have been the result either of philosophers focusing their attention
unawares on diﬀerent questions or of disagreements about adjacent philosophical
topics for which truth has served as a proxy. We have seen many instances of both
types of disagreement. The key issues about truth have been thought, at some
periods, to be the use and function of ‘true’, at others to be the term’s deﬁnition,
at still others to be the criteria for attributing truth to truth-bearers, and at others
again to be the task of discovering the nature of the property of truth. Equally
fundamental disagreements have arisen because of diﬀerences about which truth-
bearer is primary and so whether the question of truth is most important for
beliefs, or propositions, or utterances or sentences. The confusion has only been
compounded by the spilling over, into the theory of truth, of disputes in related
areas, such as the theory of meaning, the nature of causal explanations, and the
nature of quantiﬁcation. Often, in fact, the two sources of disagreement we have
mentioned came together when divergences about the way to construct theories
of meaning, say, resulted in disputes about whether such theories belong to the
theory of truth.
As well as being often confused, the extended debate about truth in the previous
century also suﬀered from paying insuﬃcient attention to the nature of truth’s ap-
parent opposite, falsity. Although often paid lip service, this topic has rarely been
adequately addressed. Yet understanding the relation between falsity, rejection,
negation and denial is surely as crucial to understanding our linguistic practice as
is understanding the relation between truth, acceptance and assertion. Further,
as many philosophers have suggested,300 theories of truth should allow us to deal
with the purported examples of truth-value gaps and gluts. However, understand-
ing falsity and its attendant notions is essential to answering questions about the
possibility of such phenomena, and some have argued that the best account of the
sense of a sentence lies in giving both assertion and denial conditions.301 Some
of the problems informing these debates, in particular the Sorites paradoxes, also
suggest that we pay attention to the equally stubborn but neglected question of
the possibility of degrees of truth. For one tempting reaction to the Sorites is to
postulate continuum-many truth-values between 0 and 1.302
300For example, Kripke and Soames (see §3.8 above).
301A rare, but penetrating, discussion of these issues is the debate between Smiley and Priest
[1993]. Smiley [1996] revives the occasionally-made case for distinguishing rejection from nega-
tion, and Rumﬁtt [2000] develops Smiley’s (p. 4) hint that this may undermine the case for the
intuitionist understanding of negation. Dummett, Gibbard and Rumﬁtt (all 2002) debate the
matter.
302For a deft description of the reaction and its motivation, some bibliography, and a brief

316
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
Apart from these neglected questions, the outstanding issue for the theory of
truth is whether it is right to adopt the deﬂationary attitude. It seems evident
that the popularity of this attitude is the result of a failure to reach agreement
even on what an investigation of truth ought to be: there is no consensus on how
to answer the question, What issues properly belong to the theory of truth?, let
alone on whether answering it will involve discovery rather than decision. This
does not imply that the deﬂationary attitude is mistaken: it may be that the
reason philosophers have not found a worthwhile project to agree on is that the
nature of truth entails that there is no such thing. An alternative explanation
is that we have simply lost our way. It remains to be seen which explanation is
true.303
BIBLIOGRAPHY
In order to avoid misleading the reader about historical matters, the cited date in both the main
text and this bibliography is nearly always that of original publication in the original language.
The very few exceptions are noted. Where this date diﬀers from that of the edition cited, a
separate date for the latter is shown.
[Alston, 1996] W. Alston. A Realist Conception of Truth (New York: Cornell University Press),
1996.
[Armstrong, 1997] D. Armstrong. A World of States of Aﬀairs (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press), 1997.
[Austin, 1950] J. L. Austin. ‘Truth’, Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 24: 111-29,
1950. Reprinted in S. Blackburn and K. Simmons, eds, 1999: 149–61. Page references are to
the latter.
[Austin, 1961] J. L. Austin. ‘Unfair to facts’, in his Philosophical Papers (Oxford: Clarendon
Press): 102–23, 1961. Reprinted in S. Blackburn and K. Simmons, eds, 1999: 183–200. Page
references are to the latter.
[Ayer, 1936] A. J. Ayer. Language, Truth and Logic, 1936. Second edition (London: Gollancz,
1946.
[Ayer, 1959] A. J. Ayer. ‘Editor’s introduction,’ in Ayer, A. J. (ed.) Logical Positivism (Glencoe,
Illinois: The Free Press): 3–28, 1959.
[Baldwin, 1991] T. Baldwin. ‘The identity theory of truth’, Mind, 100: 35–52, 1991.
[Baldwin, 1993] T. Baldwin. G. E. Moore: Selected Writings (London: Routledge), 1993.
[Barwise and Perry, 1983] J. Barwise and J. Perry. Situations and Attitudes (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press), 1983.
[Bigelow, 1988] J. Bigelow. The Reality of Numbers: A Physicalist’s Philosophy of Mathematics
(Oxford: Clarendon Press), 1988.
[Black, 1948] M. Black. ‘The semantic deﬁnition of truth’, Analysis, 8: 49-63, 1948.
[Blackburn and SImmons, 1999] S. Blackburn and K. Simmons, eds. Truth (Oxford and New
York: Oxford University Press), 1999.
[Blanshard, 1939] B. Blanshard. The Nature of Thought (London: George Allen and Unwin); 2
volumes, 1939.
[Boghossian, 1990] P. Boghossian. ‘The status of content’, Philosophical Review, 99: 157-84,
1990.
exploration of its ramiﬁcations for, e.g., modus ponens, and assigning truth values to molecular
propositions, see chapter 2 of Sainsbury 1995. There is a connection here between the issues
surrounding vagueness, and those surrounding paraconsistency: in both cases, the question arises
whether the provoking phenomenon (vagueness, inconsistency) belongs merely to the language
or can be found in the world itself.
303We wish to record our thanks to Hugh Mellor for his valuable comments on an earlier draft.

A Brief History of Truth
317
[Bradley, 1883] F. H. Bradley. The Principles of Logic, (London: Oxford University Press, 1883;
1922).
[Bradley, 1893] F. H. Bradley. Appearance and Reality (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1893, 1930).
[Bradley, 1897] F. H. Bradley. Appendix, Index and Explanatory Notes to the second edition of
Appearance and Reality, 1897.
[Bradley, 1907] F. H. Bradley. ‘On truth and copying’, Essays on Truth and Reality (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1907, 1914): 107-26. Reprinted in Blackburn, S. and Simmons, K. (eds)
1999. Page references are to the former.
[Bradley, 1909] F. H. Bradley. ‘On truth and coherence’, Essays on Truth and Reality (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1909, 914): 202-18.
[Brandom, 1988] R. Brandom. ‘Pragmatism, phenomenalism, and truth-talk’, in French, P.,
Uehling, T. and Wettstein, H. (eds) Realism and Antirealism: Midwest Studies in Philosophy,
vol. 12, (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press): 75-93, 1988.
[Brandom, 1994] R. Brandom. ‘Unsuccessful semantics’, Analysis, 54: 175-8, 1994.
[Camp, 1975] J. Camp. ‘Truth and substitution quantiﬁers’, Noˆus, 9: 165-85, 1975.
[Candlish, 1989] S. Candlish. ‘The truth about F. H. Bradley’, Mind, 98: 331-48, 1989.
[Candlish, 1996] S. Candlish. ‘The unity of the proposition and Russell’s theories of judgment’,
in Monk, R. and Palmer, A. (eds) 1996: 103-33.
[Candlish, 1999a] S. Candlish. ‘A prolegomenon to an identity theory of truth’, Philosophy, 74:
190-220, 1999.
[Candlish, 1999b] S. Candlish. ‘Identifying the identity theory of truth’, Proceedings of the Aris-
totelian Society, 99: 233-40, 1999.
[Candlish, 2001] S. Candlish. ‘Grammar, ontology, and truth in Russell and Bradley’, in Gaskin,
R. (ed.) 2001: 116-41, 2001.
[Carnap, 1934] S. Carnap. The Logical Syntax of Language, ﬁrst English edition (London: Rout-
ledge and Kegan Paul, 1934, 1937).
[Carnap, 1935] R. Carnap. Philosophy and Logical Syntax (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trub-
ner & Co. Ltd), 1935.
[Carnap, 1942] R. Carnap. Introduction to Semantics (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press), 1942.
[Carnap, 1949] R. Carnap. ‘Truth and conﬁrmation’, in Feigl, H. and Sellars, W. (eds) Readings
in Philosophical Analysis (Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview Publishing Company): 119-27, 1949.
[Cartwright, 1987] R. Cartwright. ‘A neglected theory of truth’, in his Philosophical Essays
(Cambridge, MA and London: MIT Press): 71-93, 1987.
[Coﬀa, 1991] A. Coﬀa. The Semantic Tradition From Kant to Carnap (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press), 1991.
[Daly, 2003] C. Daly. ‘Truth and the theory of communication’, in Lillehammer, H. and
Rodriguez-Pereyra, G. (eds) 2003: 54-67, 2003.
[David, 1994] M. David. Correspondence and Disquotation (Oxford: Clarendon Press), 1994.
[David, 2001] M. David. ‘Truth as identity and truth as correspondence’, in Lynch, M. (ed.)
2001: 683-704.
[David, 2004] M. David. ‘Don’t forget about the correspondence theory of truth’, Australasian
Journal of Philosophy, 82: 42-7, 2004.
[Davidson, 1967] D. Davidson. ‘Truth and meaning’, Synth`ese, 17: 304-23, 1967; reprinted in
Davidson 1984: 17-36. Page references are to the latter.
[Davidson, 1969] D. Davidson. ‘True to the facts’, Journal of Philosophy, 66: 748-64, 1969;
reprinted in Davidson 1984: 37-54. Page references are to the latter.
[Davidson, 1974] D. Davidson. ‘On the very idea of a conceptual scheme’, Proceedings and Ad-
dresses of the American Philosophical Association, 47, 1974; reprinted in Davidson 1984:
183-98. Page references are to the latter.
[Davidson, 1977] D. Davidson. ‘Reality without reference’,
Dialectica, 31:
247-53, 1977;
reprinted in Davidson 1984: 215-26. Page references are to the latter.
[Davidson, 1979] D. Davidson. ‘The inscrutability of reference’, Southwestern Journal of Phi-
losophy, 10: 7-19, 1979; reprinted in Davidson 1984: 227-41. Page references are to the latter.
[Davidson, 1980] Davidson, D. 1980. Essays on Actions and Events (Oxford: Clarendon Press),
1980.
[Davidson, 1984] D. Davidson. Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation (Oxford:
Clarendon
Press).

318
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
[Davidson, 1986] D. Davidson. ‘A coherence theory of truth and knowledge’, in LePore, E.
(ed.) Truth and Interpretation: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson (Oxford:
Blackwell): 307-19, 1986.
[Davidson, 1990] D. Davidson. ‘The structure and content of truth’, Journal of Philosophy, 87:
279-328, 1990.
[Davidson, 1996] D. Davidson. ‘The folly of trying to deﬁne truth’, Journal of Philosophy, 93:
263-79, 1996; reprinted in Blackburn, S. and Simmons, K. (eds): 308-22. Page references are
to the latter.
[Davidson, 2000] D. Davidson. ‘Truth rehabilitated’, in Brandom, R. (ed.) Rorty and his Critics
(Oxford: Blackwell): 65-74,2000.
[Devitt, 1991] M. Devitt. Realism and Truth, second edition (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press), 1991.
[Dewey, 1910] J. Dewey. ‘A short catechism concerning truth’ in his The Inﬂuence of Darwin
on Philosophy and Other Essays in Contemporary Thought (New York: Peter Smith, 1951):
154-68, 1910.
[Dewey, 1948] J. Dewey. Reconstruction in Philosophy (Boston: Beacon Press), 1948.
[Dodd, 1995] J. Dodd. ‘McDowell and identity theories of truth’, Analysis, 55: 160-5, 1995.
[Dodd, 1996] J. Dodd. ‘Resurrecting the identity theory of truth: a reply to Candlish’, Bradley
Studies, 2: 42-50, 1996.
[Dodd, 2000] J. Dodd. An Identity Theory of Truth (New York: St. Martin’s Press),2000.
[Dokic and Engel, 2002] J. Dokic and P. Engel. Frank Ramsey: Truth and Success (London:
Routledge),2002.
[Dummett, 1959] M. Dummett. ‘Truth’, 1959, reprinted in Dummett 1978: 1-24.
[Dummett, 1973] M. Dummett. Frege: Philosophy of Language (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press), 1973.
[Dummett, 1976] M. Dummett. ‘What is a theory of meaning?’ (II), in Evans, G. and McDowell,
J. (eds) 1976: 67-137.
[Dummett, 1978] M. Dummett. Truth and Other Enigmas (London: Duckworth), 1978.
[Dummett, 2002] M. Dummett. “‘Yes”, “no” and “can’t say”’, Mind 111: 289-96, 2002.
[Engel, 2002] P. Engel. Truth (Chesham: Acumen), 2002.
[Evans and McDowell, 1976] G. Evans and J. McDowell, (eds). Truth and Meaning (Oxford:
Clarendon Press), 1976.
[Field, 1972] H. Field. ‘Tarski’s theory of truth’, Journal of Philosophy, 69:
347-75, 1972;
reprinted in Field 2001: 3-26. Page references are to the latter.
[Field, 1974] H. Field. ‘Quine and the correspondence theory’, Philosophical Review, 83: 200-28,
1974. Reprinted in Field 2001: 199-215. Page references are to the latter.
[Field, 1986] H. Field. ‘The deﬂationary conception of truth’, in Macdonald, G. and Wright, C.
(eds): 55-117, 1986.
[Field, 1992] H. Field. ‘Critical notice: Paul Horwich’s Truth’, Philosophy of Science, 59: 321-
30, 1992.
[Field, 1994] H. Field. ‘Deﬂationist views of meaning and content’, Mind, 103: 249-84, 1994.
Reprinted in Field 2001: 104-140. Page references are to the latter.
[Field, 2001] H. Field. Truth and the Absence of Fact (Oxford: Clarendon Press), 2001.
[Findlay, 1933] J. N. Findlay. Meinong’s Theory of Objects and Values (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1933; 1963; revised edition of Meinong’s Theory of Objects).
[Fogelin, 1987] R. Fogelin. Wittgenstein (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul), 1987.
[Forbes, 1986] G. Forbes. ‘Truth, correspondence and redundancy’, in Macdonald, G. and
Wright, C. (eds): 27-54, 1986.
[Forrest and Khlentzos, 2000] P. Forrest and D. Khlentzos. ‘Introduction: truth maker and its
variants’, Logique et Analyse, 169-70: 3-15, 2000.
[Fox, 1987] J. Fox. ‘Truthmaker’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 65: 188-207, 1987.
[Fraassen, 1997] B. van Fraassen. ‘Putnam’s paradox:
metaphysical realism revamped and
evaded’, Philosophical Perspectives, 11: 17-42, 1997.
[Frege, 1892] G. Frege. ‘On concept and object’, in Translations from the Philosophical Writings
of Gottlob Frege, 1892. Translated and edited by Peter Geach and Max Black, second edition
(Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1960): 42-55.
[Frege, 1918] G. Frege. ‘Thoughts’, 1918. In Frege, Logical Investigations, ed. P. T. Geach (Ox-
ford: Blackwell, 1977): 1-30.

A Brief History of Truth
319
[Gaskin, 2001] R. Gaskin, (ed.). Grammar in Early Twentieth-Century Philosophy (London
and New York: Routledge), 2001.
[Geach, 1962] P. Geach. Reference and Generality (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press),
1962.
[Gibbard, 2002] P. Gibbard. ‘Price and Rumﬁtt on rejective negation and classical logic’, Mind
111: 297-304, 2002.
[Grover, 1992] D. Grover. A Prosentential Theory of Truth (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press), 1992.
[Grover et al., 1975] D. Grover, J. Camp and N. Belnap. ‘A prosentential theory of truth’, Philo-
sophical Studies, 35: 289-297, 1975. Reprinted in Grover 1992: 70-120. Page references are to
the latter.
[Gupta, 1993] A. Gupta. ‘A critique of deﬂationism’, Philosophical Topics, 21: 57-81, 1993.
Reprinted in Blackburn, S. and Simmons, K. (eds) 1999: 282-307. Page references are to the
latter.
[Haack, 1978] S. Haack. Philosophy of Logics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 1978.
[Hale and Wright, 1997] B. Hale and C. Wright. ‘Putnam’s model-theoretic argument against
metaphysical realism’, in Hale, B. and Wright, C. (eds) A Companion to the Philosophy of
Language (Oxford: Blackwell): 427-57, 1997.
[Hempel, 1935] C. G. Hempel. ‘On the logical positivists’ theory of truth’, Analysis, 2: 49-59,
1935 and reprinted in Hempel, Selected Philosophical Essays ed. by R. Jeﬀrey (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000): 9-20. Page references are to the latter.
[Hill, 2002] C. Hill. Thought and World: an austere portrayal of truth, reference, and semantic
correspondence (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 2002.
[Hornsby, 1997] J. Hornsby. Presidential Address: ‘Truth: the identity theory’, Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society, 97: 1-24, 1997; reprinted in Lynch, M. (ed.), 2001. Page references
are to the former.
[Hornsby, 1999] J. Hornsby. ‘The facts in question: a response to Dodd and to Candlish’, Pro-
ceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 99: 241-5, 1999.
[Horwich, 1994] P. Horwich, (ed.). Theories of Truth (Aldershot: Dartmouth), 1994.
[Horwich, 1998a] P. Horwich. Truth, second edition, revised (Oxford: Clarendon Press), 1998.
[Horwich, 1998b] P. Horwich. Meaning (Oxford: Clarendon Press), 1998.
[Hylton, 1990] P. Hylton. Russell, Idealism, and the Emergence of Analytic Philosophy (Oxford:
Clarendon Press), 1990.
[Jackson et al., 1994] F. Jackson, G. Oppy and M. Smith. ‘Minimalism and truth-aptness’,
Mind, 103: 287-302, 1994.
[James, 1904] W. James. ‘Humanism and truth’ in James 1909: 37-60, 1904.
[James, 1907a] W. James. ‘A word more about truth’ in James 1909: 78-89, 1907.
[James, 1907b] W. James. ‘Pragmatism’s conception of truth’ reprinted in Lynch, M. (ed.) 2001:
211-28, 1907.
[James, 1908] W. James. ‘The pragmatist account of truth and its misunderstanders’ in James
1909: 99-116, 1908.
[James, 1909] W. James. The Meaning of Truth (Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1909; 1975)
[Joachim, 1906] H. Joachim. The Nature of Truth (London: Oxford University Press, 1906;
1939).
[Khlentzos, 2000] D. Khlentzos. ‘What in the world would correspond to truth?’, Logique et
Analyse, 169-70: 109-44, 2000.
[Kirkham, 1992] R. Kirkham. Theories of Truth: A Critical Introduction (Cambridge, MA and
London: MIT Press), 1992.
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic (Oxford:
Clarendon Press), 1962.
[Kripke, 1972] S. Kripke. ‘Naming and necessity’, in Davidson, D. and Harman, G. (eds) Se-
mantics of Natural Language (Dordrecht: D. Reidel): 253-355, 1972.
[Kripke, 1975] S. Kripke. ‘Outline of a theory of truth’, Journal of Philosophy, 72: 690-716,
1975.
[Kripke, 1976] S. Kripke. ‘Is there a problem with substitutional quantiﬁcation?’ in Evans, G.
and McDowell, J. (eds) 325-419, 1976.
[Leeds, 1978] S. Leeds. ‘Theories of reference and truth’, Erkenntnis, 13: 111-29, 1978.

320
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
[Lillehammer and Rodriguez-Pereyra, 2003] H. Lillehammer and G. Rodriguez-Pereyra, eds.
Real Metaphysics: Essays in Honour of D. H. Mellor (London and New York: Routledge),
2003.
[Lewis, 1984] D. Lewis. ‘Putnam’s Paradox’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 62: 221-36,
1984.
[Lewis, 2001] D. Lewis. ‘Forget about the “correspondence theory of truth”’, Analysis, 61: 275-
80, 2001.
[Lynch, 1997] M. Lynch. ‘Minimal realism or realistic minimalism?’ Philosophical Quarterly,
47: 512-18, 1997.
[Lynch, 2001] M. Lynch, ed.. The Nature of Truth (Cambridge, MA and London: MIT Press),
2001.
[Macdonald and Wright, 1986] G. Macdonald. and C. Wright, eds. Fact, Science, and Morality
(Oxford: Blackwell), 1986.
[Mackie, 1973] J. L.Mackie. Truth, Probability and Paradox (Oxford: Clarendon Press), 1973.
[Marcus, 1972] R. Marcus. ‘Quantiﬁcation and ontology’, Noˆus, 6: 240-50, 1972.
[McDowell, 1978] J. McDowell. ‘Physicalism and primitive denotation: Field on Tarski’, Erken-
ntnis, 13: 131-52, 1978.
[McDowell, 1994] J. McDowell. Mind and World (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press),
1994.
[Mellor, 2003] D. H. Mellor. ‘Real Metaphysics: Replies’, in Lillehammer, H. and Rodriguez-
Pereyra, G. (eds), 212-38, 2003.
[Mellor, 2004] D. H. Mellor. ‘Truthmakers’, unpublished typescript, 2004.
[Monk and Palmer, 1996] R. Monk and A. Palmer, eds. Bertrand Russell and the Origins of
Analytical Philosophy (Bristol: Thoemmes), 1966.
[Moore, 1899] G. E. Moore. ‘The nature of judgment’, in Baldwin (ed.) 1993: 1-19, 1899.
[Moore, 1907] G. E. Moore. ‘William James’ “Pragmatism”’, 1907. Reprinted in Moore, Philo-
sophical Studies (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1922): 97-146.
[Mulligan et al., 1984] K. Mulligan, P. Simons and B. Smith. ‘Truth-makers’, Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 44: 287-322, 1984.
[Neale, 1995] S. Neale. ‘The philosophical signiﬁcance of G¨odel’s slingshot’, Mind, 104: 761-825,
1995.
[Neurath, 1931] O. Neurath. ‘Physicalism,’ in Neurath 1983: 52-57, 1931.
[Neurath, 1937] O. Neurath. ‘Comments on the papers by Black, Kokoszynska, Williams,’ in
Neurath 1983: 206-8, 1937.
[Neurath, 1983] O. Neurath. Philosophical Papers (1913-1946) edited and translated by Cohen,
R. S. and Neurath, M. (Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel), 1983.
[Oliver, 1999] A. Oliver. ‘A few more remarks on logical form’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society, 99: 247–72, 1999; reprinted (slightly revised) in Gaskin, R. (ed.) 2001: 142-62.
[Palmer, 1988] A. Palmer. Concept and Object (London: Routledge), 1988.
[Pears, 1977] D. F. Pears. ‘The relation between Wittgenstein’s picture theory of propositions
and Russell’s theories of judgement’, Philosophical Review, 86: 177-96, 1977.
[Peirce, 1878] C. S. Peirce. ‘How to make our ideas clear’ in Hartshorne, C. and Weiss, P. (eds)
Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vol. V (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press, 1878; 1960): 248-71.
[Peirce, 1905] C. S. Peirce. ‘What pragmatism is’ in Hartshorne, C. and Weiss, P. (eds) Collected
Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vol V (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press, 1905; 1960): 272-92.
[Pettit, 1996] P. Pettit. ‘Realism and truth: a comment on Crispin Wright’s Truth and Objec-
tivity’, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 56: 883-90, 1996.
[Platts, 1980] M. Platts. ‘Introduction’, in Platts, M. (ed.) Reference, Truth and Reality: Essays
on the Philosophy of Language (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul): 1-18, 1980.
[Popper, 1934] K. Popper. The Logic Of Scientiﬁc Discovery, ﬁrst English edition (London:
Hutchinson, 1934; 1959).
[Popper, 1974] K. Popper. ‘Some philosophical comments on Tarski’s theory of truth’, in Henkin,
L. (ed.) Proceedings of the Tarski Symposium, University of California, June 23-30, 1971
(Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society): 397-408, 1974.
[Priest, 1993] G. Priest. ‘Can contradictions be true?’, Aristotelian Society Supplementary Vol-
ume, 67: 35-54 (Part II of a symposium with T. Smiley), 1993.
[Prior, 1971] A. N. Prior. Objects of Thought (Oxford: Clarendon Press), 1971.

A Brief History of Truth
321
[Putnam, 1960] H. Putnam. ‘Do true assertions correspond to reality?’, in his Mind, Language
and Reality: Philosophical Papers Volume 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975):
70-84, 1960.
[Putnam, 1978] H. Putnam. Meaning and the Moral Sciences (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul), 1978.
[Putnam, 1980] H. Putnam. ‘Models and reality’, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 45: 464-82, 1980;
reprinted in 1983b: 1-25. Page references are to the latter.
[Putnam, 1983a] H. Putnam. Reason, Truth and History (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press), 1983.
[Putnam, 1983b] H. Putnam. Realism and Reason (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press),
1983.
[Putnam, 1988] H. Putnam. Representation and Reality (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 1988.
[Putnam, 1994] H. Putnam. ‘Sense, nonsense, and the senses: an inquiry into the powers of the
human mind’, Journal of Philosophy, 91: 488-504 and 510-17, 1994.
[Putnam, 1996] H. Putnam. ‘On Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics’, Aristotelian Soci-
ety Supplementary Volume,70: 243-64, 1996.
[Quine, 1953] W. V. O. Quine. ‘Two dogmas of empiricism’, in his From a Logical Point of View,
1953. (Second edition, revised. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1961): 20-46. We
have used this version rather than its slightly diﬀerent ancestor (Philosophical Review 1951).
[Quine, 1960] W. V. O. Quine. Word and Object (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 1960.
[Quine, 1970] W. V. O. Quine. Philosophy of Logic (Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall), 1970.
[Quine, 1990] W. V. O. Quine. Pursuit of Truth (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press),
1990.
[Ramsey, 1923] F. P. Ramsey. ‘Critical Notice of Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus’, in Ramsey
1931: 270-86, 1923.
[Ramsey, 1927] F. P. Ramsey. ‘Facts and propositions’, in Ramsey 1931: 138-54, 1927. Also in
Ramsey 1990. Page references are to the former.
[Ramsey, 1929] F. P. Ramsey. ‘General propositions and causality’, in Ramsey 1931: 237-55,
1929. Also in Ramsey 1990. Page references are to the former.
[Ramsey, 1931] F. P. Ramsey. The Foundations of Mathematics (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul), 1931.
[Ramsey, 1990] F. P. Ramsey. Philosophical Papers, ed. Mellor, D. H. (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press), 1990.
[Ramsey, 1927–9] F. P. Ramsey. On Truth, ed. Rescher, N. and Majer, U. (Dordrecht: Kluwer),
1927–9; Episteme, 16: 1991. (Ch. 1 also in Lynch (ed.) 2001 and in Horwich (ed.) 1994.) [The
cited dates are those of likely composition.]
[Restall, 1996] G. Restall. ‘Truthmakers, entailment and necessity’, Australasian Journal of
Philosophy, 74: 331-40, 1996.
[Ricketts, 1996] T. Ricketts. ‘Carnap: from logical syntax to semantics,’ in Giere, R. N. and
Richardson, A. W. (eds) Origins of Logical Empiricism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press): 231-50, 1996.
[Robinson, 2000] D. Robinson. ‘Identities, distinctnesses, truthmakers, and indiscernibility prin-
ciples’, Logique et Analyse, 169-70: 145-183, 2000.
[Rorty, 1982] R. Rorty. Consequences of Pragmatism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press), 1982.
[Rorty, 1986] R. Rorty. ‘Pragmatism, Davidson, and truth’ in Lepore, E. (ed.) Truth and In-
terpretation: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson (Oxford and New York:
Blackwell): 333-55, 1986.
[Rorty, 1995] R. Rorty. ‘Is truth a goal of inquiry? Donald Davidson versus Crispin Wright’,
Philosophical Quarterly, 45: 281-300, 1995. Reprinted in Lynch, M. (ed.) 2001: 259-86. Page
references are to the latter.
[Rorty, 2000] R. Rorty. ‘Response to Donald Davidson’, in Brandom, R. (ed.) Rorty and his
Critics (Oxford: Blackwell): 74-80, 2000.
[Rumﬁtt, 2000] I. Rumﬁtt. “‘Yes” and “no”’, Mind, 109: 781-823, 2000.
[Rumﬁtt, 2002] I. Rumﬁtt. ‘Unilateralism disarmed: a reply to Dummett and Gibbard’, Mind
111: 305-22, 2002.
[Russell, 1903] B. Russell. The Principles of Mathematics (London: Allen and Unwin, 1903;
1937).

322
Stewart Candlish and Nic Damnjanovic
[Russell, 1904a] B. Russell. ‘Meinong’s theory of complexes and assumptions’, 1904. In Russell
1994: 432–74.
[Russell, 1904b] B. Russell. ‘The axiom of inﬁnity’, 1904. In Russell 1994: 476–8.
[Russell, 1905a] B. Russell. ‘The existential import of propositions’, 1905. In Russell 1994: 486–
9.
[Russell, 1905b] B. Russell. ‘On denoting’, 1905. In Russell 1994: 415–27.
[Russell, 1907] B. Russell. ‘The monistic theory of truth’, 1907. In Russell 1910a: 131-46.
[Russell, 1908] B. Russell. ‘William James’s conception of truth’, 1908. In Russell 1910a: 112-30.
[Russell, 1910a] B. Russell. Philosophical Essays. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1966; orig-
inally published with somewhat diﬀerent contents and diﬀerent pagination 1910.
[Russell, 1910b] B. Russell. ‘On the nature of truth and falsehood’, 1910. In Russell 1992: 116–
24.
[Russell, 1911] B. Russell. ‘Knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description’,1911. In
Russell 1992: 148-61,
[Russell, 1912] B. Russell. The Problems of Philosophy (London:
Oxford University Press,
1946), 1912.
[Russell, 1918] B. Russell. ‘The philosophy of logical atomism’, 1918. In Russell 1986: 160–244.
[Russell, 1919] B. Russell. ‘On propositions: what they are and how they mean’, 1919. In Russell
1986: 278-306.
[Russell, 1924] B. Russell. ‘Logical atomism’, 1924. In Russell 1988: 160-79.
[Russell, 1959] B. Russell. My Philosophical Development (London: George Allen and Unwin),
1959.
[Russell, 1986] B. Russell. The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, Volume 8: The Philosophy
of Logical Atomism and Other Essays 1914-19 (London: George Allen and Unwin), 1986.
[Russell, 1988] B. Russell. The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, Volume 9: Essays on
Language, Mind and Matter 1919-26. London:
Routledge, 1988; 1994 (reprint of Unwin
Hyman edition of 1988).
[Russell, 1992] B. Russell. The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, Volume 6: Logical and
Philosophical Papers 1909-13 (London: Routledge), 1992.
[Russell, 1994] B. Russell. The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, Volume 4: Foundations
of Logic 1903-05 (London: Routledge), 1994.
[Sainsbury, 1979] R. M. Sainsbury. Russell (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul), 1979.
[Sainsbury, 1995] R. M. Sainsbury. Paradoxes, second edition (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press), 1995.
[Schiﬀer, 1981] S. Schiﬀer. ‘Truth and the theory of content’ in Parret, H. and Bouveresse, J.
(eds) Meaning and Understanding (Berlin: W. de Gruyter): 204-22, 1981.
[Schlick, 1934] M. Schlick. ‘On the foundation of knowledge’, 1934. Reprinted in Schlick 1979:
370-87.
[Schlick, 1935] M. Schlick. ‘Facts and propositions,’ 1935. Reprinted in Schlick 1979: 400-4.
[Schlick, 1979] M. Schlick. Philosophical Papers, ed. Mulder, H. L. and Velde-Schlick, B. F. B.
van de (Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel), 1979.
[Searle, 1995] J. Searle. Construction of Social Reality (New York: Free Press), 1995.
[Smiley, 1982] T. Smiley. ‘Presidential Address:
The Schematic Fallacy’, Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, 83, 1982/83: 1-17, 1982.
[Smiley, 1993] T. Smiley. ‘Can contradictions be true?’, Aristotelian Society Supplementary Vol-
ume, 67: 17-33 (Part I of a symposium with G. Priest), 1993.
[Smiley, 1996] T. Smiley. ‘Rejection’, Analysis, 56: 1-9, 1996.
[Soames, 1984] S. Soames. ‘What is a theory of truth?’, Journal of Philosophy, 81: 411-29, 1984.
Reprinted in Lynch, M. (ed.) 2001: 397-418. Page references are to the latter.
[Soames, 1989] S. Soames. ‘Semantics and semantic competence’, Philosophical Perspectives, 3:
575-96, 1989.
[Soames, 1999] S. Soames. Understanding Truth (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 1999.
[Sosa, 1993] E. Sosa. ‘Epistemology, realism, and truth: the ﬁrst Philosophical Perspectives
lecture’, Philosophical Perspectives, 7, Language and Logic: 1-16, 1993.
[Stalnaker, 1984] R. Stalnaker. Inquiry (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 1984.
[Stich, 1990] S. Stich. The Fragmentation of Reason (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 1990.
[Stout, 1907] G. F. Stout. ‘Immediacy, mediacy and coherence’, Mind N.S. 17: 20-47, 1907.
[Strawson, 1949] P. F. Strawson. ‘Truth’, Analysis, 9: 83-97, 1949.

A Brief History of Truth
323
[Strawson, 1950] P. F. Strawson. ‘Truth’, Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 24: 129-
56, 1950. Reprinted in Blackburn, S. and Simmons, K. (eds) 1999: 162-182. Page references
are to the latter.
[Strawson, 1964] P. F. Strawson. ‘A problem about truth – a reply to Mr. Warnock’, reprinted
in his Logico-Linguistic Papers (London: Methuen & Co., 1971): 214-33, 1964.
[Tarski, 1933] A. Tarski. ‘The concept of truth in formalized languages’, in Tarski 1983: 152-278,
1933.
[Tarski, 1936] A. Tarski. ‘The establishment of scientiﬁc semantics’, in Tarski 1983: 401-20,
1936.
[Tarski, 1983] A. Tarski. Logic, Semantics and Metamathematics (Indianapolis: Hackett Pub-
lishing Company), 1983.
[Taylor, 1976] B. Taylor. ‘States of aﬀairs’, in Evans, G. and McDowell, J. (eds) 1976: 263-84,
1976.
[Taylor, 1985] B. Taylor. Modes of Occurrence (Oxford: Basil Blackwell), 1985.
[Teichmann, 1992] R. Teichmann. ‘Whyte on the individuation of desires’, Analysis, 103-07,
1992.
[Vision, 2003] G. Vision. ‘Lest we forget “the correspondence theory of truth”’, Analysis, 63:
136-42, 2003.
[Walker, 1989] R. C. S. Walker. The Coherence Theory of Truth (London: Routledge), 1989.
[Walker, 2001] R. C. S. Walker. ‘The coherence theory’, in Lynch, M. (ed.): 123-58,, 2001.
[Wallace, 1971] J. Wallace. ‘Convention T and substitutional quantiﬁcation’, Noˆus, 5: 199-211,
1971.
[Warnock, 1964] G. J. Warnock. ‘A problem about truth’, in Pitcher, G. (ed.) Truth (Englewood
Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall): 54-67, 1964.
[Whyte, 1990] J. T. Whyte. ‘Success semantics’, Analysis, 50: 149-57, 1990.
[Whyte, 1992] J. T. Whyte. ‘Weak-kneed desires’, Analysis, 52: 107-111, 1992.
[Whyte, 1997] J. T. Whyte. ‘Success again: replies to Brandom and Godfrey-Smith’, Analysis,
57: 84-8, 1997.
[Wiggins, 1980] D. Wiggins. ‘What would be a substantial theory of truth?’ in van Straaten, Z.
(ed.) Philosophical Subjects (Oxford: Oxford University Press): 189-221, 1980.
[Williams, 1976] C. J. F. Williams. What is Truth? (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press),
1976.
[Wittgenstein, 1921] L. Wittgenstein. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, 1921; ﬁrst English edition
translated by C. K. Ogden (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1922).
[Wittgenstein, 1953] L. Wittgenstein,. Philosophical Investigations (Oxford: Blackwell), 1953.
[Wright, 1992] C. Wright. Truth and Objectivity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press),
1992.
[Wright, 1995] C. Wright. ‘Critical Notice of The Coherence Theory Of Truth – Realism, An-
tirealism, Idealism, by Ralph C. S. Walker’, Synth`ese, 103: 279-302, 1995.
[Wright, 1999] C. Wright. ‘Truth: a traditional debate reviewed’, Canadian Journal of Philos-
ophy, supp. vol. 24: 31-74, 1999. Reprinted in Blackburn, S. and Simmons, K. (eds) 1999:
203-238. Page references to the latter.
[Wright, 2000] C. Wright. ‘Truth as sort of epistemic: Putnam’s peregrinations’, Journal of
Philosophy, 97: 335-64, 2000.


TRUTH AND PARADOX: 
A PHILOSOPHICAL 
SKETCH 
JC Beall 
1 
AIMS AND STRUCTURE OF THIS ESSAY 
Because of the many surveys or otherwise readable discussions of truth and para- 
dox, I have tried to take a slightly different (philosophical) perspective on the basic 
projects and issues. Moreover, I have tried to avoid focusing on the mathematics, 
leaving citations and ~further reading' to fill out the details; indeed, proofs are 
entirely left to the cited sources, almost all of which are readily available. The risk 
in pursuing these aims is that I will inevitably lnischaracterize certain approaches, 
or at least mislead in various ways. That said, the riskiness is probably worth 
it. And when the risk of distortion 
or being overly sketchy 
is high, I try 
to flag alternative or primary sources to set things straight. (Unfortunately, this 
has resulted in an enormous amount of footnotes.) This essay is not intended as 
a representative survey of the many approaches or, per impossibility, issues that 
are significant in the literature on semantic (or logical) paradox; it aims merely to 
be a discussion of some of the issues and some of the approaches. 
This essay is also abnormal in its chief focus, which is on dtrnth (see §2), where 
dtruth is essentially intersubstitutable: dT{A} and A are intersubstitutible in all 
(non-opaque) contexts, i Since the logic of dtruth cannot be classical (assuming the 
language to be suitably resourceful), theories of dtruth are accordingly nonclassi- 
cal. I focus largely on a few- broad approaches to dtruth, namely, 'paracomplete' 
and ~paraconsistent'. On the other hand, many of the most popular approaches to 
truth-theoretic paradox are not theories of dtruth, but rather theories of some less 
transparent notion. I sketch 
but, for space reasons, only very briefly sketch 
a 
few such approaches in the last few sections. Further reading is given throughout, 
and a few remarks for further reading are given in §11. I should also mention 
that this essay focuses entirely on the semantic side of things. Some sources for 
axiomatic approaches are indicated in §11. 
I have tried to avoid arguing or even commenting much on the adequacy (philo- 
sophical or otherwise) of the canvassed proposals. Instead, I try only to mention 
1Note that, for the most part, I trust context to sort out use-mention. Except when it would 
impede readability, I write (e.g.) T{A} instead of T({A}), despite T's being a unary predicate 
and, so, standardly written as T(x) or the like. I also leave out discussion of GSdel codes, etc., 
although this is certainly in the (mathematical) background. 
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic 
Volume editor: Dale Jacquette 
General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods 
@ 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 

326 
JC Beall 
one or two issues that are relevant to the adequacy of the proposals. I leave debate 
wide open, and otherwise to the cited material. 
The basic structure of the essay is as follows. §2 §3 set up the main focus, 
namely, dtruth and dtruth-theoretic paradox, in particular, Liars. 
§4 covers a 
few different 'paracomplete' approaches to dtruth, beginning with a very infor- 
mal, leisurely discussion of Kripke's non-classical (least fixed point, empty ground 
model) proposal. §5, in turn, focuses on 'paraconsistent' (and, in particular, 'di- 
aletheic') approaches. §6 closes the discussion of dtruth with a brief discussion of 
validity and 'dtruth-preservation'. Turning away from dtruth, §7 briefly sketches 
a few standard parametric and contextualist approaches, including the 'indexi- 
ealist' idea, the 'quantifier-variability' proposal, and 'situational truth'. 
§8, in 
turn, briefly sketches the basic 'revision-theoretic' idea. The final two sections, 
§9 and §10, provide a few comments on related matters, with §9 mentioning 'set'- 
theoretic paradox and its relation to semantics, and §10 (very briefly) discussing 
'revenge'. 
Before turning to the discussion, I should mention the importance 
of truth-theoretic paradox, something often ignored or, perhaps, unappreciated 
by many philosophers working on the 'nature' of truth. (It goes without saying 
that the paradoxes are of fundamental importance in philosophical logic, but they 
are surprisingly not treated as pressing among philosophers, more generally, even 
among those who work on 'nature' questions.) By my lights, it is hard to be too 
invested in theories of the 'nature' of truth without having some grip on, some 
resolution of, the paradoxes. After all, suppose that one's 'nature' story turns on 
various key principles. It may well be that such principles cannot consistently 
or, more broadly, even nontrivially 
or even plausibly be maintained in a logic 
that accommodates the paradoxes. (This issue is particularly pressing when it 
conies to a suitable conditional, a topic discussed below.) Admittedly, the issues 
of 'nature' and logic are related, since one's 'nature' story will often motivate 
if not dictate 
a particular approach to the logic of truth. Still, it strikes me 
as methodologically misguided to plow" forward on 'nature' questions without at 
least a steady eye on the truth-theoretic paradoxes. But, for space reasons, I will 
leave this matter 
like many in this essay 
open. 
2 
DTRUTH AND TRUTH 
There is an established usage of 'is true' according to which 
(A) is true 
and 
A 
are intersubstitutable in all transparent (non-opaque) contexts. Let us use 'dtrue' 
for the given usage, a (unary) predicate dT defined simply in terms of such inter- 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
327 
substitutivity. 2 If the language also has a conditional ~ such that every instance 
of A -+ A is dtrue, then the well-known dT-biconditionals are also, one and all, 
dtrue: dT(A} +-+ A. 
We can think of 'dtrue' (or, as I'll say, dtruth) as a mere expressive device, 
one introduced only to circumvent practical, expressive problems. According to a 
common metaphor, we once spoke only the 'dtrue'-free fragment of our language. 
For the most part, the given fragment served our purposes well. We could say that 
Max is a cat, that GSdel and Tarski were independently ingenious, that there will 
never be cloned animals, and so on. Daily discourse, so long as it didn't generalize 
too much, worked well. But generalization is inevitable. Even in daily discourse, 
let alone science or logic, in general, the need arises to say (what, using dtruth, 
we say when we say) that all of So-and-so's assertions are dtrue (or that they're 
false, that is, that the negation of each of So-and-so's assertions is dtrue). Were we 
God (or even just beings with infinite time or capacities), we wouldn't need to use 
'dtrue' in such generalizing contexts; we could simply assert each of So-and-so's 
assertions (or the negations thereof). But we're not, and so we introduced 'dtrue' 
to achieve the given sorts of expression. And that, and only that, is the job of 
'dtrue' in our language. 
The foregoing, of course, is but a metaphor, one that is common among so-called 
deflationists (or, in particular, disquotationalists). 
Debates rage over whether 
there is more to truth than dtruth, whether there's more to say about the 'nature' 
of truth than is given in the story about the device 'dtrue'. Deflationists, crudely 
put, maintain that we need not (indeed, ought not) pursue the 'nature' of truth: 
at bottom, the expressive device dtr'ue is all that we need acknowledge, a Non- 
deflationists maintain that there's more to truth than what is captured by our 
expressive device dtrue. 
For present purposes, we can set aside the debate between deflationists and 
non-deflationists. Both sides can at least acknowledge the simple, 'merely disquo- 
tational' usage 
what we're calling dtr'uth. The issue at hand concerns truth- 
theoretic paradox, which is accentuated in the case of dtruth. Given the inter- 
substitutivity of dtruth, any distinction between Bivalence (BIV) and the Law of 
Excluded Middle (LEM) collapses 
at least with respect to what can be said in 
the given (object-) language. If, as is standardly assumed, falsity amounts to truth 
of negation (that A is false exactly if ~A is true), then 'dfalse' and 'not dtrue' are 
equivalent, that is, dT(~A) and ~dT(A) are equivalent. In turn, dT(A) V ~dT(A) 
and dT(A} V dT(~A) and A V ~A are equivalent, and so any 'distinction' between 
LEM and BIV collapses 
at least in the language. Dtruth is entirely transparent. 
2There is no aim to coin a neologism here, but rather only an attempt to clarify that we're 
talking about the 'merely expressive' usage of 'true'. I should note that, for purposes of pronun- 
ciation, 'dtrue' follows the conventions of Kaplan's 'dthat' 1989, p. 521, fn. 45. 
3This does not preclude disquotationalists (or deflationists, generally) from acknowledging 
other 'truth-like' predicates that might do significant work (e.g., in semantics, science). The 
requirement on disquotationalists is that any other such predicates be ultimately definable in 
terms of dtruth and other logical devices. 

328 
JC Beall 
3 
LIARS: BROAD PICTURE 
AND PROJECTS 
A typical Liar is a sentence that says 
or may be used to say 
of itself only 
that it is false (or, equivalently in the case of dtruth, not true). Example: 
x/ The ticked sentence in §3 is false. 
If the ticked sentence is true, it is false, and if false, true. Accordingly, if the ticked 
sentence is either true oi" false, it is apparently both true and false. That, in short, 
is the basic Liar paradox. 4 
Two related but distinct projects dominate the Liar-literature and work on 
semantic paradoxes, in general, at least among philosophical logicians concerned 
with modeling truth itself. 
NTP. Non-triviality Project: Explain how, despite having a truth predicate (in our 
language, for our language) and Liar-sentences, our language is nontrivial. 5 
ECP. Exhaustive Characterization Project: ~ Explain how, if at all, we can truly 
characterize 
specify the 'semantic status' of 
all sentences of our lan- 
guage (in our language). 
These projects reflect the core appearances that give rise to the Liar paradox (and 
its ilk). Semantic paradoxes arise, at least in part, fl'om the appearance that we can 
'exhaustively characterize' all sentences of our language in terms of 'semantically 
significant' predicates, and truly do as much in our language. 7 
Consider the classical picture according to which our semantically significant 
predicates are 'true' and 'false'. Our exhaustive characterization takes the form of 
bivalence. 
CEC. Classical: Every sentence is either true or false. 
4All of this can be formalized precisely. The achievements of Tarski 1936; 1944 (and, re- 
latedly, Gadel) made plain that astonishingly few resources are needed to generate the Liar 
paradox: a sufficiently 'syntactically rich' language in which the T-biconditionals hold and for 
which classical logic holds. 
5A trivial language (or theory) is one according to which everything is true. A nontrivial 
language is one that isn't trivial. For convenience, I will often speak of the (non) triviality of 
truth oi" 'true' (relative to some language) to mean the same as 'trivial language'. To say that 
truth 
or 'true' 
is trivial is to say that A is true (or A is in the extension of 'true') for all 
A in the given language. Of course, most theorists are concerned with consistency (and, hence, 
nontriviality); however, 'glut-theorists' and paraconsistentists, in general, are concerned with 
(reasonable) nontrivial but (negation-) inconsistent languages/theories, and so 'nontriviality' is 
a more general term. (See §5 for paraconsistent approaches.) 
6In his 1991, 
Patrick Grim uses 'complete' in the target sense of 'exhaustive'. Were it not 
for the already too many notions of 'complete' in logical literature, Grim's terminology would be 
quite appropriate here. In particular, one can view the two broad approaches to dtruth, sketched 
in §4 §5, as in some sense attempting to deal with a choice between (expressive) 'completeness' 
and (negation) 'consistency'. 
rThroughout, I will restrict 'sentence' to declarative (and, for simplicity, context-independent) 
sentences of a given language. (In some informal examples, context-dependence creeps in, but 
I trust that no confusion will arise.) Unless otherwise noted, I will leave it implicit that, e.g., 
'every sentence' is restricted to the sentences of the given language. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
329 
Given such a characterization 
one that purports to be truly expressible in our 
language and likewise exhaustive 
the nontriviality of our truth predicate (and, 
hence, our language, in general) is immediately in question in the face of Liars 
the ticked sentence oi" the like. 
The classical picture, of course, is just a special case of the Liar phenomenon. At 
bottom, there is a tension between the apparent nontriviality of our truth predicate 
and our language's apparent capacity to achieve (true) exhaustive characterization: 
Ec. Ezhaustive Characterization: Every sentence is either True, False, or Other. 
Here, 'Other' is a stand-in for the remaining 'semantically significant predicates', s 
For present purposes, one can focus on the 'problem cases' and think of the seman- 
tically significant predicates as those that are invoked to classify such cases (e.g., 
Liars and the like). For example, if one wishes to classify all Liars (etc.) as defec- 
tive in some sense or other, then 'defective in some sense or other' is semantically 
significant and thereby stands among one's Others in EC. 9 
The Liar paradox makes it ditlicult to see how" we can have both Ec and a 
nontrivial 
let alone (negation-) consistent 
truth predicate. As above, I will 
(until §7) focus on dtruth (or 'dtrue'), for which intersubstitutivity holds. (See §2.) 
The question is: How can we, as we appear to, have a nontrivial dtruth predicate 
(in our language, for our language) and also achieve exhaustive characterization? 
In focusing on dtruth, there are two chief approaches: paracomplete and para- 
consistent, t° 
These are the approaches that I will discuss until deviating from 
dtruth at §7 §8. 
4 
PARACOMPLETE 
Typical Liars appear to be sentences that are equivalent to their own negations. 
This is especially the case with dtruth, where dT(A) and A are intersubstitutable 
for all A, and hence for Liar-like A. The fundamental intersubstitutivity of dT(A) 
and A is formally modeled by requiring sameness of semantic value: ~(dT(A}) = 
~(A) for all A. 11 Where A is a Liar sentence, the requirement is that ~(A) = 
sI will assume throughout that '(d-)true' and '(d-)false' are among our 'semantically significant 
predicates'. Of course, since I will also assume (throughout) that falsity is truth of negation (i.e., 
that A is false exactly if ~A is true), one might better put EC just as True(A) V Other{A), with 
'Other' as a stand-in, as above. But I will set this aside. 
9I admit that the notion of 'semantically significant predicate' is not precise, but I think that 
the target, intuitive sense is clear. Giving a precise account is an open 
and, in my opinion, 
quite pressing 
issue. Unfortunately, except for a few passing comments, I am forced to here 
leave the notion fairly imprecise, trusting (hoping) that the target idea is clear enough to be 
useful. 
1°The terminology of 'paracomplete', explained in §4, is from Achille Varzi 1999, also used 
by Dominic Hyde 1997. 
(The related terminology of 'gaps' and 'gluts' was introduced by Kit 
Fine 1975.) 
1lOne can think of intersubstitutivity as demanding that A and B entail each other if B 
differs from A only in containing an occurrence of dT(C} where A contains C. (Here, we assume 
transparent contexts.) 

330 
JC Beall 
~(~A), which is impossible in classical semantics. Paracomplete semantics afford 
more options. 
Paracomplete accounts are the dominant approaches towards dtruth. 
'Para' 
in 'paracomplete' comes from the Greek for beyond (or, perhaps, beside). The 
classical picture is one according to which every instance of LEM is dtrue, a picture 
according to which every A or its negation is dtrue. Paracomplete accounts reject 
LEM 
and see it as the main principle that paradoxes call into question. 12 
While I will not discuss the issue of rejection or acceptance in this essay, it 
is worth noting that in paracomplete (and, indeed, paraconsistent) frameworks, 
'reject A' is not usually equivalent to 'accept ~A', at least if, as is the case here, 
we're dealing with dtruth. If one is rejecting AV~A (for some A), then presumably 
one is thereby 
or ought, rationally, thereby be 
rejecting both A and ~A. So, 
rejecting A is not to be understood as accepting that A is not dtrue, which would 
be equivalent to accepting ~A. On all of this, paracomplete theorists can (and, 
presumably, will) agree. 13 
4.1 Kr@ke, Martin Woodruff 
The work of Kripke 1975 
and Martin Woodruff 1975 
was ground-breaking, es- 
pecially in a climate in which 'Tarskian approaches' were the norm. (See §7.1 for a 
basic sketch of Tarski's approach.) I will focus on (the nonclassical) interpretation 
of Kripke's (least fixed point) account. 14 My aim is to give the basic philosophical 
picture, a sketch of the formal model, and a few comments on apparent virtues and 
inadequacies of the account. As throughout, I will focus on the semantic picture, 
tying my remarks to guiding projects NTP and ECP. 
Philosophical picture 
Recall the dtruth-metaphor according to which 'dtrue' is introduced for purposes 
of generalization. 'Prior' to introducing the device, we spoke only the 'dtrue'-free 
fragment. (Similarly for other semantic notions/devices, e.g., 'denotes', 'satisfies', 
'true of', etc.) For simplicity, let us assume that the given 'semantic-free' frag- 
ment (hence, 'dtrue'-free fragment) is such that LEM holds. 15 Letting £0 be our 
'semantic-free fragment', we suppose that A V ~A is dtrue for all A in L20.16 In- 
12paracomplete accounts are often called 'partiality accounts' or 'partial-predicate accounts'. 
See McGee, 19911, Reinhardt, 1986, and Soames, 1999. 
13This will call for a modification of classical probability theory, at least if 'rejection' (similarly, 
acceptance) is to be understood in terms of probability (e.g., degrees of acceptance being cashed 
out in terms of probabilities). I will skip discussion here (though see §4.2 for a brief footnote). 
14There are various interpretation-issues that surround Kripke's seminal work, both philosoph- 
ical and logical. See §4.1 for some of the issues. 
15This assumption sets aside the issue of vagueness (and related sorites puzzles). I am setting 
this aside only for simplicity. The issue of vagueness 
or, as some say, 'indeterminacy', in 
general 
is quite relevant to some paracomplete approaches to dtruth. See Field, 2003b, 
McGee, 1991, Soames, 1999. 
16This assumption is not essential to Kripke's account; however, it makes the basic picture 
much easier to see. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
331 
deed, we may suppose that classical semantics 
and logic, generally 
is entirely 
appropriate for the fragment 120- 
But now we want our generalization-device. How do we want this to work? As 
above, we want dT(A) and A to be intersubstitutable for all A. The trouble, of 
course, is that once 'is dtrue' is introduced into the language, various unintended 
and, given the role of the device, paradoxical 
sentences emerge (e.g., the 
ticked sentence above). 17 
The paracomplete idea, of which Kripke's is the best known, is (in effect) to 
allow some instances of A V ~A to fail. Is In particular, if A itself fails to 'ground 
out' in 120, fails to 'find a value' by being ultimately equivalent to a sentence in 
120, then the A-instance of LEM should fail. 19 
Kripke illustrated the idea in terms of a learning or teaching process. 
The 
guiding principle is that dT(A} is to be asserted exactly when A is to be asserted. 
Consider an 120-sentence that you're prepared to assert 
say, '1 + 1 = 2' or ~Max 
is a cat' or whatever. Heeding the guiding principle, you may then assert that 
'1 + 1 
2' and 'Max is a cat' are dtrue. In turn, since you are now prepared to 
assert 
1. 'Max is a cat' is dtrue 
the guiding principle instructs that you may also assert 
2. "Max is a cat' is dtrue ' is dtrue. 
And so on. More generally, your learning can be seen as a process of achieving 
further and further dtruth-attributions to sentences that 'ground out' in 120. (Sim- 
ilarly for dfalsity, which is just dtruth of negation.) Eventually, your competence 
reflects precisely the defining intersubstitutivity 
and transparency 
of dtruth: 
that dTIA } and A are intersubstitutable for all A of the language. 
But your competence also reflects something else: namely, the failure to assert 
either A or ~A, for some A in the language. To see the point, think of the above 
process of 'further and further dtruth-attributions' as a process of writing two 
(very, very big) books 
one, The Truth, the other The False. Think of each 
stage in the process as completing a ~chapter', with chapter zero of each book 
being empty 
this indicating that at the beginning nothing is explicitly recorded 
as dtrue (or, derivately, dfalse). 2° 
Concentrate just on the process of recording atomics in The True. When you 
were first learning, you scanned 120 (semantic-free fragment) for the dtrue (atomic) 
17With respect to formal languages, the inevitability of such sentences is enshrined in G6del's 
so-called diagonal lemma. (Even though the result is itself quite significant, it is standardly 
called a lemma because of its role in establishing G6del Tarski indefinability theorems. For 
user-friendly discussion of the limitative results, and for primary sources, see Smullyan, 1992. 
For a general discussion of diagonalization, see Jacquette, 2004.) 
lSNB: The sense in which instances of A V ~A 'fail' is modeled by such instances being undes- 
ignated (in the formal model). (See §4.1.) How, if at all, such 'failure' is expressed in the given 
language concerns ECP. (See 4.1.) 
19This is the so-called least fixed point picture. 
')°Publishers would probably delete chapter zero, but it's worth keeping it for present purposes. 

332 
JC Beall 
sentences, the sentences you were prepared to assert. Chapter one of The Truth 
comprises the results of your search 
sentences such as 'Max is a cat' and the 
like. In other words, letting 'I(t)' abbreviate the denotation of t, chapter one of 
The Truth contains all of those atomics A(t) such that I(t) exemplifies A, a 'fact' 
that would're been recorded in chapter zero had chapter zero recorded the dtrue 
semantic-free sentences. 
(For simplicity, if A(t) is an /20-atomic such that I(t) 
exemplifies A, then we'll say that I(t) exemplifies A according to chapter" zero. In 
the case of 'Max is a cat', chapter zero has it that Max exemplifies cathood, even 
though neither 'Max is a cat' nor anything else appears in chapter zero.) 
In the other book, The False, chapter zero is similarly empty; however, like 
chapter zero of The Truth, the sentences that would go into The False's chapter 
zero are those (atomic) £0-sentences that, according to the world (as it were), are 
dfalse 
e.g., '1 + 1 
3', 'Max is a dog', or the like. 21 If A(t) is a dfalse £0- 
atomic, we'll say that according to chapter zero, I(t) exemplifies ~A (even though, 
as above, chapter zero explicitly records nothing at all). In turn, chapter one of 
The False contains all of those atomics A(t) such that, according to chapter zero, 
I(t) exemplifies ~A (i.e., the £0-atomics that are dfalse, even though you wouldn't 
say as much at this stage). 
And now the writing (of atomics) continues: chapter two of The Truth com- 
prises 'first-degree dtruth-attributions' and atomics A(t) such that, as above, I(t) 
exemplifies A according to chapter one, sentences like (1) and 'Max is a cat'. In 
turn, chapter three of The Truth comprises %econd-degree' attributions, such as 
(2), and atomics A(t) such that (as it were) t is A according to chapter two. And 
so on, and similarly for The False. In general, your writing-project exhibits a 
pattern. Where I,i(dT) is chapter i of The Truth, the pattern runs thus: 
h+l(dT) = I,~(dT) U {A(t) : A(t) is an atomic and I(t) exemplifies A 
according to I,i(dT)} 
Let $ comprise all sentences of the language. With respect to The False book, the 
pattern of your writing (with respect to atomics) looks thus: 
I.i+l(dF) 
I.i(dF) U {A(t) : A(t) is an atomic and I(t) ~ 8 or I(t) 
exemplifies ~A according to I,i(dT)} 
So goes the basic process for atomies. But what about compound (molecular) 
sentences? The details are sketched below (see §4.1), but for now" the basic idea is 
as follows (here skipping the relativizing to chapters). With respect to negations, 
~A goes into The True just when A goes into The False. (Otherwise, neither A 
nor ~A finds a place in either book.) With respect to conjunctions, A A t? goes 
into The False if either A or B goes into The False, and it goes into The True 
just if both A and B go into The True. (Otherwise, A A B finds a place in neither 
21For convenience, we'll also put non-sentences into The False. Putting non-sentences into The 
False is not essential to Kripke's construction, but it makes things easier. Obviously, one can't 
write a cat but, for present purposes, one can think of The False as a special book that comes 
equipped with attached nets (wherein non-sentences go), a net for each chapter. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
333 
book.) The case of disjunctions is dual, and the quantifiers may be treated as 
'generalized conjunction' (universal) and 'generalized disjunction' (existential). 2s 
Does every sentence eventually find a place in one book or other? No. Consider 
an atomic sentence L, like the ticked sentence in §3, equivalent to ~dT(L}. 
In 
order to get L into The True book, there'd have to be some chapter in which it 
appears. L doesn't appear in chapter zero, since nothing does. Moreover, L doesn't 
exemplify anything 'according to chapter zero', since chapter zero concerns only 
the Z20-sentences (and L isn't one of those). What 
about chapter one? In order 
for L to appear in chapter one, L would have to be in chapter zero or be such 
that L exemplifies ~dT(x) according to chapter zero. But for reasons just given, 
L satisfies neither disjunct, and so doesn't appear in chapter one. The same is 
evident for chapter two, chapter three, and so on. Moreover, the same reasoning 
indicates that L doesn't appear in The False book. 
In general, Liar-like sentences such as the ticked sentence in §3 will find a place 
in one of our books only if it finds a place in one of the chapters L,(dT) or Li(dF). 
But the ticked sentence will find a place in I,,(dT) or I,i(dF) only if it finds a 
place in I.i_l(dT) or I,,_l(dF). But, again, the ticked sentence will find a place in 
I.i l(dT) or Ii l(dF) only if it finds a place in I.i 2(dT) or I.i 2(dF). And so on. 
But, then, since Io(dT) and Io(dF) are both empty, and since 
by our stipulation 
something exemplifies a property according to Io(dT) only if the property is a 
non-semantic one (the predicate is in /20), the ticked sentence (or the like) fails 
to find a place in either book. Such a sentence, according to Kripke, is not only 
ungrounded, since it finds a place in neither book, but also paradoxical 
it couldn't 
find a place in either book. 23 
So goes the basic philosophical picture. 
What was wanted was an account 
of how, despite the existence of Liars, we could have a dtruth predicate in the 
language 
and do so without triviality (or, in Kripke's case, inconsistency). The 
foregoing picture suggests an answer, at least if we eventually have a chapter I.i(dT) 
such that dT(A} is in Li(dT) if and only if A is in Li(dT), and similarly a chapter for 
The False. What Kripke (and, independently, Martin Woodruff') showed is that, 
provided our 'writing process' follows the right sort of scheme (in effect, a logic 
weaker than classical), our books will contain such target chapters, and in that 
respect our language can enjoy a (nontrivial, indeed consistent) dtruth predicate. 
Making the philosophical picture more precise is the job of formal, philosophical 
modeling, to which I now briefly turn. 
Formal model 
The main results of Kripke, 
1975 and Martin and Woodruff, 1975 are more 
general than I will discuss here. 
As throughout, my emphasis attempts to be 
')')This approach to compound sentences reflects the so-called Strong Kleene scheme, which is 
given in §4.1. 
2aThe force of couldn't here is made precise by the full semantics, but for present purposes one 
can think of couldn't along the lines of on pain of (negation-) inconsistency or, for that matter, 
on pain of being in both books (something impossible, on the current framework). 

334 
JC Beall 
philosophical, with an aim towards ~real truth', with answering NTP and ECP with 
respect to our 'real language'. 
Of course, even though our aim is 'real language', we must none the less abstract 
a bit from the mess. The aim of formal accounts of truth, at least those concerned 
with 'real truth' in natural languages (or the very language 'we' speak), is not to 
give an account of truth, but rather truth-in-Z;, for some formal 'model-language' 
£. The relevance of such an account is that ~real truth' is supposed to be ~similar 
enough' to £-truth, at least in relevant respects, to gain answers to NTP and, 
perhaps, ECP. 
For present purposes, I focus on what is known as Kripke's 'least fixed point' 
model (with empty ground model). I leave proofs to cited works (all of which are 
readily available), and try to say just enough to see how the formal picture goes. 
Following standard practice, we can think of an interpreted language £ as a 
triple (L, A4, ~), where L is the syntax (the relevant syntactical information), M 
is an ~interpretation' or ~model' that provides interpretations to the nonlogical 
constants (names, function-symbols, predicates), and cr is a 'semantic scheme' or 
'valuation scheme' that, in effect, provides interpretations 
semantic values 
to compound sentences. 24 
Consider, for example, familiar classical languages, where the set 12 of 'semantic 
values' is {1,0}. 
In classical languages, M 
= (77, I}, with ~ our (nonempty) 
domain and I an ~interpretation-function' that assigns to each name an element of 
~D (the denotation of the name), assigns to each n-ary function-symbol an element 
of Z? ~ 
~ Z?, that is, an n-ary function from Z? ~ into ~, and assigns to each 
n-ary predicate an element of ~D ~ 
~ 12, a function 
sometimes thought of as 
the intension of the predicate 
taking n-tuples of ~ and yielding a ~semantic 
value' (a ~truth value'). The eztension of an n-ary predicate F (intuitively, the 
set of things of which F is true) contains all n-tuples @1,-.-, an} of D such that 
I(F)((at,..., a~}) 
1. The classical valuation scheme ~- (for Tarski) is the familiar 
one according to which a negation is true (in a given model) exactly when its 
negatum is false (in the given model), a disjunction is true (in a model) iff one 
of the disjuncts is true (in the model), and existential sentences are treated as 
generalized disjunctions. 95 
Classical languages (with suitably resourceful L) cannot have their own dtruth 
predicate, which is the upshot of Tarski's indefinability theorem. Paracomplete 
languages reject the 'exhaustive' feature implicit in classical languages: namely, 
that a sentence or its negation is true, for all sentences. 
The standard way of formalizing paracomplete languages expands the interpre- 
tation of predicates. Recall that in your ~writing process' some sentences (e.g., 
24For present purposes, a semantic scheme or valuation scheme c~ is simply some general 
definition of truth (falsity) in a model. For a more detailed discussion, see Gupta and Belnap, 
1993. 
25I assume familiarity with the basic classical picture, including 'true in £' and so on. To 
make things easier, I will sometimes assume that we've moved to models in which everything in 
the domain has a name, and otherwise I'll assume familiarity with standard accounts of 'satisfies 
A(x) in Z2'. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
335 
Liars) found a place in neither book. We need to make room for such sentences, 
and we can expand our semantic values )2 to do so; we can let )2 = {1, 1 
5,0}, letting 
the middle value represent the status of sentences that found a place in neither 
book. 
Generalizing (but, now, straining) the metaphor, we can think of all n-ary 
predicates as tied to two such 'big books', one recording the objects of which the 
predicate is true, the other the objects of which it is false. On this picture, the 
eztension of a predicate F remains as per the classical (containing all n-tuples 
of which the predicate is true), but we now also acknowledge an antieztension, 
this comprising all n-tuples of which the predicate is false. This broader picture of 
predicates enjoys the classical picture as a special case: namely, where we stipulate 
that, for any predicate, the extension and antiextension are jointly exhaustive (the 
union of the two equals the domain) and, of course, exclusive (the intersection of 
the two is empty). 
Concentrating on the so-called Strong Kleene account 1952, 2a the formal story 
runs as follows. We expand )2, as above, to be {1, s ~,0}, and so our language 
£~ 
(L, jbl, ec} is now a so-called three-valued language (because it uses three 
semantic values). 2r Our designated values 
intuitively, the values in terms of 
which validity or eonseq~tenee is defined 
are a subset of our semantic values; in 
the Strong Kleene case, there is exactly one designated element, namely 1. 
A (Strong Kleene) model 3// = (/9, I} is much as before, with I doing exactly 
what it did in the classical case except that I now assigns to n-ary predicates 
elements of D ~ 
~ {1, 1 0}, since )2 
{1, 1 
5,0}' Accordingly, the 'intensions' 
5, 
of our paracomplete (Strong Kleene) predicates have three options: 1, 1 5, and 0. 
What about eztensions? As above, we want to treat predicates not just in terms of 
extensions (as in the classical languages) but also antiextensions. The eztension of 
an n-ary predicate F, just as before, comprises all n-tuples (al,..., 
art} of ~) such 
that /(F)((al,..., a,n}) 
1. (Again, intuitively, this remains the set of objects of 
which F is true.) The antieztension, in turn, comprises all n-tuples {al,..., 
an} of 
D such that I(F)({al,..., a~}) 
0. (Again, intuitively, this is the set of objects 
of which F is false.) Of course, as intended, an interpretation might fail to put 
z in either the extension or antiextension of F. 
In that case, we say (in our 
'metalanguage') that, relative to the model, F is undefined for x. 98 
26This is one of the paracomplete languages for which Kripke proved his definability result. 
Martin Woodruff proved a special case of Kripke's general 'fixed point' result, namely, the case 
for so-called 'maximal fixed points' of the Weak Kleene scheme, or weak Kleene languages. 
2rKripke 1975 
made much of emphasizing that 'the third value' is not to be understood as a 
third truth value or anything else other than 'undefined' (along the lines of Kleene's original work 
1952). 
I will not make much of this here, although what to make of semantic values that appear 
in one's formal account is an important, philosophical issue, one that I'll briefly touch on in §10. 
(Note that if one wants to avoid a three-valued language, one can let V = {1, 0} and proceed to 
construct a Kleene-language by using partial functions (hence, the standard terminology 'partial 
predicates') for interpretations. I think that this is ultimately merely terminological, but I won't 
dwell on the matter here. 
2SA common way of speaking is to say that, for example, F(t) is 'gappy' with respect to I(t). 
This terminology is appropriate if one is clear on the relation between one's formal model and the 

336 
JC Beall 
Letting .7 -+ and jr 
be the extension and antiextension of F, respectively, it is 
easy to see that, as noted above, classical languages are a special case of (Strong 
Kleene) paracomplete languages. Paracomplete languages typically eschew incon- 
sistency, 29 and so typically demand 
that jr+ N jc- 
0, in other words, that 
nothing is in both the extension and antiextension of any predicate. In this way, 
paracomplete languages (typically) agree with classical languages. The difference, 
of course, is that paracomplete languages do not demand 
that jr+ U jr 
:D for all 
predicates F. But paracomplete languages allow for such 'exhaustive constraints', 
and in that respect can enjoy classical languages as a special case. 
To see the close relation between classical languages and Strong Kleene, notice 
that n, the Strong Kleene valuation-scheme, runs as follows (here treating only 7, 
V, and B). Where V~4(A) is the semantic value of A in A// (and, for simplicity, 
letting each object in the domain name itself), and, for purposes of specifying 
scheme ~, treating F as standardly (linearly) ordered: 
K1. V~(~A) 
1 
VM(A). 
K2. V~(A V B) = max(Vjt4(A), VM (B)). 
K3. Vj~(~xm(x)) = max{Vj~(A(t/x)): fox" all t • ~}. 
The extent to which classical logic is an extension of a given paracomplete logic 
depends on the semantic scheme of the language. 3° Since n, as above, is entirely 
in keeping with the classical scheme 7 except for 'adding an extra possibility', it is 
clear that every classical interpretation is a Strong Kleene-interpretation (but not 
vice versa). 3x 
Let us say that an interpretation verifies a sentence A iff A is designated (in this 
case, assigned 1) on that interpretation, and that an interpretation verifies a set 
of sentences ~ iff it verifies every element of ~. We define semantic consequence 
in familiar terms: A is a consequence of N iff every interpretation that verifies 
also verifies A. I will use 'lb,~' for the Strong Kleene consequence relation, so 
understood. 32 
Let us say that a sentence A is logically true in £~ exactly if ~ IP~ A, that is, 
iff A is designated (assigned 1) in every model. A remarkable feature of £~ is 
that there are no logical truths. To see this, just consider an interpretation that 
target notions that the model is intended to serve (in one respect or other), but the terminology 
can also be confusing. I will return to this point below (see §4.2 and §10). 
29But see §5.2. 
3°Here, perhaps not altogether appropriately, I am privileging model theory over proof theory, 
thinking of 'logic' as the semantic consequence relation that falls out of the semantics. This is 
in keeping with the elementary aims of the essay, even though (admittedly) it blurs over a lot of 
philosophical and logical issues. 
31Note that in classical languages, VA4 (A) ~ {1, 0} for any A, and the familiar classical clauses 
on negation, disjunction, etc. are then simply (K1) (K3). 
32'1~' iS increasingly used for forcing in set theoretic-logical literature, and so '~' might be a 
better choice for semantic consequence. The trouble is that the latter is very standardly used in 
truth-theoretic literature to represent the true-in-a-language or true-in-a-model relation. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
33Y 
1 
assigns ~ to every atomic, in which case, as an induction will show, every sentence 
1 
is assigned ~ on that interpretation. Hence, there's some interpretation in which 
no sentence is designated, and hence no sentence designated on all interpretations. 
Afortiori, LEM fails in Strong Kleene languages. 33 
And now an answer to NTP, with respect to dtruth, becomes apparent. What 
we want is a model of how our language can be nontrivial (indeed, consistent) 
while containing both a dtruth predicate and Liar-like sentences. In large part, 
the answer is that our language is (in relevant respects) along Strong Kleene lines, 
that the logic is weaker than classical logic. Such a language, as Kripke showed, 
can contain its own dtruth predicate. 
The construction runs (in effect) along the lines of the 'big books' picture. For 
simplicity, let £~ be a classical (and, hence, Strong Kleene) language such that L 
(the basic syntax, etc.) is free of semantic terms but has the resources to describe 
its given syntax 
including, among other things, having a name (A) for each 
sentence. (So, I assigns to each r~-ary predicate an element of ~9 ~ 
~ {1, 0}, even 
though the values F of Z2~ also contain ½.) What we want to do is move to a richer 
language the syntax L t of which contains dT(z), a unary predicate (intended to 
be a dtruth predicate for the enriched language). For simplicity, assume that the 
domain I) of £~ contains all sentences of Lt. 34 
Think, briefly, about the 'big books' picture. One can think of each successive 
'chapter' as a language that expands one's official record of what is dtrue (dfalse). 
More formally, one can think of each such 'chapter' of both books as the extension 
and antiextension of 'dtrue', with each such chapter expanding the interpretation 
of 'dtrue'. 
Intuitively (with slight qualifications about chapters zero), one can 
think of ~i+l(dT) as explicitly recording 'what is true' acco~ding to chapter I.i(dT). 
The goal, of course, is to find a 'chapter' at which we have I,i+l(dT) = I,i(dT), a 
'fixed point' at which anything dtrue in the language is fully recorded in the given 
chapter 
one needn't go further. Thinking of the various 'chapters' as la~t9~uagcs, 
each with a richer interpretation of 'dtrue', one can think of the 'fixed chapter' as 
a language that, finally, has a dtruth predicate for itself. 
Returning to the construction at hand, we have our Strong Kleene (but classical) 
'ground language' £~ that we now expand to/;t, the syntax of which includes that 
of £~ but also has dT(z) (and the resulting sentences formable therefrom). We 
want the new language to 'expand' the ground language, and we want the former 
to have a model that differs from the latter only in that it assigns an interpretation 
to dT(z). For present purposes, we let I t, the interpretation function in £t, assign 
1 
(0, 0) to dT(z), where (~, 0) is the function that assigns ~ to each element of l) t. 
(Hence, the extension and antiextension of dT(z) in £t are both empty.) This is 
the formal analogue of 'chapter zero'. 
33This is not to say, of course, that one can't have a Strong Kleene 
or paracomplete, in 
general 
language some proper fragment of which is such that A V ~A holds for all A in the 
fragment. (One might, e.g., stipulate that arithmetic is such that A V ~A holds.) 
34This is usually put (more precisely) as that the domain contains the G6del-codes of all such 
sentences, but for present purposes I will skip over the mathematical details. 

338 
JC Beall 
The crucial question, of course, concerns further expansion. How do we expand 
the interpretation of dT(x)? How" do we move to 'other chapters' ? How, in short, 
do we eventually reach a 'chapter' or language in which we have a dtruth predi- 
cate for the whole given language? This is the role of Kripke's 'jump operator'. 
What we want, of course, are 'increasingly informative' interpretations (T~ +, T~ ) 
of dT(x), but interpretations that not only 'expand' the previous interpretations 
but also preserve what has already been interpreted. If A is dtrue according to 
chapter i, then we want as much preserved: that A remain dtrue according to chap- 
ter i + 1. This is the role of the 'jump operator', a role that is achievable given 
the so-called monotonieity of Strong Kleene valuation scheme n.35 The role of the 
jump operator is to eventually 'jump' through successive interpretations (chapters, 
languages) Lz(dT) and land on one that serves the role of dtruth 
serves as an 
interpretation of 'dtrue'. As above, letting I,~(dT) be a function (T~ +, T~-) yielding 
'both chapters i', the goal is to eventually 'jump' upon an interpretation (T~ +, T~ ) 
such that (Ti+ , ~ 
) = (T~+I, T~+I). 
Focusing on the 'least such point' in the Strong Kleene setting, Kripke's con- 
struction proceeds as above. We begin at stage 0 at which dT is interpreted as 
(0, 0), and we define a 'jump operator' on such interpretations: 36 dT is interpreted 
T+ 
as (~+l, ~+l) at stage i + 1 if interpreted as ( ~ , T~ ) at the preceding stage i, 
where, note well, ~/;1 comprises the sentences that are true (designated) at the 
preceding stage (chapter, language) i, and T~+ 1 the false sentences (and, for sim- 
plicity, non-sentences) at i. Accordingly, we define the 'jump operator' g~ thus: 37 
T + 
The jump operator yields a sequence of richer and richer interpretations that 
'preserve prior information' (given monotonicity), a process that can be extended 
into the transfinite to yield a sequence 
),... 
defined (via transfinite recursion) thus: as 
aSMonotonicity is the crucial ingredient in Kripke's (similarly, Martin Woodruff's) general 
result. Let Ad and fl/V be paracomplete (partial) models for (uninterpreted) L. Let F + be 
the extension of F in Ad, and similarly FI+I, for Ad t. (Similarly for antiextension.) Then Ad / 
extends 2M iff the models have the same domMn, agree on interpretations of names and function 
signs, and 5 =+ • F +, and F M • FM, for all predicates F that M and M' interpret. (In other 
words, Ad ~ doesn't change 2~l's interpretation; it simply interprets whatever, if anything, Ad 
left uninterpreted.) MONOTONICITY PROPERTY: A semantic (valuation) scheme cr is monotone 
iff for any A that is interpreted by both models, A's being designated in 3/ implies its being 
designated in 2t/V whenever fl/V extends 3/. So, the montonicity property of a scheme ensures 
that it 'preserves truth (falsity)' of 'prior interpretations' in the desired fashion. 
36S0, our operator operates on the set of all (admissible) functions from 1:) into {1, 1 
7,0}, where 
Z) is in our 'ground language', as above. 
37Note that Kripke's definition applies to any monotone scheme c~. I relativize the operator to 
t~ just to remind that we here focusing on the Strong Kleene case. 
3sIf the reader isn't familiar with transfinite recursion, just note that it's much like ordinary 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
339 
ab. Base. (To +, T o ) 
(0, 0). 
aS. Successor. (~-2÷l,~-a÷l) 
J~((7-2,7-c~ )). 
al. Limit. For limit stages, we collect up by unionising the prior stages: 
What Kripke showed 
for any monotone scheme, and a fortiori for Strong Kleene 
is that the transfinite sequence reaches a stage at which the desired dtruth 
predicate is found, a 'fixed point' of the jump operator such that we obtain 
('~2,'~0,) 
('~2+1,'rc~+1) 
,Jg(('~2,'rc~ )) 
The upshot is that 'chapter a' or 'language a' is such that T + and T~- comprise 
all of the dtrue (respectively, dfalse) sentences of £~, the language at a, which is 
to say that £~ contains its own dtruth predicate. 
The proof of Kripke's result is left to cited work. 39 For present purposes, I 
move on to a few comments about the given paracomplete account. 
Comments 
In this section I briefly mention a few" issues concerning the philosophical appli- 
cation of Kripke's paracomplete account, concentrating on the unifying projects, 
NTP and ECP. I leave much of the discussion to cited sources, especially with 
respect to what I call 'interpretation issues'. 
Interpretation issues 
Three salient interpetation-related issues have emerged with respect to Kripke's 
proposal(s). 4° I simply mention the issues here, pointing to cited works for further 
discussion. 4x 
recursive definitions except for requiring an extra clause for so-called 'limit ordinals'. Here, c~ 
and e are ordinals, and ), a 'limit ordinal'. (One can find a discussion of transfinite recursion 
in most standard set theory books or metatheory textbooks. See too McGee, 1991, Smullyan, 
1993.) 
39Kripke's own proof is elegant, bringing in mathematically important and interesting results 
of recursion theory and inductive definitions. Kripke's proof is also perhaps more philosophically 
informative than a popular algebraic proof, especially with respect to the least fixed point (on 
which we've focused here). Still, if one simply wants a proof of the given result (e.g., existence of 
least fixed point), a straightforward algebraic proof is available, due to Visser 2004 and Fitting 
1986, and discussed in a general, user-friendly fashion by Gupt~Belnap 1993. 
4°Despite my talk of Kripke's proposal or the like, I should make the traditional note that 
Kripke himself abstained from endorsing any of the particular accounts in his Kripke, 1975. So 
noted. 
41I should perhaps emphasize that, by my lights, the 'interpretation issues' are important and, 
were it not for space considerations, I would devote much more space to them. 

340 
JC Beall 
Ikl. Which fixed point? 
Ik2. Supervenience or Transparency? 
Ik3. Classical or nonclassical theory? 
I will (very) briefly discuss each issue in turn. 
(Ikl): Take any monotonic semantic (valuation) scheme ~.42 Kripke showed 
that the (suitably defined) 'jump operator' over ~-interpretations will have a fixed 
point that can serve as an interpretation of a dtruth predicate (for the given 
language). But while we've narrowly focused on one particular interpretation (the 
least fixed point), there are in fact many fixed points (as Kripke noted), and 
there's some controversy about which of the many fixed points best model the 
dtruth predicate. For discussion of the issue see Gupta and Belnap, 1993. 
(Ik2): This issue is related to (Ikl). Michael Kremer 1988 
argues that the 
so-called 'supervenience' and 'transparency' ideas about dtruth are in conflict in 
Kripke's proposal. The former is the idea that once the non-semantic 'facts' are 
fixed, then so too is the interpretation of 'dtrue'. The latter idea is as indicated 
throughout: that 'dtrue' is entirely transparent, that it, unlike the former idea, 
dictates no particular interpretation other than one that affords its essential inter- 
substitutivity. A related issue 
concerning the philosophical significance of fixed 
point constructions, generally 
is discussed by Philip Kremer 2000. 
(Ik3): This is a slightly more technical issue. In §4.1 §4.1 I focused entirely 
on r~-based languages, the Strong Kleene, least fixed point proposal. Moreover, I 
have focused entirely on a nonclassical reading of that proposal 
one for which 
the resulting logic is nonclassical (and, indeed, Strong Kleene). But a related, 
classical reading is also well-known, a reading (and resulting classical truth theory) 
proposed by Sol Feferman 1984. 
This reading is standardly called 'KF' (for 
Kripke Feferman). While the proposal is interesting, it is not an account of dtruth, 
since it gives up the essential intersubstitutivity of dT(A) and A. 43 See Reinhardt, 
1986 and Maudlin, 2004 for further discussion and related proposals. 
Non-triviality project 
Recall that NTP, the non-triviality project, is to explain how we can enjoy a non- 
trivial language that has a dtruth predicate and Liar-like sentences. In Kripke's 
case, the project is to show how we can enjoy a consistent dtruth predicate despite 
Liars. In general, one aims to answer NTP by constructing an artificial, formal 
language 
the model language 
that contains its own dtruth predicate, and 
42Kripke 1975 explicitly discusses two other well-known schemes, namely, the Weak Kleene 
scheme (which is Bochvar's 'internal' scheme) and van Fraassen's supervaluational scheme. 
(Martin Woodruff 1975 proved the existence of the 'maximal fixed point' wrt the Weak Kleene 
scheme.) 
43That it gives up on dtruth is plain from the fact that Feferman was after a consistent, classical 
theory, something with which dtruth is incompatible, at least given usual syntactic resources. 
(One conspicuous example of the departure from dtruth is in KF's commitment to instances of 
A A ~Tr(A}, something that would be inconsistent if 'Tr' were read as dtruth.) 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
341 
then claims that, at least in relevant respects, 'real dtruth' is modeled by truth- 
in-the-model language. The point of the model language is to serve as a clear, 
albeit idealized, model that explains how dtruth (in our real language) can achieve 
consistency (or, more broadly, nontriviality). 44 
Some standardly object that Kripke's account doesn't answer NTP, the reason 
being that certain notions used in the 'metalanguage' (the language in which one 
constructs one's 'model language') are not expressible in the object- or model 
language. I will return to this issue 
what is often dubbed revenge 
in §10. 
For now, I will simply sketch an example of a common charge against Kripke's 
(and many similar) accounts. 
Concentrate on the canvassed case, namely, the Strong Kleene case. Let £~ be 
such a (fixed point) language constructed via the co-scheme. 4s In constructing £~, 
we use 
in out" metalanguage 
classical set theory, and we define truth-in-£~ 
(and similarly, £~-falsity). Moreover, we can prove 
in our metalanguage 
that, despite paradoxical sentences, a sentence dT(A} is /2~-true exactly if A is 
£~-true. 
The common charge is that £~, so understood, is not an adequate account of 
dtruth (dfalsity) itself: it fails to illuminate how dtruth itself achieves consistency. 
The charge is that £~-truth achieves its consistency in virtue of/2~'s expressive 
poverty: L;~ cannot, on pain of inconsistency, express certain notions that our 
'real language' can express. Example: Suppose that £~ contains a formula A(x) 
that defines {B : B is not £~-true}. And now, where ~ says A((A)), 46 we can 
immediately prove 
in the metalanguage 
that A is £~-true iff A((A}) is /2~- 
true iff A is not £~-true. Because 
and only because 
we have it in our classical 
metalanguage that A is £~-true or not, we thereby have a contradiction: that A is 
both £~-true and not. But since we have it that Z2~ is consistent (given consistency 
of classical set theory in which Z2~ is constructed), we conclude that £~ cannot 
express 'is not £~-true'. 
The common charge, then, amounts to this: that the Kripkean model fails to 
be 'enough like our real language' to explain at least one of the target phenomena, 
namely, dtruth's consistency. Our metalanguage is part of our 'real language', 
and we can define {B : B is not /2~-true} in our metalanguage. 
As the Krip- 
kean language cannot similarly define {B : B is not £~-true}, the Kripkean model 
thereby fails to illuminate dtruth's consistency. In short, the proposed model fails 
to adequately answer NTP. 
Despite the popularity of this sort of charge, I think that it is confused. 
I 
will return to this in §10, but the basic confusion arises from conflating the model- 
relative notions (e.g., truth-in-the-model language), which are defined in a classical 
metalanguage, and the target notions in the 'real language'. Since classical logic is 
an extension of Strong Kleene 
semantically put, any classical interpretation is 
44Moreover, and importantly, such artificial 'model languages' aim to serve as models in a more 
technical sense 
affording a consistency proof. 
45The point applies to any of the given languages. 
46This is the familiar sense of 'says' introduced in Burge, 1979. 

342 
JC Beall 
a Strong Kleene interpretation 
there's no obvious reason why one can't ~stand 
squarely within a classical fragment' of one's 'real language' and define model- 
relative notions that serve as heuristic tools (serve, e.g., to answer NTP). 47 
If 
that is correct, then one can't expect 'true-in-the-model language' to be exactly 
like dtruth, since 
on the paracomplete proposal 
LEM fails for the latter but 
holds for the former. Indeed, the difference between the two notions is conspicuous: 
dtruth cannot be defined in a classical language (or fragment thereof), but 'true- 
in-the-model language' can be so defined (e.g., in Kripke's and others' proposals). 
So, even on the surface, there is reason to think that the common charge (sketched 
above) turns on a confusion. 4s 
Put another way, the problem with such common charges is that they're either 
confused or unwarranted. The paracomplete theorist proposes that LEM fails for 
negation (and, presumably, any 'negation-like' devices) in our 'real language', the 
language for which NTP arises. In the Strong Kleene framework, the paracomplete 
theorist claims that Strong Kleene is our 'real logic', the logic governing our real 
language. But that's compatible with the real language having an entirely classical 
proper fragment the logic of which 
restricted to that fragment 
is classical. 
(Recall, as above, that classical logic is a proper extension of Strong Kleene.) 
For convenience (or, perhaps, other reasons), the paracomplete theorist, towards 
answering NTP, 'stands squarely in the classical fragment' of her real language to 
construct an artificial language 
a model language intended to model the real 
language in relevant respects. The construction consists of defining various model- 
relative notions such as true-in-the-model language and, note well, its classical 
complement (viz., 'not true-in-the-model language') for which, of course, LEM 
holds. Now, the common charge, as sketched above, is confused if it conflates 
the model-relative notion of 'not true-in-the-model language' with, for example, 
'not dtrue'. But it should also be plain that the charge is unwar'ranted if it merely 
assumes that there's some negation-like device No T in the real language for which, 
for example, every sentence (in the real language) is either dtrue or NoT. The 
paracomplete theorist maintains that, perhaps in addition to other phenomena, 
the paradoxes teach us that there's no such device. The common charge, in turn, 
must come equipped with an argument that there is such a device, if it is wishes to 
47In terms of the logics, one can think of a logic being an extension of another iff the former 
'contains more validities'. More precisely, letting VL and V L, comprise the valid sentences and 
'rules' (argument-validities) of two different logics L and L ~, we say that L ~ extends L exactly if 
VL, • VL, and properly extends iff V L, C VL. As in §4.1, it is easy to see that classical logic 
(properly) extends Strong Kleene. (What mightn't be as obvious is that all classically valid rules 
that don't turn on classically valid sentences are valid in Strong Kleene.) 
48Hartry Field 2003b, 
correctly in my opinion, conjectures that some of the noted confusion, 
at least targeted at the Kripkean Strong Kleene proposal(s), may well arise due to a confusion 
between the nonclassical reading, on which I've focused here, and the KF-reading noted above. 
On the latter reading, the proposal has it that some sentences are neither true nor false. Such 
a notion makes little sense if 'true' and 'false' are understood as dtruth and dfalse. (This, of 
course, is precisely not how 'true' or 'false' are understood in KF!) On the nonclassical reading, 
in which we have dtruth, it makes little sense to talk in terms of 'neither dtrue or dfalse'. I will 
return to the issue of 'neither dtrue or dfalse' in the next (sub- sub-) section, and also in §4.2. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
343 
show the inadequacy of the paracomplete account with respect to NTP. (Pointing 
out that we use 'not true-in-the-model language' in our real language is irrelevant, 
since that, as above, is merely model-relative.) So, such common charges are either 
unwarranted or confused. 49 
Despite the confusion or lack of warrant in such common charges, there is none 
the less something correct in the objection, something about expressive poverty. 
But the issue, I think, has less to do with NTP than with ECP, to which I now 
(briefly) turn. 
E:dtaustive characterization project 
EcP is the project of explaining how, if at all, we can achieve 'exhaustive char- 
acterization' in a language with its own dtruth predicate (in the language) and 
Liar-like sentences. 
While 'exhaustive characterization' remains imprecise, the 
intuitive import is clear: a language in which we have various 'semantically sig- 
nificant predicates' that may be used to e:dtaustively and correctly (semantically) 
categorize all sentences of the language. 
One way of thinking about 'exhaustive characterization', as here intended, is as 
follows. Suppose that our semantic-free fragment/2o is exhaustively characterized 
classically, in which case we have it that, where cEc is the 'classical exhaustive 
characterization', 
cEc. Every sentence of/20 is either dtrue or dfalse. 
Now, what Kripke showed 
and paracomplete theorists, in general, advance 
is that we can retain our dtruth device (the predicate 'dtrue') if our language 
goes beyond the classical 
opens up the 'semantically significant options' for 
sentences. The idea is that, while cEc may suffice for Z:0, a genuinely e:chaustive 
characterization requires another category: 
Ec. Every sentence (in the language) is either dtrue, dfalse, or Other. 
The question is: how" shall Other be understood? 
To begin, one way that 'Other' should not be understood is as implying not 
dtrue or, hence, neither dtrue nor dfalse, at least in paracomplete accounts in 
which normal De Morgan principles (e.g., distribution-like principles) hold for the 
extensional connectives. 5° Suppose, for example, that 'other' in Ec is cashed out 
such that Other(A} implies ~dT(A}, and hence 
given intersubstitutivity 
implies ~A. One reason for introducing 'Other' into the language is to correctly 
characte~ize Liars 
e.g., the ticked sentence in §3. Let A be sentence that says 
49Hartry Field 2003b; 2005b has made a lot of use 
good use, in my opinion 
of this basic 
point. But I trust that the main point is fairly clear and uncontroversial. (Where controversy 
might arise is with EcP, to which I turn below.) 
5°In my discussion of paracomplete (and, for that matter, paraconsistent) accounts, I focus 
entirely on 'normal accounts', accounts for which conjunction, disjunction, and negation interact 
in standard ways 
at least for the 'classical values'. While I think that non-truth-functional 
approaches are worth exploring, e.g. Beall, 2005a, I omit those here due to space considerations. 

344 
JC Beall 
of itself (only) that it's not dtrue, that is, a sentence equivalent to ~dT(A) and, 
hence, ~A. If 'Other' is to play the role for which it was introduced 
namely, to 
correctly characterize, perhaps among other things, Liars 
then one would want 
Other(A} to be dtrue. But if, as supposed, Other(A) implies ~dT(A) and, hence, 
implies ~A, then inconsistency abounds: from the fact that A is other, it follows 
that A is not dtrue, in which case, since that is precisely what A says, A is also 
dtrue, by the essential intersubstitutivity of dtruth. 
In general, then, it is not difficult to see that 'Other' in EC cannot be consistently 
understood as implying not dtrue) 1 The point applies in particular to the Strong 
Kleene proposal of Kripke: it makes no sense to say of Liars that they are neither 
dtrue nor dfalse) 2 
In the end, while the account provides a (paracomplete) response to NTP, 
Kripke's Strong Kleene proposal affords no answer to ECP. 5a As a result, there's 
no 'significantly semantic predicate' that is introduced 
in the given language (as 
opposed to model-relative metalanguage-terms) 
for purposes of correctly char- 
acterizing Liars, at least on Kripke's paracomplete account. And this is thought 
by some, perhaps many, to be an inadequacy of the proposal. 
I will return to the issue of ECP below. For now, I turn to one more issue 
concerning Kripke's Strong Kleene proposal, the issue of a suitable conditional. 
Dtruth and dT-biconditionals 
What are standardly called T-biconditionals, biconditionals of the form T(A} ~ A, 
have long been thought to be an essential feature of truth, something at least 
essential to 'the' so-called naive theory of truth. But what about dtruth? What is 
essential to dtruth is its transparency, its intersubstitutivity. Whether all instances 
of dT(A) ~ A hold depends entirely on the sort of conditional one has, whether, 
for example, one's conditional ~ is such that A ~ A is valid. If A ~ A is valid in 
the language, then (obviously) the dT-biconditionals will thereby hold (assuming, 
as I will, that ~ is defined as usual). 
Whether an acceptable theory of dtruth must be one that validates all dT- 
biconditionals is an important question that I'll none the less leave open. For 
51Recall that we are focusing on dtruth, which requires the intersubstitutivity of dT(A} and 
A. Deviating from dtruth affords more options, and in many ways is what (or, more accurately, 
what may have) motivated approaches like Feferman, 1984, Maudlin, 2004, and so on. 
52Recall the difference between the model language and the real language, and in particular the 
difference between model-relative (ultimately, merely instrumental) notions and the 'real notions' 
intended to be modeled. 
It makes perfect sense, standing squarely and only in the classical 
fl'agment (mctalanguage), to say of sentences in the model-language that they're neither true-in- 
the-model language nor false-in-the-model language. But such model-relative notions aren't at 
issue here. 
5aIn fact, one might take some of Kripke's remarks to suggest that, by his lights, there's no 
escaping a 'Tarskian' or 'hierarchical' approach to ECP. (See the famous passage about Tarski's 
ghost Kripke, 
1975.) 
But I will not dwell on the exegetical issue here. Note that one might 
take the 'classical reading' of Kripke, formulated by Feferman's KF, as having an answer to ECP, 
and in many respects that's correct. 
(One can truly say, e.g., that Liars are not true.) 
But, 
again, KF gives up dtruth (and, so, NTP wrt dtruth). 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
345 
present purposes, I will assume 
without argument 
that, other things being 
equal, an account of dtruth that validates all dT-biconditionals is prima facie more 
attractive than an account that fails to do so. Accordingly, an account of dtruth 
for which we have the validity of A --~ A is prima facie more attractive than an 
account for which A ~ A isn't valid (at least other things being equal). 54 
That A ~ A is not valid in Kripke's Strong Kleene proposal is clear, since 4, 
in Strong Kleene, is simply the material conditional, which is defined ~A V B, and 
here abbreviated as A D B. But, then, A D A is valid only if ~A V A is valid, that 
is, only if LEM is valid. But LEM isn't valid in Strong Kleene, as noted in §4.1. 
Indeed, the heart of paracomplete proposals is the rejection of LEM. 
While Kripke's proposal seems to show how we can have a nontrivial (indeed, 
consistent) dtruth predicate despite the existence of Liar-like sentences, it fails to 
show how we can achieve as much in a language for which the dT-biconditionals 
hold. 
One might think it an easy fix to add a conditional. After all, Lukasiewicz's (pro- 
nounced ~woo-kush-YE-vitch') 3-valued language differs from the Strong Kleene 
language only in that it adds a conditional for which A ~ A is valid. (One can 
retain the hook, of course, so as to have two conditionals, --+ and D. This is no 
surprise given that, as noted above, A D /3 simply is ~A V/3.) 
Lukasiewicz's 
conditional is defined thus: 55 
43 
1 
'r~ 
0 
i 
i 
~ 
0 
~ 
1 
1 
'r~ 
0 
1 
1 
1 
As one can see, A 43 A is always designated in the Lukasiewcz semantics, and 
hence, given the essential intersubstitutivity of dtruth, dT(A) +-+3 A is always 
designated (with +-+3 defined as usual via conjunction). 
The trouble, however, is that this proposal will not work in the sort of paracom- 
plete, fixed-point languages at issue. One way to see this is to consider a version of 
Curry's paradox. 56 Without getting into the technical details, a simple way to see 
the problem is via an informal Curry-like situation. Assume a Strong Kleene (fixed 
point) language augmented with the Lukasiewicz conditional above. Let A be a 
sentence that says dT(A} ~+a ±, where ± is some false sentence in the semantic- 
free fragment, say, ~1 = 0'. Let C be a sentence that says dT(C) +-+3 dT(A). A 
1 (or modeled 
paracomplete theorist will want to say that A is to receive value 
54One natural route towards an argument is given by Feferman 1984, who argues that without 
the validity of A --+ A 'ordinary reasoning' is crippled. 
1 
55Here, n = 5" 
56See Curry, 1942 and, for relevant discussion, Meyer et al., 1979. Note: Some authors 
Barwise and Etchemendy, 1987 call Curry's paradox LSb's paradox, mostly due to the similarity 
between LSb's Theorem (or the proof thereof) and Curry's paradox. (The situation is somewhat 
similar to GSdel's Incompleteness proof and the Liar paradox.) But Curry certainly discovered 
the paradox much earlier 
and, indeed, it's likely that Medieval logicians discovered it prior to 
Curry. 

346 
JC Beall 
1 Then the values of C and A are 
as such). Suppose that C receives the value ~. 
the same, in which case C gets the value 1. Contradiction. Similarly, a contradic- 
tion arises if C receives 0 or, obviously, 1. Hence, there's no obvious way to add 
Lukasiewicz's conditional to the Strong Kleene (fixed point) language. 57 
Curry's paradox, in general, imposes constraints on conditionals. A Curry sen- 
tence is one that says of itself (only) that if it is dtrue, then everything is dtrue. 5s 
So, a Curry conditional is a sentence C equivalent to C ~ ±, where ± is 'explo- 
sive', a sentence implying triviality (e.g., 'Everything is dtrue'). Let us assume 
that a 'genuine conditional' is one that detaches in the following form (sometimes 
called 'rule-form'), where IF- is our consequence relation (either semantically or 
proof-theoretically defined). 
A,A ~ B IP B 
And assume that we want a genuine conditional such that A ~ A is valid (and, 
hence, given dtruth, the dT-biconditionals are valid). Then to avoid Curry para- 
dox, one must either reject reductio or contraction in the following (among other) 
forms. 59 
R. A~AIP~A 
C1. A A (A ~ B) ---+/3 
C2. (A ~ (A ~ B)) ~ (A ~ B) 
C3. A--+ ( A--+ B ) I - A--+ B 
Consider, for example, (C1). Assume that we have a conditional --~ such that A --~ 
A is valid (and, hence, the dT-biconditionals), and also have both dT and Curry 
sentences in the language. Let C be such a sentence, equivalent to dT(C) ~ ±, in 
which case, via the dT-biconditionals and intersubstitutivity, we have 
. 
c 
(c 
±) 
57This is slightly misleading, as put, but without getting into a much more technical discussion, 
I will leave the general problem there. 
58The consequent of a Curry conditional may be any sentence that implies triviality or near- 
enough triviality (e.g., '1 = 0'), where a language (or truth predicate) is trivial iff everything is 
true (in the language). 
59I should also note that in paracomplete languages in which A ~ A is valid and ~ is 'genuine' 
(and one has a dtruth predicate), one must also reject Importation and 'Introduction' in the 
following forms. 
Imp. A~(B~C) 
IF-AAB~C 
Int. From A I~/3 infer I~ A --+ /3 
The import of rejecting (Int), so put, is that 'deduction theorems' won't generally hold. (I 
briefly discuss a related issue in §6.) It's worth noting that the otherwise apparent obviousness 
of (Imp) rests largely on assumptions of contraction-principles that, for Curry reasons, must be 
rejected. A nice discussion of these issues can be found in 'relevant logic literature' Anderson 
and Belnap, 1975; Anderson et aL, 1992; Routley et al., 1982 and, of direct relevance here, 
Field's 2002; 2003a. See too Restall, 2000. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
347 
But, then, from (C1) we get 
which, via substitution, yields 
c A (c 
±) 
± 
CAC~± 
which, assuming normal conjunction, is equivalent to 
** 
C~± 
Given that ~ is a 'genuine conditional' and, so, detaches, we quickly get C itself 
via (*), and now" detaching again via (**) yields Z. Triviality. 
One might think that, while his 3-valued conditional won't work, the full 
continuum-valued language £o~ of Lukasiewicz, which, except for more values, 
retains the (K1) (K3) clauses for standard connectives (see §4.1), might do the 
trick. In particular, 4oo, the conditional in £o~, satisfies none of the given contrac- 
tion principles nor (R).6° Unfortunately, the proposal won't work, as Greg Restall 
1992 
and, more generally, Hajek et al., 2000 showed: the resulting theory will 
be c~-ineonsistent. ~1 
4.2 
Field 
The upshot of §4.1 is that while Kripke's paracomplete proposal shows that, despite 
having Liars in the language, we can have a nontrivial (indeed, consistent) dtruth 
predicate (in the language, for the language), it none the less exhibits two apparent 
inadequacies. 
I1. The proposal fails to answer NTP for a language in which all dT-biconditionals 
hold. 
I2. The proposal fails to answer ECP in any fashion. 
As in §4.1, Curry's paradox puts constraints on adding a genuine conditional for 
which A ~ 
A is valid (and, hence, for which the d-r-biconditionals all hold). 
Answering ECP, in turn, likewise requires care, since 'revenge Liars' are ever-ready 
to emerge. 
Hartry Field, in a series of papers (see throughout), advances the Kripkean 
paracomplete proposal by attempting to overcome (I1) and (I2), the two notable 
inadequacies of Kripke's own proposal. Field maintains the basic paracomplete 
line that paradoxes (perhaps among other phenomena) teach us that LEM is to be 
6°More promising yet, perhaps, is that naYve 'property theory' (sometimes called 'na'l've set 
theory') is consistent in £~. See White, 1979. 
61I will not get into the details of formulating, e.g., Peano Arithmetic in £~ and showing the 
resulting w-inconsistency. For details, I recommend beginning with Restall, 1992 and, in turn, 
the more generalized Hajek et al., 2000. 

348 
JC Beall 
rejected, that some instances of AV~A are to be rejected. 6') Field's contribution is 
an answer to NTP for a language in which all dT-biconditionals hold and, in turn, 
an answer to ECP. 63 
Field's main contributions, as above, are his conditional and his approach to- 
wards characterization (classifying Liars, etc.), with the latter nicely falling out of 
the former. 64 Given the aims of this essay, I will only provide a sketch of (the basic 
idea of) the conditional and, in turn, Field's approach towards characterization. 65 
But before sketching the conditional, I will first (briefly) discuss the background 
philosophical picture, and then turn to (a sketch of) the formal model. 
Philosophical picture: stronger truth 
An inadequacy of Kripke's proposal is that we're left with nothing to truly say 
about Liar-like sentences, at least not in our language (the language that enjoys 
its own dtruth predicate). 66 Intuitively, the paracomplete theorist thinks that, 
for purposes of truly characterizing or 'classifying' Liar-like sentences, we need to 
acknowledge an additional 'semantically significant' category beyond dtruth (and 
dfalsity). But how" shall this 'other' category be understood? 
As in §4.1, there's no clear sense in saying that Liars are neither dtrue nor 
dfalse. Still, one might think that there's some sense in which Liars are 'not true' 
or 'not false'. This thought motivates Field's proposal. 67 
62This is not to say that there aren't significant (proper) fragments of the language for which 
LEM holds. For example, one might maintain that LEM holds over the arithmetical fragment 
of our language, or physics, or so on. 
(Field 2003b 
explicitly agrees with this, suggesting 
that LEM may hold for mathematics or the like, in general.) Of course, as mentioned in §4, 
since we're (here) dealing with dtruth, rejection of A is not going to be acceptance of ~A. 
Field naturally suggests weakening the classical 'exhaustion' rule for probability (or degrees of 
belief), namely, Pr(A) + Pr(~A) = 1, to one that respects a paracomplete approach: namely, 
Pr(A) + Pr(~A) _< 1. There are subtle issues here, but for space I leave them aside. 
63The respect in which Field answers the intended import of (the admittedly imprecise) ecP 
is something I'll briefly discuss below. What I should emphasise is that, in my opinion, Field's 
work is a remarkable advance in the area of dtruth and paradox. (And, of course, Field has also 
contributed a great deal to the philosophical issues concerning dtruth. See Field, 2001.) 
64Actually, Field should also be given credit for explicitly noting that paracomplete accounts 
of rejection (and acceptance) call for an adjustment of classical probability theory. While this 
point is often assumed, Field took the time to explicitly propose a revision, one that, by my 
lights, seems to be entirely right (for purposes of a paracomplete account). See Field, 2003b for 
a nice discussion. 
65Field continues to revise the proposal, coming up with further refinements and improvements. 
My aim is not to give the very latest, or even the full details of any particular version. Rather, 
my aim is merely to sketch the basic idea. 
66Kripke precisely defines notions of ungrourzdedness and paradoxical (and more). One might 
think that we can truly characterize Liar-like sentences as paradoxical, so defined (per Kripke). 
But so defined, one can't consistently add 'is paradoxical' to the language, at least if it is to 
behave as Kripke seems to suggest 
e.g., as a predicate the extension and anti-extension of 
which are exhaustive and exclusive. It is precisely that assumption that paracomplete theorists 
ought to reject! And Field recognizes as much. 
67The thought likewise seems to motivate a related (and well-known) earlier proposal by McGee 
1991. 
McGee's work precedes that of Field's, but the two are related. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
349 
The paracomplete theorist rejects that Liars are dtrue or not dtrue (or, equiv- 
alently, dfalse or not). But perhaps one can recognize a stronger notion of 'truth' 
according to which Liars and their negations are not true. Let sT be our 'stronger 
truth predicate' (stronger than dT). 
Being a stronger notion than dtruth, one 
might have it that while both 
st1. IF sT(A) --~ A for all A (and for some suitable conditional!) 
st2. sT(A} IF A for all A 
hold, the converse of either (st1) or (st2) fails. 6s This failure need not get in the 
way of expressing generalizations or the like, since dtruth remains as before 
full 
intersubstitutivity holds. Dtruth remains our expressive device. The new device, 
sT, is brought in to do a job that dtruth was never intended to do: namely, fail 
to be transparent! In particular, we want a device that allows us to truly (dtruly) 
'classify' Liars, sentences like the ticked sentence in §3. For reasons above, we can't 
classify the ticked sentence oi" its negation as dtrue (or, hence, dfalse); however, 
with our stronger notion, we may be able to classify the sentence and its negation 
as not strongly true. That is the idea. 69 
Care, of course, must be taken. Obviously, on pain of 'revenge paradox', sT, 
however it is spelled out, must be such as to resist excluded middle, resist having 
sT(A} V ~sT(A}. (Just consider a sentence A equivalent to ~sT(A}.) And this is 
precisely in keeping with the paracomplete theorist's rejection of LEM: that there 
is no 'truth-like' or 'negation-like' device t (be it a predicate or operator) in the 
language that is 'exclusive' in the sense of satisfying both of the following. 
el. IF tA V A for all A. 
e2. ~A, A IF B for all A and B. 
The heart of paracomplete accounts is that at least (el) fails for our language. 7° 
But now an apparent tension arises. The reason that we want a stronger notion 
of truth is that we want to be able to dtruly classify Liar-like sentences, 'charac- 
terize' them as being in some sense 'not true'. So, we bring in sT, and we want to 
say for any Liar-like sentence A in the sT-free fragment that A is not strongly true; 
we want to assert ~sT(A). This much is not difficult, provided we're restricting 
ourselves to As in the sT-free fragment. The trouble, of course, is that we want 
to talk about arty sentence in the full language, including any sT-ful sentences 
sentences that use 'sT'. But, then, we want to be able to say of sT-ful Liars that 
they are not strongly true. And that's the problem. Inevitably, 71 there will be 
6STypically, e.g. McGee, 1991, the converse of (st1) fails. This is likewise the case for Field's 
proposal. 
69Such 'strong truth' is often understood in terms of determinately dtrue, the idea being that 
by rejecting each of A and ~A, one is rejecting that either sentence is determinate. 
7°Note that we're not talking about model-relative notions that may be defined in an entirely 
classical, proper fragment of one's full, paracomplete language. We're talking about 'non-model- 
relative' or, as Field (in conversation) says, 'absolute' notions. 
71Formally, the force of 'inevitably' is ensured by GSdel's diagonal lemma. 

350 
JC Beall 
sT-ful sentences A such that, were either sT(A) or ~sT(A) to hold, inconsistency 
would follow. Avoiding such inconsistency requires, as above, the rejection of (the 
equivalent of) excluded middle for sT. But, now', there would seem to be sT-ful 
sentences that fail to be 'correctly classified' by sT. 
The apparent tension can be seen as follows. 72 We begin with a transparent 
expressive device dT, which, when introduced into the language (to play its trans- 
parency role), gives rise to dT-ful Liar-like sentences. The paracomplete theorist 
maintains that such sentences are not problematic if we reject LEM, and in par- 
ticular (at least) the Liar-instances of LEM. So, we can keep our (consistent) 
expressive device dT despite its inevitable Liars. One problem solved. But, next, 
we want to be able to dtruly 'classify' or 'characterize' the given Liars. Towards 
that end, we introduce a stronger notion of truth, sT. 73 And now we can use sT to 
dtruly classify all dT-ful Liars. Another problem solved. But now again to avoid 
inconsistency, we must likewise reject LEM for sT, and in particular reject sT-ful 
Liar-instances of LEM. We now seem to require yet another 'even stronger truth' 
to dtruly classify the given sT-ful Liar-sentences (ones remaining 'unclassified' on 
pain of inconsistency). And so on, ad infinitum. 
And now the tension is clear. Suppose that we have some unified predicate (say, 
'Other') that characterizes all Liar-like sentences, so that we have the following. 
EO. IF dT(A} V dF(A) V Other(A) 
Then we seem to be stuck in inconsistency, at least assuming normal behavior 
for the (extensional) connectives. 74 
After all, consider a sentence A that says 
~A V Other(A). By EC, A is either dtrue, its negation dtrue, or it is Other. If 
dtrue, then A is dfalse or Other. If dfalse or Other, then A is dtrue. If, then, 
the given semantically significant 'categories' are exhaustive and exclusive, then 
inconsistency arises. 75 
What the picture of infinitely many 'stronger truth predicates' requires is the 
absence of any unified (semantically significant) predicate in terms of which all 
Liar-like sentences are to be classified. 76 The given picture must be accompanied 
by a rejection of anything yielding something along the lines of EC. 
Perhaps the rejection of EC 
the rejection of a unified (semantically signif- 
icant) predicate in terms of which all Liar-like sentences are classified 
is not 
unnatural. After all, the heart of standard paracomplete accounts is a rejection 
72I will assume a Strong Kleene approach to the basic, extensional connectives. This is the case 
with all paracomplete accounts that I discuss 
Kripke, Field, and the 'paranormal' suggestion. 
73Here, sT can be either a predicate or operator. The difference is minimal when our basic 
truth predicate is dtruth. 
74But see §4.3. 
75Again, unfortunately I remain vague about what counts as 'semantically significant', and I 
believe that the project of clarifying this notion is an important (and pressing) one. For now, 
one can think of 'dtrue' and 'dfalse' among the lot, and then any predicates in terms of which 
Liars are to be 'classified'. 
76Note that this immediately requires rejecting the coherence of 'quantifying over the hierarchy' 
of such predicates in the 
otherwise intuitive 
sense of, e.g., true in some sense or other of 
%trongly true' or the like. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
351 
of LEM all the way through. In broadest (though, admittedly, somewhat vague) 
terms, the rejection of LEM might be seen as a basic rejection of an 'exhaustive 
characterization' in terms of unified (semantically significant) predicates. 
The basic tension, in the end, is one arising from a common aim: the aim 
of dtruly classifying (within one's language) all Liar-like sentences in one's given 
language. 77 Intuitively, the aim is (presumably) to achieve such exhaustive charac- 
terization using 'unified' semantically significant predicates, something that yields 
the likes of EC. 
But another route is available: classifying any given Liar via 
infinitely many 'stronger and stronger' truth predicates, none of which afford a 
'unified predicate' that, as it were, serves as a 'unionizer' of all such predicates. 
While Field does not achieve the former, he none the less provides a powerful 
approach along the latter lines. 
Formal model: conditional and determinacy 
As above, Field aims to retain a consistent dtruth predicate but, going beyond 
Kripke, also have all dT-biconditionals and a way of 'classifying' any given Liar- 
like sentence in the language. Field shows how to add a suitable conditional to the 
Kripkean Strong Kleene framework, and then defines 'stronger truth' or, as Field 
says, 'determinate truth', in terms of the given conditional. Given that, as in §4.2, 
any such 'stronger truth' predicate (or operator) must resist LEM, Field's aim of 
'characterizing' Liars requires infinitely many such 'stronger truth' devices. One 
notable feature of Field's framework is that the requisite infinite stock of (stronger 
and stronger) truth devices falls out of Field's constructed conditional. 
This section presents only a sketch of Field's basic idea for introducing a suit- 
able conditional into a paracomplete 
and otherwise merely Strong Kleene 
language with a (consistent) dtruth predicate. I first present an initial sketch of 
(the basic idea of) how to extend Kripke's initial construction with a (non-truth- 
functional) suitable conditional 
what Field calls a restricted semantics. 7s In 
turn, I sketch a more general setting (what Field calls 'General semantics') for the 
conditional. 79 
Restricted semantics 
Let/(3 be the Strong Kleene logic. Field's aim is to give an extension of/(3 that, in 
addition to containing a consistent dtruth predicate, validates all dT-biconditionals 
in such a way that Curry paradox is avoided. 
The basic proposal is a novel 
77Of course, we're talking about languages that have their own, nontrivial (indeed, in this 
section, consistent) dtruth predicate. 
7SStrictly speaking, Field 2003a does show how one can expand the values of the language in 
such a way as to view the given conditional as 'truth-functional', but I will ignore that here. 
79I should note (again) that Field has modified his account in various ways, with the latest 
2005c being a variation of Stephen Yablo's work 2003. 
I would've liked to discuss Yablo's 
work, in general, as well as Field's work in more detail; however, space limitations prohibit 
doing so. (Field's work is cited throughout. For Yablo's work, see especially Yablo, 1993a; 
Yablo, 1993b.) 

352 
JC Beall 
combination of ideas from Kripke 1975 
and revision theorists Herzberger, 1982; 
Gupta and Belnap, 1993. 
We start with a (first-order) syntax supplemented with dT and a primitive 
two-place connective ~ (which I'll call the conditional). (Any sentence the main 
connective of which is the conditional will be called a conditional.) With respect to 
the conditional-free fragment, the language is interpreted exactly along the lines 
of Kripke (as in §4.1). The challenge is to interpret all sentences, including all 
conditionals, in such a way as to retain a (consistent) dtruth predicate 
and, so, 
achieve full intersubstitutivity even with respect to (and 'inside of') conditionals 
and validate all dT-biconditionals. 
Field's proposal is to interpret the language via a transfinite sequence of Krip- 
kean (Strong Kleene) fixed points P~ (for 'point c~', with c~ an ordinal), s° where 
each such fixed point is 'built from' an initial starting valuation ,9~ (for 'start c~'), 
which assigns elements of {1, s ~,0} to all and only conditionals. Beginning with 
such 'start points', Kripke's construction (see §4.1) yields a value for every sen- 
tence in the language in such a way that dtruth (transparency, intersubstitutivity) 
is preserved. With respect to such start points S~, and in particular how any given 
$~ is determined on the basis of 'prior' Kripkean 79~, Field proposes the following 
recipe, st 
s for all A and B. 
Fb. Base (Zero). $o(A ~ B) 
Fs. Successor. At successor points (or stages), we look back at the prior Kripkean 
fixed point: 
1 if 7)a(A) _< 7)a(B) 
Sa+l(A ~ B) 
0 
otherwise. 
F1. Limit. 
fixed points: 
At limit points (stages), we look backwards at all prior Kripkean 
$x(A --+ B) = { 
1 
if 7)'~(A) _< 7)'Y(B) for some ~ < A 
and any 7 such that ~ < -y < A 
0 
if 7)~(A) > 7)~(B) for some ~ < A 
and any 7 such that ~ < -y < A 
s 
otherwise. 
5 
So goes the construction of 'start points' from the 'prior' Kripkean fixed points. 
As above, the latter -- the Kripkean fixed points -- are the points that yield 
the 'ultimate values' in terms of which all sentences eventually stabilize into a 
language with both dtruth and all dT-biconditionals. The various P~, as above, 
are determined entirely by the $~ (which give values to the conditionals) and 
8°Note that these are fixed points of Kripke's 'jump operator', which will henceforth be left as 
implicit. 
81For ease, I will write '8a(A)' to abbreviate the value of A in the start point 8a. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
353 
the Strong Kleene (minimal) fixed point construction 
the various clauses for 
compounds, (Zl) (K3). (See §4.1.) 
Brief reflection on (Fb) (F1) indicates that values assigned to (at least typically 
paradoxical) sentences at the various 8~ and, in turn, 7 9~, fluctuate quite a bit; 
such sentences exhibit jumpy instability. By way of settling on 'ultimate values', 
by way of bringing about order to such apparent chaos, Field takes a leaf from 
revision theory (see §8). In particular, Field defines the ultimate value of A, say 
IAI, thus: 
r limJ)~(A) 
if the limit exists 
IAI 
1 5 
otherwise. 
In other words, if for some point a such that for any/3 > a we have it that P~(A) 
is 1, then IAI 
1. Similarly for 0. Let n c {1,0}. The idea is simply that if A 
is eventually forevermore assigned n, then n is A's ultimate value. But, of course, 
there may be no such point beyond which the value of A 'stabilizes' at either 1 or 
0 in which case IAI = 1 More precisely, IAI = 1 if either A is never eventually 
, 
5" 
5 
forevermore assigned anything or there's some point c~ such that for any/3 _> c~ we 
1 (i.e., A is eventually forevermore assigned ½). 
have it that P~(A) 
Field 2003a 
proves that such 'ultimate values' obey the K3-rules for extensional 
connectives, that is, for all connectives except the non-extensional --% the condi- 
tional, s') Moreover, he shows that the construction validates all dT-biconditionals, s3 
I will discuss the virtues of Field's proposed conditional, and its role with respect 
to 'stronger truth', in §4.2. 
For now, I turn to a more general, and perhaps 
philosophically more 'intuitive', account of the conditional. 
General semantics 
Because other approaches to dtruth (e.g., paraconsistent) often invoke a 'possible 
worlds' framework for purposes of modeling a suitable conditional, I will briefly 
sketch Field's 'general semantics' for his conditional, a semantics that is related 
to possible worlds approaches, though the intended philosophical interpretation, 
as Field 2003b 
remarks, is better thought of as 'possible assignments relative to 
actual conditions or constraints'. In this (sub-) section I will simply sketch the 
construction, leaving comments to §4.2. 84 
The aim, once again, is to give an extension of K3, but in this case we work 
with a 'modalized' /(3 (first-order) language, where, as above (throughout), we 
can stipulate that the 'semantic-free' fragment is entirely classical, and the dtruth 
S2More technically, Field's 'Fundamental Theorem' shows that there are ordinals "7 such that 
for any (non-zero) /3 the value of any sentence A at "~ •/3 is just IAI. 
SaField also shows that the dT-biconditionals are validated in a stronger sense that he dubs 
'conservative', the idea being (roughly) that the resulting theory is consistent with any arith- 
metically standard starting model. For discussion, see Field, 2003@ 
S4A few caveats: first, the 'general semantics' was motivated largely towards a unified solution 
to both semantical and soritical (vagueness-) paradoxes. I will not discuss the latter here. Second, 
I will not be giving all of the constraints that Field proposes for purposes of achieving various 
desirable features (of the conditional); I will simply sketch the basic idea. 

354 
JC Beall 
predicate is achieved along Kripkean lines, as above, s5 The difference, now, is that 
we expand our interpretations with a (nonempty) set gf of 'worlds' and, in turn, 
assign values to sentences relative to such worlds, where the values remain either 
1 This much is standard. The task is to tweak the interpretations in such 
1, 0, or ~. 
a way as to give the target conditional its desired features. 
Field's proposal is a novel variation on so-called 'neighborhood semantics'.S° We 
let W be an infinite set of worlds at which sentences are assigned an element of 
{1, 1 5,0}, letting @ be a (unique) distinguished element of W, the 'actual world'. In 
turn, we impose a 'similarity relation' on gf in such a way that each w c W comes 
equipped with a set of 'sufficiently similar worlds' (a so-called 'neighborhood' of 
w), worlds that satisfy some condition of similarity with respect to w. Specifically, 
Field proposes that each w E W be assigned a (possibly empty) directed family 
5~ that comprises nonempty elements of p(W), nonempty subsets of W. 
The 
directedness of 5w, which amounts to 
(w, ~ w)(vx, y ~ .,%)(~z ~ .,%)2 c_ why 
allows for 'incomparability', that is, that the relation of similarity needn't be 
linear, s7 
With an eye towards semantical paradox, a few" other tweaks are required, ss 
Define, for any w c W: 
Normality. w is normal iff w c X for all X c bt-~. 
Abnormality. w is abnormal iff it is not normal. 
Loneliness. w is lonely iff {w} E 5c~. 
Happiness. w is happy iff it is not lonely. 
Field stipulates that @ be both normal and happy on any interpretation, but 
otherwise worlds may be abnormal and lonely, s9 Accordingly, every interpretation 
is such that, per normality, ~ E X for all 2( E 5c~ and, per happiness, {(~} ~ brce. 
Hence, ~ is 'sufficiently similar' to itself on all interpretations, and (~ is also 
'sufficiently sinfilar' to some w ¢ @ on all interpretations. 
As above, sentences are now assigned a value at each world. With respect to 
the conditional-free fragment, the valuations simply follow" the Strong Kleene rules; 
SSAs noted above, the framework is motivated not only by semantical paradox but also soritical. 
As a result, if we were concentrating on vagueness, we wouldn't stipulate an entirely classical 
'semantic-free' language. 
S6The generalization of standard Kripke models is also sometimes called Montague semantics, 
or Montague-Scott semantics. For general references, see Chellas, 1980. 
SrField 2003b notes that one could, without radical deviation from the basic proposal, simply 
impose a linear ordering via C. 
SSActually, achieving all of Field's desired features requires other constraints on interpretations, 
but for present purposes I skip over them. 
S9That Cc~ is to be happy is not just warmheartedness on Field's part. If Q were allowed to be 
lonely, various (contraction-related) validities would emerge that would engender inconsistency 
in the resulting dtruth theory. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
355 
(K1) (K3), in effect, are modified only with respect to being relativized to worlds, 
even though reference to worlds in the clauses for extensional connectives makes 
no essential difference. (In other words, where A is conditional-free, the value of 
A at w depends only on the values of A's constituent parts at w. One needn't 
'look at other worlds' to figure out the value of purely extensional sentences.) The 
worlds come into play with conditionals. 9° 
A --0 B~ = { 
1 
if A~,_< 
B~, 
for someXE~c 
and anyw'EX 
0 
if Alw, > Biw, for some X E ~,w and any w' E X 
1 
otherwise. 
With valuation-conditions in hand, the (semantic) consequence relation IF- may 
be defined. Towards that end, let us say that, relative to an interpretation, a 
sentence A is actually verified iff IAIc~ 
1 (in the given interpretation). Similarly, 
a set E of sentences is actually verified iff t3 is actually verified, for each B E E. 
Then the (semantic) validity relation It- is defined thus: 
E IP A iff any interpretation that actually verifies E actually verifies A 
with valid sentences being consequences of 0. Given the existence of abnormal 
and lonely worlds (or the existence of interpretations containing as much), other 
notions of validity may be introduced, but for present purposes I will focus just 
on the given notion. 91 
So goes the basic model. While, for space reasons, I have left out various (some 
not insignificant) details, there is enough in the foregoing to turn to philosophical 
discussion. 92 
Comments: virtues and strong(-er) truth 
I will concentrate on the general semantics of Field's conditional, focusing on the 
philosophical features. Right off, one of the chief desiderata is plain. 
IPA~A 
9°1 will continue to use the bar-notation, e.g. IAI, to abbreviate 'the value of A'. (This follows 
Field's notation, and ties in the earlier discussion of 'ultimate values'.) The difference, of course, 
is now that values are relative to worlds, and so, e.g., IAl.w is the value of A at w. 
91In standard 'non-normal worlds' semantics, wherein one has different 'types' of worlds, 
broader notions are standardly introduced by various restrictions on the 'types' of worlds in- 
voked in one's definition. Field's neighborhood account is similar, and Field, 2003b introduces 
'universal validity' (quantifying over all worlds of all interpretations) and 'strongly valid' (all 
normal worlds of all interpretations). For space reasons, I skip over these distinctions. 
92What may not be plain is how Field's 'general semantics' is a more general version of the 
noted 'restricted semantics'. The short answer is that the latter can be seen as a special case 
of the former: one allows for 'normal ordinals' (analogous to 'normal worlds') in the latter, and 
modifies the account of validity in the latter in terms of a distinguished such 'normal ordinal' 
(something guaranteed by Field's Fundamental Theorem). For discussion see Field, 2003b. 

356 
JC Beall 
Hence, given the intersubstitutivity of dT, which is preserved in all (transparent) 
contexts, all dT-biconditionals are similarly valid. And since Field 2003a 
gives a 
consistency proof for the resulting language (and dtruth theory), this amounts to a 
remarkable step forward in (consistent) paracomplete accounts of dtruth. Kripke 
provided an answer 
a paraeomplete answer 
to NTP for a language in which 
not all dT-bieonditionals hold. What Field's conditional has given us is an answer 
a paracomplete answer 
to NTP for a language in which all dT-biconditionals 
hold, an answer that preserves the insights of Kripke but goes further, properly 
extending the resulting logic. 
But there's more. The given conditional also exhibits various familiar features. 93 
A, A---, B I~- B 
IP ~A 
~ A 
IP ~(A ~ B) ~ (A V~B) 
IP Vxd ~ d(t/x) (fox" proper substitution) 
A,~B IP ~(A ~ B) 
Ib AAB---~ A 
I~ (A ~ ~B) ~ (B ~ ~A) 
In addition to other features that are here omitted (for space reasons), Field's 
conditional exhibits fairly natural behavior, at least within a general paracomplete 
setting in which LEM is rejected (which, of course, is the aim). In particular, --~ 
behaves like D when excluded middle is assumed, and so we have, for example, 
ADBIPA~B 
and, indeed, 
A V ~A,B V ~B IP (A D B) ~ (A ~ B) 
and similarly for material equivalence. 94 
In the remainder of this (sub-) section I will briefly address a few of the pressing 
philosophical issues mentioned above: Curry, strong (-er and stronger) truth, and, 
relatedly, 'exhaustive characterization'. 
Curry paradox 
Of course, given Field's consistency proof 2003a, 
one knows that Curry paradox 
doesn't pose problems; however, it is worth (at least very briefly) touching on the 
issue 
and so I will, but only very briefly. 
I've assumed, as above, that a minimum requirement on a 'genuine condi- 
tional' is that it detach in the sense that the argument from {A,A ~ 
B} to 
B is valid. Field's conditional is genuine. But Field's conditional also validates 
Identity, I~ A ~ A, so that (given dtruth) the dT-bieonditionals all hold. In such 
93For a list of other notable features see Field, 2003a; Field, 2003b; Field, 2005c, and for a 
very illuminating discussion see Yablo, 2003. 
94Note well: These last features depend on having other features that I've here omitted, features 
that require other constraints being imposed on the 'neighborhood interpretations'. With suitable 
constraints imposed, e.g., one gets the 'meta-rule ~ that if arguments A/B and B/C are valid, 
then so too is the argument A V B/C. (This does not hold in K3, but does hold in a proper 
extension of it, sometimes called K3 +.) See Field's cited work for a full discussion. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
357 
a setting (given normal behavior of other connectives), Curry demands 
on pain 
of triviality 
giving up Reductio in form (R), contraction principles (C1) (C4) 
and the like, as well as (Imp) and (Int). (See §4.1, page 344ff.) That Field's con- 
ditional does as much is not only a virtue but, as said, a necessity 
on pain of 
triviality. Since Curry's paradox turns on the validity of such principles or rules, 
any argument towards Curry paradox is blocked as invalid. 95 
It might be useful to see a 'counterexample' to some of the invalid principles. 
Consider principle (C1), which is sometimes called Assertion or Pseudo Modus 
Ponens. Notice that if @ could be lonely, there would be no way to invalidate 
(C1). But Field's demand that @ be happy provides an immediate counterexample: 
just consider an interpretation in which 5c~ = {{~, w}} and, for simplicity, let 
1 
1 and IBl¢,, = 0. Then I A ~ 
Bl¢,, = 
~ 
= 0. Let IAI~ = IBI~ -- IAI~ = 
1 and so IA n (A ~ 
B)l~, > IBl~. But most 
and, hence, IA/~ (A ~ 
B)l~, 
5, 
importantly, since not every world in the (unique) @-neighborhood is such that 
IAA(A ~ B) ~ B I < IBI or IAA(A ~ B) ~ B I > IBI, we have what paracomplete 
theorists will naturally want with respect to Curry-instances of (C1). 
1 
IA n (A ~ B) ~ BI~ 
1 is not designated, (C1) is invalid. Sinfilar (and, indeed, even simpler) 
And since 5 
counterexamples are available for the other principles and rules. 
Strong truth: determinacy 
Field's aim is not only to validate all dT-biconditionals but also go beyond the 
Kripkean framework with respect to characterizing Liar-like sentences. Towards 
that end, Field proposes to recognize a stronger notion of truth than mere (entirely 
transparent) dtruth. 
As mentioned in §4.2, there is always a risk of introducing more 'truth-like' 
devices (predicates, operators): paradoxical sentences are always ready to spring 
up. This is where Field's consistency proof 2003a 
for the full conditional-ful (and 
dT-ful) language comes into play. 
The consistency proof shows that the conditional doesn't introduce any fur- 
ther paradoxes that aren't already resolved by the guiding, paracomplete rejection 
of LEM. And that is the key. Field wants to characterize all Liar-sentences via 
'stronger and stronger truth', and do so without bringing about yet further para- 
dox. Given the consistency proof, it is natural to seek an account of such 'strong 
truth' that invokes only the resources of the language at hand, the language for 
95I should note that there are various versions of Curry's paradox, not each of which assumes 
all of the 'bad' principles or rules, but each assumes one or more of them. I should also note 
that, at least in paracomplete settings, one need not give up the structural contraction rules, as 
one does in paraconsistent settings. (Giving up the structural rules prohibits, in effect, 'using 
a premise more than once' in a proof. Field's framework preserves structural contraction, so 
understood.) 

358 
JC Beall 
which we have Field's consistency proof. A remarkable feature of Field's frame- 
work is that he enjoys just such an account: he defines infinitely many 'determi- 
nately' operators 
these amount to 'stronger and stronger truth' 
out of the 
conditional. 
There are two items that need to be explained (or, at least, sketched): what 
is the definition of 'determinately' in terms of the conditional? How do we get 
infinitely many? I will (very) briefly sketch the answer to each question, leaving 
details to Field's work (cited throughout). 
The basic account. Where • is any logical truth, Field proposes to 'introduce' 
a determinately operator D thus: 
DA 
aS (T~A) 
A A 
This immediately gives standard behavior for 'determinately' operators, in partic- 
ular, 
dl. A Ib DA 
d2. DA Ib A 
d3. IP DA-~ A 
As mentioned in §4.2, standard approaches to 'determinate truth' usually give up 
the converse of (d3), and the situation is no different with Field. That the converse 
does fail may be seen by considering an interpretation in which IAIc~ 
1 
~, in which 
case I T -~ AIc~ is not designated, regardless of ~c~. 
With D at hand, one can now classify D-free Liars as proposed: neither they nor 
their negations are determinately true. For any such sentence A, we may assert 
~DdT(A} A ~D~dT(A} or, equivalently given dtruth, ~DA A ~D~A. 9s 
But what of weaker Liars? Now that we have D, so understood, in the language, 
we inevitably get D-ful Liars 
for example, sentences that say of themselves (only) 
that they're not determinately true, or not determinately determinately true, or so 
on. Such sentences call for 'stronger and stronger truth'. But Field's construction 
already yields as much. 
Infinitdy many. The point is fairly obvious. Consider a Liar L that says ~DL. 
That Field's construction handles L, so understood, follows from his consistency 
Of 
proof: such a sentence receives an interpretation in the language, namely, 5" 
course, given (dl) (d3), one cannot truly classify L as being not determinately 
&rue. But one can generalize Field's proposal in a natural way: one can truly 
classify L as not determinately determinately dtrue, that is, one may assert ~DDL. 
In general, Field's operator may be iterated into the transfinite: for some suit- 
able ordinal notation that yields or, we have an operator D ~, the or-many iteration of 
96Recall that Field's construction preserves dtruth, that is, preserves the essential intersub- 
stitutivity of dT(A} and A in all (transparent) contexts, including 'inside' conditionals 
and, 
hence, qnside' D-contexts. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
359 
D. And for each such 'determinately' operator, there will be (increasingly weaker) 
D~-ful Liars, each of which gets 'correctly characterized' by a stronger operator 
II} ~+1 (provided the ordinal notation yields as much). 97 
What is central to the proposal is its thoroughgoing paracompleteness. LEM 
does not hold even for 'determinate truth'. 
Consistency is purchased by such 
thoroughgoing paracompleteness: for any D~-ful Liar L~ (for suitable 0), the 
failure of II}~L~ V ~II}~L~ will arise. Of course, as mentioned in §4.2, the failure 
of LEM for one's level-or 'strong truth device' requires having an even stronger 
device if one wants to classify level-~ Liars. But the point is that Field's basic 
construction provides as much. For any Liar constructible in the language (or, at 
least, the hierarchy of determinately operators), there's a 'strong' oi" 'determinate' 
device that classifies the sentence. 
And to repeat: there is no threat of 'determinately'-Liars wreaking havoc, since 
all such Liars are constructible only in a language (the full conditional-ful language) 
that enjoys a consistency proof. Needless to say, this is a significant improvement 
on the Kripkean picture. 
Exhaustive characterization ? 
Here, the issue is delicate. What Field provides is a way of consistently classifying 
all Liar-like sentences (would-be paradoxical sentences) definable in the 'hierarchy 
of determinately operators'. This is a major step forward on other paracomplete 
accounts. On the other hand, one might wonder whether Field has achieved 'ex- 
haustive characterization' in the target (but, alas, as yet imprecise) sense. Can 
we, for example, dtruly assert that every sentence is dtrue, dfalse, or not determi- 
nately dtrue in any (of the infinite) sense(s) of 'determinately'? Better (but still 
not ideally) put, is there some unified 'semantically significant' predicate Other 
such that we can dtruly say the following? 
dT<A} V dF<A} V Other(A} 
The answer is No, at least if Other carries the intuitive sense of not determinately 
dtrue or determinately not dtrue, in some sense of 'determinately' or" other'. In that 
respect, Field's proposal, while a significant advance on paracomplete approaches, 
seems to fail to achieve the target sense of 'exhaustive characterization' involved 
in Ecp, imprecise as that target sense remains. 
But the issue, as mentioned, is delicate. Such a 'characterization' presupposes 
the existence of some 'absolute determinacy operator' that, in effect, would be 
(like) the union of all determinacy operators. Given Field's consistency proof, such 
an operator simply doesn't exist, at least if our 'real language' is relevantly like 
Field's model language. One might, of course, say that Field's model is inadequate 
precisely on that score: our 'real language', unlike Field's model language, has the 
97For limit ordinals, one can mimic infinite conjunctions via the dtruth predicate and a suitable 
ordinal notation. 

360 
JC Beall 
resources to express just such a unified ~determinacy' operator, one that is entirely 
intelligible. But Field 2005b 
questions such alleged intelligibility. 
Unfortunately, Field's position on the current matter is (well) beyond the scope 
of this essay, but the basic issue can be (very roughly) sketched as follows. What 
is remarkable about Field's proposal is that every sentence in the 'hierarchy of op- 
erators', and hence any Liar sentence in the given hierarchy, gets characterized by 
some (semantically significant) predicate or other 
in particular, some predicate 
constructed out of 'stronger truth' (determinacy), negation, and so on. Call such 
predicates indeterminacy predicates. It would seem that one could conjoin all such 
indeterminacy predicates to get one %ig, unified indeterminacy predicate', or at 
least get the same effect of such 'conjunction' by quantification and dtruth. All 
of this seems to be eminently intelligible. The trouble, according to Field, is that 
the apparent intelligibility is merely apparent. 
In short, Field 2005b 
shows that such a 'conjunction', to the extent that it 
is achievable, either cannot be (coherently) constructed or, to the extent that it 
can, won't behave as expected; the reason, in keeping with a thoroughgoing para- 
complete account, is that it is ~indeterminate' what the conjuncts are! Any such 
quantification, aimed at achieving the (alleged) unified indeterminacy predicate, 
would at best be restricted quantification involving an ~indeterminate' or ~fuzzy' 
restricting condition. 
The sense in which such 'conjuncts' are ~indeterminate', or the restricting con- 
dition 'fuzzy', is quite involved and, unfortunately, too involved for this essay. But 
it is worth noting that Field has a reply to the charge that he fails to achieve 
the target sense of exhaustive characterization. For a full, detailed discussion, see 
Field, 2005b. 9s 
~.3 
Paranorrnal 
Kripke showed how we can have a consistent (and, hence, nontrivial) dtruth pred- 
icate, but not for a language in which all dT-biconditionals hold or for a language 
in which we can dtruly characterize Liar-like sentences (let alone 'exhaustively' so 
characterize). Field, in turn, show's how we can have a consistent dtruth predi- 
cate in a language that validates all dT-biconditionals and enjoys the resources to 
characterize all Liars constructible in the language (or, at least, in the 'hierarchy 
of determinacy operators'). What Field does not 
and, in his framework, cannot 
consistently 
do is offer a 'unified predicate' that characterizes all Liar-like sen- 
9sWhile Field's proposal is clearly an advance on earlier paracomplete accounts, I should note 
that questions remain open as to whether Field's proposal sufficiently covers related semantical 
paradoxes, in particular, paradoxes of denotation (e.g., Berry's). Graham Priest 2005 argues 
that Field can handle such paradoxes, if at all, only via ad hoc restrictions. 
Field 2005a 
disagrees, maintaining, as any paracomplete theorist will, that Berry's paradox is problematic 
only if some illicit use of LEM is invoked. But the issue is tricky and, alas, beyond the scope of 
this essay. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
361 
tences. Deviating from Field's framework, this section (briefly) sketches a route 
one might take towards achieving a unified 'classification' of Liars. 99 
Paracomplete theorists recognize the need to expand our otherwise classical 
categories. We have dtrue sentences and, derivatively, dfalse sentences; and there 
are 'other' sentences 'in addition to the normal ones', sentences like Liars. Call 
such sentences paranormal, again from the Greek 'para'. How', if at all, can we 
achieve a consistent dtruth predicate, all dT-biconditionals, and also 'exhaustive 
characterization' in the target (but, admittedly, imprecise) sense, one for which we 
have a unified 'paranormal' predicate? I will briefly sketch an answer, one that, 
at least philosophically, depends on a particular conception of the role of (the 
predicate) 'paranormal'. I will not discuss a suitable conditional, but it should be 
clear that something along the lines of Field's 'neighborhood' conditional will be 
available. 100 
Philosophical picture 
What the Liar (and its ilk) teaches us is that besides the dtrue sentences and dfalse 
sentences, there are paranormal sentences. One might now wonder: what is it to 
be a 'paranormal' sentence? 
The suggestion is that we set the question aside. For present purposes, it suffices 
merely to 'tag' the target sentences (e.g., Liars) as such, namely, as paranormal. 
Ultimately, there may well be no interesting property of being paranormal, and 
accordingly no hope of informative 'analysis' or explication of 'paranormal'. But 
the term may none the less serve to give us the sort of 'exhaustive characterization' 
desired, just by giving us a 'logical device' of sorts with which to 'classify' the 
target sentences. My suggestion is that we resist questions concerning 'the nature' 
of paranormals, seeing it merely as a tag (a logical category) introduced for the 
target sentences. 
Notice that even at this stage 
without giving much more than a 'classifying 
role' for the device 
Liar phenomena already arise. 
,/ The ticked sentence in §4.3 is either not dtrue or paranormal. 
And such a sentence itself is surely among the very sort for which we introduced 
the tag 'paranormal', and indeed the usual Liar-reasoning will suggest as much 
given the relevant version of Ec: namely, that every sentence (hence, the ticked 
one) is dtrue, dfalse (true negation), or paranormal. 
The upshot is that paranormality and dtruth apparently overlap. And my sug- 
gestion is that we simply accept as much. After all, we want a simple, exhaustive 
characterization, one that is consistent. And we can enjoy as much by acknowl- 
edging that some paranormal sentences 
just in virtue of the role of 'paranormal' 
and the basic expressive job of 'dtrue' 
turn out to be dtrue. 
99This section is drawn from Beall, 2006. 
1°°Indeed, I'm inclined to think that an even simpler conditional, invoking so-called non-normal 
worlds, will do the trick. For a sketch of such a conditional 
albeit in a paraconsistent setting 
see §5.1. 

362 
JC Beall 
Likewise, of course, various paranormal sentences will inevitably be dfalse, for 
example, 
* The starred sentence in §4.3 is not paranormal. 
If we have it 
via the relevant version of EC 
that the starred sentence is 
dtrue, dfalse, or paranormal, then it's dtrue iff not paranormal (and, so, not dtrue 
and paranormal). So, the sentence (just reasoning intuitively, at the moment) is 
paranormal, and so... a dfalse paranormal. 
One might picture the story as follows, although one ought to keep in mind that 
this is only a heuristic. 1°1 
dT 
P 
dF 
One might press for analysis or explication: what is it to be paranormal?! The 
suggestion is that we resist the question. Truth itself (at least on a suitably de- 
flationary conception) affords little by way of informative analysis. On the usual 
picture, we began with our dT-free fragment and had no problems except expres- 
sive ones due to our finite limitations. We could neither implicitly nor explicitly 
assert everything that we wanted to assert. Towards that end, our 'dtruth'-device 
was introduced. But once 'dtrue' was introduced (into the grammatical environ- 
ment of English), various unintended sentences emerged 
typical Liars and so on. 
Towards 'classifying' those sentences, 'paranormal' is introduced. But given the 
job of 'paranormal', there's little reason to expect 
let alone demand 
an infor- 
mative analysis. Indeed, as is evident, there is even less to say about 'paranormal' 
than 'dtrue'. 1°2 
Notice that by allowing 'overlap' between the paranormal and the dtruths, we 
thereby avoid the need to invoke infinitely many (non-unifiable) 'stronger truth' 
predicates. Once 'paranormal' is introduced, unintended by-products of it emerge 
this sentence is paranormal, etc. The suggestion is that we simply let such 
sentences be among the paranormal, even though 
given the role and rules of 
'dtrue' 
they may likewise be dtrue. (Similarly for 'dfalse'.) If our chief concern 
1°lAnd see §4.3 for an alternative (and, in my view, more attractive) picture. 
1°2But see §4.3 for an alternative picture. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
363 
is to 'exhaustively characterize' or 'classify' in a consistent and simple way, then 
such overlap is harmless, provided that 'dtrue' and 'dfalse' avoid overlap. 
Notice, too, that the proposal is not motivated by a search for some suitably 
stronger notion of 'truth' with which we can assert the 'untruth' (in a stronger 
sense of 'true') of Liars. The proposal is simply that we classify such sentences as, 
well, paranormal 
and that is that. If more is required for serious inquiry (e.g., 
science), then the proposal is wanting in that respect. But, as far as I know, not 
more is required. Moreover, one can, of course, define a stronger notion of truth 
via dtruth and 'paranormal' if one wishes. (See Strong truth, page 366.) But doing 
so seems not to be a requirement. 
There may be philosophical issues to be sorted out, but they must wait for 
another time. For now, I briefly turn to a simple, formal sketch of the idea. 
A formal model 
The picture is along familiar many-valued lines. 1°3 Our 'semantic values' (in the 
3 1 1 0}, with designated elements in 
formal story) are elements of V = {1, ~, ~, ~, 
~) 
{1, 3l 104 
~J' 
Our atomics are interpreted via a function u in the usual way, 1°5 extended to 
compounds along the lines seen in Strong Kleene: u(AAB) is the minimum of u(A) 
and u(B), and u(A V B) the maximum. (Quantifiers can be treated similarly, as 
generalised conjunction and disjunction.) Negation is likewise familiar: u(~A) = 
1 but otherwise toggles designated and 
1 - u(A). 
Hence, negation is fixed at 
undesignated values; it is thus 'normal' in the usual (formal) sense. 
We assume a special predicate dT to be interpreted as a dtruth predicate: 
u(dT(A)) = u(A) for any 'admissible' u. Falsity, in turn, is derivative: u(dF(A)) = 
~(dT(~A)). 
Finally, we add a unary connective 7c (our 'paranormal' device), which is inter- 
preted thus: l°s 
0 
if u(A) c{1,0} 
u(TcA) 
 
otherwise. 
Note that 
letting 'P' be our 'paranormal' predicate 
the extension of P, 
103NOTE WELL: While I do not (here) discuss a suitable conditional, the conditional in question 
is not to be constructed along standard Lukasiewicz lines (for reasons mentioned in §4.1.). The 
conditional will be one that is not 'truth-functional' but, rather, either invokes 'non-normal 
points' familiar from Kripke and, more recently, work in 'relevant' semantics (see §5.1 for brief 
sketch), or something along the lines of Field's 'neighborhood'. 
1°4Logical consequence 
semantic validity 
is defined as usual in terms of ~D. I skip the 
definition here. 
l°SNote that if, for some reason, one wanted to have a three-valued language, letting )2 contain 
only three values, one could let interpretations be non-functional relations and 
given appro- 
priate constraints on the interpretations 
thereby achieve the same framework. 
Functional 
interpretations are more familiar, and so I go with that. 
1°6Note that I will use '~r' for both the connective and operator, trusting that context will do 
its clarifying job. 

364 
JC Beall 
namely, 
{ 
1 
3} 
7 9+ 
A:~ <p(A)< 
may well be negation-inconsistent; it may well contain both A and ~A for some 
A. (Indeed, for typical 7c-free Liars, that will be the case.) In this respect, being 
paranormal differs from dtruth (similarly, dfalsity), as the extension of the latter, 
namely, 
{3 
} 
T + 
A: ~ < ~(A) 
is always negation-consistent. 1°7 
Comments 
What the 'paranormal' approach yields is a simple, consistent way towards achiev- 
ing exhaustive characterization in the target sense, one that employs a unified 
'paranormal' predicate. Liars, one and all, may safely be classified as paranormal, 
even though some paranormals may also be dtrue or dfalse. And, in general, we 
achieve 'unified exhaustive characterization', in that every sentence will fall under 
one of our three semantically significant predicates: either dtrue, dfalse, or para- 
normal. In this section I briefly address two issues, leaving further discussion to 
other work. 
An alternative picture: residual 
As above, the 'paranormal' account achieves a simple, unified exhaustive charac- 
terization (while, suitably filled out, preserving the salient virtues of other para- 
complete accounts). Of course, such exhaustion 
such 'unification', as it were 
comes at the 'cost' of there being nothing illuminating to say about being paranor- 
real. How much of a cost that may be is not entirely clear. Still, one might at least 
like to have it that, for example, if a sentence is not dtrue, then it is paranormal, 
and if not paranormal, dtrue. We do not have as much on the foregoing account, 
but one can easily tweak the picture to get as much. 
One might, for example, settle on a (fairly common) thought according to which 
we have our dtrue sentences and, beyond that, we simply have the rest 
be they 
dfalse or whathaveyou. Here, the picture is one according to which our goal (e.g., 
in science or rational inquiry, generally) is to record the full, dtrue story of our 
world and simply chuck the 'remainder' to the side. On this picture, anything 
dfalse (having true negation) is 'residual' and, moreover, anything not residual 
dtrue. The picture might look as follows, with dfalsity now merely a proper part 
of the residual. 
1°7A consistency proof cannot be done in the usual fashion, given that ~r is nonmonotonic, but 
such a proof is available. (Thanks to Tim Bays and Greg Restall for their interest in the idea; 
each of them independently suggested different proof-sketches.) 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
365 
dT 
R 
Such an idea requires only a minimal tweak of the 'paranormal' account. In 
particular, instead of 'paranormal', define our 'residual' tag thus: l°s 
0 
if ~(A) =1 
v(t A) 
3 
otherwise. 
In turn, the predicate 'R' (residual) behaves thus: 
7-4+ 
{A:0<p(A) 
< 34} 
7~ + will differ from 'dfalse' by being (negation-) inconsistent, whereas the extension 
of 'dfalse' will be (negation-) consistent: 
5 + 
{A:0 < ~(A) < 14} 
This variation reflects the 'residual' conception according to which any dfalse 
sentence is residual, and any sentence that is not residual is dtrue. The salient 
difference between 7c and t is that we have 
~A Ik- tA 
and 
~tA Ik A 
only for t, not for 7c. 1°9 This reflects the idea, as above, that (in some sense) 
science 
or, generally, rational inquiry 
aims to separate dtruth from the 
'remainder', the residual. But, as before, once we add (even a minimalistically 
construed) category 'residual', Ec will demand overlap, and so we allow that sortie 
of the resulting residuals are true. But no matter; the given overlap is harmless, 
and also allows for a simple 'unified exhaustive characterization'. 
108To avoid confusion, I will use 't' for our target 'residual' tag (rather than simply redefine 
~7I-~). 
l°9while I am not discussing a suitable conditional here, the (target) conditional versions of 
the above principles will similarly hold. 

366 
JC Beall 
Strong truth 
Let me make it plain that the foregoing account is not motivated by a desire to say 
that Liars are in some sense 'not true'. Still, one can say as much if one wants. For 
example, on the 'paranormal' account (but similarly for 'residual'), define robustly 
true thus: 
TA iff A A~rcA 
Obviously, we have it that t,(qFd) 
1 iff t,(d) 
1. As above, t,(rcA) c {3 0} and, 
hence, ~(~rcA) E {1,1} for all ~. 
We immediately get principles reminiscent but atypical of standard 'determi- 
nately' operators. 
* TAIbA. 
* A~ TA. (Just let ~(A) = ~.) 
The second principle is what is atypical with respect to standard 'determinately' 
operators, especially since A ~ 
TA will likewise fail, at least on the intended 
construction (about which, for space reasons, I've said little here). While I won't 
try to defend such 'failures', it seems to me to make sense: we are acknowledging 
that some paranormals may be dtrue (true in our basic, merely expressive, entirely 
transparent sense) but not thereby 'robustly true', and that this point carries all 
the way through 
both for the 'validity' reading and the conditional reading, n° 
The advantage (if any) of having such 'robust truth' is that it may do some work 
that our fundamental dtruth predicate isn't cut out to do. Our fundamental dtruth 
predicate has only the job of being a transparent generalization device, of being 
such that dT(A} and A are intersubstitutable for any A, including, of course, the 
paranormal A. The value (if any) of 'robust truth' is that it may cut distinctions 
that dtruth itself can't 
and was never intended to 
cut. In particular, one 
can dtruly say that, for example, the ticked sentence in §3 is not robustly true. Of 
course, what, if anything, one gains from this 
over and above merely asserting 
that the given sentence and its negation are 'residual' (or paranormal) 
is not 
obvious. But, for space reasons, I will leave the matter there. 111 
5 
PARACONSISTENT 
'Para' here is used as in 'paracomplete' (see §4), and 'consistent' for negation 
consistency, the idea being that we are moving 'beyond' typical (negation-) con- 
110That these 'readings' inevitably come apart in paracomplete (and paraconsistent) approaches 
is briefly discussed in §6. 
111I will note one more thing. T, defined as above from our 'paranormal' (similarly 'residual') 
device, seems to behave very much like 
if not exactly like 
the KF-truth predicate. This 
is philosophically interesting, as it gives us the (e.g., expressive) virtues of dtruth but likewise a 
stronger notion of truth that has gained independent support from others. But details are left 
for elsewhere. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
367 
sistency constraints. 112 What is common to paracomplete theories, as in §4, is a 
rejection of LEM. What is common to paraconsistent theories, in turn, is a rejec- 
tion of EFQ (ex falso quodlibet or, more colorfully, explosion), the rule according 
to which (arbitrary) B follows from (arbitrary) A A ~A or from {A, ~A}. 113 
A paraconsistent logic, then, is one in which EFQ fails: A, ~A N B. An explo- 
sire logic is one in which EFQ holds. Any theory 
hence, any dtruth theory 
according to which both A and ~A are dtrue is trivial if its underlying logic is 
explosive. Paraconsistent logics afford nontrivial but (negation-) inconsistent the- 
ories. And that's the basic idea behind paraconsistent dtruth theories, in general. 
While paraconsistent approaches to truth are far from dominant (to say the 
least), there have been various proposals either directly in the tradition or very 
close to the spirit of it, including Dowden, 1984, Priest, 1979; Priest, 1987, 
Rescher and Brandom, 19791, Shaw-Kwei, 19541, Visser, 19841, Woodruff, 19841, 
variations of Yablo, 1993a; Yablo, 1993b, and others. 114 For present purposes, I 
will focus on Priest's so-called dialetheic account. 115 
I should note that in paraconsistent theories, as in their paracomplete relatives, 
'reject A' is not equivalent to 'accept ~A', and probability requires modification 
(in effect, the dual of the paracomplete modification). For discussion of (minor) 
adjustments to probability theory, see Priest, 1987. 
5.1 
Priest 
Graham 
Priest takes both NTP 
and ECP seriously, and, in a large body 
of work, ar- 
gues that only by acknowledging 
'gluts', sentences 
that are both dtrue and dfalse, 
do we achieve satisfactory 
answers 
to those projects, n6 
Priest (and Richard 
Syl- 
van, formerly 
Routley) 
coined the term 'dialetheism' 
(die-a-lee-thism) 
for the view 
that some 
sentences 
are both dtrue and dfalse 
equivalently 
(in the given frame- 
works), that some 
dtrue sentences 
have dtrue negations. 
Whether 
dialetheism 
is 
the only satisfactory 
approach 
to NTP 
and ECP 
is something 
that I leave open 
or, at least, to (arguments 
in) Priest's cited work. 
My 
aim, as throughout, 
is only 
to sketch the basic idea. 
112Actually, paraconsistentists seem to have different views of the import of 'para', but I will 
ignore this here. For discussion, see Priest, 2000. 
ll3Some well-known paraconsistent logics are such that 'conjunction' is abnormal 
either 
Simplification or Adjunction fails. See Priest, 2002 for broad discussion. I will skip discussion 
of such logics and focus entirely on 'normal' conjunction. 
ll4Martin, Dowden, and Yablo all (independently) tweak Kripke's iterative proposal to achieve 
an 'inconsistency' account. 
(Also, Field 2005a 
briefly discusses a paraconsistent 'dual' of his 
own iterative construction.) Rescher Brandonfs and Priest's accounts are compatible with such 
an iterative construction, but they instead give a simple, non-iterative account. Visser's given 
discussion is an excellent discussion of fixed point technicalities in four-valued frameworks. 
115priest 1987 
does not actually propose an account of dtruth, and instead imposes various 
restrictions on truth to avoid full intersubstitutivity. None the less, I will present the basic idea 
in terms of dtruth. 
ll6priest uses the terms 'dialetheia' and 'true contradictions' for gluts. I will use 'gluts', which 
is a term coined by Kit Fine 1975. 

368 
JC Beall 
I should note one caveat: that dialetheism and paraconsistency are not one and 
the same! While all paraconsistent logicians see paraconsistent logic as a useful 
tool for modeling inconsistent but nontrivial theories (e.g., naive truth, naive 
semantical properties, etc.), many 
if not most 
reject that such theories are 
'possibly dtrue'. Dialetheists are a small minority, holding that some of the given 
theories are not only possibly dtrue, but actually so. 11z 
Philosophical picture 
According to dialetheism, what the Liar paradox teaches us is that some dtruths 
have dtrue negations, specifically, Liars. 11s The lesson, I think, is quite natural. 
After all, 'dtrue', as the (typical) story goes, was introduced solely as an expressive, 
entirely transparent device: for any sentence A, be it dT-ful or otherwise, dT(A} 
and A are intersubstitutable. But, of course, once the device (a unary predicate) 
is introduced into the language, Liar-like sentences emerge, sentences that say of 
themselves only that (for example) they are not dtrue, that they are dfalse. Given 
LEM, such sentences turn out to be dtrue and dfalse. 
The paracomplete response, as above, is to reject LEM, preserving the (nega- 
tion) consistency of dtruth. The dialetheic response is to accept the inconsistency 
of dtruth but reject EFQ, thereby preserving the nontriviality of dtruth. 
Both 
approaches agree that our 'classical categories' need to be expanded 
there's 
something 'in addition to' the normal categories. The dialetheist's additional cat- 
egory is glutty, that is, both dtrue and dfalse, a category characterized (in the 
language itself) just so, 'is dtrue and dfalse'. 119 
Notice that rejecting EFQ is not ad hoc. To begin, why think that (arbitrary) B 
follows from (arbitrary) A and ~A? One answer might be that there's no apparent 
counterexample. Indeed, one (many?) might think it 'inconceivable' that both A 
and ~A be dtrue, and hence that, vacuously, the given inference count as valid. 
Such an answer, I think, is entirely natural and, in general, quite reasonable; 
however, it is not ultimately sufficient. On one hand, intuitions are 'built' from 
normal, run-of-the-mill cases 
usually cases 'grounded' in non-semantic facts 
(in a minimal sense of 'facts') 
and, in such cases, it is difficult (to say the 
least) to understand what it would be like for A A ~A to hold. 12° On the other 
hand, EFQ is a principle about all cases (all sentences), not just the run-of-the- 
117For discussion of different 'grades of paraconsistency', see Priest, 2000. (And for a reply to 
Priest's alleged 'slippery slope' towards dialetheism, see Beall and Restall, 2005, Part IV.) 
11SNote that whether a given Curry sentence is a Liar depends on the conditional. If the 
conditional is the hook (material conditional), then dialetheists (at least those, like Priest, who 
accept LEM) will count the sentence among the gluts. (Such a sentence will be nothing but 
a familiar disjunctive Liar 'I am not dtrue or everything is dtrue'.) If a genuine (detachable) 
conditional is at work, then dialetheists 
on pain of triviality 
will reject the sentence. See 
§5.1 for brief discussion of a suitable conditional. 
119I will briefly address some 'characterization' worries in §5.1. 
12°But, alas, Priest 1987 argues that even in non-semantic, sometimes run-of-the-mill cases, 
there is good reason to accept A A ~A (for some A). I will ignore such considerations here, for 
space reasons. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
369 
mills. When one takes Liars into consideration, especially with respect to (entirely 
transparent) dtruth, it is fairly easy to see how for some A, namely, an A that says 
of itself (only) that it is dfalse, both A and ~A could be dtrue. (Just consider the 
intuitively correct reasoning of the Liar paradox!) 
Another reason one might give for the validity of EFQ invokes ~the very meaning 
of negation'. One might say that what we mean 
by negation is such that EFQ 
holds. But this reply either begs the question or is confused. After all, part of the 
job of a logical theory is to 'describe' the behavior of our various so-called logical 
connectives, including negation. The question at hand is whether EFQ holds. To 
say that EFQ holds in virtue of the very meaning of negation is to either beg 
the question or confuse theory with subject matter. 121 Given the role of dtruth 
and the existence of Liars, it is not obviously unreasonable to conclude, as the 
dialetheist does, that some sentences are both dtrue and dfalse, and hence that 
some A is such that A A ~A is dtrue. 
That rejecting EFQ is not ad hoc is now plain. If one takes seriously the idea 
that a sentence 
say, a Liar 
could be both dtrue and dfalse, then arguments for 
the validity of EFQ are hard to find. C. I. Lewis' famous ~independent argument' 
for EFQ 1932 
is faulty precisely for its not taking the initial supposition seriously. 
After all, (seriously) suppose that A and ~A are (both) dtrue, in which case, 
presumably, A V B is dtrue, since, as above, at least one of the disjuncts is dtrue 
(viz., A). But now the point: there is no reason at all to think that B follows 
from the (supposed) dtruth of ~A and A V B. Indeed, it is easy to see why this 
inference 
namely, Disjunctive Syllogism 
would fail, at least if both A and 
~A could be dtrue. 192 
What about ECP? Does the dialetheist face the predicament of paracomplete 
theorists (e.g., Field) who, towards characterizing all Liar-like sentences, are forced 
to acknowledge ~stronger and stronger truth'? No, at least not obviously. (But 
see §5.1 for some muted worries.) The paracomplete theorist's trouble emerges 
from rejecting LEM, and thereby losing the means by which to classify Liars (for 
which LEM fails). (This is particularly salient in Kripke's proposal, as above.) 
But the dialetheist need not reject LEM. Indeed, Priest 1987 
argues that once 
EFQ is rejected (on the basis of recognizing gluts), there is no good argument for 
rejecting LEM. 193 Moreover, and perhaps more centrally, the dialetheist essentially 
recognizes overlap among her semantically significant categories. Such overlap, as 
in the ~paranormal' approach, affords a unified predicate in terms of which all Liars 
may be classified. 
121Quine,s famous 'dilemma of the deviant logician' seems to make just such a confusion. See 
Quine, 1970. 
122For more on 'the very idea of gluts', and related issues, see Priest, 1998. 
12aI will briefly return to this issue in §5.2, wherein a ~gappy and glutty' (dialetheie) position 
is (very briefly) suggested. 

370 
JC Beall 
Formal picture 
Priest's basic picture, as above, is one according to which our Other category 
glutty 
overlaps both dtrue and dfalse; indeed, the additional category just is 
the given overlap (with G for glut@). A picture is as follows. 
This picture is the 'dual' of the Strong Kleene picture, which likewise has three 
semantically significant categories, but, unlike the above, none of the Strong Kleene 
categories overlap. Indeed, Priest's purely extensional LP 1979 
just is the dual 
of/(3, and so clauses for conjunction (minimum), disjunction (maximum), and 
negation remain exactly as before, namely (K1) (KS). (See §4.1.) 
LP, then, is exactly like/(3 except that the 'middle value' is designated. Desig- 
nating the middle value, which represents 'both dtrue and dfalse', reflects the idea 
that any dtrue sentence 
even if also dfalse 
is assertible. Letting T + and T- 
be the extension and antiextension of dT, and letting $ comprise all sentences (in 
the augmented dT-ful language), the chief contrast between/(3 and LP, at least 
semantically, comes to this: 
K3. Every interpretation is such that T + A T 
0 but some interpretations are 
such that T + U T- ¢ 8. 
LP. Every interpretation is such that 7 -+ U T- = $ but some interpretations are 
such that T + A T 
¢ 0. 
So, while paracomplete approaches put Liars 'beyond' T + U T 
, Priest's (di- 
aletheic) paraconsistent approach puts Liars into T + A T 
. 
Validity is defined exactly as in the Ka framework: E I~- A iff every interpretation 
that designates (each element of) E also designates A. In other words, E IF- A is 
valid ifffor all interpretations p and all B c E, if p(B) c {1, 1}, then p(A) c {1, 1 ~}. 
With validity so defined, it is immediately clear that LP is paraconsistent, that 
1 = .(~A) 
is, that A, ~A P5/3. Just consider an interpretation such that ~(A) = 5 
but ~(B) = 0. 
Similarly, the above counterexample to EFQ also shows that disjunctive syllo- 
gism (DS) is invalid in LP: A V t3, ~A ~z t3. This 'failure' is especially significant 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
371 
inasmuch as DS is equivalent to 'material modus ponens', the rule that B follows 
from A D B and A, where A D B, as before, is defined ~A V B. But, then, LP 
fails to have a genuine conditional, an issue to which I return in §5.1. 
So goes the basic (extensional) fi'amework. The resulting account is one that 
answers 
NTP by rejecting EFQ, and answers ECP by recognizing a unified predicate 
(say, 'glutty') applying to all Liar-like sentences. I turn to a few issues, including 
the issue of a suitable conditional. 
Comments 
In this section I address only a few- philosophical issues that arise with respect to 
Priest's dialetheic approach to dtruth. 124 
Non-triviality project 
Recall that NTP is the project of explaining how- we can enjoy a nontrivial language 
that has a dtruth predicate and Liar-like sentences. In Priest's case, the project 
is not to show how we can enjoy a consistent dtruth predicate despite Liars, but 
how we can enjoy nontriviality. As in §4.1, one generally aims to answer NTP by 
constructing an artificial, formal language 
the model language 
that contains 
its own dtruth predicate, and then claims that, at least in relevant respects, 'real 
dtruth' is modeled by truth-in-the-model language. 
Just as in the Kripke case, one might object that Priest's account doesn't suf- 
ficiently answer 
NTP, the reason being that certain notions used in the 'lnetalan- 
guage' are not expressible in the object- 01" 'model language'. In particular, one 
might argue just as in the Kripke case: an LP-based account has it that some sen- 
tences are 'both true and false', some 'simply true', and some 'simply false'. Let 
£.~ be a typical LP-based 'lnodel-language'. In a classical lnetalanguage, one de- 
fines '£.~-silnply true', '£,~-silnply false', and, of course, 'L:,~-both-true-and-false'. 
Since such notions are defined via classical set theory, one can, in turn 
sticking 
within the (classical) metalanguage 
prove that L:.~ cannot define, for example, 
{B : B is £.~-simply false}. The charge, then, is that, on pain of triviality (versus 
'mere negation-inconsistency'), £~r~ fails to be an adequate model of real dtruth, 
since £.~-truth achieves nontriviality in virtue of lacking (the given) notions that 
we have expressed in our real language. 
So put, the charge faces the same problem as the related Kripke case: it is 
either confused or unwarranted. First, notice that classical logic is an extension 
of the logic LP. Semantically, every classical interpretation is an LP interpre- 
tation, and thus Priest's model language can enjoy a proper, classical fragment. 
The idea, of course, is that we are classically modeling our 'real, nonclassical lan- 
guage'. But, then, notions defined squarely within the classical metalanguage 
a proper fragment of one's real language 
are merely model-relative ones that, 
124Actually, once again, I should note that Priest doesn't himself give an account of dtruth, 
but his framework, as above, obviously affords such an account. See Priest, 1987 for Priest's 
preferred account of truth. 

372 
JC Beall 
not surprisingly, behave entirely classically. What one needs to show is that there 
are non-model-relative notions that are expressed in our real language but not 
expressible in the model language. 
Pending some (as yet not given) reason to 
think that the real language has some non-model-relative 'untruth predicate' that 
behaves over our whole (real) language as our model-relative '/:.~-simply false' 
behaves over/2~, the given charge is either unwarranted or simply curious, given 
the aim of £~. 
Exhaustive characterization ? 
One might think that the dialetheist does not achieve exhaustive characterization 
in the target sense. 125 After all, the dialetheist maintains that all sentences are 
either just dtrue, just dfalse, or both dtrue and dfalse. But what predicate does 
the dialetheist use to express 'just dtrue'? 
In the formal story, 'just dtrue' is 
modeled by 1, 'just dfalse' by 0, and 'both' modeled by 1 
But, again, how is 
5" 
'just dtrue' or 'just dfalse' expressed in the real language? 
If 'just dtrue' is a 
semantically significant category distinct firm 'dtrue', then the dialetheist needs 
an account of it. Unfortunately, no obvious candidate emerges. (One might think 
of something along the lines of ~(A A ~A), but this is valid in LP, and hence cuts 
no distinctions.) 
Another way putting the worry is as follows. 
In order to characterize sim- 
ple dT-ful Liars, standard paracomplete theorists invoke some stronger notion of 
truth, say ~. But, now, in order to characterize ~2-ful Liars, such theorists invoke 
an even stronger notion of truth, say ~2 t. And so on. But now consider Priest's 
dialetheic approach. While there is no problem characterizing Liars 
they are 
both dtrue and dfalse 
there is an apparent problem characterizing the 'normal 
sentences', the 'non-dialetheia', the sentences that are 'just dtrue' or 'just dfalse'. 
The problem seems to be exactly analogous to the standard paracomplete the- 
orist's problem. Whereas the standard paracomplete theorist is pushed towards 
a stratified conception of 'strong truth', the dialetheist, at least on the surface, 
seems to be pushed towards a stratified conception of 'just dtrue'. 126 
I am not sure what dialetheists should say about this (admittedly, as yet vaguely 
sketched) worry. Priest 1987 
has long maintained that 'just dtrue' is as inconsis- 
tent as dtruth itself, a claim that is neither unreasonable nor surprising. (Consider 
a sentence like 'this sentence is just dfalse' or the like.) But such a response does 
not obviously get to the heart of the worry. The point of rejecting EFQ is to allow 
some sentences to be both dtrue and dfalse while still enjoying (many) sentences 
that are 'just dtrue'. This central claim of dialetheism utilizes what one would 
take to be dialetheism's key semantic categories 
both dtrue and dfalse, and just 
dtrue. But if that is right, and if 'just dtrue' is supposed to be distinct from 'dtrue' 
125The following issue is related to discussion in both Parsons, 1990 and Shapiro, 2004. 
126I should note too that in Field's framework, just such a stratified notion of 'just dtrue' is 
available to the dialetheist. (Of course, one would 
in effect 
dualise the Field construction.) 
In particular, as c~ increases, DaA rules out more and more of the gluts, the 'dialetheia'. See 
Field, 2005a for some discussion. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
373 
(as it is in the formal model, where only the latter is represented by all designated 
values), then the dialetheist doesn't obviously achieve full characterization in the 
target sense. But I will leave the matter there. 197 
A suitable conditional 
With respect to a conditional, Priest's proposal notably contrasts with the K3 
Kripkean proposal (§4.1). While Kripke's proposal enjoys a genuine (i.e., detach- 
able) conditional, it fails to enjoy a conditional that validates all dT-biconditionals. 
Priest's 
LP, 
on the other hand, 
enjoys a conditional that 
validates 
all 
dT-biconditionals, since IP A D A in LP; however, the conditional isn't genuine, 
since it fails to detach. 
Unlike Kripke, Priest (like Field) takes the issue of a suitable conditional se- 
riously, where a 'suitable conditional' is a genuine conditional that avoids Curry 
(e.g., Contraction, etc.) and validates all dT-biconditionals. While Priest has sug- 
gested various accounts, I will briefly indicate a particularly simple one Priest, 
1992. 12s 
Since the basic issue concerns Curry and detachment, I will here ignore nega- 
tion. (As will be evident, the framework affords various approaches to negation, 
including a natural LP-approach.) We expand the language along modal lines, 
invoking points of evaluation 
worlds. Exactly how this is done is not pressing, 
for present purposes. To make matters simple, we will take a 'propositional' ap- 
proach, letting I I be a function from atomic sentences into p(W), the idea being 
that IAI is the 'proposition' expressed by A, the set of worlds at which A is true. 
Our set of points W is the union of two sets, iV (normal points) and iViV (non- 
normal points), 199 with a distinguished element ~ E iV (the actual world) and 
iV O A/iV 
0. With respect to extensional connectives (here ignoring negation), 
I I is expanded as one would expect. 
and 
IA n BI = IAI n IBI 
I vBI 
IAI u IBI 
Finally, interpretations come equipped with an 'arbitrary evaluator' ~ the task 
of which is to assign values to ~-claims at non-normal points: ~ is a function 
127A related 
but, in my opinion, not terribly troubling 
issue is that, for example, an 
LP-based approach to dtruth is committed to saying of Liars that they are neither dtrue nor 
dfalse; for, such LP-based dialetheists assert A A ~A for any Liar A, but that is equivalent in 
LP to ~(A V ~A), which, given intersubstitutivity, would amount to the claim that A is neither 
dtrne nor dfalse. See Field, 2005a for discussion. 
12SFor Priest's latest thoughts on a suitable conditional, see Priest, 2006a; Priest, 2006b. For a 
variation of the approach given below, see Beall, 2005b, which is closely related to the proposal 
in Beall et al., 2005. 
129Non-normal points were first invoked by Kripke 1965 to model Lewis systems weaker than 
$4 (systems in which Necessitation fails). Routley et al., 1982 and Routley and Loparic, 1978 
invoke such points for purposes closer to the current project, as does Mares, 2004. 

374 
JC Beall 
from pairs of 'propositions' into go(A/A/). Assuming standard $5 conditions on )A?, 
conditionals are evaluated thus, 
A ---~ B = N U NN 
where N, comprising the normal worlds at which A ~ B is true, is such that 
N 
)A? if IAI c Igl, and otherwise N 
0 
and NN, the non-normal worlds at which A --~ B is true, is given by ¢, 
NN = 0(IAI, IBI) 
The idea, put (perhaps) more simply, is just this: in addition to 'normal worlds' 
(among which is the actual), we also recognize nort-nor'mal wor'lds. Non-normal 
worlds are relevant only to the (non-extensional) conditional; extensional connec- 
tives behave normally. Conditionals are evaluated differently 
indeed, entirely 
arbitrarily 
at non-normal worlds. In effect, conditionals are evaluated exactly 
as you would expect at 'normal worlds', but evaluated in any manner one likes at 
non-normal worlds (provided the given extensional clauses are respected). This 
would wreak havoc if validity were defined over all worlds (of all interpretations), 
but it needn't be, and in fact is not. 
Validity is defined in terms of actual verification (See §4.2. Note that one could 
and standardly does 
say that validity is 'truth-preservation' over all normal 
worlds, but restricting to just @ makes no difference.) In the present context: 
A is actually verified in an interpretation iff @ c IAI.) 
So long as there's no 
interpretation such that ~ E IAI but (e ~ IBI, then A I~- B. 
Similarly, valid 
sentences are those that are actually verified on all interpretations. 13° 
This simple framework might not yield everything that one wants from a con- 
ditional, but, for present purposes, it yields the target desiderata. For example, 
the conditional is 'genuine', since no interpretation actually verifies A ~ B and 
A without thereby actually verifying B. Moreover, A --~ A is valid (as brief re- 
flection indicates), and hence all dT-biconditionals are verified. Furthermore, the 
troubling contraction principles fail, thanks to non-normal worlds. For example, 
just consider an interpretation according to which @ c IAI and IAI c IBI, but such 
that w c ~0(IAI, IBI) but w ~ IBI. This serves to invalidate A A (A ~ B) ~ B, 
and similar counterexamples invalidate the other Curry-generating principles. 
There are other approaches that one might take to conditionals in a paracon- 
sistent context, including, of course, tweaking Field's 'neighborhood' approach. 
For now, the point is simply that there are suitable conditionals available to the 
dialetheist. 
13°Of course, there are broader notions of validity that can be defined, but the given one is 
most relevant here. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
375 
5.2 
Gaps and gluts? 
Priest's dialetheie proposal offers a natural and very simple approach towards 
dtruth and, in particular, NTP and ECP. On the other hand, one might be open 
to such 'gluts' but none the less think that there are also gaps, sentences that, 
somehow, are dtruly classified as 'neither dtrue nor dfalse'. 131 Of course, as in 
§4.1, it makes little sense, and at any rate is incorrect, to say that some sentences 
are 'neither dtrue nor dfalse', at least given (only) a Strong Kleene account of 
negation. A natural response to the problem 
not radically different h'om the 
strong truth tradition 
is to acknowledge another negation, a more robust (but 
logically weaker) gap-closing negation, in particular, a sort of 'exclusion negation'. 
The reason that this is not normally pursued is that such a negation 
one for 
which LEM holds 
inevitably gives rise to inconsistency. But this is no major 
worry if the overall framework is paraconsistent: we may accept LEM for one of 
the negations (viz., exclusion) but reject EFQ for all negations. 132 
The idea can be modeled using a four-valued language along the lines of Ander- 
son and Belnap's FDE 1975; 1992. 133 Our semantic values 12 
{1, b, n, 0} are 
ordered thus: 
b:i 
n 
'0" 
Intuitively, as in Priest's proposal, 1 models sentences that are dtrue but not 
dfalse, 0 sentences that are dfalse but not dtrue, b sentences that are both dtrue 
and dfalse, and n sentences that are neither. The designated values :D are 1 and 
b, the idea being, just as in Priest's proposal, that dtrue sentences are designated 
(even when they are also dfalse). 
Interpretations are functions ~ from sentences into F such that L,(A A B) and 
u(A V B) are the infimum (glb) and supremum (lub) of ~(A) and L,(B), respec- 
tively) 34 
In FDE we have only (what I shall call) 'choice negation' 7, which toggles 1 and 
0 and is fixed at both b and n. We add another negation, pseudo-exclusion -, which 
toggles 1 and 0, is fixed at b, but takes n (gaps) to 1. The result is (what I shall 
131The material in this section is largely from Beall, 2005b. 
132As indicated, paracomplete and paraconsistent theorists unite in rejecting any 'absolute 
exclusion device', a device Q such that QA, A IF- B and IF- QA V A. The current suggestion is no 
different. 
133The name 'FDE' is now common for the following framework; however, it is perhaps un- 
fortunately so named, since there are various accounts of 'first degree entailment'. But I shall 
follow what now seems to be common practice. 
134For present purposes I lay out the propositional semantics; the predicate extension 
includ- 
ing the resulting dtruth-theory 
is straightforward: one simply allows for both T + N T 
fi (3 
and T + U T- # S. (See §5.1.) 

376 
JC Beall 
call) FDE*. la5 
with respect to negation. 
Accordingly, FDE*-interpretations ~obey' the following diagrams 
A 
A 
0 
1 
0 
n 
1 
n 
b 
b 
b 
1 
0 
1 
Notice that dfalsity, following standard thinking, remains dtruth of negation 
dtruth of choice negation, as opposed to pseudo-exclusion (henceforth, exclusion). 
A model of A is an FDE*-interpretation that designates A, that is, an interpre- 
tation ~ such that ~(A) E ~D. And a model of F = {As,..., A~} is a model of Ai, 
for each 1 ~< i ~< n. Consequence I~ is defined thus: F I~ A iff every model of F is 
a model of A. Valid sentences are consequences of ~. 
With respect to Liars, there will now" be two sorts: choice and exclusion. One 
could treat both sorts of Liar the same, namely, as gluts. On the other hand, one 
might follow the methodological principle according to which a sentence is gappy 
if its truth is determined by neither the world (as it were) nor the language. On 
such a route, choice Liars 
similarly, dtruth-tellers (e.g., 'this sentence is dtrue') 
are treated as gaps, exclusion Liars as gluts. For more on the philosophical 
picture, see Beall, 2005b. 
5.3 
Comments 
It is obvious that the foregoing approach has all the virtues of Priest's dialetheism, 
at least with respect to NTP and ECP (e.g., unified semantically significant predi- 
cates, etc.). Moreover, the conditional indicated in §5.1 may be used for purposes 
of a suitable conditional 
one that detaches and validates the dT-biconditionals. 
Here, I touch on two issues. Further discussion is available in Beall, 2005b. 
De Morgan and the notion of gaps 
As expected, excluded middle fails for choice negation but holds for exclusion: 
~z A V ~A but I~ A V 
A. Moreover, both negations exhibit standard double- 
negation behaviour, at least in terms of 'inferences'. For example: A q~ ~A 
and 
A q~ 
A. 136 
Standard de Morgan laws hold for choice: ~(A V B) is equivalent to ~A A ~B 
(and similarly for the other laws). But exclusion is different: de Morgan laws will 
laSThis is not the best name, as it might suggest an approach to FDE using the Routley star, 
but I trust that no confusion will ensue. 
la6Note, however, that in the double-exclusion case, this is only bi-consequence, not equivalence 
in the strong sense of 'same value' (which does hold in the choice case). What we have in the 
exclusion case is co-designation: A and 
A are both designated or both undesignated on any 
FDE*-interpretation. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
377 
generally hold in one direction but not both. Of particular importance 
given 
the role of exclusion in the notion of gaps 
is that we have 
-(A V B) IP -A A -B 
but we do not have equivalence; in fact, 
AA 
(AvS) 
A counterexample: p(A) 
n and t,(B) 
b. hi that case, p(A) 
1 and ~,(B) 
b, andso,( 
AA 
B) 
b. But, then, p(AVB) 
i, and so , ( (A V B)) 
0. ~37 
Is the 'nonstandard' behavior of exclusion 
failure of de Morgan principles 
a prima facie problem? I see no reason to think as much, in general. Presumably, 
choice is our 'default' negation; we employ exclusion when we need to talk about 
failures of choice. Our 'intuitions' about de Morgan, in turn, are presumably based 
on choice 
or, at least, based on 'normal cases', 'settled cases', and so on. That 
some such (de Morgan) principles should fail for exclusion seems, as said, not to 
be a problem, in general. 
On the other hand, one might worry that the given de Morgan 'failures' pose 
a problem for the role of exclusion in the notion of gaps. Gappy sentences are 
supposed to be neither dtrue nor dfalse. But that, one would think, ought to be 
equivalent to saying that such sentences are (exclusion-) not dtrue and (exclusion-) 
not dfalse. The worry is that such equivalence fails, given that, as above, 
(AVB) 
and 
A A 
B aren't equivalent, in general. 
Fortunately, the worry isn't serious: 
(A V B) and 
A A 
B are equivalent in 
the special case where B is ~A, which is precisely the case involved in saying that 
A is neither dtrue nor dfalse. Accordingly, the general failure of de Morgan (for 
exclusion) seems not to be a particular problem for the notion of gaps. 
Strong truth 
If, for some reason, one is inclined to acknowledge a notion of 'strong truth', such 
a notion is definable in terms of our two negations and dtruth Beall, 2002. 
In 
particular, define a 'robustly true' device T thus: TA iff dT(~ 
A}, or, equivalently 
(given dtruth), TA iff ~ 
A. ias 
6 
DTRUTH, VALIDITY, AND TRUTH-PRESERVATION 
The notion of validity is often cashed out, at least intuitively, as 'necessary truth- 
preservation'. At the very least, 'truth preservation' is commonly thought to be 
137The given 'inference' holds if our values are linearly ordered thus: i ;~ b >~ n > 0. But in 
that case, de Morgan will break down for choice. 
laSCompare Field's approach (§4.2). 

378 
JC Beall 
a necessary condition of validity. But in the context of dtruth, the common con- 
nection is strained, at best. In this section, I briefly discuss a (relatively under- 
discussed) issue confronting the two common approaches to dtruth 
paracom- 
plete and paraconsistent. 
One can see the issue in light of the classical picture, wherein we can retain the 
familiar connection between validity and 'necessary truth-preservation' by giving 
up a dtruth predicate (for the language) in which to express (in the language) such 
a connection. (One must resort to a 'richer metalanguage' and, hence, use some- 
thing other than dtruth.) By contrast, as the foregoing sections have indicated, 
paracomplete and paraconsistent approaches give us a dtruth predicate; however, 
the familiar connection between validity and dtruth-preservation is lost (or, at 
least, strained). I will briefly elaborate. In what follows, I will assume that our 
basic (extensional) framework is either/(3 (paracomplete) or LP (paraconsistent). 
6.1 
Validity 
Validity, as above, is often thought of as necessary truth-preservation, or at the 
very least requiring such truth-preservation. A natural way to understand such a 
thought is as follows, where Val is a binary predicate having the intuitive sense of 
follows from. 
V0. Val((d), (B)) ~ s(T(A) ~ T(B)) 
where --+ is a genuine conditional, one that at least detaches (in 'rule form'). 139 
In the case of dtrnth, which is currently the focus, V0 amounts to 
V1. VaI((A), (B)) ~ D(A ~ B) 
Intuitive as V1 may be, problems arise in both paracomplete and paraconsistent 
settings, at least if V1 is supposed to be expressible in one's given language. One 
problem, arising from Curry, arises for both approaches. 
6.2 
Curry 
To simplify matters, concentrate just on the weaker principle: 
V2. VaI((A), (B)) ~ (A ~ B) 
As above, we're assuming that ~ is detachable; hence, given plausible assumptions 
about conjunction, we have 
(1) 
Val((A A (A ~ B)),(B)) 
139In the present context, speaking of the 'rule form' of Modus Ponens (or any other argument- 
form), where this invokes a turnstile, is slightly delicate. After all, a turnstile is typically used in 
a metalanguage (for a formal object language) to represent what, intuitively, we take to be our 
validity predicate, which is precisely the issue 
viz., how to understand a validity predicate for 
our language in our language. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
379 
But, then, by V2 and detachment we get 
(2) 
AA(A~ B)~ B 
The trouble is that (2) is a notoriously easy recipe for Curry, which results in 
triviality. The upshot is that, 'intuitively right' as they may appear, V2 (and, 
hence, V1) must go. 
One not altogether unattractive response to this problem is to reject the dora- 
inant idea that validity requires 'necessary dtruth-preservation' or, more simply, 
even dtruth-preservation, and indeed reject that 'validity' be defined at all. Per- 
haps, instead, one ought to accept that validity is a primitive notion. And perhaps 
not all is lost: one might be able to retain various 'intuitive' thoughts about va- 
lidity but reformulate them in terms of 'acceptance' and 'rejection', notions that 
are already essential to paracomplete and paraconsistent frameworks. 14° 
On the other hand, it would be nicer (in some sense) to retain the idea of 'truth- 
preservation' if possible. I will consider the paraconsistent and paracomplete cases 
in turn. 
6.3 
Paraconsistent: dtruth-preservation 
V2 and, hence, V1 must go, as per §6.2. The question is: how, if at all, can we 
retain the idea that validity requires (let alone is) dtruth-preservation? 
One route, at least in the LP setting, is to give a 'mixed' account of truth- 
preservation, one that uses some other 'conditional' in addition to one's genuine 
one. A natural go invokes D, the material conditional. For simplicity, we may 
concentrate on the simpler case: 
V2*. Va,((A), (B)) ~ (A D B) 
In an LP-setting, V2* will be dtrue 
assuming, as I am, various natural ways of 
handling ~ (e.g., §5.1). Moreover, Curry paradox is harnessed. We have it that 
detaches, and so have it that (1) is dtrue. But from V2*, unlike the case of V2, 
we do not get (2); we get only 
(3) 
AA(A~B) DB 
And since D does not detach in the LP-setting (and, so, isn't a 'genuine condi- 
tional'), the threat of triviality is avoided. 141 
14°Example: One ought to reject the validity of a given argument if one accepts that it's possible 
for the given premises to be true but conclusion false. This won't generalize to V1 or even V2, 
at least in the paracomplete framework. (Speaking only of dfalsity will also not quite be enough 
in the paracomplete case, but I'm simplifying.) Still, in particular cases, such formulations may 
work. Field (in conversation) has expressed sympathy (if not full endorsement) of this approach. 
141Let A be a Curry-sentence of the form A ---* ±. Since the dT-schema is underwritten with 
---* (our 'genuine conditional'), (3) will yield ~A V ±, which, in LP, is dtrue exactly if A is dfalse, 
that is, exactly if A ~ ± is dfalse. Provided that sentences of the form A ~ B may be dfalse 
(at a point) without A's being dtrue (at that point), the threat of Curry-generated triviality is 
avoided. 

380 
JC Beall 
One salient cost of retaining dtruth-preservation via V2* concerns the familiar 
relation between inference (or, indeed, deductions) and validity. 14s The utility 
of (knowing that you have) a valid argument is often supposed to be that it is 
(necessarily) dtruth-preserving. The utility of such dtruth-preservation, in turn, 
is often supposed to be that our inferences, if dtruth-preserving, 'won't go wrong'. 
But while V2* ensures that valid arguments are dtruth-preserving (indeed, even 
necessarily so in LP), the utility of such dtruth-preservation is now dubious: one 
can know that an argument is valid, that its premises are all dtrue, but none the 
less be without a valid argument that takes one from such information and the 
(V2*-) dtruth-preservation of the argument to the given conclusion. In short, the 
dtruth-preservation of valid arguments is now without any of its familiar pragmatic 
utility. 
To what extent such a cost is crippling remains to be seen. There are (obviously) 
other ways of 'mixing conditionals' to preserve the idea that validity requires (nec- 
essary) dtruth-preservation, but, at least in LP-like settings, most of the options 
will exhibit the above 'break from pragmatic import'. 14s 
6.4 
Paracornplete: (robust) truth-preservation 
Just as in the paraconsistent setting, the paracomplete account must give up V2 
(and, in turn, V1). The question remains: is there any way to preserve that validity 
requires dtruth-preservation in a paracomplete setting? The answer is No. 
The most promising route is something along the lines of V2*, but that will not 
work. In LP, LEM holds; in K~, not. Without LEM, V2*, regardless of its other 
costs, is unavailable. 144 Consider, for example, an instance of V2* in which A is 
the conjunction of a Liar and its negation, and B is '1 = 0'. This immediately 
shows the inadequacy of V2* in a /{3 setting (wherein EFQ is supposed to be 
valid) .145 
The upshot is that paracomplete theorists, unlike paraconsistent theorists, can- 
not enjoy a 'validity' predicate (in the language, for the language) that requires 
dtruth-preservation. How, then, if at all, can a paracomplete theorist enjoy a 
'validity' predicate (for her language, in her language) that, in some sense, is 
truth-preserving (versus dtruth)? 
142Another potential cost concerns the relation between 'counterexamples' (intuitively under- 
stood) and validity, but I will ignore this here. 
143I think that the awkwardness of the given problem can be diminished by drawing a clear 
distinction between validity (or implication) and inference, much along the lines of Carroll's 
Tortoise or, more recently, Gil Harman's work 1986. 
But I leave the matter there, turning to 
the paracomplete case. 
144Of course, since I'm concentrating entirely on LP- and Ks-based approaches, my claims 
need to be taken with a grain of salt. It may be that some paracomplete approaches can utilize 
something along the lines of V2*. (I doubt it, but I leave it open.) 
145In the case of the corresponding VI*, the situation is modeled by a case in which v(A • B) 
1 (undesignated). Taking an obvious route towards the box, wherein p(13A, w) = min{~(A, w ~) : 
ff 
Rww~}, the same problem is plain. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
381 
The obvious idea is to invoke 'robust truth' or 'strong truth' or the like. After 
all, the purported utility of 'strong truth' is precisely to comment on the status 
of claims for which the dtruth predicate is inadequate. 
On this route, we have 
something like 
W,((A), (B)) ~ (TAD B) 
I am not clear whether such an approach will work in standard paracomplete 
frameworks (e.g., Field), but at least in the (admittedly nonstandard) 'paranormal' 
framework, the approach should work. Whether such an approach will ultimately 
work, or deliver all that one needs 
let alone desires 
with respect to 'truth- 
preservation', is something I here leave open. 146 
7 
LEAVING DTRUTH: PARAMETERS AND CONTEXTUAL 
SHIFTS 
Until now, I have focused entirely on dtruth and the two main approaches towards 
resolving dtruth-theoretic paradox. I should note that many (if not most) of the 
well-known approaches towards truth are not accounts of dtruth: they give up 
the unrestricted intersubstitutivity that is essential to dtruth. 
One of the main 
reasons for largely focusing on dtruth is that, as mentioned in §2, it appears to be 
the toughest case. If one can resolve the dtruth-theoretic paradoxes in an adequate 
fashion, then, presumably, one can resolve the truth-theoretic paradoxes for other 
notions of truth, since the latter notions will be less demanding 
e.g., with 
respect to unrestricted intersubstitutivity oi" so on. Another reason for focusing 
on dtruth is that, as mentioned in §1, the other approaches 
revision theory 
and what I here call parametric approaches 
are well-covered, or at least clearly 
sketched, in a variety of accessible places. (See §11.) None the less, something 
should be said about the other approaches, especially since they are both popular 
and philosophically (as well as logically) interesting. 
The most popular (semantic) approaches to truth 
at least having left dtruth 
divide into two very broad camps: parametric and revision. The former camp 
contains those accounts according to which NTP is answered via some parameter 
(hidden or otherwise) associated with truth. The latter camp contains those ac- 
counts that answer NTP by positing a 'hypothetical' or 'revision rule' character 
to truth itself. Parametric accounts of truth, at least in broad outline, are per- 
haps the best known among philosophers. Revision theory is less known among 
philosophers, despite being an approach that may well afford numerous philosoph- 
ical applications. 
146The worry, with respect to Field's framework, is that the proposal (above) calls for a 'unified 
strong truth' device, something that Field does not have. It may be that, in the framework of 
Field, 2005b, one could define validity as there being a good c~ such that, for all /3 > c~, the 
given argument preserves D/3-truth. But I don't know whether this will work. In the 'paranormal' 
(similarly 'residual') account (§4.3), we have a unified 'strong truth' device that ought to do the 
trick. 

382 
JC Beall 
My aim in the following ~parametric' sections is entirely informah I very (very) 
briefly sketch the ideas of various sub-camps within the broad, parametric camp. 
For space reasons, I skip over any formal details, leaving such detail to work cited 
in §11. Similarly, with respect to revision theory, my aim is merely to give a brief, 
informal sketch of the idea. Fortunately, there are plenty of works that sufficiently 
discuss both the informal and formal features of the canvassed accounts. 
(See 
references throughout, and §11.) 
Alfred Tarski 1956 
ushered in not only a renewed exploration of truth, but also 
the broad, and ongoing, parametric tradition towards truth. As such, I quickly 
sketch Tarski (or, at least, Tarski*), and then turn to other parametric approaches. 
7.1 
Tarski: language-parameter 
As is well known, Tarski 1956 
proposed a hierarchical account of truth for formal 
languages. A language is semantically closed just when, for all sentences A in the 
language, there is a name (A} of A in the language and all T-biconditionals hold: 
T(A} ~ A. 147 Tarski's Theorem is that no consistent, first-order language, which 
is 'syntactically resourceful' (in effect, can sufficiently 'describe' its own syntax), 
can be semantically closed, at least where ~ is material equivalence. The reason 
arises from GSdel's diagonal lemma, which applies to such languages: for any 
open sentence A(x) with x free, there is a (true) biconditional B +-~ A((B}), and 
so Liar-like biconditionals L ~ ~T(L}. 
Let £ be a first-order, sufficiently syntactically resourceful, language. 
How 
can we have a truth predicate for 12 such that all T-biconditionals hold and 12 is 
consistent (and, hence, nontrivial)? Tarski's well-known answer invoked a 'richer 
metalanguage'. In short: do not let T into 12! In other words: forget about chasing 
after semantically closed languages (theories) ! The result is that Liar-like sentences 
never arise, and so truth-theoretic paradox (and, in general, semantic-theoretic) 
paradox is avoided. 
Of course, it is one thing to simply 'ban' Liars from a suitably formal language; 
it is quite another to so ~ban' from a natural language. Tarski's own views on how, 
if at all, his proposal might apply to natural languages remain unclear. 148 But let 
us consider Tarski*, a (fictional) character who proposed a Tarskian, hierarchical 
account of truth for natural languages. 
The proposal, in short, runs as follows. We have some (interpreted) semantic- 
free ~base language' 120- No truth-theoretic (or, in general, semantic-theoretic) 
paradoxes arise in 120, since the language is devoid of semantic predicates. Let A, 
B, and C be sentences of £0, and suppose that A and B are true but C false. Of 
147This is more accurately put in terms of (the technical, logical sense of) theories, but I aim 
here only to give a sketch. The details are available in many places. See §11 for a few sources. 
14STarski seemed to think that truth itself is 'inconsistent' in some fashion, but it is not exactly 
clear on what he intended. 
(I have always thought of Tarski as a budding paraconsistentist, 
but the relevant textual support is weak, to say the least.) 
For recent discussion of Tarski's 
views, concerned (unlike here) with precise exegesis, see Patterson, 
2005 and Soames, 
1999 
and references therein. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
383 
course, since 120 is devoid of a truth predicate, we can't ezplicitly assert in 120 that 
such sentences are true or false. This is the role of the 'next language up', a richer 
language £1 that contains a truth predicate T 1 fox" £0- (Here, I use subscripts 
and superscripts, respectively, to indicate the languages .for and in which the 
predicate is introduced.) 
If the sentences of 120 are (properly) included among 
those of 121, one can consistently have it in 121 that T~{A} +~ A. (Otherwise, one 
uses a 'translation' r, where r(A) is the translation of A into an £1 sentence, and 
so in £1 gets the same effect: TI{A) ~ r(A).) And this gives us what we wanted: 
we can explicitly state in £1 the status of our £0 sentences, fox" example, TI{A}, 
T~{B}, T~{~C}, and more. 
But now what about tile status of such 121 pronouncements? We cannot explic- 
itly assert in 121 that such pronouncements are true; £1 contains no truth predicate 
for itself. This, in turn, is the role of £1% metalanguage £2, wherein we introduce 
a predicate T~. And so on. In general, a truth predicate T{~ 1 of level n applies 
only to the lower-level sentences, sentences of 12.~ for rn < n 
1. 
Tarski*'s proposal, then, is one that answers NTP by positing a parameter as- 
sociated with truth: we do not have truth simpliciter, but rather only truth in 
language such and so. Tarski*'s parameter, like that of (the real) Tarski, is a lan- 
guage. Nontriviality 
indeed, consistency 
is achieved by regimenting out Liars. 
What about Tarski*'s answer to ECP? In short: Tarski* gives no answer because 
he rejects the project. Since, according to Tarski*, we do not have semantically 
significant predicates for 12 in 12, we accordingly do not have 'exhaustive char- 
acterization' in 12, for any relevant (sufficiently resourceful) language 12. On the 
other hand, Tarski* certainly does achieve one sense of 'exhaustive characteriza- 
tion', namely, that any suitable metalanguage fox" £ can exhaustively characterize 
£, and do so consistently. Still, it is important to note that Tarski* rejects ECP~ 
at least in its target sense. 
There are various problems associated with Tarski*'s proposal, many of which 
are well-known. (See §110 Perhaps the biggest problem is the expressive diffi- 
culties associated with the proposal. One wants to be able to (competently) use 
a truth predicate fox" just the sorts of broad generalizations fox" which dtruth was 
introduced, but in the Tarski* case, things quickly become difficult. For example, 
in order to (competently, truly) assert that all of So-and-so's claims are truest, one 
would need to first know that all of So-and-so's claims never reached level n. One 
could, of course, guess and pick some reasonably high n, but this itself is very 
difficult, especially if So-and-so is wont to make broad theoretical generalizations 
concerning language or the like. 
A related (and much-discussed) difficultly, made explicit by Kripke 1975, 
is 
that some perfectly meaningful 
or, at least, seemingly perfectly meaningful 
claims wind up being meaningless on Tarski*'s account. Example: suppose that 
Nixon says (only) that everything Dean says is .false, and similarly that Dean says 
(only) that everything Nizon says is true. Finding suitable levels according to 
which such claims are meaningful is difficult on a (consistent) Tarskian* approach, 
to say the least. 

384 
JC Beall 
There are other problems (both technical and philosophical) with the Tarskian* 
account, but enough has been said to move on to another, and very popular, 
approach 
contextualism. 
7.2 
Contextual truth 
So-called contextualist approaches are increasingly dominant today, at least among 
philosophically inclined logicians and philosophers of language who are content to 
depart from dtruth. 149 Part of the attraction may be a tied to currently popular 
contextualist approaches to vagueness. Whatever the reason, the broad contextual- 
ist approach to truth is both popular and, at least in basics, fairly straightforward. 
Because the contextualist approaches are very (very) broad, space considerations 
allow only a (very) brief, informal sketch of a few leading ideas. The cited works 
should be consulted both for fro%her, informal remarks and, in particular, the 
formal account(s). 
In short, contextualist approaches maintain that an interpretation of 'true' de- 
pends on context, and does so in a way beyond ordinary ambiguity. (Obviously, 
if A is ambiguous 
requiring context to disambiguate 
-then an ascription 
of truth to A will likewise be ambiguous. The context-dependence involved in 
ordinary ambiguity is not at issue.) In particular, Liars seem to generate incon- 
sistency only when we ignore the implicit contextual parameters associated with 
truth-ascriptions. 
Exactly what sort of context-dependence is relevant to paradox is what dis- 
tinguishes contextualist theories. In its two most popular forms, such context- 
dependence is cashed out either with an explicit parameter associated with truth or 
an implicit parameter essentially involved in (at least Liar-like) truth-ascriptions. 
I will briefly 
and very broadly 
sketch these two versions. 15° 
Regardless of the version, contextualists 
one and all 
place a lot of weight 
on the idea of 'reflecting on paradoxicality' and, in turn, 'moving beyond' such 
paradoxicality. Consider, for example, the following sentences. 
$1. $1 is not true. 
$2. $1 is not true. 
Contextualists find the following reasoning plausible: $1 is true iff not. Hence 
(given LEM!), $1 is not true, which is what $2 says, in which case $2 is true. 151 
149Actually, there is no reason a contextualist could not acknowledge a dtruth predicate and 
yet also proceed to acknowledge other (non-transparent) notions of truth 
ones not definable in 
terms of dtruth (and other logical devices). I do not know whether anyone holds such a position, 
but I think it to be unlikely, since most contextualists are fairly wedded to classical logic. The 
'aletheic pluralism' of Crispin Wright 1987; 1992, similarly Michael Lynch 1998, 
or even that 
of Michael Dummett 1978, 
might be a setting for such a position. 
15°For space reasons, I am omitting discussion of other proposals commonly counted as contex- 
tualist 
e.g., Gaifman, Skyrms, and Koons. See §11. 
151Strictly speaking, LEM itself can be rejected, but the background logic needs to be 'suffi- 
ciently classical'. Contextualists are generally wedded to classical or very-close-to-classical logic. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
385 
Notice that the situation is related to 'characterization' and gaps. Consider, for 
example, the doubly starred sentence: 
** The doubly starred sentence is not true. 
Assuming the T-biconditionals, which is a common desideratum among contex- 
tualists, the doubly starred sentence is true iff not. Hence, given LEM (also a 
common desideratum), the doubly starred sentence is not true. 
But how can such reasoning be sound? In effect, that is the question 
or, at 
least, a chief question 
towards which contextualist proposals are directed, and 
the question on which I'll briefly focus in §7.2 §7.2. 
The foregoing examples are closely related to what Bas van Fraassen 1968; 
1970 called the strengthened Liar phenomenon. For those 
call them caricature 
gappists 
who wish to both reject LEM and assert that some sentences are 
'neither true not" false' (i.e., that there are gaps), sentences such as the doubly 
starred sentence serve as strengthened Liars. 
The caricature gappist proposes 
that Liars are gappy, and hence not true. But that, by all initial appearances, is 
precisely what the doubly starred sentence says 
namely, that it is not true. And 
so it is difficult to see how the proposal achieves both consistency and significant 
characterization (in the sense at issue throughout). 152 
The ~strengthened' phenomenon is not peculiar to caricature gappists; it is quite 
general, and contextualism, which is 
in all standard treatments 
intimately 
tied to classical logic, is often (if not always) motivated by it. For example, suppose 
that we introduce a semantically significant (unified) predicate Z for purposes of 
classifying Liars, and that we impose an ezclusive constraint on our semantically 
significant categories (i.e., that none of the categories overlap). 
The proposal, 
then, is that Liars are (in the extension of) Z. A ~strengthened' Liar immediately 
emerges: 
SL. SL is either Z or not true. 
Given the appropriate T-sentence and the assumptions above, one soon arrives at 
the claim that SL is not true. 
The question, as above, is how" to make sense of truly 
and consistently 
asserting that SL is not true, or that $1 is not true, or that the doubly starred 
sentence is not true, or so on. How" can any of this make sense in a (more or 
less) classical framework in which all T-biconditionals hold? That, in effect, is the 
question. 
I argue in my pro-hierarchies paper that there is nothing reall to Simmons' 
non-hierarchical account that is really not hierarchical. It is in a footnote, but the 
paper is "Truth, Reflection, and Hierarchies", the goal is to show that hierarchies 
are non-threatening, natural, and everyone should want them, including Keith. 
152Of course, at least with dtruth, caricature gappism (as it were) makes no sense unless, perhaps 
as in §5.2, the view is dialetheic (and LEM fails only for one negation or etc.). 

386 
JC Beall 
Indexical truth 
One contextualist tradition stands closely with Tarski*. Tyler Burge 1979 
and, 
in much the same spirit, Keith Simmons 1993 
maintain that truth is essentially 
indexical. 153 Truth (or, at least, 'is true'), on this story, behaves indexically: the 
extension of 'true' is determined by context, so that, in effect, we do not have 
truth simpliciter, but rather true in context c. ~54 
The idea, in short, is that truth (or 'true') comes equipped with a place-holder 
or index c for context. In effect, the index is a level in a Tarskian hierarchy, where 
the given level is determined by context. One context might determine level n, in 
which case the n-level T-biconditionals are to be used, and in another, level m, 
whereat the m-level T-biconditionals are in play. 155 
How does any of this answer the questions concerning, for example, S1 and 
$27 
The answer, of course, invokes a change in context, and hence a change 
in the appropriate indices. In particular, the suggestion is that the (pragmatic) 
implicatures associated in an assertion of $1 are different from those associated 
with $2. When $1 is asserted in (say) context c, pragmatic principles require that 
it be evaluated via the c-level T-biconditional: 
S1 is truer iff S1 is not truec 
But this quickly leads to inconsistency, and hence (more pragmatics) $1 is said to 
lack c-level truth conditions, in which case (note well) S1 is not truec. But since $1 
lacks c-level truth conditions, there are no grounds on which to infer, in turn, that 
$1 is tru%. Recording as much requires 'reflection' in a different context k /~ c, 
wherein $2, which invokes the k-level T-biconditional, may be correctly asserted. 
The indexical version of contextualism (be it either Burge's or Simmons') an- 
swers NTP by positing a hidden indexical parameter in truth. 
Classical logic 
needn't be rejected; one need only recognize that truth is parametric. 
Non- 
triviality 
indeed, consistency 
is achieved in virtue of the contextually relative 
extensions of 'true'. 
153Actually, Simmons' theory purports to be entirely non-hierarchical, unlike Burge's. In that 
respect, there is a significant difference. For space reasons, I will simply sketch the Burgean idea, 
but one should note that any reference to 'hierarchies' will be rejected on Simmons' account. 
Another related approach is in Koons, 1992. (On the other hand, Michael Glanzberg 2004c 
argues that Simmons' apparent claim to achieve a non-hierarchical theory is both unfounded and 
unmotivated; he argues that hierarchies are non-threatening, and that Simmons' position is one 
that should 
and, in fact, does 
embrace hierarchies. But this is beyond the current essay.) 
154Of course, one might try to define some notion of truth simpliciter by quantifying over 
all contexts: A is true simpliciter iff A is true~ for all contexts c. But this is generally not 
countenanced, since (unrestricted) quantification over all contexts makes for inconsistency, at 
least given classical (or classical enough) logic 
e.g., 'this sentence is false in all contexts' or 
the like. 
155This sketch is potentially more misleading than its mere brevity might otherwise afford, 
because Burge's overall proposal is a pair of proposals, one a formal theory, the other a set of 
(very complex) pragmatic principles (that are used to interpret the formal theory). For space 
reasons, I can only wave at the broad picture, leaving the two essential components (formal and 
pragmatic) in the background. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
387 
What about ECP 9 One perennial worry concerns whether such 'indexicalism' 
achieves exhaustive characterization in the target sense. If the target sense of 'ex- 
haustive characterization' requires a unified predicate in terms of which all Liars 
are properly classified (in the given language), then the Burge Simmons approach 
seems to fail. Without going into details, suppose that we have a predicate 
or 
the same effect, for example via quantification 
that applies to all Liars. (In- 
tuitively, one might think along the lines of not true in arty eontezt.) Let Z be 
the predicate, and consider SL from §7.2. There seems to be no consistent way of 
treating such a sentence in the indexicalist's framework. At the very least, some ex- 
planation must be given as to why we cannot have such a unified characterization, 
an explanation that goes beyond pointing to the otherwise resulting inconsistency, 
an explanation that makes plain why, despite its apparent intelligibility , such a 
notion is incoherent. 
Another problem is similar to Tarski*'s (pragmatic) problem. We want to use 
'true' for purposes of generalization, but stratification of contexts (on which truth 
depends) makes this cumbersome, as the pragmatic framework in Burge, 1979, 
and similarly (but less explicitly so) in Simmons, 1993, is quite involved. Indeed, 
competent, effortless generalizations involving 'true' ultimately require an enor- 
mous amount of 'pragmatic know-how', at least on Burge's account. But I will 
(for space reasons) leave the matter there. 15s 
Conteztually sensitive quantifiers 
The work of Charles Parsons 1974a; 1974b, who is generally credited with ini- 
tiating the contemporary contextualist tradition, and Michael Glanzberg 2004a; 
2004b, 
who has clarified and extended Parsons' proposal, represents the other 
popular contextualist tradition. For convenience, I will call the proposal quantifier- 
variability. 
The idea, as before, is that truth ascriptions are essentially context-dependent; 
however, there is no indezicality involved in truth (or 'is true'). On the quantifier- 
variability proposal, the context-dependence 
the variability 
involved in truth 
ascriptions turns on the essential context-dependence of natural language quanti- 
tiers. This is an attractive feature of the proposal. Like the indexicalist account, 
the background logic is assumed to be entirely classical. 157 But importantly unlike 
the indexicalist, 'true' is entirely univocal, carrying no hidden parameters at all 
(or ambiguity, or etc.), at least as applied to 'propositions', which, on the current 
picture, are the 'chief bearers of truth'. 
156I should note one thing. Burge (similarly, Simmons) takes his account to be descriptively 
accurate of competent usage of 'true' in English. But at least on Burge's account, such usage, 
as waved at above, involves an enormous amount of pragmatics 
principles that determine the 
interpretation of (the level of) 'true'. It is implausible, at least on the surface, that such principles 
are common knowledge, especially since their relevance arises only with respect to paradoxical 
claims. 
157Note that, while I am skipping the formal details here, Glanzberg's work focuses heavily 
on infinitary languages. While this is essential to some of the particular virtues that Glanzberg 
claims for his account, it can none the less be set aside for purposes of a broad, basic sketch. 

388 
JC Beall 
Taking propositions as basic 
and as the 'things' that are expressed by sen- 
tences 
the relevant T-principles have the following form: 
If <A} expresses p then p is true iff A 
And now consider, for example, the doubly starred sentence in §7.2. The verdict, 
of course, is that the doubly starred sentence does not express a proposition. 
If one sees the basic direction of the proposal (thus far), one will immediately 
foresee a 'strengthened' problem: 
x/~/ The doubly ticked sentence does not express a true proposition. 
Given classical logic and the relevant T-principle, the doubly ticked sentence ex- 
presses a proposition only if it is both true and not, and so 
3. The doubly ticked sentence does not express a proposition. 
But, then, familiar (classical) reasoning show's 
4. The doubly ticked sentence does not express a true proposition. 
And the same familiar (classical) reasoning show's 
5. The doubly ticked sentence expresses a true proposition. 
What is going on? According to the quantifier-variability proposal, the appar- 
ent contradiction is merely apparent, arising from ignoring a contextually shifted 
quantifier-domain. In particular, there is an implicit existential quantifier at work 
in the doubly ticked sentence, a quantifier ranging over (a domain of) proposi- 
tions. The proposal is that both (3) and (5) are true, each being so in virtue of 
different domains. In the case of (3), the (implicit, existential) quantifier ranges 
over a domain in which there is no proposition for the doubly ticked sentence to 
express. In the case of (5), the relevant domain is wider than that of (3), enjoying 
the requisite proposition. 
If one is willing to countenance 'propositions', the quantifier-variability proposal 
is attractive (at least for those willing to give up dtruth). 158 The story, when filled 
out (e.g., by Glanzberg), is not only that quantifiers over propositions are context- 
dependent, but that the background domain of 'truth conditions' (out of which, 
e.g., 'contents' are often constructed) is similarly subject to contextual expansion 
such domains get 'bigger and bigger' without end. Accordingly, the 'shifting' 
at work in the paradoxes is arguably (and so argued by Glanzberg to be) a sort 
158Actually, for those not willing to countenance propositions, Parsons 1983 provides an alter- 
native to the 'proposition' framework, using a truth predicate applying to sentences. (The given 
predicate may be thought of as being proof-theoretically relativized to a domain of individuals.) 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
389 
common in linguistic practice, in general, and so not some ad hoc posit invoked 
merely for paradox. 159 
The details, both formal and philosophical, are beyond the current discussion. 
But the main idea is clear enough. With respect to NTP, the quantifier-variability 
proposal has it that consistency is achieved in virtue of contextual shifts 
not 
shifts of an implicitly parametric truth predicate, but rather quantifier-domain 
shifts. Liar propositions are certainly in many domains of quantification; it's just 
that they're not in the domains that would otherwise result in inconsistency. 
What about ECP. 9 In short (and very roughly, given the absence of detail), the 
quantifier-variability proposal rejects ECP, or at least rejects that there is a single 
context in which we can exhaustively characterize all sentences. 
The situation 
is similar in many respects to the indexical version of contextualism (§7.2); the 
difference is now that there is no 'absolutely unrestricted quantification' with which 
one would otherwise be able to 'exhaustively characterize' all Liars in the target 
sense. On the other hand, the quantifier-variability proposal does achieve a great 
deal. In particular, the proposal seems to be such that for any Liar proposition, 
there is a context in which the proposition may be truly classified (e.g., as being 
not true). The price, as mentioned, is the absence of a single context in which to 
classify all Liars. How steep a price this may be is something that I leave open. 16° 
Z3 
Situational truth 
Jon Barwise and John Etchemendy 1987 
propose an account that, in many re- 
spects, is similar to the quantifier-variability proposal. Like the latter, truth itself 
is not indexical in any fashion, and propositions are the chief bearers of truth. 
Moreover, a sentence (type) may express different propositions depending on con- 
text. The difference is that the role of domains in the quantifier-variability pro- 
posal is now played by sit,rations, bits of the world that a statement is about. 
Hence, propositions are themselves parametric, or at least relative to a given situ- 
ation. Like the quantifier-variaiblity proposal, 'strengthened' cases 
for example, 
S1 and $2 or the like (see §7.2) 
are resolved by recognizing a contextual shift, 
one that determines a change in situation and, hence, a corresponding change in 
the propositions expressed in the given contexts. 
The Barwise Etchelnendy proposal 
which, for convenience, I will call the 
situational proposal 
is rich in many ways, both philosophically and logically. 
159In Glanzberg's work 2004a; 2004b, the sort of contextual shifts witnessed in Liar reasoning 
are argued to be common contextual shifts 
what is 'topical' or 'salient' at a given stage in 
a discourse 
and not merely peculiar to truth-theoretic paradox. It is precisely this broader 
phenomenon of 'shifting' that, according to Glanzberg, induces the mentioned 'bigger and bigger' 
expansions of the background domain of 'truth conditions'. (As mentioned above, Glanzberg 
works with infinitary languages and, by doing so, purports to make explicit the content of various 
Liar phenomena. In the formal framework, Glanzberg develops levels of a hierarchy that are as 
semantically closed as Kripke's minimal fixed point.) 
16°Another advantage of the quantifier-variability proposal is that it affords a natural 
and 
entirely analogous 
resolution of 'set'-theoretic paradoxes. See Parsons, 1974b for discussion. 
(And see §9 for the reasons behind scare-quoting 'set'.) 

390 
JC Beall 
A clear account of the proposal is difficult to give without discussing the formal 
framework, which, in this case, relies on Peter Aczel's ZFC/AFA non-well-founded 
set theory 1988. 
Such a set theory rejects the usual axiom of foundation, and 
hence allows for 'self-membership' (among other sorts of circularity or, more gener- 
ally, non-well-foundedness); this allows for (modeling) self-referential propositions 
in a natural way. For space reasons, I cannot lay out the background set theory 
or its key theorems, and so cannot go into the formal details of the situational 
proposal. Instead, I will give a very brief snapshot of the basic idea, leaving cited 
sources for a fuller and more accurate picture. 
As above, the heart of the situational proposal is a contextually sensitive feature 
of propositions. Two factors combine to determine what proposition is expressed 
by a sentence on a given use: namely, demonstrative conventions and descriptive 
conventions. The former pick out a situation s, and the latter a type T of situation. 
Once these elements are determined, a proposition is at hand, namely, {s;T}, 
which is the proposition that s is of type T. This account of propositions and 
their 'making' is what Barwise Etchemendy call the Austinian account, 161 where 
the corresponding (Austinian) account of truth is then natural: 
{s; T} is true iff s is of type T 
Situations, as above, are bits of the world that a statement is about. To be 
(slightly) more precise, the world consists of states of affairs, which, in turn, are 
built from individuals and properties (or relations); and a set of such states of af- 
fairs is a situation. So, in general, states of affairs have the form (R ~, 01,..., 0~; i), 
where R ~ is an n-ary relation (a property if n 
1) and i is a polarity, intuitively, 
a truth value out of {1, 0}. If SA is the class of states of affairs, then any situation 
s is a subset of SA. Moreover, states of affairs yield types of situations: if cr E SA, 
then G is a type of situation. Hence, a type T looks like this: (R ~, 01,..., 0~; i}. 
Let ~ be the state of affairs that determines T 
or 1. Then the account of truth, 
above, is equivalent to: 
{s; T} is true iff cr c s 
We say that s is of (simple) type ~1 exactly if G E s, and so {s; T} is true iff s is 
of type T. 162 
One might wonder about the role of the world in all of this. The role of the world 
is to distinguish between accessible and inaccessible propositions. If p 
{s; T} 
for some T, then p is about s. A proposition is accessible if it is about an actual 
situation, and inaccessible if about a non-actual situation. This distinction plays 
no part in determining the truth (or falsity) of propositions, since there are true 
(similarly, false) propositions about both actual and non-actual situations. (This 
is all made abundantly clear in the formal model, but for present purposes, an 
161This is in contrast to the Russellian account, which can also be modeled in the proposed 
framework. For space reasons, I will restrict the sketch to Austinian propositions. 
162Barwise Etchemendy also define molecular types, for example, c, is a disjunctive type A XI 
exactly if (7 is of some type T ~ X. Similarly for conjunctive types (dual). 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
391 
informal example will suffice.) Simplifying, if (F, y) is a state of affairs that is not 
part of the actual world, any accessible proposition that claims (as it were) that y 
is F, is a false (but accessible) proposition, since any such accessible proposition is 
one about situations that are not of the required type. On the other hand, if (F, y) 
is a state of affairs that is part of the actual world, then any accessible proposition 
that claims (as it were) that y is not F, is likewise false, since the proposition is 
about an actual situation that is of the wrong type. 
The import for simple Liars, for example, that this proposition is false, is that 
they are simply false if about actual situations. For example, a simple Liar propo- 
sition ¢:~ = {s; Etrue,¢:~;o}, 
if accessible, is false because about a situation for 
which there are no states of affairs of the right type. On the other hand, given 
situations that contain (e.g.) (true, fs; 1}, some Liars are true; it's just that no 
such situation is (or can be) actual, on pain of triviality. 
As with the quantifier-variability proposal, contextual shifts are invoked to ex- 
plain the sort of reasoning involved in typical 'strengthened' cases 
at least, 
for those, like $1 and $2, that can express propositions. Let fs, as above, be a 
Liar about actual situation s. Then f~ is false (for reasons above). But how, 
then, do we so characterize f~? We 'expand' s to s', where s' contains the fact 
(state of affairs) of f~'s falsity. The proposition that we use to characterize f~ is 
p 
{s'; tr'ue, fs; 0}, which is that s2 is of f~'s type (where f~ is about s), and 
hence is true because s2 contains (true, f~;O}. But now s' itself has Liars, for 
example, f~, = {s'; tT"ue, fs,; 0}. But f~, is handled in a similar manner: expand 
to s", a situation, unlike s', that contains the fact that f~, is false. Just like the 
quantifier-variability proposal, the picture is one in which a sequence of proposi- 
tions emerges, a sequence featuring alternating truth values that reflect contextual 
shifts: ¢~, p, f~,, p', and so on. We achieve consistency by switching to different 
(broader) situations in which the 'previous' statements are evaluated. 
The situational proposal, then, is one according to which NTP is answered by 
relativizing propositions to situations. When one pays heed to the situation a Liar 
is about, the apparent inconsistency generated by Liars is seen to be merely appar- 
ent: the given situations are not of the right type. And the proposal shares many 
(if not all) of the virtues enjoyed by the quantifier-variability proposal, similarly 
adverting to a phenomenon 
contextual shift 
that is arguably a very general 
one, rather than something peculiar to paradoxes. 
With respect to Ecp, the situational proposal faces the same problem (or, at 
least, same sort of problem) confronted by other contextualist proposals. 
In- 
deed, though the details are different, the general issue confronting the quantifier- 
variability proposal emerges for the situational account: in particular, there is no 
'global' situation in which we can truly characterize all Liars. Put another way, 
the world itself is not a situation about which we can consistently talk. (If we 
could, then there would be global-Liars, and we would be unable to 'expand' to a 
bigger situation.) But I leave the matter there. 163 
163I should note that Barwise Etchemendy address the given worry in a postscript 1987. 
They 
propose a way in which we can talk about the whole world, that is, have propositions about the 

392 
JC Beall 
8 
REVISION THEORY 
Like the parametric and contextual approaches, revision theorists leave dtruth be- 
hind by giving up on the full intersubstitutivity of T(A} and A. But revision theory 
is significantly different from the foregoing approaches, at least in its philosophical 
motivation. To fully appreciate the theory (or family of theories), the technical 
details are important. For space reasons, I cannot go into the technical machinery; 
instead, my aim is simply to convey the basic idea. 
The two pioneers of revision theory are Hans Herzberger and Anil Gupta, who 
independently came up with the technical ideas in the early eighties. Herzberger's 
theory 1982 
was motivated by an attempt to 'classicalize' Kripke's inductive 
approach to truth, the aim being a modification affording classical, two-valued 
valuations, one according to which Liars (or the like) were neither gaps nor gluts, 
but rather unstable. The given 'instability' is reflected in the manner in which 
sentences are interpreted. Specifically, sentences are evaluated classically but via 
a sequence of stages; on some such stages, paradoxical sentences are true, and on 
others false. One of the chief aims of Herzberger's theory is to characterize just 
such patterns of instability. 
Gupta 1982 
and, in turn, Gupta Belnap 1993, 
motivate a revision theoretic 
approach to truth as an instance of a much broader revision theoretic approach 
to definitions, in general. For present purposes, I will focus on the Gupta Belnap 
proposal I1993, which provides a much broader philosophical picture than found 
in Herzberger. 164 
On the traditional account of definitions, a proper definition is neither cir- 
cular not" creative. 
A definition is circular if the definiendum appears in the 
definiens. 
A definition is creative if it yields proofs of claims that are not re- 
ducible to definiendum-free claims. While revision theory maintains the stricture 
against creativity, the proposal breaks from tradition by allowing circular defini- 
tions. Indeed, in large part, the point of revision theory, at least qua theory of 
definitions, is to allow" for meaningful, useful circular definitions. Gupta Belnap 
propose to preserve classical logic, and so we assume as much in the background. 165 
Consider an example that nicely illustrates the general idea Gupta and Belnap, 
1993. 
Suppose that we are given the following definition of G, and that our domain 
is {a,b,c,d}. 
world at large. The result is that we can sometimes talk about the whole world, but any Liar- 
sentence expresses a proposition only about a proper part of the world. On the surface, this is 
philosophically suspect, since once we are able to talk about the whole world, it is very difficult to 
see how global-Liars do not emerge. Indeed, once talk of the whole world is available, one could 
introduce a convention that indicates global talk, some symbol that indicates a global reading of 
the proposition. 
164This is not a criticism of Herzberger's work. The point is that, for present purposes, the 
broader philosophical perspective is appropriate. 
165It should be noted that revision theory, at least the basic idea, is compatible with many 
nonclassical logics. Indeed, see the 'revision flavor' of Field's conditional, which is clear in the 
'restricted semantics' (§4.2). 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
393 
Gx =~f (Fx n Hx) V (Fx n ~Hx n Cx) V (~Fx n Hx n ~Gz) 
Suppose, too, that we have the following information: 
i. a and b are (in the extension of) F. 
ii. c and d are not F. 
iii. a and c are H. 
iv. b and d are not H. 
How might we determine the Gs? How, in other words, might we go about dis- 
covering the extension of G? The obvious problem confronting our definition of G 
is that it is circular. Figuring out the extension of G requires, it seems, already 
knowing the extension of G. So it appears. 
Revision theory enters with a simple (but powerful) solution: posit a hypothet- 
ical extension and proceed to calculate the extension of G on the basis of the 
hypothesis! Let h0 be your initial such hypothesis. Your subsequent calculation 
will yield an extension of G relative to h0, an extension that, depending on h0, 
may well differ from h0, and hence revise your initial hypothesis. 
Consider, for example, an initial hypothesis h0 according to which Q, the ex- 
tension of G, is 0. With respect to object a, we immediately have it that a c G h°, 
that is, that a is in the extension of G relative to ho, since, given (i) and (iii), 
we have the truth of Fa A Ha, and so the a-instance of the entire (disjunctive) 
definiens, which is evaluated classically, is true. Likewise, it is clear that c E G h°, 
since, given (ii) and (iii), we have the truth of ~Fc A Hc A ~Gc, and so the truth 
of the c-instance of the entire definiens. Similar calculation shows that neither b 
nor d is in Qh,~. Hence, relative to our initial (in this case, null) hypothesis h0, we 
have come upon an extension for G, one that is relative to, and distinct from, h0, 
namely {a, d}. 
But what now? After all, h0 was just a blind guess! The next step, according 
to revision theory, is to start again, but this time running with the 'discovered' 
extension ~ho as one's hypothesis (i.e., hypothetical extension). So, in the 'second 
run', hi is the hypothesis that ~ 
{a, d}. Simple calculation based on hi and 
(i) (iv) will yield an extension ~ hi , tile extension of G relative to hypothesis hi. 
And so on. 
Thinking of n as the stage at which h,~ is posited, the general recipe 
though 
eventually (but not here) carried into the transfinite 
is basically as follows. One 
begins with an initial hypothesis h0 to get an extension $h(, that is relative to (but 
frequently different from) h0. At stage 1, one's hypothesis hi is that the relevant 
extension is g h(,. At stage 2, one's hypothesis h2 is that the relevant extension is 
£ hi. In general, one's hypothesis at stage n + 1 is that the relevant extension is 
$h., an extension 'discovered' by calculation relative to h,~. 16~ 
166Because I am omitting the formal details, I am also omitting discussion of the revision 

394 
JC Beall 
The foregoing recipe, the process, generates a so-called revision sequence, which 
is a sequence of ~candidate extensions' for the relevant predicate. Each such revi- 
sion sequence is relative to the initial, stage-one hypothesis. Consider, again, the 
case of G above. For n > 0, let (n,:c} represent stage n at which the extension 
of G relative to h~ 1 is z. (In other words, z is the extension one gets at stage 
n + 1 by using the n-stage extension as initial input.) Then the revision sequence, 
relative to our" initial (null) hypothesis ho, looks as follows. 
(0, 0), 
(2, 
(a, 
(4, 
This sequence, as said, is relative to our given h0, in this case, an initial hypothesis 
according to which nothing is G. But, of course, with a domain of four objects, 
there are sixteen possible starting points, sixteen possible initial hypotheses (only 
one of which is null). Canvassing all such resulting sequences exhibits the sort of 
'patterns of (in-) stability' that revision theorists seek to illuminate. Two notions 
are central: 
S. Sentence B is stable if, after various stages, B forevermore enjoys the same 
value (either true or false). 
C. Sentence B exhibits convergence if B stabilizes on the same value in all 
sequences. 
In the current case, given the sixteen possible starting points and the resulting 
revision sequences based on (i) (iv), the following patterns emerge: ~67 
R1. Object a. If h0, the initial (not necessarily null) hypothesis has it that a c ~, 
then a c ~h~ for alln. If h0 has it that a ~ ~, then a c ~ 
for alln > 0. 
Accordingly, the sentence Ga is eventually forevermore true regardless of 
starting point, and hence both stable and convergent. 
R2. Object b. If h0 is such that b E G, then b E G h'~ for all n, in which case Gb 
stabilizes on all such sequences (sharing the ~positive' b-hypothesis). Simi- 
larly, if h0 has it that b ~ G, then b ~ G h'' for all n, in which case, again, 
Gb stablizes. So, Gb is stable on all initial hypotheses, but, since it doesn't 
stabilize on the same value in all sequences, it fails to be convergent. 
R3. Object c. There is no stability with respect to Oc, and hence no convergence. 
R4. Object d. This is exactly like the case of a, except that Gd is converges on 
falsity, rather than truth. 
process defined over transfinite ordinals. What should be noted is that different revision theories 
largely differ with respect to their treatment of limit ordinals and, as a result, how 'categorical' 
judgments about extensions are garnered. See §11 for relevant works. 
167Such patterns are best conveyed graphically, but for present purposes I merely sketch the 
import. 

Truth and Paradox: 
A Philosophical Sketch 
395 
With such patterns at hand, and the corresponding features of stability and conver- 
gence, revision theory finally arrives at so-called categorical verdicts, or 'absolute 
values', as one might say. After all, if the revision process is to be of any use, we 
want to arrive at a single judgment about (say) G's extension, as opposed to a 
bunch of judgments based entirely on arbitrary starting points. Not surprisingly, 
this is precisely the role of conver'gence. In the case at hand, we conclude that a is 
categorically G and that d is categorically non-G. And those, at least in the given 
case, exhaust the available categorical judgments. Nothing categorical can be said 
of c, as it remains simply unstable. Similarly, nothing categorical can be said of 
b, since, despite stability in each sequence, there is no convergence. Convergence 
gives us a single value irrespective of starting point. Failing that, it would be 
unreasonable to make a categorical judgment. And so it is with revision theory. 
What does any of this have to do with truth? The answer, in short, is that 
truth itself is said to be a circular concept. In particular, Gupt~Belnap posit an 
ambiguity in the usual T-biconditionals. Such biconditionals can be read either 
definitionally or materially (i.e., material equivalence). Each such biconditional, 
when definitionally read, has the form 
T(A~} 
df A~ 
for i E N. But, then, since A~, for some i, may contain T, the resulting definition 
of T, namely, 
T(~'g') 
df ('~" 
(A0}/~ A0) V (x 
/A1}/~ A1) V (95" (A1}/~ A1) V... 
will be circular, the definiendum appearing in the definiens, lss 
The basic picture, then, is clear. Our definition of truth 
which relies on the 
definitional T-biconditionals 
is circular. Revision theory is a theory of circular 
definitions. The proposal is that the essential character of truth, its essential defi- 
nition, is a rule of revision, a rule that tells us how to go from 'initial hypotheses' 
to new hypotheses about the extension of 'true', a rule that ultimately yields useful 
categorical judgments about truth 
about the extension of 'true'. Just as in the 
(abstract) example of G, so too with truth: some sentences will converge, others 
stabilize but not converge, and others never stabilize at all. Paradoxical sentences, 
at least ones that would otherwise result in inconsistency, fail to stabilize. 
The exact judgments concerning Liars and other 'ungrounded' sentences depend 
on the particular revision theory. (See §11 for relevant works.) But the general 
proposal, as above, is clear. With respect to NTP, for example, the revision theo- 
retic proposal is that nontriviality 
indeed, consistency 
is achieved in virtue of 
truth's ~revision-rule character', one that results in certain sentences (e.g., Liars) 
being unstable. 
Unlike the traditional account of definitions, according to which circularity of- 
ten results in inconsistency, appropriate revision rules serve to allow meaningful 
168I should mention, but (for space) cannot discuss, that Gupta Belnap prove various results 
about the behavior of d/ (as it were) and -- (material equivalence), showing that they are the 
same except in abnormal 
cases. See Gupta 
and Belnap, 1993 
for full discussion. 

396 
JC Beall 
and useful circular definitions without inconsistency. A nice feature of revision 
theoretic approaches is that, as in the quantifier-variability and situational ap- 
proaches, a 9eneral phenomenon is invoked to explain paradox, rather than some 
ad hoc feature peculiar to paradox. In the present case, the general phenomenon 
is circular definitions. 
What about ECP? In short, revision theorists reject the project. Any version of 
revision theory (as far as I can see) will invoke semantically significant categories 
that, were they introduced into the (object-) language, would result in inconsis- 
tency. Consider, for example, a typical 'strengthened' case like 'this sentence is 
not true or unstable'. This sentence poses problems. Of course, one could, as sug- 
gested in Gupta and Belnap, 1993, introduce ~unstable' into the language and, in 
turn, have a richer metalanguage that categorized the problem sentence as (say) 
'super-unstable' or the like. But, again, nothing close to the (target sense) of ex- 
haustive characterization is achieved. On the other hand, it may well be, as argued 
in Gupta and Belnap, 1993, that for any stage s of (say) English, there is a stage 
s I in which s-English is exhaustively characterized. What one won't have 
at 
least not consistently 
is some stage s such that s-English exhaustively char- 
acterizes st-English for all s t. As with other proposals, I leave the philosophical 
cost-benefit analysis of the matter open. 169 
9 
SET-THEORETIC PARADOXES? 
For space reasons, this essay has not covered the wide range of so-called semantic 
paradoxes that, in many ways, are closely related to truth-theoretic paradox 
for 
example, denotation, satisfaction, reference, etc. Instead, the focus has been on 
the Liar, and a limited number of approaches to the Liar. 17° But something should 
be said about so-called set-theoretic paradoxes, which, despite Ramsey's division 
1925, 
are often thought to be in kind with the Liar. For present purposes, I will 
only give a brief comment. 
Russell's paradox is often thought to be the set-theoretic counterpart of the 
Liar. The naTve comprehension scheme, according to which, for any open sentence 
A(x), there is a set y such that o c 3; iff A(o), for any object o. Russell's para- 
dox invokes z ~ z. By the comprehension scheme, we have some set P~ comprising 
all and only the objects that are 'non-self-membered', that is, the objects satisfying 
169I should make it plain that Gupt~Belnap 1993 argue that ECP, inasmuch as its target 
sense overlaps with what they call 'semantic self-sufficiency', is unfounded. My own thinking 
is that we star't with the strong appearance of 'exhaustive characterization', that (e.g.) natural 
languages are exhaustively characterizable in terms of unified (semantically significant) devices. 
If we cannot make sense of how this could be 
if, that is, we cannot answer ECP adequately 
then we should look for alternatives, perhaps along the lines of the 'stages of English' suggestion 
above (where the order of quantifiers is critical). But, for repeated space reasons, I must leave 
the matter there. 
17°Indeed, I have not covered even the wider family of truth-theoretic paradoxes, those para- 
doxes (e.g., Knower, Necessity, etc.) that involve 'truth-entailing notions'. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
397 
x ~ -c. But, then, 7~ c 7~ iff 7~ ~ 7~. The resemblance to Liars and the T-schema 
is obvious. 
What should be noted is that, in effect, Russell's paradox amounts to two 
paradoxes, one for set theory, one for semantics. By my lights, mathematics is 
free to simply axiomatize away its version of Russell's paradox, as is standardly 
done. 
Sets were introduced within and for mathematics, a role that need not 
be constrained by our 'intuitions' about natural language. So long as the given 
role is sufficiently served by %xiomatically harnessed' sets, then so be it. 
Of 
course, mathematicians frequently seek the most natural or 'beautiful' route in 
their endeavors, and perhaps standard axiomatized approaches towards sets are 
not as natural as one nfight like. But that is a separate issue. The main goal is to 
find entities that play the given nlathelnatical role. 
Semantics, on the other hand, seems to be a different matter. What semantics 
needs is a theory of (what I will call) semantical properties. 171 Semantical prop- 
erties are entities that play a particular semantic role, in particular, those entities 
corresponding to each meaningful predicate in the (given) language. The role of 
semantical properties is essentially given by the naive semantical schema: namely, 
that for any object o and predicate Y(~c), there is a semantical property ~Y such 
that o exemplifies £Y iff Y(o) is true. This principle is fundamental to semantics, 
at least in practice. But the principle confronts Russell's paradox for semantics, 
in particular, the instance invoking :c does not ezemplify ~c'. 
Perhaps one reason that the two paradoxes are not distinguished is that se- 
manticists simply borrowed the mathematical sets to play the role of semantical 
properties, and the history of (at least contemporary, formal) semantics has gone 
along with the borrowed entities. But why think that the mathematicians' sets 
will sufficiently play the role of semantical properties? There is no a priori rea- 
son to think as much. Indeed, inasmuch as semantics needs its unrestricted naive 
semantical schema (above), there is reason to be pessimistic. 
A solution to the Liar, at least by my lights, need not thereby be a solution to 
mathematical set-theoretic paradoxes; those paradoxes may be solved in whatever 
way suits mathematics. Of course, if mathematics remains classical, then one's 
proposed %ll-purpose logic' will need to have classical logic as an extension. The 
point is that Russell's set-theoretic paradox needn't be an issue in one's resolution 
of the Liar or truth-theoretic paradoxes, in general. On the other hand, one's res- 
olution of the Liar is constrained, to some degree, by Russell's semantics-theoretic 
paradox 
the semantical properties paradox. At the very least, solutions to the 
Liar that require rejecting the unrestricted semantical schema would seem to carry 
a prima facie blemish. 
As it turns out, accommodating the unrestricted semantical schema usually goes 
hand in hand with achieving a suitable conditional, one for which A ~ A is valid, 
171i used to use the term 'semantical extensions', but Hartry Field (in conversation) convinced 
me that 'extensions' is apt to mislead, perhaps suggesting the target entities are extensional. I 
use Field's suggested term 'properties', which is more natural. 

398 
JC Beall 
--~ detaches, and Curry problems avoided, iT> Accordingly, some of the theories 
sketched above, notably the paracomplete and paraconsistent, naturally afford a 
solution to Russell's semantical paradox. 17a 
10 
REVENGE 
AT LAST 
Charges of revenge are ubiquitous in the Liar literature. The loose metaphor aptly 
conveys the target phenomenon, fuzzy as the phenomenon may be. Dramatically 
put, Liars attempt to wreak inconsistency (or triviality) in one's language. One 
way of avoiding the Liar's intentions is to kill the Liars, much along Tarski*'s line 
or lines (not discussed here) that treat them as meaningless. But killing Liars, at 
least natural-language Liars, carries costs, as mentioned in §7.1. The more humane 
approach, exhibited by all of the canvassed approaches (except Tarski*), is to let 
Liars live but frustrate their aim of generating inconsistency (or triviality). And 
this is where the Liar's revenge is thought to emerge. In short, the Liar's aims 
are safely frustrated only at an expressive cost. If the Liar can't have what she 
wants, she'll enlist ~strengthened' relatives to frustrate your wants, in particular, 
your expressive wants. 
So goes the drama. In less dramatic terms, revengers charge that a given (for- 
mal) theory of truth fails to be explanatorily adequate with respect to its target 
phenomena. 
In all cases, the target phenomena include at least the consistency 
or, more broadly, nontriviality 
of truth, truth in our real language. ~74 The 
revenger charges that the formal 'model language' achieves consistency (or non- 
triviality) only in virtue of expressive inadequacies. In particular, some semantic 
172I should note that the semantical properties version of Curry is directly analogous to the 
truth-theoretic version. Let e be the exemplification relation, x : A(z) the semantical property 
corresponding to A(z), and xey : A(y) +-~ A(z) the semanticM property schema. Curry is 
generated via the predicate x C z + ±, yielding z : x C x + ±, where ± is either explosive or 
plainly false. 
173For concrete examples, see Field, 2004 and Priest, 1987. I should note that Priest 1987 
argues that any adequate solution to the Liar must be a solution to Russell's set-theoretic para- 
dox. I reject the argument, but the matter ultimately turns on whether there is a sustainable 
distinction between semanticM properties and mathematicM sets. Priest (in conversation) thinks 
not, but also thinks that mathematics itself is ultimately inconsistent, thereby calling for a 
paraconsistent logic. These issues, needless to say, are (far) beyond the scope of this essay. 
174All of this assumes, as I have throughout, that we are dealing with proposals that purport to 
be descriptively adequate with respect to various target phenomena. Those, like McGee 1991, 
who think that our real language is inconsistent 
due to Liars 
and, in turn, proceed to 
offer a chiefly prescriptive (consistent) remedy, are not covered in this discussion. With respect 
to the current issue, McGee's position is somewhat curious. If, as McGee 1991 
concludes (on 
the descriptive side), English is inconsistent, then why think that its logic is explosive (e.g., 
classical)? Presumably, it is because the logic is explosive that a prescriptive remedy is required. 
But a more reasonable hypothesis, at least on the surface, is that the logic is paraconsistent, at 
least if 
as McGee maintains 
our 'ha'i've theory of truth' is inconsistent. But if the logic is 
paraconsistent, then why do we need a consistent remedy? But I must leave the matter there. (I 
should mention that McGee's work, which, only for space reasons, I have not been able to cover, 
is among the pioneering works in the 'determinate truth' tradition.) 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
399 
notion 2(, which is expressible in our real language, is, on pain of inconsistency 
(or triviality), inexpressible in the (formal) model language. 
Doing formal semantics is modeling work, especially when one is engaged in 
philosophical semantics or philosophical logic, where the aim, in general, is to 
illuminate the structm'e and logic of philosophically significant notions 
semantic 
notions (truth, language, etc.), metaphysical notions (worlds, parts, etc.), perhaps 
ethical notions, or so on. With respect to formal theories of truth, the aim is no 
different; one aims to give a model that sutticiently illuminates various features of 
truth. Of course, in the case of truth, one aims to give a model in more than the 
ordinary, heuristic sense (e.g., exemplar); one also aims to establish consistency 
or, more broadly, nontriviality. 
In giving a formal theory of truth, one does not directly give a theory of truth; 
rather, one gives a theory of truth-in-/2,~, for some formal 'model language'/2,~. By 
endorsing a formal theory of truth, one is endorsing that truth itself is relevantly 
like that, like truth-in-/2,~, at least with respect to various phenomena in question 
for example, truth's consistency (or nontriviality), its logic, etc. Revengers 
charge that truth-in-/2~ is insutticiently like truth for purposes of explaining the 
target phenomena. 
For simplicity, let /2,~ be a given formal model language for/2, where/2 is our 
target, real language 
the language features of which (e.g., consistent truth) £,~ 
is intended to explain or otherwise illuminate. Let M(/2,~) be the metalanguage 
for £,~, and assume, as is typical, that M(/2,~) is a fragment of/2. Then various 
(related) recipes for revenge run roughly as follows. 175 
Rvl. RECIPE ONE. 
- Find some semantic notion 32 that is used in M(£,~) to classify various 
/2.~-sentences (usually, paradoxical sentences). 
- 
Show, in M(g~r,), that 32 is not expressible in/2~r~ lest/2~ be inconsistent 
(or trivial). 
Conclude that £.~ is explanatorily inadequate: it fails to explain how 
£, with its semantic notion 32, enjoys consistency (or, more broadly, 
nontriviality). 
Rv2. RECIPE TWO. 
Find some semantic notion 2( that, irrespective of whether it is explicitly 
used to classify £,~-sentences, is expressible in M(£,~). 
- Show, in M(/2,~), that 2( is not expressible in £,~ lest £,~ be inconsistent 
(or trivial). 
175This is not in any way an exhaustive list of recipes! (A related route, for example, is 
pursued by Glanzberg 2001, who argues that any 'good' theory of truth cannot be applied 
without invoking devices that, were they 'allowed' in the theory, would result in inconsistency or 
triviality. A proof-theoretic version of this route towards 'revenge' is in Glanzberg, 2004c.) 

400 
JC Beall 
- 
Conclude that 12m is explanatorily inadequate: it fails to explain how 
12, with its semantic notion X, enjoys consistency (or, more broadly, 
nontriviality). 
Rv3. RECIPE THaEE. 
Find some semantic notion X that is (allegedly) in 12. 
- 
Argue that 2( is not expressible in 12.~ lest 12,~ be inconsistent (or triv- 
ial). 
Conclude that 12rr~ is explanatorily inadequate: it fails to explain how 
12, with its semantic notion X, enjoys consistency (or, more broadly, 
nontriviality). 
A revenger, as above, is one who charges 'revenge' against a formal theory of 
truth, usually along lines above. 
The charge is that the model language fails 
to achieve its explanatory goals. Suppose that 12.~ is some formal language that 
enjoys its own truth predicate. Suppose, further, that consistency (or, for paracon- 
sistentists, nontriviality) is established for the given language (and the resulting 
truth theory). A rever~ger" charges that 12.~ fails to explain its target explanada, 
that, in particular, its consistency (or nontriviality) is achieved in virtue of ex- 
pressive inadequacies. In general, the revenger aims to show that there's some 
sentence in 12 (our real language) that ought to be expressible in 12~r~ if 12~ is to 
achieve explanatory adequacy. 
How ought one to reply to revengers? The answer, of course, depends on the 
details of the given theories and the given charge of revenge. For present purposes, 
without going into such details, a few general remarks can be made. 
First, the weight of (Rvl) or (Rv2) depends on the sort of?( at issue. As in §4.1 
§5.1, if X is a model-relative notion constructed in a proper'fT"agment of 12, then the 
charge of inadequacy would seem to carry little weight. In particular, as mentioned 
in §4.1 §5.1, if classical logic extends that of 12,~, then there is a clear sense in which 
you may 'properly' rely on a classical metalanguage in constructing 12.~ and, in 
particular, truth-in-12"~. After all, you endorse that 12, the real, target language, is 
nonclassical but enjoys classical logic as a (proper) extension. Accordingly, while 
details need to be given, there is nothing suspect about relying on an entirely 
classical (proper) fragment of 12 in which to construct your model language. 176 
But in such a context, it is hardly surprising that 2(, being an entirely classical 
notion (at least over 12.~), would bring about inconsistency or, worse, triviality, if 
we were to express it in £rn. 177 
Because classical logic is typically an extension of the logic of 12m, the point 
above is often sufficient to undermine the revenger's claims, at least if the given 
176Note too that if the given fragment is 'necessarily classical' in some relevant sense, then 
inferences within the given (proper) fragment of £ may turn out to be valid simplieiter 
depending on how this is cashed out. Otherwise, some restricted but, as far as I can see, entirely 
appropriate notion of validity will be in play for the 'metalanguage inferences'. 
177Hartry Field 2003b discusses this point with respect to his particular proposal. For a fuller 
discussion, see Field, 2005b. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
401 
recipe is (Rvl) and (Rv2). What the revenger must show, ultimately, is not the 
unsurprising result that a model-relative X is expressible in M(£,,~) but not in 
£,~; she must show that some relevant non-model-relative notion is expressible in 
£ but, on pain of inconsistency (or triviality), inexpressible in Z;~r~. And this task 
brings us to (Rv3). lr8 
Recipe (Rv3) is perhaps what most revengers are following. In this case, the 
idea is to locate a non-model-relative (semantic) notion in Z; and show that Z;,~ 
cannot, on pain of inconsistency (or triviality), express such a notion. As may be 
evident, the dialectic along these lines is delicate. Suppose that Theorist proposes 
some formal theory of truth, and Revenger, following (Rv3), adverts to some 
non-model-relative (semantic) X that (allegedly) is expressible in /2. If, as I'm 
now assuming, Theorist neither explicitly nor implicitly invokes ,12 for purposes of 
(semantic) classification, then Revenger has a formidable task in front of her. In 
particular, Revenger must, without begging the question, show that X really is an 
intelligible notion of £. 
An example, relevant to the paracolnplete and paraconsistent cases (see §4 §5), 
might be useful. Let us say that a language contains an absohtte ezcl,tsion device 
(P exactly if both of the following hold for the given language. 
edl. IP qPA V A 
ed2. qPA, A I~ B 
Against a paracomplete or paraconsistent proposal, a revenger, following (Rv3), 
will not make the mistake of pointing to some model-relative exclusion device. 
Rather, the (Rv3)-type revenger might maintain that £, our real (and target) 
language, enjoys such an absolute exclusion device. If the revenger is correct, then 
standard paracomplete and paraconsistent proposals are inadequate, to say the 
least. But the issue is: why think that the revenger is correct? Needless to say, 
argument is required. What makes the matter delicate is that many arguments 
are likely to beg the question at hand. After all, according to paracomplete and 
paraconsistent theorists, what the Liar teaches us is that there is no absolute 
exclusion device. Accordingly, the given revenger cannot simply point to normal 
evidence for such a device and take that to be sufficient. On the other hand, if the 
proposed theory cannot otherwise explain 
or, perhaps, explain away 
normal 
evidence for the (alleged) device, then the revenger may make progress. But the 
situation, as said, is delicate. 
The burden, of course, lies not only on Revenger; it also lies with the given 
Theorist. Paracomplete and paraconsistent theorists must reject the intelligibility 
of any absolute exclusion device. But inasmuch as such a notion is independently 
plausible 
or, at least, independently intelligible 
such theorists carry the 
burden of explaining why such a notion appears to be intelligible, despite its ulti- 
mate unintelligibility. (E.g., we are making a common, reasonable, but ultimately 
lrSThere is (obviously) a lot more that can be said about (Rvl) or (Rv2), but for space reasons 
I briefly turn to (Rv3). 

402 
JC Beall 
fallacious generalization from ~normal cases' to all cases, or some such mistake.) 
Alternatively, such theorists might argue that, contrary to initial appearances, the 
allegedly intelligible notion is in fact rather unclear; once clarified, the problematic 
features disappear. (E.g., one might argue that the alleged notion is a conflation of 
various notions, each one of which is intelligible but not one of which behaves in the 
alleged, problematic way.) Whatever the response, theorists do owe something to 
(Rv3)-revengers: an explanation as to why the given (and otherwise problematic) 
notion is unintelligible. 179 
I have hardly scratched the surface of r'evenge in the foregoing remarks. The 
phenomenon (or, perhaps more accurately, family of phenomena) has in many 
respects been the fuel behind formal theories of truth, at least in the contemporary 
period. In many respects, at least in my opinion, a clear understanding of revenge 
is a pressing and open matter. What, exactly, is revenge? How, if at all, is it a 
serious problem? Is the problem logical? Is the problem philosophical? And for 
what end, exactly, is the alleged problem a problem? How- is it related to ECP, 
NTP, or the likes of ~semantic closure'? 
Answers to some of the given questions, I hope, are clear enough in foregoing 
remarks. But answers 
clear answers 
to many of the questions remain to be 
found. Until then, full evaluation of current theories of truth remain out of reach. 
11 
FURTHER READING 
This section is intended as a brief 
but in no way exhaustive 
suggestion 
towards further reading on the main topics. The bibliographies in the given works 
contain a broader guide. 
In the case of edited collections, I try to list fairly 
recent works, which are likely to be widely available. (Again, the bibliographies 
in the given works will point to many other works of direct relevance.) Unless 
otherwise stated, collections (as used here) are volumes that contain papers by 
various authors, rather than a single author's collected papers. 
11.1 
Truth and Paradox 
Beall, 2003. 
While some of the papers in this collection focus chiefly on 
soritical paradoxes and issues of vagueness, some of the others focus squarely 
on semantical or logical paradox, with a few papers tying the two kinds of 
paradox together. 
Beall and Armour-Garb, 2005 is a collection that focuses squarely on dtruth 
and dtruth-theoretic paradox, and in particular on the prospects of achieving 
'deflationistically acceptable' solutions to such paradox. 
lrgFor a recent example of attempting to meet this burden, see Field, 2005b. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
403 
Chapuis and Gupta, 2000 is a collection that focuses on revision-theoretic 
approaches to paradox, and also contains discussion of extending revision 
theory in other philosophical and logical directions. 
Martin, 1970 is a collection that represents approaches to truth-theoretic 
paradox in the 1960s and early 70s. 
Martin, 1984 is a collection that represents approaches that, from the late 
1970s to early 80s, have emerged as philosophically popular and influential 
in the area. 
Visser, 2004 is a much broader, detailed discussion of many of the ap- 
proaches discussed in the current essay, with a focus on both philosophical 
and, especially, the mathematical aspects of the given theories. (The given 
bibliography is also quite valuable.) 
11.2 
Dtruth and 'nature' issues 
Armour-Garb and Beall, 2005 is a collection of papers representing the 
various deflationary conceptions of truth. (Note that 'deflationism' is really 
just a catch-all phrase for a family of closely related theories or, more broadly, 
views.) 
Blackburn and Simmons, 1999 is a collection of papers that give a flavor 
of the 'nature' debates. 
(The introductory essay pushes the relevance of 
truth-theoretic paradox to 'nature' questions.) 
David, 1994 is a monograph that provides an extensive examination of both 
correspondence theories and deflationary theories of truth. 
Greenough and Lynch, 2005 is a collection that, in many ways, ties ap- 
proaches to 
the nature, if any, of 
truth to broader philosophical and 
methodological issues. 
Halbach and Horsten, 2002b is a collection that discusses a wide variety 
of truth-related topics; it contains both 'nature' topics and discussion of 
truth-theoretic (and, in general, semantic) paradox. 
Kfinne, 2003 is a monograph that examines a variety of popular or histori- 
cally significant positions on 'nature' issues. (Though it is not a history, the 
historical information in this book is valuable.) 
Lynch, 2001 contains essays on the 'nature' debates, including representa- 
tives of correspondence theory, coherence theory, pragmatism, aletheic plu- 
ralism, and various deflationary positions. 
Schantz, 2002 is a collection covering a wide range of 'nature' issues, as well 
as containing a few essays examining Tarski's so-called Convention T. 

404 
JC Beall 
11.3 
Paraconsistency 
IPriest, 2002 is a wide-ranging survey of paraconsistent logics and their 
applications. 
IPriest et al., 2004 is a collection that focuses on dialetheic approaches to 
paradox and paraconsistency, more generally. 
INorman et al., 1989 is a collection that focuses on paraconsistency, quite 
generally 
touching on various logics and philosophical applications of such 
(paraconsistent) logics. 
IPriest, 2001 is a monograph that discusses the motivations of dialetheism 
found in various branches of philosophy (and mathematics); its discussion of 
semantical paradox is directly relevant to Priest's version of dialetheism. 
11.4 
Paracomplete 
As mentioned in the main discussion, paracomplete approaches are the dominant 
trend, at least with respect to dtruth, but also popular for other (less transparent) 
notions of truth. As a result, many 
if not all 
of the major works cited in the 
main discussion provide discussion and further references. 
11.5 
Tarski 
Tarski's own work 1944; 1956 is quite readable (and worth reading). Discussion 
of Tarski's (or, at least, Tarski*'s) approach to truth-theoretic paradox may be 
found in almost all of the works cited in §11, but see especially the two Martin 
collections (see §11.1) and references therein. 
11.6 
Contextual 
In addition to the positions sketched in the main discussion, a few other 'con- 
textualist' positions are prominent. 
(And for related works, see the respective 
bibliographies.) 
Koons, 1992 provides a combination of %ituational truth' and Burgean 
'indexical truth', with the main advantage being that only two levels are 
required for ~indexing', as opposed to infinitely many (as on the full Burgean 
proposal). 
IGaiflnan, 1992 offers an approach often classified as a contextualist ap- 
proach to truth. Semantic evaluation generates a 'network', and the inter- 
pretation of an utterance of ~true' depends on the place of the utterance in 
the given network. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
405 
Skyrms, 1970; Skyrms, 1984 provides an 'intensional' approach to truth, 
wherein substitutivity of identities fails. (The overall approach is often seen 
as ~contextual' given the role of contextual-like sensitivity that emerges. One 
notable feature is that we do not get the right-left direction of standard T- 
biconditionals.) 
11.7 Revision 
Revision theorists share the basic revision-theoretic idea sketched above. Where 
revision theorists differ is in the details of how to extract categorical information 
from the various revision sequences. Such differences often show up as differences 
in how to define the revision operator at limit stages. For discussion of the main 
candidates and the issues that drive the differences, consult 
in addition to 
sources cited in the main discussion (above) 
the following works and their 
respective bibliographies. 
Chapuis, 1996 offers so-called rally varied revision sequences that are con- 
trasted with standard alternatives. 
Chapuis and Gupta, 2000. (See §11.1 for brief description.) 
Shapiro, 2005, while not advancing a particular revision theory, contains a 
valuable examination of the philosophical import of revision rules. 
Villanueva, 1997 contains essays directly on both philosophical and logical 
aspects of revision theory; it also contains essays on truth, in general. 
Yaqub, 1993 is a monograph advancing a distinctive set of revision rules. 
11.8 
Axiomatic Approaches 
Cantini, 
1996 is a monograph that provides a detailed discussion of ax- 
iomatic approaches to truth (and related notions). 
Halbach and Horsten, 2002a provides a user-friendly discussion of some of 
the main approaches (and surrounding issues) of axiomatic theories of truth. 
Sheard, 1994 is a user-friendly discussion of axiomatic (and, to some extent, 
semantic) approaches to truth. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This essay is drawn from a forthcoming monograph. 
I am grateful to Hartry 
Field, Michael Glanzberg, Daniel Nolan, Graham Priest, and Lionel Shapiro for 
discussion and comments. I am also grateful to the following for discussion of 
various topics in the essay: Tim Bays, Marion David, Chris Gauker, Jay Garfield, 

406 
JC Beall 
Patrick Greenough, Anil Gupta, Carrie Jenkins, Michael Lynch, Doug Patterson, 
Stephen Read, Greg Restall, Kevin Sharp, Fritz Warfield, Crispin Wright, and 
also to audiences at Smith College, SUNY (Albany), University of Notre Dame, 
University of St Andrews, and members of the AHRC Archd Centre for Philosophy 
of Language, Logic, Mathematics, and Mind. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Aczel, 1988 P. Aczel. Non-Well-Founded Sets. Number 14 in CSLI Lecture Notes. CSLI Publi- 
cations, Stanford, 1988. 
Anderson and Belnap, 1975 A. R. Anderson and N. D. Belnap. Entailment: The Logic of 
Relevance and Necessity, volume 1. Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1975. 
Anderson et al., 1992 A. R. Anderson, N. D. Belnap, and J. M. Dunn. Entailment: The Logic 
of Relevance and Necessity, volume 2. Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1992. 
Armour-Garb and Beall, 2005 B. Armour-Garb and JC Beall, editors. 
Deflationary T~'uth. 
Open Court Press, Chicago, 2005. 
Barwise and Etchemendy, 1987 J. Barwise and J. Etchemendy. The Liar. Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, 1987. 
Beall and Armour-Garb, 2005 JC Beall and B. Armour-Garb, editors. Deflationism and Para- 
dox. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2005. In press. 
Beall and Restall, 2005 JC Beall and G. Restall. Logical Pluralism. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 2005. In press. 
Beall et al., 2005 JC Beall, R. Brady, A. Hazen, G. Priest, and G. Restall. Relevant restricted 
quantification. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 2005. Forthcoming. 
Beall, 2002 JC Beall. Deflationism and gaps: untying 'not's in the debate. Analysis, 62(4), 
2002. 
Beall, 2003 JC Beall, editor. Liars and Heaps: New Essays on Paradox. Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, 2003. 
Beall, 2005a JC Beall. Negation's holiday: double-aspect dialetheism. In David DeVidi and 
Tin Kenyon, editors, A Logical Approach to Philosophy. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dor- 
drecht, 2005. Forthcoming. 
Beall, 2005b JC Beall. Transparent disquotationalism. In JC Beall and Brad Armour-Garb, 
editors, Deflationism and Paradox, pages 7 22. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2005. 
Beall, 2006 JC Beall. True, false, and paranormal. Analysis, 2006. Forthcoming. 
Blackburn and Simmons, 1999 S. Blackburn and K. Simmons, editors. Truth. Oxford Univer- 
sity Press, Oxford, 1999. 
Burge, 1979 T. Burge. 
Semantical paradox. 
Journal of Philosophy, 76:169 198, 1979. 
Reprinted in Martin, 1984. 
Cantini, 1996 A. Cantini, editor. 
Logical Frameworks for T~'uth and Abstraction: An Ax- 
iomatic Study. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. Elsevier, Oxford, 1996. 
Chapuis and Gupta, 2000 A. Chapuis and A. Gupta, editors. 
Circularity, Definition and 
Truth. Indian Council of Philosophical Research, New Delhi, 2000. 
Chapuis, 1996 A. Chapuis. Alternative revision theories of truth. Journal of Philosophical 
Logic, 25:399 423, 1996. 
Chellas, 1980 B. F. Chellas. Modal Logic: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 1980. 
Curry, 1942 H.B. Curry. The inconsistency of certain formal logics. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 
7:115 17, 1942. 
David, 1994 M. David. Correspondence and Disquotation. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
1994. 
Dowden, 1984 B. Dowden. Accepting inconsistencies from the paradoxes. Journal of Philo- 
sophical Logic, 13:125 130, 1984. 
Dummett, 1978 M. Dummett. Truth. In M. Dummett, editor, Truth and Other Enigmas. 
Duckworth, London, 1978. 
Feferman, 1984 S. Feferman. Toward useful type-free theories, I. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 
49:75 111, 1984. Reprinted in Martin, 1984. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
407 
Field, 2001 
H. Field. Truth and the Absence of Fact. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2001. 
Field, 2002 
H. Field. 
Saving the t-schema from paradox. 
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 
31:1 27, 2002. 
Field, 2003a 
H. Field. A revenge-immune solution to the semantic paradoxes. 
Journal of 
Philosophical Logic, 32:139 177, 2003. 
Field, 2003b 
H. Field. The semantic paradoxes and the paradoxes of vagueness. In JC Beall, 
editor, Liars and Heaps: New Essays on Paradox, pages 262 311. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 2003. 
Field, 2004 
H. Field. The consistency of the na~'ve (?) theory of properties. The Philosophical 
Quarterly, pages 78 104, 2004. 
Field, 2005a 
H. Field. Is the liar both true and false? In JC Beall and Brad Armour-Garb, 
editors, Deflationism and Paradox, pages 23 40. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2005. In 
press. 
Field, 2005b 
H. Field. Solving the paradoxes, escaping revenge. 2005. To appear. 
Field, 2005c 
H. Field. Variations on a theme by yablo. In JC Beall and Brad Armour-Garb, 
editors, Deflationism and Paradox, pages 53 74. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2005. In 
press. 
Fine, 1975 
K. Fine. Vagueness, truth and logic. Synthese, 30:265 300, 1975. 
Fitting, 1986 
M. Fitting. Notes on the mathematical aspects of Kripke's theory of truth. Notre 
Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 27:75 88, 1986. 
Gaifman, 1992 
H. Gaifman. Pointers to truth. Journal of Philosophy, 89:223 61, 1992. 
Glanzberg, 2001 
M. Glanzberg. The liar in context. Philosophical Studies, 103:217 251, 2001. 
Glanzberg, 2004a 
M. Glanzberg. A contextual hierarchical approach to truth and the liar 
paradox. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 33:27 88, 2004. 
Glanzberg, 2004b 
M. Glanzberg. Quantification and realism. Philosophy and Phenomenolog- 
ical Research, 69:541 572, 2004. 
Glanzberg, 2004c 
M. Glanzberg. Truth, reflection, and hierarchies. Synthese, 142:289 315, 
2004. 
Greenough and Lynch, 2005 
P. Greenough and M. P. Lynch. 
Truth and Realism. 
Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, 2005. In press. 
Grim, 1991 
P. Grim. The Incomplete Universe. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1991. 
Gupta and Belnap, 1993 
A. Gupta and N. Belnap. The Revision Theory of Truth. MIT Press, 
1993. 
Gupta, 1982 
A. Gupta. Truth and paradox. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 11:1 60, 1982. 
Reprinted in Martin, 1984. 
Hajek et al., 2000 
P. Hajek, J. Paris, and J. Shepherdson. The liar paradox and fuzzy logic. 
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 65:339 346, 2000. 
Halbach and Horsten, 2002a 
V. Halbach and L. Horsten. Contemporary methods for inves- 
tigating the concept of truth. In Volker Halbach and Leon Horsten, editors, Principles of 
Truth, Epistemische Studien. Ontos Verlag, 2002. 
Halbach and Horsten, 2002b 
V. Halbach and L. Horsten, editors. Principles of Truth. Epis- 
temische Studien. Ontos Verlag, 2002. 
Harman, 1986 
G. Harman. Change In View: Principles of Reasoning. Bradford Books. MIT 
Press, 1986. 
Herzberger, 1982 
H. Herzberger. Notes on naive semantics. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 
11:61 102, 1982. Reprinted in Martin, 1984. 
Hyde, 1997 
D. Hyde. From heaps and gaps to heaps of gluts. Mind, 106:641 660, 1997. 
Jacquette, 2004 
D. Jacquette. Diagonalization in logic and mathematics. In Dov M. Gab- 
bay and Franz Giinthner, editors, Handbook of Philosophical Logic, pages 55 147. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, second edition, 2004. 
Kaplan, 1989 
D. Kaplan. 
Demonstratives: An essay on the semantics, logic, metaphysics, 
and epistemology of demonstratives and other indexicals. In Joseph Almog, John Perry, and 
Howard Wettstein, editors, Themes from Kaplan, pages 481 614. Oxford University Press, 
New York, 1989. 
Kleene, 1952 
S. C. Kleene. Introduction to Metamathematics. North-Holland, 1952. 
Koons, 1992 
R. C. Koons. Paradoxes of Belief and Strategic Rationality. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 1992. 
Kremer, 1988 
M. Kremer. 
Kripke and the logic of truth. 
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 
17:225 278, 1988. 

408 
JC Beall 
Kremer, 2000 
P. Kremer. 'semantics' for languages with their own truth predicates. In Andr6 
Chapuis and Anil Gupta, editors, Circularity, Definition and Truth, pages 217 46. Indian 
Council of Philosophical Research, New Delhi, 2000. 
Kripke, 1965 S. A. Kripke. Semantical analysis of modal logic II: Non-normal modal proposi- 
tional calculi. In Addison et al., editor, The Theory of Models, pages 206 220. North-Holland 
Publishing Co, 1965. 
Kripke, 1975 S. Kripke. Outline of a theory of truth. Journal of Philosophy, 72:690 716, 1975. 
Reprinted in Martin, 1984. 
Kfinne, 2003 W. Kiinne. Conceptions of Truth. Oxford University Press, New York, 2003. 
Lewis and Langford, 1932 C. I. Lewis and C. H. Langford. Symbolic Logic. The Century Co, 
New York and London, 1932. 
Lynch, 1998 M. P. Lynch. Truth in Context. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1998. 
Lynch, 2001 M. P. Lynch, editor. The Nature of Truth. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2001. 
Mares, 2004 E. D. Mares, editor. Relevant Logic: A Philosophical Interpretation. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, 2004. 
Martin and Woodruff, 1975 R. L. Martin and P. W. Woodruff. On representing 'true-in-L' in 
L. Philosophia, 5:217 221, 1975. Reprinted in Martin, 1984. 
Martin, 1970 R. L. Martin, editor. 
The Liar Paradox. Yale University Press, New Haven, 
1970. 
Martin, 1984 R. L. Martin, editor. Recent Essays on Truth and the Liar Paradox. Oxford 
University Press, New York, 1984. 
Maudlin, 2004 T. Maudlin. Truth and Paradox: Solving the Riddles. Oxford University Press, 
New York, 2004. 
McGee, 1991 V. McGee. Truth, Vagueness, and Paradox. Hackett, Indianapolis, 1991. 
Meyer et al., 1979 R. K. Meyer, R. Routley, and J. M. Dunn. Curry's paradox. 
Analysis, 
39:124 128, 1979. 
Norman et al., 1989 J. Norman, G. Priest, and R. Sylvan, editors. Paraconsistent Logic: Es- 
says on the Inconsistent. Philosophia Verlag, 1989. 
Parsons, 1974a 
C. Parsons. The liar paradox. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 3:381 412, 1974. 
Reprinted in Martin, 1984 and Parsons, 1983. 
Parsons, 1974b 
C. Parsons. Sets and classes. No~ts, 8:1 12, 1974. Reprinted in Parsons, 1983. 
Parsons, 1983 C. Parsons. Mathematics in Philosophy. Cornell University Press, Ithica, 1983. 
Parsons, 1990 T. Parsons. True contradictions. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 20:335 353, 
1990. 
Patterson, 2005 D. E. Patterson. Tarski, the liar, and inconsistent languages. 
The Monist, 
89(1), 2005. In press. 
Priest et al., 2004 G. Priest, JC Beall, and B. Armour-Garb, editors. 
The Law of Non- 
Contradiction. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2004. 
Priest, 1979 G. Priest. The logic of paradox. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 8:219 241, 1979. 
Priest, 1987 G. Priest. In Contradiction: A Study of the Transconsistent. Martinus Nijhoff, 
The Hague, 1987. 
Priest, 1992 G. Priest. What is a non-normal world? Logique et Analyse, 35:291 302, 1992. 
Priest, 1998 G. Priest. 
What is so bad about contradictions? 
Journal of Philosophy, 
XCV(8):410 426, 1998. Reprinted in Priest et al., 2004. 
Priest, 2000 G. Priest. 
Motivations for paraconsistency: The slippery slope from classical 
logic to dialetheism. In D. Batens, C. Mortensen, G. Priest, and J-P Van Bendegem, editors, 
Frontiers of Paraconsistency. Research Studies Press, KingOs College Publications, Baldock, 
2000. 
Priest, 2001 G. Priest. Beyond the Limits of Thought. Oxford University Press, Oxford, second 
edition, 2001. 
Priest, 2002 G. Priest. Paraconsistent logic. In Dov M. Gabbay and Franz Gfinthner, editors, 
Handbook of Philosophical Logic (2nd Edition), volume 6, pages 287 393. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Dordrecht, 2002. 
Priest, 2005 G. Priest. Spiking the Field artillery. In JC Beall and Brad Armour-Garb, editors, 
Deftationisrn and Paradox, pages 41 52. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2005. In press. 
Priest, 2006a 
G. Priest. Doubt Truth To Be A Liar'. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2006. 
In press. 
Priest, 2006b 
G. Priest. In Contradiction. Oxford University Press, Oxford, second edition, 
2006. Forthcoming. 

Truth and Paradox: A Philosophical Sketch 
409 
Quine, 1970 
W. V. O. Quine. Philosophy of Logic. Prentice-Hall, 1970. 
Ramsey, 1925 
F. P. Ramsey. The foundations of mathematics. Proceedings of the London 
Mathematical Society, 25:338 384, 1925. 
Reinhardt, 1986 
W. N. Reinhardt. Some remarks on extending and interpreting theories with 
a partial predicate for truth. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 15:219 251, 1986. 
Rescher and Brandom, 1979 
N. Rescher and R. Brandom. The Logic of Inconsistency. Row- 
man and Littlefield, Totowa, N J, 1979. 
Restall, 1992 
G. Restall. Arithmetic and truth in Lukasiewicz's infinitely valued logic. Logique 
et AnalysG 139 140:303 312, 1992. 
Restall, 2000 
G. Restall. An Introduction to Substructural Logics. New York: Routledge, 2000. 
Routley and Loparic, 1978 
R. Routley and A. Loparic. Semantical analyses of Arruda-daCosta 
P-systems and adjacent non-replacement systems. Studia Logica, 37:301 320, 1978. 
Routley et al., 1982 
R. Routley, V. Plumwood, R. K. Meyer, and R. T. Brady, editors. Relevant 
Logics and their Rivals. Ridgeview, 1982. 
Schantz, 2002 
R. Schantz, editor. What is Truth? Walter de Gruyter, New York, 2002. 
Shapiro, 2004 
S. Shapiro. Simple truth, contradiction, and consistency. In Graham Priest, 
JC Beall, and Brad Armour-Garb, editors, The Law of Non-Contradiction. Oxford University 
Press, 2004. 
Shapiro, 2005 
L. Shapiro. The rationale behind revision-rule semantics. Philosophical Studies, 
2005. Forthcoming. 
Shaw-Kwei, 1954 
M. Shaw-Kwei. 
Logical paradoxes for many-valued systems. 
Journal of 
Symbolic Logic, 19:37 40, 1954. 
Sheard, 1994 
M. Shear& A guide to truth predicates in the modern era. Journal of Symbolic 
Logic, 59(3):1032 54, 1994. 
Simmons, 1993 
K. Simmons. Universality and The Liar. Cambridge University Press, 1993. 
Skyrms, 1970 
B. Skyrms. Return of the liar: Three-valued logic and the concept of truth. 
American Philosophical Quarterly, 7:153 161, 1970. 
Skyrms, 1984 
B. Skyrms. Intensional aspects of semantical self-reference. In R. M. Martin, 
editor, Recent Essays on Truth and the Liar, pages 119 131. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
1984. 
Smullyan, 1992 
R. M. Smullyan. GSdel's Incompleteness Theorems, volume 19 of Oxford Logic 
Guides. Oxford University Press, New York, 1992. 
Smullyan, 1993 
R.M. Smullyan. Recursion Theory for Metamathematics, volume 20 of Oxford 
Logic Guides. Oxford University Press, New York, 1993. 
Soames, 1999 
S. Soames. Understanding Truth. Oxford University Press, New York, 1999. 
Tarski, 1936 
A. Tarski. Der wahreitsbegriff in den formalisierten sprachen. Studia Philosoph- 
ica, 1:261 405, 1936. Reprinted in English in Tarski, 1956. 
Tarski, 1944 
A. Tarski. 
The semantic concept of truth and the foundations of semantics. 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 4:341 376, 1944. 
Tarski, 1956 
A. Tarski. 
Logic, Semantics, Metamathematies: 
papers from 1923 to 1938. 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1956. Translated by J. H. Woodger. 
van Fraassen, 1968 
B. C. van Fraassen. Presupposition, implication and self-reference. Journal 
of Philosophy, 65:136 52, 1968. 
van Fraassen, 1970 
B. C. van Fraassen. Truth and paradoxical consequences. In R. Martin, 
editor, The Paradox of the Liar, pages 13 23. Yale University Press, 1970. 
Varzi, 1999 
A. Varzi. An Essay in Universal Semantics, volume 1 of Topoi Library. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Boston, 1999. 
Villanueva, 1997 
E. Villanueva, editor. Truth. Number 8 in Philosophical Issues. Ridgeview 
Publishing Company, Atascadero, California, 1997. 
Visser, 1984 
A. Visser. Four valued semantics and the liar. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 
13:181 212, 1984. 
Visser, 2004 
A. Visser. Semantics and the liar paradox. In Dov M. Gabbay and Franz Giinth- 
ner, editors, Handbook of Philosophical Logic, pages 149 240. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Dordrecht, second edition, 2004. 
White, 1979 
R. B. White. The consistency of the axiom of comprehension in the infinite-valued 
predicate logic of tukasiewicz. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 8:509 534, 1979. 
Woodruff, 1984 
P. Woodruff. Paradox, truth, and logic. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 13:213 
252, 1984. 
Wright, 1987 
C. Wright. Realism, meaning and truth. Oxford University Press, 1987. 

410 
JC Beall 
Wright, 1992 C. Wright. Truth and Objectivity. Harvard University Press, 1992. 
Yabo, 
1993a 
S. Yablo. Definitions, consistent and inconsistent. Philosophical Studies, 72:147 
175, 1993. Special Issue on Definition. 
Yabo, 
1993b 
S. Yablo. Hop, skip, and jump. In James Tomberlin, editor, Philosophical Per- 
spectives: Language and Logic, volume 7, pages 371 396. Ridgeview Publishing Co., Atas- 
cadero, CA, 1993. 
Yabo, 
2003 
S. Yablo. New grounds for na'fve truth theory. In JC Beall, editor, Liars and 
Heaps: New Essays on Paradox, pages 313 330. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003. 
Yaqfib, 1993 A. Yaqfib. The Liar @eaks the Truth. Oxford University Press, 1993. 

HILBERT’S PROGRAM THEN AND NOW
Richard Zach
1
INTRODUCTION
Hilbert’s program is, in the ﬁrst instance, a proposal and a research program in the
philosophy and foundations of mathematics. It was formulated in the early 1920s
by German mathematician David Hilbert (1862–1943), and was pursued by him
and his collaborators at the University of G¨ottingen and elsewhere in the 1920s
and 1930s. Brieﬂy, Hilbert’s proposal called for a new foundation of mathematics
based on two pillars: the axiomatic method and ﬁnitary proof theory. Hilbert
thought that by formalizing mathematics in axiomatic systems, and subsequently
proving by ﬁnitary methods that these systems are consistent (i.e., do not prove
contradictions), he could provide a philosophically satisfactory grounding of clas-
sical, inﬁnitary mathematics (analysis and set theory). Had it been successful,
Hilbert’s program would perhaps not only have eclipsed in subsequent inﬂuence
other foundational projects of the time, such as the logicist projects pursued by
Frege and Russell and Brouwer’s intuitionism, but it would also have achieved
Hilbert’s stated goal, viz., to “dispose of the foundational questions in mathemat-
ics as such once and for all” [Hilbert, 1929, 228]. Unfortunately, G¨odel’s theorems
show that the program as originally envisaged by Hilbert cannot be carried out.
Although Hilbert’s own project for the foundation of mathematics was ulti-
mately unsuccessful, the project itself and technical advances made in its pursuit
have had an enormous impact on logic and the foundations of mathematics more
generally. In order to carry out the ﬁrst part of the program, the axiomatization
of mathematics in a formal system, Hilbert and his collaborators had pushed for-
ward the development of logical formalisms in which such an axiomatization could
be carried out. This led, in particular, to the ﬁrst axiomatizations of proposi-
tional and ﬁrst-order logic as independent systems (i.e., other than as fragments
of more comprehensive higher-order systems, such as Frege’s Begriﬀsschrift and
the Whitehead-Russell system of Principia mathematica) and their metalogical in-
vestigation, such as the proof (by Paul Bernays in 1918) of the completeness of the
propositional calculus and the work in Hilbert’s school from 1921 onward on the
decision problem. The investigation of the metalogical properties of logical sys-
tems led directly to some of the most important metalogical results in logic, viz.,
G¨odel’s completeness theorem and the negative solution by Church and Turing of
the decision problem. The development of proof theory itself is an outgrowth of
Hilbert’s program. Gentzen’s development of natural deduction and the sequent
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

412
Richard Zach
calculus was carried out in the tradition of Hilbert’s program and with the aim of
constructing a logical system which facilitates consistency proofs. G¨odel obtained
his incompleteness theorems while trying to prove the consistency of analysis. And
the tradition of reductive proof theory of the Gentzen-Sch¨utte school and others
is itself a direct continuation of Hilbert’s program.
The present chapter is divided into three parts: The ﬁrst part provides a sketch
of the historical development of logic, proof theory, and philosophy of mathematics
in the work of Hilbert and his followers through the 1930s. The second part deals
with the philosophical interpretation and assessment of Hilbert’s program. The
third part presents recent work in proof theory which bears on the aims of Hilbert’s
program.
2
HILBERT’S PROGRAM THEN
2.1
Hilbert’s early work on foundations
Hilbert’s work on the foundations of mathematics can be traced to his work on
geometry of the 1890s which resulted in his inﬂuential textbook Foundations of
Geometry [1899]. One philosophical advance of this work was the development of
Hilbert’s conception of the axiomatic method. Hilbert believed that the proper
way to develop any scientiﬁc subject rigorously required an axiomatic approach. In
providing an axiomatic treatment, the theory would be developed independently of
any need for intuition, and it would facilitate an analysis of the logical relationships
between the basic concepts and the axioms. Of basic importance for an axiomatic
treatment are, so Hilbert, investigation of the independence and, above all, of the
consistency of the axioms. In his 1902 lectures on the foundations of geometry, he
puts it thus:
Every science takes its starting point from a suﬃciently coherent body
of facts as given. It takes form, however, only by organizing this body of
facts. This organization takes place through the axiomatic method, i.e.,
one constructs a logical structure of concepts so that the relationships
between the concepts correspond to relationships between the facts to
be organized.
There is arbitrariness in the construction of such a structure of con-
cepts; we, however, demand of it:
1) completeness, 2) independence, 3) consistency. [Hilbert, 2004, 540]
From the time of his work on geometry forward, the last consideration, consis-
tency, was of special importance in Hilbert’s conception of the axiomatic method
in general and the foundations of mathematics in particular. Hilbert was heavily
inﬂuenced by the foundational views of late-19th century mathematicians, in par-
ticular, Cantor, Dedekind, and Kronecker. He shared with Dedekind and Cantor
the view that mathematical activity should be free of constraints, which led to

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
413
his view, highlighted in his correspondence with Frege, that consistency of an ax-
iomatic theory guarantees the existence of the structure described, and is in this
sense suﬃcient to justify the use of the theory. And he shared with Kronecker a
recognition that elementary arithmetic has a privileged role in mathematics, al-
though he was of course opposed to the converse espoused by Kronecker, viz., that
the natural numbers, and constructions based on elementary arithmetic, exhaust
legitimate mathematics. These two inﬂuences in Hilbert’s thought are at the root
of his investigations of consistency.
Proofs of consistency for the axioms of geometry can be given by providing an
interpretation of the system in the real plane, and thus the consistency of geometry
is reduced to the consistency of analysis. Analysis, of course, itself requires justiﬁ-
cation. In [1900b], Hilbert approached the problem from the axiomatic standpoint
by proposing an axiomatization of the real numbers. In order to show the consis-
tency of this system, Hilbert expressly rejected the construction of a model, e.g.,
a construction based on Dedekind cuts of rationals, as an option. He considered
the construction of the reals from the rationals and ultimately the natural num-
bers using the “genetic method” as insuﬃcient: “Despite the high pedagogical and
heuristic value of the genetic method, for the ﬁnal presentation and the complete
logical grounding of our knowledge the axiomatic method deserves the ﬁrst rank”
[Hilbert, 1900b, 1093]. Hilbert thus was after a direct consistency proof of analysis,
i.e., one not based on reduction to another theory. He proposed the problem of
ﬁnding such a proof as the second of his 23 mathematical problems in his address
to the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1900 [1900a].
The discovery of Russell’s paradox in 1902 made it clear that an axiomatic
foundation of arithmetic and set theory requires a more precise development of
the underlying logical systems. Hilbert knew of the paradoxes of set theory from
Cantor and Zermelo, but it was apparently not until Russell’s [1902] publication
of the contradiction in Frege’s system that Hilbert and Zermelo realized their
importance. Hilbert’s exchange with Frege on the axiomatic approach to geometry
led him to realize that his conceptions of “axiom,” “deﬁnition,” “proof” were
in need of clariﬁcation. In response, Hilbert formulated an early version of his
proof-theoretical program in his 1904 Heidelberg talk [1905]. After criticizing the
foundational views of Kronecker as dogmatic, and those of Frege and Dedekind as
suﬀering from “unavoidable contradictions,” he writes:
Arithmetic is often considered to be a part of logic, and the tradi-
tional fundamental logical notions are usually presupposed when it is
a question of establishing a foundation for arithmetic. If we observe
attentively, however, we realize that in the traditional exposition of
the laws of logic certain fundamental arithmetic notions are already
used, for example, the notion of set and, to some extent, also that of
number. Thus we ﬁnd ourselves turning in a circle, and that is why a
partly simultaneous development of the laws of logic and of arithmetic
is required if paradoxes are to be avoided. [Hilbert, 1905, 131]

414
Richard Zach
Hilbert’s sketch of this “simultaneous development” of logic and arithmetic in the
case of a very basic axiom system for the natural numbers is very close to the
approach Hilbert’s proof theoretic program would take 20 years later: Hilbert
gives a direct argument that no contradiction can arise from the ﬁve axioms of his
system.
This was a promising start, but several factors delayed the further development
of Hilbert’s proof theoretic program. One was Poincar´e’s [1906] criticism of what
he saw as a viciously circular use of induction in Hilbert’s sketched consistency
proof (see [Steiner, 1975], Appendix). Moreover, Hilbert realized that axiomatic
investigations required a well worked-out logical formalism in which axiomatic
systems could be developed. At the time he used a logical formalism based on
Schr¨oder’s algebraic logic, which was not particularly suited as a formalism for
the axiomatization of mathematics. Following the 1905 lectures on foundations,
Hilbert turned his immediate attention to work in other areas of mathematics
and theoretical physics.
He did, however, actively support others who worked
on foundational questions in G¨ottingen, in particular Ernst Zermelo and Leonard
Nelson.1
The publication of Whitehead and Russell’s Principia Mathematica [1910; 1912;
1913] provided the required logical basis for a renewed attack on foundational is-
sues. Beginning in 1914, Hilbert’s student Heinrich Behmann and others studied
the system of Principia.2 Hilbert himself returned to work on the foundations of
mathematics in 1917. In September 1917, he delivered an address to the Swiss
Mathematical Society entitled “Axiomatic Thought” [1918a]. It is his ﬁrst pub-
lished contribution to mathematical foundations since 1905. In it, he again em-
phasized the requirement of consistency proofs for axiomatic systems: “The chief
requirement of the theory of axioms must go farther [than merely avoiding known
paradoxes], namely, to show that within every ﬁeld of knowledge contradictions
based on the underlying axiom-system are absolutely impossible.” He posed the
proof of the consistency of the integers (and of set theory) again as the main prob-
lems. In both these cases, there seems to be nothing more fundamental available to
which the consistency could be reduced other than logic itself. Hilbert at the time
considered the problem as essentially solved by Whitehead and Russell’s work in
Principia. Nevertheless, other fundamental problems of axiomatics remained un-
solved, including the problem of the “decidability of every mathematical question,”
which also traces back to Hilbert’s 1900 address.
1See [Sieg, 1999; Sieg, 2002], [Stein, 1988], [Hallett, 1990; Hallett, 1994], [Mancosu, 1998b],
and [Avigad and Reck, 2001] for further discussion of the conceptual framework and historical
background of Hilbert’s thought, and [Resnik, 1974a] on the Frege-Hilbert correspondence. On
Hilbert’s foundational interests before 1917, and his engagement for Husserl, Zermelo, and Nelson
in G¨ottingen, see [Peckhaus, 1990]. On general discussions of formalism and the place of Hilbert’s
thought in the mathematical context of the late 19th century, see [Webb, 1997] and [Detlefsen,
2005].
2See [Mancosu, 1999] and [2003] on Behmann’s role in Hilbert’s school and the inﬂuence of
Russell.

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
415
These unresolved problems of axiomatics led Hilbert to devote signiﬁcant eﬀort
to work on logic in the following years.
In 1917, Paul Bernays joined him as
his assistant in G¨ottingen. In a series of courses from 1917–1921, Hilbert, with
the assistance of Bernays and Behmann, made signiﬁcant new contributions to
formal logic.
The course from 1917 [Hilbert, 1918b], in particular, contains a
sophisticated development of ﬁrst-order logic, and forms the basis of Hilbert and
Ackermann’s textbook Principles of Theoretical Logic [1928]. In 1918, Bernays
submitted a treatise on the propositional calculus of Principia mathematica as a
Habilitationsschrift; it contains the ﬁrst completeness proof of the propositional
calculus for truth-functional semantics.3
The 1917–18 lectures were only the beginning of a strand of work on logic
and metalogic in Hilbert’s school, including work on the decision problem. The
decision problem for ﬁrst-order logic was tightly bound up with the aim of ﬁnding a
completeness proof for the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus (the “restricted calculus of
functions” in Hilbert’s terminology). This aim was stated in the 1917–18 lectures,
but since completeness does not hold for ﬁrst-order logic in any purely syntactic
sense (an early result due to Ackermann), a development of the semantics of ﬁrst-
order logic was needed ﬁrst. The decision problem, one of Hilbert’s main aims for
metamathematics in the 1920s, was already an issue in the lectures from 1905, and
has its roots in Hilbert’s belief, ﬁrst explicitly stated in the Paris address, that
“in mathematics, there is no ignorabimus,” i.e., that every mathematical question
can be solved either aﬃrmatively or negatively. The questions of completeness
and decidability thus became closely linked in the 1920s, with Behmann, Bernays,
Sch¨onﬁnkel, and later Ackermann working on special cases of the decision problem
for ﬁrst-order logic throughout the 1920s.
2.2
The consistency program, ﬁnitism, and proof theory
In about 1920, Hilbert came to reject Russell’s logicist solution to the consistency
problem for arithmetic, mainly for the reason that the axiom of reducibility cannot
be accepted as a purely logical axiom. In lectures from the Summer term 1920, he
concluded that “the aim of reducing set theory, and with it the usual methods of
analysis, to logic, has not been achieved today and maybe cannot be achieved at
all” [Hilbert, 1920]. At the same time, Brouwer’s intuitionist mathematics gained
currency.
In particular, Hilbert’s former student Hermann Weyl converted to
intuitionism. Weyl’s 1920 address to the Hamburg Mathematical Seminar, “The
new foundational crisis in mathematics” [1921] was answered by Hilbert in three
talks in Hamburg in the Summer of 1921 [1922b]. Here, Hilbert presented his own
mature proposal for a solution to the problem of the foundation of mathematics.
This proposal incorporated Hilbert’s ideas from 1904 regarding direct consistency
proofs, his conception of axiomatic systems, and also the technical developments
in the axiomatization of mathematics in the work of Russell as well as the further
3See [Moore, 1997], [Sieg, 1999] and [Zach, 1999] for more detail on the development of logic
in Hilbert’s school around 1918.

416
Richard Zach
developments carried out by him and his collaborators. What was new was the way
in which Hilbert wanted to imbue his consistency project with the philosophical
signiﬁcance necessary to answer Brouwer and Weyl’s criticisms: the ﬁnitary point
of view.
According to Hilbert, there is a privileged part of mathematics, contentual
elementary number theory, which relies only on a “purely intuitive basis of concrete
signs.” Whereas the operating with abstract concepts was considered “inadequate
and uncertain,” there is a realm of
extra-logical discrete objects, which exist intuitively as immediate ex-
perience before all thought. If logical inference is to be certain, then
these objects must be capable of being completely surveyed in all their
parts, and their presentation, their diﬀerence, their succession (like
the objects themselves) must exist for us immediately, intuitively, as
something which cannot be reduced to something else.4
The objects in questions are signs, both numerals and the signs that make up
formulas and formal proofs. The domain of contentual number theory consists
in the ﬁnitary numerals, i.e., sequences of strokes. These have no meaning, i.e.,
they do not stand for abstract objects, but they can be operated on (e.g., concate-
nated) and compared. Knowledge of their properties and relations is intuitive and
unmediated by logical inference. Contentual number theory developed this way is
secure, according to Hilbert: no contradictions can arise simply because there is
no logical structure in the propositions of contentual number theory.
The intuitive-contentual operations with signs form the basis of Hilbert’s meta-
mathematics. Just as contentual number theory operates with sequences of strokes,
so metamathematics operates with sequences of symbols (formulas, proofs). For-
mulas and proofs can be syntactically manipulated, and the properties and rela-
tionships of formulas and proofs are similarly based in a logic-free intuitive ca-
pacity which guarantees certainty of knowledge about formulas and proofs arrived
at by such syntactic operations. Mathematics itself, however, operates with ab-
stract concepts, e.g., quantiﬁers, sets, functions, and uses logical inference based
on principles such as mathematical induction or the principle of the excluded mid-
dle. These “concept-formations” and modes of reasoning had been criticized by
Brouwer and others on grounds that they presuppose inﬁnite totalities as given, or
that they involve impredicative deﬁnitions (which were considered by the critics as
viciously circular). Hilbert’s aim was to justify their use. To this end, he pointed
out that they can be formalized in axiomatic systems (such as that of Principia
or those developed by Hilbert himself), and mathematical propositions and proofs
thus turn into formulas and derivations from axioms according to strictly circum-
scribed rules of derivation. Mathematics, so Hilbert, “becomes an inventory of
provable formulas.” In this way the proofs of mathematics are subject to meta-
mathematical, contentual investigation. The goal of Hilbert’s program is then to
4[Hilbert, 1922b, 202].
The passage is repeated almost verbatim in [Hilbert, 1926, 376],
[Hilbert, 1928, 464], and [Hilbert, 1931b, 267]

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
417
give a contentual, metamathematical proof that there can be no derivation of a
contradiction, i.e., no formal derivation of a formula A and of its negation ¬A.
This sketch of the aims of the program was ﬂeshed out by Hilbert and his collab-
orators in the following 10 years. On the conceptual side, the ﬁnite standpoint and
the strategy for a consistency proof were elaborated by Hilbert [1923; 1926; 1928]
and Bernays [1922; 1928b; 1930], of which Hilbert’s article “On the inﬁnite” [1926]
provides the most detailed discussion of the ﬁnitary standpoint. In addition to
Hilbert and Bernays, a number of other people were involved in technical work
on the program. The ε-operator was ﬁrst introduced in the Hamburg lecture of
1921 [Hilbert, 1922b], and developed in a number of lectures given in G¨ottingen
[Hilbert, 1922a; Hilbert and Bernays, 1923], as well as in [Hilbert, 1923]. Hilbert
and Bernays developed the ε-calculus as their deﬁnitive formalism for axiom sys-
tems for arithmetic and analysis, and the so-called ε-substitution method as the
preferred approach to giving consistency proofs.
Brieﬂy, the ε-calculus is a formalism that includes ε as a term-forming operator.
If A(x) is a formula, then εxA(x) is a term, which intuitively stands for a witness
for A(x). In a logical formalism containing the ε-operator, the quantiﬁers can be
deﬁned by: ∃x A(x) ≡A(εxA(x)) and ∀x A(x) ≡A(εx¬A(x)). The only additional
axiom necessary is the so-called “transﬁnite axiom,” A(t) →A(εxA(x)). Based
on this idea, Hilbert and his collaborators developed axiomatizations of number
theory and analysis. Consistency proofs for these systems were then given using
the ε-substitution method. The idea of this method is, roughly, that the ε-terms
εxA(x) occurring in a formal proof are replaced by actual numerals, resulting in a
quantiﬁer-free proof. The simplest case, outlined in Hilbert’s papers, is as follows.
Suppose we had a (suitably normalized) derivation of 0 = 1 that contains only
one ε-term εxA(x). Replace all occurrences of εxA(x) by 0. The instances of the
transﬁnite axiom then are all of the form A(t) →A(0). Since no other ε-terms
occur in the proof, A(t) and A(0) are basic numerical formulas without quantiﬁers
and, we may assume, also without free variables. So they can be evaluated by
ﬁnitary calculation. If all such instances turn out to be true numerical formulas,
we are done.
If not, this must be because A(t) is true for some t, and A(0)
is false.
Then replace εxA(x) instead by n, where n is the numerical value of
the term t. The resulting proof is then seen to be a derivation of 0 = 1 from
true, purely numerical formulas using only modus ponens, and this is impossible.
Indeed, the procedure works with only slight modiﬁcations even in the presence
of the induction axiom, which in the ε-calculus takes the form of a least number
principle: A(t) →εxA(x) ≤t, which intuitively requires εxA(x) to be the least
witness for A(x).
The ε-substitution method is simple enough for the basic cases considered by
Hilbert, but becomes extremely complex when ε-operators are nested.
In his
1924 dissertation, [Ackermann, 1925] presented an (erroneous) consistency proof
based on the ε-substitution method for a version of analysis. John von Neumann,
then visiting G¨ottingen, gave a corrected consistency proof for a system of the
ε-formalism (which, however, did not include the induction axiom) in 1925 [1927].

418
Richard Zach
Building on von Neumann’s work, Ackermann devised a new ε-substitution proce-
dure which he communicated to Bernays (see [Bernays, 1928b]). Ackermann and
Bernays considered the proof to be correct for the entire ﬁrst-order fragment of
arithmetic and were conﬁdent that it could be extended to a consistency proof
of analysis. In his address “Problems of the grounding of mathematics” to the
International Congress of Mathematicians in Bologna in 1928 [1929], Hilbert opti-
mistically claimed that the work of Ackermann and von Neumann had established
the consistency of number theory and that the proof for analysis had already been
carried out by Ackermann “to the extent that the only remaining task consists in
the proof of an elementary ﬁniteness theorem that is purely arithmetical.”5
2.3
The impact of G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems
G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems [G¨odel, 1931] showed that Hilbert’s optimism
was unfounded. In September 1930, Kurt G¨odel announced his ﬁrst incomplete-
ness theorem at a conference in K¨onigsberg.
Von Neumann, who was in the
audience, immediately recognized the signiﬁcance of G¨odel’s result for Hilbert’s
program.
Shortly after the conference he wrote to G¨odel, telling him that he
had found a corollary to G¨odel’s result. G¨odel had found the same result already
independently: the second incompleteness theorem, asserting that the system of
Principia does not prove the formalization of the claim that the system of Prin-
cipia is consistent (provided it is). All the methods of ﬁnitary reasoning used in
the consistency proofs up till then were believed to be formalizable in Principia,
however. Hence, if the consistency of Principia were provable by the methods
used in Ackermann’s proofs, it should be possible to formalize this proof in Prin-
cipia; but this is what the second incompleteness theorem states is impossible.
Bernays also immediately realized the importance of G¨odel’s results after he stud-
ied G¨odel’s paper in January 1931. He wrote to G¨odel that (under the assumption
that ﬁnitary reasoning can be formalized in Principia) the incompleteness theo-
rems seem to show that a ﬁnitary consistency proof of Principia is impossible.
Shortly thereafter, von Neumann showed that Ackermann’s consistency proof is
ﬂawed and provided a counterexample to the proposed ε-substitution procedure.6
Although the impact of G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems for Hilbert’s pro-
gram was recognized soon after their publication, Hilbert’s program was by no
means abandoned.
Hilbert himself was no longer actively involved in founda-
tional research, but Bernays continued to work on the foundations of mathemat-
ics.
The two-volume Grundlagen der Mathematik [Hilbert and Bernays, 1934;
Hilbert and Bernays, 1939] was prepared by Bernays alone, and included new re-
5See [Avigad and Zach, 2002] for a general introduction to the ε-calculus and [Zach, 2003b]
and [2004] on the history of the ε-calculus and the substitution method. [Sieg, 1999] presents a
detailed and perceptive analysis of the development of the program and its inﬂuence as a whole.
6The correspondence between G¨odel and Bernays is published in [G¨odel, 2003a, 41–313] and
that with von Neumann in [G¨odel, 2003b, 327–377]. See also the informative introductions by
Feferman and Sieg, respectively, to these sections of the correspondence, as well as [Mancosu,
2004] and the last section of [Zach, 2003b].

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
419
sults by Ackermann and Bernays on the ε-calculus. It also included Herbrand’s
[1930] work on proof theory, and a sketch of Gentzen’s [1936] consistency proof
of ﬁrst-order arithmetic. Bernays’s and Gentzen’s work, in particular, focused on
possible extensions of the ﬁnitary standpoint which could yield consistency proofs
for substantial parts of mathematics in spite of G¨odel’s theorems.
Gentzen’s ﬁrst consistency proof for number theory, the so-called galley proof
[1935], was the result of a combination of Gentzen’s [1934] earlier work on the log-
ical formalism of the sequent calculus, which provided a proof-theoretically more
convenient axiomatization of arithmetic, and a new strategy of proving consis-
tency. This strategy involved deﬁning certain “reduction steps” on proofs: local
transformations of parts of a derivation in the new formalism. The consistency
proof then proceeds by showing that by iterating these reductions on a proof one
eventually arrives at a proof of a special form (a proof free of the cut rule and the
induction rule), and no proof of such a form can be the proof of a contradiction.
The ﬁrst version of the proof relied on the notion of a reduction rule, which itself
cannot be formalized in arithmetic.7 This notion met with some objections, and
in the revised, published version [1936], Gentzen replaced the appeal to reduction
rules by a proof that the iteration of reduction steps itself terminates. He did this
by assigning a measure for the complexity of a given derivation, and showed that
the result of the application of a reduction step to a proof reduces the complexity
measure of that proof. The complexity measure Gentzen used was certain ﬁnite
strings of numbers which may be interpreted as naming countable ordinals less
than ε0.8 The consistency result then follows if one accepts that there are no in-
ﬁnite descending sequences of such ordinal notations, or, more precisely, by using
transﬁnite induction up to ε0. This principle, by G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem,
cannot itself be formalized in ﬁrst-order arithmetic [Gentzen, 1943]. Gentzen’s
proof allowed Ackermann [1940] to give a correct consistency proof based on the
ε-substitution method for ﬁrst-order arithmetic, also based on transﬁnite induction
up to ε0.
Gentzen’s work marks the beginning of post-G¨odelian proof theory. In the proof-
theoretic tradition of Gentzen, axiomatic theories are analyzed according to which
transﬁnite induction principles are required to prove the consistency of the theory.
However, Gentzen’s contribution and inﬂuence goes beyond this: He emphasized
that proof-theoretic methods do not just allow us to prove the consistency of a
theory, but that they also enable us to extract information from proofs beyond
the fact that the formula proved follows from the axioms.
3
PHILOSOPHICAL INTERPRETATION OF HILBERT’S PROGRAM
The philosophical importance and inﬂuence of Hilbert’s work on foundations is
twofold.
First, the epistemological standpoint of Hilbert’s ﬁnitism is of inter-
7On the galley proof, see [Bernays, 1970], [Kreisel, 1971, Appendix II], and [Negri, 1980].
8If ω0 = ω, and ωn+1 = ωωn, then the ordinal ε0 is the limit of ωn for n = 1, 2, . . .. In other
words, ε0 is the least ﬁxed point of α = ωα.

420
Richard Zach
est in the philosophy of mathematics quite independently of the success of the
proof-theoretic program which it underlies.
Like other important proposals in
the philosophy of mathematics such as intuitionism, predicativism, and logicism,
Hilbert’s ﬁnitism is, inter alia, a philosophical view about the nature of mathemat-
ical knowledge and delineates a particular set of (ﬁnitarily) meaningful proposi-
tions, as well as ﬁnitarily admissible constructions and methods of proof. Debate
about the status of ﬁnitary evidence and proof are still very much alive today.
Second, Hilbert’s program can and has been seen as a version of reductive in-
strumentalism in mathematics. That is to say, one can read Hilbert as propos-
ing that only a certain part of mathematics (propositions, proofs) is meaningful,
viz., the ﬁnitary part. The rest, which includes classical inﬁnitary mathematics
(full ﬁrst-order arithmetic, analysis, and set theory, in particular) are mere in-
struments. Hilbert’s program has thus been an important inspiration for related
instrumentalist proposals in the philosophy of mathematics (e.g., [Field, 1980;
Detlefsen, 1986]).
This section will expand on these two themes. In the case of both the debate
on the philosophy of ﬁnitism, and on the view of Hilbert’s program as an instru-
mentalist philosophy of mathematics, questions of historical interpretation interact
with conceptual analysis. The distinction between these aspects should be kept in
mind.
3.1
The ﬁnitary point of view
The cornerstone of Hilbert’s philosophy of mathematics, and the substantially new
aspect of his foundational thought from [1922b] onward, was the so-called ﬁnitary
standpoint. This methodological standpoint consists in a restriction of mathemati-
cal thought to objects which are “intuitively present as immediate experience prior
to all thought,” and to those operations on and methods of reasoning about such
objects which do not require the introduction of abstract concepts, in particular,
require no appeal to completed inﬁnite totalities.
Hilbert characterized the domain of ﬁnitary reasoning in a well-known para-
graph which appears in roughly the same formulation in all of Hilbert’s more
philosophical papers from the 1920s [1922b; 1926; 1928; 1931b]:
[A]s a condition for the use of logical inferences and the performance
of logical operations, something must already be given to our faculty
of representation, certain extra-logical concrete objects that are intu-
itively present as immediate experience prior to all thought. If logical
inference is to be reliable, it must be possible to survey these objects
completely in all their parts, and the fact that they occur, that they
diﬀer from one another, and that they follow each other, or are con-
catenated, is immediately given intuitively, together with the objects,
as something that can neither be reduced to anything else nor requires
reduction. This is the basic philosophical position that I consider req-

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
421
uisite for mathematics and, in general, for all scientiﬁc thinking, un-
derstanding, and communication. [Hilbert, 1926, 376]
These objects are, for Hilbert, the signs. For the domain of contentual number
theory, the signs in question are sequences of strokes (“numerals”) such as
|, ||, |||, ||||| .
The question of how exactly Hilbert understood the numerals is diﬃcult to answer.
What is clear in any case is that they are logically primitive, i.e., they are neither
concepts (as Frege’s numbers are) nor sets. For Hilbert, the important issue is
not primarily their metaphysical status (abstract versus concrete in the current
sense of these terms), but that they do not enter into logical relations, e.g., they
cannot be predicated of anything.
In Bernays’s most mature presentations of
ﬁnitism [Bernays, 1930; Hilbert and Bernays, 1939], the objects of ﬁnitism are
characterized as formal objects which are recursively generated by a process of
repetition; the stroke symbols are then concrete representations of these formal
objects (see [Sieg, 2002]).
Sometimes Hilbert’s view is presented as if Hilbert claimed that the numbers are
signs on paper. It is important to stress that this is a misrepresentation, that the
numerals are not physical objects in the sense that truths of elementary number
theory are dependent only on external physical facts or even physical possibilities
(e.g., on what sorts of stroke symbols it is possible to write down). Hilbert [1926]
made too much of the fact that for all we know, neither the inﬁnitely small nor
the inﬁnitely large are actualized in physical space and time, yet he certainly held
that the number of strokes in a numeral is unbounded. It is also essential to the
conception that the numerals are sequences of one kind of sign, and that they are
somehow dependent on being grasped as such a sequence, that they do not exist
independently of our intuition of them. Only our seeing or using “||||” as a sequence
of 4 strokes as opposed to a sequence of 2 symbols of the form “||” makes “||||” into
the numeral that it is. This raises the question of individuation of stroke symbols.
An alternative account would have numerals be mental constructions. However,
Bernays denied also this, writing that “the objects of intuitive number theory, the
number signs, are, according to Hilbert, also not ‘created by thought’. But this
does not mean that they exist independently of their intuitive construction, to use
the Kantian term that is quite appropriate here” [Bernays, 1923, 226]. [Kitcher,
1976] proposes the view that, whatever the numerals are, the strokes on paper or
the stroke sequences contemplated by the mind merely represent the numerals.
According to Hilbert and Bernays, the numerals are given in our representation,
but they are not merely subjective “mental cartoons” (Kitcher’s term).
If we want [. . . ]
the ordinal numbers as deﬁnite objects free of all
inessential elements, then in each case we have to take the mere schema
of the relevant ﬁgure of repetition [Wiederholungsﬁgur] as an object;
this requires a very high abstraction. We are free, however, to represent
these purely formal objects by concrete objects (“number signs”); these

422
Richard Zach
contain then inessential, arbitrarily added properties, which, however,
are also easily grasped as such. [Bernays, 1930, 244]
One version of this view would be to hold that the numerals are types of stroke-
symbols as represented in intuition. This is the interpretation that Tait [1981]
gives. At ﬁrst glance, this seems to be a viable reading of Hilbert. It takes care
of the diﬃculties that the reading of numerals-as-tokens (both physical and men-
tal) faces, and it gives an account of how numerals can be dependent on their
intuitive construction while at the same time not being created by thought. The
reasoning that leads Tait to put forward his reading lies in several constraints that
Hilbert and Bernays put on the numerals. For instance, [Bernays, 1923, 159] writes
that “ﬁgures [i.e., numerals] are not shapes, they have a shape.” Thus it is the
shape of the numerals, and not the numerals themselves, which is supposed to be
independent of place and time, independent of the circumstances of production,
independent of inessential diﬀerences in execution, and capable of secure recogni-
tion in all circumstances [Hilbert, 1922b, 163]. Tait infers from this that identity
between numerals is type identity, and hence, that numerals should be construed
as types of stroke symbols.
Types are ordinarily considered to be abstract objects and not located in space
or time. Taking the numerals as intuitive representations of sign types might com-
mit us to taking these abstract objects as existing independently of their intuitive
representation. That numerals are “space- and timeless” is a consequence that al-
ready [M¨uller, 1923, 158] thought could be drawn from Hilbert’s statements, and
that was in turn denied by Bernays. The reason is that a view on which numerals
are space- and timeless objects existing independently of us would be committed
to them existing simultaneously as a completed totality, and this is exactly what
Hilbert is objecting to.
It is by no means compatible, however, with Hilbert’s basic thoughts to
introduce the numbers as ideal objects “with quite diﬀerent determina-
tions from those of sensible objects,” “which exist entirely independent
of us.” By this we would go beyond the domain of the immediately
certain. In particular, this would be evident in the fact that we would
consequently have to assume the numbers as all existing simultane-
ously. But this would mean to assume at the outset that which Hilbert
considers to be problematic. [Bernays, 1923, 225–26]
This is not to say that it is incoherent to consider the numbers as being abstract
objects, only that the ﬁnitary viewpoint prohibits such a view. Bernays goes on
to say:
Hilbert’s theory does not exclude the possibility of a philosophical at-
titude which conceives of the numbers [but not the ﬁnitist’s numerals]
as existing, non-sensible objects (and thus the same kind of ideal exis-
tence would then have to be attributed to transﬁnite numbers as well,
and in particular to the numbers of the so-called second number class).

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
423
Nevertheless the aim of Hilbert’s theory is to make such an attitude
dispensable for the foundation of the exact sciences. [Bernays, 1923,
226]
Another open question in this regard is exactly what Hilbert meant by “concrete.”
He very likely did not use the term in the same sense as it is used today, i.e., as
characteristic of spatio-temporal physical objects in contrast to “abstract” objects.
However, sign types certainly are diﬀerent from full-ﬂedged abstracta like pure sets
in that all their tokens are concrete. Parsons takes account of this diﬀerence by
using the term “quasi-concrete” for such abstracta. Tait, on the other hand, thinks
that even the tokens are not concrete physical objects, but abstract themselves.
Now what is the epistemological status of the ﬁnitary objects? In order to carry
out the task of providing a secure foundation for inﬁnitary mathematics, access
to ﬁnitary objects must be immediate and certain. Hilbert’s philosophical back-
ground was broadly Kantian, as was Bernays’s, who was closely aﬃliated with the
neo-Kantian school of philosophy around Leonard Nelson in G¨ottingen. Hilbert’s
characterization of ﬁnitism often refers to Kantian intuition, and the objects of
ﬁnitism as objects given intuitively. Indeed, in Kant’s epistemology, immediacy is
a deﬁning characteristic of intuitive knowledge. The question is, what kind of in-
tuition is at play? Mancosu [1998b] identiﬁes a shift in this regard. He argues that
whereas the intuition involved in Hilbert’s early papers was a kind of perceptual
intuition, in later writings (e.g., [Bernays, 1928a]) it is identiﬁed as a form of pure
intuition in the Kantian sense. Hilbert [1931b, 266–267] later sees the ﬁnite mode
of thought as a separate source of a priori knowledge in addition to pure intuition
(e.g., of space) and reason, claiming that he has “recognized and characterized the
third source of knowledge that accompanies experience and logic.” Both Bernays
and Hilbert justify ﬁnitary knowledge in broadly Kantian terms (without how-
ever going so far as to provide a transcendental deduction), characterizing ﬁnitary
reasoning as the kind of reasoning that underlies all mathematical, and indeed,
scientiﬁc, thinking, and without which such thought would be impossible.9
The simplest ﬁnitary propositions are those about equality and inequality of
numerals. The ﬁnite standpoint moreover allows operations on ﬁnitary objects.
Here the most basic is that of concatenation. The concatenation of the numerals
|| and ||| is communicated as “2 + 3,” and the statement that || concatenated
with ||| results in the same numeral as ||| concatenated with || by “2 + 3 = 3 +
2.”
In actual proof-theoretic practice, as well as explicitly in [Bernays, 1930;
Hilbert and Bernays, 1934], these basic operations are generalized to operations
deﬁned by recursion, paradigmatically, primitive recursion, e.g., multiplication and
exponentiation. Roughly, a primitive recursive deﬁnition of a numerical operation
is one in which the function to be deﬁned, f, is given by two equations
f(0, m)
=
g(m)
f(n′, m)
=
h(n, m, f(n, m)),
9See [Kitcher, 1976] and [Parsons, 1998] for more discussion on the metaphysics and episte-
mology of ﬁnitism, and [Sieg, 1999] for historical remarks on the development of ﬁnitism.

424
Richard Zach
where g and h are functions already deﬁned, and n′ is the successor numeral
to n.
Fraktur letters are used here, as in Hilbert’s writings, as meta-variables
for numerals. For instance, if we accept the functions g(m) = m (the constant
function) and h(n, m, k) = m + k as ﬁnitary, then the equations above deﬁne a
ﬁnitary function, in this case, multiplication f(n, m) = n × m.
Similarly, ﬁnitary judgments may involve not just equality or inequality but also
basic decidable properties, such as “is a prime.” This is ﬁnitarily acceptable as
long as the characteristic function of such a property is itself ﬁnitary: For instance,
the operation which transforms a numeral to | if it is prime and to || otherwise
can be deﬁned by primitive recursion and is hence ﬁnitary. Such ﬁnitary proposi-
tions may be combined by the usual logical operations of conjunction, disjunction,
negation, but also bounded quantiﬁcation. Hilbert [1926] gives the example of the
proposition that “there is a prime number between p + 1 and p! + 1” where p is a
certain large prime. This statement is ﬁnitarily acceptable since it “serves merely
to abbreviate the proposition” that either p + 1 or p + 2 or p + 3 or . . . or p! + 1 is
a prime.
The problematic ﬁnitary propositions are those that express general facts about
numerals such as that 1 + n = n + 1 for any given numeral n. It is problematic
because, as Hilbert puts it, it “is from the ﬁnitist point of view incapable of being
negated” [Hilbert, 1926, 378]. By this he means that the contradictory proposition
that there is a numeral n for which 1+n ̸= n+1 is not ﬁnitarily meaningful. “One
cannot, after all, try out all numbers” [Hilbert, 1928, 470]. For the same reason, a
ﬁnitary general proposition is not to be understood as an inﬁnite conjunction but
“only as a hypothetical judgment that comes to assert something when a numeral
is given” [Hilbert, 1926, 378]. Even though they are problematic in this sense,
general ﬁnitary statements are of particular importance to Hilbert’s proof theory,
since the statement of consistency of a formal system T is of such a general form:
for any given sequence p of formulas, p is not a derivation of a contradiction in T.
Even though in general existential statements are not ﬁnitarily meaningful, they
may be given ﬁnitary meaning if the witness is given by a ﬁnitary function. For
instance, the ﬁnitary content of Euclid’s theorem that for every prime p there is a
prime > p, is that given a speciﬁc prime p one can produce, by a ﬁnitary operation,
another prime > p (viz., by testing all numbers between p and p! + 1. This view
is discussed by Bernays [1930] and plays an important role in the uses Gentzen
[1936] and others make of proof theory.
3.2
Analyses of ﬁnitism
Hilbert’s substantial philosophical claims about the ﬁnitary standpoint are diﬃ-
cult to ﬂesh out. For instance, Hilbert and Bernays both appeal to the role of
Kantian intuition for our apprehension of ﬁnitary objects (they are given in the
faculty of representation). Supposing one accepts this line of epistemic justiﬁca-
tion in principle, it is plausible that the simplest examples of ﬁnitary objects and
propositions, and perhaps even simple cases of ﬁnitary operations such as concate-

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
425
nations of numerals can be given a satisfactory account. However, it is unclear
exactly which more complex objects, propositions, and operations should be ad-
mitted as ﬁnitary, and how the account can be extended to cover them. This has
led to substantial debate since the 1920s about the nature of ﬁnitary reasoning
and its justiﬁcation.
Of crucial importance to both an understanding of ﬁnitism and of Hilbert’s proof
theory is the question of what operations and what principles of proof should be
allowed from the ﬁnitist standpoint. That a general answer is necessary is clear
from the demands of Hilbert’s proof theory, i.e., it is not to be expected that
given a formal system of mathematics (or even a single sequence of formulas) one
can “see” that it is consistent (or that it cannot be a genuine derivation of an
inconsistency) the way we can see, e.g., that || + ||| = ||| + ||. What is required for
a consistency proof is an operation which, given a formal derivation, transforms
such a derivation into one of a special form, plus proofs that the operation in fact
succeeds in every case and that proofs of the special kind cannot be proofs of an
inconsistency. To count as a ﬁnitary consistency proof, the operation itself must
be acceptable from the ﬁnitist standpoint, and the proofs required must use only
ﬁnitarily acceptable principles.
Hilbert never gave a general account of which operations and methods of proof
are acceptable from the ﬁnitist standpoint, but only examples of operations and
methods of inference in contentual ﬁnitary number theory which he accepted as
ﬁnitary. Contentual induction was accepted in its application to ﬁnitary state-
ments of the hypothetical, general kind explicitly in [1922b]. Hilbert [1923, 1139]
said that intuitive thought “includes recursion and intuitive induction for ﬁnite
existing totalities,” and used exponentiation in an example in 1928.
Bernays
[1930] explained how exponentiation may be understood as a ﬁnitary operation
on numerals. Hilbert and Bernays [1934] give the only general account of ﬁnitary
contentual number theory; according to it, operations deﬁned by primitive recur-
sion and proofs using induction are ﬁnitarily acceptable. All of these methods, in
their application in the domain of numbers, can be formalized in a system known
as primitive recursive arithmetic (PRA), which allows deﬁnitions of functions by
primitive recursion and induction on quantiﬁer-free formulas. However, neither
Hilbert nor Bernays ever claimed that only primitive recursive operations count
as ﬁnitary, and non-primitive recursive methods were used in ostensibly ﬁnitary
consistency proofs already in 1923 (see [Tait, 2002] and [Zach, 2003b]). These
include, in particular, the consistency proof of a formal system of number theory
corresponding to primitive recursive arithmetic in [Hilbert and Bernays, 1923],
and a stronger system in Ackermann’s dissertation [Ackermann, 1925].10
Although Hilbert and his collaborators used methods which go beyond the prim-
itive recursive and accepted them as ﬁnitary, it is still unclear whether they (a)
realized that these methods were not primitive recursive and (b) whether they
10Ackermann in fact used transﬁnite induction up to ωωω to justify a non-primitive recursive
reduction procedure.

426
Richard Zach
would still have accepted them as ﬁnitary if they had.11
The conceptual issue
is which operations should be considered as ﬁnitary. Since Hilbert was less than
completely clear on what the ﬁnitary standpoint consists in, there is some leeway
in setting up the constraints, epistemological and otherwise, an analysis of ﬁnitist
operation and proof must fulﬁll. Hilbert characterized the objects of ﬁnitary num-
ber theory as “intuitively given,” as “surveyable in all their parts,” and said that
their having basic properties must “exist intuitively” for us. Bernays [1922, 216]
suggests that in ﬁnitary mathematics, only “primitive intuitive cognitions come
into play,” and uses the term “point of view of intuitive evidence” in connection
with ﬁnitism [Bernays, 1930, 250]. This characterization of ﬁnitism as primarily
to do with intuition and intuitive knowledge has been emphasized in particular by
Parsons [1998] who argues that what can count as ﬁnitary on this understanding
is not more than those arithmetical operations that can be deﬁned from addition
and multiplication using bounded recursion. In particular, according to Parsons,
exponentiation and general primitive recursion are not ﬁnitarily acceptable.
The thesis that ﬁnitism coincides with primitive recursive reasoning has received
a forceful and widely accepted defense by Tait [1981]. Tait, in contrast to Parsons,
rejects the aspect of representability in intuition as the hallmark of the ﬁnitary;
instead he takes ﬁnitary reasoning to be “a minimal kind of reasoning supposed
by all nontrivial mathematical reasoning about numbers” and analyzes ﬁnitary
operations and methods of proof as those that are implicit in the very notion of
number as the form of a ﬁnite sequence. This analysis of ﬁnitism is supported
by Hilbert’s contention that ﬁnitary reasoning is a precondition for logical and
mathematical, indeed, any scientiﬁc thinking [Hilbert, 1931b, 267]. The crucial
diﬀerence between Tait’s conception of ﬁnitism and Parsons (as well as Hilbert’s
own) is that according to Tait there is no ultimate epistemological foundation for
ﬁnitism which yields the security of ﬁnitary reasoning for which Hilbert appealed
to intuition. Tait argues that
. . . no absolute conception of security is realized by ﬁnitism or any other
kind of mathematical reasoning. Rather, the special role of ﬁnitism
consists in the circumstance that it is a minimal kind of reasoning
presupposed by all nontrivial mathematical reasoning about numbers.
And for this reason it is indubitable in a Cartesian sense that there
is no preferred or even equally preferable ground on which to stand
and criticize it. Thus ﬁnitism is fundamental to number-theoretical
mathematics even if it is not a foundation in the sense Hilbert wished.
[Tait, 1981, 525]
Another interesting analysis of ﬁnitary proof, which, however, does not provide
as detailed a philosophical justiﬁcation, was proposed by Kreisel [1960]. It yields
the result that exactly those functions are ﬁnitary which can be proved to be well-
deﬁned in ﬁrst-order arithmetic PA.12 Kreisel’s proposal makes use of the notions
11See Tait’s discussion in the Appendix to Chapters 1 and 2 in [Tait, 2005b].
12Kreisel [1970, Section 3.5] provides another analysis by focusing on what is “visualizable.”

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
427
of formalizations of provability predicates and ordinal progressions of theories.
Kreisel argues that if Pr(⌜A⌝) has been recognized to be a provability predicate
for a partial formalization Σµ of ﬁnitary reasoning, and Pr(⌜A(0(x))⌝)13 is provable
in Σµ (and hence established by ﬁnitary means), then the ﬁnitist is entitled to also
accept A(x) as ﬁnitarily established. If that is the case, we may add A(x) as an
axiom to Σµ to obtain a new theory Σν which is also ﬁnitarily justiﬁed.
On
Kreisel’s account, ﬁnitary provability coincides with the provability in some Σν so
obtained, starting from Σ0 = PRA. If some Σν proves ∃y A(x, y), for A(x, y) a
primitive recursive equation, then f(x) = the least y such that A(x, y), is ﬁnitarily
justiﬁed. Kreisel sketches a proof of the theorem that the functions so justiﬁed
are exactly those which are provably total in PA, and hence there are ﬁnitary
functions which are not primitive recursive.
Tait [1981, §13] also contains a discussion of Kreisel’s analysis.
In order to
obtain a non-primitive recursive function on Kreisel’s account, we must properly
extend Σ0 since the provably total functions of Σ0 = PRA are just the primitive
recursive functions. So suppose we have that PRA proves the arithmetization of
the claim that ∃y A(0(x), y) is provable.14 This, according to Kreisel, justiﬁes the
acceptance of f(x) as deﬁned above as ﬁnitary, because a ﬁnitary proof of the
general fact that it is provable in PRA that f(x) is deﬁned, together with the
acceptance of PRA as ﬁnitarily acceptable, amounts to a ﬁnitary proof that f(x)
is deﬁned for all x. The weak point in this justiﬁcation, according to Tait, is this:
For the ﬁnitist to recognize the validity of primitive recursive arith-
metic, he must recognize the general validity of deﬁnition of functions
by primitive recursion.
But he cannot even formulate this since it
involves the notion of function.
Tait’s point here is that there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between accepting each
primitive recursive deﬁnition individually as ﬁnitary, and accepting primitive re-
cursion in general as a ﬁnitarily valid principle.
The ﬁnitist is able to do the
former, but not the latter. For to accept primitive recursion in general as a ﬁni-
tarily valid principle of deﬁnition, one would either, as Tait puts it, need to invoke
the notion of a function (which is not a ﬁnitary object), or one needs a justiﬁcation
for why, say, all primitive recursive terms are calculable for every argument — and
for this a ﬁnitary evaluation procedure for primitive recursive terms is necessary.
Such an evaluation procedure, however, cannot be primitive recursive. And prior
to the extension of PRA to include the new non-primitive recursive function f(x)
there is no reason to suppose that such an evaluation procedure exists. Although
Tait’s objection is directed at Kreisel’s analysis of ﬁnitary function, it of course
also raises doubts about Kreisel’s account of ﬁnitary proof.
The result is the same: ﬁnitary functions turn out to be just those provably total in PA.
13Here, x is a free variable, and ⌜A(0(x))⌝is the function of x which computes ⌜A(0′···′)⌝with
x occurrences of ′.
14In other words, there are primitive recursive functions h(x) and g(x) so that PRA proves
that g(x) codes a derivation in PRA of the formula ⌜A(0(x), t)⌝, where t is the primitive recursive
term (containing only the free variable x) which is coded by h(x).

428
Richard Zach
3.3
Hilbert’s program and instrumentalism
Hilbert’s program has often been interpreted as an instrumentalist account of
mathematics. This reading relies on the distinction Hilbert makes between the
ﬁnitary part of mathematics and the non-ﬁnitary rest which is in need of grounding
(via ﬁnitary meta-mathematics). The ﬁnitary part Hilbert calls “contentual,” i.e.,
its propositions and proofs have content. The inﬁnitary part, on the other hand,
is “not meaningful from a ﬁnitary point of view.” This distinction corresponds to
a distinction between formulas of the the axiomatic systems of mathematics for
which consistency proofs are being sought. Some of the formulas correspond to
contentual, ﬁnitary propositions: they are the “real” formulas. The rest are called
“ideal.” They are added to the real part of our mathematical theories in order to
preserve classical inferences such as the principle of the excluded middle for inﬁnite
totalities, i.e., the principle that either all numbers have a given property or there
is a number which does not have it. This disjunction is not ﬁnitarily valid, as we
saw above. Hilbert ﬁrst mentioned “ideal” propositions in [1926], although the
distinction was hinted at in [1923]. In the latter paper, Hilbert presented a formal
system of quantiﬁer-free number theory about which he says that “the provable
formulae we acquire in this way all have the character of the ﬁnite” (1139). Then
the transﬁnite axioms (i.e., quantiﬁers) are added to simplify and complete the
theory (1144). Here he draws the analogy with the method of ideal elements: “In
my proof theory, the transﬁnite axioms and formulae are adjoined to the ﬁnite
axioms, just as in the theory of complex variables the imaginary elements are
adjoined to the real, and just as in geometry the ideal constructions are adjoined
to the actual” (ibid). When Hilbert, in [1926], explicitly introduces the notion
of an ideal proposition, and in [1928], when he ﬁrst speaks of real propositions in
addition to the ideal, he is quite clear that the real part of the theory consists only
of decidable, variable-free formulas. They are supposed to be “directly capable
of veriﬁcation” — akin to propositions derived from laws of nature which can be
checked by experiment [Hilbert, 1928, 475].15 It is this extension of the real part
of the theory by the ideal, inﬁnitary part that is in need of justiﬁcation by a
consistency proof:
For there is a condition, a single but absolutely necessary one, to which
the use of the method of ideal elements is subject, and that is the proof
of consistency; for, extension by the addition of ideals is legitimate
only if no contradiction is thereby brought about in the old, narrower
domain, that is, if the relations that result for the old objects whenever
the ideal objects are eliminated are valid in the old domain. [Hilbert,
1926, 383]
Weyl [1925] described Hilbert’s project as replacing meaningful mathematics by a
meaningless game of formulas. He noted that Hilbert wanted to “secure not truth,
15This reading is not universally accepted. [Detlefsen, 1990], for instance, considers the real
formulas to also include the general formulas, i.e., formulas with free variables. See [Zach, 2004]
for a defense of the reading given here.

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
429
but the consistency of analysis” and suggested a criticism that echoes an earlier
one by Frege: Why should we take consistency of a formal system of mathematics
as a reason to believe in the truth of the pre-formal mathematics it codiﬁes?
Is Hilbert’s meaningless inventory of formulas not just “the bloodless ghost of
analysis”? Weyl suggested a solution:
[I]f mathematics is to remain a serious cultural concern, then some
sense must be attached to Hilbert’s game of formulae, and I see only
one possibility of attributing to it (including its transﬁnite compo-
nents) an independent intellectual meaning. In theoretical physics we
have before us the great example of a [kind of] knowledge of com-
pletely diﬀerent character than the common or phenomenal knowledge
that expresses purely what is given in intuition. While in this case
every judgment has its own sense that is completely realizable within
intuition, this is by no means the case for the statements of theoreti-
cal physics. In that case it is rather the system as a whole that is in
question if confronted with experience. [Weyl, 1925, 140]
The analogy with physics is striking. Hilbert himself used a similar analogy in
[1928]. He there suggested that consistency is not the only virtue ideal mathe-
matics has: transﬁnite inference simpliﬁes and abbreviates proofs, “brevity and
economy of thought are the raison d’ˆetre of existence proofs” (476). The formal
system of transﬁnite logic is not arbitrary: “This formula game is carried out
according to certain deﬁnite rules, in which the technique of our thinking is ex-
pressed. . . The fundamental idea of my proof theory is none other than to describe
the activity of our understanding, to make a protocol of the rules according to
which our thinking actually proceeds” (ibid).
Although these remarks are suggestive, they do not force an interpretation of
Hilbert as an instrumentalist. Most commentators have taken this reading (includ-
ing [?; Giaquinto, 1983; Sieg, 1990], and in particular [Detlefsen, 1986]), in that
they interpret Hilbert’s explanation that the ideal propositions “have no meaning
in themselves” [Hilbert, 1926, 381] as claiming that classical mathematics is a mere
instrument, and that statements of transﬁnite mathematics have no truth value.
To the extent that this is accurate, however, it must be understood as a method-
ological instrumentalism: A successful execution of the proof-theoretic program
would show that one could pretend as if mathematics was meaningless.16 The
analogy with physics is therefore not: transﬁnite propositions have no meaning
just as propositions involving theoretical terms have no meaning, but: transﬁnite
propositions require no direct intuitive meaning just as one does not have to di-
rectly see electrons in order to theorize about them. Hallett [1990], taking into
account the 19th century mathematical background from which Hilbert came as
well as published and unpublished sources from Hilbert’s entire career (in particu-
lar [Hilbert, 1992], the most extensive discussion of the method of ideal elements)
comes to the following conclusion:
16On this point see also [Sieg, 1999], esp. B3 and the conclusion, and [Sieg, 2002].

430
Richard Zach
[Hilbert’s treatment of philosophical questions] is not meant as a kind
of instrumentalist agnosticism about existence and truth and so forth.
On the contrary, it is meant to provide a non-skeptical and positive
solution to such problems, a solution couched in cognitively accessible
terms. And, it appears, the same solution holds for both mathematical
and physical theories. Once new concepts or “ideal elements” or new
theoretical terms have been accepted, then they exist in the sense in
which any theoretical entities exist. [Hallett, 1990, 239]
This conclusion is in line with Weyl’s assessment in [1928]. When Weyl eventually
turned away from intuitionism,17 he emphasized the purpose of Hilbert’s proof
theory, not to turn mathematics into a meaningless game of symbols, but to turn
it into a theoretical science which codiﬁes scientiﬁc (mathematical) practice.
The reading of Hilbert as an instrumentalist goes hand in hand with a reading
of the proof-theoretic program as a reductionist project. The instrumentalist read-
ing interprets ideal mathematics as a meaningless formalism, which simpliﬁes and
“rounds out” mathematical reasoning. But a consistency proof of ideal mathemat-
ics by itself does not explain what ideal mathematics is an instrument for. Thus,
commentators have sought to elaborate on Hilbert’s discussion of consistency by
pointing out that consistency proofs do not just establish that ideal theories are
free from formal contradictions, but that they establish more than mere consis-
tency. They establish conservativity of the ideal over the real part of the theory,
in the following sense: If the ideal theory proves a real statement, then the real
statement is also provable by real, ﬁnitary means. Such reductivist projects were
common in the philosophy of science at the time, as was pointed out by Giaquinto
[1983]. A conservativity proof justiﬁes the use of transﬁnite mathematics: it is not
only internally consistent, but it proves only true intuitive propositions.
On this picture, classical mathematics is to be formalized in a system which
includes formalizations of all the directly veriﬁable (by calculation) propositions
of contentual ﬁnite number theory. The consistency proof should show that all real
propositions which can be proved by ideal methods are true, i.e., can be directly
veriﬁed by ﬁnite calculation. Actual proofs such as the ε-substitution procedure
are of such a kind: they provide ﬁnitary procedures which eliminate transﬁnite
elements from proofs of real statements. In particular, they turn putative ideal
derivations of 0 = 1 into derivations in the real part of the theory; the impossibility
of such a derivation establishes consistency of the theory. Indeed, Hilbert saw that
something stronger is true: not only does a consistency proof establish truth of
real formulas provable by ideal methods, but it yields ﬁnitary proofs of ﬁnitary
general propositions if the corresponding free-variable formula is derivable by ideal
methods [Hilbert, 1928, 474].
It bears pointing out that Hilbert never clearly articulated conservativity of the
ideal over the real for ﬁnitary general statements as an aim of his foundational
project. There are contemporary commentators, e.g., von Neumann [1931] who
17For the reasons for Weyl’s rejection of intuitionism, see [Mancosu and Ryckman, 2002].

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
431
attribute to Hilbert an interest in conservativity proofs, but it was only Bernays in
the Grundlagen der Mathematik who pointed out that consistency proofs them-
selves established not only the truth of variable-free formulas provable by ideal
methods, but also of free-variable theorems. In this context, Bernays used the
term ‘veriﬁable’ (veriﬁzierbar): a free-variable formula A(x) is veriﬁable if each
numerical instance A(z) is (ﬁnitarily) true. The proof transformation methods
used in consistency proofs for systems of arithmetic in [Hilbert and Bernays, 1934,
248, 298] can be applied not only to putative proofs of 0 = 1, but generally to
proofs of formulas with free-variables. If we have a proof of A(x), then the fol-
lowing method constitutes a ﬁnitary proof that, for any z, A(z) is true. From the
derivation of A(x) we obtain a derivation of A(z) by substitution. The procedure
given in the consistency proof transforms this derivation into a variable-free deriva-
tion of A(z) in the real part of the theory, which codiﬁes a ﬁnitary calculation that
A(z) is true.
Kreisel was most inﬂuential in promoting the interpretation of the aim of
Hilbert’s program as an attempt to establish conservativity of the ideal theory
for ﬁnitary general propositions all along. Kreisel [1951] cites Bernays’s results;
but in [Kreisel, 1960] and later, he instead points to the argument in [Hilbert,
1928, 474]. This argument, unlike Bernays’s, does not rely on a particular form
of the consistency proof. It assumes only that a ﬁnitary consistency proof for an
ideal theory is available. Assume there is a derivation of A(x). Now suppose that
for a given z, A(z) is not true. Then ¬A(z) would be true,18 and so there would be
a derivation of ¬A(z) in the ideal theory (which includes all real theorems). But
from the derivation of A(x) we obtain, by substitution, a derivation of A(z), and
hence a contradiction. Since we assume that we have a ﬁnitary consistency proof
of T, this cannot be the case. Hence, A(z) must be true.
3.4
Hilbert’s program and G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems
G¨odel announced the second incompleteness theorem in an abstract published in
October 1930: no consistency proof of systems such as Principia, Zermelo-Fraenkel
set theory, or the systems investigated by Ackermann and von Neumann is possible
by methods which can be formulated in these systems. In the full version of his
paper, G¨odel [1931] left open the possibility that there could be ﬁnitary methods
which are not formalizable in these systems and which would yield the required
consistency proofs. Bernays’s ﬁrst reaction in a letter to G¨odel in January 1931
was likewise that “if, as von Neumann does, one takes it as certain that any and
every ﬁnitary consideration may be formalized within the system P — like you,
I regard that in no way as settled — one comes to the conclusion that a ﬁnitary
demonstration of the consistency of P is impossible” [G¨odel, 2003a, 87].
Through a careful (“G¨odel”-) coding of sequences of symbols (formulas, proofs)
by numbers, G¨odel showed that in theories T which contain a suﬃcient amount
18This inference uses tertium non datur, but only regarding the unproblematic ﬁnitary state-
ment A(z).

432
Richard Zach
of arithmetic, it is possible to produce a formula Pr(x, y) which expresses that x
is (the code of) a proof of (the formula with code) y. Speciﬁcally, if ⌜0 = 1⌝is
the code of the formula 0 = 1, then ConT ≡∀x ¬Pr(x, ⌜0 = 1⌝) expresses that T
is consistent (no number is the code of a derivation in T of 0 = 1). The second
incompleteness theorem (G2) says that under certain assumptions about T and
the coding apparatus, T does not prove ConT . Now suppose there were a ﬁnitary
consistency proof of T. The methods used in such a proof would presumably be
formalizable in T. (“Formalizable” means that, roughly, if the proof uses a ﬁnitary
operation f on derivations which transforms any derivation d into a derivation
f(d) of a simple form; then there is a formula F(x, y) so that, for all derivations
d, T ⊢F(⌜d⌝, ⌜f(d)⌝).) The consistency of T would be ﬁnitarily expressed as the
general hypothetical claim that, if d is any given sequence of symbols, d is not
a derivation in T of the formula 0 = 1. The formalization of this proposition is
the formula ¬Pr(x, ⌜0 = 1⌝) in which the variable x occurs free. If there were a
ﬁnitary proof of the consistency of T, its formalization would yield a derivation in
T of ¬Pr(x, ⌜0 = 1⌝), from which ConT can be derived in T by simple universal
generalization on x. Yet, a derivation of ConT in T is ruled out by G2.
G¨odel and Bernays initially thought that the diﬃculty for the consistency proof
of Peano arithmetic PA could be overcome by employing methods which, although
not formalizable in PA, are nonetheless ﬁnitary. Bernays did not seem to have any
particular candidates for such a method in mind, and he thought that all methods
which were up to then employed in ﬁnitary considerations were in fact formalizable
in PA. Another option he considered was an extension of the notion of an axiomatic
theory by a ﬁnitary version of the ω-rule proposed by Hilbert [1931a; 1931b]. Such
theories might avoid the impact of G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem since they do
not satisfy the conditions of the incompleteness theorems: the set of axioms would
not be decidable. It is fair to say, however, that since about 1934 it has been
almost universally accepted that the methods of proof accepted as ﬁnitary prior
to G¨odel’s results are all formalizable in PA and that the incompleteness theorems
do show that there can be no ﬁnitary consistency proofs for axiomatic theories of
the kind originally considered by Hilbert.
The reaction to the incompleteness theorems in the Hilbert school then focused
on extensions of the original ﬁnitary standpoint in which consistency proofs for
substantial theories like PA can be carried out. Such extensions have been pro-
posed and defended on broadly ﬁnitary grounds, e.g., Gentzen [1936] defended
the use of transﬁnite induction up to ε0 in his consistency proof for PA as “in-
disputable,” and Takeuti [1987] gave another defense.
In the Gentzen-Sch¨utte
tradition of proof theory by ordinal analysis, the proof methods used to give con-
sistency proofs are all of this sort. To wit, one uses transﬁnite induction on ordinal
notation systems which name larger and larger ordinals. The more complicated
the ordering, the more diﬃcult it is to see that the induction principle in question
is ﬁnitarily justiﬁed. Another extension of the ﬁnitary standpoint is due to G¨odel
[1958].

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
433
Smory´nski [1977], following earlier suggestions by Kreisel, has argued that al-
ready the ﬁrst incompleteness theorem defeats Hilbert’s program. This argument
uses the fact that a ﬁnitary consistency proof of an ideal theory T implies the
conservativity of T over ﬁnitary, real mathematics for general ﬁnitary statements
of the form A(x) (with free variable x). Now G¨odel’s ﬁrst incompleteness theorem
(G1) states that for any suﬃciently strong, consistent formal theory S there is a
sentence GS which is not derivable in S if S is consistent. GS is a general real
sentence. Consider a theory T which formalizes ideal mathematics and contains
the theory S, which formalizes real mathematics, as a subtheory. S satisﬁes the
conditions of G1 and hence S does not derive GS. Yet T, being a formalization
of all of mathematics, proves (via a formalization of G1) that if S is consistent,
then GS, but it also proves the consistency (indeed, the soundness) of S. Hence
T proves GS.
Thus, we have a true real statement which is provable in ideal
mathematics but not in real mathematics.19
4
HILBERT’S PROGRAM NOW
4.1
Detlefsen’s Hilbertian instrumentalism
Detlefsen [1979; 1986; 2001] has proposed a wide-ranging instrumentalist account
of mathematics based on Hilbert’s program which is designed to escape the diﬃcul-
ties that G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems poses for Hilbert’s original consistency
project. The project has several parts: Detlefsen [1986] ﬁrst gives a detailed anal-
ysis and defense of a general instrumentalist view of mathematics along Hilbertian
lines. This includes an analysis of the epistemic import of ideal proofs of real
statements, which answers a question that was hardly addressed by Hilbert, either
in his mature writings in the 1920s or in his exchange with Frege on formalism
and consistency. This is the question of how manipulation of meaningless strings
of symbols can ever lead to knowledge (of ﬁnitary truths). Detlefsen then ana-
lyzes the characteristics of formal systems of ideal mathematics qua instruments.
On Detlefsen’s view, even though, say, full set theory is commonly accepted as a
formalization of inﬁnitary mathematics, only parts of set theory are in fact instru-
mentally useful. In particular, (1) ideal proofs of real theorems which are more
complex than any real proof of the same theorem do not yield an instrumental
advantage, and hence are not instrumentally useful; and (2) ideal proofs which are
too long or complex to be comprehended by humans, and hence never play a role
in actual mathematical reasoning, are also of no instrumental value. A proof theo-
retic justiﬁcation of instrumental mathematics, i.e., the proof of the conservativity
of the ideal theory over real mathematics, is only required, so Detlefsen, for the
instrumentally useful part. Detlefsen introduces the term “Hilbertian residue” for
that part of ideal mathematics that is instrumentally useful and hence in need of
19The argument appeals to a number of perhaps contentious assumptions, such as that T
proves the soundness of S. For a critique, see [Detlefsen, 1990].

434
Richard Zach
proof-theoretic justiﬁcation. On his view, then, we only need a consistency proof
for the Hilbertian residue, not for all of ideal mathematics.
This move from a required justiﬁcation for all of inﬁnitary mathematics to a
justiﬁcation of only the Hilbertian residue is one step toward Detlefsen’s defense of
instrumentalism against G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems. For the incompleteness
theorems only apply under certain conditions, e.g., only when the theory in ques-
tion contains enough basic arithmetic to carry out G¨odel coding, formalization of
a proof predicate, and to prove the diagonal lemma. The Hilbertian residue of a
theory, however, need not contain a suﬃciently strong arithmetical subtheory be-
cause of (1) above. This provides part of Detlefsen’s defense against the challenge
posed by the ﬁrst incompleteness theorem [Detlefsen, 1986, Appendix]. Detlefsen
[1990] also argues that instrumentalism escapes the argument from G1 by denying
that ideal mathematics must be conservative over the real part. According to him,
Hilbertian instrumentalism requires only that the ideal theory not prove anything
which is in conﬂict with the real theory; it is not required that all its real theorems
are also provable by real means. If this defense is successful, Detlefsen is right to
claim that not G1, but only G2 poses a real challenge to instrumentalism.
Detlefsen presents several lines of defense against the argument from G2, one
of which [1979] echoes [Hilbert, 1931b].
If a version of the ω-rule is ﬁnitarily
acceptable, then we would have found a ﬁnitarily acceptable method of proof which
is not capable of formalization. Hence, real mathematics is not a subtheory of the
ideal instrument, but this was an assumption necessary to draw the conclusion that
there can be no real consistency proof of the ideal theory. Ignjatoviˇc [1994] raised
serious doubts about the acceptability of Detlefsen’s version of the ω-rule, however.
Detlefsen’s other argument against the common interpretation of G¨odel’s second
theorem focuses on the notion of formalization. That the particular formalization
of “T is consistent” by G¨odel’s formula ConT is not provable does not imply that
there could not be other formulas, which are provable in T, and which have as much
right to be called “formalizations of the consistency of T.” These rely on diﬀerent
formalizations of the provability predicate Pr T than the standard ones. It is known
that formalized consistency statements are unprovable whenever the provability
predicate obeys certain general derivability conditions. Detlefsen argues that these
conditions are not necessary for a predicate to count as a genuine provability
predicate, and indeed there are provability predicates which violate the provability
conditions and which give rise to consistency formulas which are provable in their
corresponding theories. These, however, depend on nonstandard conceptions of
provability which would likely not have been accepted by Hilbert. One quite basic
example is the use of Rosser provability instead of ordinary provability. On this
approach, a derivation of a formula A only counts as a proof if no derivation
with smaller G¨odel number is a derivation of ¬A. If Prov(x, ⌜A⌝) is the standard
formalization of “x is the code of a derivation of the formula A,” then the Rosser
provability predicate is given by
RPr(⌜A⌝) ≡∃x(Prov(x, ⌜A⌝) ∧∀y < x ¬Prov(y, ⌜¬A⌝)).

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
435
For this provability predicate, ¬RPr(⌜0 = 1⌝) is provable in, e.g., ﬁrst-order Peano
arithmetic. Provability of a formula A, however, is no longer just a matter of
deriving it from the axioms; one also has to check that all shorter derivations
do not end in ¬A. Other “consistency minded” theories which prove their own
consistency are discussed, e.g., in [Jeroslow, 1971; Jeroslow, 1975] and especially
[Visser, 1989]. The Rosser provability predicate is studied in, e.g., [Guaspari and
Solovay, 1979] and [Arai, 1990].20
Another interesting aspect of Detlefsen’s approach to instrumentalism and
Hilbert’s program related to technical work in proof theory is the emphasis on
instrumental utility of ideal proofs. Hilbert, as we saw above, himself noted the
theoretical and cognitive advantage of ideal methods, such as increased simplicity
of proofs. In Detlefsen’s instrumentalism, such considerations take center stage.
Even if it is conceded that G¨odel’s theorems call the success of instrumentalism in
its most general form into question, it would still be of substantial interest to study
restricted cases of conservative extensions of real mathematics which are instru-
mentally useful. To ﬂesh out the notion of “instrumental usefulness,” one obvious
characteristic of formal proofs is length. For instance, one might take an ideal
theory to be useful if its proofs are substantially shorter than proofs in, say, PRA
of the same theorems. This question is amenable to precise proof theoretical study.
Caldon and Ignjatoviˇc [2005] prove some related, but on the whole, negative re-
sults: The subsystem of ﬁrst-order arithmetic IΣ1 in which induction is limited to
Σ1 formulas has super-exponential “speed-up” over PRA. This indicates that us-
ing induction over non-ﬁnitary formulas (Σ1 formulas have unbounded existential
quantiﬁers) yields signiﬁcantly shorter proofs than proofs without. However, more
comprehensive theories (RCA, WKL, see below) which contain some second-order
apparatus, do not signiﬁcantly shorten proofs vis-`a-vis IΣ1.
4.2
Generalized Hilbert programs
The work of Gentzen on consistency proofs for mathematical theories using meth-
ods that go beyond the strictly ﬁnitary marks the beginning of an important line
of proof-theoretic research. As outlined in 2.3 above, Gentzen’s approach was to
retain the aim of Hilbert’s program, viz., to give consistency proofs for strong
mathematical theories by restricted means.
Because of G¨odel’s incompleteness
theorems, these restricted means are necessarily not themselves formalizable in
the theories whose consistency is established by them. Nevertheless, they retain a
constructive character, and attempts have been made to justify them on ﬁnitary
grounds.
The consistency proof of Gentzen [1936], as discussed above, uses the principle
of transﬁnite induction up to ε0 in order to establish the consistency of ﬁrst-
order Peano arithmetic. Gentzen’s use of a system of notations for ordinals less
20For technical background, discussion of intensional provability predicates and examples, see
[Feferman, 1960]. For discussion, see also [Resnik, 1974b], [Auerbach, 1985; Auerbach, 1992] and
[Steiner, 1991].

436
Richard Zach
than ε0, and the proof of the termination of a reduction procedure for derivations
in PA based on induction on these ordinal notations, provide the model for the
proof theoretic analysis of axiomatic systems along these lines. In order to give
an “ordinal analysis” of a theory T, one typically produces an ordinal notation
system for ordinals less than some ordinal α such that for every β < α, the
formalization TI (β) of the transﬁnite induction principle for β is provable in T.
In practice, using transﬁnite induction up to α itself and otherwise only strictly
ﬁnitary methods, one can prove the consistency of T. The fact that induction up
to ε0 establishes the consistency of PA, together with the result of [Gentzen, 1943]
that shows that for all β < ε0, PA proves TI (β) for all β < ε0 constitutes an
ordinal analysis of PA, and we say that ε0 is the proof theoretic ordinal of PA.
Proof theory in the tradition of Gentzen and Sch¨utte as well as Takeuti has
focused on such ordinal analyses of theories of increasing strength. In recent work,
Rathjen [2005b; 2005a] has pushed the boundaries of this approach in giving an
ordinal analysis of a very strong subsystem of analysis called Π1
2-comprehension.21
The consistency proofs in this tradition are, for the most part, based on the ap-
proach of [Sch¨utte, 1960], which uses a variant of Gentzen’s formalization using
inﬁnitary derivations. A second tradition has pursued ordinal analysis using ex-
tensions of Ackermann’s ε-substitution method [1940], for examples see [Mints and
Tupailo, 1999] and [Arai, 2003].
Although generalized Hilbert programs in this tradition have certainly produced
important mathematical work, its philosophical underpinnings are thin. Takeuti
[1987] attempted to give a ﬁnitary justiﬁcation for the proof theoretic ordinal ε0,
but it is unclear to what extent more complex ordinal notation systems are ﬁnitar-
ily acceptable. Even if one concedes, as, e.g., Sch¨utte does, that the consistency
proofs in question are constructive (although no longer strictly ﬁnitary), it is still
unclear what the philosophical signiﬁcance of the technical results is. Feferman
[1988, 366] oﬀers this assessment:
[A]s the systems of ordinal notation used for consistency proofs of
stronger and stronger theories become more and more complicated,
the signiﬁcance to noncognoscenti of what is thereby accomplished de-
creases in inverse proportion. Thus, on the one hand, to say that one
has obtained a constructive consistency proof of a theory T — without
saying anything more — is too general to be informative; and, on the
other hand, to say that the proof has been carried out by transﬁnite
induction on a certain complicated recursive ordering for some very
large ordinal tells us nothing about what constructive principles are
involved in the proof of this well-ordering.22
Another important proof-theoretical approach in which the analysis of systems
of classical mathematics is accomplished using a generalization of the ﬁnitary
21See [Pohlers, 1987] for a survey of the work in the Sch¨utte school, and [Pohlers, 1998] for a
more recent technical survey.
22For a more forceful criticism of proof theory in this tradition, see [Kreisel, 1976].

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
437
standpoint is that of functional interpretations.
The model for this approach
is G¨odel’s Dialectica interpretation [1958]. The Dialectica interpretation shows
how one can reduce an inﬁnitary theory T (in this case, intuitionistic ﬁrst-order
arithmetic) to a quantiﬁer-free theory F.23 An ordinal analysis of a theory does
something similar, for instance, one can view Gentzen’s consistency proof as re-
ducing Peano arithmetic to a quantiﬁer-free theory (PRA) extended by a certain
inﬁnitary induction principle (TI (ε0)). In the case of functional interpretations,
the quantiﬁer-free theory F is also not strictly ﬁnitary: it does not just mention
ﬁnite objects but also certain inﬁnitary objects, viz., functionals of ﬁnite type. A
functional interpretation can be seen as a reduction of the inﬁnitary theory T to
the theory of functionals F in question. The approach using functional interpre-
tations has the following advantage over the Gentzen-Sch¨utte approach. It is a
consequence of the reduction of T to F that every recursive function which can
be proved to be total in T is represented by a term of F. Because the functionals
of F in practice characterize natural classes of functions, a functional interpreta-
tion yields an appealing analysis of the computational content of F. Moreover, the
conceptual import of the reduction is more apparent than in the case of ordinal
analysis: already in the case of PA, G¨odel’s functionals of ﬁnite type provide a
much clearer account of the character of the constructive methods appealed to
than induction up to ε0.24
4.3
Relativized Hilbert programs
A philosophically more satisfactory continuation of Hilbert’s program in proof
theoretic terms has been suggested by Kreisel [1954; 1968; 1983] and has been
elaborated especially by Feferman. This work proceeds from a wider conception of
Hilbert’s program as an attempt to justify ideal mathematics by restricted means.
On this conception, the aim of Hilbert’s proof theory was to show that, at least as
far as a certain class of real propositions is concerned, ideal mathematics does not
go beyond real mathematics, and in this sense ﬁnitary mathematics is a foundation
for ideal mathematics. A ﬁnitary consistency proof of the kind envisaged by Hilbert
would have accomplished this for all of classical mathematics.
The scope of the foundational project, however, need not necessarily be all
of higher mathematics.
So-called relativized Hilbert programs are projects in
which one considers certain fragments of higher mathematics as the theory for
which a foundation is sought (and, indeed, also theories stronger than ﬁnitism
as candidates for the reducing theory, e.g., predicative theories).
Examples of
these are Feferman’s work on explicit mathematics and predicative subsystems
of analysis, and to some extent also the Friedman-Simpson program of reverse
mathematics (see below). What is common to these approaches to mathematical
23Via the interpretation of classical arithmetic in intuitionistic arithmetic [Gentzen, 1933;
G¨odel, 1933], the Dialectica interpretation also yields a functional interpretation of classical
arithmetic.
24For an excellent survey of this approach, see [Avigad and Feferman, 1998].

438
Richard Zach
foundations is that they concentrate on so-called proof-theoretic reductions of
systems of classical mathematics to more restricted systems.
The reduction is
carried out using ﬁnitist means, and therein lies its philosophical signiﬁcance.
A foundational reduction in Feferman’s sense [1988; 1993a] is accomplished if
it can be shown that a body of mathematics which is justiﬁed by a foundational
framework F1 (e.g, ﬁnitary, constructive, predicative, inﬁnitary, set-theoretic) can
already be justiﬁed, in a certain sense, in a weaker, or stricter foundational frame-
work F2. This is in general not possible in a wholesale fashion, however, partial
foundational reductions can and have been achieved. Suppose a theory T1 is justi-
ﬁed by a foundational framework F1, and a theory T2 by a weaker framework F2.
A proof theoretic reduction of T1 to T2 (conservative for Φ) is a partial recursive
function f such that
1. whenever x is (the code of) a proof in T1 of a formula (with code) y in Φ,
then f(x) is (the code of) a proof of y in T2, and
2. T2 proves the formalization of (1).
If there is such a function f, we write T1 ≤T2[Φ]. Now if T1 is directly justiﬁed by
a foundational framework F1, and T2 by F2, then, so Feferman, a proof-theoretic
reduction that establishes T1 ≤T2[Φ] is a partial foundational reduction of F1
to F2. Clause (2) in the deﬁnition ensures that the reduction (the function f)
itself is justiﬁed by the weaker framework F2. In the reductions achieved in prac-
tice, it turns out that f is actually primitive recursive and the formalization of
(1) can even be proved in primitive recursive arithmetic PRA. Since PRA is di-
rectly justiﬁed by the ﬁnitary framework, such partial foundational reductions are
therefore all ﬁnitarily justiﬁed.
Feferman’s main philosophical conclusion from
the possibility of giving such foundational reductions is this: The main argument
for set-theoretical realism is the Quine-Putnam indispensability argument, which
proceeds from the premises that set-theory is indispensable to science. Feferman
has shown, ﬁrst, that much, if not all, of scientiﬁcally applicable mathematics can
actually be formalized in much weaker systems (e.g., Feferman’s system W, which
is justiﬁed by a predicative foundational framework), and second, that predicative
mathematics can be reduced to the countably inﬁnite (in the sense that there is
a partial foundational reduction of predicative mathematics to countably inﬁnite
mathematics, given by a proof-theoretic reduction of W to Peano Arithmetic PA).
He concludes that,
even if one accepts the indispensability argument, practically nothing
philosophically deﬁnite can be said of the entities which are then sup-
posed to have the same status — ontologically and epistemologically
— as the entities of natural science. That being the case, what do the
indispensability arguments amount to? As far as I’m concerned, they
are completely vitiated. [Feferman, 1993b]
Independently of the question of mathematical realism and of the scope and force of
the indispensability arguments, proof-theoretic reductions give precise answers to

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
439
questions of the relation between foundational frameworks. Since a proof-theoretic
reduction of T1 to T2 also yields a consistency proof of T1 in T2 (i.e., a relative con-
sistency result), establishing a proof-theoretic reduction also provides a solution to
Hilbert’s program relativized to T1 and T2. Feferman summarizes the importance
of proof-theoretic reductions thus:
In general, the kinds of results presented here serve to sharpen what is
to be said in favor of, or in opposition to, the various philosophies of
mathematics such as ﬁnitism, predicativism, constructivism, and set-
theoretical realism. Whether or not one takes one or another of these
philosophies seriously for ontological and/or epistemological reasons,
it is important to know which parts of mathematics are in the end
justiﬁable on the basis of the respective philosophies and which are
not. The uninformed common view — that adopting one of the non-
platonistic positions means pretty much giving up mathematics as we
know it — needs to be drastically corrected, and that should also
no longer serve as the last-ditch stand of set-theoretical realism. On
the other hand, would-be nonplatonists must recognize the now clearly
marked sacriﬁces required by such a commitment and should have well-
thought out reasons for making them. [Feferman, 1993a]
Proof theorists have obtained a number of such results, including reductions of
theories which on their face require a signiﬁcant amount of ideal mathematics for
their justiﬁcation (e.g., subsystems of analysis) to ﬁnitary systems.25
The program of so-called reverse mathematics developed by, in particular, Fried-
man and Simpson, is another continuation of Hilbert’s program. In the face of
G¨odel’s results showing that not all of classical mathematics can be reduced to
the ﬁnitary, they seek to answer the question: how much of classical mathematics
can be so reduced? Reverse mathematics aims to give a precise answer to this
question by investigating which theorems of classical mathematics are provable
in weak subsystems of analysis which are reducible to ﬁnitary mathematics (in
the sense discussed above). A typical result is that the Hahn-Banach theorem
of functional analysis is provable in a theory known as WKL0 (for “weak K¨onig
lemma”); WKL0 is proof-theoretically reducible to PRA for Π0
2 sentences (i.e.,
sentences of the form ∀x∃y A(x, y).26
Reverse mathematics in this tradition is primarily concerned with inﬁnitary
theories, e.g., subsystems of analysis. G¨odel’s theorems show, however, that not
even all truths of ﬁrst-order number theory are provable in Peano arithmetic, and
hence that not even the domain of all arithmetical truths can be given a foun-
dation on ﬁnitary principles. This suggests the questions of whether there are
“mathematically interesting” statements of number theory which are not provable
25For a discussion of the philosophical signiﬁcance of such proof theoretic reductions, see
[Feferman, 2000] and [Hofweber, 2000].
26See [Simpson, 1988] for an overview, [Simpson, 1999] for a technical introduction to reverse
mathematics, and also the collection [Simpson, 2005].

440
Richard Zach
in systems that can be reduced to the ﬁnitary. The most celebrated result in this
regard is the proof by Paris and Harrington [1977] that a version of the ﬁnite
Ramsey theorem is not provable in Peano arithmetic. However, this and other
examples of independent number theoretic statements are constructed speciﬁcally
to be independent of Peano arithmetic. It turns out that a great many “ordinary”
number theoretic results are provable even in weak fragments of ﬁrst-order number
theory, and this has led Friedman to conjecture that “every theorem published in
the Annals of Mathematics whose statement involves only ﬁnitary mathematical
objects (i.e., what logicians call an arithmetical statement) can be proved in ele-
mentary arithmetic.” (Here, elementary arithmetic is a very weak theory which
can be proved consistent by primitive recursive methods.) Avigad [2003] gives an
excellent survey of the issues and results related to this conjecture and places it
in the philosophical context of Hilbert’s program.27
The results surveyed in this section are all natural continuations of Hilbert’s
original ideas.
A central aspect of recent proof-theoretical investigations and
of Hilbert’s original program alike is that they study formalized systems using
metamathematical tools with the aim of understanding the structure and con-
tent of these systems. Hilbert’s original consistency project, the conservativity
project that Kreisel and others interpret Hilbert as having been engaged in, as
well as reductive proof theory are all examples of this, and this is also part of
the reason why many practicing proof theorists see themselves as still working
on Hilbert’s program. Ordinal analysis, functional interpretations, proof theoretic
reductions and reverse mathematics are only some of the most prominent areas
of proof theory, and those most explicitly situated in the tradition of Hilbert’s
program. Many other areas of proof theory other than those directly concerned
with consistency and foundational reductions of theories are related to the aims
of Hilbert’s program, e.g., the no-counterexample interpretation [Kreisel, 1951;
Tait, 2005a] and work on the structure and complexity of formal proofs more
generally [Pudl´ak, 1998].
5
CONCLUSION
Although it has been a commonplace in the literature on the philosophy of math-
ematics and logic from 1950 onward that Hilbert’s program has not only been
“killed” by G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems but that it was over-ambitions if not
ill-conceived from the start, in the current literature a more positive evaluation
has emerged. This is in large part due to the attention which unpublished writings
in the Hilbert school (especially lecture notes to Hilbert’s courses) have received
recently, as well as to the availability of more of the published writings in English
translation (e.g., in [Ewald, 1996] and [Mancosu, 1998a]). But it is also due to a
growing recognition that the common characterizations of Hilbert’s program are
27See also [Raatikainen, 2003] on the current status of the various branches of proof-theoretic
research relating to Hilbert’s program.

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
441
caricatures, and to a clearer philosophical engagement with the recent results of
proof theory. For instance, Ramsey’s characterization that, according to Hilbert,
“Mathematics proper is thus regarded as a sort of game, played with meaning-
less marks on paper rather like noughts and crosses” [Ramsey, 1926, 231], and
the view that Hilbert held a naive formalist and instrumentalist view of mathe-
matics, have been criticized by various writers. It remains to be seen in what ways
Hilbert’s philosophical views can be resuscitated (in the manner in which, e.g.,
Frege’s logicist program has experienced a renaissance in the neo-logicist writings
of, e.g., Boolos, Heck, and Hale and Wright). It should be clear in any case from
the discussion in the preceding section that ideas closely related to Hilbert’s own
have been hugely successful. And it is also clear from the recent historical studies
of Hilbert’s unpublished writings as well as from the study of the proof theoret-
ical practice of the Hilbert school that the ideas which underpin much of recent
and current proof theoretical research are not merely “inspired by” Hilbert’s pro-
gram. Hilbert’s fundamental aim was, all along, to make mathematical reasoning
amenable to mathematical investigation, and to carry out such an investigation
which yields an analysis of non-constructive reasoning in terms of restricted meth-
ods. Hilbert, of course, emphasized consistency of non-constructive systems as the
most interesting property to be investigated, and emphasized ﬁnitary methods as
those in terms of which such an analysis should be carried out. But even in the
1920s, in the practice of consistency proofs in the work of Ackermann, Bernays,
and von Neumann, among others, more broadly constructive methods were em-
ployed in this analysis, and results about properties other than consistency were
obtained. Gentzen’s work of the 1930s and subsequent proof theoretical studies
should thus not be seen as merely a response to G¨odel’s incompleteness results, but
more broadly as advancing Hilbert’s original aim of investigating the structure of
mathematical reasoning. Seen in this light, again, proof theory as a foundational
enterprise is very much alive.
Although G¨odel’s theorems show that Hilbert’s
original expectations about what exactly can be analyzed in which way and with
what restricted methods can not be fulﬁlled, proof theory and Hilbert’s aims more
generally have been advanced tremendously over the last half-century.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This paper is a substantially revised and expanded version of my entry in the
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy [Zach, 2003a]. I would like to acknowledge
the support of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada,
as well as helpful comments from Jeremy Avigad, Aleksandar Ignjatoviˇc, Paolo
Mancosu, and William Tait.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Ackermann, 1925] W.
Ackermann.
Begr¨undung
des
“tertium
non
datur”
mittels
der
Hilbertschen Theorie der Widerspruchsfreiheit. Mathematische Annalen, 93:1–36, 1925.

442
Richard Zach
[Ackermann, 1940] W. Ackermann. Zur Widerspruchsfreiheit der Zahlentheorie. Mathematische
Annalen, 117:162–194, 1940.
[Arai, 1990] T. Arai. Derivability conditions on Rosser’s provability predicates. Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic, 31:487–497, 1990.
[Arai, 2003] T. Arai. Epsilon substitution method for ID1(Π0
1∨Σ0
1). Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 121:163–208, 2003.
[Auerbach, 1985] D. Auerbach. Intentionality and the G¨odel theorems. Philosophical Studies,
48:337–351, 1985.
[Auerbach, 1992] D. Auerbach. How to say things with formalisms. In Michael Detlefsen, editor,
Proof, Logic, and Formalization, pages 77–93. Routledge, London, 1992.
[Avigad, 2003] J. Avigad. Number theory and elementary arithmetic. Philosophia Mathematica,
11:257–284, 2003.
[Avigad and Feferman, 1998] J. Avigad and S. Feferman. G¨odel’s functional (“Dialectica”) in-
terpretation. In Buss [1998].
[Avigad and Reck, 2001] J. Avigad and E. Reck.
“Clarifying the nature of the inﬁnite”:
the development of metamathematics and proof theory.
Technical report cmu-phil-120,
Carnegie Mellon University, 2001.
Online at http://www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/avigad/
Papers/infinite.pdf.
[Avigad and Zach, 2002] J.
Avigad
and
R.
Zach.
The
epsilon
calculus.
In
Edward
N.
Zalta,
editor,
The
Stanford
Encyclopedia
of
Philosophy.
Summer
2002.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/epsilon-calculus/.
[Barwise, 1977] J. Barwise, editor. Handbook of Mathematical Logic. North-Holland, Amster-
dam, 1977.
[Benacerraf and Putnam, 1983] P. Benacerraf and H. Putnam, editors. Philosophy of Mathe-
matics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2nd edition, 1983.
[Bernays, 1922] P. Bernays. ¨Uber Hilberts Gedanken zur Grundlegung der Arithmetik. Jahres-
bericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, 31:10–19, 1922.
English translation in
[Mancosu, 1998a, 215–222].
[Bernays, 1923] P. Bernays. Erwiderung auf die Note von Herrn Aloys M¨uller: ¨Uber Zahlen als
Zeichen. Mathematische Annalen, 90:159–63, 1923. English translation in [Mancosu, 1998a,
223–226].
[Bernays, 1928a] P. Bernays. ¨Uber Nelsons Stellungnahme in der Philosophie der Mathematik.
Die Naturwissenschaften, 16:142–45, 1928.
[Bernays, 1928b] P. Bernays.
Zusatz zu Hilberts Vortrag ¨uber “Die Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik”. Abhandlungen aus dem Mathematischen Seminar der Universit¨at Hamburg, 6:88–92,
1928. English translation in: [van Heijenoort, 1967, 485–489].
[Bernays, 1930] P. Bernays. Die Philosophie der Mathematik und die Hilbertsche Beweistheorie.
Bl¨atter f¨ur deutsche Philosophie, 4:326–67, 1930. Reprinted in [Bernays, 1976, 17–61]. English
translation in [Mancosu, 1998a, 234–265].
[Bernays, 1970] P. Bernays. On the original Gentzen consistency proof. In A. Kino, J. Myhill,
and R. E. Veseley, editors, Intuitionism and Proof Theory, pages 409–417. North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1970.
[Bernays, 1976] P. Bernays. Abhandlungen zur Philosophie der Mathematik. Wissenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt, 1976.
[Buss, 1998] S. R. Buss, editor. Handbook of Proof Theory. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1998.
[Caldon and Ignjatoviˇc, 2005] P. Caldon and A. Ignjatoviˇc. On mathematical instrumentalism.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 70:778–794, 2005.
[Detlefsen, 1979] M. Detlefsen. On interpreting G¨odel’s second theorem. Journal of Philosoph-
ical Logic, 8:297–313, 1979. Reprinted with a postscript in [Shanker, 1988, 131–154].
[Detlefsen, 1986] M. Detlefsen. Hilbert’s Program. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1986.
[Detlefsen, 1990] M. Detlefsen. On an alleged refutation of Hilbert’s program using G¨odel’s ﬁrst
incompleteness theorem. Journal of Philosophial Logic, 19:343–377, 1990.
[Detlefsen, 2001] M. Detlefsen. What does G¨odel’s second theorem say?
Philosophia Mathe-
matica, 9:37–71, 2001.
[Detlefsen, 2005] M. Detlefsen. Formalism. In Stewart Shapiro, editor, The Oxford Handbook
of Philosophy of Mathematics and Logic, pages 236–317. Oxford University Press, New York
and Oxford, 2005.
[Ewald, 1996] W. B. Ewald, editor. From Kant to Hilbert. A Source Book in the Foundations
of Mathematics, volume 2. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1996.

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
443
[Feferman, 1960] S. Feferman. Arithmetization of metamathematics in a general setting. Fun-
damenta Mathematicae, pages 35–92, 1960.
[Feferman, 1988] S. Feferman. Hilbert’s Program relativized: Proof-theoretical and foundational
reductions. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 53(2):364–284, 1988.
[Feferman, 1993a] S. Feferman. What rests on what? The proof-theoretic analysis of mathemat-
ics. In Johannes Czermak, editor, Philosophy of Mathematics. Proceedings of the Fifteenth
International Wittgenstein-Symposium, Part 1, pages 147–171, Vienna, 1993. H¨older-Pichler-
Tempsky. Reprinted in [Feferman, 1998, Ch. 10, 187–208].
[Feferman, 1993b] S. Feferman. Why a little bit goes a long way: Logical foundations of scien-
tiﬁcally applicable mathematics. Proceedings of the Philosophy of Science Association 1992,
2:442–455, 1993. Reprinted in [Feferman, 1998, Ch. 14, 284–298].
[Feferman, 1998] S. Feferman. In the Light of Logic. Oxford University Press, New York and
Oxford, 1998.
[Feferman, 2000] Solomon Feferman.
Does reductive proof theory have a viable rationale?
Erkenntnis, 53:63–96, 2000.
[Field, 1980] H. Field. Science without Numbers. A Defence of Nominalism. Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton, 1980.
[Gentzen, 1933] G. Gentzen.
¨Uber das Verh¨altnis zwischen intuitionistischer und klassischer
Logik.
First published in Archiv f¨ur mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 16
(1974), 119–132. English translation in [Gentzen, 1969, 53–67], 1933.
[Gentzen, 1934] G. Gentzen. Untersuchungen ¨uber das logische Schließen I–II. Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 39:176–210, 405–431, 1934. English translation in [Gentzen, 1969, 68–131].
[Gentzen, 1935] G. Gentzen. Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie. Published as
“Der erste Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweis f¨ur die klassische Zahlentheorie” in Archiv f¨ur mathe-
matische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 16 (1974), 97–118. English translation in [Gentzen,
1969, 132–213], 1935.
[Gentzen, 1936] G. Gentzen. Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie. Mathematische
Annalen, 112:493–565, 1936. English translation in [Gentzen, 1969, 132–213].
[Gentzen, 1943] G. Gentzen. Beweisbarkeit und Unbeweisbarkeit von Anfangsf¨allen der trans-
ﬁniten Induktion in der reinen Zahlentheorie. Mathematische Annalen, 119:140–161, 1943.
English translation in [Gentzen, 1969, 287–308].
[Gentzen, 1969] G. Gentzen. The Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen, M. E. Szabo, editor.
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1969.
[Giaquinto, 1983] M. Giaquinto. Hilbert’s philosophy of mathematics. British Journal for Phi-
losophy of Science, 34:119–132, 1983.
[G¨odel, 1931] K. G¨odel.
¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme I. Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, 38:173–198, 1931. Reprinted
and translated in [G¨odel, 1986, 144–195].
[G¨odel, 1933] K. G¨odel. Zur intuitionistischen Arithmetik und Zahlentheorie. Ergebnisse eines
mathematisches Kolloquiums, 4:34–38, 1933. Reprinted and translated in [G¨odel, 1986, 286–
295].
[G¨odel, 1958] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber eine bisher noch nicht ben¨utze Erweiterung des ﬁniten Standpunk-
tes. Dialectica, pages 280–287, 1958. Reprinted and translated in [G¨odel, 1995, 217–251].
[G¨odel, 1986] K. G¨odel. Collected Works, volume 1, Solomon Feferman et al., editors. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1986.
[G¨odel, 1995] K. G¨odel. Collected Works, volume 2, Solomon Feferman et al., editors. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1995.
[G¨odel, 2003a] K. G¨odel. Collected Works, volume 4, Solomon Feferman et al., editors. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2003.
[G¨odel, 2003b] K. G¨odel. Collected Works, volume 5, Solomon Feferman et al., editors. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2003.
[Guaspari and Solovay, 1979] D. Guaspari and R. M. Solovay.
Rosser sentences.
Annals of
Mathematical Logic, 16:81–99, 1979.
[Hallett, 1990] M. Hallett. Physicalism, reductionism and Hilbert. In Andrew D. Irvine, editor,
Physicalism in Mathemtics, pages 183–257. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1990.
[Hallett, 1994] M. Hallett. Hilbert’s axiomatic method and the laws of thought. In Alexander
George, editor, Mathematics and Mind, pages 158–200. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1994.

444
Richard Zach
[Herbrand, 1930] J. Herbrand. Recherches sur la th´eorie de la d´emonstration. Doctoral disser-
tation, University of Paris, 1930. English translation in [Herbrand, 1971, 44–202].
[Herbrand, 1971] J. Herbrand. Logical Writings, Warren D. Goldfarb, editor. Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1971.
[Hilbert, 1899] D. Hilbert. Grundlagen der Geometrie. In Festschrift zur Feier der Enth¨ullung
des Gauss-Weber-Denkmals in G¨ottingen, pages 1–92. Teubner, Leipzig, 1st edition, 1899.
reprinted in [Hilbert, 2004].
[Hilbert, 1900a] D. Hilbert.
Mathematische Probleme.
Nachrichten von der K¨oniglichen
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu G¨ottingen, Math.-Phys. Klasse, pages 253–297, 1900.
Lecture given at the International Congress of Mathematicians, Paris, 1900. Partial English
translation in [Ewald, 1996, 1096–1105].
[Hilbert, 1900b] D. Hilbert. ¨Uber den Zahlbegriﬀ. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-
Vereinigung, 8:180–84, 1900. English translation in [Ewald, 1996, 1089–1096].
[Hilbert, 1905] D. Hilbert. ¨Uber die Grundlagen der Logik und der Arithmetik. In A. Krazer,
editor, Verhandlungen des dritten Internationalen Mathematiker-Kongresses in Heidelberg
vom 8. bis 13. August 1904, pages 174–85, Leipzig, 1905. Teubner. English translation in
[van Heijenoort, 1967, 129–38].
[Hilbert, 1918a] D. Hilbert. Axiomatisches Denken. Mathematische Annalen, 78:405–15, 1918.
Lecture given at the Swiss Society of Mathematicians, 11 September 1917. Reprinted in
[Hilbert, 1935, 146–56]. English translation in [Ewald, 1996, 1105–1115].
[Hilbert, 1918b] D. Hilbert. Prinzipien der Mathematik. Lecture notes by Paul Bernays. Winter-
Semester 1917–18. Unpublished typescript. Bibliothek, Mathematisches Institut, Universit¨at
G¨ottingen. Published in [Hilbert, 2006], 1918.
[Hilbert, 1920] D. Hilbert. Probleme der mathematischen Logik. Vorlesung, Sommer-Semester
1920. Lecture notes by Paul Bernays and Moses Sch¨onﬁnkel. Unpublished typescript. Biblio-
thek, Mathematisches Institut, Universit¨at G¨ottingen. Published in [Hilbert, 2006], 1920.
[Hilbert, 1922a] D. Hilbert. Grundlagen der Mathematik. Vorlesung, Winter-Semester 1921–22.
Lecture notes by Paul Bernays. Unpublished typescript. Bibliothek, Mathematisches Institut,
Universit¨at G¨ottingen. Published in [Hilbert, 2006], 1922.
[Hilbert, 1922b] D. Hilbert. Neubegr¨undung der Mathematik: Erste Mitteilung. Abhandlungen
aus dem Seminar der Hamburgischen Universit¨at, 1:157–77, 1922. Series of talks given at the
University of Hamburg, July 25–27, 1921. Reprinted with notes by Bernays in [Hilbert, 1935,
157–177]. English translation in [Mancosu, 1998a, 198–214] and [Ewald, 1996, 1115–1134].
[Hilbert, 1923] D. Hilbert. Die logischen Grundlagen der Mathematik. Mathematische Annalen,
88:151–165, 1923. Lecture given at the Deutsche Naturforscher-Gesellschaft, September 1922.
Reprinted in [Hilbert, 1935, 178–191]. English translation in [Ewald, 1996, 1134–1148].
[Hilbert, 1926] D. Hilbert.
¨Uber das Unendliche.
Mathematische Annalen, 95:161–90, 1926.
Lecture given M¨unster, 4 June 1925. English translation in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 367–392].
[Hilbert, 1928] D. Hilbert. Die Grundlagen der Mathematik. Abhandlungen aus dem Seminar
der Hamburgischen Universit¨at, 6:65–85, 1928. English translation in [van Heijenoort, 1967,
464-479].
[Hilbert, 1929] D. Hilbert. Probleme der Grundlegung der Mathematik. Mathematische An-
nalen, 102:1–9, 1929.
Lecture given at the International Congress of Mathematicians, 3
September 1928. English translation in [Mancosu, 1998a, 227–233].
[Hilbert, 1931a] D. Hilbert. Beweis des Tertium non datur. Nachrichten der Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften zu G¨ottingen. Math.-phys. Klasse, pages 120–25, 1931.
[Hilbert, 1931b] D. Hilbert. Die Grundlegung der elementaren Zahlenlehre. Mathematische An-
nalen, 104:485–94, 1931. Reprinted in [Hilbert, 1935, 192–195]. English translation in [Ewald,
1996, 1148–1157].
[Hilbert, 1935] D. Hilbert. Gesammelte Abhandlungen, volume 3. Springer, Berlin, 1935.
[Hilbert, 1992] D. Hilbert.
Natur und mathematisches Erkennen.
Birkh¨auser, Basel, 1992.
Vorlesungen, 1919–20.
[Hilbert, 2004] D. Hilbert. David Hilbert’s Lectures on the Foundations of Geometry, 1891–
1902, Ulrich Majer and Michael Hallett, editors. Springer, New York, 2004.
[Hilbert, 2006] D. Hilbert. David Hilbert’s Lectures on the Foundations of Arithmetic and Logic,
1917–1933, William Ewald and Wilfried Sieg, editors. Springer, New York, 2006. forthcoming.
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann.
Grundz¨uge der theoretischen
Logik. Springer, Berlin, 1928.

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
445
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1923] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Logische Grundlagen der Mathematik.
Vorlesung, Winter-Semester 1922–23. Lecture notes by Paul Bernays, with handwritten notes
by Hilbert. Hilbert-Nachlaß, Nieders¨achsische Staats- und Universit¨atsbibliothek, Cod. Ms.
Hilbert 567. Published in [Hilbert, 2006], 1923.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1934] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Grundlagen der Mathematik, volume 1.
Springer, Berlin, 1934.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1939] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Grundlagen der Mathematik, volume 2.
Springer, Berlin, 1939.
[Hofweber, 2000] T. Hofweber. Proof-theoretic reduction as a philosopher’s tool. Erkenntnis,
53:127–146, 2000.
[Ignjatoviˇc, 1994] A. Ignjatoviˇc. Hilbert’s program and the omega-rule. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 59:322–343, 1994.
[Jeroslow, 1971] R. G. Jeroslow. Consistency statements in formal theories. Fundamenta Math-
ematicae, 72:17–40, 1971.
[Jeroslow, 1975] R. G. Jeroslow. Experimental logics and ∆0
2-theories. Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 4:253–267, 1975.
[Kitcher, 1976] P. Kitcher. Hilbert’s epistemology. Philosophy of Science, 43:99–115, 1976.
[Kreisel, 1951] G. Kreisel. On the interpretation of non-ﬁnitist proofs. Part I. Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic, 16:241–267, 1951.
[Kreisel, 1954] G. Kreisel. A variant to Hilbert’s theory of the foundations of arithmetic. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 4:107–129, 1954.
[Kreisel, 1960] G. Kreisel. Ordinal logics and the characterization of informal notions of proof. In
J. A. Todd, editor, Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians. Edinburgh,
14–21 August 1958, pages 289–299, Cambridge, 1960. Cambridge University Press.
[Kreisel, 1968] G. Kreisel. A survey of proof theory. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 33:321–388,
1968.
[Kreisel, 1970] G. Kreisel. Principles of proof and ordinals implicit in given concepts. In A. Kino,
J. Myhill, and R. E. Veseley, editors, Intuitionism and Proof Theory, pages 489–516. North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 1970.
[Kreisel, 1971] G. Kreisel. Review of The Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen [Gentzen, 1969].
Journal of Philosophy, 68:238–265, 1971.
[Kreisel, 1976] G. Kreisel.
Wie die Beweistheorie zu ihren Ordinalzahlen kam und kommt.
Jahresberichte der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, 78:177–223, 1976.
[Kreisel, 1983] G. Kreisel. Hilbert’s programme. In Benacerraf and Putnam [1983], pages 207–
238.
[Mancosu and Ryckman, 2002] P. Mancosu and T. Ryckman. Mathematics and phenomenology:
The correspondence between O. Becker and H. Weyl. Philosophia Mathematica, 10:130–202,
2002.
[Mancosu, 1998a] P. Mancosu, editor. From Brouwer to Hilbert. The Debate on the Foundations
of Mathematics in the 1920s. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998.
[Mancosu, 1998b] P. Mancosu. Hilbert and Bernays on metamathematics. In From Brouwer to
Hilbert [1998a], pages 149–188.
[Mancosu, 1999] P. Mancosu. Between Russell and Hilbert: Behmann on the foundations of
mathematics. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 5(3):303–330, 1999.
[Mancosu, 2003] P. Mancosu. The Russellian inﬂuence on Hilbert and his school.
Synth`ese,
137(1–2):59–101, 2003.
[Mancosu, 2004] P. Mancosu. Review of Kurt G¨odel, Collected Works, vols. IV and V, Solomon
Feferman, et al., eds. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic, 45:109–125, 2004.
[Mints and Tupailo, 1999] G. Mints and S. Tupailo. Epsilon-substitution method for the ram-
iﬁed language and ∆1
1-comprehension rule.
In Andrea Cantini et al., editors, Logic and
Foundations of Mathematics, pages 107–130. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1999.
[Moore, 1997] G. H. Moore. Hilbert and the emergence of modern mathematical logic. Theoria
(Segunda ´Epoca), 12:65–90, 1997.
[M¨uller, 1923] A. M¨uller. ¨Uber Zahlen als Zeichen. Mathematische Annalen, 90:153–158; 163,
1923.

446
Richard Zach
[Negri, 1980] M. Negri. Constructive sequent reduction in Gentzen’s ﬁrst consistency proof for
arithmetic. In Maria Luisa Dalla Chiara, editor, Italian Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
pages 153–168. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1980.
[Paris and Harrington, 1977] J. Paris and L. Harrington.
A mathematical incompleteness in
Peano arithmetic. In Barwise [1977], pages 1133–1142.
[Parsons, 1998] C. Parsons. Finitism and intuitive knowledge. In Matthias Schirn, editor, The
Philosophy of Mathematics Today, pages 249–270. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998.
[Peckhaus, 1990] V. Peckhaus. Hilbertprogramm und Kritische Philosophie. Vandenhoeck und
Ruprecht, G¨ottingen, 1990.
[Pohlers, 1987] W. Pohlers.
Contributions of the Sch¨utte school school in Munich to proof
theory, 1987. Appendix to [Takeuti, 1987].
[Pohlers, 1998] W. Pohlers. Subsystems of set theory and second-order number theory. In Buss
[1998].
[Poincar´e, 1906] H. Poincar´e. Les math´ematiques et la logique. Revue de m´etaphysique et de
morale, 14:294–317, 1906. English translation in [Ewald, 1996, 1038–1052].
[Pudl´ak, 1998] P. Pudl´ak. The length of proofs. In Buss [1998].
[Raatikainen, 2003] Panu Raatikainen.
Hilbert’s program revisited.
Synth`ese, 137:157–177,
2003.
[Ramsey, 1926] F. P. Ramsey. Mathematical logic. The Mathematical Gazette, 13:185–94, 1926.
Reprinted in [Ramsey, 1990, 225–244].
[Ramsey, 1990] F. P. Ramsey. Philosophical Papers, D. H. Mellor, editor. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1990.
[Rathjen, 2005a] M. Rathjen. An ordinal analysis of parameter free Π1
2-comprehension. Archive
for Mathematical Logic, 44:263–362, 2005.
[Rathjen, 2005b] M. Rathjen. An ordinal analysis of stability. Archive for Mathematical Logic,
44:1–62, 2005.
[Resnik, 1974a] M. D. Resnik. The Frege-Hilbert controversy. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 34:386–403, 1974.
[Resnik, 1974b] M. D. Resnik. On the philosophical signiﬁcance of consistency proofs. Journal
of Philosophical Logic, 3:133–47, 1974.
[Resnik, 1980] M. D. Resnik.
Frege and the Philosophy of Mathematics.
Cornell University
Press, Ithaca, 1980.
[Russell, 1902] B. Russell.
Letter to Frege, June 16, 1902.
In van Heijenoort [1967], pages
124–125.
[Sch¨utte, 1960] K. Sch¨utte. Beweistheorie. Springer, Berlin, 1960.
[Shanker, 1988] S. G. Shanker. G¨odel’s Theorem in Focus. Routledge, London, 1988.
[Sieg, 1990] W. Sieg. Reﬂections on Hilbert’s program. In Wilfried Sieg, editor, Acting and
Reﬂecting, pages 171–82. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1990.
[Sieg, 1999] W. Sieg. Hilbert’s programs: 1917–1922. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 5(1):1–44,
1999.
[Sieg, 2002] W. Sieg. Beyond Hilbert’s reach? In David B. Malament, editor, Reading Natural
Philosophy. Essays in the History and Philosophy of Science and Mathematics, pages 363–
405. Open Court, Chicago and La Salle, Ill., 2002.
[Simpson, 1988] S. G. Simpson. Partial realizations of Hilbert’s program. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 53(2):349–363, 1988.
[Simpson, 1999] S. G. Simpson. Subsystems of Seond Order Arithmetic. Springer, Berlin, 1999.
[Simpson, 2005] S. G. Simpson. Reverse Mathematics 2001. Lecture Notes in Logic 21. Associ-
ation for Symbolic Logic and A K Peters, Wellesley, Mass., 2005.
[Smory´nski, 1977] C. Smory´nski. The incompleteness theorems. In Barwise [1977], pages 821–
865.
[Stein, 1988] Howard Stein.
Logos, logic, and logisitik´e:
Some philosophical remarks on
nineteenth-century transformation of mathematics. In William Aspray and Philip Kitcher,
editors, History and Philosophy of Modern Mathematics, volume 11 of Minesota Studies in
the Philosophy of Science, pages 238–259. University of Minnesota Press, 1988.
[Steiner, 1975] M. Steiner. Mathematical Knowledge. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1975.
[Steiner, 1991] M. Steiner. Review of Hilbert’s Program: An Essay on Mathematical Instru-
mentalism [Detlefsen, 1986]. Journal of Philosophy, 88(6):331–336, 1991.
[Tait, 1981] W. W. Tait. Finitism. Journal of Philosophy, 78:524–546, 1981. Reprinted in [Tait,
2005b, 21–42].

Hilbert’s Program Then and Now
447
[Tait, 2002] W. W. Tait. Remarks on ﬁnitism. In Wilfried Sieg, Richard Sommer, and Carolyn
Talcott, editors, Reﬂections on the Foundations of Mathematics. Essays in Honor of Solomon
Feferman, Lecture Notes in Logic 15. Association for Symbolic Logic and A K Peters, 2002.
Reprinted in [Tait, 2005b, 43–53].
[Tait, 2005a] W. W. Tait. G¨odel’s reformulation of Gentzen’s ﬁrst consistency proof for arith-
metic: the no-counterexample interpretation. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 11:225–238, 2005.
[Tait, 2005b] W. W. Tait. The Provenance of Pure Reason. Essays in the Philosophy of Math-
ematics and Its History. Oxford University Press, New York, 2005.
[Takeuti, 1987] G. Takeuti. Proof Theory. Studies in Logic 81. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2nd
edition, 1987.
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort, editor. From Frege to G¨odel. A Source Book in Math-
ematical Logic, 1897–1931. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1967.
[Visser, 1989] A. Visser. Peano’s smart children: A provability logical study of systems with
built-in consistency. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 30:161–196, 1989.
[von Neumann, 1927] J. von Neumann. Zur Hilbertschen Beweistheorie. Mathematische Zeit-
schrift, 26:1–46, 1927.
[von Neumann, 1931] J. von Neumann. Die formalistische Grundlegung der Mathematik. Erken-
ntnis, 2:116–34, 1931. English translation in: [Benacerraf and Putnam, 1983, 61–65].
[Webb, 1997] J. C. Webb. Hilbert’s formalism and arithmetization of mathematics. Synth`ese,
110:1–14, 1997.
[Weyl, 1921] Hermann Weyl.
¨Uber die neue Grundlagenkrise der Mathematik. Mathematis-
che Zeitschrift, 10:37–79, 1921. Reprinted in [Weyl, 1968, 143-180]. English translation in
[Mancosu, 1998a, 86–118].
[Weyl, 1925] H. Weyl. Die heutige Erkenntnislage in der Mathematik. Symposion, 1:1–23, 1925.
Reprinted in: [Weyl, 1968, 511–42]. English translation in: [Mancosu, 1998a, 123–42].
[Weyl, 1928] H. Weyl. Diskussionsbemerkungen zu dem zweiten Hilbertschen Vortrag ¨uber die
Grundlagen der Mathematik. Abhandlungen aus dem Mathematischen Seminar der Univer-
sit¨at Hamburg, 6:86–88, 1928. English translation in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 480-484].
[Weyl, 1968] H. Weyl.
Gesammelte Abhandlungen, volume 1, K. Chandrasekharan, editor.
Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1968.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica, vol-
ume 1. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1910.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1912] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica, vol-
ume 2. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1912.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1913] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica, vol-
ume 3. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1913.
[Zach, 1999] R. Zach.
Completeness before Post: Bernays, Hilbert, and the development of
propositional logic. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 5(3):331–366, 1999.
[Zach, 2003a] R. Zach.
Hilbert’s program.
In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Fall 2003.
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/entries/
hilbert-program/.
[Zach, 2003b] R. Zach.
The practice of ﬁnitism. Epsilon calculus and consistency proofs in
Hilbert’s Program. Synth`ese, 137:211–259, 2003.
[Zach, 2004] R. Zach. Hilbert’s “Verungl¨uckter Beweis,” the ﬁrst epsilon theorem and consis-
tency proofs. History and Philosophy of Logic, 25:79–94, 2004.


LOGICISM AND ITS CONTEMPORARY LEGACY
Herbert Hochberg
While logicism, as a philosophy of mathematics, is traditionally taken to begin with
Frege, throughout the 20th century it has been associated with Whitehead and Russell’s
classic Principia Mathematica (1910-1913).1 Ramsey had cited Russell’s theory of deﬁ-
nite descriptions as a “paradigm” of philosophical analysis, but Russell’s logistic analysis
of elementary arithmetic was also a signiﬁcant factor in the development of logical analy-
sis, linguistic precision, and logical reconstruction in 20th century philosophy. It is ﬁtting,
then, that, as we shall later consider, the two prominent kinds of “incomplete symbols” in
Principia are deﬁnite descriptions and class abstracts (the latter the key to the Principia
variant of logicism).2 Russell’s theory of descriptions, Frege’s philosophy of language
and Alexius Meinong’s theories of objects and assumptions were landmark contributions
to 20th century discussions and attempts to resolve long standing philosophical problems
regarding reference and meaning, the relation of thoughts and judgments to their “objects”
and the perennial paradoxes posed by truth and reference. In a parallel way, Russell’s lo-
gistic analysis of arithmetic, dealing not only with the classical issues in the philosophy of
arithmetic — “What are numbers?” and “What kind of truths are arithmetical “truths”?”
— but with the puzzles posed by the development of set theory and the explorations of
what Hilbert termed “Cantor’s paradise,” and advocating a method of “logical construc-
tion,” was another major inﬂuence on the emergence of logical positivism and analytic
philosophy. Principia Mathematica has also assumed a pre-eminent place in the history
of logic, along with works of Aristotle and Frege. The two governing ideas of logicism
are, ﬁrst, that the truths of standard arithmetic, properly analyzed, can be understood
to be logical truths and, second, that all basic arithmetical terms (concepts) can be “de-
ﬁned” in the vocabulary of (analyzed in terms of) the terms (concepts) of standard logic (a
problematic anticipation of second-order predicate logic, in Frege’s case, a ramiﬁed type
variant in Principia Mathematica, and the set-theoretical versions in the cumulative work
of Zermelo, Bernays, G¨odel, von Neumann, Frankel). Assume one considers, as Russell
did, the familiar axioms of Peano (1889):3
1The work was originally intended to be a second volume of Russell’s 1903 The Principles of Mathematics,
(Principia, 1950, v).
2That classes, via Russell’s “no-class” theory, were considered “incomplete symbols” has been somewhat
ignored by critics of logicism, while the fact that propositions form a third kind of “incomplete symbol” has
been almost totally overlooked. The failure to recognize these “kinds” as incomplete symbols makes a number of
discussions of Russell’s supposed commitment to propositional entities in Principia, as well as some criticisms
of his logicism, pointless. Russell uses the phrase “incomplete symbol” to speak of both signs and what signs
supposedly represent — the ﬁrst use indicates the sign is eliminable, the second that the (kind of) seemingly
“represented” entity does not exist.
3[Russell, 1956, 125]. Russell uses “ﬁnite integer” in place of “number” but then replaces the former by
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

450
Herbert Hochberg
(P-D)
1. 0 is a number.
2. If x is a number, the successor of x is a number.
3. If the successor of x = the successor of y, x = y.
4. If x is a number, 0 is not the successor of x.
5. If 0 is a φ and the successor of every number that is a φ is a φ, then every
number is a φ.
(P-D) contains three primitive expressions, “0”, “number” and “successor of” that do not
belong to the vocabulary of a standard system of logic — as “if...then,” “and,” “the” and
“any” do belong to that vocabulary. As (P-D) is taken to provide an adequate foundation
for the arithmetic of addition and multiplication, either via the familiar “inductive deﬁni-
tions” or by explicit deﬁnitions in a higher order or set-theoretical framework, the logicist
takes the task of showing that arithmetical truths are logical truths to be two-fold. First,
“deﬁning” the three primitives solely in terms of logical signs; second, employing the def-
initions to derive (P-D) as theorems within a standard logical framework. The deﬁnitions
would serve to provide an “analysis” of the basic concepts of arithmetic, while the deriva-
tion of (P-D), so understood, would show that the purported foundational statements of
arithmetic are logical truths [Russell, 1903, 124-125]. Russell expressed these “goals” in
his preface [1902] to the ﬁrst edition of The Principles:
The present work has two main objects. One of these, the proof that all pure
mathematics deals exclusively with concepts deﬁnable in terms of a very
small number of fundamental logical concepts, and that all its propositions
are deducible from a very small number of fundamental logical principles.
....
The other object of this work, which occupies Part I., is the explanation of
the fundamental concepts which mathematics accepts as indeﬁnable. This
is a purely philosophical task. ... The discussion of indeﬁnables — which
forms the chief part of philosophical logic — is the endeavour to see clearly,
and to make others see clearly, the entities concerned, in order that the mind
may have that kind of acquaintance with them which it has with redness
or the taste of a pineapple. Where, as in the present case, the indeﬁnables
are obtained primarily as the necessary residue in a process of analysis, it is
often easier to know that there must be such entities than actually to perceive
them; there is a process analogous to that which resulted in the discovery of
Neptune, with the diﬀerence that the ﬁnal stage — the search with a mental
the latter. Though these particular statements are in the form of Peano’s postulates, such axioms are now often
called the “Peano-Dedekind axioms” due to Dedekind’s earlier construction (1887/88) of an alternative system.
Frege, discussing Dedekind’s book, commented that while Dedekind thought that “the theory of numbers is a
part of logic,” he did not reduce the concepts he used to “acknowledged logical notions” [Frege, 1967, 4]. What
Frege apparently means is that Dedekind did not take cardinal numbers to be classes or any objects characterized
apart from his axioms — though he did take the set of (ordinal) numbers to be the greatest common part of all
hereditary sets containing the initial element — a variant of the Frege-Russell deﬁnition of “natural number”
[Kneale, 1962, 470-472].

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
451
telescope for the entity which has been inferred — is often the most diﬃcult
part of the undertaking. In the case of classes, I must confess, I have failed
to perceive any concept fulﬁlling the conditions requisite for the notion of
class. And the contradiction discussed in Chapter x. proves that something
is amiss, but what this is I have hitherto failed to discover [1903, xv-xvi].
The contradiction is what ﬁrst came to be known as Russell’s Paradox and, more re-
cently, The Russell-Zermelo Paradox.4 Dedekind, by contrast, can be seen as a kind of
structuralist who took his axioms to specify, and thereby identify, an inﬁnite domain or
“system,” as he called it, of elements ordered as a progression or “omega sequence.” This
raises questions about such elements — as objects arrived at by “abstraction” or “cre-
ations of the human mind” or merely imagined possibilities, since Dedekind’s focus is on
the structure of the system. However they are taken, the elements only have the proper-
ties and relations imposed by the axioms for a progression. Such a view has similarities
to a view of a contemporary logician, P. Lindstr¨om, that we will discuss, and which he
calls “quasi-realism.” (Lindstr¨om, however, brieﬂy comments on and separates his view
from Dedekind’s [2000, 146].) Later in The Principles, Russell, as Frege had, criticized
Dedekind’s structuralism:
...it is impossible that the ordinals should be, as Dedekind suggests, nothing
but the terms of such relations as constitute a progression. If they are anything
at all, they must diﬀer from other entities as points from instants or colours
from sounds. What Dedekind intended to indicate was probably a deﬁnition
by means of the principle of abstraction, such as we attempted to give in the
preceding chapter. But a deﬁnition so made always indicates some class of
entities having (or being) a genuine nature of their own, and not logically
dependent upon the manner in which they have been deﬁned [1956, 249].
This issue is not over the supposed need for having properties other than relational prop-
erties but about being objects of a deﬁnite kind that are not simply speciﬁed as objects
that satisfy the axioms for a progression and are thereby simply distinguished by their
place in the ordering. What Russell means by the “principle of abstraction” here is the
use of “similarity of two classes” (one-one correlation) to be “analyzable (by the principle
of abstraction) into possession of a common property. This we deﬁne as the number of
either class” [1956, 241]. Thus his rejection of Dedekind’s structuralism in The Principles
stems, in part, from his holding that an equivalence relation (for Russell an instantiated
symmetrical and transitive relation) is “constituted by possession of a common property”
[1956, 166]. This was aided by the fact that “when I wrote the “Principles,” I shared with
Frege a belief in the Platonic reality of numbers which, in my imagination, peopled the
timeless realm of Being” [1956, x].
4The paradox stems from Frege’s Law V of The Basic Laws of Arithmetic, which states that two functions
(concepts) determine the same course of values (extension) if and only if they have the same values for the
same argument (the same objects fall under each), taken together with what amounts to having each (concept or
“ﬁrst-level” concept in Frege’s sense) determine an extension, which is an object [Frege, 1967, 36-46; see also
xii, xxxvii-xl].

452
Herbert Hochberg
Axiom (5) of the (P-D) postulates can be taken in two ways. Looking at (1-4), we
see that the implicit (or explicit) quantiﬁers range only over subject terms, in a ﬁrst-order
schema. We can take (5) as a “postulate schema” with “φ” as a predicate (or class) variable
— or “schematic” letter — that is not quantiﬁed over. Thus, any deﬁnite predicate that
replaces the variable yields a deﬁnite instance of the postulate. We thus have indeﬁnitely
many or denumerably many postulates as instances of (5).5 Alternatively we can read
(5) in terms of a predicate quantiﬁer, as (5*): For any φ: if 0 is a φ & if for any y: if y
is a φ then the successor of y is a φ, then every number is a φ. (5*) is a second-order
(as that expression is now used) and, in one sense of the term, “impredicative” formula.
Where the instances of (5) are obtained by “replacement” of a constant predicate for the
free variable, those of (5*) are obtained by universal instantiation. Using (5*) the logicist
construal of “number” turns the latter into an “impredicative predicate” in the sense that
it is one of the predicates (represents one of the properties) that the predicate quantiﬁer
“ranges over.” This will play a role in M. Dummett’s arguments against the recognition
of an inﬁnite set of natural numbers, which is the basis of his claim that the concept of
natural number is “indeﬁnite,” and that, in turn, is employed in his criticisms of logicism
as a philosophy of arithmetic.
1
FREGE
Frege developed his variant of logicism in connection with setting out a philosophy of lan-
guage and theories of reference, meaning, and predication and his rejection of a kind of
“formalism”6 as well as psychologism in mathematics. Doing so involved him in detailed
discussions of sense and reference, concepts and objects, as well as of functions, argu-
ments and “truth.” In those discussions he ingeniously used a few basic ideas to attempt to
resolve a number of fundamental philosophical problems that, as he rightly saw, paralleled
speciﬁc problems in the philosophy of mathematics. For example, consider the questions
posed by distinguishing between trivial identities, like “7=7,” and signiﬁcant claims, such
as “2=the positive square root of 4.” It is obviously paralleled by “Socrates=Socrates”
and “Augustus=the only adopted son of Caesar.” Since “names” like “7” and “Augustus,”
as well as the descriptive phrases, can be said to be used to refer to or denote a particular
individual or object, while what we understand when we use the diﬀerent expressions is
5One can have a ﬁnitely axiomatizable “version” by using standard order axioms and a relation, such as is
less than. See, for example, Gill [1990, 1-3].
6He mentions the mathematician E. Heine in criticizing those who take mathematics to be a “game,” where
the numbers become the arithmetical signs and the deﬁnitions are construed as rules for moving such objects
around, as with chess pieces [Frege, 1967, 10]. He is not here discussing Hilbert, though he would write
critically of, and enter into controversy with, Hilbert in later years. Ramsey noted a contrast between the early
formalists, mentioning Heine and Thomae, that Frege is criticizing and Hilbert:
Early formalists all got muddled. They said to avoid all doubt as to nature and
existence of numbers let us take them to be signs “1”, “2”, “3”. Then mathematics
consists in taking various formulae involving these signs and forming others from them
according to certain rules. . . . . Also said that real numbers were inﬁnite series of signs.
Hilbert does not commit these absurdities [Ramsey, 1991, 183].

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
453
generally taken to be diﬀerent, Frege took expressions like “2” and “the prime even num-
ber,” while denoting the same object, to have diﬀerent senses and the sentences “2=2”
and “2=the even prime number” to express diﬀerent propositions. In fact Frege took the
expressions to denote the same object since the diﬀerent senses (meanings) that they ex-
pressed denoted that object.7 Denotation was basically a relation between the sense of
an expression and a referent, and only derivatively a relation between the expression and
the referent. Thus he employed senses of expressions to account for a particular use of a
denoting expression being used to denote a certain object and held that “names” like “Pe-
gasus,” which did not refer to anything, were meaningful since they had a sense though
lacking a referent. Thus, the referent of a sign that did denote an object was not what
gave sense or “meaning” to a name. Rather, the expression referred to what it did refer
to in virtue of the sense that it was taken to express. Having introduced senses, including
propositions (the latter, being what sentences expressed, Frege called “thoughts”) in his
account of the meaning of expressions and, hence, also of the diﬀerences in meaning,
Frege developed a philosophy of language, along with his philosophy of mathematics, to
clarify and systematize his ideas.
Platonic realism is often associated with the recognition of abstract entities — entities
not locatable spatially or temporally. That view, as it relates to mathematics, can be sim-
ply presented. Consider a cat lying on a mat. The statement that a cat is on a mat is true in
virtue of two objects, the cat and the mat, being in a certain arrangement of spatial proxim-
ity — a relation. Thus, for it to be true there must be a cat and a mat. Pictures and stories
not withstanding, we do not have a unicorn lying on a dragon’s back, as there are neither
unicorns nor dragons. Hence, a corresponding statement about a unicorn on a dragon’s
back will not be true in a straightforward sense. Plato can be seen as holding that given
the meaning and the truth of arithmetical statements, like “7 > 2,” we must recognize the
numbers, 7 and 2, and, implicitly, the relationship between them. Extending this simple
idea to the case of “Socrates is wise,” one can see Plato as moving to the need to recognize
wisdom, as well as Socrates, in order for it to be true that Socrates is wise, that he partici-
pates in wisdom — a form or “abstract” object.8 Such objects, like numbers, are not only
abstract as not being spatio-temporal but in another sense. One can think of a common
attribute, as one can of a number, apart from (or abstract from) the particular objects it is
applied to — as abstracted from them. Thus, while we speak of or see 7 cups, 7 saucers
and 7 seven chairs, we can consider the number 7 apart from “concrete” realizations of
it — as what the various collections have in common. Hence, we can merely imagine 7
people having tea or 7 unicorns, for that matter. Noting certain similarities between 7 and
wisdom, one can see Plato’s theory of forms as linked to a concern with mathematical
7Some understand the senses of signs like ‘Socrates’ and ‘7’ in terms of the notion of “concept-of” — e.g.
concept of Socrates, concept of 7 — as opposed to Frege’s notion of a concept. This is reminiscent of supposed
“individual concepts.”
8Once the introduction of the forms led to the explicit recognition of the connections they have with each
other and the “ordinary” things that “participate in” or “reﬂect” them, the stage was set for the long history
of the puzzles surrounding “predication” and relations that stretches from Plato’s notion of participation and
Plotinus’ process of emanation, thru the medieval realism-nominalism controversies, to the empiricist attacks
on “abstract” ideas and on to Frege’s “unsaturated” functions and Russell’s universal relations, qualities and
logical forms.

454
Herbert Hochberg
entities, as abstract entities, to account for the truth of mathematical statements. Thus,
one can think of Plato, inﬂuenced by Pythagorean ideas, seeking correspondent abstract
entities to “ground” both the meaning of arithmetical terms and arithmetical truths —
arithmetical objects and “facts” that were not in the spatio-temporal realm.9
Frege’s distinguishing sense from reference led him, at places, to take statements,
whose subject terms expressed senses but lacked referents, to lack truth values, while
at other places he supplied an arbitrary referent for the term (and thus a truth value for the
statement), and at yet other places he suggested dismissing such terms from a scientiﬁc
language. A further question that arises is whether the sense-reference distinction applies
to predicate expressions as well as expressions for objects. Interpreters of Frege have
disagreed about this, yet it seems clear that a predicate has both a sense and a denotation,
the latter being a concept, though Frege speaks of the concept both as what is expressed
and what is denoted by a predicate term. But while it is the sense of a term like “2” that
enters into the proposition expressed by “2 is even,” it is apparently not the sense of the
predicate, “is even,” but the denoted concept itself that is the incomplete constituent of
the proposition. The sense of the expression referring to the concept plays diﬀerent roles.
One is that the sense seems to be the relevant constituent of a proposition expressed by a
sentence like “Socrates falls under the concept man,” for on Frege’s account the function
(concept) unifying the proposition is falls under, not is a man. This gave rise to a prob-
lem once discussed by Frege commentators. Frege insisted that an expression like “the
concept man” cannot denote a concept but must denote an object, since the expression
does not play a predicative role. So, in the case of certain contexts, where the relational
predicate is “falls under” for example, Frege suggested simply avoiding such expressions
as misleading and due to “...the awkward position in which language here ﬁnds itself...”
[1967, 37].
Just as Frege took signs like “Socrates” and “7” to have both a sense and a denotation,
he took sentences like “Socrates is wise” and “7 is odd” to have a sense, the proposition
(or “thought,” as he called it) expressed, and a referent. But the referent was speciﬁed
as the truth value — True, in these cases. Thus the arithmetical and the biographical
statement referred to one and the same “object” — the True — as all sentences with truth
values denoted either the True or the False. The doctrine sounds strange. It is one thing
to recognize “senses” in addition to “referents” as, apparently, further abstract objects, in
order to account for meaning. It is another thing to recognize truth values as objects. To
be sure, one who reads logic texts is familiar with the occurrences of the signs “F” and “T”
and their being said to designate truth values, as one is familiar with the use of numerals
to designate numbers. But in logic classes one no more stops to ask if there really exist
truth values than one stops in mathematics classes to ask if numbers really exist. Frege
explicitly took there to be such objects. This resulted in part from the application of
his sense-denotation distinction to sentences as well as to names like “Socrates,” in part
from his division of terms into incomplete terms representing “functions” and complete
terms representing objects and in part from his belief that attempts to deﬁne “truth” and
purported theories of truth, such as the correspondence theory, were inadequate. Frege
wrote:
9That Plato was both inﬂuenced by and concerned with Pythagorean ideas, as in the Phaedeo, is often noted.

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
455
Can it not be laid down that truth exists when there is correspondence in
a certain respect? But in which? For what would we then have to do to
decide whether something were true? We should have to inquire whether
it were true that an idea and a Reality, perhaps, corresponded in the laid-
down respect. And then we should be confronted by a question of the same
kind and the game could begin again. So the attempt to explain truth as
correspondence collapses. And every other attempt to deﬁne truth collapses
too. For in a deﬁnition certain characteristics would have to be stated. And in
application to any particular case the question would always arise whether it
were true that the characteristics were present. So one goes round in a circle.
Consequently, it is probable that the content of the word “true” is unique and
indeﬁnable [1968, 510].
One can imagine him believing that we might as well take true propositions to denote the
truth value True, since it is hopeless to try to provide an account of truth. He may also
be claiming that no deﬁnition of the predicate “is true” is feasible, since such a deﬁnition
will have to be of the form “x is true if and only if x is χ ,” where χ is some condition
or “characteristic” that is had or fulﬁlled by whatever truth is ascribed to. But, then, one
must hold that x is true if and only if it is true that x has or fulﬁlls χ. Thus, we would
be involved in another vicious circle. Another claim that he could be making is that to
oﬀer such a purportedly explanatory deﬁnition (as opposed to a stipulation) is to assert
or presuppose that the explanatory statement is itself true. But then we must know what
“truth” means in order to oﬀer such an explanation, for we must know that it is true. Thus
we cannot explain what it is to be true. Yet another way of construing his argument is to
take him to claim that a theory like a correspondence theory proposes a deﬁnition of “is
true” or claims to “analyze” the notion of truth along the following lines:
1. Given any proposition p, p is true if and only if there is a fact that p corresponds
to.10
But then, “any” in (1) applies to (1) itself, so (1) is true if and only if there is a fact to
which it corresponds, and we have
2. (1) is true if and only if there is a fact that (1) corresponds to.
Hence, by the correspondence theory that oﬀers (1) as an analysis of truth, (2) must be
true. But on the correspondence theory, (2) will be true if and only if a further statement
holding that it corresponds to a fact is true and so on. Thus, a proposition will be true
if and only if there are an inﬁnite number of facts, and we cannot set down all the facts
that its being true “presupposes.” This argument assumes that the same ground of truth
will not suﬃce as a truth ground for each element of the series of sentences containing
“is true” that is thereby generated. That is, it is assumed that each sentence in the series
corresponds to, or is “made true” by, a diﬀerent fact. One can point out that given that 7
> 2, there is no reason to hold that its being so does not suﬃce as a ground of truth for the
10Such a claim thus involves issues related to Russell’s “types” and, later, Tarski’s semantic levels, and to
further questions about the feasibility of a univocal truth predicate.

456
Herbert Hochberg
series of trivial conjunctions “7 > 2&7 > 2,” “7 > 2&(7 > 2&7 > 2)”, etc., as well as for
the series of sentences “‘7 > 2’ is true, ” ““‘7 > 2’ is true” is true,” etc. In both cases we
simply have a series of diﬀerent true sentences.
Dummett, in supporting Frege’s attack on the correspondence theory of truth, sees
Frege as arguing that, on a correspondence theory, one cannot derive what is known as
the Tarskian T-sentence for statements: “‘Socrates is wise’ is true if and only if Socrates
is wise,” for example [Dummett, 1973, 444–52, 463–64]. Hence, if one accepts Tarski’s
condition for introducing a satisfactory truth predicate into a schema, a correspondence
theory supposedly fails. It is of historical interest that both Moore and Russell, impressed
by the arguments of F. H. Bradley and B. Bosanquet against the correspondence theory,
rejected such an account in the early part of the 20th century. Thus Moore took true propo-
sitions to be true in virtue of an “inherent property” based on their constituent concepts
standing in a basic true-making relation, as the constituent concepts of false propositions
stood in another, false-making, relation [Moore, 1899, 180-83]. This suggested taking
all true (false) propositions to be necessarily true (false) as mathematical statements were
commonly taken to be. In an 1898 letter to Russell he had written:
Truth therefore does not depend on any relation between ideas and reality, nor
even between concepts and reality, but is an inherent property of the whole
formed by certain concepts and their relations; falsehood similarly.
Thus Moore’s taking true propositions to be their own ground of truth is perhaps where the
identiﬁcation of facts with true propositions, by more recent philosophers in the “analytic
tradition,” stems from. Russell, in turn, objected to the correspondence theory’s need
to appeal to “objective falsehoods” [1906/7, 45-47]. Bradley, interestingly, had his own
version of Frege’s argument [1944, 110]. Given Frege’s views on truth, his logicism,
and rejection of “psychologism” and “formalism,” in mathematics would not have been
motivated by his adhering to a correspondence account of truth.
The connection Frege saw between the use of functional expressions in mathematics
and concept expressions in ordinary language led to his considering a concept like is wise
to coordinate objects, like Socrates, taken as arguments, to truth values, the True or the
False. Thus he thought of concepts as functions whose values were truth values, and in
fact oﬀered that deﬁnition of what a concept is, with predicates being expressions for
such functions. Neither the notion of a function nor that of an object (argument) was
“deﬁned” by Frege — they remained two of the primitive logical concepts of his logistic
analysis — though he characterized functions (and function signs) as “incomplete” and
“unsaturated,” while objects (and the signs denoting them) were “complete” and “satu-
rated.” (These characterizations are still reﬂected in standard terminology as signs like ‘x
is wise,’ ‘Fx’ and ‘φx’ are classiﬁed as “predicate” expressions (as well as being called
“open” or “incomplete” sentences), while ‘x’, ‘Socrates’ and ‘2’ are, typically, “subject”
signs.) As there are arithmetical functions of two arguments, like x + y, so a dyadic rela-
tional concept, like is wiser than, requires two arguments to yield a truth value as value
and is thus logically distinct from monadic concepts.
Frege took a monadic concept, such as is even, to determine an extension as its “course
of values” — in eﬀect a class of (ordered) pairs consisting of an object, say 2, and a

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
457
truth value. Thus ⟨2, T⟩and ⟨3, F⟩would belong to the course of values determined by
the concept is even and the extension of the concept is the class of all objects falling
under the concept — those paired with T. In this way every concept determined another
entity, a class, as every concept expression or predicate “χ” gave rise to a class expression
“the class of χs.” But classes, unlike concepts, are objects and denoted by “complete”
or “saturated” expressions that can occupy a subject place in a sentence. This ﬁt with
another fundamental set of ideas Frege had about numbers as objects of a speciﬁc kind.
Consider two collections of three objects: three cups and three saucers. Having three
elements is an attribute of both collections, for both have three elements — as the three
cups are all alike in being cups. Take the collections to be classes, whatever it is that
classes are understood to be. One can then think of the natural numbers or positive inte-
gers as concepts or attributes applicable to classes — of the number three as the concept
“has three elements.” That one employs the term “three” in the phrase “has three ele-
ments” does not pose the problem of explaining a notion in terms of itself, for one easily
construes that use — “there are exactly three things such that ...” in solely logical terms
along the lines of “(∃x)(∃y)(∃z)((x  y&y  z&x  z& . . . x . . . y . . . z)&(∀w)(. . . w . . . ↔
(w = x ∨w = y ∨w = z)))” [Carnap, 1937, 143]. The real problem Frege faced was
that his basic dichotomies of argument and function in mathematics and, derivatively, of
object and concept, require numbers to be objects (arguments) and not concepts (func-
tions). A simple maneuver suggests itself. The concept of being a three-element class
determines an extension, a class — the class of all three-element classes. Such a class,
like all classes, is an object. This, in turn, suggests taking the number three not to be a
concept, such as having three elements, but as the corresponding class, the class of all
three element classes. This is what Frege later did [1967, 99-100] and Russell followed
him in doing. Frege’s earlier version was somewhat diﬀerent.
In his Grundlagen, Frege took the number three not as the class of all three-element
classes, but as the class of all concepts that determined three-element classes. And so for
all the natural numbers. The 0-element class, the null class, is determined by an empty
concept, the concept of not being self-identical. One might ﬁnd an apparent circular-
ity in taking the natural number 3 to be a class of concepts (or of classes) applying to
(containing) three-element classes. But it is not. For one can consider the class of all
concepts equinumerous with a given concept — equinumerous in the sense of there being
a one-one function holding of them. This does not make use of the notion of a natural
number as one is not speaking of any particular number of elements of a class. One sim-
ply takes a cardinal number to be a class of all concepts (or classes) equinumerous with
some concept (class), as 0 is the class of all concepts equinumerous with the concept xx.
All one then need do is specify a way of getting the rest of the natural numbers from 0,
without appealing to numbers in the process. Having introduced 0, Frege could make use
of the concept “being identical with 0.” That concept has one object falling under it —
the number 0. He could then consider the class of all concepts equinumerous with the
concept being identical with 0. This yields the class of all one-element concepts, which
is then taken to be the number 1. Having 0 and 1 we can proceed to 2, via the concept —
being identical with 0 or being identical with 1, which applies to two objects, 0 and 1. Of
course one cannot proceed step by step in such a manner or simply say “and so on.” But

458
Herbert Hochberg
one can characterize the notions of successor and of natural number by means of “logical
concepts” (such as “class” and the standard concepts of logic and set theory) in such a
way that the class of natural numbers contains the inﬁnitely many elements in the line of
succession starting with 0, and only those elements. The type of procedure is seen at its
simplest in a later set-theoretical variant. Take the null class, ∅, to be the number 0. Then
take “the successor of β” to be the class union of β and the unit class of β−{β∪{β}}. Thus,
with ‘S0’ for ‘the successor of 0’, ‘SS0’ for ‘the successor of S0’, etc., S0= {∅}, SS0=
{∅, {∅}}, etc. The signs ‘1’ and ‘2’, etc. then simply abbreviate ‘S0’, ‘SS0’, etc. What
Russell did, was take the unit class of the null class, rather than the null class, to be 0 and
specifying successor in a more complex manner was then simply use (P-D)-5 to specify
what a natural number is. Following Russell’s elegant presentation [Russell, 1953], one
deﬁnes a hereditary class (property) as one such that if x is in the class (has the property)
the successor of x is in the class (has the property). An inductive class (property) is then
said to be a hereditary class (property) that 0 is an element of (has). And, ﬁnally, the prop-
erty (class) of natural numbers is the property (class) of having all inductive properties (of
elements that belong to all inductive classes). Thus, is a natural number is an impredica-
tive property in the sense that it is an inductive property while speciﬁed as the property of
having all inductive properties (correspondingly the class an impredicative class).
Frege and Russell thus answer the traditional ontological questions about numbers —
Do numbers exist? If so, what are they? The answer to the ﬁrst is “Yes,” for Frege, but
“No” for Russell, as we shall discuss later, since Russell did not take classes to exist on
his “no class theory” of the ﬁrst edition of Principia Mathematica. Frege’s response to the
second is that they are classes, hence objects. More speciﬁcally one can say: “A (cardinal)
number is a class of concepts such that all concepts in the class are equinumerous and any
concept equinumerous to a concept in the class is in the class.” (What he actually does is
closer to (i) deﬁning “the number which belongs to the concept F” as “the extension of the
concept ‘equinumerous to the concept F”’ and then (ii) deﬁne “n is a (cardinal) number”
as “There exists a concept such that n is the number which belongs to it” [Frege, 1953,
85].) The second part of his logistic construal of arithmetic was to ﬁnd a way of showing
that arithmetical truths could be logically derived from logical truths, having supposedly
shown that arithmetical concepts could be construed in terms of logical concepts. Arith-
metic could then be claimed to be a matter of logic.
2
CONTEXT, NUMBER AND NEO-FREGEAN LOGICISM
One of the most widely discussed aspect’s of Frege’s philosophy of language has been
the meaning and signiﬁcance of his so-called “context principle.” For Dummett that
principle achieves the status of a philosophical axiom along with the more familiar neo-
Wittgensteinian dictum — to know the meaning is to know the use. In fact Dummett
takes the two principles to be pretty much the same and to allow him to recognize abstract
objects and reject popular causal accounts of reference and meaning. The latter accounts
question our being in “causal contact” with abstract objects and, as we shall see, take that
to be a ground for rejecting such entities, and hence “logicism,” in “nominalist” fashion.
Dummett observes that since we know when it is correct to say things like “We crossed

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
459
the Equator” and know the connection of the Equator to certain truths about the Earth (its
having poles, etc.), even though the Equator, unlike the Earth, is an abstract object, we can
safely speak of the referent of the expression “the Equator” [1991, 182]. This illustrates
the importance the context principle plays in Dummett’s own thinking and its link to his
focus on the “use” of language. But it also shows that he resolves classical ontological
problems, like the problem of universals, by simply noting that there obviously are com-
mon properties and referents of words like “red,” “white” and “tan” — referents other
than the red, white and tan things that “satisfy” the predicates. For we determine the truth
values of sentences like “Mondrian used the color red extensively, but never used tan,”
“Red is darker than white” and “Red is a primary color but tan is not” quite readily. One
can take Dummett as holding the problems to be resolved too simply or as not being real
problems, since his polemic against “nominalists” is really a dismissal of the question
nominalists purport to answer. This point is further illustrated by Dummett’s view that
Frege was the ﬁrst to take “the linguistic turn” by turning “an ontological question into
a linguistic one.” Dummett sees Frege’s early attempts to deﬁne “cardinal number” as
taking that turn for the ﬁrst time. Hence Frege’s logicism was a key to the development of
analytic philosophy in the 20th century. To Dummett the signiﬁcance of Frege’s deﬁning
“cardinal number” as he did is not taking numbers “to be classes” but specifying a context
for numerical expressions that provides a way of verifying the truth or falsity of sentences
employing numerical expressions, such as “The number of people in the room is 7.”
The context principle may be stated as: Only in the context of a statement does a term
(phrase) have a reference and sense. (Those who participate in the discussions about it
tend to distinguish taking it with respect to referents and truth values and taking it in
terms of senses and propositions.) Whereas Russell would take the meaning of a genuine
or logically proper name to be the object it is taken (used) to refer to — the interpretation
— Frege supposedly holds that such a term would neither have sense nor reference outside
a context supplied by a statement. Ironically, given Frege’s later distinction between sense
and reference, there is a way in which the context principle can be seen to be both true
and trivial. Consider the sentences “2 is even” and “Plato believes that 2 is even.” On
the view Frege developed after his Grundlagen statement of the context principle, the
expression “2” does not have either the same sense or the same referent in them, since
it “shifts” its sense and reference as it occurs in the second sentence. In this case, the
key shift is from the embedded sentence denoting a truth value, as it occurs by itself,
to its denoting the proposition that is its sense as it occurs “by itself.” Thus in a totally
trivial sense the context determines the sense and the denotation. This was Frege’s key
to resolving problems posed by certain “intensional” (as well as “intentional”) contexts.
Other complications to Frege’s view are posed by the way in which a sentence may be
“deconstructed.” The sentence “aRb” can be “decomposed” in terms of the names “a”
and “b” and the dyadic predicate “xRy,” or of “b” and the monadic predicate “aRy,” for
example.
Some defend the context principle on grounds that connect with the so-called veriﬁ-
cation criterion or theory of meaning and a once familiar issue raised by various inter-
pretations of Wittgenstein’s “private language” argument (purportedly showing that the
notion of a private language is incoherent since there are no criteria for determining cor-

460
Herbert Hochberg
rect use). Consider, for example, someone uttering a token of the word “Socrates” and
suddenly dropping dead before being able to say anything else. We might never be able
to ﬁgure out what she was going to say. Whether she was referring to the historical ﬁgure
or her neighbor’s dog, named after him. Surely it doesn’t follow that she wasn’t refer-
ring to something on the grounds that she didn’t ﬁnish the statement or since we cannot
determine who or what was referred to. We would simply never know whether she was
referring to some person, or other object or simply uttering sounds. (Consider her hav-
ing uttered “this” or “that” instead of a proper name.) But to even suggest that certainly
suggests, by ordinary usage, that she could have referred to something or someone. It
is simply obvious that, for whatever purpose one uses the term on such, fortunately rare,
occasions, one sometimes has referred (and intended to refer) to someone or something.
(Now consider the unfortunate person having been uttering unfamiliar sounds referring
to the trees in her garden — the sounds being tokens of the names she has given or is
currently giving to them.)
Frege seems to reject the context principle in an 1899 letter to Hilbert:
It is absolutely essential for the rigor of mathematical investigations that the
distinction between deﬁnitions and all other statements be respected most
thoroughly. The other statements (axioms, basic laws, theorems) cannot con-
tain any word and any symbol whose sense and reference or whose contri-
bution to the expression of the thought did not fully exist beforehand, so
that there is no doubt with regard to the sense of the sentence, the thought
expressed by the sentence [1975, 62].
In any case, little is to be gained if, like Dummett, one both preserves the context principle
for the later Frege (for senses) and advocates it by taking it to state that “... the sense of an
expression relates exclusively to its role in sentences, and consists in its contribution to the
thought expressed by any sentence in which it occurs. So understood, it is indisputable
that Frege continued to maintain it in Grundgezetze...” [1991, 184]. That not only ﬁts
with what is said in the letter to Hilbert but, depending on which words are stressed,
can be taken to turn the principle upside down and into a way of expressing support
for a principle of compositionality. Dummett, in fact, entitles a section of his book “A
compositional interpretation of the context principle” [1991, 202]. But his discussion is
disappointing, as, repeating a theme from an earlier book [1973], he merely claims that a
mastery of basic “characteristic sentences” or “recognition statements” is required for our
understanding of a term. These are surprising, as well as unhelpful: “... statements of the
form ‘This is T’, where T is the term in question, or ‘This S is T’ where S is a sortal such
as ‘person’, ‘street’...” [1991, 204].
Russell, who sometimes took the meaning of a logically proper name to be given by
its referent and that of a primitive predicate to be the property or relation it represented,
views Dummett rejects, could easily accept a context principle in such a form, even with-
out accepting propositional entities.11 Russell’s saying, in his logical atomism essays
11In a way he did since he often took predicates, in Frege’s manner, to be complex expressions indicating a
logical structure, as “Fx” and “Rxy” do. Thus predicates and names (the latter by being “simple”) indicate their
grammatical role [Russell, 1971, 338].

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
461
that predicates and names referred in diﬀerent ways (and didn’t exist in the same sense of
“exist”) reﬂects that. Nor is any more said by Dummett’s explication that “The context
principle ... amounts to the conceptual priority of thoughts over their constituents: the
constituents can be grasped only as potential constituents of complete thoughts” [1991,
184]. For Dummett seems to be doing no more than reiterating the weak claim that to
know the “meaning” (in one sense) of a term is to know its “logical grammar” — what
kind of term it is. So that even if one knows the referent of a logically proper name,
knows its meaning in the sense of what it refers to, one must know that it can combine
with predicates of a certain kind to form a sentence, that it cannot function as a predicate,
etc. One can even stretch this into holding that one knows its “role” in “the language” as
“a whole.” This is merely a kind of innocuous logical “holism” or contextualism that need
not be disputed by those who espouse a reference theory of meaning and seek to avoid
the recognition of senses and propositions as entities, while rejecting the replacement of
classical philosophical issues by a focus on the “use” or “role” of words and sentences in
ordinary language, including ordinary mathematical usage. It is an odd feature of analytic
philosophy how such notions, derived from the logical holism of Wittgenstein’s Trac-
tatus, have been transformed into extensively elaborated and discussed “philosophies of
language” within contemporary analytic philosophy. Thus one ﬁnds G. Evans announcing
a “Generality Constraint” whereby one can be said to comprehend a thought only if one
can be said to also comprehend every thought of a certain kind. Such a network of con-
nected thoughts form a kind of limited holistic context. Thus I can be said to understand
“6 is even” only if I also understand “7 is odd” [1982, 100 ﬀ.].
The context principle, as stated in Grundlagen [1953, 71-72] is not as clear-cut as some
think. For, ﬁrst, Frege is focused on distinguishing between the “content” of a word and
our having an “idea” of it to deny the view that “... any word for which we can ﬁnd no
corresponding mental picture appears to have no content.” The way to do this is to avoid
taking words in isolation and to focus on propositions, for this will block our thinking
in terms of an image or mental picture of some kind. Second, he is concerned with
sentences like “The number 0 belongs to the concept F” being taken to indicate that “0” is
functioning as a predicate representing a concept rather than being “only an element in the
predicate” [1953, 68]. Thus it can still be seen as a “self-subsistent [independent] object.”
Third, he consistently violates the principle in (a) his discussion of words like “the,” as
“the deﬁnite article claims to refer to a deﬁnite object,” (b) his noting that the expression
“the largest proper fraction” is senseless and “has no content” since no object falls under
the concept represented and (c) his saying things like “In this deﬁnition the sense of the
expression ‘extension of a concept’ is assumed to be known” (1953, 117). Moreover,
in speaking of concepts he constantly seems to presume we understand the meaning of
concept expressions, like “is F,” and not merely expressions like the one I just used to refer
to an expression — the entire expression including the quotation marks — which would
supposedly supply the “context” to provide its meaning. Thus, for example, he speaks of
a concept being contradictory, though the concept expressions are only mentioned, and
not used, in the statements about the concepts. Fourth, he emphasizes the incompleteness
of concepts as opposed to the completeness of propositions. This he does by noting that
concepts cannot be asserted, only judgment contents can. Thus, in the case of a relational

462
Herbert Hochberg
proposition, if you withdraw both terms you are left with a concept that has no more
“sense” than a simple concept has. (Austin, interestingly, interjects “assertible” to form
“assertible sense” in the translated text [1953, 82].) There is a further point worth noting
about Frege’s context principle that is related to this focus on concepts as incomplete and
his contrasting them with judgment contents. In his 1879 Begriﬀsschrift Frege had already
indicated an interesting form of the context principle, one that calls to mind Russell’s
comments about “incomplete symbols.” Frege contrasts concepts like “the number 20”
and “every positive integer” as not being of the same rank, as what can be asserted about
the number 20 cannot be asserted, in the same sense, about “every positive integer.” And
he goes on to write:
The expression “every positive integer” by itself, unlike “the number 20”,
yields no independent {selbstandige} idea; it acquires a sense only in the
context of a sentence [1972, 128].12
Here it would seem clear that an expression “every positive integer” diﬀers from one like
“the number 20” in an obvious and innocent sense of requiring completion to express a
deﬁnite thought that represents a truth value — hence a deﬁnite object, while the latter
expression, as it stands, can be understood to express a “selbstandige” idea that denotes a
speciﬁc object, the number 20.
Dummett infers, from his views about meaning and the context principle, that to un-
derstand a statement is to have the ability to recognize “what counts as verifying the
statement, i. e. as conclusively establishing it as true.” This is a generalization of his
construal of the “central notion of the theory of meaning for mathematical statements”
where the notion of truth is replaced by that of proof [1978, 225-26]. Understanding a
mathematical statement, say S, requires our being able to distinguish proofs of S from
non-proofs, and this ability to distinguish proofs from non-proofs cannot then depend on
our understanding the meaning of S. For S has no meaning or truth value prior to our dis-
tinguishing proofs from non-proofs, and thus appears to be arbitrary. In what sense then
is S a statement (or an expression of a statement) as opposed to a mere string of marks?
And in what sense can one speak of such a “proof” or “disproof” of S as establishing it
to be true or false? Lindstr¨om, taking a sentence to be a “string of symbols,” argues that
one does not prove (or even assert) sentences, in the ordinary sense of “prove,” and thus
establish “strings of symbols” as true. Thus proofs in Dummett’s sense “are not proofs
in the ordinary sense; indeed, they have almost nothing in common with proofs in the
ordinary sense” [2000, 134]. If we have a statement, we must clearly know what it means
to grasp that a sequence of other statements provides a proof of it. Moreover, there is no
basis, aside from having chosen them, for adopting one set of rules of logic as opposed
to another, especially the rules of classical logic. This has the consequence, on Dum-
mett’s view, that the meanings of the statements change if the rules of inference diﬀer,
so, for example, the meaning of arithmetical statements in terms of a system of classical
logic is diﬀerent from that given to them in a system employing intuitionist logic. But
this poses a problem for Dummett’s view, as it would seem to follow that with respect to
a system of classical logic we have, as we will later discuss in connection with Carnap,
12German speaking scholars suggest that the expression “a sense” should probably be replaced by “its sense.”

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
463
a purely “internal” question regarding whether they “establish their conclusions as true”
and hence the answer is trivially “yes.” For that follows from the “meaning” of those
conclusions. But Dummett takes the answer to be “no,” for how else could he reject one
system as incorrect and accept another as correct, thus employing “external” criteria, in-
stead of merely proposing the adoption of one linguistic framework rather than another?
Since Dummett must then accept that “these conclusions have a meaning independent of
what is regarded as (deﬁned to be) a ‘proof”’, Lindstr¨om argues that Dummett’s view is
therefore not only implausible but incoherent [2000, 135].
The “ﬁnitism” embodied in Dummett’s veriﬁcationist approach to logic and mathe-
matcs lead him to reject our purportedly having a deﬁnite “idea” of an inﬁnite totality,
and hence a deﬁnite concept of the natural numbers as an inﬁnite collection. His argu-
ment has changed over time. Initially he held that an “indeﬁnitely extensible” concept
is ambiguous. Thus, the Russell class of all classes that are not members of themselves
cannot be taken to be a deﬁnite totality, R. For, since R cannot belong to itself without
paradox, we have to recognize that R is not a member of itself and think of an extended
class, R∗= R ∪{R}. But then we can “extend” that to a new class and so on. Hence the
concept — being a class of classes that are not members of themselves — is “indeﬁnitely
extensible” and “inherently vague” as it does not have a determinate extension. What
Dummett has in mind is a notion Bernays had employed in a 1935 paper purporting to
refute Platonism in mathematics:
The essential importance of these antinomies is to bring out the impossibility
of combining the following two things: the idea of the totality of all mathe-
matical objects and the general concepts of set and function; for the totality
itself would form a domain of elements for sets, and arguments and values
for functions [1964, 277].
Noting that the concept of natural number was not indeﬁnitely extensible, since the class
of natural numbers is not itself a natural number, Dummett sought another ground for
holding it to be “indeterminate” or “inherently vague” [1978, 197]. He found it in the
fact that the natural numbers form a totality to which mathematical induction applies. For
that involves an “impredicative” use of quantiﬁers and the idea that induction holds for
any well-deﬁned property, where the concept of a well-deﬁned property is indeﬁnitely
extensible. This is supposedly so since a well-deﬁned property is one expressible with the
linguistic apparatus of a precisely speciﬁed language. We can then deﬁne, “by reference
to the expressions of this language” another property “which we also recognize as well-
deﬁned, but which we cannot express in the language” [1978, 198].
To speak of properties being language dependent in this way and of “properties,” not
predicates, as “deﬁned” raises questions, though logicians generally speak of a class be-
ing “well-deﬁned” or not. This bears on the early disputes among Russell, Ramsey and
Wittgenstein regarding Russell’s “Axiom of Reducibility” (see below). That aside, Dum-
mett’s failure to ﬁnd a common feature linking the concept of natural number to “inher-
ently vague” concepts like that of class of classes that are not members of themselves
leads him to focus on the “impredicative” version of mathematical induction and, im-
plicitly, the Frege-Russell logistic construal of “natural number.” For without the latter

464
Herbert Hochberg
construal of the concept, the principle of induction is simply a truth about natural numbers
and not a part of the explication of the concept. But Dummett obviously felt the inade-
quacy of questioning the concept of natural number on such a ground, for he later sought
to strengthen it by holding that the concept of natural number simply was indeﬁnitely
extensible.
The ﬁrst step was to argue that the concept of real number is indeﬁnitely extensible,
given the acceptance of Cantor’s diagonal argument for there being non-denumerably
many real numbers. Dummett sees that argument as having “... precisely the form of
a principle of extension for an indeﬁnitely extensible concept: given any denumerable
totality of real numbers, we can deﬁne, in terms of that totality, a real number that does not
belong to it” [2002, 27]. Yet, he does not deal with the totality of real numbers but merely
with any denumerable totality of real numbers. It is any of those that can be “extended”
by the addition of a real number not in the totality. But, since Cantor’s argument takes
there to be a determinate totality of real numbers “the alternative is to regard the concept
real number as an indeﬁnitely extensible one” [2002, 27]. This is hardly an argument.
Yet, it is on that basis that Dummett rests his claim that the concept of a real number
is “indeﬁnitely extensible.” And, not stopping there, he notes that the totality of natural
numbers is also not a natural number, i. e. is not a ﬁnite cardinal, where we “... assume
we have a grasp of the totality of natural numbers...” and asks “... but do we?” [2002,
28] The focal question now becomes one of how we decide that we do. For Dummett
the answer is simple, it must be capable of being “conveyed to” someone who does not
have it: “... a conception of the totality of the natural numbers is supposed to be conveyed
to one as yet unaware of any but ﬁnite totalities, but all that he is given is a principle ...
for passing from any ﬁnite totality to a larger one” [2002, 28]. Thus “The fact is that a
concept determining an intrinsically inﬁnite totality ... simply is an indeﬁnitely extensible
one” [2002, 28]. But that is hardly a fact, as he simply stipulates the result he seeks. One
can only look for what lies behind the reasoning.
While we have determinate concepts like three cups, four cups, etc. and successor of,
the concept of a natural number intrinsically involves the notion of “inﬁnitely many” and
hence of an inductive class. One thing he could be doing is bringing in the second-order
impredicative version of mathematical induction and taking it as part of the explication of
the concept of a natural number. Alternatively, he could be simply holding that applying
mathematical induction we take “all” to apply to inﬁnitely many and, using induction
in mathematical proofs about natural numbers, we thereby take the concept of a natural
number to involve the notion of inﬁnitely many. In either case, we must show that the
concept of a natural number, involving the notion of an inﬁnite totality or of inﬁnitely
many, can be “conveyed” to one who does not have it. Almost echoing Plato’s arguments
for the doctrine of recollection and Descartes on innate ideas, he holds this cannot be
done.
Frege’s context principle is also relevant to contemporary discussions of logicism in
view of its connection to the emergence of “neo-Fregean” logicism. In his discussion of a
deﬁnition of “the number of Fs” by means of a purported contextual deﬁnition, Frege ﬁrst
considers deﬁning “0” implicitly as “the number of the concept x  x. ” He does this, in
the Grundlagen, along with specifying an inductive procedure for arriving at a succession

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
465
of the numbers of concepts. A few pages later he considers an implicit deﬁnition in
the context of an identity statement: “the number of Fs = the number of Gs.”13 But he
then brieﬂy discusses a problem that supposedly arises in the ﬁrst case, since one has
not determined the truth value of statements of identity involving an expression like “the
number of Fs” and a name like “Julius Caesar,” as in the sentence “The number of Fs
= Julius Caesar.” In the second case he raises the problem in terms of “England is the
same as the direction of the earth’s axis” — after having introduced the problem about
what the direction of a line is in order to clarify the issue about numbers [1953, 78]. For
the discussion of parallel lines and directions can be put “less clumsily” and “can readily
be transferred in essentials to apply to the case of numerical identity” [1953, 76]. His
point is that while one has speciﬁed when the number of Fs is the same number as the
number of Gs, or when the direction of line A is the same as the direction of line B, by
means of “F is equinumerous to G” and “A is parallel to B,” and has thus speciﬁed the
condition for statements of identity like “the number of Fs = the number of Gs” and “the
direction of A = the direction of B” to be true, one has not determined what “sort” of
thing a cardinal number is. Hence we cannot determine that England is not a direction of
a line or a cardinal number. We supposedly have no way of determining the truth value
of the sentences “The direction of the earth’s axis=England” or “The number of planets=
England.” This has become known as the “Julius Caesar problem.” The problem, as Frege
indicates, “looks nonsensical” since, of course, “no one is going to confuse England with
the direction of the Earth’s axis; but that is no thanks to our deﬁnition...” [1953, 78].
That is, by our ordinary conception of cardinal numbers we know Julius Caesar is not a
cardinal number, but on the implicit deﬁnition being proposed there is nothing that plays
the role of that conception. Just as a formalist does not specify a deﬁnite kind of entity as
a natural number, aside from being something fulﬁlling the (P-D) axioms, so such implicit
deﬁnitions do not rule out identifying a number with Caesar.
The Caesar problem is a symptom of a problem faced by Wright and B. Hale who
attempt to employ implicit deﬁnitions, not contextual deﬁnitions, to develop a signiﬁcant
contemporary variant of logicism. Seeking to resurrect and develop Frege’s suggested
use of implicit deﬁnitions, a use he employed en route to his development of his logicist
analysis, they have set out a philosophy of arithmetic that has been aptly characterized
as “neo-Fregean.” A signiﬁcant portion of Dummett’s 1991 book on Frege’s philosophy
of mathematics is devoted to the context principle and the Caesar problem and contains
a lengthy critical discussion of Wright’s views (as expressed in Wright, 1983) that dis-
pute the claim that a Fregean program of arriving at a satisfactory account of arithmetical
entities, truths and concepts can succeed. Wright’s view, later elaborated by himself and
Hale [2001], makes crucial use of what is known as Hume’s Principle: the number of Fs
= the number of Gs if and only if F is in one-one correspondence with G. That principle
is essentially what Frege discussed, citing Hume, on the way to providing an explicit def-
inition of “cardinal number” [1953, 73-74]. He brieﬂy considered it since it satisﬁes the
familiar mathematician’s requirement for introducing objects of a certain kind: that one
13On deﬁning identity itself, Frege writes: “Now Leibniz’s deﬁnition is as follows: ‘Things are the same as
each other, of which one can be substituted for the other without loss of truth’. This I propose to adopt as my
own deﬁnition of identity” [1953, 76].

466
Herbert Hochberg
state a condition specifying when objects of that kind are identical — identity conditions.
But the real issue that is raised is not about contextual deﬁnitions, for such deﬁnitions,
as we will see in considering Russell’s contextual deﬁnitions for class expressions and
deﬁnite descriptions, may be eliminable explicit deﬁnitions. Rather, the issue raised con-
cerns the problematic appeal to so-called “implicit deﬁnitions” as providing “analyses.”
Taking implicit deﬁnitions to be a species of “deﬁnition,” and hence of “analytic truth,”
Hale and Wright seek to resolve the Caesar problem, in “To Bury Caesar” [2001, 335-
96], by focusing on certain purported “facts of the matter” regarding what sorts of objects
numbers are. Such facts supposedly show that they are “not trees, tigers, persons or coun-
tries,” and, moreover, that “Hume’s Principle could serve as a partial explanation whose
epistemological status ... might rub oﬀon the Dedekind-Peano axioms.”
It is a familiar view, and one that arises in many variations, the “structuralism” of
Dedekind can be seen as one, to hold that axioms, such as the (P-D) axioms, provide
implicit deﬁnitions for their non-logical primitive terms, since the latter are not explicitly
deﬁned and are the only terms occurring in the axioms that are not logical terms. The
problem lies with the notion of an implicit deﬁnition. All that is said by its use is that
we limit an “interpretation” of the postulates to terms that will render them “true.” Thus
we can interpret the term “number” in the familiar way in terms of — 0, 1, 2... — or we
can take it in terms of any other progression. Or, one can take it to hold of a “system”
of otherwise unspeciﬁed “abstract” objects — abstract in the sense of being obtained
by having the axioms suﬃce to uniquely determine them. (One might take Dedekind to
have held this or the view that, given the axioms, there is no need to say anything further
— such as that numbers are classes.) Hence, to speak of an “implicit deﬁnition” as if
it were a deﬁnition that gives an analysis of the concept(s) expressed by the “deﬁned”
term(s) is misleading, though there is a purely “verbal” link to the notion of a “contextual
deﬁnition.” For those who speak of implicit deﬁnitions often think of axioms providing a
“context” that gives “meaning” to terms. But Russell’s contextual deﬁnitions for deﬁnite
descriptions provide a way of eliminating the contextually deﬁned expression in diverse
contexts. Implicit deﬁnitions, as Hale and Wright note, do not do that.
Hale and Wright argue that Hume’s Principle suﬃces to “set up number as a sortal
concept” [2001, 15], which is held to be all that is required. If we ask why that suﬃces,
we are told that it is because that is what it is to be a sortal concept — to be a concept
that is partially explicated in terms of having a “criterion of identity” for its application
[14, 15]. Thus the “implicit,” not “contextual,” deﬁnition establishes “number” as a sortal
concept (actually, if one is careful, what is implicitly deﬁned is “[the] number-of-Φs”) on
a par with other sortal concepts. As one can then decide that Hale’s horse is not identical
with Wright’s and that Wright’s cabbage is not Hale’s, one does not have a problem
posed by mixing sortal categories and asking if one of the horses is a cabbage. To think
that there is a problem about numbers would apparently “rub oﬀ” in that one would then
have to think that there is a corresponding problem about cabbages and horses. But the
familiar problem with being content with implicit deﬁnitions has not changed. It remains
what Russell noted long ago: “it fails to give an adequate basis for arithmetic” in that it
does not enable us to know whether there are any sets of terms verifying Peano’s axioms
or specify “numbers to be such as can be used for counting common objects.” Doing

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
467
the latter requires the number signs to have “a deﬁnite meaning. . . not merely. . . certain
formal properties” [1953, 10].14 We are still not told what numbers are, as Frege does tell
us, nor how they are shown not to be entities at all, as Russell purports to do.
Facing the problem, Hale and Wright take Hume’s Principle to provide an implicit deﬁ-
nition of an expression for a numerical operator, “the-number-of-Φs,” that enables them to
derive the (P-D) postulates in a “suitable system” of second-order logic — using predicate
quantiﬁers. [Again, it is to be emphasized that they do not deal with the term “number”
but with the entire expression containing the purported sortal term “number.”] But they
do not, and cannot, escape the problems posed by implicit deﬁnitions and the Caesar
problem. What they do, by the end of their essay, is arrive at the obvious conclusion that
people and numbers are diﬀerent sorts of things, just as Frege had noted that Caesar was
no more a number than England was the direction of the Earth’s axis. But, whereas Frege
had also noted that that was no thanks to the implicit deﬁnition he was considering, Hale
and Wright think they can provide an explanation by appealing to Hume’s principle.
Their purported explanation of why human beings cannot be numbers is that the crite-
ria for “personal identity” are not the criteria for the identity of numbers, which is stated
in Hume’s Principle [2001, 396]. What that amounts to is that we rule out certain things
from being numbers by being of the wrong “category.” If one stops to think about it,
this is pretty much what Dedekind’s structuralism amounts to since the identity of natural
numbers is given be their place in the ordering imposed by the axioms. Hale and Wright,
in eﬀect, simply add postulates to Hume’s Principle specifying the identity conditions for
what are taken to be numbers. They, like Dedekind, by so doing, specify the numbers
(actually the “concept” number-of-Φs) as the things with a certain purported identity cri-
terion. Persons, as one would expect, do not satisfy the condition as that is not how we
identify Cicero and Tully as the same person nor Cicero not being Julius Caesar. 2 being
the even prime but not being the sum of 1 and 0, Venus and the evening star being the
same, etc. are sorted diﬀerently. Such identities and diﬀerences furnish the requisite facts
and categorial diﬀerences. If we are not willing to accept that the purported problem is re-
solved by imposing such facts, in the form of establishing categorial restraints that forbid
“cross-categorial identiﬁcations,” they see no problem. For it is a problem that “aﬄicts all
sortal concepts” [2001, 396]. Hence there is no special problem posed by taking Hume’s
Principle to give us the understanding of numerical terms since it “rubs oﬀ. . . epistemo-
logically” on the (P-D) axioms — “And that is good enough” [2001, 396]. If you reject
Hume’s Principle as being suﬃcient to provide a philosophical analysis of the problems
posed by arithmetical “objects” you are supposedly faced with the insoluble problem of
saying why Hale’s cabbage is not Wright’s horse. But that, aside from being diﬃcult to
take seriously, overlooks an elementary fact.
People, animals, cabbages and trees are familiar objects with familiar properties. Num-
bers, as purported objects, pose questions that ordinary physical objects do not pose. (i)
14At places Russell was less deﬁnite and more pragmatic with regards to his own choice of such “deﬁnite
objects,” for he held that “. . . any indubitable set of objects” that “satisfy the formulae of arithmetic” may be
taken as numbers [1952, 209-10]. It is worth stressing his use of “indubitable” — ruling out “abstract” objects
determined solely by the axioms — and recalling that by the “no-class” theory of the ﬁrst edition of Principia,
number expressions were deﬁned in terms of class expressions, which, in turn, were eliminated by contextual
deﬁnition and, hence, were not taken to represent anything.

468
Herbert Hochberg
Are there such objects? (ii) If we hold that there are, then, aside from being objects that
satisfy the (P-D) axioms, what are they? (iii) Are purported arithmetical truths “really”
true and, if so, how do they diﬀer from ordinary factual truths? (Or if they are not really
true, why are they not so?”) What logicism purports to do is identify numbers as a certain
kind of object (Frege) or explain how to avoid taking numbers to be anything at all (Rus-
sell) while, for both Frege and Russell, specifying how the truths of arithmetic are to be
construed. In the case of trees, tigers, cabbages and people there are neither correspond-
ing questions about whether there are such objects nor about what sorts of objects they
are (that there are related scientiﬁc questions one can raise is another matter, as are issues
about proof procedures in mathematics). Moreover, statements of fact about things like
cabbages and kings do not lead to puzzles about their connection to logical truths. That is
why logic courses often begin by contrasting true statements of empirical fact with “an-
alytic” or tautological truths of logic. That contrast has a long history. Thus one ﬁnds
the distinction between necessary and contingent truths made by Augustine, along with
his making use of an arithmetical example. Of course one can raise classical philosophi-
cal problems about physical objects and our perception and knowledge of them. But one
who seriously doubts the existence of physical objects is mad, while one who questions
the existence of mathematical “objects” is reasonably taken to have an “inquiring mind.”
Skepticism about the physical world is simply not the same sort of thing as being puzzled
about the existence of sets or numbers — the mysteries of modern physics and the physi-
ology of perception notwithstanding. Thus, typically, one who argues that numbers exist,
and are to be taken in a speciﬁc way, tends to argue that attempts to avoid acknowledg-
ing such objects fail. Supposedly, we are forced to accept numbers, in some fashion, in
order to account for certain truths — that there are more people than chairs at a dinner
party, laws of physics, that the number of natural numbers is not a natural number, etc.
Thus Hilbert’s formalism emphasized the role of concrete sign tokens in mathematics —
objects that the mathematician produced, arranged and could observe. And those who
deny the existence of numbers often attempt to show how to accommodate mathematical
truths without recognizing numbers as entities. Finally, as regards neo-Fregean logicism,
there is the general question of the viability of “implicit” deﬁnition as a method or tool of
philosophical “analysis.”
Since the statement of Hume’s Principle is taken as an axiom embodying an unexpli-
cated (undeﬁned) use of “number of” that expression is open to various interpretations
— and each “unwanted” interpretation must be ruled out — as one rules out “human be-
ings.” One has a general way of ruling out unwanted interpretations, in either Russell’s
or Frege’s fashion, by oﬀering explicit deﬁnitions of the key arithmetical terms. This is
what will ground Frege’s dismissal of the “Caesar-England problem” as nonsensical. But
even with purported explicit deﬁnitions, there are further problems that all forms of logi-
cism face. Russell and Frege each provided a speciﬁc interpretation of the three primitive
terms in the Peano postulates. Such an interpretation, providing a model, is simply one of
many possible interpretations of the postulates [Hochberg, 1956; Benacerraf, 1965]. One
who oﬀers such an “explicit” interpretation thus faces the problem of arguing why a spe-
ciﬁc interpretation is suitable to resolve the philosophical problems posed by arithmetic
— What are numbers? What kinds of truths are arithmetical truths? Hale and Wright

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
469
do not get to the point of answering the ﬁrst question since they do not oﬀer a speciﬁc
interpretation in that (a) “number” remains a primitive term as part of a primitive function
phrase — (the)-number-of-Φs — what they call the “numerical operator,” and (b) they
add an axiom, Hume’s Principle, containing that phrase to a system of logic. The axiom
is not, as it stands, a statement of logic, but they suggest that it is since it is “...analytic by
virtue of being determinative of the concept it thereby seeks to explain” (2001, 14). Thus
Hume’s Principle, stating an implicit deﬁnition, is analytic, and hence a matter of logic,
since an implicit deﬁnition, being “determinative of the concept” and thus explanatory (i.
e. a form of deﬁnition), is declared to be analytic. (What is being determined here is the
use of the term “analytic.”) Such “deﬁnitions” are said to be “determinative of” concepts
since they provide a way to “ﬁx the meaning of an expression by imposing some form
of constraint” [2001, 117]. Since this simply amounts to taking it to be analytic since it
is added as an axiom, one can take Dedekind to have done the same by taking a set of
axioms, rather than one, to be determinative of a system without further specifying just
what, if anything, the elements are. Overlooking the fact that just what the entities are,
aside from being declared to be the unique set of entities fulﬁlling a, or a set of, axioms,
has still not been speciﬁed, one might suggest that if specifying “constraints,” rather than
identifying the entities, eliminates all interpretations but one, they provide a kind of ex-
plicit deﬁnition by abstraction in Dedekind’s manner. Wright and Hale believe they have
a way of responding to this by holding that “number” is the only sortal concept for which
a one-one correlation supplies the criterion for determining identity. In dealing with num-
bers we deal with a sortal concept that has a unique method for determining the truth of
statements of identity — establishing a one-one correlation between appropriate terms.
Caesar and England are not “objects” where statements of identity concerning them are
explicated in terms of establishing such a correlation.
Again, the similarity to what Dedekind can be taken to have done is obvious, since his
numbers are uniquely determined by their place in the progression. Hence the number
of Fs is the number of Gs if and only if the one occupies the same place as the “other.”
What is more, the number of Fs will be found to be n if one “counts” the Fs and arrives
at n. In fact in purely arithmetical identities, like “4 = 2 +2,” one does not identify the
“number-of- Fs” with “the number-of- Gs” but, rather, “the number x” with “the number
y.” The criterion for such an identiﬁcations is not at all furnished by a one-one correlation
but by the place of x and y in the “progression” of the numbers — the “ordinal place” if
one chooses to put it that way.
Frege’s point regarding the Caesar problem is missed by the “neo-Fregeans.” Frege
is not talking about identifying the natural numbers with people, he is simply talking
about one number being identiﬁed with Caesar to emphasize that we do not know what
that number is, if we merely characterize it in terms of “the number of Fs,” for some
concept F. It could still be Caesar, or just about anything. Then Caesar would not be the
number of Gs, if G was not equinumerous with F, but would be if it was. All Hale and
Wright do is furnish an equivalence, a description of a characteristic of numbers that, in
a circuitous way, does what Frege did. For Frege used that characteristic to “identify”
numbers as classes of equinumerous concepts. What Hale and Wright do is retain the
phrase “number-of-Φs” as a primitive sign pattern. In so doing they do not employ a

470
Herbert Hochberg
sortal concept, number, in Hume’s Principle, just as they do not talk about identity with
respect to “the number x” but, rather, with respect to “the number of Fs.” Doing the latter,
they make use of a function expression, “the-number-of-Φs,” in order to introduce the
term “number” via such a functional expression. Aside from any problems that arise from
the notion of a sortal concept, the speciﬁc problem they face arises prior to their having
such a purported concept. Thinking about what they do, one realizes, as Frege did, that
all one does with Hume’s Principle is introduce a condition for when two concepts, say
F and G, are said to be equinumerous. One simply then says that the same expression of
the form “the number of Φs” applies to both concepts. All one has actually said, then,
is “F is equinumerous to (has the same number of elements as) G if and only if F and G
are in one-one correspondence” and “the number of Fs equals the number of Gs” merely
abbreviates “F is equinumerous to G.”
What Frege realized, as becomes clear from the development of the Grundlagen, is
that Hume’s Principle sets out an explicit deﬁnition of the relational predicate “is equinu-
merous to,” which is a “second level” predicate that takes predicates, like “F” and “G,”
as apparent terms (“apparent” indicates that “F” and “G” really occur as predicates when
“F is equinumerous with G” is “expanded,” just as they do with regard to the Fregean
second level predicate “(∀x)(φx →ψx),” which, for arguments “F” and “G,” yields
“(∀x)(Fx →Gx)” ). Having deﬁned such a relational predicate, Frege was in a posi-
tion, as Russell would later be, to explicitly deﬁne signs that could be used to interpret the
three primitive non-logical signs of the (P-D) postulates.
Aside from questions about the viability of implicit deﬁnitions as analyses, there is a
real philosophical problem with not really using the term “number” in Hume’s Principle
but, instead, employing the form of expression “the-number-of-Φs” (with “Φ” as an ap-
propriate predicate variable). This introduces a function expression that combines with
predicate expressions and is, implicitly, taken to represent a function that takes concepts as
arguments. For example, take the concept word “F.” Hale and Wright form the expression
“the-number-of-F’s” from “F” and the “numerical operator” expression that represents a
function. But now they face a fundamental problem about “identity.” Just ask: What is
the function that is represented? Suppose one replies that it is the function that, for every
concept taken as argument, maps that argument onto a (cardinal) number as value. But
what is a number — i. e. what is the “concept” that gives the elements of the class of
values for the “range” of the function? The only answer they have is: A number is what is
a value of the function! (Recall that a number is “implicitly” what is a number-of-some-
concept.) Thus to specify (identify) the function we must have determined what a number
is. But Wright and Hale supposedly specify the “sortal concept” being a number in terms
of what function the-number-of-Φs is.
There is a further problem. We supposedly have a function coordinating concepts
to numbers. Yet a number is implicitly construed (constructed) from a concept and an
“operator” that combines with the concept — a number forming operator, one might say.
Thus the crucial function, the number-of-Φs, is construed in a two-fold manner — as a
function that coordinates a number to a concept and as an operator that forms a number
from a concept.15 The former, key use, clearly presupposes a domain of numbers to be
15The two functions are blurred together as Frege blurred corresponding functions in his discussion of “nega-

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
471
values of the function, while the latter is completely overlooked.
What Hale and Wright do is aided by the fact that the standard constructions of elemen-
tary arithmetic by logicists, post Principia, have been in terms of set theory, where one
typically makes use of two primitive notions — “set” and “membership” — and speciﬁes
axioms involving those notions. Since “set” and “ε” are generally taken as primitive, one
might think that there is little point in oﬀering explicit deﬁnitions of the primitive terms
of the Peano postulates in terms of the concepts of set theory. There is a “yes” and a “no”
to this. However one treats the primitive concepts of set theory, one has still, by interpret-
ing the primitive terms in the Peano postulates and deriving the interpreted postulates as
theorems, oﬀered an explicit interpretation of “arithmetic” relative to set theory. On the
other hand, there are philosophical problems raised by the concepts of “set,” “class” and
“membership.” Are there sets? And, if so, what are they? Does “ε” represent a relation?
What sorts of truths are the truths of set theory? But the fact that such questions remain
does not mean we cannot distinguish between oﬀering explicit deﬁnitions, as Frege and
Russell and other logicists do, and what Hale and Wright do. Frege’s dismissal of the
“Caesar-England problem” can thus be seen as ultimately based on Caesar and England
not being classes (sets) however one construes classes.
3
RUSSELL’S LOGICISM AND THE “NO-CLASS” THEORY
In the introduction to the second edition, 1937, of The Principles of Mathematics, Russell
noted that, while the book “was published in 1903, and most of it was written in 1903”
[1956, 5], the “fundamental thesis” of the book — that mathematics and logic are “iden-
tical” — was one that he had “never seen any reason to modify.” And he proceeded to
discuss two fundamental objections that had arisen in the early decades of the 20th cen-
tury. One was that of the formalists, who, as “led by Hilbert,” (see [Hilbert, 1964]) leave
“the integers undeﬁned” but assert:
. . . concerning them such axioms as shall make possible the deduction of the
usual arithmetical propositions. That is to say, we do not assign any meaning
to our symbols 0, 1, 2 . . .
except that they are to have certain properties
enumerated in the axioms” [1956, 5-6].
Thus, as Russell saw it, for formalists, the numerals “do not represent one deﬁnite series,
but any progression whatever” — what is typically referred to as an ω-sequence. Russell
leveled his standard, brief, criticism, that formalists “forget” that numbers are used for
counting and that, since “0” can be taken as “any ﬁnite integer without thereby making
any of Hilbert’s axioms false,” we lose the familiar interpretation of “There were 12
apostles.”16
tion” as a function [Frege, 1970].
16What Russell means is that starting with any ﬁnite integer as the initial or 0 element one has an omega
sequence. One can see what Russell opposes in terms of the following.
The leading idea of Hilbert’s theory of proof is that . . . classical mathematics involves an inter-
nal closed procedure which operates according to ﬁxed rules. . . and which consists basically in
constructing successively certain combinations of symbols which are considered “correct” or

472
Herbert Hochberg
The formalists are like a watchmaker who is so absorbed in making his
watches look pretty that he has forgotten their purpose of telling the time,
and has therefore omitted to insert any works [1956, 6].
In Principia class abstracts parallel the contextual deﬁnitions for deﬁnite descriptions with
20.01
f{ˆu(ψu)}. =:(∃φ): φ!x. ↔x .ψx : f{φ!ˆu}
Df.
and
The condition corresponding to
E!(ιx)(ψx) is (∃φ):φ!x. ↔x .ψx,
which is always satisﬁed because of 12.1” [1950, 188].
The condition, transcribing “∃!” via “exists,” can virtually be seen as emphasizing the
non-existence of classes, since the apparent statement that a class exists simply states that
there is a function equivalent to the “deﬁning” function. [12. 1 is the axiom of reducibility
for functions of one argument.] What Russell says about “the existence of classes” is of
further interest. The opening sentence introducing the discussion of classes in Section
C of Principia is: “The following theory of classes, although it provides a notation to
represent them, avoids the assumption that there are such things as classes.” (Principia,
187) One avoids such an assumption due to the contextual deﬁnitions for class expressions
“just as, in *14, we deﬁned propositions containing descriptions.” This is the idea of the
“no-class” theory. It leads to:
When a class α is not null, so that it has one or more members, it is said to
exist. [This sense of “existence” must not be confused with that deﬁned in
*14: 02 .] We write “∃!α” for “α exists.” The deﬁnition is
∗24 : 03
∃!α. = .(∃x).(xεα)
Df. (Principia, 216)
The reference to *14: 02 is to the deﬁnition of “E!” for deﬁnite descriptions. This idea
had already been expressed in The Principles. “Another very important notion is what
is called the existence of a class — a word which must not be supposed to mean what
existence means in philosophy. A class is said to exist when it has at least one term”
[1956, 21].
As noted earlier, classes, and class expressions, like deﬁnite descriptions, and what
they purportedly describe, are both characterized as “incomplete symbols.” In the case
“proved.” This construction procedure, moreover, is “ﬁnitary” and directly constructive [von
Neumann, 1964, 50].
2 +3 = 3 + 2 is intended to communicate the fact that 2 + 3 and 3 + 2, when abbreviations
are taken into account, are the self-same numerical symbol, viz., the numerical symbol 11111.
Similarly 3 > 2 serves to communicate the fact that the symbol 3, i. e. 111, is longer than
the symbol 2, i. e. 11; or, in other words, that the latter symbol is a proper part of the former
[Hilbert, 1964, 143].

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
473
of the signs this means they are eliminable by contextual deﬁnition and do not have a
meaning on their own. In the case of a “purported” represented object, it would mean
that the supposed entities are not taken as existents — entities that are assumed to exist
by the employment of the linguistic system. Given Russell’s no-class theory — his view
that classes are not recognized as entities, the Principia analogs of the primitive terms
in the (P-D) axioms, being explicitly deﬁned in terms of class signs and the remainder
of the logical apparatus, are not taken to represent entities — either classes or any other
purported “objects.” Russell provided a summary statement of these themes in a 1924
essay:
This deﬁnition . . . avoids the inference to a set of entities called ‘cardinal
numbers’, which were never needed except for the purpose of making arith-
metic intelligible, and are now no longer needed for that purpose.
Perhaps even more important is the fact that classes themselves can be dis-
pensed with by similar methods. .. . all the propositions in which classes
appear to be mentioned can be interpreted without supposing that there are
classes [1971, 327].
4
CARNAP’S INTERNAL LOGICISM
The attempt to “construct” arithmetic in Principia, and Whitehead’s notion of “exten-
sive abstraction” as a tool of analysis, led Russell to reject his Kantian hypothetical or
“structural” realism, as set out in The Problems of Philosophy of 1911.17 That realism
was replaced by an attempt to sketch a construction of the objects and the spatio-temporal
framework of the everyday world out of the directly apprehended data of experience in
Russell’s 1914 Our Knowledge of the External World and subsequent Analysis of Mind of
1921 and The Analysis of Matter of 1927. As numbers, like classes, were “logical con-
structions” in Principia Mathematica, so physical objects and perceiving subjects would
become logically constructed “objects,” but constructed from an empirical basis by logical
techniques, including Whitehead’s “extensive abstraction,” and not on a basis of logical
concepts alone. Russell’s shift from his hypothetical realism about the physical world
in 1911 might be considered as an early form of “logical empiricism.” For it was this
“constructionist” approach to the empirical world of the 1914 book, combined with the
logicism of Frege and of Russell and Whitehead, that was a major inﬂuence on Carnap’s
ﬁrst major book, The Logical Structure of the World. That book interjected the term “Auf-
bau” into the philosophical vocabulary and, for a time, epitomized the movement known
as “logical empiricism” or “logical positivism” and the group labeled “the Vienna Cir-
cle.” Carnap, who for some years was an intellectual focal point of “the Circle,” was clear
about his debt in the preface to the second edition of his book:
Through the inﬂuence of Gottlob Frege, under whom I studied in Jena, but
who was not recognized as an outstanding logician until after his death, and
17This is quite akin to structuralism, as here attributed to Dedekind. For Russell took the realm of physical
objects to consist of “unknown” hypothetical objects, properties and relations that shared a “structure” with the
realm of directly experienced phenomenal objects, properties and relations (see [Hochberg, 1994]).

474
Herbert Hochberg
through the study of Bertrand Russell’s work, I had realized, on the one hand,
the fundamental importance of mathematics for the formation of a system of
knowledge and, on the other hand, its purely formal, logical character to
which it owes its independence from the contingencies of the real world.
These insights formed the basis of my book. Later on through conversa-
tions in Schlick’s circle in Vienna and through the inﬂuence of Wittgenstein’s
ideas they developed into the mode of thought which characterized the “Vi-
enna Circle.” This orientation is sometimes called “logical empiricism” (or
“logical positivism”) in order to indicate the two components.
In this book I was concerned with the indicated thesis, namely that it is in
principle possible to reduce all concepts to the immediately given.... I could
carry out my task thanks only to the modern logic which had been developed
in the preceding decades, especially by Frege, Whitehead, and Russell. . .
[1967, vi-vii].
Carnap’s logical positivism led to the dismissal of traditional philosophical problems and
to the rejection of the diverse forms of logicism apparently separating Frege and Russell.
For questions about the existence of classes and of numbers were dismissed as pseudo-
problems. As he put it in the 1937 English edition of The Logical Syntax of Language, the
statement that “Numbers are classes of classes of things” was a statement in the “material
mode of speech” that led to a “disregard of the relativity to language of philosophical
sentences... ” [1937, 299]. Such sentences really represented “suggestions, ” not asser-
tions. The corresponding “syntactical sentence” in the “formal mode of speech” would be
“Numerical expressions are class-expressions of the second level” [1937, 300]. Employ-
ing transcriptions into the formal mode of speech not only avoided fruitless controversy
but allowed the original pseudo-theses to become eligible for discussion and acceptable
or not on the basis of their fruitfulness. It did, however, require the speciﬁcation of a
linguistic system for such “theses” to be completed. The latter were thus shown to be
relative to a linguistic framework. This emphasized that there was no point (even sense)
in disputing whether numbers were objects, whether classes exist or whether numbers are
really classes.
Later, focusing on problems of meaning, denotation, truth and modality, Carnap stressed
semantics in addition to syntax. This led to his early work in modal logic and a trilogy:
Introduction to Semantics [1942], Formalization of Logic [1943] and Meaning and Neces-
sity [1947] along with the well known paper “Empiricism, Semantics and Ontology.” In
these works he developed what we may characterize as “internal logicism.” This went in
tandem with his emphasis on the distinction between “external” and “internal” questions
as a basis for the dismissal of philosophical pseudo-questions about mathematical objects
— since such questions were meaningless “external” questions. The shift of emphasis
took such questions to be replaced by syntactical and semantical questions about linguis-
tic schemata and the focus was on the pragmatic reasons for choosing one such linguistic
schema rather than another.
Contrasted with meaningless external questions that lacked cognitive content, internal
questions, like “Is there an even prime between 3 and 8?”, could not only be answered

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
475
within the context of the appropriate system but could be answered simply and “trivially,”
as the answers would follow from the “rules.” Thus the answers to such questions are
“analytic,” or “logically true” — L-True [Carnap, 1956, 217-218]. The problem Car-
nap faced in dismissing “metaphysical” questions in general, and philosophical questions
about logic itself, was the general problem faced by the positivists in connection with
their statement of a veriﬁcation criterion of meaning. Just as the veriﬁcation criterion is
problematic as applying to itself, Carnap has to appeal to, or take for granted, familiar
logical concepts and rules and some system of logic.
Carnap takes the answers to the internal questions about arithmetic to be answered
by logical analysis based on the rules governing the expressions. As such rules appear to
amount to a set of axioms and rules of inference that comprise a formal theory, one can ar-
gue that Carnap’s view must presuppose that the formal theory could be a complete formal
theory for the system of natural numbers in order to be viable. But, by G¨odel’s celebrated
theorem, it cannot be such a theory. (Thus the problem that many raised for Hilbert’s
“program” has been raised for Carnap’s construal of arithmetic.) Moreover, there is a sec-
ond problem. As Russell and Frege argued in their attacks on formalism, a philosophy of
arithmetic (of classical ﬁrst order number theory) must recognize that we have to assign
the right truth value to each arithmetical statement. But, on Carnap’s approach, there is
no reason to accept the answers yielded by the system of rules as assigning the right truth
values — as being “correct.”
What are these ”rules”? The answer seems to be: axioms and rules of infer-
ence, in other words, a formal theory. But, the concepts required to deﬁne
a linguistic framework (formal system) suﬃce to deﬁne an ω-sequence and
so Carnap’s ideas, at least in the case of ﬁrst order arithmetic, represent no
conceptual gain, or reduction, at all. Furthermore, by G¨odel’s theorem, there
is no formal theory that answers correctly all (ﬁrst order) internal questions
about the natural numbers. Finally, it is not clear why we should accept the
answers given by the ”rules for the new expressions” as correct; these an-
swers may even be inconsistent. It follows that Carnap’s idea (taken as an
account of mathematics as it is ordinarily understood and applied) is unten-
able [Lindstr¨om, 2000, 135-136].
As Lindstr¨om notes, his line of argument is found earlier, and in greater detail, in G¨odel’s
unpublished “Is Mathematics Syntax of Language?” (eventually published in G¨odel,
1986/95) that was originally intended as his contribution to the Carnap volume in The
Library of Living Philosophers.
In that paper G¨odel set out two arguments relevant to the present discussion. The ﬁrst
is:
Moreover a rule about the truth of sentences can be called syntactical only if
it is clear from its formulation, or if it somehow can be known beforehand,
that it does not imply the truth or falsehood of any ”factual” sentence (i. e.,
one whose truth, owing to the semantical rules of the language, depends on
extralinguistic facts.) This requirement not only follows from the concept
of a convention about the use of symbols, but also from the fact that it is

476
Herbert Hochberg
the lack of content of mathematics upon which its a priori admissibility in
spite of strict empiricism is to be based. The requirement under discussion
implies that the rules of syntax must be demonstrably consistent, since from
an inconsistency every proposition follows, all factual propositions included
[G¨odel, 1986/1995, 339].
The point behind the argument seems to be that by G¨odel’s Second Incompleteness The-
orem one will have to justify the rules by making use of mathematics that is beyond the
scope of the rules in question — by characterizing the syntax of the system, involving
notions like well-formed formula of the system, proof in the system, and proving the con-
sistency of the system in a mathematically “richer” system. G¨odel seems to be claiming
that on Carnap’s view one is required to prove the consistency of the rules of syntax,
since (i) it is claimed that a rule about the truth of the sentences will be syntactical, (ii)
in order to be purely syntactical no true sentence can be “factual,” but (iii) if they are not
so, “factual propositions” will follow. Thus Carnap’s claim that “mathematics” can be
taken to be embodied in such rules cannot be true. A less far reaching claim he is making
might simply be that if the formal system, embodying the rules of the language, cannot be
characterized in a certain way, then it cannot be sensibly claimed that factual propositions
do not follow from such rules as the rules cannot be claimed to be formal (syntactical)
rules without employing a suitable amount of mathematics in the characterization. Since
the rules of the system in question cannot be shown to be consistent, if they are, it would
then have to be clear from the very formulation of the rules that they embody no factual
content.
The second argument depends on the First Incompleteness Theorem, since, by it, Car-
nap’s notion of something being a consequence of the axioms of the system cannot be
taken in terms of it being derivable within the system from the axioms and rules, as not
all relevant truths are derivable in any such deductive system. One is forced to take the
notion of a “consequence” in terms of a meta-linguistic system of concepts that makes
use of a suitably rich mathematical framework.
... in order not to substitute for intuitive mathematics a “syntax” as unac-
ceptable for empiricists as intuitive mathematics itself ...it will have to be
required that: (1) not only in the rules of syntax, but also in the derivation
of the mathematical axioms from them and in the proof of their consistency
only syntactical concepts ... be used ... and (2) only procedures of proof
which cannot be rejected by anyone who knows how to apply these concepts
at all.
The necessity of the ﬁrst requirement should be beyond dispute. For, if math-
ematical intuition and the assumption of mathematical objects or facts is to
be dispensed with by means of syntax, it certainly will be ... based on con-
siderations about ﬁnite combinations of symbols. If, instead, in the formu-
lation of the syntactical rules some of the very same abstract or transﬁnite
concepts are being used — or in the consistency proof, some of the axioms
usually assumed about them — then the whole program completely changes
its meaning and is turned into its downright opposite: instead of clarifying

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
477
the meanings of the non-ﬁnitary mathematical terms by explaining them in
terms of syntactical rules, non-ﬁnitary terms are [used] in order to formulate
the syntactical rules; and, instead of justifying the mathematical axioms by
reducing them to syntactical rules, these axioms (or at least some of them)
are necessary in order to justify the syntactical rules (as consistent) [G¨odel,
1986/1995, 341-342].
Aside from Carnap’s views regarding issues posed by ﬁrst order arithmetic, given his use
of the distinction between internal and external questions to reject philosophical problems
and, especially, philosophical issues raised by logic itself [1956, 213-217], his philosophy
of arithmetic, like Dummett’s, raises the familiar question as to whether the logical posi-
tivists arbitrarily dismiss, rather than resolve, the issues by labeling them pseudo-issues.
For Lindstr¨om’s and G¨odel’s attacks on Carnap raise the issue of whether what is an ex-
ternal question, either about the nature of the “objects” or about what kinds of truths the
arithmetical truths are, and hence not a question answerable within a formal system of
arithmetic, is an internal question within a framework where we ask and seek to resolve
philosophical questions about arithmetic. In such a context we do not employ procedures
of the mathematician or logician, for the questions are not, in Carnap’s terms, “scientiﬁc.”
But all this means is that they are not resolved within the context of a formal system
that derives such answers by formal rules from “axioms.” Such a context would hardly
help resolve philosophical issues, however it might help clarify presuppositions various
philosophical positions depend on. For there is no canonical method of deciding philo-
sophical issues in the sense that there are such methods for deriving standard arithmetical
theorems, and even theorems like G¨odel’s incompleteness results.
5
CONTEMPORARY CRITICISMS OF LOGICISM
Dummett has claimed that Frege’s logicism is inherently ﬂawed since it involves recogniz-
ing a domain of abstract mathematical objects while supposedly deriving the truths about
the natural and real numbers from logical principles alone [2002, 21]. All it amounts to is
the claim that there is an incompatibility between construing numbers as abstract objects
in logistic terms (as classes, functions, etc.) and taking arithmetical truths to be logical
truths. For logical truths supposedly make no ontological claims — such as, that classes
exist. But that depends on how we construe logic. Do the logical truths “(∃x)(∃φ)φx”
and “(∃x)(∀φ)[φx ∨¬φx]” involve “ontological commitments”? Do the interpretations of
the logical signs (the quantiﬁer signs and negation sign in particular) and patterns involve
such commitments? Does the appeal to certain domains in such interpretations involve
commitments to classes, the elements of the domain, etc.? The answers are neither simple
nor easy.
As the term “logicism” has been generally used to apply to Frege’s view in the Grund-
lagen as well as to Russell’s early form of logicism in the ﬁrst edition of Principia Math-
ematica, both of those views are often taken to involve an appeal to a domain of abstract
objects that numbers are identiﬁed with — classes (or extensions of concepts) of a certain
kind. Thus it is worth reiterating that Russell’s logicism of the ﬁrst edition of Principia,

478
Herbert Hochberg
employing his “no class” theory, clearly involved avoiding “ontological commitments” to
such objects. Russell eliminated class abstract expressions by contextual deﬁnitions along
the lines of the elimination of deﬁnite descriptive expressions (which we shall soon con-
sider). Thus no “ontological commitments” to classes were involved. Dummett simply
seems to assume that “logic” does not involve ontological issues or “commitments” (aside
from his ignoring Russell’s variant of logicism, that rejects both classes and numbers as
entities). Hence, logical truths cannot, explicitly or implicitly, involve reference to spe-
ciﬁc entities. One cannot object on the grounds that “Socrates is wise or Socrates is not
wise” is a logical truth that contains a term “referring to” Socrates. For it is a logical truth
in that it is an instance of “For any x, φ : x is φ or x is not φ.” It expresses what Kant would
have classiﬁed as an “impure analytic a priori” judgment — containing a term express-
ing “empirical” content — as contrasted with the “pure” universal generalization. (Such
“impure” judgments will later lie behind the claims that there are “analytic a posteriori”
judgments.)
While Dummett objects to the supposed reference to “entities” — to logicism pur-
portedly involving ontological commitments — a less sweeping indictment of logicism
focuses on the supposed “kinds” of entities introduced — classes as “abstract” entities not
locatable in the physical spatio-temporal realm. This has led, in recent years, to the so-
called “problem of access” posed by abstract entities that Lindstr¨om has taken seriously.
The purported problem stems from the reliance on causal theories of reference and from
professed puzzlement about our ability to “abstract” and apprehend “general ideas.” As
many have observed, our ability to comprehend abstract ideas led Plato to his version of
the doctrine of innate ideas — the Platonic doctrine of “recollection.” It may also have
inspired Augustine’s focus on divine illumination, led various medieval philosophers to
rely on divine ideas and culminated in Descartes’ explicit doctrine of innate ideas that,
on a standard historical perspective, gave rise to the empiricist attacks and the develop-
ment of an implicit empiricist “meaning criterion. From Locke, Berkeley and Hume to
the Vienna Circle, to the more recent contextualist-holism of W. V. Quine, W. Sellars and
D. Davidson, and on to much contemporary discussion, one ﬁnds the mixtures, in various
combinations, of causal theories, of nominalism and of materialism, mixed with attempts
to “be scientiﬁc.” This is illustrated in Benacerraf’s attacks on logicism and realism about
abstract entities.
Benacerraf ﬁnds G¨odel’s use of the terms “perception”’ and “intuition” unclear when
G¨odel writes:
...we do have a perception also of the objects of set theory, as is seen from the
fact that the axioms force themselves upon us as being true. I don’t see why
we should have less conﬁdence in this kind of perception, i. e. in mathemati-
cal intuition, than in sense perception, which induces us to build up physical
theories... [1964, 271].
Benacerraf comments: “...what is missing is precisely what my second principle demands:
an account of the link between our cognitive faculties and the objects known” [1996, 26].
His objection is echoed by D. Lewis’s attack on properties, such as colors:
...I have complained about the diﬃculty of understanding the relation that

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
479
allegedly relates concrete things to the abstract simple possibilities — propo-
sitions or properties — that they realize... Its a nasty predicament to claim
that you somehow understand a primitive notion, although you have no idea
how you could possibly understand it [1991, 35-36].
If we ignore the haziness of the notion of an “abstract possibility” that Lewis interjects,
what is going on is precisely the line of thought that led British empiricists to reject our
having “general ideas” and to their primitive “imagist” conception of thought. While
there is a diﬀerence between the suspect apprehension of an “abstract” quality, say a
color shade, taken as a perceived phenomenal quality that one perceives in perceiving an
object of that color, and the apprehension of sets, or other mathematical objects, both are
rejected by nominalists of the Lewis-Benacerraf kind along the lines that led Hume and
Berkeley to reject abstract ideas.
Suppose, however, we make an eﬀort to consider what we are told we can’t consider,
two colors (shades of color), say black (B) and white (W) and the truths that one is darker
than the other and that Lewis prefers B to W. Assume we take B and W to be universals.
They are, like black and white colored patches, simply objects presented in experience.
There is nothing mysterious about that, so long as one does not confuse the claim that
universals are presented or directly apprehended with the claim that we are not merely
presented with the abstract objects or universals but with the fact that they are universals.
That is another matter. One can argue about whether universals are spatial objects. But if
one holds that they are localizable then one gives up certain standard laws that apply to
particulars, such as not being at diﬀerent places at the same time, and certain truths about
spatial relations — that left-of, as occurring in the perceptual ﬁeld, is neither reﬂexive nor
symmetrical. It is simpler to take universals as neither spatial nor temporal, while recog-
nizing that they are instantiated by spatio-temporal objects. So what it comes down to is
really not a question about mathematical realism or mathematical truth, but the classical
problem(s) posed by universals and the complications introduced by an extreme form of
nominalism being combined with a causal theory of reference and meaning.
There is a simple point to be made about commitments to a causal account. One
must wonder what one who advocates such a view takes causality to be. Benacerraf, for
example, casually speaks about a causal relation connecting our knowledge or cognitive
activity and the (intentional) objects of such knowledge and activity. But how does he
construe a causal relation? Though he speaks of a causal relation, he explains neither what
he understands by “a relation” nor how a relation (or any relation, as opposed to the terms
standing in it) is in physical space-time. This is typical of physicalists. Suppose, however,
that there is not a causal relation that in fact obtains between things or events or universals,
etc. That is, suppose one adopts a Humean style regularity account of causality. Then the
question becomes: How can the existence of an abstract entity be regularly connected to
the apprehension of such an entity? The answer is then obvious: the existence of such an
entity is a “necessary” condition for its apprehension — where imagining is not a form of
apprehending. There is no diﬀerence between the black truﬄe Benacerraf speaks of and
the universal black or the set of natural numbers, if such there be. In the case of the black
truﬄe there is, in ordinary terms, the context provided by the physics and physiology
of perception in our seeing such an object. But even there, we should distinguish, as

480
Herbert Hochberg
Benacerraf apparently does not, the truﬄe from the fact that it is black. (One might recall
here that Davidson dismisses facts since they cannot be located in space. In the early
1900s Russell and Moore took facts not being spatio-temporal “objects” to be a reason
not to speak of them as “existing.” Thus they simply, like universals, had “being.”) And
it is not clear how the distinction between the object, the property and the state of aﬀairs
consisting of the object having the property, crucial to numerous philosophical attempts to
resolve various issues, ﬁnds its proper place in the ordinary causal account that explains
what happens when we see a black truﬄe. How does the property black, which, let us
assume, is not a spatio-temporal object, causally interact with the eye? How does the state
of aﬀairs, which is also not sensibly located in space, do so? And, of course, the causal
account stops with physical connections, such as light rays reﬂecting or being absorbed
by an object. Phenomena are simply omitted, yet are relevant. Consider the case of an
after image.
An after image is not localized in physical space, unless one identiﬁes it with an oc-
currence in or a state of one’s brain. Yet it may be said to be a partial cause of a memory
of having had such an image, if one, say, reports the annoying persistence of such things
to a doctor. But how does the after image enter into such a causal chain as it is not in
physical space? Perhaps it does so via its assumed correlation with states of the central
nervous system that are so localized. But, then, obviously, something like that also takes
place when one apprehends a universal quality or thinks of a natural number or grasps an
arithmetical or logical truth. If such connections are the key to causal interaction, what-
ever one means by causality, then there is no mystery about our causal interaction with
arithmetical entities and truths over and above the questions about how we come to have
general ideas and the perplexities of the mind-body problem. This is brought out by a
slightly diﬀerent kind of case.
Assume we perceive that an object, a, is black, that another object, b, is green, and that
a is larger than b. If properly prepared, we see or apprehend that the two states of aﬀairs,
a’s being black and b’s being green, have the same logical form and that that form diﬀers
from the logical form of the state of aﬀairs of a’s being larger than b. If there are states of
aﬀairs or facts, there are not only the constituent terms and attributes or relations, but the
logical forms of such facts as well. Such forms are clearly abstract objects, as that phrase
is used. How do we manage to apprehend them? While it is not clear either that there is a
real question or, if there is, an answer, it is clear that we do know that we apprehend them
— and that we apprehend that the forms of the monadic and relational facts diﬀer. The
mystery, if such there be, is not about whether there are logical forms. One knows what
I am speaking of, even if one doubts that a viable philosophical theory will include such
items in its ontological inventory. Whatever mystery there is reduces to our ability to have
general ideas — to grasp universals, whether they be qualities like green, relations like
larger than and diverse from or logical forms like φx and Πxy. The simple fact is that we
can do so since we obviously do do so. We need not revert to the nominalistic empiricism,
which led to imagist conceptions of thought in the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries and to physicalism and causal theories of reference in the twentieth.
Logical forms are a variety of abstract object, but they appear to highlight a diﬀerent
aspect of the problem that is involved in the present issue. The existence of colors and

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
481
pitches are hard to deny, though, since many do, we ﬁnd nominalists and “deﬂationists”
speaking of predicates, i.e. words, being satisﬁed by objects. There is an obvious similar-
ity between the rejection of abstract entities due to their purported lack of “causal power”
and the contemporary appeal of the materialist rejection of mental and physical entities.
Physicalists avoid the traditional mind-body problem, as do Berkeleyian style idealists
and Humean phenomenalists. But the latter are rare in contemporary philosophy, while
the former are numerous. If one commonsensically acknowledges both the mental and the
physical, how is the problem of their causal interaction any diﬀerent from that supposedly
posed by universal properties or sets interacting with our cognitive states, as objects of
such intentional states (assuming that such interaction is causal in some sense)? It is clear
that Benacerraf is thinking in terms of it being a necessary condition for causal interaction
that the cause and the eﬀect be in space and time. Thus he speaks of space-time worms
(Russell’s physical space-time lines):
It is claimed that X knows that p. We think that X could not know that p.
What reasons can we oﬀer in support of our view? If we are satisﬁed that
X has normal inferential powers, that p is indeed true, etc., we are often
thrown back on arguing that X could not have come into possession of the
relevant evidence or reasons: that X’s four-dimensional space-time worm
does not make the necessary (causal) contact with the grounds of the truth of
the proposition for X to be in possession of evidence adequate to support the
inference (if an inference was relevant). The proposition p places restrictions
on what the world can be like [1997, 23].
But then it is also clear that the purported problem posed by abstract entities — including
numbers — is the same as the supposed problem about mental entities. Thus it would ap-
pear that an unstated presupposition is involved, besides the two acknowledged, and quite
questionable, principles — a commitment to physicalism. All of those are assumed in
addition to presupposing extreme nominalism — that predicates do not refer to properties
but are “satisﬁed” or “true of” or “refer to” particular objects — the objects that would be
said to have the properties if one recognized the latter.
Noting the various interpretations of the (P-D) postulates, Russell, like numerous oth-
ers to follow, took any satisfactory interpretation — one that made use of only the logical
vocabulary — to suﬃce, but he sought one that was the “simplest.” The familiar criticisms
that there were alternative interpretations were thus acknowledged early on and rejected.
Another variant of that criticism later emerged. For example, supposedly, on Russell’s
view, the class of all classes of three element classes (of individuals), which is dependent
on what individuals there are, is the natural number 3. Hence, if one of the individuals,
say Whitehead, did not exist, then the number three would be diﬀerent in a “possible
world” which did not contain Whitehead. But, it is argued, numbers are not such “con-
tingent” entities and the number 3 should be the same object in all possible worlds. This
type of criticism goes back to the early arguments about the purported “contingency” or
factual nature of “existence” claims in Principia, especially the dispute over the axiom of
reducibility. But the particular argument, regarding speciﬁc numbers, reﬂects a failure to
understand Russell’s form of “logicism.”

482
Herbert Hochberg
Before considering that, we may note that no such questions arise about the set-theoretic
versions employing either
∅, {∅}, {{∅}}, . . .
or
∅, {∅}, {∅, {∅}}, {∅, {∅}, {∅, {∅}}} . . .
in order to construe the numbers as sets. But, of more historical interest is that the line
of criticism based on logicism taking numbers to be classes that only contingently exist
(being contingent on the existence of the elements) cannot be raised about the no-class
account in the ﬁrst edition of Principia. As Principia class abstracts (expressions) are
deﬁned signs — deﬁned in context, such signs, along with deﬁnite descriptions, only
apparently represent anything, and hence in Principia (ﬁrst edition) classes are not really
represented nor taken as existents — not as individuals, nor properties nor functions.
The logicism of the ﬁrst edition of Principia takes arithmetical statements in terms
of statements with class expressions, where such expressions, in turn, are eliminable in
terms of quantiﬁed expressions containing only logical signs — variables, connectives,
quantiﬁers (and scope indicating devices). Thus, as we have noted, Russell often speaks
of classes (and class signs) as “incomplete symbols,” as he speaks of deﬁnite descriptions
and what is purportedly described. (That the domains over which the quantiﬁers range are
taken in terms of an original sub-structure of individuals, “universals” and atomic facts
is a matter we can not go into here. Though it can be noted that the latter do not play
a further role in the development of the system as the predicate variables of the formal
schema of Principia are propositional function expressions and sentential expressions are
thought of in connection with “propositions” — which, as the second edition speciﬁes,
have “particulars” and “universals” as, respectively, “constituents” and “components.”)
The historical inaccuracy of criticisms based on a purported “contingency” aside, the
line of argument itself is hardly cogent. What logicism involves, with respect to the
question of “What are numbers?”, is the construal of statements like (a) “The number
of Πs is three” (“There are three Πs.”) and (b) “2 + 3 =5” in terms of statements along
the lines of: (a) (∃x, y, z)[(x is Π&y is Π&z is Π)&(x  y&x  z&y  z)&(∀w)(w is
Π ↔(w = x ∨w = y ∨w = z))] (b) The sum-class of a two-element class and a three-
element class is a ﬁve-element class, where a class, ß, is a two-element class if and only
if (∃x, y)[(xεβ&yεβ&x  y&(∀z)(zεβ ↔(z = x ∨z = y))], etc.18 Such statements neither
make claims as to what classes are actually two-element classes, etc., nor as to whether
there are s. The formulae occur in a formal schema, none of whose primitive terms are
non-logical terms as no non-logical terms occur in the calculus of Principia. One must not
be misled by the use of “English commentary” that accompanies the schema, including
its use in “primitive propositions” — as Wittgenstein noted in a well known and pointed
comment. (For example 9. 13 cited below, though we should keep in mind that it is
numbered while being used to express an inference rule.) It should also be noted that
class abstract expressions, being “incomplete symbols” like deﬁnite descriptions, require
us to take account of their “construction.” For example, consider a statement like
18See [Carnap, 1937, p. 143 ﬀ.]

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
483
(a) 2=df. the class of two-element classes.
It is of the pattern:
(b) 2= df. ˆuθu.
(b) allows the replacement of the numeral sign by the class sign, which, as it occurs in
some context, say ‘f{ˆuθu}’, is to be replaced according to the contextual deﬁnition for a
class abstract (20.01 cited above) in Prinicipia Mathematica, as it is simply elliptical for:
(∃φ): φ!x. ↔x θx : f{φ!u}
Not ony do expressions for numbers disappear, but so do the expressions for classes,
and questions about “what numbers are” are thus removed as well, as are questions about
“what the King of France (in 2005) is.” Possible worlds with or without certain individuals
are totally irrelevant to the matters involved.
Russell discussed the question of the relevance of empirical matters to arithmetic in
The Problems of Philosophy and indicated that arithmetical propositions were “general”
[1954, 79]. There he reiterated the simple point that, in specifying the “meaning” of
numerals, like ‘2’ and ‘4’ one need make use of contexts that only contain variable ex-
pressions and quantiﬁers. Moreover, even in the second edition of Principia, where it
is suggested that to recognize classes avoids the need for the axiom of reducibility, the
particular domains of application are irrelevant to the logical system. As Whitehead and
Russell put matters in the ﬁrst edition, “. . .objects which are neither propositions nor
functions. Such objects we shall call individuals. . . ” [1950, 51] and in the second edi-
tion, “An “individual” is anything that can be the subject of an atomic proposition” [1950,
xix]. Thus, it makes no diﬀerence what the individuals are taken to be, and hence all one
can object to is that the logical system can be applied to diﬀerent domains. But this is true
of any standard system of logic. Though, perhaps the point should be stressed that it is
any domain (other than the empty domain, if that is a domain). There is also a question
about inﬁnite domains and the simple existential “presupposition” that the domain is not
empty. Thus the present purported issue regarding contingency can be seen as bringing
up an old and familiar issue.
6
STRUCTURALIST ALTERNATIVES TO LOGICISM
Wittgenstein attacked Russell’s logicism in another way in the Tractatus. He took what
amounts to a version of the Peano postulates to provide the common logical form that
constituted elementary arithmetic, and as something that could have various applications,
in counting objects, for example. Thus, he saw an analogy between such applications and
the use of logically valid argument patterns, such as modus ponens, that can be applied
to arguments with diﬀerent statements as content. This led him to speak of arithmetic as
a logic, as opposed to the logicist construal of Russell and Frege, and set forth a form of
structuralism in the Tractatus.19 This prepared the ground for what was to come in his
19This is the view suggested, cumulatively, in 4. 1273 and the 6’s.

484
Herbert Hochberg
later focus on rule following and language — focusing on, in a manner of speaking, the
individual “logics” of various kinds of discourse (about colors, ethics, mind, etc., etc.).
It is worth noting that, if one accepts complex (structural) properties, one can take the
Peano postulates to represent a complex property that is instantiated by any progression
and hence can be taken to be the ontological ground of elementary arithmetic. Wittgen-
stein might even have had something like this vaguely in mind in the Tractatus. If he did,
his structuralism was ambivalent. The same ambivalence marks Lindstr¨om’s rejection
of logicism and attempt to develop a structuralist variant that does justice to the Russell-
Frege requirement that an adequate logical foundation for arithmetic would take the prim-
itive arithmetical signs in (P-D) to have a deﬁnite meaning. For Lindstr¨om the task is to
provide an adequate subject matter for arithmetic. This he seeks to do by claiming to
“visualize” or “imagine” an ω-sequence that provides such a subject matter.
Though Russell recognized logical forms and claimed that we directly apprehend such
forms he did not face the problem of justifying that what is apprehended provides the
ground of logical truth. Sometimes what he took to be a logical truth was simply what was
an axiom or theorem of Principia. At other times he held pure mathematics to be com-
posed of logical truths in that mathematical statements expressed logical “implications.”20
And sometimes Russell seemed to take logical truths to be “ontologically grounded” or
“made true” by the existence of logical forms and relations among them (which were fur-
ther complex forms, not “facts”). Russell’s speaking of the direct apprehension of such
logical forms seems a variant of G¨odel’s later talking of intuition and perception.
Lindstr¨om echoes the appeal to direct apprehension in advocating his “quasi-realism”:
And when this principle is pointed out to us, we can immediately see that it
is correct. ...
Now what happens when you “see” that the LNP is correct? As we have seen
it is not plausible to say that you are examining an abstract structure. But the
answer, or at least one possible answer, is really quite obvious (and simple-
minded, almost trivial: You visualize (picture to yourself, form a mental im-
age of). . . an ω-sequence. You then examine the imagined sequence ... and
ﬁnd that the LNP [least number principle] is, indeed, true [2000, 126].)
Like Dedekind, he thus provides a subject matter, but by seeing, imagining and visualiz-
ing, not by “abstraction,” and not by simply examining an abstract structure. The problem
is then about his notions of visualizing and seeing, which are not used synonymously, as
well as about the sequence being imagined. He apparently sees that the LNP is correct
in something like G. E. Moore’s sense of “immediately knowing” it to be true, while his
use of “visualize” seems to paraphrase talking of “imagining” or “having an image of.”
We will return to that below. One motive for what Lindstr¨om does stems from his tak-
ing the so-called problem of access seriously. Based, as that purported problem is, on
questionable causal theories of reference and supposed puzzles generated by abstraction
and our possession of general ideas, the problem of access is a classic Carnapian pseudo-
problem. Lindstr¨om notes in his paper, as Benacerraf does in his, that the problem stems
20It helps to recall that the opening sentence of Chapter I of The Principles of Mathematics begins: “Pure
Mathematics is the class of all propositions of the form “p implies q,” . . . [1956, 3].

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
485
from our supposed ability to have “abstract ideas.” (1996, 14-30) That, as both also men-
tion, led Plato to his version of the doctrine of innate ideas — the Platonic doctrine of
“recollection.”
To avoid supposedly problematic entities to which we have no causal access, Lindstr¨om
takes the visualization of an omega sequence, and, subsequently, of the “branching tree”
of the subsets of the elements of that sequence, to provide him with a simple means of ac-
cess to such elements and sets (though not, as he observes, to all of them). This is another
motive behind his quasi-realism [2000, 126-127, 136-137]. Noting that philosophical
analyses have little connection with what actually takes place in mathematical reasoning
and proof, Lindstr¨om claims that an adequate subject matter for ﬁrst order arithmetic is
furnished by our ability to visualize an omega sequence without claiming that there re-
ally is such a sequence. This ability to “visualize” without ontological commitment to
“entities” is responsible for the phrase quasi-realism, since, such a form of realism holds
that “there is a subject matter” without making any claims about the ontological status of
that subject matter — whether there really exists such an omega sequence, and its con-
stituents, that provides the subject matter for ﬁrst order arithmetic. Hence it is merely
“quasi-real,” but its being so suﬃces to resolve the access problem, since our visualizing
such a sequence gives us access to it, while supposedly allowing us to avoid G¨odel’s Pla-
tonism and Russell’s realism about logical forms (and apparently about classes in the 2nd
edition of Principia), and other forms of both realism and logicism. To help us see what
he means, Lindstr¨om likens the visualization of such a sequence to visualizing an unreal
object, like a unicorn. The latter, too, would provide a subject matter for a thought or a de-
scription. But an obvious and familiar question arises about the truth of claims like “The
unicorn I am imagining has only one horn” (which Lindstr¨om takes to be clearly true) and
“The golden mountain is golden.” The same problems face Lindstr¨om’s quasi-realism.
That can be seen as pointing to one sort of problem that led Russell to his logicism —
the need to take the Peano postulates and the familiar arithmetical truths as true — not
merely “true of” some imagined object or possible structure. Lindstr¨om also claims that
the visualization of the familiar branching tree will serve to provide a “quasi-real” subject
matter for set theory, in so far as it is limited to the results of the power set axiom as
conﬁned to the sets of elements of the original omega sequence. Beyond that his powers
of visualization do not apply.
Such reasoning is not convincing. What it comes down to is the claim that we deal with
a certain structure that we assume to be the structure involved in certain “visualizations.”
But if we take the term “visualize” literally, and not as a variant of “conceive of” or
“imagine,” the visual objects are simply the components of the image of a tree branching,
with the thought that it goes on ever branching, in the one case, and of a visual sequence
of elements, which is thought to indeﬁnitely proceed oﬀinto the distance, in the other. If
that is not what such theories are about, how do we get to the subject matter of arithmetic
and a portion of set theory from such imaging or imagining?
Taking there to be a fundamental diﬀerence between the case of a unicorn and that
of the omega sequence, Lindstr¨om argues that certain problems that seem to arise in the
case of the unicorn do not arise about the sequence. We might not be able to ask about
the weight of the imagined unicorn, for example, since our imagining a unicorn need not

486
Herbert Hochberg
determine it to be of any particular weight. This may recall Meinong’s views about imag-
ining and thinking of “incomplete” objects and their connection to our thoughts of non-
existent objects [1907, 121; 1915, 171-73]. For once we imagine an omega sequence, any
question relevant to its being such a sequence is answered — since any omega sequence
will do. In Meinong’s sense, such a sequence is not an “incomplete” object, but, rather,
follows Dedekind’s structuralism. Moreover, one might say the same sort of thing about
the unicorn — any question relevant to its being a case of imagining a unicorn, such as its
having a horn, can be answered. All Lindstr¨om is pointing out, in his example, is that if
there were to be a real unicorn it would have to have weight — while there is no property
that a real, as opposed to a quasi-real, omega sequence would have to have — since the
imagined omega sequence is imagined as having all the properties necessary for it to be
a “real” omega sequence. But such matters do not aﬀect what is at issue. One might
say that to visualize a unicorn is to visualize a horse with one horn — as that is what is
essential to its being a unicorn, and why visualizing a cow with one horn in the middle
of its head would not be to visualize a unicorn. But there is clearly not a subject that I
speak about when I say “The unicorn I visualize has one horn” as opposed to “The image
I now have (visualize) is an image of such and such a kind.” For there is no unicorn that
there is an “image of,” though there is an image of a certain kind. The same is clearly true
of the supposedly visualized omega sequence. But images are not the subject matter of
arithmetic — nor, for that matter, is what “is visualized” in the sense in which a unicorn,
and not an image of a unicorn, is what is supposedly visualized (imagined).
The obvious questions are not about the diﬀerence between unicorns and omega se-
quences but about what is really visualized in such cases and about the connection be-
tween what is actually visualized and what Lindstr¨om speaks of as the subject matter of
ﬁrst order arithmetic and the portion of set theory he deals with. To put it another way,
there is a question as to whether what he does really diﬀers from Dedekind’s focusing only
on the distinguishing of the elements of the system based on their place in the sequence.
Here we raise questions of what some would call a phenomenological nature. One aspect
of the problem concerns whether the visual object — the image — however vague, is of
an object. We may assume that there is an image, as a visualized object, since we need not
be materialists. One question then concerns the connection, if any, between a thought or
case of imagining and a non-existent object; another is a question about the connection, if
any, between the image, which we take to exist, and a mythological creature, which does
not. The issues posed by quasi-realism, as an alternative to logicism, an alternative that,
like logicism, provides a subject matter for arithmetic (other than signs), and thereby is
not a variant of formalism, really concern the second question — a question that we would
raise by talking about the apprehended image being a unicorn-image. Is the subject matter
of arithmetic composed of images? This is hardly a viable view. Are numbers visualized?
What would it mean to say they are? So just what is visualized? What are the elements
of the omega sequence? It seems clear that if Lindstr¨om is visualizing images, as he vi-
sualizes a unicorn-image, he is taking a sequence of images (imagined as unending) as
the subject matter. But he unequivocally denies that that is what he is visualizing [2000,
126-27]. Thus in talking about visualizing he is talking about intending or apprehending
or perceiving — in the manner of Russell speaking of apprehending logical forms and

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
487
G¨odel of abstract objects.
Lindstr¨om’s quasi-realism combines a variant of structuralism, which is reﬂected by
his use of “quasi,” where the objects structured are supposedly “visualized,” and hence
not merely structured. Thus such objects provide a subject matter and not just a structure,
which accounts for the use of “realism” in “quasi-realism.” Moreover, since the omega
sequence is merely imagined or visualized, and we can visualize the sequence without
making hypothetical existential claims, his notion of “visualization” allows him to provide
a subject matter, avoiding formalism, and yet not make ontological commitments that go
beyond the common sense idea that arithmetic has a subject matter.
7
LOGICISM AND THE THEORY OF TYPES
Russell considered the paradox that bears his name for years and had noted in 1903, as he
stated in the closing sentence of a passage quoted earlier from The Principles: “And the
contradiction discussed in Chapter x. proves that something is amiss, but what this is I
have hitherto failed to discover.” He later cryptically noted in My Philosophical Develop-
ment and in the ﬁrst volume of the autobiography that his theory of descriptions led him
to the solution: “It was clear to me that I could not get on without solving the contradic-
tions, and I was determined that no diﬃculty should turn me aside from the completion of
Principia Mathematica ... in the spring of 1905 . . . I discovered my theory of descrip-
tions, which was the ﬁrst step towards overcoming the diﬃculties which had baﬄed me
for so long” [1967, 243]. He did not explain but what he very likely meant was that ex-
pressions like “the property had by all properties that are not had by themselves” and “the
class of all classes that are not members of themselves” are not to be taken as referential
expressions but as contextually deﬁned signs — incomplete symbols — that cannot be
employed in purported instantiations to yield a paradox. Thus, with “R” for the Russell
property (function) we cannot have the sequence:
i.
(∀ψ)(Rψ ↔ψψ)
ii. RR ↔¬ RR
as the paradoxical statement (ii) is not a legitimate instantiation from (i). Rather, the
pattern is like the illegitimate sequence:
i.
(∀x)(x = x)
ii. the king of France in 1905 = the king of France in 1905.
iii. (∃x)(x = the king of France in 1905).
Both cases violate the restriction on the use of deﬁnite descriptions in such contexts of
instantiation, since the additional existential premise — there is such a property (function,
class) or there is such a king — is required. Since there is neither such a king, as a matter
of fact, nor such a property, as it leads to paradox, the inference can be blocked. But while
he now had the reason why the inference didn’t hold he still sought a systematic banning

488
Herbert Hochberg
of the paradoxical properties (functions) and classes. This was provided by a theory of
types prompted by his “vicious circle principle.” Yet the theory of types would furnish
futher objections to the logicist program.
Aside from the motives for rejecting logicism that have led some to structuralism and
formalism, others to ﬁnitism and intuitionism, and Lindstr¨om to quasi-realism, the pur-
ported need to make claims that are not, in any reasonable sense, logical truths has be-
come a standard obstacle to the acceptance of the logicist reduction of arithmetic to logic.
Russell was quite aware of the problematic status of three statements the Principia system
required. To yield the appropriate statements the domain of individuals must be inﬁnite so
that for no inductive cardinal n, n = n + 1 (no inductive cardinal is its own successor).21 In
addition what Russell called the “multiplicative axiom,” (Principia, vol. I, 537), a variant
of what became more familiarly known as “choice” and now a familiar part of set theory,
“can be enunciated, but not proved, in terms of logic” [1953, 117]. Finally, Russell took
the Principia system’s ramiﬁed theory of types to require his admittedly problematic ax-
iom of reducibility that would guarantee there being an “equivalent” predicative function
for a function of any order (of a type). Questions about inﬁnity and choice point to issues
about the relation of arithmetic to set theory and of the latter to logic: Just what is logic?
First order predicate logic? Second order predicate logic? Set theory? What are logi-
cal truths?22 And, questions about the status of existence statements involving “inﬁnitely
many” and a selection class, along with the more mundane “(∃x)(x = x),” have led to
questions regarding the logical status of “existence” theorems generally: Is it a logical
truth that something exists — that there is “something” rather than “nothing”? Similarly,
existence assumptions have led some to develop logical systems without such assump-
tions — some modeled on Russell’s restrictions on instantiation to deﬁnite descriptions.
Since an existential claim follows from the “law” of identity, “(∀x)(x = x),” in standard
logical systems, this has helped fuel the dispute about “free logics” — free from exis-
tence assumptions — and inferences “about” non-existent objects. In connection with
existence assumptions, it was stated in Principia that: “Our primitive propositions do not
require the existence of more than one individual” [1950, 216].23 But, given the familiar-
ity of choice and inﬁnity, it was the axiom of reducibility that understandably led to the
strongest objections to Russell’s logicism and to a suggested change in the second edition
of Principia. Nevertheless, Russell’s treatment of reducibility, choice and inﬁnity clearly
indicates that he took none of them to be logical truths.
Russell’s ramiﬁed theory of types was designed to reject impredicative functions, in the
sense of purported functions like (λx)(∀f)f x and (λx)(∃f) f x, as well as R — or (λφ)¬φφ
— and an unrestricted truth predicate.24 The restrictions imposed by the theory led to the
21That is how Whitehead and Russell expressed the assumption that they called the “axiom of inﬁnity.” For
the conditional manner in which they treated such an “axiom” see Principia, vol. II, 201-209, 260-269.
22Current usage of “ﬁrst order” and “higher order” for systems of logic is not the sense of “order” involved
in talking of orders within a type in ramiﬁed type theory.
23In a footnote in Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy Russell noted: “The primitive propositions in
Principia Mathematica are such as to allow the inference that at least one individual exists. But I now view this
as a defect in logical purity” [1953, 203].
24I will use the lamda notation for functions in place of Russell’s Principia cap, ˆ, notation in function
signs. Russell sometimes takes a “predicative” function (from the term “predicate”) to be a ﬁrst order func-

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
489
introduction of the reducibility axiom to overcome them. One simple diﬃculty is seen in
the case of their deﬁnition of identity, since the quantiﬁer must be restricted and cannot
cover all “orders” of a type:
x = y. =: (φ) : φ!x ↔.φ!y
Df
Others are posed by mathematical constructions (such as their deﬁnition of “natural num-
ber,” construction of the real numbers) or, as they put it, with the need in mathematics for
statements “which will usually be equivalent to what we have in mind when we (inaccu-
rately) speak of ‘all properties of x”’ [1950, 166].25 But as the axiom raised an obvious
problem regarding its status as a purported truth of logic, it cast further doubts on the
purported logistic reduction of standard arithmetic to logic. Thus Russell sometimes held
to the view that logical truths were conditionals. It was as if logicism was weakened to
the claim that from the primitive propositions of Principia Mathematica “the” conditional
— (inﬁnity & choice & reducibility) →(P-D) — was derivable.
Ramsey’s well-known critique of the reducibility axiom, purporting, among other things,
to prove it was not a logical truth, involved his problematic view that the quantiﬁers were
construable in terms of inﬁnite conjunctive and disjunctive functions. (1931, 9-20, 56-
61)26 Issues about Ramsey’s view aside, it has an ironic twist. For the reducibility axiom
tion of individuals, where the expression for it contains no quantiﬁers or only quantiﬁers over individuals–
φx, ψxy, (∃x)ψxy,. . . [1950, 51-52]. Sometimes a predicative function is characterized as a “function of one
variable which is of the order next above that of its argument” and of more than one variable if there is one for
which it becomes predicative when values are assigned to the others [1971, 78]. Sometimes it is characterized as
one of the next order above that of its argument(s) — when it is “of the lowest order compatible with its having
that argument” [1950, 53]. He also sometimes speaks of properties as predicates and as functions. As we need
not explore such matters, I will simply speak of functions and not try to specify just what Russell’s ramiﬁed
theory of types is (diﬀerent versions were suggested at diﬀerent times, and there are grounds for holding that
Principia Mathematica does not contain one uniform version). Though not meant to be an accurate account of
Russell’s theory, one fairly standard account, followed, for example, in Copi [1971] will do for getting the basic
ideas. On that account, we may think of functions arranged in a hierarchy of types, so that functions of type
t may not take arguments of types higher than t-1 (whether they can only take arguments of type t-1 depends
on how restrictive the variant of the ramiﬁed type theory is). Stopping at this point yields the simple theory of
types. A ramiﬁed theory divides the functions within each function type into orders, such that a quantiﬁer of
order o ranges over functions of order o. A predicate abstract containing a predicate quantiﬁer sign of order o,
as the quantiﬁer of highest order occurring in the abstract, is then a sign for a function of at least order o+1.
25One oddity of the Principia theory of types is the recurrence of the natural numbers at each type from the
second type (for classes or functions) “on up.” In short one gets an image of the (P-D) axioms taking numbers
as diﬀerent classes of classes at each such level. Thus, that such a number is not, in a sense, one deﬁnite object
is a part of the Russell-Whitehead construction. The same sort of thing occurs in the case of “=.”
26Such a view, oddly, given Russell’s well known arguments about general facts, can be seen to be suggested
in Principia (where he notes that only ﬁnite combinations or disjunctions can be taken extensionally or “by
enumeration”):
The axiom of reducibility is equivalent to the assumption that “any combination or disjunction
of predicates is equivalent to a single predicate,” i. e. if we assert that x has all the predicates
that satisfy a function f(φ!ˆu), there is some one predicate which x will have. . . and similarly if x
has some one of the predicates that satisfy a function f(φ!ˆu). . . . hence we shall be able to get
from any non-predicative function to a formally equivalent predicative one [1950, 58-59].
This is relevant to a complicated question of interpretation of the Principia system that is related to Russell’s
Fregean style view that “predicates” can only function “predicatively” and not as terms. This view he took
to be reinforced by the need to deal with the logical paradoxes as well as, like Frege, taking it to resolve the

490
Herbert Hochberg
can be dispensed with by employing such inﬁnite disjunctive and conjunctive functions
and taking “=” to be an additional primitive, logical sign (with standard axioms). Since,
for each individual a, there is a function (λx)(x=a), there will be a function, a disjunc-
tion of such identity functions, for every subset of the domain. Such a function would be
predicative if identity is primitive. Then, trivially, for every function of individuals, there
is an equivalent predicative function of individuals. Russell, deﬁning the identity sign in
Principia, cannot make use of such a pattern. But, given the reducibility axiom, he can,
and does, conﬁne the deﬁnition of identity to predicative functions.
Unlike Ramsey, who argued that the axiom of reducibility was not a logical truth,
Wittgenstein argued that the axiom could not be sensibly stated. In a letter to Russell,
Wittgenstein wrote:
Your axiom of reducibility is
: (∃f) : φx ↔x . f!x;
now is this not all nonsense as this proposition has only then a meaning if we
turn the φ into an apparent variable .... The axiom as you have put it is only a
schema and the real Pp ought to be
: (φ) : (∃f) : φx ↔x . f!x.
and where would be the use of that? [1969, 122]
Wittgenstein’s claim is that the axiom cannot be stated without an unrestricted quantiﬁer,
which violates the restrictions of the ramiﬁed theory of types. What one can state are
indeﬁnitely many axioms (or meta-axioms or an axiom schema or statements in a back-
ground language or a typically ambiguous axiom) for various orders of functions. It is
as if one were to state, in a background schema, that there is an axiom for every order
of function of the system. But this background statement involves a quantiﬁed expres-
sion not governed by “the axiom” itself. Wittgenstein’s claim is that any statement of the
axiom must explicitly or implicitly violate the point of the ramiﬁed theory of types. Yet,
without such an axiom, or something equivalent to it, the problems Russell and Whitehead
noted about the ramiﬁed theory of types remain.
Wittgenstein’s criticism overlooks a distinction that lies behind Russell’s way of stating
the axiom. The distinction was based on the supposed diﬀerence between “all” and “any.”
As Russell put it in 1908:
If φx is a propositional function, we will denote by ‘(x).φx’ the proposition
‘φx is always true’ .... Then the distinction between the assertion of all values
and the assertion of any is the distinction between (1) asserting (x) .φx and
(2) asserting φx where x is undetermined. The latter diﬀers from the former
in that it cannot be treated as one determinate proposition .... In the case of
such variables as propositions or properties, ‘any value’ is legitimate, though
“Bradley paradox” [1971, 337-338]. The view was one target of Ramsey’s paper “Universals” that attacked the
universal-particular distinction [Ramsey, 1931, 112-134].

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
491
‘all values’ is not. Thus we may say: ‘p is true or false, where p is any
proposition’, though we cannot say ‘all propositions are true or false’. The
reason is that, in the former, we merely aﬃrm an undetermined one of the
propositions of the form ‘p is true or false’, whereas in the latter we aﬃrm (if
anything) a new proposition diﬀerent from all the propositions of the form ‘p
is true or false’. Thus we may admit ‘any value’ of a variable in cases where
‘all values’ would lead to reﬂexive fallacies.... [1971, 66-67].
Moreover, in commenting on the axiom of reducibility, as written by Wittgenstein above,
Russell explicitly applied his distinction between “all” and “any” to that axiom:
This is the axiom of reducibility. It states that, given any function φx, there
is a predicative function f!x such that f!x is always equivalent to φx. Note
that, since a proposition beginning with ‘(∃f)’ is, by deﬁnition, the negation
of one beginning with ‘(f)’, the above axiom involves the possibility of con-
sidering ‘all predicative functions of x’. If φx is any function of x, we cannot
make propositions beginning with ‘(φ)’ or ‘(∃φ)’ since we cannot consider
‘all functions’, but only ‘any function’ ... [1971, 87].
The problem, however, is whether Russell’s distinction between “all” and “any,” and its
connection with his notion of an “undetermined value” (and related notions like “ambigu-
ous denotation,” “ambiguous statement” and “statement about an ambiguity”) suﬃces to
make his statement of the axiom viable in the face of Wittgenstein’s criticism. Aside
from any concern with Russell’s views of denotation and ambiguous denotation, there
is an obvious problem raised by the claim that we can assert an indeterminate proposi-
tion, by the use of a free variable , with the expressive power of a universally quantiﬁed
(apparent) variable — while holding that no determinate proposition is thereby asserted.
It is clear that Russell’s distinction between “all” and “any” will not, by itself, do as a
reply to Wittgenstein’s criticism. Thus, at one place, Russell admits that some primitive
propositions of Principia cannot be symbolized in a standard way but must be expressed
in words in a meta-language. And, he goes on to suggest the introduction into Principia
of a new symbolic device to carry the sense of the words used in the meta-language. Thus
the symbol ‘[φy]’ is suggested in the primitive proposition:
: [φy] →(x).φx
to symbolize the “mere hypothesis of what is asserted in ‘φy”’ as the condition involved
in holding “If φy is true however y may be chosen, then (x). φx is true .” (Principia,
1950, 132) Nevertheless, Russell’s discussion of the use of a free variable in the axiom of
reducibility is not consistent with the primitive proposition of Principia that amounts to a
version of the rule of universal generalization.
*(9. 13) In any assertion containing a real variable, this real variable may
be turned into an apparent variable of which all possible values are
asserted to satisfy the function in question. (Principia, 1950, 132)

492
Herbert Hochberg
Of course, one can argue that *(9. 13) does not apply in the case of the axiom of reducibil-
ity because the resulting universal generalization is an “illegitimate” statement. But this
would merely reveal the specious use of a free variable to state the axiom. What Wittgen-
stein is claiming is that whether one appeals to an axiom schema or to typically ambiguous
axioms or to meta-linguistic statements one makes a devious move by both accepting the
axiom and violating its intent. This becomes apparent when, in the second edition of Prin-
cipia, Whitehead and Russell take all “asserted” propositions with free (real) variables to
be replaced by propositions with universally quantiﬁed variables. (1950, xiii) Moreover,
in the second edition, it is suggested that the axiom of reducibility could be dispensed
with by assuming the existence of classes:
It should be observed, in the ﬁrst place, that if we assume the existence of
classes, the axiom of reducibility can be proved. For, in that case, given
any function φz of whatever order, there is a class α consisting of just those
objects which satisfy φz. Hence, “φx” is equivalent to “x belongs to α.”
But “x belongs to α” is a statement containing no apparent variable, and is
therefore a predicative function of x. Hence, if we assume the existence of
classes, the axiom of reducibility becomes unnecessary [1950, 58].27
On the surface Russell’s argument is puzzling. For it can be seen to suggest that if we have
a function, say (λx)(∀f) f x, and accept the existence of classes, we can refer to the class of
objects that satisfy that function by a sign of the system, “α” in the above quotation, and
form the predicate “(λx)(xεα).” This predicate can then be taken to represent a predicative
function that is equivalent to (λx)(∀f)f x. Russell seems to be suggesting that we can
deﬁne the expression “α” in terms of the expression “(λx)(∀f) f x” and then proceed to use
‘α’ instead of using a class abstract. For, given the existence of classes, we supposedly
have the class for the function (λx)(∀f)f x. And one stipulates that α is that class or
that “α” refers to it. Since “α” is not an expression containing a predicate quantiﬁer, a
predicative function is represented by “(λx)(xεα).” What Russell appears to be doing is
claiming that we can introduce a sign, say “α,” to stand for any class we specify in terms
of a class abstract, and then refer to the class by means of that sign, “α,” to form a function
sign. If he were doing that, then he need not resort to classes to turn the trick. Recognizing
the function (λx)(∀f) f x, all he need do is call it “(λx)φ!x” and, as this latter expression
contains “no apparent variable,” hold that the function it represents is elementary. This is
not what Russell is doing. For, according to Principia, we take “(ια)( fα)” as “the class
which satisﬁes the function f” and “it is to be remembered that ‘α’ stands for ‘ˆu(φu),’ and
that ‘fα’ therefore stands for ‘ f{ˆu(φu)}”’ [1950, 190]. Thus, he is simply claiming that
where there is a class, α , speciﬁed by a function that is not predicative, then there also is a
predicative function, is an element of α, that is trivially equivalent to the original function
used to specify the class.28 Given that there is a class α, then, by the way Russell has
developed the Principia system, there is the function (λx)xεα. The question that arises is
whether the sign “α,” as a class sign, is to be considered as deﬁned in context, and thus
27This had already been set out in Russell’s 1908 paper “Mathematical Logic as Based on the Theory of
Types,” where the axiom of reducibility was alternatively called the “axiom of classes” [1971, 81-82].
28For a diﬀerent interpretation of what Russell is doing see [Kneale, 1962, 663-664].

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
493
the function expression “(λx) x εα” is understood in terms of the pattern:
(∃φ): φ!x. ↔x .ψx: f{φ!u}
and, hence:
(∃φ): φ!x. ↔x .ψx:xε!φˆu}.
The assumption that there are classes is what allows for the use of ‘x ε!(φ!ˆu)’ as expressing
a predicative context. Such a use of the sign ‘ε‘, where it does not occur with a class
abstract (that must be replaced via its contextual deﬁnition), was provided for in
20.02
xε!(φˆu). = .φ!x
Df
which, along with 20.01 (cited earlier), “results” in
xεˆu(ψu)}. ↔:(∃φ): ψy. ↔y .φ!y:φ!x
and
xεˆu(ψu). ↔.ψx,
the latter “by the help of” the axiom of reducibility [1950, 188] It was that “help” that
the existence of classes now made unnecessary. Thus Russell does not merely introduce
another sign for the same function, as in the case of ‘(λx)F1x’ and ‘(λx)(∀f) f x’. Rather,
he takes a class to provide a function that is predicative — along with the assumption that
classes exist. The assumption that classes exist then becomes fundamental to the variant
of logicism suggested in the introduction to the second edition of Principia and raises an
additional question about the purported “logical nature” of the assumptions required to
attempt to carry out the logicist’s program.
Russell’s revised version of logicism, recognizing classes, reiterates the general ques-
tion as to whether logic can be divorced from ontological presuppositions — a question
that can be raised in connection with the logical connectives (negative facts, non-existent
states of aﬀairs, objects), quantiﬁers (generality, existence) as well as the “domains” over
which the variables range. Thus one may argue that “logic,” aside from any considerations
about arithmetic and logicism, already involves existential presuppositions. There are the
additional questions about the nature of logic that focus on acceptable proof procedures.
Thus “constructionist” and “ﬁnitist” themes, associated with “intuitionism” in the philos-
ophy of mathematics are perhaps better taken as questions about the logical foundations
themselves. Increasingly, issues about logic itself have come to the front: Is ﬁrst order
predicate logic to be taken as “logic”? Is (standard) set theory logic? Are “free,” “para-
consistent,” “intuitionist,” etc. systems logics? The question “What is logic?” is more
complex today. Yet Russell had recognized, from the ﬁrst decades of the 20th century,
the “pragmatic” nature of the problematic assumptions he needed to carry out the logis-
tic program. This pragmatic aspect can be taken to have culminated in Carnap’s holding
that such pragmatic justiﬁcations were all that could be expected, since taking there to be
some further kind of “proof” or establishing of the correctness of a formal system would
involve failing to recognize that questions leading to such attempts were “external” and
hence meaningless. In that way Carnap and the positivists, viably or not, had followed
Russell’s early lead in suggesting that logicism embodied a “proposal” to be judged by its
fruitfulness.

494
Herbert Hochberg
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Benacerraf, 1965] P. Benacerraf. What numbers could not ne, Philosophical Review, 74, 1965.
[Benacerraf, 1996] P. Benacerraf. Mathematical truth, in The Philosophy of Mathematics, (ed. W. D. Hart),
Oxford, 1996.
[Bernays, 1964] P. Bernays. On Platonism in mathematics, in Philosophy of Mathematics, (ed. P. Benacerraf
& H. Putnam), Englewood, 1964.
[Bradley, 1944] F. H. Bradley. Essays on Truth and Reality, Oxford, 1944.
[Carnap, 1937] R. Carnap. The Logical Syntax of Language, London, 1937.
[Carnap, 1956] R. Carnap. Empiricism, semantics, and ontology in R. Carnap, Meaning and Necessity,
Chicago, 1956.
[Carnap, 1959] R. Carnap. Introduction to Semantics and Formalization of Logic, Cambridge, Mass, 1959.
[Carnap, 1967] R. Carnap. The Logical Structure of the World & Pseudo Problems in Philosophy, (trans. R.
George), Berkeley, 1967.
[Copi, 1971] I. Copi. The Theory of Logical Types, London, 1971.
[Dedekind, 1888] J. W. R. Dedekind. Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen, Brunswick, 1888.
[Dummett, 1973] M. Dummett. Frege’s Philosophy of Language, New York, 1973.
[Dummett, 1978] M. Dummett. Truth and Other Enigmas, Cambridge, Mass, 1991.
[Dummett, 1991] M. Dummett. Frege. Philosophy of Mathematics, Cambridge, Mass, 1991.
[Dummett, 2002] M. Dummett. What is mathematics about? in Philosophy of Mathematics, (ed. D. Jacquette),
Oxford, 2002.
[Evans, 1982] G. Evans. The Varieties of Reference, Oxford, 1982
[Frege, 1953] G. Frege. The Foundations of Arithmetic (trans. J. Austin), Oxford, 1953
[Frege, 1967] G. Frege. The Basic Laws of Arithmetic, (trans. M. Furth), Berkeley, 1967
[Frege, 1968] G. Frege. The thought. A logical inquiry, (trans. A. Quinton) in Essays on Frege, ed. E. D.
Klemke, University of Illinois Press, Urbana, 1968.
[Frege, 1970] G. Frege. Negation, Translation from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege, (trans. P.
Geach and M. Black), Oxford, 1970.
[Frege, 1972] G. Frege. Conceptual Notation and Other Writings. (trans. T. W. Bynum), Oxford, 1972.
[Frege, 1975] G. Frege. Wissenschaftlicher Briefwechsel, Hamburg. E. D. Klemke, Urbana, 1975.
[Gill, 1990] R. R. Gill. Deducibility and Decidability, London, 1990.
[G¨odel, 1986] K. G¨odel. Is mathematics syntax of language?, Kurt G¨odel. Collected Works vol. III, (ed. S.
Feferman et. al.), Oxford, 1986/95.
[Hale and Wright, 2001] B. Hale and C. Wright. The Reason’s Proper Study, Oxford, 2001.
[Hilbert, 1964] D. Hilbert. On the inﬁnite, in Philosophy of Mathematics, (ed. P. Benacerraf & H. Putnam),
Englewood, 1964
[Hochberg, 1956] H. Hochberg. Peano, Russell and logicism’, Analysis, 25, 3, 1956.
[Hochberg, 1994] H. Hochberg. Causal connections, universals and Russell’s hypothetico-scientiﬁc realism,
The Monist, 77, 1, 1994.
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. . The Development of Logic, Oxford, 1962.
[Lewis, 1991] D. K. Lewis. Parts of Classes, Oxford, 1991.
[Lindstr¨om, 2000] P. Lindstr¨om. Quasi-realism in mathematics,” The Monist, 83. 1, 2000.
[Moore, 1889] G. E. Moore. The nature of judgment, Mind, 30, 1889.
[Peano, 1887] G. Peano. Arithmetices principia nova methodo exposita Rome, 1887.
[Ramsey, 1931] F. P. Ramsey. The Foundations of Mathematics, (ed. R. Braithwaite), London, 1931.
[Ramsey, 1991] F. P. Ramsey. Notes on Philosophy, Probability and Mathematics, (ed. M. C. Galavotti),
Naples, 1991.
[Russell, 1906] B. Russell. On the nature of truth, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 7, 1906/7.
[Russell, 1952] B. Russell. Our Knowledge of the External World, London, 1952.
[Russell, 1953] B. Russell. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, London, 1953.
[Russell, 1954] B. Russell. The Problems of Philosophy, London, 1954
[Russell, 1956] B. Russell. The Principles of Mathematics, Cambridge, 1956.
[Russell, 1967] B. Russell. The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell 1872-1914, Boston, 1967.
[Russell, 1971] B. Russell. Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types, reprinted in Logic and Knowl-
edge, (ed. R. C. Marsh), New York, 1971.
[von Neumann, 1964] J. von Neumann. The formalist foundations of mathematics, in Philosophy of Mathe-
matics, (ed. P. Benacerraf & H. Putnam), Englewood, 1964.

Logicism and its Contemporary Legacy
495
[Whitehead and Russell, 1950] A. N. Whitehead and B. A. W. Russell. Principia Mathematica, vols. I, II.
Cambridge, 1950.
[Wittgenstein, 1963] L. Wittgenstein. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, (trans. D. Pears & B. McGuinness),
London, 1963.
[Wittgenstein, 1969] L. Wittgenstein. Notebooks. 1914-1916, (trans. G. Anscombe), New York, 1969.
[Wright, 1983] C. Wright. Frege’s Conception of Numbers as Objects, Aberdeen, 1983.


CLASSICAL LOGIC’S COMING OF AGE
John W. Dawson, Jr.
1
INTRODUCTION
The displacement of the concepts and methods of Aristotelian logic by modern
symbolic and mathematical ones began in the nineteenth century with the works
of George Boole, Charles Sanders Peirce, Ernst Schr¨oder, Georg Cantor, Giuseppe
Peano and Gottlob Frege. Each of those pioneers contributed key conceptions that
have become standard features of modern formal logic. But the integration of their
ideas into a conceptual framework that incorporated both semantic and syntactic
notions and stressed the interplay between them — one in which metalogical ques-
tions could be posed and answered — took nearly a century: almost exactly so
if we reckon from the publication of Boole’s The Mathematical Analysis of Logic
in 1847 until Leon Henkin’s doctoral dissertation of 1947, wherein the method
of constants was introduced and used to extend G¨odel’s completeness theorem to
theories formulated in languages of arbitrary cardinality.
Within that century three formative periods in the development of logic may be
distinguished: its youth, from 1847 until around 1900; its adolescence, from then
until 1928; and its coming of age, during the following two decades.
The ﬁrst of those periods was distinguished by the recognition, by Boole, Au-
gustus De Morgan, Schr¨oder and others, of the mathematical character of logic (in
particular, of analogies between the operations of arithmetic and algebra and those
of propositional logic); by the elucidation, by Frege and Peirce, of quantiﬁcation
theory (the logic of statements involving quantiﬁers and polyadic predicates); by
the development, especially through the work of Schr¨oder and Peano, of a compact
notation for exhibiting the logical structure of statements; by Cantor’s creation of
naive set theory and the notions of inﬁnite cardinal and ordinal numbers; and by
the introduction of formal axiomatizations, of arithmetic (by Peano), Euclidean
and projective geometry (by Moritz Pasch, David Hilbert and Oswald Veblen),
and the real numbers (by Hilbert and Edward V. Huntington).
The period of adolescence was marked by polemical disputes and foundational
uncertainty, engendered both by paradoxes that had emerged and by the con-
struction of pathological functions in analysis.
Highlights of that era included
the discovery of Russell’s antinomy; Ernst Zermelo’s axiomatization of set the-
ory; controversy over the legitimacy of the axiom of choice (sparked in part by
such counterintuitive consequences as the Banach–Tarski paradox); disagreement
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

498
John W. Dawson, Jr.
over the interpretation of quantiﬁers; the proof of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theo-
rem, which implied that ﬁrst-order axiomatizations of set theory admit countable
models, despite references within those theories to sets that are uncountable; and
the development of competing mathematical philosophies, by Frege, Bertrand Rus-
sell and Albert NorthWhitehead (logicism), L.E.J. Brouwer and Hermann Weyl
(intuitionism), and Hilbert (formalism).
The present article focuses on the third period, during which ﬁrst-order logic
became the focus of logical investigation, questions of consistency, completeness
and categoricity were addressed and distinguished from one another, the notion
of truth in formal languages was inductively deﬁned, the fundamental notions of
recursion theory were formulated, enabling formal proofs of undeﬁnability and
undecidability, and the axiom of choice and Cantor’s continuum hypothesis were
shown to be consistent relative to the other axioms of set theory. The principal
ﬁgures of that period included Alfred Tarski, Kurt G¨odel, Alonzo Church, Alan
Turing, Stephen C. Kleene, J. Barkley Rosser, and Emil Post.
2
THE RISE TO ASCENDENCY OF FIRST-ORDER LOGIC
In axiomatizing mathematical theories it is natural to quantify over sets or prop-
erties of the individual objects of mathematical interest.
It is not surprising,
therefore, that all of the axiomatizations referred to above possessed this second-
order character. Peano’s induction axiom, for example, stated that any class of
natural numbers that contained 1 and contained the successor of any number it
contained must contain all the natural numbers; Hilbert’s and Huntington’s ax-
iomatizations of geometry and of the real numbers involved second-order axioms
of continuity or completeness; and the axiom of separation in Zermelo’s ﬁrst for-
mulation of set theory [Zermelo, 1908] involved quantiﬁcation over what he called
‘deﬁnit’ propositional functions.
Subsequently, however, until quite recently, the attention of classical logicians
came to be focused almost exclusively on ﬁrst-order logic, in which the quantiﬁers
range only over individual variables, representing objects of a domain of interpre-
tation that is left unspeciﬁed within the theory. How that came about has been
explored in two detailed and incisive studies [Moore, 1988; Goldfarb 1979], upon
which the summary account that follows is based.
The system of quantiﬁcation theory that Frege introduced in his Begriﬀsschrift
[Frege, 1879], which formed the basis for his later attempt to derive arithmetic
from logic [Frege, 1893], involved quantiﬁcation over functions. The unrestricted
use of function variables caused Frege’s system to be compromised by Russell’s
antinomy, and in an eﬀort to rescue the logicist program from that defect Russell
set about developing the theory of types, which he and Whitehead expounded in
Principia Mathematica [Whitehead and Russell, 1910].
It would have been possible for Whitehead and Russell to restrict attention to
variables of lowest type and to quantiﬁers ranging only over them, but they did
not do so. Indeed, as Goldfarb stresses, from the logicist perspective it would not

Classical Logic’s Coming of Age
499
have made sense to do so, since logicists viewed logic as concerned with everything,
not just individuals; its generality was not understood, as it is today, in the sense
of “having no subject matter in particular”. For the same reason, metalogical
questions also lay outside the purview of logicism, because it was impossible, from
that point of view, to step outside the universe of all things to which logic applied.
In contrast, Peirce’s system of quantiﬁcation theory, developed as part of his
“logic of relatives”, belonged to the algebraic tradition in logic. It, too, included
second-order quantiﬁers, although in his 1885 paper “On the algebra of logic. A
contribution to the philosophy of notation” [Peirce, 1885] Peirce focused primar-
ily on the “ﬁrst-intentional logic of relatives”, involving quantiﬁcation just over
individuals. But Peirce (and much later, Zermelo as well) construed quantiﬁers as
inﬁnitary conjunctions and disjunctions, over a domain of discourse that was ﬁxed
in advance. In addition, since Peirce’s treatment was not axiomatic and did not
employ function symbols, it was far from what we understand today as a formal
logic.
Leopold L¨owenheim, in his paper [1915], presented a version of what later be-
came formulated as the downward L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem. He showed that
an ‘individual expression’ (Z¨ahlausdruck) of the logic within which he worked is
satisﬁable in a denumerable structure if it is satisﬁable at all. L¨owenheim dis-
tinguished ‘individual expressions’ from ‘relational’ ones (Relativausdr¨ucke). The
former contained only variables for individuals, and were equivalent within his
system to ﬁnitary expressions. But his logic itself was both inﬁnitary and second-
order, and his proof of the theorem made use of a second-order formula. Thus, as
Moore points out, though L¨owenheim in a sense distinguished ﬁrst- from second-
order expressions, he did not work within what we now call ﬁrst-order logic.
It was Thoralf Skolem, in an address to the Fifth Congress of Scandinavian
Mathematicians (1922), who ﬁrst explicitly stated that a generalization of
L¨owenheim’s theorem was valid in the latter framework [Skolem, 1923b].1 The
aim of Skolem’s remarks was to place set theory “on the same level as other ax-
iomatic theories”, by demonstrating the “relativity of set-theoretic notions”. He
intended thereby to show that set theory is unsuitable to serve as a basis for the
rest of mathematics.
But does the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem show the foundational inadequacy
of set theory, or, as Skolem’s critics (most notably, Zermelo) maintained, the
inadequacy of ﬁrst-order formalizations? According to a theorem of Per Lindstr¨om,
proved in the 1960s, ﬁrst-order logic is the strongest logic that satisﬁes both the
downward L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem and the countable compactness theorem
(which states that a countable set of sentences is satisﬁable if every ﬁnite subset
is). And though compactness is generally regarded as a desirable property for a
logic to have, Lindstr¨om’s theorem does not entail that ﬁrst-order logic is the only
reasonable logic unless one demands that the L¨owenheim-Skolem property should
1Three years earlier Skolem had given a proof of L¨owenheim’s theorem that did not employ
any second-order formula, but his statement of the result then was in the context of the language
now called Lω1ω, which allows countably inﬁnite conjunctions of ﬁrst-order formulas.

500
John W. Dawson, Jr.
also hold — a position that has been deemed tantamount to “deny[ing] reality to
the concept of uncountability” [Wang, 1974, 154].
Skolem introduced ﬁrst-order propositions as a way of explicating Zermelo’s
vague conception of ‘deﬁnit’ property. His stated justiﬁcation for doing so was
that the notion of a ﬁnite expression built up by applying connectives and quan-
tiﬁers to atomic formulas involving only individual variables was “a completely
clear notion”— one which, he claimed, was “suﬃciently comprehensive... to carry
out all ordinary set-theoretic proofs”[Skolem, 1923b]. Subsequently, Skolem never
wavered in his advocacy of ﬁrst-order logic — a position that Zermelo ridiculed
as “Skolemism, the doctrine that every mathematical theory... is realizable in a
countable model” [Zermelo, 1932].
A version of ﬁrst-order logic, referred to as “the restricted functional calculus”,
was also singled out for attention in Hilbert and Ackermann’s textbook Grundz¨uge
der theoretischen Logik [Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928], a reworking of lectures on
logic that Hilbert had given in 1917. Hilbert introduced the restricted functional
calculus, incoporating both propositional and ﬁrst-order predicate logic, in chapter
3, but went on in the next (ﬁnal) chapter to argue the need to extend it, in order
both to express the full intent of the axiom of complete induction and (contrary to
Skolem’s view) to be able to adequately axiomatize set theory. The logical frame-
work Hilbert ultimately adopted was a version of type theory, built up in stages,
beginning with a given, ﬁxed domain of individuals and certain basic predicates
on them. He deﬁned a predicate of the ﬁrst level to be “a logical function of one
or several variables that may be built up from the basic predicates” by apply-
ing ﬁnitely many propositional connectives together with “the operations ‘all’ and
‘there exists’ ”, the latter “referring only to the original domain of individuals.”
Second-order theories were then obtained by taking the functions and propositions
of the ﬁrst level as a new domain of individuals, and so on. To avoid the para-
doxes, the levels were ramiﬁed and the substitution of functional or propositional
expressions for functional or propositional variables was restricted to expressions
of “the same or lower level”.
For Hilbert the retricted functional calculus thus constituted the ﬁrst step in
the construction of a more comprehensive logical framework that subsumed it.
Merely as such, the restricted calculus would not have merited special scrutiny.
But before going on to his extended system Hilbert directed attention to a pair of
metalogical questions concerning the restricted calculus that he declared to be of
“fundamental importance” for the study of “all mathematical domains amenable
to ﬁnite axiomatization”: the decision problems for validity and satisﬁability.
3
SEMANTIC DECIDABILITY AND SEMANTIC COMPLETENESS
Hilbert posed the decision problem for logical validity as the question: “For an ar-
bitrarily given logical expression [of the restricted functional calculus] that contains
no individual constants, how can one determine whether the expression, under any
substitution whatever [of particular individuals] for the [free] variables occurring

Classical Logic’s Coming of Age
501
in it, does or does not [always] represent a correct assertion?” Similarly, Hilbert
posed the decision problem for satisﬁability as the question “Whether there is any
substitution at all [of particular individuals] for the [free] variables under which
the corresponding expression will represent a correct assertion.” He noted that the
two questions were dual to one another, since a formula will be logically valid if
and only if its negation is not satisﬁable, and that both problems had been solved
for the propositional calculus, where either the method of truth tables employed
by Post (1921) or that of conversion to conjunctive normal form (introduced by
Paul Bernays in his Habilitationsschrift of 1918 and described in an earlier chap-
ter of [Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] can be used to ascertain whether or not a
propositional formula is a tautology. To judge from his phrasing of the decision
problem for validity (which asks how, not whether, a determination can be made),
Hilbert seems to have expected that the two decision problems would have a pos-
itive solution in the case of ﬁrst-order formulas as well. Toward that end, the last
section of chapter 3 of Hilbert and Ackermann’s text gave decision procedures for
certain special classes of formulas.
Validity and satisﬁability, as deﬁned above, are semantic notions. But in his
statement of the decision problem, which he declared to be “the principal problem
of mathematical logic” [Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928, 77], Hilbert placed no re-
striction on the means that a decision procedure for validity or satisﬁability might
use. In the context of propositional logic, for example, the decision procedure
based on truth tables is normally construed to be a semantic method, though
Post apparently did not regard it as such (see the discussion on page 46 of [van
Heijenoort and Dreben, 1986], whereas Bernays’ procedure based on conversion
to normal form is a syntactic one. And if one approaches the decision problem
syntactically, one may be led to consider the related question of semantic complete-
ness: Is every logically valid formula of the restricted functional calculus formally
derivable by means of the axioms and rules of inference of that calculus? Indeed,
Hilbert had posed that question even before discussing the decision problem. It
was, he said, a “still unsolved problem”, for which there was then “only empiri-
cal evidence” that a positive solution might be expected [Hilbert and Ackermann,
1928, 68].
In fact, the step most essential for that expected solution had already been car-
ried out, in the paper of Skolem cited above. For there Skolem showed that to every
ﬁrst-order formula F of a certain normal form (to which any ﬁrst-order expression
is reducible) may be associated a countably inﬁnite sequence of quantiﬁer-free for-
mulas, each of which is a ﬁnite conjunction of substitution instances of F; and if
each formula of that sequence is truth-functionally satisﬁable, then F is satisﬁable
within the domain of natural numbers. In a further paper [Skolem, 1929] Skolem
reﬁned his argument and concluded that if the formula F were not satisﬁable, then
not only must one of the formulas of the associated sequence be truth-functionally
unsatisﬁable, but from it a contradiction would be informally deducible. To es-
tablish completeness,2 it thus remained only to show how to transform such an
2In classical logic, where any formula is logically equivalent to its double negation

502
John W. Dawson, Jr.
informal deduction into a formal proof of the negation of F. But Skolem did not
do so, and he apparently did not recognize that the chain of reasoning just de-
scribed would settle the issue. In part, that may have been due to his conﬂation of
semantic and syntactic notions (satisﬁability and consistency). More importantly,
though, it seems that he simply was not interested in the matter. (For a detailed
discussion of Skolem’s aims and accomplishments in this sphere, see [Goldfarb,
1979; van Heijenoort and Dreben 1986].)
It was Kurt G¨odel who, in his doctoral dissertation [G¨odel, 1929, published in
revised form as [G¨odel, 1930a], reconstructed Skolem’s argument, carried out the
ﬁnal syntactic step, and presented the whole as a solution to the question posed by
Hilbert and Ackermann. Mathematically, G¨odel went only slightly beyond what
Skolem had already done. But he brought to the subject a clarity of vision that had
been lacking in all that had gone before; he distinguished clearly between syntactic
and semantic concepts; and he was aware of the larger philosophical signiﬁcance
of the result he had proved. For in the introduction to the dissertation (though
not in its published revision) he remarked that the assertion of completeness could
“easily be seen to be equivalent” to the statement that every consistent set of
ﬁrst-order axioms has a concrete realization — and that, he noted, justiﬁed “the
usual method for proving consistency”, since it guaranteed that “one must either
be able to produce a contradiction” from a set of statements or else “prove the[ir]
consistency by means of a model.” In short, he recognized that he had established
a stronger result than Hilbert and Ackermann had asked for: He had shown not
just that the logical axioms of their system were adequate for deriving all logically
valid statements, but that if nonlogical axioms (such as those of Peano for the nat-
ural numbers) were added to them, the statements derivable from the augmented
system would coincide with those true in every interpretation that satisﬁed the
nonlogical axioms.
In addition, he drew an epistemological conclusion from the fact of complete-
ness. One might think, he said, (with tacit reference to Hilbert’s view) that “the
existence of notions introduced through an axiom system” is established “outright”
once it is demonstrated that no contradiction can be derived from them. But such
a belief, he cautioned, “manifestly presupposes” (as Hilbert had explicitly claimed)
that “every mathematical problem is solvable.”
Indeed, were some statement to be shown undecidable (neither provable nor
refutable) within a particular ﬁrst-order axiomatic framework, it would follow
from the completeness theorem that two non-isomorphic realizations of those ax-
ioms existed, one satisfying the statement in question and the other satisfying
its negation. That would not be a contradiction, but it would establish that the
axioms were not categorical, that is, that they did not uniquely characterize the
objects of the intended mathematical domain (such as the integers or the real
numbers).
Peano, on the other hand, had shown that his second-order axioms for the nat-
ural numbers were categorical. Accordingly, if some number-theoretic statement
were shown to be undecidable from those axioms, it would mean that second-order

Classical Logic’s Coming of Age
503
logic was not complete, so that a set of axioms, even though noncontradictory,
might have no realization whatever; and that would conclusively demonstrate the
inadequacy of consistency as a criterion for mathematical existence.
4
FORMALLY UNDECIDABLE STATEMENTS, THE UNDEFINABILITY
OF TRUTH, AND THE EXISTENCE OF NONSTANDARD MODELS
In the deﬁnitions of validity and satisﬁability given in Hilbert and Ackermann’s
book, what it meant for an expression to be ‘correct’ was left undeﬁned.
Re-
markably, that central semantic notion was also left undeﬁned in G¨odel’s paper
on completeness. In both texts it was simply assumed that there was a clear intu-
itive understanding of whether an interpreted formula held or not when particular
objects were substituted for its free variables.
It was not long, however, before G¨odel confronted the question whether the
notion of truth, for an arbitrary formula of the language of ﬁrst-order Peano arith-
metic, could be formally deﬁned within the language of arithmetic itself. The oc-
casion for doing so, he later explained, was his attempt “to give a relative model-
theoretic consistency proof of analysis in arithmetic”, in the spirit of Hilbert’s
reductive program for establishing the consistency of higher-level mathematical
theories relative to that of simpler ones.3 G¨odel quickly realized that though a
formal deﬁnition of provability from Peano’s axioms could be given within the
language of ﬁrst-order Peano arithmetic, that of truth within the domain of the
natural numbers could not.4
G¨odel exploited that diﬀerence to show that if Peano’s axioms were consistent,
one could exhibit a statement true of the natural numbers that was not formally
derivable from the axioms. In view of his completeness theorem, any such state-
ment would have to be false in some other structure that satisﬁed the ﬁrst-order
Peano axioms. So the ﬁrst-order version of Peano’s axioms, if consistent, could
not be categorical.
Such was the genesis of G¨odel’s most famous result, his (ﬁrst) incompleteness
theorem, which he announced at the same time as his completeness result, during
a conference at K¨onigsberg in September of 1930. (See [Dawson, 1984] for fur-
ther details of that momentous occasion.) The result appeared in print early the
next year [G¨odel, 1931], and was later accepted as G¨odel’s Habilitationsschrift.
In that paper G¨odel began by giving an informal pr´ecis of the main idea of his
proof “without any claim to complete precision”.
The principal technical tool
he employed was that of arithmetization of syntax, whereby all of the symbols
of the formal language of number theory, as well as all sequences thereof and all
sequences of them, were encoded in a systematic way as natural numbers. The
class of well-formed formulas (sequences of symbols of a particular kind), of proofs
3G¨odel to Yossef Balas, n.d., published on pp. 9–11 of [G¨odel, 2003a].
4Evidence of his early awareness of those facts is provided by his letter to Balas, cited above,
and by his letters of 2 April 1931 to Paul Bernays and of 12 October 1931 to Ernst Zermelo. The
latter are reproduced on pp. 91–99 of [G¨odel, 2003a] and pp. 423–429 of [G¨odel, 2003b].

504
John W. Dawson, Jr.
(sequences of formulas of a particular kind), of unary formulas (those with a single
free variable), and of numerical substitution instances of the latter (in which the
free variable is replaced by a numeral denoting a particular natural number) then
correspond to certain sets of natural numbers, each of which can be shown to be
deﬁnable5 within the framework of formal number theory.
Because it is possible to order all the unary formulas in a deﬁnable sequence,
within the theory a binary number-theoretic predicate Q(x, y) can be deﬁned such
that if F(x) is the nth unary formula and n is the numeral corresponding to n (that
is, the term of the formal language obtained by applying the successor function n
times to the constant symbol 0), the formula Q(x, n) encodes the statement “x is
not the code number of a proof of the formula F(n).” Quantifying universally over
the variable x yields the unary formula ∀xQ(x, y), which has some index number q
in the ordering of all unary formulas. The formula ∀xQ(x, q), henceforth abbre-
viated as S, then encodes the statement “the qth numerical substitution instance
of the qth unary formula is not provable”. That is, S aﬃrms its own unprovabil-
ity. G¨odel then argued informally that if the underlying theory were consistent,
the sentence S could not be provable, and if it were sound (that is, if no false
statement were provable — a stronger condition than consistency), neither could
its negation.
The notion of consistency is syntactic (for no formula F are both F and its nega-
tion provable), but that of soundness involves the notion of truth, against which,
G¨odel believed, there was at that time “a prevailing prejudice”.6 Accordingly, in
the precise analysis that he gave in the main body of his paper, he replaced the
assumption that the theory was sound by that of its being ω-consistent, the purely
syntactic criterion that if each numerical substitution instance F(n) of a unary
formula F(y) is refutable, the existential statement ∃yF(y) is not provable. The
resulting (ﬁrst) incompleteness theorem then stated: In any ω-consistent axiom-
atization of number theory that is strong enough to permit the arithmetization
described above, if the set of formulas is primitively recursively deﬁnable, the
sentence S constructed as above is neither provable nor refutable.
Any ω-consistent system is consistent, since, by deﬁnition, there is a formula
that is not provable within it. But any system Σ that satisﬁes the hypotheses of
the incompleteness theorem (and so is ω-consistent) can be extended by adjoining
the negation of the undecidable statement S. The resulting system Σ* must be
consistent, since otherwise S would have been provable in Σ. However, S is the
universal generalization of the formula Q(x,q), whose nth numerical substitution
instance Q(n,q) asserts that the numeral corresponding to the natural number n
is not the numeral for the code number of a proof in Σ of S. But in the course of
his proof G¨odel showed that Q(n,q) is provable in Σ if n is not, in fact, the code
5More precisely, (primitively) recursively deﬁnable, a notion G¨odel rigorously deﬁned later in
the paper.
6See the letter to Y. Balas cited above. Cf. also Rudolf Carnap’s recollections in his Intellec-
tual Autobiography [Carnap, 1963] and the caveat in section 9 of [Church, 1956] (quoted on p.
133 of [Henkin, 1996].

Classical Logic’s Coming of Age
505
number of a proof in Σ of S, and is disprovable in Σ if n is the code number of a
proof in Σ of S. Thus if, for some n, the negation of Q(n,q) were true, S would be
refutable in Σ; hence no numeral n can correspond to the code number of a proof
of S in Σ. Therefore Q(n,q) must be provable in Σ, and hence in Σ∗, for every n.
But that means Σ* is not ω-consistent, since the negation of S is also a theorem
of Σ* .
The incompleteness theorem holds for second-order formalizations of number
theory as well as for ﬁrst-order axiomatizations, so the state of aﬀairs described
at the end of the preceding section is actually the case: If Σ is taken to be second-
order Peano arithmetic, then Σ* is a consistent system that has no realization.
On the other hand, if Σ is taken to be the ﬁrst-order Peano axioms, then Σ* is a
consistent ﬁrst-order theory. As such (by the completeness theorem) it must have
a model, in which there must be an object that instantiates the negation of S.
That object must satisfy the statement within the theory that asserts that it is
the code number of a proof of S. But it cannot correspond to any numeral in the
theory. Thus the model must contain nonstandard numbers.
5
THE SECOND INCOMPLETENESS THEOREM, AND LATER
EXTENSIONS OF G¨ODEL’S RESULTS
Following his announcement at K¨onigsberg G¨odel was drawn aside by John von
Neumann, who was eager to learn further details about the existence of undecidable
statements. Not long afterward, as we know from their correspondence [G¨odel
2003b, 336–341], both men independently discovered the second incompleteness
theorem, according to which, in any consistent, recursively axiomatizable extension
Tof Peano arithmetic, the natural formalization ConT of the statement that T is
consistent (a formula expressing that no code number can be that of a formula
that is both provable and refutable) is itself formally unprovable within T. Thus,
contrary to Hilbert’s hope, the consistency of arithmetic cannot be demonstrated
through reduction to that of a syntactically weaker system.7
G¨odel announced the second theorem in an abstract [G¨odel, 1930b] that he
communicated to the Vienna Academy of Sciences on 23 October 1930, and he
sketched its proof in the ﬁnal section of his paper 1931, which was received for
publication on 20 November 1930. (Von Neumann wrote to apprise G¨odel of his
proof of the result three days later.) In the last sentence of that paper G¨odel
promised to give full details of the proof “in a sequel to be published soon”. But
no sequel ever appeared.
A detailed proof was ﬁrst published in 1939, in the
second volume of Hilbert and Bernays’ text Grundlagen der Mathematik [Hilbert
and Bernays, 1939].
During the interim between the publication of the proofs of the ﬁrst and sec-
ond theorems a number of important extensions of G¨odel’s methods and results
7One may, however, demonstrate the consistency of arithmetic relative to systems that appear
more perspicuously unobjectionable, as Gerhard Gentzen and, later, G¨odel himself, did. See §6
below.

506
John W. Dawson, Jr.
appeared. One was Tarski’s proof, in a postscript added in press to his Polish
monograph [Tarski, 1933], that the notion of truth for formulas of arithmetic is
not deﬁnable within arithmetic itself. As noted above, G¨odel was well aware of
that fact, but he had refrained from stating it in print because he wished to avoid
the controversy that he thought discussion of semantic issues would engender.
Tarski was bolder, and in the monograph just cited (better known in its Ger-
man translation [Tarski, 1935] he analyzed the concept of truth as it was used
both in natural and formal languages and gave an inductive deﬁnition (within a
second-order metalanguage) of the notion of truth in a formal language L. Tarski
explicitly credited G¨odel with having introduced the methods needed to establish
the undeﬁnability of truth, but he also noted that, independently of and prior to
G¨odel, he had given an example of a consistent theory that was not ω-consistent.
In a later paper [Tarski, 1936], published the same year in German translation),
Tarski analyzed the notion of logical consequence; and on the basis either of that
paper or the 1933 monograph he has generally been credited with having given
the modern model-theoretic deﬁnitions of logical truth and logical consequence.
But in a detailed essay on Tarski’s contributions to the study of those notions
[Etchemendy, 1988] John Etchmendy has pointed out that neither of those attri-
butions is correct. He notes in particular (pp. 65 and 69) that “as long as the
quantiﬁers are treated as logical constants”, the “semantic account of the logical
notions” that Tarski gave in his 1936 paper “leaves the domain of quantiﬁcation
ﬁxed”, whereas the deﬁnition that has since become standard “requires that... the
domain of quantiﬁcation” be varied. Etchemendy concludes that the history of
the model-theoretic analysis of logical truth and logical consequence “is probably
too complex to support [its] attribution to any single author.”
It was also in 1936 that Rosser strengthened the ﬁrst incompleteness theorem
by demonstrating that the hypothesis of ω-consistency is not needed in order to
establish the existence of undecidable statements in formalized arithmetic [Rosser,
1936]. He did so by replacing G¨odel’s sentence that asserts its own unprovability
by a more complex self-referential statement that asserts that if it is provable
within the system, there is a proof of its negation with a smaller code number.
Simple consistency of the underlying system then suﬃces to show that Rosser’s
statement is formally undecidable within it.
A third result related to G¨odel’s completeness and incompleteness theorems
was obtained by Skolem in a paper he published in 1933 [Skolem, 1933]. By an
explicit construction that foreshadowed the later notion of ultraproduct, Skolem
demonstrated that there is a structure not isomorphic to the natural numbers
that nevertheless satisﬁes exactly the same sentences of formal number theory
that the natural numbers do. (Following Tarski, structures that satisfy exactly
the same sentences are said to be elementarily equivalent.)
Skolem drew as a
corollary that no ﬁnite axiomatization of number theory can fully characterize
the natural numbers, a result that, as noted above (and as G¨odel observed in his
review of Skolem’s paper, [G¨odel, 1934], in Zentralblatt f¨ur Mathematik), follows
directly from the completeness and incompleteness theorems. Yet neither G¨odel

Classical Logic’s Coming of Age
507
nor Skolem seems to have noticed that the main result of Skolem’s paper is an
easy consequence of another theorem that G¨odel had proved in his 1930 paper: the
(countable) compactness theorem, mentioned earlier, which asserts that if every
ﬁnite subset of a (countably inﬁnite) set of ﬁrst-order statements is satisﬁable,
there is a structure that satisﬁes all the statements in the set.
Today the compactness theorem is considered one of the cornerstones of the
theory of models.
But that branch of logic did not become an organized sub-
discipline until the 1950s, and it took many years before the signiﬁcance of the
compactness property came to be recognized. (Indeed, the very name “compact-
ness”, with its topological connotations, is due to Tarski and dates from 1952.) A
detailed account of the rather convoluted history of the compactness theorem, in
which the principal players, in addition to G¨odel, were Henkin, Tarski, Abraham
Robinson and, especially, A.I. Malt’sev, is given in [Dawson, 1993]. For G¨odel
himself the theorem seems to have been an afterthought. There is no mention of
it in his dissertation, but only in the published revision thereof, where it is used
as a lemma in the proof of the completeness theorem (in contrast to most modern
treatments, where compactness is deduced as a corollary of completeness).
The easy non-constructive argument, invoking the compactness theorem, that
establishes Skolem’s main theorem proceeds by considering the set of all sentences
that are true in the standard model, together with the statements c > n, for
each natural number n , where c is a single new constant symbol adjoined to the
language of Peano arithmetic. It is this last move, that of expanding the language
by adjoining a new constant symbol, that seems to have escaped notice for more
than a decade after G¨odel stated and proved the compactness theorem; and it
was an extension of that method, involving the adjunction of inﬁnitely many new
constant symbols, that Henkin employed in his dissertation to give a new proof
of the completeness theorem — one which, unlike G¨odel’s, could be extended to
uncountable languages.
Henkin himself has given a detailed and fascinating account [Henkin, 1996] of
how his completeness proof came about, as an unexpected oﬀshoot of a failed
attempt to establish a very diﬀerent result. Given a consistent set Σ of ﬁrst-order
sentences, his key idea was to use added constant symbols to build a model for Σ.
In particular, he saw how constant symbols could be chosen to serve as witnesses
for the existential sentences of the expanded language, by enumerating all such
sentences and associating to each sentence ∃xAn(x) a sentence Tn of the form
∃xAn(x) →An(c), where c is a suitably chosen one of the new constants that does
not appear in An(x) nor in any of the sentences Tm previously introduced. If we
denote by T the set of all the sentences Tn , then the set Σ∪T remains consistent,
and, by a well-known theorem of Adolf Lindenbaum (ﬁrst published in [Tarski,
1930], it may be extended to a maximal consistent set M of sentences.
The set of all closed terms in the enlarged language may then be taken as the
domain of a structure A for interpreting that language. In that structure , each
n-ary function symbol f of the language is interpreted by the n-ary function whose
value at an n-tuple (τ1, τ2, . . . , τn) of closed terms is the closed term fτ1τ2 . . . τn.

508
John W. Dawson, Jr.
Each n-ary relation symbol R of the language (including the equality symbol, if
present) is interpreted in the structure by an n-ary relation R which holds of closed
terms τ1, τ2, . . . , τn if and only if Rτ1τ2 . . . τn is in M. And each constant symbol
c is interpreted by itself. If the language does not contain the equality symbol,
then A is a model for M. Otherwise, the quotient structure A/E, where E is the
relation that interprets the equality symbol, will be a model for M. In either case,
the reduct of A or A/E to the original language is a model for Σ.
6
CONSISTENCY PROOFS IN THE WAKE OF THE SECOND
INCOMPLETENESS THEOREM
Hilbert’s aim in proposing his formalist program was to secure the foundations
of mathematics by proving, by “ﬁnitary” means, the consistency of successively
more complex axiom systems, beginning with Peano arithmetic. The challenge of
carrying out the initial step in that program was the second of the problems that
he posed in his famous address to the International Congress of Mathematicians in
1900. G¨odel’s second incompleteness theorem implied that if all “ﬁnitary means”
(methods of inference that Hilbert never precisely delimited) can be formalized
within Peano arithmetic, then that goal cannot be realized. But in his incom-
pleteness paper G¨odel explicitly stressed that it was “conceivable that there exist
ﬁnitary proofs that cannot be expressed” in Peano arithmetic. As time went on,
that possibility came to seem less and less likely. But the question remained: Can
the consistency of arithmetic be established by means which, though not formaliz-
able within arithmetic itself, nonetheless appear to be “more evident [or] reliable,...
so that one’s conviction is thereby strengthened”?8
The ﬁrst such proof, based on the principle of transﬁnite induction up to the
ordinal ε0 (the limit of the sequence {sn} of ordinals given by s0 = ω, sn+1 = ωsn),
was given by Gerhard Gentzen in 1936 [Gentzen, 1936] and was carried out within
the framework of a calculus for “natural deduction” that Gentzen had developed
two years earlier [Gentzen, 1935].
The basic entities within that calculus are expressions of the form Γ1, Γ2, . . . ,
Γn →Λ, called sequents, where Γ1, Γ2, . . . , Γn (the antecedents) and Λ (the succe-
dent) are formulas of an underlying formal language. The intended meaning of
such a sequent, according to Gentzen, is that Λ follows from the assumptions
Γ1, Γ2, . . . , Γn. Sequents of the form →Λ, in which there are no assumptions, are
also admitted; they are regarded as axioms.
As the term ‘natural deduction’ implies, Gentzen’s original aim was to formalize
logical deductions in a manner that mimicked, as closely as possible, the patterns
of informal mathematical reasoning. Such reasoning is not ordinarily carried out
within an axiomatic framework, but rather involves the drawing of conclusions
8The words are quoted from a lecture G¨odel gave in January of 1938 [G¨odel, 1938a], in
which he surveyed the nature of consistency proofs and outlined a method for establishing the
consistency of arithmetic via the notion of “computable functional of ﬁnite type” (a result he
did not publish until twenty years later [G¨odel, 1958]).

Classical Logic’s Coming of Age
509
from given premises. Sequents are a way of formalizing the steps involved in such
deductions. In particular, Gentzen deﬁned a derivation, within the calculus of
sequents, to be a ﬁnite list of sequents, each of which is either a basic sequent (an
axiom, or else a sequent of the form Λ →Λ), is the result of applying one of a
speciﬁed set of structural transformations to an earlier sequent (such as rearranging
the order of its assumptions, or eliminating duplicated assumptions from it), or is
obtained from an earlier sequent by the application of one of a ﬁnite number of
rules of inference. For arithmetic, the latter comprised the rule of mathematical
induction together with the logical rules reductio ad absurdam, elimination of a
double negation, and ﬁve pairs of introduction and elimination rules, one for each
of the binary connectives (&, ∨and ⊃) and each of the quantiﬁers (∀and ∃) that
Gentzen employed.
To establish the consistency of arithmetic, Gentzen had to show that no sequent
of the form →(A&¬A) could occur as the last sequent in any derivation. He did
so in several stages. First, he indicated how to replace the symbols ∨, ∃, and
⊃, wherever they occurred in a derivation, by logically equivalent expressions
involving ¬, &, and ∀; second, he described how to modify the sequence of rules of
inference accordingly, so as to obtain a derivation, employing only the restricted
set of connectives and quantiﬁers, of the ﬁnal one of the resulting sequents from the
initial one; third, he described a set of reduction rules for sequents in the restricted
language, whereby those of particular forms can be converted, in ﬁnitely many
steps, into others of a certain reduced form; and ﬁnally, he extended the notion of
reduction to entire derivations and showed that any derivation could be converted,
again via ﬁnitely many reduction steps, into one whose last sequent was in reduced
form.
The reduced form of a sequent contains no free variables; the formulas in it are
quantiﬁer-free numerical statements whose truth or falsity is decidable through
numerical computation; and as the name implies, no further reduction rules are
applicable to it. Moreover, every sequent in reduced form is true, in the sense that
either its succedent is true or both its succedent and at least one of its antecedents is
false. To complete the proof Gentzen then showed that if there were any derivation
whose last sequent had the form →(A&¬A), there would be another derivation
whose ﬁnal sequent was →1 = 2. But the latter is a false sequent to which none
of the reduction rules is applicable, so its derivation could not be converted to one
in reduced form.
The details of Gentzen’s proof are complicated.9
The crucial step is that of
showing that the reduction rules must cease to be applicable to a derivation after
ﬁnitely many reduction steps. To do so, Gentzen proceeded by induction on the
complexity of the derivations, which he measured by correlating them with ordinals
< ε0.
It was at that point that his proof transcended the methods that are
formalizable within arithmetic.
9Two years later he gave an alternative proof [Gentzen, 1938] that is generally deemed to be
more readily comprehensible.

510
John W. Dawson, Jr.
7
THE EMERGENCE OF RECURSION THEORY
Recursive computational algorithms — procedures for calculating output values
from given input values in a ﬁnite sequence of steps, using values computed at
previous steps as inputs to later steps — have been employed by mathematicians
since ancient times. But the question of characterizing precisely which functions
can be computed by recursive algorithms — for short, those that are eﬀectively
computable — did not arise until the twentieth century.
A ﬁrst step in that direction was taken by Richard Dedekind in 1888, in his
book Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen?
(What are numbers, and what should
they be?) There, in Satz 126, he provided a rigorous proof that number-theoretic
functions whose values are speciﬁed by inductive deﬁnitions are well deﬁned, and
he went on to give the inductive deﬁnitions for addition and multiplication of
natural numbers that Peano adopted in his axiomatization of arithmetic, published
the following year.
Four years later the ﬁrst volume of Frege’s Grundgesetzte
der Arithmetik appeared, in which, as noted earlier, Frege attempted to derive
arithmetic from logic; but after the discovery of Russell’s paradox showed Frege’s
system to be contradictory, attention shifted to the “crisis” in foundations.
The theory of types, as expounded by Russell in Principia Mathematica (1910–
13), oﬀered a way to avoid the paradoxes, but it was cumbersome, and the axiom
of reducibility, which Russell had felt impelled to introduce in order to overcome
certain diﬃculties, in eﬀect compromised the whole type structure. A better way
of founding arithmetic was called for, and in 1919, after studying Principia, Skolem
set out to develop arithmetic on the basis of “the recursive mode of thought” (that
is, mathematical induction), without the use of bound variables ranging over inﬁ-
nite domains. The result was his paper [Skolem, 1923a], in which he developed the
theory now known as primitive recursive arithmetic. Skolem used inductive deﬁ-
nitions and proofs to derive the basic properties of addition, subtraction, ordering
(<), multiplication, divisibility, primes and prime factorizations. Only bounded
quantiﬁers were employed, and even they were introduced as eliminable abbrevi-
ations for ﬁnite conjunctions or disjunctions.
Skolem’s work showed how far arithmetic could be developed along ﬁnitary
lines. Skolem also proved that the apparently more general principles of deﬁnition
and proof by course-of-values recursion (whereby the value f(n + 1) of a function
is speciﬁed, or the truth of a proposition P(n + 1) is proved, with reference to
the values of f or the truth of P at all natural numbers ≤n, not just at n itself)
do not, in fact, go beyond what is obtainable by ordinary inductive deﬁnitions
or proofs. But Skolem did not work within a formal framework, and though he
gave many examples of number-theoretic functions and relations that could be
deﬁned inductively, he did not provide any schema for characterizing the class of
all functions or relations that could be so obtained.
It was G¨odel, in his incompleteness paper, who ﬁrst gave a schematic charac-
terization for the class of functions that he called rekursiv. He began by declar-
ing a number-theoretic function φ(x1, x2, . . . , xn) to be rekursiv deﬁniert (recur-

Classical Logic’s Coming of Age
511
sively deﬁned) in terms of number-theoretic functions ψ(x1, x2, . . . , xn−1) and
χ(x1, x2, . . . , xn+1) if
φ(0, x2, . . . , xn) = ψ(x2, . . . , xn)
and
φ(k + 1, x2, . . . , xn) = χ(k, φ(k, x2, . . . , xn), x2, . . . , xn).
A function was then deﬁned to be rekursiv if it was the last in a ﬁnite sequence
of functions, each of which was either a constant function, the successor function
x+1, was obtained from a previous function in the sequence by substituting other
previous functions in the sequence for some of its arguments, or was recursively
deﬁned in terms of two of the preceding functions. An n-place relation R was
deﬁned to be rekursiv if, for some rekursiv function φ, R(x1, x2, . . . , xn) held if
and only if φ(x1, x2, . . . , xn) = 0. Like Skolem, G¨odel showed that some forty-
ﬁve speciﬁc number-theoretic functions and relations were rekursiv (but that the
relation Bew(x), which held of x if and only if x was the code number of a formula
provable in formal number theory, was not). He also proved that every rekursiv
relation was arithmetically deﬁnable, that is, could be deﬁned over the domain
of natural numbers by a ﬁrst-order formula in the language with equality having
functions symbols only for addition and multiplication.
The class of rekursiv functions was all that G¨odel needed to establish his in-
completeness results. In his 1931 paper he did not aim to characterize all number-
theoretic functions that were eﬀectively computable, and it was clear by then that
the rekursiv functions did not comprise all that were. For in 1928 Wilhelm Acker-
mann had given an example of a computable function ξ of three natural-number
variables, n, b, and a, deﬁned by simultaneous recursion on n and b, for which it
could be proved that ξ(b, b, b) > φ(b) for any unary rekursiv function. Speciﬁcally,
starting from the function α(n, a) that equals 0 if n = 0, 1 if n = 1, and a if n > 1,
Ackermann deﬁned
ξ(0, b, a) = a + b,
ξ(n + 1, 0, a) = α(n, a),
and
ξ(n + 1, b + 1, a) = ξ(n, ξ(n + 1, b, a), a).
It follows that ξ(1, b, a) = a · b, ξ(2, b, a) = ab, etc. Subsequently, in a series of
papers, Rosza P´eter studied the hierarchy of functions deﬁned by n-fold simulta-
neous recursions, and in 1934 she introduced the term ‘primitive recursive’ for the
class of functions that G¨odel had called rekursiv.
In the meantime, in his papers [Church, 1932] and [Church, 1933], Church had
proposed an alternative system of logic to which he hoped G¨odel’s incompleteness
theorem would not apply. In the end that hope was dashed, for Kleene and Rosser,
two of Church’s own students, proved that the system was, in fact, inconsistent.
Nevertheless, a subsystem of it, the λ-calculus, proved not only to be consistent,
but to be unexpectedly powerful as a means for deﬁning number-theoretic func-
tions.

512
John W. Dawson, Jr.
When Church created the λ-calculus he did not foresee its use in characterizing
the class of eﬀectively computable functions. Rather, he introduced it simply to
provide a way to distinguish the function of x, deﬁned for each x as the value at
x of some formula f, from its values. For the former he wrote λfx · f(x), for the
latter f(x). Given that λ-notation, the corresponding calculus then provided rules
for evaluating functions by substituting expressions for their arguments (an oper-
ation Church called “reduction”), for expanding expressions so as to obtain others
having the same numerical value (the reverse of reduction), and for changing the
bound variables within expressions. To do arithmetic, Church identiﬁed the natu-
ral numbers 1, 2, 3, . . . with the terms λfx·f(x), λfx·f(f(x)), λfx·f(f(f(x))) . . .
formed by functional iteration, where f denotes a particular (ﬁxed) function sym-
bol.
In [Church, 1933] the development of arithmetic within the λ-calculus, in par-
ticular the proof of Peano’s axioms, was left as an open problem — one that, in
January of 1932, Kleene chose as the subject for his doctoral dissertation. By his
own later account [Kleene, 1981, 56], three of the ﬁve Peano axioms were easy to
prove, but “the third axiom (if the successors of two numbers are equal, so are
the numbers) oﬀered a challenge.” The chief diﬃculty was that of ﬁnding a way
to deﬁne the predecessor function in the λ-calculus (where 1 was deﬁned to be its
own predecessor, and n the predecessor of n+1). After much thought, Kleene saw
how to do so “one day late in January or early in February 1932, while in a den-
tist’s oﬃce” (!). He promptly communicated the result to Church, who confessed
that “he had just about convinced himself” that the predecessor function was not
λ-deﬁnable. That it turned out to be, after all, “excited [Church and Kleene’s]
interest in what functions... [were] actually λ-deﬁnable”, and “the exploration of
[that problem] became a major subproject” of Kleene’s dissertation [ibid, 56–57].
Thereafter events moved swiftly. In June of 1932, having read [Church, 1932]
not long after its appearance, G¨odel wrote to Church to inquire how it was possible
to prove “absolute existence propositions” in his system, “for example the axiom of
inﬁnity”; and in his reply the following month Church mentioned that “a student...
in Princeton” had recently proved the Peano axioms within the λ-calculus, a result
that he himself had “checked . . . in detail” and that established “the essential part
of the axiom of inﬁnity”.10 Meanwhile, as Kleene recalled in the same memoir cited
above, “from February 1932 on Church and I knew that only eﬀectively calculable
functions can be λ-deﬁnable. We kept thinking of speciﬁc such functions, and of
speciﬁc operations for proceeding from such functions to others. I kept establishing
the functions to be λ-deﬁnable and the operations to preserve λ-deﬁnability.”
Kleene submitted his dissertation in September of 1933, before the discovery of
the inconsistency in Church’s full system (which caused him to have to rewrite the
dissertation the following spring), and shortly thereafter G¨odel arrived in Princeton
for the ﬁrst of three visits that he made to the Institute for Advanced Study prior
to his emigration there in 1940. Late that same year, as recalled in [Rosser, 1984],
Church remarked to Rosser (though without “ﬁrm conviction”) that “perhaps
10The correspondence is reproduced on pp. 366–369 of [G¨odel, 2003a].

Classical Logic’s Coming of Age
513
every eﬀectively calculable function from positive integers to positive integers is
[λ-deﬁnable]”; and by early in 1934 he had become convinced enough that that
was the case to propose the idea to G¨odel — the ﬁrst version of what would later
be called “Church’s Thesis”.
G¨odel, however, thought Church’s proposal to be “thoroughly unsatisfactory”
— after all, only two years before Church had thought something as elementary
as the predecessor function was unlikely to be λ-deﬁnable — to which Church
responded that if G¨odel were to “propose any deﬁnition of eﬀective calculability
which seemed even partially satisfactory”, he would endeavor to show that “it was
included in λ-deﬁnability”.11 And that is exactly what happened.
From February to May of 1934 G¨odel lectured at the I.A.S. on extensions of
his incompleteness results. Notes on the lectures, taken by Kleene and Rosser,
were distributed to subscribers and submitted at the end of the course to G¨odel,
who corrected and approved them.12 The last section, entitled “General recursive
functions”, began with a variant of Ackermann’s function , as an example of the
“various sorts of functions” that could be “deﬁned by inductions”. Consideration
of such functions, G¨odel said, “leads to the question what one would mean by ‘every
recursive function”’, and in the following paragraphs he drew upon a suggestion of
Jacques Herbrand, communicated to him in a private letter13, to suggest how one
might “attempt to deﬁne” that notion: “If φ is an unknown function, ψ1, . . . , ψk
are known functions, and the ψ’s and φ are substituted into one another in the
most general fashions and certain pairs of the resulting expressions are equated”
(subject to the restriction that the left-hand member of each equation have the
form φ(ψi1(x1, x2, . . . , xn), ψi2(x1, x2, . . . , xn), . . . , ψik(x1, x2, . . . , xn)) ), then φ is
a general recursive function “if the resulting set of functional equations has one and
only one solution for φ” (assuming in addition that “all possible set of arguments
. . . of φ can be so arranged that the computation of the value of φ for any given
set of arguments . . . requires a knowledge of the values of φ only for [preceding]
sets of arguments”).
As G¨odel later took pains to explain to Martin Davis (see [Davis, 1982], at
the time of his lectures he was still “not at all convinced” that the deﬁnition of
general recursive function he had proposed would suﬃce to “comprise all possible
recursions”. And he remained unconvinced a year later, by which time Rosser
and Kleene, independently, had proved that all functions that are general recur-
sive according to G¨odel’s deﬁnition are λ-deﬁnable, and Church and Kleene, again
independently, had demonstrated the converse. (See [Sieg, 1997] for a more de-
tailed and precise chronology of those events.) For Church, though, the fact that
the two proposed characterizations had proved to be coextensive was apparently
11The quotations are from Church’s letter to Kleene of 29 November 1935, as reported in
[Kleene, 1981, 59].
12They were belatedly published (with a Postscript dated 3 June 1964) in [Davis, 1965]
(reprinted in [G¨odel, 1990, 346–371].
13Found by the author in G¨odel’s Nachlass after his death and published in [G¨odel, 2003b,
14–21]. Herbrand’s letter to G¨odel is dated 7 April 1931, less than four months before Herbrand’s
untimely death in a mountaineering accident.

514
John W. Dawson, Jr.
what emboldened him to proclaim his thesis publicly. He did so in a lecture to
the American Mathematical Society on 19 April 1935, whose abstract, containing
a statement of the thesis, was received on 22 March. What is remarkable, and
has been examined in detail in [Gandy, 1988; Sieg 1997; Soare 1996], is that in his
talk and his subsequent publication, [Church, 1936a] Church did not propose that
the eﬀectively computable functions be identiﬁed with those that are λ-deﬁnable
(which, as noted earlier, he had not introduced with that end in mind), but with
G¨odel’s class of general recursive functions. It seems that Church, Kleene and
Rosser all felt that “general recursivity... embod[ied] the idea of eﬀective calcula-
bility” more perspicuously than did λ-deﬁnability [Rosser,1984, 345].
Yet another concept coextensive with that of λ-deﬁnability, µ-recursiveness,
also came out of Kleene’s research. As Kleene recalled, “In racking my brains
for still more examples of eﬀective deﬁnitions on which to try out my ability to
λ-deﬁne, I thought of the least-number operator ‘the least y such that’ ”, which he
later denoted by µy. He observed that “If R(x, y) is any . . . eﬀectively decidable
relation”, deﬁned for all x and y , “and for each x there is a y such that R(x, y)”
then the function given by µyR(x, y) is deﬁned for all x and may be considered to
be eﬀectively calculable, even if no bound on y can be given in advance [Kleene,
1981, 58]. He proceeded to show that any such function was λ-deﬁnable (hence
general recursive), and went on [Kleene, 1936] to prove his Normal Form Theorem,
which established the converse: For any general recursive function φ(x) there
is a ternary primitive recursive predicate T(e, x, y), a unary primitive recursive
function U(x), and a numerical index e (a code number of a set of equations
deﬁning φ) such that for every x, φ(x) = U(µyT(e, x, y)).
For modern logic as a whole, and recursion theory in particular, 1936 was an
annus mirabilis. Not only did Gentzen’s consistency proof for arithmetic, Rosser’s
improvement of G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem, and the paper by Kleene just
cited all appear that year, but Church (in the same paper in which he proposed
his ‘Thesis’) introduced the term recursively enumerable set for a set that is the
range of a general recursive function, and, in a second paper [Church, 1936b],
demonstrated the unsolvability of the decision problem for validity14; almost si-
multaneously, Turing published his landmark analysis [Turing, 1936] of the process
of idealized human computation (culminating in his description of the abstract ma-
chines that now bear his name), together with his own independent proof of the
unsolvability of the decision problem; and Post, in his [1936], described what he
called ‘ﬁnite combinatory processes’, which, though they were conceived indepen-
dently, bore a close resemblance to Turing’s machines.
Turing’s paper was a tour de force that swept away almost all of the remaining
opposition to Church’s Thesis. In it Turing broke down the process of human
paper-and-pencil computation into elemental discrete steps whose eﬀectiveness
was beyond doubt. He then modeled the process of human computation by deter-
ministic ﬁnite-state machines capable of reading the symbols of a ﬁnite alphabet
14Actually, for derivability in the restricted functional calculus. The result for validity then
follows from G¨odel’s completeness theorem.

Classical Logic’s Coming of Age
515
written in squares on an unbounded paper tape, moving along the tape a square at
a time in either direction, and writing symbols in blank squares on the tape. The
behavior of the machines was speciﬁed by a ﬁnite set of instructions (program),
which could itself be encoded by symbols on a tape, and Turing showed how to
construct a universal machine that, given the encoded program for any one of
his machines, would simulate that machine’s behavior. He went on to show that
no machine could determine which statements of the restricted functional calculus
were formally derivable, thereby demonstrating (as Church had in terms of general
recursive functions) that the decision problem for validity was unsolvable. And in
an appendix that he added upon learning of Church’s work, he proved that any
computable function (one whose outputs are produced by one of his machines,
given the corresponding input) is λ-deﬁnable, and conversely.
(In contrast, as
pointed out in [Soare, 1996, 300], “Post did not attempt to prove that his formal-
ism coincided with any other such as general recursiveness”, though he “expressed
the expectation that... would turn out to be true”, nor did he give any “analysis...
of why the intuititively computable functions are computable in his system”; and
there is nothing in Post’s paper that corresponds to Turing’s universal machine.)
The ‘conﬂuence of ideas’ — the phrase Gandy [1988] used to describe the prov-
able coextensionality of the separately conceived notions of λ-deﬁnability, general
recursiveness, µ-recursivenes and Turing computability — certainly suggested that
some natural class of functions had been formally characterized by those notions.
But it was Turing’s detailed analysis of the steps involved in human computa-
tion that ultimately convinced G¨odel and compelled general agreement that the
functions in question were, in fact, those that were eﬀectively computable.
Nevertheless, as noted in [Davis, 1982], so long as the only computable functions
under consideration were total functions (that is, had all the natural numbers as
their domain), constructivists could still object to circularity in any of the equiva-
lent deﬁnitions. Those objections were removed, however, by Kleene’s introduction
(in his [1938]) of partial recursive functions, which might be undeﬁned for some
natural numbers (corresponding to Turing machines that, for some inputs, failed
ever to halt and produce an output). Instead of being circular, the notion of par-
tial recursive function made manifest that the problem of deciding which systems
of equations deﬁne total functions (or equivalently, which Turing machines halt for
all inputs) is algorithmically unsolvable. In the same paper Kleene also presented
his Recursion (or Fixed Point) Theorem, which, following [Soare, 1996], may be
stated as follows: If φn is the partial recursive function computed by the nth Tur-
ing machine program, Pn, in some eﬀective listing of all such programs, and if f(x)
is any total recursive function, there is a ﬁxed point k for which φf(k)=φk.
By 1940 the principal concepts and theorems of ‘ordinary’ computability theory
had been enunciated, and Turing, in his [1939], had planted the seed for their
extension to ‘relative’ computability, through his introduction of the concept of an
oracle (a source that a Turing machine might consult in order to obtain ﬁnitely
many values of a non-computable function). Given the notion of an oracle, a set
A is said to be recursive in B (or relative to B) if membership in A is computable

516
John W. Dawson, Jr.
from an oracle for membership in the set B.
The relation “A is recursive in
B” then yields a partial ordering A ≤T B (introduced in [Post, 1948]) whose
equivalence classes, referred to as degrees of unsolvability, became the subject of
much subsequent research.
8
THE RELATIVE CONSISTENCY OF THE AXIOM OF CHOICE AND
THE GENERALIZED CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS
Although the deﬁnition of general recursiveness that G¨odel gave in his 1934 lec-
tures was a stimulus to the development of recursion theory, G¨odel himself was a
bystander to that development — in part, it seems, because he did not foresee that
it would be possible to give a deﬁnitive characterization of the intuitive notion of
eﬀective computability. Indeed, in his remarks before the Princeton Bicenntennial
Conference on Problems in Mathematics, where he publicly acceded to Church’s
Thesis, he expressed his amazement that it had proved possible to give “an abso-
lute deﬁnition” (one independent of the formalism chosen) for such an “interesting
epistemological notion”, deeming it “a kind of miracle... [that] the diagonal proce-
dure d[id] not lead outside the deﬁned notion” [G¨odel, 1946, 1]. But beyond that,
even before his visit to America in 1933–34, G¨odel’s interests had shifted to set
theory. His incompleteness results had settled Hilbert’s second problem, but the
ﬁrst problem remained open: To determine whether every inﬁnite set of natural
numbers is in one-to-one correspondence either with the natural numbers or with
the continuum of real numbers, and whether that continuum can be well-ordered.
A number of relevant techniques and partial results bearing on those questions
had already been obtained.
Cantor had shown that the cardinality of any set
was strictly less than that of its power set, and it was readily seen that the real
numbers, as limits of countable sequences of rationals, could be put in one-to-one
correspondence with the power set of the natural numbers.
So the continuum
hypothesis could be recast as the assertion that no set of natural numbers has
cardinality strictly between that of the natural numbers and the reals. (The as-
sertion that for any inﬁnite set A, no set has cardinality strictly between that of
A and its power set is the generalized continuum hypothesis [GCH], ﬁrst proposed
by Felix Hausdorﬀin 1930.) In 1904, and again in 1908, Zermelo had proved that
if the axiom of choice were assumed, any set could be well-ordered [Zermelo, 1904;
Zermelo, 1908a]; and in the latter year he had also put forward his (informal)
axiomatization of set theory [Zermelo, 1908b]. The axiom of choice had then be-
come the focus of criticism, together with the vague notion of deﬁnit property that
Zermelo had employed in his axiom of separation.
In 1922 A.A. Fraenkel and Skolem, independently, realized that Zermelo’s ax-
ioms did not suﬃce to allow consideration of the function F whose domain and
initial value F(0) were the set of natural numbers and whose value F(n), for n > 0,
was the nth iterate of the power set of the natural numbers. In particular, the
range of F could not be shown to be a set on the basis of Zermelo’s axioms, a defect
that [Fraenkel, 1922] proposed to remedy by introducing the axiom of replacement.

Classical Logic’s Coming of Age
517
In the more precise formulation given by Skolem in his [1923b], Zermelo’s notion of
deﬁnit property was interpreted as a relation that was ﬁrst-order deﬁnable within
the language of set theory; both the axiom of replacement and that of separation
can then be expressed as inﬁnite axiom schemas, each instance of which refers to
a particular ﬁrst-order formula φ: For a unary formula φ(x), separation asserts
that for any set a the elements x of a for which φ(x) hold also constitute a set,
while for a binary formula φ(x, y), replacement asserts that if φ(x, y) is a univocal
relation, the image under φ of any set must itself be a set.
In 1925 von Neumann proposed an alternative version of set theory that in-
terpreted deﬁnit properties in terms of proper classes — collections too large to
be treated as sets, but which could nonetheless be handled without antinomy so
long as they were not allowed to be elements of other classes; he achieved thereby
a ﬁnite ﬁrst-order axiomatization.15 In the same paper [von Neumann, 1925] he
also introduced the notion of an inner model of set theory — one whose domain
consists of a class of sets that is ﬁrst-order deﬁnable within a given model of the
theory — and in [von Neumann, 1929] he used such a model to demonstrate that
if his axioms were consistent, they would remain so if augmented by an axiom that
prohibited the existence of inﬁnite descending ∈-chains of sets.
Such chains were allowed in Zermelo’s 1908 axiomatization, as were so-called
urelements: objects that were not themselves sets, but that could be elements of
sets. The desirability of allowing urelements and/or inﬁnite descending ∈-chains
was (and to some extent remains) a matter of debate.
As usually formulated
today, axiomatic set theory excludes both. But in 1922 Fraenkel showed that if
urelements are permitted, they can be used to demonstrate the independence of
the axiom of choice from the other axioms of set theory [Fraenkel, 1922]; and
recently non-wellfounded sets, introduced by Peter Aczel in his 1988, have found
a number of applications in logic and computer science. See, e.g., [Barwise, 1996].
In 1930 Zermelo presented a revised axiomatization of set theory [Zermelo, 1930]
that incorporated a (second-order) version of the replacment axiom as well as a new
axiom, that of foundation, that disallowed inﬁnite descending ∈-chains. As in the
ﬁrst version, urelements were permitted, and starting from them Zermelo showed
that by iterating the power-set operation transﬁnitely, all sets could be generated.
(Alternatively, if urelements are disallowed, one may begin with the null set and
deﬁne the αth level of the rank hierarchy , R(α), by transﬁnite induction, deﬁning
R(α + 1) to be the power set of R(α), and R(β), for limit ordinals β, to be the
union of all R(α) of rank α < β. ) The ﬁrst-order formulation of Zermelo’s revised
system (with schemas for separation and replacement), excluding urelements and
the axiom of choice, subsequently became the standard axiomatization, Zermelo-
Fraenkel set theory (ZF).
It appears that G¨odel had begun thinking about Hilbert’s ﬁrst problem as early
as 1928. In 1931 he studied Fraenkel’s paper 1922 in detail, and in the fall of 1935,
when he returned brieﬂy to the I.A.S., he told von Neumann that he had succeeded
15In particular, the existence of classes {x : φ(x)} representing the extensions of ﬁrst-order
formulas is achieved using only a ﬁnite number of comprehension axioms.

518
John W. Dawson, Jr.
in demonstrating the consistency of the axiom of choice relative to the other axioms
of set theory. But almost immediately thereafter he was incapacitated by a serious
bout of depression, from which he did not fully recover until the summer of 1937;
and it was only then16 that he succeeded in demonstrating the relative consistency
of the generalized continuum hypothesis as well.
The two consistency results were published in a series of papers.
An an-
nouncement of both, in the context of von Neumann’s system, was ﬁrst made
in [G¨odel, 1938b], together with the remark that corresponding theorems held also
for Fraenkel’s system. The note [G¨odel, 1939a] contained a very brief outline of
how a model for the GCH could be formally constructed within any of “the sys-
tem[s] of set theory (as formulated by A. Fraenkel, J. von Neumann, T. Skolem,
[or] P. Bernays)”. [G¨odel, 1939b] gave “a sketch of the consistency proof[s] . . . for
Zermelo’s [1908] axioms of set theory”, and the monograph [G¨odel, 1940] pro-
vided a self-contained development of set theory, including the consistency results,
in a formally more streamlined but intuitively less perspicuous framework based
essentially on the system in [Bernays, 1937].
The key idea, no matter which of the axiom systems is employed, is that of
modifying the deﬁnition of the cumulative hierarchy so as to obtain another hier-
archy. Speciﬁcally, deﬁne L(0) to be the null set, and let L(α + 1) be the set of all
subsets of L(α) that are deﬁnable by ﬁrst-order formulas φ(x), possibly containing
constants for elements of L(α). At limit ordinals β, deﬁne L(β) to be the union
of the L(α) for α < β. The union of all levels of the constructible hierarchy so
deﬁned forms a deﬁnable class L (a proper class in the systems of von Neumann
or Bernays, or the extension of a predicate C(x) in those of Zermelo, Fraenkel or
Skolem), and since formulas and ﬁnite sequences of ordinals can be enumerated,
the constructible sets possess a deﬁnable well-ordering. Crucially, the deﬁnition of
the constructible hierarchy is also absolute, in the sense that given any model M
of the underlying set theory, the sets constructible in M form a submodel LM of
M, and the sets constructible within that submodel are the same as those of LM
itself. That is, constructibility within the submodel is the same as constructibility
in the original model. The elements of LM are thus deﬁnably well-ordered, whence
LM satisﬁes the axiom of choice.
The proof that the GCH also holds within the constructible submodel is more
diﬃcult. If the order of a constructible set x is deﬁned to be the least ordinal
α for which x ∈L(α + 1) , then Cantor’s theorem on the cardinality of power
sets implies that for each ordinal γ between ωα and ωα+1 there are constructible
subsets of L(ωα) of order γ or greater. G¨odel was able to show, however, that
there are no subsets of L(ωα) of order ωα+1. In LM, therefore, the power set
of ωα, which is contained within the power set of L(ωα), must have cardinality
≤ℵα+1.
In the early 1940s G¨odel also sought to demonstrate the independence of the
axiom of choice and the GCH in set theory without urelements. But it would take
another two decades before Paul Cohen ﬁnally succeeded in that quest.
16Speciﬁcally, during the night of 14/15 June, according to a note in one of G¨odel’s workbooks.

Classical Logic’s Coming of Age
519
9
CULMINATION AND CODIFICATION
By 1950 the major branches of modern logic, with the exception of model theory,
had largely assumed their modern form. First-order logic had become the focus
of study. The questions that Hilbert had posed to logicians in his 1900 address
and his 1928 text with Ackermann had for the most part been answered (though
not, in many cases, in the way he had expected). The future direction of proof-
theoretic studies had been established through the work of G¨odel and Gentzen.
Recursion theory had become an important and highly technical specialty, poised
to play a central role in the nascent ﬁeld of computer science. The foundational
controversies had died down. And set theory had become widely regarded as the
basis for all of mathematics.
Model theory had yet to coalesce into an organized discipline, but many of the
key results and techniques — the downward and upward L¨owenheim-Skolem the-
orems, the compactness theorem, the method of elimination of quantiﬁers, ultra-
products, and the method of constants — had all been developed or foreshadowed,
and Malt’sev, Henkin, Tarski and Robinson had begun applying model-theoretic
techniques to the solution of questions in algebra.
At mid-century the time had come for modern logic to be codiﬁed in textbooks.
With the appearance, within the next few years, of Kleene’s Introduction to Meta-
mathematics [1952] and Church’s Introduction to Mathematical Logic [1956], that
goal was achieved and modern logic may be said to have come of age.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Aczel, 1988] P. Aczel. Non-well-founded Sets. (Stanford, CA: Center for the Study of Language
and Information. CSLI Lecture Notes No. 14), 1988.
[Barwise and Moss, 1996] J. Barwise and L. Moss. Vicious Circles: On the Mathematics of Non-
wellfounded Phenomena. (Stanford, CA: Center for the Study of Language and Information),
1996.
[Bernays, 1937] P. Bernays. A system of axiomatic set theory. The Journal of Symbolic Logic
2: 65–77, 1937.
[Carnap, 1963] R. Carnap. Intellectual autobiography. In The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap, ed.
Paul Arthur Schilpp (La Salle, Illinois: Open Court Publishing Co.), 3–84, 1963.
[Church, 1932] A. Church. A set of postulates for the foundation of logic. Annals of Mathematics
(2) 33: 346– 366, 1932.
[Church, 1933] A. Church. A set of postulates for the foundation of logic (second paper). Annals
of Mathematics (2) 34: 839–864, 1933.
[Church, 1936a] A. Church. An unsolvable problem of elementary number theory. American
Journal of Mathematics 58: 345–363, 1936. Reprinted in [Davis, 1965, 88–107].
[Church, 1936b] A. Church. A note on the Entscheidungsproblem. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic 1: 40–41 and 101–102 (corrigenda), 1936. Reprinted in [Davis 1965, 108–114].
[Church, 1956] A. Church. Introduction to Mathematical Logic, I. (Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press), 1956.
[Davis, 1965] M. Davis. The Undecidable. (Hewlett, New York: Raven Press), 1965.
[Davis, 1982] M. Davis. Why G¨odel didn’t have Church’s thesis. Information and Control 54:
3–24, 1982.
[Dawson, 1984] J. W. Dawson, Jr. Discussion on the foundation of mathematics. History and
Philosophy of Logic 5: 111–129, 1984.

520
John W. Dawson, Jr.
[Dawson, 1993] J. W. Dawson, Jr. The compactness of ﬁrst-order logic: From G¨odel to Lind-
str¨om. History and Philosophy of Logic 14: 15–37, 1993.
[Etchemendy, 1988] J. Etchemendy. Tarski on truth and logical consequence. Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic 53(1): 53–79, 1988.
[Fraenkel, 1922] A. Fraenkel. Der Begriﬀ‘deﬁnit’ und die Unabh¨angigkeit des Auswahlaxioms,
Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Physikalischmathematische
Klasse, 253–257, 1922. English translation in [van Heijenoort 1967, 284–289].
[Frege, 1879] G. Frege. Begriﬀschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des
reinen Denkens. (Halle: Nebert). 1879. English translation in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 1–82].
[Frege, 1893] G. Frege. Grundgesetzte der Arithmetik, begriﬀsschriftlich abgeleitet. Vol. 1. (Jena:
Pohle), 1893.
[Gandy, 1988] R. Gandy. The conﬂuence of ideas in 1936. In The universal Turing machine: a
half-century survey, ed. Rolf Herken, (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 55–111, 1988.
[Gentzen, 1935] G. Gentzen. Untersuchungen ¨uber das logische Schliessen. Mathematische
Zeitschrift 39: 176–210 and 405–431, 1935. English translation in [Gentzen 1969, 68–131].
[Gentzen, 1936] G. Gentzen. Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie. Mathematische
Annalen 112: 493– 565, 1936. English translation in [Gentzen 1969, 132–213].
[Gentzen, 1938] G. Gentzen. Neue Fassung des Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweises f¨ur die reine
Zahlentheorie. Forschungen zur Logik und zur Grundlegung der exakten Wissenschaften 4
(n.s.): 19–44, 1938. English translation in [Gentzen, 1969, 252–286].
[Gentzen, 1969] G. Gentzen. The Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen. ed. M.E. Szabo. (Am-
sterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co.), 1969.
[G¨odel, 1929] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber die Vollst¨andigkeit des Logikkalk¨uls. Doctoral dissertation, Uni-
versity of Vienna, 1929. Reprinted, with English translation, in [G¨odel, 1986, 60–101].
[G¨odel, 1930a] K. G¨odel. Die Vollst¨andigkeit der Axiome des logischen Funktionenkalk¨uls.
Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik 37: 349–360, 1930. Reprinted, with English transla-
tion, in [G¨odel, 1986, 102–123].
[G¨odel, 1930b] K. G¨odel. Einige metamathematische Resultate ¨uber Entscheidungsdeﬁnitheit
und Widerspruchsfreiheit. Anzeiger der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien 67: 214–215,
1930. Reprinted, with English translation, in [G¨odel, 1986, 140–143].
[G¨odel, 1931] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathematica und ver-
wandter Systeme, I. Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik 38: 173–198, 1931. Reprinted,
with English translation, in [G¨odel, 1986, 144–195].
[G¨odel, 1934] K. G¨odel. Review of Skolem 1933. Zentralblatt f¨ur Mathematik und ihre Grenzge-
biete 7: 193–194, 1934. Reprinted, with English translation, in [G¨odel, 1986, 379–381].
[G¨odel, 1938a] K. G¨odel. Vortrag bei Zilsel, 1938. Original and English translation in [G¨odel,
1995, 86– 113].
[G¨odel, 1938b] K. G¨odel. The consistency of the axiom of choice and of the generalized contin-
uum hypothesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 24: 556–557, 1939.
Reprinted in [G¨odel, 1990, 26].
[G¨odel, 1939a] K. G¨odel. The consistency of the generalized continuum hypothesis. Bulletin of
the American Mathematical Society 45: 93, 1939. Reprinted in [G¨odel, 1990, 27].
[G¨odel, 1939b] K. G¨odel. Consistency proof for the generalized continuum hypothesis. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 25: 220–224, 1939. Reprinted in [G¨odel,
1990, 28–32].
[G¨odel, 1940] K. G¨odel. The consistency of the axiom of choice and of the generalized continuum
hypothesis with the axioms of set theory. Annals of Mathematics Studies, Vol. 3., ed. Robert
C. Gunning, John C. Moore, and Marston Morse. (Princeton: Princeton University Press),
1940. Reprinted in [G¨odel, 1990, 33–101].
[G¨odel, 1946] K. G¨odel. Remarks before the Princeton Bicentennial Conference on problems of
mathematics, 1946. In [Davis, 1965, 84–88]. Reprinted in [G¨odel, 1990, 150–153].
[G¨odel, 1958] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber eine bisher noch nicht ben¨utzte Erweiterung des ﬁniten Stand-
punktes. Dialectica 12: 280–287, 1958. Reprinted, with English translation, in [G¨odel, 1990,
240–252].
[G¨odel, 1986] K. G¨odel. Collected Works. Vol. I: Publications, 1929–1936, ed. Solomon Feferman
et alii. (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press), 1986.
[G¨odel, 1990] K. G¨odel. Collected Works. Vol. II: Publications, 1938–1974, ed. Solomon Fefer-
man et alii. (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press), 1990.

Classical Logic’s Coming of Age
521
[G¨odel, 1995] K. G¨odel. Collected Works. Vol. III: Unpublished Essays and Lectures, ed.
Solomon Feferman et alii. (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press), 1995.
[G¨odel, 2003a] K. G¨odel. Collected Works. Vol. IV: Correspondence A – G, ed. Solomon Fefer-
man et alii. (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 2003.
[G¨odel, 2003b] K. G¨odel. Collected Works. Vol. V: Correspondence H – Z, ed. Solomon Feferman
et alii. (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 2003.
[Goldfarb, 1979] W. D. Goldfarb. Logic in the twenties:
The nature of the quantiﬁer. The
Journal of Symbolic Logic 44: 351–368, 1979.
[Henkin, 1996] L. Henkin. The discovery of my completeness proofs. The Bulletin of Symbolic
Logic 2(2): 127–158, 1996.
[Hilert and Ackermann, 1928] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann. Grundz¨uge der theoretischen
Logik. (Berlin: Julius Springer Verlag), 1928.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1939] D. Hilbert and P.Bernays 1939 Grundlagen der Mathematik. Vol.
II. (Berlin: Springer), 1939.
[Kleene, 1936] S. C. Kleene. General recursive functions of natural numbers. Mathematische
Annalen 112: 727–742, 1936. Reprinted in [Davis, 1965, 236–253].
[Kleene, 1938] S. C. Kleene. On notation for ordinal numbers. The Journal of Symbolic Logic
3: 150–155, 1938.
[Kleene, 1981] S. C. Kleene. Origins of recursive function theory. Annals of the History of Com-
puting 3: 52–67, 1981.
[L¨owenheim, 1915] L. L¨owenheim. 1915 ¨Uber M¨oglichkeiten im Relativkalkul. Mathematische
Annalen 76: 447–470, 1915. English translation in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 228–251].
[Moore, 1988] G. H. Moore. The emergence of ﬁrst-order logic. In History and Philosophy of
Modern Mathematics, ed. William Aspray and Philip Kitcher (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press), 95–135, 1988.
[Peirce, 1885] C. S. Peirce. On the algebra of logic: A contribution to the philosophy of notation.
American Journal of Mathematics 7: 180–202, 1885.
[Post, 1921] E. L. Post. Introduction to a general theory of elementary propositions. American
Journal of Mathematics 43: 169–173, 1921.
[Post, 1936] E. L. Post. Finite combinatory processes – formulation I. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic 1: 103–105, 1936. Reprinted in [Davis, 1965, 288–291].
[Post, 1948] E. L. Post. Degrees of recursive unsolvability: preliminary report. Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society 54: 641–642, 1948.
[Rosser, 1936] J. B. Rosser. Extensions of some theorems of G¨odel and Church. The Journal of
Symbolic Logic 1: 87–91, 1936. Reprinted in [Davis, 1965, 230–235].
[Rosser, 1984] J. B. Rosser. Highlights of the history of the lambda-calculus. Annals of the
History of Computing 6: 337–49, 1984.
[Sieg, 1997] W. Sieg. Step by recursive step: Church’s analysis of eﬀective calculability. The
Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 3: 154–180, 1997.
[Skolem, 1923a] T. Skolem. Begr¨undung der elementaren Arithmetik durch die rekurrierende
Denkweise ohne Anwendung scheinbarer Ver¨anderlichen mit unendlichem Ausdehnungsbere-
ich. Skrifter utgit av Videnskapsselskapet i Kristiana, I. Matematisk-naturvidenskabelig klasse
6: 1–38, 1923. English translation in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 302–333].
[Skolem, 1923b] T. Skolem. Einige Bemerkungen zur axiomatischen Begr¨undung der Men-
genlehre. In Matematikerkongressen i Helsingfors 4-7 Juli 1922, Den femte skandinaviska
matematikerkongressen, Redog¨orelse, 217–232. (Helsinki:
Akademiska Bokhandlen), 1923.
English translation in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 290–301].
[Skolem, 1929] T. Skolem. ¨Uber einige Grundlagenfragen der Mathematik. Skrifter utgitt av Det
Norske Videnskaps-Akademi i Oslo, I. Matematisk-naturvidenskapelig klasse 7: 1–49, 1929.
[Skolem, 1933] T. Skolem. ¨Uber die Unm¨oglichkeit einer vollst¨andigen Charakterisierung der
Zahlenreihe mittels eines endlichen Axiomensystems. Norsk matematisk forenings skrifter
2(10): 73–82, 1933.
[Soare, 1996] R. I. Soare. Computability and recursion. The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 2: 284–
321, 1996.
[Tarski, 1930] A. Tarski. ¨Uber einige fundamentale Begriﬀe der Metamathematik. Sprawozdania
z posiedzen Towarzystwa Naukowego Warszawskiego, wydzial III 23: 22–29, 1930.
[Tarski, 1933] A. Tarski. Pojecie prawdy w jezykach nauk dedukcyjnych. Prace Towarzystwa
Naukowego Warszawskiego, wydial III, no. 34, 1933.

522
John W. Dawson, Jr.
[Tarski, 1935] A. Tarski. Der Wahrheitsbegriﬀin den formalisierten Sprachen. Studia philosoph-
ica (Lemberg) 1: 261–405. 1935.
[Tarski, 1936] A. Tarski. O pojeciu wynikania logicznego. Przeglad Filozoﬁczny 39: 58–68, 1936.
[Turing, 1936] A. M. Turing. On computable numbers, with an application to the Entschei-
dungsproblem. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society (2) 42:
230–265, 1936.
Reprinted in [Davis, 1965, 115–153].
[Turing, 1939] A. M. Turing. Systems of logic based on ordinals, part 3. Proceedings of the
London Mathematical Society 45:161–228, 1939. Reprinted in [Davis, 1965, 154–222].
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort. From Frege to G¨odel: A Source Book in Mathematical
Logic, 1879–1931. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press), 1967.
[van Heijenoort and Dreben, 1986] J. van Heijenoort and B. Dreben. Introductory note to
[G¨odel 1929; 1930] and [1930a]. In [G¨odel, 1986, 44–59].
[von Neumann, 1925] J. von Neumann. Eine Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre. Journal f¨ur die
reine und angewandte Mathematik 154: 219–240, 1925. English translation in [van Heijenoort,
1967, 393–413].
[von Neumann, 1929] J. von Neumann. ¨Uber eine Widerspruchfreiheitsfrage in der axiomatis-
chen Mengenlehre. Journal f¨ur die reine und angewandte Mathematik 160: 227–241, 1929.
[Wang, 1974] H. Wang. From Mathematics to Philosophy. (London:
Routledge and Kegan
Paul), 1974.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica. (Cam-
bridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press), 1910.
[Zermelo, 1904] E. Zermelo. Beweis, daß jede Menge wohlgeordnet werden kann. Mathematische
Annalen 59: 514–516, 1904. English translation in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 139–141].
[Zermelo, 1908a] E. Zermelo. Neuer Beweis f¨ur die M¨oglichkeit einer Wohlordnung. Mathema-
tische Annalen 65: 107–128, 1908. English translation in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 183–198].
[Zermelo, 1908b] E. Zermelo. Untersuchungen ¨uber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre. I. Mathe-
matische Annalen 65: 261–281, 1908. English translation in [van Heijenoort 1967, 199–215].
[Zermelo, 1930] E. Zermelo. ¨Uber Grenzzahlen und Mengenbereiche: Neue Untersuchungen ¨uber
die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre. Fundamenta Mathematicae 16: 29–47, 1930.
[Zermelo, 1932] E. Zermelo. ¨Uber Stufen der Quantiﬁkation und die Logik des Unendlichen.
Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 41, pt. 2: 85–88, 1932.

INFINITY
Peter Fletcher
1
INTRODUCTION
Inﬁnity occurs in many shapes and forms in mathematics. The points at inﬁnity in
projective geometry are very diﬀerent from the inﬁnite and inﬁnitesimal quantities
that occur in nonstandard analysis, or the transﬁnite numbers in set theory, or
the inﬁnity involved in a limiting process limn→∞an. To classify this variety, it is
helpful to distinguish between actual inﬁnity and potential inﬁnity (the distinction
originates with Aristotle, who however meant it in a narrower sense than we do
today (Lear, 1979–80)). According to the idea of actual inﬁnity, inﬁnite and ﬁnite
quantities are subsumed under the same theory; an actually inﬁnite quantity is
just like a ﬁnite quantity, only bigger. According to the idea of potential inﬁnity,
inﬁnity is merely a ﬁgure of speech: whenever we speak of inﬁnity we are really
talking about arbitrarily large ﬁnite quantities.
For example, the concept of natural number can be understood in terms of a
generating process 0 →1 →2 →3 →· · ·, which can be continued as long as
one pleases without coming to an end; this is potential inﬁnity.
Or it can be
understood in terms of the set of all natural numbers N = {0, 1, 2, 3, . . .}, thought
of as given once and for all; this is actual inﬁnity. At ﬁrst sight it may appear as if
these two views come to the same thing, but we shall see in §3 that the diﬀerence
is fundamental and its consequences pervasive.
To take another example, consider the sum of an inﬁnite series, ∞
n=1 an. From
an actual-inﬁnity viewpoint this would be understood as an addition of inﬁnitely
many quantities (think for example of inﬁnitely many blobs of water that are
lumped together into a single big blob); the total may of course be ﬁnite or inﬁ-
nite. Such a conception has some appeal in the case of physical quantities, as we
shall see in §4.4. Similarly, an integral
 b
a f(x) dx can be seen as the addition of
inﬁnitely many inﬁnitesimal areas f(x) dx. From this perspective, the three equa-
tions N
n=1 an + bn = N
n=1 an + N
n=1 bn, ∞
n=1 an + bn = ∞
n=1 an + ∞
n=1 bn,
and
 b
a f(x) + g(x) dx =
 b
a f(x) dx +
 b
a g(x) dx are instances of the same rule (as
the notation suggests).
This is not, however, the way inﬁnite series are conventionally understood in
modern mathematics. ∞
n=1 an is not viewed as the sum of inﬁnitely many terms
but as a limit of ﬁnite sums, N
n=1 an; the apparent reference to inﬁnity (∞)
is explained away in ﬁnite terms. Likewise
 b
a f(x) dx is deﬁned in terms of the
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

524
Peter Fletcher
supremum and inﬁmum of ﬁnite sums of areas; the apparent reference to inﬁnites-
imals (dx) is explained away in terms of ﬁnite intervals. This explaining away of
apparent references to inﬁnity in ﬁnite terms is characteristic of potential inﬁn-
ity. The above three equations are regarded as separate rules requiring separate
proofs. The rigorous analytic theory of limits, inﬁnite sums, diﬀerentiation and in-
tegration developed in the nineteenth century banished inﬁnitesimals and inﬁnite
quantities in favour of arbitrarily small positive numbers ϵ and arbitrarily large
natural numbers n. This certainly represents a supplanting of actual inﬁnity by
potential inﬁnity. However, underlying this use of potential inﬁnity are two uses of
actual inﬁnity: the concept of an inﬁnite set (primarily the set of all natural num-
bers, N, and the set of all real numbers, R) and the concept of inﬁnite quantiﬁers
(‘for all x, . . . ’, ‘there exists a δ . . . ’).
Potential inﬁnity and actual inﬁnity are intertwined in modern mathematics.
For example, we nowadays think of a line as something extending to inﬁnity in
both directions (unlike the ancient Greeks, who thought of a line as a line segment,
indeﬁnitely extendible in either direction). Nevertheless, each point on the line has
a ﬁnite coordinate; no point has an inﬁnite coordinate. The phrase ‘going to ∞’
refers to a direction, whereas ‘going to 100’ refers to a destination.
The idea of treating the inﬁnite on the same footing as the ﬁnite, which is
characteristic of actual inﬁnity, is often very fruitful in mathematics. An obvious
example is the points at inﬁnity in projective geometry and complex analysis.
But the same idea motivates concepts such as that of a Hilbert space. When one
tries to generalise the theory of ﬁnite-dimensional vector spaces to inﬁnitely many
dimensions, one ﬁnds that many useful concepts and theorems break down. A
possible reaction to this would be to say that inﬁnite-dimensional vector spaces are
fundamentally diﬀerent from ﬁnite-dimensional ones, and so perhaps the general
concept of vector space is not very useful.
This would be hasty, however.
It
turns out that by imposing a few extra technical conditions (completeness and
separability, and by considering closed linear subspaces rather than arbitrary linear
subspaces), much of the ﬁnite-dimensional theory does generalise: for example, the
notion of the closest point to a (closed) linear subspace, the idea of a basis-free
treatment of the space, orthonormal expansions, the characterisation of a separable
Hilbert space by its dimensionality, and the isomorphism between a Hilbert space
and its dual space. It turns out that the distinction that matters is not the one
between a ﬁnite-dimensional and an inﬁnite-dimensional space (as we ﬁrst thought)
but the one between a Hilbert space (or possibly a separable Hilbert space) and
other inner-product spaces. The mathematical pay-oﬀof this is that it enables us
to treat function spaces almost as if they were ﬁnite-dimensional.
Another example of this phenomenon is the concept of a compact set in topology.
Finite point sets have many topological properties that do not hold for point sets
in general. However, by formulating the notion of compactness the properties of
ﬁnite sets can be generalised to a useful class of inﬁnite sets. Hence there is no
separate theory of ﬁnite sets in topology: it is simply subsumed in the theory of
compact sets.

Inﬁnity
525
An advocate of actual inﬁnity would draw a general moral from these examples:
that the distinction between ﬁnite and inﬁnite is less important than it naively
seems, and often masks a deeper technical distinction; by recognising this deeper
distinction we can bring the ﬁnite and the inﬁnite under a single theory. Let us
apply this thought to a philosophically controversial case: the notions of inﬁnite set
and inﬁnite number seem very problematic at ﬁrst sight, but, according to Cantor,
set theory and arithmetic can be extended from the ﬁnite into the inﬁnite by
introducing the concept of the transﬁnite. The distinction between the transﬁnite
and absolute inﬁnity turns out to be more signiﬁcant than the distinction between
ﬁnite and inﬁnite (see §2). Cantor’s followers today therefore argue that acceptance
of actual inﬁnity is in the spirit of best mathematical practice. This viewpoint is
typical of a platonist philosophy of mathematics.
On the other side, Brouwer’s philosophy of intuitionism, and other schools of
constructivism, view actual inﬁnity with suspicion and attempt to found mathe-
matics solely on potential inﬁnity; they would regard this as in the spirit of best
mathematical practice. Their views will be discussed in §3.
These questions of the nature of inﬁnity in pure mathematics cannot be seen
in isolation from applied mathematics and physics. It is a great defect of the lit-
erature on the paradoxes of mathematical inﬁnity that it ignores the paradoxes of
physical inﬁnity, and vice versa. Mathematical and physical inﬁnity are intimately
interdependent in many philosophies of mathematics, including Field’s [1980] nom-
inalism, Hellman’s [1989] modal structuralism, and logicism. Historically, ideas
of inﬁnitesimals and continuity arose from spatial and kinematic considerations.
Even today, platonists frequently rely on inﬁnitistic physical thought experiments
to bolster their support of actual inﬁnity. To many, it seems simply obvious that
there could exist actual inﬁnities in the physical world (for example, an actual
inﬁnity of stars), and they infer that actual inﬁnity is also a coherent idea in pure
mathematics [Russell, 1935–6; Benardete, 1964, 31]. I shall examine the idea of
physical inﬁnity in §4; it turns, out that it is so paradox-ridden that it counts
more against actual inﬁnity than in favour of it. However, it must be said that
constructivists have so far failed to provide an alternative account of physics based
on potential inﬁnity.
In general, platonists believe that the same philosophical considerations apply to
physical and mathematical inﬁnity [Tait, 1986], whereas constructivists typically
believe that diﬀerent considerations apply [Dummett, 1994; Fletcher, 2002].
Whatever view you take of inﬁnity, there is a pervasive problem you are certain
to encounter, which I call the horizon problem. Imagine that you call yourself a
‘ﬁnitist’; you proclaim that you only believe in ﬁnite things and that the inﬁnite is
illegitimate and incoherent. Someone asks you how many ﬁnite things you believe
in. Embarrassingly, you have to admit that you believe in inﬁnitely many of them.
Notwithstanding all your ‘ﬁnitist’ rhetoric, you require a theory of inﬁnity in order
to give a global account of your mathematical worldview.
Suppose that, in the course of rising to this challenge, you come to accept that
inﬁnite collections (such as N and R) are perfectly legitimate. Now, the same

526
Peter Fletcher
question recurs: how many inﬁnite collections do you believe in? The answer is
‘inﬁnitely many’, of course, but this latter inﬁnity is a much larger, more unman-
ageable, kind of inﬁnity than the humdrum inﬁnities you do accept. In Cantorian
terminology, the inﬁnities you accept are called ‘transﬁnite’, and the inﬁnity of
everything transﬁnite is called ‘absolute inﬁnity’. To give a general account of
transﬁnite inﬁnity you require a theory of absolute inﬁnity. You are worse oﬀthan
when you were a ﬁnitist.
Suppose that, in desperation, you resolve to revert to ﬁnitism, and (to distance
yourself as far as possible from inﬁnity) to restrict yourself to the feasible ﬁnite,
i.e., numbers you can actually count up to, such as 200, rather than practically
inaccessible numbers such as 100100. You resolve to found mathematics entirely
on what is feasible. Again, the question recurs: how many feasible numbers are
there? The answer, surely, is ‘infeasibly many’.
All three of these positions (ﬁnitism, Cantorianism and feasibilism) suﬀer from
the same problem: to characterise the domain of acceptable mathematical objects
one has to use concepts that are not acceptable. This is the horizon problem,
and it is the underlying problem of mathematical inﬁnity; we shall encounter it
repeatedly in §§2–3, though it is more acute in some theories than in others.
I had better admit my own bias here. I am a constructivist, and my views can
be found in [Fletcher, 1998]. However, in this essay I shall try to expound and
criticise each theory on its own terms, without trying to reach a ﬁnal judgement
between them.
2
ACTUAL INFINITY
2.1
Introduction
The ‘actual’ view of inﬁnity goes naturally with a general philosophy of realism.
By realism I mean the doctrine that the purpose of our physical and mathematical
theories is to describe objective reality, that the meaning of statements is given by
their truth conditions, that truth is independent of our means of knowing it, and
that the proper names, variables, and other ‘noun-like’ expressions in statements
denote objects. From such a standpoint it is natural to suppose that there is an
inﬁnity of objects and that quantiﬁers allow us to express inﬁnitely many facts
about the world in a single statement. Quantiﬁers were invented by Frege in 1879
and Peirce and Mitchell in 1883. Peirce and Mitchell devised the notation Σixi,
meaning that xi is true for some value of i, and Πixi, meaning that xi is true
for all values of i, by a conscious analogy with inﬁnite sums and inﬁnite products
in analysis [Peirce, 1885]. Nowadays we write these as ∃i xi and ∀i xi, but we
still (if we are realists) construe ∃i xi as a disjunction x1 ∨x2 ∨x3 ∨· · · and
∀i xi as a conjunction x1 ∧x2 ∧x3 ∧· · · over all possible values of i. The fact
that this disjunction and conjunction may contain inﬁnitely many terms and so
be impossible to compute is dismissed as irrelevant: the realist insists that the
objects i exist independently of us, that the property xi holds or fails to hold for

Inﬁnity
527
each i irrespective of our ability to verify it, and that there is a fact of the matter
about whether xi is true for all, some or none of the objects i, irrespective of our
ability to run through all the objects checking them.
An attractive feature of realism is that it gives us a uniform semantic account of
both mathematical and nonmathematical discourse. As Benacerraf says, it allows
us to give the grammatically similar sentences ‘There are at least three large cities
older than New York’ and ‘There are at least three perfect numbers greater than
17’ a similar logical analysis [1973].
Nowadays, the realist view of mathematics is usually based on set theory. The
choice of sets as the fundamental objects, rather than, say, functions, relations or
categories, is a historical accident (e.g., functions are taken as the basic notion by
[von Neumann, 1925], and [Bell, 1981] discusses the possibility of using categories);
what is essential is that mathematics is seen as the study of a ﬁxed universe
of actually-inﬁnite mathematical objects, existing independently of our ability to
construct them or of any other anthropocentric considerations. A few set-theoretic
realists believe that mathematics describes the same universe of objects as physical
theories [Maddy, 1990; Mayberry, 2000]; but most regard mathematical objects as
forming a separate realm disjoint from the physical world (this variety of realism
is known as platonism).
This platonist orthodoxy is a comparatively recent phenomenon, dating back
only a century or so. Before then, it was more common to view inﬁnity as potential
inﬁnity. It is illuminating to look at how and why the change-over to actual inﬁnity
occurred. The transition arose out of the needs of nineteenth-century mathematics,
particularly the arithmetisation of analysis. Four reasons can be traced.
1. Rejection of spatial and temporal intuition. Newton based his ideas of lim-
its and diﬀerentiation on intuitions of motion; other mathematicians based
their ideas of continuity on spatial intuition. These kinematic and geometric
conceptions fell into disfavour in the nineteenth century, as they had failed to
provide satisfactory theories of negative numbers, irrational numbers, imag-
inary numbers, power series, and diﬀerential and integral calculus [Bolzano,
1810, Preface]. Dedekind pointed out that simple irrational equations such
as
√
2 ·
√
3 =
√
6 lacked rigorous proofs [1872, §6].
Even the legitimacy
of the negative numbers was a matter of controversy in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries [Ewald, 1996, vol. 1, 314–8, 336]. Moreover, Bolzano,
Dedekind, Cantor, Frege and Russell all believed that spatial and temporal
considerations were extraneous to arithmetic, which ought to be built on its
own intrinsic foundations: ‘it is an intolerable oﬀence against correct method
to derive truths of pure (or general) mathematics (i.e. arithmetic, algebra,
analysis) from considerations which belong to a merely applied (or special)
part, namely geometry’ [Bolzano, 1817, Preface]. These considerations led
them to reject the potential-inﬁnity notion of a quantity capable of augmenta-
tion without end, with its connotations of time and change, and to replace it
with the static notion of the inﬁnite set of all possible values of the quantity.

528
Peter Fletcher
2. Quantiﬁer combinations. Before the nineteenth century, mathematical state-
ments typically took the form of general laws (‘(x + y)2 = x2 + 2xy + y2’)
and constructions (‘given any prime numbers we can construct a larger one’).
These are expressible, in modern logical notation, using one or two quanti-
ﬁers, and they can be understood readily in terms of potential inﬁnity: they
are all of the form ‘given any numbers we can perform certain calculations,
with certain results’. [Bolzano, 1817] pioneered the use of more logically
complex statements requiring more quantiﬁers: for example, in modern no-
tation, a sequence (xn) is said to converge to a limit l iﬀ
∀ϵ > 0 ∃N ∀n > N |xn −l| < ϵ;
and a function f : R →R is said to be continuous iﬀ
∀a ∀ϵ > 0 ∃δ > 0 ∀x |x −a| < δ ⇒|f(x) −f(a)| < ϵ.
Such statements are much harder to understand in terms of potential inﬁnity.
The quantiﬁed variables all vary in a complex interdependent way over an
inﬁnite range of values — it is hard to state this without thinking of the
value-ranges as provided once and for all, as actually-inﬁnite sets.
3. Inﬁnite sets as single objects. The arithmetic theories of real numbers devel-
oped by Weierstrass, Cantor and Dedekind represented each individual real
number by an inﬁnite object (either a sequence of rationals or a Dedekind
cut of rationals). Dedekind himself did not actually identify a real number
with the corresponding Dedekind cut, but others did take this natural step
[1888a]. The set of real numbers, R, is then an inﬁnite set of elements that
are themselves essentially inﬁnite. In the light of this it is hard to maintain
the view that there is no such thing as actual inﬁnity, only unboundedly
varying ﬁnite quantities.
4. Cantor’s set theory. Cantor was drawn into set theory by his investigations
of Fourier series [Dauben, 1979, chapter 2]. He began by studying the repre-
sentation of functions by trigonometric series, then he turned his attention to
the sets of points on which such representations break down; this led him to
study sets of points for their own sake, and then sets in general. For Cantor,
a set was no longer simply the range of variation of a variable quantity; it
had become a mathematical object in its own right.
Many forms of actual inﬁnity are in use in mathematics today, for example,
points at inﬁnity in complex analysis and projective geometry, and inﬁnitesimals
in nonstandard analysis [Robinson, 1966] and smooth inﬁnitesimal analysis [Kock,
1981; Bell, 1998].
Many others have been proposed and not received as much
attention as they deserve, such as Peirce’s theory of the continuum [Zink, 2001]
and Vopˇenka’s alternative set theory [Vopˇenka, 1979; Sochor, 1984]. Nevertheless,
in this section I shall concentrate on the most important variety, Cantor’s theory

Inﬁnity
529
of transﬁnite sets and transﬁnite arithmetic. I shall restrict my attention to those
aspects of set theory most relevant to inﬁnity, neglecting other controversial aspects
such as: the existence of sets and whether they are material or abstract objects;
the existence of the empty set and singleton sets, and the comparison between set
theory and mereology (for which see [Lewis, 1991]; the axiom of foundation and
non-well-founded set theory [Aczel, 1988]; and the axiom of choice [Moore, 1982].
2.2
Inﬁnite numbers
Cantor’s boldest achievement was to extend the concept of number into the inﬁnite,
with his theory of transﬁnite ordinal numbers and transﬁnite cardinal numbers.
Let us take the idea of cardinal number and try to isolate what is distinctive about
Cantor’s contribution.
There are two natural criteria by which one could compare the ‘size’ or ‘mul-
tiplicity’ of two classes, A and B (I am using the word ‘class’ in a rough, pre-
Cantorian sense for the moment).
1. There are fewer As than Bs if every A is a B but not every B is an A.
2. There are as many As as Bs if there exists a bijection between the As and
the Bs (i.e., a one-to-one correspondence, or a one-to-one mapping of all the
As onto all the Bs).
Both these criteria were familiar since antiquity and were generally accepted for
ﬁnite classes. But it was well known that they came into conﬂict when one tried
to apply them to inﬁnite classes, and this was sometimes used as an argument
against inﬁnite numbers. Leibniz said:
The number of all numbers implies a contradiction, which I show thus:
To any number there is a corresponding number equal to its double.
Therefore the number of all numbers is not greater than the number
of even numbers, i.e. the whole is not greater than its part. (Quoted
in [Benardete, 1964, 44].)
The key step in resolving this conﬂict is to separate the two criteria. Maybe they
are both valid, but they refer to diﬀerent concepts of size.
If we develop the
consequences of the two criteria separately we might arrive at two valid theories
of size, both applicable to inﬁnite classes.
Thus Bolzano explicitly adopted (1) as his criterion of size and rejected (2) in
the case of inﬁnite classes [1851, §§19–24]. Bolzano’s paper is notable for upholding
the existence of actual inﬁnity and for insisting that one inﬁnity could be larger
than another (for example, a line, bounded in one direction and unbounded in the
other, can contain another such line (§19)). His rejection of criterion (2) led him
into extraordinary complications when trying to evaluate sums of inﬁnite series
(§18). Nevertheless, his criterion of size has been incorporated into modern set

530
Peter Fletcher
theory in the form of the proper subset relation, and whenever we speak of, e.g., ‘a
maximal orthonormal set’ or a ‘maximal connected subset’ we are using the word
‘maximal’ in Bolzano’s sense.
Cantor, of course, adopted criterion (2) and replaced (1) with a weaker version.
(1′) There are fewer or as many As as Bs if every A is a B.
By combining the two ideas (1′) and (2) we obtain the modern concept of the
cardinality, |A|, of a class A:
|A| = |B|
iﬀthere is a bijection between A and B;
|A| ≤|B|
iﬀthere is a bijection between A and a subclass of B;
|A| < |B|
iﬀ|A| ≤|B| but |A| ̸= |B|.
If |A| = |B| then A and B are said to have the same power, or the same cardinal
number. Beginning with his [1874] paper, Cantor accomplished cardinal compar-
isons between the set of natural numbers (N), the set of real numbers (R), the set
of algebraic numbers, the set of irrational numbers, the one-dimensional interval
[0, 1], and the two-dimensional square [0, 1]2. He showed that there is an unending
succession of inﬁnite cardinal numbers, of which the smallest is |N|, known as
countable inﬁnity. In parallel with this, Cantor developed a theory of transﬁnite
ordinal numbers, 0, 1, 2, . . . ω, ω+1, ω+2, . . . ω2, ω2+1, ω2+2, . . ., thinking of them
initially as steps in a transﬁnite iteration and later as order-types of well-ordered
sets. A well-ordered set is a set equipped with an ordering relation under which
every nonempty subset has a least element. Two well-ordered sets are said to be
similar, or of the same order-type, iﬀthere exists a similarity between them (a
similarity is an order-preserving bijection). Similarities are the measuring stick for
ordinal numbers, just as bijections are the measuring stick for cardinal numbers.
Cantor deﬁned operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and
exponentiation for ordinal numbers and investigated their unique prime factori-
sation. He also deﬁned addition, multiplication and exponentiation for cardinal
numbers, and used ordinal numbers to index the sequence of cardinal numbers: the
sequence of inﬁnite cardinal numbers could be listed as ℵ0, ℵ1, ℵ2, . . . , ℵω, ℵω+1, . . .,
with every inﬁnite cardinal number occurring in the list as ℵα for a unique ordinal
number α. He developed a distinctive concept of set, under which every set had a
cardinal number and every well-ordered set had an ordinal number.
These achievements made an immense impression on Cantor’s successors. By
the simple expedients of taking actual inﬁnity seriously and adopting bijections
and similarities as measures of size, Cantor had replaced the mediaeval metaphys-
ical morass of inﬁnity with determinate mathematics. The fact that one can do
calculations with inﬁnities, one can show that 5(ω+1)(ω23+4) = ω33+ω4+5 and
ℵ37 × ℵ20 = ℵ37, convinced mathematicians that transﬁnite numbers were just as
real as ﬁnite numbers and that Cantor’s theory represented a genuine advance over
all previous thinking about inﬁnity. Mathematicians have a strong sense of the re-
ality and concreteness of anything they can calculate with. A few mathematicians

Inﬁnity
531
(Kronecker, Baire, Brouwer, Poincar´e, Weyl) resisted the move to actual inﬁnity;
the great majority applauded it. (However, it might be argued that if they had
known at the time how intractable the evaluation of cardinal exponentials such as
2ℵ0 was they might have been less willing to embrace transﬁnite arithmetic.)
2.3
The paradoxes of set theory
Even as set theory was ﬁnding its feet and actual inﬁnity was establishing itself as
mathematical orthodoxy, serious contradictions were discovered at the heart of set
theory, which were seen at the time as a ‘crisis’ in the foundations of mathematics.
Set theorists at this time (the beginning of the twentieth century) assumed a
comprehension principle:
∃S ∀x (x ∈S ⇐⇒P(x))
which says that, given a well-deﬁned property P applicable to objects of any
kind, there exists a set S consisting of all the objects x for which P(x) holds.
The motivation for this was the commonly held belief that consistency implies
existence. The view was that, if one deﬁnes a mathematical system by specifying
the types of elements it contains, the relations and functions that apply within the
system, and the axioms that characterise them, and if one does so in a rigorous,
unambiguous, consistent and complete manner (that is, if the axioms determine
unambiguously whether each relation holds between any two elements and the
value of each function on any argument), then the system is guaranteed to exist.
(This doctrine is nowadays known as ‘plenitudinous platonism’ [Balaguer, 1998].)
Now, a set is a mathematical system of a very simple kind, having only one relation,
∈; and so if we specify unambiguously what it means for an arbitrary object x to
belong to the set then we have done enough to guarantee the set’s existence. This
is the justiﬁcation for the comprehension principle.
This belief that consistency implies existence arose from the successes of nine-
teenth-century mathematics in generalising algebra to ever-larger number systems
and establishing Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry on a ﬁrm axiomatic foot-
ing. Dedekind believed that mathematical objects were ‘free creations of the hu-
man mind’, that human beings possess ‘divine’ powers to create any well-deﬁned
mathematical system [1888a, b]. Cantor believed that any consistently and pre-
cisely deﬁned mathematical system was guaranteed to occur in the external world
[1883, §8]. Poincar´e [1905] and Hilbert [1900] believed that, in mathematics, exis-
tence simply is consistency. Frege provided an explicit articulation of this idea, in
the form of his ‘context principle’ [1884, §60; 1919], which states that the meaning
of a word consists in the contribution it makes to the meanings of the sentences in
which it may occur; if this contribution can be speciﬁed adequately then the word is
guaranteed to have reference. He applied the context principle in his Grundgesetze
[1893, §§3,10] to ﬁx the meaning of the course-of-values of a function; he argued
that to do this it suﬃced to provide an equality criterion for courses-of-values; this
was his Basic Law V, his equivalent of the comprehension principle.

532
Peter Fletcher
The set-theoretic paradoxes arise from the comprehension principle.
Burali-
Forti’s paradox appeared in 1897 (in a disguised form). Let P be the property of
being an ordinal number; S is therefore the set of all ordinal numbers. Then it is
clear that S is well-ordered, by the usual ordering of ordinals. Every well-ordered
set has an ordinal number as its order-type, so let Ω be the order-type of S. Now,
Ω must be greater than all the ordinal numbers in S; but this contradicts the fact
that S contains all ordinal numbers.
Around 1900–2, Zermelo and Russell independently discovered what is generally
known as ‘Russell’s paradox’. Let P be the property that holds of x iﬀx is a set
and x /∈x. Then S is the set of all sets that do not belong to themselves. The
deﬁnition immediately gives S ∈S ⇐⇒S /∈S, a logical contradiction (even in
intuitionistic logic).
‘Cantor’s paradox’ (essentially the argument in [Cantor, 1899c]) arises by taking
P as the property of being a set. Thus S is the set of all sets. Let P(S) be the
power set of S, i.e., the set of all subsets of S. Then S is smaller in cardinality
than P(S), by Cantor’s diagonal argument [1891]; but this contradicts the obvious
fact that P(S) ⊆S.
After much confusion and controversy, it came to be generally agreed that the
fallacy in each of these arguments was the application of the comprehension prin-
ciple: there is no set of all ordinal numbers, no set of all sets that are not members
of themselves, and no set of all sets. It was concluded that the comprehension
principle was unsound, at least in its full generality. Yet some principle of this
sort is necessary if we are ever to be able to claim the existence of any set or
other mathematical system. So, lacking a clear understanding of what was wrong
with the comprehension principle, set theorists took the line of least resistance
and assembled lists of weaker principles that would allow them to carry out all
the normal operations of mathematics without reproducing the three paradoxes.
This led to an axiomatic theory called ZFC (Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with the
axiom of choice), which is nowadays considered the standard version of set theory.
The axioms are as follows.
Axioms for basic sets
Axiom of the empty set (∅exists): ∃y∀z z /∈y
Axiom of inﬁnity (there exists an inﬁnite set): ∃y (∅∈y ∧∀z ∈y z ∪{z} ∈y)
Set-building axioms
Axiom of pairing ({x1, x2} exists): ∀x1, x2∃y∀z (z ∈y ⇐⇒(z = x1 ∨z = x2))
Axiom of union ( x exists): ∀x∃y∀z (z ∈y ⇐⇒∃w ∈x z ∈w)
Axiom of power set (P(x) exists): ∀x∃y∀z (z ∈y ⇐⇒z ⊆x)
Axiom of separation ({z ∈x | P(z)} exists): ∀x∃y∀z (z ∈y ⇐⇒(z ∈x ∧P(z)))
Axiom of replacement ({F(u) | u ∈x} exists): ∀x∃y∀z (z ∈y ⇐⇒∃u ∈x z = F(u))

Inﬁnity
533
General axioms about sets
Axiom of extensionality (x = y iﬀx and y have the same elements):
∀x, y (x = y ⇐⇒∀z (z ∈x ⇐⇒z ∈y))
Axiom of foundation (there are no inﬁnite membership chains a0 ∋a1 ∋a2 ∋· · ·):
∀x ̸= ∅∃y ∈x x ∩y = ∅
Axiom of choice (for any set x of nonempty disjoint sets, there is a set w containing
one element from each set in x):
∀x ([∀y, z ∈x y = z ⇐⇒y ∩z ̸= ∅] ⇒∃w ⊆ x ∀y ∈x ∃u w ∩y = {u})
(In the axiom of separation P is any property of sets; in the axiom of replacement
F is any operation that transforms sets to sets; for the sake of deﬁniteness it is
common to assume that P and F are expressible by means of formulae in the
ﬁrst-order language of ZFC.) Most of these axioms were introduced by Zermelo
[1908]; the axioms of replacement and foundation were added later by others.
I have grouped the axioms into three classes to suggest a quasi-constructive way
of ‘generating’ the ZFC universe of sets. We start with the basic sets (the empty
set and the given inﬁnite set), and apply the set-building axioms repeatedly to
construct further sets. All the set-building axioms are of the form ‘given a set x (or
two sets x1, x2) we can construct another set y from it’. The construction process is
subject to the conditions imposed by the ‘general’ axioms: two sets are considered
equal iﬀthey have the same elements; no set may involve an inﬁnite regress or
a vicious circle of membership; and it is always possible to make simultaneous
choices of elements from any number of nonempty sets. This quasi-constructive
view is known as the iterative conception of sets; it will be discussed further in
§2.5.
2.4
Cantor and absolute inﬁnity
The paradoxes of set theory were less paradoxical to Cantor than to his contem-
poraries. When Cantor was made aware of the paradoxes he was able to point
out that he had anticipated something of this sort and made allowance for it
in his [1883] paper. Indeed, he had drawn a distinction between the transﬁnite
and absolute inﬁnity. Inﬁnite sets are transﬁnite: they ‘can be determined by
well-deﬁned and distinguishable numbers’ [1883, §5]. The sequence of all ordinal
numbers is absolutely inﬁnite, and exceeds all rational grasp: ‘the absolute can
only be acknowledged but never known — and not even approximately known’
[1883, endnote 2]. In later years he expressed this in terms of a distinction be-
tween ‘consistent multiplicities’ (of transﬁnite size) and ‘inconsistent multiplicities’
(of absolutely inﬁnite size). As I have already said, Cantor shared the widespread
assumption that any consistent mathematical system exists; but he had a novel
conception of consistency. He believed that for a system to be consistent it is
necessary not merely that its elements and their mutual relations be consistently
speciﬁed but that the elements be able to coexist consistently as a whole.

534
Peter Fletcher
If we start from the notion of a deﬁnite multiplicity (a system, a total-
ity) of things, it is necessary, as I discovered, to distinguish two kinds
of multiplicities (by this I always mean deﬁnite multiplicities).
For a multiplicity can be such that the assumption that all of its ele-
ments ‘are together’ leads to a contradiction, so that it is impossible
to conceive of the multiplicity as a unity, as ‘one ﬁnished thing’. Such
multiplicities I call absolutely inﬁnite or inconsistent multiplicities.
As we can readily see, the ‘totality of everything thinkable’, for exam-
ple, is such a multiplicity; later still other examples will turn up.
If on the other hand the totality of the elements of a multiplicity can be
thought of without contradiction as ‘being together’, so that they can
be gathered together into ‘one thing’, I call it a consistent multiplicity
or a ‘set’. [Cantor, 1899a]
Thus there exist determinate multiplicities that are not also unities —
i.e. multiplicities such that a real ‘coexistence of all their elements’ is
impossible. These are the ones I call ‘inconsistent systems’; the others
I call ‘sets’. [Cantor, 1899c]
It sounds from this as if a set is a special kind of multiplicity; to understand
sets we ﬁrst need a theory of multiplicities, then we need a dynamical theory
explaining how elements are ‘gathered’ into multiplicities and how they sometimes
form stable wholes and sometimes fall apart under the mutual repulsion of their
elements (like an unstable atomic nucleus). But this, I think, would be to take
the talk of multiplicities and gathering too literally. ‘Multiplicities’, ‘systems’ and
‘totalities’ are merely ﬁgures of speech; sets are the only kind of collective object
that Cantor believes in. A set is simply a single object containing other objects.
When Cantor says that ‘The system Ω of all [ordinal] numbers is an inconsistent,
absolutely inﬁnite multiplicity’, he is saying that the ordinal numbers do not form
any sort of collective object at all: they are just too numerous.
Thus Cantor replaced the traditional distinction between the ﬁnite and the
inﬁnite by a distinction between the ﬁnite, the transﬁnite and the absolutely inﬁ-
nite. The transﬁnite includes all the inﬁnite sets commonly used in mathematics
(such as N, R and separable Hilbert spaces), but it also shares many of the prop-
erties of the ﬁnite: it is numerically determinate, humanly graspable, ‘limited’,
‘increasable’ and ‘ﬁnished’. The absolutely inﬁnite is beyond all rational determi-
nation and is not itself an object of mathematical study. In Cantorian set theory
the transﬁnite/absolute distinction assumes central importance and plays a simi-
lar role to that traditionally played by the ﬁnite/inﬁnite distinction; whereas the
ﬁnite/transﬁnite distinction fades into relative unimportance. The theory of cardi-
nal and ordinal arithmetic is developed in a uniform way for all sets, and the ﬁnite
part of it emerges merely as a special case, not receiving a diﬀerent foundational
treatment from the transﬁnite part (Hallett calls this point of view ‘Cantorian
ﬁnitism’ [1984]). Mayberry emphasises the point further by applying the word

Inﬁnity
535
‘ﬁnite’ to all ﬁnite and transﬁnite sets [2000]. In Mayberry’s terminology, Cantor
did not develop a theory of inﬁnite sets but extended the ﬁnite to cover sets such
as N and R that had traditionally been conceived as inﬁnite. (I shall not follow
this terminology, however, as I wish to retain the use of the word ‘ﬁnite’ in the
usual sense of ‘smaller than ℵ0’.)
It is clear from this how fundamental Cantor’s distinction between the transﬁ-
nite and absolute inﬁnity is to his project; it is not just a device for avoiding the
paradoxes. But how soundly based is the distinction? In particular, what prevents
us from treating an absolutely inﬁnite ‘multiplicity’ as a deﬁnite object? Can-
tor does after all describe an absolutely inﬁnite multiplicity as ‘fully-determinate,
well-deﬁned’ [1899c], meaning I think that it has a well-deﬁned criterion for mem-
bership. But he believes it is not numerically determinate, meaning that it is
too big to have a cardinality. Yet an obvious objection arises: why can we not
compare absolutely inﬁnite multiplicities with respect to cardinality, just as we do
with transﬁnite sets? Cantor showed that there was a bijection α →ℵα between
the ordinal numbers and the inﬁnite cardinal numbers; does this not establish that
the multiplicity of ordinal numbers is of the same size as the multiplicity of inﬁnite
cardinal numbers? Moreover, in modern set theory with the global axiom of choice
we can show that all absolutely inﬁnite multiplicities are of equal cardinality to
V , the multiplicity of all sets. Hence there seems to be a well-deﬁned cardinality
common to all absolutely inﬁnite multiplicities.
Now, Cantor had defended the introduction of actual inﬁnity against the ob-
jections of Aristotle by saying that ‘determinate countings can be carried out just
as well for inﬁnite sets as for ﬁnite ones, provided that one gives the sets a deter-
minate law that turns them into well-ordered sets’ [1883, §4]. In other words, the
fact that one can carry out cardinal and ordinal comparisons in a mathematically
crisp and unambiguous way, free of any arbitrariness, demonstrates the validity of
inﬁnite sets and transﬁnite arithmetic. But the very same considerations suggest
that there is a determinate cardinality of all sets and an order-type of all ordinal
numbers, which implies a higher realm of ‘super-sets’ of absolutely inﬁnite size. A
Cantorian must reject this conclusion, for it subverts the whole idea of absolute
inﬁnity as exceeding all mathematical determination. Yet the Cantorian seems to
be without resources to resist the argument.
Dummett sets out the diﬃculty in the following terms. The idea of a transﬁnite
number seems self-contradictory when one ﬁrst meets it, he says, as one is used to
thinking of a number as something that can be arrived at by counting. However,
the beginner can be persuaded that it makes sense to speak of inﬁnite sets of
diﬀerent sizes.
When he [the beginner] has become accustomed to this idea, he is
extremely likely to ask, “How many transﬁnite cardinals are there?”
How should he be answered? He is very likely to be answered by being
told, “You must not ask that question.” But why should he not? If it
was, after all, all right to ask, “How many numbers are there”, in the
sense in which “number” meant “ﬁnite cardinal”, how can it be wrong

536
Peter Fletcher
to ask the same question when “number” means “ﬁnite or transﬁnite
cardinal”? A mere prohibition leaves the matter a mystery. It gives
no help to say that there are some totalities so large that no number
can be assigned to them. We can gain some grasp of the idea of a
totality too big to be counted, even at the stage when we think that,
if it cannot be counted, it does not have a number; but, once we have
accepted that totalities too big to be counted may yet have numbers,
the idea of one too big even to have a number conveys nothing at all.
And merely to say, “If you persist in talking about the number of all
cardinal numbers, you will run into contradiction” is to wield the big
stick, not to oﬀer an explanation. [Dummett, 1994]
Clearly we need a further account of the diﬀerence between consistent and incon-
sistent multiplicities to extricate ourselves from this diﬃculty. I shall turn to this
in the next subsection.
2.5
Three views of sets
We are seeking an account of how a ‘multiplicity’ of objects can be joined together
into a single object, a ‘set’. There are three main approaches:
• sets as classes;
• the limitation of size view;
• the iterative conception of sets.
By a class I mean a property, viewed extensionally. For example, the property of
being a subset of R is (let us suppose) fully determinate: it is determined which
objects possess the property and which don’t. We can say that x belongs to the
class P(R) iﬀx satisﬁes this property; talk of classes is just an extensional idiom
for talk of satisfying properties. We refer to two classes as ‘equal’ iﬀthey have
the same elements, even though the two properties may be diﬀerent. By forming
the property ‘subset of R’ we have enabled ourselves to refer, in a single breath,
to inﬁnitely many things (all the subsets of R); we have gathered them, mentally,
into a unity, which is the essential requirement for a set.
But what is a property? Ambiguity on this point vitiated Russell’s account of
the paradoxes in terms of ‘propositional functions’ [1906]. If our explanation of
sets in terms of properties is to achieve any real reduction, we must understand
properties syntactically, as given by sentences containing a single free variable,
e.g., ‘x is a subset of R’. There is no restriction on the language; any meaningful
declarative sentence with one free variable is considered to denote a property. This
was Frege’s notion of a concept [1891].
How do we escape the paradoxes, on this view? The properties expressed by
the sentences ‘x is an ordinal number’, ‘x does not belong to x’, and ‘x is a class’
must somehow be rejected. It is not plausible to say that the sentences are not

Inﬁnity
537
meaningful: given a particular object, we do know what it means to say that it is
an ordinal number, or that it does not belong to itself, or that it is a class. We
could, however, say, with Russell, that ‘a statement about x cannot in general be
analysed into two parts, x and what is said about x’ [1906]. That is, if one takes
a sentence of the form ‘A does not belong to A’, and tries to analyse it into a
part A and a schema ‘x does not belong to x’, this works syntactically (i.e., the
sentence is recoverable by substituting A back into the schema), but it somehow
fails semantically. The proposition expressed by the sentence just cannot be carved
up that way. This is all rather mysterious.
A more hopeful line is to assimilate the set-theoretic paradoxes to the seman-
tic paradoxes. The semantic paradoxes are diagonalisation arguments involving
sentences and properties, which work in a similar self-referential way to the set-
theoretic paradoxes. I shall just outline the three main semantic paradoxes.
• (Grelling’s paradox) Call a property heterological iﬀit does not satisfy itself.
Is heterological itself heterological?
• (Berry’s paradox) Let N be the least natural number not deﬁnable in English
in less than one hundred words. Then N is deﬁnable in English in less than
one hundred words (we have just done so in the previous sentence!).
• (Richard’s paradox) Let E be the set of every real number whose decimal
expansion is deﬁnable in English.
Enumerate the elements of E by lexi-
cographic ordering of their English deﬁnitions. By diagonalisation on the
decimal expansions we can construct a real number not in E: we have thus
deﬁned an indeﬁnable number.
These paradoxes need to be resolved by tightening up our language in some way;
either that or we need to live with the fact that our language is powerful enough
to generate nonsense. Whatever resolution we adopt for the semantic paradoxes is
likely also to cover the set-theoretic paradoxes (construed in terms of properties).
Hence the mere presence of the paradoxes, troublesome though they are, is not an
objection to the class view of sets.
A set theory based on this approach would take account of Poincar´e’s [1906b,
§IX; 1910; 1913, chapter IV] and Weyl’s [1921, 1925–7] considerations of the ‘vi-
cious circle’ principle and ‘predicative’ deﬁnitions. It would probably be similar
to Whitehead & Russell’s type theory [1910] or Quine’s set theory [1937].
The limitation of size view rejects any such intensional origin of sets. A set is
deﬁned as a multiplicity or plurality of objects that is quantitatively determinate
and hence may be thought of as a single thing. There is no doubt that this is in
line with Cantor’s own thinking: see especially his critique of Frege [Cantor, 1885].
On this view, the diﬀerence between consistent and inconsistent multiplicities is
that the latter are simply too big to have a cardinality. Neither Cantor nor any of
his successors has oﬀered any explanation of why cardinality should be the decisive
factor. Indeed, there are alternative versions of set theory in which a set can have
a non-set as a subclass [Vopˇenka, 1979; Sochor, 1984].

538
Peter Fletcher
Mayberry [2000] gives a lucid and vigorous modern presentation of set the-
ory from the ‘limitation of size’ viewpoint. He addresses a logical question that
twentieth-century set theorists were very slow to take up: given that absolute
inﬁnity ‘can only be acknowledged but never known’, how can it be legitimate
to quantify over all sets? The diﬀerence between transﬁnite and absolutely inﬁ-
nite multiplicities is so fundamental that one would expect it to be reﬂected in
a diﬀerent semantics and logic for ‘bounded’ quantiﬁers (∀x∈S, ∃x∈S, ranging
over a set) than for ‘unbounded’ quantiﬁers (∀x, ∃x, ranging over the whole uni-
verse of sets). Yet ZFC set theory allows unbounded quantiﬁers to be used freely,
and combined with the propositional connectives in arbitrary ways, without any
restrictions or precautions, as if the set universe were a domain like any other.
Mayberry gives the following reason for being suspicious of unbounded quantiﬁ-
cation (§§3.5, 7.2). If unbounded quantiﬁcation were allowed without restriction
then we could use it to deﬁne an identity criterion for classes of sets (or ‘species’,
as Mayberry calls classes):
S = T
iﬀ
∀x (x ∈S ⇐⇒x ∈T).
If unbounded quantiﬁers were subject to classical logic then any classes S and
T would determinately be either equal or unequal. Given this ﬁrm criterion of
identity, it would be hard to resist the conclusion that classes were objects, and
from them we could form pluralities of classes, and pluralities of pluralities of
classes, and so on. This subverts the Cantorian deﬁnition of ‘set’: a set was deﬁned
as a multiplicity that is also a unity (an object), so we cannot admit any other kind
of collective object. Hence a Cantorian must restrict unbounded quantiﬁcation in
some way. Mayberry discusses various possible theories involving ﬁrst- or second-
order quantiﬁcation over sets or classes, and concludes that it is better to allow
only Π1 and Σ1 propositions (i.e., ∀x · · · ∀y A and ∃x · · · ∃y A, where the initial
quantiﬁers range over all sets and A contains only bounded quantiﬁers), and to
give them a quasi-intuitionistic semantics and logic.
Aside from this logical question, there is a persistent doubt (ﬁrst raised by
[Russell, 1906]) about the meaningfulness of the fundamental notion of ‘limited
in size’. What is it exactly that determines whether a multiplicity is too large to
have a cardinality? How big is too big?
Imagine a mathematician who whole-heartedly accepts the thesis that mathe-
matics is based on sets, that a set is a plurality of limited size, and that size is
measured by bijections, but who nevertheless refuses to accept set theory in its
conventional form, preferring instead to adopt one of the following positions.
Position 1: all sets are ﬁnite (in the usual sense of being smaller than ℵ0);
their cardinalities can be measured by natural numbers; absolute inﬁnity
coincides with inﬁnity.
Position 2: only ﬁnite and countably inﬁnite sets exist; the process of con-
structing ordinal numbers can never reach ω1 (the ﬁrst uncountable ordinal
number); ω1 represents absolute inﬁnity.

Inﬁnity
539
Position 3: ﬁnite and countably inﬁnity sets exist, and the possibility of
uncountable sets is left open, but the power-set axiom is rejected; the power
‘set’ of any inﬁnite set is absolutely inﬁnite.
The problem here is that all three unorthodox positions are compatible with Can-
tor’s thesis of limitation of size and they can all be well motivated.
As regards position 1, it is generally accepted that the existence of inﬁnite
sets is merely a hypothesis, albeit a very useful one for mathematics. Mayberry
develops two alternative set theories, called ‘Cantorian’ and ‘Euclidean’, based on
aﬃrming and denying that a countable inﬁnity is ‘limited’, respectively [2000].
Cantor shrugs oﬀthe question with the comment that we cannot even prove that
ﬁnite multiplicities are sets [1899b]. His casualness on this point is disconcerting.
Is it really the case that we cannot tell whether {a, b, c, d, e} is absolutely inﬁnite?
If so, is that because the relevant facts are somehow hidden from us, or because
the concept of limited size is, after all, meaningless?
Pollard suggests the following criterion: ‘things are limited in number whenever
they are less numerous than other things’; in other words, a plurality is limited iﬀit
is increasable [1996]. By Cantor’s diagonal argument, the natural numbers are less
numerous than the sets of natural numbers. Hence the plurality of natural numbers
is limited.
The fallacy of this argument is that it assumes the two pluralities
involved have sizes, i.e., that they are sets. The diagonal argument shows that, if
the plurality of natural numbers and the plurality of sets of natural numbers have
sizes, then the former size is less than the latter size. This is no help in establishing
that any inﬁnite plurality has a size.
Position 2 is naturally suggested by reading Cantor’s account of the generation
of the ordinal numbers [1883, §§1,11]. Cantor considered the ordinals as produced
in a quasi-constructive way by applying two generating principles repeatedly, start-
ing from 0:
1. given an ordinal α we can form its successor α + 1;
2. given any succession of ordinals α, β, . . . already generated, with no greatest
member, we can form the limit of them, the ﬁrst ordinal greater than all of
them.
This process, known as transﬁnite iteration, generates the ordinals
0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , ω, ω+1, ω+2, . . . , ω2, ω2+1, ω2+2, . . . , ω3, ω3+1, . . . , ω4, . . . , ω2, ω2+1, . . .
where ω, ω2, ω3, ω4, ω2 are generated by the second principle and the others shown
(apart from 0) are generated by the ﬁrst principle.
It seems clear that by applying the two generating principles we can form a long
(but always countable) succession of countable ordinal numbers. But, as Lake
asks, how are we ever to reach the uncountable ordinals [1979, §1.3]? It seems
that we would need to generate uncountably many countable ordinals to justify
the leap to ω1; but the possibility of doing this is itself in question. How can we

540
Peter Fletcher
pull ourselves up by our countable bootstraps into the realm of the uncountable?
Cantor tries to accomplish this step by deﬁning the second number class, (II), as
the aggregate of all countable ordinal numbers formable by the two generating
principles; he says that we can continue from here to form further number classes
of ordinal numbers [1883, §12], so he seems to believe that in forming (II) we
have thereby formed ω1. (Cantor appeals to a third principle, a ‘restricting or
limiting principle’, whose function seems to be to help us in delimiting the number
classes.) But if it is acceptable to generate ω1 as the limit of uncountably many
countable ordinals, why is it not acceptable to generate Ω, the absolutely inﬁnite
order-type of all transﬁnite ordinals, as the limit of the succession of all transﬁnite
ordinals?
It would be extremely natural to identify ω1 with Ω and to regard
Cantor’s generating process as inherently limited to the countable.
Position 3 is naturally suggested by Cantor’s diagonal argument. It is conven-
tional to say that the diagonal argument shows that the power set of any set S
is strictly larger than S. But this formulation is question-begging, as I pointed
out above. The conclusion of the diagonal argument is really that, given any set
A of subsets of S, with |A| = |S|, we can always construct another subset of S
outside A. It does not establish that there is a set of all subsets of S. If one
couples the diagonal argument with Russell’s, Poincar´e’s and Weyl’s arguments
about the vicious circle principle and impredicativity, one may easily be led to the
conclusion that P(N) is an inexhaustible multiplicity of sets, so big that when we
try to grasp it in full we always fall short. In short, P(N) is an excellent candidate
for absolute inﬁnity. (Compare this with the argument of [Cohen, 1966, 151].)
Power sets were used implicitly by Cantor [1891]; the axiom asserting the exis-
tence of power sets was ﬁrst stated by [Zermelo, 1908], without any justiﬁcation.
Lake asserts the axiom as obvious:
The sum and power set axioms follow as it is inconceivable that an
inconsistent multiplicity could be obtained from a set by one of these
visualizable operations. This is even clearer if we assume that all incon-
sistent multiplicities are the same size, for then the power set axiom,
for instance, says that there is no set for which the collection of all its
subcollections is the same size as the Absolute. [Lake, 1979]
Mayberry [1994] regards the power-set axiom as ‘obviously true’, from a limitation
of size viewpoint. In [2000] he is more tentative, describing it as ‘the most pow-
erful, and least self-evident, of the ﬁniteness principles’ (p. 117), but still ‘highly
plausible’ (p. 123) (recall that Mayberry uses the word ‘ﬁnite’ to mean limited in
size).
The subsets of a plurality of determinate size are simply “there”, in
whatever multitude, deﬁnite or indeﬁnite, they may compose. Surely
it is implausible to suppose that multitude to be absolutely inﬁnite.
Surely we cannot conceive that the absolutely inﬁnite could be rooted
in, or could emerge from, a particular instance of the ﬁnite in such a
manner. (p. 124)

Inﬁnity
541
Yet set theorists do believe that the absolutely inﬁnite universe of sets emerges
from nothing (or from two or more urelements in Mayberry’s case), in the manner
described by the cumulative hierarchy of sets (see below for a deﬁnition of the
cumulative hierarchy). This is just as astonishing and counter-intuitive, when one
ﬁrst meets it, as the idea that a set could have an absolute inﬁnity of subsets. We
are all so familiar with ZFC set theory that we become insensible to its bizarre
aspects and we tend to mistake familiarity for self-evidence.
We have a vivid
diagram in our minds of the cumulative hierarchy, in which P(S) lives one level
above S, while absolute inﬁnity is represented by an arrow pointing up towards
heaven. This diagram is so entrenched in our thinking that it obstructs us from
considering with an open mind the possibility that P(S) is absolutely inﬁnite.
Hallett [1984, chapter 5] examines in detail the attempts to justify the power-set
axiom from a limitation of size viewpoint and concludes that they cannot succeed.
The problem revealed by each of these three unorthodox positions I have sketched
is that our notion of limitation of size seems insuﬃcient to justify the axioms sup-
posedly based on it. The axioms that I called ‘set-building axioms’ in §2.3, together
with the axiom of inﬁnity, are, from the limitation of size viewpoint, intended to
articulate the meaning of ‘limited size’. Indeed, one would hope that the meaning
of ‘limited size’ would be clariﬁed in the course of arguing for the axioms (one
usually understands a mathematical concept better when one has seen it used in
arguments). And indeed it can be said that the separation and replacement ax-
ioms arise naturally from the fundamental principles of cardinality, (1′) and (2),
with which we began in §2.2. However, the same cannot be said for the other ax-
ioms, particularly the power-set and inﬁnity axioms (and possibly also the union
axiom); the justiﬁcations given by set theorists for these axioms have a circular, or
even vacuous, character; one could reject power sets or inﬁnite sets and still claim
to be true to the principle of limitation of size. I am suspicious of mathematical
concepts that do no work; it is the axioms that do the work in set theory, not the
principle of limitation of size, and there seems to be an unbridgeable gap between
the principle and the power-set and inﬁnity axioms. These two axioms are central
to Cantor’s project, for we need them to show the existence of inﬁnite sets of
diﬀerent sizes.
Let us turn to the third approach to set theory, the iterative conception of sets.
As we have seen, Cantor viewed the ordinal numbers as generated by a transﬁnite
iteration, using his two principles of generation. A similar transﬁnite iteration
process can be used to generate the entire universe of sets. We think of sets as
generated in stages, indexed by ordinal numbers. The collection of sets formed at
or before stage α is called Vα (where α is any ordinal number), and is deﬁned by
(i)
V0 = ∅,
(ii) Vα+1 = P(Vα),
(iii) if α is the limit of a succession of lesser ordinals then Vα = 
β<α Vβ.

542
Peter Fletcher
Clause (i) says that we start with no sets. Clause (ii) is analogous to Cantor’s ﬁrst
principle of generation: at stage α + 1 we form all sets consisting of sets available
at stage α. Clause (iii) is analogous to Cantor’s second principle of generation: if
α is formed by taking the limit of a succession of pre-existing ordinals, then no
new sets are formed at stage α; the only sets available are those that were already
available at some previous stage.
It is a consequence of this deﬁnition that if β < α then Vβ ⊂Vα; hence this
procedure gives a cumulative hierarchy of sets. Each set is formed at a certain
stage α; it will therefore belong to Vα and all Vγ for γ > α. Indeed, a set is
deﬁned as something produced by this process at some stage. Notice that Cantor’s
‘inconsistent multiplicities’ are never produced at any stage.
This iterative conception of sets emerged from the work of [Mirimanoﬀ, 1917]
and [Zermelo, 1930], and is followed by [G¨odel, 1983; Boolos, 1971; Wang, 1974;
Shoenﬁeld, 1977] (1971) (1974) (1977) and [Maddy, 1990]. Popular though the
iterative conception is today, many authors warn us in footnotes against taking
it too literally. Maddy says ‘Of course, the temporal and constructive imagery is
only metaphorical; sets are understood as objective entities, existing in their own
right’ (p. 102). Likewise Shoenﬁeld says ‘We should interpret “before” here in a
logical rather than a temporal sense’ (p. 323). The point is that a set formed at
stage α is logically dependent on sets formed at lesser stages.
Cantor himself rarely considered sets of sets, so there is no sign of the cumula-
tive hierarchy, whether construed iteratively or not, in his writings. His position
on temporal imagery was rather ambiguous: oﬃcially he was against it [Hallett,
1984, 28; Cantor, 1885], yet he relied extensively on ideas of ﬁnite and transﬁnite
iteration.
By a ﬁnite set we understand a set M which arises out of an original
element through the successive addition of elements in such a way that
also the original element can be achieved backwards out of M through
successive removal of elements in reverse order.
This quotation is from 1887–8 and is translated in Hallett [1984, 147]; Hallett
goes on to point out that Cantor’s proof that every inﬁnite set has a countable
subset relies on successively selecting an inﬁnite sequence of elements from the
set. Moreover, Cantor’s belief that every set could be well-ordered seems to have
depended on the idea that transﬁnite iterations could be carried out and completed
[1899a].
G¨odel also seems to take transﬁnite iteration literally.
He points out
that the kinds of set used in mathematics are always sets of integers, sets of real
numbers, set of functions from R to R, or sets of some other limited type, rather
than sets in general; he proposes to take the operation ‘set of’ as primitive, and
to build up the universe of sets by transﬁnite iteration of this operation.
The iterative conception of sets leads to similar results to the limitation of
size conception, and many set theorists endorse both conceptions. Nevertheless,
the two are not equivalent. Mayberry, a supporter of the limitation of size view,
regards the notion of transﬁnite iteration (or even ﬁnite iteration) as incoherent

Inﬁnity
543
and utterly unsuitable as a basis for mathematics [2000]; his book is useful for
showing how the limitation of size view can be completely disentangled from the
iterative conception.
It should be noticed, however, that the iterative conception does not provide
justiﬁcations for the axioms; rather, the axioms are built into it. Shoenﬁeld tries to
justify the power-set axiom from the iterative conception [1977, 326], and likewise
Maddy claims that the iterative conception provides ‘the most satisfying account’
of the power-set axiom [1997, 53]; see also [1988]). But in reality the iterative con-
ception does not provide any account at all; it just takes the power-set operation
for granted, when it assumes that we can collect together all sets consisting of
objects generated so far. The axiom of inﬁnity is also presupposed: it is assumed
that given a countably inﬁnite sequence of stages there is a limit stage beyond
them. In Wang’s and Shoenﬁeld’s versions, the axiom of replacement is also pre-
supposed in their assumptions about stages; they seem to be relying on an idea
of limitation of size here, so I am inclined to agree with Boolos that the axiom of
replacement is not intrinsic to the iterative conception. Maddy [1997] relies more
on ‘extrinsic’ justiﬁcations for the axioms than on any conception of the nature of
sets.
Let us try a little harder to make sense of the power-set axiom. Bernays views
sets in a ‘quasi-combinatorial’ way, ‘in the sense of an analogy of the inﬁnite to
the ﬁnite’: a set is determined by deciding, for each candidate member, whether it
is to be included in the set or not [1935]. The decision is made independently for
each candidate. The set is determined by the outcome of inﬁnitely many decisions,
rather than by any ﬁnitely expressible membership criterion. Maddy takes up this
idea:
Finite combinatorics tell us that there is a unique subcollection of
a ﬁnite collection for every way of saying yes or no to each individ-
ual element. Carrying this notion into the inﬁnite, subcollections are
‘combinatorially’ determined, one for every possible way of selecting
elements, regardless of whether there is a speciﬁable rule for these se-
lections. [1990, 102]
Obviously, this idea presupposes that, in some suitably idealised or metaphorical
sense, it is possible to take inﬁnitely many decisions.
This sort of inﬁnitistic
thought experiment ﬁts naturally with the transﬁnite iteration process involved in
the iterative conception. The quasi-combinatorial view gives us a conception of
an ‘arbitrary’ subset of a given set A. Perhaps (this is a further leap of faith, but
a fairly natural one in this context) it makes sense to go from an arbitrary subset
of A to all subsets of A, and to gather them into a set, P(A).
In a similar vein, Wang says that a set is a multitude for which we can form
an intuitive ‘overview’, or can ‘look through’ or ‘run through’ or ‘collect together’
the elements. This leads him to the power-set axiom:
For example, not only are the inﬁnitely many integers taken as given,
but we also take as given the process of selecting integers from this

544
Peter Fletcher
unity of all integers, and therewith all possible ways of leaving integers
out in the process. So we get a new intuitive idealization (viz. the set
of all sets of integers) and then one goes on. [1974, 182]
One very useful application of the quasi-combinatorial idea is to justify the im-
predicativity in the separation and replacement axioms. If a set A is available at
stage α then so are all its subsets, so P(A) is available at stage α+1. In particular,
{x ∈A | φ(x)} is available at stage α, for any set-theoretic formula φ(x). Many
authors have been worried by the fact that φ(x) may contain reference to sets that
have not yet been formed; it may even quantify over all sets. If we are forming
sets in successive stages, how can we claim that {x∈A | φ(x)} is formed by stage
α when it depends on sets that do not yet exist? For Hallett, this undermines the
iterative conception fatally [1984, §6.1]. The quasi-combinatorial idea comes to the
rescue here. Whenever we go from one stage to the next we form all sets consisting
of sets generated previously. We do so not via expressions such as {x∈A | φ(x)}
but by choosing elements individually. If this procedure is legitimate at all, it
generates all the subsets, once and for all. As we proceed to later and later stages
we can write down more expressions of the form {x ∈A | φ(x)}, as more sets
become available to us, hence we can name more and more subsets of A, but those
subsets all existed before we could name them; they were all formed by stage α
at the latest. Hence the quasi-combinatorial idea provides an axiom of reducibility
for set theory: any expression {x ∈A | φ(x)}, no matter what sets it refers to,
is extensionally equivalent to a subset of A generated by choosing elements of A
individually.
No doubt many philosophers and mathematicians would be sceptical of such
inﬁnitistic procedures (e.g., , [Parsons, 1977], but in the privacy of their own minds
I believe they are inﬂuenced by this sort of idea. The widespread acceptance of the
impredicative separation and replacement axioms, and the consensus that there
are more sets than can be deﬁned by ﬁnite conditions, are surely attributable
to Bernays’ quasi-combinatorial picture. I am willing to take inﬁnitistic thought
experiments seriously and discuss them without embarrassment (see §4). The snag
is that the rules of the game do not seem to be very clear. If it makes sense to survey
all the possible ways of making a subset of A, and to make a set out of them, why
does it not also make sense to survey the entire iterative process of generating
the ordinals and to make set out of them all?
Indeed, Cantor himself seemed
to countenance such a completed traversal of the ordinals, while simultaneously
denying that the ordinals formed a set [1899a]; so perhaps this is not, after all, the
basis for the distinction between sets and inconsistent multiplicities.
However this may be, it is a fundamental assumption of the iterative conception
that it is possible to ‘ﬁnish’ the process of generating all the subsets of A, but not
possible to ‘ﬁnish’ the process of generating all the stages. This suggests, even more
strongly than in the limitation of size conception, that it would be appropriate to
use intuitionistic logic for quantiﬁers that range over all sets [Pozsgay, 1971; Tharp,
1971]. Perhaps the moral of the paradoxes is that the concept of set is indeﬁnitely
extensible, in Dummett’s sense [1994]; our attempts to grasp it always have an

Inﬁnity
545
incomplete and provisional character. We can never say ‘for all sets’, but merely
‘for all sets we have managed to encompass so far’.
Absolute inﬁnity, then, must be viewed as a potential inﬁnity, in rather the same
way that constructivists view countable inﬁnity. This does not sit easily with some
of Cantor’s arguments. For Cantor claimed that every potential inﬁnity implies
an actual inﬁnity; that is, anyone who accepts a certain domain as a potential
inﬁnity is on a slippery slope that can only lead to acceptance of it as an actual
inﬁnity [Hallett, 1984, §1.2]. If we apply this argument to absolute inﬁnity then
we are forced to accept the transﬁnite iteration as ‘completable’, thus blurring the
distinction between transﬁnite and absolute inﬁnity.
2.6
Conclusions on actual inﬁnity
Traditional philosophy attached great importance to the distinction between the
ﬁnite and the inﬁnite: the ﬁnite was the proper domain of human reason; the
inﬁnite eluded human understanding and could only be hinted at feebly by way of
potential inﬁnity. Cantor accepted this basic framework but reﬁned it by adding
an intermediate category, the transﬁnite (the inﬁnite being rechristened ‘abso-
lute inﬁnity’). The transﬁnite is like the ﬁnite in being ‘actual’, a ‘unity’, and
amenable to mathematical comparison and calculation, but it includes mathemat-
ical domains previously classed as inﬁnite. Indeed, it could be said that Cantor’s
aim was to shift the boundary between ﬁnite and inﬁnite upwards so that math-
ematically useful systems such as N, R and P(R) would lie on the ﬁnite side
[Hallett, 1984, §1.3]. Bijections and similarities were the instruments by which
Cantor measured, carved up, and regulated the transﬁnite.
There is no denying Cantor’s success in generating an appealing and coherent
mathematical theory, in a topic where his predecessors had seen only confusion
and paradox. But is his notion of transﬁnite ultimately sustainable? All ways of
understanding the transﬁnite rest on an analogy with the ﬁnite. I have examined
two in detail: a static view, in which some pluralities are seen as limited in size
and others are seen as too big to have a size; and a dynamic view, in which sets
are generated iteratively (I am leaving aside here the class view of sets, which
has no transﬁnite/absolute distinction). Both views are plagued by a suspicion of
semantic indeterminacy. On the iterative conception, we encounter embarrassing
gaps in the iteration process: we have to accomplish the step from ﬁnite stages
to stage ω and from countable stages to stage ω1 by speciﬁc hypotheses.
On
the limitation of size view, how do we show that N and P(N) are limited rather
than absolutely inﬁnite? The problem is not that the full facts are not available
to us (we know exactly what N and P(N) are supposed to be; no information
is hidden), or that the required proofs have yet to be discovered, but that our
notion of transﬁnite iteration or limited size does not seem substantial enough to
determine an answer. Our inability to evaluate cardinal exponentials, 2ℵα or ℵℵβ
α ,
may simply be a symptom of an underdetermination of meaning.

546
Peter Fletcher
The problem of distinguishing between transﬁnite and absolute inﬁnity is really
an instance of what I termed the ‘horizon problem’ in §1. To give a global account
of sets we need to say something about absolute inﬁnity; our account will, almost
irresistibly, lead to our treating absolute inﬁnity as an actual inﬁnity, and hence
will run the risk of conﬂating it with the transﬁnite.
The horizon problem is
especially acute for Cantorians as they must justify converting the potential inﬁnity
0, 1, 2, 3, . . . into ω, and accepting ω as an object, while resisting a similar treatment
for absolute inﬁnity.
There are other possible approaches to the question that I have not discussed.
I have ignored the theological side of Cantor’s thinking on inﬁnity [Hallett, 1984,
§§1.1, 1.3–4], as I ﬁnd it tends to make the issue of absolute inﬁnity (and whether
it is an actual inﬁnity) even more murky. I have also not mentioned the approach
of von Neumann [1925], in which absolutely inﬁnite multiplicities are admitted
as genuine objects but are not allowed to occur as members of any multiplicity.
That is, the set V of all sets exists, but we are banned from forming the set
{V }. This avoids the paradoxes successfully, but it is profoundly non-Cantorian
and I am unable to see any philosophical rationale for it. Nor have I discussed
the recent attempts to found set theory on plural quantiﬁcation and second-order
logic [Pollard, 1990], as this seems merely to rephrase the problems in a diﬀerent
language.
Sceptics will say that the central notion of transﬁniteness is ill-deﬁned and that
the attempt to understand inﬁnity by analogy with the ﬁnite is a basic category
error. Supporters of set theory will point to the large measure of agreement about
the treatment of small transﬁnite sets such as N, R and P(R) and will maintain
that any haziness about absolute inﬁnite does not compromise the ordinary prac-
tice of mathematics, where we deal only with particular ‘given’ transﬁnite sets on
any particular occasion.
3
POTENTIAL INFINITY
3.1
Introduction
The ‘potential’ view of inﬁnity arises naturally from a constructivist philosophy of
mathematics. By constructivism I mean the doctrine that constructions are the
subject-matter of mathematics. For Brouwer, this means mental constructions,
generated in the mind through the primal intuition of ‘two-ity’ (a process of suc-
cessively forming ordered pairs of mental events); see [van Stigt, 1990]. Heyting
sees constructions in a more general way, as arising from ‘the possibility of an
indeﬁnite repetition of the conception of entities’ [1956, p. 13]. Bishop sees natural
numbers as the prototype of all constructions [1967; 1970]. Hilbert was a construc-
tivist in the 1920s (see his [1925] and [1927]); his constructions were conﬁgurations
of concrete symbols:

Inﬁnity
547
as a condition for the use of logical inferences and the performance
of logical operations, something must already be given to our faculty
of representation, certain extralogical concrete objects that are intu-
itively present as immediate experience prior to all thought. If logical
inference is to be reliable, it must be possible to survey these objects
completely in all their parts, and the fact that they occur, that they
diﬀer from one another, and that they follow each other, or are concate-
nated, is immediately given intuitively, together with these objects, as
something that neither can be reduced to anything else nor requires
reduction. [Hilbert, 1925]
For my purposes in this chapter, it does not matter whether the constructions
are mental or physical; what matters is that they are built up out of discrete
building blocks by applying certain construction operations repeatedly. The word
‘construction’ is not meant in a metaphorical sense, divorced from everyday usage;
it includes things such as houses, which are constructions of bricks and mortar,
but also ranges more widely over all mental or physical structured assemblages of
elements.
When we speak of constructions we mean tokens rather than types: Hilbert
considers physical inscriptions rather than their abstract shapes [1925]; Brouwer
considers mental tokens (events in particular people’s minds at particular times)
rather than mental types (abstract thoughts that can be instantiated in people’s
minds).
Nevertheless, we treat construction tokens of the same type as inter-
changeable, so it will often sound as if we are talking about construction types:
when we speak of 4 we are referring ambiguously to any token of type “4”, and
when we say ‘4 has a unique successor’ we really mean ‘all successor tokens of “4”
tokens are of the same type’.
The simplest kind of construction is the natural number, constructed from 0
by applying the successor operation S repeatedly. Any repetitive process can be
considered to provide a system of natural number tokens: 0 is the initial state
and S is the application of one further iteration of the process. The inﬁnity of
natural numbers is understood in a modal way: given any natural number (token)
n, it is possible to construct the successor S(n). Of course, at any one time only
a ﬁnite supply of natural number tokens has yet been constructed, but this does
not matter: in constructive mathematics we are not concerned with the actual
supply of constructions (nor even the set of all possible constructions), but with
the construction process and the fact that it can always be continued one more
step. Hence we have potential inﬁnity without actual inﬁnity.
Constructivists generally reject actual inﬁnity altogether. There are three pos-
sible grounds for such a rejection.
a. Ontological grounds, i.e., the claim that no actual inﬁnities exist. This seems
to have been Hilbert’s position [1925; 1930; 1931].
b. Epistemological grounds, i.e., the claim that we ﬁnite beings cannot know
whether actual inﬁnity exists.

548
Peter Fletcher
c. Semantic grounds, i.e., the claim that we ﬁnite beings cannot meaningfully
refer to actual inﬁnity. This is Dummett’s view [1975b].
Notice that these grounds are mutually exclusive: if you believe that all talk of
actual inﬁnity is meaningless then you cannot even pose the question of whether
actual inﬁnity exists; if you believe that no actual inﬁnities exist then you evidently
believe the question is meaningful and answerable. Nevertheless, constructivists
often try to avoid committing themselves on these fundamental philosophical mat-
ters [Heyting, 1956, chapter I; Bishop, 1967, 2; Troelstra and van Dalen, 1988, vii].
In this section I shall try to explicate the notion of potential inﬁnity, primarily
in the form of the indeﬁnite repeatability of the successor operation on natural
numbers, and to consider the objections posed by supporters of actual inﬁnity and
by feasibilists. I shall not attempt to review constructive mathematics (for which
see [Bishop, 1967; Bridges and Richman, 1987; Beeson, 1985]), , but shall instead
focus on the logical issues (especially the meanings of the logical constants) and
the understanding of inﬁnity.
3.2
Potential inﬁnity versus actual inﬁnity
It should be clear from the brief description in the previous subsection that the
key idea underlying potential inﬁnity is that of indeﬁnite iteration of an operation
such as successor.
This idea has come under attack from supporters of actual
inﬁnity, who believe that it is ill-deﬁned or that it presupposes actual inﬁnity.
If iteration cannot be made sense of without relying on actual inﬁnity then the
distinction between potential and actual inﬁnity becomes blurred and the case for
constructivism is seriously undermined. I shall consider these objections in this
subsection.
Let us consider three possible ways of deﬁning the concept of natural number.
1. Deﬁne N, the set of natural numbers, using second-order logic or set theory.
There are various ways of doing this, but the general idea is to deﬁne N as
the intersection of all sets that contain 0 and are closed under S.
2. Deﬁne N as the set of all things that can be produced by applying S repeat-
edly to 0.
3. Deﬁne the counting algorithm (the algorithm that enumerates 0, S(0), S(S(0)),
S(S(S(0))), . . . , without end — see the ﬂowchart in ﬁgure 1), and interpret
all statements about the concept of natural number as being really about
the counting algorithm.
Options (1) and (2) involve actual inﬁnity, as they countenance the set of all
natural numbers as a completed inﬁnity; option (3) involves potential inﬁnity, as
it avoids reference to the totality of all natural numbers. Cantor took option (2)
(see §2.5), as did Dedekind in his [1872], but by [1888b] Dedekind had developed

Inﬁnity
549
n := 0
start
n := S(n)
output n
Figure 1. The counting algorithm.
his theory of ‘chains’ and switched to option (1). Frege also supported option (1):
his theory of the ancestral relation [1879] is similar to Dedekind’s theory of chains.
Many modern platonists take option (1) in order to distance themselves as far as
possible from iteration and potential inﬁnity.
The choice between these options is the key point of contention between platon-
ists and constructivists (it is much more important than the question of whether
to accept the principle of excluded middle). The platonist view in favour of option
(1) is supported by the following ﬁve arguments.
(i) The circularity argument. [Dedekind, 1890] claims that options (2) and (3)
involve a vicious circle. In option (2) we are deﬁning a natural number as anything
that can be reached from 0 by a ﬁnite number of iterations of S; but it is clearly
circular to deﬁne ‘natural number’ in terms of ‘ﬁnite number’. Dedekind continues:
The mere words “ﬁnally get there at some time”, of course, will not do
either; they would be of no more use than, say, the words “karam sipo
tatura”, which I invent at this instant without giving them any clearly
deﬁned meaning.
This argument is repeated by later platonists, such as Tait [1983] and Mayberry
[2000]. The argument clearly applies against option (3) as well. Understanding the
ﬂowchart in ﬁgure 1 involves realising that one is supposed to start at the ‘start’
box and follow the arrows for ever, which presupposes inﬁnite time and an inﬁnite
number of steps, indexed by natural numbers; hence option (3) presupposes both
actual inﬁnity and the general concept of natural number. Mayberry denounces
‘operationalism’ (i.e., option (3)) at length; ﬁnally he exclaims ‘But what does “for
ever” mean? That is the very point at issue!’ [p385]

550
Peter Fletcher
This argument utterly fails to impress constructivists. For them, the ﬂowchart
is a ﬁnite object (four boxes linked by four arrows). The instructions are clear:
start at the ‘start’ box and keep following the arrows. The instructions do not
contain the phrases ‘ﬁnally’, ‘ﬁnite number’ or ‘for ever’. The ﬂowchart is unusual
in having a ‘start’ box but no ‘stop’ box. This absence of a ‘stop’ box is the true
meaning of inﬁnity; unfortunately, platonists have inﬂated this humble notion and
made it into something mysterious. Constructivists insist that this idea of keeping
going is immediately intelligible, does not presuppose any grasp of eternity, and
is all the notion of inﬁnity we have or need (for arithmetic). There is something
about this view that seems to ﬁt the human condition.
We know how to put
one foot in front of the other, even though we have no inkling of our ﬁnal goal.
As Bob Dylan says, the only thing we know how to do is to keep on keepin’ on.
Brouwer has attempted to explain this in terms of temporal intuition [1907], but
such explanations have been generally found to be opaque and unhelpful. Perhaps
the best tactic for constructivists is simply to insist that we understand algorithms,
as evidenced by our ability to execute them, compare them, and express them in
various programming languages, and to take this understanding as primitive.
(ii) The reducibility argument. The circularity argument usually occurs cou-
pled with a second argument, that because natural number can be deﬁned in
terms of second-order logic or set theory, it should be so deﬁned. Mayberry makes
this claim, on the grounds that a mathematical analysis of a concept is gener-
ally preferable to a philosophical explanation of it [2000, p. 271]. Nevertheless,
many twentieth-century authors have felt that to deﬁne natural number in terms
of second-order logic or set theory is to misrepresent the real conceptual rela-
tions between them; as Poincar´e puts it, ‘This method is evidently contrary to all
sane psychology’ [1905]. Poincar´e also accused the early logicists and formalists
of circularity, as their metamathematical methods presupposed the intuition of
iteration and the principle of induction, which they were claiming to prove [1905;
1906a; 1906b]. Similar reassertions of the fundamental character of iteration have
been made frequently since then [Weyl, 1921; Skolem, 1922; Heyting, 1956,13].
There is no dispute about the fact that natural numbers can be characterised in
terms of Dedekind’s chains or in terms of sets, and that the principle of induction
can then be proved. We can all admire the ingenuity of this trick; the point at
issue is whether it is convincing as a conceptual analysis, whether this should be
taken as the deﬁnition of number, whether it represents a reduction of number to
something more fundamental. Skolem says:
Set-theoreticians are usually of the opinion that the notion of integer
should be deﬁned and that the principle of mathematical induction
should be proved. But it is clear that we cannot deﬁne or prove ad
inﬁnitum; sooner or later we come to something that is not further
deﬁnable or provable.
Our only concern, then, should be that the
initial foundations be something immediately clear, natural, and not
open to question. This condition is satisﬁed by the notion of integer

Inﬁnity
551
and by inductive inferences, but it is decidedly not satisﬁed by set-
theoretic axioms of the type of Zermelo’s or anything else of that kind;
if we were to accept the reduction of the former notions to the latter,
the set-theoretic notions would have to be simpler than mathematical
induction, and reasoning with them less open to question, but this runs
entirely counter to the actual state of aﬀairs.
Thus the controversy reduces to the question of which starting point, iteration or
set theory, is the more philosophically secure and mathematically workable.
(iii) The argument from extraneous empirical circumstances.
Platonists be-
lieve that counting and other algorithmic processes are unsuitable as a basis for
arithmetic since they are inextricably entangled with irrelevant empirical consider-
ations, such as who is doing the counting, what materials they are counting with,
and under what circumstances [Russell, 1903, §§109, 133]. Of course, platonists
accept algorithms as useful methods for discovering arithmetic facts, but not as
providing a foundation for arithmetic facts. Frege, discussing the concept of ‘y
following in a sequence after x’, rejects the idea of deﬁning it iteratively, in terms
of shifting attention step by step from x to y:
Now this [the iterative deﬁnition] describes a way of discovering that y
follows, it does not deﬁne what is meant by y’s following. Whether, as
our attention shifts, we reach y may depend on all sorts of subjective
contributory factors, for example on the amount of time at our disposal
or on the extent of our familiarity with the things concerned. Whether
y follows in the φ-sequence after x has in general absolutely nothing to
do with our attention and the circumstances under which we transfer
it . . . My deﬁnition [option (1)] lifts the matter onto a new plane; it
is no longer a question of what is subjectively possible but of what is
objectively deﬁnite. [1884, §80]
(iv) The feasibility argument. An obvious objection to options (2) and (3) is
that we cannot, in fact, continue an iteration indeﬁnitely. We shall sooner or later
drop dead, or run out of paper, or encounter some other physical obstacle. For
example, we cannot count up to 10100; yet 10100 is certainly a natural number.
Hence number cannot be based on counting. This argument originates with Can-
tor [Hallett, 1984, p. 27], and has been repeated with great frequency ever since
[Bernays, 1935; Tait, 1986; George, 1988].
(v) The argument from error. Another obvious objection, though surprisingly
less popular, is that any counting process is subject to error. An error is a dis-
crepancy between the count and the true sequence of numbers. The fact that such
discrepancies occur, or are even conceivable, demonstrates that number is founded
on something other than counting.
I am not including any constructivist counter-arguments to the last three objec-
tions here, as they are better postponed to the subsection on feasibilism (§3.5). For

552
Peter Fletcher
the moment I shall just content myself with the bland response that constructivists
base arithmetic on an ‘idealised’ counting process, free of empirical considerations,
practical limitations and errors.
3.3
Mathematics as a process of construction
Let us suppose that we are persuaded by the constructivist side of the argument
in §3.2. Like Baire [1905], we reject the idea of an inﬁnite set, conceived as like a
bag of marbles, and replace it with the idea of a construction process (i.e., option
(3)). How then are we to understand statements involving inﬁnite quantiﬁers? For
example, consider the statement ∃n OP(n), where the variable n ranges over the
natural numbers and OP(n) means that n is an odd perfect number (I shall use
the word ‘statement’ for a formula in a mathematical language based on predicate
calculus, or for its informal equivalent). There is an algorithm for testing whether
a given natural number is odd and perfect, so the meaning of the predicate OP
is clear.
The problem is the quantiﬁer ∃n, which ranges over an inﬁnite set.
A platonist would understand ∃n OP(n) as like an inﬁnite disjunction OP(0) ∨
OP(1) ∨OP(2) ∨· · · and would say that it is true iﬀat least one of the disjuncts
is true. This explanation is not open to us. Constructivists regard ∃n OP(n) not
as asserting that there is an odd perfect number, but as expressing the intention
to ﬁnd an odd perfect number or the problem of ﬁnding an odd perfect number
[Heyting, 1931; Kolmogorov, 1932]. If N is an odd perfect number then we may
say ‘N achieves the intention ∃n OP(n)’ or ‘N solves the problem ∃n OP(n)’, or
‘N is a proof of ∃n OP(n)’; these are three ways of expressing the same judgement,
which I shall also write using the notation
N ⊢∃n OP(n).
(This is a special sense of the word ‘proof’ and the symbol ‘⊢’, peculiar to construc-
tivism and separate from the way they are used in platonistic mathematics.) The
meaning of ∃n OP(n) is given by specifying the conditions under which a given
construction N counts as a ‘proof’ of it. It is easy to specify these conditions in
this example: even though we do not know any odd perfect number, we certainly
do know how to test whether a given number is odd and perfect.
Essentially the same idea is expressed by Weyl [1921] and Hilbert [1925]. Weyl
calls an existential statement a ‘judgement abstract’, and Hilbert calls it a ‘partial
proposition’. They regard ∃n OP(n) as an incomplete judgement (one could write
it as OP(−)), which needs to be supplemented by a construction, N, to make
a complete judgement, OP(N). We can say that a ‘proof’ of a statement is a
construction that, when inserted into the statement, makes a true judgement.
Mathematics, then, is simply an activity of ﬁnding constructions that prove
statements. A typical mathematical judgement is either of the form ‘P is a proof
of A’ (i.e., P ⊢A) or ‘given any construction x of a certain kind, f(x) is a proof of
A(x)’. Note that the latter judgement involves a kind of universal quantiﬁer: one is
tempted to write it as ∀x f(x) ⊢A(x). In fact, even the simple judgement P ⊢A

Inﬁnity
553
involves an element of generality: it means that if any mathematician repeats
the construction P, at any time, without error, then they must reach the same
conclusion, that it proves A.
Hence a constructive mathematical judgement is
not merely an empirical report of a particular construction episode (as sometimes
suggested by Brouwer, Placek [1999] and Heyting [1956, pp. 3, 8]), but involves an
aspect of generality, timelessness, objectivity and necessity.
How is this generality to be understood? Weyl and Hilbert say that we can
understand a simple universal statement ‘for any n, A(n)’ (where n ranges over
N) as a kind of schema, that becomes a judgement A(N) when a numeral N is
substituted into it. We can interpret this in terms of Russell’s distinction between
‘for all’ and ‘for any’ (1908, II). ‘For all n’ is the universal quantiﬁer ∀n of predicate
calculus; ∀n A(n) is understood by platonists as an inﬁnite conjunction A(0) ∧
A(1) ∧A(2) ∧· · ·. ‘For any n, A(n)’ is a singular schematic judgement, meaning
that A(n) holds regardless of the value of n.
It seems best to say, therefore,
not ‘∀x f(x) ⊢A(x)’, but ‘for any x, f(x) ⊢A(x)’ (this is consistent with the
characterisation of intuitionistic argument given by Herbrand [1931, footnote 3]).
To summarise, we hope to interpret constructivist mathematics in terms of two
ideas:
• that a mathematical statement, A, is an incomplete judgement, something
needing to be supplemented by a construction, P, to form a complete judge-
ment, P ⊢A;
• that generality in mathematical judgements is to be understood in terms of
‘for any’ rather than ‘for all’.
3.4
The meaning of the logical constants
So far we have only considered a very simple example of a mathematical statement,
∃n OP(n). What happens when other logical constants are used, and when the
logical constants occur in combination? Hilbert’s approach was to interpret each
mathematical theory as a whole: he regarded formal mathematical theories as
devices for deriving true decidable statements [1925; 1927]. Other constructivists,
however, have sought to attach a meaning to individual statements, in line with
the idea that the meaning of a statement is given by specifying what type of
construction counts as a proof of it. Let us conﬁne our attention to formulae in
the language of Peano arithmetic, for the sake of simplicity. The atomic formulae
are decidable: they can be evaluated by a computation to produce the result true
or false. Hence, for an atomic formula, we may consider a trivial construction,
such as 0, as a proof if the formula evaluates to true, and no construction as a
proof if the formula evaluates to false.
The meaning of the logical constants is determined as follows.
a. To prove A ∧B one must prove A and prove B.
b. To prove A ∨B one must select one of the two disjuncts and prove it.

554
Peter Fletcher
c. To prove A ⇒B one must show how, given a proof of A, to obtain a proof
of B.
d. To prove ∃n A(n) one must select a natural number N and prove A(N).
e. To prove ∀n A(n) one must show how, given a natural number N, to prove
A(N).
(I have not included a clause for ¬A because it is convenient to deﬁne ¬A as
A ⇒false.) I venture to call this the intended meaning of the logical constants,
since so many constructivists have given explanations of the logical constants ap-
proximately along these lines indexHeyting, A.[Kolmogorov, 1932; Heyting, 1956,
§§7.1.1, 7.2.1; Bishop, 1967, §1.3; van Dalen, 1973, §2.1; Dummett, 1977, §1.2;
Beeson, 1985, §II.6; Bridges and Richman, 1987, §1.3; Troelstra and van Dalen,
1988, chapter 1, §3.1]. Indeed, if this is not the intended meaning, it is hard to
imagine what else could be intended. However, it is in the attempt to render this
more precise that diﬀerences between constructivists emerge.
In the ﬁrst place, the above account is phrased as a deﬁnition of a verb (‘prove’),
but in clause (c) it slips into use of the noun (‘proof’). In the previous subsection we
characterised a mathematical statement as an incomplete judgement, and a proof
as the construction that has to be inserted in the gap to make a true judgement. In
the light of this it is natural to take ‘proof’ rather than ‘prove’ as the deﬁniendum.
The above clauses need to be rewritten accordingly.
However, before doing so we need to decide what type of thing a proof is. In
ordinary speech the word ‘proof’ denotes a sequence of judgements, proceeding
from axioms or hypotheses to a conclusion. The formal counterpart of this is a
tree of formulae, having axioms or hypotheses at the leaves and the conclusion at
the root. I shall refer to these as informal and formal derivations, respectively.
If a proof is a formal derivation then it is natural to rewrite clauses (a)–(e) as
follows.
a′. A proof of A ∧B consists of a proof of A, a proof of B, and a ﬁnal inference
A
B
A∧B .
b′. A proof of A ∨B consists of either a proof of A followed by a ﬁnal inference
A
A∨B , or a proof of B followed by a ﬁnal inference
B
A∨B .
c′. A proof of A ⇒B consists of a proof of B from the hypothesis A.
d′. A proof of ∃n A(n) consists of a proof of an instance A(N) followed by a
ﬁnal inference
A(N)
∃n A(n).
e′. A proof of ∀n A(n) consists of a proof of A(n) followed by a ﬁnal inference
A(n)
∀n A(n).
It appears from this that constructive proofs are formal derivations in a natural-
deduction logic, using only introduction rules. But this is too restrictive: we must

Inﬁnity
555
allow some use of elimination rules as well if formulae such as (A∧B) ⇒(B∧A) are
to be provable. So perhaps it is better to take proofs as normal natural-deduction
derivations, as suggested by Dummett [1977, p. 396].
However, there is surely something circular about deﬁning a proof as a formal
derivation when it is our intention to use the proof clauses (a)–(e) to justify the
axioms and rules of inference used in formal derivations. Moreover, both formal
and informal derivations seem very diﬀerent from the special notion of proof in-
troduced in §3.3, in which a proof is simply a construction that ﬁlls a hole in
an incomplete judgement, and may be something as simple as a natural number.
Dummett acknowledges this diﬀerence, referring to a proof in the sense of clauses
(a)–(e) as a canonical proof and a mathematical derivation (whether formal or in-
formal) as a demonstration; a demonstration provides the means for constructing
a canonical proof [1977, 391-4].
Accordingly, many authors would write the explanations of the logical constants
in the following form.
a′′. P ⊢A ∧B iﬀP = (Q, R), where Q ⊢A and R ⊢B.
b′′. P ⊢A ∨B iﬀP = (i, Q), where i = 0 and Q ⊢A, or i = 1 and Q ⊢B.
c′′. P ⊢A ⇒B iﬀP is a function such that, for any Q, if Q ⊢A then P(Q) ⊢B.
d′′. P ⊢∃n A(n) iﬀP = (N, Q), where Q ⊢A(N).
e′′. P ⊢∀n A(n) iﬀP is a function such that, for any natural number N,
P(N) ⊢A(N).
There are many theories of constructive proof along the lines of clauses (a′′)–(e′′). I
shall not attempt to describe them, but shall rather review the common dilemmas
they face.
Theories of constructive proof may be classiﬁed into bottom-up theories, which
start with well-understood mathematical constructions such as natural numbers
and try to use them to deﬁne a concept of proof based on clauses (a′′)–(e′′); and
top-down theories, which take the full pre-theoretic concept of constructive proof
and try to analyse it to make it more explicit and intelligible.
The simplest bottom-up theory is Kleene’s concept of realisability [1945]. The
proofs are natural numbers, the functions in clauses (c′′) and (e′′) are partial
recursive functions coded as natural numbers, and the pairs are also coded as
natural numbers. G¨odel’s [1958] ‘Dialectica’ interpretation, Scott’s [1970] theory,
and Martin-L¨of’s [1984] intuitionistic type theory are also bottom-up theories,
though involving higher-type constructions built upon the natural numbers.
A feature of all these systems is that the ⊢relation is undecidable. This should
be clear from clauses (c′′) and (e′′), since it is undecidable whether a function
satisﬁes the condition to be a proof of A ⇒B or ∀n A(n). As Beeson points
out, this deviates considerably from the usual notion of constructive proof [1985,
281-2]. Consider for example Goldbach’s conjecture, ∀n G(n), where G(n) is the

556
Peter Fletcher
decidable statement that 2n + 4 is the sum of two prime numbers. If Goldbach’s
conjecture is constructively valid then we have
f ⊢∀n G(n),
where f is a function mapping any natural number n to 0. (Recall that a decidable
statement such as G(n) has 0 as a proof iﬀit is true.) But no one would accept
f as a ‘proof’ of Goldbach’s conjecture. The problem of determining whether f ⊢
∀n G(n) is as hard as the problem of solving Goldbach’s conjecture; f contributes
nothing to the solution of the conjecture. The statement ∀n G(n) is an incomplete
judgement, but f fails to ﬁll the gap; it leaves the gap as wide as ever. Hence it is
often proposed that a proof ought to include enough information to make it clear
that it is a proof; in other words, the ⊢relation should be decidable [Kleene, 1945,
§2; Kreisel, 1962, §4; Dummett, 1977, p. 12]. (See [Sundholm, 1983] for a contrary
view, however.)
There are some bottom-up theories in which ⊢is decidable, such as the early
version of Martin-L¨of’s type theory [1975]: functions are given by terms in a special
language, and by reducing the term to a normal form it can be seen whether it
is a proof of a given formula. Indeed, the view that proofs are formal derivations
(clauses (a′)–(e′) above) may also be regarded as a theory of this type. Decidability,
however, is bought at the price of a limited language for deﬁning functions. By
diagonalising out of the class of expressible functions we can deﬁne a function, not
expressible in the language, that transforms any proof of a formula A to a proof of
a formula B. In such a case, we are able to derive proofs of B from proofs of A, yet
we do not have a proof of A ⇒B. This defeats the whole purpose of constructive
implication: the idea of A ⇒B was to express the problem of converting any given
proof of A to a proof of B (clause (c)).
Hence all bottom-up theories have diﬃculties conforming to the intended mean-
ing of proof. Top-down theories proceed in the other direction, beginning with
clauses (a)–(e) or (a′′)–(e′′) and trying to infer the nature and structure of proofs.
These theories distinguish between ‘concrete’ mathematical constructions (involv-
ing natural numbers, recursive functions, and similar discrete things) and ‘abstract’
mathematical constructions (involving mentalistic notions of proof, meaning and
rules). (Beeson [1985, §§III.8, VI.10] uses the word ‘rule’ to mean a procedure
whose application requires understanding of meaning, but not creativity or free
will.) It is not assumed that abstract constructions can be reduced to concrete
ones; in particular, it is not assumed that all rules mapping one natural number
to another are recursive functions. It is assumed that ⊢is decidable, in the sense
that a human can decide whether P ⊢A by attending to the meaning of P and
A; but it is not assumed that ⊢is mechanically decidable, i.e., recursive.
In order to make ⊢decidable, it is necessary to add ‘supplementary data’ or
‘second clauses’ into the clauses (c′′) and (e′′):
c′′′. P ⊢A ⇒B iﬀP = (E, F), where F is a function and E is evidence that,
for any Q, if Q ⊢A then F(Q) ⊢B.

Inﬁnity
557
e′′′. P ⊢∀n A(n) iﬀP = (E, F), where F is a function and E is evidence that,
for any natural number N, F(N) ⊢A(N).
Thus every proof carries its own evidence that it really is a proof. But what is
evidence, exactly? Beeson [1985, p. 39] and D´ıez [2000] believe that evidence is
simply proof. Thus the deﬁnition of ⊢is circular, rather like Tarski’s platonistic
deﬁnition of truth of a formula in a model. Beeson ﬁnds this circularity untrou-
bling, since constructive proof is a fundamental concept and needs no explaining.
Nevertheless, this leaves us with a rather obscure notion of proof, with the proof re-
lation characterised in terms of an ill-delimited totality of all proofs (clause (c′′′)).
As Beeson admits [402], this disrupts the attempt to deﬁne P ⊢A by structural
induction on the formula A.
Most authors prefer to construe evidence as something simpler and more funda-
mental than proof. Note that the ‘for any’ quantiﬁer used in clauses (c′′′) and (e′′′)
may be understood in the sense explained in §3.3, rather than as ∀. All we need
to assume is that it is decidable whether any given E is evidence for a judgement
of the form ‘for any x, C(x)’, where C(x) is a decidable statement or a conditional
involving decidable statements; then ⊢becomes decidable. The deﬁnition of ⊢
becomes non-circular, since we are deﬁning proof of a formula in terms of proof of
its syntactic components, using a predeﬁned concept of evidence. All we need to
complete the story is a philosophical account of evidence.
Theories of this sort are provided by Kreisel [1962; 1965] and Goodman (1970,
1973). Unfortunately, neither tells us anything about what evidence is. Worse,
it turns out that the assumption that evidence is decidable and sound leads to
a self-referential paradox [Goodman, 1970, §9].
Goodman attributes this to a
vagueness in the description of how constructions are built up [§10], and responds
by stratifying the universe of constructions into levels. The bottom level consists
of constructive rules, the next level consists of rules and proofs about rules, and so
on. Goodman restricts the scope of each item of evidence to apply to constructions
of a particular level. He then ﬁnds that he needs to posit a reducibility operator
(§11), acting rather like the reducibility axiom in Russell’s ramiﬁed type theory
[1908], and suﬀering of course from the same implausibility.
This unexpected need for stratiﬁcation and reducibility is related to a perceived
impredicativity in the deﬁnition of constructive implication. If one believes that
proofs are composed of formulae (as they would be if they were natural-deduction
derivations), then to understand A ⇒B one is required to survey all proofs of A,
some of which may contain A ⇒B. This is clearly an impredicativity. To avoid
this, Dummett proposes that, for any statement A, there should be an upper
bound on the complexity of the proofs of A that need be considered, a bound
that increases with the syntactic complexity of A [1977, §7.2, especially 394-6].
The impredicativity does not arise if proofs are not composed of formulae, but the
complexity bound is still desirable as it makes the task of surveying all proofs of
A more tractable. Goodman also makes the proposal of a complexity bound; and
he points out that if one applies it to the case where A is itself an implication
C ⇒D, then it implies that all functions mapping proofs of C to proofs of D may

558
Peter Fletcher
be assumed to be of bounded complexity [1970, §11]. This itself is a sort of axiom
of reducibility.
The foregoing argument suggests that stratiﬁcation and reducibility are neces-
sary to the coherence of constructive implication; unfortunately it does nothing to
make them plausible.
It should be clear now that constructivism is in serious diﬃculties in its attempt
to make sense of its fundamental concept of proof. Bottom-up theories, appropriate
to constructivists such as Markov [1968] and Bishop [1970], fail to do justice to
the intended meaning of proof (i.e., clauses (a)–(e)). Top-down theories, which
are more appropriate to intuitionism, rely on our supposed ability to grasp and
quantify over an ill-deﬁned universe of proofs. They appeal to ad hoc assumptions
of stratiﬁcation and reducibility to make constructive implication manageable.
They make heavy use of mentalistic notions such as ‘understanding of meaning’
and ‘humanly computable rule’, which seem to entangle them with intractable
problems in the philosophy of mind.
D´ıez [2000] oﬀers a hybrid solution that uses a concept of realisability similar
to Kleene’s, but also uses ‘second clauses’ at the outermost level:
P ⊢A iﬀP = (E, N), where E ⊢‘N realises A’.
This gives rise to an odd notion of implication: there will be cases in which we
know how to transform a proof (E, N) of A to a proof (E′, N ′) of B, yet N ′ may
depend on both E and N, hence there is no function transforming N to N ′. In
this case, A ⇒B is not realised and hence is not proved. Thus we have a violation
of clause (c): we know how to convert a proof of A into a proof of B, yet we have
not proved A ⇒B. As with the decidable bottom-up theories, this undermines
the very purpose of implication. D´ıez is well aware of this phenomenon but does
not seem to see it as a problem. In addition, D´ıez’s proposal suﬀers from the same
risk of circularity as the top-down theories, but in an especially clear form, since
‘N realises A’ may be of arbitrary logical complexity.
My own theory of proof can be found in Fletcher [1998]; I shall not attempt to
describe it here, except to say that its aim is to combine the explicitness of the
bottom-up approach with full adherence to the intended meaning (clauses (a)–(e)),
using ‘second clauses’ and a theory of evidence.
3.5
Feasibility
It is time to return to a problem left over from §3.2. A constructivist believes
that the subject matter of arithmetic is iterative processes in general, of which
counting is a typical example. In §3.2 I stated an obvious objection to this view:
that all iterative processes are subject to practical limitations; it is not feasible to
count up to 10100. This objection is used by platonists to expose the incoherence
of constructivism, but it can also be made by those who genuinely believe that
arithmetic should be limited to feasible numbers, numbers one can actually count

Inﬁnity
559
up to. Such people are known as strict ﬁnitists, ultra-ﬁnitists, ultra-intuitionists
or feasibilists Yessenin-Volpin, 1970; Wright, 1982].
The feasibilists accuse the constructivists of making an unwarranted and ill-
deﬁned idealisation from small ﬁnite examples to arbitrary ﬁnite examples. This
accusation is rather reminiscent of the charge brought by the constructivists against
the platonists, that of making an unwarranted and ill-deﬁned extrapolation from
the ﬁnite case to actual inﬁnity. Some authors have claimed that there is a very
close analogy between the feasible-to-ﬁnite idealisation and the ﬁnite-to-inﬁnite
extrapolation [Wright, 1982; George, 1988]. If so then constructivism is in trou-
ble.
Strangely, constructivists have given little attention to this serious objection.
Troelstra and van Dalen admit that it is a genuine problem [1988, p. 851]. Dum-
mett has argued that feasibilism is incoherent, because the predicate ‘feasible’ is
vague and hence prone to the ancient Greek paradox of the heap [1975a]. Con-
structivism, of course, is not similarly dependent on any vague predicate. This
certainly disrupts the analogy that Wright and George are attempting to draw,
but it does nothing to justify the constructivist’s idealisation.
Let me try to provide the missing justiﬁcation. Imagine that we are setting out
to develop a theory of some counting process, such as the writing of a sequence of
strokes ||||||||| · · · ; we intend to take account of all the practical factors that might
aﬀect this process, such as running out of paper or being struck by a meteorite. We
ﬁrst note that our theory will contain both necessary and contingent propositions.
Examples of necessary propositions are:
‘To write ten strokes entails writing ﬁve strokes, twice.’
‘To write two strokes, followed by two more, is to write four strokes.’
Examples of contingent propositions are:
‘It is practically feasible to write 500 strokes.’
‘The likelihood of a meteorite strike while one is writing 500 strokes is
very low.’
‘If one attempts to copy a sequence of 500 strokes one is very likely to
write too many or too few by mistake.’
Note that the contingent propositions involve vague predicates and miscellaneous
empirical considerations, whereas the necessary ones do not. Note further that
a necessary proposition is never logically dependent on contingent propositions.
Hence the necessary propositions form a self-contained logical system: their logical
inter-relationships can be studied without reference to the contingent propositions.
The necessary propositions all have a conditional character: they do not contain
any outright assertion that any sequence of strokes can be written (after all, even
writing a single stroke might be practically very diﬃcult in some circumstances).
Our theory of stroke-writing, therefore, falls apart neatly into two parts: a self-
contained necessary theory, and a contingent theory that surrounds it and links
it to our general knowledge about the physical world. The necessary theory is,

560
Peter Fletcher
of course, arithmetic. An important advantage of this decomposition is that the
necessary theory can be transferred to other iterative situations. For example, if we
wanted a theory of, say, building towers of cardboard boxes we could use the same
necessary theory and couple it to a new contingent theory. In short, arithmetic
is a theory of the necessary aspects of all iterative processes. The application of
arithmetic to a particular iterative situation is a two-step process: ﬁrst develop the
arithmetic facts, and then take account of contingent factors. From this point of
view the proposal to insert feasibility considerations into arithmetic is completely
misconceived.
This account answers two objections left over from §3.2: the argument from
extraneous empirical circumstances and the feasibility argument. It can also be
extended to answer the remaining objection, the argument from error. The fact
that we are able to repeat a calculation, compare the two versions, identify discrep-
ancies, and determine which version is erroneous, gives an operational meaning to
the concept of error. It gives us a grip on the question of objectivity, the distinction
between a calculation’s being correct and its merely seeming to be correct.
The feasibility issue is so important that I think it worthwhile to make the same
point again by an analogy from a diﬀerent ﬁeld. In theoretical linguistics, a distinc-
tion is drawn between competence and performance [Chomsky, 1972, chapter 5].
The competence of a speaker of a language is their knowledge of its vocabulary and
grammatical constructions. The performance of a speaker is their actual linguistic
behaviour, the sentences they are able to produce or understand under various cir-
cumstances, and the errors they make. A highly convoluted sentence, containing
many nested subordinate clauses, might be within a speaker’s linguistic compe-
tence, in the sense that they know all the words and grammatical constructions
used in it, but beyond their linguistic performance, in the sense that it is too com-
plicated for them to take in. Modelling a speaker’s language abilities is a two-step
process. First we model their competence, perhaps by means of a formal grammar;
the grammar will usually include recursive production rules, which can be applied
any number of times in a single sentence, and hence the grammar generates an
inﬁnite set of sentences. The second step is to model the speaker’s performance,
which is the result of an interaction between their inﬁnite competence and ﬁnite
resource constraints of short-term memory and attention.
It may seem paradoxical that, in order to do justice to a speaker’s real linguis-
tic behaviour, we have to begin by constructing an idealised competence theory in
which we pretend that the speaker can handle sentences of arbitrary complexity.
Indeed, many theorists have rejected this two-step analysis and have attempted
to model performance directly. The best discussion of the controversy I have seen
is by
Fodor and Pylyshyn, 1988, especially §3.1]. They point out the explana-
tory value of the two-step analysis: ‘a speaker/hearer’s performance can often be
improved by relaxing time constraints, increasing motivation, or supplying pencil
and paper.
It seems very natural to treat such manipulations as aﬀecting the
transient state of the speaker’s memory and attention rather than what he knows
about — or how he represents — his language.’

Inﬁnity
561
These considerations generalise to other types of cognitive function, particu-
larly arithmetic. A person’s performance in an arithmetic test can be accounted
for as an interaction between their arithmetic competence (the algorithms they
know) and the incidental circumstances (calculating aids, distractions, frame of
mind, etc.). Someone who has been taught to calculate square roots in their head
can calculate more square roots when given pen and paper — even though they
have not been taught any more mathematics. Hence it is natural to infer that
their knowledge of extracting square roots exceeds what they are actually able to
demonstrate with particular materials.
Nevertheless, in arithmetic as in linguistics, there are those who maintain that
we should develop a theory of performance directly, without going via competence;
this view is feasibilism.
Let us attempt to develop a feasible theory of numbers, based on the principle
that a number is feasible iﬀwe can write that many strokes. (The word ‘we’ may be
construed as referring to a particular person or the whole mathematical community
at a certain time.) The ﬁrst diﬃculty is that the obstacles that limit our stroke-
writing are so various and variable. If our pencil point breaks then we are suddenly
prevented from proceeding; there is a number n such that n is feasible but S(n)
is infeasible. Other obstacles, such as fatigue, boredom, or a shrinking piece of
chalk, operate in a more gradual way. Sazonov [1995, §1] considers a theory of the
former type, in which there is a largest feasible number; he claims that ‘recursion
theory relativized to such a ﬁnite row of natural numbers is essentially the theory
of polynomial-time computability’. Most theories of feasibility, however, are of the
latter type, satisfying the axiom
F(n) ⇒F(S(n)),
where F(x) means that x is feasible [Yessenin-Volpin, 1970; Parikh, 1971]. In this
case the feasible numbers should satisfy Peano’s axioms. One may view F as a
vague predicate if one wishes. A popular way of obtaining a theory of feasibility
is by adapting some system of nonstandard arithmetic. We can set up a theory of
nonstandard arithmetic very simply by introducing into ﬁrst-order Peano arith-
metic a constant ‘c’, with a list of axioms ‘N < c’ for every numeral N. Such a
theory is consistent, since every ﬁnite subset of the axioms is consistent, so it has
a model, containing an inﬁnite natural number c as well as the standard numbers
0, 1, 2, . . .. Now, if we alter the terminology, substituting the word ‘feasible’ for
‘standard’, then we can re-construe this as a theory of all the natural numbers,
containing the feasible numbers as a subsystem. The full natural numbers satisfy
the principle of induction
(A(0) ∧∀n (A(n) ⇒A(S(n)))) ⇒∀n A(n)
for any formula A(x) not containing the feasibility predicate F.
If we extend
the original theory to include sets, the nonstandard theory will have standard,
internal and external sets (in the usual sense of nonstandard set theory). When

562
Peter Fletcher
we transfer this to a theory of feasibility, the internal sets are simply called ‘sets’
and the external sets are called ‘classes’. For example, there is a (proper) class of
all feasible numbers, which is a subclass of the set of all numbers less than c.
The most comprehensive attempt at providing a foundation for mathematics
along these lines is alternative set theory (AST), developed by Vopˇenka [1979] and
Sochor [1984]. For readers unfamiliar with AST, a helpful ultrapower model of
AST in conventional set theory is provided by Pudl´ak and Sochor [1984]. It turns
out that in AST the feasibility predicate can be deﬁned in terms of classes: a
natural number n is feasible iﬀall subclasses of {0, 1, . . . n} are sets. AST provides
a useful new view of the relation between the continuum and discrete structures,
in terms of inﬁnitesimals and indiscernibility relations (in fact, this can be done
in any theory containing two models of arithmetic, one nested inside the other).
Feasibility theories of this type may be considered unsatisfying, as they say
nothing about the size of infeasible numbers such as c; indeed, they allow us to
prove that numbers such as 101000 are feasible (by applying F(n) ⇒F(S(n))
repeatedly 101000 times). A bolder type of theory inserts a speciﬁc axiom ¬F(θ),
where θ is a particular closed primitive-recursive term such as ‘101000’. This of
course renders the theory inconsistent. The usual way round this, introduced by
Parikh [1971], is to impose feasibility restrictions in the meta-theory, i.e., to limit
the derivations to those with a feasible number of steps. It is also necessary to limit
the syntactic complexity of the formulae in the derivations. For example, in AST
the induction axiom is limited to formulae A(x) of feasible length; otherwise one
could apply induction with the formula x = 0 ∨x = 1 ∨x = 2 ∨· · · (a disjunction
over all feasible numbers) to show that all numbers were feasible.
A theory of this sort will assume that the feasible numbers are closed under
some arithmetic operations but not others: for example, it may contain as axioms
F(m) ∧F(n) ⇒F(m + n) and F(m) ∧F(n) ⇒F(m · n), but not F(m) ∧F(n) ⇒
F(mn).
Parikh shows (§2) that if a suitable upper bound is imposed on the
complexity of derivations then an axiom ¬F(θ) can be added without enabling any
new contradictions to be derived. Hence the theory is consistent from a feasibilist
point of view.
The snag is that the value of θ has to be very large in comparison with the
bound on the complexity of derivations. For example, a fairly short derivation will
give:
F(10), hence F(102), hence F(104), hence F(108), . . . hence F(101024).
Thus the concept of feasibility embodied in the theory far outruns the concept of
feasibility being applied in the meta-theory. This presumably makes the theory
implausible to a feasibilist.
It is possible to bring the feasibility restrictions in the theory and meta-theory
into harmony by restricting the theory rather drastically in other ways [Sazonov,
1995, §§3–4]. In fact, one has to reject the law of modus ponens and accept only
normal natural-deduction derivations; and one has to reject the doubling function
as infeasible.

Inﬁnity
563
The underlying trouble here can be stated quite simply without meta-mathematics.
One would like to include the following principles in a theory of feasible arithmetic.
(i)
If n is a feasible number and f is a feasible function then it is feasible to apply
f n times.
(ii) The doubling function is feasible.
(iii) 1000 is feasible.
(iv) 21000 is infeasible.
But of course these are inconsistent. One could make a case for rejecting any of
them; but giving up (i) makes the feasible number system less self-contained and
the concept of feasibility less coherent; giving up (ii) makes feasible arithmetic
seem very impoverished; giving up (iii) or (iv) is contrary to our informal ideas of
what is feasible.
In the end we may have to accept that feasibility is a context-dependent notion
(it is feasible to write 1000 strokes, but not if each stroke is required to be twice
the length of the previous one). Hence the idea of axiomatising feasibility with a
single unary F predicate may be too simple-minded and may only capture some
aspects of real-life feasibility constraints. Perhaps it would be fair to say that
feasible arithmetic does not remove idealisation from arithmetic (as the feasibilists
intended) but simply shifts the boundary of the idealisation so that the abstract
notion of a bound to counting is incorporated in arithmetic.
It is signiﬁcant that these formal theories of feasible arithmetic have diﬃculty
quantifying over the feasible domain. Either the quantiﬁers range over all natural
numbers (feasible and infeasible), or they are bounded by arithmetic terms (see
§2 and §4 of Parikh [1971], respectively). This is reminiscent of the dilemma in
Cantorian set theory, where one either ﬁnds oneself referring to proper classes
(which oﬃcially one does not believe in) or restricting the range of each quantiﬁer
to a set (with consequent diﬃculties in making general statements about sets).
This is simply a re-emergence of what in §1 I termed the horizon problem. A
feasibilist needs a theory of infeasible quantities, just as a ﬁnitist needs a theory
of the inﬁnite and a Cantorian set theorist needs a theory of proper classes. The
rejection of idealisation beyond actual human capabilities does not do away with
the problem of inﬁnity; it merely shifts the frontier.
3.6
Conclusions on potential inﬁnity
The view of inﬁnity developed in §3.2 and the concept of proof developed in §§3.3–4
require a reform of the whole structure of mathematics. Kronecker was the ﬁrst to
see that this required rejection of the logical principle of excluded middle, A∨¬A,
in cases where A is undecidable. It also requires a modiﬁed concept of real number,
based on Cauchy sequences given either by constructive rules [Bishop, 1967] or by
free choice sequences [Troelstra, 1977]; the former option leads to results consistent

564
Peter Fletcher
with ‘classical’ platonistic analysis, but the latter option leads to powerful new
theorems having no platonistic counterpart. The more general consequences for
mathematics, and set theory in particular, are just beginning to be elaborated;
Beeson [1985] provides a good summary. Brouwer deserves the credit for almost
singlehandedly establishing the philosophical basis of constructive mathematics
and carrying out the required reconstruction of arithmetic and analysis [van Stigt,
1990].
Since Brouwer, constructivism has split into many schools [Bridges and Rich-
man, 1987]. A large part of constructive mathematics, however, is common to all
schools and is developed by Bishop [1967]. Moreover, proof-theoretic investiga-
tions have shown that almost all scientiﬁcally applicable mathematics (e.g., the
theory of separable Hilbert spaces) can be formalised in theories that are proof-
theoretically reducible to constructive number theory [Feferman, 1998]. It might
be argued, therefore, that the reasons that led to the acceptance of actual inﬁnity
at the end of the nineteenth century [see §2.1] have now been superseded. Potential
inﬁnity works just as well.
The feasibility objection to potential inﬁnity, which seems at ﬁrst sight so dam-
aging, turns out to be untroubling. Feasible arithmetic can coexist peacefully with
constructive arithmetic: the two are simply based on diﬀerent idealisations.
On the other hand, we have seen in §3.4 the serious obscurities surrounding
the fundamental concept of constructive proof. The meaning of any formula of
the form A ⇒B depends on a quantiﬁcation over a murky and ill-delimited
totality of proofs of A.
By comparison, the universe of transﬁnite sets seems
clear and deﬁnite, and our worries about it in §2 seem to pale into insigniﬁcance.
The motivation for constructivism was to avoid reliance on ungraspable inﬁnite
totalities, but we seem to have ended up worse oﬀthan we were under Cantor’s
regime. The diﬃculty of reasoning constructively about the totality of constructive
proofs of a formula is the constructivist’s equivalent of the horizon problem.
The more perceptive critics of constructivism have pointed out this objection
[Bernays, 1935, p. 266; G¨odel, 1933; 1938; 1941]. Constructivists themselves have
emphasised the importance and diﬃculty of the problem [Dummett, 1977, §7.2;
Weinstein, 1983].
Clearly, the clariﬁcation of these issues is the most pressing problem facing
constructivism today.
4
PHYSICAL INFINITY
4.1
Introduction
The topic for this section is the nature of inﬁnity as it occurs in applied mathe-
matics and physics, in both countable form (an inﬁnite number of particles) and
uncountable form (the continua of space and time and other real-valued physical
quantities such as mass and charge).

Inﬁnity
565
We are also concerned with the relation between mathematical inﬁnity and
physical inﬁnity. There are two obvious ways in which they could be related. One
could start with mathematical inﬁnity and use it as a model for describing physical
reality. Thus one would provide a foundation for the system of real numbers on
pure mathematical grounds and then hypothesise that the structure of space and
time is isomorphic to a four-dimensional manifold. The relation between the pure
mathematical theory and the physical application is often explained in terms of
‘bridge principles’ [Peressini, 1999].
Alternatively, one could start with physical inﬁnity and use it as a foundation for
mathematical inﬁnity. An example of this is Hellman’s modal structuralism. Hell-
man [1989] interprets propositions of number theory as modal statements about
all ω-sequences (an ω-sequence is a model of second-order Peano arithmetic, and
may consist of elements of any kind, including physical objects). A proposition of
number theory is deﬁned to be true iﬀit is necessarily the case that it holds in
all ω-sequences. Using this interpretation, Hellman [1998] has argued that if one
accepts even the possibility of a physical ω-sequence then one is committed to the
coherence of actual inﬁnity in pure mathematics.
It is more common, however, to argue by analogy or thought experiment from
the meaningfulness and possibility of physical inﬁnity to the meaningfulness and
possibility of mathematical inﬁnity. To platonists it seems obvious that there could
be an inﬁnity of stars: ‘It is fatuous to suppose that we know a priori that the
stars in the heavens cannot possibly go on and on forever but that at some point
in space they must come to an end’ [Benardete, 1964, 31]. Thus the idea of actual
inﬁnity is surely coherent. Hence the idea of an actual inﬁnity of mathematical
objects also makes sense. This seems to undermine fatally the semantic objection
to actual inﬁnity [see §3.1].
Furthermore, this line of thought can be used to
defend the principle of excluded middle in pure mathematics. Wittgenstein and
the intuitionists have questioned whether it is justiﬁed to say that the sequence
7777 must either occur or not occur in the decimal expansion of π. Benardete
[1964, 129-130] imagines an inﬁnite row of stars, colour-coded according to the
digits of π (white represents 0, black represents 1, etc., with scarlet representing
7). He asserts a priori that either a sequence of four consecutive scarlet stars
exists or it doesn’t; the conclusion then transfers to π.
A second common platonist argument is that their truth-conditional view of
inﬁnite quantiﬁers [see §2.1] makes sense because one could, in principle, evaluate a
quantiﬁed statement by examining each instance separately. Imagine, for example,
testing Goldbach’s conjecture (the statement that every even number greater than
2 is the sum of two prime numbers) by testing the even numbers 4, 6, 8, . . . in
succession. If one proceeded at ever-doubling speed one could complete all the
tests in a ﬁnite time and so give a deﬁnite truth-value to the conjecture. This
sort of inﬁnitistic thought experiment is nowadays known as a supertask. Weyl
questioned whether such a supertask was possible and related it to Zeno’s paradox
of Achilles and the tortoise [1949, 42].

566
Peter Fletcher
In a similar vein, Russell believed that our inability to run through all the digits
of π is not ‘logically impossible’ but merely ‘medically impossible’ [1935–6]. This
distinction indicates that we should disregard contingent limitations in this context
as we are only concerned with conceptual coherence. It would not be appropriate
to rule out the supertask by citing the limited human lifespan, the impossibility of
travelling faster than light, or the atomic structure of matter, as these contingent
factors do not undermine the conceptual coherence of the example and hence do
not aﬀect its validity as a thought experiment to elucidate the meaning of inﬁnity.
Let us therefore make the following idealising assumptions:
(i)
an actual inﬁnity of bodies is possible, occupying arbitrary positions (provided
they do not overlap);
(ii) any physical quantity (e.g., duration, velocity, mass, density) can take on
arbitrarily large ﬁnite values or values arbitrarily close to zero;
(iii) bodies are perfectly rigid and have well-deﬁned boundaries (this assumption
can be relaxed in many cases).
This idealised world-picture can be used to probe the structure of the spatial
continuum. The two key characteristics of the continuum are: divisibility (any
line segment can be divided into two line segments), and homogeneity (all line
segments are qualitatively alike, diﬀering only in length).
By enquiring about
the ultimate parts of a line segment we can identify a number of options for the
structure of the continuum. The ﬁrst question to ask is, what happens if we try
to divide a line segment into smaller and smaller pieces by repeated halving?
Option 1: a line segment cannot be halved more than a certain ﬁnite number
of times. In this case the continuum has a discrete structure.
Option 2: a line segment can be halved any ﬁnite number of times. In this
case the next question is, can we think of this endless subdivision process as
completable? To state it more precisely, can we survey the whole collection of
parts produced by this subdivision?
Option 2.1: the process of repeated subdivision is completable. Then we can
take the intersection of a nested inﬁnite sequence of parts, P1 ⊃P2 ⊃P3 ⊃· · ·,
produced by subdivision, thus forming a smaller part, ∞
n=1 Pn, which I shall call
an ω-part. Since the continuum is homogeneous, the ω-parts are all alike and the
original line segment is the union of all its ω-parts. The next question is, is an
ω-part itself divisible?
Option 2.1.1: the ω-parts are indivisible and hence are the smallest parts of the
continuum. The next question is, what is their length?
Option 2.1.1.1: the ω-parts are of zero length. This is the view taken by con-
ventional modern analysis: the continuum is considered as a set of points, and an
ω-part is a singleton set containing one point. It is conventional to add a com-
pleteness axiom, stating that any criterion for dividing a line segment into two
connected parts determines a point where the division occurs.

Inﬁnity
567
Option 2.1.1.2: the ω-parts are of positive length, though still indivisible.
Option 2.1.2: the ω-parts are divisible, so we can continue the process of sub-
division. On this view the continuum is represented by a non-archimedean ﬁeld;
an ω-part consists of parts separated by inﬁnitesimal distances. This view was
taken by Peirce; he regarded the continuum as an inexhaustible source of parts,
exceeding in cardinality any transﬁnite set [Zink, 2001].
Option 2.2: the process of repeated subdivision is not completable. However
many times one has divided one can always divide one step further, but it is illegit-
imate to consider this unending process as a ﬁnished whole. This was Aristotle’s
view [Lear, 1979–80]. It is also the view that underlies modern ‘pointless’ topology,
in which a space is considered as a lattice of open neighbourhoods rather than as
a set of points [Tarski, 1927; Johnstone, 1983; Clarke, 1981, 1985], and also Dum-
mett’s [2000] intuitionistic view of physical continua. From this point of view, one
admits that a line segment contains points, but only in the ‘potential’ sense in
which a block of marble may be said to contain a statue; a line segment certainly
does not consist of all its points, any more than a block of marble consists of all
its statues.
Zeno’s paradoxes were designed to refute each of these options (see Owen [1957–
8]), and twentieth-century authors have devised further geometric, kinematic and
dynamic paradoxes of inﬁnity [Benardete, 1964; Gr¨unbaum, 1967; Salmon, 1970].
I shall review these paradoxes with a view to discovering their implications for the
concept of inﬁnity in the physical world, and in particular for the idea of grounding
mathematical inﬁnity in physical models.
4.2
Geometric paradoxes
First let us consider paradoxes relating purely to the structure of space (and mat-
ter extended in space), without involving motion. Zeno’s paradox of extension was
intended to refute the hypothesis that space is inﬁnitely divisible and has indivis-
ible parts (option 2.1.1 above). Under this hypothesis, a line segment consists of
inﬁnitely many indivisible parts, all of the same magnitude (by homogeneity). If
the parts are of zero magnitude, then the sum of the parts must be zero (however
many there are of them); whereas if the parts are of positive magnitude then the
sum of them must be inﬁnite. Yet the original line segment was of ﬁnite positive
magnitude. This seems to rule out options 2.1.1.1 and 2.1.1.2.
The modern analytic theory of the continuum is devised to avoid paradoxes of
this sort. This theory adopts option 2.1.1.1, but it also makes a number of dis-
tinctions that the ancient Greeks did not. It distinguishes between a line segment
and its length; it distinguishes several notions of magnitude (ordinality, cardinal-
ity and measure); and it distinguishes several notions of ‘sum’ (the sum of ﬁnitely
many numbers, the sum of an inﬁnite series of numbers, and the union of sets).
Notice the mixture of potential and actual views of inﬁnity involved here: an in-
ﬁnite sum ∞
n=1
1
2n = 1 does not mean literally the addition of inﬁnitely many
numbers but the limit of a succession of ﬁnite sums 1
2, 1
2 + 1
4, 1
2 + 1
4 + 1
8, . . . (i.e.,

568
Peter Fletcher
potential inﬁnity); whereas an inﬁnite union of sets ∞
n=1
 1
2n ,
1
2n−1

= (0, 1] is
interpreted literally as a straightforward pooling of the contents of all the sets at
once (i.e., actual inﬁnity). Having made all these distinctions, we can say that a
line segment is the set of all its points and is the union of the singleton sets of
its points; however, we can deny that its length is the sum of the lengths of the
singleton sets. The line segment has positive length, while the singleton sets have
zero length. The length (measure) function μ is countably additive, which means
that μ(∞
n=1 An) = ∞
n=1 μ(An) provided the sets An are disjoint and measurable
and the inﬁnite series converges. This additivity property does not, however, ex-
tend to uncountable sums; indeed, there is no way of adding uncountably many
numbers. Hence we cannot form the sum of the lengths of all the singleton sets in
a line segment. Zeno’s paradox is therefore blocked.
As a piece of pure mathematics this is perfectly consistent; indeed, some authors
regard it as a resolution of the paradox [Gr¨unbaum, 1967, chapter III]. However,
there are grounds for dissatisfaction with this as a theory of space. Let us consider,
for example, Thomson’s Cheese-Grater [Thomson, 1970]. Compare the following
two processes.
(i)
Take a lump of cheese and chop it into halves, then chop one of the pieces in
half, then chop one of the pieces so produced in half, and so on.
(ii) Take a lump of cheese and chop it into halves, then chop both pieces in half,
then chop all four pieces in half, and so on.
Process (i) produces a countable inﬁnity of pieces of cheese of positive size, and
does not seem particularly paradoxical. But what does (ii) produce? Certainly
not chunks of cheese, in the conventional sense.
The only thing one can say,
if one accepts the conventional theory of the continuum, is that it produces an
uncountable inﬁnity of ‘cheese-points’, dimensionless, indivisible pieces of cheese.
Since both procedures are, in principle, reversible, we ought to be able to stick
the pieces together to recover the original lump of cheese. On the other hand,
notice that two lumps of cheese of diﬀerent size, if both subjected to process
(ii), will produce identical sets of cheese-points: that is to say, the metric, order,
topological and measure properties of the two lumps are broken up by the grating
process, leaving just two sets of cheese-points of equal cardinality. Hence it should
be possible to grate one lump of cheese by process (ii) and then reassemble it into
a lump of a diﬀerent size.
This of course is reminiscent of the Banach-Tarski paradox: a ball of radius 1
(thought of as a set of points) can be decomposed into six pieces and reassembled
by rigid motions into two balls of radius 1 [Banach and Tarski, 1924].
Similar anomalies arise in the attempt to represent physical boundaries [Smith,
1997]. Is the space occupied by a physical body an open set or a closed set? If two
bodies are in contact, are the points on the boundary between them occupied by
both bodies or neither? If a disc is divided into two halves, one red and one green,
what colour is the boundary? One possible answer would be that colour properties

Inﬁnity
569
only apply to regions, not points; but if the sky varies in colour continuously from
blue in the east to white in the west, then it is very natural to model this by
assigning a diﬀerent colour to each point. A mathematician’s solution to these
problems would be to represent a colour distribution using a function from points
to colours, but to regard two such functions as equivalent if they diﬀer only on a
set of measure zero, and then to deﬁne a colour distribution as an equivalence class
of functions rather than as a single function. A similar technique can be applied
to the space occupied by bodies. It could be said that this approach amounts to
not taking points very seriously.
These issues of spatial modelling are of practical concern to computer scientists
in the ﬁelds of artiﬁcial intelligence, computational linguistics, qualitative spatial
reasoning, geographical information systems, and spatial perception [Vieu, 1993;
Smith, 1996; Varzi, 1996]. These ﬁelds all face the problem of representing and
reasoning about real-world objects, masses of liquid, boundaries, holes and shad-
ows, their positions in space and their evolution through time. In a computational
setting, ﬁnitist representations are forced on us: it is not helpful to represent ev-
erything as an uncountable set of points. Mereology is found to be more suitable
than set theory, in the spirit of option 2.2.
These examples provide reason for doubting the suitability of the conventional
theory of analysis for representing space. As Dummett [2000] complains, the con-
ventional theory provides excess expressive possibilities: it allows one to formulate
distinctions and thought experiments that one would prefer to ban on geometric
grounds.
One may well want to rule out the cheese-grating process (ii), while
permitting (i); but on what basis can one justify treating them diﬀerently?
The diﬃculties we have considered in this subsection will recur more forcibly
when we proceed to consider kinematic and dynamic paradoxes.
4.3
Kinematic paradoxes
Next let us consider paradoxes involving change and motion (but without consid-
ering the forces and dynamical laws that produce motion).
The options listed in §4.1 for the spatial continuum also apply to the temporal
continuum. Zeno’s paradox of the arrow was directed against the view that time
consists of indivisible parts (options 1 and 2.1.1).
(I am loosely following the
interpretation of Zeno’s paradoxes given by Owen [1957–8].) If there are indivisible
parts of time (instants), then, during one instant, an arrow in ﬂight cannot move.
That is to say, it cannot change its position, since if it did it would be occupying
diﬀerent positions at diﬀerent parts of the instant, and we would have conceded
that the instant was divisible. On the other hand, we are also assuming that time
consists entirely of instants, so if the arrow does not move in any instant then it
does not move at all.
This paradox is usually resolved by saying that motion is just a matter of being
at diﬀerent positions at diﬀerent instants of time (this is known as the ‘at-at’
theory). If we conﬁne our attention to a single instant then the question of motion

570
Peter Fletcher
does not arise: the arrow just has a single position. The concept of motion only
applies to intervals of time.
Admittedly, we do often speak in physics of the
‘instantaneous’ velocity of a particle, but this just means the limit of its velocity
over an interval as the length of the interval tends to zero. This resolution of the
paradox seems mathematically and physically satisfactory, provided one has no
other objection to indivisible parts of time.
Zeno’s paradox of the stadium seems to be directed against the view that space
and time consist of indivisible parts of positive length (options 1 and 2.1.1.2).
Zeno considers two lines of chariots moving in opposite directions at a speed of
one indivisible part of space per indivisible part of time. By considering the relative
motion of the two lines, Zeno ﬁnds that we are more or less forced to subdivide
our parts of space or time. Alternatively one could say that motion that appears
smooth at the macroscopic scale consists of a jerky, non-consecutive traversal of
positions at the microscopic scale. Since discrete theories of space and time have
never been popular I shall not dwell on this paradox further.
More troubling are Zeno’s dichotomy paradox and Achilles paradox, which are
directed against option 2.2, the view that space and time are inﬁnitely divisible
but that the process of inﬁnite subdivision cannot be surveyed as a whole. (These
paradoxes also apply against option 2.1.2, at least in its Peircean form in which the
process of subdivision is transﬁnite and incompletable; but I shall stick to option
2.2 for expository convenience.) To traverse a spatial interval [0, 1] one must begin
by crossing the ﬁrst half, [0, 1
2]; but to do so one must begin by crossing the ﬁrst
half of that, [0, 1
4], and to do this one must begin by crossing the ﬁrst half, [0, 1
8],
and so on. Thus one can never get started. This is the regressive version of the
dichotomy paradox. The progressive version says that to complete the crossing of
[0, 1] one must cross [ 1
2, 1]; to do that one must cross [ 3
4, 1], and so on. The Achilles
paradox involves a race between Achilles and the tortoise, in which Achilles runs
ten times as fast as the tortoise but the tortoise has a head start of 1 unit of length.
Achilles must traverse the interval [0, 1] to reach the tortoise’s initial position, by
which time the tortoise has reached 1.1; so Achilles must next traverse [1, 1.1], by
which time the tortoise has reached 1.11; so Achilles must traverse [1.1, 1.11]; and
so on. Thus Achilles must traverse inﬁnitely many intervals to catch up with the
tortoise.
In all three cases, a smooth motion is analysed into inﬁnitely many parts by
repeated subdivision. Under option 2.2, this subdivision process cannot be thought
of as a ﬁnished whole; hence the motion can never be completed.
Aristotle believed that this argument could be answered within the terms of
option 2.2. The motion can be completed but the subdivision process cannot. The
points of subdivision exist only in a potential sense; hence Achilles does not actu-
ally have to traverse inﬁnitely many points [Huggett, 1999, 31-6]. Unfortunately,
this solution cannot cope with the ‘staccato’ version of the paradoxes [Benardete,
1964, 8-9; Gr¨unbaum, 1970]. In the staccato form of the progressive dichotomy,
we traverse [0, 1
2] in 1
4 second, then pause for 1
4 second, then we traverse [ 1
2, 3
4] in
1
8 second, then pause for 1
8 second, and so on, thus reaching the point 1 after 1

Inﬁnity
571
second. In this case the spatial points 1
2, 3
4, . . . are individuated by the traversal
process, so it cannot be maintained that they are merely potential points.
In fact, this is just one of a long list of modern paradoxes involving ‘supertasks’,
i.e., inﬁnite sets of discrete actions accomplished in a ﬁnite time; the idea is that
one speciﬁes the individual actions and then enquires what the outcome of the
whole process would be. I am only concerned with the conceptual coherence of
supertasks here; see Davies [2001] and Cotogno [2003] for discussion of how they
might be realised in Newtonian and general relativistic dynamics.
Let us ﬁrst
consider supertasks of order-type ω. These involve an inﬁnite sequence of actions
a1, a2, a3, . . ., where action an is carried out in the time interval (1−2−n+1, 1−2−n).
We are assuming here that any given action can be carried out at an arbitrarily
high speed. All the actions are completed in the time interval (0, 1). The question
is, what is the resulting state of aﬀairs at time 1?
The simplest and most telling example is Thomson’s lamp [1954–5]. The lamp
has a button that switches it from oﬀto on or from on to oﬀ. Initially the lamp
is oﬀ. Action an consists of pressing the button. At time 1, is the lamp on or oﬀ?
There would seem to be ﬁve possible answers.
(i)
The lamp is on.
(ii) The lamp is oﬀ.
(iii) The situation is indeterministic: both outcomes at time 1 are causally possi-
ble, given the course of events before time 1.
(iv) The situation is indeterminate: our physical laws break down here and are
unable to tell us which outcomes at time 1 are permitted, given the course of
events before time 1.
(v)
The situation is underdetermined: the outcome depends on other information
about the events before time 1 not provided in the description.
Answers (i) and (ii) can be rejected as arbitrary: the problem description is sym-
metric between on and oﬀ, and cannot imply an asymmetric outcome. Answers
(iii) and (iv) are very odd, but we shall encounter examples of such unexpected
indeterminism and indeterminacy shortly when we come to dynamic paradoxes.
Benacerraf [1962], Gr¨unbaum [1967, 92-102] and Harrison [1996] choose answer
(v): for them, the outcome depends on the internal mechanism of the lamp switch.
Suppose the button controls the position of a lever; if the height of the lever is zero
an electrical circuit is made and the lamp is on, whereas if the height is non-zero
the circuit is broken and the lamp is oﬀ. Consider two possibilities:
a. a ‘discontinuous’ version, in which the lever rises to a ﬁxed height h whenever
the lamp is switched oﬀ;
b. a ‘diminishing’ version, in which, due to the increasing rapidity of switching
on and oﬀ, the lever rises to decreasing heights hn (at the nth switching oﬀ),
where hn →0 as n →∞.

572
Peter Fletcher
Let f(t) be the position of the lever at time t.
The function f is said to be
continuous at 1 iﬀf(1) = limt→1 f(t). In version (a), f is discontinuous at 1; in
fact, the one-sided limit limt→1−f(t) does not exist. Some authors [Black, 1950–1;
Gr¨unbaum, 1970] dismiss discontinuous trajectories as ‘kinematically forbidden’,
though without giving any justiﬁcation. A possible dynamical motive for insisting
on continuity might be a belief that the evolution of a system is governed by
diﬀerential equations, which would certainly impose smoothness conditions on any
dynamically realisable trajectory. If one does not assume the use of diﬀerential
equations, then on what other basis could the present state of a system determine
its future? Is f(1) causally determined by the values of f on (−∞, 1)? If the
answer is no then we are back to answers (iii) and (iv).
In version (b), we have a well-deﬁned limit limt→1−f(t) = 0, so if f is continuous
then f(1) = 0 and the lamp ends up on.
Many other supertasks of order-type ω also admit a ‘discontinuous’ version and
a ‘diminishing’ version.
The discontinuous version is either banned (if one in-
sists on continuity), indeterministic or indeterminate.
The diminishing version
has a unique outcome consistent with continuity. For example, Gr¨unbaum [1970]
considers both discontinuous and diminishing versions of the staccato dichotomy
paradox. Black’s (1950–1) inﬁnity machines (which transfer inﬁnitely many mar-
bles from one tray to another) are discontinuous cases, though Gr¨unbaum (1967,
p. 103) considers a diminishing version. Benacerraf’s (1962) vanishing and shrink-
ing genies also ﬁt into this classiﬁcation.
We have seen that we can only derive an outcome for a supertask of order-
type ω if we are willing to assume continuity (or, to be precise, left-continuity,
f(1) = limt→1−f(t), where f(t) is the state of the system at time t).
Even
assuming continuity, however, the outcome can be ambiguous, as for example
in various paradoxes involving putting balls into urns [Allis and Koetsier, 1991;
Friedman, 2002]. In the Littlewood-Ross paradox, a countable inﬁnity of balls is
numbered 1, 2, 3 . . .; action an consists of putting balls number 10n −9, . . . 10n
into an urn and removing ball number n. At time 1, after all the actions have
been carried out, what balls are in the urn? Inﬁnitely many or none of them?
Allis and Koetsier [1995] argue, using a continuity principle, that the urn should
be empty: their argument amounts to considering the fate of each ball separately
on the grounds that each ball is only aﬀected by ﬁnitely many actions. On the
other hand, if one rubs oﬀthe numeric labels on the balls and simply considers
the number of balls, N(t), in the urn at time t, one sees that limt→1−N(t) = ∞,
so by continuity N(1) = ∞. It beggars belief that the outcome can depend so
drastically on the presence of labels on the balls. This discrepancy arises of course
because continuity depends on a topology on the set of states; Allis and Koetsier’s
argument relies on one topology and the opposing argument relies on another.
Diﬀerent topologies are suggested by diﬀerent ways of describing the supertask
and by diﬀerent assumptions about which aspects are relevant. Hence the outcome
is indeterminate until we can justify the choice of one topology.

Inﬁnity
573
Let us consider the consequences of this analysis for Russell’s and Weyl’s notion
of an inﬁnite computation, e.g., evaluating Goldbach’s conjecture by testing each
even number 4, 6, 8, 10, . . . to see whether it is the sum of two primes. When we
describe this supertask as a ‘computation’, we are presupposing two things.
(i)
Determinism: the outcome of the computation must be determined by the
instructions. We must get the same answer every time we repeat it.
(ii) Abstractness: the outcome should not depend on whether the computer is
made of electronic, mechanical, optical or hydraulic components, but only on
the computation performed. An evaluation of Goldbach’s conjecture should
only depend on arithmetic facts about even numbers and prime numbers, not
on the type of hardware, nor the details of the design of the switches and
logic gates, nor the colour of the equipment, nor the weather.
If these conditions are not satisﬁed then we cannot speak of an inﬁnite computation
but merely an inﬁnite experiment and it is no use in elucidating the meaning of an
inﬁnitistic statement such as Goldbach’s conjecture. Unfortunately, in our analysis
we have discovered that there are four possible verdicts on supertasks of order-
type ω: (a) banned on kinematic grounds; (b) indeterministic; (c) underdetermined
(dependent on the detailed design of switches); and (d) indeterminate (dependent
on an arbitrary choice of topology). Hence we do not yet have a convincing example
of an inﬁnite computation.
Let us move on to consider supertasks of order-type ω∗. These consist of a
reversed inﬁnite sequence of actions . . . a5, a4, a3, a2, a1, where an is carried out
in the time interval (2−n, 2−n+1), or possibly (if one allows an inﬁnite past) in
the time interval (−n, −n + 1). Consider the following puzzle, ﬁrst published in
Mathematics Magazine in 1971.
A boy, a girl, and a dog take a walk along a path; they depart from a
common starting point. The boy walks at four miles per hour and the
girl walks at three miles per hour; the dog trots back and forth between
them at ten miles per hour. Question: at the end of one hour, what is
the position of the dog and in which direction is it facing? Answer: the
dog can be at any point between the boy and the girl, and it can be
facing in either direction. Pick an arbitrary point and either direction.
If you time-reverse the whole process, you will ﬁnd that it invariably
leads back to the stated starting conditions. [Salmon, 1970, preface to
2001 reprint, p. ix]
The situation is underdetermined: it needs a boundary condition specifying the
dog’s position and direction at one point in time. A similar observation applies
to other paradoxes of order-type ω∗; for example, in a time-reversed version of
Thomson’s lamp, the lamp could be on or oﬀafter the ﬁnal action a1. This is
not paradoxical. In the forwards version of Thomson’s lamp we expect to have to

574
Peter Fletcher
specify the initial state of the lamp, so in the reversed version we should expect
to have to specify the ﬁnal state.
The example most relevant to our purposes is Benardete’s [1964, 123-4] back-
wards veriﬁcation of Goldbach’s conjecture. The action an consists of checking
whether 2n + 2 is the sum of two prime numbers; if it is not then we keep a
record of 2n + 2. At the end we have a list of all counter-examples to Goldbach’s
conjecture. Unfortunately this procedure is also vulnerable to underdetermina-
tion: the list may contain, in addition to the genuine counter-examples we have
recorded, spurious numbers that are present because they were there at every
stage. Moreover, we cannot check at the end whether these numbers are really
counter-examples because there may be inﬁnitely many of them.
Worse still, it is easy to design variations of this backwards computation that
have no possible outcome at all: e.g., let an consist of testing whether n is a prime
number and halting if it is, thus yielding the greatest prime number. This is closely
analogous to a series of paradoxes presented by Benardete [1964, 236–239, 252–
261]; the general idea of all of them is that an object encounters an ω∗-sequence
of barriers, each of which would be suﬃcient to stop it, but since there is no ﬁrst
barrier the object encounters we cannot say which barrier has stopped it. The
most troubling version of the paradox involves non-existent barriers [259–260]. A
man walks along the x-axis towards 0 from the negative direction. A sequence of
gods g1, g2, g3, . . . awaits to put barriers in his path. God gn resolves to place a
barrier at the position 2−n if the man reaches as far as 3
42−n. What happens as the
man tries to pass through 0? He cannot reach any position beyond 0, since that
would entail passing some barrier; so he never gets further than 0. But, in that
case, none of the barriers is ever placed. So he is stopped by the gods’ unrealised
intentions to place barriers!
The man’s progress is not blocked by a ‘strange ﬁeld of force’ or ‘before-eﬀect’
as suggested by Benardete and some later commentators. Indeed, as Yablo points
out, the paradox does not even depend on the presence of the man [2000]. Let
Bn be the proposition that god gn places his barrier (at time 2−n, say).
Let
In be the proposition Bn ⇔∀m > n ¬Bm, which expresses gn’s intention to
place a barrier iﬀno earlier god has done so. In formal logical terms, the set of
propositions {I1, I2, I3, . . .} is consistent but not ω-consistent and not satisﬁable
(i.e., not satisﬁable by any standard model, in which the ∀m quantiﬁer ranges
over the standard natural numbers). Hence Yablo is right to say that the gods are
prevented from carrying out their intentions by pure logic. No contradiction can be
deduced from the gods’ intentions; no obstacle prevents any god from carrying out
his intention; yet no state of aﬀairs counts as all the gods fulﬁlling their intentions.
We can dispel the sense of mystery by viewing the matter in the following light:
whenever we set up a supertask by specifying what is to happen at each step we are
deﬁning the evolution of the system by recursion on the steps. As is well known,
recursive deﬁnitions work perfectly on ω and other well-founded orderings, but fail
on non-well-founded orderings, such as ω∗, for which there may be zero, one or
more solutions of the recursion equations – exactly as we found in our examples.

Inﬁnity
575
This makes our paradoxes look a lot less paradoxical: this failure of recursion is
in fact a perfectly familiar and well-understood mathematical phenomenon. This
provides a strong reason for dismissing all supertasks of non-well-founded order-
type as ill-deﬁned.
Indeed, this rather undermines the idealised world-picture we have been work-
ing with. We have assumed that we are free to imagine an inﬁnity of objects,
to assign to them arbitrary properties, to arrange them in any non-overlapping
conﬁguration, to assume that any ‘god’ or machine (or whatever) will carry out
its instructions correctly, and then to ask what happens when the set-up is left
to run. We have found that in some cases the set-up simply cannot evolve and
hence cannot exist in a world that has time. Nevertheless I shall not abandon the
idealised world-picture; I shall persevere with it, assuming that it is well-behaved
as long as we do not try to set up temporally non-well-founded systems of events.
4.4
Paradoxes involving sums of conserved quantities
It is a standard result of elementary analysis that the inﬁnite series ∞
n=1
(−1)n
n
can be made to converge to any sum, or to diverge, by reordering the terms
suitably [Haggarty, 1993, §4.2]. This can be turned into a physical paradox if we
imagine a countably inﬁnite set of particles p1, p2, . . ., where pn has an electric
charge (or any other conserved quantity) of (−1)n
n
. Suppose the particles collide
simultaneously and coalesce. What is the charge of the resulting particle? The
problem is that inﬁnite sums are deﬁned only for sequences of numbers, whereas
the physical situation contains an unordered set of particles.
This type of paradox was introduced by Cooke, using examples with particles
of unbounded density, unbounded speed or unbounded length (2003). If we are
willing to assume an upper bound ρ on (positive or negative) charge density, an
upper bound v on speed, and that the resulting composite particle is bounded by
a sphere of radius r, then we can exclude the paradox as follows. Let us generalise
the situation to allow the particles to have any charges q1, q2, . . ., and let us suppose
that the particles coalesce within a time period T. Then at the beginning of the
time period they must all have been bounded by a sphere of radius r + vT, and
hence ∞
n=1 |qn| ≤4
3π(r+vT)3ρ. Thus the sequence (qn) is absolutely convergent,
and hence (by a standard theorem) its sum ∞
n=1 qn converges and is independent
of the order of terms. In particular, coalescence in a ﬁnite time is impossible in
the case qn = (−1)n
n
.
Unfortunately, Cooke’s paper also shows how to realise the summation ∞
n=1
(−1)n
n
as a sum of gravitational forces, using a static conﬁguration of particles of
equal mass and volume; this example cannot be excluded by limits on density,
speed or size. Cooke suggests that there may be some ‘intrinsic ordering’ hidden
in the physical situation that speciﬁes how the terms are to be summed, but it is
very hard to see where such an ordering could be found.
There is a second type of problematic inﬁnite summation that occurs in physics,
where a sum or limit of positive quantities diverges unexpectedly in what seems

576
Peter Fletcher
to be a feasible physical situation.
In classical physics the electromagnetic or
gravitational self-energy of a point particle diverges (that is, it tends to inﬁnity
like 1
r as the radius r tends to 0, for ﬁxed charge or mass). There is also Olbers’
paradox of conservation of ﬂux [Wesson, 1991]: if an inﬁnite static universe is
sprinkled evenly with stars of uniform luminosity then the light intensity at any
point tends to inﬁnity over time.
These paradoxes provide some motivation for abandoning the ‘limit of partial
sums’ view of inﬁnite summation and re-asserting a naive ‘actual inﬁnity’ view, as
suggested in §1, under which inﬁnitely many quantities (of the same qualitative
kind) can be simply lumped together into a total quantity, in precisely the same
way that ﬁnitely many quantities can (cf. [Benardete, 1964, 26]). This entails
accepting the possibility of inﬁnite quantities, of course. The ∞
n=1
(−1)n
n
problem
can be dismissed by rejecting the concept of negative quantities. This view ﬁts
quite well with the way we naively think of quantities: intuitively, a quantity
(e.g., the lifetime of the universe) can be ﬁnite or inﬁnite but cannot be negative.
Negative quantities are merely a ﬁgure of speech: a ‘negative acceleration’ is not
really an acceleration at all but a deceleration; a ‘negative proﬁt’ is not really
a proﬁt but a loss.
Proﬁts and losses diﬀer qualitatively (not merely in sign),
so, although it is always possible to add inﬁnitely many proﬁts together to give
a (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) total, we cannot be expected to add inﬁnitely many proﬁts
and losses together. This view merits further development; notice, however, that
it involves unpicking the laboriously constructed solution to Zeno’s paradox of
extension adopted by conventional mathematics (see §4.2).
4.5
Paradoxes of collision
Consider an inﬁnite collection of bodies that interact only by elastic collision,
according to Newton’s three laws of motion. Assume that the bodies can be made
as nearly rigid as required: i.e., any collision can be assumed to be completed
in an arbitrarily small time. Newtonian mechanics is commonly supposed to be
deterministic and to satisfy laws of conservation of mass, momentum and energy,
but there are four ways in which these properties can be subverted.
The ﬁrst method is by escape to inﬁnity. Laraudogoitia [1997] describes how,
by an ω-sequence of elastic collisions, a particle can be made to double its speed
at ever-halving intervals and so escape to spatial inﬁnity in a ﬁnite time (like
Benardete’s metaphysical rocket [1964, 149]). Hence the particle disappears from
space (and in fact so do all the other particles involved in the collisions). This
phenomenon of escape to inﬁnity is a genuine feature of Newtonian mechanics, not
an artifact of our unrealistic assumptions of inﬁnitely many objects and perfectly
elastic collisions: Xia [1992] has shown that ﬁve point-mass particles interacting
via Newton’s law of gravity can escape to spatial inﬁnity in a ﬁnite time without
colliding. Moreover, since Newton’s laws are time-reversible, it is equally possible
for particles to appear spontaneously from inﬁnity, in an ω∗-sequence of collisions.
We know from §4.3 that ω∗-sequences of actions can be indeterministic, so perhaps

Inﬁnity
577
this is no great surprise. (There are also cases in which collision set-ups of order-
type ω∗have no solutions at all, such as the one described by Angel [2001], but I
shall not consider this phenomenon as it has already been dealt with in §4.3.)
The second method is by using inﬁnite mass to evade the conservation laws.
Consider inﬁnitely many balls B1, B2, B3, . . . of equal mass, where Bn has radius
2−n. We can enclose them all in a spherical shell to produce a composite body of
inﬁnite mass and ﬁnite volume. Take two such bodies and collide them; what hap-
pens? The result is indeterminate, since total mass and momentum are undeﬁned,
so the law of conservation of momentum cannot be applied.
The third method involves momentum disappearing into an ω-sequence. La-
raudogoitia [1996; 1999] imagines a moving particle P0 colliding elastically with
a sequence of stationary particles P1, P2, P3, . . ., all of equal mass. In accordance
with Newton’s laws, P0 passes all its momentum on to P1, which then passes all
its momentum on to P2, and so on. After a ﬁnite time all the collisions are com-
plete and all the particles are stationary. The momentum has disappeared. In the
time-reversed version motion appears spontaneously from stationary particles.
Laraudogoitia’s [2002] example of spontaneous self-excitation exploits both the
second and third methods.
The fourth method is by imitating Thomson’s lamp (see §4.3): we set up an
oscillating ω-sequence of collisions that has no possible outcome compatible with
continuity [Earman and Norton, 1998; Laraudogoitia, 1998]. Newton’s laws are
indeterminate in such a case. Laraudogoitia suggests that the particles simply
disappear when their world-lines cannot be continued in a continuous way. He
also believes that the situation is time-reversible, so that particles can appear
unpredictably out of the void.
Perhaps it is time to take a closer look at conservation laws. Earman [1986]
points out that they can be formulated in a variety of ways.
In most of our
examples momentum is conserved locally (at each collision) but not globally (the
total momentum of the system is not equal at all times). The relation between
the local and global conservation laws can be most easily seen from ﬁeld theory
[Weinberg, 1995, §7.3], since any situation involving particles can be modelled
in terms of density ﬁelds. A continuous symmetry of the action implies a local
conservation law
∂Jμ(x)
∂xμ
= 0
where J is a four-vector current ﬁeld, x = (t, x) is a point in space-time, and μ
is a Lorentz index. Using Stokes’ theorem we can deduce the global conservation
law
dQ(t)
dt
= 0,
where Q(t) =

J0(t, x) d3x.
This argument assumes that J vanishes suﬃciently fast at large spatial distances.
It also presupposes that J is diﬀerentiable.
These two conditions rule out all
the above cases.
Any case involving escape to inﬁnity or particles spread out
over unbounded space violates the condition of vanishing at inﬁnity. Any case

578
Peter Fletcher
involving inﬁnitely many equal masses in a bounded space-time volume violates
the diﬀerentiability condition, since, by the properties of compact sets, there must
exist a point every neighbourhood of which contains inﬁnite mass.
Hence, in mathematical terms, there is nothing paradoxical about the above
cases: they simply demonstrate that conservation laws are subject to conditions
of smoothness and vanishing at inﬁnity. However, they are certainly paradoxical
physically. After all, the purpose of conservation laws is to explain the stability of
the world; if the laws are formulated in a weakened form that permits matter and
motion to appear and disappear spontaneously (as advocated by Earman [1986]
and Laraudogoitia [1998]) then they fail to serve their purpose and we need another
physical principle to explain why this never seems to happen in nature.
4.6
Conclusions: does nature abhor inﬁnities?
It is very natural to assume that the world is an inﬁnitely divisible space-time
manifold containing a possibly inﬁnite number of non-overlapping particles with
arbitrary values for speed, mass, etc.; we use this picture as the starting point for
our physical theorising and as an aid to thinking about actual inﬁnity in pure math-
ematics. All the physical paradoxes we have considered involve problems with this
idealised picture or a mismatch between it and the mathematical systems we use
in our physical theories. None of the paradoxes reveals any inconsistency or con-
ceptual incoherence in the mathematical systems considered as pure mathematics.
Equally, none of them would be troubling to a physicist. Worse things happen in
physics every day. Physicists are used to calculating with inﬁnite and inﬁnitesi-
mal quantities to obtain ﬁnite results, most notoriously in the divergent integrals
and divergent perturbation series that occur in quantum ﬁeld theory; they think
nothing of treating space-time as (4 + ϵ)-dimensional, where ϵ is a small complex
number, rather than 4-dimensional, if that is what it takes to make their integrals
converge (this technique is known as dimensional regularisation [Weinberg, 1995,
§11.2]). Physicists are tolerant of inﬁnities appearing in their calculations because
they regard their theories merely as low-energy approximations to some more com-
prehensive theory in which the calculation would converge [Weinberg, 1995, §12.3].
The inﬁnities in quantum ﬁeld theory are believed to be ultimately due to the use
of local ﬁeld operators, which embody the idealised view that particles and their
interactions can be localised to a point [Cao and Schweber, 1993]. More generally,
inﬁnities arise in calculations due to unrealistic simplifying assumptions and they
are dealt with by modifying the assumptions.
Nevertheless, the paradoxes are problematic from the point of view of this es-
say, namely the attempt to use physical models to demonstrate the conceptual
coherence of actual inﬁnity, in order to justify its use in mathematics. The geo-
metric paradoxes cast doubt on the view that space is an inﬁnite set of points;
the kinematic paradoxes undermine the notion of an inﬁnite computation; and
the dynamic paradoxes undermine the notion of an inﬁnity of objects. The ω∗-
sequence paradoxes discussed at the end of §4.3 are particularly troubling. If the

Inﬁnity
579
world could contain inﬁnitely many objects, what is to stop them from arranging
themselves into a conﬁguration in which they cannot evolve?
One possible reaction to the paradoxes is to impose boundary conditions on our
idealised picture, such as banning inﬁnite numbers of objects, imposing a bound
on speed and density, or insisting that matter is represented by ﬁelds that are
diﬀerentiable and vanish at inﬁnity. This would certainly tame the paradoxes but
is hard to motivate on a priori grounds.
A second possible reaction is to reject the idealised picture as incoherent and
insist that we stick to real physics, in which paradoxes are excluded by the speed
of light limitation, the atomic structure of matter, the uncertainty principle, or
some other limiting principle. Note that each such limiting principle is merely
contingent, but it may be a necessary truth that some limiting principle exist to
cover each paradox.
Certainly, the idea of a world of inﬁnitely many objects is not an innocent
and straightforward extension of the idea of a world of ﬁnitely many objects.
Unexpected global diﬃculties arise when one passes from ﬁnite to inﬁnite, and
they are diﬀerent from the diﬃculties that arise for inﬁnity in pure mathematics.
That is not to say that these diﬃculties are insuperable, merely that supporters
of actual inﬁnity have a lot of explaining to do.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Aczel, 1988] P. Aczel. Non-well-founded Sets. Stanford: CSLI Publications, 1988.
[Allis and Koetsier, 1991] V. Allis and T. Koetsier. On some paradoxes of the inﬁnite. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 42, no. 2, 187–94, 1991.
[Allis and Loetsier, 1995] V. Allis and T. Koetsier. On some paradoxes of the inﬁnite II. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 46, no. 2, 235–47, 1995.
[Angel, 2001] L. Angel. A physical model of Zeno’s dichotomy. British Journal for the Philoso-
phy of Science, 52, no. 2, 347–58, 2001.
[Baire, 1905] R. Baire. Letter to J. Hadamard. Translated by G.H. Moore. In Ewald (1996),
vol. 2, pp. 1079–80, 1905.
[Balaguer, 1998] M. Balaguer. Platonism and Anti-Platonism in Mathematics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1998.
[Banach and Tarski, 1924] S. Banach and A. Tarski. Sur la d´ecomposition des ensembles de
points en parties respectivement congruentes. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 6, 244–77, 1924.
[Beeson, 1985] M. J. Beeson. Foundations of Constructive Mathematics:
Metamathematical
Studies. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1985.
[Bell, 1981] J. L. Bell. Category theory and the foundations of mathematics. British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 32, no. 4, 349–58, 1981.
[Bell, 1998] J. L. Bell. A Primer of Inﬁnitesimal Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1998.
[Benacerraf, 1962] P. Benacerraf. Tasks, super-tasks, and the modern Eleatics. Journal of Phi-
losophy, LIX, 765–84. Reprinted in Salmon (1970), pp. 103–129, 1962.
[Benacerraf, 1973] P. Benacerraf. Mathematical truth. The Journal of Philosophy, 70, no. 19,
661–79, 1973.
[Benacerraf and Putnam, 1983] P. Benacerraf and H. Putnam, eds. Philosophy of Mathematics.
2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
[Benardete, 1964] J. A. Benardete. Inﬁnity:
An Essay in Metaphysics. Oxford:
Clarendon
Press, 1964.
[Bernays, 1935] P. Bernays. On platonism in mathematics. Translated by C.D. Parsons. In [Be-
nacerraf and Putnam, 1983, 258–71].

580
Peter Fletcher
[Bishop, 1967] E. Bishop. Foundations of Constructive Analysis. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967.
[Bishop, 1970] E. Bishop. Mathematics as a numerical language. In A. Kino, J. Myhill and
R.E. Vesley (eds) Intuitionism and Proof Theory. Proceedings of the summer conference at
Buﬀalo, New York, 1968. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 53–71, 1970.
[Black, 1950–1] M. Black. Achilles and the tortoise. Analysis, XI, 91–101, 1950–1. Reprinted in
[Salmon, 1970, 67-81].
[Bolzano, 1810] B. Bolzano. Contributions to a better-grounded presentation of mathematics,
1810. Translated by S. Russ. In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 1, 174–224].
[Bolzano, 1817] B. Bolzano. Purely analytic proof of the theorem that between any two values
which give results of opposite sign there lies at least one real root of the equation, 1817.
Translated by S. Russ. In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 1, 225–48].
[Bolzano, 1851] B. Bolzano. Paradoxes of the Inﬁnite, 1851. Translated by D.A. Steele, 1950.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
[Boolos, 1971] G. Boolos. The iterative conception of set. Journal of Philosophy, 68, 215–32,
1971. Reprinted in [Benacerraf and Putnam, 1983, 486-502].
[Bridges and Richman, 1987] D. Bridges and F. Richman. Varieties of Constructive Mathemat-
ics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
[Brouwer, 1907] L. E. J. Brouwer. On the Foundations of Mathematics, 1907. In A. Heyting (ed.)
(1975) L.E.J. Brouwer: Collected Works. Vol. I. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 11–101.
[Cantor, 1874] G. Cantor. On a property of the set of real algebraic numbers, 1874. Translated
by W. Ewald. In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, 839–43].
[Cantor, 1883] G. Cantor. Foundations of a general theory of manifolds:
a mathematico-
philosophical investigation into the theory of the inﬁnite, 1883. Translated by W. Ewald.
In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, 878–920].
[Cantor, 1885] G. Cantor. Rezension der Schrift von G. Frege ‘Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik’.
Deutsche Literaturzeitung, 6, 728–9, 1885.
[Cantor, 1891] G. Cantor. On an elementary question in the theory of manifolds, 1891. Trans-
lated by W. Ewald. In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, 920–2].
[Cantor, 1899a] G. Cantor. Letter to R. Dedekind, 3rd August 1899. Translated by W. Ewald.
In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, 931–5].
[Cantor, 1899b] G. Cantor. Letter to R. Dedekind, 28th August 1899. Translated by W. Ewald.
In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, 936–7].
[Cantor, 1899c] G. Cantor. Letter to R. Dedekind, 31st August 1899. Translated by W. Ewald.
In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, 939–40].
[Cao and Schweber, 1993] T. Y. Cao and S. S. Schweber. The conceptual foundations and the
philosophical aspects of renormalization theory. Synthese, 97, no. 1, 33–108, 1993.
[Chomsky, 1972] N. Chomsky. Language and Mind. Enlarged Edition. New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, 1972.
[Clarke, 1981] B. L. Clarke. A calculus of individuals based on connection. Notre Dame Journal
of Formal Logic, 22, no. 3, 204–18, 1981.
[Clarke, 1985] B. L. Clarke. Individuals and points. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 26,
no. 1, 61–75, 1985.
[Cohen, 1966] P. J. Cohen. Set Theory and the Continuum Hypothesis. New York: W.A. Ben-
jamin, 1966.
[Cooke, 2003] M. C. Cooke. Inﬁnite sequences: ﬁnitist consequence. British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 54, 591–9, 2003.
[Cotogno, 2003] P. Cotogno. Hypercomputation and the physical Church-Turing thesis. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 54, 181–223, 2003.
[Dauben, 1979] J. W. Dauben. Georg Cantor: His Mathematics and Philosophy of the Inﬁnite.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1979.
[Davies, 2001] E. B. Davies. Building inﬁnite machines. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 52, 671–82, 2001.
[Dedekind, 1872] R. Dedekind. Continuity and irrational numbers,
1872. Translated by
W.W. Beman, with revisions by W. Ewald. In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, 765–79].
[Dedekind, 1888a] R. Dedekind. Letter to H. Weber, 1888. Translated by W. Ewald. In [Ewald,
1996, vol. 2, 834–5].
[Dedekind, 1888b] R. Dedekind. Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen?
1888. Translated by
W.W. Beman, with revisions by W. Ewald. In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, 787–833].

Inﬁnity
581
[Dedekind, 1890] R. Dedekind. Letter to H. Keferstein, 1890. Translated by H. Wang and
S. Bauer-Mengelberg. In [van Heijenoort, 1967, 98–103].
[D´ıez, 2000] G. F. D´ıez. Five observations concerning the intended meaning of the intuitionistic
logical constants. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 29, no. 4, 409–24, 2000.
[Dummett, 1975a] M. Dummett. Wang’s paradox. Synthese, 30, 301–24, 1975.
[Dummett, 1975b] M. Dummett. The philosophical basis of intuitionistic logic. In H.E. Rose and
J.C. Shepherdson (eds) Logic Colloquium ’73 (Bristol). Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 5–40,
1975.
[Dummett, 1977] M. Dummett. Elements of Intuitionism. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977.
[Dummett, 1994] M. Dummett. What is mathematics about? In A. George (ed.) Mathematics
and Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 11–26, 1994.
[Dummett, 2000] M. Dummett. Is time a continuum of instants? Philosophy, 75, no. 294, 497–
515, 2000.
[Earman, 1986] J. Earman. A Primer on Determinism. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1986.
[Earman and Norton, 1998] J. Earman and J. D. Norton. Comments on Laraudogoitia’s ‘Clas-
sical particle dynamics, indeterminism and a supertask’. British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science, 49, no. 1, 123–33, 1998.
[Ewald, 1996] W. Ewald, ed. From Kant to Hilbert:
A Source Book in the Foundations of
Mathematics. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996.
[Feferman, 1998] S. Feferman. In the Light of Logic. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.
[Field, 1980] H. H. Field. Science without Numbers: A Defence of Nominalism. Oxford: Black-
well, 1980.
[Fletcher, 1998] P. Fletcher. Truth, Proof and Inﬁnity: A Theory of Constructions and Con-
structive Reasoning. Synthese Library, vol. 276. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1998.
[Fletcher, 2002] P. Fletcher. A constructivist perspective on physics. Philosophia Mathematica
(3), 10, no. 1, 26–42, 2002.
[Fodor and Pylyshyn, 1988] J. A. Fodor and Z. W. Pylyshyn. Connectionism and cognitive ar-
chitecture: a critical analysis. Cognition, 28, nos 1 & 2, 3–71, 1988.
[Frege, 1879] G. Frege. Begriﬀsschrift, a formula language, modelled upon that of arithmetic,
for pure thought, 1879. Translated by S. Bauer-Mengelberg. In [van Heijenoort, 1967, 1–82].
[Frege, 1884] G. Frege. The Foundations of Arithmetic: A Logico-Mathematical Enquiry into
the Concept of Number, 1884. Translated by J.L. Austin, 2nd revised edition, 1953. Oxford:
Blackwell.
[Frege, 1891] G. Frege. Function and concept. Translated by P. Geach. In B. McGuinness (ed.)
Gottlob Frege: Collected Papers on Mathematics, Logic, and Philosophy. Oxford: Blackwell,
pp. 137–156, 1891.
[Frege, 1893] G. Frege. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, begriﬀsschriftlich abgeleitet. Vol. 1. Jena:
Verlag Hermann Pohle, 1893. English translation of §§0–52 by M. Furth (1967) The Basic
Laws of Arithmetic: Exposition of the System. Berkeley: University of California Press.
[Frege, 1919] G. Frege. Notes for Ludwig Darmstaedter, 1919. In H. Hermes, F. Kambartel &
F. Kaulbach (eds) (1979) Gottlob Frege: Posthumous Writings. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 253–7.
[Friedman, 2002] K. S. Friedman. A small inﬁnite puzzle. Analysis, 62, no. 4, 344–5, 2002.
[George, 1988] A. George. The conveyability of intuitionism, an essay on mathematical cogni-
tion. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 17, no. 2, 133–56, 1988.
[G¨odel, 1933] K. G¨odel. The present situation in the foundations of mathematics, 1933. In
S. Feferman (ed.) (1995) Kurt G¨odel: Collected Works. Vol. III. New York: Oxford University
Press, pp. 45–53.
[G¨odel, 1938] K. G¨odel. Lecture at Zilsel’s, 1938. In S. Feferman (ed.) (1995) Kurt G¨odel: Col-
lected Works. Vol. III. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 86–113.
[G¨odel, 1941] K. G¨odel. In what sense is intuitionistic logic constructive?, 1941. In S. Feferman
(ed.) (1995) Kurt G¨odel: Collected Works. Vol. III. New York: Oxford University Press,
pp. 189–200.
[G¨odel, 1958] K. G¨odel. On a hitherto unutilized extension of the ﬁnitary standpoint, 1958.
Translated by S. Bauer-Mengelberg & J. van Heijenoort. In S. Feferman (ed.) (1990) Kurt
G¨odel: Collected Works. Vol. II. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 217–51.
[G¨odel, 1983] K. G¨odel. What is Cantor’s continuum problem? In [Benacerraf and Putnam,
1983, 470–85].

582
Peter Fletcher
[Goodman, 1970] N. D. Goodman. A theory of constructions equivalent to arithmetic. In
A. Kino, J. Myhill and R.E. Vesley (eds) Intuitionism and Proof Theory. Proceedings of the
summer conference at Buﬀalo, New York, 1968. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 101–20, 1970.
[Goodman, 1973] N. D. Goodman. The arithmetic theory of constructions. In A.R.D. Mathias
& H. Rogers (eds) Cambridge Summer School in Mathematical Logic (Cambridge, 1971).
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 337. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 274–98, 1973.
[Gr¨unbaum, 1967] A. Gr¨unbaum. Modern Science and Zeno’s Paradoxes. London: Allen &
Unwin, 1967.
[Gr¨unbaum, 1970] A. Gr¨unbaum. Modern science and Zeno’s paradoxes of motion. In Salmon
(1970), pp. 200–50, 1970.
[Haggarty, 1993] R. Haggarty. Fundamentals of Mathematical Analysis. 2nd edition. Woking-
ham, U.K.: Addison-Wesley, 1993.
[Hallett, 1984] M. Hallett. Cantorian Set Theory and Limitation of Size. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1984.
[Harrison, 1996] C. Harrison. The three arrows of Zeno: Cantorian and non-Cantorian concepts
of the continuum and of motion. Synthese, 107, no. 2, 271–92, 1996.
[Hellman, 1989] G. Hellman. Mathematics without Numbers: Towards a Modal-Structural In-
terpretation. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989.
[Hellman, 1998] G. Hellman. Mathematical constructivism in spacetime. British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 49, no. 3, 425–50, 1998.
[Herbrand, 1931] J. Herbrand. On the consistency of arithmetic, 1931. Translated by J. van
Heijenoort. In [van Heijenoort, 1967, 618–28].
[Heyting, 1931] A. Heyting. The intuitionist foundations of mathematics, 1931. Translated by
E. Putnam and G.J. Massey. In [Benacerraf and Putnam, 1983, 52–61].
[Heyting, 1956] A. Heyting. Intuitionism: An Introduction. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1956.
[Hilbert, 1900] D. Hilbert. Mathematical problems. Translated by M.W. Newson. In Bulletin of
the American Mathematical Society (2), 8, 1902, 437–79, 1900.
[Hilbert, 1925] D. Hilbert. On the inﬁnite, 1925. Translated by S. Bauer-Mengelberg. In [van
Heijenoort, 1967, 367–92].
[Hilbert, 1927] D. Hilbert. The foundations of mathematics, 1927. Translated by S. Bauer-
Mengelberg and D. Føllesdal. In [van Heijenoort, 1967, 464–79].
[Hilbert, 1930] D. Hilbert. Logic and the knowledge of nature, 1930. Translated by W. Ewald.
In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, pp. 1157–65].
[Hilbert, 1931] D. Hilbert. The grounding of elementary number theory, 1931. Translated by
W. Ewald. In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, 1148–57].
[Huggett, 1999] N. Huggett, ed. Space from Zeno to Einstein: Classic Readings with a Con-
temporary Commentary. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1999.
[Johnstone, 1983] P. T. Johnstone. The point of pointless topology. Bulletin (New Series) of
the American Mathematical Society, 8, no. 1, 41–53, 1983.
[Kleene, 1945] S. C. Kleene. On the interpretation of intuitionistic number theory. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 10, no. 4, 109–24, 1945.
[Kock, 1981] A. Kock. Synthetic Diﬀerential Geometry. Cambridge:
Cambridge University
Press, 1981.
[Kolmogorov, 1932] A. N. Kolmogorov. On the interpretation of intuitionistic logic, 1932. Trans-
lated by P. Mancosu. In [Mancosu, 1998, 328–34].
[Kreisel, 1962] G. Kreisel. Foundations of intuitionistic logic. In E. Nagel, P. Suppes and
A. Tarski (eds) Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science. Stanford: Stanford Univer-
sity Press, pp. 198–210, 1962.
[Kreisel, 1965] G. Kreisel. Mathematical logic. In T.L. Saaty (ed.) Lectures on Modern Mathe-
matics. Vol. III. New York: Wiley, pp. 95–195, 1965.
[Lake, 1979] J. Lake. The approaches to set theory. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 20,
no. 2, 415–37, 1979.
[Lear, 1979–80] J. Lear. Aristotelian inﬁnity. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (new se-
ries), 80, 187–210, 1979–80.
[Lewis, 1991] D. Lewis. Parts of Classes. Oxford: Blackwell, 1991.
[Maddy, 1988] P. Maddy. Believing the axioms, I. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 53, no. 2, 481–511,
1988.
[Maddy, 1990] P. Maddy. Realism in Mathematics. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990.
[Maddy, 1997] P. Maddy. Naturalism in Mathematics. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997.

Inﬁnity
583
[Mancosu, 1998] P. Mancosu, ed. From Brouwer to Hilbert: The Debate on the Foundations of
Mathematics in the 1920s. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
[Markov, 1968] A. A. Markov. An approach to constructive mathematical logic. In B. van Root-
selaar and J.F. Staal (eds) Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science III. Proceedings of
the Third International Congress for Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, Amster-
dam, 1967. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 283–94, 1968.
[Martin-L¨of, 1975] P. Martin-L¨of. An intuitionistic theory of types:
predicative part. In
H.E. Rose and J.C. Shepherdson (eds) Logic Colloquium ’73 (Bristol). Amsterdam: North-
Holland, pp. 73–118, 1975.
[Martin-L¨of, 1984] P. Martin-L¨of. Intuitionistic Type Theory. Napoli: Bibliopolis, 1984.
[Mayberry, 1994] J.
P.
Mayberry.
What
is
required
of
a
foundation
for
mathematics?
Philosophia Mathematica (3), 2, no. 1, 16–35, 1994.
[Mayberry, 2000] J. P. Mayberry. The Foundations of Mathematics in the Theory of Sets. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
[Mirimanoﬀ, 1917] D. Mirimanoﬀ. Les antinomies de Russell et de Burali-Forti et le probl`eme
fondamental de la th´eorie des ensembles. L’Enseignement Math´ematique, 19, 37–52, 1917.
[Moore, 1982] G. H. Moore. Zermelo’s Axiom of Choice: Its Origins, Development, and Inﬂu-
ence. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1982.
[Owen, 1957–8] G. E. L. Owen. Zeno and the mathematicians. Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society (new series), 58, 199–222. Reprinted in Salmon (1970), pp 139-163. 1957–8.
[Parikh, 1971] R. Parikh. Existence and feasibility in arithmetic. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 36,
no. 3, 494–508, 1971.
[Parsons, 1977] C. Parsons. What is the iterative conception of set?
In R.E. Butts and
J. Hintikka (eds) Proceedings of the 5th International Congress of Logic, Methodology and
Philosophy of Science 1975. Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 335–67, 1977.
[Peirce, 1885] C. S. Peirce. On the algebra of logic: a contribution to the philosophy of notation.
American Journal of Mathematics, 7, 180–202, 1885. Reprinted in [Ewald, 1996, vol. 1, 608-
32].
[Peressini, 1999] A. Peressini. Applying pure mathematics. Philosophy of Science, 66, no. 3,
S1–S13, 1999.
[P´erez Laraudogoitia, 1996] J. P´erez Laraudogoitia. A beautiful supertask. Mind, 105, no. 417,
81–3, 1996.
[P´erez Laraudogoitia, 1997] J. P´erez Laraudogoitia. Classical particle dynamics, indeterminism
and a supertask. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 48, no. 1, 49–54, 1997.
[P´erez Laraudogoitia, 1998] J. P´erez Laraudogoitia. Inﬁnity machines and creation ex nihilo.
Synthese, 115, no. 2, 259–65, 1998.
[P´erez Laraudogoitia, 1999] J. P´erez Laraudogoitia. Earman and Norton on supertasks that
generate indeterminism. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 50, no. 1, 137–41,
1999.
[P´erez Laraudogoitia, 2002] J. P´erez Laraudogoitia. Just as beautiful but not (necessarily) a
supertask. Mind, 111, no. 442, 281–7, 2002.
[Placek, 1999] T. Placek. Mathematical Intuitionism and Intersubjectivity: A Critical Exposi-
tion of Arguments for Intuitionism. Synthese Library, vol. 279. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1999.
[Poincar´e, 1905] J. H. Poincar´e. Mathematics and logic: I, 1905. Revised in 1908. Translated by
G.B. Halsted and W. Ewald. In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, 1021–38].
[Poincar´e, 1906a] J. H. Poincar´e. Mathematics and logic: II, 1906. Translated by G.B. Halsted
and W. Ewald. In [Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, 1038–52].
[Poincar´e, 1906b] J. H. Poincar´e. Mathematics and logic: III, 1906. Translated by G.B. Halsted
and W. Ewald. In [Ewald. 1996, vol. 2, 1052–71].
[Poincar´e, 1910] J. H. Poincar´e. On transﬁnite numbers, 1910. Translated by W. Ewald. In
[Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, 1071–4].
[Poincar´e, 1913] J. H. Poincar´e. Mathematics and Science: Last Essays, 1913. Translated by
J.W. Bolduc, 1963. New York: Dover.
[Pollard, 1990] S. Pollard. Philosophical Introduction to Set Theory. Notre Dame, Indiana: Uni-
versity of Notre Dame Press, 1990.
[Pollard, 1996] S. Pollard. Sets, wholes, and limited pluralities. Philosophia Mathematica (3),
4, no. 1, 42–58, 1996.

584
Peter Fletcher
[Pozsgay, 1971] L. Pozsgay. Liberal intuitionism as a basis for set theory. In D.S. Scott (ed.)
Axiomatic Set Theory, I. Providence, Rhode Island: American Mathematical Society, pp. 321–
30, 1971.
[Pudl´ak and Sochor, 1984] P. Pudl´ak and A. Sochor. Models of the alternative set theory. Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic, 49, no. 2, 570–85, 1984.
[Quine, 1937] W. V. O. Quine. New foundations for mathematical logic. American Mathematical
Monthly, 44, no. 2, 70–80, 1937.
[Robinson, 1966] A. Robinson. Non-standard Analysis. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1966.
[Russell, 1903] B. Russell. The Principles of Mathematics. London: Allen and Unwin, 1903.
[Russell, 1906] B. Russell. On some diﬃculties in the theory of transﬁnite numbers and order
types. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society (2), 4, 29–53, 1906.
[Russell, 1908] B. Russell. Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types. American Journal
of Mathematics, 30, 222–62, 1908.
[Russell, 1935–36] B. Russell. The limits of empiricism. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
(new series), 36, 131–50, 1935–6.
[Salmon, 1970] W. C. Salmon, ed. Zeno’s Paradoxes. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1970.
[Sazonov, 1995] Y. V. Sazonov. On feasible numbers. In D. Leivant (ed.) Logic and Compu-
tational Complexity. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 960. Berlin: Springer-Verlag,
pp. 30–51, 1995.
[Scott, 1970] D. S. Scott. Constructive validity. In M. Laudet, D. Lacombe, L. Nolin and
M. Sch¨utzenberger (eds) Symposium on Automatic Demonstration (Versailles, December
1968). Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 125. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 237–75, 1970.
[Shoenﬁeld, 1977] J. R. Shoenﬁeld. Axioms of set theory. In J. Barwise (ed.) Handbook of Math-
ematical Logic. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 321–44, 1977.
[Skolem, 1922] T. Skolem. Some remarks on axiomatized set theory. In van Heijenoort (1967),
pp. 290–301, 1922.
[Smith, 1996] B. Smith. Mereotopology: a theory of parts and boundaries. Data and Knowledge
Engineering, 20, no. 3, 287–303, 1996.
[Smith, 1997] B. Smith. Boundaries: an essay in mereotopology. In L.E. Hahn (ed.) The Phi-
losophy of Roderick M. Chisholm. Chicago and La Salle, Illinois: Open Court, pp. 533–63,
1997.
[Sochor, 1984] A. Sochor. The alternative set theory and its approach to Cantor’s set theory. In
H.J. Skala, S. Termini and E. Trillas (eds) Aspects of Vagueness. Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 161–
203, 1984.
[Sundholm, 1983] G. Sundholm. Constructions, proofs and the meaning of the logical constants.
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 12, no. 2, 151–72, 1983.
[Tait, 1983] W. W. Tait. Against intuitionism: constructive mathematics is part of classical
mathematics. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 12, no. 2, 173–95, 1983.
[Tait, 1986] W. W. Tait. Truth and proof: the Platonism of mathematics. Synthese, 69, no. 3,
341–70, 1986.
[Tarski, 1927] A.
Tarski.
Foundations
of
the
geometry
of
solids,
1927.
Translated
by
J.H. Woodger. In Tarski, A. (1956) Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics: Papers from 1923
to 1938. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 24–9.
[Tharp, 1971] L. H. Tharp. A quasi-intuitionistic set theory. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 36,
no. 3, 456–60, 1971.
[Thomson, 1954–55] J. Thomson. Tasks and super-tasks. Analysis, XV, 1–13. Reprinted in
Salmon (1970), pp. 89–102, 1954–5.
[Thomson, 1970] J. Thomson. Comments on Professor Benacerraf’s paper. In Salmon (1970),
pp. 130–8, 1970.
[Troelstra, 1977] A. S. Troelstra. Choice Sequences: A Chapter of Intuitionistic Mathematics.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977.
[Troelsta and van Dalen, 1988] A. S. Troelstra and D. van Dalen. Constructivism in Mathemat-
ics: An Introduction. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1988.
[van Dalen, 1973] D. van Dalen. Lectures on intuitionism. In A.R.D. Mathias and H. Rogers
(eds) Cambridge Summer School in Mathematical Logic (Cambridge, 1971). Lecture Notes
in Mathematics, vol. 337. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 1–94, 1973.
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort, ed. From Frege to G¨odel: A Source Book in Mathe-
matical Logic 1879–1931. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1967.
[van Stigt, 1990] W. P. van Stigt. Brouwer’s Intuitionism. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1990.

Inﬁnity
585
[Varzi, 1996] A. C. Varzi. Parts, wholes, and part-whole relations: the prospects of mereotopol-
ogy. Data and Knowledge Engineering, 20, no. 3, 259–86, 1996.
[Vieu, 1993] L. Vieu. A logical framework for reasoning about space. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 716, 25–35, 1993.
[von Neumann, 1925] J. von Neumann. An axiomatization of set theory. Translated by S. Bauer-
Mengelberg and D. Føllesdal. In van Heijenoort (1967), pp. 393–413, 1925.
[Vopˇenka, 1979] P. Vopˇenka. Mathematics in the Alternative Set Theory. Leipzig: Teubner,
1979.
[Wang, 1974] H. Wang. From Mathematics to Philosophy. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1974.
[Weinberg, 1995] S. Weinberg. The Quantum Theory of Fields. Vol I: Foundations. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1995.
[Weinstein, 1983] S. Weinstein. The intended interpretation of intuitionistic logic. Journal of
Philosophical Logic, 12, no. 2, 261–70, 1983.
[Wesson, 1991] P. S. Wesson. Olbers’s paradox and the spectral intensity of the extragalactic
background light. The Astrophysical Journal, 367, 399–406, 1991.
[Weyl, 1921] H. Weyl. On the new foundational crisis of mathematics, 1921. Translated by
B. M¨uller. In [Mancosu, 1998, 86–118].
[Weyl, 1925–27] H. Weyl. The current epistemological situation in mathematics, 1925–7. Trans-
lated by B. M¨uller. In [Mancosu, 1998, 123–42].
[Weyl, 1949] H. Weyl. Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1949.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica to *56.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1910.
[Wright, 1982] C. Wright. Strict ﬁnitism. Synthese, 51, no. 2, 203–82, 1982.
[Xia, 1992] Z. Xia. The existence of noncollision singularities in newtonian systems. Annals of
Mathematics, 135, no. 3, 411–68, 1992.
[Yablo, 2000] S. Yablo. A reply to new Zeno. Analysis, 60, no. 2, 148–51, 2000.
[Yessenin-Volpin, 1970] A. S. Yessenin-Volpin. The ultra-intuitionistic criticism and the antitra-
ditional program for foundations of mathematics. In A. Kino, J. Myhill and R.E. Vesley (eds)
Intuitionism and Proof Theory. Proceedings of the summer conference at Buﬀalo, New York,
1968. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 3–45, 1970.
[Zermelo, 1908] E. Zermelo. Investigations in the foundations of set theory I. Translated by
S. Bauer-Mengelberg. In van Heijenoort (1967), pp. 199–215, 1908.
[Zermelo, 1930] E. Zermelo. On boundary numbers and domains of sets: new investigations in
the foundations of set theory. Translated by M. Hallett. In Ewald (1996), vol. 2, pp. 1219–33,
1930.
[Zink, 2001] J. Zink. Peirce and the continuum from a philosophical point of view. In P. Schuster,
U. Berger and H. Osswald (eds) Reuniting the Antipodes – Constructive and Nonstandard
Views of the Continuum. Synthese Library, vol. 306. Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 303–16, 2001.


L¨OWENHEIM-SKOLEM THEOREMS
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
1
INTRODUCTION
In 1915 Leopold L¨owenheim proved that every satisﬁable ﬁrst-order sentence has
a countable model [L¨owenheim, 1915]. His result is regarded as the beginning of
model theory. As its proof is rather involved and was outside the focus of the logic
of that time, it did not receive instant acknowledgement (cf. [Badesa, 2004]).
The situation changed when Thoralf Skolem generalized L¨owenheim’s theorem
to what is now known as the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem, namely to countable
sets of ﬁrst-order sentences, providing several simpliﬁed proofs [Skolem, 1920;
Skolem, 1923; Skolem, 1929] and an unexpected consequence: In his 1923 pa-
per he gives the ﬁrst formulation of the Zermelo-Fraenkel Axiom System ZF (or
ZFC if the Axiom of Choice is included) by formulating Zermelo’s Axiom of Sepa-
ration as demanding that for every ﬁrst-order deﬁnable property E and any set S
there exists the set {x ∈S | E(x)} of the elements x of S having property E, and
proceeding similarly with the Axiom of Replacement. He justiﬁes his proposal by
its precision, its simplicity, and its suﬃcient strength. ZF(C) being a countable
system of ﬁrst-order sentences, he applies the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem, thus
showing that the system — if satisﬁable at all — has a countable model, say M.
As a model of ZF(C), M satisﬁes all theorems of ZF(C), in particular the theorem
stating that there are uncountable sets and, hence, uncountably many sets. This
seeming incompatibility got known as Skolem’s Paradox. Not clearly understood
by the pioneers of axiomatic set theory — Zermelo and Fraenkel — but by the
younger representatives such as von Neumann and G¨odel, it became the watershed
that separated the old generation from the new one which in the 1930s created
modern mathematical logic with ﬁrst-order logic its central part.
Skolem had explicated for the ﬁrst time and very clearly that ﬁrst-order logic
comes with two dual features: On the one hand it is strong enough to allow a
formulation of the whole of set theory and therefore, via modelling mathematical
notions in set-theoretic terms, for the whole of mathematics. On the other hand,
it lacks the expressive power needed to ﬁx important structures, in particular their
cardinality. It was the ﬁrst aspect, together with G¨odel’s Completeness Theorem,
which led to the rise of ﬁrst-order logic in the 1930s. Concerning the latter aspect,
it turned out that the weakness of ﬁrst-order logic as illustrated by the L¨owen-
heim-Skolem Theorem (and its generalizations) implied a methodological richness
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

588
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
which made the theorem a key fact for ﬁrst-order model theory. At the end of the
1960s, Lindstr¨om [1969] succeeded in proving that ﬁrst-order logic is optimal in
respect to the methodological possibilities it oﬀers: A logic which obeys the G¨odel
Completeness Theorem and the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem cannot be strictly
stronger than ﬁrst-order logic.
The L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem can be re-formulated as a special kind of transfer
theorem of the type:
If a (set of) sentence(s) has a model of cardinality κ,
then it has a model of cardinality µ.
Given in this way, it leads to a variety of possible L¨owenheim-Skolem-type the-
orems: One may vary κ and µ and the logic. Or one may search for stronger
transfer results by asking, given a model A of cardinality κ, whether the model of
cardinalty µ (if it exists) can be chosen as being related to A in a certain prescribed
sense, say, being an extension or a substructure of A. Faced with the fact that the
L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem is of major importance for ﬁrst-order model theory,
corresponding theorems may shed light on the model-theoretic possibilities of the
logic under consideration.
For a set Φ of sentences of a logic we denote by spec(Φ) the spectrum of Φ, i. e.,
the class of cardinalities of its models. L¨owenheim-Skolem-type theorems witness
certain closure properties of spectra. In this sense the investigation of transfer
results for a given logic is related to the problem of describing its spectra.
The present paper is intended to give a picture of what has been obtained with
respect to L¨owenheim-Skolem phenomena. The contents is as follows:
In §2 we introduce some basic terminology and describe the original result of
L¨owenheim and Skolem together with immediate extensions to some other logics.
§3 treats stronger transfer theorems for ﬁrst-order logic and inﬁnitary languages.
They are variants of the so-called L¨owenheim-Skolem-Tarski Theorem. The section
concludes with a glance at the spectrum problem for ﬁrst-order logic.
§4 investigates special transfers from “big” to “small”. The ﬁrst part deals with
reﬂection principles in set theory; they provide a transfer from “size of a class” to
“size of a set”. The second part deals with the ﬁnite model property, providing a
transfer from “inﬁnite” to “ﬁnite”.
§5 asks for the validity of transfer theorems for logics which contain operators
for ﬁxing cardinalities. The question leads to a more general type of ﬁrst-order
transfer theorems which involve several cardinalities.
After various logics have been considered with respect to the validity of transfer
theorems, §6 treats L¨owenheim numbers and Hanf numbers as a means to mea-
sure the extent to which transfer theorems are valid. It starts by introducing an
appropriate framework for a general theory of logical systems.
§7 stays within this framework, describing two results which expose general
features of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem. The ﬁrst one treats Lindstr¨om-type
theorems, thus providing arguments for the essential role of upward and downward

L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems
589
transfer for ﬁrst-order logic. The second one treats a general L¨owenheim-Skolem
Theorem for logics which are “nearly ﬁrst-order”, a property made precise by set-
theoretic conditions which impose some kind of simplicity on the syntax and on
the semantics.
The cardinal transfers treated so far concern the case where one starts with an
inﬁnite cardinal. Finally, §8 turns to the case where the cardinals involved are
ﬁnite.
The presentation of the results is accompanied by speciﬁc information about the
literature. A systematic treatment of ﬁrst-order L¨owenheim-Skolem phenomena
can be found, for example, in [Chang and Keisler, 1973] or [Hodges, 1993].
2
THE L¨OWENHEIM-SKOLEM THEOREM
2.1
Notational conventions
The set of natural numbers 0, 1, 2, . . . is denoted by ω.
Vocabularies τ consist of relation symbols R, . . ., function symbols f, . . ., and/or
constants c, . . .. Each R ∈τ has an arity ar(R) ≥1 and each f ∈τ an arity
ar(f) ≥1. A vocabulary τ is relational if it contains only relation symbols.
To deﬁne ﬁrst-order logic FO, we ﬁx a denumerable set V = {xi | i ∈ω} of
ﬁrst-order variables.
First-order τ-formulas are deﬁned as usual and may contain the identity symbol.
FO[τ] is the set of (ﬁrst-order) τ-formulas. A formula without a free variable is
called a sentence. By ϕ(x1, . . . , xn) or, for short, ϕ(x), we denote formulas ϕ where
the variables free in ϕ occur among x1, . . . xn. The abbreviation x always refers
to tuples of appropriate length.
The quantiﬁer rank of a formula is the maximal number of nested quantiﬁers
occurring in it.
For a sentence ϕ and a unary relation symbol U, ϕU denotes the relativization
of ϕ to U. It arises from ϕ by relativizing all quantiﬁers to U. Intuitively, ϕU says
that ϕ holds on U.
With τ = {R, . . . , f, . . . , c, . . .}, a τ-structure A is of the form
A = (A, RA, . . . , f A, . . . , cA, . . .)
where A ̸= ∅is the domain of A, and for R ∈τ, f ∈τ, and c ∈τ we have
RA ⊆Aar(R), f A : Aar(f) →A, and cA ∈A, respectively.
A τ-structure A is a substructure of the τ-structure B, in terms: A ⊆B, if
A ⊆B and A and B coincide on A. In this case, A is τ-closed in B, i. e., c ∈A for
c ∈τ and A is closed under f B for f ∈τ.
If σ is a vocabulary with σ ⊇τ, A a τ-structure, and B a σ-structure, we write
A = B ↾τ
if A = B and A and B coincide on τ. We then call A a reduct (the τ-reduct) of
B and B an expansion of A.

590
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
For a cardinal κ, A has power κ if the cardinality |A| of A equals κ.
Given a τ-structure A, an A-assignment α of the set V of variables is a mapping
from V into the domain A of A. For A, α, and ϕ ∈FO[τ], say, ϕ = ϕ(x), we write
(A, α) |= ϕ
or
A |= ϕ(α(x))
if (A, α) satisﬁes ϕ or is a model of ϕ in the usual sense (where the variables x are
interpreted by α(x)).
Given a ∈A (short for a ∈Alength of a),
A |= ϕ(a)
means that (A, α) |= ϕ for any A-assignment α with α(x) = a.
In case ϕ is a sentence, we simply write A |= ϕ.
By deﬁnition, (A, α) is a model of the set Φ of ﬁrst-order τ-formulas, in terms:
(A, α) |= Φ, if (A, α) is a model of all ϕ ∈Φ.
A τ-formula or a set of τ-formulas is satisﬁable if it has a model.
A set is countable if it is ﬁnite or countably inﬁnite.
If κ is a cardinal, κ+
denotes the cardinal successor of κ, i. e., the smallest cardinal > κ.
2.2
The theorem and its proof
The proof of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem sketched below follows a simple
idea: Given a large model A of a set Φ of ﬁrst-order sentences, one can construct
a small model B of Φ by choosing a small subset of the domain A of A and closing
it under examples for ﬁrst-order existential assertions true in A. If B is the closure,
one can deﬁne B as the substructure of A with domain B.
The L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem. If Φ is a countable set of ﬁrst-order τ-
sentences which is satisﬁable (say, by the τ-structure A ) then Φ has a countable
model (which can be chosen as a substructure of A ).
Proof. We may assume that τ is countable, too. To illustrate the main idea, we
ﬁrst treat the special case where τ = {R} with binary R and Φ = {∀x ∃y Rxy}.
Let
A |= ∀x ∃y Rxy.
In order to get a countable substructure B ⊆A with B |= ∀x ∃y Rxy we start with
a nonempty countable subset B0 of A, say
B0 = {a0},
where a0 ∈A, and deﬁne an ascending chain B0 ⊆B1 ⊆B2 . . . of countable
subsets of A by choosing, for any i ∈ω, Bi+1 above Bi in such a way that for all
b ∈Bi, the set Bi+1 contains some b′ with (b, b′) ∈RA. Let B := 
i∈ω Bi. As τ is
relational, B is τ-closed in A and, hence, the domain of a countable substructure
B of A. By construction, B |= ∀x ∃y Rxy.

L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems
591
The deﬁnition of the chain B0 ⊆B1 ⊆B2 . . . can be given in a slightly diﬀerent
form by choosing a so-called Skolem function for ∀x ∃y Rxy in A, namely a function
h : A →A such that for all a ∈A,
h(a) := some b such that A |= Rab.
Then one can deﬁne Bi+1 as the union of Bi and its image under h, and B is the
closure of B0 in A under h.
If Φ consists of sentences of the form ∀x ∃y ϕ(x, y) with quantiﬁer-free ϕ (so-
called Π2-sentences or sentences in Skolem normal form), we can argue as above.
In his 1920 proof Skolem reduces the general case to this special case. Here we
sketch a somewhat diﬀerent way which will pay later.
Let τ be countable, Φ ⊆FO[τ], and A |= Φ. Let Σ be the set of all formulas of
the form ∃y ψ(x, y) where ψ is an arbitrary τ-formula. Σ is countable. For
∃y ψ(x, y) =: χ ∈Σ
we deﬁne a Skolem function hχ : Alength of x →A, using a ﬁxed element a0 of A,
as follows:
hχ(a) :=
 a0, if A |= ¬∃y ψ(a, y)
some b such that A |= ψ(a, b), else.
We construct the chain B0 ⊆B1 ⊆B2 ⊆. . . ⊆A with B0 as above by setting
Bi+1 := Bi ∪{hχ(a) | χ ∈Σ and a ∈Bi}
for all i ∈ω and B := 
i∈ω Bi. It is easy to show that B is τ-closed and, hence,
induces a (countable) substructure B of A with domain B. By induction on the
composition of formulas one can prove that for all ϕ(x) and for all b ∈B,
A |= ϕ(b)
iﬀ
B |= ϕ(b).
As A |= Φ, we have B |= Φ.
■
Our argumentation (as also that in [Skolem, 1920]) uses the Axiom of Choice,
namely in the deﬁnition of the hχ. The argumentation in [Skolem, 1923] avoids
the Axiom of Choice by constructing the chain B0 ⊆B1 ⊆B2 ⊆. . . in the set of
natural numbers, making use of their natural well-ordering. Hence, when starting
with a model A of Φ, it leads to a countable model B whose domain is a set of
natural numbers. We will not pay attention to the Axiom of Choice, but will
tacitly argue in ZFC.
As mentioned in the introduction, the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem illustrates
a weakness of ﬁrst-order logic, at the same time playing an essential role in ﬁrst-
order model theory. To give an illustration of the latter aspect, we show that
the theory T ⊆FO[{<}] of dense open orderings, i. e., of orderings which are
dense and do not have a minimal or a maximal element (like the ordering of the
rationals), is complete in the sense that for any sentence ϕ ∈FO[{<}], either ϕ ∈T

592
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
or ¬ϕ ∈T. For reductio ad absurdum assume that for some sentence ϕ neither
ϕ ∈T nor ¬ϕ ∈T. Then both T ∪{ϕ} and T ∪{¬ϕ} are satisﬁable. By the
L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem they have countable models A and B, respectively.
By a theorem of Cantor, any two countable dense open orderings are isomorphic.
Hence, A |= ϕ iﬀB |= ϕ, a contradiction.
2.3
Some immediate extensions
The proof of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem given above can immediately be
extended to some more powerful logics. We give two examples.
Logic with the Inﬁnity Quantiﬁer. Let Q be a new unary quantiﬁer symbol and
extend the rules for forming ﬁrst-order formulas by the rule allowing the transition
from ϕ to Qx ϕ for any variable x. Extend the satisfaction relation by
A |= Qx ϕ(a, x) iﬀ
there are inﬁnitely many b ∈A such that A |= ϕ(a, b).
The resulting logic FO(Q) is stronger than ﬁrst-order logic. For example, there is
no Φ ⊆FO[∅] whose models are just the ﬁnite sets, whereas the sentence ¬Qx x = x
of FO(Q) has this property. To prove the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem for FO(Q),
one proceeds as in the proof above, letting Σ contain also the corresponding formu-
las of the form Qy ψ(x, y) and adding to Bi+1 countably many b with A |= ψ(a, b)
in case a ∈Bi and A |= Qy ψ(a, b).
Weak Second-Order Logic. Second-order logic SO does not satisfy the analogue
of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem. For instance, the ordered ﬁeld of the reals is
up to isomorphism the only model of the (ﬁnite) set Φ consisting of the axioms
for ordered ﬁelds together with the Completeness Axiom saying that every subset
of the universe which is nonempty and bounded to the left, has an inﬁmum. So
Φ has only models of power 2ℵ0.
Things change if we consider weak second order logic WSO. In WSO no function
variables are allowed, and the relation variables run over ﬁnite relations. WSO
satisﬁes the analogue of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem. The proof for FO ex-
tends to WSO in a way similar to the extension from FO to FO(Q), making use of
the simple fact that a ﬁnite relation comprises only ﬁnitely many elements.
3
L¨OWENHEIM-SKOLEM-TARSKI THEOREMS
3.1
The downward L¨owenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem
We start with a deﬁnition.
Let A and B be τ-structures.
B is an elementary
substructure of A (and A an elementary extension of B), in terms: B ⪯A, if
B ⊆A and for all ϕ(x) ∈FO[τ] and b ∈B,
B |= ϕ(b)
iﬀ
A |= ϕ(b).

L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems
593
If B ⪯A, then A and B satisfy the same ﬁrst-order τ-sentences even if parameters
from B are allowed. In general, the elementary substructure relation is stronger
than the substructure relation. For example, the ﬁeld Q of the rational numbers
is a substructure of the ﬁeld R of the real numbers, but not an elementary one,
as 2 is a square in R, but not in Q.
With a straightforward generalization to higher cardinals the proof of the L¨o-
wenheim-Skolem Theorem given above yields the following stronger form which
goes back to Tarski [Tarski and Vaught, 1957]:
THEOREM. For any τ-structure A and any inﬁnite cardinal λ, if |FO[τ]| ≤λ ≤
|A|, then there is a τ-structure B with
B ⪯A and |B| = λ.
B can be chosen such that X ⊆B for a given subset X of A of cardinality ≤λ.
Moreover, there is an extension to certain inﬁnitary logics. For a given inﬁnite
cardinal κ, let the logic Lκ+ω be deﬁned like ﬁrst-order logic, but allowing con-
junctions and disjunctions over sets of formulas of cardinality ≤κ as far as the
resulting formulas contain only ﬁnitely many free variables. For every formula ϕ
of Lκ+ω there is a vocabulary τ with |τ| ≤κ such that ϕ ∈Lκ+ω[τ]; moreover,
ϕ has at most κ many subformulas.
As usual, we write Lω1ω for Lℵ1ω.
A strict analogue of the L¨owenheim-Skolem-Tarski Theorem fails already in the
countable case. For example, any Lω1ω-elementary substructure B of the ordered
ﬁeld R of the reals (as a {+, ·, 0, 1, <}-structure) contains all reals since each real
x can be described by countably many inequalities of the form x < ρ or ρ < x
with rational numbers ρ.1
There is, however, a weaker form: Given, say, a relational τ, a sentence ϕ of
Lκ+ω[τ], and a model A of ϕ, one can proceed as in the proof of the L¨owenheim-
Skolem Theorem, taking as Σ the set of all formulas ∃y ψ(x, y) of Lκ+ω[τ] where
ψ is a subformula of ϕ or the negation of such a formula. Σ has cardinality ≤κ.
Concentrating on the subformulas of ϕ and their negations, one thus gets the
relational version of
Downward L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem for Inﬁnitary Logic. Let κ be
inﬁnite, |τ| ≤κ, and ϕ a sentence in Lκ+ω[τ]. If A is a τ-structure with A |= ϕ
and κ ≤λ ≤|A|, then there is a τ-structure B with
B ⊆A, B |= ϕ, and |B| = λ.
If τ is not relational, we enlarge Σ by the formulas ∃y f(x) = y and ∃y c = y for
f, c ∈τ. It is here that the assumption |τ| ≤κ is needed.
To give an application, we consider simple groups, i. e., groups having no non-
trivial normal subgroups. The class of simple groups can be axiomatized by a
sentence of Lω1ω. By the preceding theorem, each simple group G has a countable
simple subgroup.
1For, say, ρ = 2/3, x < ρ can be expressed as x + x + x < 1 + 1.

594
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
3.2
The upward L¨owenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem
The transfer theorems given so far deal with downward transfers. What about
the other direction? In the ﬁrst-order case it can be proved by making use of
the compactness theorem. In §§6 and 7 we shall see that upward transfer and
compactness are related in various ways.
We start with a simple case: If Φ is a set of ﬁrst-order τ-sentences and A an
inﬁnite model of Φ, then by the compactness theorem for ﬁrst-order logic, given a
set C of new constants of power ≥λ, the set
Φ ∪{¬c = c′ | c, c′ ∈C, c ̸= c′}
has a model, say B. Obviously, |B| ≥λ. We get more if we work not with Φ,
but with the so-called elementary diagram ED(A) of the model A of Φ. With new
constants a for a ∈A we set
ED(A) := {ϕ(a) | ϕ(x) ∈FO[τ], a ∈A, A |= ϕ(a)}.
(Note that Φ ⊆ED(A).) Then the corresponding model (B, (aB)a∈A) with |B| ≥λ
can be chosen such that aB = a for a ∈A, i. e., such that A ⪯B. If |A| ≤λ and
FO[τ] ≤λ, we apply the Downward L¨owenheim-Skolem-Tarski Theorem to B and
X := A to get D with A ⪯D ⪯B and |D| = λ. Hence, we have proved the
following theorem from [Tarski and Vaught, 1957]:
Upward L¨owenheim-Skolem-Tarski Theorem. Let A be an inﬁnite τ-structure
and λ ≥max{|A|, |FO[τ]|}. Then there is a τ-structure B with
A ⪯B and |B| = λ.
⊣
The extensions of ﬁrst-order logic considered so far do not allow a corresponding
upward transfer: For any inﬁnite κ, the logic Lκ+ω allows to characterize the
natural ordering of ω up to isomorphism, namely by the axioms for orderings with
a ﬁrst but not a last element together with the sentence
∀x

{“there are at most n elements < x” | n = 0, 1, 2, . . .}.
Similarly one can argue with FO(Q) and weak second-order logic WSO.
The L¨owenheim-Skolem-Tarski Theorems can be regarded as strengthenings of the
simple transfer theorem addressed in the introduction, requiring that the models
in question are linked by the elementary substructure relation. There is a variety
of other strengthenings. For example, the models may have additional properties
such as being saturated, admitting few types, etc. Many theorems of ﬁrst-order
model theory which show the existence of models with special properties, can be
interpreted in this way.
For later reference, Subsection 3. 4 below contains an
important example: models with indiscernibles.

L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems
595
3.3
Spectra
Let Φ be a set of ﬁrst-order τ-sentences with an inﬁnite model. According to the
L¨owenheim-Skolem-Tarski Theorems, Φ has models of all cardinalities ≥|FO[τ]|,
i. e., the spectrum of Φ,
spec(Φ) :=
{|A| | A |= Φ},
the class of cardinalities of models of Φ, contains all cardinals ≥|FO[τ]|. What
about the cardinalities of models of Φ in the interval
[ω, |FO[τ]|⟩:= {ν | ω ≤ν < |FO[τ]|}?
A ﬁrst answer is given by the following result of Keisler (cf. [Chang and Keisler,
1973], Cor. 6. 5. 12):
THEOREM. For all µ ≥ω and ν ≥µω, if µ is less than the ﬁrst (uncountable)
measurable cardinal and µ ∈spec(Φ) then ν ∈spec(Φ).
The special case ν = µω is a consequence of a weaker form of the theorem saying
that spec(Φ) is closed under exponentiations in the inﬁnite.
The proof of this
form uses ultrapower techniques: Let A |= Φ with |A| = µ ≥ω, and let ν ≥ω.
Moreover, let D be a regular ultraﬁlter over ν. Then the ultrapower 
ι∈ν A/D is
a model of Φ of cardinality µν.
Results concerning the possible gap between µ and µω in the theorem would have
to be of a special kind. A result of Mekler [1977] shows that for µ ∈spec(Φ) the
set spec(Φ)∩[µ, µω⟩has no regular pattern: Given µ less than the ﬁrst measurable
cardinal such that
ω ≤µ < µω,
and given S ⊆[µ, µω⟩, there are τ and a set Φ of ﬁrst-order τ-sentences such that
spec(Φ) ∩[0, µω⟩= S.
3.4
Appendix: models with indiscernibles
Indiscernibles provide a powerful tool in model theory and will be of importance
for several topics treated below. In order to give an impression, we describe a
basic variant in more detail.
Let A be a τ-structure and (B, <) an ordering with B ⊆A.
(B, <) is an
ordered set of indiscernibles in A if, for all ϕ(x) ∈FO[τ] and all <-ascending
tuples a, b ∈B,2
A |= ϕ(a) iﬀA |= ϕ(b).
The main result, going back to Ehrenfeucht and Mostowski [1956], says:
PROPOSITION. If Φ ⊆FO[τ] is a set of sentences with an inﬁnite model and
(C, <) is an ordering, then Φ has a model which has (C, <) as an ordered set of
2Equivalently, one can consider <-isomorphic tuples.

596
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
indiscernibles. If |C| ≥|FO[τ]|, then there is such a model which has cardinality
|C|.
Proof. Choosing new constants c for c ∈C, it suﬃces to show that the set
Θ := Φ ∪

c ̸= d | c, d ∈C, c ̸= d

∪

ϕ(c) ↔ϕ(d) | ϕ(x) ∈FO[τ] and c, d <-ascending tuples over C

has a model. W.l.o.g. one can assume that (C, <) is dense and open. By the
compactness theorem the satisﬁability of Θ can be reduced to the satisﬁability
of all sets of the form Φ ∪Ψ with Ψ a ﬁnite set of inequalities c ̸= d and of
equivalences
ϕ(c) ↔ϕ(d),
where c, d ∈C are <-ascending and for the ﬁnitely many ϕ1(x), . . . , ϕk(x) involved,
the tuples x are of the same length n(Ψ).
Let A be an inﬁnite model of Φ and ≺an arbitrary ordering relation on A.
Given Ψ as above, deﬁne an equivalence relation ∼on the set of ≺-ascending
n(Ψ)-tuples of A by setting
a ∼b
:iﬀ

A |= ϕi(a) iﬀA |= ϕi(b)

for i = 1, . . . , k.
As ∼has only ﬁnitely many equivalence classes, Ramsey’s Theorem yields that A
contains an inﬁnite subset B such that all ≺-ascending n(Ψ)-tuples over B belong
to the same equivalence class. Hence, Φ ∪Ψ has a model which results from A by
interpreting the constants c in Ψ by suitable b ∈B.
■
4
FROM “VERY LARGE” TO “VERY SMALL”
Basically, the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem deals with transfer from inﬁnite cardi-
nalities to smaller inﬁnite cardinalities. In this section we shortly discuss transfer
from “very large” to “very small”, exemplifying the contrast by (1) “very large”
= “size of a class” and “very small” = “size of a set” and (2) “very large” =
“inﬁnite” and “very small” = “ﬁnite”.
4.1
The reﬂection theorem
We consider ﬁrst-order set theory based on the Zermelo-Fraenkel Axiom System
ZF. The levels Vα of the von Neumann Hierarchy are deﬁned by iterating the power
set operation along the ordinals:
V0 = ∅
for all ordinals α, Va+1 = powerset of Vα
for all limit ordinals δ, Vδ =

{Vβ | β < δ}.
The hierarchy is cumulative in the sense that Vα ⊆Vβ for α ≤β. Hence, the union
of a set of levels is a level. The union of all Vα is the whole universe.

L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems
597
Let ϕ(x) be a ﬁrst-order formula of set theory. Regarding the universe as a
big {∈}-structure, one can imitate the proof of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem,
thereby concentrating on the subformulas of ϕ and their negations (as in the proof
of the inﬁnitary version in Subsection 3. 1.) and starting with an arbitrary level
Vγ. Instead of adding single examples for a valid statement ∃y ψ(a, y), one adds
all elements of the lowest level Vβ containing an example, in this way avoiding
use of the Axiom of Choice. Let W be the union of all levels Vβ involved in the
construction. Then W is a level which behaves as an elementary subset of the
universe (with respect to the ∈-relation) for the subformulas of ϕ. By writing
“Vβ reﬂects ϕ(x)”
for
“∀x ∈Vβ

ϕ(x)Vβ ↔ϕ(x)

”,
we thus have:
Reﬂection Theorem. Let ϕ(x) be a ﬁrst-order formula of set theory. Then ZF
proves that for all γ there exists an α ≥γ such that Vα reﬂects ϕ(x). In particular,
if ϕ is a sentence which is provable in ZF, then ZF proves that ϕ holds in some
level of the von Neumann Hierarchy.
The theorem goes back to Montague
[1961] and Levy [1960]. Levy showed in
addition that reﬂection is equivalent to the Axiom of Replacement together with
the Axiom of Inﬁnity.
By G¨odel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem one cannot prove that the uni-
verse (together with the ∈-relation) has an elementary substructure Vα. So the
restriction to single formulas in the Reﬂection Theorem is essential. On the other
hand, stronger forms of reﬂection may serve as stronger axioms of inﬁnity (cf.,
e. g., [Kanamori, 1994]).
4.2
The ﬁnite model property
Let Φ be a class of formulas of a logic L. Φ has the ﬁnite model property if any
satisﬁable ϕ ∈Φ has a ﬁnite model.
In the case of ﬁrst-order logic, the ﬁnite model property for a recursive Φ implies
the decidability of the satisﬁability problem for Φ.
If, say, τ is ﬁnite and Φ a
recursive set of ﬁrst-order τ-sentences with the ﬁnite model property, the satisﬁable
sentences of Φ are recursively enumerable as one can enumerate the sentences
in Φ and all ﬁnite τ-structures (up to isomorphism) and eﬀectively check the
satisfaction relation; the unsatisﬁable sentences of Φ are recursively enumerable
because their negations are tautologies and, hence, recursively enumerable by the
G¨odel Completeness Theorem.
As a rule, one gets complexity results, too. To give some examples, let
• τ be ﬁnite and relational and Φ the set of universal ﬁrst-order τ-sentences,
i. e., of τ-sentences ∀x ϕ with quantiﬁer-free ϕ;
• τ = {P1, . . . , Pn} with unary relation symbols Pi and Φ the set of ﬁrst-order
τ-sentences.

598
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
In order to show the ﬁnite model property of Φ, observe for the ﬁrst example that
the model class of a universal ﬁrst-order sentence is closed under substructures.
Concerning the second example, given a τ-sentence ϕ, let A and B be τ-structures
which are ϕ-similar in the sense that for any conjunction (¬)P1x ∧. . . ∧(¬)Pnx
the number of elements of A and the number of elements of B satisfying it are
equal or both greater than the quantiﬁer rank qr(ϕ) of ϕ. Then one can prove
that A |= ϕ iﬀB |= ϕ. For any A there is a ﬁnite B of size ≤2n · (1 + qr(ϕ)) such
that A and B are ϕ-similar.
Hence, in both cases there exists a recursive function f deﬁned on Φ with values
in ω such that any satisﬁable ϕ ∈Φ has a model of cardinality ≤f(ϕ). Thus,
by checking “A |= ϕ?” for all τ-structures with domain ⊆{0, . . . , f(ϕ) −1}, one
can decide the satisﬁability of ϕ and also evaluate the complexity of this decision
procedure, thus getting an upper bound for the complexity of the satisﬁability
problem.
The decidability of the satisﬁability problem for ﬁrst-order sentences containing
only unary relation symbols goes back to [L¨owenheim, 1915]. For further results
see [B¨orger et al., 1997]. We conclude with an important example of Mortimer
[1975], the complexity bound stemming from [Gr¨adel et al., 1997]:
THEOREM. First-order logic restricted to sentences of a relational vocabulary
which use at most two diﬀerent variables, has the ﬁnite model property. More
exactly: Any such sentence ϕ which is satisﬁable, has a model of a cardinality
which is exponentially bounded in the length of ϕ.
Two-variable ﬁrst-order logic is strong enough to admit an eﬀective embedding of
various modal logics. Hence, also these logics obey an eﬀective version of the ﬁnite
model property and have a decidable satisﬁability problem (cf. [Gabbay, 1971]
and, for temporal logics, also [Etessami et al., 2002]).
5
BUILDING CARDINALITIES INTO THE LOGIC
In order to overcome the weakness of ﬁrst-order logic apparent in the L¨owenheim-
Skolem-type theorems, extensions of ﬁrst-order logic with built-in possibilities for
ﬁxing cardinalities have been introduced. We shall consider here the most basic
type of such logics. They will lead to theorems on the simultaneous transfer for
several cardinals.
5.1
Logic with the quantiﬁer “There are ℵα Many”
In Subsection 2. 2 we have described the logic FO(Q) which arises from ﬁrst-order
logic by adjoining a new unary quantiﬁer Q interpreted by “there are inﬁnitely
many”. In the following we write “Q0” instead of “Q”, thereby indicating the
intended meaning “there are at least ℵ0 many”. Generalization from α = 0 to
arbitrary ordinals α results in the logics FO(Qα), where Qα now says that there
are at least ℵα many.

L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems
599
The logics FO(Qα) go back to Mostowski [1957]. They were ﬁrst investigated
by Fuhrken [1964; 1965] and Vaught [1964].
For information about them and
the variety of further logics with cardinality constructs, cf. [Ebbinghaus, 1985;
Kaufmann, 1985; Mundici, 1985]. We mainly treat the logic FO(Q1) here.
FO(Q1) satisﬁes the compactness theorem for countable sets of formulas and
a completeness theorem for countable sets of premises. An elegant calculus was
given by Keisler [1970]. On the other hand, compactness fails already for sets of
sentences of cardinality ℵ1 as exempliﬁed by the set
{¬Q1x x = x} ∪{¬cα = cβ | α < β < ℵ1}.
The exact analogue of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem fails, too, as exempliﬁed
by the sentence Q1x x = x. Even more, FO(Q1) is able to ﬁx the cardinality ℵ1,
say, by a {<}-sentence expressing that (universe, <) is an ℵ1-like ordering, i. e., an
uncountable ordering such that every strict initial segment is countable. However,
there is the following weaker form which ensures transfer down to ℵ1:
THEOREM. Let τ be of cardinality ≤ℵ1 and A an uncountable τ-structure.
Then for any κ with ℵ1 ≤κ ≤|A|, A has an FO(Q1)-elementary substructure of
cardinality κ.
Proof. It varies that for FO(Q) in Subsection 2. 3 by starting with a subset of
cardinality κ and choosing ℵ1 many examples for true statements of the form
Q1y ϕ(a, y).
■
Obviously the theorem and its proof can be generalized to all FO(Qα).
The analogue of the Upward L¨owenheim-Skolem-Tarski Theorem fails in a
strong form. For given κ we deﬁne the corresponding Beth operation recursively
by
ℶ0(κ) = κ
for all ordinals α, ℶα+1(κ) = 2ℶα(κ)
for all limit ordinals δ, ℶδ(κ) = sup{ ℶβ(κ) | β < δ}.
Then we have:
PROPOSITION. For every n ∈ω there is a vocabulary τn and a sentence ϕn of
FO(Q1)[τn] which has a model of cardinality ℶn(ℵ0), but no larger model.
Proof. We set τ0 := ∅and ϕ0 := ¬Qx x = x. Suppose that τn and ϕn are already
deﬁned and satisfy the claim. Using a new unary relation symbol U and a new
binary relation symbol E, we set
τn+1 := τn ∪{U, E}
and let ϕn+1 say that ϕn holds in the substructure with domain U and that the
elements of the universe code subsets of U, Exy meaning that x belongs to the
subset of U coded by y, i. e., we set
ϕn+1 := ϕU
n ∧∀xy

Exy →Ux

∧∀yy′ 
∀x (Exy ↔Exy′) →y = y′
.

600
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
Then in any model A of ϕn+1 we have
|U A| ≤ℶn(ℵ0)
and
|A| ≤2|U A|,
and, hence,
|A| ≤2ℶn(ℵ0) = ℶn+1(ℵ0).
As ϕn has a model of cardinality ℶn(ℵ0), the sentence ϕn+1 has a model of cardi-
nality ℶn+1(ℵ0).
■
5.2
Two cardinal theorems
Given α and β, one can ask whether FO(Qα) and FO(Qβ) have the same valid sen-
tences, or, more general, to what extent FO(Qα) and FO(Qβ) behave in the same
way. As for any α the quantiﬁer Qα acts trivially on structures of cardinality < ℵα
and as FO(Qα) satisﬁes transfer down to ℵα, one may concentrate on structures
of cardinality ℵα when investigating this logic.
For successor ordinals α + 1 a reformulation of the problem leads to a new
kind of transfer theorems which involve four cardinals. Starting our preparations
with the example α = 0 we show that the meaning of a sentence of FO(Q1) in
structures of cardinality ℵ1 can be reduced to the meaning of a related ﬁrst-order
sentence in structures of cardinality ℵ1 where some ﬁxed unary relation symbol U
is interpreted by a countably inﬁnite set.
Let A be a τ-structure of cardinality ℵ1. Set σ = τ ∪{U, <, F} with new relation
symbols U (unary), < (binary), and F (ternary). Expand A to a σ-structure B by
taking U Bcountably inﬁnite and letting (A, <B) be an ordering and F B a ternary
relation over A such that for all a ∈A, F(·, ·, a) describes an injection from the
initial section of (A, <B) determined by a into U B. Then (A, <B) is an ℵ1-like
ordering, and an arbitrary subset of A is uncountable just in case it is unbounded
in (A, <B). Hence, for example, ¬Qy Py (with unary P in τ) has the same meaning
in A as ∃z ∀y (Py →y < z) has in B.
Now the question whether, for instance, FO(Qα+1) has the same valid sentences
as FO(Q1) or satisﬁes the compactness theorem for countable sets of sentences like
FO(Q1) does, can be reduced to the question whether any countable set of ﬁrst-
order sentences with a designated unary relation symbol U which has a model A of
cardinality ℵα+1 with |U A| = ℵα, has a model B of cardinality ℵ1 with |U B| = ℵ0,
and vice versa. Writing
(ℵα+1, ℵα) →(ℵ1, ℵ0) and (ℵ1, ℵ0) →(ℵα+1, ℵα)
for the respective transfer property, we arrive at the question for what cardinals
ℵ0 ≤µi ≤κi (i = 1, 2) we have (κ1, µ1) →(κ2, µ2).
Respective results are known as two-cardinal theorems.
We list some exam-
ples. Further ones, also examples involving even more cardinals, can be found in
[Schmerl, 1985]. For a systematic treatment and a representation of the combina-
torial methods involved see [Devlin, 1984; Kanamori, 1994], and also [Chang and
Keisler, 1973].

L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems
601
THEOREM.
(a) For all ordinals α,
(ℵα+1, ℵα) →(ℵ1, ℵ0).
(b) (GCH) For all ordinals α with ℵα regular,
(ℵ1, ℵ0) →(ℵα+1, ℵα).
(c) (V = L) For all ordinals α, (ℵ1, ℵ0) →(ℵα+1, ℵα).
(d) (V = L) For all ordinals α and β,
(ℵα+2, ℵα) →(ℵβ+2, ℵβ).
Part (a) is Vaught’s Two-Cardinal Theorem from [Morley and Vaught, 1962],
part (b) Chang’s Two-Cardinal Theorem from [Chang, 1965]. The assumption of
the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis in (b) is necessary because the proof uses
saturated models. The extension (c) of (b) under the Axiom of Constructibility
is due to Jensen [1972]; its proof replaces the use of saturated models by that of
special ones. Parts (a) to (c) are examples of gap-1 theorems. Part (d), also due
to Jensen, is an example of a gap-2 theorem.
According to, say, part (c) we have under V = L that for all ordinals α, the
logic FO(Qα+1) has the same valid sentences as FO(Q1), satisﬁes the compactness
theorem for countable sets of sentences and also the completeness theorem for
countable sets of premises with the same set of rules as that from [Keisler, 1970]
for FO(Q1). (Compactness and completeness even hold for sets of sentences of
cardinality ≤ℵα; see [Schmerl, 1985].)
We conclude with some simple counterexamples. Using ℵ1-like orderings, one
instantly sees that
(ℵ1, ℵ0) ̸→(ℵ2, ℵ0),
and the construction in the preceding subsection shows that
for all n ∈ω,

ℶn(ℵ0), ℵ0

̸→

ℶn+1(ℵ0), ℵ0

.
However, in Subsection 6. 4 we shall see that

ℶω(ℵ0), ℵ0

→

κ, ℵ0

for all κ ≥ℶω(ℵ0).
6
TRANSFER IN GENERAL LOGIC SYSTEMS
As emphasized earlier, the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem witnesses a weakness of
ﬁrst-order logic. On the one hand, ﬁrst-order model theory lives on this weakness.
For example, the characterization of the models of a given theory up to elemen-
tary equivalence (in the sense of satisfying the same ﬁrst-order sentences) may
provide valuable insights in cases where a characterization up to isomorphism is
still missing. On the other hand, this weakness limits the applicability of ﬁrst-
order model theory as the structures under consideration may not be ﬁrst-order
characterizable. Using stronger logics to overcome this shortage may result in re-
duced model-theoretic possibilities. The 1970s brought the rise of a general theory
for investigating the model-theoretic behaviour of logics which allows to facilitate
tracing model-theoretically promising systems [Barwise and Feferman, 1985]. In
the present section and the next one we report on some of its results that deal
with L¨owenheim-Skolem-type phenomena.

602
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
6.1
General logic systems
Up to now we have met a variety of logics: ﬁrst-order logic, (weak) second-order
logic, logics with cardinality quantiﬁers, inﬁnitary logics. The notion of a general
logic system is designed to catch essential features of these examples. We provide
only a rough description, referring for details to [Ebbinghaus, 1985].
A general logic system L is given by
•
a mapping deﬁned on vocabularies which maps a vocabulary τ to a class L[τ],
the class of τ-sentences of L,
•
a binary relation |=L, the L-satisfaction relation, which consists of pairs (A, ϕ)
where – for suitable τ – A is a τ-structure and ϕ ∈L[τ],
such that the following properties hold:
(a) τ ⊆σ →L[τ] ⊆L[σ].
(b) Isomorphic τ-structures satisfy the same sentences of L[τ].
(c) For τ ⊆σ, ϕ ∈L[τ], and A a σ-structure, ( A |=L ϕ iﬀA ↾τ |=L ϕ).
(d) The satisfaction relation |=L is invariant under renamings of symbols.
A general logic system L is small if every L[τ] is a set. L has the ﬁnite occurrence
property if each sentence of L belongs to L[τ] for some ﬁnite τ, and it is of bounded
occurrence if there is a cardinal ν such that each sentence of L belongs to L[τ] for
some τ with |τ| ≤ν. L is compact if it obeys the analogue of the compactness
theorem for arbitrary sets of sentences, and it is countably compact if it does so
for countable sets of sentences.
If appropriate, we admit variables in a natural way.
The general logic systems we have mentioned so far, are regular in the following
sense: They contain all atomic sentences, are closed under the usual proposi-
tional connectives, ﬁrst-order quantiﬁcations, relativizations, and the substitution
of relation symbols by deﬁned relations of the same arity, and, moreover, allow
to eliminate function symbols and constants by use of relation symbols (namely
their graphs). Any regular general logic system is at least as expressive as ﬁrst-
order logic.
For simplicity, we shall speak of logics when referring to regular general logic
systems.
6.2
L¨owenheim numbers
The preceding sections present a variety of results about downward and upward
transfer for various logics. There is a uniform kind of measuring the extent to
which such L¨owenheim-Skolem phenomena are valid in a logic, namely by two types
of cardinals, L¨owenheim numbers as a measure for downward transfer and Hanf
numbers as a measure for upward transfer. We start with L¨owenheim numbers.

L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems
603
DEFINITION. The L¨owenheim number l(L) of a logic L is the least cardinal µ
such that every satisﬁable sentence of L has a model of cardinality ≤µ, provided
such a cardinal exists; otherwise, l(L) = ∞.3
Using inequalities between constants, one gets l(L) ≥ℵ0 for any logic L and, in
particular, l(Lκ+ω) ≥κ for all inﬁnite cardinals κ. Moreover, l(FO(Qα)) ≥ℵα for
all ordinals α. Downward transfer yields
l(FO) = ℵ0, l(FO(Qα)) = ℵα, and l(Lκ+ω) = κ.
Let L∞ω := 
κ≥ω Lκ+ω be the union of all Lκ+ω. Obviously, l(L∞ω) = ∞and
L∞ω is neither small nor of bounded occurrence. On the other hand, we have the
following existence result which may be regarded as a general downward transfer
theorem:
THEOREM. Let L be a small logic of bounded occurrence. Then l(L) < ∞.
Proof. Let ν witness the bounded occurrence of L. By the renaming property (d)
of general logic systems it suﬃces to consider a ﬁxed vocabulary τ0 which consists
of ν many relation symbols of any arity n, ν many function symbols of any arity
n, and ν many constants. For a satisﬁable τ0-sentence ϕ of L, let κ(ϕ) be the least
cardinality of a model of ϕ. Then
l(L) = sup

κ(ϕ) | ϕ is a satisﬁable sentence of L[τ0]

.
The supremum is < ∞as L[τ0] is a set.
■
The proof is a pure existence proof. In fact, a description of the L¨owenheim
number may be impossible already for familiar logics as shown by Barwise [1972a]
for second-order logic SO.
6.3
Hanf numbers
DEFINITION. The Hanf number h(L) of a logic L is the least cardinal µ such that
every sentence of L which has a model of cardinality ≥µ, has arbitrarily large
models, provided such a cardinal exists; otherwise, h(L) = ∞.4
By regularity of L we have h(L) ≥ℵ0.
Moreover, h(FO) = ℵ0 because of the
Upward L¨owenheim-Skolem-Tarski Theorem. In Subsection 5. 1 we showed that
h(FO(Q1)) ≥ℶω(ℵ0). A similar argument yields that in case h(L) exists, h(L) = ℵ0
3Given a cardinal κ, the κ-L¨owenheim number lκ(L) is deﬁned similarly, referring to sets of
sentences of L of cardinality ≤κ instead of single sentences. By deﬁnition, l(L) = l1(L). As
a rule, results about l(L) can be suitably generalized to lκ(L). We shall concentrate here on
l(L) (and similarly will do so in respect to Hanf numbers and well-ordering numbers introduced
below).
4It can be shown that h(L) is the supremum of all cardinals µ such that there is a sentence
of L which has a model of cardinality µ, but not arbitrarily large models.

604
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
or h(L) is a limit cardinal, i. e., of the form ℵα for some limit ordinal α.
By
considering
ϕ := ∀x

{x = cα | α < κ}
we get h(Lκ+ω) ≥κ+ for inﬁnite κ and, hence, h(L∞ω) = ∞. On the other hand,
an argument like that for the preceding theorem for L¨owenheim numbers shows
the following observation by Hanf [1960]:
THEOREM. Let L be a small logic of bounded occurrence. Then h(L) < ∞.
As in the case of L¨owenheim numbers the theorem leaves us with nothing more
than existence. The next subsection will provide some explicit results.
What about the relationship between L¨owenheim numbers and Hanf numbers?
We have
l(FO) = h(FO)
and, as shown below,
l(L) < h(L) for L = FO(Qα), Lκ+ω, and WSO.
Furthermore, there is a natural logic L such that the statement
h(L) < l(L)
is consistent with ZFC (cf. [V¨a¨an¨anen, 1982]). So there is no general relationship.
For more details see the literature mentioned in [Mundici, 1985].
6.4
Hanf numbers and well-ordering numbers
So far we have obtained upward transfer results only for ﬁrst-order logic, thereby
making essential use of the compactness theorem. But incompactness does not
necessarily exclude upward transfer. Below we report on some kind of substitute
for compactness which as a rule corresponds to reasonably small Hanf numbers.
The following fact forms the intuitive starting point.
PROPOSITION. A logic L is not countably compact iﬀthere is a vocabulary τ
containing < and a countable set Φ of τ-sentences of L such that the class
{<A| A is a τ-structure with A |=L Φ}
is the class of well-ordering relations of type ω.
Proof. For the direction from left to right — the other one is obvious — assume
that L is not countably compact and let Ψ = {ψ0, ψ1, ψ2, . . .} be a countable set
of τ-sentences of L for which every ﬁnite subset has a model, but Ψ itself has no
model. As L is regular, τ may be chosen relational. Using new binary relation
symbols < and R, let the (countable) set Φ consist of the following sentences:

L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems
605
(a) “< is an ordering relation without a last element”;
(b) ∀x

“x ∈ﬁeld(<)” →∃z Rxz

;
(c) ∀x

“x ∈ﬁeld(<)” →

“|{y | y < x}| ≥n” →ψ{z|Rxz}
n

for all n.
We show that Φ satisﬁes the right side. As each ﬁnite subset of Ψ has a model,
Φ has a model where < is interpreted by an ordering relation of type ω.
As
Ψ is unsatisﬁable, no model B of Ψ has an element with inﬁnitely many <B-
predecessors. Hence, in any model B the ordering relation <B is of order type ω.
■
Intuitively, the proposition exempliﬁes that compactness corresponds to the
noncharacterizability of well-orderings. In contrast to the simple alternative “com-
pact – not compact” the capability of a logic to characterize inﬁnite well-orderings
allows a lot of diﬀerent degrees which correspond to the amount of inﬁnite well-
orderings characterizable in it.
This amount is made precise by the notion of
well-ordering number.
DEFINITION. Let L be a logic.
(a) Given τ with <∈τ, a τ-sentence ϕ of L pins down the ordinal α if for all
models A of ϕ the relation <A is a well-ordering relation, and there is a model
A of ϕ such that <A is a well-ordering relation of type α.
(b) L is bounded if no sentence of L pins down arbitrarily large ordinals.
(c) The well-ordering number w(L) of L is the supremum of all ordinals α which
are pinned down by sentences of L, provided the supremum exists; otherwise,
w(L) = ∞.
Obviously, all ordinals < w(L) can be pinned down by sentences of L. Hence, w(L)
is an adequate measure for the amount of well-orderings characterizable in L.
By regularity of L we have w(L) ≥ω. Therefore, compactness yields that
w(FO) = w(FO(Q1)) = ω.
In Lω1ω all countable ordinals α ̸= 0 can be pinned down in a strong way, namely by
{<}-sentences ϕα which axiomatize the class of well-orderings of type α. Setting
ϕ0 := ¬∃x x = x, they can inductively be deﬁned as follows:
ϕα
:=
< is an ordering of the universe
∧∀x  
ϕ{z|z<x}
β
| β < α

∧ 
∃x ϕ{z|z<x}
β
| β < α

.
Hence, w(Lω1ω) ≥ℵ1.
Similarly, w(Lκ+ω) ≥κ for all inﬁnite κ and, hence,
w(L∞ω) = ∞. More exactly it can be shown that w(Lω1ω) = ℵ1 and that L∞ω is
bounded ([Morley, 1965] and [L´opez-Escobar, 1966], respectively). On the other
hand, second-order logic is not bounded as it admits a characterization of the class
of all well-orderings, i.e., the class of all orderings where each nonempty subset
has a least element.

606
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
As we shall see now, large well-ordering numbers lead to large Hanf numbers.
Let µ be a cardinal and L a logic having a sentence ϕ which has a model of
cardinality µ, but no larger one.
An argument similar to that for FO(Q1) in
Subsection 5. 1 yields
h(L) ≥ℶω(µ).
However, we get more: Let w(L) < ∞. The inductive step in the argument which
leads from the sentence ϕn having a model of cardinality ℶn(µ) but no larger one
to the sentence ϕn+1 having a model of cardinality ℶn+1(µ) but no larger one, can
be iterated along ordinals which are pinned down by L-sentences. We thus obtain:
THEOREM. Let L be a logic with w(L) < ∞and ϕ an L-sentence having a model
of cardinality µ, but no larger one. Then
h(L) ≥ℶw(L)(µ).
In particular, h(Lω1ω) ≥ℶℵ1(ℵ0) and again h(FO(Q1)) ≥ℶω(ℵ0).
In many cases, the reverse inequality is true, too. As an example we sketch the
argument for FO(Q1). The result is due to Vaught; cf. [Morley, 1965].
In Subsection 5. 2 we saw that in structures of cardinality ℵ1 sentences of FO(Q1)
can be replaced by ﬁrst-order sentences if an ℵ1-like ordering is present. By minor
modiﬁcations this possibility can be extended to arbitrary uncountable structures.
More exactly, we set
O := the class of ℵ1-like orderings
and deﬁne FO(O), ﬁrst-order logic with standard part O, by admitting only vocab-
ularies τ containing the relation symbols U (unary) and < (binary) and allowing
only structures A where <A ⊆U A × U A and (U A, <A) ∈O. In order to get
h(FO(Q1)) ≤ℶω(ℵ0),
it suﬃces to show
h(FO(O)) ≤ℶω(ℵ0).
The proof of the latter inequality uses the techniques of indiscernibles described
in Subsection 3. 4, but in a more elaborated way as the indiscernibles have to
respect the standard part from O of the structures involved. In order to master
these diﬃculties, one uses the Erd¨os-Rado Theorem instead of Ramsey’s Theorem.
The higher cardinalities needed are at hand because one may work with models
of cardinality ℶω(ℵ0).
Altogether we now have
h(FO(Q1)) = ℶω(ℵ0).
The method applies to other logics treated so far and yields, for example,
h(Lω1ω) = ℶℵ1(ℵ0)

L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems
607
[L´opez-Escobar, 1966]. We ﬁnally mention the following result of Morley [1967]:
w(WSO) = w(FO(Q0)) = ωc
1 and h(WSO) = h(FO(Q0)) = ℶωc
1(ℵ0),
where ωc
1 is the ﬁrst non-recursive ordinal. For more information cf. [Flum, 1972;
Flum, 1975; Barwise, 1975; Nadel, 1985; Dickmann, 1985].
Logics L such as second-order logic where h(L) < ∞and the class of all well-
orderings is deﬁnable, satisfy h(L) = ℶh(L)(0) [Barwise, 1974]. However, in general
results about the Hanf number of logics which are not bounded are rare. For a
structural explanation of this fact cf. [Baldwin, 1985] and the introductory hints
in [Barwise, 1985].
7
GENERAL ASPECTS
We conclude the considerations about logics by two examples which illustrate the
scope of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem in a general context.
7.1
Lindstr¨om-type theorems
For logics L1 and L2 we write L1 ⪯L2 if for every τ and every ϕ1 ∈L1[τ] there
is ϕ2 ∈L2[τ] such that ϕ1 and ϕ2 have the same models. L1 ≡L2 means that
L1 ⪯L2 and L2 ⪯L1. Intuitively, L1 ≡L2 if L1 and L2 have the same expressive
power. For all logics L we have FO ⪯L by regularity.
In the introduction we addressed already one of Lindstr¨om’s theorems from
[Lindstr¨om, 1969]. Essentially it says that ﬁrst-order logic FO is the strongest
logic which admits a complete axiomatization and obeys the L¨owenheim-Skolem
Theorem. So there is no hope to realize these methodologically valuable properties
in a logic with greater expressive power.
In the following we give two further
theorems from Lindstr¨om’s paper where completeness is replaced by compactness
and by upward transfer, respectively.
THEOREM. Let L be a logic with the ﬁnite occurrence property.
(a) If l(L) = ℵ0 and L is countably compact, then L ≡FO.
(b) If l(L) = ℵ0 and h(L) = ℵ0, then L ≡FO.
H. Friedman [1970] observed that the ﬁnite occurrence property is not needed for
(a) if L is (fully) compact, as in a compact logic the meaning of a sentence depends
only on ﬁnitely many of its symbols. (For a proof cf., e. g., [Ebbinghaus et al.,
1994]. See [Shelah and V¨a¨an¨anen, 2005] for possible extensions of (a) to inﬁnitary
logics.) Part (b) demonstrates in a convincing way the power which is unfolded
by the simplest forms of upward and downward transfer.
We give the idea of a common proof for parts (a) and (b) in order to demonstrate
a methodological relationship between upward transfer and compactness in case
the L¨owenheim number is ℵ0.

608
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
Let L be a logic having the ﬁnite occurrence property and L¨owenheim number
ℵ0. Assume that L is strictly stronger than ﬁrst-order logic, and let τ be ﬁnite
and ϕ ∈L[τ] a sentence which is not equivalent to a sentence in FO[τ]. Because
of regularity τ may be chosen relational.
Claim. There are a ﬁnite relational vocabulary σ ⊇τ, a binary relation symbol
E ∈σ \ τ, and a satisﬁable σ-sentence ψ of L such that for all σ-structures B with
B |= ϕ, the reduct (B, EB) is isomorphic to (ω, <), i. e., the class of well-orderings
of type ω is a so-called pseudoelementary class of L.
By the claim, L is not countably compact and its Hanf number is greater than
ℵ0; so the proofs of (a) and (b) are complete.
In order to prove the claim, one ﬁrst shows that for any m ≥1 there are
countable τ-structures A and B such that A |=L ϕ, B |=L ¬ϕ, and A and B satisfy
the same ﬁrst-order τ-sentences of quantiﬁer rank ≤m. By a theorem of Fra¨ıss´e
this yields that for all m ≥1 there are countable τ-structures A and B with
(∗)m
A |=L ϕ, B |=L ¬ϕ, and A ∼=m B.5
As ∼=ω yields ∼= on countable structures, there are no countable τ-structures A and
B with (∗)ω.
Regarding partial isomorphisms as ﬁrst-order objects, one can describe this
situation in L and in this way obtain σ ⊇τ, E ∈σ \τ, and a satisﬁable σ-sentence
ψ of L such that ψ ensures for any model B that (B, EB) is a discrete ordering
without a last element which allows descending sequences of length α ∈ω ∪{ω}
just in case α ∈ω, i. e., that (B, <B) is of type ω.
7.2
First-order-like logics
There is a principal diﬀerence between ﬁrst-order logic and second-order logic: In
FO the satisfaction relation is “of local character” in the sense that the truth or
falsity of A |= ϕ is essentially ﬁxed by ϕ and its subformulas and by A and its
elements.
In SO, however, it may depend on the whole set-theoretic universe,
in particular, on what subsets of A there are. For example, it is easy to give a
second-order sentence which is valid just in case Cantor’s Continuum Hypothesis
holds. The local character of the ﬁrst-order satisfaction relation may be made more
precise by demanding that it should not depend on changes of the set-theoretic uni-
verse “far apart”, i. e., it should be invariant under end extensions of the universe,
extensions where old sets do not get new elements.
We shall provide an impression of these ideas, ending with (a special case of )
a general downward L¨owenheim-Skolem type theorem. The theory goes back to
Barwise [1972b] with an extended framework given in [Barwise, 1975].
5Given structures A and B of the same relational vocabulary, a partial isomorphism from
A into B is the empty mapping or an isomorphism from a substructure of A onto a substructure
of B. For m ∈ω, A ∼
=m B means that the empty mapping can be extended m times, in each
step prescribing either an element from A for the domain or an element from B for the range,
such that the resulting mapping is a partial isomorphism from A into B. A ∼
=ω B is deﬁned
analogously.

L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems
609
We start with some deﬁnitions.
A ﬁrst-order formula ϕ(x) of set theory is
• bounded if all its quantiﬁers are restricted to sets;
• Σ1 if it has the form ∃y ψ where ψ is bounded;
• ΣZFC
1
if it is equivalent in ZFC to a Σ1 formula.
The formula ϕ(x) is persistent if for all models A and B of ZFC where B is an end
extension of A, we have for all a ∈A that
A |= ϕ(a) implies B |= ϕ(a).
By a theorem of Feferman and Kreisel [1966], ϕ(x) is persistent iﬀit is ΣZFC
1
.
Vocabularies and structures can be deﬁned set-theoretically.
Moreover, this
can be done in such a manner that the predicate “x is a vocabulary and y is an
x-structure” is ΣZFC
1
. All the logics treated so far can be given in set-theoretic
terms, too. According to the introductory remarks above it seems appropriate to
make precise the notion of being a ﬁrst-order like logic by imposing conditions of
persistence on (the set-theoretic deﬁnition of) the syntax and the semantics.
Following this idea, we call a logic L weakly absolute if the set-theoretic predicate
“x ∈L[τ]” and the satisfaction relation are persistent and, hence, ΣZFC
1
.6
FO, WSO, FO(Q0), and Lω1ω are weakly absolute, whereas the following theo-
rem will show that FO(Q1) and SO are not.
Before giving it, we still need a crucial fact from ZFC set theory. The transitive
closure TC(x) of a set x is the smallest transitive set y ⊇x, i. e., the smallest set
y ⊇x such that each element of y is a subset of y. Let
||x|| := max{ℵ0, |TC(x)|}.
Then an argument based on the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem for ﬁrst-order sen-
tences of set theory yields the following result of Levy [1965]:
LEMMA. If ϕ(x, y, z) is ΣZFC
1
, then ZFC proves
∃x ϕ(x, y, z) →∃x

||x|| ≤max{||y||, ||z||} ∧ϕ(x, y, z)

.
THEOREM. Let L be a weakly absolute logic and ϕ ∈L[τ]. If ϕ is satisﬁable, it
has a model of cardinality ≤max{||ϕ||, ||τ||}.
Proof. As the conjunction of two ΣZFC
1
formulas is ΣZFC
1
, a weakly absolute logic
L admits a ΣZFC
1
formula S(x, y, z) such that for all vocabularies τ, all sentences
ϕ ∈L[τ], and all sets x,
S(x, ϕ, τ) iﬀx is a τ-structure and x |=L ϕ.
6In general, the negation of a persistent formula is not persistent, i. e., persistent formulas
need not be (fully) invariant or absolute under end extensions.
Fully absolute logics impose
conditions of absoluteness on the satisfaction relation.

610
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
By assumption there is a τ-structure A with A |=L ϕ. We, hence, have
∃A S

A, ϕ, τ

.
As the set-theoretic deﬁnition of structures ensures A ⊆TC(A), the lemma yields
the claim.
■
For the weakly absolute logics FO, WSO, FO(Q0), and Lω1ω the vocabularies τ
may be chosen countable, and the usual set-theoretic deﬁnitions are given in such
a way that ||ϕ||, ||τ|| ≤ℵ0. We thus get back all our results about transfer down
to ℵ0. In this sense the theorem may be regarded as a general form of a ﬁrst-
order like L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem for sentences. For its general version and
a comprehensive presentation of the theory of absolute logics, see also [V¨a¨an¨anen,
1985].
8
TRANSFER IN THE FINITE
Most results and techniques of ﬁrst-order model theory fail or get trivial if one
considers only ﬁnite structures. Interpolation and preservation theorems and the
method of ultraproducts are prominent examples. Nevertheless, some parts such as
the Ehrenfeucht-Fra¨ıss´e method survive (cf. [Ebbinghaus and Flum, 1995; Libkin,
2004]).
In the present section we consider L¨owenheim-Skolem phenomena.
It
should come with no surprise that positive results are rare, whereas negative ones
are abundant.
Given a ﬁnite vocabulary τ, the following trivial facts correspond to a weak
form of the existence of L¨owenheim numbers and Hanf numbers:
(Lﬁn) There exists a function l : FO[τ] →ω such that every τ-sentence ϕ which
has a ﬁnite model, has a model of cardinality ≤l(ϕ).
(Hﬁn) There exists a function h : FO[τ] →ω such that every τ-sentence ϕ which
has a ﬁnite model of cardinality ≥h(ϕ), has arbitrarily large ﬁnite models.
They turn into interesting questions if one imposes conditions on l and h, say,
by asking whether these functions can be chosen recursive, allowing that they are
deﬁned only on certain subsets of FO[τ], and/or by letting them depend only on
certain parameters such as length, quantiﬁer rank, or number of variables.
Positive results can be extracted from proofs of the ﬁnite model property. We
mention the Bernays-Sch¨onﬁnkel classes
∃∗∀∗[τ] := {ϕ ∈FO[τ] | ϕ = ∃x1 . . . ∃xnϕ∀y1 . . . ∀ymϕψϕ, ψϕ quantiﬁer-free}
for relational τ. Using the fact that model classes of universal sentences are closed
under substructures, one gets immediately that on ∃∗∀∗[τ] the function
l(ϕ) := nϕ

L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems
611
can serve for (Lﬁn). Ramsey’s proof [Ramsey, 1930] for the decidability of the
satisﬁability problem for ∃∗∀∗[τ] yields that (Hﬁn) can be witnessed by a function
of the form
h(ϕ) = h2(nϕ, mϕ),
where h2 is primitive recursive on ω × ω.
There is no hope for a substantial extension of these results. For the arith-
metical vocabulary σ := {0, +, ×, <, S} (with S for the successor relation) and for
“reasonable” G¨odel numberings ϕ −→⌈ϕ⌉on ∃∗∀∗[σ], Grohe [2002] showed:
THEOREM. (a) For each recursive function l there exist ϕ ∈∃∗∀∗[σ] and n >
l(⌈ϕ⌉) such that ϕ has a model in all cardinalities ≥n, but no model of cardinality
< n.
(b) For each recursive function h there exist ϕ ∈∃∗∀∗[σ] and n > h(⌈ϕ⌉) such
that ϕ has a model in all cardinalities < n, but no model of cardinality ≥n.
Dawar [1998] treats a diﬀerent version of L¨owenheim-Skolem-type theorems in
the ﬁnite. They refer to the ﬁnite variable languages FOk (k = 1, 2, 3, . . .) where
only those ﬁrst-order sentences are allowed which use at most k distinct variables.
In many cases full ﬁrst-order logic is too strong for ﬁnite model theory as each
structure (of ﬁnite vocabulary) is characterizable up to isomorphism by a single
sentence, whereas experience shows that ﬁnite variable logics are methodologically
well-adapted.
Given a ﬁnite relational vocabulary τ, some k ≥1, and a τ-structure A, a k-type
of A is a maximal set of formulas ϕ(x1, . . . xk) of FOk[τ] which is satisﬁable in A.
It can be completely described by one suitably chosen formula. The k-size of A is
the number of k-types of A. The k-size reﬂects the richness of A as far as it can be
expressed in FOk[τ]. Instead of considering models of a given τ-sentence of FOk,
Dawar considers τ-structures satisfying the same sentences of FOk, i. e., models of
the same complete FOk-theory (which can also be ﬁnitely axiomatized).
Dawar proposes several techniques with indiscernibles in order to attack the
following questions:
Lﬁn-Question. Given τ, is there a recursive function lk, for every k ≥1, such
that, for every ﬁnite τ-structure A with k-size ≤n, there is a τ-structure B such
that |B| ≤lk(n) and A and B satisfy the same τ-sentences of FOk?
Hﬁn-Question. Given τ, is there a recursive function hk, for every k ≥1, such
that, if B is a ﬁnite τ-structure with k-size ≤n and |B| ≥hk(n), then there
are arbitrarily large ﬁnite τ-structures A such that A and B satisfy the same τ-
sentences of FOk?
He provides a solution for the class of ﬁnite trees.
However, in general the
answer to both questions is negative ([Grohe, 2002] for the Lﬁn-Question, [Barker,
2003] for the Hﬁn-Question).
In Subsection 3. 3 we saw that the ﬁrst-order transfer theorems give information
about the spectra of ﬁrst-order theories. The failure of the search for suitable

612
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
analogues of L¨owenheim-Skolem phenomena in the ﬁnite leaves us with the prob-
lem of providing general features of the spectra specﬁn(ϕ) of ﬁrst-order sentences
ϕ in the ﬁnite, originally formulated by Scholz [1952]. According to Jones and
Selman [1974] the ﬁrst-order spectra in the ﬁnite coincide with the NP-sets of nat-
ural numbers, if the numbers are given in unary notation. So they are linked to
fundamental questions in complexity theory. For further information see [B¨orger
et al., 1997], for historical remarks about the problem see [B¨orger, 1984].
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author appreciates valuable comments from J¨org Flum and Martin Otto.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Badesa, 2004] C. Badesa. The Birth of Model Theory: L¨owenheim’s Theorem in the Frame of
the Theory of Relatives. Princeton University Press: Princeton, New Jersey, 2004.
[Baldwin, 1985] J. T. Baldwin. Deﬁnable second-order quantiﬁers. In [Barwise and Feferman,
1985, 445–477].
[Barker, 2003] R. Barker. Lk-Equivalence and Hanf Functions for Finite Structures. Ph. D.
Thesis, University of Oxford, 2003.
[Barwise, 1972a] J. Barwise. The Hanf number of second order logic. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic 37, 588–594.1972.
[Barwise, 1972b] J. Barwise. Absolute logics and L∞ω. Annals of Mathematical Logic 4, 309–
340, 1972.
[Barwise, 1974] J. Barwise. Axioms for abstract model theory. Annals of Mathematical Logic 7,
221–265, 1974.
[Barwise, 1975] J. Barwise. Admissible Sets and Structures. An Approach to Deﬁnability The-
ory. Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1975.
[Barwise, 1985] J. Barwise. Model-theoretic logics: Background and aims. In [Barwise and Fe-
ferman, 1985, 3–23].
[Barwise and Feferman, 1985] J.
Barwise
and
S.
Feferman,
eds.
Model-Theoretic
Logics.
Springer-Verlag: New York, Berlin, et al., 1985.
[B¨orger, 1984] E. B¨orger. Spektralproblem and completeness of logical decision problems. In:
E. B¨orger, G. Hasenjaeger, and D. R¨odding (eds.): Logic and Machines: Decision Problems
and Complexity. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 171, Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Heidelberg,
New York, et al., 333–356, 1984.
[B¨orger et al., 1997] E. B¨orger, E. Gr¨adel and Y. Gurevich. The Classical Decision Problem.
Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, et al., 1997.
[Chang, 1965] C. C. Chang. A note on the two cardinal problem. Proceedings of the American
Mathematical Society 16, 1148–1155, 1965.
[Chang and Keisler, 1973] C. C. Chang and H. J. Keisler. Model Theory. North-Holland Pub-
lishing Company: Amsterdam et al., 1973.
[Dawar, 1998] A. Dawar. Finite models and ﬁnitely many variables. In J. A. Makowsky and E.
V. Ravve (eds.): Logic Colloquium ’95. Lecture Notes in Logic 11, Springer-Verlag: Berlin,
Heidelberg, New York, et al., 51–65, 1998.
[Devlin, 1984] K. J. Devlin. Aspects of Constructibiliy. Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Heidelberg, New
York, et al., 1984.
[Dickmann, 1985] M. A. Dickmann. The inﬁnitary languages Lκλ and L∞λ. In [Barwise and
Feferman, 1985, 318–363].
[Ebbinghaus, 1985] H.-D. Ebbinghaus. Extended logics: The general framework. In [Barwise
and Feferman, 1985, 25–76].
[Ebbinghaus and Flum, 1995] H.-D. Ebbinghaus and J. Flum. Finite Model Theory. Springer-
Verlag: Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, et al., 1995.

L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems
613
[Ebbinghaus et al., 1994] H.-D. Ebbinghaus, J. Flum, and W. Thomas. Mathematical Logic.
Springer-Verlag: New York, Berlin, et al., 1994.
[Ehrenfeucht and Mostowski, 1956] A. Ehrenfeucht and A. Mostowski. Models of axiomatic the-
ories admitting automorphisms. Fundamenta Mathematicae 43, 50–68, 1956.
[Etessami et al., 2002] K. Etessami, M. Y. Vardi and T. Wilke. First-order logic with two vari-
ables and unary temporal logic. Information and Computation 179, 279–295, 2002.
[Feferman and Kreisel, 1966] S. Feferman and G. Kreisel. Persistent and invariant formulas rel-
ative to theories of higher order. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 72, 480–485,
1966.
[Flum, 1972] J. Flum. Hanf numbers and well-ordering numbers. Archiv f¨ur Mathematische
Logik und Grundlagenforschung 15, 164–178, 1972.
[Flum, 1975] J. Flum. First-order logic and its extensions. In: G. H. M¨uller, A. Oberschelp, and
K. Potthoﬀ(eds.): Logic Conference Kiel 1974. Lecture Notes in Mathematics 499, Springer-
Verlag: Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 248–310, 1975.
[Flum, 1985] J. Flum. Characterizing logics. In [Barwise and Feferman, 1985, 77–120].
[Friedman, 1970] H. M. Friedman. Why ﬁrst-order logic? Manuscript, Stanford University and
the University of Wisconsin, 1970, 16pp.
[Fuhrken, 1964] G. Fuhrken. Skolem-type normal forms for ﬁrst-order languages with a gener-
alized quantiﬁer. Fundamenta Mathematicae 54, 291–302, 1964.
[Fuhrken, 1965] G. Fuhrken. Languages with added quantiﬁer ‘there exist ℵα many’. In: J. W.
Addison, L. H. Henkin, and A. Tarski (eds.): The Theory of Models. North-Holland Publishing
Company: Amsterdam, 121–131. 1965.
[Gabbay, 1971] D. M. Gabbay. Expressive functional completeness in tense logic. In: U. M¨onnich
(ed.): Aspects of Philosophical Logic. Reidel: Dordrecht, 91–117, 1971.
[Gr¨adel et al., 1997] E. Gr¨adel, P. Kolaitis and M. Y. Vardi. On the decision problem for two-
variable ﬁrst-order logic. The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 3, 53–69, 1997.
[Grohe, 1996] M. Grohe. Some remarks on the ﬁnite L¨owenheim-Skolem theorems. Mathematical
Logic Quarterly 42, 569–571, 1996.
[Grohe, 2002] M. Grohe. Large ﬁnite models with small Lk-types. Information and Computation
179, 250–278,2002.
[Hanf, 1960] W. P. Hanf. Models of languages with inﬁnitely long expressions. In: Abstracts of
Contributed Papers from the First Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science Congress,
Stanford University 1960. Vol. 1, 1960, 24.
[Hodges, 1993] W. Hodges. Model Theory. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge et al., 1993.
[Jensen, 1972] R. B. Jensen. The ﬁne structure of the constructible hierarchy. Annals of Math-
ematical Logic 4, 229–308 and 443, 1972.
[Jones and Selman, 1974] N. D. Jones and A. L. Selman. Turing machines and the spectra of
ﬁrst-order formulas. The Journal of Symbolic Logic 39, 139–150, 1974.
[Kanamori, 1994] A. Kanamori. The Higher Inﬁnite. Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Heidelberg, New
York, et al., 1994.
[Kaufmann, 1985] M. J. Kaufmann. The quantiﬁer ‘There exist uncountably many’ and some
of its relatives. In [Barwise and Feferman, 1985, 123–176].
[Keisler, 1970] H. J. Keisler. Logic with the quantiﬁer ‘there are uncountably many’. Annals of
Mathematical Logic 1, 1–93, 1970.
[Levy, 1960] A. Levy. Axiom schemata of strong inﬁnity in axiomatic set theory. Paciﬁc Journal
of Mathematics 10, 223–238. 1960.
[Levy, 1965] A. Levy. A hierarchy of formulas in set theory. Memoirs of the American Mathe-
matical Society 57, 76 pp, 1965.
[Libkin, 2004] L. Libkin. Elements of Finite Model Theory. Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Heidelberg,
New York, et al., 2004.
[Lindstr¨om, 1969] P. Lindstr¨om. On extensions of elementary logic. Theoria 35, 1–11, 1969.
[L¨owenheim, 1915] L. L¨owenheim. ¨Uber M¨oglichkeiten im Relativkalk¨ul. Mathematische Anna-
len 76, 447–470, 1915.
[L´opez-Escobar, 1966] E. G. K. L´opez-Escobar. On deﬁning well-orderings. Fundamenta Math-
ematicae 59, 13–21 and 299–300, 1966.
[Mekler, 1977] A. Mekler. Theories with models of prescribed cardinalities. The Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic 42, 251–253, 1977.

614
H.-D. Ebbinghaus
[Montague, 1961] R. M. Montague. Fraenkel’s addition to the axioms of Zermelo. In: Y. Bar-
Hillel, E. I. J. Poznanski, M. O. Rabin, and A. Robinson (eds.): Essays in the Foundations
of Mathematics. Magnus Press: Jerusalem, 91–114, 1961.
[Morley, 1965] M. D. Morley. Omitting classes of elements. In: J. W. Addison, L. Henkin, and
A. Tarski (eds.): The Theory of Models. North-Holland Publishing Company: Amsterdam,
265–273, 1965.
[Morley, 1967] M. D. Morley. The Hanf number for ω-logic (abstract). The Journal of Symbolic
Logic 32, 437, 1967.
[Morley and Vaught, 1962] M. D. Morley and R. L. Vaught. Homogeneous and universal models.
Mathematica Scandinavica 11, 37–57, 1962.
[Mortimer, 1975] M. Mortimer. On languages with two variables. Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische
Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik 21, 135–140, 1975.
[Mostowski, 1957] A. Mostowski. On a generalization of quantiﬁers. Fundamenta Mathematicae
44, 12–36, 1957.
[Mundici, 1985] D. Mundici. Other quantiﬁers: An overview. In [Barwise and Feferman, 1985,
211–233].
[Nadel, 1985] M. Nadel. Lω1ω and admissible fragments. In [Barwise and Feferman, 1985, 271–
316].
[Ramsey, 1930] F. P. Ramsey. On a problem of formal logic. Proceedings of the London Mathe-
matical Society 30, 264–286, 1930.
[Schmerl, 1985] J. H. Schmerl. Transfer theorems and their application to logics. In [Barwise
and Feferman, 1985, 177–209].
[Scholz, 1952] H. Scholz. Ein ungel¨ostes Problem in der symbolischen Logik. The Journal of
Symbolic Logic 17, 160, 1952.
[Shelah and V¨a¨an¨anen, 2005] S. Shelah and J. V¨a¨an¨anen. A note on extensions of inﬁnitary
logic. Archive for Mathematical Logic 44, 63–69, 2005.
[Skolem, 1920] T. Skolem. Logisch-kombinatorische Untersuchungen ¨uber die Erf¨ullbarkeit und
Beweisbarkeit mathematischer S¨atze nebst einem Theoreme ¨uber dichte Mengen. Skrifter,
Vitenskapsakademiet i Kristiania, Matematisk-Naturvidenskapelig Klasse 4, 1–36, 1920.
Reprinted in [Skolem, 1970, 103–16]. English translation of the ﬁrst section in [van Heijenoort,
1967, 252–263].
[Skolem, 1923] T. Skolem. Einige Bemerkungen zur axiomatischen Begr¨undung der Mengen-
lehre. In Wissenschaftliche Vortr¨age gehalten auf dem f¨unften Kongress der skandinavischen
Mathematiker in Helsingfors vom 4. bis 7. Juli 1922. Akademiska Bokhandeln, Helsinki, 217–
232, 1923. Reprinted in [Skolem, 1970, 137–152]. English translation in [van Heijenoort, 1967,
290–301].
[Skolem, 1929] T. Skolem. ¨Uber einige Grundlagenfragen der Mathematik. Skrifter, Vitenskaps-
akademiet i Oslo, Matematisk-Naturvidenskapelig Klasse 4, 1–49, 1929. Reprinted in [Skolem,
1970, 227–273].
[Skolem, 1970] T. Skolem. Selected Works in Logic, ed. by J. E. Fenstad, Universitetsforlaget:
Oslo, Bergen, Troms¨o, 1970.
[Tarski and Vaught, 1957] A. Tarski and R. L. Vaught. Arithmetical extensions of relational
systems. Compositio Mathematica 13, 81–102, 1957.
[V¨a¨an¨anen, 1982] J. V¨a¨an¨anen. Abstract logic and set theory. II. Large cardinals. The Journal
of Symbolic Logic 47, 335–346, 1982.
[V¨a¨an¨anen, 1985] J. V¨a¨an¨anen. Set-theoretic deﬁnability of logics. In: [Barwise and Feferman,
1985, 599–643].
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort. From Frege to G¨odel. A Source Book in Mathematical
Logic, 1879–1931, Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Mass., 1967.
[Vaught, 1964] R. L. Vaught. The completeness of logic with the added quantiﬁer ‘there are
uncountably many’. Fundamenta Mathematicae 54, 303–304, 1964.
[Zermelo, 1908] E. Zermelo. Untersuchungen ¨uber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre. I. Mathe-
matische Annalen 65 , 261–281, 1908. English translation in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 199–215].

THE MATHEMATICS OF
SKOLEM’S PARADOX
Timothy Bays
In 1922, Thoralf Skolem published a paper entitled “Some Remarks on Axiom-
atized Set Theory.” The paper presents a new proof of a model-theoretic result
originally due to Leopold L¨owenheim and then discusses some philosophical impli-
cations of this result. In the course of this latter discussion, the paper introduces
a model-theoretic puzzle that has come to be known as “Skolem’s Paradox.”
Over the years, Skolem’s Paradox has generated a fairly steady stream of philo-
sophical discussion; nonetheless, the overwhelming consensus among philosophers
and logicians is that the paradox doesn’t constitute a mathematical problem (i.e.,
it doesn’t constitute a real contradiction). Further, there’s general agreement as
to why the paradox doesn’t constitute a mathematical problem. By looking at
the way ﬁrst-order structures interpret quantiﬁers — and, in particular, by look-
ing at how this interpretation changes as we move from structure to structure —
we can give a technically adequate “solution” to Skolem’s Paradox. So, whatever
the philosophical upshot of Skolem’s Paradox may be, the mathematical side of
Skolem’s Paradox seems to be relatively straightforward.
In this paper, I challenge this common wisdom concerning Skolem’s Paradox.
While I don’t argue that Skolem’s Paradox constitutes a genuine mathematical
problem (it doesn’t), I do argue that standard “solutions” to the paradox are
technically inadequate. Even on the mathematical side, Skolem’s Paradox is more
complicated — and quite a bit more interesting — than it’s usually taken to
be. Further, because philosophical discussions of Skolem’s Paradox typically start
with an analysis of the paradox’s mathematics — and only then examine how the
interpretation of this mathematics reveals the paradox’s philosophical signiﬁcance
— it is important to get the mathematics itself right before we start in on our
philosophy.
From a structural standpoint, this paper breaks into six sections. In section 1,
I formulate a simple version of Skolem’s Paradox and try to disentangle the roles
that set theory, model theory and philosophy play in making it look plausible.
In section 2, I sketch a generic solution to Skolem’s Paradox — a solution which
explains, in rough outline, why no version of the paradox generates a genuine
contradiction. §§3–5 examine diﬀerent ways of “ﬁlling out” this generic solution.
§3 focuses on the role quantiﬁcation sometimes plays in Skolem’s Paradox and
includes a discussion of the so-called “transitive submodel” version of the paradox.
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

616
Timothy Bays
§§4 and 5 look at some cases where quantiﬁcation doesn’t help to explain Skolem’s
Paradox. Finally, section 6 presents some concluding philosophical reﬂections.1
1
SKOLEM’S PARADOX
In its simplest form, Skolem’s Paradox involves a (seeming) conﬂict between two
theorems of modern logic: Cantor’s theorem from set theory and the L¨owenheim-
Skolem theorem from model theory. Cantor’s theorem says that there are uncount-
able sets — sets which are too big to be put into one-to-one correspondence with
the natural numbers. The L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem says that if a countable
collection of ﬁrst-order sentences has a model, then it has a model whose domain
is only countable. Skolem’s Paradox arises when we note that the standard axioms
of set theory are themselves a countable collection of ﬁrst-order sentences. How
can the very axioms which prove the existence of uncountable sets be satisﬁed by
a merely countable model?
This puzzle can be made somewhat more concrete by considering a speciﬁc case.
Let T be a standard, ﬁrst-order axiomatization of set theory — say, ZFC. On the
assumption that T has a model, the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem ensures that it
has a countable model. Call this model M.2 Now, as T ⊢∃x “x is uncountable,”
1Let me emphasize that — with the exception of section 6 and some brief philosophical
digressions — this paper focuses fairly tightly on the mathematical side of Skolem’s Paradox. In
particular, I don’t attempt to survey all the things philosophers have said about the paradox or
to assess the various ways the paradox has been used (and abused) in the philosophical literature.
For discussion of such topics, I invite the reader to examine [Bays, 2000] (esp. chapter 3), [Hart,
1970], [Myhill, 1967], and [Resnik, 1966]. I also recommend the illuminating exchange between
[Benacerraf, 1985] and [Wright, 1985]. For a quite diﬀerent view, see [Klenk, 1976] or [Putnum,
1980].
That being said, this paper does serve two philosophical purposes. First, many versions of
Skolem’s Paradox depend on misleading (and/or outright mistaken) presentations of the under-
lying mathematics. I think, therefore, that a clear exposition of this mathematics — highlighting
all the little twists and turns — already does a lot towards “solving” the paradox. Second, I
think philosophers have tended to overemphasize the role quantiﬁcation plays in Skolem’s Para-
dox, and that this overemphasis colors most standard assessments of the paradox’s philosophical
signiﬁcance. In sections 4–5, I argue that quantiﬁcation is less important for Skolem’s Paradox
than many commentators have supposed, and, in section 6, I say a little about the philosophical
upshot of de-emphasizing quantiﬁcation.
A ﬁnal comment is in order. Throughout the paper, I relegate a lot of technical machinery
— particularly concerning the construction of speciﬁc models — to the footnotes. Most of this
machinery can be skipped without losing the main thread of argument.
The reader who is
willing to accept technical claims on faith should feel free to bypass this material. All readers
should be warned that some footnotes, especially those in sections 4–5, presuppose substantial
mathematical background.
2Throughout this paper, I use blackboard bold letters to denote models and the corresponding
unbolded letters to denote the domains of those models: so, M is a model and M is its domain, N
is a model and N is its domain, etc. That being said, I will often abuse notation and write things
like “M is countable” or “m ∈M” when I really mean that “M is countable” or that m ∈M;
in context, this should never cause any confusion. Finally, unless otherwise speciﬁed, all models
should be assumed to be for the language of set theory — i.e., the language with “∈” as its sole
nonlogical primitive.

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
617
there must be some ˆm ∈M such that M |= “ ˆm is uncountable.” But, as M itself
is only countable, there are only countably many m ∈M such that M |= m ∈ˆm.
On the surface, then, we seem to have a conﬂict: from one perspective, ˆm looks
uncountable, while from another perspective, ˆm is clearly countable.
In exploring this seeming conﬂict, I want to begin with three preliminary points.
First there’s at least one sense in which this appearance of conﬂict is clearly mis-
leading. Strictly speaking, M doesn’t understand ordinary English phrases like
“x is uncountable,” so the sentence “M |= ‘ ˆm is uncountable’ ” makes no literal
sense. Literally, what’s going on is the following. There is a speciﬁc formula in the
language of ﬁrst-order set theory which mathematicians sometimes ﬁnd it conve-
nient to abbreviate by “x is uncountable.” If we avoid this abbreviation — and
use, say, “Ω(x)” to denote the relevant formula — then the initial appearance of
paradox vanishes. The argument of the last paragraph simply shows that there is
some ˆm ∈M such that:
1. M |= Ω[ ˆm]
and,
2. ˆm is countable.
Even on the surface, these claims look philosophically innocuous. After all, lots
of models satisfy lots of formulas with respect to lots of parameters, and there’s
no general reason to think that these instances of satisfaction have anything to do
with countability and uncountability.
Unfortunately, Skolem’s Paradox is a bit harder than this. There’s a reason
mathematicians often abbreviate Ω(x) by “x is uncountable,” and this reason
goes a long way toward explaining why 1 and 2 might — even under the surface
— continue to look paradoxical.
Consider the ordinary English sentence “x is
uncountable.” If asked what this sentence means, a set theorist will say something
about the lack of a bijection between x and the natural numbers. If asked about
the phrase “is a bijection,” she might go on to talk about collections of ordered
pairs satisfying certain nice properties. Finally, if asked about the term “ordered
pair,” she may say something about the ways one can identify ordered pairs with
particular sets.
Suppose our set theorist takes this explanatory process to its logical conclusion.
By continuing to ﬁll in the details of “x is uncountable,” she will eventually obtain
a single sentence which uses no phrases other than “equals,” “is a member of,”
“not,” “if. . . then,” and “there is a set y, such that.” Because this sentence is
quite long,3 she may chose to shorten it by abbreviating the above phrases with
3It’s important to emphasize just how long this sentence really is. Written explicitly, even a
simple phrase like “x is a singleton” turns into the following:
There is a set a such that it is not the case that if a is a member of x, then there
exists a set b such that it is not the case that if b is a member of x then b is equal
to a.
If we examine marginally more complicated phrases — say, “x is an ordered pair” or “f is a
function” — then we get sentences as long as good size paragraphs. Finally, a full explication
of the phrase “x is uncountable” will require several (largely incomprehensible) pages to write
down explicitly!

618
Timothy Bays
the symbols =, ∈, ¬, →, and ∃y. Having done so, she will obtain an explication
of the ordinary English sentence “x is uncountable” which uses no symbols other
than =, ∈, ¬, →, and ∃y (and, perhaps, some punctuation).
At this point, we should notice something interesting: the sentence our set
theorist has just produced looks exactly like the ﬁrst-order formula that we’ve been
calling Ω(x).4 That is, if we simply compare the syntax of these two expressions on
a symbol-by-symbol basis — ignoring any semantic information we may happen
to have about them — we will ﬁnd that they contain exactly the same symbols
in exactly the same order. This explains why set theorists ﬁnd it so convenient
to abbreviate the formula Ω(x) with the expression “x is uncountable.” It also
explains why we might continue to ﬁnd claims 1 and 2 somewhat puzzling: after
all, the formula that M satisﬁes in 1 looks just like the negation of claim 2 (after,
of course, claim 2 has been fully explicated).
This brings me to my second preliminary point.
In explicating claim 2, we
need to start with an initial interpretive question. When we say that the element
ˆm ∈M “is countable,” do we mean that
I. {x | x ∈ˆm} is countable
or do we mean that
II. {x | M |= x ∈ˆm} is countable?
These two interpretations lead to rather diﬀerent understandings of what’s going
on in Skolem’s Paradox. In particular, although they each require us to put some
constraints on our choice of M, they don’t require us to put the same constraints
on this choice. Hence, it’s important to get clear about these interpretations —
and their associated constraints — before we go any further.5
Let me begin with two comments concerning the diﬀerence between I and II.
First, the two interpretations diﬀer only in the way they interpret the notion
of “membership” vis-a-vis the element ˆm. Interpretation I assumes that we are
interested in the real membership relation on ˆm, while interpretation II assumes
4A caveat is in order here. There are many diﬀerent ways of explicating the notion “x is
uncountable,” depending on how we decide to “code up” basic set theoretic notions — e.g., or-
dered pair or natural number. For convenience, I’m assuming our set theorist has made the same
decisions we made when we formulated Ω(x). For any particular Ω(x), there is an explication of
“x is uncountable” which has the same syntactic form as Ω(x); so, we don’t lose any generality
in assuming that it’s the explication our set theorist actually came up with (if it isn’t, then we
can just ﬁnd another, more accommodating, set theorist!).
Although this issue about coding is quite important when thinking about the semantics of
ordinary English set theory, I don’t think it has much to do with the issues underlying Skolem’s
Paradox. After all, if we simply reformulate the paradox in terms of some particular explication
of “x is countable” — e.g., by rewriting claim 2 more explicitly — then we can avoid coding issues
altogether. For this reason, I’ll largely bypass these issues here (see [Bays, 2000], 1.2.1–1.2.2 for
more on the matter).
5Note that I’m going to resist the idea that any reasonably attractive version of Skolem’s
Paradox can be formulated in terms of an arbitrary countable model of ZFC. Whatever plau-
sibility attaches to such formulations stems, I think, from some surreptitious slide between the
two interpretations of “ ˆm is countable” mentioned above.

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
619
that we are interested in whatever relation M thinks is the membership relation
on ˆm — i.e., in whatever relation on M × M serves as the interpretation of “∈”
under the interpretation function of M.
Second, the two interpretations share the same conception of countability. On
both interpretations, claim 2 asserts the existence of a bijection between ω and
some particular set, and, on both interpretations, the existence of this bijection is
an issue of ordinary (naive) set theory. The diﬀerence between the two interpre-
tations concerns the appropriate range of this bijection: interpretation I takes the
range to be {x | x ∈ˆm}, while interpretation II takes it to be {x | M |= x ∈ˆm}.
To put this point another way, the two interpretations agree on how we measure
the countability of a given set, but they disagree on which set we want to measure
— i.e., which set contains the relevant “members” of the element ˆm.6
Given this, which of these two interpretations provides the best reading of claim
2? From one perspective, interpretation I is clearly the most natural reading of
the phrase “ ˆm is countable.” Further, and as we’ll see later, it’s the reading which
makes our explication of claim 2 line up most cleanly with the syntax of Ω(x).
Nevertheless, there are (at least) two diﬃculties with adopting interpretation I in
the context of thinking about Skolem’s Paradox.
First, interpretation I runs the risk of making claim 2 straightforwardly false.
As Paul Benacerraf has noted, there is absolutely no reason to think that the
countability of a model M entails that every member of M is also countable —
i.e., “countable” in the sense of interpretation I.7 In fact, it’s quite easy to con-
struct models of ZFC where the models themselves are countable but where some
members of those models are uncountable (again, “uncountable” in the sense of
interpretation I).
Since constructing such models lets me introduce some machinery which will
eventually prove useful, I give two examples of this phenomenon here (the reader
who’s simply looking for the big picture should feel free to skip over these exam-
ples for the present). First, suppose that κ is an inaccessible cardinal and that N
is a countable, elementary submodel of Vκ. In this case, even though N is count-
able, and even though N |= ZFC, N still contains the uncountable set (ℵ1)V as a
member.8 Second, suppose that N is any countable model for ZFC and that X
6It’s important to keep this particular how/what distinction in mind.
As we move along,
we’ll encounter some formulations of Skolem’s Paradox which turn on reinterpreting the notion
of countability — i.e., on changing how we assess the countability of some ﬁxed set.
We’ll
encounter other formulations which turn on varying the set whose countability we wish to assess
— i.e., on changing which set is supposed to be uncountable.
Keeping these issues distinct,
therefore, will be important for understanding the mathematical issues underlying the various
formulations.
7See [Benacerraf, 1985], 102–3.
8For our purposes, there are two things which are important about this example. First, the
fact that κ is inaccessible entails that the model ⟨Vκ, ∈⟩satisﬁes ZFC. Second, the fact that N
is an elementary submodel of Vκ entails both that N also satisﬁes ZFC and that N and Vκ agree
on the identity of cardinals which have unique ﬁrst-order deﬁnitions — e.g., cardinals like ℵ1,
ℵ2 and ℵω. Hence, each of these (uncountable) cardinals must be an actual member of N. As a
result, the countable model N is literally bursting with uncountable elements.

620
Timothy Bays
is any set which doesn’t happen to be a member of the domain of N. Then, by
simply substituting X for some arbitrary member of N and then modifying the
“membership” relation on N so as to respect this substitution, we obtain another
model N′ which 1.) contains X, 2.) has exactly the same cardinality as N, and 3.)
satisﬁes exactly the same sentences as N (e.g., ZFC). If, therefore, X happens to
be an uncountable set, then N′ will be a countable model of ZFC which contains
an uncountable set as a member.9
This, then, is one problem with taking interpretation I as the appropriate read-
ing of “ ˆm is countable” in claim 2. Fortunately, this problem isn’t as serious as it
may appear to be at ﬁrst. If we exercise a little care in choosing our model M, then
we can ensure that ˆm really is countable in (even) the interpretation I sense. So,
for instance, Paul Benacerraf has suggested that we reformulate Skolem’s Paradox
in terms of transitive models.10 If we do so, then we ensure that for every m ∈M,
{x | x ∈m} ⊂M — in fact, we ensure that {x | x ∈m} = {x | M |= x ∈m}.11
Hence, if M itself is countable, then so is {x | x ∈ˆm}, and Benacerraf’s problem
simply vanishes.
Unfortunately, transitive models are sometimes hard to come by. If we assume
the existence of an inaccessible cardinal — as we did, for instance, in the ﬁrst ex-
ample of the second-to-last paragraph — then we can obtain such models easily.12
Without such an assumption, however, transitive models may be hard to ﬁnd. It is
consistent with ZFC, for example, to accept the existence of non-transitive models
9 This second example uses a technical trick which will reappear frequently throughout this
paper, so it is useful to take a few moments and explain it in more detail. The example depends
on two theorems of model theory. First, if two models N and N′ are isomorphic — i.e., if there
exists a bijection f : N →N′ such that for every a, b ∈N, a ∈N b ⇐⇒f(a) ∈N′f(b) — then these
models must also be elementarily equivalent — i.e., for every sentence φ, N |= φ ⇐⇒N′ |= φ.
Second, if N is a model and if f : N →A is a bijection, then f carries with it a canonical
method for building a model which has A as its domain and which is isomorphic to N. To obtain
this model, we simply deﬁne a relation ∈A on A × A as follows:
a ∈A a′ ⇐⇒f−1(a) ∈N f−1(a′).
Given this deﬁnition, ⟨A, ∈A⟩is the desired model, and f itself is the desired isomorphism.
Returning to the example from the text, we ﬁnd that substituting X for an arbitrary ˆn ∈N
amounts to constructing a bijection f : N →(N ∪{X}) \ {ˆn} such that f(ˆn) = X and f ↾
(N \ {ˆn}) = Id. Similarly, redeﬁning ∈in the manner suggested above amounts to building the
very model which this bijection canonically induces. Given this, claim 1 follows directly from
the deﬁnition of N′, claim 2 follows from the fact that f is a bijection, and claim 3 follows from
the fact that f is an isomorphism along with the fact that isomorphic models are elementarily
equivalent.
10See [Benacerraf, 1985], 102–3. I will discuss transitive models in some detail when we get to
section 3, so I won’t say much about them here. For present purposes, the fact mentioned in the
main text — i.e., that {x | x ∈m} ⊂M when M is transitive — is enough to be going on with.
11So, interpretations I and II coincide for transitive M.
12The technique for obtaining such models involves a result called the “Mostowski Collapsing
Lemma.” This lemma allows us to take any well-founded model — i.e., any model which contains
no inﬁnite descending ∈-chains — and ﬁnd a transitive model which is isomorphic to it. Hence, if
we start with an inaccessible cardinal κ and then apply the Collapsing Lemma to some countable,
elementary submodel of Vκ, we end up with a countable, transitive model of ZFC (see footnotes
8 and 9 for further background concerning this construction).

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
621
of set theory while rejecting the existence of transitive ones.13 Indeed, it is fairly
easy to ﬁnd consistent extensions of ZFC which are incompatible with transitivity:
even if ZFC has transitive models, these extensions do not.14
This, then, brings me to a second technique for solving Benacerraf’s problem —
i.e., for building our model M so as to ensure that {x | x ∈ˆm} is really countable.
Let N be an arbitrary model of ZFC and let A be a collection of countable sets
such that |A| = |N|.15 Employing a trick from footnote 9, we can turn A into a
model for the language of set theory which is isomorphic to our original N. This
gives us a model which 1.) satisﬁes ZFC, 2.) has the same size as N, and 3.)
contains only countable sets as members.16 So, if our original N was countable,
then this new model will have exactly the properties needed to solve Benacerraf’s
problem — i.e., for any m ∈M, {x | x ∈m} will be countable.
This gives us two ways of responding to the ﬁrst problem with interpretation
I — to the worry that this interpretation might make claim 2 straightforwardly
false. Unfortunately, the second of these responses also serves to highlight a second
problem with interpretation I. Suppose that the model N from the last paragraph
is uncountable.
Then the argument of that paragraph allows us to generate a
model N′ such that 1.) N′ satisﬁes ZFC, 2.) N′ has the same size as N (indeed N′
13Here,
I
use
the
fact
that
if
M
is
a
transitive
model
of
ZFC,
and
if
M
|=
∃N “N is a transitive model of ZFC,” then M must really contain some transitive model of
ZFC (to use the jargon, the property “being a transitive model of ZFC” is absolute between
M and V ).
I also use the fact that every transitive model of ZFC satisﬁes the sentence
∃N “N is a model of ZFC” (since this sentence is essentially arithmetical, and transitive mod-
els get arithmetical sentences right).
Suppose, then, that there is a transitive model of ZFC. As an inﬁnite descending sequence
of transitive models violates the axiom of foundation, there must be a transitive model which
contains no other transitive models as members (a so-called minimal transitive model). This
model satisﬁes ZFC plus ∃N “N is a model of ZFC” plus ¬∃N “N is a transitive model of ZFC”.
Hence, even if transitive models exist, it is consistent with ZFC + ∃N “N is a model of ZFC” to
assume that they don’t.
14Here are two ways to obtain such extensions. The most straightforward way involves adding
a new constant c to our language and then adding the sentences “c is a natural number,” “c ̸= 1,”
“c ̸= 2,” etc. to the axioms of ZFC. The resulting theory is (by compactness) consistent; but,
since the constant c names a nonstandard natural number, the theory cannot have transitive (or
even well-founded) models.
Alternately, we could let T any consistent, axiomatizable extension of ZFC and then note that
the theory T ′ = T ∪¬ Con(T) is still consistent but fails to have transitive models (since, in any
model of T ′, the “natural number” witnessing ¬ Con(T) has to be nonstandard).
15Let me introduce some machinery here. Our goal is to ﬁnd a set A such that 1.) A has
the same size as N and 2.) every member of A is a countably inﬁnite set. Let Pω1(N) be an
abbreviation for {X | X ⊂N and |X| < ω1}. Because N is inﬁnite, we know that there are at
least |N| many countable subsets of N. Hence, we can ﬁnd a subset of Pω1(N) which has the
same size as N. This subset gives us just the A we want.
16It is worth noting that there is nothing special about the fact that our ﬁnal model contains
only countable sets. The same technique can be used to obtain a model all of whose members
are ﬁnite, and a minor modiﬁcation let us obtain a model all of whose members have cardinality
κ, for κ an arbitrary cardinal. In the ﬁrst case, we let the domain of our model be a subset of
Pω(N) rather than Pω1(N); in the second, we let this domain be a subset of Pκ+(κ) \ Pκ(κ).
(Note that we use κ rather than N in this construction, because Pκ+(N) \ Pκ(N) may be empty
if |N| < κ).

622
Timothy Bays
is isomorphic to N), and 3.) N′ contains only countable sets as members. Given
this, and given that we’re taking interpretation I as our reading of claim 2, we can
clearly use N′ as the basis for a new version of Skolem’s Paradox.17
But surely something’s gone wrong here.
Skolem’s Paradox is supposed to
involve the fact that countable models of set theory satisfy sentences like “ ˆm
is uncountable.”
We now have a version of the paradox which uses only the
uncountable model N′. Indeed, since any model of set theory — whether countable
or uncountable — is isomorphic to a model all of whose members are countable,
we can generate versions of “Skolem’s Paradox” for models of any size — and,
indeed, any isomorphism type — we happen to want.
There’s a ﬂip side to this problem. Not only does interpretation I make the size
of our model irrelevant, it also makes the sentence “x is uncountable” irrelevant.
Once again, let N be an arbitrary model of ZFC. Applying tricks from the last
few paragraphs, we can ﬁnd a model N′ such that 1.) N′ is isomorphic to N and
2.) N′ has only singletons as members.18 Then, if we give “interpretation I” style
readings to phrases like “is the empty set,” “is a doubleton,” “is inﬁnite,” etc., we
can generate obvious analogs of Skolem’s Paradox for those phrases.19
Together, these examples show that there is something conceptually wrong with
using interpretation I to make sense of Skolem’s Paradox. A proponent of Skolem’s
Paradox thinks that there is something puzzling about the fact that countable
models of set theory can satisfy sentences like “ ˆm is uncountable.” On interpre-
tation I, the fact that these models are countable is irrelevant, and the puzzle at
issue can be formulated for sentences which are far simpler than those involving
countability/uncountability. As a result, interpretation I seems to miss the point
of Skolem’s Paradox.
This brings me to interpretation II. Clearly, interpretation II avoids the two
problems we’ve just been discussing.
If M is countable, then every set of the
form {x | M |= x ∈m} is also countable; hence, Benacerraf’s problem doesn’t
arise.
Further, it’s because M is countable, that {x | M |= x ∈m} has to be
countable; so, the countability of M plays, as it should, a real role in our argu-
ment.20 Nor does the argument generalize to arbitrary set-theoretic properties.
17That is, since N′ |= ZFC, there must be some ˆn ∈N′ such that N′ |= Ω[ˆn].
By our
construction, however, every member of N′ is countable (in the interpretation I sense of the
phrase). So, we get obvious analogs of claims 1 and 2 above.
18We might, for instance, let A = {{n} |n ∈N} and then follow through the argument from
the third-to-last paragraph.
19For example, let Ω′(x) be the formula which “codes up” the phrase “x is the empty set.”
Since N′ |= ZFC, there must be some ˆn ∈N′ such that N′ |= Ω′[ˆn]. Clearly, however, ˆn isn’t
really empty; by construction, ˆn is really a singleton.
Note that this argument is perfectly general. If P is a set-theoretic property such that there
are inﬁnitely many sets which don’t have P, then our isomorphism trick lets us build a model, N,
such that no member of N has P. So, if ZFC ⊢∃x P(x), then we can generate an “interpretation
I”-style analog of Skolem’s Paradox for the property P.
20Some cautions are in order here. With enough care, it’s possible to build uncountable models
which exhibit Skolem’s Paradox-like phenomena (we’ll see some in sections 4–5). Nonetheless,
interpretation II does two things for us.
It ensures that every countable model gives rise to
a version of Skolem’s Paradox, and it ensures that uncountable models need to have a special

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
623
If M |= “ ˆm is the empty set,” then {x | M |= x ∈ˆm} really is the empty set;
if M |= “ ˆm is a doubleton,” then {x | M |= x ∈ˆm} really is a doubleton; etc.21
Hence, interpretation II does a better job of capturing the point of Skolem’s Para-
dox than interpretation I did.
That being said, interpretation II does have one, relatively minor, problem. If
we use interpretation II as the basis for explicating claim 2, then it’s not obvious
that our explication will line up syntactically with the Ω(x) in claim 1. On the
surface, explicating the claim “{x | M |= x ∈ˆm} is countable” should involve a fair
bit of machinery that’s devoted to characterizing the model M and to cashing out
the notion of satisfaction. But, there’s nothing corresponding to this machinery
in (the most natural version of) the formula Ω(x). On the purely syntactic level,
it’s the explication of “{x | x ∈ˆm} is countable” which lines up most cleanly with
the formula Ω(x).
Fortunately, there are several ways of overcoming this problem. First, we could
choose our model M so as to ensure that interpretations I and II agree on this
model. If we let M be transitive, for instance, then {x | M |= x ∈m} = {x | x ∈m}
for every m ∈M. Similarly, if we start with a countable M and an arbitrary ˆm ∈M,
then a simple variant of our footnote 9 trick will allow us to ﬁnd an isomorphic
M′ and ˆm′ such that {x | M′ |= x ∈ˆm′} = {x | x ∈ˆm′}.22 In either of these
cases, then, the problem from the last paragraph disappears: for these models, the
syntax of Ω(x) lines up with a perfectly natural explication of “{x | M |= x ∈ˆm}
is countable.”
Second, since we’re particularly interested in the membership relation on ˆm, we
could simply use a new symbol to represent this relation. So, for instance, let M
be a countable model, let ˆm be arbitrary element of M, and let “∈ˆm” be a new
binary relation. Expand M so as make ∈ˆm represent “membership” in ˆm.23 Then,
there’s a natural formula Ω′(x) such that M′ |= Ω′[ ˆm] and such that the syntax of
Ω′(x) lines up cleanly with an equally natural explication of “{x | M′ |= x ∈ˆm ˆm}
is countable.”24
This gives us a second technique for making interpretation II
isomorphism-type if they are to give rise to Skolem’s Paradox (so, it’s not the case that every
model of ZFC is isomorphic to a model in which a variant of Skolem’s Paradox arises).
21Of course, there will still be notions other than countablity/uncountablity which the model
gets wrong — e.g., “x is ﬁnite,” “x is inaccessible,” “x is the power set of y,” etc. But these
are relatively complicated set-theoretic notions, so it’s not too surprising that models which get
countablity/uncountablity wrong should also have problems with them. What interpretation II
does is to ensure that this problem isn’t completely general; on interpretation II, our models get
easy notions — “being empty,” “being a singleton,”etc. — correct.
22If {x | M |= x ∈ˆm} isn’t already a member of the domain of M, then we can just replace ˆm
with {x | M |= x ∈ˆm} to get our M′. If {x | M |= x ∈ˆm} is a member of M, then we can let a be
any set which isn’t a member of M. We get M′ by ﬁrst replacing {x | M |= x ∈ˆm} with a, and
then replacing ˆm with {x | M |= x ∈ˆm}.
23Some clariﬁcation may be in order here.
In expanding M we’re not adding anything to
M’s domain — indeed, we’re not changing M’s domain at all. Nor are we changing the way M
interprets the symbol “∈.” We’re simply stipulating that the expanded model, M′, also interprets
the symbol ∈ˆ
m via the clause: M′ |= m1 ∈ˆ
m m2 ⇐⇒m2 = ˆm and M′ |= m1 ∈m2.
24The formula Ω′(x) is obtained by taking our original Ω(x) and replacing each instance of
y ∈x with y ∈ˆ
m x. The explication uses ∈ˆ
m as an abbreviation for M′ |= x ∈ˆm. Note that,

624
Timothy Bays
work. Unlike the ﬁrst, it allows us to start with an arbitrary countable model of
ZFC; but, like the ﬁrst, it still requires us to use some trickery to make the Ω(x)
in claim 1 line up with a natural explication of claim 2.
In the long run, though, this kind of trickery is probably unavoidable. The pre-
ceding discussion shows that, if we want to make Skolem’s Paradox look plausible,
then we need to ﬁnd an interpretation of claim 2 which satisﬁes the following three
conditions: 1.) it makes claim 2 come out true, 2.) it ensures that the truth of
claim 2 is appropriately connected to the fact that M is a countable model of ZFC,
and 3.) it ensures that the syntax of our explication of claim 2 lines up neatly
with the syntax of Ω(x). Interpretation I does a good job with condition 3, but
it requires some tricks to deal with condition 1 and it can’t deal with condition
2 at all. Interpretation II takes care of conditions 1 and 2, but it requires some
tricks to take care of condition 3. In both cases, therefore, we need some tricks
to ensure that our three conditions are jointly satisﬁed — in particular, we need
some constraints on the choice of our model M.
This need for care in choosing M brings me to my third preliminary point. So
far, our discussion has pretty much ignored our initial stipulation that M |= ZFC .
(We’ve only used it to ensure that there exists some ˆm ∈M such that M |= Ω[ ˆm].)
Clearly, though, the fact that M |= ZFC plays a larger role in making Skolem’s
Paradox look plausible. After all, it’s not the members of M which make us think
that this model has something to do with set theory: there are many models for
the language of set theory which contain objects other than sets, and there are
some models which contain no sets at all.25 So, unless these models satisfy some
set-theoretic axioms — say, a signiﬁcant fragment of ZFC — it’s hard to see why
they should be regarded as having anything to do with our topic.
To reinforce this point, we should notice just how badly models for the language
of set theory can fail to satisfy ZFC, while nevertheless satisfying formulas like
Ω(x). Consider the model whose domain consists of the numbers 1–10 and which
interprets “∈” by:
n ∈m ⇐⇒n ≤5 and 5 < m ≤10.
In this model, all numbers greater than 5 satisfy Ω(x), although the model itself has
no connection with set theory and fails to satisfy even the axiom of extensionality.26
because M′ |= m ∈ˆ
m ˆm ⇐⇒M′ |= m ∈ˆm, this also serves as a reasonable explication of
“{x | M′ |= x ∈ˆm} is countable.”
25We might, for instance, build a model which contained only my three cats as elements and
which interpreted “∈” as identity. This model wouldn’t be very interesting — and it certainly
wouldn’t satisfy the axioms of set theory — but it would be a model for the language of set
theory.
26With respect to the axiom of extensionality, note that all of the numbers n ≤5 have exactly
the same “members,” as do all of the numbers m > 5. With respect to the satisfaction of Ω(x),
note that this formula has the overall form:
Ω(x) ≡df ¬∃f [“f is a bijection & Domain(f) = ω & Range(f) = x].
Here, the phrases “x is a bijection,” “Range(f),” and “Domain(f)” are themselves mere abbrevi-
ations for further (rather complicated) formulas. For our purposes, the important thing to notice
is that the formulas “f is a bijection and “Range(f) = x” together entail that every member of

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
625
For that matter, if we let Ψ(y) be the formula which codes “y = ω,” then any model
which satisﬁes “¬∃y Ψ(y)” will also satisfy “∀x Ω(x).”27 So, unless we’re working
with a model which satisﬁes some basic set-theoretic axioms, there’s just no reason
to think that the formula Ω(x) has any special signiﬁcance.
At this point, then, we have an overview of the machinery needed to set up
Skolem’s Paradox and to make it look somewhat plausible.
We start with a
countable model for the language of set theory, M. This model has several nice
properties. Most importantly, M |= ZFC; but M also satisﬁes one of the structural
constraints discussed on pages 618–624 (e.g., M is transitive, or it’s been expanded
with an appropriate ∈ˆm relation, or . . . ). Next, we note that there’s a formula
Ω(x) — a formula which it’s awfully hard to resist abbreviating with the phrase
“x is uncountable” — and an element ˆm ∈M such that M |= Ω[ ˆm]. This gives us,
once again, the two claims highlighted on page 617:
1. M |= Ω[ ˆm]
2. ˆm is countable.
Finally, we provide a natural explication of the phrase “ ˆm is countable” in claim
2 which 1.)
follows the lead given by interpretation II from page 618 and 2.)
uses no symbols other than =, ∈, ¬, →, and ∃y (and, perhaps, ∈ˆm and/or some
punctuation).
Given all this, Skolem’s paradox arises from two things. First, the sentence
produced by our explication of “ ˆm is countable” is true. (Since M is countable,
{x | M |= x ∈ˆm} is also countable, and our sentence is just a longwinded way of
saying that {x | M |= x ∈ˆm} is countable.) Second, this sentence looks like an
unnegated version of the formula Ω(x). That is, if we simply inspect the syntax of
these two expressions — ignoring the initial negation in Ω(x) — then we will ﬁnd
that they contain exactly the same symbols in exactly the same order. Together,
these two facts explain why claims 1 and 2 may still look quite problematic: both
of the claims are true, and the formula that M satisﬁes in claim 1 looks just like the
negation of claim 2 (after, of course, claim 2 has been appropriately explicated).
That being said, looks aren’t everything, and syntax isn’t semantics. To make
Skolem’s Paradox work — as opposed to simply making it look superﬁcially
plausible — we need to uncover a stronger connection between Ω(x) and some
particular explication of “x is uncountable.” Ideally, we would like to ﬁnd a deep
semantic connection between the two expressions: perhaps they mean the same
x is also a member of a member of a member of f. Hence, since the interpretation of “∈” in our
model does not allow membership chains containing more than two elements, no f of the type
forbidden by, e.g., Ω[6] lives in our model. Hence, the model satisﬁes Ω[6] (and Ω[7], and Ω[8],
etc.).
It is worth noting that this model also satisﬁes Ω[n] for n ≤5, though unpacking the relevant
deﬁnitions is more time-consuming in these cases and depends on a particular deﬁnition of ω.
The basic idea is that discussed in the next footnote.
27Again, this is a simple consequence of the deﬁnition of Ω(x). To see this, simply note that:
¬∃y Ψ(y) ⊢¬∃f [· · · & ∃y (y = Domain(f) & Ψ(y)) & · · · ]
for any possible values of “· · · ” (including those relevant to Ω(x)).

626
Timothy Bays
thing or have the same sense. At the very least, we need to establish a truth-
functional implication between the formula Ω(x), as this formula gets interpreted
at the model M, and the particular explication in question. Without such a con-
nection, Skolem’s Paradox won’t get oﬀthe ground.
For convenience in discussing these issues, let me introduce two pieces of nota-
tion. First, I will use ΩE(x) to denote our canonical explication of “x is uncount-
able.”28 Second, I will use ΩM(x) to denote the interpretation of the formula Ω(x)
on the model M. That is, ΩM(x) is the interpretation of Ω(x) which results from
letting the quantiﬁers in Ω(x) range over the domain of M, letting the signiﬁcance
of ∈(and, perhaps, ∈ˆm) be ﬁxed by the interpretation function of M, and let-
ting the signiﬁcance of ¬, →, and = be given by the recursion clauses in the the
deﬁnition of ﬁrst-order satisfaction. With these abbreviations in place, the above
discussion shows that Skolem’s Paradox turns on some variant of the following
claim:
∀m ∈M [ΩM(m) =⇒ΩE(m)].
(†)
This claim captures — in a purely truth-functional manner — the kind of con-
nection between ΩM(x) and ΩE(x) which would have to hold if Skolem’s Paradox
were to constitute a genuine mathematical contradiction.29 To solve the paradox,
therefore, we simply need to ﬁgure out what’s wrong with (†).
Of course, from one perspective, it’s easy to see what’s wrong with (†): it’s
false. On the one hand, if (†) were true, then we could use Skolem’s Paradox itself
to generate a straightforward contradiction in set theory. Since set theory isn’t
contradictory, we should obviously apply modus tollens and reject claims like (†).
On the other hand, it’s relatively easy to construct models of ZFC in which, for
certain elements m, ΩM(m) is true but ΩE(m) is clearly false. (We will, in fact,
construct several such models later in this paper.) This makes it look as though
Skolem’s Paradox can — and perhaps even should — be dismissed rather quickly.
28Recall, here, that ΩE(x) is not generated by interpreting a formula of ﬁrst-order set theory.
We do not, that is, begin with a string of uninterpreted ﬁrst-order symbols and then stipulate that
these symbols are to be understood in some particular way. Instead, we begin with a sentence
of ordinary mathematical English, and then use a certain collection of symbols — which just
happen to be commonly used in the formulation of ﬁrst-order set theory — as abbreviations
for terms and phrases which already occur in this sentence. As a result, ΩE(x) has exactly the
same semantics as an ordinary language explication of “x is uncountable” — i.e., a completely
unabbreviated one.
Of course, the fact that ΩE(x) has the same semantics as this ordinary English explication
doesn’t mean that ΩE(x) is semantically unproblematic. If there are problems with our original
explication of “x is uncountable” — e.g., problems of vagueness or ambiguity — then these will
carry over to ΩE(x). It does, however, mean that there are no special problems (which arise
merely) from the fact that ΩE(x) makes (purely abbreviatory) use of the symbols =, ∈, ¬, →and
∃.
29In [Bays, 2000], I isolate a general form of argument which encompasses many diﬀerent
versions of Skolem’s Paradox. I show that (†) provides a necessary condition for any argument
of this form to be sound, and I show that (†) provides a suﬃcient condition for at least one
argument of this form to be sound. In this sense, then, (†) really does lie at the heart of (the
mathematical side of) Skolem’s Paradox. For reasons of space, I’ll eshew a full discussion of these
diﬀerent variants of Skolem’s Paradox here. For more on the subject, see chapter 1 of [Bays,
2000] (especially section 1.2.2).

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
627
Once again, though, I think Skolem’s Paradox is a bit harder than this. For one
thing, although the above argument shows that (†) is false, it doesn’t really explain
why it’s false. That is, it doesn’t provide an analysis of the semantic diﬀerences
between ΩM(x) and ΩE(x) which explains why the former does not entail the latter
(or, at the very least, why the semantics of the two are suﬃciently diﬀerent that
we should not be surprised when the former doesn’t entail the latter with respect
to a particular model M).
For another thing, this approach may seem to miss the point of Skolem’s Para-
dox. Someone worried about Skolem’s Paradox starts out thinking that there’s
enough of a relationship between ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) that we should seriously con-
sider re-construing classical set theory in light of this relationship. That is, he
is at least tempted by the idea that Skolem’s Paradox shows that classical set
theory, when taken at face value, just is contradictory, and that we need to ap-
peal to philosophical notions like relativity or perspective to ease the sting of this
contradiction.
Given this, I think it is highly unlikely that a proponent of Skolem’s Paradox
would be persuaded by the kind of modus tollens argument I just gave.
This
proponant already knows that assumptions like (†) lead to contradictions — that,
after all, is the whole point of Skolem’s Paradox. By themselves, however, these
contradictions don’t lead him to abandon (†). Hence, unless my modus tollens
argument is supplemented by a more detailed analysis of why (†) fails — of where
the semantics of ΩM(x) and ΩE(x) diﬀer and of how this diﬀerence leads to the
failure of (†) — the proponent of Skolem’s Paradox is unlikely to ﬁnd it persuasive.
2
A QUICK TECHNICAL SOLUTION
In this section, I discuss two, fairy obvious, diﬀerences between the semantics of
ΩM(x) and ΩE(x). Together, they explain why there’s nothing at all surprising
about the failure of claims like (†). In doing so, they bolster the plausibility of the
basic modus tollens argument given at the end of the last section, and they show
why there’s no purely mathematical reason to be worried about Skolem’s Paradox.
Before beginning this discussion, a philosophical comment is in order. The so-
lution to Skolem’s Paradox that I sketch here — a solution I call the “technical
solution” — simply explains why there’s no straightforward contradiction between
naive set theory and the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem. With a little care, it can
also be used to explain why the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem doesn’t introduce
contradictions into various forms of axiomitized set theory. As a result, the tech-
nical solution allows the working set theorist — or the philosopher who is content
to take a naively realistic attitude toward set theory — to remain untroubled by
Skolem’s Paradox.
Of course, many philosophers will be reluctant to take such an attitude toward
set theory — e.g., those with theoretical reasons for identifying the semantics of
ΩE(x) with those of ΩM(x), or even just those who have qualms about the overly-
quick invocation of things like “the ordinary English signiﬁcance of ‘∈’.” Such

628
Timothy Bays
philosophers are unlikely to ﬁnd the solution developed in this section satisfactory.
However, because the main topic this paper — the mathematical side of Skolem’s
Paradox — has more to do with the ﬁne details of the technical solution than with
its ultimate philosophical adequacy, I won’t say too much about these philosophers’
worries here (just a little bit in section 6). For more on their concerns, see [Bays,
2000] (chapter 3), [Benacerraf, 1985], [Hart, 1970], [Klenk, 1976], [Myhill, 1967],
or [Resnik, 1966].30
What, then, can we say about the semantic diﬀerences between ΩE(x) and
ΩM(x)? First, we can note that the semantics of ΩE(x) interpret the symbol “∈”
so that:
E∈:
“x ∈y” is true iﬀy is a set and x is a member of y.
In contrast, let iM be the interpretation function for M.
Then the semantics of ΩM(x) interpret “∈” so that
M∈:
“x ∈y” is true iﬀ⟨x, y⟩is a member of iM(∈).
Clearly, however, there is no reason to think that these two interpretations of “∈”
are coextensive. This is most obvious when some elements of M aren’t even genuine
candidates for the ordinary membership relation. It is possible, for instance, to
build models of ZFC in which the “membership relation” holds between ordinary
housecats.31 Similarly, providing that there are inﬁnitely many non-sets in the
world, we can ﬁnd models of ZFC whose domains contain no sets at all.32 In cases
like these, it should be quite clear that the semantics of ΩM(x) and ΩE(x) are
interpreting the symbol “∈” in radically diﬀerent ways.
Further, even when a model does contain sets — and perhaps even only sets
— there is no guarantee that this model’s interpretation of “∈” agrees with the
ordinary English interpretation of this symbol. To illustrate this point, let N be
an arbitrary model of ZFC, let X be the collection of singletons of members of
N, and let Y be the collection of doubletons of members of X. Applying our trick
from footnote 9, we can build a model N′ such that 1.) N′ has Y as its domain
30I should probably also note that I don’t view the technical solution as in any way original.
Others have said quite similar things (see, e.g., [Benacerraf, 1985], [Myhill, 1967] or [Resnik,
1966]). Instead, the material in this section is preparatory for the more-detailed discussions of
quantiﬁcation and membership presented in sections 3–5.
31To build such a model, we just let N be an arbitrary model of ZFC, and we let n and n′
be arbitrary elements of N such that N |= n ∈n′. Given this, let Puﬀy and Fluﬀy be two
ordinary housecats (neither of which lives in the domain of N), and let f : N →(N \ {n, n′}) ∪
{Puﬀy, Fluﬀy} be a bijection such that f(n) = Puﬀy, f(n′) = Fluﬀy and f ↾(N \ {n, n′}) = Id.
Then, using f to induce a canonical “membership” relation on the domain (N \ {n, n′}) ∪
{Puﬀy, Fluﬀy} — i.e., in the manner described in footnote 9 — we obtain a model N′ such
that N′ |= ZFC + “Puﬀy ∈Fluﬀy.”
32Again, this follows from a simple application of our trick from footnote 9. We start by letting
N be an arbitrary countable model of ZFC. We then let X be a countable collection of non-sets,
and let f : N →X be some arbitrary bijection. Following the argument of footnote 9, we note
that f induces a relation, ∈f, on X such that the model ⟨X, ∈f⟩is isomorphic to N. Hence,
⟨X, ∈f⟩satisﬁes ZFC as desired.

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
629
and 2.) N′ is isomorphic to N (and, hence, satisﬁes exactly the same sentences as
N does). Given this construction, all of the members of N′ are genuine sets, but N′
displays almost no agreement with ordinary English concerning the interpretation
of “∈.” In particular, there are many sets n1, n2 ∈N′ such that N′ |= n1 ∈n2,
but there are no sets n1, n2 ∈N′ such that n1 ∈n2.33
These examples show that the semantics of ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) sometimes dis-
agree about expressions of the form “a ∈b.” When we move to more complicated
expressions, we ﬁnd further disagreements. In particular, the semantics of ΩE(x)
interpret the expression “∃x” as synonymous with the phrase “there is a set x,
such that” (since the former is, after all, simply an abbreviation for the latter). In
contrast, the semantics of ΩM(x) interpret “∃x” via the recursion clause:
∃.
M |= ∃x Φ(x) ⇐⇒there exists an m ∈M such that M |= Φ[m].
In practice, this amounts to identifying the expression “∃x” with the phrase “there
is an element x ∈M, such that.” Given that the domain of M is not identical
with the set-theoretic universe (as M is, after all, a merely countable model), this
introduces a second diﬀerence between the semantics of ΩE(x) and ΩM(x).
Let me make a few comments concerning these two semantic diﬀerences. To
begin: there shouldn’t be anything surprising — from either a mathematical or a
philosophical standpoint — about the fact that ﬁrst-order model theory allows us
to vary the interpretation of ∈and ∃(and, as a result, that it doesn’t “capture” the
ordinary English notions of membership and quantiﬁcation over the set-theoretic
universe). From a mathematical standpoint, model theory is designed to allow
substantial variation in the models at which particular sentences can be interpreted
(and, indeed, in the models at which particular sentences can come out true).
The point of model theory is to investigate the interaction between models and
formulas. So, if we give our formulas too speciﬁc a semantics — e.g., by ﬁxing
everything about the interpretation of our language and leaving nothing to vary
as we move from model to model — then we threaten to make those formulas
model-theoretically trivial.34
In the special case of ﬁrst-order model-theory, we ﬁx the interpretation of ¬, →,
and =, but we allow the interpretation of quantiﬁers and of other relations — e.g.,
∈or ∈ˆm — to vary. (In particular, therefore, we don’t even try to ﬁx the signiﬁ-
cance of “∈” or “∃.”) The resulting system is interesting in part because has nice
meta-theoretic properties — e.g., completeness and compactness — which render
it easy to work with. More importantly, when we use ﬁrst-order model theory to
investigate the axioms of set theory, we ﬁnd that the ability to reinterpret ∈and ∃
as we move from model to model underlies some standard set-theoretic techniques
33This latter claim follows from the fact that every element of Y is a doubleton which contains
only singletons. Hence, there are no elements y1, y2 ∈A, such that y1 ∈y2.
34In particular, then, we shouldn’t be surprised to ﬁnd that ﬁrst-order sentences can be satisﬁed
by a whole variety of structurally diﬀerent models. In designating a sentence “ﬁrst-order,” we say
that it is to be evaluated at these kinds of models. And while some sentences — e.g., ∀x∀y x = y
— may do a good job at picking out the structure of their models, this cannot be the case for all
sentences. If it were, then ﬁrst-order model theory would lose much of its mathematical interest.

630
Timothy Bays
— forcing, inner models, large-cardinal arguments, etc. These techniques turn out
to be important for understanding the structure of the real set-theoretic universe.
Hence, not only is there nothing surprising about the fact that ﬁrst-order model
theory doesn’t capture the ordinary English signiﬁcance of “∈” or “there is a set,”
but there’s also nothing surprising about the fact that mathematicians — i.e.,
model theorists and set theorists — continue to study it anyway.
From a more philosophical standpoint, the fact that model theory lets us vary
the interpretation of certain symbols is part of what makes the subject philosoph-
ically fruitful. It is, for instance, what allows us to give model-theoretic analyses
of the notion of logical consequence, and it’s what lets us to use models as for-
mal proxies for possible worlds in certain metaphysical arguments. Once again,
then, the fact that model theory doesn’t ﬁx the signiﬁcance of every symbol in
our language — e.g., “∈” in the case of ﬁrst-order model theory — shouldn’t be
viewed as a surprising ﬂaw in the model-theoretic machinery; on the contrary, it’s
part of what makes this machinery so philosophically useful. To put this point
in Microsoft’s jargon, variability of interpretation is a feature of ﬁrst-order model
theory, it’s not a bug.
This brings me to two ﬁnal comments. First, it’s important to note that dif-
ferences in the way ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) interpret “∈” and “∃x” give rise to many
diﬀerences in the overall interpretation of these two expressions. Because each ex-
pression contains several thousand instances of “∈” and “∃x,” there will be many
places where the semantics of ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) diverge. Hence, ground level dif-
ferences in the interpretation of “∈” and “∃x,” have the potential to ramify into
deeper — and far more systematic — diﬀerences between the overall semantics of
ΩE(x) and ΩM(x). So, to the extent that we ﬁnd diﬀerences in the interpretation
of “∈” and “∃x” unsurprising, we should ﬁnd diﬀerences in the overall semantics
of ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) even less surprising.
Second, these diﬀerences in the semantics of ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) exist even when
the expressions happen to agree about some particular element of M — i.e., even
when ΩE(m) and ΩM(m) both come out true (or false) for some particular m. If
we look carefully, we will usually ﬁnd that these sentences are true (or false) for
structurally diﬀerent reasons. The membership relations which make ΩE(m) true
may have nothing to do with the instances of M |= m1 ∈m2 which make ΩM(m)
true, and the particular sets which make “there exists a set x such that . . . ” true
may be diﬀerent from the elements of M which make “there exists an m ∈M,
such that . . . ”
true. As a result, even when ΩE(m) and ΩM(m) do happen to
agree, we should view their agreement as little more than a happy accident.
At the end of the day, then, we should not be surprised to ﬁnd that that claims
like (†) fail rather frequently. Since many of the corresponding parts of ΩE(x) and
ΩM(x) have radically diﬀerent semantics — and semantics which diﬀer in ways
which directly aﬀect the truth values of ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) — we have no reason to
expect that the two expressions will have the same truth-value. Indeed, as noted in
the last two paragraphs, the diﬀerences between ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) are suﬃciently
severe and pervasive that it’s little more than an accident when they do happen

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
631
to agree. If we ﬁnd a case where they agree on all members of a model’s domain,
then this agreement itself should be viewed as a surprising fact which stands in
need of explanation; in cases where they don’t so agree, we should regard their
disagreement as completely ordinary and unsurprising.
This, therefore, gives us a generic — and a somewhat simpleminded — solution
to Skolem’s Paradox. In its simplest formulations — e.g., that presented at the
beginning of section 1 — the paradox rests on a straightforward equivocation be-
tween the (superﬁcially similar) expressions ΩE(x) and ΩM(x). More sophisticated
formulations, although they may avoid outright equivocation, must still postulate
a connection between ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) which is strong enough to ground claims
like (†). As we have just seen, however, there is absolutely no reason to believe
in such a connection. At the level of individual symbols, there are clear diﬀer-
ences in the way ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) interpret “∈” and “∃”; at the level of whole
expressions, postulating a connection between ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) leads to imme-
diate contradictions — i.e., when we consider elements like ˆm. Given all this, we
have no reason to regard Skolem’s Paradox as a genuine mathematical problem.
Indeed, on reﬂection, it’s not even a particularly surprising fact about the models
of ﬁrst-order set theory.
3
THE VIRTUES OF QUANTIFICATION
In the last section, I gave a generic solution to Skolem’s Paradox. I noted that the
paradox rests on conﬂating the ordinary English signiﬁcance of “∈” and “∃” with
the signiﬁcance given to these symbols by ﬁrst-order model theory — i.e., when we
interpret them at a particular model. I did not, however, say anything about which
instances of “∈” and “∃” are really crucial to Skolem’s Paradox. For a generic
solution, it’s enough to notice that there are many places where the semantics of
ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) diverge; hence, there’s nothing surprising about the fact that
these two expressions often have diﬀerent truth-values.
In the philosophical literature, there’s a widespread tradition of wanting to go
a bit further than this — of wanting, that is, to pin down just which instances of
“∈” and “∃” really serve to explain Skolem’s Paradox. And, from one perspective,
it seems like we should be able to accomplish this. Consider the formula we’ve
been calling Ω(x). Abbreviating wildly, we can represent this formula as follows:
Ω(x) ≡¬∃f “f : ω →x is a bijection”
where ω is the standard set-theoretic representation of the natural numbers.
Clearly, any interpretation of this formula will depend heavily on the signiﬁcance
we give to its initial existential quantiﬁer — i.e., to the “∃f” which follows the ini-
tial negation. As we have seen, however, ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) interpret this quantiﬁer
quite diﬀerently.
Following this line of thought, let’s track the relevant diﬀerences through the
details of our claim, (†). On the one hand, it’s easy to see that the expression
ΩE( ˆm) means something like:

632
Timothy Bays
1. There is no f in the set-theoretic universe such that f : ω →{x | M |= x ∈ˆm}
is a bijection.
On the other hand, the expression ΩM( ˆm) means (at best):
2. There is no f ∈M such that f : ω →{x | M |= x ∈ˆm} is a bijection.
Given 1 and 2, the explanation for the failure of (†) looks quite simple. Because
the domain of M is countable, the set {x | M |= x ∈ˆm} must also be countable.
Hence, there really is a bijection between ω and {x | M |= x ∈ˆm}, and claim 1
is simply false. In contrast, as long as all the f’s which falsify 1 happen to live
outside the domain of M, claim 2 can perfectly well be true. As a result, Skolem’s
Paradox simply shows that countable models don’t contain all the functions which
live in the set-theoretic universe (no surprise there!), and that some countable
models don’t contain any functions belonging to a particular class — i.e., the
class of bijections from ω to {x | M |= x ∈ˆm}.
Let’s look at this argument from a slightly diﬀerent angle. We know that the
quantiﬁers in ΩE( ˆm) range over a domain which is large enough to include several
(indeed 2ℵ0!) bijections f : ω →{x | M |= x ∈ˆm}. Further, the semantics of
ΩE( ˆm) allows it to recognize these f’s as bijections from ω to {x | M |= x ∈ˆm}.
So, ΩE( ˆm) comes out false. The idea behind the present argument is that this
kind of analysis should almost work for ΩM( ˆm) as well. If M only knew about
some bijection f : ω →{x | M |= x ∈ˆm}, then M would recognize f as a bijection
from ω to {x | M |= x ∈ˆm}. As a result, M would satisfy some formula of the
form “f : ω →ˆm is a bijection,” and it would fail to satisfy Ω( ˆm). In short,
if the quantiﬁers in ΩM( ˆm) could only know about the same functions that the
quantiﬁers in ΩE( ˆm) know about, then the analysis of ΩM( ˆm) would run exactly
parallel to that of ΩE( ˆm). However, the quantiﬁers in ΩM( ˆm) don’t know about
the same functions as the quantiﬁers in ΩE( ˆm), and this diﬀerence is what explains
the failure of claims like (†).
This, then, gives us a simple — and a relatively attractive — solution to
Skolem’s Paradox.
It’s a solution which focuses on diﬀering interpretations of
the initial existential quantiﬁer in Ω(x), and which uses these diﬀerences to ex-
plain the failure of claims like (†).
It’s also a rather common solution in the
philosophical literature. Variants of it can be found in [Benacerraf, 1985], [Hart,
1970], [McIntosh, 1979], and [Myhill, 1967], and it’s even made its way into sev-
eral introductory textbooks (see, for instance, [Shoenﬁeld, 1967] and [van Dalen,
1997]). Further, although I don’t think this quantiﬁcational analysis provides a
complete solution to Skolem’s Paradox (for reasons we’ll discuss in sections 4–5),
I do think it gets some things deeply right.
First, the quantiﬁcational solution is right to insist that there is a diﬀerence in
the way ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) interpret the initial existential quantiﬁer in Ω(x). More
speciﬁcally, it’s right to insist that there exist bijections f : ω →{x | M |= x ∈ˆm}
which 1.) live within the range of the quantiﬁers in ΩE(x) (and, in so doing, help
to explain why ΩE(x) comes out false), but which 2.) live outside the range of
the quantiﬁers in ΩM( ˆm). After all, there are only countably many elements in the

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
633
domain of M, and there are 2ℵ0 bijections between ω and {x | M |= x ∈ˆm}. So,
at least some of these bijections (indeed 2ℵ0 many of them!) must live outside the
domain of M. As a result, there really is an important diﬀerence between the class
of bijections which gets “noticed” by the initial existential quantiﬁer in ΩE(x) and
that which gets “noticed” by the initial existential quantiﬁer in ΩM(x).
Second, there are some cases where this diﬀerence in quantiﬁer-ranges really
does explain what’s going on in Skolem’s Paradox. To see this — and to further
bring out real virtues of the quantiﬁcational solution to Skolem’s Paradox — it’s
worth looking at one such case in more detail. I begin with some terminology.
Let’s say that a model N is transitive if 1.) every member of N is itself a set, 2.)
every member of a member of N is also a member of N and 3.) the “membership”
relation on N is just the real membership relation restricted to N’s domain — i.e.,
iN(∈) = {⟨n1, n2⟩∈N × N | n1 ∈n2}.
This terminology puts us in a position to understand the so-called “transitive
submodel” version of Skolem’s Paradox. Suppose that our favorite model of ZFC
— i.e., M — is actually a countable transitive model.35
Then there are four
things we should immediately notice. First, transitivity takes care of all of the
interpretation I/interpretation II type problems discussed in section 1. If M is
transitive, then {x | x ∈m} = {x | M |= x ∈m} for every m ∈M. So, the
fact that M is countable really does imply that each m ∈M is also countable.
Further, the equivalence of “m ∈ˆm” with “M |= m ∈ˆm” implies that we don’t
need any ∈ˆm-style tricks to ensure that the syntax of ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) line up
appropriately.36
Second, the transitivity of M eliminates one of the semantic diﬀerences between
ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) which we discussed in the last section. For any elements m1
and m2 in M :
M |= m1 ∈m2
if and only if
m1 ∈m2.
As a result, any purely extensional diﬀerences between the way ΩE(x) and ΩM(x)
interpret the symbol “∈” vanish on transitive models. This means that we have to
explain the transitive submodel version of Skolem’s Paradox in terms of the way
ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) interpret their quantiﬁers.
Third, the transitivity of M ensures that M “gets it right” about a lot more than
just the membership relation. Let me say that a relation R is absolute for transitive
models if there is some formula ΨR(¯x) such that for any transitive N |= ZFC and
any ¯n ∈N:
R holds of ¯n ⇐⇒ΨR
E(¯n) ⇐⇒ΨR
N (¯n) ⇐⇒N |= ΨR[¯n].37
35As I noted on page 620, the assumption that there exists a countable transitive model of
ZFC is slightly stronger than the assumption that there exists an arbitrary model of ZFC. That
being said, it’s not a particularly strong assumption — it follows, for instance, from almost any
standard large cardinal assumptions. Nonetheless, it is stronger anything we’ve assumed so far.
36Note that when M is transitive, ˆm = {x | M |= x ∈ˆm}. Hence, we can avoid writing things
like f : ω →{x | M |= x ∈ˆm} and just use the more perspicuous: f : ω →ˆm. I will use this later
notation throughout the remainder of this section.
37Here, ΨR
E(¯n) is just the “ordinary English” interpretation of ΨR(¯n) and ΨR
N (¯n) is the in-

634
Timothy Bays
Clearly, the deﬁnition of transitivity ensures that the relation “is a member of” is
absolute for transitive models. With a bit of work, we can show that the following
are also absolute:
• f is a function; f is injective; f is surjective; f is bijective.
• x = Domain(f); x = Range(f).
• x is ﬁnite; x is inﬁnite; x is an ordinal; x is a limit ordinal; x = ω.
Hence, transitive models “know” quite a lot about the sets they contain. For a
wide range of set-theoretic concepts, transitive models of ZFC pin these concepts
down accurately (at least, that is, with respect to elements living in those models’
domains).
Finally, the transitivity of M lets us determine just which symbol in ΩM(x)
should “take the blame” for Skolem’s Paradox.
As we have already seen, the
fact that M is transitive ensures that extensional diﬀerences between ΩE(x) and
ΩM(x) must be located in the interpretation of “∃x” (since diﬀerences involving the
interpretation of “∈” have already been eliminated). Further, the above discussion
of absoluteness provides us with the resources to isolate just which instance of “∃x”
really does the explanatory work.
To see this, we should ﬁrst note that the class of concepts which are absolute for
transitive models is rich enough to include the two-place relation “f is a bijection
between ω and x.”
That is, there exists a formula Ψ(f, x) such that for any
transitive N |= ZFC and any n1, n2 ∈N,
n1 is a bijection between ω and n2 ⇐⇒ΨE(n1, n2) ⇐⇒ΨN(n1, n2).38
Further, the formula we’ve been calling Ω(x) is closely related to this formula
Ψ(f, x). In particular,
Ω(x) ≡df ¬∃f Ψ(f, x).
This gives us the technical machinery we need to explain where ΩE(x) and ΩM(x)
really diﬀer.
At the most general level, we can start with the fact that ΩE(x) and ΩM(x)
clearly interpret the symbol “¬” the same way: both make ¬φ true exactly when
φ is false. Next, we note that the absoluteness of Ψ(f, x) ensures that, for any
particular f, x ∈M, the sentences ΨE(f, x) and ΨM(f, x) are also extensionally
terpretation of this formula at N. The notation is intended as a strict analog of the ΩE(x) and
ΩM(x) notation introduce on page 626. I will use this type of notation freely throughout the
remainder of this paper.
38To get this Ψ, note that we already have formulas Ψ1(f), Ψ2(x, f), Ψ3(y, f), and Ψ4(y),
which capture, respectively, the concepts “f is a bijection,” “x = Range(f),” y = Domain(f),
and “y = ω.” Note further that any transitive model of ZFC must already contain the real ω
(since ZFC ⊢∃y y = ω and the formula y = ω is absolute for transitive models). Therefore, the
formula:
Ψ(f, x) ≡Ψ1(f) ∧Ψ2(x, f) ∧∃y (Ψ3(y, f) ∧Ψ4(y))
accurately captures the concept “f is a bijection between ω and x.”

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
635
equivalent. Hence, diﬀerences in the interpretation of symbols occurring inside
of Ψ(f, x) won’t help to explain the failure of (†). When we combine these two
facts, we see that the only signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the semantics of ΩE(x)
and ΩM(x) involves the interpretation of the initial existential quantiﬁer in Ω(x).
For transitive models, therefore, the analysis of (†) given by the quantiﬁcational
solution to Skolem’s Paradox — i.e., the analysis which focuses solely on the range
of the initial existential quantiﬁer in Ω(x) — really does explain the failure of (†).
Let’s take a closer look at this explanation by tracking it through a particular
case. Since we already know that ˆm provides a witness to the failure of (†) — i.e.,
that the conditional ΩM( ˆm) =⇒ΩE( ˆm) is both false and an instantiation of (†)
— we’ll focus our attention there. Given what we already know about Ψ(x, y), the
following two facts are clear:
1. For any set f, ΨE(f, ˆm) is true if and only if f is a bijection between ω and
ˆm.
2. For any f ∈M, ΨM(f, ˆm) is true if and only if f is a bijection between ω
and ˆm.
Further, the fact that M is countable entails that ˆm is also countable. So, there
really is a bijection ˆf : ω →ˆm.
Now, because ˆf is a bijection between ω and ˆm, fact 1 entails that ΨE( ˆf, ˆm)
is true. So, since the quantiﬁers in ΩE( ˆm) range over the whole universe of sets
— in particular, then, over a domain large enough to contain ˆf — the expression
∃f ΨE(f, ˆm) must also be true. Hence, ΩE( ˆm) ≡¬∃f ΨE(f, ˆm) must be false.
In contrast, fact 2 only entails that M recognizes those bijections which live in its
domain. That is, if some f ∈M is a bijection between ω and ˆm, then M “knows”
that it’s a bijection between ω and ˆm, and if f ∈M is not a bijection between ω
and ˆm, then M “knows” that it’s not. It so happens, however, that neither ˆf nor
any other bijection between ω and ˆm lives in the domain of M. Hence, the initial
quantiﬁer in ΩM( ˆm) doesn’t “see” any f for which ΨM(f, ˆm) comes out true. As
a result, ∃f ΨM(f, ˆm) comes out false, and ΩM( ˆm) comes out true.
This, then, gives us a more detailed explanation of the failure of (†). There
are two things to note about this explanation.
First, our ability to pin down
the particular quantiﬁer which accounts for the failure of (†) depends on the fact
that M is a transitive model. It is because M is transitive that we know that
the expressions ΨE(f, x) and ΨM(f, x) are equivalent, and it is only because we
know about this equivalence that we can isolate the initial “∃f” in Ω(x) as the
place where ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) really disagree. If M were not transitive, then we
would have no reason for believing that ΨE(f, x) and ΨM(f, x) are equivalent —
in particular, we would have none of the absoluteness results from page 634. In
that case, therefore, any of the instances of “∈” and “∃y” which occur inside of
Ψ(f, x) could — at least in principle — explain the failure of (†) just as well as
the initial “∃f” in Ω(x) does.
Second, the clarity of this transitive model explanation helps, I think, to ex-
plain the popularity of the quantiﬁcational solution to Skolem’s Paradox. As noted

636
Timothy Bays
above, this is a case — and a very often cited case — where the quantiﬁcational
solution really does explain what’s going on in Skolem’s Paradox. When we com-
bine this with the fact — discussed on page 632 — that countable models always
do exclude genuine bijections between ω and {x | M |= x ∈ˆm} from the range of
their quantiﬁers, we can see the real virtues of the quantiﬁcational solution. Even
if it doesn’t provide a complete solution to Skolem’s Paradox, it does provide an
excellent partial solution — i.e., a solution which works perfectly well in some
particular cases.
4
THE VICES OF QUANTIFICATION I
So, why doesn’t the quantiﬁcational solution work in all cases? Why does it fail
as a general solution to Skolem’s Paradox? To answer these questions, recall one
of the roles that transitivity played in the last section. By making M transitive,
we ensured that if M contains a bijection f : ω →ˆm, then M also recognizes f
as a bijection from ω to ˆm. This was the point of our discussion of absoluteness,
and it played a key role in allowing us to isolate a particular quantiﬁer as the one
which “explained” Skolem’s Paradox. To generate an example where this kind
of analysis breaks down, therefore, we should start by looking for a model which
contains various bijections without recognizing them as bijections.
Fortunately, it’s relatively easy to ﬁnd such a model. The idea is to start with
a transitive model, N, and then use our footnote 9 trick to replace some element
of N with a bijection of the relevant sort (while leaving enough other things ﬁxed
that our new model, M, doesn’t recognize this new element as a bijection of the
relevant sort). More formally, let N be a countable, transitive model of ZFC, let
ˆm be an element of N such that N |= Ω[ ˆm], and let ˆn be an element of N such
that Rank(ˆn) > Rank( ˆm) + ω.39 Now, since N is countable and transitive, the set
ˆm = {x | N |= x ∈ˆm} is also countable; so, there exists a bijection ˆf : ω →ˆm.
Next, we deﬁne a function σ : N →(N \ {ˆn}) ∪{ ˆf} such that:
σ(n) =

n
if n ̸= ˆn
ˆf
if n = ˆn
This function σ allows us — by means of the trick described in footnote 9 — to
construct a new model, M, such that 1.) Domain(M) = (N \ {ˆn}) ∪{ ˆf} and 2.)
σ is an isomorphism between N and M.
From a technical perspective, this new model has four nice properties. First,
because σ is an isomorphism between N and M, M satisﬁes the same sentences
39A remark on this choice of ˆn is in order. Basically, I have chosen ˆn so as to ensure that it
does not live in the same “part” of N as ˆm does. In particular, ˆn is not a member of either ˆm
or ω. What’s more, ˆn isn’t equal to any ordered pair of the form ⟨n1, n2⟩, where n1 ∈ˆm and
n2 ∈ω, nor is ˆn equal to a collection of such ordered pairs. As a result, we can manipulate ˆn
in various ways without modifying the parts of N which directly involve ˆm, ω, and ω × ˆm. The
signiﬁcance of this choice of ˆn will become clear as my argument progresses.

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
637
as N did; in particular, therefore, M |= ZFC. Second, because N |= Ω[ ˆm] and
σ : N →M is an isomorphism such that σ( ˆm) = ˆm, M |= Ω[ ˆm] as well. Third,
because we chose ˆn from a diﬀerent “part” of N than ˆm, the equivalence ˆm =
{x | x ∈ˆm} = {x | M |= x ∈ˆm} caries over from the transitive model case (see fn.
36). Finally, because ˆf ∈M, M contains a function which witnesses the fact that
ˆm is countable. Although M does not recognize this function in the right sort of
way — as indicated by the fact that M |= Ω[ ˆm] — M does contain the relevant
function.40
From a more philosophical perspective, this example brings out two things about
Skolem’s Paradox. First, it provides an example where the quantiﬁcational analysis
of Skolem’s Paradox starts to break down. Informally, it’s no longer true to say
that the quantiﬁers in ΩM( ˆm) don’t “know” about any bijections between ω and
{x | M |= x ∈ˆm} (while those in ΩE( ˆm) do know about such bijections). More
formally, the key absoluteness result on which the analysis of the last section
depended — i.e., that for Ψ(f, x) — doesn’t hold in the current context. In this
context, ΨE( ˆf, ˆm) is true, but ΨM( ˆf, ˆx) is not.
Second — and more strongly — I think this case provides an example where
Skolem’s Paradox can’t be explained by quantiﬁer-ranges at all. To see this, we
can begin by taking a closer look at the non-absoluteness of Ψ(f, x). On the one
hand, because M |= Ω[ ˆm], we know that ΨM( ˆf, ˆm) must be false. On the other
hand, the fact that ˆf really is a bijection between ω and ˆm entails that ΨE( ˆf, ˆm)
must be true. These facts, together with the fact that both ΩM(x) and ΩE(x)
“know” about ˆf — i.e., the fact that ˆf is within the range of the quantiﬁers of
both ΩM(x) and ΩE(x) — suggest that any diﬀerences between ΩM(x) and ΩE(x)
lie inside of Ψ(f, ˆm), rather than in the way ΩM(x) and ΩE(x) interpret their
initial existential quantiﬁers.
Following this line of thought, let’s look even more closely at Ψ( ˆf, ˆm). Abbre-
viating wildly, we get:
Ψ( ˆf, ˆm)
≡df
∀x ∈ˆf [x ∈ω × ˆm]
∧∀x ∈ω ∃!y ∈ˆm [⟨x, y⟩∈ˆf]
∧∀y ∈ˆm ∃!x ∈ω [⟨x, y⟩∈ˆf].
Now, if we examine this formula closely, we will ﬁnd that many of its subformulas
receive equivalent interpretations under the semantics of ΨE( ˆf, ˆm) and those of
ΨM( ˆf, ˆm); to use our earlier jargon, these subformulas are absolute between V and
M. In particular, we should observe that for any set s:41
• s ∈ˆm ⇐⇒M |= s ∈ˆm.
40Of course, there are other bijections f : ω →ˆm which don’t live in the domain of M (since,
as before, there are 2ℵ0 diﬀerent bijections between ω and ˆm, and not all of them can live in the
countable domain of M). I will discuss these other bijections in section 5.
41Note, here, that it’s our original choice of ˆn which ensures that the following claims are true.
By choosing ˆn to be in a diﬀerent “part” of N than ˆm and ω were, we ensured that replacing ˆn
with ˆf does not eﬀect the following properties. See footnote 39 for more on this.

638
Timothy Bays
• s ∈ω ⇐⇒M |= s ∈ω.
• s ∈ω × ˆm ⇐⇒M |= s ∈ω × ˆm.
• If s1 ∈ω and s2 ∈ˆm, then s = ⟨s1, s2⟩⇐⇒M |= s = ⟨s1, s2⟩.
Finally, we should observe that, with respect to the sets that are actually relevant
to the truth or falsity of Ψ( ˆf, ˆm), there’s a fair bit of agreement between the
quantiﬁers in ΨE( ˆf, ˆm) and those in ΨM( ˆf, ˆm). In particular, every s ∈ˆn ∪ˆm ∪
ω ∪(ω × ˆm) lives in the range of both sets of quantiﬁers.
Keeping these observations in mind, we can distinguish three kinds of diﬀerences
between the semantics of ΨE( ˆf, ˆm) and those of ΨM( ˆf, ˆm). First, there are diﬀer-
ences that occur within subformulas that are, themselves, absolute between V and
M — e.g., formal diﬀerences in the interpretation of quantiﬁers within expressions
like “x ∈ω× ˆm.” Second, there are diﬀerences in the interpretation of quantiﬁers
where 1.) these quantiﬁers are explicitly bounded as they occur in ΨE( ˆf, ˆm) and
ΨM( ˆf, ˆm) and 2.) these quantiﬁers have ranges, both as they occur in ΨE( ˆf, ˆm)
and as they occur in ΨM( ˆf, ˆm), which include every element in either of the rele-
vant bounding sets. So, for instance, the initial quantiﬁer in “∀x ∈ˆf [x ∈ω × ˆm]”
is bounded by the expression “∈ˆf ”; but the ranges of the quantiﬁers in both
ΨE( ˆf, ˆm) and ΨM( ˆf, ˆm) are large enough to include {x | x ∈ˆf}∪{y | M |= y ∈ˆf}.
Similarly, the initial quantiﬁers in “∀x ∈ˆm ∃!y ∈ω [⟨x, y⟩∈ˆf ]” are bounded by
“∈ˆm” and “∈ω” respectively; but the quantiﬁers in both ΨE( ˆf, ˆm) and ΨM( ˆf, ˆm)
range over ˆm ∪{y | M |= y ∈ˆm} and ω ∪{y | M |= y ∈ω}. Third, there are
diﬀerences in the interpretation of the membership sign in the three instances of
the expression “∈ˆf ” which occur in Ψ( ˆf, ˆm) — i.e., one instance of “x ∈ˆf ” and
two of “⟨x, y⟩∈ˆf.”
Clearly, neither of the ﬁrst two kinds of diﬀerence can explain the diﬀerence in
truth-value between ΨE( ˆf, ˆm) and ΨM( ˆf, ˆm). Because diﬀerences of the ﬁrst kind
are isolated within subformulas whose truth-values are constant between ΨE( ˆf, ˆm)
and ΨM( ˆf, ˆm), these diﬀerences cannot be where ΨE( ˆf, ˆm) and ΨM( ˆf, ˆm) ulti-
mately diverge. Similarly for diﬀerences of the second kind. Although the quan-
tiﬁers in ΨE( ˆf, ˆm) range over a larger domain than those in ΨM( ˆf, ˆm), none of
the “extra” objects within the range of ΨE( ˆf, ˆm)’s quantiﬁers are relevant to the
truth-values of formulas like ∀x ∈ˆf [x ∈ω × ˆm] or ∀x ∈ˆm ∃!y ∈ω [⟨x, y⟩∈ˆf]
(whether these formulas are interpreted after the fashion of ΨE or of ΨM). Hence,
none of these diﬀerences in quantiﬁer-ranges can explain the ﬁnal diﬀerence in
truth-value between ΨE( ˆf, ˆm) and ΨM( ˆf, ˆm).
This, therefore, brings us back to the third diﬀerence between ΨE( ˆf, ˆm) and
ΨM( ˆf, ˆm) — their diﬀering interpretations of the membership sign in the expres-
sion “∈ˆf.” As this is the only diﬀerence which is not covered by cases 1 and 2, it
must be the one which explains the diﬀerence in truth-values between ΨE( ˆf, ˆm)
and ΨM( ˆf, ˆm). Further, this explanation is relatively intuitive. The notion cap-
tured by ΨE(x, y) — that “x is a bijection between ω and y” — is a notion that’s
deﬁned in terms of the members of x. So, since M doesn’t know about the real

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
639
members of ˆf (recall, the things M thinks are members of ˆf are really members
of ˆn), M doesn’t know that ˆf is a bijection between ω and ˆm. Hence, it’s not
surprising that M fails to satisfy the formula Ψ( ˆf, ˆm). It’s a simple consequence
of the discrepancy between M’s understanding of the membership relation on ˆf
and the real membership relation on ˆf.
This gives us an analysis of the failure of (†) which is quite diﬀerent from the
one given in section 3. There, the explanation for the failure of (†) involved the
diﬀering interpretations which ΩE( ˆm) and ΩM( ˆm) give to their quantiﬁers (and, in
particular, to one speciﬁc quantiﬁer). Here, the explanation depends on the way
these expressions interpret the symbol “∈” in the embedded formula Ψ(f, ˆm) (and,
again, we can limit our attention to a few speciﬁc instances of “∈”). Of course,
there are other places where the semantics ΩE( ˆm) and ΩM( ˆm) diﬀer formally
(that’s true in the transitive submodel case as well), but these are the diﬀerences
which really explain the present version of Skolem’s Paradox.
This example gives an initial indication as to why the standard, quantiﬁcational
solution to Skolem’s Paradox is inadequate. In particular, it shows that an analysis
of Skolem’s Paradox which works ﬁne for transitive models does not work for all
models (e.g., because we may lose the absoluteness of Ψ(f, x)). Further, I’ve made
a preliminary argument for the claim that this new example can’t be explained by
looking at quantiﬁer-ranges at all. In the next section, I’ll bolster this argument
by looking at two more examples. Along the way, I’ll try to dispel a worry that the
argument of this section may have occasioned. I’ll end with some general remarks
about Skolem’s Paradox.
5
THE VICES OF QUANTIFICATION II
Let’s start with a possible concern about the analysis of the last section. In giving
the analysis, I noted that the bijection ˆf lived in the domain of the quantiﬁers
of both ΩE( ˆm) and ΩM( ˆm), and I then focused my attention on the diﬀerence
in truth value between ΨE( ˆf, ˆm) and ΨM( ˆf, ˆm). There are, however, 2ℵ0 other
bijections g : ω →ˆm which don’t live in the domain of M. Why can’t one of
these other bijections “explain” the fact that ΩE( ˆm) is false while ΩM( ˆm) is true?
Why, in short, can’t the diﬀerence between ΩE( ˆm) and ΩM( ˆm) still be explained
— if only partially — by the way these sentences interpret their initial existential
quantiﬁers?
There are, I think, three ways of responding to these questions. First, we should
note that there is no particular g : ω →ˆm which plays a special role in explaining
the diﬀerences between ΩE( ˆm) and ΩM( ˆm). After all, for any particular g, we can
easily build a new version of M which contains that g — i.e., by substituting it for
ˆf in the preceding construction. Indeed, a trivial modiﬁcation of that construction
allows us to include countably many bijections g : ω →ˆm within the domain of

640
Timothy Bays
M.42 So, there’s no sense in which we’ve somehow used the wrong ˆf in building
our model M.
Second, it’s hard to see how some g : ω →ˆm could explain the diﬀerence
between ΩE( ˆm) and ΩM( ˆm). Presumably, the thought goes something like this.
In the case of ΩE( ˆm), the quantiﬁers range over a domain large enough to include
the relevant g’s. Further, the semantics of ΩE( ˆm) recognize these g’s as bijections
from ω to ˆm. So, ∃f ΨE(f, ˆm) comes out true, and ΩE( ˆm) comes out false. The
idea, then, is that this kind of analysis should almost work for ΩM( ˆm). If M knew
about some bijection g : ω →ˆm, then M would recognize g as a bijection from
ω to ˆm. As a result, M would satisfy some formula of the form Ψ(g, ˆm); so, it
would also satisfy ∃f Ψ(f, ˆm), and it would fail to satisfy Ω( ˆm). In short, if the
quantiﬁers in ΩM( ˆm) only knew about the same functions that the quantiﬁers in
ΩE( ˆm) know about, then the analysis of ΩM( ˆm) would run exactly parallel to that
of ΩE( ˆm).
Why, though, should we believe any of this? After all, M already does contain
one bijection ˆf : ω →ˆm, and M doesn’t recognize ˆf as a bijection (or, at least,
not as a bijection between ω and ˆm). Why should we think M would do any better
when it comes to other bijections? In the transitive model case, our absoluteness
results ensured that M got bijections right — that if M knew about some bijection
g : m →n, then M recognized g as a bijection from m to n. So, it was at least
superﬁcially plausible to think that if M could know about some new g : ω →ˆm,
then M would properly recognize g as a bijection from ω to ˆm.43 But, once M
misidentiﬁes one bijection — i.e., ˆf — then there’s no particular reason to think
it should do better with respect to other bijections.
These ﬁrst two points suggest that the questions raised at the beginning of this
section are not well-motivated. Unlike in the transitive model case, there may
simply be no coherent story about how initial quantiﬁers could help to explain
the version of Skolem’s Paradox we’re now considering. If so, then our solution to
this version of Skolem’s Paradox is going to have to look quite a bit diﬀerent from
the quantiﬁer-oriented solution presented in section 3. And, while this doesn’t
directly show that the membership-oriented solution presented in the last section
is correct, it does lend that solution a good deal of indirect support.44
This brings me to a third point. As we saw earlier, part of the appeal of the
quantiﬁcational solution to Skolem’s Paradox comes from the fact that, for any
countable M and any ˆm ∈M, there are 2ℵ0 bijections g : ω →{m | M |= m ∈ˆm}
42I.e., we just use σ to replace countably many elements of N (all with suﬃciently high rank)
with new bijections g : ω →ˆm.
43Of course, it’s hard to know how to evaluate this kind of subjunctive conditional, since its
antecedent is necessarily false.
We can, however, say the following: if M were extended to
a larger transitive model, M′, such that M′ contained a bijection g : ω →ˆm, then M′ would
recognize this g as a bijection between ω and ˆm.
44Recall, here, that the discussion of absoluteness and bounded quantiﬁcation on pp 637–638
showed that most of the symbols in Ω(x) are irrelevant to explaining this version of Skolem’s
Paradox. If, as suggested above, the initial quantiﬁer in Ω(x) is also irrelevant, then the instances
of “∈” isolated on page 638 provide the only possible focus for our explanation.

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
641
which don’t live in the domain of M. Clearly, there’s no way of formulating a
version of Skolem’s Paradox which allows us to evade this fact.45 We can, however,
formulate puzzles that are closely analogous to Skolem’s Paradox and which do
allow us to evade this fact. Further, the solution to these later puzzles follows
precisely the lines given in the last section. This leads me, once again, to think
that the solution from the last section is correct (and that the fact about “missing”
bijections is largely a red herring in our present context).
Let’s look at two of these analogous puzzles. The ﬁrst involves the comparison
of ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) where M is a, suitably chosen, uncountable model of ZFC. As
usual, we’ll start by letting N be a countable, transitive model of ZFC. Applying
a theorem of Keisler and Morley, we generate a model N′ such that 1.) N′ is an
elementary end extension of N and 2.) |N ′| = 2ℵ0.46 Now, let ˆm be an element of
N such that N |= Ω[ ˆm], and let X = {g : ω →ˆm | g is a bijection} (so, X is the set
of real bijections between ω and ˆm). Finally, using the fact that |N ′| = 2ℵ0, we
build a bijection σ : N ′ →N ′ ∪X such that σ ↾N = Id; we let M be the model
induced by this σ — i.e., induced in the manner described in footnote 9.
At the end of this construction, our new model, M, has ﬁve nice properties: 1.)
M |= ZFC, 2.) M |= Ω[ ˆm], 3.) ˆm = {x | M |= x ∈ˆm}, 4.) ˆm is countable, and
5.) every real bijection, g : ω →ˆm, is actually a member of M. Here, 1 follows
from the fact that N satisﬁes ZFC, together with the fact that N′ is an elementary
extension of N and that σ : N′ →M is an isomorphism. 2 follows from the same
facts, along with the fact that σ( ˆm) = ˆm. 3 and 4 follow from the fact that N is
countable and transitive, together with the fact that N′ is an end extension of N
and that σ ↾N = Id. Finally, 5 follows from our choice of X, together with the
fact that X ⊂M.
There are two things to notice about all this machinery. First, properties 1–
4 give rise to an obvious analog of Skolem’s Paradox. After all, M is a model
of ZFC which satisﬁes Ω[ ˆm] (properties 1 and 2), despite the fact that the set
ˆm = {x | M |= x ∈ˆm} is only countable (properties 3 and 4). So, just as in
our previous examples, ΩM( ˆm) is true, and ΩE( ˆm) is false. Second, this analog
of Skolem’s Paradox neatly evades the concerns raised at the beginning of this
section. After all, fact 5 ensures that all of the 2ℵ0 bijections g : ω →ˆm which
witness the falsity of ΩE( ˆm) live within the domain of M.
Indeed, we can go a bit further than this. It’s pretty clear that any solution to
this analog of Skolem’s Paradox has to run parallel to the solution sketched on pp
45As a matter of classiﬁcation, I take it that “Skolem’s Paradox” always involves the comparison
of ΩE(x) and ΩM(x), where M is a countable model. Hence, the fact mentioned in the main text
will always be present (though, as I have argued, it may not always be relevant).
46 Some clariﬁcation is probably in order here. To say that N′ is an elementary extension of N
means that for any formula φ(¯x) and any sequence ¯n ∈N, N′ |= φ[¯n] ⇐⇒N |= φ[¯n]. In particular,
then, the fact that N satisﬁes ZFC entails that N′ also satisﬁes ZFC; further, for any n ∈N,
N′ |= Ω[n] ⇐⇒N |= Ω[n]. To say that N′ is an end extension of N means that for every n ∈N,
{x | N |= x ∈n} = {x | N′ |= x ∈n}; so, moving to N′ doesn’t involve adding “new” elements to
old members of N. Given this, Keisler and Morley proved (see [Keisler and Morley, 1968]) that
any countable model of ZFC has elementary end extensions of arbitrarily large cardinality.

642
Timothy Bays
637–638. Since every bijection which witnesses the falsity of ΩE( ˆm) — i.e., every
g which makes ΨE(g, ˆm) come out true — is contained within the domain of M,
the diﬀerence in truth-value between ΩE( ˆm) and ΩM( ˆm) can’t be explained by
looking at the interpretation of the initial quantiﬁers in ΩE( ˆm) and ΩM( ˆm). Nor
can we explain M’s failure to “recognize” elements of X as bijections between ω
and ˆm by appealing to way M interprets the quantiﬁers in the embedded formula
Ψ(x, ˆm). To be sure, the quantiﬁers in formulas like ΨE(g, ˆm) do range over a
larger domain than those in ΨM(g, ˆm). As before, however, every set which is
relevant to the truth of ΨE(g, ˆm) is a member of ω ∪ˆm ∪(ω × ˆm). These sets are
within the range of the quantiﬁers in ΨM(g, ˆm), and every set in the range of the
quantiﬁers of ΨM(g, ˆm) is within the range of the quantiﬁers in ΨE(g, ˆm).47 Hence,
the only remaining explanation for the diﬀerence in truth-values between ΩE( ˆm)
and ΩM( ˆm) stems from the way these formulas interpret the symbol “∈.”48
This, therefore, gives us an analog of Skolem’s Paradox whose solution has to
follow the lines sketched in the last section. I’ll close this section with a second such
analog. Whereas my ﬁrst example involved the comparison of ΩE(x) and ΩM(x) for
an uncountable model, M, this one will compare ΩN(x) and ΩM(x) where N and M
are both countable. As before, we can start by letting N be a countable, transitive
model of ZFC. Next, let N′ = N[G] be a generic extension of N such that ωN
1 has
been “collapsed” to have cardinality ℵ0.49
Given this, let X = {n ∈N | N |=
“Rank(n) < ωω”}, and let σ : N ′ →N be a bijection such that σ ↾X = Id.
Finally, using our trick from footnote 9, we can deﬁne a new membership relation
on the domain of N such that σ becomes an isomorphism between N′ and M (where
M is the new model canonically induced by this bijection).
At this point, we are in a position to formulate a puzzle very much like Skolem’s
Paradox except that it holds between N and M (rather than between N and the
set-theoretic universe). To begin, note that the fact that σ ↾X = Id ensures that
N and M agree about the membership relation on ωN
1 . That is,
{x | N |= x ∈ωN
1 } = {x | N′ |= x ∈ωN
1 } = {x | M |= x ∈ωN
1 }.50
However, N and M do not agree about the countability of ωN
1 . On the one hand,
N |= Ω[ωN
1 ]. On the other hand, our forcing construction ensures that N′ |= ¬Ω[ωN
1 ]
47As in our original example, this point can be put in terms of “bounding sets.”
For any
particular g : ω →ˆm, all of the quantiﬁers in Ψ(g, ˆm) are bounded by sets like g, ˆm, ω, and
ω × ˆm. Since the elements of these bounding sets all live in the domain of M, the quantiﬁers in
ΨM(f, ˆm) will “know” about all these elements.
48Again, as in the original example, a careful analysis allows us to isolate three speciﬁc instances
of “∈” which do all the explanatory work. Since there’s nothing new going on in this particular
case, I omit the details of this further analysis.
49 The details of this construction are too complicated to explain fully here. The relevant facts
about N′ are these: 1.) N′ is a countable, transitive model of ZFC, 2.) N′ is an “end extension”
of N (cf. footnote 46), and 3.) N′ |= “ωN
1 is countable”. Note that 3 entails that N′ |= ¬Ω[ωN
1 ]
and that 1–3 together entail that N′ contains some (real) bijection g : ω →ωN
1 . Further details
about this construction can be found in chapter 7 of [Kunnen, 1980] or chapter 3 of [Jech, 1978].
50The ﬁrst of these equalities follows from the fact that N′ is an end extension of N. The second
follows from the fact σ ↾X = Id. Basically, the fact that σ is the identity in the “neighborhood”
of ωN
1 ensures that “locally-deﬁnable” properties of ωN
1 will be absolute between N and M (and,

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
643
(see footnote 49). So, the fact that σ : N′ →M is an isomorphism, together with
the fact that σ(ωN
1 ) = ωN
1 , ensures that M |= ¬Ω[ωN
1 ] as well.
This gives us a simple analog of Skolem’s Paradox: even though N and M
agree about the members of ωN
1 , the expression ΩN(ωN
1 ) comes out true, and the
expression ΩM(ωN
1 ) comes out false. Further, there’s no possibility of explaining
this discrepancy by appealing to the diﬀering ways ΩN(x) and ΩM(x) interpret their
quantiﬁers. Since N and M have the same domain, ΩN(x) and ΩM(x) interpret their
quantiﬁers in exactly the same way. Hence, any diﬀerence in truth-value between
ΩM(ωN
1 ) and ΩN′(ωN
1 ) must be explained in terms of the diﬀering ways N and M
interpret the symbol “∈.” In short, this is a case where the only possible solution
to our puzzle follows the membership-oriented lines sketched in section 4.51
This, then, explains why I think the concerns raised at the beginning of this
section are misguided.
Although it’s certainly true that, given any countable
M |= ZFC and any ˆm ∈M, there will be 2ℵ0 bijections g : ω →{x | M |= x ∈ˆm}
which don’t live in the domain of M, it’s not at all clear that these bijections are
relevant to the solution of (all versions of) Skolem’s Paradox. For the version of
Skolem’s Paradox discussed in the last section, it’s unclear how these bijections
are supposed to explain the diﬀerence in truth-value between ΩE( ˆm) and ΩM( ˆm)
(while it’s quite clear how certain instances of “∈” could do this explanatory work).
Further, there are cases which involve the same kind of phenomena as Skolem’s
Paradox where the corresponding bijections simply don’t exist. Given this, we
should be cautious about insisting that Skolem’s Paradox has a single, uniform
explanation which can be formulated in terms of quantiﬁer ranges.
Although
such quantiﬁcational solutions work well in certain cases — e.g., the transitive
model case — there are other solutions which work better when we turn to more
complicated cases — e.g., the case discussed in section 4.
6
A FEW CONCLUDING REMARKS
In the ﬁrst ﬁve sections of this paper, I provided a tour through (some of) the
mathematical issues involved in Skolem’s Paradox. I looked at what it takes to
make this paradox “look plausible,” what we need to “solve” the paradox, what
diﬀerent solutions are appropriate for diﬀerent versions of the paradox, etc. In
this section, I want to step back and take a somewhat broader view. I’ll start by
highlighting a few of the main points — both technical and philosophical — from
for that matter, between either of these models and V ). With a little work, we can show that
all of the properties listed on pp. 637–638 are absolute between N and M, when we put ωN
1 in
place of our previous ˆm. In particular, then, “x = ω” and “x ∈ω × ωN
1 ” will both be absolute.
51In fact, the solution of this puzzle follows our previous solution rather closely. By letting
N′ be an end extension of N and then setting σ ↾X = Id, we ensured that the vast majority of
the symbols in Ω(ωN
1 ) occur within subformulas that are absolute between N and M. This fact,
together with the fact that N and M agree on the interpretation of their quantiﬁers, entails that
any diﬀerences between ΩN(ωN
1 ) and ΩM(ωN
1 ) must be explained by ways these formulas interpret
the usual three instances of “∈” — i.e., the three instances highlighted in the “∈f” clauses in
the formulation of Ψ(f, x) on page 637.

644
Timothy Bays
the preceding sections. I’ll then examine what I take to be the main philosophical
worry which the preceding discussion may have provoked.
From a technical perspective, there are two points I want to emphasize. First,
it’s a lot harder to formulate a plausible-looking version of Skolem’s Paradox than
it may seem to be at ﬁrst. To make Skolem’s Paradox look plausible, we need to
exercise some care in choosing the countable model in terms of which the paradox
is formulated (in general, an arbitrary countable model of ZFC won’t do the job).
We also need to think about just how we explicate our ordinary English notion of
countability. Finally, we need to ensure that the choices we make with regard to
these ﬁrst two issues ﬁt together appropriately: if, for instance, we use a model
with a designated ∈ˆm-relation to formulate the paradox, then we need to explicate
our notion of countability in terms of that relation. So, even getting a superﬁcially
plausible version of the paradox onto the table may require some careful technical
work.
Second, Skolem’s Paradox isn’t just a puzzle concerning the interpretation of
quantiﬁers. To be sure, there are some versions of the paradox which are best
solved by looking at the way ﬁrst-order models interpret quantiﬁcation — e.g., the
transitive submodel argument discussed in section 3. But, there are other versions
of the paradox which require quite diﬀerent solutions — e.g., the versions examined
in sections 4–5. Given this, we should resist the idea that Skolem’s Paradox has
a completely general explanation which can be formulated in terms of quantiﬁer
ranges. Indeed, if we’re really looking for a general solution to Skolem’s Paradox
— a solution which applies to all formulations of that paradox — then I doubt we
can ﬁnd one which is much more speciﬁc than the “generic solution” of section 2.
Let me make a comment about this second point.
For expository reasons,
sections 3–5 focused on cases where we could pretty easily isolate the speciﬁc
symbols whose interpretation served to “explain” Skolem’s Paradox (instances of
“∃x” in 3, and instances of “∈” in 4–5). I don’t, however, think that all cases are
quite this simple. As we saw on page 617, Ω(x) is an incredibly long formula, so
there are many diﬀerent symbols which can, in the context of speciﬁc models, “take
the blame” for particular instances of Skolem’s Paradox. Further, there are cases
where Skolem’s Paradox can’t be pinned on speciﬁc symbols at all — i.e., cases
where the paradox turns on a complicated interplay between the interpretation of
several diﬀerent symbols.52 So, unless we’re willing to accept a wildly disjunctive
solution — potentially one with 2ℵ0 cases — I don’t think we can get a general
solution to Skolem’s Paradox which is more speciﬁc than that given in section 2.53
52To explore this possibility, the reader is encouraged to think through the case where κ is an
inaccessible cardinal and M is a countable elementary submodel of ⟨Vκ, ∈⟩. Let ˆm = ℵ17, and
analyze the version of Skolem’s Paradox which results from the fact that M |= Ω[ ˆm].
53I do, however, think there’s a lot to learn from tracking Skolem’s Paradox through the details
of various speciﬁc models. In doing so, we learn about the particular pathologies which give rise
to things like Skolem’s Paradox, about the strengths and weaknesses of ﬁrst-order formulations
of set theory, and about the ﬁne details of our (various) conceptions of cardinality. There are a
lot of open questions here, and I encourage philosophers — or, at least, those philosophers who
are as fascinated by Skolem’s Paradox as I am — to spend more time exploring this paradox in

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
645
So much, then, for the technical issues. On the more philosophical side, there
are also two points worth emphasizing. First, there shouldn’t be anything too sur-
prising about Skolem’s Paradox. At a general level, we can isolate clear diﬀerences
between the semantics of ordinary English set theory and the model-theoretic se-
mantics of formulas like Ω(x) — e.g., in their interpretation of symbols like “∈”
and “∃” — and we can see how Skolem’s Paradox turns on an equivocation be-
tween these two kinds of semantics. At a more local level, when we track these
diﬀerences through the details of particular models, we can often isolate just which
symbols really give rise to Skolem’s Paradox, and we can explain how the inter-
pretation of these symbols gives rise to the paradox. Given all this, the paradox
itself should no longer seem very puzzling.
Second, the argument of sections 4–5 should lead us to be cautious about any
philosophical analysis of Skolem’s Paradox which focuses overmuch on quantiﬁ-
cation or which overemphasizes certain special cases of the paradox — e.g., the
transitive submodel case.
As we have seen, Skolem’s Paradox comes in many
forms, and, even at the technical level, these diﬀerent forms require diﬀerent kinds
of solutions. This point carries over to the philosophical level as well. It’s clear, for
instance, that Skolem’s Paradox may lead us to ask diﬃcult questions about things
like the indeﬁnite extensibility of the concept of set or the coherence of absolute
notions of quantiﬁcation, but I doubt very much that answers to these questions
will enable us to provide a (complete) solution to the paradox itself. At best, they
will help us to solve those instances of the paradox which most clearly turn on the
interpretation of quantiﬁers. For philosophy, then, as much as for mathematics,
a full solution to Skolem’s Paradox will have to focus on the ﬁne-grained analysis
of many diﬀerent models of set theory (where these diﬀerent models give rise to
diﬀerent philosophical questions).
These, then, are what I take to be the main points of the preceding discussion.
I want to close by considering a worry which this entire discussion may have
provoked. So far, I have treated Skolem’s Paradox as though it were an essentially
technical matter. I started by taking both Cantor’s theorem and the L¨owenheim-
Skolem theorem at face value — by, that is, taking a naively realistic attitude
towards the mathematics lying behind these two theorems — and I then tried
to explain why, understood in this manner, the theorems don’t conﬂict with each
other. In doing so, I felt perfectly free to make use of expressions like “the ordinary
English understanding of membership,” “the real members of ˆm,” “quantiﬁers
which range over the whole set-theoretic universe,” etc.
The worry here is that this analysis might be a bit too naive. At the most basic
level, this worry ﬂows from simple incredulity at the idea that anything as strong
as full classical set theory can simply be presupposed when solving puzzles like
Skolem’s Paradox.54 Moving deeper, our incredulity can be reinforced by recalling
the context of speciﬁc models.
54In the literature, incredulity about appeals to our “ordinary English” understanding of set
theory is often expressed in terms of opposition to “Platonism.” See [Fine, 1968], [Klenk, 1976],
[Thomas, 1968], and [Thomas, 1971] for some examples of this way of putting things.

646
Timothy Bays
other philosophical puzzles about the interpretation of mathematical language —
i.e., puzzles which call into question the determinacy of naive talk about things like
“membership” or “the whole universe of sets.”55 Finally, the entire development
of twentieth-century set theory may seem to tell against my approach to Skolem’s
Paradox. After all, the standard response to the classical paradoxes has been to
move away from naive approaches to set theory and toward formal axiom systems
(and especially ﬁrst-order axiom systems).
Clearly, addressing these kinds of worries in any detail would lead us rapidly
into deep waters. I don’t plan to do that here. Indeed, I won’t even try to develop
these worries more completely or to track them through the relevant literature.
Instead, I’ll just make a few short remarks in defense of the kind of technical
solution given in sections 2–5. For obvious reasons, I don’t regard these remarks
as a complete response to the above worries; at best, they constitute a gesture in
the direction of such a response.
Let’s begin by recalling the point of Skolem’s Paradox. In theory, the paradox
highlights a certain incoherence — or perhaps even an inconsistency — in our
ordinary ways of thinking about set theory. More speciﬁcally, it purports to show
that there is a conﬂict between the naive acceptance of Cantor’s theorem and
certain instances of the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem. Since the L¨owenheim-Skolem
theorem is, presumably, unassailable, this leads to the conclusion that Cantor’s
theorem should not be taken at face value — i.e., that we should view naive talk
about “absolutely uncountable sets” as problematic and to be avoided.
Notice the order of argument here. We start with a naive acceptance of Cantor’s
theorem. (At the very least, we start with an open mind towards this theorem and
towards the naive set theory which lies behind it.) We then formulate Skolem’s
Paradox. The paradox shows that there is a problem with our initial naivet´e, and
it forces us to abandon our original acceptance of “ordinary-English” formulations
of set theory. In short: Skolem’s Paradox does the philosophical work here, and
the problematization of ordinary-English set theory is (part of) the philosophical
payoﬀ.
My concern, then, is that the worries we’re now discussing eﬀectively reverse
this order of argument. They start with a rejection of ordinary-English set theory
— start, that is, with the very thing that Skolem’s Paradox is supposed to help
us establish — and they then use this rejection as a means of defending Skolem’s
Paradox against certain technical challenges (e.g., those in sections 2–5). On this
way of proceeding, however, it’s hard to see how Skolem’s Paradox still does any
real philosophical work. On the surface, it’s our initial worries — and whatever
arguments may lie behind them — that do the real philosophical work; Skolem’s
Paradox just tags along for the ride. Let me put this point another way. Anyone
55See [Klenk, 1976] for an attempt to parley one of Benacerraf’s classical puzzles — that
presented in [Benacerraf, 1965] — into this kind of challenge to naively technical solutions to
Skolem’s Paradox. See [Wright, 1985] for a similar argument based on Wittgensteinian consid-
erations concerning the relationship between meaning and use.

The Mathematics of Skolem’s Paradox
647
who comes to set theory with serious worries about the determinacy (or even
the coherence) of ordinary talk about sets and membership will, of course, have
corresponding worries about the solution to Skolem’s Paradox which I developed
in sections 2–5. But, they will also have independent worries about the notions of
countability and uncountability (since these notions are, after all, deﬁned in terms
of the problematic notions of membership and quantiﬁcation over the set-theoretic
universe). As a result, there’s no need for them to bring Skolem’s Paradox into
the discussion.
Given their initial worries, they have direct arguments against
naive talk about “absolutely uncountable sets,” and Skolem’s Paradox becomes
completely superﬂuous. In short: taking these kinds of worries seriously doesn’t
help to make Skolem’s paradox more signiﬁcant. On the contrary, it threatens to
reduce the paradox to a mere technical side show.
Here’s one more (and ﬁnal) way of thinking about all this. To solve Skolem’s
Paradox, we need to show that there’s no conﬂict between Cantor’s theorem and
the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem. But that’s all we need to do. We don’t also have
to solve every other problem in the philosophy of set-theory — i.e., we don’t have
to solve them before we can use words like “set” and “membership” to provide a
solution to Skolem’s Paradox. In saying this, I’m not trying to dismiss these other
problems; I’m just emphasizing that they are, in fact, other problems.56 When we
focus resolutely on Skolem’s Paradox itself — on the purported conﬂict between
Cantor and L¨owenheim — then we ﬁnd that the technical analysis of sections 2–5
is exactly what we need to solve this particular puzzle. In the present context,
that’s all we need to do.
This, then, explains why I’m at least inclined towards a wholesale dismissal
of the kinds of worries now under discussion.
It’s not that I think that these
worries are trivial or misguided (some of them clearly aren’t); it’s just that I don’t
think that attending to these worries helps us to understand Skolem’s Paradox
itself (indeed, I think the worries tend to trivialize the paradox). Of course, I’m
aware that I’m evading all of the argumentative details here: to really make these
thoughts stick, I’d have to develop the above worries in far more depth and to
explore their interaction with Skolem’s Paradox in far more detail. But that is a
project for another time. For now, I’ll simply end with a ﬁnal summary of this
paper: there is no conﬂict between Cantor’s theorem and the L¨owenheim-Skolem
theorem.
56An analogy from ethics may be helpful here. Presumably, it’s legitimate to discuss topics
like abortion or just war theory without ﬁrst solving the Liar Paradox and/or the problem
of induction.
This is true even though we may want to use the word “truth” in our ethical
discussions and/or make some empirical generalizations. To think otherwise is to think that we
need to solve all philosophical problems in order fruitfully discuss any of them. That’s neither
a reasonable nor a proﬁtable standard for good philosophical discourse.

648
Timothy Bays
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Bays, 2000] T. Bays. Reﬂections on Skolem’s Paradox. PhD thesis, UCLA, 2000.
[Benacerraf, 1965] P. Benacerraf. What the numbers could not be. In Philosophy of Mathemat-
ics, pages 272–294. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1983.
[Benacerraf, 1985] P. Benacerraf. Skolem and the skeptic. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Soci-
ety, 59:85–115, 1985.
[Ebbinhaus et al., 1994] H. Ebbinghaus, J. Flum, and W. Thomas.
Mathematical Logic.
Springer, Amsterdam, 1994.
[Fine, 1968] A. Fine. Quantiﬁcation over the real numbers. Philosophical Studies, 19:27–31,
1968.
[George, 1985] A. George. Skolem and the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorems. History and Philos-
ophy of Logic, 6:75–89, 1985.
[Hart, 1970] W. Hart. Skolem’s promises and paradoxes. The Journal of Philosophy, 67:98–109,
1970.
[Jech, 1978] T. Jech. Set Theory. Academic Press, San Diego, 1978.
[Keisler and Morley, 1968] J. Keisler and M. Morley. Elementary extensions of models of set
theory. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 6:49–65, 1968.
[Klenk, 1976] V. Klenk. Intended models and the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem. The Journal
of Philosophical Logic, 5:475–489, 1976.
[Kunnen, 1980] K. Kunnen. Set Theory. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1980.
[McIntosh, 1979] C. McIntosh. Skolem’s criticisms of set theory. Nous, 13:313–334, 1979.
[Myhill, 1967] J. Myhill. On the ontological signiﬁcance of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem.
In I. Copi and J. Gould, editors, Contemporary Readings in Logical Theory, pages 40–51.
Macmillan, New York, 1967.
[Putnum, 1980] H. Putnam. Models and reality. In Realism and Reason, pages 1–25. Cambridge
UP, Cambridge, 1983.
[Resnik, 1966] M. Resnik. On Skolem’s Paradox. The Journal of Philosophy, 63:425–438, 1966.
[Shoenﬁeld, 1967] J. Shoenﬁeld. Mathematical Logic. Association for Symbolic Logic, Natick,
MA., 67.
[Skolem, 1967] T. Skolem. Some remarks on axiomitized set theory. In Jean van Heijenoort,
editor, From Frege to G¨odel, pages 290–301. Harvard, Cambridge, Mass., 1967.
[Thomas, 1968] W. Thomas. Platonism and the Skolem Paradox. Analysis, 28:193–196, 1968.
[Thomas, 1971] W. Thomas. On behalf of the Skolemite. Analysis, 31:177–186, 1971.
[van Dalen, 1997] D. van Dalen. Logic and Structure. Springer, Amsterdam, 1997.
[Wright, 1985] C. Wright.
Skolem and the skeptic.
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
59:116–137, 1985.

OBJECTUAL AND SUBSTITUTIONAL
INTERPRETATIONS OF THE
QUANTIFIERS
Michael Hand
INTRODUCTION
The ordinary language quantiﬁcation “There’s a cat in my kitchen” does not re-
quire for its truth that any of the cats in my kitchen have names. Likewise, “Every
cat is in my kitchen” is not made true simply by the presence in my kitchen of all
the cats with names. Ordinarily ∀and ∃are understood in the same way. For ϕ
with only x free, we can say roughly,
(∀x)ϕ is true iﬀevery individual satisﬁes ϕ;
(∃x)ϕ is true iﬀsome individual satisﬁes ϕ.
This is the objectual interpretation of (ﬁrst-order) universal and existential quan-
tiﬁcation. The respective truth-theoretic inductive clauses have the following forms
(or something very akin to them).
s satisﬁes (∀x)ϕ iﬀfor every α ∈U, s(x/α) satisﬁes ϕ,
s satisﬁes (∃x)ϕ iﬀfor some α ∈U, s(x/α) satisﬁes ϕ,
where U is the universe of quantiﬁcation, s an assignment of members of U to
variables, and s(x/α) an assignment diﬀering from s at most by assigning α to x.
Note that a truth theory for a language with objectual quantiﬁers detours
through an inductive deﬁnition of satisfaction, as seen here. The substitutional
interpretation of ∀and ∃does not require this.
(∀x)ϕ is true iﬀevery instance of ϕ is true.
(∃x)ϕ is true iﬀsome instance of ϕ is true.
where an instance of a (closed) quantiﬁcation (∀x)ϕ or (∃x)ϕ is the result of
putting an individual constant for the free variable in ϕ.
It will help henceforth if we reserve the symbols ∀and ∃for objectual quantiﬁca-
tion and use Π and Σ for their substitutional counterparts. The question whether
the quantiﬁers of a given language are to be construed objectually or substitu-
tionally becomes the question whether that language’s universal and existential
quantiﬁers are to be represented as our ∀and ∃or rather as Π and Σ. We can use
this convention to give the truth-conditions for substitutional quantiﬁcations as
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

650
Michael Hand
(Πx)ϕ is true iﬀ(∀t)(ϕ(x/t) is true),
(Σx)ϕ is true iﬀ(∃t)(ϕ(x/t) is true).
where t ranges over individual constants and ϕ(x/t) is the result of putting the
name t for all free occurrences of x in ϕ. (For metalinguistic quantiﬁers we sim-
ply underline.
In general, we remain as casual as possible on the use-mention
distinction, as the reader may have already noticed.) The right-hand sides are
clearly seen to involve objectual metalinguistic quantiﬁcation. Philosophical in-
terest in the distinction between objectual and substitutional quantiﬁcation falls
for the most part into two sorts, ontological and meaning-theoretical, though these
are not unrelated. The bulk of what follows is devoted to such philosophical is-
sues, but it will be useful ﬁrst to make some purely logical observations on the
objectual/substitutional distinction.
In general, the truth-condition of (Πx)ϕ is just that of a possibly inﬁnitary
conjunction of all ϕ’s instances (depending on whether the language has a ﬁnite or
inﬁnite number of individual constants; if the former, substitutional quantiﬁcation
is redundant anyway). Let < t0, t1,...> enumerate the individual constants. Then
(Πx)ϕ amounts in eﬀect to
ϕ(x/t0)&ϕ(x/t1)&...
and the truth-condition for (Σx)ϕ is similarly the possibly inﬁnitary disjunction.
This observation is merely heuristic, since we assume an ordinary language with
only ﬁnitely long wﬀs. (Typically we take only individual constants as substuends;
this restriction can be loosened to allow other terms, with certain restrictions
imposed.)
If for every member of the domain U of quantiﬁcation there is a name in the
language, then objectual quantiﬁcations and their substitutional counterparts co-
incide in truth-value. If not, however, then (∀x)ϕ may fail while (Πx)ϕ holds,
since all the named individuals may satisfy ϕ and thus all instances of ϕ are true,
yet some unnamed individuals may nonetheless fail to satisfy ϕ. When only un-
named individuals satisfy ϕ, (∃x)ϕ holds though (Σx)ϕ fails. This is the problem
of too few names: in general ∀is stronger than Π, and ∃weaker than Σ; only on
the assumption that all individuals have names are objectual and substitutional
quantiﬁcations equivalent. (A wﬀϕ is stronger than a wﬀψ iﬀfor any wﬀχ, if
ψ ⊨χ then ϕ ⊨χ.)
It was mentioned above that although a truth theory for a language with objec-
tual quantiﬁcation requires an inductive detour through the notion of satisfaction,
with truth deﬁned in terms of satisfaction of closed wﬀs, this detour is unnecessary
for substitutional quantiﬁcation. The reason the detour is needed in customary
semantic treatments of languages with objectual quantiﬁers is that the semantic
apparatus determines the semantic value of a nonatomic wﬀon the basis of the
semantic values of its immediate syntactic constituents (the wﬀs mentioned on the
right-hand sides of the inductive clauses). In the case of quantiﬁers, this means
that the speciﬁcation of a semantic value of a closed wﬀrequires semantic values

Objectual and Substitutional Interpretations of the Quantiﬁers
651
to be assigned to open wﬀs. (We reserve “sentence” for closed wﬀs.) The truth-
values of sentences (∀x)ϕ and (∃x)ϕ are determined by the value of ϕ, which has
at most x free. (Some languages allow superﬂuous quantiﬁcation, where ϕ is al-
ready closed, but this is beside the present point.) Intuitively, a wﬀϕ that has
only x free is not (typically) true or false, but rather true or false of something.
This is codiﬁed in the notion of a wﬀ’s satisfaction by an assignment of individuals
to variables. Truth of a sentence is then deﬁned as satisfaction by all assignments.
In contrast, substitutional quantiﬁers require only that sentences be accorded se-
mantic values, and (closed) quantiﬁed sentences are treated not by reference to the
semantic values of their immediate syntactic constituents, but instead by means of
the semantic values of their instances. This feature of substitutional quantiﬁcation
may thus open ontologically interesting semantic possibilities, depending on how
the semantic values of quantiﬁer-free sentences, ultimately atomic sentences, are
determined.
A quick inspection of the quantiﬁer rules belonging to a perspicuous deductive
system (natural deduction trees) shows how ∀is stronger than Π and ∃weaker
than Σ in the case where not all members of U have names in the language.
In particular, the rule of ∀-introduction is too demanding to capture merely the
meaning of Π, and the ∃-elimination rule too weak to capture merely that of Σ.
∀−introduction: Conclude (∀x)ϕ from ϕ(x/t), when ϕ(x/t) depends
on no undischarged assumptions containing t.
The eﬀect of the condition for application of this rule is to ensure that the sub-
proof above ϕ(x/t) remains valid on any reinterpretation of t. (This rule can be
formulated with a parametric free variable instead of a parametric name, and thus
serve as a rule of inference for a nameless language.) Thus the condition requires,
for the applicability of the rule, not merely that for each name t′, every wﬀϕ(x/t′)
be true (on the given assumptions), but rather that ϕ(x/t) be true (on the given
assumptions) no matter which individual the name t is taken to name, even when
the individual is in fact nameless in the language. ∃-elimination is a bit more
complicated.
∃−elimination: From the major premise (∃x)ϕ and the minor premise
ψ, conclude ψ and discharge from the subproof above the minor premise
the assumption ϕ(x/t), when (i) neither (∃x)ϕ nor ψ contains t, and
(ii) no remaining undischarged assumptions of that subproof contain
t.
The eﬀect of this condition is again to ensure that the subproof in question remains
valid on any reinterpretation of the parametric name. This, assuming the truth
of the existential major premise on its given undischarged assumptions and of the
remaining undischarged assumptions of the subproof in question, guarantees the
drawn conclusion.
Note, however, that these rules remain valid for the substitutional quantiﬁers.
In both cases, the “conditions” on the applicability of ∀-intro and ∃-elim are

652
Michael Hand
suﬃcient to validate the substitutional counterparts of the rules. If the proof or
subproof in question remains valid on any reinterpretation of the involved name,
then it remains valid on any reinterpretation of the name over just the named
individuals.
This is related to the fact that the semantic consequence relation (entailment)
is compact for ﬁrst-order objectual quantiﬁcation but not for substitutional. For
a set of sentences Γ and a sentence ϕ, Γ ⊨ϕ when any interpretation of the
language whereon all members of Γ are true is such that ϕ is also true on that
interpretation. (We assume the language has an inﬁnite set of individual constants.
An interpretation of a ﬁrst-order language consists in a nonempty universe U —
a set of individuals — with denotations from U for all individual constants, n-
ary relations on U for all the n-adic predicates, and n-ary functions on U for all
the n-adic function symbols of the language.) Compactness of ⊨is the following
property.
If Γ ⊨ϕ then there is a ﬁnite Γ′ ⊆Γ such that Γ′ ⊨ϕ.
Now observe that
{ϕ(x/t0), ϕ(x/t1), ...} ⊨(Πx)ϕ
although no ﬁnite subset of this inﬁnite one entails (Πx)ϕ. Because some universes
have inﬁnite U but not every member of U has a name in the language, even
the inﬁnite set does not entail (∀x)ϕ. (Thus ω-inconsistency is intrinsically an
objectual notion.)
Up to this point we have been talking speciﬁcally about substitutional quanti-
ﬁers that involve substitution of individual constants for variables, but substitu-
tional quantiﬁcation need not be so limited. In general, the semantics of substi-
tutional quantiﬁcation requires only a speciﬁed substitution-class of expressions
available to serve as substituends into the sites occupied by a wﬀ’s variables,
yielding the sentences whose truth or falsity determine the truth-value of the
substitutionally quantiﬁed sentence. This substitution-class might consist in, for
instance, predicate constants of the right adicity, so that “higher-order” substi-
tutional quantiﬁcation is possible, or it might consist in sentences themselves, or
even punctuation marks of the language, e.g., parentheses.
QUINE AND ONTOLOGICAL COMMITMENT
W. V. Quine is famous for his “criterion of ontological commitment”. Let a theory
T in a given language be closed under entailment. We can formulate Quine’s idea
as follows.
When a theory T includes an existential objectual quantiﬁcation (∃x)ϕ,
it is ontologically committed to (i.e., committed to the existence of)
an individual satisfying ϕ.

Objectual and Substitutional Interpretations of the Quantiﬁers
653
This criterion can be formulated with only the existential quantiﬁer because (∀x)ϕ
entails (∃x)ϕ. (It is important that Quine also inveighs against higher-order quan-
tiﬁcation, for independent reasons, and assumes that T does not contain higher-
order quantiﬁers.) Alternatively put, T is committed to the existence of all the
members of the universe U of quantiﬁcation, the values assigned to variables. Thus
the well-known Quinean dictum, “to be is to be the value of a variable”.
Substitutional quantiﬁcation lacks such ontological potency. Its semantics in-
volves metalinguistic objectual quantiﬁcation over substituends, expressions of the
object language, not over members of a universe of object-language reference.
Substitutional quantiﬁcation is therefore inadequate for such ontological work as
Quine has in mind with his criterion. As he puts it [1969, 107],
Substitutional quantiﬁcation in the substitution class of singular terms,
or names, is the sort that comes closest to objectual quantiﬁcation.
But it is clearly not equivalent to it — not unless each of our ob-
jects is speciﬁable by some singular term or other in our language,
and no term of that substitution class fails to specify an object. For
this reason substitutional quantiﬁcation gives no acceptable version
of existence properly so-called, not if objectual quantiﬁcation does.
Moreover, substitutional quantiﬁcation makes good sense, explicable
in terms of truth and substitution, no matter what substitution class
we take — even that whose sole member is the left-hand parenthesis.
To conclude that entities are being assumed that trivially, and that far
out, is simply to drop ontological questions.
Quine also rejects the thought that names are vehicles of ontological commitment.
He advocates elimination of names in favor of deﬁnite descriptions, and elimination
of these in favor of objectual quantiﬁcation, to produce a properly regimented
language within which a theory wears its ontological commitment on its sleeve, in
the form of its existential objectual quantiﬁcations.
Names are eliminable as follows. For each name t, introduce a monadic predicate
Nt true uniquely of t’s referent, and convert ϕ into ϕ(t/ιxN tx). The latter can
be treated in the familiar Russellian way (the theory of descriptions). The result
is a name-free, description-free T. Besides, as Quine mentions, we sometimes use
names in ways that do not match up with any (objectual) existential claims of
the regimented theory: so-called “empty names,” as we shall see. Only names
that do match up carry ontological weight, and this is seen in the existential
products of their elimination in favor of existential quantiﬁcations. It is these that
indicate ontological commitment. Names cannot be relied upon as indicators of
such commitment.
Some have urged that the semantical treatment of substitutional quantiﬁca-
tion shows only that such quantiﬁcation merely defers the question of ontological
commitment, placing the metaphysical weight upon the quantiﬁer-free wﬀs of the
language, especially the atoms. Assuming some prior treatment of empty names
distinguishing them from successfully referential ones, and bearing in mind that

654
Michael Hand
(ﬁrst-order) substitutional quantiﬁcation can be present only for a language from
which names have not been regimented away, we might hold contra Quine that if
the closed atoms are treated by means of a semantics of satisfaction, then an on-
tological commitment to the members of a domain of values of variables is already
present. Thus Dummett [1973, 528]:
Quine supposes that only quantiﬁcation over a range of entities requires
us to ascribe to the corresponding constant expressions reference to
those entities, or commits us to including those entities in our ontol-
ogy: substitutional quantiﬁcation thus appears to him as a threat, a
device for employing quantiﬁcation without ontological commitment.
The advocates of substitutional quantiﬁcation share with Quine the as-
sumption that ontological commitment is required only by [objectual]
quantiﬁcation, and therefore regard substitutional quantiﬁcation as a
means of achieving liberation from ontological commitment. Both are
wrong, because it is not quantiﬁcation which in the ﬁrst place requires
the ascription of reference: reference must be ascribed to any expres-
sions which function as signiﬁcant units of sentences of a language, if
we are to be able to frame a semantic account of that language.
REFERENTIAL AND NONREFERENTIAL BASE SEMANTICS
We distinguish in the semantic apparatus two parts: the base semantics, which
treats atoms, and the structural semantics, which treats nonatoms. Structural
semantics for a ﬁrst-order language with objectual quantiﬁcation and the familiar
connectives includes such inductive clauses for satisfaction as those given earlier
for ∀and ∃, as well as clauses for connectives, e.g.,
s satisﬁes (ϕ&ψ) iﬀ(s satisﬁes ϕ and s satisﬁes ψ),
s satisﬁes ∼ϕ iﬀnot (s satisﬁes ϕ).
The base semantics for a language containing objectual quantiﬁcation contains
such clauses as
s satisﬁes Px iﬀPs(x),
where Px is atomic, P is the metalinguistic predicate interpreting the object-
language predicate P, and s(x) the individual that s assigns to x. Similarly, when
t is an individual constant we have
s satisﬁes Pt iﬀPs(t),
with the proviso that assignments do not vary with respect to individual constants.
(It is clear at this point that our semantics cannot serve the purposes of free
logic, wherein nondenoting names are permitted.)
Assignments assign to both
names and variables members of the universe, and thus we call such a base seman-
tics “referential”.

Objectual and Substitutional Interpretations of the Quantiﬁers
655
A base semantics for a language with substitutional quantiﬁcation (but lacking
objectual quantiﬁcation) has no more need for the notion of satisfaction than does
the structural semantics.
It need only treat closed atoms, and may avoid the
whole semantical machinery of assignments. It becomes possible to invoke some
nonreferential notion of “truth” for closed atoms. In fact, it is inappropriate to
describe substitutional quantiﬁers as “ranging” over “values” for their variables at
all. If, however, the base semantics does involve satisfaction, then the language
already involves ontological commitment by providing a universe whose members
are the values of assignments.
Indeed, even if objectual quantiﬁers are absent
from the language, such a referential semantics is already ontologically committed.
Some have argued that, contrary to the idea underlying Quine’s idealization of a
completely regimented, quantiﬁer-free name-free language of a theory, it is names
in particular that are basic to objectual reference. As Neil Tennant [1979, 40] puts
the case in a nutshell,
What makes [names] basic to the semantic enterprise is this: no lan-
guage could be taken as speaking of objects without our grasping what
it is (or would be) to refer to an object by name. Even a language
“with [objectual] quantiﬁers but without names” can have its semantic
workings made clear only by drawing on an implicit understanding of
the name-bearer relation. The semantics of [objectual] quantiﬁcation
requires at the very least a notion of assignment of individuals to vari-
ables. This is the very same notion as that of temporarily treating
variables as names.
If such comments are correct, we must qualify Quine’s criterion of ontological
commitment. Of a language interpreted by means of referential base semantics
we might say that it “has room” for names and for objectual quantiﬁcation even
if in fact it has neither of these in its vocabulary: the base semantics relies upon
the idea of assigning objects to variables, and the language’s namelessness in-
dicates only that there are no expressions concerning which it is required that
assignments do not vary with respect to them. When objectual quantiﬁcation is
present, the only overt object-language indication of ontological commitment is
made by them. Still, our ontological commitment stems from the referential base
semantics whereby members of the quantiﬁcational universe are assigned to vari-
ables. Objectual quantiﬁcation is important because it requires such treatment. If
the language is quantiﬁer-free, nothing in it necessitates that a theory be ontolog-
ically committed, but we must see it as carrying such commitment if we take its
atoms to be referential. Interpretation of T’s language by means of a referential
base semantics — even in the absence of objectual quantiﬁcation — suﬃces on its
own to carry ontological commitment. Quine’s point may thus be taken as the
claim that unless objectual quantiﬁcation is present, T is subject to a nonreferen-
tial semantical treatment. Perhaps Quine would prefer this point to be formulated
as follows: absent objectual quantiﬁcation, T itself is ontologically noncommittal
in that proponents of T do not ipso facto commit themselves to entities that T

656
Michael Hand
appears (intuitively, given our referential habits of interpretation) to be about; to
secure their freedom, they must hold that this is mere appearance.
THE “SUBSTITUTIONAL STRATEGY”
The suggestion that substitutional quantiﬁcation may open new ontological possi-
bilities and thus alleviate some metaphysical worries has impressed some theorists.
We shall examine a few uses of the “substitutional strategy” for avoiding these wor-
ries. To address the ﬁrst example, we need to remind ourselves of Quine’s “three
grades of modal involvement” and his special antagonism toward the third grade.
Quine is no fan of the analytic/synthetic distinction, nor of modal logic. In par-
ticular, however, he objects to the third grade, “quantifying in,” on distinctive
grounds.
The ﬁrst grade of modal involvement consists in application of a metalinguistic
modal predicate to metalinguistic names of sentences, as in
Nec(“ϕ”),
where the metalinguistic predicate expresses some necessity-like property of sen-
tences, e.g.
logical validity.
Quine of course has no objections to reading the
Nec predicate as “is logically valid”. To this extent, our involvement with this
“modal” predicate and its dual, Poss, is no more problematic than our commit-
ment to the notion of logical validity, though a risk is involved if we try to widen
this notion of necessity to include such “necessary” sentences as “All bachelors are
unmarried,” i.e., to apply it to analytic claims that are not logically valid. Still,
use of the restricted necessity predicate is intrinsically unobjectionable, and no
more objectionable that this is the move to the second grade, where we introduce
into the object language a “statement operator” □applicable only to sentences
(closed wﬀs). Stipulating for a closed ϕ that □ϕ is true iﬀϕ is logically valid
is again risky, but not itself objectionable on semantic grounds. The danger of
this second grade lies in the fact that attempts to encode in the object language
a device for expressing a feature of ϕ whose attribution should properly occur in
the metalanguage invites troublesome (but avoidable) further moves. Historically,
this second grade of modal involvement is, in virtue of the attempt to capture in
the object language a properly metalinguistic predication is “conceived in sin”:
failure to observe the distinction between use and mention. It invites pointless
research into iterated modalities, losing sight of the fact that □□ϕ should, on the
metalinguistic interpretation of □as Nec, involve us in yet a higher metalanguage:
Nec(“Nec(“ϕ”)”). But we can take care, and so our involvement in the second
grade is not ipso facto problematic.
An important further danger of the second grade of involvement is that it invites
an extended use of □not merely as a statement operator but as a “sentence oper-
ator” (what we would call a wﬀoperator), attachable to an open wﬀ, the result of
which can then be closed by a quantiﬁer, for instance (∃x)□Fx. This is “quanti-
fying in”. □is no longer understandable in terms of a metalinguistic predication,

Objectual and Substitutional Interpretations of the Quantiﬁers
657
but requires for its interpretation something radically diﬀerent. Logical validity is
at least a property of sentences, but quantifying in cannot be understood in terms
of a metalinguistic attribution of any property of sentences. Rather, the third
grade requires that sense be made of the open wﬀ□Fx, and this seems to require
attribution of a modal property to an individual independently of any particular
means of referring to it. For example, we might (contentiously) hold
(1)
Nine is odd
to be logically true, thus necessary, and so endorse
(1′) odd(9).
(For the moment we abandon our restriction to languages whose only terms are
names.) We might (uncontentiously) also take
(2)
The number of planets is odd
to be not logically true, and thus endorse (with P for “numbers the planets”)
(2′) ∼odd(ιxPx)
But nine is the number of planets, so there is already a new peculiarity present
here at the second grade. This unfortunate state of aﬀairs is explainable on the
grounds that replacement in a logically valid sentence of one denoting phrase for
a coreferential diﬀerent one cannot be expected to preserve validity. Yet we still
cannot make sense of (3). (Whatever we take Nec to mean, no matter how ill-
conceived, e.g., analyticity, we create new problems when we move to the third
grade.)
(3)
(∃x)□odd(x)
This existential generalization from (1′) forces us to the view that there is some
number (nine? the number of planets?) satisfying odd(x). That it satisﬁes odd(x)
cannot be explained in terms of metalinguistic ascriptions of properties to any
sentence, and so it appears that we must invoke the idea of a number’s being
necessarily odd independently of how it is referred to. Quine concludes that the
third grade of modal involvement forces “Aristotelian essentialism” upon us. We
may distinguish the third grade by attributing to the second grade of modal in-
volvement the view that necessity is relational: an object may possess a property
necessarily, relative to one way of referring to it, but not necessarily, relative to
another way. The number nine is necessarily odd relative to the expression “9”,
but at the same time it is not necessarily odd relative to the coreferential expres-
sion “the number of planets”. The third grade removes this relativity, and with it
any hope of treating necessity as a linguistic phenomenon at all.
Reinterpretation of quantiﬁers may seem to remove this worry. Instead of treat-
ing (∃x)□Fx as an objectual quantiﬁcation, we may treat it substitutionally, i.e.,
we read it as (Σx)□Fx. Its truth does not require us to assert that some individual

658
Michael Hand
is necessarily F, but only that for some term t of the language, □Ft is true. This
suggestion has immediate implications for Quine’s worry over the third grade of
modal involvement because it preserves the linguistic nature of necessity in the
face of quantifying in.
Identity in a language with opacity, such as the one at hand here, is a very del-
icate business. The principle of substitutivity of identity is an objectual principle,
(∀x)(∀y)(x = y →(ϕ →ϕ′)),
where ϕ′ results from ϕ by replacing any number of free occurrences of x therein
by y. The corresponding substitutional principle (Πx)(Πy)(x = y
→(ϕ →ϕ′))
may fail, as above. (For this reason we subsequently focus mostly on substitutional
languages lacking identity.)
Thus substitutional reconstrual may motivate the
imposition of restrictions on the substitution-class of terms associated with the
quantiﬁers (cf. Marcus).
Another potentially useful employment of the substitutional strategy is its ap-
plication to such examples as (5), which we might wish to endorse in view of our
willingness to hold (4) true.
(4)
Pegasus is a ﬂying horse.
(5)
There is a ﬂying horse.
The Russell/Quine elimination of names results in the verdict that (4) is false,
for it takes (4) already to have the logical form of an objectual quantiﬁcation. If
the covert existential quantiﬁer of (4) and the overt one of (5) are construed as
objectual, then both (4) and (5) must be denied. Even if the Russell/Quine way
of regimenting (4) is rejected and (4) is allowed to stand at face value, it entails
(5) and so must be counted as false anyway. Of course, a desire to regard (4)
as being true cannot be accommodated by means of a straightforward referential
base semantics, since the atoms “Pegasus is a horse” and “Pegasus ﬂies”, of which
(4) can be treated as a conjunction, must thereby be interpreted by means of
assignments that (uniformly) assign a member of the universe to “Pegasus” and
presumably have disjoint extensions of the predicates “is a horse” and “ﬂies” (lest
we be ontologically committed to at least one ﬂying horse, Pegasus). But if some
other semantical story is told about (4), so that (4) turns out true, a substitutional
construal of quantiﬁers may seem happy: (5), so treated, is true in virtue of (4)’s
truth: (Σx) (x is a horse & x ﬂies).
In a related way, substitutional quantiﬁcation might be thought to avoid certain
problems in the semantics of propositional attitude constructions. While we may
assume that
John believes that Hesperus is a planet
is true, and given the truth of
Hesperus = Phosphorus,

Objectual and Substitutional Interpretations of the Quantiﬁers
659
it nonetheless seems that
John does not believe that Phosphorus is a planet
may also be true. This problem especially aﬄicts the view that proper names are
directly referential, having no descriptive content and therefore no diﬀerence to be
appealed to in accounting for the failure of substitutivity here. We appear to be
committed to
(∃x)(∃y)(x = y and John believes that x is a planet and John does not
believe that y is a planet),
which yields a contradiction,
(∃x)(John believes that x is a planet and John does not believe that x
is a planet).
This distasteful conclusion is avoided when the quantiﬁers are construed substitu-
tionally. The double quantiﬁcation is true, but there is no entailment to the single
quantiﬁcation.
This strategy of substitutional reconstrual seems to have potential for avoiding
other metaphysical problems. In particular, it may seem attractive to nominalists.
Nominalism is traditionally understood as an ontological view that denies existence
to anything other than individuals. Thus a traditional nominalist will object to
the higher-order quantiﬁcation of (6) when regimented as (6′).
(6)
There is something that Alicia and Beth both are.
(6′) (∃X)(Xa&Xb)
A second-order objectual quantiﬁer as in (6′) is treated as follows. For monadic
predicate variables, the universe of quantiﬁcation U2 is the power set (or non-
standardly, a proper subset of the power set satisfying certain conditions) of the
ﬁrst-order universe U1 (the set of individuals); for n-adic predicate variables, the
universe is the n-th Cartesian product Un
2, the set of n-tuples of members of U1 (or
nonstandardly, a proper subset of it satisfying certain conditions). An assignment
now treats second-order variables and constants as well, assigning them members
of the appropriate universe and always taking the same value for second-order
constants, which in the monadic case are thus treated as “names” of sets. This
ontological commitment to sets (or, on a more ﬁne-grained treatment, to proper-
ties), as Quine would have it, is speciﬁcally due to the presence of the objectual
higher-order quantiﬁer in (6′).
Let Alicia and Beth be police oﬃcers. Unless we are prepared ontologically
to admit the set of police oﬃcers (not to mention the property of being a police
oﬃcer), (6′) should trouble us. As nominalists we may respond by rejecting higher-
order objectual quantiﬁcation. What, then, to do with (6)?

660
Michael Hand
On the other hand, (6′′) would seem to avoid this metaphysical trouble.
(6′′) (ΣX)(Xa&Xb)
(6′′) is true iﬀfor some substituend of the appropriate syntactic category (monadic
second-order constants), the corresponding substitution-instance of Xa&Xb holds.
Indeed, (6′′) is true because (7) is true.
(7)
police-oﬃcer(a)&police-oﬃcer(b)
Even if, in our base semantics, we interpret the predicate by means of a set, (7) is
ﬁrst-order and does not require sets as values of variables. The unreconstructed
Quine, and with him our nominalists, will breathe a sigh of relief.
Propositions are simply zero-place properties, and so an ontological distaste for
properties should apply to propositions. Yet from our earlier
John believes that Hesperus is a planet
we may conclude
(∃p)(John believes p).
Here the quantiﬁcation appears to range over propositions. Substitutional quan-
tiﬁcation yields the supposedly unobjectionable
(Σp)(John believes p).
Another allegedly ontologically potent use of substitutional quantiﬁcation concerns
arithmetic (cf. Gottlieb 1980). A philosopher who wishes to avoid ontological
commitment to the natural numbers may choose to construe the quantiﬁers of
ﬁrst-order arithmetic as substitutional.
There is a prime between 7 and 12
may be read as
(Σx)(prime(x) & (7< x & x <12)
and thus is true in virtue of the truth of
prime(11) & (7<11 & 11<12).
Of course the deﬁned predicate prime involves quantiﬁcation as well, which will
again be construed substitutionally.
(Fortunately for the substitutional strate-
gist, all the natural numbers have names.) The general idea of this approach to
avoiding ontological commitment is obvious. Given a discourse with respect to
which we wish to avoid the ontological commitments of objectual quantiﬁcation,
invoke substitutional quantiﬁcation instead (but a nonreferential base semantics
must also be provided, if the earlier remarks on Quine’s criterion of ontological
commitment are correct).

Objectual and Substitutional Interpretations of the Quantiﬁers
661
Set theory provides another vivid, and ultimately perhaps less objectionable, ex-
ample of this ontological strategy. It is well known that there is an intimate connec-
tion between Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with choice (ZFC) and Von Neumann-
Bernays-Godel set theory (NBG). Although ZFC is strictly a set theory, NBG per-
mits proper classes: set-like objects — “collections” — that are not sets. Proper
classes cannot be members, so the set-theoretic paradoxes (e.g.
Russell’s) are
avoided.
In particular, the proper classes of NBG are “predicative”: although
NBG has comprehension axioms asserting the existence of classes in general (and
distinguishes sets as those classes not equinumerous with the set-theoretic universe,
the so-called limitation of size principle), all comprehension axioms are formulated
with quantiﬁers, other than the initial existential, ranging only over sets (and the
axioms of ZFC that are not already provable for sets in NBG are restricted to sets
as well). For ϕ with at most x free, and all quantiﬁers in ϕ restricted to sets,
(∃Y )(∀x)(x ∈Y iﬀϕ).
(These axioms are typically formulated with lower-case set-variables and upper-
case class-variables.) So the only proper classes admitted are those answering to
these restricted comprehension axioms.
The intimate connection mentioned above is this: NBG is conservative over
ZFC. Roughly, NBG tells us nothing more about sets and how they relate to other
sets than ZFC already tells us. The metaphysical question is then whether ZFC
has a lesser ontological commitment than NBG. Prima facie, and on Quinean
grounds, it would seem so, since NBG asserts the existence of things, in fact a
strange new kind of things, that ZFC does not: proper classes.
If there are, however, conceivable reasons to desire the ontological admission
of a mild variety of proper classes, then NBG may seem preferable. Here is a
very simple (though ﬁctitious) example. Although the (proper) class of ordinals
is not accommodated by the iterative conception of sets embodied by ZFC, we
can imagine a “procedure” for collecting them.
Each time a new rank of sets
is “formed” (by power set or union), add the “new” ordinal rank to our ever-
increasing collection of sets’ ranks. The peculiarity of this new collection is that
it is never completed (though at each stage of the collecting, all it has in it are
sets). If we grant that such a “procedure” is suﬃcient to yield a conception of its
totality, we have thus admitted a proper class.
A proponent of a strictly set ontology, wishing to avoid this further commitment,
has an substitution-strategic option. She may suggest that the initial existential
quantiﬁers of NBG’s comprehension principles be construed substitutionally. (Ob-
jectual interpretation of set-quantiﬁcation will re-establish commitment to sets.)
In this way, she holds, she avoids ontological commitment to anything other than
sets, while permitting a certain amount of ontologically innocuous theorizing seem-
ingly about nonset collections. Indeed, it is not clear that this strategy would have
great philosophical advantages over the mere denial that that there are nonset col-
lections, but at least it would not interfere with the advocate’s use of ZFC to
characterize sets, since NBG is conservative over ZFC, and it accommodates the

662
Michael Hand
views of ontologically mild proponents of proper classes, who want only the “pred-
icative” ones of NBG. (Abandoning the predicativity of NBG’s comprehension
principles results in loss of conservativeness.) But here again, in light of earlier
discussion, it is not obvious that this substitutional move has ontological conse-
quences. If the unreconstructed Quine is right, perhaps so. Charles Parsons [1983,
66] writes,
The advantage of substitutional quantiﬁcation in [such a] case is that
it ﬁts the idea that the classes involved are not “real” independently of
the expressions for them...The fact that the substitution interpretation
yields truth-conditions for quantiﬁed sentences means that everything
necessary for speaking of these classes as entities is present, and the
request for some more absolute veriﬁcation of their existence seems
senseless.
There remains a further diﬃculty with the substitutional strategy in general.
We’ve seen a variety of cases where opponents of various ontologies, belonging
to various discourses, might invoke substitutional quantiﬁcation in hopes of avoid-
ing an unpleasant commitment. The worry arises that the substitutional strategy
is used promiscuously, invoked helter-skelter against whatever ontological threats
one wishes to avoid cheaply. Paul Benacerraf [1983] has addressed the general con-
cern of which this — substitutional reconstrual as as a strategy for escape from
ontological commitment — is a special instance. He considers (p. 405) speciﬁcally
the case of arithmetic, and asks whether (7) and (8) should be both construed as
having the form (9).
(7)
There are at least three large cities older than New York.
(8)
There are at least three perfect numbers greater than 17.
(9)
There are at least three FGs that bear R to a.
Benacerraf objects to the tendency on the part of some philosophers to posit new
construals of arithmetical claims in order to serve some philosophical goal. He
proposes a (no doubt defeasible) methodological condition on theories of meaning
for diﬀerent discourses: that their semantics cohere across discourses. Speciﬁcally,
few would deny that (9) is the logical form of (7), with objectual readings of the
quantiﬁers. Yet some would deny that (9) is the logical form of (8). The primary
villains here are philosophers of mathematics who advocate “combinatorial” rein-
terpretations of arithmetical claims, but his concern applies to proponents of the
substitutional strategy as well. He requires a uniform semantical treatment, and
writes [p. 408]
Perhaps the applicability of this requirement to the present case amounts
only to a plea that the semantical apparatus of mathematics be seen
as part and parcel of that of the natural language in which it is done,
and thus that whatever semantical account we are inclined to give of

Objectual and Substitutional Interpretations of the Quantiﬁers
663
names, or, more generally, of singular terms, predicates, and quanti-
ﬁers in the mother tongue include those parts of the mother tongue
which we classify as mathematese.
Benacerraf’s appeal for semantical uniformity (amounting to a requirement of
referentiality) can be read in our case as focusing on base semantics. Without a
referential base semantics for arithmetical discourse, there is no guarantee that
truth is what the semantics is assigning to sentences. Objectual quantiﬁcation
guarantees base referentiality, but as we have seen substitutional quantiﬁcation
does not constitute an immediate rejection of it. Substitutional quantiﬁcation as
a means of avoiding ontology is likely to be accompanied by a nonreferential base
semantics, for substitutional construal of quantiﬁers merely pushes the ontological
issues downward (or, again as we’ve seen, so some hold).
Substitutionalism is
perhaps not itself a particularly egregious violation of Benacerraf’s principle, but
an advocate who also prefers a nonreferential base semantics must give a lengthy
metasemantical account of truth to excuse her base nonreferentiality in order to
avoid deeply violating the principle.
Another aspect of Benacerraf’s case, one that he does not particularly emphasize
in the passage above but which deserves attention, is that discourses interpene-
trate. Consider the substitutional strategy in connection with the third grade of
modal involvement. Sentences of the third grade do not belong to a well-insulated
discourse. Their quantiﬁers are, prima facie, the quantiﬁers of much nonmodal
language. The consequences of adopting a substitutional construal with respect
to them must therefore extend far into the surrounding language. The same is
true for the quantiﬁers of arithmetic. The substitutional strategy applied here
can be expected to aﬀect our semantics of a good deal of applied mathematics,
and may cause ripples far beyond the limits even of that. On the other hand, the
substitutional treatment of the class comprehension axioms of NBG seems consid-
erably less threatening, given an objectual treatment of set quantiﬁers. No doubt
each use of the strategy must be judged on its own semantical and ontological
merits — the uniformity requirement is presumably defeasible — but Benacerraf’s
meaning-theoretical concern is a signiﬁcant one for substitutionalism in general.
.
KRIPKE ON SUBSTITUTIONAL QUANTIFICATION
Saul Kripke [1976] is the most important discussion of substitutional quantiﬁcation
since Quine. He answers various meaning-theoretical objections to substitutional
quantiﬁcation, gives a thorough account of the semantics of such quantiﬁcation,
and provides deep insights on the question of ontological commitment, the signif-
icance of Tarski’s “Convention T”, the question of homophonic T-sentences, and
other matters. We cannot go into all the contributions of this paper, but will
discuss some central ones, beginning with his semantics.

664
Michael Hand
We distinguish notationally between objectual variables, which are bound by
objectual quantiﬁers and whose semantics involves assignments to them of individ-
uals, and substitutional variables, marking the sites of substitution by expressions
belonging to a speciﬁed substitution-class and bound by substitutional quantiﬁers.
Use italicized “x1”, “x2”, etc. for the former and roman “x1”, “x2”, etc., for the
latter. (We continue to write simply “x”, “y”, “x” and “y” for convenience.)
Given a language L and a semantics for it — call the L-sentences atoms regard-
less of their own internal structure — we extend L to L′ by introducing the usual
connectives and also (Σx). (Kripke introduces (Πx) by deﬁnition as the dual of
(Σx), just as he has only & and ∼for primitive connectives, but this is inessential.)
The logical vocabulary introduced in this extension must be notationally diﬀerent
from the logical vocabulary of L. The L′-connectives are interpreted customar-
ily. Let C (the substitution-class) be a set of L-expressions; call the members
of C terms. Kripke allows that C need not be a set of individual constants or
higher-order constants, but merely a set of expressions of L, perhaps including
punctuation symbols or even “ungrammatical” L-expressions, e.g., those consist-
ing of L-sentences followed by binary L-connectives.
An atomic preformula of
L′ is the result of replacing terms in an L-sentence by substitutional variables.
When an atomic preformula is such that replacement of its variables by any terms
yields back an L-sentence, it is an atomic formula of L′. (This ensures that C is
not motley, as we will use the term later. All members of C are grammatically
available substituends for any variable bound by the associated quantiﬁer, even
though the L-expressions belonging to C need not themselves be grammatical.) In
Lesniewski’s extreme case where C contains only the left-hand parenthesis,
xϕ&ψ)
is a formula when ϕ and ψ are L-sentences and the ampersand is L’s conjunction-
connective (and the parentheses its punctuation devices), because replacement of x
therein by any member of C yields back an L-sentence, (ϕ&ψ). Note that Kripke’s
treatment is considerably more general than those we have discussed so far: he
calls the L-sentences “atomic”, but in fact they may already involve connectives
and quantiﬁers (but not the new ones of the extension). The formulas of L′ are
deﬁned inductively on the basis of “atomic” L′-formulas in the usual way. Truth
(not satisfaction) is inductively deﬁned over closed conjunctions, negations, etc.,
of L′-formulas. Where ϕ has at most x free, (Σx)ϕ is true iﬀthere is a t ∈C such
that ϕ(x/t) is true.
However truth is handled in the semantics for L, all that this semantics for
L′-sentences presupposes is the set Tr(L) of L-truths. The given semantics then
suﬃces to extend Tr(L) uniquely to a set Tr(L′) of L′-truths. For instance, when
ϕ is an L′-atomic formula with at most x and y free, (Σx)(Σy)ϕ is true iﬀthere
are t, t′ ∈C such that ϕ(y/t′)(x/t) ∈Tr(L). This conﬁrms that substitutional
quantiﬁcation is not itself ontologically committal: the commitments of a theory
expressed in L′ are no more than those of L, mod the (objectual) metalanguage’s
additional ontology of new L′-expressions.

Objectual and Substitutional Interpretations of the Quantiﬁers
665
In our earlier terms, the ontological commitments of a substitutional language L′
reduce to those of the “base semantics” that determines Tr(L). If the base seman-
tics is nonreferential, and involves only metalinguistic reference to L-expressions,
then the additional ontology of L′ is null (save for those new L′-expressions).
Kripke gives an example of this. Let L contain no logically compound wﬀs. Let
the only L-predicate be the binary predicate M, and the terms of L be ﬁnite
nonzero strings of the two letters a and b.
So all L-sentences have the form
M(t, t′), where t and t′ are L-terms. Let M(t, t′) ∈Tr(L) iﬀt′ is the mirror-image
of t. Then among the L-truths are M(a, a), M(abb,bba), and M(bbaaba,abaabb);
L-falsehoods include M(a,b), M(aba,bb), etc. This nonreferential base semantics
requires no ontological commitment beyond L-expressions, which is presumably
required of any semantics, so we may say loosely that its ontological commitment
is null. Extending L to the substitutional L′ as above, thus providing the nec-
essary structural semantics accordingly, yields a substitutional semantics that is
again null.
Kripke indicates how a language with both objectual and substitutional quan-
tiﬁcation can be handled semantically. Since the former kind of quantiﬁcation is
present, truth in general must be deﬁned in terms of satisfaction, but the recursion
clauses for satisfaction will not deal with wﬀs having free substitutional variables.
This generalizes the fact that substitutional quantiﬁers of a language (without
objectual ones) allow a direct inductive deﬁnition of truth. The set C of available
substituends must also be speciﬁed. Our base semantics treats “substitutionally
closed” atomic formulas. Our inductive clauses are as usual for connectives and ∃,
but involve satisfaction only of substitutionally closed wﬀs, so assume that ϕ has
among its substitutional variables only x free. The clause for Σ is predictably
s satisﬁes (Σx)ϕ iﬀ(∃t ∈C)(s satisﬁes ϕ(x/t)).
The earlier substitutional extension L′ of an “atomic” L (which, recall, need not
be a language of mere atoms but may even contain objectual quantiﬁcation and
notationally distinct substitutional quantiﬁcation) does not require clauses like
this one. L′-sentences do not have the substitutional quantiﬁers of L′ occurring
within the scopes of objectual ones. The present semantics handles such sentences,
e.g. (∀x)(Σx)ϕ.
s satisﬁes (∀x)(Σx)ϕ iﬀ(∀α ∈U)[s(x/α) satisﬁes (Σx)ϕ],
so
s satisﬁes (∀x)(Σx)ϕ iﬀ(∀α ∈U)(∃t ∈C)[s(x/α) satisﬁes ϕ(x/t)],
and in this way a truth-condition for a mixed quantiﬁcational sentence like (∀x)
(Σx)ϕ is ultimately determined.
Kripke notes that the valid sentences of the pure predicate calculus (PC) with
objectual quantiﬁers are precisely the valid sentences when quantiﬁers are con-
strued substitutionally. There is a perfect parallel between objectual validity and

666
Michael Hand
substitutional validity. The language of PC can be notationally adapted for ei-
ther interpretation. It has denumerably many variables; write them italicized for
the objectual treatment, roman for the substitutional. It has denumerably many
n-adic predicate letters and n-adic function letters, for each n. (As usual, 0-adic
predicate letters are the sentence letters of propositional logic; 0-adic function
letters are, in eﬀect, “derived” constants. The language of PC is contains no “con-
stants” properly so-called; its only constants are these 0-adic function letters.)
Also present are parentheses, connectives & and ∼, and one of ∃and Σ.
We
thus have two languages, perspicuous notational variants of each other, but the
same point could be made by means of a single language and the two semantical
apparatuses applied to it.
First the objectual case. A sentence ϕ of PC is objectually valid iﬀit is true on
any objectual interpretation, i.e.,
(i)
for any nonempty universe U of values of variables,
(ii) for any assignment of members of U to ϕ’s constants,
(iii) for any assignment of sets of n-tuples of members of U to ϕ’s n-adic predicate
letters,
(iv) for any assignment of n-ary functions U n →U to ϕ’s n-adic function letters.
(Since the only constants are the 0-ary function letters, clause (ii) is a special case
of clause (iv); it is included for explicitness.)
Now the substitutional case. An n-adic functor of a language is an expression
with at most n number of free variables, such that any substitution of terms from
C for the free variables results in a term. The 0-ary functors are the constants. A
sentence ϕ of the pure predicate calculus is substitutionally valid iﬀit is true for
any substitutional extension L′ of any L,
(i)
for any (nonempty) substitution-class C,
(ii) for any (uniform) replacements of ϕ’s constants with any members of C,
(iii) for any (uniform) replacements of ϕ’s n-adic predicate letters with any n-adic
atomic formulas of L′,
(iv) for any (uniform) replacements of ϕ’s n-adic function letters with any n-adic
functors of L.
This perfect parallelism shows why the set of objectually valid sentences of PC is
precisely the set of substitutionally valid ones. Kripke notes (336):
The important fact is this: one and the same formal system can be
used to prove all the valid formulae of both the pure referential and
the pure substitutional predicate calculi. If a formula is valid in the
one sense, it is valid in the other.

Objectual and Substitutional Interpretations of the Quantiﬁers
667
The result does not conﬂict with our earlier observation on the relative strengths
of objectual quantiﬁers and their substitutional counterparts, however. It does not
follow that for a language containing both sorts of quantiﬁers, objectual quantiﬁ-
cations and their substitutional counterparts are equivalent. Their relationships
are as indicated earlier, due to the “problem of too few names”.
Kripke intended his observations to answer objections lodged against substi-
tutional quantiﬁcation in previous inﬂuential work (Tharp 1971; Wallace 1971,
1972, and elsewhere). These had argued that that substitutional quantiﬁcation
was both formally and meaning-theoretically defective. It is generally accepted
that Kripke showed such quantiﬁcation to be formally unproblematic on those
particular grounds, but subsequent theorists have continued to object to it on
further meaning-theoretical grounds. We turn now to a family of these.
THE LYCAN-VAN INWAGEN-FINE OBJECTION(S)
William L. Lycan [1979] raises a serious meaning-theoretical worry concerning sub-
stitutional quantiﬁcation. A similar concern is expressed by Peter van Inwagen
[1985], who gives a diﬀerent argument for almost the same conclusion. Lycan con-
cludes that substitutional quantiﬁcations don’t say anything at all; van Inwagen
holds that if substitutional quantiﬁcations do not say anything metalinguistic,
then he does not know what they say (nor does anyone else), so that indeed they
say nothing.
Lycan’s argument runs in general outline as follows. Recall Frege’s horizontal
operator. Applied to a sentence, the horizontal yields an expression denoting the
True if the sentence itself denotes the True (ie., is true), and denotes the False
if the sentence itself denotes the False (is false). Applied to any other expression
(which denotes something other than a truth-value if it denotes anything), the
resulting expression also denotes the False. Thus
(10) —-7
denotes the false. In this sense, then, (10) has a truth-condition. Note, however,
that (10) does not say anything, in a very natural sense of “say”. Now compare
(10) with (11), where the substitution-class for the quantiﬁer contains only the
left-hand parenthesis.
(11) (Σx)xϕ →ϕ)
This is not gibberish. Its sole substitution-instance is (ϕ →ϕ). Since this is true,
(11) is true. But again, (11) fails to say anything. By the same token, then,
(12) (Σx)(x is a dog)
fails to say anything, despite its truth.
To reach this conclusion, Lycan ﬁrst
considers (12) against the background of a semantics whose substitution-class C

668
Michael Hand
of terms available as substituends for (12)’s quantiﬁer is motley: it includes terms
such that their substitutions for x in “x is a dog” are syntactically acceptable, but
also some that are not.
A semantics with a motley substitution-class is not obviously unworkable. The
idea is that the members of C which do not yield well-formed wﬀs upon substitu-
tion are simply irrelevant semantically, for the truth-condition of a substitutional
existential quantiﬁcation is an objectual existential quantiﬁcation over C, ren-
dering syntactically inappropriate members of C semantically immaterial. Lycan
urges the intuition that (12) is no more able to say anything than is (11). Then,
given this, he concludes that even when C contains only terms that uniformly
yield grammatical instances, (12) remains “semantically mute,” as he puts it. The
transition from the motley case to the uniform case is made by means of the
consideration that if the motley C contains, say, both names and the left-hand
parenthesis, then both (12) and
(13) (Σx)xBetsy is a dog)
are thus made true by the same substitution-instance,
Betsy is a dog
and it is diﬃcult to see how (12) can avoid muteness in light of (13)’s.
This argument is intuitively powerful.
It seems clear enough that (11) ex-
presses no proposition, despite its possession of a truth-condition. Having a truth-
condition is no guarantee of an expression’s possession of content. Lycan distin-
guishes the two possible treatments of (12) because he expects this intuition to be
shared concerning (12) when interpreted against a motley C, and then argues that
there is at best a formal and meaning-theoretically arbitrary diﬀerence between
this treatment and a treatment of (12) where C is uniform. Lycan holds that an
arbitrary, formal change in the semantics such as restricting C to grammatically
acceptable substituends for x cannot bestow meaning upon (12). Thus (12) is
mute on the uniform substitutional treatment as well as the motley one.
Van Inwagen [1985] complains that no one knows what proposition a sentence
like (12) expresses (unless it is the metalinguistic objectual quantiﬁcation over
terms, which it is supposed not to express).
Substitutional quantiﬁcations are
radically unlike their corresponding objectual quantiﬁcations, for which it is easy
to give the “bottom-level” expressed propositions that are not about language and
truth.
Van Inwagen’s conclusion is based on the assumption that (12) does not mean
that “x is a dog” has a true instance, while Lycan’s conclusion is that (12) doesn’t
mean anything at all, even that. Van Inwagen concludes only that neither he nor
anyone else understands (knows which proposition is expressed by) (12).
A few words about what a sentence means, or rather what it needn’t mean,
are in order.
A correct T-sentence for a given sentence ϕ is a metalinguistic
biconditional whose left-hand side attributes truth to ϕ and whose right-hand side
states the condition that must obtain in order for ϕ to be true. When ϕ is a

Objectual and Substitutional Interpretations of the Quantiﬁers
669
bottom-level sentence, an adequate truth theory must provide a T-sentence for ϕ
whose right-hand is also a bottom-level sentence of the semantical metalanguage.
Many theorists use something like this idea, “truth-conditionalists” in particular,
who cannot avail themselves of Tarski’s requirement that the right-hand side be
a translation of ϕ into the metalanguage.
This would presuppose a notion of
meaning, and they take their project to be, roughly, a characterization of meaning
in terms of the antecedently better-understood notion of truth.
Because they
cannot appeal to the meaning of ϕ in placing stronger constraints on the right-
hand sides of T-sentences, there are correct T-sentences which have no chance of
expressing on their right-hand sides what the sentence in question means. If (14)
is correct, then so is (15).
(14) Tr(ϕ) iﬀthere is a dog.
(15) Tr(ϕ) iﬀ[there is a dog, and (ψ∨∼ψ)]
Any truth theory that issues in (14) also issues in (15) (assuming its logic is clas-
sical, a matter we will not pursue). But proposition-theorists insist that proposi-
tions, which are supposed to be the meanings of sentences, are individuated more
ﬁnely than by logical equivalence. The proposition that there is a dog is not the
proposition that-there-is-a-dog-and-either-ψ-or-not-ψ (where ψ is some unrelated
sentence). Thus although (14) and (15) associate ϕ with the same truth-condition,
they do not both identify the proposition that ϕ expresses. The mere fact that the
truth-condition for a substitutional existential quantiﬁcation is given by means
of metalinguistic objectual quantiﬁcation is no reason to think that the propo-
sition it expresses is a metalinguistic one. Van Inwagen grants that the truth-
condition of (12) can be given metalinguistically, and requests more information:
what bottom-level proposition does (12) express, whereby a metalinguistic state-
ment of its truth-condition can be seen to be correct?
Now, van Inwagen’s argument presupposes that if (12) does express a propo-
sition, then we should be able to say what (12) means. He grants that among
the correct T-sentences for (12) should be one whose right-hand side expresses the
very proposition that (12) expresses. Assuming (12) doesn’t mean that there is a
term that yields a truth when substituted for x in “x is a dog,” then we cannot
say what (12) says. Call the standard statement of (12)’s truth-condition, the
objectual quantiﬁcation over terms, “∃”. Van Inwagen writes [p. 285],
[(12)], therefore, does not express ∃. But then what proposition does
it express? I do not know. No one knows. No one knows because
no one has ever said. I know of only one proposition — ∃— that
one might reasonably suppose...to be the proposition [(12)] expresses,
and I am told by those who know what proposition [(12)] expresses
if anyone knows what proposition [(12)] expresses that ∃is not the
proposition [(12)] expresses...That is, I do not understand [(12)]. And
neither, I think, does anyone else. But then neither I nor anyone else
understands substitutional quantiﬁcation.

670
Michael Hand
Lycan, unlike van Inwagen, is not happy with the use of propositions in an ac-
count of what a sentence says. He is a truth-conditionalist who thinks that truth-
conditions are at least a good starting point for an account of understanding a
sentence (knowing what it means). Knowing what a sentence means is not just a
matter of knowing a T-sentence for it, but of being able to compute a T-sentence
on the basis of the sentence’s structure and its words, where it is assumed that
one knows the meaning of its words and how its compositional structure con-
tributes to truth-conditions.
Substitutional quantiﬁcation threatens the whole
truth-conditionalist project, since anyone familiar with Σ and Π knows how to
compute a T-sentence for (12) in Lycan’s preferred way.
Michael Hand [1993] suggests a response to these arguments. First, there is a
consideration that comes close to answering van Inwagen without answering Lycan.
Van Inwagen seeks a bottom-level proposition expressed by (12), and ﬁnds one for
its objectual counterpart by means that fail for (12). He explains our grasp of ∀
and ∃by reference to the quantiﬁcational idioms of natural language. He takes it
that the proposition expressed by
(16) (∃x)(x is a dog)
is also expressed in ordinary English by “There is a dog,” so that his answer to
the question what is meant by (16) is simple. (16) means that there is a dog. This
indicates that the root of his problem is simply that English (and any other natural
language he understands) lacks substitutional quantiﬁers. If English already had
its own vernacular substitutional existential quantiﬁer, say “sigma” (to be used
in constructions like “There is sigma F” in contrast to “There is an F”), or if
we add “sigma” to English, yielding a new, augmented “natural language,” then
it would be easy enough to produce a natural language sentence expressing the
same proposition that (12) expresses. Speaking this augmented language, we can
answer van Inwagen’s demand to be told what proposition is expressed: (12) says
that there is sigma dog. To resist this option, van Inwagen must deny that any
proposition is expressed (in the new language) by this new sentence. Yet it is not
a diﬃcult imaginative exercise to become ﬂuent enough in the new enlargement of
English to think twice about this denial. It amounts to a claim that the expansion
of English is not a possible natural language.
A response to Lycan is also in the oﬃng, which further undermines van Inwa-
gen’s predicted denial. Assuming that the semantics of this new locution is best
formulated by means of a uniform substitution-class, and that speakers have be-
come ﬂuent with their new substitutional quantiﬁer, their grasp of natural language
substitutional quantiﬁcation appears to be on a meaning-theoretical par with their
grasp of English objectual quantiﬁcation.
A Lycanian truth-conditionalist can
therefore grant that (12) is no more mute than (16). That is, Lycan’s consid-
erations on muteness do not count against a sophisticated truth-conditionalist
theory of meaning. (Hand tries to ﬁnesse Lycan’s worry about motley vs. uniform
substitution-classes.)

Objectual and Substitutional Interpretations of the Quantiﬁers
671
In much the same vein, Kit Fine [1989] argues that our understanding of sub-
stitutional quantiﬁcations is to be explained in terms of our understanding of
objectual quantiﬁcation.
He considers (Σx)Fx and its corresponding objectual
quantiﬁcation (∃x)Fx, interpreting F in the latter in a new, “shifted” way as the
predicate holding of a term t just when Ft, interpreted in the original way, is
true. The substitutional quantiﬁer is therefore read as a metalinguistic one over
terms: its meaning is objectual, though metalinguistic. Like van Inwagen, Fine
reports diﬃculty in understanding (Σx)Fx in any other way than by means of the
“shifted” interpretation of F, and concludes that there is apparently no diﬀerence
in our understanding (Σx) and our understanding of (∃x): rather the diﬀerence
between (Σx)Fx and (∃x)Fx is in our interpretation of the predicate F.
Fine’s reinterpretation of (∃x)Fx is of course just the metalinguistic charac-
terization of the truth-condition of (Σx)Fx in new guise, and his argument is
no stronger than van Inwagen’s own, though Fine remains uncommitted to a
proposition-theoretic account of meaning. His argument is cast in terms of our
understandings of these sentences, and thus is neutral on the divide between
proposition-theoretic meaning theories and sophisticated truth-conditionalist ones.
It nonetheless appears subject to a rephrasing of Hand’s response to van Inwa-
gen’s case: Fine cannot understand (Σx)Fx except by means of his metalinguistic
“shift” because he does not understand the corresponding new vernacular state-
ment “There is sigma F”, which by hypothesis does not engage an interpretive
“shift” with respect to the predicate.
THE PROBLEM OF TOO MANY NAMES
H. A. Lewis [1985] observes that certain nonstandard substitutional quantiﬁers
give rise to an problem reminiscent of the problem of too few names. It is the
problem of too many names. As a special case, it plagues numerical substitutional
quantiﬁers. Consider the nonstandard quantiﬁer “most” and a straightforward
substitutional account, assuming a straightforward referential semantics.
(We
write nonstandard objectual quantiﬁers as well as their variables in italics, and
nonstandard substitutional ones along with their variables in roman. We reserve
“term” for names belonging to C.) Where ϕ has at most x free,
(most x)ϕ is true iﬀ(most t ∈C)(ϕ(x/t) is true)
An objectual interpretation of “most” is predictable; here we do not require that
ϕ has at most x free (for parallelism with the clauses for ∀and ∃).
s satisﬁes (most x)ϕ iﬀ(most α ∈U)(s(x/α) satisﬁes ϕ)
Let our universe contain only three members: U={a,b,c}. Let C, however, contain
ten terms, {t1,...t10}, with t1 naming a, t2 naming b, and the remainder naming
c. Let F’s extension be {a, b}. Then the objectual quantiﬁcation
(most x)Fx

672
Michael Hand
is clearly true, for two out of the universe’s three members belong to F’s extension.
Yet among the ten substitution-instances of Fx are a single true one for a, a single
true one for b, and eight that are false in virtue of c’s absence from F’s extension.
That is, the substitutional quantiﬁcation
(most x)Fx
is false. The example is easily modiﬁed so that the substitutional quantiﬁcation
is spuriously true — let a and b each have ten names, and c only one, but only c
belong to F’s extension.
Many nonstandard quantiﬁers give rise to this problem, including “several”, “a
few”, and “many”. The problem also aﬄicts numerical quantiﬁers like “exactly
three”, as is easily seen. (As remarked earlier, identity must be treated with kid
gloves in the presence of substitutional quantiﬁcation, but as Kripke observed,
under certain assumptions it behaves. The key condition is transparency, so we
stipulate that the language has no referential opacity.)
Lewis concludes that the use of substitutional quantiﬁcation requires a seman-
tical principle limiting the language to a single name for each member of U. This
would solve his problem, but it is an extreme solution, since on this account any
identity statement having distinct names ﬂanking the identity sign is false. Such
extremity is avoidable when the base semantics of the language is referential, as
it clearly is in Lewis’s scenario.
The problem shows that substitutional quantiﬁcation cannot be relied upon to
“count” individuals correctly. Rather, these nonstandard quantiﬁers count terms.
The problem arises because a single individual may be counted more than some
other individual because it has more terms denoting it, and its many terms yield
substitution-instances that are all true or false together.
Let δ be the denotation function taking each term to its value, the member of
U it denotes. For each t ∈C, there is the equivalence class {t′ ∈C : δ(t′) = δ(t)} of
terms that are coreferential with t. Given a well-ordering of terms, each equivalence
class has a least member. Call these the proper terms of C, and consider the set
C∗of C’s proper terms. C∗has no more than one term per member of U (though
it may leave some out entirely — the problem of too few names). In this way we
ensure that these substitutional quantiﬁers do not count individuals more than
once. Instead of requiring that every true identity-statement of the language has
the same name on both sides, we ensure, in eﬀect, only that no true identity
statement has distinct proper terms on both sides. This less stringent solution
tweaks the semantics of the substitutional quantiﬁers, rather than tweaking the
language itself.
(Σx)ϕ is true iﬀ(∃t ∈C*)(ϕ(x/t) is true)
(most x)ϕ is true iﬀ(most t ∈C*)(ϕ(x/t) is true)
and so on.
Both Lewis’s proposal and this one exploit the referentiality of the (base) se-
mantics. Both proposals involve sensitizing the truth-conditions of substitutional

Objectual and Substitutional Interpretations of the Quantiﬁers
673
nonstandard quantiﬁers to features of the denotation function δ, the ﬁrst by re-
quiring δ to be one-to-one, and the latter by reducing C to C*, thereby requiring δ
to be one-to-one over proper terms. The need for such a move counts as evidence
that the natural language nonstandard quantiﬁers themselves ought always to be
construed, regardless of the discourse in which they are used, as objectual. When
they are used in a discourse in which the standard quantiﬁers “there are”, “some,”
“every,” etc. are also used, this would constitute a good reason to treat these
as objectual, too. In particular, it counts against the substitutional strategy for
avoiding ontological commitment. For instance, any case for construing the ordi-
nary quantiﬁers as substitutional in discourse about ﬁctitious entities like Pegasus
is weakened by the observation that nonstandard quantiﬁers are also used to talk
about ﬁctitious entities: “Leopold Bloom was taller than most of his countrymen.”
NATURAL LANGUAGE SUBSTITUTIONALISM
We turn ﬁnally and brieﬂy to a legendary view of which it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd
advocates, the view that the ordinary quantiﬁers “there is” and “for all” (and
their variants) of natural language are themselves substitutional in nature. The
view has an idealistic air, and appears to bear on the claim that we understand
the use of ∀and ∃by means of our grasp of ordinary language quantiﬁers, which
are supposedly objectual. Can the objectuality of ordinary language quantiﬁers be
called into question generally? Kripke (380) observes that the question of whether
ordinary language quantiﬁers are objectual or substitutional evaporates.
[A]nyone who doubts or denies that English has any resources for mak-
ing genuinely existential assertions has cut the ground out from under
his feet; he has no way even of formulating the question at issue. The
alleged “issue”, then is bogus.
Indeed, what is this substitutionalism to make of the obvious claim that the truth
of “There is a cat in my kitchen” does not require that any cats in my kitchen
have names?
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Benacerraf, 1983] P. Benacerraf. Mathematical truth. In Paul Benacerraf and Hilary Putnam
(eds.), Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings, 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1983.
[Dummett, 1973] M. Dummett. Frege: Philosophy of Language. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1973.
[Fine, 1989] K. Fine The problem of De Re modality. In Joseph Almog, John Perry, Howard
Wettstein (eds.), Themes From Kaplan. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989.
[Gottlieb, 1980] D. Gottlieb Ontological Economy: Substitutional Quantiﬁcation and Mathe-
matics. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980.
[Hand, 1993] M. Hand. “Truth, meaning, and substitutional quantiﬁcation. Philosophical Stud-
ies 68, 195–216, 1993.

674
Michael Hand
[van Inwagen, 1981] P. van Inwagen. Why I don’t understand substitutional quantiﬁcation.
Philosophical Studies 39, 281–85, 1981.
[Kripke, 1976] S. Kripke. Is there a problem about substitutional quantiﬁcation?
In Gareth
Evans and John McDowell (eds.), Truth and Meaning. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976.
[Lewis, 1985] H. A. Lewis. Substitutional quantiﬁcation and nonstandard quantiﬁers. Noˆus 19,
447–451, 1985.
[Lycan, 1979] W. G. Lycan. Semantic competence and funny functors. The Monist 62, 209–22,
1979.
[Marcus, 1993] R. B. Marcus. Modalities and intensional languages, in her Modalities. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1993.
[Parsons, 1983] C. Parsons. A plea for substitutional quantiﬁcation, in his Mathematics in Phi-
losophy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1983.
[Quine, 1996] W. V. O. Quine. Three grades of modal involvement, in his The Ways of Paradox
and Other Essays. New York: Random House, 1966.
[Quine, 1980] W. V. O. Quine. On what there is, in his From a Logical Point of View. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, second edition revised, 1980.
[Quine, 1969] W. V. O. Quine. Existence and quantiﬁcation, in his Ontological Relativity and
Other Essays. New York: Columbia University Press, 1969.
[Tennant, 1979] N. Tennant. Antirealism and Logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979.
[Tharp, 1971] L. Tharp. Truth, quantiﬁcation and abstract objects. Noˆus V, 363–79, 1971.
[Wallace, 1972] J. Wallace. On the frame of reference. In Donald Davidson and Gilbert Harman
(eds.), Semantics of Natural Language. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1972.
[Wallace, 1971] J. Wallace. Convention T and substitutional quantiﬁcation, Nous V, 199–212,
1971.

MANY-VALUED LOGICS
Siegfried Gottwald
1
BASIC IDEAS
1.1
From classical to many-valued logic
Logical systems in general are based on some formalized language which includes
a notion of well-formed formula, and then are determined either semantically or
syntactically.
That a logical system is semantically determined means that one has a notion
of interpretation or model1 in the sense that w.r.t. each such interpretation every
well-formed formula has some (truth) value or represents a function into the set
of (truth) values. It furthermore means that one has a notion of validity for well-
formed formulas and, based upon it, also a natural entailment relation between
sets of well-formed formulas and single formulas (or sometimes also whole sets of
formulas).
That a logical system is syntactically determined means that one has a notion
of proof and of provable formula, i.e. of (formal) theorem, as well as a notion of
derivation from a set of premisses.
From a philosophical, especially epistemological point of view the semantic as-
pect of (classical) logic is more basic than the syntactic one, because it are mainly
the semantic ideas which determine what are suitable syntactic versions of the
corresponding (system of) logic.
The most basic (semantic) assumptions of classical, i.e. two-valued – proposi-
tional as well as ﬁrst-order — logic are the principles of bivalence and of composi-
tionality. Here the principle of bivalence is the assumption that each sentence2 is
either true or false under any one of the interpretations, i.e. has exactly one of the
truth values ⊤and ⊥, usually numerically coded by 1 and 0. And the principle of
compositionality3 is the assumption that the value of each compound well-formed
formula is a function of the values of its (immediate) subformulas.
The most essential consequence of the principle of compositionality is the fact
that each one of the propositional connectives as well as each one of the (ﬁrst
1We prefer to use the word interpretation in general and to restrict the use of the word model
to particular interpretations which are tied in a speciﬁc way with sets of well-formed formulas.
2By a sentence one means either any well-formed formula of the corresponding formalized
propositional language, or any well-formed formula of the corresponding formalized ﬁrst order
language which does not contain any free individual variable.
3Sometimes this principle is also named principle of extensionality.
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

676
Siegfried Gottwald
order) quantiﬁers is semantically determined by a function (of suitable arity) from
the set of (truth) values into itself, or by a function from its powerset into the set
themselves.
Disregarding the quantiﬁers for a moment, i.e. restricting the considerations to
the propositional case, the most essential (semantical) point is the determination
of the truth value functions, i.e. of the operations in the truth value set which
characterize the connectives. From an algebraic point of view, hence, the crucial
point is to consider not only the set of truth values, but a whole algebraic structure
with the truth value set as its support. And having in mind that all the classical
connectives are deﬁnable from the connectives for conjunction, disjunction, and
negation, this means to consider the set {0, 1} of truth values together with the
truth functions min, max and 1 −. . . of these connectives — and this is a partic-
ular Boolean algebra. The semantical notion of validity of a well-formed formula
ϕ w.r.t. some interpretation now means that ϕ has truth value 1 at this particu-
lar interpretation. (And universal validity of course means being valid for every
interpretation.)
Generalizing the notions of truth value, of interpretation and of validity in such
a way that the truth value structure may be any (nontrivial) Boolean algebra
B = ⟨B, ⊓, ⊔, ∗, 0, 1⟩, that an interpretation is any mapping from the set of all
propositional variables into B, the truth value functions for conjunction, disjunc-
tion, negation are chosen as ⊓, ⊔, ∗, respectively, and validity of a well-formed
formula ϕ w.r.t. a given interpretation means that ϕ has the Boolean value 1 at
this interpretation.
This generalized type of interpretations can easily become extended to the ﬁrst
order case: one then has to consider only complete Boolean algebras and has
to consider the operations of taking the inﬁmum or supremum as the operations
corresponding to the universal or existential quantiﬁer.
It is well-known that the class of universally valid formulas of classical logic is
just the class of all formulas valid for all (nontrivial) — and complete (in the ﬁrst
order case) — Boolean algebras as truth value structures. This fact is referred
to by saying that the class of (complete) Boolean algebras is characteristic for
classical logic.
Many-valued logic deviates from the two basic principles of bivalence and of
compositionality only in that it neglects the principle of bivalence. Therefore, any
system S of many-valued logic is characterized (i) by a suitable formalized language
LS which comprises
• its (nonempty) family J S of (basic) propositional connectives,
• its (possibly empty) family of truth degree constants,
• its set of quantiﬁers,4
4Each quantiﬁer for simplicity is supposed here to be a unary one. This means that we allow
to have some kinds of generalized quantiﬁers in the sense of Mostowski [Mostowski, 1957] but we
do not consider the possibility to have quantiﬁers with more than one scope, as is allowed e.g.
in [Rescher, 1969; Gottwald, 2001].

Many-Valued Logics
677
and adopts the usual way of deﬁning the class of well-formed formulas w.r.t. these
syntactic primitives, and parallel to these syntactic data (ii) by the corresponding
semantic data, i.e. by
• a (nonempty) set WS of truth degrees,5
• a family of truth degree functions together with a correspondence between
these truth degree functions and the propositional connectives of the (formal)
language,
• a (possibly empty) family of nullary operations, i.e. of elements of the truth
degree set together with a one-one correspondence between the members of
this family and the truth degree constants of the (formal) language,
• a set of quantiﬁer interpreting functions from the power set IP(W S) of WS
into WS together with a one-one correspondence between these functions
and the quantiﬁers of the (formal) language.
Based upon these data which constitute any particular system S of many-valued
logic, it is a routine matter to combine with each truth degree evaluation e of all
atomic formulas an extension ValS which gives for each well-formed formula ϕ of
the language of S its truth degree ValS(ϕ, e) under e.
As usual, ValS(ϕ, e) could be deﬁned by recursion on the complexity of ϕ.
And, again as usual, in the propositional case such an evaluation e is given
immediately, and in the ﬁrst-order case e = (A, v) is determined by a suitable in-
terpretation A together with an assignment v of objects from A to the (individual)
variables of the language.
1.2
Particular truth degree sets
Usually one additionally assumes that the classical truth values (or some “isomor-
phic” copies of them, also coded by 1 and 0) appear among the truth degrees of
any suitable system S of many-valued logic:
(1)
{0, 1} ⊆WS .
Formally, for the systems S of many-valued logic there is essentially no restric-
tion concerning the set WS of truth degrees of S besides (1). Nevertheless the
choice of WS as a set of numbers (either integers or rationals or even reals) is
widely accepted use. At least as long as one is not interested to have an ordering
5For systems of many-valued logic we prefer to call their semantic values truth degrees to
emphasize the diﬀerence to the truth values of classical logic. Moreover this term appears to
be a bit more neutral concerning ontological commitments. And this is important because one
does not have any preferred ontological reading for the truth degrees of many-valued logics. The
intuitive understanding of these degrees completely depends upon the particular applications
under consideration.
Because this is a completely diﬀerent situation compared with classical
logic, this change in the terminology is intended to underline just this diﬀerence.

678
Siegfried Gottwald
of the truth degrees which allows for incomparable truth degrees6. The existence
of incomparable truth degrees, however, may be crucial for certain particular ap-
plications, e.g. in a situation where the truth degrees are intended to code parallel
evaluations of diﬀerent points of view. To imagine such a situation assume to be
interested, in image processing, to evaluate whether a certain point P belongs to
a certain ﬁgure F, i.e. to determine the truth value of the sentence “P is a point
of F”. For black and white pictures, the evaluation yields one of the truth values
⊤, ⊥. Being instead confronted with a graytone picture, the evaluation of this
sentence may yield as truth degrees the values of some scale which characterizes
the diﬀerent gray levels. And being, ﬁnally, confronted with a colored picture, e.g.
on the screen of some monitor, which consists of (colored) pixels which themselves
are generated by superposing pixels of the three basic colors, then it may be rea-
sonable to evaluate the above mentioned sentence by a truth degree which is a
triple of the levels of intensity of the basic colors which give point P.
Another widely accepted kind of approach is to assume that among the truth
degrees there is a smallest one, usually interpreted as an equivalent for the truth
value ⊥, and a biggest one, usually interpreted as an equivalent for ⊤.
Based on these common assumptions it is usually at most a simple matter of
isomorphic exchange of the structure of truth degrees to assume (1) together with
(2)
WS ⊆[0, 1] ⊆R.
And this choice of the truth degree set shall be the standard one in the following
discussions.
For the case of inﬁnitely many truth degrees it is common usage to consider
either countably many or uncountably many truth degrees and furthermore to
choose either one of the truth degree sets
(3)
W0 =def {x ∈Q | 0 ≤x ≤1}
or
W∞=def {x ∈R | 0 ≤x ≤1}.
For the case of ﬁnite sets of truth degrees usually one additionally assumes that
these truth degrees form a set of equidistant points of the real unit interval [0, 1],
i.e. are of the kind
(4)
Wm =def

k
m −1 | 0 ≦k ≦m −1

for some integer m ≧2.
1.3
Designated truth degrees
In classical logic there is a kind of superiority of the truth value ⊤over the other
one ⊥: given some well-formed formula (or some set of formulas) one mainly
6Of course, even in such a situation one can take a set of numbers for the set of truth degrees
— and adjoin another ordering relation to these numbers than their natural ordering. But this
is rather unusual.

Many-Valued Logics
679
is interested in those interpretations for the system of many-valued logic one is
working in which make the given formula(s) true.
With the set WS of truth degrees each system S of many-valued logic has its
equivalent to the truth value set {⊤, ⊥}. However, even admitting condition (1),
this does not mean that the truth degree 1 has to be the equivalent of ⊤. The
rather vague philosophical idea that in many-valued logic one considers some kind
of “splitting” of the classical truth values does not by itself determine which truth
degrees “correspond” to ⊤. Therefore, to determine some system S of many-valued
logic does not only mean to ﬁx its set of truth degrees and its formal language, i.e.
its connectives, quantiﬁers, predicate symbols and individual constants, together
with their semantic interpretations, it also means to ﬁx which truth degrees “cor-
respond” to ⊤.
Formally this means, that with each system S of many-valued one connects not
only its set WS of truth degrees but also some set DS of designated truth degrees.
Of course, usually one supposes
(5)
1 ∈DS ⊆WS
together with
0 /∈DS.
Such a choice of designated truth degrees is of fundamental importance for the
generalization of the notions of logical validity and of logical consequence.
1.4
Logical validity and logical consequence
Based on the notion of designated truth degrees it is essentially a routine matter to
generalize the notions of logical validity and of logical consequence to any system
S of many-valued logic.
Adopting the standard usage to mean by a sentence either a well-formed formula
in the case of a propositional language LS or a well-formed formula without free
individual variables of a ﬁrst order language LS, one calls a sentence ϕ valid w.r.t.
an evaluation e of the atomic formulas iﬀit has a designated truth degree for that
evaluation, and one calls a sentence ϕ logically valid iﬀit is valid for every suitable
evaluation.
As usual, furthermore, a formula ϕ of a ﬁrst order language LS is called valid in
a given interpretation A, iﬀit has a designated truth degree w.r.t. any assignment
of objects of A to the individual variables of the language LS.
On the other hand, an evaluation e is called a model of a formula ϕ iﬀthis
formula ϕ is valid under this evaluation e. And e is called a model of a set Σ of
well-formed formulas iﬀit is a model of any formula H ∈Σ. The fact that e is a
model of ϕ, or of Σ, as usual is denoted by e |= ϕ or e |= Σ. And, as usual, one
considers the (crisp) model classes
(6)
ModS(Σ) =def {e | e |= Σ} = {e | ValS(ϕ, e) ∈DS for all ϕ ∈Σ} .
As usually, hence, one has that the logical validities are just those formulas ϕ
whose model class is the class of all evaluations.

680
Siegfried Gottwald
Sometimes, the notion of model is generalized a bit further in many-valued
logic. Given some truth degree α and some formula ϕ, an evaluation e is called
an α-model of ϕ iﬀthe truth degree of ϕ under the evaluation e equals α or7 iﬀit
is greater or equal to α. We prefer here, to speak in the last mentioned case of a
(≥α)-model.
Correspondingly the notion of α-model of a set of sentences is used. In this
case, the most suitable way is to call an evaluation an (≥α)-model of a set Σ of
sentences iﬀthis interpretation is an (≥α)-model of each sentence ϕ ∈Σ.
Based on these preliminaries, the notion of logical consequence is deﬁned almost
in the standard way, but again with mainly two slightly diﬀerent basic intuitions.
For simplicity, we restrict again the considerations to sentences only. The extension
to all well-formed formulas happens in many-valued logic exactly as in classical
logic.
One deﬁnes that a sentence ϕ is a logical consequence of a set Σ of sentences,
usually also written Σ |= ϕ, iﬀ
(Version 1):
each model of Σ is also a model of ϕ, or equivalently
(7)
Σ |= ϕ ⇐⇒ModS(Σ) ⊆ModS(ϕ) .
(Version 2):
each (≥α)-model of Σ is also a (≥α)-model of ϕ.
With |= ϕ as shorthand for ∅|= ϕ in any case |= ϕ means that ϕ is logically
valid.
The checking of well-formed formulas of any propositional system of many-
valued logic for being logically valid can be done in the same way as for classical
logic by determining complete truth degree tables — and this is eﬀective provided
the set of truth degrees is ﬁnite.
THEOREM 1. For each ﬁnitely many-valued system S of propositional logic the
property of being a logically valid sentence is decidable, and for each ﬁnite set Σ
of sentences of S also the property of being a logical consequence of Σ is decidable.
2
OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY
Many-valued logic as a separate part of logic was created by the works of J.
Lukasiewicz [1920] and E.L. Post [1921] in the beginning 1920th.
Admittedly,
both authors have not been the ﬁrst ones which did not assume the principle of
bivalence, but earlier attempts to do logic without this principle of bivalence did
not prove to be inﬂuential8.
7Both these variants are in use. One has to check the use of the term α-model in the particular
case to see which version applies.
8Even the previous paper [	Lukasiewicz, 1913] of J. 	Lukasiewicz which also admitted general-
ized truth “degrees” besides the traditional truth values ⊤, ⊥did not inﬂuence the development
of logic toward many-valued logic in any perceivable manner.

Many-Valued Logics
681
The prehistory of many-valued logic, however, may be traced back up to
Aristotle9 who e.g. in his De Interpretatione, chap. 9, discussed the problem of
future contingencies, i.e. the problem which truth value a proposition should have
today which asserts some future event. This problem was stimulating even for J.
Lukasiewicz [1930], and it is closely tied with the philosophical problem of deter-
minism. The link is provided by the interpretation that the classification of some
future event as (actually) “possible” or “undetermined” may well be seen as the
acceptance of a third “truth value” besides ⊤and ⊥. Surely, this reading is not
the necessary one. Nevertheless, the ancient philosophical school of Epicureans
which tended toward indeterminism refused the principle of bivalence, whereas
the school of the Stoics did accept it — and strongly advocated determinism.
The same problem of contingentia futura was also the source for several extended
discussions during the Middle Ages, cf. e.g. [Lukasiewicz, 1935; Michalski, 1937;
Baudry, 1950; Rescher, 1969], without getting resolved. And in the phase of the
general revival of investigations into the ﬁeld of logic during the second half of
the 19th century the idea of neglecting the principle of bivalence appeared (partly
without clear mentioning of this fact) to H. McColl [McColl, 1897], cf. also [Lovett,
1900], and Ch.S. Peirce, cf. [Peirce, 1931, vol. 4] as well as [Fisch and Turquette,
1966; Turquette, 1967].
The real starting phase of many-valued logic was the time interval from about
1920 till about 1930, and the main force of development was the Polish school of
logic under J. Lukasiewicz. The papers [Lukasiewicz and Tarski, 1930; Lukasiewicz,
1930] as well as the inﬂuential textbook [Lewis and Langford, 1932], all published
in 1930, explain the core ideas as well as the background of philosophical ideas and
the main technical results proven up to this time.10 They also stimulated further
research into the topic.
In [Lukasiewicz, 1930] Lukasiewicz intends to give a modal reading to his many-
valued propositional logic, claiming that only the 3-valued and the inﬁnite valued
case (with the set of all rationals between 0 and 1 as truth degree set) are really
of interest for applications. In [Lukasiewicz and Tarski, 1930] however all ﬁnitely
many-valued propositional systems and the just mentioned inﬁnitely many-valued
one are discussed, always based on a negation and an implication connective as
primitive ones characterized semantically by their truth degree functions.
Parallel with this “Polish” development the US-American mathematician E.L.
Post [Post, 1921] designed a family of ﬁnitely valued systems. However, it seems
that his main aim was not a philosophical one, but “only” a technical: he was
interested in the problem of functional completeness, i.e. in the representation of
all truth degree functions (say from Wm into Wm) with the help of only a few of
them.
9The interested reader may consult e.g. [	Lukasiewicz, 1930; 	Lukasiewicz, 1970; Rescher, 1969;
Patzig, 1973].
10As a side remark it has to be mentioned that P. Bernays [Bernays, 1926] used more than the
usual two truth values of classical logic to study independence problems for systems of axioms
for systems of classical propositional calculus. But in his case these multiple values were only
formal tools for his unprovability results.

682
Siegfried Gottwald
Basic theoretical results for systems of many-valued logics which followed the
initial phase of “Polish” many-valued logic have e.g. been
• M. Wajsberg’s [1977] axiomatization of the three valued (propositional) sys-
tem L3 of Lukasiewicz, i.e. of that one propositional system with Lukasiewicz’s
implication and negation connectives as primitive connectives,
• the extension of Lukasiewicz’s system L3 to a functionally complete one and
its axiomatization by J. Slupecki [1936],
• the work of K. G¨odel [G¨odel, 1932] and S. Ja´skowski [Ja´skowski, 1936] which
clariﬁed the mutual relations of intuitionistic and many-valued logic in the
sense that it was proven that there does not exist a single (propositional)
many-valued system whose set of logically valid formulas coincides with the
set of logically valid formulas of intuitionistic (propositional) logic,
• the application of systems of three valued logic to the problems of logical
antinomies by Boˇcvar [1938; 1943] with the third truth value read as “sense-
less”,
• the application of systems of three valued logic to problems of partially
deﬁned function by S. Kleene [1938; 1952] with the third truth value read as
“undeﬁned”.
Furthermore, during the 1940th basic approaches have been generalized and essen-
tial results were proven by J. B. Rosser and A.R. Turquette in a series of papers and
later on most of this material collected in their monograph [Rosser and Turquette,
1952], which besides the Lukasiewicz papers of 1930 was the standard reference
for years. At least up to 1969 in which year the nice monograph [Rescher, 1969]
appeared which became one of the standard references to many-valued logics up
to the 1990s.
In the 1950s and 1960s then there was some decline in the interest in many-
valued logics — and at the same time some shift in the focus of what were consid-
ered as the more interesting problems. The decline as well as the shift may have
been caused by the same situation: the fact — mentioned in the Rosser/Turquette
monograph [Rosser and Turquette, 1952] quite open — that up to this time no re-
ally convincing applications had been approached by the methods of many-valued
logic. The shift in interest inside many-valued logic thus happened toward prob-
lems of deﬁnability of operations in {1, 2, . . . , n} from particular sets of such oper-
ations, i.e. toward problems connected with the functional incompleteness of most
of the then “usual” systems of connectives of (ﬁnitely) many-valued systems of
(propositional) logic. In the background, however, there was not only the the-
oretical problem of functional completeness, there was (and is) also the related
problem in switching theory of sets of suitable elementary circuits which allow
to generate all the (ﬁnitary) operations in {1, 2, . . . , n} by being combined into
suitable circuits — or the related problem to determine the class of all operations
which can be generated by some given ones.

Many-Valued Logics
683
3
BASIC SYSTEMS OF MANY-VALUED LOGICS
If one looks systematically for many-valued logics which have been designed for
quite diﬀerent applications, one ﬁnds four main types of systems:
• the Lukasiewicz logics Lκ as explained in [Lukasiewicz, 1930];
• the G¨odel logics Gκ from [G¨odel, 1932];
• the product logic Π studied in [H´ajek et al., 1996];
• the Post logics Pm for 2 ≤m ∈N from [Post, 1921].
The ﬁrst two types of many-valued logics each oﬀer a uniformly deﬁned family
of systems which diﬀer in their sets of truth degrees and comprise ﬁnitely valued
logics for each one of the truth degree sets (4) together with an inﬁnite valued
system with truth degree set (3), which formally is indicated by choosing κ ∈{n ∈
N | n ≥2} ∪{∞}. For the fourth type an inﬁnite valued version is lacking.
In their original presentations, these logics look rather diﬀerent, regarding their
propositional parts.
For the ﬁrst order extensions, however, there is a unique
strategy: one adds a universal and an existential quantiﬁer such that quantiﬁed
formulas get, respectively, as their truth degrees the inﬁmum and the supremum
of all the particular cases in the range of the quantiﬁers.
As a reference for these and also other many-valued logics in general, the reader
may consult [Gottwald, 2001].
3.1
The G¨odel logics
The simplest ones of these logics are the G¨odel logics Gκ which have a conjunction
∧and a disjunction ∨deﬁned by the minimum and the maximum, respectively, of
the truth degrees of the constituents:
(8)
u ∧v = min{u, v} ,
u ∨v = max{u, v} .
For simplicity we denote here and later on the connectives and the corresponding
truth degree functions by the same symbol.
These G¨odel logics have also a negation ∼and an implication →G deﬁned by
the truth degree functions
(9)
∼u =
 1 ,
if u = 0;
0 ,
if u > 0.
u →G v =
 1 ,
if u ≤v;
v ,
if u > v.
The systems diﬀer in their truth degree sets: for each 2 ≤κ ≤∞the truth degree
set of Gκ is Wκ.

684
Siegfried Gottwald
3.2
The Lukasiewicz logics
The Lukasiewicz logics Lκ, again with 2 ≤κ ≤∞, have originally been designed
in [Lukasiewicz, 1930] with only two primitive connectives, an implication →L and
a negation ¬ characterized by the truth degree functions
(10) ¬u = 1 −u ,
u →L v = min{1, 1 −u + v} .
The systems diﬀer in their truth degree sets: for each 2 ≤κ ≤∞the truth degree
set of Gκ is Wκ.
However, it is possible to deﬁne further connectives from these primitive ones.
With
(11) ϕ & ψ =df ¬(ϕ →L ¬ψ) ,
ϕ ⊻ψ =df ¬ϕ →L ψ
one gets a (strong) conjunction and a (strong) disjunction with truth degree func-
tions
(12) u & v = max{u + v −1, 0} ,
u ⊻v = min{u + v, 1} ,
usually called the Lukasiewicz (arithmetical) conjunction and the Lukasiewicz
(arithmetical) disjunction.
It should be mentioned that these connectives are
linked together via a De Morgan law using the standard negation of this system:
(13) ¬(u & v) = ¬u ⊻¬v .
With the additional deﬁnitions
(14) ϕ ∧ψ =df ϕ & (ϕ →L ψ)
ϕ ∨ψ =df (ϕ →L ψ) →L ψ
one gets another (weak) conjunction ∧with truth degree function min, and a
further (weak) disjunction ∨with max as truth degree function, i.e. one has the
conjunction and the disjunction of the G¨odel logics also available.
3.3
The Product logic
The product logic Π, in detail explained in [H´ajek et al., 1996], has a fundamental
conjunction ⊙with the ordinary product of reals as its truth degree function, as
well as an implication →Π with truth degree function
(15) u →Π v =
 1 ,
if u ≤v;
u
v ,
if u < v.
Additionally it has a truth degree constant 0 to denote the truth degree zero.
In this context, a negation and a further conjunction are deﬁned as
(16) ∼ϕ =df ϕ →Π 0 ,
ϕ ∧ψ =df ϕ ⊙(ϕ →Π ψ) .
Routine calculations show that both connectives coincide with the corresponding
ones of the inﬁnite valued G¨odel logic G∞. And also the disjunction ∨of this
G¨odel logic becomes available, now via the deﬁnition

Many-Valued Logics
685
(17) ϕ ∨ψ =df ((ϕ →Π ψ) →Π ψ) ∧((ψ →Π ϕ) →Π ϕ) .
There is, however, no natural way to combine with this (inﬁnite valued) product
logic a whole family of ﬁnite valued systems by simply restricting the set of truth
degrees to some Wm as in the previous two cases: besides W2 no such set is
closed under the ordinary product, and for W2 the product coincides e.g. with the
minimum operation.
3.4
The Post logics
The Post system Pm for m ≥2 has truth degree set Wm. These propositional
systems have been originally formulated uniformly in negation and disjunction as
basic connectives with the following truth degree functions:
∼u =

1 ,
for u = 0 ,
u −
1
m−1 ,
for u ̸= 0 ,
u ∨v = max{u, v} .
Contrary to the previous systems, the deﬁnition of negation here does not seem to
be given in a uniform way independent of the number of truth degrees. However,
it is always just a cyclic permutation of all the truth degrees (in their natural
order).
For the sets of designated truth degrees a canonical choice does not exist; already
Post [Post, 1921] has discussed the possibility that there may be chosen truth
degrees diﬀerent from 1 as designated ones. Nevertheless, DP = {1} is a kind of
standard choice.
The set of basic connectives of each one of the Post systems Pm is functionally
complete, i.e. allows to represent every possible truth degree function (over Wm).
Therefore each one of the Post systems Pm, with DP = {1} as the set of designated
truth degrees, covers its corresponding Lukasiewicz system with the same set of
truth degrees — in the sense that the set of Lm-tautologies is a subset of the set of
Pm-tautologies, and that this set of Pm-tautologies does not contain any formula
ϕ whose Lukasiewicz negation ¬H is Lm-satisﬁable, of course always via a suitable
reading of the Lukasiewicz connectives in the Post systems. And the same holds
true for the corresponding m-valued G¨odel system Gm.
If one enriches all the ﬁnitely many-valued (propositional) Lukasiewicz systems
Lm with truth degree constants for all their truth degrees, then these enriched
systems L∗
m become functionally complete.
And this means that the extended
m-valued Lukasiewicz systems L∗
m and the m-valued Post logics become interde-
ﬁnable (for each ﬁxed number m of truth degrees). Hence there is in principle
no essential diﬀerence between both types of (ﬁnitely valued) systems: all what
can be expressed in the “Post world” can also be expressed in the (extended)
“Lukasiewicz world”, and vice versa.

686
Siegfried Gottwald
4
STANDARD AND ALGEBRAIC SEMANTICS
The fundamental many-valued logics have their standard semantics as explained:
the sets Wm or the whole real unit interval [0, 1] as truth degree sets, and the
connectives (and quantiﬁers) as mentioned.
And derived from these basic choices one has the notions of validity under some
evaluation, of logical validity, and of model as explained.
Besides these standard semantics, all these many-valued logics have also alge-
braic semantics determined by suitable classes K of truth degree structures. The
situation is similar here to the case of classical logic: the logically valid formulas
in classical logic are also just all those formulas which are valid in all Boolean
algebras.
Of course, these structures have to have the same signature as the language L of
the corresponding logic. This means that these structures provide for each connec-
tive of the language L an operation of the same arity, and they have to have — in
the case that one discusses the corresponding ﬁrst order logics — suprema and in-
ﬁma for all those subsets which may appear as value sets of formulas. Particularly,
hence, they have to be (partially) ordered, or at least pre-ordered.
For each formula ϕ of the language L of the corresponding logic, for each such
(generalized truth degree) structure A, and for each evaluation e which maps the
set of atomic formulas of L into the carrier of A, one has to deﬁne a value Val(ϕ, e),
and ﬁnally one has to deﬁne what it means that such a formula ϕ is valid in A.
Then a formula ϕ is logically valid w.r.t. this class K iﬀϕ is valid in all structures
from K.
The standard way to arrive at such classes of structures is to start from the
Lindenbaum algebra of the corresponding logic, i.e. its algebra of formulas modulo
the congruence relation of logical equivalence. For this Lindenbaum algebra one
then has to determine a class of similar algebraic structures which — ideally —
forms a variety.
A variety is a class K of algebraic structures which is equationally deﬁnable,
i.e. for which there exists a set E of equations between terms of the language of
these structures such that an algebraic structure A belongs to K iﬀA is a model
of E. Besides this characterization in logical terms there is also a characterization
in purely algebraic terms: a variety is a class K of algebraic structures which is
closed under the formations of subalgebras, of homomorphic images, and of direct
products. For the algebraic details the interested reader may e.g. consult [Burris
and Sankappanavar, 1981; Denecke and Wismath, 2002; Gr¨atzer, 1979].
4.1
G¨odel and Lukasiewicz logics
It is remarkable that for both these types of many-valued logics corresponding
algebraic semantics have mainly been developed for the inﬁnite valued systems,
and have been considered in the context of completeness proofs.

Many-Valued Logics
687
For the inﬁnite valued G¨odel logic G∞such a class of structures is, according
to the completeness proof given by Dummett [Dummett, 1959], the class of all
Heyting algebras, i.e. of all relatively pseudo-complemented lattices, which satisfy
the pre-linearity condition
(18) (u ↣v) ⊔(v ↣u) = 1 .
Here ⊔is the lattice join and ↣the relative pseudo-complement.
For the inﬁnite valued Lukasiewicz logic L∞the corresponding class of structures
is the class of all MV-algebras, ﬁrst introduced again within a completeness proof
by Chang [Chang, 1958], and more recently extensively studied in [Cignoli et al.,
2000].
And for the product logic the authors of [H´ajek et al., 1996] introduce a class
of lattice ordered semigroups which they call product algebras.
It is interesting to recognize that all these structures — prelinear Heyting alge-
bras, MV-algebras, and product algebras — are abelian lattice ordered semigroups
with an additional “residuation” operation.
For the Lukasiewicz as well as for the G¨odel inﬁnite valued logics these algebraic
semantics have long been considered as a mathematically nice, but logically not
really important tool.
The recent development of inﬁnite valued logics, which shall be discussed later
on, beginning with §6, has completely modiﬁed this point of view: this development
got very important stimulations from suitable algebraic semantics.
For the ﬁnite valued logics from both families, separately developed algebraic
semantics did not yet ﬁnd considerable interest. There was, again in the context
of a completeness proof, an approach by R.S. Grigolia [Grigolia, 1977] toward
MV-algebras for m-valued Lukasiewicz logics, called MVm-algebras.11 But these
structures play only a marginal rˆole in algebraic investigations toward many-valued
logics.
Besides a certain minor interest in this topic, this situation may mainly be
caused by the fact that the ﬁnite valued Lukasiewicz logics Lm become function-
ally complete after enriching their language either with truth degree constants for
all truth degrees, or with suitable unary (and binary) connectives which are suﬃ-
cient to characterize each one of the truth degrees. And for these enriched systems
G.C. Moisil [Moisil, 1940; Moisil, 1941], and later on R. Cignoli [Cignoli, 1982], of-
fered algebraic semantics. These Lukasiewicz algebras, however, are quite diﬃcult
structures which do not have a primitive counterpart for the Lukasiewicz implica-
tion. And therefore there is a tendency to consider them more as variants of Post
algebras, as explained in §4.3, than as “natural” counterparts to MV-algebras.
11It seems, to the best of this authors knowledge, that for the ﬁnite valued G¨odel logics there
are no separate algebraic studies. In principle, however, Heyting-algebras with m elements should
do the job for Gm.

688
Siegfried Gottwald
4.2
Product logic
The product logic, as introduced in [H´ajek et al., 1996], was from the very begin-
ning designed as a logic which had, in parallel, a standard semantics — provided
by the real unit interval and by a product based conjunction as a fundamental
connective — as well as an algebraic semantics, formed by the class of all product
algebras — introduced in [H´ajek et al., 1996] again within a completeness proof.
We shall not explain more details here because this whole approach proved to
become paradigmatic for the development of t-norm based inﬁnite valued logics,
a topic which shall be discussed later on, starting with §6.
4.3
Post logics
Contrary to the situation for the Lukasiewicz and the G¨odel systems, for the Post
systems in their original form there exist only very few syntactically oriented stud-
ies toward constituting or investigating logical calculi for these systems. Instead,
for the Post systems one mainly was interested in corresponding algebraic struc-
tures, which were suitable to form an algebraic semantics, and investigated such
structures earlier, and in more detail, as similar structures for the Lukasiewicz and
the G¨odel systems. Rosenbloom in a paper [Rosenbloom, 1942] of 1942 was the
ﬁrst one to do this. His algebraic structures shall here be called P-algebras for
short — but not be considered in detail: the interested reader may e.g. consult
[Gottwald, 2001].
One of the main reasons for the diﬃculty and complexity of the deﬁning condi-
tions of P-algebras is the fact that the Post systems as well as the P-algebras have
only two primitive notions, their connectives resp. their basic operations, but have
maximal expressive power in the sense of being functionally complete. That this
choice of the primitive notions really is the main obstacle toward a simpliﬁcation
became clear as Epstein [Epstein, 1960] in 1960 changed these basic operations
and found a much simpler class of “essentially” these P-algebras, now called Post
algebras. The reservation “essentially” here comes from the fact that formally the
choice of other basic operations creates another type of algebraic structures, and
it means–in more technical terms– that Post algebras and P-algebras are deﬁni-
tionally equivalent. We shall not go into details and refer e.g. again to [Gottwald,
2001] for details.
What are not covered by these basic considerations are possible inﬁnite valued
generalizations of these logical calculi, or of these Post algebras.
Approaches
toward this problem started e.g. with papers on generalizations of the notion of
Post algebras like [Cat-Ho, 1973; Dwinger, 1968; Dwinger, 1977; Traczyk, 1967].
The most inﬂuential paper, however, which also discussed the corresponding logical
systems was the paper [Rasiowa, 1973] of Rasiowa in which Post algebras of order
ω + 1 and corresponding systems of inﬁnitely many-valued (ﬁrst-order) logic have
been introduced. The algebraic theory of these Post algebras of order ω + 1 is
partly given in [Rasiowa, 1973].

Many-Valued Logics
689
Another such inﬁnitely many-valued generalization of the standard Post systems
is discussed e.g. in [Epstein and Rasiowa, 1990; Epstein and Rasiowa, 1991], Post
algebras of order ω + ω∗.
The Post algebras of ﬁnite or inﬁnite order and the systems of many-valued
logic related with them seem to be of particular importance for investigations in
computer science, which rely on many-valued logic as a toolbox, because these Post
systems are functionally complete and well suited to study the representability of
truth degree functions on the basis of some predetermined set of basic truth degree
functions, as determined e.g. by available electronic components, cf. [Rine, 1977]
for a good introduction.
5
PARTICULAR THREE- AND FOUR-VALUED SYSTEMS
Each system of many-valued logic which is not only intended to be some particular
kind of formalism, but supposed to express some meaning, is confronted with the
problem to oﬀer a meaning for its truth degrees, or at least for its “additional”
truth degrees diﬀerent from the degrees 1 for “true” and 0 for “false”. In the
light of this problem, three-valued as well as four-valued systems get particular
importance because for them only one or two “additional” truth degrees exist and
need an interpretation. Hence it should not appear as a surprise that from the
viewpoint of philosophically-oriented applications three- and four-valued systems
assumed a more prominent role than other systems, at least as other ﬁnitely many-
valued systems.
5.1
Three-Valued Systems
Here we shall be interested only in some such 3-valued systems and mainly restrict
the attention to two strongly related systems introduced by Boˇcvar [1938] and
Kleene [1938], and a system designed as the “true” logic of the natural language
by Blau [1978]. The intentions of these authors, connected with their systems,
have been quite diﬀerent despite some strong similarities of the systems.
The main problem of Boˇcvar has been the philosophical and logical analysis
of logical and semantical antinomies as they appear in ﬁrst-order and higher-
order logic, often in connection with some lack of care e.g. in the use of the (set
theoretic) comprehension principle or of metatheoretical notions, cf. e.g. [Beth,
1965]. Therefore his preferred interpretation of the additional truth degree 1
2 was
its reading as “meaningless”, “paradoxical”, or “senseless”. The starting point of
Kleene, on the other hand, was a mathematical one and related to his research on
partial recursive relations. Such relations sometimes may be undeﬁned. Therefore
in his case the intended reading of the additional truth degree 1
2 was “undeﬁned”
or “undetermined”. Both systems coincide in their approach to consider the truth
degrees 1, 0 just as the counterparts of the classical truth-values ⊤, ⊥. Accordingly
for both systems the degree 1 is the only designated one.

690
Siegfried Gottwald
Boˇcvar subdivides his truth degree functions and thus also his connectives into
internal and external ones. The characteristic property of the internal truth degree
functions is that they have always a (truly: the) function value diﬀerent from
0, 1 if a argument value diﬀers from 0, 1. The external truth degree functions,
on the other hand, map into {0, 1}. Hence this subdivision is not a (complete)
classiﬁcation because there obviously exist truth degree functions which are neither
external nor internal ones. The the 3-valued system B3 of Boˇcvar has four basic
connectives ¬, ∧+, J0, J1 for internal negation, internal conjunction, external
negation, and external assertion.
The internal negation ¬ is nothing but the
negation of the Lukasiewicz system L3. The internal conjunction may, again in
terms of L3, be deﬁned as
(19) ϕ ∧+ ψ =def (ϕ ∧ψ) ∨(ϕ ∧¬ϕ) ∨(ψ ∧¬ψ)
or by the formula
u ∧+ v =def

min(u, v) ,
if u, v ∈{0, 1} ,
1
2 ,
if u = 1
2 or v = 1
2 .
The truth degree functions of J0, J1 are given by
J0(u) =

1 ,
if u = 0
0 ,
otherwise
J1(u) =

1 ,
if u = 1
0 ,
otherwise
Thus B3 is a subsystem of L3. It is a proper subsystem because it was shown in
[Finn, 1974] that the Lukasiewicz implication →L is not B3-deﬁnable.
Further internal versions of disjunction, implication and biimplication can be
deﬁned as
ϕ ∨+ ψ
=def
¬(¬ϕ ∧+ ¬ψ) ,
(20)
ϕ →+ ψ
=def
(ϕ ∧+ ¬ψ),
(21)
ϕ ↔+ ψ
=def
(ϕ →+ ψ) ∧+ (ψ →+ ϕ) ,
(22)
and get truth degree functions which coincide over {0, 1} with their classical coun-
terparts and are internal truth degree functions. Corresponding external versions
of these connectives result by a uniform approach which e.g. for external conjunc-
tion and external disjunction reads as
ϕ ⋒ψ
=def
J1(ϕ) ∧+ J1(ψ) ,
ϕ ⋓ψ
=def
J1(ϕ) ∨+ J1(ψ) .
The axiomatizability problem for B3 has been discussed and solved in [Finn,
1971; Finn, 1974a]. We shall not treat it here.
The 3-valued system K3 of Kleene has the so-called strong connectives
(23) ¬, ∧, ∨, →K, ↔K .

Many-Valued Logics
691
The ﬁrst three of them are again the (equally denoted) connectives of L3. The last
two of them are characterized by the truth degree tables:
→K
0
1
2
1
0
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
0
1
2
1
↔K
0
1
2
1
0
1
1
2
0
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
0
1
2
1
Also for this system K3 the connectives ¬, ∧, ∨are just the same as in the Luka-
siewicz system L3.
This system K3 furthermore has weak connectives ∧+, ∨+, →+ which coincide
with the equally denoted connectives of the Boˇcvar system B3, i.e. which yield
formulas which have truth degree 1
2 iﬀone of their constituents has truth degree 1
2.
These weak connectives are deﬁnable from the connectives of the list (23) because
of (19), (20), and (21).
Because the implication →K of the Kleene system is L3-deﬁnable, e.g. by
(24) ϕ →K ψ =def (ϕ →L ψ) ∧(ϕ ∨¬ϕ ∨ψ ∨¬ψ) ,
also the 3-valued Kleene system K3 is a subsystem of the Lukasiewicz system L3.
Again, however, the Lukasiewicz implication →L is not deﬁnable in the Kleene
system and this system therefore is a proper subsystem of L3. This undeﬁnability
follows from the fact that each (binary) connective △which is deﬁnable from the
basic connectives in the list (23) has a corresponding truth degree function which
assumes the value 1
2 if all its arguments have this value, and hence cannot be the
truth degree function of the Lukasiewicz implication.
If one combines the basic connectives of the Boˇcvar system with the basic
connectives of the Kleene system, then →L becomes deﬁnable as mentioned by
ˇSestakov [ˇSestakov, 1964]. Therefore neither are all the connectives of the Kleene
system deﬁnable in the Boˇcvar system, nor conversely are all the connectives of
the Boˇcvar system deﬁnable in the Kleene system.
Systems of many-valued propositional logic with an intended reading of the third
truth degree as “meaningless”, or as “undeﬁned”, or as something like, as in the
Boˇcvar and Kleene systems, and with basic connectives which essentially can be
deﬁned in L3, have also been investigated e.g. in [˚Aqvist, 1962; Ebbinghaus, 1969;
Halld´en, 1949; Pir´og-Rzepecka, 1977; Segerberg, 1965].
In [Bolc and Borowik,
1992] a longer, but concise survey of such and other 3-valued systems is given. Ad-
ditionally the interested reader should also consult [Goddard and Routley, 1973].
It is interesting to notice that the intended reading of the third truth degree as
“undeﬁned” in the Kleene system, and the connection with the similar approach
via truth value gaps which we mentioned earlier, was a substantial fact that this
system was more recently considered in connection with partial, i.e. sometimes
undeﬁned, truth predicates e.g. in [Gupta and Belnap, 1993; Kripke, 1975; Martin
and Woodruﬀ, 1975; McGee, 1991].
Another approach toward 3-valued systems comes from the consideration of
vague predicates like “hot water”, i.e. of predicates which in some cases neither

692
Siegfried Gottwald
really apply nor really do not apply to some objects. This eﬀect can be modeled
in diﬀerent ways. A usual one is via fuzzy sets, which supported the recent in-
vestigations into inﬁnite valued systems, as explained later on. But also 3-valued
systems provide a (rough) possibility — with the third truth degree read as “nei-
ther completely applies nor fully does not apply”. From this point of view three-
valued logic was studied with a philosophical attitude quite early in [Black, 1937;
Black, 1963] and more recently e.g. in [K¨orner, 1966] and also in [Blau, 1978;
Cleave, 1974; Kearns, 1974; Kearns, 1979].
It should additionally be mentioned that the phenomenon of presuppositions
was discussed within the realm of truth value gaps, as well as in the realm of
3-valued — but also of 4-valued — systems. And also systems of paraconsistent
logic have been discussed which can be based on ﬁnitely many truth degrees, cf.
e.g. [Epstein, 1990; Sette, 1973; Sette and Carnielli, 1995].
Both of these aspects, i.e. vague predicates as well as presuppositions, are cov-
ered in the use of three-valued logic for the analysis of natural language given by
Blau [1978]. His approach is essentially based on discussions in the realm of the
philosophy of language. From these discussions he gets the fundamental motiva-
tions for the intuitive understanding of the three truth degrees. He identiﬁes the
classical truth value ⊤with the truth degree 1, and he splits the classical truth
value ⊥into the two degrees 0 and 1
2. He takes the truth degree 0 as a modiﬁed
version of the (usual) truth value ⊥, and his intended reading for the truth degree
u = 1
2 is “undetermined”, combined with the understanding that the appearance
of this degree is caused either by the use of vague predicates, or by the use of
nondenoting names, i.e. by reference to unsatisﬁed presuppositions.
On the propositional level his considerations are based on three primitive con-
nectives, two kinds of negation connectives ¬, ≈and a conjunction connective ∧.
Again ¬ is the Lukasiewicz negation of L3, and ∧the weak conjunction of that
system. The additional negation ≈is characterized by the truth degree function
(25) ≈(u) =

0 ,
if u = 1 ,
1 ,
if u ̸= 1 .
All these connectives satisfy the normal condition, hence this system is not func-
tionally complete. However, these connectives suﬃce to introduce some further,
interesting connectives, e.g. the G¨odel negation ∼as
∼ϕ =def ¬≈¬ϕ ,
and to introduce an implication connective →Bl by the formula
ϕ →Bl ψ =def ≈ϕ ∨ψ .
The main background idea behind the choice of this implication connective is
the authors claim that only this implication connective is suitable for a three-
valued modeling of (two-valued) sentences of the form “All A are B” in natural
language, of course read as short form for: all objects which have property A

Many-Valued Logics
693
also have property B. And this claim is essentially based upon the idea that for
the truth of a sentence of this form “all objects which have property A also have
property B” it is completely out of any rational interest to allow the antecedent
“a particular object has property A” to be undetermined. Formally this means
that inside a universally quantiﬁed sentence the case that the antecedent has truth
degree 1
2 should not be a reason that the whole sentence may become not true.
A core intuitive point of the whole approach is the idea that natural language
uses only such connectives which satisfy the normal condition, because the appear-
ance of the truth degree u = 1
2 for some sentenceϕ(in some particular situation)
is simply an unintended mistake caused either by the use of vague predicates, or
by the use of nondenoting names.
5.2
Four-Valued Systems
In contrast to the situation with three-valued systems, where there are a lot of
approaches and interpretations, only a few approaches concern four-valued systems
and give particular interpretations to the four truth degrees. One of these rare
exceptions is Lukasiewicz [1953] who, in his later years, preferred a four-valued
approach via his system L4 toward a modal reading of the truth degrees over his
original three-valued one via L3 in [Lukasiewicz, 1920].
However, instead of this reference to the system L4 with its linearly ordered truth
degree set W4, an approach toward four-valued systems has become prominent
more recently which makes essential use of the natural partial ordering of the
truth degree set W∗
4 = {0, 1}2 = {(0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1)}, and which connects a
very natural interpretation with these degrees.
This approach was inspired by theoretical work on systems of relevance logic
and later on also applied to considerations on how to treat — possibly inconsistent
— information in computers, e.g. in data bases or knowledge bases, like in [Belnap,
1977; Belnap, 1977a; Dunn, 1976; Dunn, 1998], but also to discussions related to
the liar paradox, cf. [Visser, 1984].
In data and knowledge bases information is stored, e.g. in the form of “facts”,
i.e. sentences which are marked as true or false. This information may have been
collected from diﬀerent sources, and at diﬀerent times. One kind of use which can
be made from such information is that one asks such data or knowledge bases,
or the computers they are stored in, to answer some suitable questions, e.g. for
(the conﬁrmation or refutation of) simple statements concerning facts. The crucial
point is that this information usually is incomplete — and often even inconsistent.
Therefore one should allow a computer to answer not only “true” or “false”, but
also “I don’t know” — and even “true and false”. Of course, the answer “I don’t
know” indicates incompleteness of the information stored in the data or knowledge
base, and the answer “true and false” indicates that this information is inconsistent
— in the simplest case because contradictory facts have been stored.
For the computer these answers are just “marks” which it has to connect with
sentences (which e.g. formulate the questions it is asked to answer). And with these

694
Siegfried Gottwald
four “values” the computer should also be able to “reason” internally, because one
likes (within a bit more sophisticated applications) that the computer is not only
able to repeat something that he was told before, he should also be able to connect
diﬀerent facts by a kind of (internal) reasoning mechanism.
Of course, as this explanation shows, this is an epistemic understanding of these
four “values”, and not an ontological one: the “real world” is, of course, treated
here as well covered by the basic ideas of two-valued logic. This remark does not
say, however, anything about the suitability of a four-valued approach based on
this (epistemic) understanding of the truth degrees.
It is interesting to notice that some (preliminary) form of an ontological un-
derstanding of these four degrees appears in ancient Indian logic, e.g. in the
work of Sanjaya who worked prior to the sixth century B.C. There the princi-
ple of bivalence was rejected in favor of an idea of so-called “four corners”, which
correspond just to an ontological reading of these four degrees, cf. [Horn, 1989;
Raju, 1954].
For simpler reading we write T = (1, 0), F = (0, 1), N = (0, 0), B = (1, 1), and
understand the truth degree N (for “none”) as indicating “underdetermination”
or a gap, i.e. the lack of information on a truth value, and the truth degree B
(for “both”) as “overdetermination” or a glut, i.e. the presence of contradictory
information on some truth value.
One has even more than only the truth degree set W∗
4 in this case: one has a
natural (partial) ordering of these degrees, having in mind that they evaluate the
(computers) knowledge about the truth value of some sentence ϕ. Then surely the
degree T = (1, 0) is ranked in top position, and the degree F = (0, 1) is ranked in
lowest position — because it is most preferable to have a (deﬁnitely) true sentence
ϕ, and worse to have a (deﬁnitely) false one. The two other degrees N = (0, 0),
B = (1, 1) are ranked somehow “between” the degrees T, F because they, in some
suitable sense, if assigned to ϕ, leave open both possibilities that ϕ may “really”
be true or be false. As a result, this provides the truth degree set W∗
4 with a lattice
structure as indicated in Fig. 1.
In this truth degree lattice W∗
4 the lattice ordering ≦goes “bottom-up”, i.e. lattice
elements which are on a lower level position are smaller ones.
With the corresponding lattice operations ⊓, ⊔one has natural candidates for
truth degree functions for a conjunction and a disjunction connective ⋏, ⋎of a
(propositional) system D4 of four-valued logic which is to be based on the intuitions
discussed up to now.
And this choice ﬁts even well into the intuitive picture
mentioned previously.
This intuitive picture provides also the basis for the introduction of a negation
connective ⇁into D4, with a similar relationship to classical negation, as ⋏and ⋎
have to classical conjunction and disjunction, respectively. This essentially means
that to a formula ⇁H the truth value ⊥(or: ⊤) should be assigned if to ϕ the
truth value ⊤(or: ⊥) is assigned. So one immediately has for ⇁the truth degree
table given in Fig. 2.

Many-Valued Logics
695
s
s





@
@
@
@
@
s
s
@
@
@
@
@





F = (0, 1)
T = (1, 0)
B = (1, 1)
N = (0, 0)
Figure 1. Four-valued truth degree lattice W∗
4
ϕ
F
N
B
T
⇁H
T
N
B
F
Figure 2. Truth table characterization of the D4-negation
These connectives ⋏, ⋎, ⇁form the basic vocabulary of D4.
One can also prove that the two three-valued subsystems of D4, which are
constituted by the restrictions of the truth degrees to {T, F, N} or {T, F, B},
coincide as three-valued systems, and are subsystems of L3.
The crucial point now is to deﬁne a suitable entailment relation |=D which ﬁts
well into this intuitive realm.
A very natural approach seems to be, to say again that a set of formulas Σ
entails a formula ϕ iﬀeach model of Σ is also a model of ϕ. However, what shall
we understand by a model of a set Σ of formulas? Well, nothing but some valuation
which gives to all the formulas of Σ a designated truth degree.
So the problem arises what the designated truth degrees should be. Up to now
there is no agreement on this point. One of the possible approaches is to take only
T as a designated truth degree, i.e. to put DD = {T}.
In this case the resulting notion of model ﬁts well into the background intuition:
for our computer a model of a set of formulas should be any (partial and non-
functional) two-valued valuation which makes all the formulas of Σ deﬁnitely true
— with “deﬁnitely true” understood here as meaning true but not false or valueless.
And this represents the standard notion of a model. Thus we get in this case
according to (7):
(26) Σ |=D H ⇔ModD(Σ) ⊆ModD(H) ,
with the notion of model class deﬁned as in (6).

696
Siegfried Gottwald
With applications to relevance logic in mind, Dunn [Dunn, 1976] considers in-
stead both truth degrees T, B as designated. The intuition behind this choice is
that a formula which has such a designated truth degree is considered as “at least
true”.12 Problems of deﬁnability of truth degree functions, i.e. of connectives, and
of relations between truth degrees for this choice of designated truth degrees have
been discussed e.g. in [Avron, 1999; Pynko, 1999].
The models in the sense of [Dunn, 1976] for this situation are just the (≧B)-
models, with ≦for the lattice ordering of the truth degree lattice W∗
4. Let us
call them weak models for the moment, and denote the class of all weak models of
some set Σ of formulas by ModD
0 (Σ).
Then Dunn discusses the following notion |=0
D of weak entailment:
Σ |=0
D H ⇔ModD
0 (Σ) ⊆ModD
0 (H) ,
which is more general than the previous notion from (26), as the following result
shows.
PROPOSITION 2. For each set Σ of formulas of D4 and each formula ϕ one has
Σ |=0
D H
⇒
Σ |=D H .
Still another notion of entailment |=∗
D is taken into account in [Belnap, 1977;
Belnap, 1977a]. There Belnap considers however only entailment relationships of
the form ϕ |=∗
D H. This corresponds for the two former cases to a restriction to
ﬁnite sets Σ of formulas. The deﬁnition of |=∗
D is the following:
ϕ |=∗
D ψ
=def
ValD(ϕ, β) ≦ValD(ψ, β) for all valuations β.
It is immediately clear that one has for all formulas ϕ, ψ of D4:
ϕ |=∗
D ψ
⇒
ϕ |=0
D ψ .
For this notion of entailment Belnap gives in [Belnap, 1977; Belnap, 1977a]
a ﬁnite list of principles claiming that it is a complete list to infer all the valid
entailments. We shall not give this list here, the interested reader may consult
[Belnap, 1977] or [Belnap, 1977a].
Instead we take into consideration another aspect which in a natural way
is connected with the epistemic understanding of the truth degree set W∗
4 =
{T, F, N, B}. The lattice ordering of W∗
4, symbolized in Fig. 1, was based on
the intuition that the “larger” elements are the better ones in the sense that the
best possible case is deﬁnite truth, and the worst possible case is deﬁnite falsehood.
Hence this lattice ordering ≦is a kind of truth ordering.
This truth ordering can be contrasted with a knowledge ordering which counts
“complete” lack of knowledge of the truth value of some sentence ϕ as the worst
12This type of four-valued semantics may be used to give adequate semantical interpretations
for diﬀerent systems of relevance logic. We will not discuss details here. The interested reader
may e.g. consult [Priest and Sylvan, 1992; Restall, 1995].

Many-Valued Logics
697
case, and which prefers “more complete” knowledge. In some sense, this point of
view transforms W∗
4 into a set of knowledge degrees. From this point of view, an-
other lattice ordering ⊑, and hence another lattice structure, becomes interesting
which may be symbolized by the diagram of Fig. 3.
s
s





@
@
@
@
@
s
s
@
@
@
@
@





N = (0, 0)
B = (1, 1)
T = (1, 0)
F = (0, 1)
Figure 3. Four-valued knowledge degree lattice W∗
4
Again here, the lattice ordering ⊑goes “bottom-up”. Of course, the diagram of
Fig. 3 is just the diagram of Fig. 1 “turned around”, which also means that the
knowledge ordering ⊑goes “left-to-right” in the diagram of Fig. 1.
From an algebraic point of view the truth degree set W∗
4 with these two lattice
structures becomes a particular case of a bilattice.
This is a type of structure
which more recently has been introduced in lattice theory, and which seems to be
of particular interest for applications in logic and computer science, cf. e.g. [Baaz
et al., 1993; Fitting, 1988; Fitting, 1989; Ginsberg, 1987; Ginsberg, 1988].
6
LOGICS WITH T-NORM BASED CONNECTIVES
From now on we shall restrict our considerations to the case of inﬁnite valued
logics, even to logics with the real unit interval (3) as truth degree set. The main
reason for this decision is that the recent development of many-valued logics has
its focus on the development of such inﬁnite valued systems. The core motivation
for the emphasis on this type of systems is that they count as the background
logics for the theory of fuzzy sets, as introduced by Zadeh [Zadeh, 1965]. And
fuzzy sets have become an important tool in knowledge engineering as well as in
artiﬁcial intelligence, hence are highly application relevant.
The fundamental inﬁnite valued logics from §3 look quite diﬀerent if one has in
mind the form in which they ﬁrst were presented.

698
Siegfried Gottwald
Fortunately, however, there is a common generalization which allows to present
all these three logics in a uniform way. In this uniform presentation one of the
conjunction connectives becomes a core role: ∧in the system G∞, & in the system
L∞, and ⊙in the system Π.
But this uniform generalization covers a much larger class of inﬁnite valued
logics over [0, 1]: the core conjunction connective — which shall now in general
be denoted & — has only to have a truth degree function ⊗which, as a binary
operation in the real unit interval, should be an associative, commutative, and
isotonic operation which has 1 as a neutral element, i.e. should satisfy for arbitrary
x, y, z ∈[0, 1]:
(T1)
x ⊗(y ⊗z) = (x ⊗y) ⊗z,
(T2)
x ⊗y = y ⊗x,
(T3)
if x ≤y then x ⊗z ≤y ⊗z,
(T4)
x ⊗1 = x.
Such binary operations are known as t-norms and have been used in the context
of probabilistic metric spaces, cf. e.g. [Klement et al., 2000]. At the same time
they are considered as natural candidates for truth degree functions of conjunction
connectives. And from such a t-norm one is able to derive (essentially) all the other
truth degree functions for further connectives.
The minimum operation u ∧v from (8), the Lukasiewicz arithmetic conjunction
u & v from (12), and the ordinary product are the best known examples of t-norms.
In algebraic terms, such a t-norm ⊗makes the real unit interval into an ordered
monoid, i.e. into an abelian semigroup with unit element. And this ordered monoid
is even integral, i.e. its unit element is at the same time the universal upper bound
of the ordering. Additionally this monoid has because of
(27) 0 ⊗x ≤0 ⊗1 = 0
the number 0 as an annihilator.
Starting from a t-norm ⊗one ﬁnds a truth degree function ↣for an implication
connective via the adjointness condition
(28) x ⊗z ≤y
⇐⇒
z ≤(x ↣y) .
However, to guarantee that this adjointness condition (28) determines the op-
eration ↣uniquely, one has to suppose that the t-norm ⊗is a left continuous
function in both arguments. Indeed, the adjointness condition (28) is equivalent
to the condition that ⊗is left continuous in both arguments, cf. [Gottwald, 2001].
Instead of this adjointness condition (28) one could equivalently either give the
direct deﬁnition
(29) x ↣y = sup{z | x ⊗z ≤y}

Many-Valued Logics
699
of the residuation operation ↣, or one could force the t-norm ⊗to have the
sup-preservation property
(30) sup
i→∞
(xi ⊗y) = ( sup
i→∞
xi) ⊗y
for each y ∈[0, 1] and each non-decreasing sequence (xi)i→∞from the real unit
interval.
In this framework one additionally introduces a further unary operation −by
(31) −x =df x ↣0 ,
and considers this as the truth degree function of a negation connective. That this
works also in the formalized language of the corresponding system of logic forces to
introduce into this language a truth degree constant 0 to denote the truth degree
zero.
And ﬁnally one likes to have the weak conjunction and disjunction connectives
∧, ∨available. These connectives should also be added to the vocabulary. However,
it suﬃces to add only the min-conjunction ∧, because then for each left continuous
t-norm ⊗and its residuated implication ↣one has, completely similar to the
situation (17) in the product logic,
(32) u ∨v = ((u ↣v) ↣v) ∧((v ↣u) ↣u) .
All these considerations lead in a natural way to algebraic structures which,
starting from the unit interval, consider a left continuous t-norm ⊗together with
its residuation operation ↣, with the minimum-operation ∧, and the maximum
operation ∨as basic operations of such an algebraic structure, and with the partic-
ular truth degrees 0, 1 as ﬁxed objects (i.e. as nullary operations) of the structure.
Such an algebraic structure
(33) ⟨[0, 1], ∧, ∨, ⊗, ↣, 0, 1⟩
shall be coined to be a t-norm algebra.
7
RESIDUATED IMPLICATIONS VERSUS S-IMPLICATIONS
With the basic properties of classical logic in mind, particularly because of the
logical equivalence of the formulas
(34) ϕ →ψ
and
¬ϕ ∨ψ
and
¬(ϕ ∧¬ψ)
in classical logic, the introduction of the implication connective directly as residu-
ation via (29) or via the adjointness condition (28) seems to be quite sophisticated,
and perhaps unnecessarily complicated.
If one has in mind an arrow-free approach similar to (34) for the present case,
one would have to start for a deﬁnition of an implication connective either with a

700
Siegfried Gottwald
generalized disjunction or with a generalized conjunction, and had to add in any
case a generalized negation.
In this case the implication, deﬁned according to one of the equivalences in (34),
is often coined “S-implication”.
This has been done e.g. in [Butnariu et al., 1995; Hekrdla et al., 2003], but this
approach does not really become simpler as the former one because one needs to
ﬁx either, besides the basic t-norm, an additional negation, or one has to ﬁx a
negation together with a disjunction.
However, the main disadvantage of such a modiﬁcation is that one looses a quite
natural strong soundness property one has for the rule of detachment in the former
t-norm based approach. From the adjointness condition (28) one has always
(35) u ⊗(u ↣v) ≤v
simply because of
u ⊗(u ↣v) ≤v
iﬀ
(u ↣v) ⊗u ≤v
iﬀ
u ↣v ≤u ↣v .
Therefore one has, in the t-norm based approach with implication deﬁned as resid-
uation, a natural lower bound for the truth degree of a formula ψ which has been
derived from ϕ →ψ and ϕ via the rule of detachment: the truth degree of the
formula ϕ & (ϕ →ψ).
A similar property is lacking in general for the approach via S-implications.
In this case, say starting from a t-norm ⊗and a negation ⇁, the corresponding
property to (35) would be
(36) u ⊗⇁(u ⊗⇁v) ≤v .
But this fails already in the case that, independent of the choice of the t-norm
⊗, the negation ⇁is the G¨odel negation ∼of (9), i.e. the common negation of
the systems G and Π. For this negation and any v > 0 one has ∼v = 0, hence
u ⊗∼v = 0, which means ∼(u ⊗∼v) = 1 and u ⊗∼(u ⊗∼v) = u. Now one
may choose u > v to see that (36) fails.
8
CONTINUOUS T-NORMS
Among the large class of all t-norms the continuous ones are the best understood.
A t-norm is continuous iﬀit is continuous as a real function of two variables,
or equivalently, iﬀit is continuous in each argument (with the other one as a
parameter), cf. [Gottwald, 2001; Klement et al., 2000].
Furthermore, all continuous t-norms are ordinal sums of only three of them: the
Lukasiewicz arithmetic t-norm u & v from (12), the ordinary product t-norm, and
the minimum operation u ∧v. The deﬁnition of an ordinal sum of t-norms is the
following one.
DEFINITION 3. Suppose that ([ai, bi])i∈I is a countable family of non-overlap-
ping proper subintervals of the unit interval [0, 1], let (ti)i∈I be a family of t-norms,

Many-Valued Logics
701
and let (ϕi)i∈I be a family of mappings such that each ϕi is an order isomorphism
from [ai, bi] onto [0, 1]. Then the (generalized) ordinal sum of the combined family
(([ai, bi], ti, ϕi))i∈I is the binary function T : [0, 1]2 →[0, 1] characterized by
(37) T(u, v) =

ϕk−1(tk(ϕk(u), ϕk(v)),
if u, v ∈[ak, bk]
min{u, v}
otherwise.
Often it is helpful to visualize the construction of an ordinal sum. For a simple
case which shows some of the interval summands this is done in Fig. 4.
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
0
1
1
min
min
t1
t2
t3
tk
tk+1
Figure 4. The basic construction of an ordinal sum
It is easy to see that an order isomorphic copy of the minimum t-norm is again
the minimum operation. Thus the whole construction of ordinal sums of t-norms
even allows to assume that the summands are formed from t-norms diﬀerent from
the minimum t-norm. This detail, however, shall be inessential for the present
considerations.
But it should be mentioned that all the endpoints ai, bi of the interval family
([ai, bi])i∈I give idempotents of the resulting ordinal sum t-norm T:
T(ai, ai) = ai ,
T(bi, bi) = bi
for all i ∈I.
Conversely, if one knows all the idempotents of a given continuous t-norm t, i.e.
all u ∈[0, 1] with t(u, u) = u, then one is able to give a representation of t as an
ordinal sum, as explained again in [Klement et al., 2000].
The general result, given e.g. in [Gottwald, 2001; Klement et al., 2000], reads
as follows.

702
Siegfried Gottwald
THEOREM 4. Each continuous t-norm t is the (generalized) ordinal sum of (iso-
morphic) copies of the Lukasiewicz t-norm, the product t-norm, and the minimum
t-norm.
As was mentioned in §3, the t-norm based logics which are determined by these
three t-norms are well known and adequately axiomatized.
Therefore one is interested to ﬁnd adequate axiomatizations also for further
continuous t-norms. A global solution of this problem, i.e. a solution which did
not only cover some few particular cases, appeared as quite diﬃcult. Therefore,
instead, one ﬁrst has been interested to ﬁnd all those formulas of the language of
t-norm based systems which are logically valid in each one of these logics.
There seems to be a natural way to get an algebraic semantics for these consid-
erations: the class of all t-norm algebras with a continuous t-norm should either
form such an algebraic semantics, or should be a constitutive part — preferably a
generating set — of a variety of algebraic structures which form such an algebraic
semantics.
However, there seems to be an inadequacy in the description of this algebraic
semantics: on the one hand the notion of t-norm algebra is a purely algebraic
notion, the notion of continuity of a t-norm on the other hand is an analytical
one. Fortunately, there is a possibility to give an algebraic characterization for the
continuity of t-norms. It needs a further notion.
DEFINITION 5. A t-norm algebra ⟨[0, 1], ∧, ∨, ⊗, ↣, 0, 1⟩is divisible iﬀone has
for all a, b ∈L:
(38) a ∧b = a ⊗(a ↣b) .
And this notion gives the algebraic counterpart for the continuity, as shown e.g.
in [Gottwald, 2001; Klement et al., 2000].
PROPOSITION 6. A t-norm algebra ⟨[0, 1], ∧, ∨, ⊗, ↣, 0, 1⟩is divisible iﬀthe t-
norm ⊗is continuous.
9
THE LOGIC OF CONTINUOUS T-NORMS
The class of t-norm algebras (with a continuous t-norm or not) is not a variety: it
is not closed under direct products because each t-norm algebra is linearly ordered,
but the direct products of linearly ordered structures are not linearly ordered, in
general. Hence one may expect that it would be helpful for the development of a
logic of continuous t-norms to extend the class of all divisible t-norm algebras in
a moderate way to get a variety. And indeed this idea works: it was developed by
P. H´ajek and in detail explained in [H´ajek, 1998].
The core points are that one considers instead of the divisible t-norm algebras,
which are linearly ordered integral monoids as mentioned previously, now lattice
ordered integral monoids which are divisible, which have an additional residuation
operation connected with the semigroup operation via an adjointness condition

Many-Valued Logics
703
like (28), and which satisfy a pre-linearity condition like (18). These structures
have been called BL-algebras; they are completely deﬁned in the following way.
DEFINITION 7. A BL-algebra is an algebraic structure
(39) L = ⟨L, ∨, ∧, ∗, →, 0, 1⟩
with four binary operations and two constants such that
(i) (L, ∨, ∧, 0, 1) is a bounded lattice, i.e. has 0 and 1 as the universal lower and
upper bounds w.r.t. the lattice ordering ≤,
(ii) (L, ∗, 1) is an abelian monoid, i.e. a commutative semigroup with unit 1 such
that the multiplication ∗is associative, commutative and satisﬁes 1 ∗x = x
for all x ∈L,
(iii) the binary operations ∗and →form an adjoint pair, i.e. satisfy for all x, y, z ∈
L the adjointness condition
(40) z ≤(x →y) ⇐⇒x ∗z ≤y
(iv) and moreover, for all x, y ∈L one has satisﬁed the pre-linearity condition
(41) (x →y) ∨(y →x) = 1
as well as the divisibility condition
(42) x ∗(x →y) = x ∧y .
The axiomatization of H´ajek [1998] for the basic t-norm logic BL (in [Gottwald,
2001] denoted BTL), i.e. for the class of all well-formed formulas which are valid in
all BL-algebras, is given in a language LT which has as basic vocabulary the
connectives →, & and the truth degree constant 0, taken in each BL-algebra
⟨L, ∩, ∪, ∗, ↣, 0, 1⟩as the operations ↣, ∗and the element 0. Then this t-norm
based logic has as axiom system AxBL the following schemata:
(AxBL1)
(ϕ →ψ) →((ψ →χ) →(ϕ →χ)) ,
(AxBL2)
ϕ & ψ →ϕ ,
(AxBL3)
ϕ & ψ →ψ & ϕ ,
(AxBL4)
(ϕ →(ψ →χ)) →(ϕ & ψ →χ) ,
(AxBL5)
(ϕ & ψ →χ) →(ϕ →(ψ →χ)) ,
(AxBL6)
ϕ & (ϕ →ψ) →ψ & (ψ →ϕ) ,
(AxBL7)
((ϕ →ψ) →χ) →(((ψ →ϕ) →χ) →χ) ,
(AxBL8)
0 →ϕ ,

704
Siegfried Gottwald
and has as its (only) inference rule the rule of detachment, or: modus ponens
(w.r.t. the implication connective →).
The logical calculus which is constituted by this axiom system and its inference
rule, and which has the standard notion of derivation, shall be denoted by KBL or
just by BL. (Similarly in other cases.)
Starting from the primitive connectives →, & and the truth degree constant 0,
the language LT of BL is extended by deﬁnitions of additional connectives ∧, ∨, ¬:
ϕ ∧ψ
=df
ϕ & (ϕ →ψ) ,
(43)
ϕ ∨ψ
=df
((ϕ →ψ) →ψ) ∧((ψ →ϕ) →ϕ) ,
(44)
¬ϕ
=df
ϕ →0 ,
(45)
where ϕ, ψ are formulas of the language of that system.
Calculations (in BL-algebras) show that the additional connectives ∧, ∨just
have the lattice operations ∩, ∪as their truth degree functions.
It is a routine matter, but a bit tedious, to check that this logical calculus KBL,
usually called the axiomatic system BL, is sound, i.e. derives only such formulas
which are valid in all BL-algebras. A proof is given in [H´ajek, 1998], together with
a proof of a corresponding completeness theorem.
COROLLARY 8. The Lindenbaum algebra of the axiomatic system BL is a BL-
algebra.
THEOREM 9 (General Completeness). A formula ϕ of the language LT is deriv-
able within the axiomatic system BL iﬀϕ is valid in all BL-algebras.
The proof method yields that each BL-algebra is (isomorphic to) a subdirect
product of linearly ordered BL-algebras, i.e. of BL-chains. Thus it allows a nice
modiﬁcation of the previous result.
COROLLARY 10 (General Completeness; Version 2). A formula ϕ of LT is deriv-
able within the axiomatic system BL iﬀϕ is valid in all BL-chains.
But even more is provable and leads back to the starting point of the whole
approach: the logical calculus KBL characterizes just those formulas which hold
true w.r.t. all divisible t-norm algebras. This was proved in [Cignoli et al., 2000].
THEOREM 11 (Standard Completeness). The class of all formula which are prov-
able in the system BL coincides with the class of all formulas which are logically
valid in all t-norm algebras with a continuous t-norm.
The main steps in the proof are to show (i) that each BL-algebra is a subdirect
product of subdirectly irreducible BL-chains, i.e. of linearly ordered BL-algebras
which are not subdirect products of other BL-chains, and (ii) that each subdirectly
irreducible BL-chain can be embedded into the ordinal sum of some BL-chains
which are either trivial one-element BL-chains, or linearly ordered MV-algebras,
or linearly ordered product algebras, such that (iii) each such ordinal summand is
locally embedable into a t-norm based residuated lattice with a continuous t-norm,
cf. [Cignoli et al., 2000; H´ajek, 1998] and again [Gottwald, 2001].

Many-Valued Logics
705
This is a lot more of algebraic machinery as necessary for the proof of the
General Completeness Theorem 9 and thus oﬀers a further indication that the
extension of the class of divisible t-norm algebras to the class of BL-algebras made
the development of the intended logical system easier. But even more can be seen
from this proof: the class of BL-algebras is the smallest variety which contains all
the divisible t-norm algebras. And the algebraic reason for this is that each variety
may be generated from its subdirectly irreducible elements, cf. again [Burris and
Sankappanavar, 1981; Denecke and Wismath, 2002; Gr¨atzer, 1979].
And another generalization of Theorem 9 deserves to be mentioned. To state it,
let us call schematic extension of BL every extension which consists in an addition
of ﬁnitely many axiom schemata to the axiom schemata of BL. And let us denote
such an extension by BL(C). And call BL(C)-algebra each BL-algebra A which
makes A-valid all formulas of C.
Then one can prove, as done in [H´ajek, 1998], an even more general completeness
result.
THEOREM 12 (Extended General Completeness). For each ﬁnite set C of axiom
schemata and any formula ϕ of LT there are equivalent:
(i) ϕ is derivable within BL(C);
(ii) ϕ is valid in all BL(C)-algebras;
(iii) ϕ is valid in all BL(C)-chains.
The extension of these considerations to the ﬁrst-order case is also given in [H´ajek,
1998], but shall not be discussed here.
But the algebraic machinery allows even deeper insights. After some particular
results e.g. in [Hanikov´a, 2001; Hanikov´a, 2003], the study of such subvarieties
of the variety of all BL-algebras which are generated by single t-norm algebras
⟨[0, 1], ∧, ∨, ⊗, ↣, 0, 1⟩with a continuous t-norm ⊗led to (ﬁnite) axiomatizations
of those t-norm based logics which have a standard semantics determined just
by this continuous t-norm algebra. These results have recently been presented in
[Esteva et al., 2004].
10
THE LOGIC OF LEFT CONTINUOUS T-NORMS
The guess of Esteva/Godo [Esteva and Godo, 2001] has been that one should arrive
at the logic of left continuous t-norms if one starts from the logic of continuous
t-norms and deletes the continuity condition, i.e. the divisibility condition (38).
The algebraic approach needs only a small modiﬁcation: in Deﬁnition 7 of BL-
algebras one has simply to delete the divisibility condition (42). The resulting
algebraic structures have been called MTL-algebras. They again form a variety.
Following this idea, one has to modify the previous axiom system in a suitable
way. And one has to delete the deﬁnition (43) of the connective ∧, because this def-

706
Siegfried Gottwald
inition (together with suitable axioms) essentially codes the divisibility condition.
The deﬁnition (44) of the connective ∨remains unchanged.
As a result one now considers a new system MTL of mathematical fuzzy logic,
characterized semantically by the class of all MTL-algebras. It is connected with
the axiom system
(AxMTL1)
(ϕ →ψ) →((ψ →χ) →(ϕ →χ)) ,
(AxMTL2)
ϕ & ψ →ϕ ,
(AxMTL3)
ϕ & ψ →ψ & ϕ ,
(AxMTL4)
(ϕ →(ψ →χ)) →(ϕ & ψ →χ) ,
(AxMTL5)
(ϕ & ψ →χ) →(ϕ →(ψ →χ)) ,
(AxMTL6)
ϕ ∧ψ →ϕ ,
(AxMTL7)
ϕ ∧ψ →ψ ∧ϕ ,
(AxMTL8)
ϕ & (ϕ →ψ) →ϕ ∧ψ ,
(AxMTL9)
0 →ϕ ,
(AxMTL10)
((ϕ →ψ) →χ) →(((ψ →ϕ) →χ) →χ) ,
together with the rule of detachment (w.r.t. the implication connective →) as (the
only) inference rule.
It is a routine matter, but again tedious, to check that this logical calculus KMTL
is sound, i.e. derives only such formulas which are valid in all MTL-algebras.
COROLLARY 13. The Lindenbaum algebra of the logical calculus KMTL is an
MTL-algebra.
Proofs of this result and also of the following completeness theorem are given
in [Esteva and Godo, 2001].
THEOREM 14 (General Completeness). A formula ϕ of the language LT is deriv-
able within the logical calculus KMTL iﬀϕ is valid in all MTL-algebras.
Again the proof method yields that each MTL-algebra is (isomorphic to) a
subdirect product of linearly ordered MTL-algebras, i.e. of MTL-chains.
COROLLARY 15 (General Completeness; Version 2). A formula ϕ of LT is deriv-
able within the axiomatic system MTL iﬀϕ is valid in all MTL-chains.
And again, similar as for the BL-case, even more is provable: the logical calculus
KMTL characterizes just these formulas which hold true w.r.t. all those t-norm
based logics which are determined by a left continuous t-norm. A proof is given
in [Jenei and Montagna, 2002].

Many-Valued Logics
707
THEOREM 16 (Standard Completeness). The class of all formulas which are
provable in the logical calculus KMTL coincides with the class of all formulas which
are logically valid in all t-norm algebras with a left continuous t-norm.
This result again means, as the similar one for the logic of continuous t-norms,
that the variety of all MTL-algebras is the smallest variety which contains all
t-norm algebras with a left continuous t-norm.
Because of the fact that the BL-algebras are the divisible MTL-algebras, one
gets another adequate axiomatization of the basic t-norm logic BL if one extends
the axiom system KMTL with the additional axiom schema
(46) ϕ ∧ψ →ϕ & (ϕ →ψ) .
The simplest way to prove that this implication is suﬃcient is to show that the
inequality x ∗(x ↣y) ≤x ∩y, which corresponds to the converse implication,
holds true in each MTL-algebra. Similar remarks apply to further extensions of
MTL we are going to mention.
Also for MTL an extended completeness theorem similar to Theorem 12 remains
true.
THEOREM 17 (Extended General Completeness). For each ﬁnite set C of axiom
schemata and any formula ϕ of LT the following are equivalent:
(i) ϕ is derivable within the logical calculus KMTL + C;
(ii) ϕ is valid in all MTL(C)-algebras;
(iii) ϕ is valid in all MTL(C)-chains.
Again the extension to the ﬁrst-order case is similar to the treatment in [H´ajek,
1998] for BL and shall not be discussed here.
11
SOME GENERALIZATIONS
The standard approach toward t-norm based logics, as explained in §§9 and 10,
has been modiﬁed in various ways. The main background ideas are the extension
or the modiﬁcation of the expressive power of these logical systems.
A ﬁrst, quite fundamental addition to the standard vocabulary of the languages
of t-norm based systems was proposed in [Baaz, 1996]: a unary propositional
operator △which has for t-norm algebras the semantics
(47) △(x) = 1
for x = 1 ,
△(x) = 0
for x ̸= 1 .
This unary connective can be added to the systems BL and MTL via the additional
axioms
(∆1)
△ϕ ∨¬△ϕ
(∆2)
△(ϕ ∨ϕ) →(△ϕ ∨△ψ)

708
Siegfried Gottwald
(∆3)
△ϕ →ϕ
(∆4)
△ϕ →△△ϕ
(∆5)
△(ϕ →ψ) →(△ϕ →△ψ)
This addition leaves all the essential theoretical results, like correctness and com-
pleteness theorems, valid: of course w.r.t. suitably expanded algebraic structures.
A second stream of papers discusses the addition of an idempotent negation,
i.e. a negation which satisﬁes the double negation law, for those cases where the
standard negation of the t-norm based system is not idempotent. This is e.g. the
case for the product logic which, as explained at the end of Subsection 3.3, has
the G¨odel negation (9) as its standard negation. By the way, it should be noticed
that (routine calculations show that) this non-idempotent G¨odel negation is the
standard negation of all those t-norm algebras with a t-norm ⊗which does not
have zero-divisors.13 A very general approach is given in [Esteva et al., 2000], and
a more particular axiomatization problem discussed in [Gottwald and Jenei, 2001].
Another stream of papers, partly related to the previously mentioned one, is
devoted to the problem of a uniﬁed treatment of diﬀerent, usually two, t-norms and
their related connectives within one logical system. Here the focus is on the join
of the systems based upon the Lukasiewicz t-norm and upon the product t-norm.
The great advantage of this uniﬁcation is that the Lukasiewicz t-norm essentially
allows to treat the addition, as may be seen from the truth degree function (12) of
the Lukasiewicz (arithmetical) disjunction, and that the product t-norm adds the
treatment of the usual product: and this means that the elementary arithmetic
(in the unit interval) can be discussed in this combined system. This combined
system has been considered in two strongly related forms, denoted LΠ and LΠ 1
2.
The distinction between both systems is that LΠ has both t-norms & and ⊙and
their related (residual) implications and negations among their basic connectives,
and that LΠ 1
2 adds a truth degree constant for the truth degree 1
2. These two
systems are discussed in detail in [Cintual, 2001; Cintula, 2001a; Cintula, 2001b;
Esteva and Godo, 1999; Esteva et al., 2001].
A fourth stream of papers intends to weaken the systems BL and MTL in such
a way that one deletes the explicit reference to the truth degree constant 0 and
considers the falsity free fragments of the previous systems. From the algebraic
point of view their characteristic structures become the hoops which in general are
deﬁned as algebraic structures H = ⟨H, ∗, ⇒, 1⟩such that ⟨H, ∗, 1⟩is an abelian
monoid and that the further binary operation ⇒satisﬁes the equations
x ⇒x = 1 ,
x ∗(x ⇒y) = y ∗(y ⇒x) ,
(x ∗y) ⇒z = x ⇒(y ⇒z) .
The deﬁnition
x ⊑y =def x ⇒x = 1
13Zero-divisors of a t-norm t are such reals 0 < u, v < 1 for which t(u, v) = 0 holds.

Many-Valued Logics
709
provides an ordering ⊑with universal upper bound 1 which makes ⟨H, ∗, 1⟩an
ordered monoid, and which has the additional property that the operations ∗, ⇒
become an adjoint pair w.r.t. this ordering.
In particular, hoops with the additional property
x ⇒(y ⇒z) ⊑(y ⇒(x ⇒z)) ⇒z
can in a natural way be generated from t-norm algebras with continuous t-norms,
as has been shown in [Agliano et al., 200X].
So one has a kind of competing
generalization of t-norm algebras. And for this kind of algebraic semantics one
can ﬁnd adequate axiomatizations for corresponding hoop logics quite similar to
the approaches of §§9 and 10. The details have been developed in [Esteva et al.,
2003].
And a ﬁfth stream discusses the generalization of the algebraic semantics from
the case of abelian lattice ordered monoids with residuation to the case of non-
commutative lattice ordered semigroups. In this context one tries to deﬁne non-
commutative BL-algebras or non-commutative MTL-algebras, and similarly de-
ﬁnes non-commutative t-norms, also called pseudo-t-norms.
And these consid-
erations become combined with the design of an adequate axiomatization, with
similar results as in §§9 and 10. The most important ones of these papers are [di
Nola et al., 2002; Flondor et al., 2001; H´ajek, 2003; H´ajek, 2003a; H´ajek, 2003b;
Jenei and Montagna, 2003; K¨uhr, 2003].
And ﬁnally it should be mentioned that H´ajek
[2005] even gives a common generalization of all of these generalized fuzzy log-
ics, thus giving up divisibility, the falsity constant, and commutativity. The corre-
sponding algebras are called ﬂeas (or ﬂea algebras), and the logic is the ﬂea logic
FlL. There are examples of ﬂeas on (0, 1] not satisfying divisibility, nor commuta-
tivity, and having no least element.
It shall be suﬃcient to mention these generalizations here. The interested reader
can ﬁnd more details in the survey paper [Gottwald and H´ajek, 2005] and in the
original publications.
12
PAVELKA STYLE EXTENSIONS
Having in mind that fuzzy logics, also in their form as formalized logical systems,
should be a (mathematical) tool for approximative reasoning makes it desirable
that they should be able to deal with graded inferences.
The systems of t-norm based logics discussed up to now have been designed
to formalize the logical background for fuzzy sets, and they allow themselves for
degrees of truth of their formulas. But they all have crisp notions of consequence,
i.e. of entailment and of provability.
It is natural to ask whether it is possible to generalize these considerations to
the case that one starts from fuzzy sets of formulas, and that one gets from them
as consequence hulls again fuzzy sets of formulas. This problem was ﬁrst treated

710
Siegfried Gottwald
by Pavelka [1979]. The basic monograph elaborating this approach is [Nov´ak et
al., 1999]. We discuss in the present section this kind of approach, because it uses
graded relations of entailment and of provability.
However, it should be mentioned that there is also another, more algebraically
oriented approach toward consequence operations for the classical case, originating
from Tarski [1930] and presented e.g. in [W´ojcicki, 1988]. This approach treats
consequence operations as closure operations. And this type of approach has been
generalized to closure operations in classes of fuzzy sets of formulas by Gerla [2001].
It shall be discussed in §13.
The Pavelka-style approach has to deal with fuzzy sets Σ∼of formulas, i.e.
besides formulas ϕ also their membership degrees Σ∼(ϕ) in Σ∼. And these mem-
bership degrees are just the truth degrees. We may assume that these degrees
again form a residuated lattice L = ⟨L, ∩, ∪, ∗, ↣, 0, 1⟩. Thus we (slightly) gener-
alize the standard notion of fuzzy set (with membership degrees from the real unit
interval). Therefore the appropriate language has the same logical connectives as
in the previous considerations.
The Pavelka-style approach is an easy matter as long as the entailment rela-
tionship is considered. An evaluation e is a model of a fuzzy set Σ∼of formulas
iﬀ
(48) Σ∼(ϕ) ⩽Val(ϕ, e)
holds for each formula ϕ. This immediately yields as deﬁnition of the entailment
relation that the semantic consequence hull of Σ∼should be characterized by the
membership degrees
(49) Csem(Σ∼)(ψ) =

{Val(ψ, e) | e model of Σ∼}
for each formula ψ.
For a syntactic characterization of this entailment relation it is necessary to
have some calculus K which treats formulas of the language together with truth
degrees. So the language of this calculus has to extend the language of the basic
logical system by having also symbols for the truth degrees. Depending upon the
truth degree structure, this may mean that the language of this calculus becomes
an uncountable one.
Further on we indicate these symbols by overlined letters like a, c. And we realize
the common treatment of formulas and truth degrees by considering evaluated
formulas, i.e. ordered pairs (a, ϕ) consisting of a truth degree symbol and a formula.
This trick transforms in a natural way each fuzzy set Σ∼of formulas into a (crisp)
set of evaluated formulas, again denoted by Σ∼.
So K has to allow to derive evaluated formulas out of sets of evaluated formulas,
of course using suitable axioms and rules of inference. These axioms are usually
only formulas ϕ which, however, are used in the derivations as the corresponding
evaluated formulas (1, ϕ). Derivations in K out of some set Σ∼of evaluated formu-
las are ﬁnite sequences of evaluated formulas which either are axioms, or elements

Many-Valued Logics
711
of (the support of) Σ∼, or result from former evaluated formulas by application
of one of the inference rules.
Each K-derivation of an evaluated formula (a, ϕ) counts as a derivation of ϕ
to the degree a ∈L. The provability degree of ϕ from Σ∼in K is the supremum
over all these degrees. This now yields that the syntactic consequence hull of Σ∼
should be the fuzzy set Csyn
K
of formulas characterized by the membership function
(50) Csyn
K (Σ∼)(ψ) =

{a ∈L | K derives (a, ψ) out of Σ∼}
for each formula ψ.
Despite the fact that K is a standard calculus, this is an inﬁnitary notion of
provability.
For the inﬁnite-valued Lukasiewicz logic L this machinery works particularly well
because it needs in an essential way the continuity of the residuation operation.
In this case we can form a calculus KL which gives an adequate axiomatization for
the graded notion of entailment in the sense that one has suitable soundness and
completeness results.
This calculus KL has as axioms any axiom system of the inﬁnite-valued Luka-
siewicz logic L which provides together with the rule of detachment an adequate
axiomatization of L, but KL replaces this standard rule of detachment by the
generalized form
(51)
(a, ϕ)
(c, ϕ →ψ)
(a ∗c, ψ)
for evaluated formulas.
The soundness result for this calculus KL yields the fact that the KL-provability
of an evaluated formula (a, ϕ) says that a ≤Val(ϕ, e) holds for every valuation e,
i.e. that the formula a →ϕ is valid — however as a formula of an extended propo-
sitional language which has all the truth degree constants among its vocabulary.
Of course, now the evaluations e have also to satisfy e(a) = a for each a ∈[0, 1].
And the soundness and completeness results for KL say that a strong complete-
ness theorem holds true giving
(52) Csem(Σ∼)(ψ) = Csyn
KL (Σ∼)(ψ)
for each formula ψ and each fuzzy set Σ∼of formulas.
If one takes the previously mentioned turn and extends the standard language of
propositional L by truth degree constants for all degrees a ∈[0, 1], and if one reads
each evaluated formula (a, ϕ) as the formula a →ϕ, then a slight modiﬁcation K+
L
of the former calculus KL again provides an adequate axiomatization: one has to
add the bookkeeping axioms
(a & c) ≡a ∗c ,
(a →c) ≡a ↣L c ,

712
Siegfried Gottwald
as explained e.g. in [Nov´ak et al., 1999]. And if one is interested to have evaluated
formulas together with the extension of the language by truth degree constants,
one has also to add the degree introduction rule
(a, ϕ)
a →ϕ .
However, even a stronger result is available which refers only to a notion of
derivability over a countable language.
The completeness result (52), for K+
L
instead of KL, becomes already provable if one adds truth degree constants only
for all the rationals in [0, 1], as was shown in [H´ajek, 1998]. And this extension of
L is even only a conservative one, cf. [H´ajek et al., 2000], i.e. K+
L proves only such
constant-free formulas of the language with rational constants which are already
provable in the standard inﬁnite-valued Lukasiewicz logic L.
For more details the reader may also consult e.g. [H´ajek, 1998; Nov´ak et al.,
1999; Turunen, 1995].
13
GERLA‘S GENERAL APPROACH
For completeness we mention also a much more abstract approach toward fuzzy
logics with graded notions of entailment as the previously explained one for the
t-norm based fuzzy logics is.
The background for this generalization by G. Gerla, in detail explained in [Gerla,
2001], is that (already) in systems of classical logic the syntactic as well as the
semantic consequence relations, i.e. the provability as well as the entailment re-
lations, are closure operators within the set of formulas. This is a fundamental
observation made by Tarski [1930] already in 1930. And the same holds true for
the Pavelka style extensions of §12 and the operators Csem and Csyn introduced in
(49) and (50), respectively: they are generalized closure operators.
The context, chosen in [Gerla, 2001], is that of L-fuzzy sets, with L = ⟨L, ⩽⟩
an arbitrary complete lattice. A closure operator in L is a mapping J : L →L
satisfying for arbitrary x, y ∈L the well known conditions
x ⩽J(x) ,
(increasingness)
x ⩽y ⇒J(x) ⩽J(y) ,
(isotonicity)
J(J(x) = J(x) .
(idempotency)
And a closure system in L is a subclass C ⊆L which is closed under arbitrary
lattice meets.
For fuzzy logic such closure operators and closure systems are considered in
the lattice FL(F) of all fuzzy subsets of the set F of formulas of some suitable
formalized language.
An abstract fuzzy deduction system now is an ordered pair D = (FL(F), D)
determined by a closure operator D in the lattice FL(F). And the fuzzy theories

Many-Valued Logics
713
T of such an abstract fuzzy deduction system, also called D-theories, are the ﬁxed
points of D: T = D(T), i.e. the deductively closed fuzzy sets of formulas.
A rather abstract setting is also chosen for the semantics of such an abstract
fuzzy deduction system: an abstract fuzzy semantics M is nothing but a class of
elements of the lattice FL(F), i.e. a class of fuzzy sets of formulas. These fuzzy sets
of formulas are called models. The only restriction is that the universal set over F,
i.e. the fuzzy subset of F which has always membership degree one, is not allowed
as a model. The background idea here is that, for each standard interpretation
A (in the sense of many-valued logic — including an evaluation of the individual
variables) for the formulas of F, a model M is determined as the fuzzy set which
has for each formula ϕ ∈F the truth degree of ϕ in A as membership degree.
Accordingly the satisfaction relation |=M coincides with inclusion: for models
M ∈M and fuzzy sets Σ of formulas one has:
(53) M |=M Σ
⇔
Σ ⊆M .
In this setting, one has a semantic and a syntactic consequence operator, both
being closure operators, i.e. one has for each fuzzy set Σ of formulas from F a
semantic as well as a syntactic consequence hull, given by
(54) Csem(Σ) =

{M ∈M | M |=M Σ} ,
Csyn(Σ) = D(Σ) .
Similar to the classical case one has Csem(M) = M for each model M ∈M, i.e.
each such model provides a Csem-theory.
However, a general completeness theorem is not available.
What one needs
instead, in search for a completeness result, that are speciﬁcations which restrict
the full generality of this approach, and lead mainly back to situations which have
been discussed in the previous sections.
14
SOME RECENT APPLICATIONS
14.1
Fuzzy sets theory
It is an old approach, dating back to the early days of fuzzy set theory, to identify
the membership degrees of fuzzy sets with truth degrees of a suitable many-valued
logic. In diﬀerent forms, this idea has been oﬀered and explained e.g. in [Giles,
1976; Goguen, 1968; Gottwald, 1984; Gottwald, 1993; Klaua, 1966]. And it has
since been the topic of occasional investigations like in [Takeuti and Titani, 1984;
Takeuti and Titani, 1992].
This point of view toward fuzzy set theory has been one of the motivations
behind the development of mathematical fuzzy logics. Therefore one may expect
that the recent results in this ﬁeld of mathematical fuzzy logics give rise to a return
to this starting point to use the new insights e.g. for a coherent development of a
(formalized) fuzzy set theory.
Indeed, the paper [H´ajek and Hanikov´a, 2003] and the subsequent Ph.D. Thesis
[Hanikov´a, 2003] use the (ﬁrst-order) logic BL of continuous t-norms, extended

714
Siegfried Gottwald
with the △-operator mentioned in (47), to develop a ZF-like axiomatization for a
formalized fuzzy set theory together with a kind of standard model constructed in
the style of Boolean valued models for (standard) set theory, as explained e.g. in
[Bell, 1985].
The axioms are suitable versions of the axioms of extensionality, pairing, union,
powerset, ∈-induction (i.e. foundation), separation, collection (i.e. comprehension),
and inﬁnity, together with an axiom stating the existence of the support of each
fuzzy set.
The standard model for this theory is formed w.r.t. some complete BL-chain
L = ⟨L, ∧, ∨, ∗, →, 0, 1⟩and given by the transﬁnite hierarchy
(55) V L
0 = ∅,
V L
α+1 =

f ∈dom(u)L | dom(u) ⊆V L
α

,
with unions at limit stages.14
The primitive predicates ∈, ⫅, = are interpreted using the following deﬁnitions
for their truth degrees [[ . . . ]]:
[[x ∈y]]
=

u∈dom(y)
([[u = x]] ∗y(u)) ,
[[x ⫅y]]
=

u∈dom(x)
(x(u) ⇒[[u ∈y]]) ,
[[x = y]]
=
△[[x ⫅y]] ∗△[[y ⫅x]] .
The last condition forces the equality to be crisp.
Besides this “global” approach toward a generalization of the idea of the cumu-
lative set universe for fuzzy sets, there is also a recent more “local” one [Bˇehounek
and Cintula, 200X] which only aims to give a uniﬁed treatment of a theory of fuzzy
subsets of a given universe of discourse, i.e. which–in a suitable sense–restricts the
considerations to the ﬁrst level of the transﬁnite hierarchy (55).
The authors of [Bˇehounek and Cintula, 200X] use the (ﬁrst-order) fuzzy logic
LΠ, extended again with the △-operator, as the background logical system. They
take it as a two-sorted language with one sort of variables for objects of the universe
of discourse and the other sort for fuzzy sets. The advantage of this choice is that
(i) this logic is well understood, cf. e.g. [Horˇcik and Cintula, 2004], and that (ii) it
has suﬃciently high expressive power such that former approaches, like [Gottwald,
1993], which used a mixture of object and metalanguage considerations, can be
uniﬁed and given in a uniform way within the language of LΠ, again with the
primitive predicates ∈, =. So one can e.g. express the fundamental comprehension
axiom by the schema
∃X△∀x(x ∈X ↔ϕ(x))
which has ϕ(x) as an arbitrary formula of the language (not containing the set
variable X free). And one can express the axiom of extensionality by
∀x△(x ∈X ↔x ∈Y ) →X = Y .
14Here, as usual, by BA one denotes — for crisp sets A, B — the class of all functions from B
into A.

Many-Valued Logics
715
This allows to denote fuzzy sets by class terms as in [Gottwald, 1993], with
(56) a ∈{x | ϕ(x)} ↔ϕ(a)
as the guiding principle.
To guarantee the existence of fuzzy sets which are not crisp ones, one may either
start with the logic LΠ 1
2 or add a speciﬁc axiom of fuzziness reading
∃X∃x(x ∈X ↔¬L(x ∈X)) .
Some examples shall illustrate the expressive power of this language:
{x | ¬Π¬L(x ∈X)}
deﬁnes
the kernel of X ,
{x | ¬Π¬Π(x ∈X)}
deﬁnes
the support of X ,
{x | △(α →x ∈X)}
deﬁnes
the (closed) α-cut of X ,
of course with α as truth degree constant to denote the truth degree α.
A further expansion of the language with additional sorts of variables allows
the authors to develop a machinery to discuss also fuzzy sets of higher level, and
ﬁnally also a kind of fuzzy type theory and higher order fuzzy logics. Actually this
is work in progress, partly contained in [Cintual, 2005].
14.2
Nonmonotonic fuzzy reasoning
One of the core areas for the application of logic in computer science is artiﬁcial
intelligence. And inside AI, nonmonotonic reasoning has a prominent position.
So it is natural to ask how the basic ideas of nonmonotonic inference can be
generalized from the crisp case to the fuzzy case, i.e. to the case in which either
the knowledge comes e.g. with degrees of vagueness, or of conﬁdence, or in which
e.g. the defaults are accepted only to some degrees.
A ﬁrst idea was oﬀered in [Lehmke and Thiele, 1996]. This paper generalizes
the circumscription approach in a straightforward way from classical logic to the
inﬁnite-valued Lukasiewicz logic L, and gives some basic properties of the non-
monotonic inference operator deﬁned via minimal models.
Interesting new ideas, based upon the abstract approach toward fuzzy logic
discussed in §13, have quite recently been oﬀered in [Booth and Richter, 2005;
Richter, 2003].
It is possible to deﬁne, quite similar to the standard case (6), for abstract fuzzy
semantics M the model class of a fuzzy set Σ of formulas as
(57) modM(Σ) = {M ∈M | M |=M Σ} ,
and to deﬁne the theory of a class K ⊆M of models as
(58) th(K) =

{u ∈FL(F) | M |= u for all M ∈K} ,

716
Siegfried Gottwald
which means, in accordance with (53), that one has
th(K) =

u ∈FL(F) | u ⊆

K

=

K .
It is a routine matter to prove that for each fuzzy set Σ ∈FL(F) of formulas
one obtains
Csem(Σ) = th(modM(Σ)) ,
i.e. th(modM(Σ)) is a Csem-theory.
Therefore it is possible to adapt within this abstract setting the model theoretic
method of nonmonotonic inference which connects with each set Σ of formulas as
its nonmonotonic inference hull C∼(Σ) the theory of a subclass Φ(mod(Σ)) of the
class mod(Σ) of all models of Σ:
C∼(Σ) = th(Φ(mod(Σ))) ,
e.g. the subclass of all normal or of all minimal models. In this generalized setting
one can prove quite similar theoretical results as in the crisp case, as can be seen
from [Richter, 2002].
Also another tool from nonmonotonic reasoning has a natural generalization to
a fuzzy setting: Poole systems as introduced in [Poole, 1989]. Such a crisp Poole
system P is determined by a pair (D, C) of sets of sentences understood as the
relevant defaults and constraints. For each set Σ of formulas and a suitably chosen
closure operator C it deﬁnes a class EP of extensions by
EP (Σ) = {C(Σ ∪Dm) | Dm ⊆D maximal w.r.t. consistency of Σ ∪C ∪Dm} ,
and an inference operator CP by
CP (Σ) =

EP (Σ) .
All these deﬁnitions allow, in the abstract setting of §13, a natural extension to
the case of fuzzy sets of defaults and constraints. Details again may be found in
[Richter, 2002; Richter, 2003].
However, even a more practical application becomes available: toward fuzzy
belief revision.
A fuzzy belief base B is just a fuzzy set of formulas B ∈FL(F). The revision
information (ϕ/a), understood as the fuzzy singleton of ϕ with membership degree
a, tells that a “new” formula ϕ should be integrated with degree a. As in the
AGM framework [Alchourron et al., 1985] for the crisp case this may happen in
the following steps, cf. [Booth and Richter, 2003; Booth and Richter, 2005]:
1. Form the family B ⊥(ϕ/a) of all maximal X ∈FL(B) consistent
with (ϕ/a).
2. Select a subset γ(B ⊥(ϕ/a)) ⊆B ⊥(ϕ/a) and form its meet.

Many-Valued Logics
717
3. Add the revision information to get the revised belief base
B ⋆(ϕ/a) =

γ(B ⊥(ϕ/a)) ∪(ϕ/a) .
The adaptation of this procedure to the case of the revision of fuzzy theories is
not as straightforward as in the crisp case, but can also be handled suﬃciently
well with some extra care regarding the moment for taking (deductive) closures.
Details are in [Richter, 2003].
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Agliano et al., 200X] P. Agliano, I. M. A. Ferreirim and F. Montagna. Basic hoops: an algebraic
study of continuous t-norms. Studia Logica (200X, to appear).
[Alchourron et al., 1985] C. Alchourron, P. G¨ardenfors and D. Makinson. On the logic of theory
change: partial meet contraction and revision functions, J. Symbolic Logic 50, 510–530. 1985.
[˚Aqvist, 1962] L. ˚Aqvist. Reﬂections on the logic of nonsense, Theoria 28, 138–157, 1962.
[Avron, 1999] A. Avron. On the expressive power of three-valued and four-valued languages, J.
of Logic and Computation 9, 977–994, 1999.
[Baaz, 1996] M. Baaz. Inﬁnite-valued G¨odel logics with 0-1 projections and relativizations. In:
G¨odel’96 (P. H´ajek, ed.), Lecture Notes in Logic 6, Springer: New York, 23–33, 1996.
[Baaz et al., 1993] M. Baaz, C. G. Ferm¨uller, G. Quirchmayr and R. Zach. A many-valued logic
for default reasoning, in: L. G¨un/R. Onvural/E. Gelenbe (eds.), Proc. 8th Internat. Symp.
Computer and Information Sci., ISCIS VIII, Istanbul, Nov. 1993, Middle East Techn. Univ.,
Ankara, 476–479, 1993.
[Baudry, 1950] L. Baudry. La Querelle des Future Contingents: Louvain 1465–1475, Vrin, Paris,
1950.
[Bˇehounek and Cintula, 200X] L. Bˇehounek and P. Cintula. Fuzzy class theory, Fuzzy Sets Sys-
tems (to appear, 200X).
[Bell, 1985] J. L. Bell. Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs in Set Theory. Oxford
Logic Guides 12, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1985.
[Belnap, 1977] N. D. Belnap. How a computer should think, in: G. Ryle (ed.) Contemporary
Aspects of Philosophy. Oriel Press, Stockﬁeld, 30–56, 1977.
[Belnap, 1977a] N. D. Belnap. A useful four-valued logic, in: J.M. Dunn/G. Epstein (eds.),
Modern Uses of Multiple-Valued Logic. Reidel, Dordrecht, 8–37, 1977.
[Bernays, 1926] P. Bernays. Axiomatische Untersuchungen des Aussagenkalk¨uls der “Principia
Mathematica”. Math. Zeitschr. 25, 305–320, 1926.
[Beth, 1965] E. W. Beth The Foundations of Mathematics. North-Holland Publ. Comp., Ams-
terdam, 1965.
[Black, 1937] M. Black. Vagueness: an exercise logical analysis, Philosophy of Science 4, 427–
455, 1937.
[Black, 1963] M. Black. Reasoning with loose concepts, Dialogue 2, 1–12, 1963.
[Blau, 1978] U. Blau. Die dreiwertige Logik der Sprache: ihre Syntax, Semantik und Anwendung
in der Sprachanalyse. de Gruyter, Berlin, 1978.
[Boˇcvar, 1938] D. A. Boˇcvar. Ob odnom trechznaˇcnom isˇcislenii i ego primenenii k analizu
paradoksov klassiˇceskogo funkcional’nogo isˇcislenija. Mat. Sbornik 4 (46), 287–308, 1938.
[Boˇcvar, 1943] D. A. Boˇcvar. K voprosu o neprotivoreˇcivosti odnogo trechznaˇcnogo isˇcislenija.
Mat. Sbornik 12 (54), 353–369, 1943.
[Bolc and Borowik, 1992] L. Bolc and P. Borowik. Many-Valued Logics, 1. Theoretical Founda-
tions. Springer, Berlin, 1992.
[Booth and Richter, 2003] R. Booth and E. Richter. On revising fuzzy belief bases. In: UAI
2003. Proc. 19. Internat. Conf. on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Acapulco, Mexico (U.
Kjaerulﬀ, C. Meek eds.), Morgan Kaufmann: San Francisco, 81–88, 2003.
[Booth and Richter, 2005] R. Booth and E. Richter. On revising fuzzy belief bases, Studia Logica
80, 29–61, 2005.

718
Siegfried Gottwald
[Butnariu et al., 1995] D. Butnariu, E. P. Klement and S. Zafrany. On triangular norm-based
propositional fuzzy logics, Fuzzy Sets Systems 69, 241–255, 1995.
[Burris and Sankappanavar, 1981] S. Burris and H. P. Sankappanavar. A Course in Universal
Algebra. Springer: New York, 1981.
[Cat-Ho, 1973] Cat-Ho, Nguyen. Generalized Post Algebras and Their Applications to Some
Inﬁnitary Many-Valued Logics. Dissertationes Math., vol. 57, PWN, Warsaw, 1973.
[Chang, 1958] C. C. Chang. Algebraic analysis of many valued logics, Transactions American
Mathematical Society 88, 476–490, 1958.
[Cignoli, 1982] R. Cignoli. Proper n-valued 	Lukasiewicz algebras as S-algebras of 	Lukasiewicz
n-valued propositional calculi, Studia Logica 41, 3–16, 1982.
[Cignoli et al., 2000] R. Cignoli, F. Esteva, L. Godo and A. Torrens. Basic Fuzzy Logic is the
logic of continuous t-norms and their residua, Soft Computing 4, 106–112, 2000.
[Cignoli et al., 2000] R. Cignoli, I. D’Ottaviano and D. Mundici. Algebraic Foundations of
Many-Valued Reasoning. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 2000.
[Cintual, 2001] P. Cintula. The 	LΠ and 	LΠ 1
2 propositional and predicate logics, Fuzzy Sets
Systems 124, 289–302, 2001.
[Cintula, 2001a] P. Cintula. An alternative approach to the 	LΠ logic, Neural Network World
124, 561–575, 2001.
[Cintula, 2001b] P. Cintula. Advances in 	LΠ and 	LΠ 1
2 logics, Archive Math. Logic 42, 449–468,
2001.
[Cintual, 2005] P. Cintula. From Fuzzy Logic to Fuzzy Mathematics. Ph.D. Thesis, Technical
University, Prague, 2005.
[Cleave, 1974] J. P. Cleave. The notion of logical consequence in the logic of inexact predicates,
Zeitschr. math. Logik Grundl. Math. 20, 307–324, 1974.
[Denecke and Wismath, 2002] K. Denecke and S. L. Wismath. Universal Algebra and Applica-
tions in Theoretical Computer Science, Chapman & Hall/CRC: Boca Raton/FL, 2002.
[di Nola et al., 2002] A. di Nola, G. Georgescu and A. Iorgulescu. Pseudo-BL algebras. I and II,
J. Multiple-Valued Logic 8, 671–750, 2002.
[Dummett, 1959] M. Dummett. A propositional calculus with denumerable matrix, J. Symbolic
Logic 24, 97–106, 1959.
[Dunn, 1976] J. M. Dunn. Intuitive semantics for ﬁrst-degree entailments and ‘coupled trees’,
Philosophical Studies 29, 149–168, 1976.
[Dunn, 1998] J. M. Dunn. A comparative study of various semantical treatments of negation:
a history of formal negation, in: D. Gabbay/H. Wansing (eds.), What is Negation. Kluwer,
Dordrecht, 23–51, 1988.
[Dwinger, 1968] Ph. Dwinger. Generalized Post algebras, Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci., S´er. Sci. Math.,
Astronom., Phys., 16, 559–563, 1968.
[Dwinger, 1977] Ph. Dwinger. A survey of the theory of Post algebras and their generalizations,
in: J.M. Dunn/G. Epstein (eds.), Modern Uses of Multiple-Valued Logic. Reidel, Dordrecht,
53–75, 1977.
[Ebbinghaus, 1969] H.-D. Ebbinghaus.
¨Uber eine Pr¨adikatenlogik mit partiell deﬁnierten
Pr¨adikaten und Funktionen, Archiv math. Logik Grundlagenforsch. 12, 39–53, 1969.
[Epstein, 1960] G. Epstein. The lattice theory of Post algebras, Transactions American Math.
Soc. 95, 300–317, 1960. Reprinted in: D.C. Rine (ed.) Computer Science and Multiple Valued
Logic. North-Holland Publ. Comp., Amsterdam 1977, 17–34.
[Epstein, 1990] G. Epstein. The Semantic Foundations of Logic. Vol.1: Propositional Logics.
Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1990.
[Epstein and Rasiowa, 1990] G. Epstein and H. Rasiowa. Theory and uses of Post algebras of
order ω + ω∗. I, in: 20th Internat. Symp. Multiple-Valued Logic, Charlotte/NC, 1990, Pro-
ceedings, IEEE Computer Soc., New York, 42–47, 1990.
[Epstein and Rasiowa, 1991] G. Epstein and H. Rasiowa. Theory and uses of Post algebras of
order ω + ω∗. Part II, in: 21st Internat. Symp. Multiple-Valued Logic, Victoria/B.C., 1991,
Proceedings, IEEE Computer Soc., New York, 248–254, 1991.
[Esteva and Godo, 1999] F. Esteva and L. Godo. Putting together 	Lukasiewicz and product
logics, Mathware and Soft Computing 6, 219–234, 1999.
[Esteva and Godo, 2001] F. Esteva and L. Godo. Monoidal t-norm based logic: towards a logic
for left-continuous t-norms, Fuzzy Sets Systems 124, 271–288, 2001.
[Esteva et al., 2000] F. Esteva, L. Godo, P. H´ajek and M. Navara. Residuated fuzzy logic with
an involutive negation, Archive Math. Logic 39, 103–124, 2000.

Many-Valued Logics
719
[Esteva et al., 2003] F. Esteva, L. Godo, P. H´ajek and F. Montagna. Hoops and fuzzy logic,
Journ. Logic and Comput. 13, 531–555, 2003.
[Esteva et al., 2001] F. Esteva, L. Godo and F. Montagna. The 	LΠ and 	LΠ 1
2 logics: two com-
plete fuzzy systems joining 	Lukasiewicz and product logics, Archive Math. Logic 40, 39–67,
2001.
[Esteva et al., 2004] . Esteva, L. Godo and F. Montagna. Equational characterization of the
subvarieties of BL generated by t-norm algebras, Studia Logica 76, 161–200, 2004.
[Finn, 1971] V.
K.
Finn.
Ob
aksiomatizacii
nekotorych
trechznaˇcnych
logik,
Nauˇcno-
Techniˇceskaja Informacija, ser. 2, no. 11, 16–20, 1971.
[Finn, 1974] V. K. Finn. A criterion of functional completeness for B3, Studia Logica 33, 121–
125, 1974.
[Finn, 1974a] V. K. Finn. Aksiomatizacii nekotorych trechznaˇcnych isˇcislenij vyskazyvanij i ich
algebr, in: Filosoﬁja v Sovremennom Mire. Filosoﬁja i Logika. Nauka, Moscow, 398–438, 1974.
[Fisch and Turquette, 1966] M. Fisch and A. R. Turquette. Peirce’s triadic logic. Trans. Charles
Sanders Peirce Society 2, 71–85, 1966.
[Fitting, 1988] M. C. Fitting. Logic programming on a topological bilattice, Fundamenta Infor-
maticae 11, 209–218, 1988.
[Fitting, 1989] M. C. Fitting. Bilattices and the theory of truth, J. Philosophical Logic 18,
225–256, 1989.
[Flondor et al., 2001] P. Flondor, G. Georgescu and A. Iorgulescu. Pseudo t-norms and pseudo-
BL algebras, Soft Computing 5, 355–371, 2001.
[Gerla, 2001] G. Gerla. Fuzzy Logic. Mathematical Tools for Approximate Reasoning, Trends
in Logic, vol. 11, Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 2001.
[Giles, 1976] R. Giles. 	Lukasiewicz logic and fuzzy set theory, Internat. J. Man-Machine Studies
8, 313–327, 1976.
[Ginsberg, 1987] M. L. Ginsberg. Multi-valued logics, in: M.L. Ginsberg (ed.), Readings in
Nonmonotonic Reasoning. Morgan Kaufman, Los Altos/Ca., 251–255, 1987.
[Ginsberg, 1988] M. L. Ginsberg. Multivalued logic: a uniform approach to reasoning in artiﬁcial
intelligence, Computational Intelligence 4, 265–315, 1988.
[Goddard and Routley, 1973] L. Goddard and R. Routley. The Logic of Signiﬁcance and Con-
text. Scottish Academic Press, Edinburgh, 1973.
[G¨odel, 1932] K. G¨odel. Zum intuitionistischen Aussagenkalk¨ul, Anzeiger Akademie der Wis-
senschaften Wien, Math.-naturwiss. Klasse 69, 65–66, 1932; also: Ergebnisse eines mathema-
tischen Kolloquiums H. 4 (1933) 40.
[Goguen, 1968] J. A. Goguen. The logic of inexact concepts, Synthese 19 325–373, 1968–69.
[Gottwald, 1984] S. Gottwald. Fuzzy set theory. Some aspects of the early development. In:
Aspects of Vagueness (H.-J. Skala, S. Termini, E. Trillas eds.), Theory and Decision Libr.,
vol. 39, Reidel, Dordrecht, 13–29, 1984.
[Gottwald, 1993] S. Gottwald. Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic. The Foundations of Application —
From a Mathematical Point of View, Vieweg, Braunschweig/Wiesbaden and Teknea, Toulouse,
1993.
[Gottwald, 2001] S. Gottwald. A Treatise on Many-Valued Logics. Studies in Logic and Com-
putation, vol. 9, Research Studies Press, Baldock, 2001.
[Gottwald and Jenei, 2001] S. Gottwald and S. Jenei. A new axiomatization for involutive
monoidal t-norm based logic, Fuzzy Sets Systems 124, 303–307, 2001.
[Gottwald and H´ajek, 2005] S. Gottwald and P. H´ajek. T-norm based mathematical fuzzy logics.
In: Logical, Algebraic, Analytic, and Probabilistic Aspects of Triangular Norms (E.P. Klement
and R. Mesiar, eds.), Elsevier, Dordrecht, 275–299, 2005.
[Gr¨atzer, 1979] G. Gr¨atzer. Universal Algebra. Springer, Berlin, 1979.
[Grigolia, 1977] R. ˇS. Grigolia. Algebraic analysis of 	Lukasiewicz–Tarski’s n-valued logical sys-
tems, in: R. W´ojcicki/G. Malinowski (eds.) Selected Papers on Lukasiewicz Sentential Calculi.
Ossolineum, Wroclaw, 81–92, 1977.
[Gupta and Belnap, 1993] A. Gupta and N. Belnap. The Revision Theory of Truth. MIT Press,
Cambridge/Mass, 1993.
[H´ajek, 1998] P. H´ajek. Basic fuzzy logic and BL-algebras, Soft Computing 2, 124–128, 1998.
[H´ajek, 1998] P. H´ajek. Metamathematics of Fuzzy Logic. Trends in Logic, vol. 4, Kluwer Acad.
Publ., Dordrecht, 1998.
[H´ajek, 2003] P. H´ajek. Embedding standard BL-algebras into non-commutative pseudo-BL-
algebras, Tatra Mt. Math. Publ. 27, 125–130, 2003.

720
Siegfried Gottwald
[H´ajek, 2003a] P. H´ajek. Fuzzy logics with non-commutative conjunctions, Journ. Logic and
Comput. 13, 469–479, 2003.
[H´ajek, 2003b] P. H´ajek. Observations on non-commutative fuzzy logics, Soft Computing 8,
28–43, 2003.
[H´ajek, 2005] P. H´ajek. Fleas and fuzzy logic, J. Multiple-Valued Logic and Soft Computing 11,
137–152, 2005.
[H´ajek et al., 1996] P. H´ajek, L. Godo and F. Esteva. A complete many-valued logic with
product-conjunction, Arch. Math. Logic 35, 191–208, 1006.
[H´ajek and Hanikov´a, 2003] P, H´ajek and Z. Hanikov´a. A development of set theory in fuzzy
logic. In: Beyond Two. Theory and Applications of Multiple-Valued Logic (M. Fitting, E.
Orlowska eds.), Physica-Verlag, Heidelberg, 273–285, 2003.
[H´ajek et al., 2000] P. H´ajek, J. Paris and J. Shepherdson. Rational Pavelka predicate logic is a
conservative extension of 	Lukasiewicz predicate logic, J. Symbolic Logic 65, 669–682, 2000.
[Halld´en, 1949] S. Halld´en. The Logic of Nonsense. Uppsala Univ., Uppsala, 1949.
[Hanikov´a, 2001] Z. Hanikov´a. Standard algebras for fuzzy propositional calculi, Fuzzy Sets
Systems 124, 309–320, 2001.
[Hanikov´a, 2003] Z. Hanikov´a. Mathematical and Metamathematical Properties of Fuzzy Logic,
Ph.D. Thesis, Charles University Prague, 2003.
[Hekrdla et al., 2003] J. Hekrdla, E. P. Klement and M. Navara. Two approaches to fuzzy propo-
sitional logics, J. Multiple-Valued Logic and Soft Computing 9, 343–360, 2003.
[Horˇcik and Cintula, 2004] R. Horˇcik and P. Cintula. Product 	Lukasiewicz logic, Archive Math.
Logic 43, 477–503, 2004.
[Horn, 1989] L. R. Horn. A Natural History of Negation. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
1989.
[Ja´skowski, 1936] S. Ja´skowski. Recherches sur le syst`eme de la logique intuitioniste. In: Actes
du Congr`es Internat. de Philosophie Scientiﬁque 1936, vol. 6, Actualit`es Scientiﬁque et In-
dustriel, vol. 393, Hermann, Paris, 58–61, 1936.
[Jenei and Montagna, 2002] S. Jenei and F. Montagna. A proof of standard completeness for
Esteva and Godo’s logic MTL, Studia Logica 70, 183–192, 2002.
[Jenei and Montagna, 2003] S. Jenei and F. Montagna. A proof of standard completeness for
non-commutative monoidal t-norm logic. Neural Network World 13, 481–488, 2003.
[Kearns, 1974] J. T. Kearns. Vagueness and failing sentences, Logique et Analyse, N. S. 17,
301–315, 1974.
[Kearns, 1979] J. T. Kearns. The strong completeness of a system for Kleene’s three-valued
logic, Zeitschr. math. Logik Grundl. Math. 25, 61–68, 1979.
[Klaua, 1966] D. Klaua. ¨Uber einen zweiten Ansatz zur mehrwertigen Mengenlehre, Monats-
berichte Deut. Akad. Wissensch. Berlin 8, 161–177, 1966.
[Kleene, 1938] S. C. Kleene. On notation for ordinal numbers. J. Symbolic Logic 3, 150–155,
1938.
[Kleene, 1952] S.
C.
Kleene.
Introduction
to
Metamathematics,
North-Holland
Publ.
Comp.,Amsterdam and van Nostrand, New York, 1952.
[Klement et al., 2000] E. P. Klement, R. Mesiar and E. Pap. Triangular Norms. Kluwer Acad.
Publ., Dordrecht, 2000.
[K¨orner, 1966] S. K¨orner. Experience and Theory. Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1966.
[Kripke, 1975] S. A. Kripke. Outline of a theory of truth, J. of Philosophy 72, 690–716, 1975.
[K¨uhr, 2003] J. K¨uhr. Pseudo-BL algebras and PRl-monoids. Mathematica Bohemica 128 199–
208, 2003.
[Lehmke and Thiele, 1996] S. Lehmke and H. Thiele. On fuzzy circumscription. In: EUSFLAT
’96. Proc. Fourth Europ. Congr. Intell. Techniques and Soft Computing, Aachen 1996, vol.1,
Aachen, 641–645, 1996.
[Lewis and Langford, 1932] C. J. Lewis and C. H. Langford. Symbolic Logic, Dover, New York,
1932.
[Lovett, 1900] E. O. Lovett. Mathematics at the International Congress of Philosophy, Paris
1900. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 7, 157–183, 1900–01.
[	Lukasiewicz, 1913] J. 	Lukasiewicz. Die logischen Grundlagen der Wahrscheinlichkeits- rech-
nung, Krakow [cf. also his (1970)], 1913.
[	Lukasiewicz, 1920] J. 	Lukasiewicz. O logice tr´ojwarto´sciowej. Ruch Filozoﬁczny 5, 170–171,
1920.

Many-Valued Logics
721
[	Lukasiewicz, 1930] J. 	Lukasiewicz. Philosophische Bemerkungen zu mehrwertigen Systemen des
Aussagenkalk¨uls, Comptes Rendus S´eances Soci´et´e des Sciences et Lettres Varsovie, cl. III,
23, 51–77, 1930.
[	Lukasiewicz, 1935] J. 	Lukasiewicz. Zur Geschichte der Aussagenlogik. Erkenntnis 5, 111–131,
1935.
[	Lukasiewicz, 1953] J. 	Lukasiewicz. A system of modal logic, J. Computing Systems 1, 111–149,
1953.
[	Lukasiewicz, 1970] J. 	Lukasiewicz. Selected Works (L. Borkowski, ed.). North-Holland Publ.
Comp., Amsterdam, 1970.
[	Lukasiewicz and Tarski, 1930] J. 	Lukasiewicz and A. Tarski. Untersuchungen ¨uber den Aus-
sagenkalk¨ul. Comptes Rendus S´eances Soci´et´e des Sciences et Lettres Varsovie, cl. III, 23,
30–50, 1930.
[Martin and Woodruﬀ, 1975] R. L. Martin and P. W. Woodruﬀ. On representing ‘True-in-L’ in
L, Philosophia 5, 213–217, 1975.
[McColl, 1897] H. McColl. Symbolic reasoning. II, Mind, N.S., 6, 493–510, 1897.
[McGee, 1991] V. McGee. Truth, Vagueness, and Paradox. Hackett Publ. Comp., Indianapo-
lis/Ind, 1991.
[Michalski, 1937] K. Michalski. Le probl`eme de la volont´e `a Oxford et `a Paris au XIVe si`ecle.
Studia Philosophica 2, 233–365, 1937.
[Moisil, 1940] G. C. Moisil. Recherches sur les logiques non chrysipiennes, Annales Scientiﬁques
de l’Universit´e de Jassy 26, 431–466, 1940.
[Moisil, 1941] G. C Moisil. Notes sur les logiques non-chrysipiennes, Annales Scientiﬁques de
l’Universit´e de Jassy 27, 86–98, 1941.
[Mostowski, 1957] A. Mostowski. On a generalization of quantiﬁers. Fund. Math. 44, 12–36,
1957.
[Nov´ak et al., 1999] V. Nov´ak, I. Perﬁlieva and J. Mo˘cko˘r. Mathematical Principles of Fuzzy
Logic. Kluwer, Boston, 1999.
[Patzig, 1973] G. Patzig. Aristotle, 	Lukasiewicz and the origins of many-valued logic. In: Logic,
Methodology and Philosophy of Science IV (P. Suppes et al. eds.), PWN, Warsaw and North-
Holland Publ. Comp., Amsterdam, 921–929, 1973.
[Pavelka, 1979] J. Pavelka. On fuzzy logic. I–III, Zeitschr. math. Logik Grundl. Math. 25, 45–52;
119–134; 447–464, 1979.
[Peirce, 1931] C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers (C. Hartshorne et al. eds.), Harvard Univ. Press,
Cambridge/MA, 1931–58.
[Pir´og-Rzepecka, 1977] K. Pir´og-Rzepecka. Systemy nonsense-logics. PWN, Warsaw–Wroclaw,
1977.
[Poole, 1989] D. Poole. What the lottery paradox tells us about default reasoning. In:
KR
’89: Proc. First Internat. Conf. Principles of Knowl. Repres. and Reas. (H.J. Levesque, R.J.
Brachman, R. Reiter eds.), Morgan Kaufmann: San Matteo/Ca., 333–340, 19889.
[Post, 1921] E. L. Post. Introduction to a general theory of elementary propositions. Amer. J.
Math. 43, 163–185, 1921.
[Priest and Sylvan, 1992] G. Priest and R. Sylvan. Simpliﬁed semantics for basic relevant logics,
J. Philosophical Logic 21, 217–232, 1992.
[Pynko, 1999] A. P. Pynko. Functional completeness and axiomatizability within Belnap’s four-
valued logic and its expansions, J. Applied Non-Classical Logics 9, 61–106, 1999.
[Raju, 1954] P. T. Raju. The principle of four-cornered negation in Indian philosophy, Review
of Metaphysics 7, 694–713, 1954.
[Rasiowa, 1973] H. Rasiowa. On generalised Post algebras of order ω+ and ω+-valued predicate
calculi, Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci., S´er. Sci. Math., Astronom., Phys., 21, 209–219, 1973.
[Rescher, 1969] N. Rescher. Many-Valued Logic, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1969.
[Restall, 1995] G. Restall. Four-valued semantics for relevant logics (and some of their rivals),
J. Philosophical Logic 24, 139–160, 1995.
[Richter, 2002] E. Richter. Nonmonotonic inference operators for fuzzy logic. In:
Proc. 9th
Internat. Workshop on Nonmonotonic Reasoning, NMR’2002, Toulouse, France (S. Benferhat,
E. Giunchiglia, eds.), Toulouse, 321–329, 2002.
[Richter, 2003] E. Richter. Nonmonotonic Fuzzy Inference. Ph.D. Thesis, Leipzig University,
2003.
[Rine, 1977] D. C. Rine, ed. Computer Science and Multiple Valued Logic. North-Holland Publ.
Comp., Amsterdam, 1977. 2nd rev. ed. 1984.

722
Siegfried Gottwald
[Rosenbloom, 1942] P. C. Rosenbloom. Post algebras. I. Postulates and general theory, American
J. Mathematics 64, 167–188, 1942.
[Rosser and Turquette, 1952] J. B. Rosser and A. R. Turquette. Many-Valued Logics, North-
Holland Publ. Comp., Amsterdam, 1952.
[Segerberg, 1965] K. Segerberg. A contribution to nonsense-logics, Theoria 31, 199–217, 1965.
[ˇSestakov, 1964] V. I. ˇSestakov. O vzaimootnoˇsenii nekotorych trechznaˇcnych logikach isˇcislenij,
Uspechi Matematiˇceskich Nauk 19, 177–181, 1964.
[Sette, 1973] A. M. Sette. On the propositional calculus P 1, Mathematica Japonica 18, 173–180,
1973.
[Sette and Carnielli, 1995] A. M. Sette and W. A. Carnielli. Maximal weakly-intuitionistic log-
ics, Studia Logica 55, 181–203, 1995.
[S	lupecki, 1936] J. S	lupecki. Der volle dreiwertige Aussagenkalk¨ul. C. R. S´eances Soc. Sci. et
Lettr. Varsovie, cl. III, 29, 9–11, 1936.
[Takeuti and Titani, 1984] G. Takeuti and S. Titani. Intuitionistic fuzzy logic and intuitionistic
fuzzy set theory, J. Symbolic Logic 49, 851–866, 1984.
[Takeuti and Titani, 1992] G. Takeuti and S. Titani. Fuzzy logic and fuzzy set theory, Archive
Math. Logic 32, 1–32, 1992.
[Tarski, 1930] A. Tarski. Fundamentale Begriﬀe der Methodologie der deduktiven Wissen-
schaften, Monatshefte Mathematik Physik 37, 361–404, 1930.
[Traczyk, 1967] T. Traczyk. On Post algebras with uncountable chain of constants. Algebras
and homomorphisms, Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci., S´er. Sci. Math., Astronom., Phys., 15, 673–
680, 1967.
[Turquette, 1967] A. R. Turquette. Peirce’s Phi and Psi operators for triadic logic. Trans.
Charles Sanders Peirce Society 3, 66–73, 1967.
[Turunen, 1995] E. Turunen. Well-deﬁned fuzzy sentential logic, Math. Logic Quarterly 41,
236–248, 1995.
[Visser, 1984] A. Visser. Four-valued semantics and the Liar, J. Philosophical Logic 13, 181–217,
1984.
[Wajsberg, 1977] M. Wajsberg. . Axiomatization of the three-valued propositional calculus. In:
M. Wajsberg: Logical Works (S.S. Surma ed.), Ossolineum, Wroclaw, 12–29, 1977.
[W´ojcicki, 1988] R. W´ojcicki. Theory of Logical Calculi: Basic Theory of Consequence Opera-
tions, Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1988.
[Zadeh, 1965] L. A. Zadeh. Fuzzy sets, Information and Control 8, 338–353, 1965.

RELEVANCE LOGICS
Katalin Bimb´o
Relevance logics emerged in the middle of the 20th century as a characterization
of implication and entailment. From early on it was known that classical logic
validates certain weird inferences and assigns the truth-value ‘true’ to conditional
statements of a peculiar kind. It was “understood” that classically there need not
be a connection between the premises and the conclusion or between the antecedent
and the consequent of a conditional — except certain patterns of truth values.
Of course, one could try to shrug away the irrelevance of the classical con-
sequence relation by saying that it is a “pragmatic issue.” However, it is not.
Relevance logics show that one of the causes of the problem can be pinpointed as
an axiom (in a frequently used formulation) of classical logic, and relevant infer-
ences can be captured mathematically precisely — by logical calculi. Accordingly,
we use the term ‘relevance logics’ primarily to refer to logics that do not contain
A →(B →A) as an axiom (or a theorem).1 As a word of caution, however, we
note that once the overpowering dominance of classical logic has been successfully
challenged (and it has been), it becomes clear that there is no single superior way
to formalize what is a logically valid inference. There are several ways, though
some are more plausible and useful than others.2
One of the ﬁrst relevance logics is Church’s weak implicational calculus (in-
troduced in Church [1951] and later denoted as R→), which is axiomatized by
the principal type schemes of combinators that can deﬁne λI-abstraction. Indeed,
Church deﬁned his calculus by replacing A →(B →A) (the principal type scheme
of K) by A →A (the principal type scheme of I) in the positive implicational
logic.3 Ackermann’s and further on, Anderson and Belnap’s aim was more inher-
ently philosophical: to formalize the notion of strong implication and of entailment
1There are other implicational theorems that turn a relevance logic into a “somewhat rele-
vant logic,” e.g., the “mingle axiom” A →(A →A), that is closely related to K. There are
“classical relevance logics,” that include “Boolean negation” (hence permit certain irrelevance)
but conservative over their “nonclassical” fragment.
2Classical logic is, of course, familiar to many people due to its prevalence in curricula.
(See e.g., Enderton [2001] — a standard introduction in logic.)
However, nonclassical logics
appeared as early as (if not earlier than) the second decade of the 20th century, in the form of
modal logics, many-valued logics, intuitionistic logic etc. A historical survey of relevance logics
is Restall [200+]. We include historical ﬁgures and facts only for purposes of illustration and to
ﬁx some points for later reference.
3Combinatory logic was invented (independently) by Sch¨onﬁnkel and by Curry; the λ-calculi
are due to Church. We assume a certain familiarity with these logics — those aspects that are
needed for our purposes here are introduced in Hindley [1997]. Incidentally, we note that the
role of the type of K in the implicational fragment of classical logic is highlighted when that is
formalized by adding K to Peirce’s law and suﬃxing. By a result of J. 	Lukasiewicz, A →(B →A)
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

724
Katalin Bimb´o
(see Ackermann [1956], Anderson and Belnap [1962]). Their research direction
produced a wealth of mathematically and philosophically interesting results about
some of the best known relevance logics (such as T, E and R), as well as their
fragments, extensions, etc. Similar ideas emerged in other areas, for instance, in
computer science. One of the relevance logics most recently introduced (that is
also supported with an abundance of intuitive motivation) is linear logic L, which
in eﬀect adds a modality to one of the earlier relevance logics.4 Thereby, linear
logic hits a middle ground between allowing and disallowing irrelevant inferences
— by keeping track of them. The connections to mathematics, philosophy and
computer science that we mentioned above are just a small sample of the origins
and inﬂuences of relevance logics. Other disciplines including informatics, artiﬁ-
cial intelligence, linguistics, cognitive science (to mention some) are suitable areas
to use and utilize relevance logics and, perhaps, some other logics too that are
nonmonotonic (that is, they reject arbitrary additions of new premises) or that
adhere to a variable sharing property (some — e.g., the Lambek calculi — to an
even stricter one than relevance logics).
A chapter cannot cover — probably, could not even list — all the relevance
logics, let alone can it state all the theorems, metatheorems, lemmas or give their
proofs. The result of an attempt to squeeze everything about relevance logics into
one chapter would not only be foolish but most likely result in something quite
useless. Furthermore, there are comprehensive volumes and several recent survey
articles on the topic. There are two two-volume monographs: Anderson and Bel-
nap [1975], Anderson, Belnap and Dunn [1992] and Routley, Meyer, Plumwood
and Brady [1982], Brady [2003] — each being the result of collaborative eﬀorts
of several logicians over quite a few years. (Anderson et al. [1992] also contains a
bibliography.) A recent book that is primarily about the philosophical underpin-
nings of relevance logics is Mares [2004]. Handbook chapters and survey articles
include Dunn [1986] (that has been updated as Dunn and Restall [2002]), as well
as Mares and Meyer [2001] and Mares [2002].
Our aim here is to introduce and illustrate some of the motivating ideas that
lead to the formal systems called relevance logics. We also hope to give a ﬂavor of
the excitement that arises from the technical details of some proofs and from the
mathematical subtleties of certain results.5 We chose as our central example one
of the preeminent relevance logics: the logic of ticket entailment. The most recent
surveys concentrated on R (and to a lesser extent on E), thus, it seems reasonable
to bring into the foreground another well-motivated relevance logic. (Incidentally,
may then be replaced by any theorem of the form C →(A →B), including the case when A →B
is a theorem itself. Replacing A →(B →A) with A →A, however, yields only a proper sublogic
of classical logic.
4Girard [1987] seems to be the ﬁrst (English) exposition of linear logic.
5The main ideas and research approaches in relevance logics as well as the bulk of the results
mentioned here come from published articles and books by others. Needless to say that I made
an eﬀort to report the results of the original works faithfully and to provide accurate references
everywhere. Nonetheless, some lemmas, theorems etc. included here are new (as far as I know),
hence, no references to other publications are given.

Relevance Logics
725
sometimes T is technically more challenging than R.) In the last section we whip
through an array of logics and results — though we put a special emphasis on four
well-known systems — to round out the picture.
1
A PROBLEM WITH CLASSICAL “IMPLICATION”
The propositional fragment of classical logic has an undeniable splendor stemming
from its simple two-valued semantics. Classical logic is Post complete, that is, it
forms an “upper limit” of the set of potential theorems — the inclusion of any
new theorems makes classical logic inconsistent.6 However, a discrepancy between
inferences validated by classical logic and inferences considered acceptable was
known from the very beginning. Similarly, it was realized long ago that there is
a wide gap between true conditionals and “if. . . , then. . . ” sentences which are
truthfully stated.
Frege writes in his Begriﬀsschrift:
For example, let ⊢A stand for 3 × 7 = 21 and B for the circumstance
that the sun is shining. . . . There need not exist a causal connection
between the two contents.
Then, two paragraphs later he states:
The causal connection inherent in the word “if”, however, is not ex-
pressed by our signs, even though only such a connection can provide
ground for a judgement of the kind under consideration. Frege [1967,
14].
Hilbert and Ackermann practically start their textbook — which was widely trans-
lated and used for many years — with a disclaimer:
The compound sentence “if X then Y ” is not to be taken to indicate
a relation of premise to conclusion or of cause and eﬀect. Rather, the
sentence X →Y is always true if X is a false and also if Y is a true
sentence. Hilbert and Ackermann [1950, 4].
One of their examples of a true “if. . . , then. . . ” statement is: “If 2 times 2
equals 5, then snow is black.”
Of course, we are not belittling the importance of Frege’s attempt to sift out
from the so-called “traditional logic” various psychological, metaphysical and lin-
guistic factors, which were mixed up with accounts of valid patterns of inference.7
6Of course, this does not mean that a logic cannot include theorems that look like non-
theorems of classical logic (when connectives are “matched”). Indeed, there are such logics, but
they omit some of the theorems, connectives, etc. of classical logic.
7Incidentally, the only causal connections that we are to be concerned about are the logical
ones.

726
Katalin Bimb´o
Neither are we denouncing Hilbert and Ackermann, two well-known and accom-
plished logicians of the past century, though they surely must have been aware of
the connection between implications and deductions in classical logic when they
wrote the statements cited above (cf. especially 23–27). Rather, we quoted their
writings to show that they knew that classical logic does not formalize actual rea-
soning, which is, perhaps, a minor deﬁciency. It is obvious that classical logic
does not model everyday reasoning, if for no other reason because it is not wholly
unparallelled that people misstep in reasoning.8 We contend that classical logic
does not formalize idealized reasoning either (that is, reasoning when we disregard
mishaps, mistakes, errors and such), because classical logic validates some unusual
and odd inferences.9
Some might opine that classical logic, perhaps, models mathematical reason-
ing — eventually, Boole and Ackermann, and especially Hilbert, are well-known
as mathematicians (not as philosophers, linguists or psychologists). An imagined
situation showing classical logic deﬁcient as a tool in mathematical reasoning is
described in Anderson and Belnap [1975, §3]. We intend to advance an argument
leading to the same conclusion based on actual happenings. A somewhat forgotten
fact is that Cantor knew (toward the end of the 1890s) that the set theory he
invented was inconsistent (cf. Zermelo [1962, 443–451]). His argument was based
on his proof that the cardinality of a powerset is always strictly greater than the
cardinality of the set one started with, together with allowing any collection to be
a set. Cantor used various terms for “collections,” however, the realization of this
inconsistency led him to label certain multiplicities inconsistent (or absolutely in-
ﬁnite). (In the Bernays–von Neumann–G¨odel (BNG) axiomatization of set theory
these “collections” turn out to be proper classes.) A more widely known fact is that
he not only invented but also tried to prove the continuum hypothesis (CH) with
no success. (From the work of G¨odel [1938] and Cohen [1963; 1964], of course, it is
clear why Cantor could not prove GCH (or CH).) What is interesting for our pur-
poses here is to note that there is absolutely no record (as far as I know) to indicate
or allege that Cantor attempted to infer CH from the existence of “inconsistent
collections.” That is, he did not reason according to classical logic, because he did
not infer from the contradiction he discovered (which was later named “Cantor’s
paradox”) the truth of the conjecture he made (the CH). Perhaps, this is the sort of
situation which was meant by Wittgenstein when he claimed that inconsistency in
mathematics (unlike in everyday life) is harmless, because no conclusion should be
drawn from a (mathematical) contradiction. (Cf. Diamond [1976, 209, 213–220].)
There are at least two ways to look at our brief chronicle on Cantor’s paradox
as far as the pros and cons for classical logic are in question. The discovery of a
contradiction led Cantor (and then others) to seek ways to avoid that particular
8There is a vast amount of literature exhibiting that ⊃does not model natural language
conditionals or counterfactuals either.
It seems to us unnecessary to elaborate here on this
(quite obvious) claim beyond noting the fact.
9There are famous and quite amusing examples (involving guinea pigs) that show the oddities
of classical logic.
Such sentences are given, for example, by Dunn [1986, 123] as well as in
Mares [2004, §7.2].

Relevance Logics
727
contradiction — by marking certain kinds of collections as “diﬀerent” (as in BNG)
or by totally excluding them (as in ZF(C), the Zermelo–Fraenkel axiomatization of
set theory (with the axiom of choice (AC))). This approach is in accordance with
what we said about classical logic being Post complete. On the other hand, no
sane mathematician tries to draw arbitrary conclusions from contradictions. The
only “meta-conclusion” that (sometimes) seems to be drawn from a contradiction is
that that piece of mathematics is badly ﬂawed. Therefore, a calculus of implication
(better than what classical logic provides) should also preclude the conclusion of an
arbitrary proposition from a contradiction. This aspect of mathematical reasoning
— together with others that we overview in §3 — is faithfully modeled by relevance
logics.
Classically not only the inference from A ∧¬A to B is correct, in customary
notation, (1′) A ∧¬A
⊢
B, but also the conditional (1) (A ∧¬A) ⊃B is
valid. Notice that because of the rule modus ponens and of the deduction theorem
it is justiﬁed to talk about inference patterns (with ﬁnitely many premises) and
conditionals in tandem (as we did above), or to talk about just one of them in
lieu of both. As it happens, (1) and (1′) are not the only problematic conditional-
cum-inference pattern of classical logic.
(1) is one of the so-called “paradoxes
of material implication.”10
(1)–(6) are valid formulas of classical logic, which
are counterintuitive when the connective ⊃is interpreted as implication. (The
implausibility of the interpretation can be reinforced by choosing suitably disparate
sentences in place of A and B.)
(1)
(A ∧¬A) ⊃B
—
ex falso quodlibet,
(2)
A ⊃(B ∨¬B)
—
verum ex quodlibet,
(3)
A ⊃(B ⊃A)
—
positive paradox (K),
(4)
A ⊃(B ⊃B)
—
negative paradox (KI),
(5)
A ⊃(¬A ⊃B)
—
ex falso quodlibet2,
(6)
(A ⊃B) ∨(B ⊃A)
—
linearity.11
Under the “⊃is implication” interpretation (1) and (5) — in two diﬀerent forms
— state that a contradiction implies anything, while (2) states the dual.
The
positive paradox says that a sentence implies that any sentence implies it. The
negative paradox can be read as: any formula implies an identity. Perhaps, one
of the most strange classically valid formulas is (6), which says that given two
arbitrary formulas (at least) one implies the other. This formula is similar to that
expressing connectedness of a (weak) partial order. Of course, because of the two
10‘Paradox’ appears as a label for very diﬀerent sorts of phenomena.
Cantor’s, Russell’s,
Curry’s paradoxes each show a theory — naive or formalized — to be inconsistent or trivial.
The so-called “paradoxes of material implication” are more similar to Skolem’s paradox; these
refer to discrepancies between intuitions and what certain formulas really say or can express.
11Some of these labels are “traditional.” We named (4) as “negative paradox” because in the
standard formalization of recursive functions in combinatory logic KI is the Church numeral 0,
while in the modeling of truth functions K stands for truth.

728
Katalin Bimb´o
valued interpretations for classical logic, the validity of this formula is no surprise
— 2 (the smallest nontrivial Boolean algebra) is, indeed, linearly ordered.
These formulas look weird as implications, because people normally seem to
think that for an implication to be valid or for an inference to be logically cor-
rect it is inevitable that the sentences involved have some information content
in common — though this is hardly a suﬃcient condition for validity.12
If ⊃
is eliminated using the rest of the connectives and the formulas are massaged
through some theorems of classical logic, then the resulting expressions are much
less “objectionable.” However, afterward neither are they expressing inferences or
implications — as the following rewriting shows.
(i)
¬A ∨A ∨B
(iv)
¬A ∨¬B ∨B
(ii)
¬A ∨B ∨¬B
(v)
¬A ∨A ∨B
(iii)
¬A ∨¬B ∨A
(vi)
¬A ∨B ∨¬B ∨A
Essentially, either all or none of (i)–(vi) are to be accepted as valid — for instance,
depending on if somebody is or is not an intuitionist (or constructivist) by his
convictions.
We give one more example to illustrate the problem with classical “implication”
— independently of the other connectives. Our claim is that the following sentence
(when the “if. . . , then. . . ”s turned into ⊃) is true (according to classical logic) no
matter if the clauses are true or false.
(7) If the world’s steepest street is not far away from the University of Otago
and a sculpture of Burns, then the world’s steepest street is not far away
from the University of Otago and a sculpture of Burns, if I purchased two
books on logic in the bookstore of the University of Otago and I like milk
chocolate from Cadbury’s factory a few blocks from Baldwin Street.
Well, the reader might not know of my preferences in chocolate, or if I like chocolate
at all; and she or he might have no idea if I ever bought any books in the bookstore
at the University of Otago — though maybe a sympathetic reader supposes that
I bought some logic books somewhere at some earlier time. The sentence is nec-
essarily true (according to classical logic, of course), and not because the world’s
steepest street is correctly (though somewhat vaguely) located in the sentence.
Furthermore, each clause alludes to locations — the University of Otago and its
bookstore, Cadbury’s chocolate factory, Burns’s sculpture that is prominently po-
sitioned on the Octagon, and the steepest street — that are close to each other on
the map. Still it is odd what my tastes and shopping habits have to do with the
location of the steepest street of the world, and it is unclear why anybody would
state the above sentence if only not for the purpose of deceit. Assume for a minute,
even if it is unlikely at the moment, that development in Nepal leads to the open-
ing of the now really steepest street in the world, which is appropriately named
12The classical ⊃has been found problematic also from the point of view of other nonclassical
logics — for example, see Barwise [1993].

Relevance Logics
729
by the grateful Sherpas after Sir Edmund. (7) would remain true (in the sense of
classical logic), and by claiming (7) one could, perhaps, give the impression that
the steepest street is not at all in Nepal.
The above examples, hopefully, show convincingly that classical logic’s ⊃does
not formalize implication — it is way too permissive. Thus, there is ample moti-
vation to try to ﬁnd a better logic that is completely rigorous and more adequate.
2
FIRST-DEGREE ENTAILMENT
An implication is relevant if the antecedent and the consequent are appropriately
related. The case when there is no implication in the scope of another implication
in a formula is relatively straightforward.
Let the set of formulas (wﬀs) be generated by a denumerable set of propositional
variables (P = { p0, p1, . . . }) using negation (∼), conjunction (∧) and disjunction
(∨) in the usual way.13 A ﬁrst-degree formula (an fd wﬀ) is two wﬀs A and B
joined together with a binary connective →, which stands for relevant implication
or entailment. The idea then is to exclude the possibility that formulas like (1)
and (2) are theorems or valid (of course, with ⊃replaced by →and ¬ by ∼), but
to retain as much as possible from the usual properties of ∼, ∧and ∨. Indeed,
since →can only be the main connective of an fd wﬀ, the validity must depend
on the other connectives. Some relevance logics — such as B, T, E, R (and the
semi-relevant RM) — are conservative extensions of one and the same ﬁrst-degree
fragment: fde.
First-degree entailments have been characterized via normal forms, ‘coupled
trees’ and four-valued semantics — see Anderson and Belnap [1975, §§15–16],
Dunn [1976a], Dunn [1980] and Dunn [1986]. We introduce an analytic tableaux
formulation for fde.14 Analytic tableaux (also called ‘semantic tableaux’) are an
elegant and ﬂexible formalism; for classical logic analytic tableaux were introduced
and investigated in Smullyan [1968].
Signed formulas are usually deﬁned as wﬀs preﬁxed with T or F; for fde the
signs are Ti and Fi where i ∈{ 0, 1 }. To decide if A →B is a theorem of fde an
fde analytic tableau is started by putting at the top T0A, F1B. Then the tableau
is a tree with ﬁnite sets (singletons or doubletons) of signed formula occurrences
as nodes built (top-down) according to the rules
13From now on we assume that notions such as well-formed formulas (wﬀs), axioms, rules, etc.
are understood from the context (i.e., without the deﬁnitions repeated again and again). (For
the deﬁnitions of these sorts of notions (for classical logic) — see e.g., Enderton [2001].) As far
as general conventions go, A, B, C, . . . range over formulas throughout and outside parentheses
may be dropped.
14Although, perhaps, fde has not yet been formulated exactly as here, the fde tableaux are
closely related to both the normal form and the coupled tree presentations.

730
Katalin Bimb´o
Ti(A ∧B)
TiA, TiB
Ti∧
Ti(A ∨B)
TiA
TiB
Ti∨
Ti ∼A
FiA
Ti ∼
Fi(A ∧B)
FiA
FiB
Fi∧
Fi(A ∨B)
FiA, FiB
Fi∨
Fi ∼A
TiA
Fi ∼,
where i ∈{ 0, 1 }, branching is indicated by | and (as usual) we omit { and }
within the tree. We deﬁne a pair of signed formulas TiC and FjC to be conjugates
whenever i ̸= j. (Classically, TC and FC are always conjugates — there are no
indices on signs or other side conditions.)
A branch of a tableau is closed when it contains conjugates, and a tableau is
closed when all its branches are closed. Clearly, the rules shorten the formulas that
are signed; therefore, a tableau can be completed in ﬁnitely many steps, meaning
that there are no formulas in it to which a rule could be but has not yet been
applied. A ﬁrst-degree entailment A →B has a tableaux proof (or is valid) when
the tableau started with T0A, F1B is closed. We give three simple tableaux as a
quick illustration.15
T0(A ∧(C ∨∼B)),
T0(p ∨(p ∧∼p ∧q)),
T0(A ∧(∼A ∨B)),
F1((A ∧C) ∨∼B)
F1p
F1 ∼∼B
T0A, T0(C ∨∼B)
T0p
T0(p ∧∼p ∧q)
T1 ∼B
F1(A ∧C), F1 ∼B
∗
T0p, T0(∼p ∧q)
F1B
T0C
T0 ∼B
∗
T0A, T0(∼A ∨B)
F1A
F1C
∗
T0 ∼A
T0B
∗
∗
F0A
∗
The ﬁrst two tableaux are closed; they prove that (A∧(C∨∼B)) →((A∧C)∨∼B)
and (p ∨(p ∧∼p ∧q)) →p are valid ﬁrst-degree entailments. The third tableau is
complete but open, that is, (A ∧(∼A ∨B)) →∼∼B is not valid. (This formula,
with a little variation on negation, is an example of the so-called “disjunctive
syllogism” in theorem form.)
The tableaux formulation provides a particularly easy decision procedure to
check the validity of ﬁrst-degree implications. By ‘easy’, of course, we do not mean
the space-time complexity. The validity problem for the classical propositional
calculus is co-np-complete (deﬁnitely not feasible), so is it for fde. Instead, we
mean only that the description of the procedure is brief and transparent. Actually,
15Of course, if a tableau can be closed then there is no need to complete it before closing (i.e.,
compound conjugates necessarily yield propositional variable conjugates). We emphasize this in
the examples by using propositional variables only in one of them, and closing branches, that
is indicated by a ∗, as soon as possible. In order to make this chapter not too long, we rarely
include proofs, let alone full proofs; sometimes we give a more or less detailed sketch, and other
times (as now) only a hint (without emphasizing that details have been omitted). I hope that the
reader will be able to reconstruct the missing steps or will consult the references (and otherwise,
will trust me that I proved my theorems).

Relevance Logics
731
given a formula of classical logic with ⊃as its main connective one can similarly
check if the formula in question corresponds to a relevant entailment by rewriting
the two subformulas (on the left and on the right of ⊃, which is, of course, also
changed to →) into ∼, ∧, ∨formulas. (1) and (2) (after such a transcription) are
not valid ﬁrst-degree formulas.
fde shows that it is possible to formalize implication between ∼, ∧, ∨-wﬀs. More-
over, fde is robust (it has various proof systems), and stable (it has a variety of
semantics).
Algebraically, ﬁrst-degree implications give rise to De Morgan lat-
tices (pseudo-complemented distributive lattices). Moreover, 4 (the four element
lattice in which ∼has two ﬁxed points) is characteristic for fde (see Dunn [1986,
182–193]). Finally, we mention that fde has the perfect interpolation property (see
Anderson and Belnap [1975, 161]).
THEOREM 1. (Perfect interpolation)
If A →B is an fde theorem, then
there is a formula C such that C contains only propositional variables that are
common to A and B, and both A →C and C →B are fde theorems.
As it is well-known Craig’s interpolation theorem for classical ﬁrst-order calculi
(without ‘=’) had to include additional clauses to take care of the two cases when
¬A and B are theorems. A way to avoid this problem within classical proposi-
tional logic is to introduce two constants, T for “truth” and F for “falsity,” and
postulate that any wﬀ’s vocabulary contains these constants (even if the formula
itself does not) — see e.g., Smullyan [1968]. The perfect interpolation theorem
states unconditionally that if A implies B in fde then the two formulas share a
propositional variable. Of course, sharing a propositional variable, that is, shar-
ing some content which can be formally described is not a suﬃcient condition for
A →B to be a valid fd wﬀ, however, it is a necessary one. (The ﬁrst-degree
formula (A ∧(∼A ∨B)) →∼∼B above illustrates this point.)
fde has nothing to say about embedded implications (for instance, the analogues
of (3)–(5)), thus, we proceed now to higher-degree logics.
3
T — TICKET ENTAILMENT IN FOCUS
For a moment let us return to informal motivations, and let us turn back to math-
ematical reasoning. One of the famous (and as of September 2005) open problems
is the Riemann Hypothesis. Drawing an analogy with what happened to Fermat’s
Last Theorem, a notably easy to state and understand conjecture, it seems per-
fectly safe to predict that should Riemann’s Hypothesis be proven (or, even if it
seems unlikely, disproven), the proof will be complicated. Probably, there will be
lemmas, subtheorems, theorems, invocations of various established facts, etc. A
proof — even a not very complex proof — is a certain kind of reasoning, and it
is rather exceptional when the premises can be arbitrarily permuted.16 It is not
16We slightly (but intentionally) oversimplify the situation. Sometimes it is useful for purposes
of exposition (even in a rigorous mathematical proof) to state and prove the “main theorem”
ﬁrst, and then prove the lemmas that were assumed to be true. The assumptions of a lemma

732
Katalin Bimb´o
customary to insert premises into mathematical proofs unless they are used in the
proof. While (AC) had a not impeccable reputation in ZFC many authors took
care to make explicit when a lemma or theorem was proved relying on (AC) (or
any of its equivalents). Somewhat similarly Kleene [1952] ﬂags with ◦theorems
of classical logic that are not intuitionistically valid. A relatively new research
area called reverse mathematics (cf. Simpson [1991]) aims at precisely delineating
the fragment of second-order Peano arithmetic Z2 that is not only suﬃcient but
also necessary for the proof of various (so-called) “not set-theoretical” theorems of
mathematics. The observation to be made from these examples is that it is quite
reasonable to limit premises to actually used statements. Furthermore, sometimes
it makes sense to combine some of the premises together, but perhaps not cer-
tain others, then add some further premises, and in general, to proceed from the
premises to the conclusion in orderly steps. The logic of ticket entailment imposes
certain restrictions on changing the order of premises without fully disallowing
permutation.
We brieﬂy rephrase and illustrate some of the original informal motivations for
T.17 There is a distinction running across various disciplines between laws and
facts. Disregarding for a moment epistemological reservations about how laws are
discovered and justiﬁed in sciences, it is easy to recall examples of lawlike sentences
from physics, for instance. Objects dropped from a certain height above sea level
will accelerate toward the ground depending on the constant G (when some other
factors, e.g. air resistance, are ignored). As Galilei’s famous experiment proved, the
dropped objects’ mass is irrelevant. Statements of facts might be about particular
objects dropped at particular times, for example, it might be a statement about a
person performing a bungy jump in Rotorua.18 There is usually an accompanying
claim to the primacy of the laws over the facts; hence, the problem with facts that
do not abide by the laws.
From both pictures set out above we intend to extract the idea that in reasoning
it might be sensible to impose a certain, perhaps, somewhat loose ordering on the
statements involved based on their role in the reasoning.19
We introduce T, the logic of ticket entailment, step by step, and in the process
we hope to demonstrate that it is a technically versatile logic, which exhibits a
whole range of interesting features (some of) which hold of various other relevance
logics.
normally still would be listed together with that lemma, and not with some others; and probably,
the hypotheses of one lemma would not be exchangeable with those of another theorem, etc.
17The name for this logic was derived from certain philosophical considerations of Ryle. See
Anderson and Belnap [1975, 42], as well as Mares [2004, 43].
18A similar distinction between sorts of statements is drawn in many other sciences. Some
might say that even in the humanities there are laws and facts, though perhaps, the laws are not
quantitative.
19Some relevance logics mentioned in §4, for instance, R and L allow the permutation of the
premises just as classical logic does. E restricts the permutation of premises depending on if
they are implicational formulas or not, and B disallows all permutations.

Relevance Logics
733
3.1
The implicational fragment: T→
The pure implicational fragment of T looks deceptively simple — it can be axiom-
atized by four axioms, (A1)–(A4), and a rule, (R1).
(A1) A →A
(A2) (A →B) →((C →A) →(C →B))
(A3) (A →B) →((B →C) →(A →C))
(A4) (A →(A →B)) →(A →B)
(R1) A →B, A ⇒B
The notions of a proof and of a theorem are deﬁned in the usual way, that is, a
proof is a sequence of wﬀs in which each formula is an axiom or is obtained from
two earlier formulas by (R1); a theorem is any, but in particular, the last wﬀin a
proof. We call these proofs ordinary to distinguish them from more reﬁned notions
of proofs some of which we introduce below.
Notice that this deﬁnition is very broad. Although the formulation of modus
ponens (R1) might seem to suggest that in a detachment the implicational formula
comes ﬁrst, nothing actually guarantees that. Before we introduce a new notion
of a proof, which also suﬃces to obtain all the theorems of T→, we take a closer
look at the axioms. First of all, we note that the four axioms are principal type
schemes (in the Curry-style typing discipline) of some well-known combinators.
(A1) is I’s, (A2) is B’s, (A3) is B′’s and (A4) is W’s principal simple type.20
The laws vs facts distinction is engraved into the axioms. It does not seem sappy
to assume that A →A should be a law; at least the following reasoning looks safe:
if A is a fact, then we certainly may (re)state that A by appealing to (A1) and
(R1), even though the conclusion is not new, of course. (Notwithstanding, compare
this to theorem 16 (p. 751) concerning the role of the axiom (A1).) (A2) can be
interpreted to say that if A →B and C →A are laws, then the fact C should
suﬃce to conclude B. (A3) is a lot alike (A2); if A →B and B →C are laws
then given the fact A one can conclude C. (A2) and (A3) could be summarized by
saying that implication is transitive. Lastly, (A4) says that if a fact has been used
twice to obtain a conclusion, then the repetition can be disregarded in getting to
the same conclusion B.
As a ﬁrst attempt to tighten up the rather loose notion of ordinary proofs, we
could require that the major premise of modus ponens (i.e., A →B) be introduced
into the proof before the minor one (i.e., A). However, the resulting notion (that
was introduced in Bimb´o [2005a] for T→under the name “neat proof”) is still more
permissive than what we want now. The problem is that it is possible to move
around formulas within a proof — some wﬀs can be moved toward the beginning
and some wﬀs can be moved toward the end of the proof. Therefore, we introduce
further restrictions, so that proofs contained more information about the theorem
20The axioms for these and some other combinators mentioned earlier are Ix ▷x, Kxy ▷x,
Bxyz ▷x(yz), B′xyz ▷y(xz), Wxy ▷xyy.

734
Katalin Bimb´o
proven that ordinary proofs do.
The intuitive counterpart of traversing proofs
is a sharpening of the idea that a major premise, which is an “inference ticket”
licensing an inference step, should not only precede its minor pair, and further,
the minor pair of the minor pair etc., but they should come as close as possible
to each other within the proof. This vague statement about how the wﬀs are to
follow each other in a proof is made precise in the next deﬁnition.
Traversing proofs. Let P = ⟨A1, . . . , Az⟩be a sequence of wﬀs, (z ∈Z+). P
is a traversing proof if
(i) z = 1 and A1 is an instance of one of the axioms,
or
(ii) z ≥3 and P has an initial segment P1 = ⟨A1, . . . , Aj⟩and an interior
segment P2 = ⟨Aj+1, . . . , Az−1⟩(where 1 ≤j ≤z −1) such that P1 and P2
are traversing proofs, and Aj is Az−1 →Az.
A theorem is the last wﬀof a traversing proof.
The rationale behind (i) is that a proof which consists of two wﬀs — given that
(R1) is the sole rule — cannot be properly understood as a proof. A timehonored
observation is that the two premises of modus ponens cannot be identical. There-
fore, in a purported proof of length two the ﬁrst wﬀcontributes nothing to the
second’s being a theorem. (The second wﬀmust be an instance of an axiom, oth-
erwise the two formulas do not constitute an (ordinary) proof.) The idea leading
to (ii) is that the applications of (R1) — with the major premise coming ﬁrst —
might be thought of as imposing an ordered tree structure on a linear sequence
of formulas (as long as no wﬀs are used repeatedly). Then (ii) reﬂects traversing
the leaves of the proof tree from top left counter clockwise to top right. The root
corresponds to the last formula in the proof.
...................................................
.......................................................................................................................................................
.................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
...................................................
.......................................................................................................................................................
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
W
B
B′
B′
B′
B
B′
W(B(B′B′)(B′BB′))
...................................................
.......................................................................................................................................................
.................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
...................................................
.......................................................................................................................................................
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Figure 1. A combinatory term and a traversing proof
Figure 1 illustrates the similarities as well as the diﬀerences between traversing
proofs and combinatory terms. The tree on the left shows the unique formation
tree of the combinatory term W(B(B′B′)(B′BB′)). The tree on the right shows the
indices of formulas which appear in a traversing proof of the formula (A →B) →
((B →A) →(A →B)).21 The example also shows that a wﬀmay be an instance
21Finding the appropriate types for the combinators, that is, instances of the axioms (A1)–
(A4), is an easy exercise — given the combinatory term.

Relevance Logics
735
of the principal type of more that one combinator. The above wﬀis an instance
of the principal type of the combinator K in addition to being an instance of
the principal type of the combinators W(B(B′B′)(B′BB′)), B′(B′B′)W(B′B(B′B)),
W(B(B(B′B)B′)B′) and so on. Of course, (A →B) →((B →A) →(A →B)) is
not the principal type of K, which is not a theorem of T→.
Obviously, any traversing proof is an ordinary proof; less obviously, the existence
of an ordinary proof implies the existence of a traversing proof for a wﬀ.
THEOREM 2. (Sets of theorems)
A formula A has an ordinary proof if
and only if A has a traversing proof. A provable formula has ℵ0 ordinary proofs.
Tidying up an ordinary proof into a traversing proof may require deleting,
inserting and rearranging formulas.
Given a traversing proof it is suﬃcient to
choose one axiom and generate its instances to be inserted one by one as the ﬁrst
wﬀinto the proof to get ℵ0 ordinary proofs.
The set of traversing proofs is a proper subset of the set of ordinary proofs,
and in this sense traversing proofs are more restrictive, though they do not change
the set of theorems. The correspondence between combinatory terms and travers-
ing proofs provides a better grasp of T→theorems (cf. §3.4). Notwithstanding,
traversing proofs can replace the notion of ordinary proofs in other logics too, such
as E→, L→and R→(cf. §4). Thus, one can also look at the “inference ticket idea”
as a more rigorous way to analyze proofs.
Proofs are often deﬁned as derivations from an empty set of premises, thus, a
natural question is if it is possible to deﬁne deductions similarly to proofs. First of
all, we observe that if deductions in T→were deﬁned like ordinary proofs, then the
analogue of the deduction theorem would turn out to be false — trivially. How-
ever, there are various ways to deﬁne deductions (with an appropriate deduction
theorem) from traversing proofs. A not too complicated deﬁnition is as follows.
T-deductions. Let ⟨A1, . . . , Aj, B1, . . . , Bz⟩be a string of wﬀs (j, z ∈Z+) such
that (i) ⟨A1, . . . , Aj⟩is a traversing proof of Aj, and (ii) for all ⟨B2i+1, B2i+2⟩
(where i ∈Z, 0 ≤2i ≤z −2) B2i+2 is obtained by detaching B2i+1 from the
immediately preceding wﬀin the string. Then A1, . . . , Aj, B1, . . . , Bz−1 ⊢T→Bz,
that is, there is a T-deduction of Bz from A1, . . . , Aj, B1, . . . , Bz−1.
THEOREM 3. (T-deduction theorem)
If A1, . . . , Aj, B1, . . . , Bz−1 ⊢T→Bz
then there is a T-deduction of Bz−1 →Bz from A1, . . . , Aj, B1, . . . , Bz−2 or
Bz−1 →Bz is a theorem.
The proof of this theorem is practically obvious. The results of §3.4 reveal that
it is possible to deﬁne a more sophisticated notion of deduction for T→without
loosing either the deduction theorem or the relevance of deductions. A deduction
theorem for R→was proven by Church and Moh. See Dunn [1986, §1.4].
T→demonstrates that good properties of implication — such as transitiv-
ity, for instance — can be formalized without a recourse to classical logic. Al-
though we have not proven (yet) that T→is a proper sublogic of (that is, not
identical to) the “strong implicational calculus” with Peirce’s law, it could be

736
Katalin Bimb´o
proven in various ways.22
(1) For instance, there is a well-known correspon-
dence between the provability of Peirce’s law and a sequent calculus having mul-
tiple right hand sides (without restricted implication introduction on the right).
Thus, if a suitable Gentzenization can be found for T→with single right hand
side, then this can demonstrate that T→cannot prove Peirce’s law (cf. §3.2,
p. 741).
(2) Another way to argue the same point is to appeal to the corre-
spondence between combinatory terms and theorems. Every theorem of T→is a
principal type scheme of some combinator over the basis { I, B, B′, W }. For ex-
ample, K and C are not deﬁnable from this basis.23
Therefore, T→does not
prove (A →(B →C)) →(B →(A →C)) either, although it is easily seen to
be a theorem of classical logic. There is a similar correspondence between simple
types — axiom schemes — and combinatory bases, in particular, between E→and
{ I, B′, C(B(CC)(B′I)), W } and R→and { I, B, C, W } — see §4.
(3) Yet another
way to prove that T→does not collapse into classical logic is to deﬁne a semantics
that is sound for T→, but not for classical logic (cf. §3.3).
In sum, T→shows that a reasonable and rigorously formalizable notion of im-
plication need not to collapse into classical logic. Moreover, this logic has straight-
forward connections to other areas of mathematical and computational logic. One
might ask if we have lost something (beyond the connectives ∼, ∨and ∧, which
were not included in T→). Classical logic and fde are decidable (cf. p. 730), but no
similar procedure seems to exist for T→— perhaps, decidability is lost. (Unless
otherwise speciﬁed by “decidability” we mean the decidability of theoremhood, or
equivalently the decidability of validity, if applicable.) The problematic axiom is
(A4), so to speak. This axiom together with (A2) and (A3) is the one that causes
diﬃculty when one tries to deﬁne a decision procedure in a more or less direct way.
This observation is underscored by the fact that the logic T-W→is decidable (cf.
Anderson et al. [1992, §67] as well as theorem 9 below). Adding more permuta-
tion than what is contained in (A3) also helps to establish decidability: E→and
R→(which both include contraction) are decidable just as E∼
→and R∼
→are — cf.
Kripke [1959], Anderson and Belnap [1975, §13] and Dunn [1986, §§3.6–7].
Axiom (A4) may be replaced by axiom (A5), which is closely related to (A6),
the “self-distribution of implication.”
(A5) (A →B) →((A →(B →C)) →(A →C))
(A6) (A →(B →C)) →((A →B) →(A →C))
That is, the implicational fragment of ticket entailment may be deﬁned equivalently
by (R1), (A1)–(A3) and (A5). ((A6) frequently appears as an axiom of classical
logic, but it is a theorem of T→too, and so it can be added as an axiom if desired.)
(A5) and (A6) are the principal type schemes of S′ and S, respectively. The axioms
22T→is, obviously, a “sublogic” of classical logic, because (A1)–(A4) (with ⊃instead of →,
of course) are theorems of and modus ponens is a rule of classical logic.
23The axiom of C is Cxyz ▷xzy; for axioms of some other combinators (including K’s) see
footnote 20 (p. 733).

Relevance Logics
737
of these combinators are Sxyz ▷xz(yz) and S′xyz ▷yz(xz). (W is deﬁnable as
S′I, on the other hand, B(B(B′B′)(BW))B′ is S and B(BW)(BBB′) is S′.)
3.2
Intensional fragments: LT t
→, LT ◦t
→, T ◦t
→, T t
→and LT→
T→can be deﬁned as a “Gentzen-style” calculus, however, we have to take some
preparatory steps. In Gentzen’s sequent calculi LK and LJ, which formalize clas-
sical and intuitionistic predicate logics, there are connectives beyond ⊃, in partic-
ular, there is conjunction and disjunction. Furthermore, the Lindenbaum algebra
of classical logic (and also that of intuitionistic logic) is based on an implicative
lattice, (i.e., ⊃is the residual of ∧). Conjunction is commutative and a conjunc-
tion implies its conjuncts. If →were taken to be the residual of ∧then the positive
and negative paradoxes, (3) and (4), would reappear immediately. Therefore, a
structural connective in a sequent calculus must have a diﬀerent relationship to ∧
than
,
has.
The ﬁrst sequent calculus LR+ that contained a second structural connective
was introduced in 1969 by Dunn (cf. Dunn [1973]). In §3.5 we will use two struc-
tural connectives in LT ◦t
+ , however, at the moment we only introduce ; . Infor-
mally, ; corresponds to putting premises together. Unlike , , which is a polyadic
structural connective, ; is a binary structural connective. Moreover, ; is not as-
sumed to be associative or commutative. To be able to deﬁne the structural rules
appropriately we need a notion between a formula and an antecedent of a sequent.
“Bunches” of formulas will be called structures.
Structures. The set of structures, denoted by str, is deﬁned as follows.
(i) If A is a wﬀthen A ∈str;
(ii) if A, B ∈str then (A; B) ∈str.
Note that the base set of the induction is the set of wﬀs and there is no empty struc-
ture in str. (A, B, C, . . . range over (nonempty) structures everywhere.) Thus, no
empty left (or right) hand sides are allowed in our sequent calculi (unlike in LK
or LJ).
A structure can be uniquely decomposed into substructures. As a consequence,
occurrences of structures in structures can be identiﬁed unambiguously. We do
not need here detailed conventions for the identiﬁcation of arbitrary substructures
or formulas occurring in structures; we need only that such an identiﬁcation is
possible.
B[A] is the structure B in which one particular occurrence of A is singled
out.24 Additionally, we assume that this bracket notation allows the identiﬁcation
of occurrences across limited contexts such as within a rule.
Then, if C is a
structure and B[C/A] is the result of replacing the chosen occurrence of A in B
by C then the result of this replacement is also denoted by B[C] (when there is
24In λ-calculus t[ ] is sometimes used to indicate a context (or a “hole”) in the term t — which
is not very far in spirit from what is meant by B[ ].

738
Katalin Bimb´o
no risk of confusion). The notation can be applied repeatedly to a structure B;
if the structures in the brackets are all the same we simply replace the square
brackets with angle ones. That is, A⟨B⟩is the structure A in which at least one,
but possibly several occurrences of B have been ﬁxed.
For technical reasons — essentially, to make some proofs easier — we add a
constant (a zeroary connective) to the logic, that is denoted by t. Informally, t
is the truth, that is, the greatest lower bound of all theorems. t has been added
to both consecution and axiomatic calculi before (see Anderson et al. [1992, §28]),
and t is of chief importance in Gentzenizations of positive fragments of R, E, T
etc. — see Dunn [1986, §3.10].25
Sequent calculus LT t
→. Sequents (or consecutions) are formed from a struc-
ture, ⊢and a formula. LT t
→is deﬁned by the following axiom and rules.
A ⊢A I
A ⊢A
B[B] ⊢C
B[A →B; A] ⊢C
→⊢
A; A ⊢B
A ⊢A →B
⊢→
A[B; (C; D)] ⊢A
A[(B; C); D] ⊢A
B⊢
A[C; (B; D)] ⊢A
A[(B; C); D] ⊢A
B′⊢
A[(B; C); C] ⊢A
A[B; C] ⊢A
W⊢
A[B] ⊢A
A[ t; B] ⊢A
t ⊢
A[ t; t ] ⊢A
A[ t ] ⊢A
Mt⊢
A proof is a certain kind of tree (exactly as in other sequent calculi); and a
formula A is a theorem of LT t
→when t ⊢A has a proof.
The labels for the
structural rules (except, perhaps, (Mt ⊢)) are hopefully self-explanatory based on
our previous remarks.26 The subscript in the label of the rule (Mt ⊢) shows that
for this rule to be applicable two structures have to be t.
The piecemeal single cut and the multiple cut rules are as follows.
A ⊢C
B[C] ⊢A
B[A] ⊢A
cut
A ⊢C
B⟨C⟩⊢A
B⟨A⟩⊢A
cut
The two rules bear the same label, because they are equal in power.
THEOREM 4. (Cuts are equipotent)
The single and the multiple cut rule
allow the same sequents to be proven.
In the presence of (W⊢) certain proof techniques (derived from Gentzen’s proof)
fail to ensure the admissibility of single cut. However, the usual adaptation of
Gentzen’s double induction proof of the eliminability of mix fails to demonstrate
25LT t
→below is similar to the →, t-fragment of the LT ◦t
+ -W calculus of Giambrone (cf. Ander-
son et al. [1992, §67.2]). The diﬀerences, however, go beyond the obvious ones such as omitting
the extensional connectives and adding a rule for contraction.
26M is deﬁnable as WI and (following Curry) M is occasionally denoted by W∗. The axiom for
M is Mx ▷xx. Incidentally, notice that the set of combinators that have a simple type is not
closed under combinatory application, because there is no →wﬀcorresponding to M.

Relevance Logics
739
the admissibility of multiple cut in LT-W t
→. (We denote by LT-W t
→LT t
→with-
out (W⊢).)
THEOREM 5. (Admissibility of the cut)
The multiple cut rule is admis-
sible in LT t
→and LT-W t
→.
The theorem may be proven by an application of the proof technique introduced
in Bimb´o [2005b].
Corollary. (Admissibility of single cut rule)
The single cut rule is admis-
sible in LT t
→as well as in LT-W t
→.
In LK (or in LJ) all provable sequents are equivalent to formulas; not so in
LT t
→(or in LT-W t
→), because ; lacks certain properties that , has. Now we
introduce a connective that enables one to turn any structures into wﬀs, therefore,
all provable sequents into provable formulas. If the antecedent of a consecution is
left associated with t as the leftmost structure, then all the wﬀs (save t) can be
pushed across the turnstile into an implicational formula. Otherwise, the binary
connective ◦(called fusion or tensor product) can yield a formula.
Fusion added to sequent calculi LT t
→and LT-W t
→. The logics LT ◦t
→and
LT-W ◦t
→are deﬁned by adding the rules (◦⊢), (⊢◦) and (bt ⊢) to LT t
→and
LT-W t
→.27
A[A; B] ⊢C
A[A ◦B] ⊢C
◦⊢
A ⊢A
B ⊢B
A; B ⊢A ◦B
⊢◦
A[(t; B); C] ⊢A
A[t; (B; C)] ⊢A
bt⊢
The subscript in (bt ⊢) indicates that not all structures are arbitrary, in this
case only one has to be t. (bt ⊢) — even in the absence of (Mt ⊢) — causes a
problem for a Gentzen-style proof of ET. However, once again it is possible to use
four inductions to prove the admissibility of the cut rule.
THEOREM 6. (Admissibility of cut rule)
The cut rule is admissible in
LT ◦t
→and LT-W ◦t
→.
The admissibility of the cut rule has various pleasant consequences such as the
subformula property. In LT t
→, LT-W t
→, LT ◦t
→and LT-W ◦t
→this means that if
there is a proof of a sequent A ⊢A, then there is a proof such that the root sequent
A ⊢A contains all formulas (perhaps, as subformulas) that occur in a consecution
in the proof. This way of putting the subformula property emphasizes the role of
the above theorem as a cut elimination theorem (when, to begin with, the calculi
are deﬁned to include the cut rule). An inspection of the connective and structural
rules veriﬁes that any formula in the upper sequent of any rule enters the lower
sequent as a formula or a subformula; therefore, the subformula property implies
the truth of the next theorem.
THEOREM 7. (Conservativity of fusion)
LT ◦t
→and LT-W ◦t
→are conser-
vative extensions of LT t
→and LT-W t
→, respectively.
27b is a dual combinator; its axiom is x(y(zb)) ▷xyz. b does not have a →type, although it
has a ←type, viz., ((A ←B) ←(C ←B)) ←(A ←C) in an extended type assignment system.

740
Katalin Bimb´o
The inclusion of fusion makes the proof of the equivalence of sequent and ax-
iomatic calculi straightforward. The axiomatic calculi T ◦t
→and T-W ◦t
→are deﬁned
by (A1)–(A4) and (A1)–(A3), together with rules (R1)–(R5). The new rules are
(R2) ⊢A →(B →C) ⇒⊢(A ◦B) →C
(R3) ⊢(A ◦B) →C ⇒⊢A →(B →C)
(R4) ⊢A ⇒⊢t →A
(R5) ⊢t →A ⇒⊢A
If A ⊢A is a provable sequent then t ⊢A◦→A is provable too (where A◦is B
if A is B, and otherwise A◦is B◦◦C◦if A is B; C). Conversely, if t ⊢A◦→A is
provable and A is not t ◦B then A ⊢A is provable as well.
THEOREM 8. (Equivalence of consecution and axiomatic calculi)
The sequent t ⊢A is provable in LT ◦t
→(or LT-W ◦t
→) if and only if A is a
theorem of T ◦t
→(or, respectively, of T-W ◦t
→).
The proof, going from the axiomatic to the consecution calculi, is straightfor-
ward. We only point out that (Mt ⊢) is useful in proving (R1) and (R5), while
(bt ⊢) is utilized in proving (R2).
Sequent calculi sometimes can be used to establish the decidability of a logic —
more or less similarly to the proofs of the decidability of classical and intuition-
istic propositional logics. Using the equivalence of the consecution and axiomatic
calculi, together with both LT-W ◦t
→and T-W ◦t
→conservatively extending their
counterpart LT-W t
→and T-W t
→, we can state a completely straightforward de-
cidability result. (The decidability of T-W→follows from Giambrone’s theorem
for LT ◦t
+ -W — see Anderson et al. [1992, §67]. We give a sketch of a diﬀerent
proof.)
THEOREM 9. (Decidability of T-W→)
The logic T-W→is decidable.
Proof. First one proves that t is conservatively added to T-W→by the rules (R4)
and (R5). Then, from the equivalence of the logics follows that ⊢T-W t
→A →B if
and only if t ⊢LT-W t
→A →B. Since t does not occur in B, all the occurrences in
the derivation of t ⊢A →B must have been introduced by (t ⊢). Furthermore,
no (→⊢) rule application in the proof can have t ⊢C as its left premise, because
the structural rules do not allow t to be permuted into its ﬁnal position; let
alone can t ⊢C be the right premise.
Notice that LT-W t
→has not only the
usual subformula property, but a stronger one: no formula occurrences, with the
exception of occurrences of t, can disappear in a proof. Since the only remaining
role for t is to ensure that the left hand side of ⊢does not become empty, in a
backward proof search it is enough to keep one t in the sequent. This brings about
a decision procedure.
■
Parity of propositional variables in T-W→. An immediate consequence of
the strong subformula property is that any propositional variable occurring in a
theorem of T-W→occurs evenly many times.

Relevance Logics
741
This observation excludes the provability in T-W→of the formula (A4) —
which is, of course, the axiom that has been dropped — but also that of (A5) and
(A6) (s. p. 736), and of some further formulas from among those that are principal
types of combinators with duplicative eﬀect. A subclass of the theorems of T-W→
has a sharper characterization.
(Some details of the proof are in Anderson et
al. [1992, §66].)
THEOREM 10. (Mutual provability in T-W→(Martin, 1978))
If both
A →B and B →A are theorems of T-W→then A and B are the same formula.
A rather interesting question is if it is possible to deﬁne a consecution calculus
for the pure implicational part of ticket entailment without extending the set
of logical connectives, that is, without the addition of fusion and truth. (It is
possible to so Gentzenize some other relevance logics, e.g., R→and R∼
→— see
Dunn [1986, §§3.6–7].) Of course, fusion can be gotten rid oﬀat once since LT ◦t
→
is a conservative extension over LT t
→. Thus the question is simpliﬁed to if it is
possible to eliminate t. The answer — somewhat surprisingly — is yes.
First we deﬁne LT→, that is going to include some but not all of the rules of
LT ◦t
→, then we prove that it suﬃces.
Sequent calculus for implicational ticket entailment.
LT→contains
the axiom ( I ), and the rules (→⊢), (⊢→), (B ⊢), (B′ ⊢), (W ⊢) and (M ⊢) where
the last rule is the unrestricted variant of (Mt ⊢).
Cut is admissible in LT→, moreover, this can be shown (for multiple cut) by
the simple (Gentzen-style) double induction argument on the degree and rank of
the cut formula. No empty left hand sides are allowed, which suggests that we
should deﬁne A →B to be provable in LT→when A ⊢B is provable. Of course,
all theorems of T→are implicational formulas, and it is easy to prove (indeed,
parts of some previously mentioned proofs suﬃce here) that all of (A1)–(A4) are
provable in LT→. However, a diﬃculty arises if one tries in a direct way simulate
modus ponens in this sequent calculus. One would need to show that A1 ⊢A2 and
A1 →A2 ⊢B implies that B is B1 →B2 for some wﬀs B1 and B2, and moreover,
that B1 ⊢B2 is provable. Perhaps, one can ﬁnd a way to prove this claim directly
(possibly, using a cut or cuts). Of course, in T→⊢A and ⊢A →B are easily seen
to imply — due to T’s consistency — that B is B1 →B2. However, even if the
assumption that B is an implication is granted, still it has to be proven that the
provability of A1 →A2; B1 ⊢B2 implies the provability of B1 ⊢B2. It seems to us
that an argument establishing that A1 →A1 is “superﬂuous” would go through a
similar reasoning that we give below exploiting the connection between LT→and
LT t
→. In any case, what needs to be proven is not the usual match between cut
and detachment, therefore, we argue diﬀerently.
LT t
→proves exactly the same →, t-theorems as T t
→does, since T t
→is a con-
servative extension of T→(cf. Anderson et al. [1992]). For any theorem A of T→
(i.e., for any A such that ⊢T→A), ⊢T t
→A, hence, t ⊢LT t
→A. Since the cut rule is
admissible (or for the present point we should stress eliminable), there is a cut-free

742
Katalin Bimb´o
proof of this sequent in LT t
→. A is by necessity of the form B →C where neither
B nor C has t as its subformula. The proof’s last connective rule is (⊢→). Since
t is not a subformula of B →C, t must have been introduced by an application
of (t ⊢). Furthermore, due to its position in the ﬁnal sequent, t could not be
the whole A in an application of (→⊢). t plays no special role in (⊢→) steps, in
particular, t can be neither B nor the all B[B] of the (→⊢) rule, because t is not a
subformula of the theorem we are considering. Therefore, any (→⊢) step in LT t
→
can be repeated (or simulated) in LT→. Any (B ⊢) or (B′ ⊢) step can be either
repeated without t, or if t by itself is one of the structures B, C or D then the step
may be completely omitted. t cannot form by itself the duplicated structure in the
(W⊢) rule because it is not a right identity. It only remains to consider when the
(W⊢) rule could be applied because t was the whole structure B. However, after
applying (t ⊢) backwards, now (M ⊢) can be applied to yield the same sequent.
Lastly, we note that (M ⊢) is an admissible rule in LT ◦t
→, therefore, by inclusion,
it does not lead to the proof of non-theorems of T→in LT→either.
It seems to us that beyond the elegance of LT→, this consecution calculus might
be useful in obtaining further technical results about T→, since it provides a tight
grasp on sequents without the burden of extra vocabulary.
Now we turn back to LT ◦t
→to show that this is a calculus that is easy to han-
dle. LT ◦t
→and LT-W ◦t
→can be “algebraized” by deﬁning an equivalence relation
between formulas as follows. Two wﬀs A and B are equivalent whenever both
t ⊢A →B and t ⊢B →A are provable. The proof that the so deﬁned relation is
really an equivalence relation and a congruence (when the operations are “lifted”
to equivalence classes) can be easily carried out via appealing to (B ⊢), (B′ ⊢),
(Mt ⊢) and (bt ⊢). By “half” of the equivalence relation we deﬁne an ordering on
the equivalence classes as [A] ≤[B] if t ⊢A →B. From the proof that the “whole”
relation is an equivalence relation, it follows that ≤is a partial order. (Instead
of [A], [B], [C], . . . we might use the usual algebraic notation a, b, c, . . . in quotient
algebras, when it seems more convenient and there is no danger of confusion.)
Quotient algebra of LT ◦t
→. The quotient algebra of LT ◦t
→is obtained by di-
viding out the word algebra of LT ◦t
→modulo the equivalence relation, and by
deﬁning operations on the equivalence classes by the binary connectives →and ◦
as well as by adding the partial order ≤. Then the result is A
LT ◦t
→
L
= ⟨A; ≤, ◦, →, t⟩,
that is a tonoid satisfying (i)–(vii).
(i)
⟨A; ≤⟩is a poset;
(v)
(a ◦b) ◦c ≤a ◦(b ◦c);
(ii)
t ◦a = a;
(vi)
(a ◦b) ◦c ≤b ◦(a ◦c);
(iii)
a ◦b ≤c ⇔a ≤b →c;
(vii)
a ◦b ≤(a ◦b) ◦b.
(iv)
a ≤b ∧c ≤d ⇒a ◦c ≤b ◦d;
The quotient algebra of LT-W ◦t
→is alike except that (vii) does not hold.
We are not going to utilize directly A
LT ◦t
→
L
or A
LT-W ◦t
→
L
, nevertheless, it is useful
to keep (i)–(vi) and (vii) in mind when we deﬁne semantics for these logics. (For
more explicit uses of algebraic methods see Dunn and Hardegree [2001].)

Relevance Logics
743
We hope to have demonstrated on the intensional fragments that it is fruitful
— both conceptually and technically — to reﬁne and sharpen various notions,
such as proofs, sequent calculi, etc. As a result, proof techniques may have to (and
sometimes can be) amended and improved — as is the case with the admissibility
of the cut rule.
3.3
Semantics for T ◦t
→, T-W ◦t
→, T-W t
→and T→
There are various ways to interpret a logic. (For instance, in §2 we mentioned that
fde has both a four-valued and a set theoretical semantics.) For T ◦t
→we introduce
an operational semantics. These kinds of semantics are often preferred in com-
puter science, especially, when the logic interpreted is concerned with functions
or programs. However, the naturally deﬁnable operations are not always compat-
ible with the objects in the interpretation (as it happens, e.g., in the semantics
of dynamic logic). For relevance logics operational semantics were introduced by
Urquhart [1972] and also by Fine [1974]. The ﬁrst semantics we give here is not
based on a semi-lattice (as Urquhart’s), nonetheless, a binary operation on the
frame is central to the modeling of →and ◦. We incorporate into the operational
setting some ideas from a semantics for residuated groupoids by Dunn [1993].
We follow the general pattern how intensional logics (in particular, modal log-
ics) are interpreted in a set theoretical model. First, we deﬁne a frame, that is
sometimes called a model structure or simply a structure, and then — relying on
the frame — we deﬁne a model for the logic.
Operational frames for T ◦t
→. An operational frame F for the logic T ◦t
→is a
quadruple ⟨U, ⊑, ◦, ι⟩where the following conditions are true.
(o1)
⊑⊆U 2,
◦: U 2 −→U,
ι ∈U,
(o5)
α ◦(β ◦γ) ⊑(α ◦β) ◦γ,
(o2)
α ⊑α,
α ⊑β ∧β ⊑γ. ⇒α ⊑γ,
(o6)
α ◦(β ◦γ) ⊑(β ◦α) ◦γ,
(o3)
α ⊑β ⇒α ◦γ ⊑β ◦γ,
(o7)
(α ◦β) ◦β ⊑α ◦β.
(o4)
α = ι ◦α,
Informally, the frame may be conceptualized similarly to the “possible worlds”
(or relational, Kripke-style, set theoretical) semantics of modal logics. U is a pre-
ordered set of situations or information states and ι is a distinguished element of
U — the logical situation. The operation ◦is a binary operation that combines
situations according to (o3)–(o7). (The symbol ‘◦’ for this operation is chosen for
easy remembrance.) For example, when a situation is fused with the logical one
(from the right hand side) the same situation results.
In what follows we repeatedly use the notation ℘(X)↑for the set of upward
closed (increasing) subsets of (or cones on) a quasi-ordered set X. That is, given
⟨X, ⊑⟩, Y ∈℘(X)↑when Y ∈℘(X) and x ∈Y together with x ⊑y implies y ∈Y .
Also, for any Y ⊆X, Y ↑denotes the subset of X that contains all elements of Y
as well as any element above (i.e., Y ↑= { x: ∃y ∈Y. y ⊑x }). Sometimes, { x }↑

744
Katalin Bimb´o
may be abbreviated as x↑. Directed (sub)sets are a useful generalization of ﬁlters
and ideals. Let ⟨X, ⊑⟩be, again, a quasi-ordered set. Y ⊆X is downward directed
when x, y ∈Y implies that z ⊑x ∧z ⊑y for some z ∈Y .
Models for T ◦t
→. An operational model for T ◦t
→is a pair ⟨F, v⟩where F is a
frame for the logic and v is a function v: P −→℘(U)↑.28 The valuation is ﬁxed
for t by (o8) and it is extended to complex formulas by (o9) and (o10).
(o8) v( t ) = { ι }↑,
(o9) v(A ◦B) = { γ : ∃α ∈v(A) ∃β ∈v(B). α ◦β ⊑γ },
(o10) v(B →C) = { α: ∀γ(∃β ∈v(B). α ◦β = γ ⇒γ ∈v(C)) }.
Note that the semantics is more than just operational because beyond the pos-
tulated binary operation we allowed a slight relational component “to sneak into”
(o9). The valuation clauses may be stated (equivalently) using “truth” (1) and
“falsity” (0), in a perhaps, more familiar form — and without formalizing the
metalanguage. Let v′ : P × U −→{ 0, 1 } such that v′(p, α) = 1 and α ⊑β implies
v′(p, β) = 1. Then, (o8′)–(o10′) parallel (o8)–(o10).
(o8′) v′(t, α) = 1
if and only if
ι ⊑α,
(o9′) v′(A ◦B, α) = 1
if and only if
v′(A, β) = 1 and v′(B, γ) = 1 for some
β, γ such that β ◦γ ⊑α holds too,
(o10′) v′(A →B, α) = 1
if and only if
for any β for which v′(A, β) = 1 also
v′(B, α ◦β) = 1.
The valuation v is restricted to a certain subset of the powerset of the set of
situations, and it is possible to give a suﬃcient ﬁrst-order condition (as we did in
(o3)) on the pre-order and the binary operation that ensures that the extension of
the valuation to compound formulas does not change v’s co-domain.
LEMMA 11. (Heredity in T ◦t
→)
For any formula A, v(A) ∈℘(U)↑.
THEOREM 12. (Soundness of T ◦t
→)
If A is a theorem of T ◦t
→then ι ∈v(A)
in any model for the logic.
For the proof of completeness we deﬁne a canonical model (in a standard way)
building it from pieces of the logic itself. Roughly, the idea is to take theories, or
sets of formulas closed under implication with the additional property that any
two formulas are implied by some formula contained in the theory.
Canonical frame for T ◦t
→. The canonical frame Fc for T ◦t
→is deﬁned as Fc =
⟨Uc, ⊑c, ◦c, ιc⟩where the members of the four-tuple are as follows.
(o11) Uc = { α: ∀A, B(A ∈α ∧⊢A →B . ⇒B ∈α) ∧∀A, B(A, B ∈α ⇒
∃C ∈α. ⊢C →A ∧⊢C →B) },
28Recall that P is the set of propositional variables of a logic. As a rule, we suppress indexing
v (or its extension) with F assuming that context prevents confusion, and that it is understood
that without a frame, on which the model is deﬁned, v is not deﬁned at all.

Relevance Logics
745
(o12) ⊑c is the subset relation,
(o13) α ◦c β = { C : ∃A →B ∈α ∃A ∈β . ⊢B →C },
(o14) ιc = { A: ⊢t →A }.
The deﬁnition is fortunate in the sense that the canonical frame is in the class of
T ◦t
→frames.
LEMMA 13. (Canonical frame is frame)
The canonical frame Fc of T ◦t
→
is a frame for T ◦t
→.
Proof. There is a certain interest in proving this lemma, therefore, we include
a few details. First we note that ◦c is easily proved to yield upward closed sets
from similar ones. However, this is not enough since Uc contains not arbitrary
cones. Thus, let us assume that C1, C2 ∈α ◦c β where α, β are downward directed
upward closed sets of formulas. By the deﬁnition of ◦c we obtain ∃B1 →A1 ∈
α ∃B1 ∈β. ⊢A1 →C1 as well as ∃B2 →A2 ∈α ∃B2 ∈β. ⊢A2 →C2. The
inductive hypothesis gives ∃D ∈α. ⊢D →(B1 →A1) ∧⊢D →(B2 →A2)
and for β, ∃E ∈β. ⊢E →B1 ∧⊢E →B2.
Using (A3) and (A2) we get ⊢
(D →(B1 →C1)) →(D →(E →C1)). On the other hand, by two applications
of (R1) to (A2) we have ⊢(D →(B1 →A1)) →(D →(B1 →C1)). Then, by
detachment from an instance of (A2) (or (A3)) together with the deﬁnition of Uc
we get ⊢D →(E →C1). Alike steps give ⊢D →(E →C2). These, respectively,
amount to ⊢D ◦E →C1 and ⊢D ◦E →C2 by (R2). Also, E →D ◦E ∈α because
D ∈α, hence, D◦E ∈α◦c β. Then, by introducing conjunctions and an existential
quantiﬁer, we get ∃G ∈α ◦c β. ⊢G →C1 ∧⊢G →C2 as had to be shown.
■
To show that the logic is complete we need a suitable valuation on Fc.
Canonical valuation. The canonical valuation h is deﬁned as
(o15) h(A) = { α: α ∈Uc ∧A ∈α }.
THEOREM 14. (Completeness of T ◦t
→)
If A is not a theorem of T ◦t
→then
there is model for the logic such that the logical situation is not in v(A), (i.e., ⊬A
implies ι /∈v(A) in a model for T ◦t
→).
First, one has to prove that the canonical valuation is indeed a valuation and
this can be proven by induction on the structure of formulas. It is useful to note
the step of the previous proof that we detailed as well as that any principal cone
is a theory satisfying the additional condition of downward directedness. Second,
h has to be proven not to validate any non-theorems.
The canonical model for T ◦t
→can also be used to demonstrate that T→is not
the implicational fragment of classical logic (as we hinted at on p. 736).
Adjusting the semantics for T-W ◦t
→and T-W t
→. The connection between
the combinatory axioms for B, B′ and W, on the one hand, and (o5)–(o7), on
the other, probably, does not require extra arguing.
Indeed, as expected, by

746
Katalin Bimb´o
omitting (o7) we get a frame for T-W ◦t
→, and also for T-W t
→.
Based on the
proofs of soundness (theorem 12), of the canonical frame lemma (lemma 13) and
of completeness (theorem 14) soundness obtains for these logics and completeness
obtains for T-W ◦t
→. However, a complication is caused by downward directedness
in a proof of the canonical frame lemma for T-W t
→.
The canonical frame for T-W ◦t
→and T-W t
→can be based on a set of situations
Uc that is deﬁned as follows.
(o16) Uc = { α: ∀A, B(A ∈α ∧⊢A →B. ⇒B ∈α) }.
Then soundness and completeness holds for both logics.
We noted earlier that adding ◦as another binary connective gives a certain
ﬂexibility to go back and forth between provable sequents and provable formulas in
a consecution calculus. Residuation is a plus in the interpretation too. There seems
to be no straightforward way to prove lemma 13 for T t
→without the canonical
situations being downward directed objects, and there seems to be no way to prove
that ◦c yields downward directed cones. Incidentally, there is a further subtlety
here. It is not that unusual when the (standard) canonical frame of a nonclassical
logic is not in the class of frames on which the logic is sound, because some frame
condition is not satisﬁed by the (standard) canonical frame.
Nevertheless, the
canonical model is a model for the logic. (As an example take G, the modal logic
of provability, that is K together with the L¨ob axiom □(□A ⊃A) ⊃□A. An
analysis of the canonical frame of G is in Boolos [1995, Ch. 6].) In case of T t
→,
the “canonical model” (so-called) in fact is not a model for the logic.29 Certainly,
one can claim that this shows — or at least strongly suggests — that the language
of the pure implicational fragment of ticket entailment is too impoverished in its
expressive power. However, another possible view is that the usual Hilbert-style
proofs (what we called “ordinary proofs” at some point) do not provide suﬃcient
information about the theorems they prove, and perhaps, we do not (yet) have a
good understanding of the purely implicational theorems independently of some
additional information.
The semi-lattice semantics for T→is due to Urquhart (see Anderson et al. [1992,
§47.3]). It is related to a diﬀerent formalization of the pure implicational fragment
of ticket entailment. Therefore, before we outline the semi-lattice semantics we
recall the natural deduction formulation of T→. Actually, T→was ﬁrst formulated
as a Fitch-style natural deduction system by Anderson [1960]. FT→is deﬁned like
the Fitch-style systems for E and R, but with some further restrictions. (For a
detailed exposition of FT→together with the proof of its equivalence to T→see
Anderson and Belnap [1975, 42–50].)
A subproof may contain wﬀs subscripted with ﬁnite subsets of Z+ and subproofs;
so do proofs. Proofs are ﬁnite objects — just as in axiomatic calculi. The ﬁrst item
in a proof or subproof is a hypothesis which is a formula indexed with a singleton
set that contains a positive integer which has not yet occurred in the proof and
29To be precise, the present author could not ﬁnd a way to prove that to be a model.

Relevance Logics
747
greater than all preceding numbers. Beyond this rule, which allows one to begin
a proof or a subproof, there are four other rules.
(i) Any wﬀcan be repeated within a subproof without changing its index set.
(ii) Any wﬀof the form A →B can be reiterated into a subproof with the same
index set.
(iii) If A →Bα and Aβ occur in a subproof, and max(α) ≤max(β), then Bα∪β
can be inserted into the subproof by →elimination.
(iv) If Aα occurs within a subproof started with hypothesis B{ z } and z ∈α
(z ∈Z+), then B →Aα−{ z } can be inserted into the preceding subproof by
→introduction.
A formula A is provable in FT→if there is a proof of A∅.
There are some simpliﬁcations of the above natural deduction system that do
not change the set of theorems. For example, any instance of any theorem (already
proven in another proof) can be inserted into a proof with the index ∅. (Note that
the proviso “already proven” excludes circular proofs.) Requiring the hypotheses
to be indexed by consecutive (increasing) numbers starting with 1 is a trivial,
but convenient modiﬁcation. Similarly, a transitivity rule (v) could be added to
shorten proofs.
(v) If A →Bα and B →Cβ occur in a subproof then A →Cα∪β can be inserted
into the subproof by transitivity.
It is easy to demonstrate that this rule is derivable, because the types of B and B′
are, of course, provable, hence their appropriately relabeled proofs (or simply their
appropriate instances indexed with ∅) can be inserted into subproofs whenever
needed.
A more signiﬁcant modiﬁcation is to dispense with all the subproofs.
Then the reiteration rule, which is the only rule essentially relying on subproofs,
becomes superﬂuous due to the condition on the indices in (iii) — the so-called
“ticket restriction.” (The last observation is part of the proof of the equivalence
of FT→to T→by Anderson and Belnap [1975, 45–46].)
Omitting subproofs,
however, forces a certain carefulness with →introductions.
Namely, all these
steps have to be made in decreasing order of the elements of the index set (after
all hypotheses have been introduced).
It is rather easy to prove (A →B) →((B →A) →(A →B)) using FT→“from
scratch,” that is, without relying on the combinators we provided earlier. Finding a
Hilbert-style proof without the help of the combinators is much more complicated.
This illustrates that FT→has some advantages over T→, especially, when it comes
to practical proof search.30 The index sets, while suﬃce for the purpose of deﬁning
an adequate proof system for the implicational fragment, make the combination
of premises look simpler than sometimes desired.
30Natural deduction systems for E and R and some other related logics are overviewed in An-
derson and Belnap [1975, §27.2]. Individual quantiﬁcation for a wide range of natural deduction
systems is introduced in Brady [1984]; propositional quantiﬁcation is covered in Anderson et
al. [1992, esp. §35.1].

748
Katalin Bimb´o
Semi-lattice semantics for T→(Urquhart, 1992). A model M for T→is
a ﬁve-tuple ⟨U, ∨, ⊥, R, v⟩where the members satisfy the following conditions.
(s1) ∨: U 2 −→U,
⊥∈U,
R ⊆U 2,
v: wﬀ−→℘(U),
(s2) ⟨U, ∨, ⊥⟩is a join semi-lattice with a bottom element,
(s3) R is a proto-order, that is, Rαβ ∧Rβγ. ⇒Rαγ,
(s4) R⊥α,
(s5) Rαβ ⇒R(α ∨γ)(β ∨γ),
(s6) v: P −→℘(U),
(s7) v(A →B) = { α: ∀β(Rαβ ∧β ∈v(A). ⇒α ∨β ∈v(B)) }.
A formula A is valid when in any model M for T→⊥∈v(A).
The soundness may be proven straightforwardly making use of the frame condi-
tions. The completeness can be proven in two steps, ﬁrst, constructing a canonical
model from FT→and then establishing the equivalence of FT→and T→(cf. An-
derson and Belnap [1975, §6]). For the purposes of the deﬁnition of the canonical
model it is helpful to think of the index sets as dependency sets, that is, the in-
dices referring to preceding formulas in the proof from which the wﬀhas been
derived. A theorem then is a wﬀthat does not depend on any wﬀ. Uc is the set
of all ﬁnite sets of indexed wﬀs, with ∅the least element. Rcαβ holds whenever
∀Ai ∈α ∃Bj ∈β. max(i) ≤max(j) or α = ∅(where max(i) is the greatest integer
in i (if i ̸= ∅), otherwise 0). Conditions (s1)–(s5) are satisﬁed, thus, it remains to
deﬁne vc. α ∈vc(A) iﬀthere is a proof of A from α. (A proof of A from α is a
sequence of indexed formulas ending with A such that (i) each indexed formula is
in α, or a theorem of T→indexed with ∅, or obtained by →elimination, and (ii)
A depends on all members of α.)
The semi-lattice semantics and the Fitch-style natural deduction system are
conducive to considering the connection between combinators and provable wﬀs
more closely.
3.4
B, B′, W, I combinators — a code for T→theorems
We started this chapter by mentioning certain connections between the positive
implicational logic (of Hilbert), a fragment of classical logic, and combinators as
well as a similar connection between the implicational fragment of R and certain
(other) combinators (cf. also Anderson et al. [1992, §71]). We pointed out that T→
is related to I, B, B′, W (or I, B, B′, S′). Now we state the connection more precisely.
A characterization of terms that can be abstracted using a I, B, B′, W bracket ab-
straction algorithm was ﬁrst given by Helman [1977]. We recall a version of the
notion of hereditary right maximal terms and a theorem that allows us to further
reduce the set of inhabitants of the simple types of these terms. Then, we mention
the result that T→may be formalized using the rule condensed detachment, which
is reminiscent of, but not the same as, modus ponens.

Relevance Logics
749
The simple type schemes of S and K with modus ponens provide an axiomatiza-
tion for the positive implicational fragment of classical logic (which coincides with
the implicational fragment of intuitionistic logic, i.e., H→). Traversing proofs may
replace ordinary proofs in the positive implicational fragment of classical logic too.
It is easy to see that if A is a theorem (of H→) then there is a combinatory term
built from S and K such that choosing appropriate instances of the axiom schemes
and interpreting combinatory application as modus ponens the combinatory term
represents (the proof of) the theorem A. This observation can be made precise by
using Curry types for combinators and for variables in a type assignment system
(cf. e.g., Hindley [1997]). If the assignment τ : A is provable, then the combinatory
term τ has A as its simple type. A combinatory term has a unique formation tree
and this tree corresponds to the natural deduction style proof tree of τ : A in the
type assignment system (assuming the minimally necessary consistent context).
In the case of H→any theorem A has an inhabitant, a combinatory term τ, such
that τ : A is provable, moreover, any wﬀB for which τ : B is provable, is a sub-
stitution instance of A. In other words, every theorem is the principal type of an
S, K combinator.
Of course, not all combinatory terms over { S, K } are typable, which means that
certain formation trees do not encode any proofs. To see what causes the problem
one could ﬁrst think of Church types for combinators and consider self-application.
KA→(B→A)KA→(B→A) clearly yields no implicational formula. However, KK (with
Curry types) encodes a traversing proof of A →(C →(B →C)), which is a
— somewhat odd looking — theorem of classical logic (with ⊃s instead of →s).
Nevertheless, the idea that some terms of the form ττ are not typable is fruitful
for demonstrating that certain combinatory terms are not typable (with simple
types).
While combinators stand for sets of formulas, variables are limited to
singletons (in consistent contexts), hence xx is simple typeless. Thus, for instance,
the combinator S(SKK)(SKK) does not have a corresponding pure implicational
formula. (The connection between the line of reasoning we sketched and this term
is probably obvious, despite the fact that the combinator itself does not contain a
subterm of the form ττ.) In general, it is neither necessary nor suﬃcient for simple
typelessness that a term is of the form ττ. Famously, the combinator WI (i.e., M)
does not have a simple type (though it has an intersection type). Another example
of a combinatory term without a simple type is W(BBB′). The question if a term
has a type is decidable and an algorithm can be deﬁned to search for a simple
type, moreover, for the principal one. In combinatory logic such an algorithm is
called the principal type search algorithm (cf. Hindley [1997, 3E]).
The combinators S and K together have the remarkable property that they
constitute a combinatorially complete basis. In other words, if there is a term
τ built from (some of the) variables x1, . . . , xz (for some z ∈Z+) then there is
a combinator C containing (solely) S and K such that Cx1 . . . xz ▷τ. In other
words a bracket abstraction deﬁnable using these two combinators can simulate
the abstraction of the λK-calculus.31
Church’s λI-abstraction limits the set of
31The relationships between combinatory logics and λ-calculi (the detailed exploration of which

750
Katalin Bimb´o
well-formed terms to those that do not contain any vacuous abstraction. A bracket
abstraction deﬁnable using the combinators I, B, C, S, which correspond to R→, is
like the abstraction of the λI-calculus. In other words, if τ is a term that contains
all variables x1, . . . , xz (z ∈Z+), then there is an I, B, C, S combinator C with arity
z such that Cx1 . . . xz ▷τ.
Although B′ may be deﬁned as CB, and so, obviously, includes some per-
mutation, C is not deﬁnable from the basis { I, B, B′, S′ } (or equivalently, from
{ I, B, B′, W }). The set of terms that can be abstracted by an algorithm using
these combinators was ﬁrst characterized by Helman [1977]. We give a version of
the deﬁnition of HRMz-terms that is suitable for our purpose here.
Hereditary right maximal terms. Let ⟨x1, . . . , xz, . . .⟩be a denumerable se-
quence of variables.
We deﬁne in parallel the index of a term (denoted by a
subscript), and the dependency set of a term, denoted by a superscript as follows.
(t1) C{ 0 }
0
when C ∈{ I, B, B′, W },
(t2) y{ i }
i
when y is xi,
(t3) M α∪β
i
when M is N α
j P β
k and i = max(j, k).
M α
z is a hereditary right maximal term with variables up to and including xz (i.e.,
M α
z ∈HRMz, where z ∈Z+) if (t4) and (t5) hold.
(t4) k ≥j for all complex subterms N γ
j P β
k of M α
z if M is complex,
(t5) α = { 0, 1, . . . , z } or α = { 1, . . . , z }.
HRMz-terms and I, B, B′, W combinators are tightly connected.
The set of
HRMz-terms is closed under reduction. As a consequence, in the special case when
a combinator (built from these combinators) is applied to (suﬃciently many) vari-
ables subscripted with increasing positive integers, each reduction step yields an
HRMz-term. If the term has a normal form, then that term is an HRMz-term too.
On the other hand, given any HRMz-term τ, there is a combinatory term C built
from I, B, B′, W that is a z-ary function term producing τ, that is, Cx1 . . . xz ▷τ.
The next lemma (except ‘principal’) follows from the existence of traversing
proofs, for instance.
LEMMA 15. (T→theorems and HRMz-terms)
If A is a theorem of T→
then there is an I, B, B′, W combinator E such that A is the principal type scheme
of E; where the arity of Ez (z ∈Z+), is the number of A’s antecedents. Further,
Ex1 . . . xz has a normal form which is an HRMz-term too.
Of course, there are inﬁnitely (ℵ0) many HRMz-terms for any z. Furthermore,
given a theorem A of T→, E in general, is not unique. The formula (A →B) →
is outside of the scope of this chapter), are more intricate than this broad statement might suggest.
There are various relations between combinatory terms (e.g., weak reduction (▷), weak equality,
strong reduction etc.), between λ-terms (e.g., β-reduction, βη-equality, etc.), and “the” bracket
abstraction algorithm may be deﬁned in more that one way.

Relevance Logics
751
((B →A) →(A →B)), which was an example above, has over 20 inhabitants in
normal form, each having the wﬀas its principal type scheme.
The following theorem provides a way to limit the number of potential inhab-
itants.32 (Note that the choice of the particular combinatory basis is essential in
this theorem.)
THEOREM 16. (I-free HRMz-terms (Bimb´o, 2005))
If A is a theorem of
T→then it is either of the form B →B (that is, a type of I), or there is a
combinatory term E in normal form over the basis { B, B′, W } such that A is a
type of E.
The idea behind limiting the set of inhabitants for a type is that this may lead
to a solution of the decidability problem of the logic. Of course, it is decidable
if a combinatory term τ can be assigned the type A.
(For instance, ﬁrst one
can ﬁnd the principal type scheme (if any) of τ, then it is easy to check if A
is a substitution instance.) However, the “converse” problem is in general not
known to be decidable. That is, no algorithm is known that decides if an arbitrary
simple type has an inhabitant among the combinators over a given combinatory
basis. Therefore, limiting the set of potential inhabitants is clearly advantageous
for solving the decidability problem of an implicational logic.
We devote the second part of this section to a brief outline of D-completeness
— a proof theoretical property possessed by T→(formalized as (A1′)–(A4′) with
rule D, cf. theorem 17), however, not by T-W→(formalized similarly but without
(A4′)).
Early on (in the ﬁrst decades of the 20th century) classical logic was typically
formalized with a rule of substitution included. This rule — which is not completely
unlike the substitution rule in predicate logic or λ-calculus, and completely like
substitution in combinatory logic — allows uniform substitution of wﬀs for propo-
sitional variables. (For instance, (p1 →p2) →((p2 →p3) →(p1 →p3))[p4 →
p2/p2, p2/p3, p3/p1] is (p3 →(p4 →p2)) →(((p4 →p2) →p2) →(p3 →p2)).)
Substitution preserves theoremhood or validity (except in a few exotic logics).
Nowadays, usually axiom and rule schemes are used in the formalization of clas-
sical and nonclassical logics; this modiﬁcation can be thought of as limiting sub-
stitution to the axioms and rules. (A perhaps useful analogy is the formulation of
classical ﬁrst-order logic without the rule of universal generalization, but with the
axioms replaced by the sets of their universal closures.) Another way (that via
schemes) “to get rid oﬀ” the rule of substitution in a purely implicational calcu-
lus is to build in a certain amount of substitution into the rule of modus ponens.
Combining rules into new ones may lead to interesting new results (even if some
resulting rules are perhaps not “very natural”). A relevant example is the modiﬁed
implication introduction rule in R→which is helpful in showing decidability (see
Dunn [1986]).
32For the proof of this theorem as well as for an application of the theorem see Bimb´o [2005a].

752
Katalin Bimb´o
The rule of condensed detachment allows just “the right amount” of substitu-
tion in the two premises to yield a principal type.33 Then, an interesting question
is if an implicational logic formalized by axiom schemes and modus ponens can
be equivalently formalized by axioms that are instances of the schemes and con-
densed detachment, that is, if the axiomatization is D-complete. ‘Equivalently’, of
course, means that the sets of theorems in the two calculi are the same. In a rather
trivial sense any implicational logic, that has an axiomatization with modus po-
nens, can be made D-complete. (First, take the theorems as axiom schemes with
detachment, then take the theorems as axioms with condensed detachment.) The
equivalence of the sets of theorems is immediate, because the rule of condensed
detachment is a derivable rule in any logic that includes modus ponens and the
rule of substitution.
A slightly diﬀerent notion of D-completeness is even more interesting. A logic
is D-complete if it can be axiomatized by ﬁnitely many axioms and the rule of
condensed detachment. (This deﬁnition attaches D-completeness to a logic as a
set of theorems rather that a particular axiomatization. Thus an axiomatization
of a logic may be D-incomplete, even though the logic is D-complete.) The logics
deﬁned by (A1) and (R1) and by (A2) and (R1) have been conjectured to be
D-incomplete (in both senses).
Relettering wffs. Formulas are ﬁnite and card(P) = ℵ0. Therefore, it is im-
mediate that any wﬀhas denumerably many substitution instances. Moreover,
any wﬀA has ℵ0 instances produced by substitutions σ (where σ: P −→P) that
satisfy (rl) too.
(rl) pi ̸= pj ⇒σ(pi) ̸= σ(pj) whenever pi, pj occur in A.
Given such a substitution σ, the formula σ(A) that is the result of applying σ to
A (where σ is recursively extended to complex wﬀs), is called a relettering or an
alphabetic variant of the wﬀA.
The “/”-notation, that we illustrated above, omits all pi/pis and all A/pis if
pi does not occur in the aﬀected wﬀ; however, substitutions are formally total
functions on P.
A relettering is just what the term says: σ may change the
propositional letters of a wﬀto new ones, however, it may not identify them.
(Reletterings may be thought of in more familiar terms as permutations on a
(ﬁnite) subset of propositional variables; however, σ may reletter a wﬀwithout
being injective on its whole domain.) Since formulas are ﬁnite objects, any two
formulas have alphabetic variants that do not share any variables.
Most general common instance. Given two formulas A and B without a
shared propositional variable, their most general common instance (mgci) results
from substitutions σ1 and σ2 such that (c1) and (c2) hold.
33The rule of condensed detachment was invented by C. A. Meredith in the late 1950s — cf.
Lemmon et al. [1969], Meredith and Prior [1963].

Relevance Logics
753
(c1) σ1(A) = σ2(B),
(c2) ∀σ3, σ4(σ3(A) = σ4(B) ⇒∃σ5, σ6. σ5(σ1(A)) = σ3(A) ∧σ6(σ2(B)) = σ4).
Without loss of generality, we may take any reletterings of A and B and any
σ1, σ2 as long as they produce an mgci. Therefore, A and B either have no mgci
or they have ℵ0 many mgcis.
Informally, an mgci for a pair of wﬀs is a formula that is a substitution instance
of both, and furthermore, any other wﬀthat is a common substitution instance
of the two formulas is a substitution instance of the mgci. From the deﬁnition it
is obvious that any two mgcis are substitution instances of each other; then from
the fact that no propositional variable is a substitution instance of an implication
and that a substitution is a function it follows that mgcis are alphabetic variants
of each other. (This outlines the essence of the uniﬁcation theorem.)
Condensed detachment originally emerged as an abbreviation in writing out
proofs, especially proofs demonstrating that fewer and shorter axioms suﬃce for
some already known calculus. The condensed detachment of B from A is denoted
by DA B in a preﬁx style notation, which is like KA B for the conjunction and
CA B for the implication of A and B. However, it should be noted that D is not a
connective and DA B is not a wﬀ. One way to actually, apply rule D is to generate
a set of equations from the premises and solve them. This method became known
as uniﬁcation and has been used in theorem proving programs.
Condensed detachment may be formulated at least in two diﬀerent ways. One
places an emphasis on an algorithm that produces a resulting formula (or termi-
nates with nil), the other formalizes the idea behind the rule that no unneeded
substitutions are made in the premises of the detachment.
Condensed detachment, I. The condensed detachment of two formulas A →B
and C, which is either a wﬀor nil, is derived as follows.
(d1) Choose alphabetic variants of A →B and C, let us say σ1(A →B) and
σ2(C) that have no variables in common,
(d2) choose an mgci of σ1(A) and σ2(C) (if there is one), let us say, σ3(A),
(d3) output σ3(B) if (d1) is successful, otherwise, output nil.
The above description intended to “imitate” an algorithm (when it is understood
that alphabetic variants and mgcis can be generated by algorithms), hence ‘choose’
may be read as ‘generate the next’ given some arbitrary but ﬁxed ordering of
variables. However, for theoretical (rather that implementational) purposes it is
convenient to suppose that in (d1) and (d2) arbitrary alphabetic variants may be
picked.
The next deﬁnition of condensed detachment is “nonalgorithmic,” but it pro-
vides a better grasp of some properties of the resulting formula. (ℓ(A) is the length
of the wﬀA.)

754
Katalin Bimb´o
Condensed detachment, II. The condensed detachment of two formulas A →
B and C is a σ1(B) if (d4) is true for some σ1, σ2 (otherwise, it is nil), where σ1
and σ2 also satisfy (d5) and (d6).
(d4) σ1(A) = σ2(C),
(d5) ∀σ′
1, σ′
2. σ′
1(A) = σ′
2(C) ⇒ℓ(σ1(B)) ≤ℓ(σ′
1(B)),
(d6) ∀σ′
1, σ′
2. σ′
1(A) = σ′
2(C) ⇒(ℓ(σ′
1(B)) ≤ℓ(σ1(B)) ⇒∃σ′′
1. σ′′
1(σ1(B)) = σ′
1(B)).
(d4) ensures that A and C have a common instance. (d5) states that σ1(B) is one
of the shortest substitution instances obtained from a uniﬁer of A and C. Lastly,
(d6) says that σ1 keeps as many propositional variables in B distinct as possible.
THEOREM 17. (T→is D-complete (Meyer and Bunder, 1988))
All the-
orems of T→are principal types of { I, B, B′, W } combinators. That is, replacing
(A1)–(A4) by
(A1′) p0 →p0
(A2′) (p0 →p1) →((p2 →p0) →(p2 →p1))
(A3′) (p0 →p1) →((p1 →p2) →(p0 →p2))
(A4′) (p0 →(p0 →p1)) →(p0 →p1)
and taking rule D instead of (R1), all the theorems of T→are provable.
An informal rendering of the role of the last three axioms is that (A2) and (A3)
are needed to get to complex formulas from propositional variables, while (A4)
can force the identiﬁcation of propositional variables.
Other D-complete logics include R→and E→, as well as the implicational
fragments of intuitionistic and classical logics.
On the other hand, (A1)–(A3)
with (R1) (an axiomatization of T-W→) is not D-complete, though T-W→is. It
is possible to deﬁne inﬁnitely many D-complete logics, each strictly weaker that
T→via essentially “hiding” a certain amount of contraction in instances of A →A
without postulating (A4) itself (s. Megill and Bunder [1996]).
Incidentally, theorem 16 (about the I-free HRMz-terms) in a sense is the “oppo-
site” of theorem 17. Instead of stating that for any theorem there is a combinator
that has the formula as its principal type, that is, each theorem has its “own
scape-goats,” so to speak, theorem 16 practically omits one of the combinators in
lieu of having certain theorems merely as substitution instances of a principal type
of a combinator. The normal form restriction that is indispensable in the proof
shrinks the set of inhabitants even further.
3.5
Positive fragment of ticket entailment: LT ◦t
+ and T ◦t
+
In fde there are no embedded implications, but fde contains two usual extensional
connectives: conjunction and disjunction (cf. §2). In the intensional fragments
these two connectives are not included (cf. §§3.1–3.3). Now we add the two exten-
sional connectives to the intensional fragments. Compounding these parts can be

Relevance Logics
755
motivated — beyond the inherent logical interest — by considering a wider range
of inferences than before. We argued that a way of putting together premises (by
◦), which is more restricted than the “usual” one (by ∧), is often reasonable and
sometimes outright desirable. But there are other natural patterns of reasoning,
some of which are more lax with respect to ordering and counting the premises,
and perhaps, are better modeled using ∧.
Conjunction and disjunction distribute over each other in classical logic and so
do they in fde. To extend LT ◦t
→with ∧and ∨one could think of adding the so-
called “structure-free” rules for these connectives (cf. Belnap [1993]). These rules
allow one to prove all the formulas that express the usual properties of ∧and ∨
except distributivity. The proof of distributivity requires some kind of contraction,
permutation and thinning rules on the left in sequent calculi with a single right
hand side. Given the connection between the structural connective ; and fusion ◦
the addition of exchange and weakening is not feasible; and the lack of associativity
of ; is likely to cause further problems. Therefore, we adopt the approach that
was invented for R ◦t
+ (see LR+ in Dunn [1973] and Dunn [1986]) that postulates
two structural connectives (cf. p. 737). The sequent calculus LT ◦t
+ -W — due to
Giambrone (cf. Anderson et al. [1992, §67.2]) — is similar to our LT ◦t
+ without
(W ⊢) (i.e., to LT-W ◦t
+ ), but the two calculi are not exactly the same.
In the classical sequent calculus of Gentzen [1935] the comma , corresponds to
∧or ∨depending on side. We add this structural connective to the previously
introduced calculi (but keep them single right sided). Thus, in LT ◦t
+ there are two
structural connectives and the notion of stuctures is modiﬁed from the previous
one (cf. p. 737).
Extensional and intensional structures. The set of structures, denoted by
str, is the least set deﬁned inductively as follows.
(i) If A is a wﬀthen A ∈stri and A ∈stre;
(ii) A ∈str ∧B ∈str ⇒(A; B) ∈stri;
(iii) ∀z∈Z+
i≥2 Ai ∈str ⇒A1, . . . , Az ∈stre;
(iv) stri ⊆str ∧stre ⊆str.
In words, formulas are the base set for both extensional and intensional struc-
tures; by (iii) , acts like a polyadic operation on structures. (ii) is exactly as
before, that is, ; combines two structures into an intensional structure.
Sequent calculus LT ◦t
+ . A consecution is a structure followed by ⊢and a
formula. The axiom and rule schemes are ( I ), (→⊢), (⊢→), (◦⊢), (⊢◦), (B ⊢),
(B′ ⊢), (W⊢), (t⊢), (bt ⊢) and (Mt ⊢) together with the following rules.
A[A] ⊢C
A[A ∧B] ⊢C
∧1⊢
A[B] ⊢C
A[A ∧B] ⊢C
∧2⊢
A ⊢A
A ⊢B
A ⊢A ∧B
⊢∧
A[A] ⊢C
A[B] ⊢C
A[A ∨B] ⊢C
∨⊢
A ⊢A
A ⊢A ∨B
⊢∨1
A ⊢B
A ⊢A ∨B
⊢∨2

756
Katalin Bimb´o
A[B] ⊢A
A[B, C] ⊢A
Ke⊢
A[B, C] ⊢A
A[C, B] ⊢A
Ce⊢
A[B, B] ⊢A
A[B] ⊢A
We⊢
Notions such as proofs, provable sequents, cut rules are deﬁned as before. Note
that this calculus (similarly to LT ◦t
→) has the property that all provable sequents
correspond to provable formula(s). The next theorem is provable like theorem 6.
THEOREM 18. (Admissibility of cut rule in LT ◦t
+ )
The cut rule is ad-
missible in LT ◦t
+ .
The previous Hilbert-style calculus can be extended with conjunction and dis-
junction as follows.
Positive ticket entailment axiomatized. The axiomatic calculus T ◦t
+ is de-
ﬁned as an expansion of T ◦t
→by axioms (A7)–(A13) and a rule (R6).
(A7) (A ∧B) →A
(A8) (A ∧B) →B
(A9) ((C →A) ∧(C →B)) →(C →(A ∧B))
(A10) A →(A ∨B)
(A11) B →(A ∨B)
(A12) ((A →C) ∧(B →C)) →((A ∨B) →C)
(A13) (A ∧(B ∨C)) →((A ∧B) ∨(A ∧C))
(R6) A, B ⇒A ∧B
Proofs can be deﬁned as ordinary proofs were deﬁned above — with the incorpo-
ration of the new axioms and rules; a theorem is a wﬀin a proof. Incidentally, it
is interesting to observe that (R6) is a derived rule in T ◦t
+ for theorems A, B.
THEOREM 19. (Theorems in LT ◦t
+ and T ◦t
+ )
If t ⊢A is provable in LT ◦t
+
then A is a theorem of T ◦t
+ , and vice versa.
We deﬁne an equivalence relation between formulas A and B to hold if and only
if t ⊢A →B ∧t ⊢B →A.
LT ◦t
+ algebraized. The Lindenbaum algebra of LT ◦t
+ is A
LT ◦t
+
L
= ⟨A; ∧, ∨, →, ◦,
t⟩(of similarity type ⟨2, 2, 2, 2, 0⟩), where the following quasi-inequations are true.
(i)
⟨A; ∧, ∨⟩is a distributive lattice;
(v)
(a ◦b) ◦c ≤a ◦(b ◦c);
(ii)
t ◦a = a;
(vi)
(a ◦b) ◦c ≤b ◦(a ◦c);
(iii)
a ◦b ≤c
iﬀ
a ≤b →c;
(vii)
a ◦b ≤(a ◦b) ◦b.
(iv)
(a →b) ∧(c →b) ≤(a ∨c) →b
and
a ◦b ≤a ◦(b ∨c);

Relevance Logics
757
Informally, (ii) states that t’s equivalence class is a (lower and upper) left identity.
(iii) is two quasi-inequations expressing that →is the right residual of ◦. ((iii)
can be equivalently stated by a ﬁnite set of equations.) (iv) gives certain tonicity
properties to →and ◦. The last three conditions express properties of ◦which are
noticeably reminiscent of the axioms of the combinators B, B′ and W.
A well-known feature of intuitionistic logic is that A∨¬A is not a theorem. On
the other hand, if A ∨B is an intuitionistic theorem then so is A or B.34 It is not
diﬃcult to see how this property can be proven in LJ or in the single right sided
LT ◦t
+ .
Disjunction property for T ◦t
+ . The disjunction property is true in LT ◦t
+ ,
that is, t ⊢A ∨B implies that either t ⊢A or t ⊢B.
The same concept in “algebraese” is the primeness of an algebra. More con-
cretely, in A
LT ◦t
+
L
the pseudo-(in)equation (viii) holds.
(viii) t ≤a ∨b ⇒t ≤a ∨t ≤b.
For the semantics we are about to introduce for T ◦t
+ it is useful to note the
following property that we call conjunction property.
Conjunction property for T ◦t
+ . The conjunction property is true in LT ◦t
+ ,
that is, t ⊢(A ∧B) →t implies that either t ⊢A →t or t ⊢B →t.
3.6
Dual gaggle semantics for positive ticket entailment
Classical propositional logic has an easy-to-understand two-valued semantics, the
existence of which is the trade-oﬀfor its capturing minimal content. Intensional
logics such as normal modal logics and intuitionistic logic have “Kripke-style” rela-
tional semantics.35 Unquestionably, the invention of the possible worlds semantics
enhanced the understanding of these logics, for instance, by producing theorems
on soundness, completeness, fmp and decidability for many of them. The relatively
straightforward intuitive rendition of the maximally consistent sets of formulas as
“worlds” and their relations as “accessibility” made these nonclassical logics more
widely accepted and known. In a sense it became expected for an intensional logic
to have some sort of set theoretical semantics, which was a shift from the earlier
trend when semantics were primarily thought of as matrices.
Operational semantics, for example the semantics of T ◦t
→above, cannot be
adapted without considerable complications (such as two sorts of possible worlds)
to the positive relevance logics, let alone to their extensions with negation — see
Fine [1974] and Anderson et al. [1992, §51].
Relational semantics weaken the
assumptions a structure has to satisfy (without sacriﬁcing soundness), thereby
leading to simpler and more elegant frames. At the end of the 60s, Dunn deﬁned
34Of course, classically it is the other way around. That is, the ﬁrst wﬀis a theorem, and the
second metatheorem is false.
35For an account of the emergence of the Kripke semantics see e.g., Goldblatt [2003].

758
Katalin Bimb´o
a relational semantics for the semi-relevant logic R-mingle (RM), using a binary
accessibility relation; for the complete details see Dunn [1976b] and [1976c]. RM
is not wholly relevant because it contains theorems like A →B ∨B →A and
A →(A →A); the last one is just a notch from the positive and negative para-
doxes. Various positive relevance logics were equipped with relational semantics
in Routley and Meyer [1972b] — see also §3.8.
A novelty of the ternary relational semantics was to use a relation with one
more argument place, but perhaps even more important was the modeling of im-
plicational formulas.
Gaggle theory further generalizes relational semantics for
nonclassical logics (see Dunn [1991], [1993], [1995]). (‘Gaggle’ expands ‘ggl’ that is
the abbreviation of ‘generalized Galois logics’.) All the above mentioned semantics
exploit some kind of theories, that roughly speaking correspond to ﬁlters (for logics
that include at least ∧, and possibly, also ∨). The connection between theories and
ﬁlters was explicated in the wider context of “generalized Kripke semantics” that
were introduced in Bimb´o and Dunn [2002]. Furthermore, Bimb´o and Dunn [2005]
also showed (among other things) how to “dualize” such semantics in the absence
of conjunction relying on — slightly extrapolated — principles of gaggle theory.
We give a similar semantics for T ◦t
+ .
Dual gaggle frame for LT ◦t
+ . A dual gaggle frame for LT ◦t
+ is a four-tuple
F = ⟨U, ⊑, R, ι⟩where the elements satisfy the following conditions.
(g1)
⊑⊆U 2,
R ⊆U 3,
ι ∈U,
(g5)
α ⊑α,
α ⊑β ∧β ⊑γ. ⇒α ⊑γ,
(g2)
Rαβγ ∧α /∈ι↑. ⇒γ ⊑β,
(g6)
Rαβγ ⇒∃δ. Rαβδ ∧Rδβγ,
(g3)
∃β. Rβαα ∧β /∈ι↑,
(g7)
Rαβδ ∧Rδγε ⇒∃δ. Rβγδ ∧Rαδε,
(g4)
R↑↑↓, i.e.,
(g8)
Rαβδ ∧Rδγε ⇒∃δ. Rαγδ ∧Rβδε.
Rαβγ ∧α ⊑α′ ∧β ⊑β′ ∧γ′ ⊑γ. ⇒Rα′β′γ′,
Informally, the set U may be thought of as a set of situations. The smaller
the situation with respect to the ⊑ordering, the less informative it is, which
means that ⊑can be conceived as an information ordering. ι is the largest alogical
situation and R is a ternary accessibility relation between situations.
Dual gaggle models for LT ◦t
+ . A dual gaggle model for LT ◦t
+ is a pair M =
⟨F, v⟩where F is a frame for the logic and v is a valuation function of type v: P −→
℘(U)↑, that is ﬁxed for t and extended to compound formulas as follows.
(g9) v(t) = { ι }↑,
(g10) v(A ∧B) = v(A) ∪v(B),
(g11) v(A ∨B) = v(A) ∩v(B),
(g12) v(A ◦B) = { γ : ∀α, β(Rαβγ ∧α /∈v(A). ⇒β ∈v(B)) },
(g13) v(B →C) = { α: ∃β /∈v(B) ∃γ ∈v(C). Rαβγ }.

Relevance Logics
759
Although there is a certain dual character to this semantics, the propositions
are unchangeably upward closed sets.
LEMMA 20. (Heredity in T ◦t
+ )
For any formula A, v(A) ∈℘(U)↑.
THEOREM 21. (Soundness of T ◦t
+ )
If A is a theorem of T ◦t
+ then v(A) ⊆
{ ι }↑.
Notice that in the operational semantics the inclusion points into the opposite
direction. The reason is exactly that the situations here may be thought of as
(ramiﬁcations of) the “duals” of the situations in the operational semantics. For
the proof of completeness we deﬁne the canonical frame, as usual.
Canonical frame for T ◦t
+ . The canonical frame of T ◦t
+ is Fc = ⟨Uc, ⊑c, Rc, ιc⟩
deﬁned as follows.
(g14) Uc = { α: ∀A, B(A ∈α ∧⊢B →A . ⇒B ∈α) ∧∀A, B(A, B ∈α ⇔
A ∨B ∈α) ∧∀A ∧B ∈α. A ∈α ∨B ∈α },
(g15) ⊑c is ⊆,
(g16) Rcαβγ ⇔∀A, B(A ◦B ∈γ ⇒. A ∈α ∨B ∈β),
(g17) ιc = { A: ⊢A →t }.
In words, the clauses mean that the canonical situations are prime co-theories,
that is sets of wﬀs such that if a conjunction is in the co-theory then at least one
of the conjuncts is in the co-theory; otherwise, co-theories are downward closed
with respect to entailment, and closed with respect to disjunction. (Co-theories
are (approximately) prime ideals on A
T ◦t
+
L
.) ⊆needs no explanation. R is the ac-
cessibility relation on the frame, which captures alternative choices (or branching)
along fused wﬀs. ι is the set of all co-theorems of the logic. Note that the greatest
co-theorem is, at the same time, the least theorem, and to this extent ι is not fully
alogical.
LEMMA 22. (Canonical frame is frame)
The canonical frame of T ◦t
+ is
a frame for the logic T ◦t
+ .
We do not go into the details of this proof here, however, we recommend to
the reader working out the proof, because this lemma (we believe) provides deep
insights into this as well as into some other set theoretical semantics.

760
Katalin Bimb´o
Canonical valuation. The canonical valuation h is deﬁned as
(g18) h(A) = { α: α ∈Uc ∧A ∈α }.
THEOREM 23. (Completeness of T ◦t
+ )
If A is not a theorem of T ◦t
+ then
there is a model for T ◦t
+ in which v(A) ⊈v(t).
The structure of the proof of this theorem is similar to that of the previous
completeness proofs. First, one proves by structural induction that h is indeed a
valuation on the canonical frame, and second, that formulas that are not provably
equivalent have diﬀerent sets of situations corresponding to them in the model.
Adding both ∧and ∨at once is a somewhat arbitrary choice. Of course, fde
contains these two connectives, so adding them together is a move toward com-
bining fde and the purely intensional fragments. However, either ∧or ∨can be
easily omitted by dropping the three rules from LT ◦t
+ that involve the connective.
An inspection of the proof of ET for LT ◦t
+ conﬁrms that cut is unchangeably ad-
missible. Accordingly, either the disjunction or the conjunction property remains
true. We denote by LT ◦t
∨the consecution calculus obtained by omitting (∧1 ⊢),
(∧2 ⊢) and (⊢∧).
Soundness and completeness for LT ◦t
∨. The logic LT ◦t
∨is sound for the se-
mantics modiﬁed by dropping (g10). Moreover, if t ⊢A is not provable in LT ◦t
∨
then h(A) ⊈h(t) in the canonical model which is deﬁned as before except that the
last conjunct is dropped from the deﬁnition of Uc.
We emphasized that the logic of ticket entailment is not the same as classical
logic. Broadly following ideas (that were articulated by others beforehand) we
explicated that ⊃is not an implication. Thus, it is useful to point out that —
despite appearances — there seems to have been a tendency in relevance logics
to preserve as much from classical logic as can be reasonably retained. A clear
example of this is R, but in a sense E supports this observation too. One of the
principles that has been only partially questioned by E (and not at all by R) is the
permutation of antecedents of an implication. (A →(B →C)) →(B →(A →C)),
is a theorem of R but not of E or T. In E B has to be an implication to be permuted
into the ﬁrst position, that is, (A →((B →D) →C)) →((B →D) →(A →C)) is
a theorem of E but not of T.
If ◦is in the language and →is its residual, then permutation of the antecedents
of an implication amounts to commutativity of ◦. Then t is not only a left but
also a right identity (as it is in R).
Therefore, t is the unique identity of ◦.
Commutativity of ◦implies that →is not only the right but also the left residual
of ◦, or the residual.
Thus, it is possible to introduce a second “implication like” connective into the
logic of ticket entailment without (A →B) →(B ←A) and (B ←A) →(A →B)
becoming theorems.

Relevance Logics
761
Consecution calculus for LT ◦t
+
←. The logic of ticket entailment with a left
residual connective LT ◦t
+
←is LT ◦t
+ with (←⊢), (⊢←) and (bcbt ⊢) added.
A ⊢A
B[B] ⊢C
B[A; B ←A] ⊢C
←⊢
A; A ⊢B
A ⊢B ←A
⊢←
A[t; B; C] ⊢A
A[B; (t; C)] ⊢A
bcbt⊢
Given the proofs of the preceding cut theorems it is not diﬃcult to establish
that cut is admissible in T ◦t
+
←.
The logic of positive ticket entailment with left residual, T ◦t
+
←, is axiomatized by
adding rules (R7) and (R8) to T ◦t
+ .
(R7) ⊢(A ◦B) →C ⇒⊢B →(C ←A)
(R8) ⊢B →(C ←A) ⇒⊢(A ◦B) →C
The two calculi, T ◦t
+
←and LT ◦t
+
←, are “in parallel” as were their ←less fragments.
THEOREM 24. (LT ◦t
+
←and T ◦t
+
←are essentially same)
A is provable in
T ◦t
+
←if and only if t ⊢A is a provable consecution in LT ◦t
+
←.
The admissibility of cut combined with theorems 19 and 24 gives a syntactic
proof of the conservativity of T ◦t
+
←over T ◦t
+ . A semantic proof is immediate from
the following.
Dual gaggle semantics for T ◦t
+
←. A dual gaggle frame for T ◦t
+
←is exactly like
that for T ◦t
+ . A dual gaggle model is as before with the addition of a valuation
clause for complex wﬀs containing ←.
(g19) v(C ←A) = { β : ∃α, γ. Rαβγ ∧α /∈v(A) ∧γ ∈v(C) }.
The canonical frame and model is deﬁned as before. T ◦t
+
←is sound and complete
for the dual gaggle semantics augmented with (g19).
Incidentally, the introduction of the ←connective (in addition to →) also en-
sures that provable sequents correspond to provable formulas. Thus, ﬁnally, we
consider the case when the fusion operation ◦is omitted from T ◦t
+
←. In the conse-
cution calculus this simply means dropping the two rules (◦⊢) and (⊢◦), while to
obtain an adequate axiomatization one has to add two new rules (R9) and (R10)
instead of (R2)–(R3) and (R7)–(R8).
(R9) ⊢A →(B →C) ⇒⊢B →(C ←A)
(R10) ⊢B →(C ←A) ⇒⊢A →(B →C)
The two resulting logics are denoted by LT t
+
←and T t
+
←, and they can be shown to
be equivalent as before.
Canonical frame for T t
+
←. The notions of a frame and of a model need not to
be modiﬁed at all (except, perhaps, omitting (g12)). However, in the deﬁnition of
the canonical frame the deﬁnition of the canonical accessibility relation should be
replaced by (g20) which is as follows.

762
Katalin Bimb´o
(g20) Rcαβγ ⇔∀A, B(B ∈γ ⇒. A →B ∈α ∨A ∈β).
T t
+
←is sound and complete with respect to this dual gaggle semantics.
3.7
Negation in ticket entailment: T ◦t
In §1 we emphasized that certain classically valid formulas which include negation
are implausible as principles for implication. (1), (2) and (A∧(∼A∨B)) →∼∼B
are such wﬀs.
We proved one of them not to be an fde theorem and it is an
easy exercise to disprove the other two using the fde tableaux. Clearly, ∼is not
“classical negation,” since ∧and ∨have all their usual negation free properties.
De Morgan negation. A unary operation ∼is called a De Morgan negation
when (n1) and (n2) hold.
(n1)
A →∼B ⇒B →∼A,
(n2)
∼∼A →A.
If conjunction and disjunction are in the language of the logic (with their usual
properties) then (n3)–(n6), the De Morgan laws also hold.
(n3)
∼(A ∧B) →(∼A ∨∼B),
(n5)
∼(A ∨B) →(∼A ∧∼B),
(n4)
(∼A ∨∼B) →∼(A ∧B),
(n6)
(∼A ∧∼B) →∼(A ∨B).
Given a (bounded) distributive lattice and an order inverting unary operation ′ of
period two (like De Morgan negation) (n7) and (n8) may be false.
(n7)
a ∧a′ ≤b,
(n8)
b ≤a ∨a′.
An operation ∼satisfying (n1)–(n2) as well as (n7′) and (n8′) is called orthonega-
tion, and if ∧and ∨distribute then it is sometimes labeled “classical negation.”
(n7′)
A ∧∼A →B,
(n8′)
B →A ∨∼A.
Axiomatic calculus for T ◦t. The logic of ticket entailment T ◦t is deﬁned by
axioms (A1)–(A4), (A7)–(A13) and rules (R1)–(R6) together with axioms (A14)–
(A16).
(A14) (A →∼A) →∼A
(A15) (A →∼B) →(B →∼A)
(A16) ∼∼A →A

Relevance Logics
763
3.8
Routley–Meyer-style relational semantics for T ◦t
We introduce a Routley–Meyer-style semantics for T ◦t.
Semantics for various
systems of relevance logics (including fragments and extensions) were introduced in
a series of co-authored papers of Meyer and Routley [1972], [1973], [1972a], [1972b].
The semantics we give for T ◦t utilizes the idea of modeling both binary intensional
connectives via a three-place accessibility relation, that is original with Routley
and Meyer; however, we do not follow them in all the details (or in terminology).
Instead we make certain modiﬁcations in line with Dunn and Meyer [1997] and
Dunn [2001].
Relational frame for T ◦t. A relational frame for the logic T ◦t is F = ⟨U,
⊑, R, ∗, I⟩, where conditions (r1)–(r10) hold.
(r1)
∗: U −→U,
I ̸= ∅,
I ⊆U,
(r6)
Rαβγ ⇒∃δ. Rαβδ ∧Rδβγ,
(r2)
⊑⊆U 2 is a quasi-order,
(r7)
α∗∗= α,
(r3)
R ⊆U 3 and R↓↓↑,
(r8)
Rαβγ ⇔Rαγ∗β∗,
(r4)
Rαβδ ∧Rδγη ⇒∃δ. Rβγδ ∧Rαδη,
(r9)
Rββ∗β,
(r5)
Rαβδ ∧Rδγη ⇒∃δ. Rαγδ ∧Rβδη,
(r10)
∃ι ∈I. Rιαβ ⇔α ⊑β.
Informally, U is a set of situations and I is a nonempty subset of situations,
the set of logical situations.
(These situations are “akin” to the situations of
the operational semantics of T ◦t
→and “duals” of those that were introduced in
the gaggle type semantics for the positive fragment T ◦t
+ .) ⊑is a pre-order on
the situations, again, it may be viewed as a kind of information order.
∗is a
unary operation of period two, which also interacts with the accessibility relation
R that connects certain situations and additionally obeys conditions (r3)–(r6) and
(r8)–(r10). Informally, the accessibility relation may be thought of as relaxing an
operation with the help of the pre-order. (Cf. in particular, (r10) and (o4).)
This seems to be a good place to brieﬂy comment on the ternary accessibility
relation’s “intuitive plausibility.” The binary accessibility relation in the semantics
of nonclassical logics, especially, in the semantics of H or S4 and some of its
extensions, such as S4.2, S4.3, easily gives rise to mental images of accumulation
of perfect knowledge through time and that of connections of time and necessity.
Of course, we should not overlook that not all modal logics (not even all normal
modal logics) are so easy to picture. For instance, KB is sound and complete
for the class of frames with a symmetric relation — but it looks like there are not
that many merely symmetric relations lingering out there in the realm of “intuitive
interpretations.”
Technically, the motivation for the binary accessiblity relation in the Kripke-
style semantics of normal modal logics is that the set of maximally consistent sets
of wﬀs, in general, is not closed under the desired operation deﬁnable from the
modal connectives. Certainly, the use of a ternary accessibility relation to model
binary intensional operations (or as in gaggle theory, the use of a z +1-ary relation

764
Katalin Bimb´o
to model a z-ary intensional operation) is technically perfectly well-motivated.
Moreover, it seems to us that gaggle theory provides more explanatory power by
treating various nonclassical logics in a uniform way than what ad hoc semantics
built for particular logics can garner.
The three-place accessibility relation can be informally explicated depending on
the logic which is interpreted. For instance, Dunn and Meyer [1997], crediting
P. Woodroof, introduce a way of looking at the ternary relation as indexed bi-
nary relations in the semantics of structurally free logics. The binary intensional
connective modeled there is application in the sense of combinatory logic. Since
combinators are functions (in other words, programs), this type of interpretation
is in harmony with other indexed binary relations entering semantics. Although
there are important technical diﬀerences between structurally free logics and dy-
namic logic, a natural way to think of the (so-called) “standard interpretation” of
dynamic logic is in terms of indexed binary relations.
In the semantics that we are about to deﬁne, the accessibility relation can be
viewed as an encapsulation. If Rαβγ holds then γ envelopes the two situations α
and β put (or “fused”) together. In other words, if Rαβγ is true, then γ contains
at least as much information as the combination of the two theories α and β,
by which, of course, we mean all the possible pairings of elements of α and that
of β (in this order) plus their consequences. To phrase the same thought slightly
diﬀerently, R should not hold of ⟨α, β, γ⟩if it is possible to choose some information
bearers A and B, respectively from α and from β, and obtain some information
via putting them together that is not contained in γ. Having explained frames
informally, we proceed to deﬁne models.
Relational models for T ◦t. A relational model for T ◦t is M = ⟨F, v⟩where
F is a relational frame for the logic and v is a valuation function mapping proposi-
tional variables and t into upward closed subsets of U that is extended to compound
formulas as follows.36
(r11) α ⊨p
iﬀ
α ∈v(p),
(r12) α ⊨t
iﬀ
α ∈v(t)
iﬀ
ι ⊑α for some ι ∈I,
(r13) α ⊨A ∧B
iﬀ
α ⊨A and α ⊨B,
(r14) α ⊨A ∨B
iﬀ
α ⊨A or α ⊨B,
(r15) α ⊨A →B
iﬀ
for any β and γ such that Rαβγ, β ⊨A implies γ ⊨B,
(r16) α ⊨A ◦B
iﬀ
for some β ⊨A and for some γ ⊨B also Rβγα,
(r17) α ⊨∼A
iﬀ
α∗⊭A.
LEMMA 25. (Heredity in T ◦t)
For any formula A, if α ⊨A and α ⊑β
then also β ⊨A.
36We use ⊨for the extension of v; of course, in each case ⊨is speciﬁc to the frame and the
valuation, however, we refrain from subscripting it, because context prevents confusion.

Relevance Logics
765
The proof of this lemma is by structural induction, in which appealing to the
tonicity condition of R (in particular, of the ﬁrst and third argument places) is
central.
THEOREM 26. (Soundness of T ◦t)
If A is a theorem of T ◦t, then ∀α ∈
I↑. α ⊨A.
To prove completeness we ﬁrst deﬁne a special structure. There is a certain
analogy here with normal modal logics, however, it is not full. In classical logic
and in classically based modal logics the theories used in proving completeness
are maximal and they contain exactly one of each pair of formulas A and ¬A.
The canonical model of T ◦t will not be restricted to contain only “consistent”
situations — despite the fact that T ◦t has no “contradictions” (A ∧∼A) among
its theorems.
This time we deﬁne the canonical frame in two stages via the Lindenbaum
algebra.
Mutual provability deﬁnes an equivalence relation on the set of wﬀs;
furthermore, T ◦t has the replacement property with respect to this relation. Thus,
the connectives cannot distinguish between the elements of the equivalence classes,
that is, the connectives lead to well-deﬁned operations.37
Lindenbaum algebra of T ◦t. The quotient algebra of T ◦t is AT ◦t
L
= ⟨A; ∧, ∨,
◦, →, ∼, t⟩(of similarity type ⟨2, 2, 2, 2, 1, 0⟩) where (i)–(x) are true.
(i)
⟨A; ∧, ∨⟩is a distributive lattice;
(vi)
(a ◦b) ◦c ≤b ◦(a ◦c);
(ii)
t ◦a = a;
(vii)
a ◦b ≤(a ◦b) ◦b;
(iii)
a ◦b ≤c
iﬀ
a ≤b →c;
(viii)
∼∼a = a;
(iv)
a ◦(b ∨c) = (a ◦b) ∨(a ◦c);
(ix)
a ≤∼b
iﬀ
b ≤∼a;
(v)
(a ◦b) ◦c ≤a ◦(b ◦c);
(x)
a ◦b ≤c
iﬀ
a ◦∼c ≤∼b.
To ﬁx the meaning of certain terms we deﬁne ﬁlters and prime ﬁlters.
Filters and prime filters. Let A = ⟨A; ∧, ∨⟩be a distributive lattice. F is a
ﬁlter when (F1) and (F2) hold.
(F1) F ∈℘(A) −{ ∅},
(F2)
a ∈F and b ∈F
iﬀ
a ∧b ∈F.
The set of all ﬁlters of A is denoted by F. P is a prime ﬁlter when (F1)–(F2) as
well as (P1)–(P2) hold of P.
(P1) P ∈℘(A),
(P2)
a ∈P or b ∈P
iﬀ
a ∨b ∈P.
The set of all prime ﬁlters of A so deﬁned is denoted by P.
Theories as deductively closed sets of wﬀs and ﬁlters of the Lindenbaum algebra
of the logic are closely related. A (prime) ﬁlter is really a (prime) theory when
37As earlier we use lower case letters to denote the equivalence classes; e.g., we write a for the
equivalence class generated by A, and t stands for its own equivalence class.

766
Katalin Bimb´o
one pretends not to notice that certain formulas are literally distinct though they
can be proven to imply each other.38 With this thought in mind we can deﬁne the
canonical structure straightforwardly.
Canonical structure for T ◦t. The canonical frame for T ◦t is deﬁned as
Fc = ⟨Uc, ⊑c, Rc, ∗c, Ic⟩where the elements of the quintuplet are deﬁned as
(r18) Uc = P,
(r19) ⊑c = ⊆,
(r20) Rc = { ⟨α, β, γ⟩: ∀a, b. a ∈α ⇒. b ∈β ⇒a ◦b ∈γ },
(r21) α∗c = { a: ∼a /∈α },
(r22) Ic = { ι: ι ∈P ∧t ∈ι }.
The completeness proof of T ◦t is of particular interest, since T ◦t now includes
implication, as well as all of fde.
Furthermore, simply adding or subtracting
some frame conditions but retaining the skeleton of the whole semantics one can
furnish an interpretation for other relevance logics such as B, E and R. (This
is not true for L though, not even for its nonmodal fragment.
To obtain an
adequate semantics for L quite a few signiﬁcant changes must be made to the
present relational semantics — cf. p. 778.)
Canonical structure in class. The canonical structure Fc of T ◦t deﬁned by
(r18)–(r22) is a frame for T ◦t.
To make the structure of the completeness proof transparent, it is useful to prove
ﬁrst the so-called squeeze lemma.39 Note that if Rcαβγ then after narrowing α
and β to smaller prime theories or just smaller sets of wﬀs w, v the triplet ⟨w, v, γ⟩
satisﬁes the deﬁning condition in (r20). (Of course, the variables in (r20) range
over Uc and w and v may or may not be members of Uc. Thus, it is convenient
to denote by R′
c the relation deﬁned by (r20) without the assumption that α, β
and γ are in Uc.) That is, R′
cwvγ, and similarly, R′
cαβu for any u ⊇γ. These
observations imply that Rc ↓↓↑.
The squeeze lemma shows that under certain
conditions it is possible to extend theories in the ﬁrst two argument places of R′
c
to larger theories.
LEMMA 27. (Squeeze lemma)
Let R′
cαβγ where α, β ∈F and γ ∈P. Then
there are α′, β′ ∈P such that α ⊑c α′ and β ⊑c β′ as well as Rcα′β′γ.
38Of course, the scrupulous reader noticed the “cheating” long ago.
There is a type level
diﬀerence between theories and ﬁlters. But ≡determines a homomorphism from the wﬀs, and
via composition with a valuation (with the set of equivalence classes as its domain) we simply
get another valuation (with the set of wﬀs as its domain).
39“Squeezing” is used repeatedly in the proof of completeness, therefore, it is useful to isolate
the claim into a separately proven lemma. Diﬀerent proofs of versions of this lemma may be
found, e.g., in Routley and Meyer [1973] (cf. “primeness lemma”), Dunn [1986, §4.7], Anderson
et al. [1992, §48.3].

Relevance Logics
767
Proof. The proof is in two steps, ﬁrst we construct the two extended theories,
and then we show that these theories are prime. We give a detailed sketch of the
proof because of the importance of the lemma.
1 Given α and β we deﬁne a set E of ordered pairs of theories as follows.
E = { ⟨α0, β0⟩: α ⊆α0 ∧β ⊆β0 ∧R′
cα0β0γ ∧α0, β0 ∈F }
Note that E is not empty, at least ⟨α, β⟩is an element of E. Further, with ⊆on
pairs deﬁned pointwise, E is a partially ordered set. For any linearly ordered set
of pairs ⟨αi, βi⟩i∈I (where the index set I ̸= ∅) there is a least upper bound in
E, namely, 
i∈I⟨αi, βi⟩with  deﬁned componentwise. Zorn’s lemma guarantees
that E has a maximal element, and we denote this element by ⟨α′, β′⟩. We note
that by the deﬁnition of the set E, obviously, R′
cα′β′γ as well as α ⊆α′ and β ⊆β′.
The construction of α′ and β′ is complete; it remains to show that Rcα′β′γ holds
as well.
2 Let us assume that a1 ∨a2 ∈α′ and neither a1 ∈α′ nor a2 ∈α′.
From
the construction of ⟨α′, β′⟩follows that ∃c1, c2 ∈α′ and ∃b1, b2 ∈β′ such that
(a1 ∧c1) ◦b1 /∈γ and (a2 ∧c2) ◦b2 /∈γ. α′, β′ ∈F and so c1 ∧c2 = c ∈α′
as well as b1 ∧b2 = b ∈β′. By the tonicity of ◦and by γ ∈P, we have that
(a1 ∧c) ◦b /∈γ and (a2 ∧c) ◦b /∈γ, hence neither ((a1 ∧c) ◦b) ∨((a2 ∧c) ◦b) ∈γ.
Then ((a1 ∨a2) ∧c) ◦b /∈γ, which contradicts E’s deﬁnition. By eliminating the
assumption to the contrary, α′ is prime. The argument is symmetric with respect
to the argument places of ◦.
■
The squeeze lemma is useful in showing that (r4)–(r6) and (r10) are true on Fc
as well as in some of the steps in the proof of the next theorem.
The canonical valuation maps an element a of the Lindenbaum algebra into the
set of all objects from Uc that contain a.
Canonical valuation. The canonical model Mc is ⟨Fc, h⟩where h is deﬁned as
(r23) h(a) = { α: α ∈P ∧a ∈α }.
Of course, h has to be shown to preserve the operations of the Lindenbaum
algebra; then it follows that h induces a valuation from the set of wﬀs into ℘(Uc)↑.
THEOREM 28. (Completeness of T ◦t)
If in any model of T ◦t ι ⊨A for
all ι ∈I, then A is a theorem of T ◦t.
After h has been proven inductively to be a homomorphism, h has to be shown
to be an isomorphism. If a ≰b (i.e., ⊬A →B) then the propositions that represent
A and B, respectively, are distinct. In other words, there is an element α of Uc
such that α separates ha from hb. a↑fails to contain b, because of the initial
assumption, hence a↑can be maximalized (using Zorn’s lemma) to a ﬁlter which
does not contain b either. The Lindenbaum algebra is a distributive lattice which
implies that such a relatively maximal ﬁlter is prime.
In §3.1 we emphasized the diﬀerence between ordinary and traversing proofs,
although they generate the same set of T→theorems.
Certain details of the

768
Katalin Bimb´o
soundness and completeness proof show that it is possible to deﬁne a consequence
relation for T ◦t in line with the concept of ordinary proofs. Let A be a set of wﬀs,
and let A ⊢B hold whenever from any set of wﬀs closed under the rules of T ◦t
there is a proof of B with elements of A allowed into the proof. Then the following
holds.
THEOREM 29. (Strong soundness and completeness of T ◦t)
A ⊢B if
and only if α ⊨A for all A ∈A implies α ⊨B.
We stressed throughout the chapter proving completeness in two steps, namely,
by proving that the canonical structure is a structure, and then showing that
the canonical model does not validate wﬀs that are not theorems. This is clearly
analogous to standard ways of proving completeness for normal modal logics (when
such a completeness proof is possible). If a modal logic is sound and complete for
a class of frames and the canonical frame is a member of that class then the logic is
called canonical. In other words, such a logic is sound with an arbitrary valuation
on its canonical frame. (‘An arbitrary valuation’, of course, means an arbitrary
valuation v with dom(v) = P extended standardly to all wﬀs.) The algebra of a
normal modal logic contains a Boolean algebra “in the background,” (i.e., it has
a BA reduct), and so the co-domain of the valuation function is simply ℘(W)
(where W is the set of possible worlds). The algebra of the logics we introduced
so far are not Boolean algebras (with additional operations), and the valuation
functions were deﬁned with co-domain ℘(U)↑. Thus, the following theorem can
be seen as a generalization of canonicity in modal logics.
THEOREM 30. (Canonicity of T ◦t)
Let v be a valuation (v: P −→℘(Uc)↑)
on the canonical frame that is extended to ⊨according to (r11)–(r17).
Then,
⊢T ◦t A only if ι ⊨A for any ι ∈Ic in the model Mc = ⟨Fc, ⊨⟩.
3.9
More on the ticket entailment logics
The previous §§2–3.8 explored some of the ticket entailment systems. We included
informal motivations behind various concepts, beyond providing deﬁnitions, state-
ments of results and some details of (some of) the proofs. Now we turn to recalling
some further important results that concern the ticket entailment logics (and often
also the other relevance logics of §4).
THEOREM 31. (Decidability of LT ◦t
+ -W (Giambrone, 1985))
The posi-
tive fragment of ticket entailment without contraction, LT ◦t
+ -W, is decidable.40
Giambrone’s sequent calculus LT ◦t
+ -W contains a (t−⊢) rule, that is the “con-
verse” of (t ⊢), that is, the constant t can be deleted from an intensional structure
of the form (t; A). The (t−⊢) rule is useful in proving the equivalence of the
consecution calculus to the Hilbert-style axiomatization when the only structural
rules are (B ⊢) and (B′ ⊢). Then, a diﬀerent but equivalent consecution calculus
40The calculus LT ◦t
+ -W (which is diﬀerent from LT-W ◦t
+ ) is deﬁned in Giambrone [1985] (cf.
also Anderson et al. [1992, §67]), where the theorem is proven too.

Relevance Logics
769
without t can be deﬁned. Further, extensional structures can be simpliﬁed into
ones without embedded extensional structures and without repetitions of formu-
las. The decidability result is based on a backward proof search in the consecution
calculus with a limit on the number of potential antecedents for a provable for-
mula. (With a certain modiﬁcation to the sequent calculus, that is, by allowing
unrestricted permutation, Giambrone also proved the decidability of R ◦t
+ -W.)
THEOREM 32. (Undecidability of relevance logics (Urquhart, 1984))
The deducibility problem for logics between T-W+ and KR is undecidable, and
if ((A →B) ∧A ∧t) →B is a theorem of the logic then it is undecidable.
Deducibility means that given a ﬁnite set of wﬀs with elements A1, . . . , An and
a formula B there is a derivation of B from the set of wﬀs, that is, B is in the
closure of the set { A1, . . . , An } under the rules of the logic.
The problem of
decidability, as we have mentioned, is the question whether the set of theorems of
a logic is recursive or not. The logic KR is obtained from R via the addition of
(A ∧∼A) →B. (Accidentally, KR is not the same logic as the “classical relevant
logic” CR in §4.) Although KR is hardly relevant, it is still not the same as
classical logic.
The theorem includes as special cases the undecidability of T, E and R and
their positive fragments. The contrast between T-W+ and T+ seems to suggest
an informal conjecture that “the type of W causes undecidability.” However, it
should not be forgotten that R∼
→and E∼
→— just as their negationless fragments
— are decidable. Moreover, R without distributivity, and the semi-relevant logic
RM have been shown decidable by Meyer (see Meyer [1966] and Anderson and
Belnap [1975, §29.3]). (RM is R with A →(A →A) added.) The ﬁnite model
property for T, E and R would imply decidability, therefore, they lack the fmp.
The question of the decidability of E was one of the open problems posed by
Anderson in the early 60s, and the problem of the decidability of T, E, R and of
their positive fragments remained open for more than two decades. Thus it should
not be surprising that Urquhart’s proof is rather complex; it essentially relies
on concepts and results that concern algebraic modular lattices together with a
careful analysis of proofs — both within the logic T-W+ (and its extensions) as
well as in the proof of the undecidability of the restricted word problem for ﬁnite
dimensional projective geometries. The proof can be found (beyond the paper
cited above) in Anderson et al. [1992, §65], and a brief conceptual overview of the
proof by Urquhart is included in Brady [2003, §11.5].
There is a certain philosophical importance to undecidability. Harrop noted (in
the mid 60s) that no philosophically interesting propositional logics were known
to be undecidable, and that “[i]t would be of interest to a number of people to
see a natural propositional calculus which has not got the ﬁnite model property,
or possibly even better, one which is undecidable.” Given that Harrop himself
constructed several propositional calculi that do not possess the fmp but are de-
cidable, his remarks gain in their weight. The decidability of a logic, of course,
implies a certain “simplicity,” although this need not be the same, in the sense of

770
Katalin Bimb´o
complexity theory, as that of the classical propositional logic. Not only classical
and intuitionistic logics are decidable, but so is a wide range of propositional modal
logics. Thus, relevance logics provided the ﬁrst example of propositional logics that
are well-motivated and undecidable, as contrasted with various “artiﬁcial” systems
that were constructed speciﬁcally to be undecidable.
Interpolation and decidability are not closely related properties of a logic, in
general, however, the following theorem was originally proven using some of the
same geometric constructions as the previous one. By interpolation we mean again
“Craig interpolation,” that is, if A →B is provable in a logic then there is a wﬀC
in the common vocabulary of A and B such that A →C and C →B are theorems.
THEOREM 33. (Interpolation in relevance logics (Urquhart))
Inter-
polation fails for all logics between T-W+ and KR (independently of whether the
language of the logic includes t and f or not).41
The complete proof (with constants) is in Urquhart [1993], and the elimination
of constants is in Brady [2003, §11.6].
The proof is somewhat complicated in
the sense that it puts together model theoretic and proof theoretic theorems with
theorems of projective geometry.
Frames with a ternary accessibility relation that are suitable for KR connect
with projective geometry because R can be interpreted as the colinearity relation.
In projective geometry it is possible to deﬁne a multiplication operation of points
on a line. This operation is associative or nonassociative depending on properties
of the projective geometry. In particular, there are projective geometries in which
Desargues’s theorem is not true. (A simple planar case of this theorem is illustrated
in ﬁgure 2 (see p. 771), where the two triangles are perspectival with respect
to the center of perspectivity P and with respect to the line ℓ.) All projective
spaces with at least 3 dimensions are Arguesian, but in some projective spaces the
theorem is not true. If the projective space has at least four coordinate points
then the multiplication operation can be proven associative. A subtlety is that the
algebraic proof of the associativity of the multiplication operation relies only on
the modularity of the coordinate points and it is independent of the modularity
of the other points.
The proof starts with selecting two ﬁnite projective spaces: a two dimensional
non-Arguesian space and a three dimensional one. Concretely, these are πN(9)
which is of order 9, and PG(3, 9) which is determined by the Galois ﬁeld of order
9.
A third projective plane, denoted by π(3), can be shown to be a subplane
of the two previous geometries. The next step is to deﬁne KR frames from the
geometries. A KR frame is like an R frame (cf. §4) except that additionally the
ternary relation R is “totally symmetric,” that is, Rαβγ implies Rαγβ and Rγβα.
Although on frames of relevance logics this condition looks weird, it is useful to
41Actually, Urquhart’s original claim is somewhat stronger, because his proof establishes the
ﬁrst part of the result up to L(F1, F2), which is a logic that consists of wﬀs that are valid on
two concrete relational frames F1 and F2. (We brieﬂy outline the frame construction below,
however, the projective spaces from which they are deﬁned are only described by one of their
names.)

Relevance Logics
771
.................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
.........................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
a
b
c
d
e
f
P
ℓ
....................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
....................................
•
•
•
•
•
•
T
f
a
b
t
F
Figure 2. A planar case of Desargues’s theorem and the lattice crystal
note that this condition is crucial to the proof of modularity for the connectives
∧and ◦. Colinearity — even if some special cases are excluded — is a relation
which is invariant under the permutation of the arguments. Frames from πN(9)
and PG(3, 9) are deﬁned similarly by adding a point to the set of points of the
geometries and turning colinearity into the accessibility relation. To be precise,
R is colinearity of distinct points together with Rααα for all points α and Rωαα
where ω is the added element. The frame obtained from πN(9) is further expanded
by a new possible world to yield F1; the frame deﬁned from PG(3, 9) is F2. The
frame F0 is deﬁned from π(3) by the addition of 15 points and several clauses (see
Urquhart [1993, 465]).
F1, F2 are easily shown to be KR frames. The third frame is indeed a KR frame
because it is possible to deﬁne maps from F1 and F2 that are onto F0 and frame
morphisms (i.e., surjective relational homomorphisms that are minimally faithful).
These maps also ensure that certain theories deﬁned on models on the two frames
F1 and F2 are extensions of a complete theory in their common vocabulary.
The next stage of the proof involves encoding the multiplication operation of
points into logics. Since the frames ultimately come from projective geometries, the
valuation can be deﬁned using the points of the geometries. Informally, the content
of the three theories T0, T1 and T2 may be described as follows. T0’s vocabulary
contains three independent points together with three centers of perspectivity; T1
adds three points on a line, whereas T2 adds a fourth independent point and three
centers of perspectivity. The frame on which T1 is deﬁned is F1, hence, T1 proves
that ∼(A · (B · C) ↔(A · B) · C). Since PG(3, 9) is Arguesian, the multiplication
operation is associative, in other words, T1∪T2 proves that A·(B·C) ↔(A·B)·C.
KR contains R and so by rule (R6) and KR’s characteristic axiom T1 ∪T2 is
inconsistent. This shows that the joint consistency lemma fails, because T0 is a
complete theory in a superset of the common vocabulary of T1 and T2 and the three
theories themselves are consistent, however, T1 ∪T2 is inconsistent. (For classical
ﬁrst-order logic the joint consistency lemma was introduced, and its equivalence
to the interpolation lemma was proved by A. Robinson.)
The last step of the proof requires a suitable deduction theorem to move from
the failure of the joint consistency lemma to the failure of interpolation. This
theorem ensures that given that there is a deduction of f from T1 ∪T2, there are

772
Katalin Bimb´o
formulas A ∈T1 and B ∈T2 such that A →(B →¬2l□kf) is a theorem, where ¬2l
is 2l-many ¬ s, □D is t →D, and k is a positive integer indicating preﬁxing t k-
times. Since T1 ∪T2 in the construction is inconsistent, by the deduction theorem,
there are such formulas A and B. Assuming that interpolation is true, A →C as
well as C →(B →¬2l□kf) are theorems. A ∈T1 implies C ∈T1 because T1 is a
theory. However, then C ∈T0, because C is in the common vocabulary, hence in T2,
because T2 extends T0. But from ¬2l□kf ∈T2, f ∈T2 follows, which contradicts
T2’s consistency. (To ensure that the argument is applicable to the logics all the
way from KR to T-W+, moreover, without constants further deﬁnitions within
the logics and an analysis of proofs is necessary — see Anderson et al. [1992, §65],
Urquhart [1993], Brady [2003, §11.6].)
Before we turn to listing various further properties of T ◦t we hasten to point
out that the failure of interpolation does not imply the failure of variable sharing
(with t, or course, appropriately exempted). Indeed, in the logics between T-W+
and R◦variable sharing holds, that is, if A →B is a theorem then there is
a propositional variable p occurring both in A and B.
A perhaps better way
to look at the failure of interpolation is that these logics allow the formulation
of theorems in which the antecedent relevantly implies the consequent, however,
exactly because of the rigorous character of the implication the potential formulas
built from the shared variables are either not implied by A or do not imply B.
The ﬁrst-degree fragment of T is fde and it is decidable, moreover, its complexity
is co-np (see §2). The decision procedure (if any) for the implication–conjunction
fragment of T was established to be at least in expspace by Urquhart [1990].
A decision procedure for the pure implicational fragment of R was invented by
Kripke (cf. Kripke [1959], Dunn [1986, §3.6]). In the same paper Urquhart showed
that this algorithm for R ◦
∧
→is primitive recursive in the Ackermann function. The
lower bound of any decision procedure for a logic between T ∧
→and R ∧
→was proven
not to be primitive recursive by Urquhart [1999].
The proof is obtained from
a space bounded version of the halting problem, where the space is limited by
an “Ackermann kind” function. (Ackermann’s original function was proven not
to be primitive recursive — despite the fact that the function is easily deﬁnable
by a handful of recursive equations. Some simple modiﬁcations of the function
leave its characteristic feature, i.e., that it is not primitive recursive, intact.) The
Ackermann kind functions are “fast groving” and they dominate every primitive
recursive function. In other words, for every primitive recursive function there is
a natural number such that the value of the Ackermann kind function is strictly
greater for all greater numbers. To sum up, for instance, R ∧
→is decidable, however,
a decision procedure for this logic is not more or less infeasible, rather it is way
out in the range of intractable.
The next notable results concerning the ticket entailment logics were obtained
earlier. Logically valid inferences are often described by saying that the conclusion
follows inevitably from the premises. Accordingly, in the context of relevance logics
“the interesting modality” typically is necessity, which is taken to be characterized
by principles reminiscent of the modal axioms of the minimal normal alethic modal

Relevance Logics
773
logic, which is — coincidentally — also denoted by T. In T→there is no formula in
one variable such that the corresponding modal principles would become provable
— except, of course, the trivial case, when necessity of a wﬀis the wﬀitself. (For
the proof see Anderson and Belnap [1975, §6].)
We mentioned earlier that in a certain formulation of the implicational fragment
of classical logic the principal type scheme of K can be replaced by any wﬀp →
(A →B) given that it is a two-valued theorem. Among the axioms of T→there is
only A →A that allows a nonimplicational formula to be implied by or to imply
a wﬀ. If a logic does not have any theorem of the form p →(B →C) then it is
said to have the Ackermann property; if a logic does not have a theorem that is
like the converse of the previous wﬀ, then it has the converse Ackermann property.
T→does not have the converse Ackermann property, however, T-W→possesses
it — cf. Anderson and Belnap [1975, 95–96].
Finally we turn to the relationship between T and classical logic, which is of
particular philosophical interest. (The next theorem holds also for T, that is, when
t and ◦are omitted.)
THEOREM 34. (Classical logic in T ◦t)
All the theorems of classical logic
are theorems of T ◦t under a translation τ, where τ is deﬁned as follows.
(i) τ(p) = p if p ∈P;
(ii) τ(¬A) = ∼τ(A);
(iii) τ(A ∨B) = τ(A) ∨τ(B).
The proof of the previous theorem, probably, belongs to the “folklore” of rele-
vance logics by now, but see Anderson and Belnap [1975, §24.1]. The proof of the
next theorem, however, is not at all obvious.
THEOREM 35. (γ in T (Meyer and Dunn, 1969))
The following rule is
admissible in T as well as in E and R (and also in T ◦t).
(γ)
⊢A, ⊢∼A ∨B ⇒⊢B.
The rule (γ), which is also called “disjunctive syllogism,” is obviously related —
via matching the connectives as in the translation above — to the rule of modus
ponens of classical logic (cf. Anderson and Belnap [1975, §16.1]). For a detailed
exposition of how the admissibility of this rule became a question (originally for
E) as well as for proofs of this theorem see Dunn [1986, §2.3] and Anderson et
al. [1992, §25, also §28.2.4]. The ﬁrst proof, which uses algebraic methods, was
obtained by Meyer and Dunn [1969]. The rule is admissible, that is, for theorems
only. A way to think of the admissibility of (γ) is that negation does not have a
ﬁxed point on any theorems of the logic. Negation in T is De Morgan negation
and it is well-known that there are De Morgan lattices larger that any ﬁxed ﬁnite
size (and of size ℵ0 too) in which some elements are identical to their negation
(cf. also §2). Thus, the claim is far from trivial. Of course, the admissibility of
(γ) also implies that for no wﬀA A ∧∼A is a theorem of T ◦t (except if T ◦t is
inconsistent, that is not). A yet another consequence of the admissibility of (γ)
is that the rule ⊢A ∧∼A ⇒⊢B is admissible too, though ⊬A ∧∼A →B, of
course.

774
Katalin Bimb´o
Lastly, we mention that classical negation can be conservatively added to T ◦t,
and so T ◦t can be Gentzenized in the framework of display logic (cf. Anderson et
al. [1992, §62.5.4] and Brady [2003, §12.3]).
4
OTHER RELEVANCE LOGICS: B, L, E AND R
So far we mainly focused on the logic of ticket entailment and its fragments,
although occasionally we also mentioned other logics. Admittedly, T is not one of
the “most-written-about” relevance logics, which is one of the reasons we selected
T as our main example. To use a metaphor, T has been kind of a younger sibling
of the two older and better known relevance logics E and R — it’s there, but not
in the limelight.42 Thus, it is reasonable to brieﬂy introduce the last two logics as
well as two others, B and L.
Even with four more logics — or rather, four more families of logics — intro-
duced we neglect a whole range of topics some of which have direct philosophical
applications. A theory of relevant predication has been worked out by Dunn (see
Anderson et al. [1992, §74]), and systems of relevant arithmetic have been intro-
duced and investigated by Meyer and Dunn (see Anderson et al. [1992, §§72–73]).
(We list a few other themes — at the level of the detail of keywords — to hint at
what we could not ﬁt into a small chapter: the theory of implication; propositional
quantiﬁcation; individual quantiﬁcation; meta-valuations; nonclassical metalogic;
merge sequent calculi; semi-relevant systems; matrices; relevant theory of counter-
factuals; relevant belief revision; depth relevance.)
To start with, we note that the implicational fragments of B, T-W, T, L, E and
R are ordered by the following inclusions: Th(B→) ⊊Th(T-W→) ⊊Th(T→) ⊊
Th(E→) ⊊Th(R→) and Th(B→) ⊊Th(T-W→) ⊊Th(L→) ⊊Th(R→) (where
Th denotes the set of theorems); no other inclusions hold. fde is contained in the
positive fragments of these logics except in L.
Basic relevance logic: B
There are various senses in which a logic can be “minimal.” Although sometimes
even A →A has been questioned as a reasonable principle for implication, (A1)
is usually considered a wﬀthat is acceptable to be an axiom. (Including (A1) in
a logic is also helpful for deﬁning a reasonable congruence relation on formulas.)
B ◦t
+ was introduced by Meyer and Routley [1972]. B→consists of (A1) together
with (R1), (R11) and (R12).
(R11) A →B ⇒(B →C) →(A →C)
(R12) A →B ⇒(C →A) →(C →B)
42A good example of this point is Meyer and Dunn [1969] that has E and R in its title, but
includes the proof of the admissibility of (γ) for T too, as well as for some extensions of E.

Relevance Logics
775
The positive fragment of B is obtained by the addition of (A7)–(A13) and (R6)
— while ◦and t can be added as usual.
A semantics for B ◦t
+ can be obtained (cf. Routley and Meyer [1972b]) by omit-
ting (r4)–(r6) and ∗from the deﬁnition of a frame for T ◦t (together with all the
conditions that involve ∗). (r17) obviously becomes superﬂuous in a model, so
does (r21) in the deﬁnition of the canonical frame.
THEOREM 36. (Soundness, completeness (Meyer and Routley, 1972))
A is a theorem of B ◦t
+ if and only if for any ι ∈I↑ι ⊨A.
A diﬀerence of B ◦t
+ from fde is that the former allows embedded implications to
occur in provable formulas. However, B ◦t
+ does not postulate many features for the
implication connective itself beyond self-identity. Another diﬀerence is, of course,
that B ◦t
+ does not contain negation. The logic B (of Meyer and Routley [1972]) is
deﬁned by adding (A16) and (A17) as well as a rule form of contraposition (A15),
that is, (R13).
(A17) A ∨∼A
(R13) A →∼B ⇒B →∼A
The corresponding semantic conditions for negation in the Routley–Meyer-style
relational semantics for B are (r7), ∀ι ∈I↑. ι = ι∗and ∃ι ∈I↑. Rιαβ ⇒∃ι ∈
I↑. Rιβ∗α∗.
Meyer [2004] extended B+ with a Boolean negation yielding the logic CB (“clas-
sical B”), which is also shown there to be decidable.
Linear logic: L
Entailment is thought to include both relevance and necessity (see Anderson and
Belnap [1962]). As a result, in relevance logics modality was investigated ﬁrst of all
as an operation deﬁnable from the implication connective of the logic itself (cf. the
comment on the deﬁnability of □in T→in §3.9), though □also has been added as
an undeﬁned connective to R (cf. Meyer [1966] and Anderson et al. [1992, §61]).
Linear logic was introduced by Girard [1987], who found a new use for a modality,
so to speak. To put it in a slightly baﬄing way, the modalities in L signal that
“resource consciousness” has been suspended with respect to the formula that is
modalized. In other words, modalities allow the introduction of irrelevance, where
relevance is understood in a more limited sense that in R, but in a more relaxed
sense that in B ◦t.
Another diﬀerence of L from the logics considered so far in some detail (such
as fde, T ◦t and B ◦t) is the lack of distributivity of conjunction and disjunction.
Distributivity of ∧and ∨has not been questioned on the basis of concerns about
relevance. However, a reason to consider relevance logics without distributivity
existed nonetheless. Sometimes in a Hilbert-style axiomatization distributivity is
an “extra” (independent) axiom in addition to the other axioms for ∧and ∨(as

776
Katalin Bimb´o
(A13) is above). Dropping distributivity allows a simple sequent calculus formal-
ization without the need to introduce a second structural connective. Thus, L can
be construed — undoubtedly, without faithfulness to history — as an extension
of the basic rigorous relevance logic BR+ (see Anderson and Belnap [1975, 294]).
BR+ adds to the distributionless part of B+ two further implicational axioms
(A2) and (A18).
(A18) (A →(B →C)) →(B →(A →C))
This formula is the principal type scheme of C (cf. fn. 23). Linear logic then is a
further extension of BR+ by ◦and its dual ⊕(that is sometimes called ﬁssion) as
well as four propositional constants t, f, T , F and negation ∼, but more crucially
also by two modalities ♦, □, that are also duals of each other.43
One of the informal motivations of linear logic is the incorporation of a principle
of consciousness about the use of resources (of computing devices). This relevance
principle for implications excludes contraction but allows unlimited permutations
yielding a notion of relevance stronger that in Church’s weak calculus of implica-
tion, but weaker that in T-W or in B (cf. p. 774). The implicational fragment of
linear logic can be axiomatized by the principal type schemes of the combinators
B, C and I. Indeed, this logic was (independently) discovered, and named “B-C-I
logic,” by Meredith and Prior [1963] in the course of proof theoretical investiga-
tions of classical logic. The BCI axiomatization of L→exhibits an interesting proof
theoretic phenomenon due to the lack of contraction.
LEMMA 37. (D-incompleteness of an axiomatization of L→(Hindley,
1997))
The implicational logic deﬁned by replacing the axiom schemes of the
implicational fragment of linear logic L→by axioms, that is, axiomatized by (A1′),
(A2′) and (A18′) together with condensed detachment is D-incomplete.
(A18′) (p2 →(p1 →p0)) →(p1 →(p2 →p0))
However, it is possible to axiomatize the BCI logic diﬀerently.
Theorem 16
emphasized that I has a special role in the BB′IW logic. Following theorem 17
we recalled a certain way of looking at the role of the type of W in that result.
However, (A4) is not a theorem of BCI logic.
Therefore, the “identiﬁcation of
variables” has to be handled diﬀerently if D-completeness is to be attained.
LEMMA 38. (D-completion of BCI)
BCI is a D-complete logic that may
be axiomatized (equivalently to (A1), (A2), (A18), (R1)) by (A1′), (A2′), (A3′),
(A18′) together with
(A1′′) (p1 →(p1 →p2)) →(p1 →(p1 →p2))
and condensed detachment.
43The extensional connectives in L are called “additives,” while the intensionals are “multi-
plicatives.” The modalities are often labeled as “exponentials.” Accordingly, the fragment with-
out the modalities is called “exponential-free” or “multiplicative additive.” (Cf. Avron [1988].)

Relevance Logics
777
Linear logic without modalities is deﬁned by the axiom schemes and rules (A1)–
(A2), (A18), (A7)–(A12), (A15)–(A16), and (A19)–(A21) as well as by the rules
(R1)–(R8) where the additional axioms are
(A19) (t →∼f) ∧(∼f →t)
(A20) (A →T ) ∧(F →A)
(A21) (∼(∼A ◦∼B) →(A ⊕B)) ∧((A ⊕B) →∼(∼A ◦∼B))
Obviously, some of the axioms can be viewed as deﬁnitions, and the set of connec-
tives can be reduced without loss of the expressive power.
The similarity between the axioms and rules governing the modalities in L and
in certain modal logics, in particular in S4, can easily lead to a misunderstanding
as to the “nature” of these modalities. The axioms (A24)–(A26) and the rule (R14)
below are reminiscent of the axioms (K), (T) and (4) and the rule of necessitation
when ♦is seen as □— perhaps, with a little squinting. We note, however, that
principles of modeling various connectives in gaggle theory make clear that the
modality, originally denoted by ! , is like a possibility operation, and its dual,
originally denoted by ? , is like a necessity.
Therefore, to get full L as a Hilbert-system the following axioms and rule are
added to the exponential-free fragment.
(A22) A →(♦B →A)
(A23) (♦A →(♦A →B)) →(♦A →B)
(A24) ♦(A →B) →(♦A →♦B)
(A25) ♦A →A
(A26) ♦A →♦♦A
(R14) ⊢A ⇒⊢♦A
(A22) and (A23) are “modalized” versions of the types of K and W. Axiom
(A22) clearly shows the connection of the ♦modality to irrelevance. As we men-
tioned (A24)–(A26) and (R14) (with ♦replaced by □, and →replaced by ⊃)
suﬃce to deﬁne S4 when added to classical logic. However, L is not classical and,
for instance, (♦A ∧♦B) →♦(A ∧B) is not a theorem of L. Under the common
intuitive interpretation of (alethic) modal logics (A25), of course, does not make a
whole lot of sense — it states that “if A is possible, then A is the case.” However,
this does not prevent ! from being a ♦sort of modality.
An analytic tableaux formulation of L is given in Meyer et al. [1995]. An alter-
native Gentzenization of linear logic was obtained by Belnap in the framework of
display logic (cf. Anderson et al. [1992, §62]).
The absence of distributivity between the extensional connectives makes the
deﬁnition of a sound and complete semantics more complicated that the Routley–
Meyer semantics for T ◦t or B ◦t. Girard [1987] deﬁned an operational semantics
for the multiplicative additive fragment. Kripke models with a ternary accessi-
bility relation for the multiplicative additive fragment can be found in Allwein

778
Katalin Bimb´o
and Dunn [1993]. In terms of the Lindenbaum algebra of L, this semantics ex-
ploits maximally disjoint ﬁlter–ideal pairs with Galois connections, which were
introduced as objects in a general lattice representation in Urquhart [1979]. A
complication results, however, in the process of adding the intensional operations,
because of the unprovability of the distributivity of conjunction and disjunction,
the distributivity of fusion over ∨cannot be proven either from the usual deﬁni-
tion of these operations from the ternary accessibility relation that is used in the
canonical model of T ◦t, for instance.
A less complex semantics was deﬁned for full linear logic in Bimb´o [2003]. The
price for avoiding some of the complications is that when distributivity of ∧and
∨is added to the logic, the resulting semantics slightly diﬀers from the usual
Routley–Meyer semantics for the relevance logic B and its extensions.
THEOREM 39. (Undecidability of L (Lincoln et al., 1992))
Full propo-
sitional linear logic L is undecidable.
The proof of Lincoln et al. [1992] is a direct reduction style proof, where the
halting problem of a certain type of register machines is reduced to the problem
of decidability of the logic. The computational model used is the and-branching
two-register machine without zero tests. The halting problem for these machines is
equivalent to the halting problem of Turing machines. The modality-free fragment
of L (L♦) was shown decidable, in eﬀect, in Meyer [1966] — the decidability of
L♦easily follows from the decidability of R without distribution, that is, from
the decidability of exponential-free linear logic with contraction. For a computer
science application of the latter result see Thistlewaite et al. [1988].
Lincoln et al. [1992] proved that the multiplicative additive fragment of linear
logic is pspace-complete. Further, they also showed that the multiplicative frag-
ment is in np, whereas with weakening added the logic becomes np-complete. The
decision problem of aﬃne logic (i.e., of the multiplicative modal fragment of L
with weakening added) was solved by Kopylov [2001] via reducing aﬃne logic to
its “good” and then further to its “normal” fragment, which is proven decidable
using a game on vectors that correspond to a certain type of fusion formulas.
Aﬃne logic is also known to have the fmp. Urquhart [2000] proved that the worst
case complexity of Kopylov’s decision procedure is not primitive recursive (rather
primitive recursive in the Ackermann function — cf. section 3.9). He also stated
that the decision procedure can be improved so that it had a double expspace
upper bound.
Linear logic has various computer science motivations (such as modeling par-
allelism and proof-nets) which are to be found in Girard [1987]. A further mo-
tivation seems to be a translation of intuitionistic logic into L, in particular, a
certain “decomposition” of intuitionistic implication. The translation function τ
(for propositional H) is deﬁned by the clauses (i)–(v).

Relevance Logics
779
(i)
τ(p) = p
whenever
p ∈P;
(iv)
τ(A →B) = ♦τ(A) →τ(B);
(ii)
τ(A ∧B) = τ(A) ∧τ(B);
(v)
τ(¬A) = ♦τ(A) →F .
(iii)
τ(A ∨B) = ♦τ(A) ∨♦τ(B);
Given the above translation if τ(A) is provable in linear logic then it is provable
in H.
The above decomposition of intuitionistic implication is directly linked
to coherent spaces that provide an interpretation for intuitionistic logic. (This
translation — not surprisingly — also lends itself to a translation of quantiﬁed
λ-calculus.) Details of the connection to intuitionistic logic are in Girard [1987,
§III.1 and §5.2]; the quantum interpretation of linear logic and L’s philosophical
signiﬁcance (via Aquinas’s ideas) is outlined in Girard [2004].
Entailment: E
The discovery of a correspondence between certain implicational formulas and
combinators goes back to Curry’s and Church’s work in the 30s and 40s (of the 20th
c.) — cf. Curry and Feys [1958] and Hindley [1997]. Curry also used combinators
in labels of structural rules in sequent calculi, for example, in Curry [1963]. To
be able to further explicate the connection between the implicational logics and
combinatory bases, we recall that there is a distinction between proper and not
proper (improper) combinators in combinatory logic. Roughly speaking, a proper
combinator applied to (suﬃciently many) arguments gives a result in which only
(some of) the arguments occur. The combinators K, I, B, B′, C, W, M, S, and S′ are
all proper, and their axioms show the pattern we sketched. Not all combinators are
proper, however. Famously, the ﬁxed point combinator Y is improper. Moreover,
the set of proper combinators is not closed under application. On the other hand,
the set of simple typable combinators includes some improper combinators, but it
does not include all proper combinators.
The implicational fragment of E can be deﬁned by the principal types of I, B′,
S and C(B′(B′I)), that is, (A1), (A3), (A6) and (A27), together with rule (R1).
(A27) (A →B) →(((A →B) →C) →C)
is called restricted assertion, where “restricted” indicates that in assertion, that
is, in A →((A →B) →B), the wﬀA has to be an implication. This restriction
corresponds precisely to the fact that C(B′(B′I)) is improper.
Assertion is the
principal type of CI, but combinators in general cannot restrict arbitrary arguments
to have complex or identical types, therefore, B′(B′I) replaces I. Some of the other
“restricted laws” that are theorems of E→(axiomatized as above) are principal
types of other improper combinators. For instance, restricted permutation (rp) and
restricted conditional modus ponens (rMP) are principal types of C(B(CC)(B′I))
and B(CC)(B′I), respectively.
(rp) (A →((B →C) →D)) →((B →C) →(A →D))

780
Katalin Bimb´o
(rMP) (B →C) →((A →((B →C) →D)) →(A →D))
These improper combinators do not have a commonly used single letter as abbre-
viation (like some proper ones have), but of course, we could name them as 1, 2
and 3; then their axioms are 1xy ▷y(B′Ix), 2xyz ▷xz(B′Iy) and 3xyz ▷yz(B′Ix).
The axioms clearly show both that these combinators are not proper as well as that
their application leads out of the set of hereditary right maximal terms (cf. p. 750).
The axioms also suggest that they themselves, or for instance { I, B′, S, 1 }, cannot
deﬁne C. (We used C in their original description to convey a certain familiarity.)
Indeed, (A18) is a wﬀthat is not a theorem of E→.
The implicational fragment of E is D-complete, which is a consequence of the
D-completeness of T→and E→’s passing the identity test.
Necessity in E→(Anderson and Belnap, 1962). There is a wﬀof E→in
one variable such that (with that wﬀas a deﬁnition of □) the following wﬀs are
theorems of E→.
(□1) (A →B) →(□A →□B)
(□2) (A →B) →□(A →B)
(□3) □A →□□A
From (□2), and (R1), it is immediate that the rule, which is in normal modal
logics called “necessitation” is admissible.
(□4) ⊢A ⇒⊢□A
The formula that deﬁnes □A is (A →A) →A. (For further discussion of the role
of necessity and of the provability of the above wﬀs, as well as some other modal
formulas, see Anderson and Belnap [1975, §4.3].)
The implicational fragment can be extended with ∧, ∨via adding the axioms
and rules (A7)–(A13) and (R6) as well as axiom (A28).
(A28) (((A →A) ∧(B →B)) →C) →C
This wﬀensures that (((A →A) →A) ∧((B →B) →B)) →(((A ∧B) →
(A ∧B)) →(A ∧B)) is a theorem, which — according to the deﬁnition of □above
— can be abbreviated simply as (□A ∧□B) →□(A ∧B). Distributivity of □over
∧is a desirable property of □when □is thought of as necessity.
The other intensional connective ◦can be added by (R2)–(R3) as in the other
logics. The modality of E, especially rule (□4), suggests that all theorems should
be necessary. Hence, to add truth, t, an extra axiom (A29) is needed beyond rules
(R4) and (R5).
(A29) (t →t) →t
The axiom can be viewed as stating that t is necessary (according to the deﬁnition
of □). Alternatively, (A29) can be thought of as a wﬀobtained by modus ponens

Relevance Logics
781
from an “exceptional instance” of restricted assertion, which is exceptional because
t behaves as if it were an implicational wﬀ.
(A14)–(A16) suﬃce for negation
without any interaction with □. All these extensions are conservative, though the
resulting axiom set is known not to be independent (cf. Anderson et al. [1992,
§R].)
E contains classical logic in the same sense as T does (cf. theorem 34). Rule
(γ) is admissible in E (see theorem 35, Meyer and Dunn [1969]).
Some of the theorems that were mentioned in §3.9 equally apply to E. E→
and E∼
→are decidable, whereas E+ and E are undecidable.
Interpolation fails
both for E+ and E (and for E ◦t). Nonetheless, antecedents and consequents of
implicational theorems of E share a propositional variable.
An adequate (sound and complete) relational semantics for E ◦t can be deﬁned
by slightly amending a frame for T ◦t.
Let ⊑be a partial order, and let the
following new frame condition be included as (r24).
(r24) ∃ι ∈I. Rαια.
Then, E ◦t is sound and complete with respect to the resulting relational seman-
tics. Mares [2000] uses semantical methods to show that the addition of classical
negation to E ◦t is not conservative.
CE is not conservative over E (Mares, 2000). The formula (K⊃) is a the-
orem of CE but not of E ◦t.
(K⊃)
∼(((∼p ∨q) →(∼p ∨q)) →(∼p ∨q)) ∨∼((p →p) →p) ∨((q →q) →q)
Relevant implication: R
The ﬁrst relevance logic we mentioned in this chapter was the “weak implicational
calculus” of Church, that is, the implicational fragment of R. We end this section
with brieﬂy recalling some results concerning R.
The implicational fragment R→is axiomatized by (A1), (A2), (A4), (A18) and
(R1). An equivalent sequent calculus is described in Dunn [1986, §3.6] together
with the statement of the admissibility of cut and the proof of the decidability of
R→.
De Morgan negation is added by the axioms (A15)–(A16) — (A14) is provable.
An adequate sequent calculus is in Dunn [1986, §3.7], and an analytic tableaux
formulation is in McRobbie and Belnap [1979] (cf. also Anderson et al. [1992,
§60]). R∼
→is decidable — see Dunn [1986, §§3.6–3.7].
Positive R is axiomatized by the addition of the axioms (A7)–(A13) and rules
(R2)–(R6) to R→. An equivalent Gentzen system LR◦t
+ is in Dunn [1986, §3.10]
and in Dunn [1973] (where it is denoted as LR+). A somewhat modiﬁed version
is in Anderson and Belnap [1975, §28.5]. R ◦t
+ is undecidable by Urquhart’s result,
that we mentioned in §3.9.

782
Katalin Bimb´o
Urquhart demonstrates (s. Brady [2003, §11.6]) that the wﬀ(with p, q, r, s, t ∈P)
(ﬁp) (q ◦(p ∧(q →r) ∧(q →(p →q)) ∧((p →q) →q) ∧((q ∧s) →p))) →
(((r →(s ∨t)) ∧(p →p) ∧(p →t) ∧(p →(t →t))) →t)
together with the six-element De Morgan monoid, that was labeled crystal in
Thistlewaite et al. [1988, 75] (see ﬁgure 2, p. 771), suﬃces to prove the failure of
interpolation in positive R. The reasoning proceeds by deﬁning an assignment to
the variables so that the formula takes one of the two incomparable middle values.
(Negation has ﬁxed points on the two middle elements. The value of A →B is
(i) T if A = F or B = T , (ii) F if B < A or A ∥B, (iii) B if A = t, (iv) ∼A
if B = f and (v) A if A = B and B is a or b.) Then, from the assumption that
there is a suitable interpolant for (ﬁp) it can be determined by direct calculations
on the lattice that there is no suitable element in the monoid for the wﬀto take
as a value.
An adequate set theoretical semantics for R ◦t
+ was deﬁned by Meyer and Rout-
ley [1972], and proofs of the soundness and completeness theorems can be also
found in Dunn [1986, §4.7] as well as in Anderson et al. [1992, §48.3]. A frame
can be deﬁned as that for T ◦t — except, of course, the conditions which include ∗
((r7), (r8), (r9), (r17), and (r21)) — with the addition of the following condition.44
(r25) Rαβδ ∧Rδγη ⇒∃δ. Rαγδ ∧Rδβη.
Combining the negation-implication and the positive fragment gives R — the
logic of relevant implication. A sound and complete semantics is deﬁned by revers-
ing the previous deletion, in other words, by (r1)–(r25). R has the variable sharing
property which means that there are no implicational theorems in R without the
antecedent and the consequent sharing some information.
R ◦t was algebraized by Dunn [1966], for expositions of this algebra see Anderson
and Belnap [1975, §28.2] and Dunn [1986, §4.5]. The following is a deﬁnition of
De Morgan monoids with a brief explanation.
De Morgan monoids (Dunn, 1966). A De Morgan monoid D = ⟨D; ∧, ∨, ◦, ∼,
t⟩is an algebra (of type ⟨2, 2, 2, 1, 0⟩) that is equationally characterized by (i)–(iii).
(i) ⟨D; ∧, ∨, ∼⟩is a distributive lattice with De Morgan negation;
(ii) ⟨D; ◦, t⟩is a square increasing Abelian monoid;
(iii) ∼(a ◦∼b) ◦a ≤b
(where ≤is the standard lattice order).
(i) means that ⟨D; ∧, ∨, ∼⟩is a De Morgan lattice, that is, the usual equations
deﬁning a distributive lattice are satisﬁed, and together with the unary operation
44In the presence of the other conditions the whole set of frame conditions may be simpliﬁed —
(r25) is the condition that corresponds to axiom (A18). (The semantics obtained via modifying
the one we gave above for T ◦t also diﬀers in some other (small) details from Meyer and Routley’s
original semantics.)

Relevance Logics
783
∼the De Morgan laws hold. An Abelian monoid is an algebra with a binary asso-
ciative operation, that is also commutative and has an identity element t. Square
increasingness is true when ◦is “idempotent in one direction,” so to speak, that
is, a ≤a ◦a is true. (iii) together with the De Morgan lattice provide residuation
between ◦and λxy. ∼(x◦∼y). This ensures further desirable interactions between
the operations.
Translations of and into intuitionistic logic has been a favorite topic in logic
ever since the invention of H. (We mentioned that a most prominent motiva-
tion behind linear logic is a translation of intuitionistic implication.) Though the
question of the philosophical import of H (and of Heyting’s arithmetic) for the
foundations of mathematics has been outlined of course, early on by G¨odel [1933a]
and [1933b]. As Meyer [1973] shows intuitionistic logic can be translated into R.
Let H be axiomatized with ¬ (intuitionistic negation) deﬁned, rather that a prim-
itive, operation. Any wﬀB contains ﬁnitely many propositional variables, let us
say, p0, . . . , pn. Then the translation of B, τ(B), is inductively deﬁned by (1)–(5).
(1)
τ(F ) = n
i=0 pi;
(4)
τ(A ∧B) = τ(A) ∧τ(B);
(2)
τ(p) = p where p ∈P;
(5)
τ(A ∨B) = τ(A) ∨τ(B).
(3)
τ(A →B) = t ∧τ(A) →τ(B);
Then, B is a theorem of H if and only if τ(B) is a theorem of R t. Of course, since
τ(B) is a positive wﬀ, R t can be replaced by R t
+. On the other hand, under the
identity translation every theorem of R t
+ is a theorem of H.
A potential next question is the relation of R to classical logic. We note before
anything else that adding the principal type scheme of K to R collapses R into
classical logic. Nowadays, it is a common place that classical logic has several
functionally complete sets of connectives such as { ¬, ∧}, { | } and { ¬, ∨}, for
instance. The wﬀs (1′)–(6′) (of section 1) all could be derived from A ∨¬A by a
rule A ⇒A ∨B. This restates the observation that classical theorems can easily
be translated into R theorems (cf. theorem 34). Of course, classically all theorems
are equivalent, and so in a certain sense all classical theorems are equivalent to
A ∨¬A, which means that classical logic has ℵ0 copies amongst the theorems of
R. Moreover, ℵ0 many instances of A ∨∼A are distinct in R, that is, they do
not imply each other. Thus, classical logic is in R in another sense too. After all
nothing is lost from classical logic in R in the sense of theoremhood; rather, because
the implication of R is an implication, hence ∼A∧A →B, for instance, is not an R
theorem (but ∼A∨A∨B is). An interesting turnaround is that classical ﬁrst-order
logic can be formalized with logical constants disjunction, negation and existential
quantiﬁer and with only relevant inference steps as the one sided Gentzen-style
calculus K1 in Dunn and Meyer [1989] demonstrates.
The relationship of R to classical logic has been investigated in a diﬀerent,
but also technically motivated setting. As we mentioned the Lindenbaum algebra
of R is not a Boolean algebra, that is, R does not contain classical logic in the
same way as well-known modal logics such as K, B, S5, etc. encompass classical

784
Katalin Bimb´o
logic. R+ can be extended to include ¬ (classical negation), without the resulting
logic crumbling into the two-valued propositional system. The system of “classical
relevance logic” CR is deﬁned by the addition of axiom (A30) and rule (R15) (cf.
Meyer and Routley [1973] and Meyer and Routley [1974]).
(A30) ¬¬A →A
(R15) A ∧B →¬ C ⇒A ∧C →¬B
Of course, ¬ is not ∼, thereby some of the undesirable (i.e., paradoxical) wﬀs
piggyback on ¬ as theorems. For instance, A ∧¬A →B as well as A →B ∨¬B
are provable in CR. We reiterate that not only the relevance logics that formalize
various reasonable properties of implication do not collapse into classical logic, but
after adding classical negation to R+ the so obtained logic still stands apart from
classical logic. Ultraﬁlters of a Boolean algebra form an antichain. Hence, the
frame for CR which has a Boolean algebra (topped with further operations) as
its Lindenbaum algebra can be simpliﬁed by turning ⊑into identity. Meyer and
Routley [1973] remark that the addition of Boolean negation might simplify the
decidability problem for R+; and it seems it indeed did.
Another place where Boolean negation may be useful is in a display logic for-
mulation of R. Display logic was introduced by Belnap [1982] (see also Anderson
et al. [1992, §62]) as a generalization of Gentzen-style sequent calculi. Beyond
the idea of having enough many structural connectives for diﬀerent kinds of con-
nectives (e.g., some extensional and intensional ones) that was already present in
LR+, display logic builds in residuation into the syntax of a logic directly (on
the level of the structural connectives). Display calculi enjoy both cut-free proofs
and the subformula property as a result of exploiting the structural connectives
for back and forth moves between the two sides of a consecution (which is what
makes residuation attractive proof theoretically) without making the connectives
(that are the counterparts of the structural connectives involved) part of a wﬀ. R
can be so Gentzenized, because the addition of classical negation does not yield
new theorems in R’s language (see Anderson et al. [1992, §62.5.2]).
Some of the main points we made in this chapter are as follows. We argued that
classical logic does not formalize implication or entailment, however, relevance
logics formalize a whole variety of these notions. We presented some technical
details that contribute not only to the proofs of certain lemmas and theorems, but
are of interest in themselves and provide true philosophical insights.
We agree with Haack [1996] and Woods [2003], for instance, that certain formal
results might have philosophical implications.45 It seems that some philosophers
are concerned about the place (or displacement) of classical logic in the late 20th
and in the 21st century. In this chapter we tried to introduce a wide range of
relevance logics so as to demonstrate their versatility. Some of the logics we men-
tioned, such as T→, do not contain classical logic under any obvious translation,
45We ﬁnd, however, Haack’s classiﬁcation of logics into “deviant/rivals” and “alterna-
tive/supplements” more that a bit “fuzzy.”

Relevance Logics
785
despite the fact that they model a certain kind of entailment. Some other logics, for
example, T ◦t, contain all the theorems of classical logic under a straightforward
matching of the connectives without abandoning the requirement that implications
should be relevant. Furthermore, some (though not each) of the relevance logics,
but importantly R, can be extended to contain classical logic as an underlying
Boolean algebra — without becoming a notational variant of classical logic.
It is our hope that the exploration of the relation of relevance logics to clas-
sical logic — that we slightly overemphasized in this chapter if looked at from
purely the point of view of relevance logics — addresses some of the not fully
uncommon philosophical concerns about the advancement of nonclassical logics
including relevance logics. In a more technical tone, one has to profess that the
Boolean extensions led to exciting logical results both for intensional logics in
general, but also, speciﬁcally, for relevance logics without orthonegation.
Lastly, we want to point out that relevance logics connect fruitfully to further
removed logics that are variously called substructural, nonstandard, intensional or
nonclassical. However, the exploration of those relationships is way more that
what could ﬁt into the scope of this chapter.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am grateful to Michael Dunn for advancing my knowledge of logic in a variety of
ways for more that a decade, and for his useful comments on this chapter. I owe
thanks to Alasdair Urquhart for his help at a crucial moment as the project of
writing this chapter was getting on the road. I am thankful to the Robarts Library
of the University of Toronto that generously gave me access to its collections (that
led to some citations in this chapter). I wish to thank Steve Giambrone for acting
as an intermediary in setting up the project. Financial support was provided by
the School of Informatics at Indiana University in Bloomington, that is gratefully
acknowledged.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Ackermann, 1956] W. Ackermann. Begr¨undung einer strengen Implikation. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 21, 113–128, 1956.
[Allwein and Dunn, 1993] G. Allwein and J. M. Dunn. Kripke models for linear logic. Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 58, 514–545, 1993.
[Anderson and Belnap, 1962] A. R. Anderson and N. D. Belnap. The pure calculus of entail-
ment. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 27, 19–52, 1962.
[Anderson and Belnap, 1975] A. R. Anderson and N. D. Belnap.
Entailment. The Logic of
Relevance and Necessity, volume I. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1975.
[Anderson et al., 1992] A. R. Anderson, N. D. Belnap, and J. M. Dunn. Entailment. The Logic
of Relevance and Necessity, volume II. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1992.
[Anderson, 1960] A. R. Anderson. Entailment shorn of modality, (abstract). Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 25, 388, 1960.
[Avron, 1988] A. Avron. The semantics and proof theory of linear logic. Theoretical Computer
Science, 57, 161–184, 1988.

786
Katalin Bimb´o
[Barwise, 1993] J. K. Barwise. Constraints, channels and the ﬂow of information. In P. Aczel,
D. Israel, Y. Katagiri, and S. Peters, editors, Situation Theory and its Applications, pages
3–27. CSLI, Stanford, CA, 1993.
[Belnap, 1982] N. D. Belnap. Display logic. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 11, 375–417, 1982.
[Belnap, 1993] N. D. Belnap. Life in the undistributed middle. In K. Doˇsen and P. Schroeder-
Heister, editors, Substructural Logics, pages 31–41. Clarendon and Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK and New York, NY 1993.
[Bimb´o and Dunn, 2002] K. Bimb´o and J. M. Dunn. Four-valued logic. Notre Dame Journal
of Formal Logic, 42, 171–192, 2002.
[Bimb´o and Dunn, 2005] K. Bimb´o and J. M. Dunn. Relational semantics for Kleene logic and
action logic. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 46, 461–490, 2005.
[Bimb´o, 2003] K. Bimb´o.
A set theoretical semantics for full propositional linear logic, (ab-
stract). Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 10, 136, 2003.
[Bimb´o, 2005a] K. Bimb´o. Types of I-free hereditary right maximal terms. Journal of Philo-
sophical Logic, 34, 607–620, 2005.
[Bimb´o, 2005b] K. Bimb´o.
Admissibility of cut in LC with ﬁxed point combinator.
Studia
Logica, 81, 399–423, 2005.
[Boolos, 1995] G. Boolos. The Logic of Provability. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK, 1995.
[Brady, 1984] R. T. Brady.
Natural deduction systems for some quantiﬁed relevant logics.
Logique et Analyse, 27, 355–377, 1984.
[Brady, 2003] R. T. Brady, editor. Relevant Logics and their Rivals, vol. II. A continuation
of the work of R. Sylvan, R. Meyer, V. Plumwood and R. Brady, volume 59 of Western
Philosophy Series. Ashgate, Burlington, VT, 2003.
[Church, 1951] A. Church. The weak theory of implication. In A. Menne, A. Wilhelmy, and
H. Angsil, editors, Kontrolliertes Denken, Untersuchungen zum Logikkalk¨ul und zur Logik
der Einzelwissenschaften, pages 22–37. Komissions-Verlag Karl Alber, Munich, 1951.
[Cohen, 1963] P. Cohen. The independence of the continuum hypothesis, I. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 50, 1143–1148, 1963.
[Cohen, 1964] P. Cohen. The independence of the continuum hypothesis, II. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 51, 105–110, 1964.
[Curry and Feys, 1958] H. B. Curry and R. Feys. Combinatory Logic, volume I. North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1st edition, 1958.
[Curry, 1963] H. B. Curry. Foundations of Mathematical Logic. McGraw-Hill Book Company,
New York, NY, 1963.
[Diamond, 1976] C. Diamond, editor. Wittgenstein’s Lectures on the Foundations of Mathe-
matics. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 1976.
[Dunn and Hardegree, 2001] J. M. Dunn and G. M. Hardegree. Algebraic Methods in Philo-
sophical Logic, volume 41 of Oxford Logic Guides.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK,
2001.
[Dunn and Meyer, 1989] J. M. Dunn and R. K. Meyer. Gentzen’s cut and Ackermann’s gamma.
In J. Norman and R. Sylvan, editors, Directions in Relevant Logic, pages 229–240. Kluwer,
Dordrecht, 1989.
[Dunn and Meyer, 1997] J. M. Dunn and R. K. Meyer. Combinators and structurally free logic.
Logic Journal of IGPL, 5, 505–537, 1997.
[Dunn and Restall, 2002] J. M. Dunn and G. Restall.
Relevance logic.
In D. Gabbay and
F. Guenthner, editors, Handbook of Philosophical Logic, volume 6, pages 1–128. Kluwer,
Amsterdam, 2nd edition, 2002.
[Dunn, 1966] J. M. Dunn. The Algebra of Intensional Logics. PhD thesis, University of Pitts-
burgh, Ann Arbor (UMI), 1966.
[Dunn, 1973] J. M. Dunn.
A ‘Gentzen system’ for positive relevant implication, (abstract).
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 38, 356–357, 1973.
[Dunn, 1976a] J. M. Dunn. Intuitive semantics for ﬁrst-degree entailment and ‘coupled trees’.
Philosophical Studies, 29, 149–168, 1976.
[Dunn, 1976b] J. M. Dunn. A Kripke-style semantics for R-mingle using a binary accessibility
relation. Studia Logica, 35, 163–172, 1976.
[Dunn, 1976c] J. M. Dunn. Quantiﬁcation and RM. Studia Logica, 35, 315–322, 1976.
[Dunn, 1980] J. M. Dunn. A sieve for entailments. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 9, 41–57,
1980.

Relevance Logics
787
[Dunn, 1986] J. M. Dunn. Relevance logic and entailment. In D. Gabbay and F. Guenthner,
editors, Handbook of Philosophical Logic, volume 3, pages 117–229. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1st
edition, 1986.
[Dunn, 1991] J. M. Dunn. Gaggle theory: An abstraction of Galois connections and residuation
with applications to negation and various logical operations. In J. van Eijck, editor, Logics
in AI: European Workshop JELIA ’90, volume 478 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 31–51. Springer, Berlin, 1991.
[Dunn, 1993] J. M. Dunn. Partial-gaggles applied to logics with restricted structural rules. In
K. Doˇsen and P. Schroeder-Heister, editors, Substructural Logics, pages 63–108. Clarendon
and Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK and New York, NY 1993.
[Dunn, 1995] J. M. Dunn. Gaggle theory applied to intuitionistic, modal and relevance logic.
In I. Max and W. Stelzner, editors, Logik und Mathematik. Frege-Kolloquium Jena, pages
335–368. W. de Gruyter, Berlin, 1995.
[Dunn, 2001] J. M. Dunn. A representation of relation algebras using Routley-Meyer frames.
In C. A. Anderson and M. Zel¨eny, editors, Logic, Meaning and Computation. Essays in
Memory of Alonzo Church, volume 305 of Synthese Library: Studies in Epistemology, Logic,
Methodology and Philosophy of Science, pages 77–108. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2001.
[Enderton, 2001] H. B. Enderton. A Mathematical Introduction to Logic. Harcourt-Academic
Press, Burlington, MA, 2nd edition, 2001.
[Fine, 1974] K. Fine. Models for entailment. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 3, 347–372, 1974.
[Frege, 1967] G. Frege. Begriﬀsschrift. In J. van Heijenoort, editor, From Frege to G¨odel, pages
5–82. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1967.
[Gentzen, 1935] G. Gentzen.
Untersuchungen ¨uber das logische Schließen.
Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 39, 176–210, 1935.
[Giambrone, 1985] S. Giambrone. TW+ and RW+ are decidable. Journal of Philosophical Logic,
14, 235–254, 1985.
[Girard, 1987] J.–Y. Girard. Linear logic. Theoretical Computer Science, 50, 1–102, 1987.
[Girard, 2004] J.–Y. Girard. Between logic and quantic: a tract. In T. Ehrhard, J.–Y. Girard,
P. Ruet, and Ph. Scott, editors, Linear Logic in Computer Science, number 316 in Lon-
don Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, pages 346–381. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, 2004.
[G¨odel, 1933a] K. G¨odel. Eine Interpretation des intuitionistischen Aussagenkalk¨uls, 1933. In
S. Feferman, editor, Collected Works, volume I, pages 300–303. Oxford University Press and
Clarendon Press, New York, NY and Oxford, UK, 1986.
[G¨odel, 1933b] K. G¨odel. Zur intuitionistischen Arithmetik und Zahlentheorie, 1933. In S. Fefer-
man, editor, Collected Works, volume I, pages 286–295. Oxford University Press and Claren-
don Press, New York, NY and Oxford, UK, 1986.
[G¨odel, 1938] K. G¨odel. The consistency of the axiom of choice and of the generalized continuum
hypothesis. The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 24, 665–557, 1938.
[Goldblatt, 2003] R. Goldblatt. Mathematical modal logic: a view of its evolution. Journal of
Applied Logic, 1, 309–392, 2003.
[Haack, 1996] S. Haack. Deviant Logic, Fuzzy Logic. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL,
1996.
[Helman, 1977] G. H. Helman. Restricted Lambda Abstraction and the Interpretation of some
Nonclassical Logics. PhD thesis, University of Pittsburgh, Ann Arbor (UMI), 1977.
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1950] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann.
Principles of Mathematical
Logic. Chelsea Publishing Company, New York, NY, 2nd edition, 1950.
[Hindley, 1997] J. R. Hindley. Basic Simple Type Theory, volume 42 of Cambridge Tracts in
Theoretical Computer Science. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1997.
[Kleene, 1952] S. C. Kleene. Introduction to Metamathematics. Van Nostrand, New York, NY,
1952.
[Kopylov, 2001] A. P. Kopylov. Decidability of linear aﬃne logic. In A. R. Meyer, editor, Special
issue: LICS 1995, volume 164 of Information and Computation, pages 173–198. IEEE, 2001.
[Kripke, 1959] S. A. Kripke. The problem of entailment, (abstract). Journal of Symbolic Logic,
24, 324, 1959.
[Lemmon et al., 1969] E. J. Lemmon, C. A. Meredith, D. Meredith, A. N. Prior, and I. Thomas.
Calculi of pure strict implication. In J. W. Davis, D. J. Hockney, and W. K. Wilson, editors,
Philosophical Logic, pages 215–250. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1969.

788
Katalin Bimb´o
[Lincoln et al., 1992] P. Lincoln, J. Mitchell, A. Scedrov, and N. Shankar. Decision problems
for linear logic. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 56, 239–311, 1992.
[Mares and Meyer, 2001] E. D. Mares and R. K. Meyer. Relevant logics. In L. Goble, editor, The
Blackwell Guide to Philosophical Logic, volume 4 of Blackwell Philosophy Guides, chapter 13,
pages 280–308. Blackwell, Oxford, UK, 2001.
[Mares, 2000] E. D. Mares. CE is not a conservative extension of E. Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 29, 263–275, 2000.
[Mares, 2002] E. D. Mares. Relevance logic. In D. Jacquette, editor, A Companion to Philo-
sophical Logic, volume 22 of Blackwell Companions to Philosophical Logic, chapter 38, pages
609–627. Blackwell, Madden, MA, 2002.
[Mares, 2004] E. D. Mares. Relevant Logic. A Philosophical Interpretation. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, UK, 2004.
[McRobbie and Belnap, 1979] M. A. McRobbie and N. D. Belnap. Relevant analytic tableaux.
Studia Logica, 38, 187–200, 1979.
[Megill and Bunder, 1996] N. D. Megill and M. W. Bunder. Weaker D-complete logics. Journal
of IGPL, 4, 215–225, 1996.
[Meredith and Prior, 1963] C. A. Meredith and A. N. Prior. Notes on the axiomatics of the
propositional calculus. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 4, 171–187, 1963.
[Meyer and Dunn, 1969] R. K. Meyer and J. M. Dunn. E, R and γ. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
34, 460–474, 1969.
[Meyer and Routley, 1972] R. K. Meyer and R. Routley.
Algebraic analysis of entailment I.
Logique et Analyse, 15, 407–428, 1972.
[Meyer and Routley, 1973] R. K. Meyer and R. Routley.
Classical relevant logics, I.
Studia
Logica, 32, 51–66, 1973.
[Meyer and Routley, 1974] R. K. Meyer and R. Routley. Classical relevant logics, II. Studia
Logica, 33, 183–194, 1974.
[Meyer et al., 1995] R. K. Meyer, M. A. McRobbie, and N. D. Belnap. Linear analytic tableaux.
In P. Baumgartner, R. H¨ahnle, and J. Posegga, editors, Theorem Proving with Analytic
Tableaux and Related Methods, volume 918 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
278–293, Berlin, 1995. 4th International Workshop, tableaux’95, Springer.
[Meyer, 1966] R. K. Meyer. Topics in Modal and Many-valued Logic. PhD thesis, University of
Pittsburgh, Ann Arbor (UMI), 1966.
[Meyer, 1973] R. K. Meyer. Intuitionism, entailment, negation. In H. Leblanc, editor, Truth,
syntax and modality, pages 168–198. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1973.
[Meyer, 2004] R. K. Meyer. Ternary relations and relevant logics. Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 127, 195–217, 2004.
[Restall, 200+] G. Restall. Relevant and substructural logics. In D. M. Gabbay and J. Woods,
editors, The Handbook of the History of Logic, (to appear), volume 6. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
200+.
[Routley and Meyer, 1972a] R. Routley and R. K. Meyer.
The semantics of entailment, II.
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 1, 53–73, 1972.
[Routley and Meyer, 1972b] R. Routley and R. K. Meyer.
The semantics of entailment, III.
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 1, 192–208, 1972.
[Routley and Meyer, 1973] R. Routley and R. K. Meyer. The semantics of entailment, I. In
H. Leblanc, editor, Truth, Syntax and Modality. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1973.
[Routley et al., 1982] R. Routley, R. K. Meyer, V. Plumwood, and R. Brady. Relevant Logics
and their Rivals, vol. I. Ridgeview Publishing Company, Atascadero, CA, 1982.
[Simpson, 1991] S. G. Simpson. Subsystems of Second Order Arithmetic. Springer, New York,
NY, 1991.
[Smullyan, 1968] R. M. Smullyan. First-order Logic. Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 1968,
(Dover, New York, NY, 1995).
[Thistlewaite et al., 1988] P. B. Thistlewaite, M. A. McRobbie, and R. K. Meyer. Automated
Theorem Proving in Non-classical Logics. Pitman, London, UK, 1988.
[Urquhart, 1972] A. Urquhart.
Semantics for relevant logic.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 37,
159–169, 1972.
[Urquhart, 1979] A. Urquhart. A topological representation theorem for lattices. Algebra Uni-
versalis, 8, 45–58, 1979.
[Urquhart, 1984] A. Urquhart. The undecidability of entailment and relevant implication. Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic, 49, 1059–1073, 1984.

Relevance Logics
789
[Urquhart, 1990] A. Urquhart. The complexity of decision procedures in relevance logic I. In
J. M. Dunn and A. Gupta, editors, Truth or Consequences: Essays in honour of Nuel Belnap.
Kluwer, Amsterdam, 1990.
[Urquhart, 1993] A. Urquhart. Failure of interpolation in relevant logics. Journal of Philosoph-
ical Logic, 22, 449–479, 1993.
[Urquhart, 1999] A. Urquhart.
The complexity of decision procedures in relevance logic II.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 64, 1774–1802, 1999.
[Urquhart, 2000] A. Urquhart. The complexity of linear logic with weakening. In S. R. Buss,
P. H´ajek, and P. Pudl´ak, editors, Logic Colloquium’98, volume 13 of Lecture Notes in Logic,
pages 500–515, Natick, MA, 2000. A. K. Peters.
[Woods, 2003] J. Woods.
Paradox and Paraconsistency. Conﬂict Resolution in the Abstract
Sciences. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2003.
[Zermelo, 1962] E. Zermelo, editor. Georg Cantor: Gesammelte Abhandlungen. G. Olms Ver-
lagsbuchhandlung, Hildesheim, 1962.


PARACONSISTENT LOGICS AND
PARACONSISTENCY
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
1
INTRODUCTION
“I predict a time when there will be mathematical investigations
of calculi containing contradictions, and people will actually be
proud of having emancipated themselves from contradictions.”
L. Wittgenstein
“As a lightning clears the air of unpalatable vapors, so an incisive
paradox frees the human intelligence from the lethargic inﬂuence
of latent and unsuspected assumptions. Paradox is the slayer of
Prejudice.”
J. J. Sylvester
In a few words, paraconsistent logics (PL) are the logics of inconsistent but nontrivial
theories. A deductive theory is paraconsistent if its underlying logic is paraconsistent.
A theory is inconsistent if there is a formula (a grammatically well-formed expression
of its language) such that the formula and its negation are both theorems of the theory;
otherwise, the theory is called consistent. A theory is trivial if all formulas of its language
are theorems. Roughly speaking, in a trivial theory ‘everything’ (expressed in its lan-
guage) can be proved. If the underlying logic of a theory is classical logic, or even any of
the standard logical systems like intuitionistic logic, inconsistency entails triviality, and
conversely. So, how can we speak of inconsistent but nontrivial theories? Of course,
by changing the underlying logic to one which admits inconsistency without making the
system trivial. Paraconsistent logics do just this job.
Our use of terms like ‘consistency’, ‘inconsistency’, ‘contradictory’ and similar ones
is syntactical, which is in accordance with the original metamathematical terminology of
Hilbert and his school. In order to treat such terms from a semantic point of view, in the
ﬁeld of paraconsistency, one must be able to build, ﬁrst, a paraconsistent set theory. This
is possible, as we will see, although most semantics for paraconsistent logics are classical,
i.e., constructed inside classical set theories. So, to begin with, it is best to employ the
above terms syntactically.
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

792
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
1.1
The origins
The origins of paraconsistent logics go back to the ﬁrst systematic studies dealing with
the possibility of rejecting or restricting the law (or principle) of noncontradiction, which
(in one of its possible formulations) says that a formula and its negation cannot both be
true. The law of noncontradiction is one of the basic laws of traditional, or classical (Aris-
totelian), logic. This principle is important. After all, since inconsistency entails triviality,
an inconsistent set of premises yields any well-formed statement as a consequence. The
result is that the set of consequences of an inconsistent theory, or set of premises, will
explode into triviality and the theory is rendered useless.
Another way of expressing this fact is by saying that under classical logic the closure
of any inconsistent set of sentences includes every sentence. It is this which lies behind
Popper’s famous statement that the acceptance of inconsistency ‘’. . . would mean the
complete breakdown of science” and that an inconsistent system is ultimately uninforma-
tive.1
Inconsistencies appear in various levels of discussion of science and philosophy. For
instance, Peirce’s world of ‘signs’ (which we inhabit) is an inconsistent and incomplete
world. Bohr’s theory of the atom is one of the well-known examples in science of an
inconsistent theory. The old quantum theory of black-body radiation, Newtonian cos-
mology, the (early) theory of inﬁnitesimals in the calculus, the Dirac δ-function, Stokes’
analysis of pendulum motion, Michelson’s ‘single-ray’ analysis of the Michelson-Morley
interferometer arrangement, among others, can also be considered as cases of inconsis-
tencies in science. Given cases such as these, it seems clear that we should not eliminate
a priori inconsistent theories, but rather investigate them. In this context, paraconsistent
logics acquire a fundamental role within science itself as well as in its philosophy. As we
will see below, due to the wide range of applications which nowadays have been found
for these logics, they have an important role in applied science as well.
The forerunners of paraconsistent logics are Jan Łukasiewicz and Nicolai I. Vasiliev.
Independently of each other, both suggested in 1910 and 1911 that ‘non-Aristotelian’
logics could be obtained by rejecting the law of noncontradiction.2 Although Łukasi-
ewicz did not construct any system of paraconsistent logic, his ideas on the principle of
noncontradiction in Aristotle inﬂuenced his student S. Ja´skowski in the construction of
’discussive’ (or ‘discursive’) logic in 1948. (We will comment on Ja´skowski’s systems
below.) In 1911, 1912 and 1913, inspired by the works of Lobachewski on non-Euclidean
geometry, initially called ‘imaginary geometry’, Vasiliev envisaged an imaginary logic, a
non-Aristotelian logic where the principle of noncontradiction was not valid in general.
According to Arruda, Vasiliev did not believe that there exist contradictions in the real
world, but only in a possible world created by the human mind. Thus, he hypothesized
imaginary worlds where the Aristotelian principles were not valid, even though Vasiliev
did not develop his ideas in full.3
1For further details and references, see [da Costa and French, 2003], Chap. 5.
2For further historical details on PL, see [Arruda, 1980], [Arruda, 1989], [Arruda, 1990], [Bobenrieth, 1996],
[da Costa and Marconi, 1989], [D’Ottaviano, 1990], [Puga and da Costa, 1988], [Guillaume, 1996], [da Costa
et al., 1995].
3Arruda systematized some points on Vasiliev’s imaginary logic, giving rise to three systems of paraconsis-

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
793
The very ﬁrst logician to construct a formal system of paraconsistent logic was Stanis-
law Ja´skowski in 1948. His motivations came from his interests in systematizing theories
that contain contradictions, such as dialectics, as well as to study theories where contra-
dictions are caused by vagueness. He was also interested in the study of empirical theo-
ries whose postulates include contradictory assumptions (see section 4). Despite the wide
range of possible applications, Ja´skowski’s discussive logic was restricted to the propo-
sitional level. In 1958, the ﬁrst author of this paper, independently of Ja´skowski, began
the general study of contradictory systems [da Costa, 1958]. Ever since, da Costa has de-
veloped several systems related to paraconsistency (for instance, ‘paraclassical logic’ —
see section 7.3), showing how to deal with inconsistencies from diﬀerent perspectives. He
apparently became the ﬁrst logician to develop strong logical systems involving contradic-
tions which could be useful for substantive parts of mathematics as well as the empirical
and human sciences. It should be remarked that the adjective ’paraconsistent’ (which
means something like ‘at the side of consistency’) was suggested by F. Mir´o-Quesada, in
1976, in a letter to da Costa.
Already in the sixties, the interest in logics dealing with inconsistencies began in other
parts of the world as well, particularly in Poland, Australia, United States, Italy, Ar-
gentina, Belgium, Ecuador, and Peru, mainly for its relations to da Costa’s logics and to
relevant and dialectical logic. Of course, in this paper, we cannot refer to all of these ten-
dencies nor do justice to all the authors involved. For the historical details, we recommend
the reading the papers mentioned above.
At least two facts have contributed to emphasize the relevance of these developments.
The ﬁrst is that in 1990, Mathematical Reviews added a new entry, 03B53, called ‘Para-
consistent Logic’. From 2000 on, the title was changed to ‘Logics admitting inconsistency
(paraconsistent logics, discussive logics, etc.)’, thus encompassing a wider subject. The
second fact is that since 1996, several World Congresses on Paraconsistency have been
organized.4 Nowadays ’paraconsistency’ can be regarded as a ﬁeld of knowledge. But
perhaps the most surprising fact concerning paraconsistent logic is related to its applica-
tions. As we will note later, there have been applications not only to the foundations of
science and its philosophical analysis, but even to technology. Here we do not have space
to present all the details, but the references list the original sources.
1.2
On the nature of logic
To understand the meaning and nature of logic, it is important to take into account that
logic today is a ﬁeld of knowledge of the same nature as mathematics.
The results
achieved in logic can be compared to those of mathematics and the empirical sciences in
their depth and originality (let us just mention G¨odel’s theorems, the results in recursion
theory and in the theory of models). And similarly to mathematics, we can divide logic
into two domains: pure logic and applied logic. ‘Pure’ logic, similarly to pure mathemat-
ics, can be developed in principle in abstracto, independently of possible applications. In
tent logic [Arruda, 1977]. Nowadays, the logical works of Vasiliev have been studied in Russia, specially by V.
A. Bazhanov.
4See www.cle.unicamp.br/wcp3 for the page of the third congress.

794
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
particular, we can study paraconsistent logic or intuitionistic logic by themselves, basi-
cally with the aim of exploring their abstract mathematical properties. From this point of
view, in developing a logical system, the logician can proceed as Hilbert suggested, when
he said that “[t]he mathematician will have to take account not only of those theories that
come near to reality, but also, as in geometry, of all logically possible theories” [Hilbert,
1902]. To sum up, from the pure viewpoint, logic studies certain abstract structures, such
as formal languages, models, and Turing machines, independently of their applications.
Following Hilbert’s suggestion, we can develop abstract (pure) systems where some
principle of classical logic is violated, for instance, the principle that entails that from
contradictory premises any formula can be derived; in symbols, α ∧¬α ⊢β . (The
corresponding law, (α ∧¬α) →β, is Duns Scotus Law, valid not only in classical logic,
but in almost all known logical systems, including intuitionistic logic.)5 This is the way
taken by Vasiliev in the construction of his imaginary logics.
But to develop a logic we can also proceed from the applied point of view. In this
case, we look at some domain of knowledge where it seems that some logic (in particular,
a paraconsistent one) could be used to describe certain abstract structures that reﬂect
the way certain deductive inferences are made in that domain. One of the best known
examples is provided by Birkhoﬀand von Neumann’s approach to quantum logic, when
they insisted that quantum mechanics would demand a logic distinct from the classical
one, giving rise to a whole new ﬁeld of investigation, quantum logic (see [Dalla Chiara
and Giuntini, 2001]).
It is sometimes claimed that nonclassical logics need to be developed because classical
logic is wrong, and so it must be replaced by a suitable logic, in accordance to some
philosophical criterion (for a discussion, see [Haack, 1974]). This would be the case, for
example, of the intuitionistic Brouwer-Heyting logic if we consider it as a culmination of
Brouwer’s original philosophy of mathematics. Brouwer’s stance implies that, in a certain
sense, classical mathematics has basic shortcomings and that a constructive mathematics
should take its place; the underlying logic of this constructive mathematics is a new one,
diﬀerent from classical logic. In particular, it may be argued that, in domains involving
inconsistency (if really there are any), some other logic should be used instead of classical
logic. Nowadays, there are also philosophers who believe that, in these ﬁelds, classical
logic should be replaced by another logic (most of them think that the right logic would
be relevant).
But this is not our view regarding the rejection of classical logic. We think that classical
logic is a key subject that has, and will continue to have, strong interest and applications.
The only diﬀerence is that, in certain domains, other logics, in particular paraconsistent
logics, may be more adequate to make explicit some of the underlying structures that
(apparently) are being assumed in these domains. Classical logic can’t do that in every
domain. This does not show that classical logic is wrong, but that its area of application
should be restricted. The use of nonclassical logics in systematizing certain domains helps
us understand important aspects of these domains. For example, with PL, the nature of
negation has been better understood, and the signiﬁcance of Russell set can be appreciated
— see section 3.
5Some authors attribute this principle, also known as ‘the principle of explosion’, to Pseudo Scotus.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
795
Furthermore, as will become clear below, in our view, classical logic is valid in its
particular domain of application. With regard to PL, two possibilities emerge. In certain
contexts, PL can be viewed as a ‘heterodox’ logic, as a ‘rival’ logic [Haack, 1974], that
is, as a logic that deviates from classical logic with respect to some of its principles. But,
in other contexts, PL can be viewed as a supplement to classical logic. After all, certain
paraconsistent logics coincide with classical logic if we take into consideration just what
are called ‘well-behaved propositions’ (roughly, those propositions that obey the principle
of noncontradiction). In short, we don’t intend to play according to PL rules alone. PL
may be useful in some domains, as shown below, but we will continue to use classical
logic, or any other logic for that matter, whenever it is convenient or appropriate.
So, we are inclined to agree with Gonseth [Gonseth, 1974, Chap. 8] and sustain that
(applied) logic has an empirical counterpart. Nevertheless, we also have some reserva-
tions about Gonseth’s picture. First, given our distinction between pure and applied logic,
it is not necessary to eliminate a certain a priori aspect of logic, as Gonseth apparently
wants (according to him, ‘’logic is the science of an arbitrary object”). This does not
imply that we are endorsing the position that there is just one logic, which is indepen-
dent of any domain of knowledge. As noted above, logic can be studied independently
of any application, as a pure mathematical system, and in this sense, it can be considered
as weakly a priori. So, even an applied logical system possesses an a priori dimension,
in addition to its a posteriori one. In fact, we can begin by studying a logical system
(say, some quantum logic) motivated by empirical considerations from science, but then
proceed to verify whether this domain can be axiomatized, prove a completeness theorem
for the resulting system, study other metalogical properties of the system, and so on.
From another point of view, however, logic deals with the underlying structures of
inference of particular domains or theories. In this sense, a particular ﬁeld (such as the
quantum world, to continue with the example) may suggest that a diﬀerent logic (that
is, other than the classical one) is useful to accommodate certain features that cannot be
dealt with by classical logic. For example, suppose we accept the view (advanced by E.
Schr¨odinger, M. Born and others) that quantum objects are non-individuals, that is, they
have no individuality since a quantum object is always indistinguishable of any other of
a similar kind. It then seems that if we look at the quantum world as constituted by enti-
ties of this kind, classical logic (with Leibniz’s Principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles)
and classical mathematics (based on the notion of set, that is, collections of distinguish-
able objects) should be revised. This is particularly the case if we want to accommodate
entities that, in certain contexts, can be regarded as ‘individuals’ (for instance, when an
apparatus is prepared to work with particles), but in other contexts cannot be regarded as
‘individuals’ (say, when waves are taken into consideration). (Concerning these points,
see [French and Krause, to appear].) So, diﬀerent ‘perspectives’ of a domain of science
may demand distinct logical tools, which puts us in a diﬀerent framework than the classi-
cal one.
However, let us insist, the possibility of using nonstandard systems does not necessar-
ily entail that classical logic is wrong, or that domains like quantum theory need at the
moment another logic. Physicists and other scientists probably will continue to use classi-
cal (informal) logic in the near future. But we should realize that other forms of logic may

796
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
help us understand certain features of these domains, which are not easily accommodated
by classical means — as the concepts of non-individuality and complementarity in the
quantum domain show (see [French and Krause, to appear], [da Costa and Krause, 2004],
[da Costa and Krause, 2004a]).
We don’t think there is just one ‘true logic’. After all, distinct logical systems can be
useful to describe diﬀerent aspects of knowledge. (The same point can be made about
distinct mathematical systems, and perhaps even about diﬀerent physical physical sys-
tems.) In other words, we defend a form of logical pluralism. But our proposal is not
relativist, since it’s not the case that anything goes as far as applied logic is concerned.
We can always rule out certain applied logical systems as being inadequate for certain
domains. For instance, to capture constructive features of mathematical reasoning, clas-
sical logic is clearly inadequate; intuitionistic logic isn’t. (We will return to the issue of
logical pluralism below.) With regard to PL, we claim, with Granger [Granger, 1998], that
paraconsistent logic can, and should, be employed in the development of certain domains,
but only as a preliminary tool. In the end, classical logic may eventually replace it as the
underlying logic of these domains. Our position does not exclude Granger’s.
In summary, there are in principle various ‘pure’ logics whose potential applications
depend not only on a priori reasons, but, above all, on the nature of the applications one
has in mind. This is also true of PL.
This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we present da Costa’s C-logics.
We then turn to paraconsistent set theories, and show, in particular, how they accommo-
date inconsistent objects, such as the Russell set. Next, we examine Ja´skowski’s discus-
sive logic, and show how it can be used in the formulation of the concept of partial truth.
We then examine annotated logic, and some of its applications. Since all of these logics
have been applied so extensively, such applications are here only touched upon (but ref-
erences are given). Limitations of space also prevent us from examining all the related
paraconsistent systems that have been developed in the literature. In fact, it would be im-
possible to do justice to all developments of PL and their corresponding applications. So,
we limit ourselves to present the ideas and results with which our work is more closely
related.
2
THE C-LOGICS
In this section, we study a class of logics termed C-logics, which show that it is pos-
sible to elaborate strong paraconsistent logical systems. In particular, within some of
these systems, it is possible to build set theories and paraconsistent mathematics such that
they contain standard mathematics. So, we can say that certain paraconsistent logico-
mathematical systems increase the scope of traditional mathematics. In other words, it is
possible to construct strong inconsistent systems without the immediate danger of trivial-
ization. And there is no diﬃculty in reproducing within these systems the usual theories
of logic and mathematics.
We begin with the propositional paraconsistent logic and, little by little, show how it is
possible to get paraconsistent set theories and paraconsistent mathematics.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
797
The way we approach the subject will be that of pure mathematics, in the same way
that group theory or projective geometry of several dimensions are developed. The sig-
niﬁcance of all of this to the ‘real world’, that is, the possible applications of the resulting
systems, will be discussed throughout the paper.
2.1
The propositional calculi Cn
Our initial goal is to develop propositional calculi that can be the basis of inconsistent but
nontrivial theories.
We recall that a theory T, whose underlying logic is L and whose language is L, is in-
consistent if there is a formula α such that both α and ¬α (the negation of α) are theorems
of T; otherwise, T is consistent. T is trivial if all formulas of L are theorems of T; other-
wise, T is nontrivial. L is paraconsistent if it can be the underlying logic of inconsistent
but nontrivial theories.
An expression of the form α ∧¬α, where ∧is the symbol for the conjunction, is called
a contradiction. In general, if a theory is inconsistent, its logic enables us to derive, for
whatever formula α, a contradiction α ∧¬α from α and ¬α; on the other hand, in most
logics, from α∧¬α we can deduce both α and ¬α. So, it is usual to call the trivial theories
contradictory, which means that in such theories there are contradictions as theorems (or,
equivalently, contradictory theorems).
We will begin by presenting the propositional calculus C1. It seems natural that it
should contain the usual connectives: →(implication), ∧(conjunction), ∨(disjunction),
and ¬ (negation); equivalence (↔) is deﬁned as usual (see Deﬁnition 1 below). Further-
more, it seems also natural that C1 should be composed of most all of the valid schemes
and rules of classical propositional calculus, obeying the following conditions:6
I. In C1 it should be not generally valid the principle of noncontradiction.
II. From two contradictory propositions, that is, one being the negation of the another,
it should not be possible to deduce any proposition whatever.
The language L of C1 contains the following primitive symbols: (i) propositional vari-
ables: a denumerable (inﬁnite) set of propositional variables (formulas that are not ana-
lyzed at the propositional level); (ii) connectives: →, ∧, ∨and ¬; and (iii) parentheses.
Formulas are deﬁned as follows: (i) any propositional variable is a formula; (ii) if α
and β are formulas, then (α →β), (α ∧β), (α ∨β) and ¬α are formulas; (iii) the only
formulas are those obtained from the preceding conditions (i) and (ii).
To facilitate the reading, we will adopt some conventions: (a) the symbol →is stronger
than the others; (b) ∧and ∨are stronger than ¬; and (c) external parentheses can be
dispensed with.
DEFINITION 1. α ↔β =def (α →β) ∧(β →α)
Now we list the postulates of C1 (axiom schemes, axioms, and primitive inference
rules). To begin with, we adopt the postulates of positive intuitionistic propositional logic:
6Until section 5, validity means syntactic validity: a formula is valid in a calculus if it has a proof in such
calculus or if it is a theorem of this calculus.

798
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
1. α →(β →α)
2. (α →β) →((α →(β →γ)) →(α →γ))
3. α ∧β →α
4. α ∧β →β
5. α →(β →α ∧β)
6. α →(α ∨β)
7. β →(α ∨β)
8. (α →γ) →((β →γ) →(α ∨β →γ))
9. α, α →β ⧸β
Let us now examine negation. We could think about adding to the postulates above the
characteristic postulate of negation taken from the minimal calculus, namely,
(1)
(α →β) →((α →¬β) →¬α).
However, this would not be adequate. After all, from (1) and the postulates above, we can
deduce the schema
¬(α ∧¬α).
This stands for the principle of noncontradiction, which, by condition (I) above, should
not be valid in C1. Furthermore, in the minimal calculus, we can prove that the negation
of any proposition can be derived from a contradiction, and this is not adequate either (see
condition (II)). In the minimal calculus, we have (using (1))
α, ¬α, β ⊢α
and
α, ¬α, β ⊢¬α;
hence
α, ¬α ⊢¬β.
As a result, by applying twice the deduction theorem (which is a consequence of the
postulates for implication of the minimal calculus), we have
⊢α →(¬α →β).
However, it seems interesting to accept (1), at least for those β such that
¬(β ∧¬β).
This motivates us to adopt the following schema:
¬(β ∧¬β) →((α →β) →((α →¬β) →¬α)).

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
799
We think it is convenient that every proposition be either true or false, at least in prin-
ciple. (Nonetheless, we accept that there might be propositions that are true and whose
negations are also true.) It then seems convenient to include, in addition, the following
schema:
α ∨¬α.
Now, ¬(α ∧¬α) means that α satisﬁes the law of noncontradiction, that is, α is well-
behaved. If this is not the case, that is, if α ∧¬α holds, then α is ill-behaved. We then
introduce the following deﬁnition:
DEFINITION 2. αo =def ¬(α ∧¬α).
Let us now consider the schema
(2)
¬¬α →α.
We can reason heuristically as follows: if α is well-behaved, we can suppose that it obeys
classical logic, and so (2) holds. If α is ill-behaved, then both α and ¬α are true, and by
the postulates for implication, it follows that any proposition entails α; in particular, ¬¬α
entails α. Thus, (2) seems to be acceptable.
Finally, given what was said above, we also adopt postulates that entail that formulas
built with well-behaved formulas are also well-behaved. That is:
αo ∧βo →(α ∧β)o,
αo ∧βo →(α ∨β)o,
αo ∧βo →(α →β)o.
These new postulates can be written as follows:
αo ∧βo →(α ∧β)o ∧(α ∨β)o ∧(α →β)o.
We can then deduce
αo ∧βo →(α ↔β)o.
Note that there is no necessity of assuming that
αo →(¬α)o,
for this can be proven from the postulates above.
So, we have the following list of postulates for C1:
(→1) α →(β →α)
(→2) (α →β) →((α →(β →γ)) →(α →γ))
(→3) α, α →β ⧸β
(∧1) α ∧β →α
(∧2) α ∧β →β
(∧3) α →(β →α ∧β)

800
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
(∨1) α →(α ∨β)
(∨2) β →(α ∨β)
(∨3) (α →γ) →((β →γ) →(α ∨β →γ))
(¬1) βo →((α →β) →((α →¬β) →¬α))
(¬2) αo ∧βo →(α ∧β)o ∧(α ∨β)o ∧(α →β)o
(¬3) α ∨¬α
(¬4) ¬¬α →α.
We will show shortly that C1 has a bivalent semantics. But before doing that, let us
study the main properties of C1.
The concept of (formal) deduction of a formula from a set of formulas (i.e., in the
standard notation, Γ ⊢α) is deﬁned in the usual way. In this case, we say that α is a
syntactic consequence of the formulas in Γ. From now on, capital Greek letters stand for
collections of formulas, while small Greek letters stand for formulas. We have, in C1:
THEOREM 3.
(a) {α} ⊢α,
(b) Γ ⊢α entails Γ ∪Δ ⊢α,
(c) if Γ ⊢γ for any γ ∈Δ and Δ ⊢α, then Γ ⊢α.
Proof. Immediate, from the standard deﬁnition of syntactic consequence (⊢).
■
DEFINITION 4. α is a theorem of C1 iﬀ⊢α.
As usual, ⊢α means ∅⊢α. The symbols ⇒and ⇔are metalinguistic abbreviations of
implication and bi-implication respectively.
THEOREM 5. In C1:
(a) (Deduction theorem) Γ ∪{α} ⊢β ⇒Γ ⊢α →β
(b) (Modus ponens) {α, α →β} ⊢β
(c) {α, β} ⊢α ∧β, {α, β} ⊢α, {α, β} ⊢β
(d) {α} ⊢α ∨β, {β} ⊢α ∨β
(e) (Proof by cases) (Γ ∪{α} ⊢γ and Γ ∪{β}) ⊢γ ⇒Γ ∪{α ∨β} ⊢γ
(f) (Double negation elimination) {¬¬α} ⊢α.
Proof. As in classical logic. The deduction of the paraconsistent reductio ad absurdum is
made using the rules for implication and the schema (¬1).
■

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
801
The next theorem is important, since it shows that conditions (I) and (II) that C1 should
obey are indeed satisﬁed.
THEOREM 6. In C1, the following schemas do not hold:
1. ¬α →(α →β)
2. ¬α →(α →¬β)
3. α →(¬α →β)
4. α →(¬α →¬β)
5. α ∧¬α →β
6. α ∧¬α →¬β
7. (α →β) →((α →β) →¬α)
9. α →¬¬α
10. (α ↔¬α) →β
11. (α ↔¬α) →¬β
12. ¬(α ∧¬α)
13. α ∧¬α →¬(α ∧¬α)
Proof. The result is established using the tables below, with 1 and 2 as designated values:
α
β
α →β
α ∧β
α ∨β
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
3
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
3
2
1
3
1
1
3
3
3
1
2
3
3
3
1
3
3
1
3
3
α
¬α
1
3
2
1
3
1
■
We emphasize that, in C1, the following principles — that play an important role in
certain paradoxes, since they lead to trivialization — are not valid:
¬α →(α →β), ¬α →(α →¬β), α ∧¬α →β, α ∧¬α →¬β.

802
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
THEOREM 7. In C1, the following version of reductio ad absurdum holds:
(Γ ⊢βo, Γ ∪{α} ⊢β, Γ ∪{α} ⊢¬β) ⇒Γ ⊢¬α.
Proof. By the deduction theorem and (¬1).
■
COROLLARY 8. In C1, the following rules hold:
(Γ ∪{α} ⊢βo, Γ ∪{α} ⊢β, Γ ∪{α} ⊢¬β) ⇒Γ ⊢¬α,
(Γ ∪{¬α} ⊢βo, Γ ∪{¬α} ⊢β, Γ ∪{¬α} ⊢¬β) ⇒Γ ⊢¬α.
Proof. From the previous theorem and from the fact that in C1 we have: ⊢α ∨¬α and
⊢¬¬α →α.
■
THEOREM 9. If we add to the axioms of C1 the principle of noncontradiction, ¬(α∧¬α),
as an additional postulate, we get the classical propositional calculus (CPC).
Proof. By adding the principle of noncontradiction to C1, we get ⊢(α →β) →((α →
¬β) →¬α), and, hence, the postulate system for CPC presented by Kleene [Kleene, 1952,
p. 82].
■
From now on, to simplify the notation, we will eliminate the symbols { and } when we
write deductions.
THEOREM 10. In C1, we have:
1. α →α
2. α ↔α
3. α →β, β →γ ⊢α →γ
4. α →(β →γ) ⊢β →(α →γ)
5. α →(β →γ) ⊢α ∧β →γ
6. α ∧β →γ ⊢α →(β →γ)
7. α →β ⊢(β →γ) →(α →γ)
8. α →β ⊢(γ →α) →(γ →β)
9. α →β ⊢α ∧γ →β ∧γ
10. α →β ⊢γ ∧α →γ ∧β
11. α →β ⊢α ∨γ →β ∨γ

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
803
12. α →β ⊢γ ∨α →γ ∨β
13. α ↔β ⊢β ↔α
14. α ↔β, β ↔γ, γ ⊢α ↔γ
15. ⊢(α ↔β) ↔(β ↔α)
16. ⊢(α →(α →β)) →(α →β)
17. ⊢(α →(α →(α →β))) →(α →(α →β))
18. ⊢(α →. . . (α →β) . . .)

n+1 times
→(α →. . . (α →β) . . .)

n times
Proof. Immediate consequences of the way C1 was constructed.
■
THEOREM 11. Propositional positive intuitionistic logic is contained in C1.
Proof. This intuitionistic logic is, in fact, characterized by the postulates (¬1) to (∨3). ■
THEOREM 12. In C1, we have:
1. βo, α →β ⊢¬β →¬α
2. βo, α →¬β ⊢β →¬α
3. βo, ¬α →β ⊢¬β →α
4. βo, ¬α →¬β ⊢β →α
5. (α →¬α) →¬α
6. (¬α →α) →α
Proof. We prove item 3. We have: βo, ¬α →β, ¬α ⊢βo; βo, ¬α →β, ¬β, ¬α ⊢¬β;
βo, ¬α →β, ¬β, ¬α ⊢β. Hence, βo, ¬α →β, ¬β ⊢¬¬α, therefore βo, ¬α →β, ¬β ⊢α.
So, βo, ¬α →β ⊢¬β →α.
■
Remark: Since C1 has several of the usual properties of classical propositional calculus,
we can prove various other schemas as well, as is easy to see.
THEOREM 13. C1 is a sub-calculus of the classical propositional calculus.
Proof. All postulates of C1 are valid in the classical propositional calculus. Furthermore,
Theorem 6 shows that there are schemas that are valid in the latter calculus, but which are
not valid in C1.
■

804
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
THEOREM 14. In C1, the following schemas are not valid:
(α ∧β) ∧¬α →β and α ∨β →(¬α →β).
Proof. If these schemas were valid in C1, then using the deduction theorem, modus
ponens and the schema α →α ∨β, we could derive in C1 the schema α →(¬α →β). ■
The previous theorem could also be proven using the tables above. As a result, several
other schemas that are valid in classical logic are not theorems of C1.
COROLLARY 15. The following rules are not valid in C1 (disjunctive syllogisms):
α ∨β, ¬α
β
and ¬α ∨β, α
β
.
THEOREM 16. If α1, . . . , αn are the prime components (propositional variables) of a
formula α, then a necessary and suﬃcient condition for α to be provable in the classical
propositional calculus is that αo
1, . . . , αo
n ⊢α in C1.
Proof. If αo
1, . . . , αo
n ⊢α in C1, then ⊢α in the classical propositional calculus, since βo is
an abbreviation of ¬(β∧¬β). Now, if ⊢α in the classical propositional calculus (supposed
axiomatized as in [Kleene, 1952]), then there exists a proof P of α in this calculus, in
which only those formulas whose prime components are among α1, . . . , αn appear. So,
if k is one of the formulas in P, given postulate (¬2), we have that αo
1, . . . , αo
n ⊢ko in
C1. Furthermore, in C1, we have that αo
1, . . . , αo
n ⊢(γ →δ) →((γ →¬δ) →¬γ), with
the usual restrictions. But, since every postulate of the classical propositional calculus of
[Kleene, 1952] is valid in C1, with the exception of (θ →π) →((θ →¬π) →¬θ), we see
that P can be transformed into a deduction, in C1, of α from αo
1, . . . , αo
n.
■
THEOREM 17. If α1, . . . , αn are the prime components (propositional variables) of the
formulas Γ and of a formula α, then a necessary and suﬃcient condition for Γ ⊢α in the
classical propositional calculus is that Γ, αo
1, . . . , αo
n ⊢α in C1.
Proof. Analogous to the previous one.
■
THEOREM 18 (A. I. Arruda).
In C1, we have: ⊢αoo.
Proof. ⊢αoo means ¬(αo ∧¬αo), that is, ¬(αo ∧¬¬(α ∧¬α)). But αo ∧¬¬(α ∧¬α) ⊢αo
and αo ∧¬¬(α ∧¬α) ⊢α ∧¬α, hence ⊢¬(αo ∧¬¬(α ∧¬α)), that is, ⊢αoo.
■
THEOREM 19. In C1, we have: ⊢αo →(¬α)o.
Proof. We have: αo, ¬α∧¬¬α ⊢α and αo, ¬α∧¬¬α ⊢¬α. Given that αo, ¬α∧¬¬α ⊢αo,
it follows that αo ⊢¬(¬α ∧¬¬α), and hence, αo ⊢(¬α)o. Thus, ⊢αo →(¬α)o.
■
DEFINITION 20 (Strong negation).
¬⋆α =def ¬α ∧αo
THEOREM 21. In C1, ⊢(α →β) →((α →¬⋆β) →¬⋆α)

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
805
Proof. We have
α →β, α →¬⋆β, αo ⊢¬⋆α, and
(1)
α →β, α →¬⋆β, ¬αo ⊢α ∧¬α. But
α →β, α →¬⋆β, α ∧¬α ⊢β,
α →β, α →¬⋆β, α ∧¬α ⊢¬β and
α →β, α →¬⋆β ⊢αo. Therefore,
α →β, α →¬⋆β, ¬αo ⊢α,
α →β, α →¬⋆β, ¬αo ⊢¬α,
α →β, α →¬⋆β, ¬αo ⊢αo, and
α →β, α →¬⋆β, ¬αo ⊢¬⋆α.
(2)
From (1) and (2), using proof by cases and excluded middle, we have that
α →β, α →¬⋆β ⊢¬⋆α, hence
⊢(α →β) →((α →¬⋆β) →¬⋆α).
■
THEOREM 22. ⊢α →(¬⋆α →β)
Proof. We have:
α, ¬α ∧αo, ¬β ⊢α,
α, ¬α ∧αo, ¬β ⊢¬α,
α, ¬α ∧αo, ¬β ⊢αo. Hence,
α, ¬α ∧αo ⊢¬¬β,
α, ¬α ∧αo ⊢β and α, ¬⋆α ⊢β. So,
⊢α →(¬⋆α →β).
■
THEOREM 23. ⊢α ∨¬⋆α
Proof. We have:
⊢(α ∨¬⋆α) ↔α ∨(¬α ∧αo),
⊢(α ∨¬⋆α) ↔(α ∨¬α) ∧(α ∨αo), and

806
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
⊢(α ∨¬⋆α) ↔(α ∨αo).
But i) αo ⊢α ∨αo and ii) ¬αo ⊢α ∧¬α ⊢α ⊢α ∨αo. So, from i) and ii) it follows that
⊢α ∨αo, hence ⊢α ∨¬⋆α.
■
THEOREM 24. The connectives →, ∧, ∨and ¬⋆, in C1, satisfy all schemas and inference
rules of classical propositional calculus.
Proof. In C1, the following schemas are valid:
(α →β) →((α →¬⋆β) →¬⋆α),
α →(¬⋆α →β) and
α ∨¬⋆α.
If we add to these schemas the postulates (→1) to (∨3) above, we get the postulates for
the classical propositional calculus (see [Kleene, 1952]).
■
THEOREM 25. In C1, Peirce’s Law is valid; that is,
⊢((α →β) →α) →α.
Proof. Peirce’s Law can be derived in the classical propositional calculus. So, by the
previous theorem, it is provable in C1.
■
THEOREM 26. In C1, we have: ⊢α ∨(α →β).
Proof. ⊢α ∨(α →β) is valid in the classical propositional calculus.
■
The results above show that classical propositional calculus is, in a certain sense, con-
tained in C1, although C1 is a sub-calculus of it.
DEFINITION 27. A schema or formula α trivializes a calculus C if by adding α to C, the
new calculus is trivial, that is, all of its formulas are theorems.
THEOREM 28. Any formula of the form α ∧¬⋆α trivializes C1.
Proof. By the results above, we see that ¬⋆is a classical negation. So, α ∧¬⋆α entails
any formula, that is, ⊢α ∧¬⋆α →β.
■
THEOREM 29. The schema α ↔(α →β), where β is any formula, trivializes C1.
Proof. In C1, we have (i) ⊢α ∨(α →β). Hence, from α and α ↔(α →β), we deduce β.
From α →β and from α ↔(α →β), we deduce β again. So, from (i), ⊢β.
■

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
807
Since, in C1, we have that: ⊢α ∨(α →(α →. . . (α →β) . . .)

noccurences of α
, then the schema
α ↔α ∨(α →(α →. . . (α →β) . . .),
where β is any formula, also trivializes C1.
THEOREM 30. In C1,
⊬(α ↔(α ∨α)) ↔(¬α ↔(¬(α ∨α)).
Proof. Use the table given at Theorem 2.1.3, and assign to α the value 2.
■
THEOREM 31. In C1, the following schema and rule are not valid:
(α ↔β) →((¬α ↔¬β),
α ↔β
¬α ↔¬β.
Proof. Immediate consequence of the previous theorem.
■
2.2
The hierarchy Cn, 0 ≤n ≤ω
The calculus C1 is not the only that satisﬁes the conditions I and II formulated above (see
page 797). Among other possible solutions, we will indicate, in what follows, a hierarchy
of calculi which satisfy such conditions, except for the ﬁrst one, which will be taken to be
the classical propositional calculus. The hierarchy is the following:
(3)
C0, C1, C2, . . . , Cn, . . . , Cω,
where C0 is the classical propositional calculus and the remaining ones are deﬁned below.
To begin with, let us introduce the following deﬁnition:
DEFINITION 32.
(i) α(1) stands for αo
(ii) α(n) stands for αn−1 ∧(α(n−1))o, 2 ≤n ≤ω.
The calculus Cn (0 < n < ω) is then individualized by the postulates (→1) to (∨3)
above, plus α ∨¬α, ¬¬α →α and the following ones:
(n1) β(n) →((α →β) →((α →¬β) →¬α)
(n2) α(n) ∧β(n) →((α →β)(n) ∧(α ∧β)(n) ∧(α ∨β)(n)).

808
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
The calculus Cω has as postulates (→1) to (∨3) plus α ∨¬α and ¬¬α →α.
We can see that, in Cn, 1 ≤n ≤ω, we can substitute the schema β(n) ∧β ∧¬β →γ
for the postulate (n1). It is also easy to verify that the results above, proven for C1, with
suitable adaptations, can be also proven for Cn, n = 2, 3, . . .
THEOREM 33. Each calculi in the hierarchy (3) is strictly stronger than those which
follow it.
Proof. (A. I. Arruda) The tables of the proof of Theorem 6, which we call here T1,
show that C0 properly contains C1. With the aim of proving that Ci properly contains
Ci+1, i = 1, 2, . . ., we deﬁne the following tables T2, T3, . . . (note that they do not include
the tables for negation, which will be deﬁned separately). T2 is obtained from T1 (as in
the proof of Theorem 6) by the addition of a new value, 4, which will be the only non-
designated value; we obtain Tn from Tn−1 by adding a new value n + 2, which will be the
only non-designated one etc. The tables Tn are then obtained from Tn−1, n = 2, 3, . . ., as
follows. (Note that the rules below refer to the new arrangements of values, which result
from the addition of a new value, and no changes are made, in the new tables, of those
already obtained in the tables of order n −1.)
(1) Conjunction: If the components have diﬀerent values, the conjunction will have the
greatest value among the values of its conjuncts; if the values are equal, this will be the
value of the conjunction.
(2) Disjunction: If the values of the components are distinct, the disjunction will have
the smaller value among the values of the components; if they are equal, this value will
be the value of the disjunction.
(3) Implication: If the values of the components are distinct, the implication will have
the value of the consequent; if they are equal, the implication will have the value 1.
As for negation, Tn gives us the following table:
α
1
2
3
· · ·
n
n+1
n+2
¬α
n+2
1
2
· · ·
n-1
n
1
In the table above, n = 1, 2, . . . , n, n + 1 are the designated values and n + 2 is the only
non-designated one.
The tables Tn show that Cn−1 strictly contains Cn. For instance, the postulate β(n−1) →
((α →β) →((α →¬β) →¬α)) and the schema α(n−1) →(¬α)(n−1) are not valid in Cn,
which may be veriﬁed with some work (n > 1). Furthermore, Cω is strictly weaker than
all the other calculi of the hierarchy.
■
2.3
Theories
In this section, we will make explicit reference to the calculus C1, although the exposition
can be extended to all the calculi Cn, 0 ≤n ≤ω.
DEFINITION 34. Δ =def {α : Δ ⊢α}

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
809
THEOREM 35.
(i) Δ ⊂Δ
(ii) Δ ⊂Γ ⇒Δ ⊂Γ
(iii) Δ ⊂Δ
Proof. Immediate.
■
DEFINITION 36. Δ is a theory if and only if Δ = Δ.
DEFINITION 37. Let Υ be the set of all formulas of C1. Then Δ is inconsistent if there
exists α such that Δ ⊢α and Δ ⊢¬α, otherwise Δ is consistent. Γ is trivial if Γ = Υ;
otherwise, Γ is nontrivial. An inconsistent set is also called contradictory. A theory Δ is
paraconsistent if it is inconsistent but nontrivial.
DEFINITION 38. Expressions of either the form α ∧¬α or ¬α ∧α are called contradic-
tions.
It is easy to see that Δ is inconsistent if and only if Δ ⊢α ∧¬α for some formula α.
THEOREM 39. C1 can be the underlying calculus of paraconsistent theories.
Proof. It suﬃces to consider the theory {α ∧¬α}, where α is a propositional variable, and
to apply the tables of Theorem 6.
■
DEFINITION 40. A formula α trivializes a calculus C if, by adding α to C as a new
axiom, the new resulting system is trivial. In this case, C is said to be ﬁnitely trivializable.
For instance, the intuitionistic or classical implicative propositional calculi and the
classical positive propositional calculus are not ﬁnitely trivializable, while the classical
predicate calculus is.
THEOREM 41. A formula of the form α ∧¬α ∧α(n) trivializes Cn, 1 ≤n < ω.
Proof. Immediate.
■
THEOREM 42. Cω is not ﬁnitely trivializable.
Proof. Let us consider the following matrix M, where 1 is designated:
α
β
α →β
α ∧β
α ∨β
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
If α does not begin with the symbol ¬, then:

810
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
1) If the value of α is 1, then the value of ¬nα is 1, where ¬n stands for ¬¬ . . . ¬, (¬
repeated n times, n ≥1).
2) If the value of α is 0, then the value of ¬2kα is 0, and the value of ¬2k+1α is 1, for all
k = 0, 1, 2, . . .
M is sound for Cω, as is easy to see. By induction on the length of the formulas, we can
show that no formula assumes the value 0. So, there is no formula γ such that γ ⊢α (or
⊢γ →α), for any formula α of Cω.
■
The following results can also be proven without diﬃculty:
THEOREM 43. The calculi Cn, 0 < n < ω, with a ﬁnite number of propositional vari-
ables, are trivializable by formulas of the form α ∧¬α ∧α(n).
THEOREM 44. Cω, with a ﬁnite number of propositional variables, cannot be ﬁnitely
trivializable.
It should be remarked that if a theory is based on Cn, there is more risk of trivialization
than if it were based on Cn+1. To obtain the ‘maximum security’ in avoiding trivialization,
we should adopt Cω. But the further we go in the hierarchy (3), the weaker the calculi we
get.
THEOREM 45 (A. I. Arruda).
In Cn, 1 ≤n ≤ω, there is no reduction of negations;
that is, expressions like ¬pα ↔¬qα, for p  q (p, q = 0, 1, 2, . . .), are not valid in these
calculi.
Proof. It suﬃces to use the following truth-tables: the values of the tables are the integers
≥1 and the only non-designated value is 1. If d stands for designated value and v(α) is
the value of α, then the tables for →, ∧, ∨and ¬ are as follows:
→: v(α →β) = 1 iﬀv(α) = d and v(β) = 1; v(α →β) = 2 otherwise.
∧: v(α ∧β) = 2 iﬀv(α) = d and v(β) = d, and v(α ∧β) = 1 otherwise.
∨: v(α ∨β) = 1 iﬀv(α) = 1 and v(β) = 1, and v(α ∨β) = 2 otherwise.
¬: v(¬α) = 2 iﬀv(α) = 1 and v(¬α) = 1 otherwise.
■
COROLLARY 46 (A. I. Arruda).
The calculi Cn, 1 ≤n ≤ω, do not have ﬁnite charac-
teristic truth-tables; that is, ﬁnite tables such that a necessary and suﬃcient condition for
α to be a theorem is that it assumes only designated values in these tables.
Proof. From the hypothesis of the corollary, it is easy to see that if the calculi had char-
acteristic ﬁnite tables, they would enable reduction of negations.
■

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
811
2.4
Quantiﬁcation
Corresponding to the hierarchy (3), we construct the corresponding ﬁrst-order predicate
calculi. These new calculi will be denoted by
(4)
C⋆
0 , C⋆
1 , C⋆
2 , . . . , C⋆
n , . . . , C⋆
ω.
To begin with, we will construct the calculus C⋆
1 . Let L⋆be a ﬁrst-order language that
contains the usual symbols, connectives and quantiﬁers, as well as a denumerable family
of individual variables, predicate symbols (one for each arity), and auxiliary symbols.
We could also suppose that L⋆contains functional symbols, and in particular, individual
constants; but we will not make this supposition here, except when explicitly mentioned.
The notions of formula, free and bound variables in a formula, sentence (formula without
free variables) etc. are standard. The notations and metalogical conventions extend those
made for the propositional calculi.
C⋆
0 is the classical ﬁrst-order predicate calculus. The postulates of C⋆
1 are those of C1
(suitably adapted) plus the following:
(I)
α→β(x)
α→∀xβ(x)
(II) ∀xα(x) →α(y)
(III) α(x) →∃xα(x)
(IV)
α(x)→β
∃xα(x)→β
(V) ∀x(α(x))o →(∀xα(x))o
(VI) ∀x((α(x))o →(∃xα(x))o
where the variables x and y and the formulas α and β satisfy the usual restrictions.
Furthermore, an additional postulate needs to be adopted. To present it, let us say
that two formulas are congruent if one can be obtained from the other by replacing bound
variables or by suppressing vacuous quantiﬁcations (without confusion of variables). Here
is the additional postulate:
(VII) A ↔B, where A and B are congruent formulas.
A reason to accept postulates I - IV derives from the fact that they hold in classical
logic and are acceptable intuitively. Postulates V and VI are assumed for reasons similar
to those that motivate the postulates of C1. Finally, VII is required for it seems correct to
say that two congruent formulas are equivalent, and this fact cannot be deduced from the
remaining postulates.
We can then establish the following theorem, whose proof is done in the same way as
in classical logic.
THEOREM 47. All derived rules of theorem 5 hold in C⋆
1 . Furthermore, we have:
α(x) ⊢∀xα(x)
∀xα(x) ⊢α(y)

812
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
α(t) ⊢∃xα(x)
If Γ ∪{α(x)} ⊢β, then Γ ∪{∃xα(x)} ⊢β,
with the usual restrictions (see [Kleene, 1952]).
Note that in C⋆
1 , similarly to what happens in the classical calculus C⋆
0 , the above rules
impose restrictions on the deduction theorem (see [Kleene, 1952]).
The proofs of the following theorems are also obtained without diﬃculty.
THEOREM 48. In C⋆
1 :
⊢∀x(α(x) →β(x)) →(∀α(x) →∀xβ(x))
⊢∀x(α(x) →β(x)) →(∃α(x) →∃xβ(x))
THEOREM 49. Suppose that γ1, . . . , γn are the quantiﬁcationally prime components of
the formula α and the set of formulas Γ. In this case, if Γ ⊢α in the classical predicate
calculus, then {γo
1, . . . , γo
n} ∪Γ ⊢α in C⋆
1 , and conversely.
COROLLARY 50. Let α1, . . . , αn be the quantiﬁcationally prime components of the for-
mula α. Then a necessary and suﬃcient condition for ⊢α in C⋆
0 is that {αo
1, . . . , αo
n} ⊢α in
C⋆
1 .
THEOREM 51. C⋆
0 is included in C⋆
1 .
Proof. In the case of formulas whose prime components are well-behaved, Theorem 49
shows that, for these formulas, the laws and rules of C⋆
0 hold. But, from Theorem 24, C1
is, in a certain sense, included in C⋆
1 , and so is C⋆
0 .
■
COROLLARY 52. C⋆
1 is undecidable.
Proof. Given that C⋆
0 is included in C⋆
1 , and C⋆
0 is undecidable (Church’s theorem), so is
C⋆
1 .
■
THEOREM 53. The following schemas are valid in C⋆
1 , with the usual restrictions (see
[Kleene, 1952, p. 162]), and where γ is a formula in which x does not appear free:
1. ∀x γ ↔γ
2. ∃x γ ↔γ
3. ∀x∀yα(x, y) ↔∀y∀xα(x, y)
4. ∃x∃yα(x, y) ↔∃y∃xα(x, y)
5. ∀x∀yα(x, y) →∀xα(x, x)
6. ∃xα(x, x) →∃x∃yα(x, y)
7. ∀xα(x) →∃xα(x)
8. ∃x∀yα(x, y) →∀y∃xα(x, y)

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
813
9. ∀x(α(x) ∧β(x)) ↔∀xα(x) ∧∀xβ(x)
10. ∃x(α(x) ∨β(x)) ↔∃xα(x) ∨∃xβ(x)
11. α ∧∀xβ(x) ↔∀x(α ∧β(x))
12. α ∨∃xβ(x) ↔∃x(α ∨β(x))
13. α ∧∃xβ(x) ↔∃x(α ∧β(x))
14. α ∨∀xβ(x) →∀x(α ∨β(x))
15. ∃x(α(x) ∧β(x)) →∃xα(x) ∧∃xβ(x)
16. ∀xα(x) ∨∀xβ(x) →∀x(α(x) ∨β(x))
Proof. Similar to the proofs in the classical calculus (the same point also applies to some
other schemas that hold in C⋆
1 ).
■
THEOREM 54. In C⋆
1 ,
∀x(α(x))o ⊢∃xα(x) ↔¬∀¬α(x)
∀x(α(x))o ⊢∀xα(x) ↔¬∃x¬α(x)
∀x(α(x))o ⊢¬∀xα(x) ↔∃x¬α(x)
∀x(α(x))o ⊢¬∃xα(x) ↔∀x¬α(x)
We deﬁne now the k-transform of a formula α, where k is a numeral among 1, 2, . . .,
that is, constant symbols in correspondence with the natural numbers 1, 2, . . . [Kleene,
1952, pp. 177ﬀ]. By hypothesis, these symbols do not belong to the language of C⋆
0 and
of C⋆
1 .
Case 1: If α has no free variables, its k-transform is obtained as follows: each part of α
of the form ∀xβ(x) or of the form ∃xβ(x) is replaced respectively by β(1)∧β(2)∧. . .∧β(n)
or by β(1) ∨β(2) ∨. . . ∨β(n). Hence, this k-transform has no (individual) variables.
Case 2: If α has free variables, that is, if α is α(x1, . . . , xm), then its k-transforms are
obtained as follows: (a) we replace the variables x1, . . . , xm by permutations of 1, 2, . . . , k
with repetitions of order k; (b) we then take the k-transforms of the resulting formulas of
(a).
THEOREM 55. If Γ ⊢α in C⋆
1 , then any k-transform of α is deducible, in C1, from the
k-transforms of the formulas of Γ.
Proof. By induction on the length of a deduction of α from Γ in the calculus C⋆
1 . The
proof is similar to the classical case (that is, similar to C⋆
0 ).
■

814
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
COROLLARY 56. If ⊢α in C⋆
1 , then the k-transforms of α are provable in C1.
COROLLARY 57. If the formula α has only predicate symbols of arity zero, that is, with
zero associated variables, and ⊢α in C⋆
1 , then ⊢α in C1.
Proof. It suﬃces to note that, in this case, the only k-transform of α is α itself.
■
Remark:
Corollary 57 is important for it emphasizes that those propositional schemas
that do not hold in C1 continue not to hold in C⋆
1 . In other words, if we add to C1 the
postulates and speciﬁc formation rules of C⋆
1 , no new result is obtained relatively to the
pure formulas of C1. Furthermore, Theorem 55 can be extended to sub-systems of the
classical propositional calculus (and of intuitionistic propositional calculus) and their cor-
responding quantiﬁcation theories. This is the case, for instance, of classical positive
logic (and intuitionistic positive logic) as well as the propositional intuitionistic calculus
and the minimal intuitionistic calculus. Theorem 55 applies to the classical calculi C0 and
C⋆
0 and constitutes the so-called Hilbert-Bernays Theorem on k-transforms.
THEOREM 58. In C⋆
1 , the following schemas are not valid:
1. ¬∃x¬α(x) ↔∀xα(x)
2. ¬∀x¬α(x) ↔∃xα(x)
3. ¬∃xα(x) ↔∀x¬α(x)
4. ∃x¬α(x) ↔¬∀xα(x)
Proof. It is easy to see that the 2-transforms of these schemas are not provable in C⋆
1 . It
suﬃces to take the 2-transforms and to use the tables of Theorem 6.
■
THEOREM 59. C⋆
1 is strictly weaker than C⋆
0 , and C⋆
0 can be obtained from C⋆
1 by adding
to its postulates the following schema: ¬(α ∧¬α).
Proof. The result is a consequence of the fact that C0 is obtained from C1 if we add
¬(α ∧¬α) to C1 as a postulate.
■
The remaining calculi C⋆
n , 2 ≤n < ω of the hierarchy (4) are obtained by adding to Cn,
with obvious adaptations, the postulates I-IV and VII above, plus the following ones:
(Vn) ∀(α(x))(n) →(∀xα(x))(n)
(VIn) ∀(α(x))(n) →(∃xα(x))(n)
C⋆
ω is obtained from Cn by adding to its postulates the schemes IV and VII.
It is clear that the calculi C⋆
n , 2 ≤n < ω have properties similar to those of C⋆
1 . In
particular, the following results hold.
THEOREM 60. Let the quantiﬁcationally prime components of the formula α and of the
formulas of Γ be α1, . . . , αm. In this case, if Γ ⊢α in C⋆
0 , then α(n)
1 , . . . α(n)
m , Γ ⊢α in C⋆
n ,
1 ≤n < ω, and conversely.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
815
THEOREM 61. C⋆
n , 0 ≤n < ω, is undecidable.
THEOREM 62. (Essenin-Volpin) C⋆
ω is undecidable.
THEOREM 63. If Γ ⊢α in C⋆
n , 0 ≤n ≤ω, then the k-transforms of α are deducible, in
Cn, from the k-transforms of the formulas of Γ.
THEOREM 64. If ⊢α in C⋆
n , 0 ≤n ≤ω, then the k-transforms of α are provable in Cn.
THEOREM 65. If formula α belongs to Cn, 0 ≤n < ω, and ⊢α in C⋆
n , then ⊢α in Cn.
THEOREM 66. Every calculus of the hierarchy C⋆
n , 1 ≤n ≤ω, is a proper sub-system
of C⋆
0 .
We can prove for the hierarchy (4) results analogous to those established for the corre-
sponding propositional calculi. For instance, we have:
THEOREM 67. Every calculus of the hierarchy C⋆
n , 0 ≤n ≤ω, is strictly stronger than
those that follow it.
THEOREM 68. Every calculus C⋆
n , 0 ≤n < ω, is ﬁnitely trivializable.
THEOREM 69. C⋆
ω is not ﬁnitely trivializable.
2.5
Equality
From the hierarchy (4), we can construct the following hierarchy of predicate calculi with
equality:
(5)
C=
0, C=
1, C=
2, . . . , C=
n, . . . , C=
ω.
This is done by adding to their languages the binary predicate symbol of equality, =,
with suitable modiﬁcations in the concept of formula, and by adding the following two
postulates:
(I’) ∀x(x = x)
(II’) x = y →(α(x) →α(y))
with the same restrictions adopted in the classical calculus. Here, C=
0 stands for the clas-
sical ﬁrst-order predicate calculus with equality. We begin by studying C=
1.
THEOREM 70. We have in C=
1:
1. ⊢x = x
2. ⊢x = y →y = x
3. ⊢x = y ∧y = z →x = z
THEOREM 71. We have in C=
1:
1. ⊢x = y ↔(α(x) →α(y))

816
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
2. ∀t(α(t))o ⊢α(x) ∧¬α(y) →x  y, where x  y stands for ¬(x = y).
Proof. The ﬁrst schema is proven in the same way as in C=
0. As for the second, note that
∀t(α(t))o ⊢(α(y))o and x = y →(α(x) →α(y)). So,
∀t(α(t))o, α(x) ∧¬α(y), x = y ⊢(α(y))o
∀t(α(t))o, α(x) ∧¬α(y), x = y ⊢¬α(y)
∀t(α(t))o, α(x) ∧¬α(y), x = y ⊢α(y).
Consequently,
∀t(α(t))o, α(x) ∧¬α(y) ⊢¬(x = y)
∀t(α(t))o ⊢α(x) ∧¬α(y) →x  y.
■
THEOREM 72. In C=
1:
∀y(α(y) ↔∃x(x = y ∧α(x))
∀y(α(y) ↔∀x(x = y →α(x))
∀y∃x(x = y)
THEOREM 73. If we add to the postulates of C=
1 the schema ¬(α ∧¬α), we obtain C=
0.
THEOREM 74. Let Γ ⊢α, and let α1, . . . , αm be the quantiﬁcationally prime components
of the formula α and of the formulas in Γ. In this case, Γ ⊢α in C=
0 iﬀαo
1, . . . , αo
m, Γ ⊢α in
C=
1.
THEOREM 75. C=
ω is undecidable.
Proof. C=
1 contains C=
0 just as C⋆
1 contains C⋆
0 . So, C=
1 is undecidable.
■
All valid schemas of C=
0 that do not explicitly contain the symbol ¬ are valid in C=
1.
THEOREM 76. If Γ ⊢α in C=
0, and if in the formulas of Γ∪{α} we replace ¬⋆for ¬, thus
obtaining the formula α⋆and the set of formulas Γ⋆, then Γ⋆⊢α⋆in C=
1.
Proof. It suﬃces to note that ¬⋆has the properties of classical negation.
■
DEFINITION 77. ∃!xα(x) =def ∃y∀x(y = x ↔α(x))
THEOREM 78. In C=
1, ⊢∀x∃!y(x = y).
THEOREM 79. If α does not contain the equality symbol and ⊢α in C=
1, then ⊢α in C⋆
1 .

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
817
Proof. Let D be a formal proof of α in C=
1. There are only a ﬁnite number of applications
of postulate (II’) in D, say
x1 = y1 →(α1(x1) ↔α1(y1)), . . . , xk = yk →(αk(xk) ↔αk(yk)).
Let u and v be variables that don’t appear in the formulas of D. We denote by K(u, v) the
universal closure of the following formula, with respect to all free variables distinct from
u and v:
(α1(x1) ↔α1(y1)) ∧. . . ∧(αk(xk) ↔αk(yk)).
If we then replace subformulas of the form x = y of formulas occurring in D by K(x, y),
we get a formal proof of α in C⋆
1 , after a few suitable adaptations.
■
As a consequence of the above theorem, we have that if Γ ∪{α} is a set of formulas of
C⋆
1 such that Γ ⊢α in C=
1, then Γ ⊢α also in C⋆
1 .
The theorem 79 is important, for it shows that the quantiﬁcational schemes that are not
deducible in C⋆
1 remain not deducible in C=
1. So, the formulas α∧¬α →β, ¬(α(x)∧¬α(x))
and ∃xα(x) ↔¬∀x¬α(x) are not theorems of C=
1, since they are not theorems of C⋆
1 .
With regard to the calculi of the hierarchy (5), we can prove several interesting results.
In what follows, we sum up some of these results, without proof.
THEOREM 80. The propositions 70, 72, 73, 75 and 79 hold for C=
n, 0 ≤n ≤ω.
THEOREM 81. If the quantiﬁcationally prime components of the formulas of Γ∪{α} are
α1, . . . , αm, then if Γ ⊢α in C=
0, we have that αo
1, . . . , αo
m, Γ ⊢α in C=
n, 1 ≤n ≤ω.
THEOREM 82. Every calculus of the hierarchy (5) is strictly stronger than those follow-
ing it.
THEOREM 83. The calculi of the hierarchy C=
n, 1 ≤n < ω, is ﬁnitely trivializable, while
C=
ω is not.
2.6
Descriptions
In the calculi C=
n, 1 ≤n ≤ω, we can introduce the description operator, ι, by means
of a contextual deﬁnition, similarly to Russell’s well-known deﬁnition in the case of C=
0.
Alternatively, the symbol ι can be introduced in the language of the calculi as a primitive
symbol, satisfying the axioms presented below. This gives rise to a new hierarchy of
calculi of descriptions:
(6)
D0, D1, D2, . . . , Dn, . . . , Dω.
The postulates to be added to those of C=
n, 1 ≤n ≤ω, are the following ones (satisfying
the usual restrictions; see [Rosser, 1953]):
(D.1) ∀xF(x) →F(ιyQ(y))
(D.2) ∀x(P(x) ↔Q(x)) →ιxP(x) = ιxQ(x)
(D.3) ιxF(x) = ιyF(y)

818
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
(D.4) P(ιyQ(y)) →∃xP(x)
(D.5) ∃!xP(x) →(∀x((ιxP(x) = x) ↔P(x)).
It can be proven that Dn is a conservative extension of C=
n (0 ≤n ≤ω). As above, we
will focus the discussion on the ﬁrst calculus of the hierarchy, namely D1. In particular,
the following results are signiﬁcant (and their proofs are adaptations of the classical case):
THEOREM 84. In D1, ⊢ιxF(x) = ιxF(x).
THEOREM 85. If ιxF(x) is free for x in F(x), then ⊢∃!xF(x) →F(ιxF(x)).
Proof. From (D.5), we have ⊢∃!xF(x) →∀x((ιxF(x) = x) ↔F(x)). Taking ∃!xF(x) as
hypothesis, we get ∀x((ιxF(x) = x) ↔F(x)). Then, from (D.1), (ιxF(x) = ιxF(x)) ↔
F(ιxF(x)), hence F(ιxF(x)). So, ⊢∃!xF(x) →F(ιxF(x)).
■
THEOREM 86. In D1, ⊢∀y(ιx(x = y) = y).
THEOREM 87. In D1, we have:
1. ⊢∀y(ιxP(x) = y ↔y = ιxP(x))
2. ⊢∀y∀x(ιxP(x) = y ∧y = z →ιxP(x) = z)
3. ⊢∀x∀z(x = ιyQ(y) ∧ιyQ(y) = z →x = z)
4. ⊢∀z(ιxP(x) = ιyQ(y) ∧ιyQ(y) = z →ιxP(x) = z)
5. ⊢∀y(ιxP(x) = y ∧y = ιzR(z) →ιxP(x) = ιzR(z))
6. ⊢ιxP(x) = ιyQ(y) ↔ιyQ(y) = ιxP(x)
7. ⊢ιxP(x) = ιyQ(y) ∧ιyQ(y) = ιzR(z) →ιxP(x) = ιzR(z)
8. ⊢F(ιxP(x)) ∧∃x(x = ιxP(x) →F(x))
9. ⊢F(ιxP(x)) ↔∀x(x = ιxP(x) →F(x))
10. ⊢ιxP(x) = ιyQ(y) ∧ιzQ(z) = ιtK(t) →ιxP(x) = ιtK(t)
THEOREM 88. Let F(x) be a formula, and u and t be two terms (variables or descrip-
tions) free for x in F(x). Then,
⊢u = v →(F(u) →F(v)).
THEOREM 89. If y does not occur free in P(x) and ιxP(x) is free for x in P(x), then
⊢∃!xP(x) →(F(ιxP(x)) ↔∃y(F(y) ∧∀x(x = y ↔P(x)))).

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
819
Proof. Let us assume that ∃!xP(x). So,
∀x(ιxP(x) = x ↔P(x)).
Then, taking F(ιxP(x)) as a hypothesis, we get
F(ιxP(x)) and ∀x(ιxP(x) = x ↔P(x)).
Hence,
F(ιxP(x)) ∧∀x(x = ιxP(x) ↔P(x)),
and so,
∃y(F(y) ∧∀x(x = y ↔P(x)).
Consequently,
F(ιxP(x)) →∃y(F(y) ∧∀x(x = y ↔P(x))).
But, assuming that
∃y(F(y) ∧∀x(x = y ↔P(x)),
it results that
F(y) ∧∀x(x = y ↔P(x)),
so
F(y) and ∀x(x = y ↔P(x)),
and hence we conclude that y = ιxP(x) and that F(ιxP(x)). Then,
∃y(F(y) ∧∀x(x = y ↔P(x)) →F(ιxP(x)).
So,
∃!xP(x) →(F(ιxP(x)) ↔∃y(F(y) ∧∀x(x = y ↔P(x)))).
■
THEOREM 90. Let A1, . . . , An be the quantiﬁcationally prime components of the formula
F and of the formulas in Γ. In this case, if Γ ⊢F in D0, then Ao
1, . . . , Ao
n, Γ ⊢F in D1, and
conversely.
Let us consider the set of formulas Γ of D1, and suppose that the ﬁnitely many descrip-
tions that appear in these formulas are:
ιx1Q1(x1), ιx2Q1(x2), . . .
ιx1Q2(x1), ιx2Q2(x2), . . .
...

820
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
which we admit ordered by some order relation. We can then associate to each of these
descriptions one of the variables t0, . . . , tn−1, which do not appear in the formulas of Γ, in
such a way that the association is a bijection. The ι-transforms of the formulas of Γ are the
formulas obtained from the members of Γ by replacing in them the descriptions by their
associated variables, and identifying the variables corresponding to descriptions, such as
in the case of D.4.
THEOREM 91. If ⊢F in D1 and F does not contain the symbols = and ι, then ⊢F in
C⋆
1 .
Proof. If F can be proven in D1, it is deducible in C=⋆
1
from a ﬁnite number of formulas
of types D.1–D.5 (see page 817 above), where C=⋆
1
is the calculus obtained from C=
1 by
introducing formation rules enabling descriptions as new terms in addition to variables.
Let us denote by Δ a deduction of F in C=⋆
1
from formulas of types D.1–D.5. If we
substitute, in such a deduction, formulas by their ι-transforms, we see that we get a valid
deduction Δ⋆in C=
1. But after such substitutions, the formulas of types D.1, D.3 and D.4
turn out to be axioms of C=
1 and Δ⋆is a deduction of F from formulas of the forms (i)
∀x(P(x) ↔Q(x)) →ti = t j and (ii) ∃!xP(x) →∀x(tk = x ↔P(x)). If in Δ⋆we identify
pairs of variables, such as ti and tj, that appear free in the formulas of the type (i) above,
then Δ⋆becomes a deduction Δ⋆⋆, which is still valid in C=
1. But since the formulas of
the speciﬁed type are axioms of C=
1, they can be suppressed from the hypothesis of Δ⋆⋆.
This yields a deduction Δ⋆⋆⋆of F in C=
1 from formulas of the form (ii). However, to say
that F is deducible in C=
1 from formulas of the above type is to say that F is deducible in
C⋆
1 from formulas of the following forms: ∀x(x = x), x = y →(A(x) →A(y)) and P(tk).
Therefore, taking into account theorem 79, we easily complete the proof.
■
The calculi D0, D2, . . . , Dn, . . . , Dω have properties similar to those of D1.
THEOREM 92. The Theorems 84 to 89 hold for every calculi Dn, 0 ≤n ≤ω.
THEOREM 93. If ⊢F in D0 and F does not contain the symbol ι, then ⊢F in C=
0.
THEOREM 94. The calculi Dn, 0 ≤n ≤ω are simply consistent.7
Proof. By the previous theorem, D0 is simply consistent if C=
0 is. Since the remaining
calculi are sub-systems of D0, the theorem follows.
■
THEOREM 95. Let 0 ≤n < ω, and let A1, . . . , An be the quantiﬁcationally prime compo-
nents of the formula F and of the formulas in Γ. Then, Γ ⊢F in D0 iﬀA(n)
1 , . . . , A(n)
n Γ ⊢F
in D0.
THEOREM 96. The calculi Dn, 0 ≤n < ω, are undecidable.
THEOREM 97. Every calculus of the hierarchy Dn, 0 ≤n ≤ω, is strictly stronger than
those that follow it.
THEOREM 98. Dn, 0 ≤n < ω, is ﬁnitely trivializable.
THEOREM 99. Dω is not ﬁnitely trivializable.
7This means that for no formula A, both A and ¬A are provable in these calculi ([Kleene, 1952, p. 124]).

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
821
THEOREM 100. If Γ ⊢α in Dn and the formulas in Γ∪{α} do not contain the description
symbol, then ‘Γ ⊢α in C=
n, 0 ≤n ≤ω.
2.7
Semantics
We begin by sketching a two-valued semantics for C1.8 Here, F stands for the set of
formulas of C1; Γ and Δ designate subsets of F , while Γ denotes the set of all formulas α
such that Γ ⊢α.
Recall that we say that a set Γ of formulas is trivial iﬀΓ = F ; otherwise, it is nontrivial.
Γ is inconsistent iﬀthere is at least one formula α such that both α and ¬α belong to Γ;
otherwise, Γ is consistent. Finally, Γ is maximal nontrivial iﬀit is nontrivial and, for any
formula α, if α  Γ, then Γ ∪{α} is trivial.
THEOREM 101. If Γ is maximal nontrivial, then:
1. Γ ⊢α ⇔α ∈Γ
2. α ∈Γ ⇒¬⋆α  Γ
3. ¬⋆α ∈Γ ⇒α  Γ
4. α ∈Γ or ¬⋆α ∈Γ
5. ⊢α ⇒α ∈Γ
6. α, αo ∈Γ ⇒¬α  Γ
7. ¬α, αo ∈Γ ⇒α  Γ
8. α, α →β ∈Γ ⇒β ∈Γ
9. αo ∈Γ ⇒α  Γ or¬α  Γ
10. αo ∈Γ ⇒(¬α)o ∈Γ
Proof. We will prove only one side of the ﬁrst property. Suppose that Γ ⊢α but α  Γ.
Then, since Γ is maximal nontrivial, Γ ∪{α} ⊢α ∧¬⋆α. Hence Γ ⊢α →(α ∧¬⋆α), and
Γ ⊢¬⋆α. But, since Γ ⊢α, then Γ ⊢α ∧¬⋆α, therefore Γ is trivial, which is absurd.
■
DEFINITION 102. A valuation of C1 is a mapping ν : F →{1, 0} such that:
1) ν(α) = 0 ⇒ν(¬α) = 1
2) ν(¬¬α) = 1 ⇒ν(α) = 1
3) ν(βo) = ν(α →β) = ν(α →¬β) = 1 ⇒ν(α) = 0
4) ν(α →β) = 1 ⇔ν(α) = 0 or ν(β) = 1
5) ν(α ∧β) = 1 ⇔ν(α) = ν(β) = 1
6), ν(α ∨β) = 1 ↔ν(α) = 1 or ν(β) = 1
7) ν(αo) = ν(βo) = 1 ⇒ν((α ∨β)o) = ν(α ∧β)o) = ν((α →β)o) = 1.
THEOREM 103. If ν is a valuation of C1, it has the following properties: ν(α) = 1 ⇔
ν(¬⋆α) = 0, ν(α) = 0 ⇔ν(¬⋆α) = 1, ν(α) = 0 ⇔ν(α) = 0 and ν(¬α) = 1, ν(α) = 1 ⇔
ν(α) = 1 or ν(¬α) = 0.
DEFINITION 104. (i) A valuation ν is singular if there exists at least one formula α
such that ν(α) = ν(¬α) = 1; otherwise, ν is normal. (ii) A formula α is valid if for every
valuation ν, ν(α) = 1. (iii) A valuation ν is a model for a set Γ of formulas if ν(α) = 1 for
any α ∈Γ. (iv) A formula α is a semantic consequence of Γ if every model ν of Γ is such
that ν(α) = 1; in this case, we write Γ |= α. In particular, |= α — which abbreviates ∅|= α
— means that α is valid.
THEOREM 105 (Soundness). Γ ⊢α ⇒Γ |= α (in particular, ⊢α ⇒|= α).
8The semantics of valuations, conceived as a general semantic method, was developed by the ﬁrst author of
this paper in the 1960s, in his Logic Seminar at Federal University of Paran´a, Brazil.

822
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
Proof. As in classical logic.
■
LEMMA 106. Every nontrivial set of formulas is contained in a maximal nontrivial set.
Proof. By adapting the corresponding proof in classical logic.
■
COROLLARY 107. There exist maximal nontrivial inconsistent sets.
Proof. It is easy to see that {α, ¬α} is inconsistent but nontrivial. By the preceding
Lemma, it is contained in a maximal nontrivial set of formulas, which is inconsistent. ■
LEMMA 108. Every maximal nontrivial set of formulas Γ has a model.
Proof. Deﬁne a mapping ν : F →{0, 1} as follows: for every formula α, if α ∈Γ, then
ν(α) = 1, and ν(α) = 0 otherwise. It is then easy to see that ν satisﬁes all the conditions
in the deﬁnition of a valuation.
■
COROLLARY 109. Any nontrivial set of formulas has a model.
COROLLARY 110. There are singular valuations; that is, valuations that assign value
1 to contradictory formulas. (A valuation that is not singular is called normal.)
Proof. The set {α, ¬α} is inconsistent but nontrivial, hence it is contained in a maximal
nontrivial set, as shown above. But this set has a model, which is a singular valuation. ■
THEOREM 111 (Completeness). Γ |= α ⇒Γ ⊢α (in particular, |= α ⇒⊢α).
Proof. Let us suppose that Γ ⊬α. In this case, Γ ∪{¬⋆α} is nontrivial and has a model ν.
So, there is a model ν of Γ such that ν(α) = 0, which is absurd.
■
THEOREM 112. There are inconsistent (but nontrivial) sets of formulas that have mod-
els.
DEFINITION 113. Let Δ =def {αo ∈F : ⊢α}. Then Γ is said to be strongly nontrivial if
Γ ∪Δ is nontrivial. Γ is said to be strictly nontrivial if Γ ∪Δ is nontrivial.
THEOREM 114. There exist sets of formulas that are nontrivial and sets of formulas that
are strictly nontrivial.
Proof. To prove the ﬁrst part of the theorem, suppose that Δ is the set {αo ∈F : ⊢α}. Then
Δ is consistent, which implies that it is also nontrivial. So, Δ is contained in a maximal
nontrivial set Δ′. Let Δ′′ be Δ′ −Δ. Then Δ′′ is strongly nontrivial.
■
We will now discuss a byproduct of the semantics for C1 sketched above, namely, the
decidability of this calculus.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
823
The decidability of C1.
DEFINITION 115 (Quasi-matrix).
We call quasi-matrices the tables constructed accord-
ing to the instructions given below, applicable to each formula of C1(see [Alves, 1976]).
Given a formula α:
1. Make a list of all propositional variables that appear in α, and arrange them in a line.
2. Under the propositional variables, place all possible distributions of 0s and 1s that can
be attributed to the variables, as usual.
3. Make a list of the negations of propositional variables appearing in the formula. And
calculate their truth-value, in each line, as follows: (i) if a variable has value 0, its negation
will have truth-value 1; (ii) if the variable has value 1, bifurcate the line in which it
appears, by writing in the ﬁrst part the value 0 for the negation and, in the second part, the
value 1 for the negation. Before a bifurcation, the truth-values must be the same for the
two resulting lines.
4. Complete the previous list, by adding the sub-formulas of α and the negations of proper
sub-formulas. And calculate, for each line, the truth-value of each sub-formula of α. If it is
a proper sub-formula, calculate the value of its negation (whose proper sub-formulas and
their negations have already been listed and calculated), as follows: (i) When no negations
are involved, proceed as in the truth-tables for the classical propositional calculus; (ii) If
any of the formulas in consideration is a negation — and so of the form ¬α′ — write the
truth-value 1 under it in those lines where α′ has value 0. And in the lines where α′ has
value 1, proceed as follows: (i’) If α′ is of the form ¬β, then check if the value of β is
the same as the value of ¬β; in this case, bifurcate the line by writing the value 0 in the
ﬁrst part and the value 1 in the second. If the value of β is distinct from the value of ¬β,
simply write 0. (ii’) If α′ is of the form β ▷◁γ, where ▷◁∈{→, ∨, ∧}, there are two cases to
consider: (a) α′ is of the form δ ∧¬δ or of the form ¬δ ∧δ. In this case, write the value 0
for the formula α′; (b) α′ is neither of the form δ ∧¬δ nor of the form ¬δ ∧δ. In this case,
check if the value of β is equal to the value of ¬β or if the value of γ is equal to the value
of ¬γ. In the positive case, bifurcate the line, by writing the value 0 in the ﬁrst part and,
in the second, write 1. If the value of β is distinct from the value of ¬β, simply write 0.
We will exemplify this deﬁnition below. Before that, we state the following lemma:
LEMMA 116. ν : F →{0, 1} is a valuation iﬀ:
1. ν(¬α) = 0 ⇒ν(α) = 1
2. ν(¬¬α) = 1 ⇒ν(α) = 1
3. ν(βo) = ν(α →β) = ν(α →¬β) = 1 ⇒ν(α) = 0
4. ν(α →β) = 1 ⇔ν(α) = 0 or ν(β) = 1
5. ν(α ∧β) = 1 ⇔ν(α) = ν(β) = 1

824
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
6. ν(α ∨β) = 1 ⇔ν(α) = 1 or ν(β) = 1
7. ν((α ∧β)o) = 0 ⇔ν(αo) = 0 or ν(βo) = 0
8. ν((α ∨β)o) = 0 ⇔ν(αo) = 0 and ν(βo) = 0
9. ν((α →β)o) = 0 ⇔ν(αo) = 0 or ν(βo) = 1
LEMMA 117. ν(αo) = 0 ⇔ν(α) = ν(¬α) = 1
Proof. (a) ν(αo) = 0 implies that ν(α ∧¬α) = 1 and ν(α) = ν(¬α) = 1. (b) Suppose that
ν(α) = ν(¬α) = 1. If ν(αo) = 1, then ν(α) = ν(¬α) = ν(αo) = 1, that is, ν(α) = ν(¬⋆α) =
1, and ν would not be a valuation. Hence ν(αo) = 0 and, therefore, ν(α) = ν(¬α) = 1.
■
LEMMA 118. ν : F →{0, 1} is a valuation iﬀthe conditions 1-6 of Lemma 116 hold
and:
7i. ν((α →β)o) = 0 ⇔ν(α) = ν(¬α) = 1 or ν(β) = ν(¬β) = 1
7ii. ν((α ∧β)o) = 0 ⇔ν(α) = ν(¬α) = 1 or ν(β) = ν(¬β) = 1
7ii. ν((α ∨β)o) = 0 ⇔ν(α) = ν(¬α) = 1 or ν(β) = ν(¬β) = 1
DEFINITION 119. Let ν be a valuation and α a formula. Then να is called the restriction
of ν to the set of sub-formulas of α and the negations of proper sub-formulas of α.
LEMMA 120. For every valuation ν and formula α, ν(α) = να(α).
DEFINITION 121. Let ν be a valuation and Γ a set of formulas. Then νΓ is the restriction
of ν to the set Γ.
DEFINITION 122. We say that a line of a quasi-matrix corresponds to νΓ if νΓ(α) is the
value corresponding to α in that line for every α ∈Γ, where Γ is the set of all formulas of
the matrix.
LEMMA 123. Given a quasi-matrix Q, then for every valuation ν there exists a line of Q
that corresponds to νΓ, where Γ is the set of all formulas of Q.
Proof. By induction on the number of columns of Q.
■
DEFINITION 124. Let Q be a quasi-matrix for a formula α, and let Γ be the set of all
sub-formulas and negations of proper sub-formulas of α. Let k be a line of Q and k(α)
be the value attributed to α in k. We call Δ(Γ, k) the set of formulas such that, for every
formula α:
(I) If α ∈Γ, then α ∈Δ(Γ, k) iﬀk(α) = 0.
(II) If α  Γ, then α ∈Δ(Γ, k) iﬀ
a) α is atomic, or
b) α is of the form ¬α1 and α1  Δ(Γ, k), or

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
825
c) α is α1 ∧α2 and α1 ∈Δ(Γ, k) and α2 ∈Δ(Γ, k), or
d) α is α1 ∨α2 and α1 ∈Δ(Γ, k) and α2 ∈Δ(Γ, k), or
e) α is α1 →α2 and α1  Δ(Γ, k) and α2 ∈Δ(Γ, k).
Some properties of the set Δ(Γ, k) are the following:
1. ¬α ∈Δ(Γ, k) ⇒α  Δ(Γ, k)
2. α ∈Δ(Γ, k) ⇒¬¬α ∈Δ(Γ, k)
3. ¬⋆α ∈Δ(Γ, k) ⇔α  Δ(Γ, k)
4. α →β  Δ(Γ, k) ⇔α ∈Δ(Γ, k) or β  Δ(Γ, k)
5. α ∈Δ(Γ, k) or β ∈Δ(Γ, k) ⇔α ∧β ∈Δ(Γ, k)
6. α  Δ(Γ, k) or β  Δ(Γ, k) ⇔α ∨β  Δ(Γ, k)
7. (α ▷◁β)o ∈Δ(Γ, k) ⇒α  Δ(Γ, k) and ¬α  Δ(Γ, k), or β  Δ(Γ, k) and ¬β  Δ(Γ, k),
where ▷◁∈{→, ∧, ∨}.
LEMMA 125 (A. Lopari´c).
For every line k of a quasi-matrix Q, there is a valuation ν
such that νΓ corresponds to k, where Γ is the set of formulas of Q.
Proof. Let ν be a function from F in {0, 1} such that, for every α ∈F , ν(α) = 0 if
α ∈Δ(Γ, k), and ν(α) = 1 if α  Δ(Γ, k). Then, by the properties 1-7 above of the set
Δ(Γ, k), ν is a valuation. Since νΓ and k are the same, we can say that there exists a
valuation ν such that νΓ corresponds to k.
■
THEOREM 126 (M. Fidel).
The calculus C1 is decidable.
Proof. Consequence of Lemmas 120, 123 and 125. The formula α is a theorem of C1 iﬀ
in any quasi-matrix for α, the last column has only 1’s. In eﬀect, in this case, for every
valuation ν, we have that ν(α) = να(α) = 1.
■
Let us exemplify the method presented here by showing that ¬(α ∨β) →¬α ∧¬β is
not valid in C1:

826
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
α
β
¬α
¬β
α ∨β
¬(α ∨β)
¬α ∧¬β
¬(α ∨β) →¬α ∧¬β
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
The extension of the semantics of C1 to the systems Cn, 2 ≤n < ω, is immediate.
All deﬁnitions and theorems are the same, with obvious adaptations (for instance, ¬⋆
becomes ¬(n), and αo becomes α(n)). When constructing quasi-matrices, if α is of the form
β(n−1)∧¬β(n−1), or of the form ¬β(n−1)∧β(n−1), we must write 0 for the formula α. We must
have ν(¬α) = 0, otherwise, due to clause 7 of Deﬁnition 102, ν(β ∧¬(n)β) = 1, and then ν
would not be a valuation. Note that this clause is precisely the one that characterizes the
quasi-matrices of the systems Cn, 1 ≤n < ω.
As an additional example, to see that the schema (α(n−1) ∧¬α(n−1))(n) is valid in Cn, but
not in Cm, for m > n, it suﬃces to show that the schema (α ∧¬α)o is valid in C1, but not
in C2. In fact, we have in C1:
α
¬α
α ∧¬α
¬(α ∧¬α)
(α ∧¬α) ∧¬(α ∧¬α)
¬((α ∧¬α) ∧¬(α ∧¬α))
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
However, in C2, we have:
α
¬α
α ∧¬α
¬(α ∧¬α)
(α ∧¬α) ∧¬(α ∧¬α)
¬((α ∧¬α) ∧¬(α ∧¬α))
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
It is also possible to show that Cω is decidable; see [Lopari´c and Alves, 1980] and
section 6.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
827
Semantics for C=
1
The semantics sketched above can be extended to the quantiﬁcational calculi described
earlier. Let us begin by deﬁning an interpretation for C=
1 (in fact, for the language of
C=
1) as a pair I = ⟨D, ρ⟩, where D is a non-empty set and ρ is a mapping such that: (i) ρ
associates an element ρ(a) ∈D to each individual constant a of the language of C=
1; (ii) for
each n-ary functional symbol f of the language of C=
1, ρ associates an n-ary function from
Dn to D, and (iii) to each n-ary predicate symbol P, other than identity, ρ associates an
n-ary relation on D; (iv) to the identity symbol =, ρ associates the diagonal of D, namely,
the set ΔD =def {⟨x, x⟩: x ∈D}.9
If I is an interpretation for C=
1, then for each element of D, we choose a new individual
constant c, the name of the element (as usual, diﬀerent names are chosen for diﬀerent
elements). This new language, as is well known, is called the diagram language of C=
1
relatively to I ([Shoenﬁeld, 1967, p. 18]), and we refer to it as DC=
1.
If I is an interpretation for C=
1, a valuation ν of C=
1 is a map from the set of sentences
of DC=
1 in {0, 1}, deﬁned as follows:
(1–7) Clauses 1-7 of Deﬁnition 102
8) ν(∀xα(x)) = 1 iﬀfor any individual constant c of DC=
1, ν(α(c)) = 1
9) ν(∃xα(x)) = 1 iﬀthere exists a constant c of DC=
1 so that ν(α(c)) = 1
10) ν(∀x(α(x))o) = 1 ⇒ν((∀xα(x))o) = ν((∃xα(x))o) = 1
11) If α and β are congruent, then ν(α) = ν(β)
12) ν(c = c′) = 1 iﬀρ(c) = ρ(c′)
13) ν(c = c′) = 1 and ν(α(c)) = 1, then ν(α(c′)) = 1
We say that a valuation ν satisﬁes a sentence α of DC=
1 (and, in particular, of C=
1 ) if
ν(α) = 1. ν is a model for a set Γ of sentences if ν(α) = 1 for every α ∈Γ, and α is a
semantic consequence of Γ (in symbols, Γ ⊨α) if ν(α) = 1 for every model ν of Γ.
THEOREM 127 (Soundness). Γ ⊢α ⇒Γ ⊨α, where Γ ∪{α} is a set of sentences.
Proof. As in the classical case, using induction on the length of the proof of α from Γ. ■
We say that Γ is trivial if Γ ⊢α, for every α; otherwise, Γ is nontrivial. Γ is inconsistent
if there exists α such that Γ ⊢α and Γ ⊢¬α; otherwise, Γ is consistent. Finally, a set Γ os
sentences is a Henkin set if for any formula α(x) with just one free variable, there exists a
constant c of the language of C=
1 such that Γ ⊢∃xα(x) →α(c).
THEOREM 128. If Γ is non-trival (and a Henkin set), then it is contained in a maximal
nontrivial (and also a Henkin set) set of sentences.
Proof. As in the classical case.
■
9As we noted earlier, the language may contain neither individual constants nor functional symbols.

828
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
THEOREM 129. If Γ is a maximal nontrivial Henkin set of sentences, then:
(1) α →β ∈Γ ⇔α  Γ or β ∈Γ
(2) α ∧β ∈Γ ⇔α, β ∈Γ
(3) α ∨β ∈Γ ⇔α ∈Γ or β ∈Γ
(4) Γ ⊢α ⇔α ∈Γ
(5) α ∈γ ⇔¬⋆α  Γ
(6) ¬α, αo ∈Γ ⇒α  Γ
(7) α, αo ∈Γ ⇒¬α  Γ
(8) α ∈Γ or ¬⋆α ∈Γ
(9) α, α →β ∈Γ ⇒β ∈Γ
(10) αo ∈Γ ⇒(¬α)o ∈Γ
(11) αo, βo ∈Γ ⇒(α →β)o, (α ∧β)o, (α ∨β)o ∈Γ
(12) ∀xα(x) ∈Γiﬀfor any constant c of C=
1,α(c) ∈Γ
(13) ∃xα(x) ∈Γ iﬀfor some constant c of C=
1, α(c) ∈Γ
(14) ∀x(α(x))o ∈Γ ⇒(∀xα(x))o ∈Γ and (∃xα(x))o ∈Γ
(15) If α and β are congruent, then α ↔β ∈Γ
(16) c = c′, α(c) ∈Γ ⇒α(c′) ∈Γ
Proof. As in the classical case, by using the strong negation ¬⋆instead of the weak
negation ¬.
■
THEOREM 130. If Γ is a Henkin nontrivial set of sentences (either consistent or incon-
sistent), then Γ has a model.
Proof. Consequence of the preceding theorem.
■
COROLLARY 131. Every nontrivial set of sentences of the language of C=
1 has a model.
THEOREM 132 (Completeness). Γ |= α ⇒Γ ⊢α
THEOREM 133 (L¨owenheim-Skolem). If Γ has an inﬁnite model, then it has an inﬁnite
denumerable model.
Other results can also be obtained, so that it is possible to construct a paraconsistent
model theory. For instance, E. A. Alves has developed such a theory for a variant of the
calculus C1 to which he introduced an additional axiom, namely, ¬¬α ↔α (see [Alves,
1984]). (Recall that α →¬¬α is not a theorem of C1; see Theorem 6.) The preceding
results can also be adapted in order to be applied to the calculi Cn, 1 ≤n < ω, as well as
to the calculi with descriptions Dn, 1 ≤n < ω.
2.8
Syllogism and paraconsistency
Similarly to the case of traditional syllogistic, which was interpreted within classical
monadic predicate calculus, it is possible to develop a paraconsistent syllogistic. It is
based, for instance, on the monadic calculus corresponding to the paraconsistent predi-
cate logic C⋆
1 . In order to do that, it suﬃces to translate the propositions A, I, E and O into
C⋆
1 . The translations (based on the classical case) are as follows:
Aab
∀x(a(x) →b(x))
Iab
∃x(a(x) ∧b(x))
Eab
∀x(a(x) →¬b(x))

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
829
Oab
∃x(a(x) ∧¬b(x))
Two remarks are in order here. (1) The valid positive deductions in C⋆
0 , the classical
predicate calculus, are also valid in C⋆
1 ; that is, when no explicit negation is involved, the
positive deductions of C⋆
0 and C∗
1 are the same. (2) In C⋆
1 , one can ﬁnd paraconsistent
predicates, for which there are objects that satisfy these predicates and, at the same time,
do not satisfy them. In other words, for some predicate p, the following holds:
∃x(p(x) ∧¬p(x)).
Thus, based on arguments similar to the ones found in the classical case, it is possible
to verify the validity of inferences, and one changes accordingly the theories of opposi-
tion, conversion, immediate inferences and syllogism. (Each predicate in the universe of
discourse has three parts: of the elements that satisfy it, of those that do not satisfy it, and
of those that simultaneously satisfy it and do not satisfy it. Simple graphics supply then
evidence for the validity, or for the invalidity, of certain inferences and conversions.)
Based on this approach, one can prove the following result. In the paraconsistent logic
C⋆
1 , all modes of the ﬁrst and of the third ﬁgures of the syllogism are valid; none of the
second is valid; and of the fourth, just Bramantip and Dimaris modes are valid. It is worth
mentioning that since C⋆
1 has a strong negation, of a classical trend, and if such negation
is adopted in the interpretation of syllogistic reasoning, then the classical theory is ob-
tained. As is known, Łukasiewicz has axiomatized the theory of categorical syllogism,
based on the classical propositional calculus and admitting as speciﬁc axioms certain
categorical propositions, as well as some appropriate deﬁnitions. Based on the paracon-
sistent propositional calculus, for instance the calculus C1, it is also possible to formulate
an axiomatics for paraconsistent syllogistic, articulated in parallel lines to the theory just
outlined. Moreover, we should note that there are further extensions or modiﬁcations of
the Aristotelian syllogistic that also admit paraconsistent versions, such as Hamilton’s,
De Morgan’s and Gergone’s.
Aristotle’s syllogistic and paraconsistency
A surprising result can be sketched as follows. The theory of syllogism can be devel-
oped in an appropriate language so that the only formulas turn out to be expressions
corresponding to the categorical propositions A, E, I and O. We can then interpret the
valid syllogisms (given by the four ﬁgures of Aristotelian syllogistic) as providing in-
ference rules, and adopt the Aristotelian deﬁnition of contradictory propositions to mean
contradictory formulas of our language. Thus, it is easy to see that, based on such a lan-
guage, we can deﬁne contradictory theories (that is, those which involve contradictory
formulas in the above sense), which are nontrivial (in the sense that not all formulas are
theorems). This means that, with a suitable interpretation, Aristotle’s syllogistic can be
seen as a paraconsistent logic, since from two contradictory premisses we cannot deduce
any proposition whatsoever. Analogously, Aristotle’s modal syllogistic constitutes also a
paraconsistent modal logic.

830
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
3
PARACONSISTENT SET THEORY
Cantor’s naive set theory was based mainly on two fundamental principles: the postulate
of extensionality (if the sets x and y have the same elements, then they are equal), and
the postulate of comprehension or separation (every property determines a set, composed
of the objects that have this property). The latter postulate, in the standard (ﬁrst-order)
language of set theory, becomes the following formula (or schema of formulas):
(7)
∃y∀x(x ∈y ↔F(x)).
Now, it is enough to replaces the formula F(x) in (7) by x  x to derive Russell’s
paradox. That is, the principle of comprehension (7) entails an inconsistency. Thus, if
one adds (7) to ﬁrst-order logic, conceived as the logic of a set-theoretic language, a
trivial theory is obtained. There are also other paradoxes, such as those of Curry and Moh
Schaw-Kwei, that indicate that (7) is trivial or, more precisely, trivializes set theory if its
underlying logic is classical, even ignoring negation.10 In other words, classical positive
logic is incompatible with (7); the same holds also for several other logics, such as the
intuitionistic one.
Classical set theories are distinguished by the restrictions they impose on (7), so that
the paradoxes are avoided. In order that the theory thus obtained does not become too
weak, some further axioms, besides extensionality and comprehension (with appropriate
restrictions), are added, depending on the particular case. Thus, for instance, in Zermelo-
Fraenkel (ZF), comprehension is formulated in the following way:
(8)
∀z∃y∀x(x ∈z ↔(x ∈∧F(x))),
where the variables are subject to the usual conditions. In ZF, then, F(x) determines the
subset of the elements of the set z that have the property F (or satisfy the formula F(x)).
In the Kelly-Morse system, on the other hand, comprehension is formulated as follows:
(9)
∃y∀x(x ∈y ↔(F(x) ∧∃z(x ∈z)).
In Quine’s system NF, in turn, the notion of stratiﬁcation is employed, and the schema
of comprehension is written like (7), provided that F(x) is stratiﬁed (and the standard
conditions regarding the variables are met).
However, we can ask whether it is possible to examine the problem from a diﬀerent
viewpoint: what is needed to maintain the schema (7) without restrictions (disregarding
the conditions on the variables)? The answer is immediate: one should change the un-
derlying logic, so that (7) does not inevitably lead to trivialization. The comprehension
schema, without strong restrictions, leads to contradictions. Hence, such a logic has to be
10Let us exemplify this fact with Curry’s paradox. In (7), substitute for F(x) the expression x ∈x →α, where
α is an arbitrary formula in which y does not appear free. Then, by (7), we get ∃y∀x(x ∈y ↔(x ∈x →α)). In
honor of Curry, let us call this set y, c. In this case, ∀x(x ∈c ↔(x ∈x →α)). But then c ∈c ↔(c ∈c →α),
hence (i) c ∈c →(c ∈c →α) and (ii) (c ∈c →α) →c ∈c). However, the law of contraction, (γ →(γ →
β)) →(γ →β), holds. So, (i) entails (iii): c ∈c →α. From (ii) and (iii), we get c ∈c. Finally, from this
last sentence and from (iii), by modus pones, we obtain α. This shows that (7) entails triviality even without
negation.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
831
paraconsistent. It was slowly veriﬁed that there are inﬁnitely many ways of weakening the
classical restrictions imposed on the comprehension schema, each of them corresponding
to distinct categories of paraconsistent logic. Furthermore, extremely weak logics have
been formulated as the underlying logics of set theories in which (7) is used without any
restrictions (not related to the choice of variables).
An important point is that several paraconsistent set theories contain the classical one,
in Zermelo-Fraenkel’s, Kelly-Morse’s or Quine’s formulations. Hence, paraconsistency
goes beyond the classical domain, and allows for, among other things, the reconstruction
of traditional mathematics (see [da Costa et al., 1998a], [da Costa, 1986a], [da Costa
et al., 2004], [Mortensen, 1995]). It is fair to claim that paraconsistent theories extend
the classical ones, just as Poncelet’s imaginary geometry comprises standard Euclidean
geometry.
Moreover, these considerations suggest a diﬃculty in the foundations of logic. Clas-
sical elementary logic (in fact, it is enough to consider only positive logic) and the com-
prehension postulate seem to be both evident. We may even claim that they are equally
evident, or intuitive. However, they are mutually incompatible. This constitutes, thus, an
intriguing case of incompatible evidences, which generates, in particular, a diﬃculty for
classical logic.
Without presenting a detailed philosophical analysis, we just note that classical and
paraconsistent theories develop diﬀerent approaches to the handling of inconsistencies.
Interestingly, the paraconsistent approach contributes to a better understanding of the
classical position itself (by helping, e.g., to clarify the beneﬁts and limitations the position
has). The paraconsistent approach also provides a clearer understanding of negation (e.g.,
by distinguishing diﬀerent meanings of this notion), and the approach articulates a more
realistic perception of the possibility of discourse even if the principle of noncontradiction
is partially left behind.
3.1
The systems NF n, 1 ≤n ≤ω
Here we begin by describing NF 1.11 The underlying logic of NF 1 is the calculus C=
1,
that is, we assume the language of this calculus plus the propositional postulates →1 to
¬4 (see page 799), the postulates (I)-(VII) for the predicate calculus (see page 811), and
the postulates for equality (I’) and (II’) (see page 815). The speciﬁc postulates of NF 1
are:
(NF1) (Extensionality) ∀x∀y(∀z(z ∈x ↔z ∈y) →x = y)
(NF2)
(Comprehension)
∃y∀x(x ∈y ↔α(x)), where x and y are distinct variables, y
does not occur free in α(x) and this formula is either stratiﬁed or is of the form x  x.12
11Caiero and de Souza have developed a paraconsistent version of the ML system in [Caiero and de Souza,
1997].
12We recall that a formula is stratiﬁed if it is possible to replace each variable occurring in it by a numeral in
the following manner: we replace everywhere the same variable by the same numeral so that, for each occurrence
of ∈, the numeral immediately following ∈is the immediate successor of the numeral immediately preceding ∈
[Hatcher, 1982, p. 213].

832
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
If we add to C=
1 the schema ¬(α∧¬α), we get the classical ﬁrst-order predicate calculus
with identity. The system NF of Quine is obtained by adding to this calculus the postulates
(NF1) and (NF2) above, provided that the latter postulate meets the condition that α(x) be
stratiﬁed. We denote Quine’s system by NF 0.
In order to introduce the set theories NF n, 1 ≤n < ω, we employ the calculus C=
n,
1 ≤n < ω, as their underlying logics plus the speciﬁc postulates above. Several results
can now be established:
THEOREM 134. NF n, 1 ≤n < ω, contains NF 0.
Proof. It follows from the fact that if α is a theorem of NF 0, and if we replace all
occurrences of ¬ in this formula by ¬(n), obtaining α′, then α′ is provable in NF n, 1 ≤
n < ω, where ¬(n)α is the formula ¬α ∧α(n).
■
THEOREM 135. If NF n, 1 ≤n < ω, is nontrivial, then NF 0 is consistent.
Proof. Let us suppose that NF n, 1 ≤n < ω, is nontrivial and that NF 0 is inconsistent.
Let α1, . . . , αn be a proof of a contradiction in NF 0, where αn is β∧¬β. Then, if α′
1, . . . , α′
n
are formulas obtained from the αi as explained in the proof of the previous theorem,
then this last sequence would be a derivation of β′ ∧¬(n)β′ in NF n. But in this system
(γ ∧¬(n)γ) →δ is a valid scheme, and so NF n would be trivial.
■
We can also prove the following results:
THEOREM 136.
1. In the hierarchy NF n, 1 ≤n < ω, every system is stronger that those that follow it.
2. If NF 1 is nontrivial, then all NF n, 1 < n < ω, are also nontrivial.
3. NF n, 1 ≤n < ω, is inconsistent.
Let us comment on item 3. In NF n, Russell set, that is, the set R =def {x : x  x}, does
exist (see the next subsection). In other words, in these systems we have: ⊢∃y∀x(x ∈
y ↔x  x). As we will see below, it is easy to prove that R ∈R ∧R  R. So, the
systems NF n are inconsistent. The other two items can be proved without diﬃculty (see
[da Costa, 1986a]).
The next step is to show that if NF 0 is consistent, then NF 1 is nontrivial. Therefore,
due to item 2 of the previous theorem, the consistency of NF 0 entails the nontriviality of
NF n, 1 ≤n < ω.
Let us ﬁrst deﬁne a system NF ∗
1 as follows: We keep only the following propositional
postulates (see page 799): →1 −→3, ∧1 −∧3, ∨1 −∨3, and add the following new
postulates: (→∗
4) (Peirce’s Law) ((α →β) →α) →α, and (→∗
5)
(¬α →β) →((¬α →
¬β) →α), where β is not atomic. This new set of postulates provides, of course, an
axiomatization for the classical propositional logic. The remaining postulates of NF ∗
1
are those of NF 1, except for those that turn out to be redundant. For instance, since
αo is provable in NF ∗
1 when α is not atomic, it results that postulates (V) and (VI) (see
page 811) are provable. So, NF 1 is weaker than NF ∗
1.
LEMMA 137. The consistency of NF 0 entails the nontriviality of NF ∗
1.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
833
Proof. Let V =def {x : x = x}, and let f be a map whose domain is the set of formulas of
NF ∗
1 and whose range is the set of formulas of NF 0, deﬁned as follows:
1.f(x = y) =def x = y
2. f(x ∈y) =def x ∈y
3.f(x ∈y) =def x ∈y
4. f(x  y) =def x ∈V ∧y ∈V
5.f(∀xα) =def ∀x f(α)
6. f(∃xα) =def ∃x f(α)
7.f(α ∧β) =def f(α) ∧f(β)
8. f(α ∨β) =def f(α) ∨f(β)
9.f(α →β) =def f(α) →f(β)
.
Then, using the preceding results, we can see that if α is a theorem of NF 0, then f(α) is
a theorem of NF ∗
1. Since the rules of inference of NF ∗
1 are valid in NF 0, any theorem
α of NF ∗
1 induces a theorem f(α) of NF 0. Therefore, supposing that NF 0 is consistent,
NF ∗
1 cannot be trivial. For instance, ∅∈∅is not a theorem of NF ∗
1, since f(∅∈∅) = ∅∈
∅is not provable in NF 0.
■
THEOREM 138. If NF 0 is consistent, then NF 1 is nontrivial.
Proof. The consistency of NF 0 implies the nontriviality of NF 1 because this system is
weaker than NF ∗
1.
■
THEOREM 139. If NF 0 is consistent, then all the inconsistent systems NF n, 1 ≤n < ω,
are nontrivial.
Proof. It suﬃces to note that the theories NF n, 1 ≤n < ω, are weaker than NF ∗
1.
■
By slightly changing the proof of Theorem 138, we can prove the following result: if
NF 0 is consistent, then the system obtained from NF n, 1 ≤n < ω, by adding axioms
guaranteeing the existence of the sets of all non-k-circular sets (k = 1, 2, . . .) is nontrivial.
For example, the set of all non-3-circular sets is the following set: {x : ¬∃y1∃y2∃y3(x ∈
y1 ∧y1 ∈y2 ∧y2 ∈y3 ∧y3 ∈x)}.
NF ω is like NF 1, except that its underlying logic is C=
ω instead of C=
1.
NF ω is weaker than NF 1, so if NF 0 is consistent, it is nontrivial.
3.2
Zermelo-Fraenkel-like systems
Starting with the Zermelo-Fraenkel system, we can introduce a new hierarchy of paracon-
sistent set theories ZF n, 1 ≤n ≤ω, similar to the hierarchy NF n, 1 ≤n ≤ω. Instead
of ZF, we could have employed any other classical system of set theory, or type theory,
as the ﬁrst system in the hierarchy (see [da Costa and Alcˆantara, 1982] and [da Costa and
Alcˆantara, 1986]). Among the several versions of ZF that can be used, perhaps the best
form is Church’s [Church, 1974], which admits the existence of the universal set.
Let us call the latter theory ZF 0. The language L of ZF 0 is that of C=
1, but with
only one speciﬁc (binary) predicate symbol: ∈(membership). The syntactic notions of L
are obvious adaptations of those of C=
0. In addition,  has its standard meaning, and the
description symbol ι is introduced by contextual deﬁnition, following Russell. In order to
state the postulates of ZF 0, we need some deﬁnitions.

834
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
DEFINITION 140.
1. {x : α(x)} =def ιy∀x(x ∈y ↔α(x))
2. ∅=def {x : x  x}
3. V =def {x : x = x}
4. x ⊂y ↔∀z(z ∈x →z ∈y)
5. {x} =def {y : y = x}
6. P(x) =def {y : y ⊂x}
7. x =def {y : y  x}
8. ∃{x : α(x)} ↔∃y∀x(x ∈y ↔α(x))
We easily deﬁne other basic notions such as x ∪y, x ∩y, {x, y}, ⟨x, y⟩, ∪x, ∩x, relation,
function, etc.
DEFINITION 141.
1. trans(x) ↔∀y(y ∈x →y ⊂x) (transitive set)
2. conn(x) ↔∀y∀z(y ∈x z ∈x →(z = y ∨y ∈z ∨z ∈y)) (connected set)
3. wf(x) ↔(x  ∅→∃y(y ∈x ∧x ∩y = ∅)) (well-founded set)
4. ord(x) ↔trans(x) ∧conn(x) ∧w f(x) (x is an ordinal)
5. low(x) ↔w f(x)∧x is equipotent to y (x is a low set)
The postulates of ZF 0 are those of C=
0 plus the following:
(P1) ∀z(z ∈x ↔z ∈y) →x = y
(Extensionality)
(P2) ∃{z : z = x ∨z = y}
(Pair Set)
(P3) ∃{z : ∃y(y ∈x ∧z ∈y}
(Union Set)
(P4) ∃ x
(Intersection Set)
(P5) ∃{x : x is a ﬁnite ordinal}
(Inﬁnity)
(P6) Any formulation of the Axiom of Choice.
(P7) low(z) →∃x{x : α(x) ∧x ∈z}
(Comprehension)
(P8)
∀x∀y∀z((α(x, y) ∧α(x, z) →x = y) ∧(α(x, y) ∧α(z, y) →x = z)) ∧∀y(y ∈t →
∃xα(x, y)) →(low(t) →∃v∀x(x ∈v ↔∃y(α(x, y) ∧y ∈t)))
(Replacement)
(P9) low(x) →∃{y : y ⊂x}
(Power Set)

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
835
(P10) ∃{y : y  x}
(Complement)
ZF 0 is really a strong set theory; the well-founded sets constitute a ‘model’ of usual
Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. Moreover, the universal set does exist in ZF 0:
⊢∃{x : x = x},
that is, the set V such that ⊢∀x(x ∈V) and, in particular, ⊢V ∈V. The collection of all
sets, plus ∅, V, ⊂, ∪, ∩and form a complete Boolean algebra.
THEOREM 142. In ZF 0:
a) ⊢x ∪x = V
b) ⊢x ∩x = ∅
c) ⊢x = x
d) ⊢V = ∅
e) ⊢ V = ∅
f) ⊢ V = V
g) ⊢ ∅= V
h) ⊢ ∅= ∅
i) ⊢¬w f(V)
j) ⊢¬low(V)
k) ⊢∅= V
l) x ⊂y →y ⊂x
m) ⊢w f({V})
n) ⊢wf(∅)
o) ⊢low(∅)
p) ⊢f is a function ∧low(dom(f)) →low(range( f)), where dom( f) and
range( f) stand for the domain and the range of f respectively.
Let us call αwf the formula obtained from the formula α by restricting its variables by
the condition w f( ). Then we have the following result, whose proof is immediate:
THEOREM 143. If α is a closed theorem of the standard ZF, then αwf is a theorem of
ZF 0.
As Church notes, it would be interesting to investigate the extension of ZF 0 with
the introduction of new postulates; for example, similar to the postulates of Quine’s NF
[Church, 1974]. A system of this type has already been studied in [da Costa, 1969].
Let us describe the system ZF 1. This system is related to ZF 0 as C=
1 is related to
C=
0. (Recall that the latter is the standard ﬁrst-order predicate calculus with identity.) So,
we should have, among other things, that: (a) ZF 1 should be partially included in ZF 0,
though the latter is also to be contained, in a certain sense, in the former. (b) ZF 1 should
be consistent, but can be used as the basis for inconsistent but nontrivial theories. In
particular, in ZF 1, we should be able to deﬁne ‘inconsistent’ set-theoretical structures,
such as Russell set and Russell relations (see below), and other more complex structures
(e.g. inconsistent arithmetics, and ‘inconsistent’ groups, among others).
ZF 1 is constructed as follows: its language, called L, and the logical postulates are
those of C=
1. The basic set-theoretical concepts are analogous to those of ZF 0, although
the concepts involving negation give raise to two notions: one involving the weak nega-
tion (¬), the other involving the strong negation (¬⋆). In general, the symbols for those
negations will diﬀer only by the fact that the strong versions are starred. For instance, we
have two empty sets: ∅=def {x : ¬(x = x)}, and ∅⋆=def {x : ¬⋆(x = x)}.
Each speciﬁc axiom or axiom scheme of ZF 0 yields two corresponding axioms, or
axiom schemas, of ZF 1: one with the strong negation and another with the weak one.
(We suppose that negation does occur essentially; otherwise, the postulate of ZF 0 yields
only one of ZF 1, having the same syntactic form.)

836
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
It is important to note that, for example, NF 1 is inconsistent, while ZF 1 is appar-
ently consistent, but nontrivial. However, it can be used as the basis for inconsistent but
nontrivial theories.
The following results can be proved without diﬃculty. We emphasize, once again, that
ZF 1 is part of ZF 0; but ZF 0 is also contained, in certain sense, in ZF 1.
THEOREM 144.
1. Let α be a sentence of L and α⋆the sentence obtained from α by replacing ¬ by
¬⋆. Then α is a theorem of ZF 0 iﬀα⋆is a theorem of ZF 1.
2. ZF 1 is consistent (with regard to ¬ or ¬⋆) iﬀZF 0 is consistent.
3. If α is a closed theorem of ZF 0, then ∀x∀y((x ∈y)o ∧(x = y)o) →α is a theorem
of ZF 1.
In the next subsection, we will show how ZF 1 can be used as a paraconsistent basis for
inconsistent but nontrivial theories (and, loosely speaking, for inconsistent mathematics).
As a ﬁnal remark, note that in the set theories described above, we can construct seman-
tics for C-logics, where the syntactic metalinguistic level can be considered as classical
(in the sense that all the syntactic propositions are well-behaved; see [da Costa et al.,
1998a] for further references).
3.3
Russell sets and relations
By adapting the standard notion of a mathematical structure [Bourbaki, 1968], it is possi-
ble to deﬁne the concept of a paraconsistent structure [da Costa, 1989]. However, instead
of developing here a general theory of paraconsistent structures, we will consider some
particular cases, and show how a certain kind of paraconsistent mathematics can be de-
veloped.
DEFINITION 145 (Russell set). R =def {x : x  x}
The ﬁrst structure to be studied is
(10) R = ⟨V, R⟩,
characterized by the axiom
(11) ∃R ∧∀x∃P(x),
where V is the domain (the universal set) of R, and R is its sole predicate; P(x) denotes
the power set of x.
We emphasize that the following constructions are done in ZF 1. Thus, we can make
free use of the valid schemas and rules of C=
1.
THEOREM 146. ⊢R ∈R ∧R  R

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
837
Proof. Given the deﬁnition of R, x ∈R ↔x  x. Hence, replacing x for R, we get
R ∈R ↔R  R. However, if R ∈R, it follows that R  R, and if R  R, we obtain R  R.
Therefore, by excluded middle, R  R. Similarly, we prove that R ∈R by assuming that
R  R.
■
THEOREM 147. ⊢y ∈{x} ↔y = x
Proof. In ZF 1, we have that: ∃{x}. Therefore, ⊢y ∈{x} ↔y = x, by the deﬁnition of
{x}.
■
THEOREM 148. ⊢x ∈R →{x} ∈R
Proof. Either {x}  {x} or {x} ∈{x}. In the ﬁrst case, {x} ∈R, by the deﬁnition of R. In the
second case, {x} = x, and given the hypothesis, {x} ∈R.
■
THEOREM 149. ⊢x, y ∈R →{x, y} ∈R
Proof. Either {x, y}  {x, y} or {x, y} ∈{x, y}. In the ﬁrst case, {x, y} ∈R, by the deﬁnition of
R. In the second case, either {x, y} = x or {x, y} = y, and given the hypothesis, {x, y} ∈R. ■
THEOREM 150. ⊢{{x, R}} ∈R
Proof. Either {{x, R}} ∈{{x, R}} or {{x, R}}  {{x, R}}. In the second case, it is immediate
that {{x, R}} ∈R. In the ﬁrst case, by Theorem 147, it follows that {x, R} = {{x, R}}.
Therefore, x = R = {x, R}, and given that R ∈R, by Theorem 149, {x, R} ∈R. Thus, by
Theorem 148, {{x, R}} ∈R.
■
THEOREM 151 (Arruda and Batens, 1982).  R = V.
Proof. It suﬃces to prove that, for every x, x ∈ R. Let us suppose that (i) {x, R}  {x, R}.
Hence, {x, R} ∈R and, by the deﬁnition of the union set, x ∈ R. On the other hand,
if (ii) {x, R} ∈{x, R}, then either {x, R} = x or {x, R} = R. In the second case, it follows
that x ∈ R. If {x, R} = x, we have that {{x, R}} = {x}, and given that {{x, R}} ∈R
(Theorem 150), it follows that {x} ∈R. Hence, x ∈ R.
■
This last theorem shows that a set theory with Russell set has, in general, a universal
class.
THEOREM 152 (Arruda).
. . . ⊂P(P(R)) ⊂P(R) ⊂R.
Proof. If x ∈P(R), then x ⊂R. Now, either x  x or x ∈x. If x  x, then x ∈R; if
x ∈x, given that x ⊂R, it follows that x ∈R. Therefore, P(R) ⊂R. Furthermore, if
x ∈P(P(R)), then x ⊂P(R), and by the previous result, x ⊂R; hence x ∈P(R). Thus,
P(P(R)) ⊂P(R) ⊂R. It is now easy to complete the proof.
■
THEOREM 153. In ZF 1 plus the axiom (11):
1. ⊢∅∈R, {∅} ∈R, {{∅}} ∈R . . .

838
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
2. ⊢∃x(x  R)
3. ⊢V  R
4. ⊢x, y ∈R →⟨x, y⟩∈R
5. ⊢V = P(V)
6. ⊢x ⊂R →x ∈R
7. ⊢R ∪R =  R
8. ⊢R × R ⊂R
9. ⊢¬⋆∃{x : ¬⋆(x ∈x)}
10 ⊢∃R →∃x(x is inﬁnite)
Given Theorem 150, it is possible to demonstrate that R is, as it were, an ‘internal
model’ of the set theory in which we are working. Moreover, given that  R = V, it
follows that the existence of R implies the existence of inﬁnite sets. The properties of R
are by no means arbitrary. For example, it does not seem possible to prove that (R ∈R)o.
Moreover, it is not possible to prove everything with regard to R without also proving, at
the same time, that some classical, standard set theories are inconsistent (see [da Costa,
1964a] and [da Costa, 1986a]). Finally, ZF 1 with the extra axiom ∃R is nontrivial iﬀ
ZF 0 is consistent.
Russell relations
DEFINITION 154 (Russell relations). Let n = 1, 2, . . ., and 0 < i ≤n. Then:
Rn,i =def {⟨x1, . . . , xn⟩: ⟨x1, . . . , xn⟩ xi}.
By convention, we have: ⟨x⟩= x.
In particular, R1,1 = R. With Rn,i, assuming appropriate postulates, we can build struc-
tures similar to R above. We can also prove the following results:
THEOREM 155.
1. ⊢Rn,i ∈Rn,i ∧Rn,i  Rn,i
2. ⊢V × · · · × V =  Rn,i, where the product on the left has n terms. In particular,
⊢V × V ⊂∪∪R2,1
THEOREM 156.
1. ⊢∀t(⟨∅, t⟩∈R2,1)
2. ⊢∪∪R2,1 = V
Proof. With regard to 1, by hypothesis, ∃R2,1. Then, ⟨∅, t⟩∈R2,1 ↔⟨∅, t⟩ ∅. With
regard to 2, since {{∅}, {∅, t}} = ⟨∅, t⟩∈R2,1, it follows that {∅, t} ∈∪R2,1 and t ∈∪∪R2,1. ■
Given the consistency of NF 0 (see the previous subsection), if we add to NF n, 1 ≤
n < ω, new postulates guaranteeing the existence of Russell relations, the resulting system
is nontrivial.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
839
3.4
Paraconsistent Boolean algebra
In various paraconsistent set theories, even in classical set theories such as Zermelo-
Fraenkel, it is possible to consider intuitively a set as an ordered pair, in the classical
sense, of sets that are part of a universal class V. Thus, a set X is a pair ⟨X1, X2⟩, where:
(1) x ∈X iﬀx ∈X1
(2) x  X iﬀx ∈X2
(3) x ∈X and x  X is equivalent to x ∈X1 and x ∈X2
Given that the principle of excluded middle holds in certain paraconsistent set theories,
it should be the case that X1 ∪X2 = V. If X1 ∩X2 = ∅, a classical set is obtained. Let us
consider then the collection of the sets just constructed on V, which will be denoted by
V. An element of V is called a paraconsistent set, or a p-set. In what follows, we outline
an algebra of p-sets V. We suppose that the p-sets are embedded in a classical set theory,
for instance, ZF.
Suppose that X = ⟨X1, X2⟩and Y = ⟨Y1, Y2⟩. In this case:
DEFINITION 157.
(i) X ⊔Y =def ⟨X1 ∪Y1, X2 ∩Y2⟩
(ii) X ⊓Y =def ⟨X1 ∩Y1, X2 ∪Y2⟩
(iii) 1 =def ⟨V, ∅⟩
(iv) 0 =def ⟨∅, V⟩
(v) X =def ⟨X2, X1⟩
(vi) X ⊏Y =def X1 ⊂Y1 ∧Y2 ⊂X2
THEOREM 158.
⊢X ⊔X = X
⊢X ⊓X = X
⊢X = X
⊢X ⊔Y = Y ⊔X
⊢X ⊓Y = Y ⊓X
1 = 0
⊢(X ⊔Y) ⊔Z = X ⊔(Y ⊔Z)
⊢(X ⊓Y) ⊓Z = X ⊓(Y ⊓Z)
⊢0 = 1
⊢1 ⊔X = 1
⊢1 ⊓X = X
⊢0 ⊓X = 0
⊢0 ⊔X = X
⊢X ⊔X ⊏1
⊢0 ⊏X ⊓X
⊢X ⊏X
⊢0 ⊏X
⊢X ⊏1
⊢X ⊏Y ∧Y ⊏X →X = Y
⊢X ⊏Y ∧Y ⊏Z →X ⊏Z
⊢X ⊏X ⊔X
⊢X ⊓X ⊏X
DEFINITION 159. The structure P = ⟨V, ⊔, ⊓, —, 1, 0 ⟩is called a paraconsistent Boolean
algebra.
Using this structure, it is possible to formalize several paraconsistent patterns of rea-
soning, just as with classical Boolean algebras, we can put in algebraic terms various clas-
sical inferences. We can also verify that the paraconsistent logical mechanism considered

840
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
here does not exclude classical logic, but extends it in a certain sense — though under
another point of view, it can be embedded into classical logical structures. Of course, this
point is valid for particular categories of paraconsistent structures. It corroborates the fact
that both paraconsistent logic and paraconsistent mathematics do not destroy either tradi-
tional logic or standard mathematics. Rather, the paraconsistent approach complements
the classical developments of logic and mathematics, and in certain cases, extends them.
The structure of the paraconsistent Boolean algebra clearly is richer than the classical
one. Thus, for instance, one can introduce two operators, π1 and π2, such that, given a
p-set X, π1(X) = X1 and π2(X) = X2, where X1 and X2 are in another Boolean algebra, the
classical algebra of the subsets of V etc.
When the structure P, in the above deﬁnition, is such that, for every X = ⟨X1, X2⟩, it
is the case that X1 ∩X2 = ∅, one obtains a Boolean algebra that essentially is the usual
algebra of the subsets of V.
In this way, it is possible to construct a general theory of paraconsistent structures (al-
gebraic, topological, of order etc.), obtaining in this way a generalization of the traditional
theory of structures, such as Bourbaki’s. Moreover, as we will see below, paraconsistent
structures, such as those described in this section, have been applied to several areas,
such as computer science, artiﬁcial intelligence and logic programming (see, e.g., [Sub-
rahmanian, 1987], [Blair and Subrahmanian, 1989a], [Blair and Subrahmanian, 1988b],
and [Kifer and Subrahmanian, 1989]). 13 This provides a signiﬁcant motivation for their
study.
3.5
Paraconsistent mathematics
In this subsection, we outline a paraconsistent formulation of elementary diﬀerential and
integral calculus, in which what we will call l’Hospital principle is true:
‘Two ﬁnite quantities that diﬀer by an inﬁnitely small quantity are equal.’ 14
The paraconsistent nature of this principle is clear, even though we are not trying to ad-
vance an exegesis of l’Hospital’s work (see [l’Hospital, 1996] and [Robinson, 1966]). To
begin with, we describe two (classical) algebraic structures A and A⋆.
The ring A The ring A is described as follows. Let R denote the ﬁeld of real numbers
and a an element of a ﬁxed open interval I (I ⊂R). An inﬁnitesimal variable is a real
valued function deﬁned on I that has limit zero in a (we can use right or left limits). The
expression ‘inﬁnitesimal variable’ is here employed inspired by the terminology of the
classical French treatises, such as those by Picard and Gousart, as well as by Cauchy. The
elements of A are ordered pairs ⟨r, f⟩, where r ∈R and f is an inﬁnitesimal variable.
13It is worth noting that paraconsistent structures have also been employed in quantum mechanics by Dalla
Chiara and Giuntini (see [Dalla Chiara and Giuntini, 1989], [Dalla Chiara and Giuntini, 2000], and [Dalla Chiara
and Giuntini, 2001]).
14In this context, it is worth also giving a quotation attributed to Johann Bernoulli (1667-1748), according
to which ‘a quantity that is increased or decreased by an inﬁnitely small quantity is neither increased nor de-
creased’.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
841
If ⟨r, f⟩and ⟨s, g⟩belong to A, then ⟨r, f⟩= ⟨s, g⟩if r = s and f = g. Addition is
deﬁned as follows: ⟨r, f⟩+ ⟨s, g⟩=def ⟨r + s, f + g⟩. By an abuse of language, we take
0 = ⟨0, 0⟩, where the second zero in ⟨0, 0⟩is the identically zero function in I. We also
take −⟨r, f⟩=def ⟨−r, −f⟩, and ⟨r, f⟩−⟨s, g⟩=def ⟨r, f⟩+ (−⟨s, g⟩) = ⟨r −s, f −g⟩.
The following additional deﬁnitions are needed: ⟨r, f⟩· ⟨s, g⟩=def ⟨rs, rg + f s + fg⟩
and 1 =def ⟨1, 0⟩. Furthermore, if r  0, we put ⟨r, f⟩−1 =def ⟨r−1, −f/r( f + r)⟩and
⟨s, g⟩÷ ⟨r, f⟩=def ⟨s, g⟩· ⟨r, f⟩−1.
The elements of A with the operation + constitute a commutative group, and with ×,
a commutative semi-group with unity. Moreover, multiplication is distributive in relation
to addition. Therefore, A is a commutative ring with unity. The elements of A are called
hyper-reals. If we identify ⟨r, 0⟩with r, then the ﬁeld R is contained in A as a sub-ring.
We write ⟨r, f⟩as r + ⟨0, f⟩. A pair such as ⟨0, f⟩is called an inﬁnitesimal, and will be
usually denoted by small Greek letters. Any element of A, ⟨r, f⟩, then, is the sum of a
standard real and an inﬁnitesimal: ⟨r, f⟩= r + ε, where ε = ⟨0, f⟩.
Division can be extended to inﬁnitesimals. In fact, let us suppose that κ = ⟨0, f⟩,
λ = ⟨0, g⟩, and lim f/g = r in A. Also, let κ/λ = ⟨r, f/g −r⟩, where the variable g is
supposed not to assume the value 0. Therefore, making h = f/g −r, it is easy to check
that the inﬁnitesimal ε = ⟨0, h⟩is such that κ = λ · ε. When lim f/g = ∞, or does not
exist, the quotient κ/λ is not deﬁned.
We introduce in A a relation of inequality, <, so that ⟨r, f⟩< ⟨s, g⟩if r < s, or in case
r = s, if f < g (the variable f is less than the variable g in all points of I).
The set of all hyper-reals of the form ⟨r, f⟩is called the monad of r ∈R. The order of
an inﬁnitesimal ε in relation to another inﬁnitesimal κ is deﬁned without diﬃculty. Given
a function f : R →R, it can be extended so that dom( f) = A, under the hypothesis
that limx→t f(x) exists and is ﬁnite for any t ∈R. We take f(r + ε) = b + δ, where
b = limx→r f(x) and δ is an inﬁnitesimal obviously deﬁned.
The basic concepts of the diﬀerential calculus can then be deﬁned in terms of inﬁnites-
imals. For example, the expression:
lim
x→r f(x) = b
means that f(r + ε) = b + δ, for every inﬁnitesimal ε (δ is also an inﬁnitesimal), where
r ∈R. Similarly, the derivative of f is deﬁned as follows:
f(r + ε) −f(r) = f ′(r) · ε + δ,
for any inﬁnitesimal ε, δ being an inﬁnitesimal of order higher than that of ε. The proper-
ties of limits, derivatives etc. are easily proved from the properties of inﬁnitesimals.
The quasi-ring A⋆The quasi-ring A⋆is obtained from A by the introduction of inﬁnite
‘numbers’. An inﬁnite variable is a standard real-variable function, deﬁned in I, and
divergent at a ∈I.
The pair ⟨v, 0⟩is called an inﬁnite hyper-real number when v is an inﬁnite variable.
The (ﬁnite) elements of A and the inﬁnite numbers form A⋆. Two inﬁnite numbers ⟨v, 0⟩
and ⟨u, 0⟩are equal if v = u. The operations of A⋆are deﬁned as in A, but extended as
follows:

842
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
Addition
1. If ⟨v, 0⟩is inﬁnite and ⟨k, f⟩is ﬁnite, then ⟨v, 0⟩+ ⟨k, f⟩= ⟨k, f⟩+ ⟨v, 0⟩=
⟨v + k, 0⟩.
2. If ⟨v, 0⟩and ⟨u, 0⟩are both inﬁnite, then ⟨v, 0⟩+⟨u, 0⟩= ⟨u, 0⟩+⟨v, 0⟩= ⟨v+u, 0⟩,
whenever lim(v+u) = ∞; ⟨v, 0⟩+⟨u, 0⟩= ⟨u, 0⟩+⟨v, 0⟩= ⟨k, f⟩when lim(v+u) = k
(standard real), where f = k −(u + v). Otherwise, ⟨v, 0⟩+ ⟨u, 0⟩and ⟨u, 0⟩+ ⟨v, 0⟩
are not deﬁned.
Subtraction
By deﬁnition, the opposite of an inﬁnite ⟨v, 0⟩is ⟨−v, 0⟩. Then, the
diﬀerence of two elements of A⋆is deﬁned as the sum of the ﬁrst with the opposite
of the second.
Multiplication
1. If ⟨v, 0⟩and ⟨u, 0⟩are inﬁnite, then ⟨v, 0⟩· ⟨u, 0⟩= ⟨u, 0⟩· ⟨v, 0⟩= ⟨uv, 0⟩.
2. If ⟨v, 0⟩is inﬁnite and ⟨k, f⟩is ﬁnite, but not an inﬁnitesimal, then ⟨v, 0⟩·⟨k, f⟩=
⟨k, f⟩· ⟨v, 0⟩= ⟨vk, 0⟩
3. If ⟨v, 0⟩is inﬁnite and ⟨0, f⟩is an inﬁnitesimal, then ⟨v, 0⟩· ⟨0, f⟩= ⟨0, f⟩·
⟨v, 0⟩= ⟨v f, 0⟩, when lim(v f) = ∞; if lim(v f) = 0, the product is equal to ⟨0, v f⟩.
Otherwise, the product is not deﬁned.
Division Let ⟨v, 0⟩be an inﬁnite number satisfying obvious conditions; ⟨v, 0⟩−1 is the
inﬁnitesimal ⟨0, v−1⟩. If ⟨0, f⟩is an inﬁnitesimal satisfying appropriate conditions,
then ⟨0, f⟩−1 is the inﬁnite ⟨f −1, 0⟩. The quotient of two elements of A⋆is the product
of the ﬁrst by the inverse of the second.
The relation < can be extended to A⋆without diﬃculty. (However, A and A⋆are
not Archimedean structures.) In terms of inﬁnitesimals and inﬁnities, we can express
in A⋆the basic ideas and results of the inﬁnitesimal calculus (for analogous views, see
[Schmieden and Laugwitz, 1958], [Laugwitz, 1961a], and [Laugwitz, 1961b]). In partic-
ular, we can get something like de l’Hospital’s principle on curves, according to which
a smooth curve may be analyzed into an inﬁnite number of inﬁnitesimal straight lines
([l’Hospital, 1996], and [Robinson, 1966]).
The classical theory of inﬁnitesimals and inﬁnite quantities, as well as Du Bois Rey-
mond’s theory of orders of magnitude concerning the asymptotic behavior of functions
(see [Borel, 1950, Note II]), are translatable in the language of A⋆. The same is true in
connection with other topics of pure and applied mathematics, such as, the theory of dif-
ferential equations and Fourier series. Loosely speaking, A⋆is a model of a theory with
inﬁnitesimals and inﬁnite quantities. It is also worth noting that natural suppositions about
the orders of inﬁnitesimals and inﬁnities give raise to propositions that are undecidable in
Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory (see [Ellentuck, 1975]).
To describe a paraconsistent model for the diﬀerential and integral calculus, we start
with the language L in which we can treat the central notions of this calculus. L is essen-
tially Manin’s L2Real [Manin, 1977, p. 109], conveniently extended by the introduction

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
843
of names, in the sense of Shoenﬁeld (see [Shoenﬁeld, 1967]), for all elements of A (or of
A⋆). So, L is composed of the following primitive symbols: (1) individual variables; (2)
variables for functions of one variable; (3) individual constants: the names of the elements
of A (or of A⋆); (4) the symbols + and × for binary operations; (5) two binary relation
symbols: ≡and <; (6) the connectives: →, ∧, ∨, ↔and ¬; and (7) the quantiﬁers: ∀and
∃; (8) parentheses.
Terms of L: (a) All individual variables, individual constants, and function variables are
terms. (b) If F is a function variable and t is a term, then F(t) is a term. (c) If t1 and t2 are
terms, so are t1 + t2 and t1 × t2.
Formulas of L: If t1 and t2 are terms, then t1 ≡t2 and t1 < t2 are atomic formulas.
The remaining formulas are deﬁned as usual, but quantiﬁcation over function variables
is allowed. The common syntactic notions such as those of bound and free variables,
sentence etc. are deﬁned in the usual way.
The following clauses deﬁne when ν is a paraconsistent valuation of L:
1. Names denote the corresponding elements of A (or of A⋆).
2. Let t1 < t2 be an atomic sentence. In this case, ν(t1 < t2) = 1 if t1 < t2 is true in A
(or in A⋆). Otherwise, ν(t1 < t2) = 0.
3. ν(t1 ≡t2) = 1 iﬀt1 −t2 is inﬁnitesimal with respect to ε (ε is an inﬁnitesimal).
4. Let t1 ≡t2 be an atomic sentence. In this case, ν(t1  t2) = ν(¬(t1 ≡t2)) = 1 if
t1  t2 in A (or in A⋆); otherwise, ν(t1  t2) = 0.
5. Similarly, we deﬁne the value of ν for any sentence of L, replacing ≡and  in the
sentence by convenient symbolic combinations, respectively as in 3 and 4.
If a sentence F is undecidable in the usual set theory plus the axioms of A (or of A⋆),
the value of F is chosen arbitrarily, in such a way that ν be the characteristic function of a
maximal nontrivial set of sentences. Therefore, ν is really a valuation in L.
It is immediate to verify that we may have, for some terms t1 and t2, that ν(t1 ≡t2) =
ν(t1  t2) = 1. In fact, ν constitutes a paraconsistent valuation and determines a model
of the inﬁnitesimal calculus in which de l’Hospital’s principle about ﬁnite quantities that
diﬀer by an inﬁnitely small increment holds. Moreover, in the case of A⋆, the model is
such that even de l’Hospital’s second principle, on smooth curves, happens to be valid
(when conveniently interpreted).
The method sketched here to obtain ν is analogous to those of Chris Mortensen (see
[Mortensen, 1995]), and of synthetic diﬀerential geometry (see [Bell, 1988] and [Bell,
1995]). For the treatment of functions of several variables, we have to strengthen L with
the introduction of functional variables (see [Scott, 1967]).
In summary, we may say that ν is a paraconsistent structure, which we will call the de
l’Hospital structure. On the paraconsistent version of the inﬁnitesimal calculus outlined
here, see also [da Costa et al., 1998a]. Further developments could start with the para-
doxes of Burali-Forti and of Cantor, which naturally motivate the deﬁnition of interesting

844
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
paraconsistent structures. The development of paraconsistent arithmetics, in turn, oﬀers
no diﬃculty at all.
4
JA´SKOWSKI’S LOGIC
4.1
Ja´skowski’s discussive logic
As noted above, following a suggestion by J. Łukasiewicz, Stanislaw Ja´skowski (1906-
1965) was the ﬁrst logician to construct a system of paraconsistent propositional calculus
(see [Ja´skowski, 1948], [Ja´skowski, 1949], [Ja´skowski, 1969], and [da Costa and Doria,
1995]). Ja´skowski motivated his discussive logic (sometimes also referred to as discursive
logic) by the need for addressing three issues: (i) to systematize theories that contain
contradictions, such as dialectics; (ii) to study theories where there are contradictions
originated by vagueness, and (iii) to investigate empirical theories whose postulates or
basic assumptions are contradictory (see [Arruda, 1980] and [Arruda, 1989]).
Later, da Costa and Dubikajtis extended the discussive propositional calculus to ﬁrst-
and higher-order predicate calculi (see [da Costa and Dubikajtis, 1968] and [da Costa and
Dubikajtis, 1977]; see also [Kotas, 1971], [Kotas, 1974], and [Kotas, 1975]). Recently,
discussive logic has been applied to the theory of pragmatic truth (as we will discuss
below), to the foundations of physics (see [da Costa and Doria, 1995] and also below),
and in the philosophy of science (for a general account, see [da Costa and French, 2003]).
In this section, we will sketch the main ideas related to Ja´skowski’s discussive logic.
Let us call J the discussive propositional calculus whose language L and notations
are those one the modal system S5. We pose: ♦Γ =def {♦α : α ∈Γ}. So, J can be
semantically deﬁned as
Γ |=J α iﬀ♦Γ |=S 5 ♦α,
where the notation has an obvious meaning. It is immediate that
THEOREM 160.
(1) |=J α iﬀ|=S 5 ♦α
(2) Γ |=J α iﬀthere are γ1, . . . , γn in Γ such that |=S 5 ♦γ1 ∧. . . ∧♦γn →♦α
COROLLARY 161. Γ |=J α iﬀthere is a ﬁnite set {γ1, . . . , γn} ⊆Γ such that
{γ1, . . . , γn} |=J α.
COROLLARY 162. If |=S 5 α, then |=J α.
Proof. It is enough to note that if |=S 5 α, then |=J ♦α.
■
Given the deﬁnitions and results above, we can see that J accomplishes Ja´skowski’s
main intensions.
J has several axiomatizations (see [da Costa, 1975] and [da Costa and Dubikajtis,
1977]); the one presented here was introduced in [da Costa and Doria, 1995]. The postu-
lates are:

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
845
(J1) If α is an axiom of S5, then □α.
(J2) □α, □(α →β)⧸□β
(J3) □α⧸α
(J4) ♦α⧸α
(J5) □α⧸□□α
LEMMA 163. If ⊢J α means that α is provable in J, then: if ⊢J α, then |=S 5 ♦α.
Proof. By induction on the length of a given derivation of α in J.
■
LEMMA 164. If |=S 5 α, then ⊢J □α.
Proof. By induction on the length of a given derivation of α in S5.
■
THEOREM 165. ⊢J α iﬀ|=J α.
Proof. If ⊢J α, then by Lemma 163, |=S 5 ♦α. So, by deﬁnition, |=J α. Conversely, if
|=J α, then by deﬁnition |=S 5 ♦α. So, by Lemma 164, ⊢J □♦α. By postulate (J3), ⊢J ♦α,
and by postulate (J4), ⊢J α.
■
DEFINITION 166. We write Γ ⊢J α iﬀthere are γ1, . . . , γn such that ⊢J ♦γ1∧. . .∧♦γn →
♦α.
THEOREM 167. Γ ⊢J α iﬀΓ |=J α.
Proof. Immediate consequence of the deﬁnition above and Theorem 165.
■
THEOREM 168. Modus Ponens, that is, the rule α, α →β⧸β, is not valid in J.
Proof. The uniform predicate calculus U is a subcalculus of the monadic calculus; it is,
the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus dealing only with unary predicates in which there is only
one individual variable, say x (see [Church, 1956]). There is an obvious bijection between
the set of formulas of U and the language of S5: given a formula α of U, we obtain the
corresponding formula α′ of the language of S5 by replacing any subformula Pi(x) of α
by pi, and any universal quantiﬁcation ∀x by □. We can show that if α is a formula of U
and α′ is its corresponding formula in S5, then |=U α iﬀ|=S 5 α′ (see [da Costa and Doria,
1995]). To prove the theorem, it is enough to note that ∃xα(x) and ∃x(α(x) →β(x)) do
not imply that ∃xβ(x) in U.
■
THEOREM 169. (a) The rules α, β⧸α ∧β and α, ¬α⧸β are not valid in J. (b) The
deduction theorem Γ, α ⊢J β ⇒Γ ⊢J α →β is not true in J.
These results show that J can be used to accommodate inconsistent sets of premisses
while avoiding triviality; that is, it is paraconsistent.

846
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
DEFINITION 170.
(1) [Discussive Implication] α →d β =def ♦α →β
(2) [Discussive Conjunction] α ∧d β =def ♦α ∧β
(3) [Discussive Equivalence] α ↔d β =def (α →d β) ∧d (β →d α)
(4) [Impossibility] ∇α =def ¬♦α
THEOREM 171. The connectives →d, ∨, ∧d, ↔d and ↔d have all the classic properties
of →, ∨, ∧, ↔and ¬ respectively.
This shows that the classical propositional calculus is naturally embedded in J. How-
ever, as the next theorem shows, several rules and formulas do not hold in this calculus.
THEOREM 172. The following formulas and rules are not valid in J.
(1) α →d (β →d α ∧β)
(2) α →d (¬α →d β)
(3) (α ∧β →d γ) →d (α →d (β →d γ))
(4) Γ, α |=J β and Γ, α |=J ¬β ⇒Γ |=J ¬α
(5) (α ↔d ¬α) →d β
(6) (α →d ¬α) →d ¬β
THEOREM 173.
(1) J is decidable.
(2) J has no ﬁnite characteristic matrix, but has the ﬁnite model property.
Proof. With regard to (1), the decidability of J follows from S5’s decidability. In fact,
if α is a formula of J, use Deﬁnition 170 to obtain a formula β of S5 by eliminating the
discussive connectives. Now, since β is a theorem of J iﬀ♦β is a theorem of S5, use a
decision procedure for S5 to verify whether ♦β is a theorem of S5. With regard to (2), it
follows from the fact that S5 has the ﬁnite model property, even though it has no ﬁnite
characteristic matrix (for details, see [da Costa, 1975]).
■
J has (at least) two equivalent semantics. One based on Kripke structures, the other
based on the notion of Hanle algebra. A Hanle algebra is a structure H = ⟨A, −, ∧, ⋆⟩,
where ⟨A, −, ∧⟩is a Boolean algebra and ⋆is an unary operator over A such that: ⋆1 = 1
and ⋆x = 0, for all x  0, where 0 and 1 are, respectively, the ﬁrst and the last elements
of the Boolean algebra. We can prove that the following sentences are equivalent (where
α is a formula of S5): (i) α is a theorem of S5; (ii) α is valid in every Hanle algebra, and
(iii) α is valid in every ﬁnite Hanle algebra (see [da Costa and Doria, 1995]). From these

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
847
statements, it is easy to derive a semantics for J. Nevertheless, in what follows, we will
make reference only to the semantics based on Kripke structures.
A Kripke semantics for J can be constructed by the same steps we take to build a
model theory for S5, and the corresponding results can be proved.
DEFINITION 174. Let Γ be a set of formulas of the language of J. Then:
(1) Γ =def {α : Γ ⊢J α}
(2) If Γ is the set of all formulas, then Γ is trivial; otherwise, it is nontrivial.
(3) If there is a formula α such that Γ ⊢J α and Γ ⊢J ¬α, then Γ is inconsistent;
otherwise, it is consistent.
(4) If there is a formula α such that Γ ⊢J α and Γ ⊢J ∇α, then Γ is strongly inconsis-
tent.
THEOREM 175. There are inconsistent, but nontrivial sets of formulas.
Proof. If p is a propositional variable, then {p, ¬p} is inconsistent, but nontrivial.
■
A Kripke structure is an ordered pair K = ⟨W, υ⟩, where W is a non-empty set whose
elements are called worlds, and υ is a mapping υ : W × P →{0, 1}, where P is the set of
propositional variables of the language of J. As usual, if υ(w, p) = 1(= 0), we say that p
is true (false) in the world w.
For brevity’s sake, let us take ∨, ¬, and □as the primitive connectives of our language.
If α is a formula, then we say that K, w force α, and write K, w ⊩α, according to the
following recursive deﬁnition:
(i) K, w ⊩p iﬀυ(w, p) = 1
(ii) K, w ⊩β ∨γ iﬀK, w ⊩β or K, w ⊩γ
(iii) K, w ⊩¬β iﬀK, w ⊮β
(iv) K, w ⊩□β iﬀfor every t ∈W, K, t ⊩β
DEFINITION 176. If K is a Kripke structure, then K is a model of Γ if for every γ there
is a world w ∈W such that K, w ⊩γ.
THEOREM 177.
(1) Γ has a model iﬀit is nontrivial.
(2) There are inconsistent sets of formulas that have models.
Proof. Immediate application of Kripke semantics for J.
■

848
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
These results reinforce that J is a paraconsistent logic.
We can deﬁne ﬁrst-order discussive calculi with necessary identity as follows (these
calculi can also be extended to higher-order systems). Let us call J∗the calculus whose
language is that of the quantiﬁcational system S5Q= of Hughes and Creswell (see [Hughes
and Cresswell, 1968]). We then deﬁne:
Γ |=J∗α iﬀ♦Γ |=S 5Q= ♦α.
In particular, |=J α iﬀ|=S 5Q= ♦α. Given these deﬁnitions, all the results above can be
applied to J∗.
It is possible to present a sound and complete axiomatization for J∗as follows:
(J1∗) If α is an axiom of S5Q=, then □α.
(J2∗) Rules similar to (J2) to (J5) of J (see page 844).
(J3∗) □(α →β(x))⧸□(α →∀xβ(x)), where x is not free in α.
It is easy to see that in J∗, →d, ∧d, ∨d, ↔d, ∇, ∀and ∃have all the classical properties
of →, ∧, ∨, ↔, ¬, ∀and ∃, respectively. Furthermore, it is not diﬃcult to justify that:
(i) S5Q= is contained in J∗; (ii) both J∗and S5Q= are not decidable; (iii) both have
algebraic semantics in which they are sound and complete; (iv) there are inconsistent, but
nontrivial sets of formulas of J∗, and ﬁnally, (v) a set of formulas Γ is nontrivial iﬀthere
is a Kripke structure for J∗that is a model of Γ. As a result, there are inconsistent sets of
formulas that do have models.
There is another, and equivalent, way of building a ﬁrst-order discussive calculus. This
is suitable for certain applications, as will become clear below. We will call this calculus
J∗∗(it is essentially the same as J∗). The language of J∗∗is also the same as that
of S5Q=, except that if α is a formula, we write ⊎α to denote the formula obtained by
preceding α by a sequence of universal quantiﬁers so that all variables of ⊎α are bound.
To deﬁne the calculus J∗∗, we stipulate that
⊢J∗∗α iﬀ⊢S 5Q= ♦⊎α.
Furthermore, we say that α is a syntactic consequence of Γ in J∗∗, that is, ⊢J∗∗α, iﬀthere
are γ1, . . . , γn ∈Γ such that ♦⊎(γ1 ∧. . . ∧γn →α) is valid in S5Q=. The postulates of
J∗∗are (with the usual restrictions):
(J1∗∗) If α is an instance of a classical tautology, then □⊎α is an axiom.
(J2∗∗) □⊎α, □⊎(α →β)⧸□⊎β
(J3∗∗) □⊎(□(α →β) →(□α →□β))
(J4∗∗) □⊎(□α →α)
(J5∗∗) □⊎(♦α →□♦α)

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
849
(J6∗∗) □⊎(∀xα(x) →α(t))
(J7∗∗) □⊎α⧸α
(J8∗∗) □⊎α⧸□⊎□α
(J9∗∗) ♦⊎α⧸α
(J10∗∗) □⊎(α →β(x))⧸□⊎(α →∀xβ(x))
(J11∗∗) Vacuous quantiﬁcation may be introduced in any formula.
(J12∗∗) □⊎(x = x)
(J13∗∗) □⊎(x = y →(α(x) →α(y))
THEOREM 178. In J∗∗, the connectives →d, ∧d, ∨d, ∇, ↔d, ∀and ∃have all the stan-
dard properties of classical (material) implication, conjunction, disjunction, negation,
(material) equivalence, and of the universal and existential quantiﬁers, respectively.
Thus, classical ﬁrst-order logic is contained in J∗∗. Furthermore, when we restrict
the formulas of J∗∗to the stable ones only — that is, to those formulas α such that
□(α ↔d ♦α) is true — then J∗∗reduces, in a certain sense, to classical ﬁrst-order logic.
4.2
Application to the foundational analysis of physical theories
A physical theory T can be characterized roughly as follows. We start with a language
L by means of which we express the postulates of T. These postulates, or axioms, can
be divided up into three kinds: the logical axioms (say, those of ﬁrst-order predicate
calculus), the mathematical axioms (say, those of a set theory like Zermelo-Fraenkel),
and the speciﬁc, or physical, axioms of T. It is clear that this schema is quite general,
and can be suitably adapted to several contexts (see [da Costa and French, 2003]). In
particular, this schema is useful to an analysis of physical theories when we consider the
possibility of inconsistencies. For instance, in certain situations, it may be more adequate
to use a calculus such as J∗∗instead of standard ﬁrst-order logic. This is the case we
would like to consider here.
According to Dalla Chiara and Toraldo di Francia (see [Dalla Chiara and di Francia,
1981]), the language of a physical theory T is interpreted in a set-theoretic structure of
the form
A = ⟨M, S, ⟨Q0, . . . , Qn⟩, ρ⟩,
where
(1) M is an instance of a mathematical species of structure in the sense of Suppes-
Bourbaki (see [da Costa and Chuaqui, 1988]).
(2) S is a set of physical situations; that is, a set of physical states assumed by a
physical system in a certain interval of time.

850
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
(3) Each Qi, 0 ≤i ≤n, denotes an operationally deﬁned quantity whose domain of
deﬁnition is some subset of S . In general, Q0 represents time.
(4) ρ is a function that associates to each term employed to characterize S , and in
particular to each Qi, a set-theoretic entity in M.
When we measure a physical quantity Qi of a physical system in a state s ∈S in a
certain time t j, we usually consider that its ‘acceptable values’ qi(tj) lie in an interval
[qi −ϵ, qi + ϵ] of the real number line. (The length ϵ depends on the speciﬁc measurement
technique and on the nature of the quantity in question.) In a certain sense, all values in
the interval are ‘appropriate values’ for the measurement of the quantity Qi of the physical
system in a state s ∈S . For instance, in measuring the table where we are working just
now, we should accept (for all ‘practical purposes’) any value in the interval 1.20 ± 10−3
meters.
Let α(t, qi(t j)) be a formula of L whose only free variables are t and tj (which stand for
time). Dalla Chiara and Toraldo di Francia consider the case of partial formulas, that is,
formulas that are not deﬁned for all values of their variables and parameters. But here we
will only discuss ‘total’ formulas. We say that α(t, qi(tj)) is true with respect to a situation
s, written ⊨s α, if there are values t0 of t in the considered time interval and q0
i of Qi in the
corresponding interval, such that α(t0, q0
i ) is true in M in the standard (Tarskian) sense.
We also say that α(t, qi(t j)) is true in A, and write A |= α(t, qi(t j)), if α(t, qi(tj)) is true
in M for every s ∈S . Paraconsistency enters in Dalla Chiara and Toraldo di Francia’s
approach whenever we get t0 and q0
i also in the intervals such that ¬α(t0, q0
i ) is also true
in M. Let us explain this case with an example.
Consider Newton’s second law f = m.a. The three physical variables appearing in
this equation correspond to three deterministic physical quantities: force ( f), mass (m)
and acceleration (a), which are the physical quantities to be measured. Their acceptable
range of values for a certain physical situation s lie, respectively, within three intervals:
[ f1, f2] ⊆R, [m1, m2], and ⊆R [a1, a2] ⊆R, each expressing a certain precision ϵ for
the measurements. It is the case that ⊨s f = m.a whenever there are three real numbers
p1 ∈[f1, f2], q1 ∈[m1, m2] and r1 ∈[a1, a2], such that p1 = q1.r1.
However, due to the imprecision ϵ, there are also other three real numbers p2, q2 and
r2, each in the respective interval, so that p2  q2.r2, and these numbers are also accept-
able values for the measurements of the corresponding physical quantities. So, strictly
speaking, it is also the case that ⊨s ¬(F = m.a). In other words, the negation of Newton’s
law should also be true in the same physical situation s. Hence, we may have, for a sen-
tence α and physical situation s ∈E, both ⊨s α and ⊨s ¬α. However, it is not the case
that ⊨s α ∧¬α, for this last case would entail the existence of three real numbers p′, q′
and r′, belonging to the respective intervals, such that ⊨s p′ = q′.r′ ∧p′  q′.r′, which is
impossible (see [Dalla Chiara and di Francia, 1981, p. 66]).
This deﬁnition of truth reﬂects a kind of empirical truth. And it has interesting con-
sequences, as Dalla Chiara and Toraldo di Francia point out. For example, the logical
connectives are not truth-functional, in the sense that the truth of a conjunction is not
equivalent to the simultaneous truth of both conjuncts. Note also the ‘paraconsistent as-
pect’ of this deﬁnition of truth. After all, we can have both ⊨s α and ⊨s ¬α. In specifying

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
851
the underlying logic of Dalla Chiara and Toraldo di Francia’s approach, we may use the
postulates of a Ja´skowski’s discussive logic, such as J∗∗, as logical axioms for such phys-
ical theories. (Alternatively, we could use a paraclassic logic instead; see section 7.3.)
4.3
Application to partial truth
In a paper by Mikenberg, da Costa and Chuaqui (see [Mikenberg et al., 1986]), the math-
ematical concept of pragmatic truth (today called ‘partial truth’) was introduced. An
inﬁnitary logical system was presented to formulate this concept, and some applications
were made in logic and in algebra. An application of this concept in the foundations of
the theory of probability was studied in [da Costa, 1986b], and some of its extensions to
inductive logic and to the philosophy of science were discussed, respectively, in [da Costa
and French, 1989a] and [da Costa and French, 1990]. This framework was also employed
to examine some issues involved in the theory of acceptance (see [da Costa and French,
2003a]), as well as in the modeling of ‘natural reasoning’ (see [da Costa and French,
1993b]). For a general discussion, see [da Costa and French, 2003].
The wide range of applications of the notion of partial truth motivates an investigation
of the logic of partial truth. In this section, we will show that there are important connec-
tions between this logic and Ja´skowski’s discussive logic. We will study these connections
in the context of certain ‘pragmatic structures’, which we will present below. As will be-
come clear, pragmatic structures can be considered as worlds of a Kripke structure, and in
this setting, the necessity operator corresponds to the notion of ‘pragmatic validity’, and
the possibility operator to the notion of partial truth. Two systems are then put forward to
formalize these notions. One of the main results of the present section is that the logic of
partial truth is paraconsistent. The philosophical signiﬁcance of this result, which justiﬁes
the application of partial truth to inconsistent settings, is then discussed.
A remark on our terminology is important here. We call the kind of truth deﬁned in
this section partial truth. Originally, it was called ‘pragmatic truth’, due to its connec-
tions with the pragmatic conception of truth, as developed by philosophers such as James,
Dewey and particularly Peirce (see [Mikenberg et al., 1986], [da Costa, 1986b], and [da
Costa and French, 2003]). However, our work is not exegetical. The only point to em-
phasize is that our deﬁnition was heuristically inspired by some passages of pragmatic
thinkers, such as Pierce, when he wrote: ‘consider what eﬀects, that might conceivably
have practical bearings, we conceive the object of our conceptions to have. Then, our
conception of these eﬀects is the whole of our conception of the object’ ([Peirce, 1965, p.
31]). In our view, the deﬁnition of partial, or pragmatic, truth investigated in this section
captures, at least in part, the common concept of a theory saving the appearances, usually
by means of partially ﬁctitious constructions (see [Vaihinger, 1952] and [Bueno, 1997]).
We now move on to the formulation of partial truth.
Let us suppose that we are interested in studying a certain domain of knowledge Δ in
the ﬁeld of empirical sciences, for instance, particle physics. We are, then, concerned with
certain real objects (in particle physics, with some conﬁgurations in a Wilson chamber,
some spectral lines, etc.). Let us denote the set of these objects by A1. Among the objects
of A1, there are some relations that interest us, and that we model as partial relations Ri,

852
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
i ∈I (every relation having a ﬁxed arity). The relations Ri are partial relations, that is,
each Ri, supposed of arity ri, is not necessarily deﬁned for all ri-tuples of elements of A1.
More formally, an n-place partial relation R can be viewed as a triple ⟨R1, R2, R3⟩, where
R1, R2, and R3 are mutually disjoint sets, with R1 ∪R2 ∪R3 = Dn, and such that R1 is
the set of n-tuples that (we know) belong to R; R2 the set of n-tuples that (we know) do
not belong to R; and ﬁnally R3 of those n-tuples for which it is not deﬁned whether they
belong or not to R. (Note that when R3 is empty, R is a usual n-place relation that can be
identiﬁed with R1.)
The reason for using partial relations is that they are supposed to express what we do
know, or what we accept as true, about the actual relations among the elements of A1.
Thus, the partial structure ⟨A1, Ri⟩i∈I encompasses, so to say, what we know, or accept
as true, about the actual structure of Δ. However, to systematize our knowledge of Δ,
it is convenient to introduce in our structure ⟨A1, Ri⟩i∈I some ideal objects. (In particle
physics, quarks would be an example.) The set of these new objects will be denoted by
A2. It is understood that A1 ∩A2 = ∅, and we stipulate that A = A1 ∪A2. In this way, the
modeling of Δ involves new partial relations Rj, j ∈J, some of which extend the relations
Ri, i ∈I. Furthermore , there are some sentences (closed formulas) of the language L, in
which we talk about the structure ⟨A, Rk⟩k∈I∪J (I ∩J = ∅) that we accept as true, or that are
true (in the sense of the correspondence theory of truth). This occurs, for instance, with
sentences expressing true decidable propositions (a proposition whose truth or falsehood
can be decided), and with some general sentences that express laws or theories already
accepted as true. Let us denote the set of such sentences, dubbed primary, by P (this set
may be empty).
Given this informal discussion, we suggest that what we call a simple pragmatic struc-
ture (sps) be regarded as a set-theoretic structure of the form:
A = ⟨A1, A2, Ri, R j, P⟩i∈I,j∈J,
where the elements in question satisfy the conditions above. Alternatively, we can simply
write:
A = ⟨A, Rk, P⟩k∈K
for a sps, where A = A1 ∪A2 and the Rk are partial relations deﬁned on A, and P is a
set of sentences of the language L of the same similarity type as that of A, and which is
interpreted in A. Note that for some k, Rk may be empty.
Let L be a ﬁrst-order language with identity, but without function symbols. The sym-
bols of L are logical symbols (connectives, individual variables, quantiﬁers, and the iden-
tity symbol), auxiliary symbols (parentheses), a collection of individual constants, and a
collection of predicate symbols. To interpret L in a sps A is to associate to each individual
constant of L an element of A (the universe of A), and to each n-ary predicate symbol of
L a relation Rk, k ∈K, of the same arity. It is supposed that every predicate of the family
Rk, k ∈K, is associated with a predicate symbol.
DEFINITION 179. Let L and A = ⟨A, Rk, P⟩k∈K be, respectively, a language and a sps in
which L is interpreted. Let B be a total structure, that is, a usual structure whose n-ary
relations are deﬁned for all n-tuples of elements of its universe. And suppose that L is
also interpreted in B. Then, B is said to be A-normal if the following conditions are met:

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
853
(1) The universe of B is A.
(2) The (total) relations of B extend the corresponding partial relations of A.
(3) If c is an individual constant of L, then in both A and B, c is interpreted by the
same element.
(4) If α ∈P, then B |= α.
Given a pragmatic structure A, it may happen that there are no A-normal structures.
It is possible, however, to provide a system of necessary and suﬃcient conditions for the
existence of such structures (see [Mikenberg et al., 1986]). One condition of this system is
the following: For each partial relation Rk in A, we construct a set Mk of atomic sentences
and negations of atomic sentences such that the former correspond to n-tuples that satisfy
Rk, and the latter to n-tuples that do not satisfy Rk (such sentences correspond to n-tuples
in the ‘anti-extension’ of Rk). Let M be the set 
k∈K Mk. Therefore, a sps A admits an
A-normal structure only if the set M ∪P is consistent.
In what follows, we will always suppose that our sps satisﬁes the relevant conditions;
in other words, given any sps A, the set of A-normal structures is not empty.
DEFINITION 180. Let L and A be, respectively, a language and a sps in which L is
interpreted. We say that a sentence α of L is pragmatically true, or partially true in the sps
A, according to B, if
(1) B is an A-normal structure, and
(2) B |= α, that is, α is true in B in accordance with the Tarskian deﬁnition of truth.
In other words, we say that α is pragmatically (or partially) true in the sps A if there
exists an A-normal structure B in which α is true in the standard Tarskian sense. If α
is not pragmatically (partially) true in the sps A according to B (α is not pragmatically
(partially) true in the sps A), we say that α is pragmatically (partially) false in the sps A
according to B (α is pragmatically (partially) false in the sps A).
Given a sps A, it is natural to consider its A-normal structures as the worlds of a Kripke
structure for S5 with quantiﬁcation. That is, we have a universe and several structures,
deﬁned in this universe, in which the language L can be interpreted, and where every
world is accessible to every world (see [Hughes and Cresswell, 1968]). It is also natural
to extend the language L of the sps A to a modal language, by adding the modal operator
□to the primitive symbols of L. The operator □, which in modal logic represents the
notion of necessity, corresponds in the present situation to pragmatic validity (in a sps
A). Analogously, the possibility symbol ♦, deﬁnable in terms of □and negation, corre-
sponds to pragmatic truth (in a sps A). Thus, we can extend the semantics of L so that the
symbols □and ♦represent the concepts of pragmatic validity and pragmatic truth, respec-
tively. Moreover, since the universes of all ‘worlds’ belonging to a sps are the same, it is
reasonable that identity behaves, in the cases of pragmatic truth and pragmatic validity, as
necessary identity.

854
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
Among the pragmatically valid formulas — that is, those formulas α such that □α
is a theorem of S5 with quantiﬁcation and necessary identity — there are the logically
pragmatically true formulas — that is, those formulas α such that □♦α or, equivalently,
♦α is a theorem of the same system. To simplify the language, from now on, the former
class of formulas will be called strictly pragmatically valid and the latter will be called
pragmatically valid. The ﬁrst class of formulas coincides with the set of theorems of S5
with quantiﬁcation and necessary identity; the second, with Ja´skowski’s logic associated
with the same system.
We ﬁrst present the logical system that systematizes the notion of strict pragmatic
validity. It will be denoted by PV. The system has a language L∗whose primitive symbols
are those of a standard formalization of the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus with identity and
individual constants, plus the symbol □. (For simplicity, function symbols are excluded.)
The deﬁned symbols are introduced as usual, and the common conventions in the writing
of formulas and in the formulation of postulates (axiom schemas and primitive rules of
inference) are employed without explicit mention. The postulates of PV are the following:
(1) If α is an instance of a (propositional) tautology, then α is an axiom.
(2) α, α →β ⧸β
(3) □(α →β) →(□α →□β)
(4) □α →α
(5) ♦α →□♦α
(6) ∀xα(x) →α(t)
(7) α ⧸□α
(8) α →β(x)⧸α →∀xβ(x)
(9) x = x
(10) x = y →(α(x) →α(y))
In the postulates above, the symbols have a clear meaning. In particular, in the axiom
schema (6), t is either a variable free for x in α(x) or an individual constant. This system
is essentially S5 with quantiﬁcation and necessary identity.
We deﬁne the concept of deduction as in [Henkin and Montague, 1956]. The basic idea
is that one can only use the generalization rule α⧸∀α in a step k of a deduction when a
subsequence of the deduction up to k is a proof of α. This restriction to the generalization
rule is exactly similar to the one adopted with regard to the necessitation rule, α⧸□α. As
a result, the usual derived rules, such as the deduction theorem, remain valid.
The semantics of PV can be easily developed. The basic (strict) semantic concepts of
pragmatic truth, pragmatic falsehood, pragmatic validity, pragmatic invalidity, pragmatic
semantic consequence, etc. oﬀer no diﬃculties in being formulated, and maintain the

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
855
spirit of Deﬁnition 180. (For more details on these points, see [da Costa et al., 1998b] and
[da Costa et al., 1996].)
We have the following theorem, whose proof can be obtained by the methods of
[Hughes and Cresswell, 1968] and [Gallin, 1975]:
THEOREM 181. Let Γ be a set of formulas of L∗and α be a formula of the same lan-
guage. Then, Γ ⊢α if, and only if, Γ |= α.
That is, α is a syntactic consequence of Γ in PV iﬀα is a strict pragmatic semantic
consequence of Γ.
The logic of strict pragmatic validity, which we have just sketched, can be extended to
higher-order (modal) languages, for example by adapting some ideas presented in [Gallin,
1975, Chap. 3]. Moreover, we can also develop a metatheoretic study of this logic. For
instance, we can adopt diﬀerent modal systems as basic (S4, for instance), distinguish
frames from models etc. Instead of pursuing this path here, we will now consider a
diﬀerent system to study the logic of pragmatic validity. This system, as we will see, is
constructed in terms of PV, which was presented here mainly as an auxiliary construction.
We will then show that the logic of pragmatic validity is paraconsistent.
Let us call PT (for ‘pragmatic truth’) a system whose language is the same as that of
PV. The idea is to construct a system in which ⊢α means that ♦α is strictly pragmatically
valid. As before, if α is a formula of L∗, which is the language of PV and PT, we write ⊎α
to denote the formula composed by preceding α by a sequence of universal quantiﬁers, so
that all variables of ⊎α are bound.
Clearly, in order that α be pragmatically valid in the intended sense, we must have that
⊢α in PT if, and only if, ⊢♦⊎α in PV. So, PT is a kind of Ja´skowski’s discussive
logic associated with PV. (Recall that, given a modal system M, the Ja´skowski’s logic
associated with M is the set of all formulas α such that ♦α is a theorem of M.)
PT can be axiomatized as J∗∗of the previous section (see postulates J1∗∗to J13∗∗of
page 848). The deﬁnitions of proof and of (formal) theorem are the usual ones. We now
show that that postulates do provide an axiomatization for PT.
LEMMA 182. If α is a theorem of our proposed axiomatization for PT, then ♦⊎α is a
theorem of PV.
Proof. By induction on the length of the proof of α in the proposed axiomatization for
PT. Let α1, . . . , αn, where αn is α, be a (formal) proof of α in the proposed axiomatization
for PT. Then, αi, 1 ≤i ≤n, is an axiom or is obtained by the application of one of the
rules. If ai is an axiom, then it has the form □⊎β, where β is an axiom of PV (observe
that PV is S5 with quantiﬁcation and necessary identity). Therefore, □⊎β is a theorem of
PV, and so ♦⊎□⊎β, i.e. ♦⊎αi, is also a theorem of PV. Suppose that αi is a consequence
of two previous formulas by Rule J2∗∗. Then αi is □⊎β, obtained from the premises □⊎γ
and □⊎(γ →β). By the induction hypothesis, ♦⊎□⊎γ and ♦⊎□⊎(γ →β) are provable
in PV. Consequently, □⊎γ and □⊎(γ →β) are also provable in PV, and so is □⊎β. But
if □⊎β is a theorem of PV, then ♦⊎□⊎β, i.e. ♦⊎αi, is also a theorem. The other rules
are treated similarly.
■

856
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
LEMMA 183. If α is a theorem of PV, then □⊎α is a theorem of the proposed axioma-
tization for PT.
Proof. By induction on the length of the proof of α in PV. Let α1, . . . , αn, where αn is α,
be a proof of α in PV. If αi, 1 ≤i ≤n, is an axiom of PV, then □⊎α a is a theorem of
the proposed axiomatization for PT, as is easy to see. If αi is obtained by an application
of modus ponens (Rule J2∗∗), from γ and γ →αi, we have, by the induction hypothesis,
that □⊎γ and □⊎(γ →αi) are provable in the proposed axiomatization. Then, by Rule
J2∗∗, □⊎αi is also provable. Rule J8∗∗is treated analogously.
■
THEOREM 184. Postulates J1∗∗–J13∗∗characterize PT. That is, we have:
⊢α in PT iﬀ⊢♦⊎α in PV.
Proof. Let us suppose that α is a theorem of the proposed axiomatization for PT. Then,
by Lemma 182, ♦⊎α is a theorem of PV. Conversely, assume that ♦⊎α is a theorem
of PV. So, by Lemma 183, □⊎♦⊎α is a theorem of the proposed axiomatization for
PT. Therefore, by Rule J7∗∗, ♦⊎α is a theorem of PT, and so, by Rule J9∗∗, α is also a
theorem of PT.
■
DEFINITION 185. In PT, we say that the formula α is a syntactic consequence of a set
of formulas Γ (in symbols, Γ ⊢α) if there exist γ1, . . . , γn in Γ such that
(♦γ1 ∧. . . ∧♦γn) →♦α
is a theorem of PT. Or, equivalently,
♦⊎((♦γ1 ∧. . . ∧♦γn) →♦α)
is a theorem of PV. When n = 0, the ﬁrst formula above reduces, by convention, to α
(and ∅⊢α means, thus, that ⊢α).
DEFINITION 186. A pragmatic theory is a set T of sentences (closed formulas of PT)
such that if γ1, . . . , γn are in T and {γ1, . . . , γn} ⊢α, then α is also in T.
It follows that if T is a pragmatic theory and α is a (closed) theorem of PT, then
α ∈T. Let S be the set of all sentences of PT and T be a pragmatic theory. Using
a terminology that has already been introduced, we say that T is trivial (overcomplete)
if T = S; otherwise, T is nontrivial. Furthermore, T is inconsistent if there is at least
one sentence α such that α ∈T and ¬α ∈T, where ¬ is the symbol of negation of PT;
otherwise, T is consistent. We can now prove the following result:
THEOREM 187. There exist pragmatic theories that are inconsistent but nontrivial.
Proof. Let c and M be, respectively, an individual constant and a monadic predicate
symbol of PT. The theory whose (nonlogical) axioms are M(c) and ¬M(c) is inconsistent.
But it is nontrivial, because the corresponding theory of PV, whose (nonlogical) axioms
are ♦M(c) and ♦¬M(c), is consistent. In eﬀect, it is easy to construct a Kripke model for
PV in which both ♦M(c) and ♦¬M(c) are true. However, in no Kripke model for PV the
formula ♦(M(c) ∧¬M(c)) is true.
■

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
857
Given the deﬁnitions of the discussive connectives →d and ∧d, introduced in Deﬁni-
tion 170, we can also prove that, in PT, →d, ∧d, ∨d, ∀and ∃satisfy all the schemas and
rules of classical positive logic. If we consider a valid primitive schema (or rule) of classi-
cal positive logic, and replace in it implication by discussive implication and conjunction
by discussive conjunction, we obtain a valid schema (or rule) of PT, as is easily seen.
THEOREM 188. If T is a pragmatic theory, then α ∈T iﬀthere exist γ1, . . . , γn in T
such that
(γ1 ∧d . . . ∧d γn) →d ♦α
is a theorem of PT.
It is worth noting that in some applications of the theory just developed, it is sometimes
convenient to employ an alternative deﬁnition of syntactic consequence. For instance, in
certain applications in the foundations of physics, instead of Deﬁnition 185, it is more
appropriate to adopt the following alternative:
DEFINITION 189. In PT, the sentence α is said to be a proper syntactic consequence of
a set of sentences Γ if there are γ1, . . . , γn in Γ such that ♦(γ1 ∧. . . ∧γn) and □((γ1 ∧. . . ∧
γn) →α) are theorems of PT (or of PT and some extra axioms).
The philosophical signiﬁcance of the above formal account can be seem by considering
inconsistencies in our belief systems, as explored by da Costa, French and Bueno (see [da
Costa et al., 1998b]). If we focus on Theorem 187, it becomes clear that a pragmatic
theory can contain contradictory theorems without becoming trivial. This means that PT
belongs to the class of paraconsistent logics. In the case of pragmatic (partial) truth,
this is not an unreasonable situation: contradictory propositions may, of course, both be
pragmatically true (see [da Costa and French, 2003, Chap. 5]). Thus, partial truth can be
used to provide the epistemic framework for characterizing inconsistent belief systems.
More precisely, we can formulate a position according to which ‘belief that p’ is not
to be understood as ‘belief that p is true’ in the correspondence sense. When it comes to
representational structures, such as scientiﬁc theories, ‘belief that p’ is to be understood
as ‘belief that p is pragmatically or partially true’. This allows for the accommodation of
inconsistency by acknowledging that an inconsistency is not a permanent feature of reality
to which theories correspond, but is rather a temporary aspect of these theories that may
turn out to be epistemically fruitful. On this account, it is not the ‘logic of science’, in the
sense of the underlying logic of deductive and inferential practices, that is paraconsistent,
but rather the appropriate ‘logic of truth’. (For further details, see [da Costa and French,
2003].)
The logic of pragmatic truth, as presented above, has also been developed to serve
as a ‘logic of scientiﬁc acceptance’ (see [da Costa and French, 2003]). The nature of
acceptance is a topic that hasn’t received as much attention as it deserves. The accounts
that consider the issue can be divided in two extremes: those that identify acceptance and
belief, and those that distinguish the two. The former typically regard belief in terms of the
correspondence conception of truth, whereas the latter fall prey to the accusation of some
sort of anti-realism (or even conventionalism). An alternative is to retain the connection
between belief and acceptance whilst rejecting truth-as-correspondence. On this view, to

858
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
accept a theory is to be committed, not to believing it to be true per se, but to holding it
as if it were true, for the purposes of further elaboration, development and investigation.
Thus, acceptance involves belief that the theory is partially, or pragmatically, true only,
and this, we believe, corresponds to the fallibility found in scientiﬁc practice.
Linking acceptance and pragmatic truth in this way restores a formal similarity be-
tween ‘truth’, taken generally, and acceptance with regard to deductive closure. So, it has
been argued, for example, that acceptance diﬀers from truth in that whereas the latter is
deductively closed, in the sense that what one deduces from a set of truths is also true, the
former generally is not (see [Ullian, 1990]). This is correct if closure is understood only
in classical terms. However, what the above formal analysis shows is that acceptance,
understood within the framework of pragmatic truth, may be regarded as closed under
the Ja´skowski’s discussive system. To put it more precisely: although there is no closure
with regard to acceptance under classical conjunction and material implication, one can
deﬁne discussive forms of implication and conjunction as above, with respect to which
acceptance can be taken as closed.
This is a result of both general and particular signiﬁcance. Our contention is that
inconsistency can be accommodated in a framework in which accepted propositions are
closed under implication. The framework is the one in terms of pragmatic truth, and the
form of implication is, of course, discussive. Shifting perspective from the speciﬁc to the
general, it is the failure to consider such nonclassical systems that undercuts the claim that
‘logic’ is not specially relevant to reasoning. Within the framework of pragmatic truth, we
can accommodate inconsistency while still retaining a sense of deductive closure. In this
manner the relevance of logic to reasoning – especially scientiﬁc reasoning — is restored
(see [da Costa and French, 2003]).
5
ANNOTATED LOGICS
Reasoning about inconsistency is also important in computer science, data base theory,
and artiﬁcial intelligence. For instance, to construct a knowledge base about a certain
domain D of knowledge, we generally consult a certain number of experts, say E1, . . . , En,
of that ﬁeld of knowledge. Each expert contributes with facts and rules that form the bases
S 1, . . . , S n of sets of sentences. In this way, the whole knowledge base can be taken as the
set S 1 ∪. . . ∪S n. However, experts may disagree, and often they do. As a result, this last
set may be inconsistent, and so, according to classical ﬁrst-order model theory, will have
no models, and consequently, will be deemed ‘meaningless’.
In 1987, H. Blair and V. S. Subrahmanian devised a kind of paraconsistent logic, called
‘annotated logic’, that was suitable for representing databases and knowledge bases that
contain inconsistencies (see [Subrahmanian, 1987]). Later, Blair and Subrahamanian de-
veloped this framework further, endowing it with a ﬁxed-point theory, a model theory and
a proof theory (see [Blair and Subrahmanian, 1989c]). Moreover, they extended earlier
results to allow for logic programming over a complete lattice of truth-values, extending
accordingly the ﬁxed-point theory and the proof theory (see [Blair and Subrahmanian,
1988b]). In turn, Kifer and Subrahmanian generalized annotated logic in such a way that
a framework for logic programming based on the concept of ‘bilattice’ (which had been

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
859
developed earlier by Fitting) was provided by the extended annotated logic framework
(see [Kifer and Subrahmanian, 1989]). Kifer and Li then showed how annotated logic
can be used as a foundation for reasoning in the presence of inconsistency (see [Kifer
and Li, 1988]). And Kifer and Lozinskii demonstrated an embedding of classical logic in
annotated logic; showed the connections between these logics and nonmonotonic logics,
and devised a mechanical proof procedure for annotated logic (see [Kifer and Lozinskii,
1989]). Finally, Kifer and Wu showed how annotated logics serve as a foundation for
object-oriented databases (see [Kifer and Wu, 1989]), whereas Kifer and Krishnaprasad
showed how annotated logics can be used as a foundation for inheritance networks (see
[Kifer and Kriphnaprasad, 1989]).
The foundational study of annotated logic was suggested by da Costa, Subrahmanian
and Vago (see [da Costa et al., 1991]), who developed a family of propositional calculi,
called PT , as well as their ﬁrst-order counterparts, QT . This work has been extended to
annotated set theory, and further results about QT have been presented as well (see [da
Costa et al., 1991]).
5.1
The annotated logic QT
QT is a ﬁrst-order logic deﬁned as follows. T is an arbitrary, but ﬁxed, complete lattice.
The least element of T is denoted by ⊥, while the greatest element is denoted by ⊤.
Furthermore, ¬ is taken to be a unary operator from T to T . The language L of QT is a
ﬁrst-order language without identity whose primitive symbols are the following:
1. Connectives: →(implication), ∨(disjunction), ∧(conjunction) and ¬ (negation).
2. Individual variables: a denumerably inﬁnite set of variable symbols.
3. Individual constants: an arbitrary family of constant symbols.
4. Quantiﬁers: ∀(universal quantiﬁer) and ∃(existential quantiﬁer).
5. Function symbols: for each natural number n > 0, a collection of function symbols
of rank n.
6. Predicate symbols: for each n ≥0, a family of predicate symbols of rank n.
7. Auxiliary symbols: parentheses and comma.
Terms of L are introduced as usual. An (ordinary) atom is an expression of the form
P(t1, . . . , tn). If P is a predicate symbol of rank n and λ ∈T , an annotated predicate is a
pair ⟨P, λ⟩. We will denote an annotated predicate by Pλ, and sometimes will simply call
it a ‘predicate’.
Given an annotated predicate Pλ of rank n and n terms t1, . . . , tn, an annotated atom
is an expression of the form Pλ(t1, . . . , tn). The notion of formula is introduced in the
standard way. Note that the symbol ¬ is used here in two distinct ways: ﬁrst, as a mapping
from T to T , and second, as a unary connective of L. The appropriate meaning of ¬ will
be given by the context.

860
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
DEFINITION 190. An interpretation I for the language L is a 4-tuple
I = ⟨D, ηI, ζI, χI⟩,
where:
(i) D is a non-empty set, called the domain of I.
(ii) ηI maps individual constants of L into D.
(iii) ζI assigns to each function symbol f of rank n a mapping from Dn to elements of
D.
(iv) χI assigns to each predicate symbol P of rank n a function χI(P) from Dn to T .
DEFINITION 191.
(i) Let I be an interpretation for L. Then a variable assignment ν for L, with respect
to I, is a map from the set of individual variable symbols of L to D.
(ii) The denotation dI,ν(t) of a term t of L, with respect to an interpretation I and
variable assignment ν, is deﬁned inductively as follows:
(a) If t is a constant symbol, then dI,ν(t) = ηI(t).
(b) If t is an individual variable, then dI,ν(t) = νI(t).
(c) If t is f(t1, . . . , tn), then dI,ν(t) = χI(dI,ν(t1), . . . , dI,ν(tn)).
(iii) An annotated atom Pλ(t1, . . . , tn) will be denoted by P(t1, . . . , tn) : λ. An expres-
sion of the form ¬ . . . ¬

k times
(A : μ), where A is an ordinary atom, is called a hyper-literal
of order k, k ≥0, and abbreviated by ¬k(A : μ).
DEFINITION 192.
Let I be an interpretation for L, and let ν be a variable assignment
for L. Also, let A be an ordinary atom, and let α, β, and γ be arbitrary formulas. In this
case:
(i) If A is an ordinary atom P(t1, . . . , tn), then
I, ν |= (A : μ) iﬀχI(P)(dI,ν(t1), . . . , dI,ν(tn)) ≥μ.
(ii) I, ν |= ¬ . . . ¬

k times
(A : μ) iﬀI, ν |= ¬ . . . ¬

k−1 times
(A : ¬μ).
It is important to note here the two senses in which ¬ is used. Inside the atom, that is,
in (A : ¬μ), what appears is the map from T to T . However, outside the atom, that
is, in the ﬁrst occurrence of ¬ in the expression ¬(A : ¬μ), it is the negation symbol
that should be considered. Condition (ii) states that, to reduce negations, we replace
values in the lattice according to the map ¬.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
861
(iii) I, ν |= α ∧β iﬀI, ν |= α and I, ν |= β.
(iv) I, ν |= α ∨β iﬀI, ν |= α or I, ν |= β.
(v) I, ν |= α →β iﬀI, ν |= α or I, ν ⊭β.
(vi) If F is not a hyper-literal, then I, ν |= ¬F iﬀI, ν ⊭F.
(vii) I, ν |= ∀xα iﬀfor every variable assignment ν′ that agrees with ν in all variables
distinct from x (that is, ν′(y) = ν(y), for all y  x), I, ν′ |= α.
(viii) I, ν |= ∃xα iﬀfor some variable assignment ν′ that agrees with ν in all variables
distinct from x (that is, ν′(y) = ν(y), for all y  x), I, ν′ |= α.
(ix) I |= α iﬀfor all variable assignments ν associated with I, I, ν |= α.
DEFINITION 193.
1. Let Γ ∪{α} be a set of formulas. We write ⊨α, and say that α is valid (in QT ) if,
for every interpretation I, I ⊨α. We say that α is a semantic consequence of Γ iﬀfor
every interpretation I such that, for all β ∈Γ, I ⊨β, it is the case that I ⊨α.
2. If α, β are formulas of L, then α ↔β =def (α →β) ∧(β →α).
3. If α is a formula, then ∼α =def (α →(α →α)) ∧¬(α →α).
(∼α is called the strong negation of α in QT .)
4. A formula is called complex if it is not a hyper-literal.
We will describe now an axiomatic system, called A, whose underlying language is L.
In the postulates below, α, β and γ denote arbitrary formulas; ϕ and ψ denote complex
formulas, and θ is an annotated atom.
The postulates of our system are:
(→1) α →(β →α)
(→2) (α →β) →((α →(β →γ)) →(α →γ))
(→3) α, α →β ⧸β
(→4) ((α →β) →α) →α
(∧1) α ∧β →α
(∧2) α ∧β →β
(∧3) α →(β →α ∧β)
(∨1) α →(α ∨β)
(∨2) β →(α ∨β)

862
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
(∨3) (α →γ) →((β →γ) →(α ∨β →γ))
(¬1) (ϕ →ψ) →((ϕ →¬ψ) →¬ϕ)
(¬2) ϕ →(¬ϕ →α)
(¬3) ϕ ∨¬ϕ
(∃1) α(t) →∃xα(x)
(∃2)
α(x)→β
∃xα(x)→β
(∀1) ∀xα(x) →α(t)
(∀2)
α→β(x)
α→∀xβ(x)
(τ1) (θ :⊥) ∧¬k(θ : μ) ↔¬k−1(θ : ¬μ)
(τ2) (θ : ¬μ) →(θ : ¬λ), where λ ≤μ.
(τ3) If α →(θ : μ j) for every j ∈J, then α →(θ : μ), where μ = sup{μj : j ∈J}.
The postulates (∃1)-(∀2) satisfy the usual restrictions. If T is a complete lattice, the
supremum in rule (τ3) is well deﬁned. When T is ﬁnite, rule (τ3) can be replaced by the
schema (θ : μ1) ∧. . . ∧(θ : μn) →(θ : μ), where μ = sup{μj : 1 ≤j ≤n}.
We easily deﬁne the syntactic concepts associated to the axioms above. In particular,
the concept of syntactic consequence ⊢is deﬁned as usual. However, the notion of de-
duction is not ﬁnitary if T is inﬁnite. The propositional counterpart of QT can also de
developed, as shown in [da Costa et al., 1991].
THEOREM 194 (Soundness). Let Γ∪{A} be a set of formulas of QT . Then Γ ⊢α implies
that Γ |= α. That is, the axiomatic system is sound with respect to the semantics of QT .
Proof.
By induction on the length of deduction (if T is inﬁnite, we use transﬁnite
recursion).
■
DEFINITION 195. Suppose that Γ is a set of formulas such that the set of annotated
constants occurring in Γ is ﬁnite (Γ itself may be inﬁnite). In this case, Γ is said to have
the ﬁnite annotation property.
We note that if T ′ is a substructure of T , then T ′ is closed under the operations of T .
THEOREM 196 (Finitary Completeness). Let Γ ∪{A} be a set of formulas of QT . Then
if T is ﬁnite or if Γ ∪{α} has the ﬁnite annotated property, then Γ |= α entails Γ ⊢α.
Proof. By extending the proof of the propositional fragment of QT presented in [da Costa
et al., 1991].
■
When T is inﬁnite, it seems that the completeness can be obtained by adding to the
axioms an extra inﬁnitary rule (see [da Costa et al., 1991] for further indications). The
system QT is a nonclassical logic which is both paraconsistent and paracomplete (see [da
Costa, 1997]).

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
863
Another axiomatization of QT .
A diﬀerent axiomatization of QT can be obtained by adding to the language of classi-
cal ﬁrst-order predicate calculus a symbol for the paraconsistent weak negation satisfying
suitable axioms. As an example, let C be an axiomatic systematization of ﬁrst-order pred-
icate calculus without identity whose symbol of negation is ∼. The remaining primitive
symbols of C are as those of QT . We still suppose that the atomic formulas of C are
annotated atoms, as above. Furthermore, our language has a primitive symbol ¬ for the
weak negation.
Let us denote by A′ the axiomatic system obtained from C by adding to it the axioms
(¬1), (¬2), (¬3), (τ1), (τ2) and (τ3) plus the following rule:
[Rule] Let α and β be formulas such that β is obtained from α by replacing sub-formulas
of the form ∼α by α →((α →α)∧¬(α →α)), or by replacing sub-formulas of the latter
form by the ﬁrst. We can then infer that α ↔β.
THEOREM 197. The axiom system A and A′ are equivalent. So, both characterize QT .
Proof. Any postulate of A is a postulate of A′, and item 3 of Deﬁnition 193 corresponds
to a rule in A′. Conversely, any postulate of A′ is a postulate or a deﬁnition of A, or is
provable in A, as is easy to show.
■
Let X be a non-empty set. A normal structure based on X is a function f : X × X →
T . Let us denote by QT 2 the logic obtained from QT by suppressing all function and
predicate symbols from the language, with the exception of one binary predicate symbol,
which we represent by ∈. Then QT 2 is a dyadic predicate logic whose atoms are annotated
by T . These atoms have the form ∈λ (a, b), where a and b are terms, and λ ∈T . This
atom will be denoted by a ∈λ b.
THEOREM 198. QT 2 is sound with respect to the semantics of normal structures. If T
is ﬁnite, or if we consider only sets of formulas having the ﬁnite annotation property, then
QT 2 is also complete.
Proof. Consequence of Theorems 194 and 196.
■
5.2
Annotated set theory
Theorem 198 above shows that normal structures are important to annotated logics, par-
ticularly when QT is developed along the lines of the previous section. In this section, we
will extend annotated logic to set theory, and we will be dealing with normal structures
throughout.
Let ZF be a standard formulation of the Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. The language
of annotated set theory, called AZF, is obtained from the language of ZF by adding two
individual constants, T and U. The following axioms are also added to those of ZF:
(AZF.1) T is a complete lattice, and we denote by ≤an arbitrary, but ﬁxed, ordering. We
use ⊥and ⊤to stand for its least and greatest elements, respectively.

864
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
(AZF.2) T ⊆U and ∀x(x ∈U →x ⊆U). That is, U is transitive.
In most applications, it is usually enough to postulate that T is a set with a reﬂexive
binary relation with unique least and greatest elements.
DEFINITION 199.
(1) We say that E is a normal structure, or a normal function based on U, if E is a
mapping from U × U into T . We write x ∈λ y instead of E(x, y) = λ.
(2) If x ∈U, then:
(2.1) x(λ,E) =def {y : y ∈U ∧y ∈λ x}
(2.2) x[λ,E] =def {y : y ∈U ∧∃μ(μ ∈T ∧μ ≤λ ∧y ∈μ x)}
(2.3) Fx =def {f : f : x →T ∧∃E(E is a normal function ∧∀λ∀y(λ ∈T ∧y ∈
U) →( f(y) = λ ↔y ∈λ x)}.
(3) If x, y ∈U and λ ∈T , then x =λ,E y =def ∀z ∈U(z ∈λ x ↔z ∈λ y).
(4)
A set x  ∅is strongly transitive if it is transitive and ∀y(y ∈x →P(y) ∈x),
where P(y) is the power-set of y.
(5) x is called a universe iﬀit is strongly transitive and for every function f : x →x,
if y ∈x, then  ran( f) ∈x, where ran(f) =def {z : ∃t(t ∈y ∧f(t) = z)}.
THEOREM 200. If x is a universe, then x is a standard model of all axioms of ZF, with
the possible exception of the axiom of inﬁnity. If ω ∈x, then x is a complete universe (ω
is the set of natural numbers).
Set theoretic constructions are used to deal with normal structures based on U. It
seems that the more such constructions are available, the better. In most cases, it is useful
to take U as a universe, that is, as a model of ZF if ω ∈U. In particular, we have the
following result:
THEOREM 201. If U is an universe, λ ∈T , and x ∈U, then x[λ,E] ∈U, x(λ,E) ∈U, and
Fx ∈U. Furthermore, {y : F(y) ∧y ∈λ x} ∈U, where F(y) is any formula of ZF, and
∀x∀y(x, y ∈U →(∀E∀λ(E is a normal function ∧λ ∈T ) →x =E,λ y) ↔x = y).
Proof. Immediate, since U is a model of ZF (except for the axiom of inﬁnity).
■
We can introduce a weak negation ¬ in AZF without diﬃculty. For instance, it applies
to hyper-literals only, and is such that:
¬k(x ∈λ y) ↔¬k−1(x ∈¬λ y).

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
865
Fuzzy sets
The concept of a fuzzy set can be formulated in AZF. If U is a set, then a fuzzy set of U
is a function u : U →[0, 1]. Let us denote by FU the set of all fuzzy sets of U. We say
that two fuzzy sets u, v ∈FU are equal iﬀfor every x ∈U, u(x) = v(x). Let us use 1u
and 0u to denote the fuzzy sets of U so that for every x ∈U, 1u(x) = 1 and 0u(x) = 0.
Furthermore, if u, v ∈FU and x ∈U, we stipulate that (u ⊔v)(x) =def sup{u(x), v(x)};
(u ⊓v)(x) =def inf{u(x), v(x)}, and ¯u =def 1 −u(x).
It is then easy to prove that ⟨FU, ⊔, ⊓⟩is a complete lattice with the inﬁnite distributive
property, and that ⟨FU, ⊔, ⊓,¯⟩is an algebra that, in general, is not Boolean. A fuzzy set
u of U can be identiﬁed with a normal structure ˜u based on the set U ∪[0, 1], such that
T = {⊤, ⊥} and
˜u =
 ⊤
if x ∈U ∧y ∈[0, 1] ∧y = u(x),
⊥
otherwise.
Hence, AZF, considered as the theory of normal structures, encompasses the theory of
fuzzy sets. It is clear that if U is a universe, the deﬁnition of fuzzy set in terms of normal
structures can be simpliﬁed. In the same way, the theory of ﬂou sets and of L-sets (see
[Negoita and Ralescu, 1975]) can also be obtained by extending the concept of normal
structures. Further developments relating annotated logics and fuzzy logics can be found
in [da Costa et al., 1991] and [Abe, 1992].
5.3
Applications
Annotated logics have a wide range of applications. In this section, we will illustrate
how annotated logics provide a formalism for reasoning about inconsistent knowledge
bases.15 (In section 7.2, we will sketch another use of annotated logics.) Although the
technical details cannot be given here in complete detail, the references provide additional
information.
Expert systems and knowledge bases about a domain D are usually constructed by
programmers who, in general, know little about D. To build an expert system, say, in
medicine, we need to consult several experts in the particular ﬁeld we are interested in
(say, cardiology). We ask the experts to provide us with adequate knowledge, based on
their previous experience, so that we can construct a knowledge base. It is common to
assume that the information provided by the experts can be expressed in suitable form in
a certain logic language.
But experts usually disagree. For instance, given the same observable symptoms, doc-
tor d1 may believe that the patient has a virus infection, doctor d2 may conclude that the
patient has an allergic reaction, while doctor d3 may say that the patient either has a viral
infection or an allergy, but not both. It is clear that if we had used the opinions of these
three doctors in our knowledge base, we would be led into an inconsistency. The im-
portant point is that often experts disagree, and have conﬂicting opinions, for very good
reasons. So, inconsistencies, such as the one found in this sample, should be regarded as
15This section is partially based on [da Costa and Subrahmanian, 1989].

866
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
@
@
@
@
@








@
@
@
@
@
⊥
⊤
t
f
Figure 1. The Lattice FOUR
natural. In other words, to construct knowledge bases, we need to be sensitive to the fact
that inconsistencies may be present, and take them seriously.
We present here a general framework for logic programming over a set of truth-values
that has the structure of a complete lattice. We develop two formulations of the frame-
work: one that provides a four-valued logic to reason in the presence of inconsistency,
and another that shows how to reason with both inconsistency and uncertainty.
Let us assume that we have a ﬁxed set T of truth-values that is a complete lattice under
an ordering ≤deﬁned on T . Let us denote the least upper bound and the greatest upper
bound of the subsets S ⊂T , respectively, by ⊔S and ⊓S . For instance, consider the
lattice FOUR shown in Figure 1. Here, t and f represent the classical truth-values ‘true’
and ‘false’, respectively, while ⊥denotes ‘unknown’, and ⊤stands for ‘inconsistent’ or
‘over-deﬁned’.
Intuitively, a lattice like FOUR can be useful to accommodate certain classically in-
consistent theories. Consider, for example, the theory T axiomatized by {p, ¬p, q}. T has
a model, namely, the interpretation that assigns ⊤to p and t to q. Given the deﬁnition of
satisfaction discussed below (see Deﬁnition 204), it can be shown that ¬q is not a logical
consequence of T. Of course, this is not the case in classical logic.
Another important complete lattice is SQUARE, that is, the set S Q = [0, 1] × [0, 1] of
truth-values, where [0, 1] ⊂R, endowed with the ordering below. Here, the assignment
of a truth value [μ1, μ2] to p means that the degree of belief in p is μ1, while the degree of
disbelief in p is μ2. The ordering is the following:
[μ1, μ2] ≤[ρ1, ρ2] iﬀμ1 ≤R ρ1 and μ2 ≤R ρ2,
where ≤R is the ordinary ‘less than or equal to’ deﬁned on the real numbers. In S Q, [0, 0]
intuitively denotes absolute lack of belief, [0, 1] denotes complete disbelief, [1, 0] denotes
complete belief and [1, 1] denotes absolutely inconsistent beliefs.
Let (A : μ) be an annotated atom over T (see Deﬁnition 191). If α1 and α2 are ﬁrst-
order expressions (terms or atoms), then a substitution θ of variable symbols for terms is
called a uniﬁer of α1 and α2 iﬀthe application of θ to α1, denoted α1θ, yields the same
expression as α2θ. A most general uniﬁer (mgu for short) of any two syntactic expressions
α1 and α2 is a uniﬁer θ such that for any uniﬁer ϑ of the expressions α1 and α2, there is

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
867
a substitution γ such that θγ = ϑ. If α1 and α2 are uniﬁable terms of atoms, then they
posses a mgu (see [da Costa and Subrahmanian, 1989]).
DEFINITION 202. If L0, L1, . . . , Ln are annotated atoms over T , then L0 ⇐L1 ∧. . .∧Ln
is an annotated clause over T . L0 is called the head of the annotated clause, while L1 ∧
. . . ∧Ln is its body. We will often refer to annotated clauses just as clauses.
DEFINITION 203. An annotated logic program (ALP) over T is a ﬁnite set of annotated
clauses over T .
Semantics
Let us deﬁne a semantics for ALPs. To do that, we will consider only those interpreta-
tions whose domain of discourse are the set of ground terms of the language (Herbrand
interpretations). An interpretation I of an ALP P over T is a mapping I : Bp →T , where
Bp is the Herbrand base of P, that is, the set of variable-free atoms expressible in the
language of P. The ordering ≤is extended to the interpretation in a natural way, namely:
I1 ≤I2 iﬀ(∀A ∈Bp)(I1(A) ≤I2(A)).
The orderings ≥, < and > are deﬁned in the usual way. We also assume the existence of a
function ¬ : T →T .
DEFINITION 204 (Satisfaction). An interpretation I is said to satisfy
1. the formula α iﬀit satisﬁes every closed instance of α;
2. the variable-free annotated atom (A : μ) iﬀI(A) ≥μ;
3. the variable-free annotated hyper-literal ¬(A : μ) iﬀI(A) ≥¬(u);
4. the variable-free formula α1 ∧α2 iﬀI satisﬁes α1 and α2;
5. the variable-free formula α1 ∨α2 iﬀI satisﬁes α1 or α2;
6. the variable-free formula α1 ⇐α2 iﬀeither I satisﬁes α1 or does not satisfy α2;
7. the variable-free formula α1 ⇔α2 (that is, (α1 ⇐α2) ∧(α2 ⇐α1)) iﬀI satisﬁes
α1 ⇐α2 and α2 ⇐α1;
8. the closed formula ∃xα iﬀthere is some variable-free term t such that I satisﬁes
α[x/t] (the result of replacing all free occurrences of x in α by t);
9. the closed formula ∀xα iﬀfor every variable-free term t, I satisﬁes α[x/t].
When I satisﬁes α, we write I |= α, and I ⊭α, when it does not. In this section, we write
(∀)α and (∃)α to denote ∀x1 . . . ∀xnα and ∃x1 . . . ∃xnα, respectively, where x1, . . . , xn are
the free variables of α.
LEMMA 205. If I is an interpretation, then:

868
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
1. I |= ¬(A : μ) iﬀI |= (A : ¬μ).
2. I |= (∃)(¬(A : μ)) iﬀI |= (∃)(α : ¬(μ)).
THEOREM 206. Suppose that P is an ALP over T . Let P′ be the ALP obtained from P
by replacing all annotated literals of the form (¬A : μ) by (A : ¬(μ)). Then I is a model
of P iﬀI is a model of P′.
Without loss of generality, we will assume (throughout this work) that ALPs contain
no negated literals. Moreover, associated with every ALP P over T , there is a function
Tp, from the class of Herbrand interpretations to the class of Herbrand interpretations,
deﬁned as follows:
Tp(I)(A) =def ⊔{μ : (A : μ) = β1 ∧. . . ∧βn is a ground instance
of an annotated clause in P andI |= β1 ∧. . . ∧βn}.
THEOREM 207. Suppose that P is an ALP over T (where T is a complete lattice under
≤) and that Tp is as above. Then I is a model of P iﬀTp(I) ≤I.
THEOREM 208. Suppose that P is an ALP over T as above. Then Tp is monotonic; that
is, I1 ≤I2 entails Tp(I1) ≤Tp(I2).
The monotonicity of Tp guarantees, by the Tarski-Knaster theorem, that Tp has a least
ﬁxed point that coincides with the least pre-ﬁxed point of Tp. (Here, I is a pre-ﬁxed point
of Tp iﬀT (I) ≤I.)
THEOREM 209. P has a least model that is identical with the least ﬁxed point of Tp.
Given that T is a complete lattice, it possesses a least element and a greatest element,
which we denote, respectively, by ⊥and ⊤. Furthermore, associated with every T , there
are two distinguished interpretations, denoted by △and ∇, that assign the truth-values ⊥
and ⊤, respectively, to the elements A ∈Bp, where Bp is the Herbrand base of P.
DEFINITION 210. If P is an ALP over T , then the upward iteration of Tp is deﬁned, for
all ordinals λ, as
 Tp ↑0 =def △
Tp ↑λ =def ⊔α<λTp(Tp ↑α).
THEOREM 211. Tp ↑ω is identical to the least ﬁxed point of Tp.
DEFINITION 212. A model I of the ALP P over T is supported iﬀI(A) = ⊔{μ : (A :
μ) ⇐(β1 : μ1) ∧. . . ∧(βn : μn) is a ground instance of an annotated clause in P and
I |= (β1 : μ1) ∧. . . ∧(βn : μn)}.
THEOREM 213. I is a ﬁxed point of Tp iﬀI is a supported model of P.
DEFINITION 214. Let λ be an ordinal. The downward iteration of Tp is deﬁned as
follows:
 Tp ↓0 =def ∇
Tp ↓λ =def ⊓α<λTp(Tp ↑α)

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
869
DEFINITION 215. The ALP is canonical iﬀTp ↓ω is a ﬁxed point of Tp.
DEFINITION 216. Suppose C1 and C2 are the annotated clauses given below:
 (A1 : μ1) ⇐(B1
1 : ρ1
1) ∧. . . ∧(B1
n : ρ1
n)
(A2 : μ2) ⇐(B2
1 : ψ2
1) ∧. . . ∧(B2
m : ψ2
m).
C1 is semantically equivalent to C2 iﬀthere is a substitution Θ such that A1Θ = A2 and
{(B1
1Θ : ρ1
1), . . . , (B1
nΘ : ρ1
n)} = {(B2
1 : ψ2
1), . . . , (B2
m : ψ2
m)}.
DEFINITION 217. Suppose that C1 and C2 do not share common variables. An ALP P is
closed iﬀfor every pair C1,C2 of annotated clauses in P satisfying the previous condition,
if C1,C2 are of the form
 (A1 : μ1) ⇐(B1
1 : ρ1
1) ∧. . . ∧(B1
n : ρ1
n)
(A2 : μ2) ⇐(B2
1 : ψ2
1) ∧. . . ∧(B2
m : ψ2
m),
such that A1, A2 are uniﬁable via the mgu Θ, and μ1 and μ2 are incomparable (i.e., μ1 ≰μ2
and μ2 ≰μ1), it is the case that
((A1 : ⊔{μ1, μ2}) ⇐(B1
1 : ρ1
1) ∧. . . ∧(B1
n : ρ1
n) ∧(B2
1 : ψ2
1) ∧. . . ∧(B2
m : ψ2
m))Θ
is semantically equivalent to some annotated clause in P. The closure of an ALP P, de-
noted CL(P), is the closed ALP obtained by repeatedly adding to P all clauses C obtained
from annotated clauses C1,C2 whose heads are uniﬁable and whose heads’s annotations
are incomparable.
Every ALP P can be extended to a closed ALP CL(P) by adding a ﬁnite number of
new annotated clauses, as is easy to show. Moreover, we have:
THEOREM 218. Suppose P is an ALP over a complete lattice T of truth-values. Then:
(1) Tp = TCL(P)
(2) Hence, P and CL(P) have the same models, i.e., they are logically equivalent.
(3)If I is a supported model of CL(P), and A is a variable-free atom such that I(A) =
λ ⊥, then there is a single annotated clause in P having a ground instance of the
form
(A : μ) ⇐(B1 : ψ1) ∧. . . ∧(Bn : ψn)
such that λ ≤μ and I |= (B1 : ψ1) ∧. . . ∧(Bn : ψn).
DEFINITION 219. P is canonical iﬀTp ↓ω is the greatest ﬁxed point of Tp.
THEOREM 220. If P is canonical, then Tp ↓ω is the greatest supported model of P.

870
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
Executing queries
Important applications of the formal framework above are found when we analyze the
interactions between an user who ask queries to a knowledge base. To discuss cases
of this type, we assume that all ALPs are closed, which suﬃces for this purpose (see
[da Costa and Subrahmanian, 1989]). In this kind of application, the knowledge base is
expressed as an ALP over a suitably chosen complete lattice (T , ≤) of truth-values. In this
framework, experts may use expressions such as p is likely to be false or, more precisely,
p is false with 90 % certainty (see [da Costa and Subrahmanian, 1989], where examples
are given).
Other applications of annotated logics will be mentioned in the next section.
6
DEVELOPMENTS IN PARACONSISTENT LOGIC
6.1
Some carried out developments
Since the 1960s, when paraconsistent logic was established as a logic stricto sensu,16
several developments have been made, most of them in connection with the C-systems.17
To give an idea (although not a complete one) of some of these developments,18 let us
recall some of the most important events. In 1969, M. Fidel proved the decidability of
Cn, 1 ≤n ≤ω, by algebraic methods (see [Fidel, 1977], and also [D’Ottaviano, 1990]).
Another decision method for Cn, 1 ≤n ≤ω, was presented by D. Marconi in 1980 using
semantic tableaux (see [Marconi, 1980]). In 1987, W. Carnielli, after systematizing ﬁnite
many-valued logics through tableaux, approached C1 by this method, and also showed
that C1 is decidable (see [Carnielli, 1987]).
In 1970s, da Costa, Alves, Lopari´c and Arruda studied the semantic counterpart of the
calculi Cn, 1 ≤n ≤ω, later extended to the calculi Cn⋆and Dn, 1 ≤n ≤ω (see [Arruda
and da Costa, 1977]). Da Costa and Alves’ work on the issue has been mentioned already.
Although the subject has not been discussed here, new hierarchies of calculi, constructed
between Cn and Cn+1, n ≥0, have also been introduced. Their semantics was studied by
Alves (see [Alves, 1976]). We noted above that Alves has proved the decidability of da
Costa’s propositional systems by the method of quasi-matrices. Later, Lopari´c presented
a two-valued semantics and a decision method for Cω (see [Lopari´c, 1977], [Lopari´c,
1978], and [Lopari´c and Alves, 1980]).
Arruda and da Costa have also axiomatized some paraconsistent systems that are also
relevant logics (see [Arruda and da Costa, 1984]). In their systems, α ∧(α →β) →β,
the rules of contraction, namely, α →(α →β)⧸α →β and (α →(α →β)) →(α →β),
and the deduction theorem do not hold. These systems (called P and P⋆), as well as
their quantiﬁcational counterparts, are not ﬁnitely trivializable, are not decidable by ﬁnite
matrices, but can be extended to modal and tense logics, as these authors have shown.
16That is, with the development of (at least) ﬁrst-order predicate calculus. This turning point is acknowledged
in general (see, for instance, [Tuziak, 1993]).
17Further details on these developments and references to the authors who have contributed to the subject can
be found in [Arruda, 1980], [Arruda, 1989], [da Costa and Marconi, 1989], and [D’Ottaviano, 1990].
18For further information, see the references just mentioned.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
871
Routley and Lopari´c studied the semantic aspects of P, as well as some of its ‘dialectical’
extensions (see [Routley and Lopari´c, 1980]). Arruda and da Costa have also developed
the systems Jn, 1 ≤n ≤5 (at the propositional and predicate levels), in which modus
ponens is not valid (see [Arruda and da Costa, 1970]). These systems have been studied
also by M. Bunder (see [Bunder, 1983]).
Based on Ja´skowski’s ideas, D’Ottaviano and da Costa introduced a three-valued propo-
sitional logic J3 with two designated values, which turn out to be paraconsistent (see
[D’Ottaviano and da Costa, 1970]). Furthermore, D’Ottaviano presented an axiomatiza-
tion of J3 (see [D’Ottaviano, 1982] and [D’Ottaviano, 1985a]), and studied the connec-
tions between this calculus and several others, such as intuitionistic logic and Łukasiewicz’s
three-valued logic. The system J3 was further studied by D’Ottaviano herself in other pa-
pers, where she introduced the concept of J3-theories, and adapted and proved to the latter
several results of model theory (see also [D’Ottaviano, 1985b]).
The algebraization of Ja´skowski’s logic was studied by Kotas, following the axiomatic
treatment given by da Costa, Dubikajtis and Kotas himself. In particular, Kotas proved
that the system is not decidable by ﬁnite matrices (see [Kotas, 1975]). Other studies
related to Ja´skowski’s logics have been developed in [Furmanowski, 1975], [Kotas and
da Costa, 1977], [Kotas and da Costa, 1978], [Kotas and da Costa, 1979], and [Marconi,
1979]. Pinter’s system that deals with ‘inherent ambiguity’ is a slight modiﬁcation of a
Ja´skowski logic (see [Pinter, 1980]).
One of the main problems with regard to the algebraic study of the C-logics is that the
only congruence relation in C1 is the identity relation, as shown by C. Mortensen (see
[Mortensen, 1980]). Despite this fact, some algebraic approaches to the C-systems, or
their extensions, were presented in [da Costa, 1966a], [da Costa, 1966b], [da Costa and
Sette, 1969], [Sette, 1971], [Carnielli and Alcˆantara, 1984], and [Lewin et al., 1990], as
well as in some of B´eziau’s works referred to below.
The fact that the C-systems do not enable substitutivity by equivalents is discussed
by I. Urbas (see [Urbas, 1989]), who attempted to remedy this situation by extending
these systems with the addition of new rules. He then proved that these extensions do
not lead to systems distinct from classical logic, concluding that new hierarchies should
be constructed, where adequate equivalence relations can be formulated. The same prob-
lem regarding the impossibility of deﬁning such equivalences in da Costa’s systems is
discussed by Pe˜na in [Pe˜na, 1991, pp. 284ﬀ].
Important contributions to PL have been made by J. -Y. B´eziau in a series of works. He
started studying PL in the late 1980s, formulating a semantics for C1. He also axiomatized
a sequent system for C1. (This was a problem that A. Raggio tried to solve in 1960s; see
[D’Ottaviano, 1990].) B´eziau also extended C1 to a stronger system, C1+, by replacing
the axioms αo∧βo →(α⊙β)o, where ⊙∈{∧, ∨, →}, by αo∨βo →(α⊙β)o. As a result, he
obtained more theorems as well as some of De Morgan laws. He then studied a non-truth
functional semantics for the stronger system (see [B´eziau, 1990]). B´eziau also investi-
gated a general theory of negation (see [B´eziau, 1995a]), and argued that both classical
ﬁrst-order logic and the modal system S5 can be viewed as paraconsistent systems (see
[B´eziau, 2002a]). These last results led him to study a new theory of opposition, where a
polyhedron replaces the traditional square of opposition (see [B´eziau, 2003]).

872
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
The extension of ﬁrst-order paraconsistent logic to set theory has already been dis-
cussed in section 3. This work was initiated by da Costa (see [da Costa, 1963a]), and
continued by Arruda (see [Arruda, 1964]). (For additional references and historical de-
tails, see [D’Ottaviano, 1990] and [da Costa et al., 1998a].) Higher-order paraconsistent
logics corresponding to the C-systems have been presented in [Alves and Moura, 1978],
[da Costa and Alcˆantara, 1982], and [da Costa and Alcˆantara, 1986]. Semantics for para-
consistent systems containing descriptions and Hilbert’s ϵ-symbol have been discussed,
respectively, by Abar (see [Abar, 1985]) and Yamashita (see [Yamashita, 1985]). These
authors have also shown how to develop a general theory of v.b.t.o. in the calculi C=
n.
These developments are, of course, only part of what has been done in paraconsistent
logic. Despite the huge amount of work that has been produced in the area (which we
cannot, of course, even begin to summarize here), we still do not have a comprehensive
introductory book on the subject. (A ﬁrst introductory book on PL is Grana’s [Grana,
1983]; see also [Grana, 1990a; Grana, 1990b; Grana, 1990c; Grana, 2001] for some of his
ideas on the subject.) We will now brieﬂy comment on some other lines of research.
6.2
A taxonomy of C-systems
Recently, the C-logics have been studied from a diﬀerent perspective. In ‘A Taxonomy
of C-systems’, Carnielli and Marcos presented an elaborate study of the foundations of
paraconsistent logics (see [Carnielli and Marcos, 2002]). In particular, the authors show
how several classes of paraconsistent logics can be distinguished from the point of view
of general abstract logic. They also put forward a new discriminating account of several
logical principles, such as the principle of noncontradiction and various forms of pseudo-
Scotus (also known as the principle of explosion).
The logics of formal inconsistency (LFIs) are then introduced as a large class of para-
consistent logics in which the concepts of consistency and inconsistency can be inter-
nalized. This allows Carnielli and Marcos to present a novel account of the notion of
consistency, and distinguish formally between the notions of contradictoriness and incon-
sistency. While studying the general features of an important subclass of LFIs — namely,
the C-systems and the dC-systems — they show that most paraconsistent logics can be
seen as C-systems (C-logics), and explore their properties and shortcomings.
Developing further the work done in [Carnielli and Marcos, 2002], Carnielli, Coniglio
and Marcos improved some results and emphasized semantic and proof-theoretic aspects
of the logics of formal inconsistency (see [Carnielli et al., 2006]). The main LFI and one
of its primary subclasses, the C-systems, were also surveyed. A striking feature of LFIs
is their ability to encode classical logic, in the sense that LFIs are able to reproduce clas-
sical reasoning, despite being subsystems of classical logic. The dC-systems, a particular
subclass of the C-systems, are carefully discussed; particular cases include da Costa’s Cn,
and Ja´skowski’s D2.
By adding new axioms to the dC-systems, the authors show that it is possible to intro-
duce a large family of logics by controlling the propagation of inconsistency. Exploring
this possibility allows the deﬁnition of thousands of new logics. The paper also empha-
sizes the semantic meaning of LFIs, discussing in detail both the valuation semantics

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
873
for LFIs and the possible-translation semantics. Another kind of semantics, the society
semantics, is also addressed. Furthermore, modal extensions of LFIs and their Kripke se-
mantics are discussed, as well as some ﬁrst-order LFIs. An entire subsection of [Carnielli
et al., 2006] is dedicated to proof systems, especially to the tableaux method; indeed,
tableaux proof systems for several LFIs are provided. Several other issues, including the
diﬃculties of algebraizing LFIs, are also studied in both papers.
A further development of this approach is concerned with modal LFIs. Given the
epistemic version of the normal logic KT, if we add to it the so-called veriﬁcationist thesis,
‘A implies that it is possible to know A’, it follows that ‘A implies that KA’. This yields the
collapse of the knowledge operator. This problem is known as the knowability paradox,
and it threatens any normal modal logic that expands KT by the alethic thesis. Modal LFIs
are useful in the task of avoiding the knowability paradox, because it is possible to add to
the paraconsistent version of the modal logic KT the veriﬁcationist thesis without losing
the modality, as shown in [Carnielli et al., to appear]. In this sense, modal LFIs are able to
avoid the knowability paradox while simultaneously recovering classical reasoning with
such logics.
6.3
Other directions
Several directions, other than those suggested by the development of da Costa’s C-logics,
were also proposed to deal with inconsistencies. For instance, D. Batens initially studied
paraconsistent systems related to dialectics (see [Batens, 1980]). Later, he considered
the case of inconsistency-adaptive logics, i.e. logics in which abnormalities are inconsis-
tencies, and presented two ﬁrst-order inconsistency-adaptive logics, both from the proof-
theoretic and the model-theoretic points of view (see [Batens, 1999] and [Batens, 2000]).
In 1979, Lorenzo Pe˜na introduced a new kind of PL that resembled fuzzy logic in
certain respects (see [Pe˜na, 1979]; see also [Pe˜na, 1991; Pe˜na, 1993], where Pe˜na’s ideas
are developed further).
Paraconsistent logic has also progressed in Australia and New Zealand, in part due to
the eﬀords of R. Routley, motivated by the connections with relevant logics. In these
logics, certain schemas and rules from classical logic, such as α →(¬α →β) and
α, ¬α ⊢β, are not valid (see [Anderson and Belnap, 1975], [Routley and Meyer, 1976],
and [Routley, 1979]). As a result, these systems can also be used as the basis for in-
consistent but nontrivial theories. Marconi gave a precise formulation of the relation
between paraconsistent logic and relevant logic (see [Marconi, 1979]). From our point
of view, most relevant systems are paraconsistent. Additional contributions from Aus-
tralia can be found in the works of Mortensen [Mortensen, 1980], Bunder [Bunder, 1980;
Bunder, 1983], and Priest [Priest, 1979; Priest et al., 1989; Priest, 1987] (see also [Priest
and Tanaka, 2000] for Priest’s view on paraconsistent logics).
Another domain to which paraconsistent logic can be applied is dialectics. From a
historical perspective, dialectics may implicitly assume some system of paraconsistent
logic, since most dialectical views maintain that there are ‘real contradictions’, i.e., that
the actual world is contradictory. (For a basic antology on this subject, see [Marconi,
1979].)

874
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
We mention here the researches of da Costa and R. G. Wolf on the underlying logic of
dialectics — dialectics conceived according to the interpretation of McGill and Parry (see
[McGill and Parry, 1948]). The resulting systems, involving propositional and predicate
levels, have formal features analogous to the C-logics. But they are strictly stronger than
the latter (for details, see [da Costa and Wolf, 1980] and [da Costa and Wolf, 1985]).
In [Akama, 2002], S. Akama reappraises D. Nelson’s work on inconsistent systems
from the 1950s (see [Nelson, 1949; Nelson, 1959]). Taking Nelson as a forerunner of PL,
Akama presents an interesting study on Nelson’s ‘constructive’ PL.19 Additional devel-
opments of PL, more closely related to applications, will be discussed in the next section.
7
APPLICATIONS
7.1
Technology
As we discussed above, annotated logics were originally introduced by Blair and Sub-
rahmanian in the 1980s. These logics have been developed further and applied to several
ﬁelds, such as robot control [Nakamatsu et al., 2002], air traﬃc control [Nakamatsu et
al., to appear], control systems for autonomous machines, defeasible deontic reasoning
[Nakamatsu et al., 2001], information systems [Akama and Abe, 2001] and medicine.
Here, we cannot do justice to all applications that have been devised in recent years. But
let us give a brief sketch of some of the recent developments in the area.
A programming language, called PARALOG, was implemented in [ ´Avila and Abe,
1997]. It is a paraconsistent version of PROLOG, and it has been used to construct several
computational systems for planing data, vision systems, and to represent inconsistencies
(see [ ´Avila, 1996]).
Furthermore, digital circuits, inspired in annotated logics, were introduced in [Abe and
da Silva Filho, 1998] to accommodate incompatible signals. The authors suggest that
this device may be useful to develop more general electric circuits, as well as to articu-
late applications in logistic and to decision procedures. Hardware devices are also under
construction, motivated by paraconsistent ideas. The so-called para-analyser enables
scientists to handle uncertainty, inconsistencies and paracompleteness (see [Abe and da
Silva Filho, 2003]). Several other related devices have also been constructed, leading to
the ﬁrst ‘paraconsistent robot’: Emmy (see [Silva Filho and Abe, 2001a] and [Silva Filho
and Abe, 2001b]).
Interesting applications are being developed in medicine: in the recognition of cancer
cells, in Alzheimer illness, and in disfunctions of speech. These applications are new, and
they suggest that applied paraconsistent logics may have an extraordinary role. Further-
more, in engineering, nonmonotonic and defeasible forms of reasoning have been repre-
sented in terms of paraconsistent logics, leading to the development of softwares that are
being used in traﬃc control — of trains, aircrafts, and cars (see [Nakamatsu et al., 1999]
and [Nakamatsu et al., 2000]). The hardware counterpart has also been developed in the
form of a computer chip (see [Nakamatsu et al., 2003]).
19Akama claims that ‘da Costa did not appear to be familiar with Nelson’s system’ (see [Akama, 2002]).
However, Nelson’s paper [Nelson, 1959] is listed in the references of da Costa’s seminal work [da Costa, 1963a].

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
875
7.2
Informatics
Several types of applications of paraconsistent logics in informatics have been devised.
In this section, we will discuss some of them.
Epistemic inconsistencies in artiﬁcial intelligence
Paraconsistent logic has been used in the construction of models of ‘real life reasoning’
in artiﬁcial intelligence. This is part of the general problem of ‘practical reasoning’, and
is treated under the label of the ‘logic of appearance’. In all of these areas, we ﬁnd
contributions by T. Pequeno, A. Buchsbaum, A. T. Martins, and their collaborators (see,
e.g., [Buchsbaum et al., 2004], [Martins and Pequeno, 1996], [Pequeno and Buchsbaum,
1995], [Correa et al., 1993], and [Pequeno, 1990]). For example, they introduce the notion
of epistemic inconsistency, which refers to the existence of contradictory views about the
same situation (see [Pequeno, 1991]). These contradictions reﬂect the incompleteness (or
vagueness) of our knowledge about the domain under study. In particular, the association
of this phenomenon with nonmonotonic reasoning is explored. The idea is to devise
a logical system and the corresponding semantics that make these notions precise and
enable reasoning on these inconsistent views without triviality (see [Pequeno, 1990]).
In [Buchsbaum and Pequeno, 1993], it is presented a proof method for automation of
reasoning in paraconsistent logic, using da Costa’s calculus C⋆
1 . The method is analytical,
and it employs a specially designed tableaux system. In fact, the authors present two
tableaux systems. The ﬁrst, with a small number of rules, is used to prove the soundness
and the completeness of the method. The second, which is equivalent to the ﬁrst, is a
system of derived rules designed to enhance computational eﬃciency. A prototype based
on the second system was also eﬀectively implemented.
Other paraconsistent fuzzy systems
In addition to the systems connecting paraconsistent logic and fuzzy logic mentioned
earlier, Barreto and Ebecken presented some applications of PL in artiﬁcial intelligence.
They explored, in particular, the use of PL in the construction of paraconsistent knowl-
edge bases, implemented in fuzzy shells (see [Barreto, 2004], [Barreto and Ebecken,
1998] and [Barreto and Ebecken, 2001]). It was shown that it is possible to build para-
consistent knowledge bases in the Mathlab Fuzzy Logic Toolbox, and that fuzzy shells
are inconsistency-tolerant. Moreover, it has also been shown that the ‘defuzziﬁcation
method’, that plays an important role in paraconsistent fuzzy systems, must be chosen
according to the nature of the knowledge base in question (see [Barreto and Ebecken,
2002]). In fact, the authors describe a particular defuzziﬁcation method in the interpreta-
tion of a paraconsistent knowledge base.
These works provide only partial results for the handling of inconsistency in artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI), and the authors insist on the need for investigating the problems of co-
herence and normalization of inconsistent and paraconsistent knowledge bases, including
their semantic aspects. In [Barreto, 2002], the relationship between paraconsistent knowl-
edge bases and possibilistic logic is explored. Using possibilistic logic, it is possible to

876
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
accommodate inconsistent information by assigning to each piece of knowledge a certain
degree of paraconsistency, and by tracking the use of such pieces in the derivation of new
conclusions. This proposal seems to solve partially the problem of normalization and the
problem of knowing whether paraconsistent propositions in the knowledge base aﬀect the
conclusions of the deductive processes where they are used. The degree of paraconsis-
tency and the tracking system help to indicate to what extent the conclusions are thus
aﬀected.
Furthermore, in [Barreto, 2004], the proof of the consistency between possibilistic res-
olution and Zadeh’s approximate reasoning theory is outlined. This is an interesting result
for AI, since it provides a theoretical base for the improvement of an eﬃcient methodol-
ogy for reasoning in the presence of inconsistency. An interesting aspect of this method-
ology is that it provides a possible model of human knowledge, where qualitative analysis
is needed. Examples of applications include medical diagnosis as well as juridical and
business decisions.
The matrix connection method and paraconsistency
As is well known, W. Bibel’s matrix connection method provides an alternative proce-
dure for theorem proving other than the usual resolution technique (see [Bibel, 1982]
and [Bibel, 1993]). This method was adapted and implemented in the particular case of
an annotated propositional paraconsistent logic by Kaestner, Krause, Musicante and No-
bre (see [Kaestner and Krause, 2996] and [Krause et al., 2001]). We will give here the
main ideas of this approach, and highlight some connections between annotated logic and
computation.
We will be working, once again, in a propositional language with standard connectives
and other symbols. Let A be a non-empty, ﬁnite, ordered set of propositional symbols. To
each element a ∈A, we associate a non-empty, ﬁnite lattice Ta. The elements of Ta are
called annotated constants, and denoted by μ, ν etc.
DEFINITION 221. A ground literal is a triple (a, μ, p), where a ∈A, μ ∈Ta, and p ∈
{0, 1}. p is the polarity of the literal. We will write either ∼L or ∼Lμ to denote the
literal (a, μ, 1), while either L or Lμ denotes the literal (a, μ, 0). In general, literals will be
denoted by K, L, M etc.
Let R be an alphabet of occurrences or positions. The elements of R are denoted by r.
DEFINITION 222. By induction, we deﬁne the concept of propositional matrices over
(A, R), denoted by the letters D, E, F. Similarly, we deﬁne their size σ(F), their positions
Ω(F) ⊂R, and the depth δ(r) of r in the matrix F, for any r ∈Ω(F):
a) For any literal L, and for any r ∈R, the pair (L, r) = Lr is a matrix with σ(Lr) = 0,
Ω(Lr) = {r}, and δ(Lr) = 0.
b) If F1, . . . , Fn, n ≥0, are matrices such that Ω(Fi) ∩Ω(F j) = ∅, for i  j and
1 ≤i, j ≤n, then the set F = {F1, . . . , Fn} is a matrix where:
(i) σ(∅) = 0, for n = 0, and σ(F) = 1 + 	n
i=1 σ(Fi), for n > 0;

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
877
{∼M, {{L}, ∼M}}
∼M
{{L}, ∼M}
{L}
∼M
L



L
L
LL



L
L
LL
Figure 2. Representation of a matrix by a tree
(ii) Ω(F) = Ω(F1) ∪. . . ∪Ω(Fn);
(iii) δ(r) = m + 1, for any r ∈Ω(Fi), 1 ≤i ≤n, where m is the depth of r in Fi.
According to this deﬁnition, the atomic parts of the matrices are ground literals, and in
general, a matrix is a nested set of occurrences of literals.
EXAMPLE 223. Let us consider A = (a, b, c, d), associated with the elements of the
lattice FOUR (see ﬁgure 5.3), and let R = {0, 1, 2, 3} be an alphabet of positions. Then L =
(a, ⊥, 0) and ∼M = (c, f, 1) are ground literals, while {{L0}, {∼M1}} and {∼M0, {{L1}, ∼
M2}} are matrices over (A, R).
A matrix can also be viewed as a tree, where some leaves are associated with literals.
Figure 2 presents the tree corresponding to the second matrix of the example above.
DEFINITION 224. Let F be a matrix and l, m ∈{0, 1}. The set of formulas ˜F, represented
by F with respect to (l, m), is inductively deﬁned as follows:
(i) If F is a literal F = Lr and l = 0, then ˜F = L.
(ii) If F is a literal F = Lr and l = 1, then ˜F =∼L.
(iii) If F = {F1, . . . , Fn}, n ≥0, and if m = 1, then ˜F = ∧( ˜F1, . . . , ˜Fn), where the ˜Fi
are formulas represented by Fi with respect to (l, 0), i = 1, . . . , n.
(iv) If F = {F1, . . . , Fn}, n ≥0, and if m = 0, then ˜F = ∨( ˜F1, . . . , ˜Fn), where ˜Fi are
formulas represented by Fi with respect to (l, 1), i = 1, . . . , n.

878
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
DEFINITION 225. A formula ˜F is positively represented by a matrix F if it is repre-
sented by F with respect to l = m = 0. ˜F is negatively represented if it is represented by
F with respect to l = m = 1. A propositional formula is any formula represented by some
matrix. Formulas are also denoted by D, E, F, but this should not bring any confusion
with the notation above.
We use the following notation:
1. If n = 0, ∧(F1, . . . , Fn) is abbreviated by T, while ∨(F1, . . . , Fn) is abbreviated by
F.
2. If n = 1, ∧(F) and ∨(F) are both abbreviated by F.
3. If n ≥2, then ∧(F1, . . . , Fn) is a conjunction, while ∨(F1, . . . , Fn) is a disjunction.
4. For any literal L, the formula ¬kL is called a hyper-literal. If L is a hyper-literal,
then ¬kL = (a, ¬k(μ), p), where ¬ : Ta −→Ta denotes some ﬁxed function (that gives
the meaning to the negation), and k is a multiplicity factor (a natural number).
5. If F = ∧(F1, . . . , Fn) and n ≥0, then ∼F = ∨(∼F1, . . . , ∼Fn).
6. If F = ∨(F1, . . . , Fn) and n ≥0, then ∼F = ∧(∼F1, . . . , ∼Fn).
7. For any formula F, ∼∼F = F.
8. Any formula ∼F ∨G is abbreviated by F →G.
9. Any formula (F →G) ∧(G →F) may be written as F ↔G.
10. We also adopt the convention that the order of precedence decreases in the se-
quence ∼, ∧, ∨, →, ↔. Parentheses, which are redundant given this convention, may
be deleted.
Note that if F and G are formulas, then ¬(F →G) and ¬ ∼F, for example, are not
formulas.
According to the conventions above, every well-formed formula (deﬁned in the stan-
dard way) determines a unique matrix. However, a matrix may represent more than one
formula.
EXAMPLE 226. Let F = {K, {L, ∼M}, {}} be a matrix. The tree in ﬁgure 3 is the positive
representation of F.
EXAMPLE 227. The formulas K∧L →M, K →∼L∨M, L∧K →M are all represented
by {∼K1, ∼L2, M3}.
The results presented in [Bibel, 1982], chapter 2, remain applicable here, such as the
following:
• If a formula ˜F is positively represented by a matrix F, then ∼
˜F is negatively
represented by F.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
879
{K, {L, ∼M}, {}}
K
{L, ∼M}
{}
L
∼M
,
,
,
,
,
l
l
l
ll



L
L
LL
m = 0, l = 0
m = 1, l = 0
m = 1, l = 0
m = 1, l = 0
m = 0, l = 0
m = 0, l = 0
Figure 3. Positive representation of F = {K, {L, ∼M}, {}}
• If two formulas ˜F1 and ˜F2 are positively represented by the same matrix F, then ˜F1
and ˜F2 are logically equivalent in the sense of annotated logics.
These results justify the use of matrices instead of formulas. The following example
justiﬁes the name matrix, that was ﬁrst employed by Bibel (see [Bibel, 1982]) and is also
used here (see also [Kaestner and Krause, 2996]).
EXAMPLE 228. Let ˜F be the formula
(K∧∼L →∼N) ∧M ∧¬L →(∼N∧∼K)
where K, L, M and N are literals. If we put ˜F in the disjunctive normal form (as usual),
we have:
(K∧∼L ∧N)∨∼M∨∼¬L ∨(∼N∧∼K)
This formula can be represented by a bi-dimensional arrangement, where the literals,
placed in a ﬁxed column, are connected by ‘∧’, while the columns are connected by ‘∨’,
as follows:
F =
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
K
∼N
∼L
∼M
∼¬L
N
∼K
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
With regard to semantics, let us ﬁrst introduce the following deﬁnition:
DEFINITION 229. An interpretation M is a function that associates to each proposi-
tional symbol, an element of a chosen lattice. By denoting M(a) = μa, we can write
(a, b, c, . . .) →(μa, μb, μc . . .).

880
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
F =
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
K
∼N
∼L
∼M
∼¬L
N
∼K
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
-
HH
j
-
H
H
j
-
Figure 4. The path {K, ∼M, ∼¬L, ∼K} through the matrix F
We can now deﬁne the ‘truth value’ M(F) of a matrix F as follows:
• If F is a literal (a, μ, 0), then M(F) = T = {∅} iﬀM(a) ≥μ; otherwise, M(F) =
F = ∅.
• If F is a literal (a, μ, 1), then M(F) = F = ∅iﬀM(a) ≥μ; otherwise, M(F) = T =
{∅}.
• If F is a matrix F = {F1, . . . , Fn}, n ≥0, then M(F) = n
k=1 M(Fk) if m = 0, and
M(F) = n
k=1 M(Fk) if m = 1.
We write M sat
˜F (and also M sat F) iﬀM(F) = T, for a matrix F that represents
˜F.
DEFINITION 230. A matrix F is valid iﬀM(F) = T, for every interpretation. It is called
contradictory iﬀM(F) = F, for every interpretation.
Note that F is valid iﬀ∼F is contradictory.
Paths, Connections, and Validity
DEFINITION 231. A path through a matrix F is a set of occurrences of literals, deﬁned
as follows:
1. If F = ∅, then the only path through F is ∅.
2. If F = Lr, then the only path through F is the set {Lr}.
3. If F = {F1, . . . , Fm, Fm+1, . . . , Fm+n}, m, n ≥0, m + n ≥1, for m literals F1, . . . , Fm
and for n matrices that are not literals Fm+1, . . . , Fm+n, then for any matrix Ei ∈Fm+i,
and for any path pi through Ei, 1 ≤i ≤n, the set m
j=1 {F j} ∪n
i=1 pi is a path through
F.
EXAMPLE 232. Let F be the matrix of the Example 228. A path through F is a path in
the matrix from left to right, constrained to pass by the literals (that should be interpreted
as ‘gates’), as shown in Figure 4.
DEFINITION 233. The two literals L = (a, μ, p) and M = (a, ν, q) are complementary
iﬀ:
• p = 0, q = 1 and ν ≥μ, or
• p = 1, q = 0 and μ ≥ν.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
881
DEFINITION 234. Connections are paths that have complementary literals as elements.
EXAMPLE 235. Let Ta be the lattice FOUR, ∼K = (a, t, 1), ∼L = (a, f, 1), M =
(a, ⊤, 0), and let the matrix F = {∼K, ∼L, M}. The (singleton) path through F has no
complementary literals. In fact, neither ∼K nor ∼L are complementary to M. Alterna-
tively, it suﬃces to see that ⊤≰t and ⊤≰f, and hence, M cannot be connected by either
∼K or ∼L.
DEFINITION 236. We say that an ordered n-tuple (μ1, . . . , μn), n > 1, of non-comparable
elements of Ta is a decomposition of μ if μ = ⊔{μ1, . . . , μn} and there are no non-
comparable elements {μ′
1, . . . , μ′
n} of Ta such that μ′
i < μi and μ = ⊔{μ′
1, . . . , μ′
n}. We
note that this deﬁnition is eﬃcient for small discrete lattices.
EXAMPLE 237. Consider the complete lattice FOUR. Then the only decomposition of
the element ⊤are the elements {t, f}, and hence, the matrix of the last example now is
F = {∼K, ∼L, {M1, M2}}, where M1 = (a, t, 0) and M2 = (a, f, 0). Note that K is
complementary to M1 and L is complementary to M2. Alternatively, note that t ≤t and
f ≤f.
THEOREM 238 (Soundness and Completeness). A matrix F is valid iﬀevery path through
F has a connection.
Proof. Adapted from [Bibel, 1982, pp. 30-31], by using induction on the size of σ in the
matrix F.
■
Checking the validity of a formula
In our setting, the theorem proving technique con-
sists in developing the following items:
a) First, we construct a matrix containing a goal and all the premises (or knowledge
base).
b) We then check this matrix for validity.
Suppose that we have a set of formulas Γ = {F1, . . . , Fn} and a query G. Then, to
determine whether G is a semantic consequence of Γ, we should verify that the matrix
provided by (n
i=1 Fi) →G is valid.
The paraconsistent component appears in this procedure given our deﬁnition of com-
plementary literals. In this case, the existence of both a literal L = (a, μ, p) and its ‘nega-
tion’ ¬L = (a, ¬(μ), p) is not a suﬃcient condition to guarantee the existence of comple-
mentary literals in the path (see the deﬁnition 233). This illustrates the key ideas of the
‘paraconsistent program’ (see [da Costa, 1974]). Note that to obtain a proof of the query,
it is necessary that all paths of the matrix ∼(n
i=1 Fi) ∨G have connections. This implies
the existence of complementary literals in every path.
A case study
Consider the construction of a simple medical system, aimed at diagnos-
ing three diseases K, L and M. Let us suppose that there are two diﬀerent symptoms,
denoted by N and O. The intended usage of the system can be described as follows:

882
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
(i) The core part of the system is the knowledge provided by a doctor (DOC1).
(ii) Before applying this knowledge to a speciﬁc patient, say Paul, the pathologists,
X-ray technicians and other professionals who conduct medical tests on Paul add the
results of these tests to the knowledge base.
(iii) To use the system, we submit a goal to the program similarly to what is done in
PROLOG.
Usually, in the system, the main knowledge base described above is kept in one ﬁle,
while each patient’s records are maintained in a separate ﬁle (or possibly as a record in a
given ﬁle). The main knowledge base and this ﬁle (or its record) are merged together to
form an updated knowledge base. The latter is then used in the program that diagnoses
the patient’s disease.
We assume that the system is written as a ﬁnite set of annotated formulas over FOUR.
Suppose also that DOC1 provided the following ﬁve rules (formulas):
(F1)
Kt →Lf
(F2)
Lt →Kf
(F3)
Kt →Mt
(F4)
Nt →Kt
(F5)
Ot →Lt
Intuitively, the doctor is asserting that:
• An individual cannot have both diseases K and L. (F1 and F2)
• If an individual has the disease K, then he has the disease M. (F3)
• If an individual has the symptom N, then he has the disease K. (F4)
• If an individual has the symptom O, then he has the disease L. (F5)
To exemplify the use and behavior of the program, we describe three situations. The
ﬁrst is similar to asking a query to a PROLOG program, while the other two explore the
capacity of our method to handle inconsistencies:
Case 1:
Suppose that the pathologist tell us that Paul was tested positively for the symp-
tom N. And we want to know whether Paul has the disease K, but not L.
To answer this query, we must verify whether the matrix of the formula
F1 ∧F2 ∧F3 ∧F4 ∧F5 ∧Nt →(Kt ∧Lf )
is valid.
First, we transform the formula into its disjunctive normal form, and then into its matrix
form. The result of this process is shown in Figure 5. Now we must check whether all
paths in this matrix are complementary. Note that the ﬁrst path {Kt, Lt, Kt, Nt, Ot, ∼Nt, Kt}
has as complementary literals Nt and ∼Nt. And it is easy to see that all paths in this matrix
have complementary literals. Since the matrix is valid, we conclude that Paul has the
disease K, but not L.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
883
 Kt
Lt
Kt
Nt
Ot
∼Nt
Kt
∼Lf
∼Kf
∼Mt
∼Kt
∼Lt
Lf

Figure 5. The matrix of the formula F1 ∧F2 ∧F3 ∧F4 ∧F5 ∧Nt →(Kt ∧Lf )
Case 2:
Suppose now that the pathologist determined that Paul was tested positively for
symptoms N and O. And we want to know whether Paul has both diseases K and L.
To verify this query, we must check whether the matrix of the formula
F1 ∧F2 ∧F3 ∧F4 ∧F5 ∧Nt ∧Ot →(Kt ∧Lt)
is valid.
Following the same procedure used in the ﬁrst case, it is easy to see that the matrix for
this formula is valid. We conclude that Paul has both diseases K and L.
Note that this conclusion is in contradiction to what DOC1 said: see the formulas
F1 and F2 above. The reason for this conclusion is that the information given by the
pathologist is in contradiction with that provided by the doctor. In a classical logic setting,
this contradiction would make the knowledge base trivial (all formulas in the language
could be derived from the knowledge base). In our case, the inconsistency is limited to
the literals K and L; any atomic formula containing these literals can be proved.
Case 3:
The previous example shows an inconsistent knowledge base, used to derive
an inconsistent formula. The system, however, can handle inconsistencies in a nontrivial
way. Let us exemplify this situation using the same set of symptoms as in Case 2 to
determine whether Paul does not have the disease M. The latter condition can be written
as Mf . So, the new situation is described by the following formula:
F1 ∧F2 ∧F3 ∧F4 ∧F5 ∧Nt ∧Ot →Mf
Following the evaluation procedure once more, we verify that the matrix for this for-
mula is not valid.
The last two queries show that our method can deal with inconsistencies in the knowl-
edge base without every formula becoming derivable.
Implementation Issues
In [Krause et al., 2001], an implementation of our method,
using Standard ML Language [Milner, 1997], was described. But this process is not
discussed here for reasons of space.
The ideas presented here can be used to model reasoning made by an intelligent agent
that admits contradictory information. We believe that a system with this feature is more
robust than the traditional ones. After all, the system keeps the inconsistency within a
subset of its formulas, without aﬀecting other parts of the knowledge base.

884
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
Inductive paraconsistent logic
Science does not use only deductions, of course. It is natural to ask then whether we
can build ‘nonclassical inductive logics’ on a pair with nonclassical deductive logics, to
develop systems especially in artiﬁcial antelligence (AI). John Pollock, who has been
investigating several aspects of defeasible reasoning in AI, notes that:
A common misconception about reasoning is that reasoning is deducing, and
in good reasoning the conclusions follow logically from the premisses. It
is now generally recognized both in philosophy and in AI that nondeductive
reasoning is at least as common as deductive reasoning, and a reasonable
epistemology must accommodate both. ([Pollock, 1987])
The literature on nondeductive forms of reasoning presents various systems of com-
putational tools devoted to nonmonotonic and defeasible reasoning (see, e.g., [Pequeno,
1990] and [Pollock, 1987], to mention just two works). A particularly diﬃcult task for AI
experts is to improve AI systems so that the latter can ‘reason’ and ‘make inferences’ from
vague propositions, as we humans usually do. These propositions are such that we can-
not, in general, assign with certainty one of the two truth-values, true or false. Frequently,
our (human) reasoning is performed by attributing only a certain ‘degree of conﬁdence’
as to whether the propositions in question are true or not. Suppose, for instance, that we
are visiting a foreign country, and our informant gives us a vague information about the
location of a certain building. (Perhaps our informant is also not sure about the right ge-
ography of the city.) We ‘believe’ in the information with a certain degree of conﬁdence,
and ‘decide’ the way to be taken.
We will outline now of a way of accommodating such ‘degrees of conﬁdence’ in terms
of paraconsistent logic. The result is a diﬀerent process of dealing with vagueness, which,
we believe, may be of interest to AI researchers. Our main motivation is, of course, to
handle vague information mechanically. But, in this section, we will limit ourselves to
the description of a vague inductive logic that, we hope, will be useful in the mechanical
treatment of inductive information. Further developments should lead to the development
of expert systems based on the proposal below. (The main ideas are from [da Costa and
Krause, 2002].)
First, we need to specify in what sense we are using the word ‘inductive’ in ‘inductive
reasoning’. We take as inductive any reasoning such that the truth of the premises does not
entail necessarily the truth of the conclusion. Instead, the conclusion should be regarded
as ‘plausible’ in light of the premises. There are ways of measuring this ‘plausibility’, but
we need not discuss this issue here (for details, see [da Costa, 1986b]).
Our question then is: is there an ‘inductive’ paraconsistent logic? Positive answers
were given, from diﬀerent perspectives, in [Lopari´c and da Costa, 1986] and [da Costa and
Krause, 2002]. In the latter work (which will be our focus here), an ‘inductive annotated
system’ was developed to deal with vagueness and degrees of conﬁdence. The idea is that,
when we face situations of vague information, such as the one about locating a building
in a foreign city, we should opt for the more prudent alternative, according to a ‘warning
rule’. This rule tells us to be cautious in attributing degrees of conﬁdence. In particular,

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
885
we should not accept conclusions with degrees of conﬁdence smaller than those of the
premises. This is motivated by a rational stance, since a signiﬁcant feature of rationality
is the attempt to optimize our rational degrees of conﬁdence in the propositions we are
concerned with.
The proposal is to extend the common way of using arguments by accepting that some
propositions are vague. For instance, ‘Peter is smart’ is a vague proposition. However, we
still assign a degree of conﬁdence in the truth of these propositions. In other words, we
believe ‘Peter is smart’ with some degree of conﬁdence. Peter’s mother may have a great
conﬁdence in such a proposition, but his teacher may be not so conﬁdent. The degree of
conﬁdence can be interpreted as the amount of conﬁdence someone has in the truth of a
proposition.
To accommodate these two concepts, namely, vagueness and degree of conﬁdence, we
use the resources of annotated logics.
Let us call Iτ a propositional logic whose language has the following categories of
primitive symbols: (a) a countable set of propositional letters, which stand for proposi-
tions (we use P, Q, . . . as syntactic variables for propositions); (b) the elements μ, . . . , μ1, . . .
of a complete lattice τ ordered by ≤, which are called the values of vagueness; (c) the usual
logical connectives (¬, ∧, ∨, →), as well as (d) auxiliary symbols (parentheses).
The concept of formula of Iτ is introduced in the following way:
(i) If P is a propositional letter and μ ∈τ, then P : μ is a formula of Iτ (atomic
formula).
(ii) If α and β are formulas, then ¬α, α ∧β, α ∨β, α →β are formulas.20
(iii) Every formula is obtained only from the two clauses above.
Intuitively speaking, P : μ means that P is true with degree of vagueness μ. Note that
we are assigning degrees of vagueness to atomic formulas only, and not to formulas in
general. So, expressions such as:
((P : μ1) ∨(Q : μ2)) : μ
(12)
are not well formed in our system.
DEFINITION 239.
(i) If P is a propositional letter and μ ∈τ, then:
(a) ¬0P : μ means P : μ
(b) ¬1P : μ means ¬(P : μ)
(c) ¬kP : μ means ¬(¬k−1(P : μ)), where k is a natural number, k  0.
20α ↔β is introduced in the standard way.

886
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
(ii) Let ∼: τ −→τ be a ﬁxed mapping.21 From now on, we will write ∼μ instead of
∼(μ). If μ ∈τ, then:
(a) ∼0 μ means μ
(b) ∼1 μ means ∼μ
(c) ∼k μ means ∼(∼k−1 μ), where k  0 is a natural number.
Expressions such as P : μ are called annotated atoms, while ¬k(α : μ) are hyper-literals
of order k (k ≥0). The other formulas are called complex.
Semantics
Let τ be the complete lattice above with least element ⊥and greatest element
⊤. Let h : P −→τ be a mapping, called an interpretation of Iτ, where P is the collection
of propositional letters of Iτ. The image of the proposition P by the mapping h will be
denoted P : μ, where μ ∈τ. Informally speaking, as we noted, P : μ means that P
is true with degree of vagueness μ. To each interpretation h, we associate a valuation
vh : F −→{0, 1}, where F is the collection of formulas of Iτ deﬁned above. Intuitively
speaking, 1 and 0 stand for ‘true’ and ‘false’, respectively.
Particular applications may demand appropriate choices of the complete lattice. Here,
to accommodate the case studies mentioned above, we will be concerned with a particular
ﬁnite, linearly ordered set τ = {μ1, . . . , μ4} (with μ1 ≤· · · ≤μ4) to express the distinct
degrees of vagueness of a proposition. But, clearly, the approach presented here is quite
general.
DEFINITION 240. Let h and vh be as above. Let P be a propositional letter, and let α
and β denote formulas. Then:
(i) vh(P : μ) = 1 iﬀμ ≤h(P).
(ii) vh(¬k(P : μ)) = vh(¬k−1(P :∼μ)), where k  0.
(iii) vh(α ∧β) = 1 iﬀvh(α) = vh(β) = 1.
(iv) vh(α ∨β) = 1 iﬀvh(α) = 1 or vh(β) = 1.
(v) vh(α →β) = 1 iﬀeither vh(α) = 0 or vh(β) = 1.
(vi) If α is a complex formula, then vh(¬α) = 1 iﬀvh(α) = 0.
If vh(α) = 1, we say that vh satisﬁes α, and that it does not satisfy α otherwise (that
is, when vh(α) = 0). If Γ is a set of formulas, then we say that a formula α is a semantic
consequence of (the formulas of) Γ, and write Γ |= α, iﬀfor every valuation vh such that
vh(β) = 1 for each β ∈Γ, vh(α) = 1. A formula α is valid iﬀ∅|= α, and in this case we
write |= α.
21The speciﬁc deﬁnition of this mapping depends on the particular application. For instance, if we take τ
to be the unit interval [0, 1] ⊆ℜand ∼(x) =def 1 −x, the introduction of ‘fuzzy’ ways of reasoning can be
performed within the scope of annotated logics (see [da Costa et al., 1991]).

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
887
As usual, we say that a valuation vh is a model of a set of formulas Γ iﬀvh(β) = 1,
for every β ∈Γ. In particular, vh is a model of α iﬀvh(α) = 1. Other concepts, such as
maximal nontrivial sets of formulas, are deﬁned in the usual way.
The postulates of Iτ
If α, β, and γ are formulas and P is a propositional letter, then the
postulates (axioms plus inference rules) of Iτ are the following:22
(I1) All the postulates of classical positive logic.
(I2) If α and β are complex formulas, then the following is an axiom: (α →β) →((α →
¬β) →¬α).
(I3) If α is complex, then α ∨¬α is an axiom.
(I4) If α is complex and β is an arbitrary formula, then α →(¬α →β) is an axiom.23
(I5) P :⊥is an axiom.24
(I6) If λ ≤μ, then P : μ →P : λ
(I7) ¬k(P : μ) ↔¬k−1(P :∼μ), if k  0.
(I8) Let α be an arbitrary formula. In this case, if α →(P : μi), i ∈I, then α →(P :

i∈I μi). If τ is a ﬁnite lattice, then this axiom may be replaced by the following one (see
[da Costa et al., 1991]):
P : μ1 ∧. . . ∧P : μn →P :
n

i=1
μi
(13)
The syntactic concepts of Iτ are introduced in the standard way, as well as, in particu-
lar, the symbol of deduction ⊢(see [da Costa et al., 1991]).
We can prove the soundness and completeness of the logic Iτ with respect to the se-
mantics described in the previous section, and we will outline the result below. Let us ﬁrst
introduce a deﬁnition:
DEFINITION 241 (Strong Negation).
¬∗α =def α →((α →α) ∧¬(α →α))
(14)
It is easy to prove that ¬∗has all the properties of classical negation. Hence, classical
laws hold when ¬∗is used instead of ¬ in the formulas of our system. For instance,
reductio ad absurdum, (α →β) →((α →¬∗β) →¬∗α), is a theorem of Iτ, and so is
excluded middle, α∨¬∗α. Note that we can also show that if α is a complex formula, then
¬α ↔¬∗α is valid (see the theorem below). However, this does not hold for formulas in
general. For instance, if Q is a hyper-literal, then ¬Q ↔¬∗Q is not valid in general (see
[da Costa et al., 1991]).
22These postulates are adapted from [da Costa et al., 1991] and [da Costa et al., 1991].
23In other words, classical logic holds for complex formulas. The presence of inconsistencies will be allowed
at the level of atomic formulas only (see [da Costa et al., 1991]).
24The technical reason for using this axiom is that vh(P :⊥) = 1 iﬀh(α) ≥0, which is always true.

888
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
Other results are the following:
THEOREM 242.
(i) If Γ, α ⊢β, then Γ ⊢α →β (deduction theorem).
(ii) If Γ ⊢α and Γ ⊢α →β, then Γ ⊢β
(iii) α ∧β ⊢α, α ∧β ⊢β, α, β ⊢α ∧β
(iv) α ⊢α ∨β, β ⊢α ∨β
(v) Γ, α ⊢γ and Γ, β ⊢γ, then Γ, α ∨β ⊢γ (proof by cases)
(vi) Γ, α ⊢β and Γ, α ⊢¬∗β, then Γ ⊢¬∗α (reductio ad absurdum)
(vii) α, ¬∗α ⊢β, ¬∗¬∗α ⊢α, α ⊢¬∗¬∗α
(viii) If α is complex, then ¬∗α ↔¬α.
(ix) (α : μi)i∈I ⊢α : 
i∈I μi
(x) If Γ ⊢α, then Γ |= α (soundness theorem).
To prove the completeness theorem, we need a few deﬁnitions and results.
DEFINITION 243.
(i) Γ =def {α : Γ ⊢α}
(ii) Γ is trivial iﬀΓ = F , where F is the set of formulas of Iτ. Otherwise, Γ is
nontrivial.
(iii) Γ is inconsistent iﬀthere exists α such that both α and ¬α belong to Γ. Otherwise,
Γ is consistent.
(iv) Γ is strongly inconsistent iﬀthere exists α such that both α and ¬∗α belong to Γ.
Otherwise, Γ is strongly consistent.
It is easy to see that Γ is strongly inconsistent iﬀit is trivial, and that Γ is strongly con-
sistent iﬀit is nontrivial. Furthermore, for a suitable choice of τ, we can prove that there
exist inconsistent but nontrivial sets of formulas, which are still not strongly inconsistent
(see [da Costa and Subrahmanian, 1989]). So, the logic Iτ is paraconsistent. This means
that there exist interpretations h and formulas α such that vh(α) = vh(¬α) = 1. But we
can also prove that for a certain τ, there are formulas α and interpretations h such that
vh(α) = vh(¬α) = 0. So, Iτ is also a paracomplete logic. These results are treated in
detail in several papers listed in the References (see, e.g., [da Costa et al., 1991] and [da
Costa and Subrahmanian, 1989]).
LEMMA 244. Every nontrivial set of formulas is a subset of some maximal nontrivial
set of formulas.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
889
Proof. See [da Costa et al., 1991] and [da Costa and Subrahmanian, 1989].
■
The completeness theorem results from the following lemma:
LEMMA 245. If Γ is a maximal nontrivial set of formulas, then its characteristic function
χΓ : F −→{0, 1} is a model of Γ; that is, this mapping is a valuation such that χΓ(β) = 1,
for every β ∈Γ.
Proof. The idea is to deﬁne, for a given interpretation h, a valuation vh, in such a way that
the rules of Iτ are ‘preserved’. This means that, given Γ, we may deﬁne h : P −→τ such
that for every proposition P ∈P,
h(P) =def

i
{μi : μi ∈Γ}
(15)
It is not diﬃcult to prove that the valuation generated by this interpretation coincides with
the characteristic function χΓ.
■
As a consequence, we have the completeness theorem:
THEOREM 246. If Γ |= α, then Γ ⊢α.
Proof. See [da Costa and Subrahmanian, 1989] and [da Costa et al., 1991].
■
Degrees of conﬁdence
We will sketch now a theory of conﬁdence, which enables us to
assign degrees of conﬁdence to propositions, even to vague ones. Our degrees of conﬁ-
dence are in general only qualitative, characterized by the elements of an appropriate lat-
tice with least and greatest elements. In abstract terms, degrees of conﬁdence are elements
of a lattice σ, and are assigned to the formulas of the language Iτ when the propositional
variables are interpreted as denoting vague statements (in the sense discussed above).
Let σ be a lattice with least and greatest elements, denoted respectively by ⊥′ and ⊤′.
The algebraic lattice operations are represented by ⊓and ⊔, and the corresponding partial
order by ≤. Let F be the set of formulas of the logic Iτ, and let α and β denote arbitrary
annotated propositions. We then deﬁne the mapping C : F −→σ, which satisﬁes the
following postulates:
(C1) C(α ∧¬∗α) =⊥′
(C2) C(α ∨¬∗α) = ⊤′
(C3) C(
i∈I αi) ≥
i∈I C(αi), where I is ﬁnite.
(C4) C(
i∈I αi) ≤⊓i∈IC(αi), where I is ﬁnite.
(C5) If ⊢α ↔β, then C(α) = C(β).

890
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
Any mapping such as C is called a conﬁdence function. Depending on the application
under consideration, we can extend the postulates above. For instance, we can add the
following ones: (i) if ⊢α →β, then C(α) ≤C(β), and (ii) C(α) ⊔C(¬∗α) = ⊤′.
Our proposal is to combine the concept of vagueness with that of conﬁdence, that is, the
logic Iτ with the operator C. This is similar to the introduction of probability measures
in a classical system of the probability calculus. Obviously, an ‘algebra of conﬁdence’, as
we suggest here, extends the classical case of subjective measure of probability, deﬁned
on Boolean algebras of propositions. Moreover, our procedure also encompasses Zadeh’s
theory of possibility (see [Zadeh, 1978] and [Dubois and Prade, 1988]).
When the degrees of conﬁdence reduce to strict degrees of belief (that is, to subjective
probability), they can be handled in the standard way, following the rules of the Bayesian
probability calculus. In the more general case, it is important to strengthen our system
with additional rules. In particular, we add the following warning rule (note that, below,
we write P : μ : λ for C(P : μ) = λ):25
[Warning rule]
P : μi : λi , P : μj : λ j
P : μi ⊓μj : λi ⊔λj
Γ
(16)
Γ stands for the set of contextual conditions, which provide the basis for the application
of the rule. These conditions are accepted as true.
The warning rule has an intuitive appeal, and provides a tool to deal simultaneously
with vagueness and degrees of conﬁdence. Some inductive rules, such as those of induc-
tion by simple enumeration and analogy (see [da Costa, 1993]), complemented by the
approach to vagueness and the degrees conﬁdence suggested here, are also useful to rein-
force the logic we are trying to build. Similarly, the methods of the theory of possibility
can be useful here.
We designate the resulting system of inductive logic by Iτ. Our main goal is to use
an appropriate Iτ to the mechanization of inductive inferences, say in robotics and in the
theory of expert systems. Let us outline how this can be done by considering a simple
example.
Suppose an insurance company needs to provide a way of classifying people into dis-
joint classes by age. For instance, the company needs to distinguish young from old
people to diﬀerentiate among several prices for insurance premiums. The company will
run a series of interviews to determine the age of the interviewees. Suppose also that
the company decides to classify people in four diﬀerent categories: (C1) ‘young’ (less or
equal to 25 years old); (C2) ‘not so young’ (less or equal to 35 years old, and more than
25); (C3) ‘not so old’ (between 35 and 45 years old), and (C4) ‘old’ (more than 45 years
old). Furthermore, suppose that the government decided to pay for insurance services
also for people who don’t have birth certiﬁcates, and in some cases, who don’t know pre-
cisely their age. The hard and poor conditions of life these people face may confuse the
interviewers if the latter try to attribute precise ages to the interviewees.26
25Note also that, to state the rule, we used for simplicity ⊓and ⊔to denote the algebraic operations in both
lattices τ and σ. This should not cause any confusion.
26This situation is not uncommon in developing and poor countries.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
891
As a result, the information provided by the interviewers may be considered, in some
cases, as not completely precise. For instance, interviewer A may report to the company
his belief that John seems to be ‘not so old’ (that is, it seems to the interviewer that
John has an age between 35 and 45 years). Similarly, the interviewer may report that
Paul looks ‘not so young’. In other words, John and Paul were classiﬁed as satisfying,
respectively, the predicates C3 and C2 above. But the interviewer is not completely sure
about the correctness of the classiﬁcation. If John and Paul have their birth certiﬁcates, in
principle there would not be a problem as to how to deal with the information. After all,
the interviewer’s judgment about the age of each interviewee can be double checked.
Suppose, however, that neither John nor Paul have their birth certiﬁcates. How should
we to deal with this situation? Since the attribution of age cannot be done with precision,
the interviewer can adopt one of the following two alternatives: (1) to classify John as
‘old’ and Paul as ‘not so young’, or (2) to classify John as ‘not so old’ and Paul as ‘young’.
Several factors are involved in the choice between these two options. They include: the
expertise of the interviewer (that is, her experience in the job); the interviewer’s interest
in the defense of a particular policy; or an ‘external recommendation’, for instance, the
company’s interest in classifying people in certain classes of ages so that the due premium
prices are the highest possible (in this way, say, the company will receive more money
from the government).27
Humans in general go around situations of this kind by accepting some (perhaps ad
hoc) criterion. For example, they may decide what to do by adopting some rule more or
less arbitrarily, or by deciding on a case by case basis. But what happens if the situation
should be handled by an expert system? In this case, is it possible to keep the system with
the capacity of dealing with propositions to which diﬀerent ‘degrees of conﬁdence’ are
attached to? Or is it possible to follow an insurance policy wherever it takes to express
the ‘conﬁdence’ in the information provided by an interviewer?
Let τ be a linearly ordered set τ = {μ1, . . . , μ4} that is also a complete lattice (where
μ1(=⊥) ≤. . . ≤μ4(= ⊤)). Suppose that two interviewers28 give as inputs P : μ2 and
P : μ3, and suppose that P stands for ‘John is old’. Then, according to the example we
are discussing, P : μ2 means ‘John is not so young’, while P : μ3 says that ‘John is not so
old’. More precisely, the ﬁrst interviewer has classiﬁed John as having an age between 25
and 35 years, while the second interviewer admitted that he is between 35 and 45 years
old.
To attach a certain value to John’s taxes, an expert system may follow a rule such as
this: Let C1, . . . ,C4 be the classes of ages in the example above. In case of doubt as to
whether someone belongs to a class Ci or Ci+1, classify him/her as belonging to the class
Ci. So, in the case above, John would be considered as ‘not so young’, and then his due
taxes would be supposed to be smaller than if he were classiﬁed as being ‘not so old’.
The choice of P : μ2 can be interpreted as resulting from the application of the warning
rule. After all, we assigned the greater degree of conﬁdence to the vaguer proposition. In
other words, recalling the convention made when we stated the warning rule, if we write
P : μ2 : λ2 for C(P : μ2) = λ2 and P : μ3 : λ3 for C(P : μ3) = λ3, then we can say
27Of course, the situation could be precisely the opposite.
28This number can be generalized, of course.

892
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
that from the ‘premisses’ P : μ2 and P : μ3, we arrived at the ‘conclusion’ P : μ2, which
has greater degree of conﬁdence. This can be expressed by saying that the ‘conclusion’ is
P : μ2 ⊓μ3 : λ2 ⊔λ3. (Note that τ is a linear lattice in which μ2 ⊓μ3 = μ2.)
Roughly speaking, the warning rule insists that an expert system, elaborated to accom-
modate vagueness and equipped with degrees of conﬁdence, when faced with situations
such as the one considered, should opt for the more prudent option. This is a perfectly
rational move. After all, as noted above, rationality involves the attempt to optimize our
rational degrees of conﬁdence in the propositions under study, but with the caution of
not taking conclusions with degrees of conﬁdence smaller than those attributed to the
premises.
7.3
Foundations of physics
Logic and physics
During the International Congress of Mathematicians, held in Paris in 1900, David Hilbert
presented a list of 23 Problems of Mathematics that, in his view, should occupy the eﬀorts
of mathematicians in the following century. To solve one of these problems was to achieve
something extraordinary in mathematics, and several Fields medals were awarded for this
kind of eﬀort. The sixth problem of Hilbert’s celebrated list dealt with the axiomatization
of physical theories. Hilbert proposed ‘to treat in the same manner [as Hilbert himself had
done with geometry], by means of axioms, those physical sciences in which mathematics
plays an important part’ ([Hilbert, 1902]).
In the 20th century, much was done in this direction, continuing the eﬀorts already de-
veloped in the previous century. There have also been a parallel development of logic in
the 20th century, and the development of nonclassical systems, linked to some philosoph-
ical views about science and the presentation of scientiﬁc theories, such as that one of
the logical empiricists, with emphasis in logic and language. These developments forced
philosophers to acknowledge that underlying the axiomatic version of a scientiﬁc theory,
there are also logical postulates (often of a higher-order logic kind), which provide the
grounds for the theory’s deductive and mathematical counterparts. Roughly speaking, we
can think as ‘logical’ those postulates of ﬁrst-order logic (with identity), while the ‘math-
ematical’ postulates can be those of a set theory, such as Zermelo-Fraenkel. (Of course,
alternative approaches can also be developed, but we will not discuss this point here.) In
this framework, logic plays an important role, and if there are reasons to suspect that some
logical system, other than classical logic, should be used to axiomatize a certain domain,
its details must be made explicit.
For example, discussions about the relationship between logic and quantum physics
tend to relate the subjects with so-called ‘quantum logics’. This is a ﬁeld that has its
‘oﬃcial’ birth in Birkhoﬀand von Neumann’s well-known paper from 1936. This is
completely justiﬁed, for this fundamental work led to the development of a new ﬁeld of
research in logic. Today, there are various ‘quantum logical systems’, including some
paraconsistent quantum logics (see [Dalla Chiara and Giuntini, 1989], [Dalla Chiara and
Giuntini, 2000], and [Dalla Chiara and Giuntini, 2001]). However, these systems have

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
893
been studied especially as pure mathematical systems, far from applications to the axiom-
atization of the microphysical world and from the insights of the forerunners of quantum
mechanics.
Of course, the axiomatization of a given empirical theory is not always completely
determinate, and the need for a logic distinct from the classical as the underlying logic
of quantum theory is still an open question. The axiomatic basis of a scientiﬁc theory
depends on several aspects of the theory, some more explicit than others, that are needed to
take into account the theory’s structure. For instance, Ludwig studies an axiomatization of
quantum mechanics based on classical logic (see [Ludwig, 1990]). All such approaches,
from those that use a paraconsistent logic, or some other kind of logic, to those of Ludwig,
are in principle acceptable. After all, they provide diﬀerent perspectives to the same
domain of discourse, and such diﬀerent ‘perspectives’ of a domain of science may demand
distinct logical apparatuses. This is a philosophical stance radically diﬀerent from the
classical, and it is against the idea that there is only one logic — classical logic.
As we noted in the Introduction, the possibility of using nonstandard logical systems
in the foundations of physics — and, more generally, in the foundations of science —
does not entail that classical logic is wrong, or that quantum theory, in particular, needs
another logic. Physicists are likely to continue to use classical, informal logic in the near
future. But we should realize that other forms of logic may help us to understand better
certain aspects of the quantum world that may not be so easily treated by classical means.
(An interesting example is the concept of complementarity, which can be studied very
naturally in a nonclassical context.) Of course, only in the future it will be decided (if at
all) whether the use of nonclassical systems in science should (or should not) be preferred
to the development of theories in a ‘classical’ framework. Clearly, any such decision will
involve signiﬁcant pragmatic factors.
To summarize our proposal, we do not believe that there is only one ‘true logic’, and
we think that distinct logical systems systems, such as those provided by paraconsistent
logic, are useful to approach diﬀerent aspects of such wide domains of knowledge, such
as quantum theory. The important point is scientists should be open to the justiﬁable
revision of concepts (including logical ones). This point was very lucidly emphasized by
Niels Bohr, who wrote:
For describing our mental activity, we require, on the one hand, an objec-
tively given content to be placed in opposition to a perceiving subject, while,
on the other hand, as is already implied by this assertion, no sharp separation
between object and subject can be maintained, since the perceiving subject
also belongs to our mental content. From these considerations, it follows
not only the relative meaning of every concept, or rather of every word (the
meaning depending upon our arbitrary choice of viewpoint), but also that we
must, in general, be prepared to accept the fact that a complete elucidation
of one and the same object may require diverse points of view that defy a
unique description. Indeed, strictly speaking, the conscious analysis of any
concept stands in a relation of exclusion with its immediate application. The
necessity of invoking a complementarity, or reciprocal, mode of description
is perhaps most familiar to us from psychological problems. In opposition to

894
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
this, the feature that characterizes the so-called exact sciences is, in general,
the attempt to obtain uniqueness by avoiding all reference to the perceiving
subject. This eﬀort is found most consciously, perhaps, in the mathemati-
cal symbolism that presents for our contemplation an ideal of objectivity for
whose achievement scarcely any limits are set, as long as we remain within
a self-contained ﬁeld of applied logic. In natural sciences, however, there
can be no question of a strictly self-contained ﬁeld of application of the logi-
cal principles, since we must continually expect the appearance of new facts,
the inclusion of which within the boundaries of our earlier experience may
require a revision of our fundamental concepts. (ibid.)
A case involving paraconsistency
In this section, we will discuss, as an illustration, how paraconsistent logic can be used
to approach what we call ‘complementarity theories’. These theories are based on Bohr’s
view on complementarity, a concept he introduced in his famous ‘Como Lecture’, in
1927, although the basic ideas go back to 1925. The consequences of his views were fun-
damental, particularly to the development of the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum
mechanics, and they constitute, as is largely recognized in the literature, as one of the
most signiﬁcant contributions to the development of quantum theory. However, we are
not making an exegesis of Bohr’s ideas, for, as is well known, they are quite controver-
sial.29 Rather, we will use a particular understanding of the notion of complementarity
to provide the basis for deﬁning a general class of theories (C-theories). As will become
clear, the logic of such theories is a particular paraconsistent logic, called paraclassic.
Roughly speaking, we say that a theory T admits a complementarity interpretation,
or that T is a C-theory, if T encompasses ‘true’ formulas α and β that are ‘mutually
exclusive’, in the sense that their conjunction yields a contradiction if classical logic is
applied. More precisely, let ⊢be the symbol of deduction of classical logic. We say that
T is a C-theory if there exists γ such that if α and β are complementary, we have (in T)
α, β ⊢γ ∧¬γ. Of course, if the underlying logic of T is classical logic, since T involves
complementary propositions, T is contradictory, or inconsistent.
Let us call C an axiomatized system for the classical propositional calculus (the devel-
opments presented here can be extended to quantiﬁcation). The concept of deduction in
C is the standard one. We use the symbol ⊢to represent deductions in C. Furthermore,
the formulas of C are denoted by Greek lowercase letters, while Greek uppercase letters
stand for sets of formulas. The symbols ¬, →, ∧, ∨and ↔have their usual meanings, and
standard conventions in writing formulas will be also assumed without further comments.
DEFINITION 247. Let Γ be a set of formulas of C, and let α be a formula (of the lan-
guage of C). Then we say that α is a (syntactic) P-consequence of Γ, and write Γ ⊢P α, if
and only if
29For references and further discussion of this particular point, see [Beller, 1992] and [da Costa and Krause,
2004].

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
895
(P1) α ∈Γ, or
(P2) α is a classical tautology, or
(P3) there exists a consistent (according to classical logic) subset Δ ⊆Γ such that Δ ⊢α
(in classical logic).
We call ⊢P the relation of P-consequence.
DEFINITION 248. P is the logic whose language is that of C and whose relation of
consequence is that of P-consequence. This logic will be called paraclassic.
It is immediate that, among others, the following results can be proved:
THEOREM 249.
1. If α is a theorem of the classical propositional calculus C and if Γ is a set of
formulas, then Γ ⊢P α; in particular, ⊢P α.
2. If Γ is consistent (according to C), then Γ ⊢α (in C) iﬀΓ ⊢P α (in P).
3. If Γ ⊢P α and if Γ ⊆Δ, then Δ ⊢P α. (The notion of P-consequence is monotonic.)
4. The notion of P-consequence is recursive.
5. Since the theses of P (that is, valid formulas of P) are those of C, P is decidable.
DEFINITION 250. A set of formulas Γ is P-trivial iﬀΓ ⊢P α, for every formula α.
Otherwise, Γ is P-nontrivial. (Similarly, we deﬁne the concept of a set of formulas being
trivial in C.)
DEFINITION 251. A set of formulas Γ is P-inconsistent if there exists a formula α such
that Γ ⊢P α and Γ ⊢P ¬α. Otherwise, Γ is P-consistent.
THEOREM 252.
1. If α is an atomic formula, then Γ = {α, ¬α} is P-inconsistent, but P-nontrivial.
2. If the set of formulas Γ is P-trivial, then it is trivial (according to classical logic).
If Γ is nontrivial, then it is P-nontrivial.
3. If Γ is P-inconsistent, then it is inconsistent according to classical logic. If Γ is
consistent according to classical logic, then Γ is P-consistent.
A semantic analysis of P, for instance a completeness theorem, can be obtained without
diﬃculty, as indicated in [da Costa and Vernengo, 1999]. Note that the set {α ∧¬α},
where α is a propositional variable, is trivial according to classical logic, but it is not
P-trivial. However, we are not suggesting that complementary propositions should be
understood necessarily as pairs of contradictory sentences. This is made clear by the
following deﬁnition:

896
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
DEFINITION 253 (Complementarity Theories or Cmp-theories). A C-theory is a set of
formulas T of the language of C (the classical propositional calculus) closed by the rela-
tion of P-consequence, that is, α ∈T, for any α such that T ⊢P α. In other words, T is
a theory whose underlying logic is P. A Cmp-theory is a C-theory that satisﬁes additional
meaning postulates (that are introduced in the particular context in which the theory is
used).
Of course, the deﬁnition of a Cmp-theory is vague. But, in each context of use, what a
Cmp-theory amounts to is clear. Moreover, note also that if a meaning postulate introduces
restrictions in the acceptable statements of the theory, the hypotheses and axioms used in
deductions must satisfy such restrictions as well. For instance, if a meaning postulate of
a theory T is formulated as Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, this will impose obvious
restrictions to certain statements of T.
THEOREM 254. There exist C-theories and Cmp-theories that are inconsistent, although
they are P-nontrivial.
Proof. Immediate consequence of Theorem 196.
■
Finally, we state a result (Theorem 256), whose proof is an immediate consequence of
the deﬁnition of P-consequence. However, before stating the theorem, let us introduce a
deﬁnition:
DEFINITION 255 (Complementary Propositions). Let T be a Cmp-theory (in particular,
a C-theory), and let α and β be formulas of the language of T. We say that α and β are
T-complementary (or simply complementary) if there exists a formula γ of the language
of T such that:
1. T ⊢P α
and
T ⊢P β
2. T, α ⊢P γ
and T, β ⊢P ¬γ (in particular, α ⊢P γ and β ⊢P ¬γ).
THEOREM 256. If α and β are complementary theorems of a Cmp-theory T, and α ⊢P γ
and β ⊢P ¬γ, then in general γ ∧¬γ is not a theorem of T.
Proof. Immediate, as a consequence of Theorem 196.
■
In other words, T is inconsistent from the point of view of classical logic, but it is
P-nontrivial.
It should be emphasized, once again, that our way of characterizing complementarity
does not mean that complementary propositions are always contradictory, for α and β
above are not necessarily the negation of each other. However, since they are comple-
mentary propositions, we can derive from them (in classical logic) a contradiction. For
example, ‘x is a particle’ is not the direct negation of ‘x is a wave’, but ‘x is a particle’
entails that ‘x is not a wave’. This reading of complementarity as not indicating strict
contradiction is in accordance with Bohr’s view. As he notes (see [da Costa and Krause,
2004]):

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
897
When we consider the well-known paradoxes that are encountered in the ap-
plication of quantum theory to atomic structure, it is essential to remember, in
this connection, that the properties of atoms are always obtained by observ-
ing their reactions under collisions or under the inﬂuence of radiation, and
that the (. . .) limitation on the possibilities of measurement is directly related
to the apparent contradictions that have been revealed in the discussion of the
nature of light and of material particles. To emphasize that we are not con-
cerned here with real contradictions, the author [Bohr himself] introduced in
an earlier article the term ‘complementarity’. [The italics is ours.]
Let us give a simple example of a situation involving a Cmp-theory. Suppose that
our theory T is a fragment of quantum mechanics admitting Heisenberg’s relations as a
meaning postulate, and having as its underlying logic paraclassic logic. If α and β are
two incompatible propositions according to Heisenberg’s principle, we can interpret this
principle as implying that α entails ¬β (or that β entails ¬α). So, even if we add α and β
to T, we will be unable to derive, in T, α ∧β. Analogously, Pauli’s exclusion principle
has a similar interpretation to Heisenberg’s.
As we have already noted, the basic feature of Cmp-theories is that, to make P-inferences,
we suppose that some sets of statements we handle are consistent. In other words, Cmp-
theories are closer to those theories scientists actually use in their everyday activity than
those theories with the classical concept of deduction. That is, paraclassic logic — and
paraconsistent logics in general — seem to ﬁt more accurately the way scientists reason
when they state and articulate their theories.
Generalization: the paralogic associated with a given logic
The technique used above to deﬁne the paraclassic logic associated with classical logic
can be generalized to other logics L. (This includes logics that have no negation symbol;
but we will not discuss this case here.) The same point also applies to the concept of a
Cmp-theory. More precisely, let L be a logic. It can be seen as a pair L = ⟨F , ⊢⟩, where
F is a set of formulas of L, and ⊢⊆P(F ) × F is the deduction relation of L (satisfying
certain postulates depending on the particular logic L). We deﬁne the PL-logic associated
with L (the ‘paralogic’ associated with L) as follows:
Let L be a logic, which may be classical logic, intuitionistic logic, some paraconsistent
logic or, in principle, any other logic. For simplicity, we suppose that the language of L
has a symbol for negation, ¬. Then:
DEFINITION 257. A theory based on L (an L-theory) is a set of formulas Γ of the
language of L closed under ⊢L (the symbol of deduction in L). In other words, α ∈Γ, for
every formula α such that Γ ⊢L α.
DEFINITION 258. An L-theory Γ is L-inconsistent if there exists a formula α of the
language of L such that Γ ⊢L α and Γ ⊢L ¬α, where ¬α is the negation of α. Otherwise,
Γ is L-consistent.
DEFINITION 259. An L-theory Γ is L-trivial if Γ ⊢L α, for every formula α of the
language of L. Otherwise, Γ is L-nontrivial.

898
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
We can now deﬁne the PL-logic associated with L, whose language and syntactic con-
cepts are those of L. The only exception is the concept of deduction, which is introduced
as follows: We say that α is a PL-syntactic consequence of a set of formulas Γ, and write
Γ ⊢PL α, if and only if:
(1) α ∈Γ, or
(2) α is a provable formula of L (that is, ⊢L α), or
(3) there exists Δ ⊆Γ such that Δ is L-nontrivial, and Δ ⊢L α.
As an example, we can consider the paraconsistent calculus C1 as our logic L. Then
the paralogic associated with C1 is a kind of ‘para-paraconsistent’ logic.
As a ﬁnal remark, note that, sometimes, given a paraclassic theory T such that T ⊢P α
and T ⊢P ¬α, there exist appropriate propositions β and γ such that T can be replaced by a
classical consistent theory T ′ in which β →α and γ →¬α are theorems. If this happens,
the logical diﬃculty can be, in principle, solved, and classical logic can be maintained.
7.4
Morality and Law
In its standard form, deontic logic can be taken as a kind of classical modal logic with
the introduction of deontic operators: O for obligatory, P for permitted, V for prohibited,
and F for indiﬀerent. One of the interesting problems about deontic logic is that standard
systems do not enable the existence of ‘true’ moral dilemmas. The latter are expressed by
formulas of the form Oα∧O¬α, stating that both α and its negation are obligatory. This is
due to the fact that, in standard deontic systems, Oα ∧O¬α →Oβ is a theorem. Hence, a
moral dilemma trivializes the whole system, in the sense that all formulas become oblig-
atory. Other problems about standard deontic logics are created by Ross’ paradox and the
Good Samaritan paradox (see [Puga and da Costa, 1992]).
A standard solution to the problem about the nonexistence of moral dilemmas is simply
to maintain that such dilemmas really cannot exist. However, for some philosophers,
they are genuine possibilities (see [da Costa and Carnielli, 1986] for references). To
accommodate this view, it is crucial to make room for moral dilemmas, but obviously
without deontic triviality. Paraconsistent logics are excellent candidates for doing this.
The obligatory operator — as well as the other mentioned above – have various inter-
pretations, the most common are in terms of moral obligations (and moral prohibitions
etc.) and legal obligations (legal prohibitions etc.). If we write Ol and Om for the legal and
the moral obligations, respectively (the same notation applies to the other operators), it is
important to study the principles Olα →Pmα and Omα →Plα, which seem to be quite
‘natural’. To study these (and related) principles, some deontic paraconsistent logics have
been introduced (see [Puga and da Costa, 1987]).
7.5
Philosophical signiﬁcance of paraconsistent logic
After discussing the formal details of several paraconsistent systems, we can now examine
some philosophical issues raised by the various constructions above as well as by para-

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
899
consistency more generally. Several issues need to be addressed. In particular, the issues
of whether there is a true paraconsistent logic, and how to choose between such logics
should be examined. In our view, the choice between such logics is ultimately a prag-
matic and context-dependent matter, largely dependent on the details of the applications
at hand. We will develop these points below.
The constructions we have just presented make clear that, at least at the level of math-
ematics, there are inconsistent but nontrivial theories. In other words, there are theories T
in which both a formula α and its negation ¬α are theorems of T, and some formula β of T
is not a theorem. In our view, this fact provides an important support for paraconsistency,
since it shows that the attempt at accommodating inconsistencies by devising appropriate
inconsistent but nontrivial theories is by no means empty or unrealizable. On the contrary,
it provides a distinctive perspective on the issues under consideration. Instead of retaining
classical logic, and avoiding the inconsistency by rejecting one or another of the premises
which generate it — making more or less ad hoc moves — we retain the inconsistency,
change the underlying logic to a paraconsistent one, and study the properties of the ‘in-
consistent object’ so ‘generated’. The important feature, as the paraconsistent set theory
discussed above shows, is that these ‘inconsistent objects’ have certain determined prop-
erties and lack others: it is simply not the case that everything goes with regard to them.
So, as opposed to what happens in the case of classical logic, there is a whole new domain
of investigation determined by the formulation of paraconsistent logic: the domain of the
inconsistent.
Now, the issue arises as to the status of the resulting inconsistent set theory: is it true?
Well, can we say that there are true contradictions? The answer depends on several con-
siderations. (1) What is the notion of truth used in this context? (2) What kinds of objects
are we considering (only mathematical objects or do we include physical objects as well)?
(3) What notion of existence is assumed? And how are ontological commitments to be
spelled out? Of course, the examination of these issues involves particular philosophical
moves, and we cannot do more here than consider them in fairly general terms. But we
hope to say enough to make clear the approach we favor.
According to some authors, the answer to the question Are there true contradictions? is
aﬃrmative (see [Priest, 1987]). The examples given by Priest are the logical and semantic
paradoxes, statements about moving objects (objects subject to change), and certain views
in the foundations of mathematics. In order to articulate an ‘ontic’ or ‘realist’ view about
true contradictions, Priest advocates (i) a strong notion of truth – truth simpliciter under-
stood in the correspondence sense – (ii) a classical view about existence (as the range
of bound variables), and (iii) an extended claim as to the domain of his theory — which
incorporates both mathematical and physical objects. (Of course, in order to avoid trivi-
ality, Priest adopts a paraconsistent logic: see his system LP discussed in [Priest, 1987].)
So, Priest’s approach countenances classical views about truth and existence, and applies
them to a wide-ranging domain. In our view, Priest’s commitment to several doctrines is
by no means fortuitous: in order to be adequately accommodated, inconsistencies require
a whole package of logical and philosophical doctrines — indeed, a whole research pro-
gram is involved. Of course, there are stronger and weaker programs; some are closer to
classical proposals, some farther away.

900
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
It seems to us that, in retaining classical notions of truth and existence, Priest’s proposal
ends up committed to strong metaphysical views. Given the use of truth in the correspon-
dence sense, and the claim that our assertions about the world (be it the ‘empirical’ or the
‘mathematical’ world) are to be true, Priest’s view is ipso facto committed to all objects
that are posited by these claims. In particular, his proposal seems to be committed to
‘inconsistent objects’ in the physical world: the objects to which our inconsistent but true
physical theories refer. But how can their existence be established?
The argument to this eﬀect assumes, of course, the classical account of ontological
commitment: we are ontologically committed to whatever our bound variables range over.
And in the case of inconsistent theories, this criterion leads us to postulate objects that
both have and lack a given property (for instance, the liar sentence is both true and false,
Russell set is both a member of itself and it isn’t etc.). And the same goes for theories
about the physical world.
In our view, this argument is not so conclusive. First, this criterion of ontological com-
mitment is not independent of particular philosophical assumptions. It comes as part of
a philosophical program — indeed, Quine’s view — and it has built into it, as it were,
a given logic: classical ﬁrst-order logic. It goes without saying that, as such, it is at
odds with Priest’s own dialetheic approach, in which a paraconsistent logic is advocated.
Moreover, Quine’s criterion is not independent of logic: if we change the underlying logic
of a given theory, we may change the entities we are quantifying over as well. This can
be seen in several ways. For example, consider that we move to second-order logic. We
are then allowed to quantify over properties and relations. As the result of second-order
logic’s strong expressive power, several mathematical theories can be better formulated
in this setting (in particular, as is well known, arithmetic and analysis are categorical in
a second-order context). Because of this, several nominalist proposals (such as those de-
veloped in [Field, 1980] and [Hellman, 1989]) have adopted second-order logic as part of
their nominalization strategies of science and mathematics. The idea is that, by increas-
ing the strength of the logic, we can decrease our ontological commitments. Secondly,
using paraconsistent logic, we are allowed to quantify over certain constructions (such
as Russell set) that are impossible in classical logic, given the latter’s identiﬁcation of
inconsistency and triviality.
Our point here is that Quine’s slogan — to be is to be the value of a variable — can
only have any force once a particular logic is admitted. Quine knows that, of course. The
problem is that his view assumes a logic (classical ﬁst-order logic) that is not the most
adequate to deal with inconsistencies in a heuristically fruitful way.
We suggest a diﬀerent way of addressing the inconsistency issue. We may well explore
the rich representational devices allowed by the use of paraconsistency in inconsistent do-
mains, but withholding any claim to the eﬀect that there are ‘inconsistent objects’ in real-
ity. Whether the world is indeed ‘inconsistent’ — assuming there is a sensible formulation
of this claim — is something we would rather be agnostic about. Just as empiricists (such
as van Fraassen [van Fraassen, 1980]) are agnostic about the existence of unobservable
entities in science, we are agnostic about the existence of true contradictions in nature.
And one of the reasons in support of this claim is an underdetermination argument. Given
the hierarchy of paraconsistent C-logics discussed above, there are always inﬁnitely many

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
901
paraconsistent logics that can be used to accommodate a given ‘phenomenon’ — whether
it is an ‘inconsistent’ reasoning or an ‘inconsistent’ theory (see [da Costa et al., 1998c]).
Which of these paraconsistent logics reﬂects the logic of the world? There is no argument
based on purely observational terms that could settle the issue. We can select, of course,
one of these logics on pragmatic grounds, but these grounds are certainly not enough to
establish a substantive claim about the world. For instance, if one of these logics makes
the modeling of the inconsistency in question easier, why should this be taken as a reason
for this logic to be true? Simplicity may well be a sensible criterion to adopt on pragmatic
grounds, but the claim that a logic selected on this basis is (likely to be) true, is to confuse
pragmatic and epistemic considerations. Why should the world conform to our cognitive
limitations? Of course, it might well do. But to establish this claim demands an argument
that goes beyond what we observe: it requires a metaphysical commitment to the simplic-
ity of reality. And, to a certain extent, this is as ‘strong’ as the claim that there are true
contradictions. After all, both make substantial assertions about the world that transcend
empirical observation. Both are metaphysical claims.
In our view, an alternative program of interpretation of inconsistencies can be devised
in which no commitment to this kind of metaphysics is required. The idea is ﬁrst to
avoid the claim that inconsistent theories are true; they are partially true (or quasi-true)
at best. As discussed above, the notion of partial truth receives a formal treatment. But
for our needs, it suﬃces to recall that a sentence α is partially true if it models adequately
only part of a given domain D, leaving open the ‘complete’ description of the latter. (Of
course, in a precise sense, α is consistent with a true description of D.) In claiming that
with regard to inconsistent theories all we need is to determine their partial truth, we
are in position to provide a ‘formal underpinning’ to our agnosticism with regard to true
contradictions. We are suggesting a change in the notion of truth to the weaker notion of
partial truth, withholding then the commitment to ‘inconsistent objects’. After all, several
(A-normal) structures describe the domain under consideration, and inconsistent objects
are not countenanced in all of them.30 Moreover, we also suggest a revision of Quine’s
slogan about ontological commitment, making explicit its dependence on the underlying
logic. In this way, it becomes clear that this slogan is not the only criterion to adjudicate
between alternative logics.
However, if we end up not being committed to an ontology of actual inconsistent phys-
ical objects, are we committed to inconsistent mathematical entities? This depends, of
course, on how we interpret the relevant mathematical theory. Does it provide a true
description of the inconsistent mathematical ‘world’? Again, if all we claim is to have
described this ‘world’ in at best partially true terms, we will not be committed to those
entities. There is, of course, a whole story to be told here, but for the present purposes, it
suﬃces to note that it is possible to provide an entirely syntactic formulation of paracon-
sistent set theory, in which various inconsistent theories can be embedded, such that the
30Descartes once remarked (in his Principles, iv, 204) that, ‘with regard to those things that our senses cannot
perceive, it suﬃces to explicate how they can be’. We would say the same with regard to inconsistent theories.
The notion of partial truth allows us to accommodate formally this point, since partial truth is strictly weaker
than truth, and does not commit us to anything beyond the assertion that certain structures are possible, given
some paraconsistent logic.

902
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
only commitment is to a countable language. Thus, in a certain sense, we do not require
a special commitment to mathematical objects either.
So, the ‘package’ we suggest to accommodate inconsistencies is characterized by (1)
the claim that inconsistent theories are partially true at best; (2) an agnosticism with
regard to the existence of true contradictions and a nominalism about inconsistent math-
ematical entities; and (3) a re-evaluation of Quine’s view about ontological commitment,
emphasizing its dependence on the underlying logic.
In our view, the striking feature of this ‘package’ is its logical pluralism, on the one
hand, and the fact that it allows us to make sense of the several uses and applications
of paraconsistent logic with no commitment to actual ‘inconsistent objects’. The logical
pluralism derives from claim (3) above. Depending on the domain we are considering,
diﬀerent kinds of logic may be appropriate. For instance, if we want to model constructive
features in mathematical reasoning, an intuitionistic logic is the best alternative; if we are
concerned with inconsistent bits of information, the use of a paraconsistent logic is the
natural option. In particular, we do not reject classical logic: it has its own domains and
applications. To this extent, while dealing with distinct domains, paraconsistent logic
and classical logic are complementary rather than rivals. (They become rivals only when
applied to the same domain. The rivalry derives from the fact that they provide diﬀerent
accounts of the logical connectives.)
But in applying paraconsistent logic, as we have done when formulating the theory
of the Russell set and other inconsistent objects, we do not have to be committed to the
existence of ‘inconsistent entities’ — this is the point of our claims (1) and (2) above. We
can always use the resources provided by this logic only to help us draw consequences
from inconsistent theories without triviality, but with no commitment to the truth of the
theory in question; it can be at best partially true.
In this way, a noncommittal (agnostic) interpretation of paraconsistency can be pre-
sented, making sense of the application of paraconsistent logic articulated here. ‘Incon-
sistent objects’, either mathematical or physical, can be accommodated without requiring
an ontology which includes them. In particular, inconsistent mathematical theories can be
studied in the context of paraconsistent logic, but it is not necessary to countenance the
existence of the entities the theories are taken to be about.
8
CONCLUDING REMARKS
We noted above that it is nearly impossible for anyone to follow all the literature on para-
consistent logics. We have left untouched numerous important topics here. Nowadays,
‘paraconsistency’ has become a ﬁeld of knowledge so wide that only events such as World
Congresses on Paraconsistency can begin to do justice to it.
As a curiosity, a search for ‘paraconsistent logic’ on Google (www.google.com) on
October 13, 2005 yielded 61,600 entries! We should stop now.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
903
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank W. Carnielli, J. M. Abe, M. Barreto, A. Costa Leite and J. -Y.
B´eziau, M. Guillaume, Q. Zhang, J. Marcos and I. D’Ottaviano for sending us updated
information on their works on paraconsistency. We have not been able to incorporate all
of their helpful comments and suggestions in this work. But we hope to do that in our
forthcoming book.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Abar, 1985] C. A. A. P. Abar. Descri¸c˜ao e Paraconsistˆencia, Doctor Thesis, Ponthiﬁcal Catholic University
of S˜ao Paulo, S. Paulo, 1985.
[Abe, 1992] J. M. Abe. Fundamentos da L´ogica Anotada, Thesis, University of S˜ao Paulo, 1992.
[Abe and da Silva Filho, 1998] J. M. Abe and J. I. da Silva Filho. Inconsistency and electronic circuits, Pro-
ceedings of The International ICSC Symposium on Engineering of Intelligent Systems (EIS’98), Volume 3,
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Editor: E. Alpaydin, ICSC Academic Press International Computer Science Conven-
tions Canada/Switzerland, 1998, pp. 191-197.
[Abe and da Silva Filho, 2003] J. M. Abe and J. I. da Silva Filho. ’Manipulating Conﬂicts and Uncertainties in
Robotics’, Multiple-Valued Logic and Soft Computing, V.9, pp. 147-169, 2003.
[Akama, 2002] S. Akama. Nelson’s paraconsistent logics, Logic and Logical Philosophy, 1999 (published in
2002).
[Akama and Abe, 2001] S. Akama and J. M. Abe. The role of inconsistency in information systems, Proc. of
the 5th World Multiconference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (SCI’2001), pp. 355-360, Orlando,
USA, 2001.
[ ´Avila, 1996] B. C. ´Avila. Uma Abordagem Paraconsistente Baseada em L´ogica Evidencial para Tratar
Exce¸c˜oes em Sistemas de Frames com M´ultipla Heran¸ca, Thesis, University of S˜ao Paulo, 1996.
[ ´Avila and Abe, 1997] B. C. ´Avila, J. M. Abe and J. P. A. Prado. Reasoning in paraconsistent frame systems,
The Second International Workshop on CSCW in Design, P. Siriruchatapong Z. Lin & J. P. Barthes (Eds),
International Academic Publishers, Bangkok, Thailand, pp. 239-244, 1997.
[Alves, 1976] E. H. Alves. L´ogica e Inconsistˆencia: um estudo dos c´alculos Cn 1 ≤n ≤ω, Master Disserta-
tion, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, 1976.
[Alves, 1984] E. H. Alves. Paraconsistent logic and model theory, Studia Logica 43(1/2), 1984, pp. 17-32.
[Alves and Moura, 1978] E. H. Alves and J. E. Moura. On some higher order paraconsistent calculi, in A. I.
Arruda, N. C. A. da Costa and R. Chuaqui (eds.), Mathematical Logic: Proceedings of the First Brazilian
Conferece, Marcel Dekker, 1978, pp. 1-8.
[Anderson and Belnap, 1975] A. R. Anderson and N. D. Belnap, Jr. Entailment, the Logic of Relavance and
Necessity, Princeton Un. Press, 1976.
[Arruda, 1964] A. I. Arruda. Considera¸c˜oes sobre os sistemas formais NF n, Thesis, Universidade Federal do
Paran´a, 1964.
[Arruda, 1977] A. I. Arruda. On the imaginary logic of N. A. Vasil’´ev, in Arruda, A. I., da Costa, N. C. A. and
Chuaqui, R. (eds.), Non-Classical Logics, Model Theory and Computability, North Holland, 1977, pp. 3-22.
[Arruda, 1980] A. I. Arruda. A survey of paraconsistent logic, in Arruda, A. I., Chuaqui, R. and da Costa, N.
C. A. (eds.), Mathematical Logic in Latin America, North-Holland, 1980, pp. 3-41.
[Arruda, 1989] A. I. Arruda. Aspects of the historical development of paraconsistent logic, in Priest, G., Rout-
ley, R. and Norman, J., (eds.), Paraconsistent Logic, Philosophia Verlag, 1989, pp. 99-130.
[Arruda, 1990] A¿ I. Arruda. N. A. Vasiliev e a L´ogica Paraconsistente, Centro de L´ogica, Epistemologia e
Hist´oria da Ciˆencia, State Univesity of Campinas, Col. CLE v. 7, 1990.
[Arruda and da Costa, 1966] A. I. Arruda and N. C. A. da Costa. O paradoxo de Curry-Moh Shaw-Kwei, Bo-
letim da Sociedade de Matem´atica de S˜ao Paulo 18, 1966, pp. 83-89.
[Arruda and da Costa, 1970] A. I. Arruda and N. C. A. da Costa. Sur le sch´ema de la s´eparation, Nagoya Math.
Journal 38, 1970, pp. 71-84.
[Arruda and da Costa, 1977] A. I. Arruda and N. C. A. da Costa. Une s´emantique pour le calcul C1. C. R. Acad.
Sc. Paris 284 (A), 1977, 279-282.
[Arruda and da Costa, 1984] A. I. Arruda and N. C. A. da Costa. On the relevant systems P and P⋆and some
related systems, Studia Logica 43, 1984, pp. 33-49.

904
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
[Asenjo, 1966] F. G. Asenjo. A calculus of antinomies, Notre Dame J. of Formal Logic XVI, 1966., pp. 103-
105.
[Barreto, 2002] M. M. G. Barreto. Handling Paraconsistent Information with Possibilistic Logic, Cole¸c˜ao Doc-
umentos, S´erie L´ogica e Teoria da Ciˆencia, Instituto de Estudos Avanc¸ados, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo,
2002.
[Barreto, 2004] M. M. G. Barreto. Handling Paraconsistent Knowledge with Possibilistic Resolution. To ap-
pear in Cole¸c˜ao Documentos, S´erie L´ogica e Teoria da Ciˆencia, Instituto de Estudos Avanc¸ados, Universi-
dade de S˜ao Paulo, 2004.
[Barreto and Ebecken, 1998] M. M. G. Barreto and N. F. F. Ebecken. An Intelligent System for Helping
Petroleum Industry Risk Management Decision Making, Proceedings of the Rio Oil & Gas Expo and Con-
ference, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 1998.
[Barreto and Ebecken, 2001] M. M. G. Barreto and N. F. F. Ebecken. Using Paraconsistent and Fuzzy Logics
to Build up Inconsistent KBS, Proceedings of the 5th World Multi Conference on Systems, Cybernetics and
Informatics (SCI2001) and the 7th International Conference on Information Systems, Analysis and Synthesis
(ISAS2001), Orlando, USA, 2001.
[Barreto and Ebecken, 2002] M. M. G. Barreto, N. F. F. Ebecken and N. C. A. da Costa. The Defuzziﬁcation
Process of a Paraconsistent Model, Coleo Documentos, S´erie L´ogica e Teoria da Ciˆencia, Instituto de Estudos
Avanc¸ados, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo, N´umero 42, 2002.
[Batens, 1980] D. Batens. Paraconsistent extensional propositional logics, Logique et Analyse 90-91, pp. 195-
234, 1980.
[Batens, 1999] D. Batens. Inconsistency-adaptive logics, in e. Orłowska (ed.), Logic at Work. Essays dedicated
to the memory of Elena Rasiowa, Springer-Verlag, pp. 445-472, 1999.
[Batens, 2000] D. Batens. Minimally abnormal models in some adaptive logics, Synthese 125, pp. 5-18, 2000.
[B´eziau, 1990] J.-Y. B´eziau. Logiques construites suivant les m´ethodes de da Costa, Logique et Analyse 131-
132, pp. 259-272, 1990.
[B´eziau, 1995a] J.-Y. B´eziau. Negation: what it is and what it is not, Boletim da Sociedade Paranaense de
Matem´atica 15 (1/2), pp. 37-43, 1995.
[B´eziau, 1995b] J.-Y. B´eziau. Universal logic, in Childers, T. and Majer, O. (eds.), Proceedings of the 8th
International Colloquium Logica’94, Praga, Philosophia, pp. 73-93, 1995.
[B´eziau, 1997] J.-Y. B´eziau. La logique paraconsistante, Appendix A of da Costa, N. C. A., Logiques Clas-
siques et Non Classiques, Paris, Masson, pp. 237-255, 1997.
[B´eziau, 2002a] J.-Y. B´eziau. Are paraconsistent negations negations? In Paraconsistency: the logical way to
the inconsistent, W. Carnielli et al. (eds), Marcel Dekker, New-York, pp. 465-486, 2002.
[B´eziau, 2002b] J.-Y. B´eziau. S5 is a paraconsistent logic and so is ﬁrst-order classical logic, Logical Investi-
gations 9, pp. 301-309, 2002.
[B´eziau, 2003] J.-Y. B´eziau. Talk given at Federal University of Santa Catarina, 2003.
[Blair and Subrahmanian, 1989a] H. A. Blair and V. S. Subrahmanian. Paraconsistent Logic Programming,
Theoretical Computer Science 68, pp. 135-154, 1989.
[Blair and Subrahmanian, 1988b] H. A. Blair, H. A. and Subrahmanian, V. S.,’Paraconsistent foundations of
logic programming’, J. Non Classical Logic 5, pp. 44-73, 1989.
[Blair and Subrahmanian, 1989c] H. A. Blair and V. S. Subrahmanian. Paraconsistent logic programming, in
Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Sci-
ence 287, 1987, pp. 340-360. Extended version in Theoretical Computer Science 68, 1989, pp. 135-154.
[Bell, 1988] J. L. Bell. Inﬁnitesimals’, Synthese 75, pp. 285-315, 1988.
[Bell, 1995] J. L. Bell. Inﬁnitesimals and the continuum’, Mathematical Intelligencer 17, pp. 55-57, 1995.
[Beller, 1992] M. Beller. The birth of Bohr’s complementarity: the context and the dialogues’, Stud. Hist. Phil.
Sci. 23 (1), 147-180, 1992.
[Bibel, 1982] W. Bibel. Automated Theorem Proving, Friedr. Vieweg & Sohn, Braunschweig, Wiesbaden,
1982.
[Bibel, 1993] W. Bibel. Deduction: automated logic, Academic Press, 1993.
[Bobenrieth, 1996] A. Bobenrieth Miserda. Inconsistencias, ?por que no?, Bogot´a, Cocultura, 1996.
[Borel, 1950] E. Borel. Le¸cons sur la th´eorie des functions, Gauthier-Villars, 1950.
[Bourbaki, 1968] N. Bourbaki. Theory of Sets, Paris and Reading, MA, Hermann and Addison-Wesley, 1968.
[Buchsbaum and Pequeno, 1993] A. Buchsbaum and T. Pequeno. A reasoning method for a paraconsistent
logic’, Studia Logica 52 (2), pp. 281-289, 1993.
[Buchsbaum et al., 2001] A. Buschbaum, T. Pequeno and M. Pequeno. A Positive Formalization for the Notion
of Pragmatic Truth, Proceedings of 2001 International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence - 25 a 28 de
junho de 2001 - Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 2001.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
905
[Buchsbaum et al., 2004] A. Buschbaum, T. Pequeno and M. Pequeno. The Logical Expression of Reasoning’.
In: New Trends in the Foundations of Science (Papers dedicated to the 80th birthday of Patrick Suppes
presented in Florian´opolis, Brazil, April 22-23, 2003), Collection Logic, Epistemology and the Unity of
Science, J. -Y. B´eziau and D. Krause (eds.), to appear.
[Bueno, 1997] O. Bueno. Empirical Adequacy: A Partial Structures Approach’, Studies in History and Philos-
ophy of Science 28, pp. 585-610, 1997.
[Bunder, 1980] M. Bunder. A new hierarchy of paraconsistent logics, in A. I. Arruda, N. C. A. da Costa and A.
M. Sette (eds.), Proceedings of the Third Brazilian Conference on Mathematical Logic, Sociedade Brasileira
de L´ogica, S˜ao Paulo, pp. 13-22, 1980.
[Bunder, 1983] M. Bunder. On Arruda and da Costa’s logics J1 to J5, J. Non-Classical Logic 2, pp. 43-48,
1983.
[Caiero and de Souza, 1997] R. da C. Caiero and E. G. de Souza. A new paraconsistent set theory: ML1,
Logique et Analyse 157, pp. 115-141, 1997.
[Carnielli, 2002] W. A. Carnielli, M. E. Coniglio and I. M. L. D’Ottaviano. Paraconsistency: the logical way to
the inconcistent, Proceedings of the Second World Congress on Paraconsistency, held in S˜ao Paulo, Marcel
Dekker, 2002.
[Carnielli, 1987] W. A. Carnielli. Systematization of ﬁnite many-valued logics through the method of
tableaux’, J. Symb. Logic 52 (2), pp. 473-493, 1987.
[Carnielli and Alcˆantara, 1984] W. A. Carnielli and L. P. Alcˆantara. Paraconsistent algebras, Studia Logica 43,
pp. 79-88, 1984.
[Carnielli and Marcos, 2002] W. A. Carnielli and J. Marcos. A Taxonomy of C-Systems, in Carnielli, W. A.,
Coniglio, M. E. and D’Ottaviano, I. M. L. eds., Paraconsistency - the Logical Way to the Inconsistent.
Lecture Notes in Pure and Applied Mathematics, Vol. 228, pp. 1-94. Marcel Dekker, New York, 2002.
[Carnielli et al., 2006] W. A. Carnielli, M. E. Coniglio and J. Marcos. Logics of Formal Inconsistency’. To
appear in the Handbook of Philosophical Logic, Kluwer Academic Publishers (eds. D. Gabbay and F. Guen-
thner).
[Carnielli et al., to appear] W. A. Carnielli, M. E. Coniglio and A. Costa-Leite. Paraconsistency and knowabil-
ity’, to appear.
[Correa et al., 1993] M. Correa, A. Buchsbaum and T. Pequeno. Sensible inconsistent reasoning, Technical
Notes of The AAAI Workshop on Automated Deduction for Non Standart Logics, North Carolina, 1993.
[Church, 1956] A. Church. Introduction to Mathematical Logic, Vol. I, Princeton Un. Press, 1956.
[Church, 1974] A. Church. Set theory with a universal set, in Henkin, L. (ed.), Proceedings of the Tarski
Symposium, Providence, American Mathematical Society, pp. 297-308, 1974.
[da Costa, 1958] N. C. A. da Costa. Nota sobre o conceito de contradio’, Anu´ario da Sociedade Paranaense de
Matem´atica 1, pp. 6-8, 1958.
[da Costa, 1959] N. C. A. da Costa. Observac¸˜oes sobre o conceito de existˆencia em matem´atica’, Anu´ario da
Sociedade Paranaense de Matem´atica 2, pp. 16-19, 1959.
[da Costa, 1963a] N. C. A. da Costa. Sistemas Formais Inconsistentes, Rio de Janeiro, NEPE, 1963. Reprinted
by Editora da UFPR, Curitiba, 1993.
[da Costa, 1963b] N. C. A. da Costa. Calculs propositionels pour les syst`emes formales inconsistants, C. R.
Acad. Sc. Paris 257, 1963, pp. 3790-3793, 1964.
[da Costa, 1964a] N. C. A. da Costa. Calculs de pr´edicats pour les syst`emes formales inconsistants, C. R. Acad.
Sc. Paris 258, 1964, pp. 27-29, 1964.
[da Costa, 1964b] N. C. A. da Costa. Sur un syst`eme inconsistant de la th´eorie des ensembles’, C. R. Acad. Sc.
Paris 258, pp. 3144-3147, 1964.
[da Costa, 1966a] N. C. A. da Costa. ´Algebras de Curry, S˜ao Paulo, 1966.
[da Costa, 1966b] N. C. A. da Costa. Op´erations non-monotones dans les treillis, C. R. Acad. Sc. Paris 263A,
pp˙429-432, 1966.
[da Costa, 1969] N. C. A. da Costa. ’On a set theory suggested by Ehresmann and Dedecker’, Proceedings of
the Japan Academy of Sciences 45, pp. 880-888, 1969.
[da Costa, 1974] N. C. A. da Costa. On the theory of inconsistent formal systems, Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic XV (4), pp. 497-510, 1974.
[da Costa, 1975] N. C. A. da Costa. Remarks on Ja´skowski’s discussive logic, Rep. Math. Logic 4, pp. 7-16,
1975.
[da Costa, 1980] N. C. A. da Costa. Ensaio sobre os Fundamentos da L´ogica, Hucitec-EdUSP, S. Paulo, 1980.
[da Costa, 1982] N. C. A. da Costa. The philosophical import of paraconsistent logic, The Journal of Non-
Classical Logic, 1, pp. 1-19, 1982.
[da Costa, 1986a] N. C. A. da Costa. On paraconsistent set theory, Logique et Analyse 115, pp. 361-371, 1986.
[da Costa, 1986b] N. C. A. da Costa. Pragmatic Probability’, Erkenntnis 25, pp. 141-162, 1986.

906
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
[da Costa, 1989] N. C. A. da Costa. Mathematics and Paraconsistency (in Portuguese), Monograﬁas da So-
ciedade Paranaense de Matem´atica 7, 1989.
[da Costa, 1993] N. C. A. da Costa. L´ogica Indutiva e Probabilidade, Hucitec-EdUSP, 2nd. ed., 1993.
[da Costa, 1997] N. C. A. da Costa. Logique Classique et Non-Classique, Paris, Masson, 1997 (French trans-
lation of [da Costa, 1980], with Preface and Appendices by J. -Y. B´eziau).
[da Costa and Alcˆantara, 1982] N. C. A. da Costa, L. P. and Alcˆantara. On paraconsistent set theories, Relat´orio
Interno 215, IMECC-Unicamp, 1982.
[da Costa and Alcˆantara, 1986] N. C. A. da Costa, L. P. and Alcˆantara. A note on type theory, Comptes rendus
de l’Acad´emie bulgare des Sciences 39 (10), pp. 5-7, 1986.
[da Costa and Alcˆantara, 1991] N. C. A. da Costa and L. P. Alcˆantara. On paraconsistent set theories, Bol. Soc.
Paran. Mat. 12/13 (1/2), pp. 78-81, 1991/1992.
[da Costa and Alves, 1977] N. C. A. da Costa and E. H. Alves. A semantical analysis of the calculi Cn, Notre
Dame J. of Formal Logic 18 (4), pp. 621-630, 1977.
[da Costa and Carnielli, 1986] N. C. A. da Costa and W. A. Carnielli. On paraconsistent deontic logic,
Philosophia 16 (3/4), pp. 293-305, 1986.
[da Costa and Chuaqui, 1988] N. C. A. da Costa and R. Chuaqui. On Suppes’ set theoretical predicates, Erken-
ntnis 29, pp. 95-112, 1988.
[da Costa and Doria, 1995] N. C. A. da Costa and F. A. Doria. On Ja´skowski’s discussive logic, Studia Logica
54, pp. 33-60, 1995.
[da Costa and Dubikajtis, 1968] N. C. A. da Costa and L. Dubikajtis. Sur la logique discoursive de Ja´skowski,
Bull. Acad. Polonaise des Sciences 26, pp. 551-557, 1968.
[da Costa and Dubikajtis, 1977] N. C. A. da Costa and L. Dubikajtis. On Ja´skowski’s discussive logic, in Ar-
ruda, A. Y., da Costa, N. C. A. and Chuaqui, R. (eds.), Non-Classical Logic, Model Theory and Computabil-
ity, North-Holland, pp. 37-56, 1977.
[da Costa and French, 1989a] N. C. A. da Costa and S. French. Pragmatic truth and the logic of induction, The
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 40, pp. 333-356, 1989.
[da Costa and French, 1989b] N. C. A. da Costa and S. French. In contradiction. Review of G. Priest, ‘In
Contradiction: A Study of the Transconsistent’, Phil. Quarterly 39, pp. 498-502. 1989.
[da Costa and French, 1990] N. C. A. da Costa and S. French. The model-theoretic approach in the philosophy
of science, Philosophy of Science 57, pp. 248-265, 1990.
[da Costa and French, 2003a] N. C. A. da Costa and S. French. Towards an acceptable theory of acceptance:
partial structures, inconsistency and dorrespondence, in S. French and H. Kamminga (eds.), Correspondence,
Invariance and Heuristics, Dordrecht, Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 137-158, 1993.
[da Costa and French, 1993b] N. C. A. da Costa and S. French. A model theoretic approach to ‘natural reason-
ing’, International Studies in the Philosophy of Science 7, pp. 177-190, 1993.
[da Costa and French, 2003] N. C. A. da Costa and S. French. Partial Truth: a unitary approach to models and
scientiﬁc reasoning, Oxford University Press, 2003.
[da Costa and Krause, 2002] N. C. A. da Costa and D. Krause. An inductive annotated logic, in W. Carnielli,
M. Cogniglio and I. M. L. D’Ottaviano (eds.), Paraconsistency: the Logical Way to the Inconsistent, Pro-
ceedings do II World Congress on Paraconsistency, Juquehy, SP, May 2000 (Marcel Dekker, New York), pp.
213-225, 2002.
[da Costa and Krause, 2004] N. C. A. da Costa and D. Krause. Complementarity and paraconsistency, in S.
Rahman; J. Symons; D. M. Gabbay; J. -P. van Bendegen (eds.), Logic, Epistemology, and the Unity of
Science, forthcoming by Kluwer Ac. Press, 2004.
[da Costa and Krause, 2004a] N. C. A. da Costa and D. Krause. The logic of complementarity, in G. Heinz-
mann (ed.), The Age of Alternative Logics: assessing philosophy of logic and mathematics today, forthcom-
ing. (http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001559)
[da Costa and Krause, 2004b] N. C. A. da Costa and D. Krause. Remarks on the applications of paraconsistent
logic to physics, forthcoming. (http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001566)
[da Costa and Marconi, 1989] N. C. A. da Costa and D. Marconi. An overview of paraconsistent logic in the
80s, J. Non-Classical Logic 6 (1), pp. 5-32, 1989.
[da Costa and Sette, 1969] N. C. A. da Costa and A. M. Sette. Les alg`ebres Cω, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 268, pp.
1011-1014, 1969.
[da Costa and Subrahmanian, 1989] N. C. A. da Costa and V. S. Subrahmanian. Paraconsistent logics as a
formalism for reasoning about inconsistent knowledge bases, Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 1, pp. 167-
174, 1989.
[da Costa and Vernengo, 1999] N. C. A. da Costa R. J. y Vernengo. Sobre algunas l´ogicas paracl´assicas y el
an´alisis del razonamiento jur´ıdico, Doxa 19, pp. 183-200, 1999.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
907
[da Costa and Wolf, 1980] N. C. A. da Costa and R. G. Wolf. Studies in paraconsistent logic I: The dialectical
principle of the unity of opposites, Philosophia (Philosophical Quarterly of Israel) 9, no. 2, pp. 189-217,
1980.
[da Costa and Wolf, 1985] N. C. A. da Costa and R. G. Wolf. Studies in paraconsistent logic II: quantiﬁcation
and the unity of opposites, Rev. Comobiana de Matem´aticas 19, pp. 56-67, 1985.
[da Costa et al., 1991] N. C. A. da Costa, J. M. Abe and V. S. Subrahamanian. Remarks on annotated logic,
Zeitschr. f. math. Logik und Grundlagen d. Math. 37, pp. 561-570, 1991.
[da Costa et al., 1995] N. C. A. da Costa, J.-Y. B´eziau and O. Bueno. Paraconsistent logic in a historical per-
spective, Logique et Analyse 150-151-152, pp. 111-125, 1995.
[da Costa et al., 1998a] N. C. A. da Costa, J.-Y. B´eziau and O. Bueno, O., Elements of Paraconsistent Set
Theory (in Portuguese), Campinas, Centro de L´ogica, Epistemologia e Hist´oria da Ciˆencia (Coleo CLE 23),
1998.
[da Costa et al., 2004] N. C. A. da Costa, O. Bueno and A. G. Volkov. Outlines on a paraconsistent category
theory, in P. Weingartner (ed.), Alternative Logics: do sciences need them? Springer, pp. 95-114, 2004.
[da Costa et al., 1998b] N. C. A. da Costa, O. Bueno and S. French. The logic of pragmatic truth, Journal of
Philosophical Logic 27, pp˙603-620, 1998.
[da Costa et al., 1998c] N. C. A. da Costa, O. Bueno and S. French. Is there a Zande logic? History and
Philosophy of Logic 19, pp. 41-54, 1998.
[da Costa et al., 1996] N. C. A. da Costa, R. Chuaqui and O. Bueno. The logic of quasi-truth, Notas se la
Sociedad de Matematica de Chile XV, pp. 7-26, 1996.
[da Costa et al., 1990] N. C. A. da Costa, L. J. Henschen, J. J. Lu, and V. S. Subrahamanian. Automatic theorem
proving in paraconsistent logics: foundations and implementation, in Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Automated Deduction, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science 449, pp. 72-86, 1990.
[da Costa et al., 1991] N. C. A. da Costa, V. S. Subrahamanian and C. Vago. The paraconsisten logic PT ,
Zeitschr. f. math. Logik und Grundlagen d. Math. 37, pp. 139-148, 1991.
[Dalla Chiara and di Francia, 1981] M. L. Dalla Chiara amd G. Toraldo di Francia. Le Teorie Fisiche:
un’analisi formale, Torino, Boringhieri, 1981.
[Dalla Chiara and Giuntini, 1989] M. L. Dalla Chiara and R. Giuntini. Paraconsistent quantum logic, Founda-
tions of Physics 19, 1989, pp. 891-904.
[Dalla Chiara and Giuntini, 2000] M. L. Dalla Chiara and R. Giuntini. Paraconsistent ideas in quantum logic,
Synthese 125, pp. 55-68, 2000.
[Dalla Chiara and Giuntini, 2001] M.
L.
Dalla
Chiara
and
R.
Giuntini.
Quantum
logic,
in
http://xxx.lanl.gov/list/quant-ph/0101.
[D’Ottaviano, 1982] I. M. L. D’Ottaviano. Sobre uma Teoria de Modelos Trivalente, Ph.D. Dissertation, State
University of Campinas, 1982.
[D’Ottaviano, 1985a] I. M. L. D’Ottaviano. The completeness and compactness of a three valued ﬁrst-order
logic’, Revista Colombiana de Matem´acicas 15, pp. 31-42, 1995. s
[D’Ottaviano, 1985b] I. M. L. D’Ottaviano. The model extension theorems for J3-theories, in C. A. di Prisco
(ed.), Methods in Mathematical Logic, Springer, pp. 157-183, 1985.
[D’Ottaviano, 1990] I. M. L. D’Ottaviano. On the development of paraconsistent logic and da Costa’s work, J.
Non-Classical Logic 7 (1/2), pp. 9-72, 1990.
[D’Ottaviano and da Costa, 1970] I. M. L. D’Ottaviano and N. C. A. da Costa. Sur un probl`eme de Ja´skowski,
Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´emie des Sciences de Paris 270A, pp. 1349-1353, 1970.
[Dubois and Prade, 1988] D. Dubois and H. Prade. Possibility theory: an approach to computerized processing
of uncertainty, Plenum Press, 1988.
[Ellentuck, 1975] E. Ellentuck. G¨odel’s square axioms for the continuum’, Math. Ann. 216, pp. 29-33, 1975.
[Fidel, 1977] M. Fidel. The decidability of the calculi Cn, Reports on Mathematical Logic 8, pp. 31-40, 1977.
[Field, 1980] H. Field. Science without Numbers, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1980.
[French and Krause, to appear] S. French and D. Krause. Identity and Individuality in Modern Physics, to ap-
pear.
[Furmanowski, 1975] T. Furmanowski. Remarks on discussive propositional calculus, Studia Logica 34, pp.
39-43, 1975.
[Gallin, 1975] D. Gallin. Intensional and Higher-Order Logic, Amsterdam, North-Holland, 1975.
[Gonseth, 1974] F. Gonseth. Les Math´ematiques et la R´ealit´e: essay sur la m´ethode axiomatique, Albert Blan-
chard, 1936 (1974).
[Grana, 1983] N. Grana. Logica Paraconsistente, Loﬀredo Editore, Napoli, 1983.
[Grana, 1990a] N. Grana. Logica Deontica Paraconsistente, Liguori Editore, Napoli, 1990.
[Grana, 1990b] N. Grana. Sulla Teoria delle Valutazioni di da Costa, Liguori Editore, Napoli, 1990.
[Grana, 1990c] N. Grana. Contradizione e Incompletezza, Liguori Editore, Napoli, 1990.

908
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
[Grana, 2001] N. Grana. Epistemologia della Matematica: ontologia, verit`a, valutazioni, L’Orientale Editrice,
Napoli, 2001.
[Granger, 1998] G.-G. Granger. L’irrationnel, Odile Jacob, 1998.
[Grant and Subrahmanian, 2000] J. Grant and V. S. Subrahmanian. ’Applications of paraconsistency in data
and knowlwedge basis’, Synthese 125, pp. 121-132, 2000.
[Guillaume, 1960] M. Guillaume. Recherches sur le symbole de Hilbert, Clermond-Ferrand, 1960.
[Guillaume, 1996] M. Guillaume. Regard en arri`ere sur quinze ann´es de coop´eration douce avec
l’´ecolebr´ezilienne de logique paraconsistante’ Logique et Analyse 153-154, pp. 5-14, 1996.
[Haack, 1974] S. Haack. Deviant Logic, Cambridge Un. Press, 1974.
[Hatcher, 1982] W. S. Hatcher. The Logical Foundations of Mathematics, Toronto, Pergamon Press, 1982.
[Hellman, 1989] G. Hellman. Mathematics without Numbers, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1989.
[Henkin and Montague, 1956] L. Henkin and R. Montague. On the Deﬁnitions of Formal Deduction, The Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic 21, 1956, pp. 129-136.
[Hilbert, 1902] D. Hilbert. Mathematical problems, Bull. American Mathematical Society 8, 437-479, 1902,
translated by M. W. Nelson from ‘Mathematische probleme’, Archiv der Math. u. Phys. 1, 1901, 44-63 and
213-237. Reprinted in Browder 1976, pp. 1-34.
[Hughes and Cresswell, 1968] G. E. Hughes and M. J. Cresswell. An Introduction to Modal Logic, Methuen,
1968.
[Ja´skowski, 1948] S. Ja´skowski. Rachuneck zda´n dla system´ow dedukcyjnych sprzecznych’, Studia Soc. Sci.
Torunensis 5, pp. 55-77, 1948.
[Ja´skowski, 1949] S. Ja´skowski. O koniunkcji dyskusyjney w rachunku zda´n dla system´ow dedukcyjnych
sprzecznych, Studia Soc. Sci. Torunensis 8, pp. 171-172, 1949.
[Ja´skowski, 1969] S. Ja´skowski. Propositional calculus for contraditory deductive systems, Studia Logica 24,
pp. 143-157, 1969.
[Kaestner and Krause, 2996] C. A. A. Kaestner and D. Krause. Matrix proof in annotated paraconsistent logic,
in Atas del 2do. Workshop sobre Asp´ectos Te´oricos de la Inteligencia Artiﬁcial, Universidad Nacional del
Sur, Bahia Blanca, Argentina, 5-7 Octubre 1995, Univ. Nacional del Sur, pp. 416-425, 1996.
[Kifer and Kriphnaprasad, 1989] M. Kifer and T. Kriphnaprasad. An evidence based framework for a theory
of inheritance, in Proceedings of the 1989 International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Morgan-
Kauﬀman, San Mateo, CA, pp. 1093-1098, 1989.
[Kifer and Li, 1988] M. Kifer and A. and Li. On the semantics of rule-based expert systems with uncertainty,
in Proceedings of the 2nd. International Conference on Database Theory, Bruges, Belgium, M. Gyssens, J.
Paredaens and D. van Gucht (eds.), Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science 326, pp. 102-117, 1988.
[Kifer and Lozinskii, 1989] M. Kifer and E. L. Lozinskii. RI: A Logic for Reasoning with Inconsistency, Proc.
LICS, pp. 253-262, 1989.
[Kifer and Subrahmanian, 1989] M. Kifer and V. S. Subrahmanian. Theory of generalized annotated logic pro-
gramming and its applications, Journal of Logic Programming 12, pp. 335-36, 1989.
[Kifer and Wu, 1989] M. Kifer and J. Wu. A logic for object oriented logic programming, in Proceedings of
the 8th. ACM SIGACT/SIGMOD/SIGART Symposium on Principlea of Database Systems, Philadelphia, pp.
379-393, 1989.
[Kneale and Kneale, 1988] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic, Oxford, Clarendon Press,
1988.
[Kleene, 1952] S. C. Kleene. Introduction to Metamathematics, New York, Van Nostrand, 1952.
[Kotas, 1971] J. Kotas. On the algebra of classes of formulas of Ja´skowski’s discussive system, Studia Logica
27, pp. 81-91, 1971.
[Kotas, 1974] J. Kotas. The axiomatization of Ja´skowski’s discussive system, Studia Logica 28, pp. 195-200,
1974.
[Kotas, 1975] J. Kotas. Discussive sentential calculus of Ja´skowski, Studia Logica 34, 1975, pp. 149-168, 1975.
[Kotas and da Costa, 1977] J. Kotas and N. C. A. da Costa. On some modal logical systems deﬁned in connec-
tion with Ja´skowski’s problem. In Arruda, A. I., N. C. A. da Costa. A. and Chuaqui, R., (eds.), Non-Classical
Logic, Model Theory and Computability, Amsterdam, North-Holland, pp. 57-73, 1977.
[Kotas and da Costa, 1978] J. Kotas and N. C. A. da Costa. On the problem of Ja´skowski and the logics of
Łukasiewicz, in A. I. Arruda, N. C. A. da Costa and R. Chuaqui (eds.), Mathematical Logic: Proceedings of
the First Brazilian Conferece, Marcel Dekker, pp. 127-139, 1978.
[Kotas and da Costa, 1979] J. Kotas and N. C. A. da Costa. A new formulation of discussive logic, Studia
Logica 38, pp. 429-445, 1979.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
909
[Krause et al., 2001] D. Krause, M. A. Musicante and E. F. Nobre. Bibel’s matrix connection method in
paraconsistent logic: general ideas and implementation, Proceedings of the XXI Internacional Conference
Chilean Computer Society, Punta Arenas, Chile, 5-9 Nov. 2001 (IEEE Computer Society Press 2001), pp.
161-167, 2001.
[Kyburg, 1998] H. Kyburg. Review of [da Costa, 1974; da Costa, 1982; da Costa, 1986a; da Costa et al., 1995],
The Journal of Symbolic Logic 63 (3), pp. 1183-1184, 1998.
[Laugwitz, 1961a] D. Laugwitz. Anwendungen unendlichkliner Zahlen, I: Zur Theorie der Distributionen,
Journal f. d. reine und angewandte Mathematik 207, pp. 53-60, 1961.
[Laugwitz, 1961b] D. Laugwitz. Anwerdungen unendlichkliner Zahlen, II: Ein Zungang zur Operatorenrech-
nung von Mikusinski, Journal f. d. reine und angewandte Mathematik 208, pp. 22-34, 1961.
[Lewin et al., 1990] R. A. Lewin, I. F. Mikenberg and M. G. Schwarze. Algebrization of paraconsistent logic
P1, The J. of Non-Classical Logic 7 (1/2), pp. 145-154, 1990.
[Lopari´c, 1977] A. Lopari´c. Une ´etude s´emantique de quelques calculs propositioneles, C. R. Acad. Sc. Paris
284A, pp. 835-838, 1977.
[Lopari´c, 1978] A. Lopari´c. The method of valuation in modal logic, in A. I. Arruda, N. C. A. da Costa and
R. Chuaqui (eds.), Mathematical Logic: Proceedings of the First Brazilian Conferece, Marcel Dekker, pp.
141-157, 1978.
[Lopari´c and Alves, 1980] A. Lopari´c and E. H. Alves. The semantics of the systems Cn of da Costa, in A.
I. Arruda, N. C. A. da Costa and A. M. Sette (eds.), Proceedings of the Third Brazilian Conference on
Mathematical Logic, Sociedade Brasileira de L´ogica, S˜ao Paulo, pp. 161-172, 1980.
[Lopari´c and da Costa, 1986] A. Lopari´c and N. C. A. da Costa. Paraconsistency, paracompleteness, and in-
duction, Logique et Analyse 113, pp. 73-80. 1986.
[l’Hospital, 1996] G. F. A. l’Hospital. Analyse des inﬁnitament petits pour l’intelligence des lignes courbes,
Paris, 1696.
[Ludwig, 1990] G. Ludwig. Les Structures de base d’une th´eorie physique, Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1990.
[Łukasiewicz, 1971] J. Łukasiewicz. On the principle of contradiction in Aristotle, Review of Methaphysics 24,
pp. 485-509, 1971.
[Manin, 1977] Yu. I. Manin. A Course in Mathematical Logic, Springer, 1977.
[Marconi, 1979] D. Marconi, ed. La Formalizzazione della Dialettica, Rosenberg & Sellier, Turin, 1979.
[Marconi, 1980] D. Marconi. A decision method for the calculus C1, in A. I. Arruda, N. C. A. da Costa and A.
M. Sette (eds.), Proceedings of the Third Brazilian Conference on Mathematical Logic, Sociedade Brasileira
de L´ogica, S˜ao Paulo, pp. 211-223, 1980.
[Marcos, 2004] Marcos, J., Logics of Formal Inconsistency, Ph.D. dissertation, Campinas, UNICAMP, 2004.
[Martins and Pequeno, 1993] A. T. C. Martins and T. Pequeno. Proof-theoretical considerations about the logic
of epistemic inconsistency, Logique et Analyse 36, no. 143-144, pp. 245-260, 1993.
[Martins and Pequeno, 1994] A. T. C. Martins and T. Pequeno. Proof-theoretical considerations about the logic
of epistemic inconsistency, Logique et Analyse, 1996.
[Martins and Pequeno, 1996] A. T. C. Martins and T. Pequeno. A meta analyse of the inconsistent default logic
reasoning style, submitted to the Special Issue of The Journal of The Interest Group in Pure and Logics,
Oxford University Press, 1996.
[McGill and Parry, 1948] N. J. McGill and W. T. Parry. The unity of opposites: a dialectical principle, Science
and Society XII, pp. 418-444, 1948.
[Mendelson, 1997] E. Mendelson. Introduction to Mathematical Logic, 4th. ed., London, Chapman & Hall,
1997.
[Mikenberg et al., 1986] I. Mikenberg, N. C. A. da Costa and R. Chuaqui. Pragmatic truth and approximation
to truth, The Journal of Symbolic Logic 51, pp. 201-221, 1986.
[Milner, 1997] R. Milner, M. Tofte and R. Harper. The Deﬁnition of Standard ML, MIT Press, 1997.
[Moraes, 1970] L. de Moraes. Sobre a L´ogica Discursiva de Ja´skowski, Master Thesis, University of S˜ao Paulo,
S. Paulo, 1970.
[Mortensen, 1980] C. Mortensen. Every quotient algebra for C1 is trivial, Notre Dame J. of Formal Logic 21,
pp. 694-700, 1980.
[Mortensen, 1995] C. Mortensen. Inconsistent Mathematics, Dordrecht, Kluwer Ac. Press, 1995.
[Nakamatsu et al., 1999] K. Nakamatsu, J. M. Abe and A. and Suzuki. An approximate reasoning in a frame-
work of vector annotated logic programming, The Vietnam-Japan Bilateral Symposium on Fuzzy Systems
And Applications, VJFUZZY’ 98, Nguyen H. Phuong & Ario Ohsato (Eds), HaLong Bay, Vietnam, pp.
521-528, 1998.

910
Newton C. A. da Costa, D´ecio Krause and Ot´avio Bueno
[Nakamatsu et al., 2000] K. Nakamatsu, J. M. Abe and A. Suzuki. A railway interlocking safety veriﬁcation
systems based on abductive paraconsistent logic programming, Soft Computing Systems: Design, Manage-
ment and Applications, Eds. A. Abraham, J. Ruiz-del-Solar & M. K¨oppen, Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Its Applications, IOS Press, Amsterdan, Ohmsha, Tokyo, Editores, Vol. 87, pp. 775-784, 2002.
[Nakamatsu et al., 2001] K. Nakamatsu, J. M. Abe and A. Suzuki. ’Annotated semantics for defeasible deontic
reasoning’, in W. Ziarko and Y. Yao (eds.), RCCTC 2000, Springer Verlag, pp. 470-478, 2001.
[Nakamatsu et al., 2002] K. Nakamatsu, J. M. Abe and A. Suzuki. ’Defeasible deontic robot control based
on extended vector annotated logic programming’, Computer Antecipatory Systems: SASYS 2001 - Fifth
International Conference, ed. D. M. Dubois, American Institute of Physics, pp. 490-500, 2002.
[Nakamatsu et al., to appear] K. Nakamatsu, H. Suito, J. M. Abe and A. Suzuki. Paraconsistent logic program
based safety veriﬁcation for air traﬃc control, to appear.
[Nakamatsu et al., 2003] K. Nakamatsu, Y. Mita, T. Shibata and J. M. Abe. Defesiable deontic action control
based on paraconsistent logic program and its implementation, Proceedings of the 2003 International Con-
ference on Computational Intelligence for Modelling, Contrl & Automation - CIMCA 2003, M. Mohammadia
(Ed), pp. 233-246, 2003.
[Negoita and Ralescu, 1975] C. V. Negoita and D. A. Ralescu. Applications of fuzzy sets to systems analysis,
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1975.
[Nelson, 1949] D. Nelson. Constructive falsity’, J. Symb. Logic 14, pp. 16-26, 1949.
[Nelson, 1959] D. Nelson. Negation and separation of concepts in constructive mathematics, in Heyting, A.
(ed.), Constructive Mathematics, North-Holland, pp. 208-225, 1959.
[Peirce, 1965] C. S. Peirce. Philosophical Writings of Peirce, selected and edited by Buchler, J., New York,
Dover, 1965.
[Pe˜na, 1979] L. Pe˜na. Contradiction et Verit´e, Thesis, Universit´e de Li`ege, 1979.
[Pe˜na, 1991] L. Pe˜na. Rudimentos de L´ogica Matem´atica, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas,
Collecti´on Textos Universitarios 7, Madrid, 1991.
[Pe˜na, 1993] L. Pe˜na. Introducci´on a las L´ogicas No Cl´asicas, Instituto de Investigaciones Filos´oﬁcas, Cuader-
nos 60, Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico, 1993.
[Pequeno, 1990] T. Pequeno. A logic for inconsistent non-monotonic reasoning, Technical Report 90/6, De-
partment of Computing, Imperial College, London, 1990.
[Pequeno, 1991] T. Pequeno and A. Buchsbaum. The logic of epistemic inconsistency, Principles of knowledge
representation and reasoning, Cambridge, MA, pp. 453-460, 1991.
[Pequeno and Buchsbaum, 1995] T. Pequeno and A. Buchsbaum. The logic of epistemic inconsistency, in
Carnielli, W. A. and Pereira, L. C. P. D., Logic, sets and information, Proccedings of the Tenth Brazilian
Conference on Mathematical Logic, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Colec¸˜ao CLE 14, pp. 177-197,
1995.
[Pinter, 1980] C. Pinter. The logic of ambiguity’, in A. I. Arruda, N. C. A. da Costa and A. M. Sette (eds.),
Proceedings of the Third Brazilian Conference on Mathematical Logic, Sociedade Brasileira de L´ogica, S˜ao
Paulo, pp. 253-262, 1980.
[Pollock, 1987] J. L. Pollock. Defeasible reasoning, Cognitive Science, 11, pp. 481-518, 1987.
[Popper, 1972] K. R. Popper. The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery, Hutchinson, 1972,
[Priest, 1979] G. Priest. The logic of paradox, The Journal of Philosophical Logic 8, pp. 219-241, 1979.
[Priest, 1987] G. Priest. In Contradiction, Dordrecht: Nijhoﬀ, 1987.
[Priest et al., 1989] G. Priest, R. Routley and J. Norman, eds. Paraconsistent Logic: essays on the inconsistent,
Philosophia Verlag, Munich, 1989.
[Priest and Tanaka, 2000] G.
Priest
and
K.
Tanaka.
Paraconsistent
logic,
The
Stanford
En-
cyclopedia
of
Philosophy
(Winter
2000
Edition),
Edward
N.
Zalta
(ed.),
URL
=
¡http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2000/entries/logic-paraconsistent/¿.
[Puga, 1985] L. Z. Puga. Uma L´ogica do Querer: preliminares sobre um tema de Mally, Doctor Thesis, Pon-
thiﬁcal Catholic University of S˜ao Paulo, S. Paulo, 1985.
[Puga and da Costa, 1987] L. Z. Puga and N. C. A. da Costa. Logic with deontic and legal modalities, Bull.
Sec. Logic of the Polish Academy of Sciences 2, pp. 141ss, 1987.
[Puga and da Costa, 1988] L. Z. Puga and N. C. A. da Costa. On the imaginary logic of N. A. Vasiliev, Zeitschr.
f. math, Logik und Grundlagen d. Math. 34, pp. 205-211, 1988.
[Puga and da Costa, 1992] L. Z. Puga, N. C. A. da Costa, and R. J. Vernengo. Normative logics, morality and
law, Expert Systems in Law, A. Martino (ed.), Elsevier Sci. Pu., , pp. 345-365, 1992.
[Robinson, 1966] A. Robinson. Non-standard analysis, North-Holland, 1966.
[Rosser, 1953] B. Rosser. Logic for Mathematicians, New York, McGraw-Hill, 1953.

Paraconsistent Logics and Paraconsistency
911
[Routley and Lopari´c, 1980] R. Routley and A. Lopari´c. Semantics for quantiﬁed relevant logics without re-
placement, in A. I. Arruda, N. C. A. da Costa and A. M. Sette (eds.), Proceedings of the Third Brazilian
Conference on Mathematical Logic, Sociedade Brasileira de L´ogica, S˜ao Paulo, pp. 262-280, 1980.
[Routley, 1979] R. Routley. Dialectical logic, semantics and metamathematics, Erkenntnis 14, pp. 310-331,
1979.
[Routley and Lopari´c, 1979] R. Routley and A. Lopari´c. Semantical analysis of Arruda and da Costa P systems
and adjacent non-replacement systems, Studia Logica 37, pp. 301-320, 1979.
[Routley and Meyer, 1976] R. Routley and R. K. Meyer. Dialectical logic, classical logic and the consistency
of the world, Studies in Soviet Thought 16, pp. 1-25, 1976.
[Scott, 1967] D. Scott. A proof of the independence of the contiuum hypothesis, Mathematical Systems Theory
1, pp. 89-111, 1967.
[Schmieden and Laugwitz, 1958] C. Schmieden and D. Laugwitz. Eine Erweiterung der Inﬁnitesimalrech-
nung, Math. Zeitschrift 69, pp. 1-39, 1958.
[Sette, 1971] A. M. Sette. Sobre as ´Algebras e Hiper-Reticulados Cn , Master Thesis, Universidade Estadual
de Campinas, 1971.
[Shoenﬁeld, 1967] J. R. Shoenﬁeld. Mathematical Logic, Reading, Addison-Wesley, 1967 (reprinted by the
Association of Symbolic Logic, 2000).
[Silva Filho and Abe, 2001a] J. I da Silva Filho and J. M. Abe. Paraconsistent electronic circuits, International
Journal of Computing Anticipatory Systems, 9, pp. 337-345, 2001.
[Silva Filho and Abe, 2001b] J. I. da Silva Filho and J. M. Abe. Emmy: a paraconsistent autonomous mobile
robot, in Logic, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, and Robotics, Proc. 2nd Congress of Logic Applied to Technology -
LAPTEC 2001, Eds. J.M. Abe & J.I. Da Silva Filho, Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Its Applications,
IOS Press, Amsterdan, Ohmsha, Tokyo, Editores, Vol. 71, pp. 53-61, 2001.
[Subrahmanian, 1987] V. S. Subrahmanian. On the semantics of quantitative logic programs, Proc. 4th IEEE
Symposium on Logic Programming, Computer Socitety Press, Washington, DC, pp. 173-182, 1987.
[Tuziak, 1993] R. Tuziak. Review of Priest, Routley’s and Norman (eds.) ‘Paraconsistent logic: essays on the
inconsistent’, Brit. J. Phil. Sci. 44, pp. 167-170, 1993.
[Ullian, 1990] J. S. Ullian. Learning and meaning, in Barrett, R. B. and Gibson, R. F., (eds.), Perspectives on
Quine, Oxford, Blackwell, pp. 336-346, 1990.
[Urbas, 1989] I. Urbas. Paraconsistency and the C1-systems of da Costa, Notre Dame J. of Formal Logic 30
(4), pp. 583-597, 1989.
[Vaihinger, 1952] H. Vaihinger. Philosophy of ‘As If’: A System of Theoretical, Practical and Religious Fic-
tions of Mankind, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1952.
[van Fraassen, 1980] B. van Fraassen. The Scientiﬁc Image, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1980.
[Yamashita, 1985] M. Yamashita. O s´ımbolo de Hilbert em L´ogica Paraconsistente, Doctor Thesis, Ponthiﬁcal
Catholic University of S˜ao Paulo, S. Paulo, 1985.
[Zadeh, 1978] L. A. Zadeh. Fuzzy sets as a basis for a theory of possibility, Fuzzy sets and Systems, 1, pp.
3-28, 1978.
[Zhang, 2003] Q. Zhang. Paraconsistent Logic [in Chinese], Chinese Society Press, 2003.


EXTENSIONAL VS. INTENSIONAL LOGIC
Jaroslav Peregrin
1
FREGE’S BEDEUTUNG
The German mathematician and one of the founding fathers of modern logic, Gottlob
Frege (1848–1925), was the ﬁrst to clearly realize that semantics has little to do with
psychology, and that it could be usefully explicated in mathematical terms (see [Dummett,
1973; 1981]). His depsychologization of semantics followed from his depsychologization
of logic. Frege understood how crucial it was for the development of logic to draw a sharp
boundary separating it from psychology: to make it clear that logic is not a matter of what
is going on in some person’s head, in the sense that psychology is. This is because logic
is concerned with what is true and consequently what follows from what — and whether
something is true, or whether something follows from something else, is an objective
matter independent of what is going on in the head of a particular person.
As a consequence, Frege realized that if logic must be separated from psychology, then
the same is true for semantics — at least insofar as semantics underlies truth and entail-
ment. It is clear that the truth value of a sentence depends on the meaning of the sentence:
the sentence “Penguins eat ﬁsh” is true not only due to the fact that penguins do eat ﬁsh,
but of course also due to the fact that the words of which it consists mean what they do in
English. Hence, if meaning were a matter of what is going on in somebody’s head, then
truth would have to be too — hence meaning must not, in pain of the subjectivization of
truth, be a psychological matter. But what, then, is meaning?
Frege started from the prima facie obvious fact that names stand for objects of the
world. Unprecedentedly, he assimilated indicative sentences to names as well: he saw
them as speciﬁc kinds of names denoting the two truth values: truth and falsity. The
reason for this move was that he divided expressions into two sharply separated groups:
into “saturated” — i.e. self-standing — and “unsaturated” — i.e. incomplete — ones.
He took names and sentences as species of the former kind, whereas he took predicates
as paradigmatic examples of the latter one; and he came to use the word “name” as a
synonym of “saturated expression”.
The reason why he identiﬁed the entities named by sentences with truth values was
articulated by Frege in the form of what has later become known as the slingshot argu-
ment.1 This argument itself rests on what has subsequently come to be called the principle
of compositionality and what Frege tacitly, but unambiguously assumed.2 The principle
1See [Neale, 2001].
2See [Janssen, 1997].
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

914
Jaroslav Peregrin
states that the meaning of a complex expression is uniquely determined by the meanings
of its parts plus the mode of their combination. This means that for every mode of com-
bination (grammatical rule) G there must exist a function G∗such that for every e1, ..., en
to which G is applicable it is the case that (where ∥e∥denotes the meaning of e):3
∥G(e1, ..., en)∥= G∗(∥e1∥, ..., ∥en∥).
It follows that replacing a part e of a complex expression by an expression e′ with the
same meaning as e we cannot change the meaning of the whole complex:
if ∥e∥= ∥e′∥, then ∥G(..., e, ...)∥= ∥G(..., e′, ...)∥.
Now Frege argued that replacing names by other names of the same entities can get us
from a sentence to a sentence which has very little in common with the original one; in
particular that there is only one thing which inevitably persists during such a process, and
this is precisely the truth value.
We can illustrate this by means of an example introduced by Alonzo [Church, 1956,
24–25]:
[T]he denotation (in English) of “Sir Walter Scott is the author of Waverley”
must be the same as that of “Sir Walter Scott is Sir Walter Scott,” the name
“the author of Waverley” being replaced by another which has the same deno-
tation. Again, the sentence “Sir Walter Scott is the author of Waverley” must
have the same denotation as the sentence “Sir Walter Scott is the man who
wrote twenty-nine Waverley Novels altogether,” since the name “the author
of Waverley” is replaced by another name of the same person; the latter sen-
tence, it is plausible to suppose, if it is not synonymous with “The number,
such that Sir Walter Scott is the man who wrote that many Waverley Novels
altogether, is twenty-nine,” is at least so nearly so as to ensure its having the
same denotation; and from this last sentence in turn, replacing the complete
subject by another name of the same number, we obtain, as still having the
same denotation, the sentence “The number of counties in Utah is twenty-
nine.”
Now the two sentences, “Sir Walter Scott is the author of Waverley” and
“The number of counties in Utah is twenty-nine,” though they have the same
denotation according to the preceding line of reasoning, seem actually to have
very little in common. The most striking thing that they do have in common
is that both are true. Elaboration of examples of this kind leads us quickly
to the conclusion, as at least plausible, that all true sentences have the same
denotation. And parallel examples may be used in the same way to suggest
that all false sentences have the same denotation (e.g., “Sir Walter Scott is not
the author of Waverley” must have the same denotation as “Sir Walter Scott
is not Sir Walter Scott”).
3In algebraic terms, meaning-assignment is a homomorphism.

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
915
Hence it seems that if we accept that a name means the thing it names, then given the
principle of compositionality, two sentences are bound to have the same meaning iﬀthey
have the same truth value; and it is plausible to explicate the meanng of a sentence with
its truth value.
Frege’s most brilliant contribution to the explication of the concept of meaning then
was the way he accounted for the meanings of predicates.4 He called them concepts, as
usual; but he rejected the standard view of concepts as something mental and, in eﬀect,
suggested explicating them by studying the role of those expressions which express them
— i.e. predicates — within language.
What is the role of a predicate, such as “to sing”? Well, the predicate is attached to a
subject, a name such as “Frege”, to form a sentence, “Frege sings”. Hence if we assume
that the meaning of a complex expression is the result of combining the meanings of its
parts (i.e. that meanings are composed in a way paralleling that in which the expressions
expressing them are), then the meaning of the predicate together with the meaning of a
subject, which is the object stood for by the subject, yields the meaning of a sentence,
i.e. a truth value. Therefore a concept is something that together with an object yields a
truth value — and this led Frege to identify concepts with functions, in the mathematical
sense of the word, taking objects to truth values. In eﬀect, this meant the identiﬁcation
of the meaning of an item with the semantic role of the item captured as a function in the
mathematical sense of the word; and this opened the door for a mathematical treatment of
semantics. Thus, we can say that Frege married semantics, which he had earlier divorced
from psychology, to mathematics.
Let us reconstruct this move, which we will dub Frege’s maneuver, in greater detail.
We have a category of expressions, call it A, whose meanings we want to explicate. We
see that an expression of the category A (say that of predicates) can be combined with an
expression of a category B (say that of names, singular terms) to form an expression of a
category C (say that of sentences). So if we take an expression a of the category A, we
know that together with the expression b1 of the category B it yields an expression c1 of
C, with b2 it yields c2 etc.:
a + b1 = c1
“to sing” + “Madonna” = “Madonna sings”
a + b2 = c2
“to sing” + “Moon” = “Moon sings”
. . .
. . .
Hence we can see a as a means of assigning c1 to b1, c2 to b2 etc.
a :
b1 →c1
“to sing”:
“Madonna” →“Madonna sings”
b2 →c2
“Moon” →“Moon sings”
. . .
. . .
Now suppose that we know what the meanings of both the expressions of B and of C are.
Then we can transfer the whole consideration to the level of semantics:
∥a∥:
∥b1∥→∥c1∥
∥to sing∥:
∥Madonna∥→∥Madonna sings∥
∥b2∥→∥c2∥
∥Moon∥→∥Moon sings∥
. . .
. . .
4See especially [Frege, 1891; 1892a].

916
Jaroslav Peregrin
Now if we accept that meanings of names are the objects named by them (the meaning of
“Madonna”, ∥Madonna∥, is the person Madonna, that of “Moon”, ∥Moon∥, is the celestial
body the Moon) and that the meanings of sentences are their truth values (∥Madonna
sings∥being the truth, T, that of ∥Moon sings∥being the falsity, F), what we gain by
this maneuver as the explication of the meaning of “to sing” is a function assigning truth
values to individuals: T to those which do sing (to Madonna and others) and F to those
which do not (to the Moon and others).
Let us further illustrate this maneuver by applying it to logical operators. Take con-
junction: it joins two sentences to form a sentence. Thus it can be considered as assigning
sentences to pairs of sentences. Hence on the semantic level it can be seen as assign-
ing truth values to pairs of truth values; and hence its meaning can be identiﬁed with a
function taking pairs of truth values to a truth value. Which particular function? This is
revealed by inspecting the dependence of the truth values of conjoined sentences on those
of their parts; and of course it is the usual well-known function assigning T to T plus T,
and F to any other pair of truth values. Thus, according to Frege, meanings were either
objects or functions, and the principal way of combining meanings of parts of the whole
expression into the meaning of the whole was functional application.
Notice that Frege’s maneuver has two substantial presuppositions. First, there is the
presupposition that the meaning of a complex expression is yielded by (or ‘composed of’)
meanings of the parts of the expressions — viz. the principle of compositionality. How
do we know that this principle holds? Some theoreticians appear to think that it is an
empirical thesis that must be veriﬁed as empirical theses are: by means of inspecting as
many cases as possible. However, such a view presupposes that meanings are indepen-
dently identiﬁable objects whose combinations can be studied in the way we study, e.g.,
combinations of molecules in a solution: that we can empirically verify (or falsify) the
thesis that, say, the meaning of a sentence is yielded by the meaning of its subject and
that of its predicate, by means of ﬁnding the meanings and ﬁnding out what they yield if
they are put together. In contrast to this, we saw that for Frege the principle was rather a
way of articulating what it takes to be meaning: the principle was co-constitutive of the
notion of meaning in a sense analogous to that in which, say, the principle of extensional-
ity is co-constitutive of the concept of set. And just as it makes no sense to try to ﬁnd out
whether sets are extensional (for this is simply part of what it takes to be a set), it makes
no sense to try to ﬁnd whether meaning is compositional.5
The other presupposition of Frege’s maneuver is of a diﬀerent kind: it concerns the
behavior of the particular expressions to which it is applied. The presupposition is that the
role of the expression within language is exhausted by, or at least in some sense reducible
to, its role within the kind of syntactic combination which is taken into consideration. We
explicated the meanings of predicates by considering the way they combine with names
into sentences; but predicates also do other things, e.g. combine with adverbials into
complex predicates. We must always be sure that this is taken care of — that it is proven
that it is somehow substantiated to treat some part of the functioning of an expression as
representative of the whole functioning.
5See [Peregrin, 2005b]. For general discussions of the principle of compositionality see also [Janssen, 1997;
2001] and [Pelletier, 2001].

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
917
Is Frege’s way of explicating the concept of meaning acceptable? In fact not: what
Frege called meaning cannot be taken as a plausible explication of the pre-theoretic notion
of meaning. After all, who would want to claim that all true sentences have the same
meaning? And Frege himself soon realized the implausibility of such an explication.
Therefore he complemented his theory of meaning with what he called a theory of sense.6
Every name, he claimed, has not only a meaning, but rather also a sense, which is the
‘way of givenness’ of the meaning. And it is then Frege’s concept of sense, rather than
his concept of meaning, which is to be taken as his explication of the intuitive concept of
meaning.
Frege’s own instructive example is that of the terms “morning star” and “evening star”.
As we now know, these two terms refer to one and the same celestial body, the planet
Venus. Hence they share the same meaning (in Frege’s sense of the word), or (in the
current jargon) the same referent. If the referent were all that there is to meaning, it
should be possible to substitute one of them for the other within any expression without
changing its meaning. However, although the sentence “The morning star is the morning
star” is obviously trivial, “The morning star is the evening star” does not appear to be
such. The reason, Frege claimed, is that the terms diﬀer in their senses, i.e. in the ways
they present their referent: “the morning star” presents it as the most attractive body in
the morning sky, whereas “the evening star” as the most attractive one in the evening sky.
Hence we have the general picture according to which the relation between a name and
what the name refers to is mediated by the sense of the name:
NAME
↓
SENSE (SINN)
(= meaning in the intuitive sense of the word)
↓
MEANING (BEDEUTUNG)
(= object referred to)
One must remember, though, that despite his recognition of Sinn, Frege kept insisting
that it is Bedeutung which is crucial from the viewpoint of logic. As he puts it in an
unpublished text [1983, 133]:
Die Inhaltslogiker bleiben nur zu gerne beim Sinn stehen; denn, was sie In-
halt nennen, ist, wenn nicht gar Vorstellung, so doch Sinn. Sie bedenken
nicht, dass es in der Logik nicht darauf ankommt, wie Gedanken aus Gedanken
hervorgehen ohne R¨ucksicht auf den Wahrheitswert, dass, allgemeiner, der
Schritt vom Sinne zur Bedeutung getan werden muss; dass die logischen
Gesetze zun¨achst Gesetze im Reich der Bedeutungen sind und sich erst mit-
tlebar auf denn Sinn beziehen.7
6See [Frege, 1892b].
7“The content-logicians only remain too happily with the sense, for what they call content is for them, if not
mental image, then surely sense. They do not consider the fact that in logic it is not a question of how thoughts

918
Jaroslav Peregrin
To summarize: Frege saw as his main target truth (and truth-dependence, i.e. conse-
quence); and took for granted that the account for it is to be compositional. He concluded
that this can be accomplished on the level of his meaning (Bedeutung); in particular that
(i) the assignment of meanings to expressions is compositional; (ii) the meaning of a sen-
tence is its truth value. (The most developed logical system based on the ideas, presented
in his Grundgesetze der Arithmetik,8 was, however, shown to be inconsistent.)
2
CARNAP’S EXTENSION AND EXTENSIONAL LOGIC
Rudolf Carnap (1891–1970), the logician and logico-positivist philosopher, realized that
if what we are after is meaning in the intuitive sense of the word, then we should be
interested not so much in meanings in the sense of Frege, but rather in Fregean senses.
However, as Frege did not explicate the concept of sense to Carnap’s satisfaction, Carnap
proposed replacing the Fregean twin concepts of meaning and sense with the concepts of
extension and intension. (A laudable proposal, for it did away with Frege’s misleading
usage of “meaning”.) And his claim is that the extension of a term is what the term shares
with all terms that are equivalent to it; whereas its intension is what it shares with all the
terms that are logically equivalent to it.
Of course this deﬁnition becomes nontrivial only after we give a rigorous account of
the concept of equivalence on which it rests. For the basic categories of the predicate
calculus this is not diﬃcult: two individual terms t1 and t2 are equivalent iﬀ
t1 = t2,
two n-ary predicates p1 and p2 are equivalent iﬀ
∀x1 . . . ∀xn(p1(x1, . . . , xn) ↔p2(x1, . . . , xn));
and two sentences s1 and s2 are equivalent iﬀ
s1 ↔s2.
This explication leads to a concept of extension almost indistinguishable from Frege’s
meaning: the extension of an individual expression being the object for which it stands,
that of a predicate being the function assigning the truth value T to those n-tuples of
objects of which the predicate is true, and that of a sentence being its truth value.
Meanwhile, what was built into the foundations of modern formal logic were exten-
sions. The basic concept of a semantic interpretation, due essentially to Tarski and ac-
cepted by the mainstream of logicians,9 was in fact that of the mapping of expressions on
their extensions: names on individuals, predicates on sets of individuals or sets on their
come from thoughts without regard of truth value, that, more generally, one must make the step from senses to
meanings; that the logical laws are ﬁrst laws in the realm of meanings and only then mediately relate to senses.”
8[Frege, 1893; 1903].
9The roots of the concept go back to Tarski [1936] (cf. also [Etchemendy, 1990]). For the deﬁnition of the
concept of semantic interpretation in the modern sense, see, e.g. [Mendelson, 1964].

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
919
n-tuples10 and sentences on truth values. The reasons why most logicians did not share
Carnap’s scruples were, roughly, two: (i) like Frege, they assumed that what is the pri-
mary aim of logic is truth, and that what we need to account for truth were extensions, not
intensions; (ii) many of them were primarily interested in mathematics, where intensions,
explicated in the Carnapian way, came to coincide with extensions. Many logicians of
the second half of the twentieth century, especially those inclining to mathematics, thus
came to the conclusion that there is something as the language of logic — the language
of ﬁrst-order predicate calculus (FOPC). And the semantics of this language is based on
mapping expressions on their extensions.
To see this, consider FOPC as it is standardly presented. We have the logical con-
stants ¬, ∧, and ∀; the extralogical (individual, predicate, functor) constants and the
(individual) variables, with the well-known syntactic rules. The semantics of the lan-
guage is then based on two sets of assignments of objects to expressions: the valuation of
variables (assignments of individuals to variables) and the interpretation of extralogical
words (assignments of individuals to individual constants, sets of n-tuples of individuals
to n-ary predicates and, n-ary functions from individuals to individuals to functor con-
stants). Given an interpretation I and a valuation V, every individual term t is assigned
a denotation ∥t∥I,V based on I and V so that ∥t∥I,V = I(t), if t is an individual constant,
∥t∥I,V = V(t) if t is an individual variable and ∥f(t1, . . . , tn)∥I,V = I( f)(∥t1∥I,V, . . . , ∥tn∥I,V).
An interpretation I and a valuation V then render each formula true or false, which is
deﬁned in the usual recursive way: p(t1, . . . , tn) is true w.r.t. (or satisﬁed by) I and V iﬀ
⟨∥t1∥I,V, . . . , ∥tn∥I,V⟩∈I(p); ¬F is true w.r.t. (or satisﬁed by) I and V iﬀF is not; F1 ∧F2
is true w.r.t. (or satisﬁed by) I and V iﬀboth F1 and F2 are; ∀xF is true w.r.t. (or satisﬁed
by) I and V iﬀF is true w.r.t. (or satisﬁed by) I and V′ for every valuation V′ which diﬀers
from V at most in the value it assigns to x.
In this way, only extralogical words are taken to denote extensions; whereas the logical
ones are treated as nondenoting terms. However, it is easy to do away with this diﬀerence
in status by redeﬁning an interpretation as a mapping of all expressions on their exten-
sions, reducing the diﬀerence between logical and extralogical expressions to the mere
fact that whereas the former ones have ﬁxed interpretation, the interpretation of the lat-
ter varies. We may let logical constants denote the usual truth functions and we can let
quantiﬁers denote functions mapping functions from individuals to truth values on truth
values; in particular ∃as denoting the function which maps f on T iﬀf maps at least one
individual on T and ∀as denoting the function which maps f on T iﬀf maps all individ-
uals on T. If we do this, we can reformulate the above deﬁnition of truth as an explicit
deﬁnition of denotation-assignment:
∥p(t1, . . . , tn)∥I,V = ∥p∥(∥t1∥I,V, . . . , ∥tn∥I,V)
∥¬F∥I,V = ∥¬∥(∥F∥I,V)
∥F1 ∧F2∥I,V = ∥∧∥(∥F1∥I,V, ∥F2∥I,V)
∥∀xF′∥I,V = ∥∀∥( f), where f is the function which maps an individual i
on ∥F∥I,V′, where V′ is just like V with the single possible exception
that it maps x on i.
10There is usually no need to make a diﬀerence between a set and its characteristic function, i.e. the function
which assigns T to elements of the set and F to elements of its complement.

920
Jaroslav Peregrin
In this way we can see semantic interpretation, i.e. the function ∥. . . ∥, as simply an
assignment of extensions.
Notice that viewed from this perspective denotations of all expressions of the language
can be seen as arising from the denotations of terms and sentences by means of Frege’s
maneuver. Thus, a predicate takes an n-tuple of terms into a sentence, and hence it denotes
an n-ary function from individuals to truth values; a functor takes an n-tuple of terms
into a term, hence it denotes an n-ary function from individuals to individuals; and a
sentential operator takes one or two sentences to a sentence, hence denotes a function
from truth values or their pairs to truth values. The situation is trickier w.r.t. quantiﬁers,
which prima facie do not take predicates to sentences (which would seem to have to
underlie the application of Frege’s maneuver resulting into the above kind of denotations
for quantiﬁers).
However, to straighten this it is only necessary to reassess the underlying syntax. Let
us introduce a new kind of rule, the rule of lambda-abstraction,11 taking a formula and a
variable (typically one contained free in the formula) to a unary predicate, denoting the
function which maps an individual i of the universe on the extension which the formula
would have if the variable denoted i. Formally, if F is a sentence and x a variable, then
λx.F is a unary predicate whose semantics is deﬁned in the following way:
∥λx.F∥I,V is the function which maps an individual i on ∥F∥I,V′, where V′ is
just like V with the single possible exception that it maps x on i.
Given this, we can treat a quantiﬁer as an expression taking a unary predicate to a sen-
tence, and take the quantiﬁed sentence Qx.F as a shortcut for Q(λx.F) so that
∥∀x.F∥I,V = ∥∀(λx.F)∥I,V = ∥∀∥(∥λx.F∥I,V); and
∥∃x.F∥I,V = ∥∃(λx.F)∥I,V = ∥∃∥(∥λx.F∥I,V).
This reformulation of FOPC renders all standard kinds of syntactic rules as paralleled
by the same kind of combination of denotations — namely functional application: it is
always the application of one of the denotations to the rest. (We have seen that this is the
result of the fact that with the exception of terms and sentences, we can see the denotations
of all other categories as furnished via Frege’s maneuver.) Hence we can see the usual
kind of extensional semantics as based on:
(i)
letting terms denote the objects they name;
(ii) letting sentences denote truth values (which derives from (i) via the slingshot); and
(iii) letting expressions of all other categories stand for functions constructed from indi-
viduals and truth values (which derives from (i) and (ii) via Frege’s maneuver).
Probably the most general language of extensional logic, based on the most consequential
exploitation of Frege’s maneuver, was put forward by Alonzo [Church, 1940] under the
11See [Church, 1956].

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
921
name of the simple theory of types.12 Church’s language is based on two basic categories,
the category ι of individual terms and the category o of sentences. Besides this, there
is a category (αβ) for every two categories α and β of the language. (Thus we have
categories such as (oo), (oι), (o(oι)) etc.) The extensional semantics of the language is
such that expressions of the category ι denote individuals (elements of a given universe
of discourse), expressions of the category o denote truth values, and expressions of every
category (αβ) denote functions from the denotations of the expressions of β to those of
the expressions of α. Thus, expressions of the category (oo) denote functions from truth
values to truth values, those of (oι) functions from individuals to truth values, those of
(o(oι)) functions from these functions to truth values etc.
Given this semantics, the basic kind of grammatical rule of the language forms the
expression a(b) of the category α from an expression a of the category (αβ) and an ex-
pression b of the category β; and the denotation of the resulting expression a(b) results
from the application of the denotation of a to that of b. To this, Church only added the
above rule of lambda abstraction. The resulting language was syntactically quite rich, but
wonderfully simple:
Church’s Simple theory of types (Ty1)
Syntax
o and ι are types, and if α and β are types then also (αβ) is a type. For each type there is
an unlimited stock of constants and variables of the type.13 If a is an expression of type
(αβ) and b an expression of type β, then a(b) is an expression of type α; and if a is an
expression of type α and x a variable of type β, then λx.a is an expression of type (αβ).
Semantics
To each type α there corresponds a domain Dα, so that Do is the set of the two truth
values, Dι is a universe of discourse (any given set) and D(αβ) is a set of functions from Dβ
to Dα. An interpretation maps every constant a of type α on an element of Dα; a valuation
does the same for variables. If I is an interpretation and V a valuation we deﬁne the
denotation assignment ∥. . . ∥I,V as follows: for a constant c, ∥c∥I,V = I(c); for a variable
v, ∥v∥I,V = V(v). Moreover, ∥a(b)∥I,V = ∥a∥I,V(∥b∥I,V) and ∥λx.a∥I,V is the function which
maps every element i of Dβ on ∥a∥I,V′, where V′ is just like V with the single possible
exception that it maps x on i.
12The generalization leading to this language is parallel to the one proposed by Ajdukiewicz (1935) and [Bar-
Hillel, 1950] and which has led to what is now called categorial grammar (see [Casadio, 1988]). [Bar-Hillel,
1953, 65] expounds the idea behind this as follows: “Each sentence which is not an element is regarded as the
outcome of the operation of one sub-sequence upon the remainder, which may be to its immediate right, or to its
immediate left or on both sides. (‘Left’ and ‘right’ are to be understood here, as in what follows, only as the two
directions of a linear order.) That sub-sequence which is regarded as operating upon the others will be called an
operator, the others its arguments.”
13The construals of languages of this kind often ﬂuctuate between the delimitation of speciﬁc (though general)
language with a maximal vocabulary so that more speciﬁc languages can be cast as its sublanguages; and the
delimitation of a mere language form with vocabulary ‘open’ and to be speciﬁed only on the level of speciﬁc
languages.

922
Jaroslav Peregrin
It is not diﬃcult to embed the language of FOPC into this language: n-ary predi-
cates become expressions of the category (((oι)ι) . . . ι), n-ary terms those of (((ιι)ι) . . . ι),14
propositional operators turn into expressions of the category (oo) or ((oo)o), whereas
quantiﬁers become expressions of the category (o(oι)).
The syntactical structure of
Church’s language is, however, incomparably richer than that of the language of FOPC.
Consider an axiomatization. We start from some axiom system of the classical propo-
sitional calculus, say
S 1 →(S 2 →S 1)
(S 1 →(S 2 →S 3)) →((S 1 →S 2) →(S 1 →S 3))
(¬S 1 →¬S 2) →(S 2 →S 1)
S 1, S 1 →S 2/S 2
(where S 1, S 2 and S 3 are expressions of the type o, ¬ and →are constants of the respec-
tive types (oo) and ((oo)o); and we write ¬S and S →S ′ instead of ¬(S ) and (→(S ))(S ′),
respectively. We add a generalization of the usual additional axioms and rule of the clas-
sical ﬁrst-order predicate calculus — for every type α we have:
Πα(F) →F(A)
Πα(λx.(S →F(x))) →(S →Πα(F)), where x is not free in S
S/Πα(λx.S )
(Here S is an expression of the type o, F is an expression a type (oα), A is an expression
of type α, x is a variable of type α, and Πα is a constant of the type (o(oα)).) Now it turns
out that if we deﬁne =α as λa.λb.Πo(λf.(f(a) →f(b))) (where f is a variable of type
(oα)), and aand b those of type α) all that must be added to the above axioms to obtain an
axiomatization of Ty1 are the following four axiom schemes (again, for every type α and
writing the equality sign in the obvious inﬁx way):
(S 1 ↔S 2) →(S 1 =o S 2)
Πα(λx.(F(x) =o G(x))) →(F =(oα) G)
(λx.B)(A) =β Bx←A
F(A) →F(ια(F))
(where S 1, S 2, F, x are as above, ια a constant of type (α(oα)), G an expression of type
(oα), B an expression of type β, S ↔S ’ is a shorthand for ¬((S →S ′) →¬(S ′ →S )),
and Bx←A denotes the result of the replacement of x by A throughout B).
Note that as A =α B amounts to A and B being intersubstitutive salva veritate, the
ﬁrst two of the axioms guarantee the ‘extensionality’ of the system: they guarantee that
equivalent statements are always equal (hence that sentences can be treated as denoting
truth values) and that functions which have the same courses-of-values are equal (and
hence that they can be treated as denoting the very courses-of-values, which is the essence
14In this way, we take an n-ary predicate (functor) to take not an n-tuple of terms to a sentence (term), but
rather a term to an (n-1)-ary predicate (functor); hence the combination of the n-ary predicate (functor) with n
individuals comes out as n subsequent applications. This purely formal maneuver makes it possible to make do
with merely unary predicates (functors).

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
923
of Frege’s maneuver). The third axiom, called lambda-conversion, guarantees the proper
semantic working of the λ-operator;15 whereas the last axiom is a sort of an axiom of
choice that guarantees that whenever a set is not empty, we can name an element of the
set (which implies that whenever there is a true existential statement, we have the name
of a corresponding witness).16
Completeness of a slightly diﬀerent version of this axiom system was proved by Henkin
[1950]. However, the completeness proof is possible only because we deﬁned the seman-
tics so that D(αβ) is a set of functions from Dβ to Dα; once we replace “a set of functions”
by “the set of all functions”, we get a semantics which is not axiomatizable (in conse-
quence of the G¨odel theorem). The former kind of semantics is usually called the Henkin
semantics, whereas the latter is called standard semantics.17 Hence the above axioma-
tization of Ty1 are complete w.r.t. the Henkin semantics of the language, not w.r.t. the
standard one.
Thanks to the expressive richness of the language we can also take all the usual logical
operators as deﬁned symbols; taking only = (for every type) as primitive:
T ≡Def. (λy.y =(oo) λy.y)
F ≡Def. (λy.y =(oo) λy.T)
Πα ≡Def. λg.(g =(oα) λa.T)
∧≡Def. λy.λz.(λh.h(T, T) =o λh.h(y, z))
→≡Def. λy.λz.(y =o y ∧z)
¬ ≡Def. λy.(y =o F)
∨≡Def. λy.λz.¬(¬y ∧¬z)
(where y, z, a, g, h are variables of the respective types o, o, α, (oo) and ((oo)o) and we
write h(x, y) instead of (h(x))(y) and use the usual inﬁx notation for logical operators).
Andrews [1986] has shown that then we can make do with the following axioms and
rule:
H(T) ∧H(F) =o Πo(λy.H(y))
B =β B′ →(I(B) =α I(B′))
(I =(αβ) I′) →Πβ(λx.(I(x) =α I′(x)))
(λx.B)(A) =β Bx←A
ια(λx.(x =α A)) =α A
A =α A′, B/BA←A′
Here the newly introduced letters H, B′, I and I′ stand for expressions of the respective
types (oo), β, (αβ), (αβ).
To summarize: we can see the semantics of ﬁrst-order predicate calculus (which under-
lies also common model theory) as a matter of connecting expressions to their extensions
15As Andrews [1986] duly points out, this axiom can be seen as a disguised comprehension principle: it
involves that to every open formula there corresponds a function, especially that for every formula of type o
there is the function which maps all n-tuples satisfying the formula on T and all others on F.
16The ι operator is thus reminiscent both of the ‘iota inversum’ operator of Russell, and of the ε operator of
Hilbert.
17For the concept of the Henkin semantics, see, e.g., Andrews [1986] or Shapiro [1991].

924
Jaroslav Peregrin
such that the extension of a whole is always computed from the extensions of parts via a
functional application; and we can see Ty1 as the ultimate generalization of this idea.
3
FAILURES OF EXTENSIONALITY AND CARNAP’S INTENSION
As we saw, Carnap pointed out that if what we are after is meaning in the intuitive sense,
then extensions would not do. We saw that in fact this is rather obvious, for probably
nobody would be willing to admit that a truth value is what a sentence means and that
consequently all true sentences (as well as all the false ones) are synonymous. However,
Carnap used more sophisticated counterexamples, mostly concerning predicates. Thus,
for instance, he claimed (borrowing from Aristotle’s classiﬁcation) that though the predi-
cates “human” and “featherless biped” are co-extensional (there is, as a matter of fact, no
animal species which has no feathers and at the same time has two legs, save us, humans),
they are clearly not synonymous. (We all know that a non-human featherless biped is
surely conceivable — e.g. a hobbit!).18
This means that insofar as a logician wants to explicate the concept of meaning, she
must not stay on the level of extensions and must follow Carnap to that of intensions.
However, should a logician struggle to explicate meaning at all? Or should she care only
about truth, and hence, as Frege maintained, extension? We have seen that Frege endorsed
extensions in view of the fact that they are enough to provide for a compositional account
for truth; in particular that (i) the assignment of extensions to expressions is composi-
tional; (ii) the assignment of extensions to sentences coincides with the assignment of
truth values.
It is important to realize that the Carnapian considerations challenge not only the ex-
tensions’ capability of explicating the intuitive concept of meaning, but rather also the
Fregean way of accounting for truth, by challenging the assumption (i). Consider the
sentence
(1) One need not know that all featherless bipeds are human.
It is clearly true: one who has not studied much zoology need not know such thing.
However, if extensions are compositional, then we are free to replace the name of an
extension by another name of the same extension within the sentence without thereby
changing the truth value of the sentence. Hence it seems that also the sentence
(2) One need not know that all humans are human,
which arises out of replacing “featherless biped” by the co-extensional “human”, must
also be true. But how could anybody sensibly fail to know that humans are humans?
Or consider a sentence of the shape
(3) One plus one is necessarily two.
Such sentences have traditionally been considered as resulting from the application of
the operator of necessity to a sentence; hence its extension, i.e. its truth value should be
18See [Carnap, 1947, §5].

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
925
yielded by a combination of the extension of “necessarily” and the extension (truth-value)
of “one plus one is two”. It follows that replacing the sentence “one plus one is two” by
any other sentence with the same truth value should not change the truth value of (3).
However, it is easy to see that if we replace “one plus one is two” by a sentence which
is true only contingently, perhaps “Prague is the capital of Czechia”, then the truth value
will change from T to F.
Hence it is clear that extensions in general are not compositional. (What would be
Frege’s response to this? Did he not see this? He surely did, but he was convinced
we could restrict ourselves to only that part of language where the compositionality of
extensions does hold — that this is the ‘logically relevant core’ of language.) Thus a
non-extensional logic is needed not only when we are engaged within the philosophical
enterprise of explicating the concept of meaning, but also when we want to logically
master certain, ‘non-extensional’ contexts.
All in all, it seems that if what we want is either to explicate the concept of meaning, or
to account for non-extensional contexts, we should follow Carnap and turn our attention
to intensions. However, what is an intension? Is there a possibility of explicating it as
explicitly as extension and to establish an ‘intensional logic’?
We saw that Carnap considered two expressions co-extensional if they were equivalent
in the precise sense deﬁned in the beginning of the previous section. This yielded him
the explication of extensions. Now turning his attention to intensions, he concluded that
they can be approached in an analogous way: he proposed to consider two expressions
co-intensional if they are logically equivalent, i.e. if their equivalence is not simply true,
but logically true (their equivalence follows by nothing else than the laws of logic). Thus
while “the morning star” and “the evening star” are co-extensional, for
(4) The morning star is the evening star
is true, they are not co-intensional, for (4) is not logically true. Similarly “featherless
biped” and “human” are — for all we know — co-extensional, for
(5) An individual is a featherless biped iﬀit is human
is true; but they are not co-intensional, for (5) is not logically true.
While this meant an advance on the way to explicating co-intensionality, it was not,
however, directly on the way to explicating intension. But Carnap indicated also a more
promising route to the latter goal: he noticed that two sentences are logically equivalent iﬀ
they are true w.r.t. the same states-of-aﬀairs. Thus, Carnap [1947], introduced the concept
of state-description. A state description is a set of atomic sentences containing for every
atomic sentence either it, or its negation. Then Carnap assigned to every sentence what
he called its range: the set of all state-descriptions in which it is true.
Intuitively, state-descriptions represent conceivable states of our world (as Carnap him-
self puts it, ibid., p. 9, they represent “Leibniz’s possible worlds or Wittgenstein’s possible
states of aﬀairs”); formally each of them uniquely determines a maximal consistent set of
sentences. Carnap’s observation indicated that the intension of a sentence could perhaps
be explicated precisely as its range: as the set of all those state-descriptions (and conse-
quently ‘possible worlds’ — whatever these may be) in which the sentence is true. And
precisely this has later become the point of departure of modal and intensional semantics.

926
Jaroslav Peregrin
4
MODAL LOGIC
In fact logicians did ponder sentences claiming that something is possible or that it is
necessary from the very beginning of the enterprise of logic, i.e. since the time of Aristo-
tle. And besides the majority of post-Fregean logicians, who developed the wonderfully
simple and transparent extensional logic outlined by Frege (and also Boole and others),
there was always a minority of those who thought about ways of integrating even the
non-extensional contexts into logic.
In 1932 Lewis and Langford published their Survey of Symbolic Logic, in the Appendix
of which C. I. Lewis presented ﬁve axiomatic systems of modal logic (thereafter known
as S1–S5). The crucial logical connective which appeared in them was the so-called strict
implication (); however, the modern modal logicians came to the conclusion that as
this is one of the triad of mutually interdeﬁnable modal operators, the other members of
which being necessity (□) and possibility (♦), we are free to take any one of the three as
the primitive one and mostly settled for □. (♦S then can be deﬁned as ¬□¬S , whereas
S 1  S 2 as □(S 1 →S 2)). Therefore most modern axiomatic systems of modal logic
are based on the necessity operator (usually called the box; the possibility operator being
called the diamond).19 It is, however, good to realize that there is a respect in which
Lewis’ strict implication is more important than its two relatives: while the necessity
and the possibility operators do not correspond to anything terribly important in ordinary
discourse,20 the strict implication seems to correspond to the all-important contrafactual
conditional of natural language.
It was clear that the language of modal logic did not allow for an extensional inter-
pretation. □was syntactically on a par with ¬, hence within the extensional framework
it would have to denote a unary truth function. Assume that such a function exists; call
it f□. And assume that within the language we are interested in there is a sentence, say
“1=1”, which is necessarily true, and another sentence, perhaps “Prague is the capital
of Czechia”, which is true, but not necessarily (if there were no such two sentences, the
situation would be trivial). Then it must be the case that
T = ∥□(1 = 1)∥= f□(∥1 = 1∥) = f□(T) =
= f□(∥Prague is the capital of Czechia∥) = ∥□(Prague is the capital of Czechia)∥=
= F.
Hence, in pain of contradiction, no such function exists.
This means that if modal logic is to be interpreted, we need a semantics which is not
extensional. The ﬁrst attempts to build a feasible semantics were presented in the ﬁfties;
19For a detailed exposition of modal calculi, see Hughes & Cresswell [1968], Chellas [1980] Gamut [1991],
or Blackburn et al. [2000].
20This was argued for by Quine. He pointed out [1992, 73] that when, in ordinary discourse, we apply
the adverb “necessarily” to a sentence, we usually do not mean to express anything of the kind studied by
modal logic, but rather either want to express that the sentence is “presumed acceptable to our interlocutor and
stated only as a step toward the consideration of moot ones” or want to “identify something that follows from
generalities already expounded, as over against new conjectures or hypotheses”. Thus, Quine concludes that
“expression [of necessity] serves a purpose in daily discourse, but a shallow one.”

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
927
they culminated in the work of Saul Kripke, who is nowadays usually considered as the
author of such a semantics.21 Let us consider his proposals in detail.
Kripke came to the conclusion that we must let sentences denote not truth values, but
rather subsets of a given set. He called elements of the underlying set possible worlds,
which made his proposal (treacherously) easy to grasp: each sentence is taken to denote
the set of those possible worlds in which it is true. This further lets us explicate necessity
as ‘truth in every possible world’ and possibility as ‘truth in at least one possible world’,
which is again very plausible. Formally, given a set Wof possible worlds, we can deﬁne
f□as follows:
f□(x)
= W iﬀx = W
= ∅otherwise.
This semantics yields a rather plausible class of tautologies, like □S →S (‘if some-
thing is necessarily the case, then it is the case’), □S →□□S (‘if something is necessarily
the case, then it is necessary that it is necessarily the case’) etc.
Aside of the story about ‘possible worlds’, there is also a purely algebraic way to
understand Kripke’s proposal. The ordinary (extensional) logical connectives make the
set of denotations of sentences into a Boolean algebra (with conjunction acting as the
meet, disjunction as the join and negation as the complement). As there is no need for
a more complicated Boolean algebra than the simplest, two-element one, we make do
with the two truth values. However, the introduction of the modal operators blocks this
simplest possibility; so the solution is to settle for less trivial Boolean algebras, and as
every Boolean algebra can be represented by the algebra of subsets of a set, we have the
semantics outlined above.22
In fact, Kripke proposed a more sophisticated semantics,23 in which the set of possible
worlds was supplemented by a binary relation, which is called the accessibility relation.
The idea is that what would be relevant for the necessary truth of S w.r.t. a world w is not
the truth of S w.r.t. all worlds whatsoever, but rather only its truth w.r.t. those which are
accessible from w. Thus, if we are, for example, trying to explicate physical necessity,
then we might, considering necessity in a world w, want to disregard those worlds in
which there are diﬀerent physical laws (and hence we make the accessibility relation into
the relation of sharing the same physical laws).
It has turned out that by ﬁne-tuning the accessibility relation we can develop sound and
complete semantics for a rich variety of axiomatically deﬁned modal logics. In particular,
it has turned out that many axioms of modal logic correspond to simple properties of the
accessibility relation. Thus, for example, □S →S holds if and only if the relation is
reﬂexive; and similarly for many other axiom-candidates. Investigations into this kind of
correspondence has generated what is now called the correspondence theory.
There is a further way of understanding the step from the extensional to the intensional,
possible-world semantics. We can imagine that we simply change the extensional seman-
tics so as to admit that the ‘actual’ distribution of truth values among sentences is not
the only one possible — hence that we have a whole set of acceptable truth valuations.
21See Copeland (2002) for a detailed overview of the emergence of possible-worlds-semantics.
22Cf. Peregrin (2005a).
23See [Kripke, 1963; 1965].

928
Jaroslav Peregrin
Each such valuation corresponds, on the one hand, to a Kripke possible world, while, on
the other, can be seen as amounting to a Carnap state-description, as a means of pointing
out certain sentences. In this way, Kripke’s proposal come to connect with the one of
Carnap.24
5
MODAL PREDICATE LOGIC
There is a limited parallel between modal propositional logic and extensional predicate
logic. We may compare possible worlds with individuals and modalities with quantiﬁers:
indeed in the simplest case,
necessarily S
means
for (in) every world, S
whereas
possibly S
means
for (in) at least one world, S .
In the general case the situation is more complicated, but still we can say that
necessarily S
means
for (in) every accessible world, S
whereas
possibly S
means
for (in) at least one accessible world, S .
This opens the way for a reduction of some modal logics to the extensional ﬁrst-order
predicate logic.25 (For other systems of modal logic this may not be possible because
24An approach to the semantics of modal logic alternative to that of Kripke and more congenial to that
of Carnap was fostered by [Hintikka, 1969]. Its basic concept of model set is quite close to Carnap’s state
description.
25As we have already pointed out, □S →S , for instance, is valid within a modal logic iﬀthe underlying
accessibility relation is reﬂexive, i.e. iﬀ, denoting the relation as BR, ∀w.wBRw.

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
929
some modal formulas correspond to such properties of the accessibility relation that are
not ﬁrst-order deﬁnable.26)
However, once we have a propositional logic of possibility and necessity, we would
want to extend it to a predicate logic. On ﬁrst sight, this should be simply a matter of
adding the necessity operator to the standard predicate calculus; but in fact the situation
is somewhat trickier. Whereas in extensional predicate calculus we have the universe of
individuals and in modal propositional calculi we have the universe of possible worlds,
which can be seen as, in a sense, replacing it, in modal predicate logic we have both, and
we face the problem of their mutual relationship.
This is indeed a problem, though prima facie the situation might seem to be clear: it
appears that the universe of individuals must be relativized to possible worlds, that there
should be a separate universe for each world. However, the situation is not so simple.
First, this would imply considerable complications for the formal apparatus. The point
is that whereas the formula □∀xS (“for every world and every its individual, S ”) would
continue to make sense, ∀x□S would become senseless, for it would require us to quantify
over individuals which do not belong to any possible world, which would make no sense.
Besides this, there is a less formal problem. One of the basic points of modal logic is
the analysis of contrafactual locutions, which in natural language typically have the form
“If [it were the case that] ..., then [it would be the case that] ...”. This means that one of
the prototypical kinds of sentences which we might hope to capture by means of modal
predicate calculus is that exempliﬁed by
(6) If I were the president of Russia, I would make St. Petersburg the capital.
And it seems that this requires that the same individual be in more than one possible
world: namely that there is a possible world in which I, the same person which exists in
the actual world, am the president of Russia.
There are a number of responses to this problem. Thus, D. Lewis [1968; 1986], for
example, wanted to save the idea of the world-speciﬁc universes by postulating a coun-
terpart relation among individuals of the universes of diﬀerent worlds. Hence though I
do exist only in the actual world, in other worlds there are my counterparts which are, for
the purposes of semantic analysis, indistinguishable from me.
Tich´y [1971], on the other hand, accepted that individuals are prior to possible worlds:
which made him reduce individuals to bare ‘property-hangers’. That is, the individuals
outside of possible worlds do not have any nontrivial properties (though they are ‘numer-
ically’ distinct from each other), and they acquire such properties only within the context
of possible worlds: and possible worlds then emerge from a distribution of some basic
properties among the transcendental individuals.
However, also this solution has consequences which appear unwanted. It implies, for
example, that there cannot be a possible world in which I do not exist — in some worlds I
may be a stone or an ash-tray (or perhaps even a summer breeze?), but there is for me no
way of not being there at all. It also implies that there are worlds which do not diﬀer in
26Thus, for example, to □♦S →♦□S there arguably corresponds no property of the accessibility rela-
tion which would be expressible within the language of FOPC (see Goldblatt, [1975]). Another example is
□(□S →S ) →□S (see [Boolos, 1979, 82].

930
Jaroslav Peregrin
any humanly recognizable way, but which are diﬀerent in that, for example, the property-
hanger underlying a person A in one of them underlies a person B in the other and vice
versa.
These two extreme approaches may be partly reconciled by means of diﬀerentiating
two senses of “exists”: there is a broader sense, in which every individual which can be
found in any possible world exists (simpliciter); and there is a narrower sense in which
existence is relativized to a possible world and in which only what can be found in a
world exists in that world. Some individuals which exist in the broader sense may not
exist in the narrower sense in a given possible world. Existence-in-a-world then can be
conceived of as a property, a property which in every possible world is instantiated by
those individuals which exist-in-the-world.
The way we choose to construe the relationship between the universe of individuals
and that of possible worlds also bears on the validity of the so-called Barcan formula.
This formula codiﬁes the interchangeability of the quantiﬁcations over the two universes:
∀x□F ↔□∀xF.
If the universes are treated as independent (in the sense that we take all individuals to exist
in every possible world — so that the quantiﬁcation over individuals is always taken to be
over the whole universe), the formula is unproblematically true. On the other hand, if the
individuals are relativized to possible worlds (so that the quantiﬁcation over individuals
within a possible world is only over the individuals which exist in that possible world,
which need not be all individuals), then this formula, if not deemed utterly meaningless
(see above), may hold only for such interpretations in which the universe of individuals of
every possible world would be the same as that of every possible world accessible from
it.
It seems that from the intuitive viewpoint, it would be natural to have both the pos-
sibility of the same individual occurring in more than one world and the possibility of
an individual present in a world being utterly absent from another world. However, this
would obviously lead to an apparatus much more complicated and much less elegant than
the above two.27
6
MONTAGUE’S ‘LOCALLY’ INTENSIONAL LOGIC
The most famous system of modal predicate logic was presented by Richard [Montague,
1970a; 1970b; 1973]. He called the system intensional logic and this term has been almost
universally accepted, so that the usage of the term “modal” is now normally restricted
to propositional logic. The basic idea was that of explicating intensions generally as
functions from possible worlds to extensions. This was compatible with how we could
see the relationship between the extension of a sentence and its Kripkean intension: the
27See [Gamut, 1991, §3.3] for a further discussion of the choice between an absolute universe and relative
universes. For discussions of further aspects of the ‘metaphysics of possible worlds’ see Loux [1979] or Divers
(2002).

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
931
intension of a sentence could be seen as a function mapping each world on the truth value
of the sentence for that world.
This means that while an intension of a sentence is a function from possible worlds to
truth values, that of an individual term is a function from possible worlds to individuals
and that of a predicate is a function from possible worlds to classes of individuals or
classes of n-tuples of individuals. Thus, the intension of “the president of the USA” is
a function mapping every possible world on its president of the USA (if any); whereas
the intension of “featherless biped” is a function mapping every world on the class of its
featherless bipeds. In this way, Carnap’s idea of ranges gets generalized to expressions of
all categories.
However, this elegant solution brings with it a grave problem. We saw that within
extensional semantics the uniform way of combining denotations of parts into the deno-
tation of a whole was functional application; but if we explicate intensions as Montague
did, this is no longer possible. While we can apply the extension of “featherless biped” to
the extension of “the president of the USA” to yield us the extension of “The president of
the USA is a featherless biped” (for the former extension is a function from individuals
to truth values and the latter is an individual), we cannot do the same with the respective
intensions — the intension of “featherless biped” is no longer the kind of function which
would be applicable to the intension of “the president of the USA”.
What we can do is to take the values (i.e. extensions) of these intensions for a particu-
lar world and let them yield us the extension of “The president of the USA is a featherless
biped” for the possible world. And we can do this for any possible world. Hence as the in-
tension of the sentence is uniquely determined by its truth values w.r.t. all possible worlds,
the intension can be obtained by obtaining the extensions for every possible worlds. This
was Montague’s strategy: he gave the rules for computing extensions assuming that their
totality yields us also intensions.
Obviously, the situation is not so simple that we could always merely take extensions
of components and use them to yield us the extension of the corresponding compound —
if so, then the diﬀerence between extensional and intensional logic would be rather trivial.
The raison d’ˆetre of intensional logic, we saw, was the fact that in some cases we may
need more than just the extension of a component to get the extension (not to speak about
intension) of the compound.
Montague’s solution was that (i) each expression of his logic had both an extension and
an intension; (ii) in extensional contexts expressions continued to denote their extensions;
and (iii) there was a mechanism which would take care of intensional contexts in that
it would allow, in eﬀect, an expression to ‘exceptionally’ denote its intension instead of
the extension. Thus, Montague’s was what we could call a locally intensional logic —
intension enters the scene only where there is no way of making do with extension. The
mechanism with which Montague accomplished this was realized by an operator, namely
∧. Its role was such that if we denote the extension of an expression e as ∥e∥E whereas its
intension as ∥e∥I, we can write
∥∧e∥E = ∥e∥I.
Thus, as “necessarily”, as we saw, constitutes an intensional (i.e. non-extensional) con-
text, the formula corresponding to the natural language necessarily S will not be □S , but

932
Jaroslav Peregrin
rather □∧S . And while the extension of S is a truth value, that of ∧S equals the intension
of S and hence is a set of possible worlds.
Let us describe Montague’s system in greater detail.28 However, we will present it in
a slightly simpliﬁed form and also using a diﬀerent notation than Montague, in order to
stress the continuity with Church’s Ty1 described above.29
Montague’s intensional logic (MIL)
Syntax
ι and o are basic types, and if α and β are types then also (αβ) is a type. Moreover, if α
is a type, then also (αω) is a type. For each type we have an unlimited stock of constants
and variables. If a is an expression of type (αβ) and b an expression of type β, then a(b)
is an expression of the type α; and if a is an expression of type α and x a variable of type
β, then λx.a is an expression of type (αβ). Moreover, if a is an expression of type α, then
∧a is an expression of type (αω); and if a is an expression of type (αω), then ∨a is an
expression of type α.
Semantics
To each type α there correspond two domains S α and Dα, where S α is identical to D(αω).
Do is the set of the two truth values, Dι is a universe of discourse (any given set); D(αβ)
is a set of functions from Dβ to Dα, and D(αω) is a set of functions from a set of ‘possible
worlds’ (any given set) to Dα. An interpretation maps every constant a of type α on an
element of S α; a valuation maps every variable x of type α on an element of Dα. If I
is an interpretation and V a valuation, then for every expression a of the language and
every possible world w we deﬁne the extension ∥a∥w
I,V of a in w, thereby deﬁning the
intension ∥a∥I,V of a, as the function mapping every w on ∥a∥w
I,V. For a constant c, ∥c∥w
I,V
= (I(c))(w); for a variable v, ∥v∥w
I,V = V(v). ∥a(b)∥w
I,V = ∥a∥w
I,V(∥b∥w
I,V) and ∥λx.a∥w
I,V is the
function which maps every element i of Dβ on ∥a∥w
I,V′, where V′ is just like V with the
single possible exception that it maps x on i. Moreover, ∥∧a∥w
I,V is the function which
maps every possible world w′ on ∥a∥w′
I,V; whereas ∥∨a∥w
I,V is ∥a∥w
I,V(w).
As an example, consider the sentence
(7) Madonna sings
In terms of Ty1 (or, for that matter, FOPC), it might be analyzed simply as
(7′) sing(Madonna)
where sing is an expression of the type (oι) and Madonna of the type ι. Now passing over
to MIL, nothing needs to change; save for the fact that each of the expressions as well as
28See [Mongague, 1974]; and also [Gallin, 1975], [Partee, 1976] and [Gamut, 1991, Chapter 6].
29Montague used the letters e, t and s instead of ι, o and ω, and he also wrote ⟨b, a⟩instead of (αβ). Hence,
for example, his equivalent of (o(oι)) was ⟨⟨e, t⟩, t⟩.

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
933
the whole sentence will now have also also an intension; the intension of the sentence
being denoted by ∧(sing(Madonna)).
To illustrate some idiosyncrasies of Montague’s approach, consider a slightly more
sophisticated example:
(8) John ﬁnds a unicorn
Within FOPC, the most straightforward analysis would be
(8′) ∃x (ﬁnd(John,x) ∧unicorn(x)).
Switching to Ty1, we need to make the binary predicate ﬁnd into an expression of the
type ((oι)ι) (taking a term to a unary predicate):
(82) ∃x (((ﬁnd(x))(John)) ∧unicorn(x)).
Using the mechanism of lambda-abstraction, this can be further transformed to
(83) (λy.∃x(((ﬁnd(x))(y)) ∧unicorn(x)))(John).
Now if we deﬁne (where r is a variable of the type (o(oι)))
ﬁnd* ≡Def. λr.λy.r(λx.(ﬁnd(x))(y)),
this can be further turned into
(84) (ﬁnd*((λp.∃x(p(x) ∧unicorn(x)))))(John)
Here John is a constant of the type ι, x is a variable of the same type, p is a variable
of the type (oι), and unicorn and ﬁnd* are constants of the types (oι) and ((oι)(o(oι))),
respectively. (Note that the step from ﬁnd to ﬁnd* was a purely technical one, relying
on the fact that an individual, or any other object, can be identiﬁed with the class of all
classes to which it belongs; hence though the type of the counterpart of “ﬁnd” should be
intuitively ((oι)ι), ﬁnd* is of the type ((oι)(o(oι))).)
Now consider a similar sentence
(9) John seeks a unicorn,
which, however, diﬀers from (8) in the crucial respect that the object position of “seek”,
unlike that of “ﬁnd”, constitutes an intensional context. (Whereas you cannot ﬁnd a uni-
corn without there being one, you can perfectly well seek a unicorn even when no uni-
corns exist.) Thus the counterpart of “seek”, unlike that of “ﬁnd”, should be intuitively of
the type ((oι)(ιω)), but due to the maneuver explained above we have seek* of the type
((oι)(o(o(ιω)))). Hence we must use, instead of p, a variable q of the type o(ιω) and,
consequently, ‘intensionalize’ its argument:
(9′) (seek*((λq.∃x((q)(∧x) ∧unicorn(x)))))(John).

934
Jaroslav Peregrin
Montague’s own analysis only diﬀers from this one in two minor points: ﬁrst, he lets all
arguments of all predicative expressions undergo intensionalization (which forces diﬀer-
ent types of the predicative expressions); and, second, he uses variables which have only
extensions and no intensions. This results into the formula30
(92) (seek*(λq.∃u(unicorn(∧x) ∧(∨q)(∧x))))(∧John),
where q is a variable of the type ((o(ιω))ω), and unicorn and seek* are constants of the
types (o(ιω)) and ((o(ιω))(o((o(ιω))ω))), respectively. It is clear that only to comprehend
the type of the verb is anything but easy, and to decipher the whole formula is even harder.
An axiomatization of Montague’s intensional logic was presented by [Gallin, 1975].
It turns out that there are only two axioms which must be added to an axiomatization of
Ty1, namely
□(∨x = ∨y) →(x = y);
∨∧x = x,
where
□x ≡Def. (∧x = ∧T).
7
‘GLOBALLY’ INTENSIONAL LOGIC
Thus Montague still declares extensions as the basic semantic values, and takes intensions
to be relevant only in that they can temporarily assume the place of extensions. Therefore
he needs the operator ∧, which is, however, not unproblematical in that it is, in contrast
to usual logical operators, not deﬁned compositionally. In particular, there is no function
which would take us from the semantic value (extension) of e to that of ∧e. This is
understandable in that insofar as Montague sees extensions as the basic semantic values,
intensionality cannot but be a failure of compositionality. Note however that though ∧is
generally applicable, there is no way of deﬁning it generally: going from ∥e∥to ∥∧e∥is
not a matter of a rule or of an algorithm, but rather of the advance knowledge of ∥∧e∥.
We can say that facing the dilemma of either taking intensions at face value (i.e. regard-
ing them directly as denotations of sentences) or saving the Fregean paradigm (according
to which one constituent of every complex expression denotes a function applicable to the
denotations of the others), Montague voted for the second alternative and hence treated
expressions as denoting extensions, letting intensions do their job only via the mediation
of the operator ∧. However, it seems that to embrace the ﬁrst alternative may be in some
respects better. We may let expressions denote directly intensions (thereby achieving what
can be called globally intensional logic) and modify the Fregean paradigm.
Let f be a function from Dω to D(αβ) and let g be that from Dω to Dβ. Let us use
the term intensional application of f to g for the operation which produces the function
h from Dω to Dα such that for every x ∈Dω, h(x) = ( f(x))(g(x)). It is easy to see
that if we change Montague’s semantics in such a way that every expression comes to
denote its intension and every application of a denotation to other denotations becomes
an intensional application, everything will work as smoothly as before.
30See [Montague, 1973].

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
935
Moreover, it takes only a minor enhancement of the language of MIL to be able to
articulate intensional application explicitly. If we add variables ranging over possible
worlds, then obviously the result of the intensional application of the denotation of an
expression A of the type ((αβ)ω) to an expression B of the type (βω) will be denoted
by λw.A(w)(B(w)). Thus, the intension of (9) will be denoted by (where for the sake of
comprehensibility we write the argument w as a subscript):
(93) λw.(seek*w(λw.λq.∃x(unicornw(x) ∧q(x))))(John)
where the respective types of q and unicorn have been changed to ((oι)ω) and (oι),
whereas that of seek* to (((oι)((o(oι)ω)))ω).
In what respect may a globally intensional logic be considered as preferable to the
locally intensional one? First, there is some slight simpliﬁcation both of the types cor-
responding to the common expressions of natural language and of the formulas which
emerge from their analyses. Second, we get rid of Montague’s problematic operators ∧
and ∨. And third, we can take the theoretical relation of denotation as a reasonable ex-
plication of the pre-theoretical relation of meaning, for now it relates expressions to their
intensions, which, unlike extensions, are capable of serving as explicata of meanings
(though not as perfect ones).31
A simple way to achieve globally intensional logic is to elevate possible worlds to a
fully-ﬂedged type. Hence we have, in addition to the basic types o and ι, also the type ω
of possible worlds; and of course all the types which can be obtained from all the three.
And we assume that each expression is mapped simply on its intension (a function from
possible worlds to the corresponding extensions).
This logic, within the context of post-Montagovian research, was presented by [Gallin,
1975] under the name of two-sorted type theory (or Ty2, as a generalization of Church’s
system with a second domain, besides that of individuals).32
However, it should not
escape our attention that an intensional logic based on this approach was presented inde-
pendently by [Tich´y, 1975; 1978a; 1978b].
Ty2 or Tich´y’s intensional logic
Syntax
ι, o and ω are basic types, and if α and β are types then also (αβ) is a type. For each
type we have an unlimited stock of constants and variables. If a is an expression of type
(αβ) and b an expression of type β, then a(b) is an expression of type α; and if a is an
expression of type α and x a variable of type β, then λx.a is an expression of type (αβ).
31See the last section.
32For a thorough discussion of the relationship between MIL and Ty2, see [Zimmerman, 1989].

936
Jaroslav Peregrin
Semantics
To each type α there corresponds the domain Dα. Do is the set of the two truth values,
Dι is a given universe of discourse and Dω is a given set of possible worlds;33 D(αβ) is a
set of functions from Dβ to Dα. An interpretation maps every constant of type α on an
element of Dα; a valuation maps every variable of type α on an element of Dα. If I is an
interpretation and V a valuation, then for every expression a of the language we deﬁne
the intension ∥a∥I,V in the following way. For a constant c, ∥c∥I,V = I(c); for a variable
v, ∥v∥I,V = V(v). ∥a(b)∥I,V = ∥a∥I,V(∥b∥I,V) and ∥λx.a∥I,V is the function which maps every
element i of Dβ on ∥a∥I,V′, where V′ is just like V with the single possible exception that
it maps x on i.
We can see that Ty2 is merely a minor variation on Ty1. However, we saw that Ty1
was purely extensional; and now it seems that intensional logic boils down to its simple
variation — a variation which merely adds one more type and does not aﬀect its basic
extensionality in any substantial way. Should we take this as a reductio ad absurdum of
the possibility of a (‘truly’) intensional logic? Not really; but we should take it as an
indication that a deeper insight into the concept of intensionality is needed.
At ﬁrst, we must distinguish dealing with an abstract, mathematical structure from
dealing with something via the structure.34 It is true that Ty2, in itself, is in no clear
way any more intensional than Ty1. However, note that before we can consider a formal
system as a language and especially as a language underlying a logic, we have to single
out the category of sentences, and more generally the categories which are to regiment
the pre-theoretic categories of expressions of our ordinary language. And here is where
an important diﬀerence emerges: whereas for Church sentences were expressions of the
category o, for an intensional logician they are rather expressions of the category (oω).
And this diﬀerence spreads to the other categories.
Hence the step from an extensional language to an intensional one does not consist in
changing the structure of Ty2, but rather in the way of employing it for logical purposes,
in the way of matching it with the natural language and pre-formal reasoning.
8
QUINE’S EXTENSIONALIST PROGRAM
Rampant philosophical objections to intensions and intensional logic were raised by W.
V. Quine [1960]. The basic objection was that intensions were not suﬃciently clearcut to
be included into the subject matter of a science so rigorous as logic. According to Quine,
they do not have real boundaries: there is no clear telling where one ends and another
begins. Take propositions, the intensions of sentences: is the proposition expressed by
“Berlin is east from Paris” the same as that expressed by “Paris is west of Berlin”? Who
is to decide? Similarly, is the intension of the predicate “to be bigger than John” the same
as “not to be smaller than John”?
33Tich´y takes the language of his logic to be fully interpreted, so he does not count with varying universes.
(He sees himself as the continuator of the Frege–Russell tradition as discussed by [Goldfarb, 1979].
34See Peregrin (2000b).

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
937
Quine concluded that intensions are simply illusory: there cannot be an entity, he in-
sists, which would not have a clear-cut boundary. (His famous slogan was “No entity with-
out identity.”) Hence propositions, properties and intensions in general are non-entities. In
comparison, individuals, truth values and sets of individuals, which underlie extensional
logic, are objects par excellence. At least, that is what Quine claims.
However, did not Carnap and Kripke help us to a rigorous concept of intension, which
is as clearcut as anything can be clearcut at all? True, meanings of expressions of natural
languages are fuzzy, but Kripkean intensions are functions, and functions are in general
well-deﬁned if anything is. It may be an obscure matter whether two sentences of natural
language denote the same intension; but intensions themselves are not obscure! Hence
are Quine’s scruples simply preposterous?
Not really. In fact, the fuzziness Quine diagnosed did ﬁnd its way even into our notion
of intension, hidden within the Trojan horse of the concept of possible world. Is there a
possible world in which Berlin is east from Paris, while Paris is not west of Berlin? If
we imagine possible worlds in some intuitive (in the Kantian sense) way, then it seems
not, but could we not have possible worlds with some bizarre non-Euclidean geometries
in which something like this would be possible? (And should we insist on intuitivity of
possible worlds at all?) And again, who is to decide?
What if we construe possible worlds as maximal consistent classes of sentences? Are
such worlds not automatically excluded at least in this case? Are not “Berlin is east from
Paris” and “Paris is not west of Berlin” incompatible? Well, if all expressions already
have exactly speciﬁed meanings, then it is determined what is incompatible with what
and hence what are the maximal consistent classes of sentences. However, in such a case
it is unclear what could be the reason for taking pains to build a possible-worlds semantics:
this is an achievement for a language whose semantics is in need of explication, i.e. for a
formal language determined merely in terms of axioms and inference rules or for a natural
language existing only via the practices of certain communities.
Besides this, even if we denied that the Carnapo-Kripkean intensions are fuzzy, a prob-
lem would persist. What we are interested in are the very intensions of our expressions;
and to promote the goal of their explication it is of little help to have some crisp inten-
sions, about which we are nevertheless unable to say by which real expressions they are
denoted. (Lewis, [1975], pointed out that it is one thing to study abstract languages, and
it is another thing to pin down the abstract language which can be identiﬁed with an em-
pirical language. Our point here is that if what we are interested in is meaning within the
empirical languages, then the former enterprise in itself is not of much use.)
Hence Quine seems to have a good point after all: intensions are essentially fuzzy.
However, be they as fuzzy as they may, the two points stated above which render exten-
sional semantics problematic persist: it is incapable of providing (i) an adequate expli-
cation of meanings and (ii) an adequate analysis of non-extensional contexts. What is
Quine’s response to these obstacles?
As for (i), Quine simply rejects the concept of meaning. This is not to say that he rejects
that our expressions are meaningful, he only insists that such meaningfulness is a more-or-
less matter and as such is not reasonably graspable as a possession, by the expression, of
a deﬁnite object. “I would not seek,” claims Quine [1992, 56], “a scientiﬁc rehabilitation

938
Jaroslav Peregrin
of something like the old notion of separate and distinct meanings; the notion is better
seen as a stumbling block cleared away.”
An objection which can be raised against this view is that the fact that something is
fuzzy does not automatically imply that it could not be useful to explicate (or model) it in
a non-fuzzy way. After all, everything we encounter within the empirical world is (more
or less) fuzzy, and we often proﬁt from making idealized models.35 The whole point is
to be aware of the level of idealization employed and not to employ the model where a
higher resolution is required.
As for (ii), Quine claims that some of the alleged non-extensional contexts may be
disregarded for their role is in fact marginal; whereas others can be dealt with in some
indirect extensional ways. Thus, the contexts studied by ordinary modal logic are, ac-
cording to him, of the ﬁrst kind: the contexts possibly ... and necessarily ..., as understood
by modal logicians, are not really important for natural language.36
But there are less marginal contexts, like those of propositional attitude reports (with-
out which, for example, no psychological theory would be imaginable). How does Quine
want to cope with them? What he proposes is to understand such reports as expressing
a relation between an individual and a sentence. Thus “John believes that all featherless
bipeds are human” will get analyzed as a relation between John and the sentence “all
featherless bipeds are human”. (What if John does not speak English? Would it still make
sense to say that his believing that all featherless bipeds are human is a matter of his rela-
tionship with an English sentence? In one sense yes: he would be related to the sentence
by the relation which relates a person to a sentence iﬀthe latter expresses the belief of the
former.)
It is now up to the reader to weigh the fuzziness of intensions against the cumbersome-
ness of the Quinean analysis of intensional contexts.
9
BEYOND INTENSIONS
Anyway, intensional logic has proved itself especially fruitful for the purposes of expli-
cating meanings in natural language37 (simultaneously with the systems of Montague and
Tich´y there also appeared others, like that of [Creswell, 1973]). However, already from
the outset it became clear that even intensions are not entirely suﬃcient for this purpose.
This was particularly apparent in the case of propositional attitude reports (mentioned
already above). Consider
(10) John believes that one plus one equals two
Viewed from the perspective of intensional semantics, this statement claims that there is
a relation of believing between a person John and a proposition that one plus one equals
two. And the proposition can be nothing else than an intension, namely the intension of
“one plus one equals two”, hence the class of all possible worlds. So (10) claims that John
35See Peregrin (ibid.).
36See footnote 20.
37See [Partee and Hendriks, 1997].

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
939
is in the relation of believing to the class of all possible worlds. But exactly the same is
claimed by any sentence which results from (10) by replacing the object clause by any
other mathematical truth, i.e.
(11) John believes that every consistent ﬁrst-order theory has a denumerable model.
This would entail that (10) and (11) are synonymous and especially that they cannot dif-
fer in truth value. But while it is unlikely that someone does not believe that one plus
one equals two, it is surely possible that he has no idea about properties of ﬁrst-order
theories.38
There are several responses to this observation. One of them is not to tie possible
worlds to empirical possibility. Thus Hintikka [1978] proposed what he called ‘impossi-
ble possible worlds’: such a world is not possible in the sense of being realizable, but is
possible in the sense that somebody might simultaneously believe everything which holds
in it.
Another, more popular response was to supplement intensional semantics by some
superstructure which would allow us to explicate meanings as something more ‘ﬁne-
grained’ than intensions (then we can speak, together with Cresswell [1975], about hyper-
intensional semantics and perhaps logic). Thus David Lewis [1972], following a hint of
Carnap [1947], proposed seeing meanings of compounds as a kind of structures based on
the syntactic structures of the corresponding expressions, but involving intensions of their
components. These ideas were then elaborated especially by Cresswell [1985]. Tich´y
[1986], in a similar vein, proposed seeing meanings of compounds as ‘constructions’ of
their intensions from the intensions of their parts: hence to see the meaning of one plus
one as the construction of the number two out of the operation of addition and two in-
stances of the number one; and to see the meaning of one plus one equals two as the
construction of the truth value T out of this construction, the relation of equality and
another (trivial) construction of the number two. And propositional attitudes are then
construed as relations to constructions.
This is connected to another problem concerning the Carnapian approach to intensions.
Having followed Carnap’s explication, whereby intensions became in fact extensions rel-
ativized to the state of the world, we have arrived at an extension–intension distinction
which makes a nontrivial sense only in the case of empirical terms. Where there is no de-
pendence on the state of the world, there the distinction between extension and intension
is trivial (the intension becomes a constant function mapping every possible world on the
same extension). However, it seems that the intuition underlying the Carnapian distinc-
tion applies also to mathematical discourse. Hence, should not the distinction between
intension and extension apply also to non-empirical vocabulary?
The point behind the ‘intuitive’ extension and intension (which Carnap set out to ex-
plicate) seems to be that whereas on the extensional level we can only say what (actually)
‘falls under’ a word, on the level of intension we can say why it is that it falls under it. The
Carnapian explication exploits the idea that the knowing why can be explicated as know-
ing the way extension depends on the state of the world. We can know what the sum of
38The problems posed by the propositional attitude reports were pointed out already by Carnap [1947]; in the
post-Montagovian era the discussion was revived by [Lewis, 1972; Partee, 1982; Cresswell, 1985] and others.

940
Jaroslav Peregrin
two numbers is without knowing why; and the knowing why, understanding what addition
is, can possibly be equated with the ability to give the sum of arbitrary numbers. Simi-
larly, knowing why some things fall under a term, knowing the corresponding concept, is
equated with the ability to give the extension of the term w.r.t. arbitrary circumstances.
From this viewpoint, it would seem that minimally within the realm of mathematics, it
is something of the kind of Tichyan constructions, rather than Carnapian intensions that
should play the role of meanings in the intuitive sense.39
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Work on this text was supported by the reseearch grant No. 401/04/0117 of the Grant
Agency of the Czech Republic.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Ajdukiewicz, 1935] K. Ajdukiewicz. Die syntaktische Konexit¨at, Studia Philosophica 1, 1-27, 1935.
[Andrews, 1986] P. B. Andrews. Introduction to Mathematical Logic and Type Theory, Academic Press, San
Diego, 1986; second edition Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2002.
[Bar-Hillel, 1950] Y. Bar-Hillel. On syntactical categories, Journal of Symbolic Logic 15, 1-16, 1950.
[Bar-Hillel, 1953] Y. Bar-Hillel. A quasi-arithmetical notation for syntactic description, Language 29, 47-58,
1953.
[van Benthem and ter Meulen, 1997] J. Benthem van and A. ter Meulen. Handbook of Logic and Language,
Elsevier / MIT Press, Oxford / Cambridge (Mass.), 1997.
[Blackburn et al., 2000] P. M. Blackburn, M. de Rijke and Y. Venema. Modal Logic, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2000.
[Boolos, 1979] G. Boolos. The Unprovability of Consistency, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1979.
[Carnap, 1947] R. Carnap. Meaning and Necessity, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1947.
[Casadio, 1988] C. Casadio. Semantic categories and the development of categorial grammars, in Categorial
Grammars and Natural Language Structures (ed. T. Oeherle et al.), Reidel, Dordrecht, 95-123, 1988.
[Chellas, 1980] B. F. Chellas. Modal Logic: An Introduction, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1980.
[Church, 1940] A. Church. A formulation of the simple theory of types, Journal of Symbolic Logic 5, 56-68,
1940.
[Church, 1956] A. Church. Introduction to Mathematical Logic, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1956.
[Copeland, 2002] B. J. Copeland. The genesis of possible worlds semantics, Journal of Philosophical logic 31,
99-137, 2002.
[Cresswell, 1975] M. J. Cresswell. Hyperintensional logic, Studia Logica 34, 25-38, 1975.
[Cresswell, 1985] M. J. Cresswell. Structured Meanings: The Semantics of Propositional Attitudes, MIT Press,
Cambridge (Mass.), 1985.
[Divers, 2002] J. Divers. Possible Worlds, Routledge, London, 2002.
[Dummett, 1973] M. Dummett. Frege, the Philosophy of Language, Duckworth, London, 1973.
[Dummett, 1981] M. Dummett. The Interpretation of Frege’s Philosophy, Duckworth, London, 1981.
[Etchemendy, 1990] J. Etchemendy. The Concept of Logical Consequence, Harvard University Press, Cam-
bridge (Mass.), 1990.
[Frege, 1891] G. Frege. Function und Begriﬀ(Ein Vortrag, gehlaten inder Sitzung vom 9.1.1891 der Jenaischen
Gesellschaft f¨ur Medizin und Naturwissenschaft), Jena, 1891.
[Frege, 1892a] G. Frege. ¨Uber Begriﬀund Gegenstand, Vierteljahrschrift f¨ur wissentschaftliche Philosophie
16, 192-205, 1892.
[Frege, 1892b] G. Frege. ¨Uber Sinn und Bedeutung, Zeitschrift f¨ur Philosophie und philosophische Kritik 100,
25-50, 1892.
[Frege, 1893] G. Frege. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik I-II, Pohle, Jena, 1893; 1903.
39For an elaboration of the approach of Tich´y in this direction see Materna [1998].

Extensional vs. Intensional Logic
941
[Frege, 1983] G. Frege. Nachgelassene Schriften (ed. H. Hermes et al.), Meiner, Hamburg, 1983.
[Gallin, 1975] D. Gallin. Intensional and Higher-order Modal Logic, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
[Gamut, 1991] L. T. F. Gamut. Logic, Language and Meaning, vol. 2, University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
1991.
[Goldblatt, 1975] R. Goldblatt. First-order deﬁnability in modal logic, Journal of Symbolic Logic 40, 35-40,
1975.
[Goldfarb, 1979] W. D. Goldfarb. Logic in the twenties: the nature of the quantiﬁer, Journal of Symbolic Logic
44, 351-368, 1979.
[Henkin, 1950] L. Henkin. Completeness in the theory of types, Journal of Symbolic Logic 15, 81-91, 1950.
[Hintikka, 1969] J. Hintikka. Models for Modalities, Reidel, Dordrecht, 1969.
[Hintikka, 1978] J. Hintikka. Impossible possible worlds vindicated, in Game-Theoretical Semantics (ed. E.
Saarinen), Reidel, Dordrecht, 367-379, 1978.
[Hughes and Cresswell, 1968] G. E. Hughes and M. J. Cresswell. An Introduction to Modal Logic, Methuen,
London, 1968; revised edition A New Introduction to Modal Logic, Routledge, London, 1996.
[Janssen, 1997] T. M. V. Janssen. Compositionality, in [van Benthem and ter Meulen, 1997].
[Janssen, 2001] T. M. V. Janssen. Frege, contextuality and compositionality, Journal of Logic, Language and
Information 10, 115-136, 2001.
[Kripke, 1963] S. Kripke. Semantical analysis of modal logic I (normal modal propositional calculi), Zeitschift
f¨ur mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik 9, 67-96, 1963
[Kripke, 1965] S. Kripke. Semantical analysis of modal logic II (non-normal modal propositional calculi), in
The Theory of Models (ed. J. W. Addison et al.), North-Holland, Amsterdam, 206-220, 1965.
[Lewis, 1932] C. I. Lewis and C. H. Langford. Symbolic Logic, Century, New York, 1932.
[Lewis, 1968] D. K. Lewis. Counterpart theory and quantiﬁed modal logic, Journal of Philosophy 65, 113-126,
1968.
[Lewis, 1972] D. K. Lewis. General semantics, in Semantics of Natural Language (ed. D. Davidson & G.
Harman), Reidel, Dordrecht, 1972.
[Lewis, 1975] D. K. Lewis. Languages and language, in Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science VII
(ed. K. Gunderstone), University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1975.
[Lewis, 1986] D. K. Lewis. On the Plurality of Worlds, Blackwell, Oxford, 1986.
[Loux, 1979] M. J. Loux, ed. The Possible and the Actual: Readings in the Metaphysics of Modality, Cornell
University Press, Ithaca, 1979.
[Materna, 1998] P. Materna. Concepts and Objects (Acta Philosophica Fennica 63), Societas Philosophica
Fennica, Helsinky, 1998.
[Mendelson, 1964] E. Mendelson. Introduction to Mathematical Logic, Wadsworth & Brooks, Paciﬁc Grove,
1964.
[Montague, 1970a] R. Montague. English as a formal language, in Visenti, B. et. al. (eds): Linguaggi nella
Societ`a et nella Tecnica, Milan, 1970, 189-224; reprinted in [Montague, 1974].
[Montague, 1970b] R. Montague. Universal grammar, Theoria 36, 373-398, 1970; reprinted in [Montague,
1974].
[Montague, 1973] R. Montague. The proper treatment of quantiﬁcation in ordinary English, in Approaches
to Natural Language, (ed. J. Hintikka et. al.), Reidel, Dordrecht, 221-242, 1973; reprinted in [Montague,
1974].
[Montague, 1974] R. Montague. Formal Philosophy: Selected Papers of R. Montague (ed. R. Thomason), Yale
University Press, New Haven. 1974.
[Neale, 2001] S. Neale. Facing Facts, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2001.
[Partee and Hendricks, 1997] B. Partee. and H. L. W. Hendricks. Montague grammar, in [van Benthem and ter
Meulen, 1997, 5-92].
[Partee, 1982] B. Partee. Belief sentences and limits of semantics, in Processes, Beliefs and Questions (eds. S.
Peters and E. Saarinen), Reidel, Dordrecht, 1982.
[Partee, 1976] B. Partee, ed. Montague Grammar, Academic Press, 1976.
[Pelletier, 2001] F. J. Pelletier. Did Frege believe Frege’s principle?, Journal of Logic, Language and informa-
tion 10, 87-114, 2001.
[Peregrin, 2000] J. Peregrin. The “natural” and the “formal”, Journal of Philosophical Logic 29, 75-101, 2000.
[Peregrin, 2005] J. Peregrin. Is compositionality an empirical concept?, in M. Werning, E. Machery & G.
Schurz (eds.): The Compositionality of Concepts and Meanings, Ontos, Frankfurt, 135-150, 2005.
[Peregrin, 2006] J. Peregrin. Semantics as based on inference, in The Age of Alternative Logics (ed. J. van
Benthem et al.), Kluwer, Dordrecht, to appear.
[Quine, 1992] W. V. O. Quine. Pursuit of Truth (revised edition), Harvard University Press, Cambridge (Mass.),
1992.

942
Jaroslav Peregrin
[Quine, 1960] W. V. O. Quine. Word and Object, MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.), 1960.
[Shapiro, 1991] S. Shapiro. Foundations without Foundationalism, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1991.
[Tarski, 1936] A. Tarski. ¨Uber den Begriﬀder logischen Folgerung, Actes du Congr`es International de
Philosophique Scientiﬁque 7, 1-11, 1936; English translation ‘On the Concept of Logical Consequence’
in Tarski: Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1956, pp. 409-420.
[Tich´y, 1971] P. Tich´y. An approach to intensional analysis, Nˆous 5, 273-297, 1971; reprinted in [Tich´y, 2004].
[Tich´y, 1975] P. Tich´y. What do we talk about?, Philosophy of Science 42, 80-93, 1975; reprinted in [Tich´y,
2004].
[Tich´y, 1978] P. Tich´y. De Dicto and De Re, Philosophia 8, 1978; reprinted in [Tich´y, 2004].
[Tich´y, 1978] P. Tich´y. Two kinds of intensional logic, Epistemologia 1, 143-164, 1978; reprinted in [Tich´y,
2004].
[Tich´y, 1986] P. Tich´y. Constructions, Philosophy of Science 53, 514-534, 1986; reprinted in [Tich´y, 2004].
[Tich´y, 2004] P. Tich´y. P. Tich´y’s Collected Papers in Logic and Philosophy (ed. V. Svoboda, B. Jespersen &
C. Cheyne), Filosoﬁa, Prague, 2004.
[Zimmerman, 1989] T. E. Zimmermann. Intensional logic and two-sorted type theory, The Journal of Symbolic
Logic 54, 65-77. 1989.

LOGICALLY POSSIBLE WORLDS
AND COUNTERPART SEMANTICS
FOR MODAL LOGIC
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
Since to belong and to belong of necessity and to be
possible to belong are diﬀerent (for many things be-
long, but nevertheless not of necessity, while others
neither belong of necessity nor belong at all, but it
is possible for them to belong), it is clear that there
will also be diﬀerent deductions of each and that their
terms will not be alike: rather, one deduction will be
from necessary terms, one from terms which belong,
and one from possible terms.
Aristotle: Prior Analytics, Book I, 8 1
INTRODUCTION
Modal logic has a remarkable history indeed. Originally conceived as the logic of
necessity and possibility, its philosophical roots go back at least as far as Aristo-
tle and the Stoic Diodorus Cronus.2 While Diodorus’s ‘Master Argument’ could
be considered an early example of modal propositional, more precisely temporal,
reasoning,3 the Stagirite’s investigations into modal syllogisms probably constitute
the earliest serious essay on combining modality with quantiﬁcation.4 Interest into
modal distinctions kept very much alive during Mediaeval Scholastics, notably in
the form of ontological arguments such as St. Anselm’s,5 and only seems to have
1English translation by Robin Smith [Aristotle, 1989].
2Classic (and encyclopaedic) texts on the early history of logic are Boche´nski’s [Boche´nski,
2002] and William and Martha Kneale’s [Kneale and Kneale, 1984].
3For the ‘Master Argument’ compare [White, 1984], as well as, for prominent modern recon-
structions, Arthur Prior’s [Prior, 1955], Oskar Becker’s [Becker, 1960], and Jaakko Hintikka’s
[Hintikka, 1964].
4Modern attempts at interpreting and understanding Aristotle’s still puzzling elaborations in
Prior Analytics include Lukasiewicz’s [Lukasiewicz, 1957] in the 1950ies, [Thom, 1979; Thom,
1996], [Patterson, 1995] and [Schmidt, 2002].
5Of which we ﬁnd variants in the work of, for example, Descartes and Leibniz, and a mod-
ern counterpart in Kurt G¨odel’s ontological argument, a descendant of the argument given by
Leibniz, being sketched in higher-order modal logic (second- or third-order depending on the in-
terpretation) and which was only posthumously published in [G¨odel, 1995]. For details compare
Melvin Fitting’s [Fitting, 2002b].
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

944
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
slowed down with the dawn of the Renaissance. While Leibniz, being an eminent
contributor to the development of modern logic, is usually credited with the intro-
duction of the notion of a ‘possible world’, the birth of modal logic as a technical
discipline of mathematical logic is often considered to be Clarence Irving Lewis’s
investigations into the paradoxes of material implication in 19186, and, in the
early thirties, Kurt G¨odel’s interpretation [G¨odel, 1932; G¨odel, 1933] of Heyting’s
version [Heyting, 1930] of Brouwer’s intuitionistic propositional logic [Brouwer,
1907; Brouwer, 1908] in terms of the modality ‘it is provable’7. Despite Quine’s
early attempts at discrediting the intelligibility of modal discourse [Quine, 1947;
Quine, 1953], its technical development went hand in hand with the rise of ana-
lytic philosophy, and both its technical sophistication as well as its philosophical
signiﬁcance virtually exploded in the 1970s with the unlikely success of Kripke’s
possible worlds semantics. In the early 21st century, modal logic is not only an
important tool in philosophy and linguistics, it also provides, in its many disguises,
key formalisms in artiﬁcial intelligence and knowledge representation.
In this contribution, however, we shall not review the history of modal logic,
nor do we delve deeply into the discussion of its metaphysics.8
Rather, we shall concentrate on the interplay between formal results and ana-
lytical thought. As argued already in [Hazen, 1979], formal semantic theories such
as Lewisian counterpart theory or Kripkean possible worlds semantics are com-
patible with a wide spectrum of metaphysical views concerning possible worlds,
the nature of objects and possibility, and so on. It is therefore pointless to ask
whether or not a given formal semantics is ontologically adequate. Besides, many
of these questions quickly take a diﬀerent turn: they become questions of physi-
cal nature whose answers often elude the specialists themselves. That theme will
be touched upon when we discuss the nature of time. Our main interest here is,
however, diﬀerent and more modest. We shall simply ask in what ways the formal
structures reﬂect the intuitions that they are claimed to model, and in what ways
technical results can be interpreted from a philosophical point of view. The most
common semantics of modal logics introduce the notions of a world, a possibility
or a situation, and impose further structure by means of more or less complex
relations, e.g., by the notion of an accessibility.
The nature and existence of ‘worlds’ has been an intensely debated topic in
analytic philosophy and metaphysics. Also, the nature of the accessibility relation
has largely been unscrutinised. Although nowadays the idea of a binary relation
6C. I. Lewis created his ﬁrst correct modal calculus S3 of strict implication in 1920 [Lewis,
1920] (an emendation of a system proposed earlier in his [Lewis, 1918]), compare also [Parry,
1970].
7In fact, a similar interpretation can be found even earlier in Orlov’s [Orlov, 1928].
8But compare [Goldblatt, 2003] for the historical development of mathematical modal logic
in the 20th century and [van Benthem et al., 2006] for the state-of-the-art as of 2005, [Copeland,
2002] for the genesis of possible worlds semantics, and [Lindstr¨om and Segerberg, 2006] for a
discussion of various early systems of quantiﬁed modal logic.
A good starting point for the
reader interested in the metaphysics of modality would be the anthologies [Linsky, 1971] and
[Loux, 1979], or John Divers’s [Divers, 2002].

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
945
between worlds is the most popular one, many alternatives have been tried (and
are being tried).
There is, however, a problem with Kripke-semantics, which
is both of technical and of philosophical nature: it is incomplete.
There exist
diﬀerent logics with the same class of Kripke-frames. This means that the choice
of Kripke-semantics encapsulates metaphysical commitments whose precise nature
is unfortunately diﬃcult to explicate. This is unproblematic when the semantics
is given beforehand and the logic is derived from it. In all other cases, however, we
have committed ourselves to the complete logics from the start without knowing
whether that is justiﬁed.
What is more, criteria for completeness are almost
impossible to give (a notable exception is Kit Fine’s [Fine, 1975]). The remedy
is to restrict the domain of interpretation to admissible sets, but this approach is
philosophically unsatisfactory as long as there is no clear account of where these
sets originate.
Another notion that has been met with suspicion is that of an object. One
problem with the notion of an object is the problem of transworld identiﬁca-
tion. If there are possible worlds, then which objects in a given world are the
same as other objects in another world? The answer depends in part on what we
think an object is. Saul Kripke and many with him have assumed that objects
are transcendental, to use a rather old-fashioned terminology here. This choice
was inﬂuenced by a particular school of thought which regards possible worlds
as man made, constructed out of the things that we know, namely the objects.
The worlds contain more or less the same objects, only the facts about these ob-
jects may change.
This view faces philosophical problems of its own, and has
been challenged on these grounds. Technically, its main disadvantage is that it is
highly incomplete. Most propositional logics become incomplete when we move to
predicate logic.
A diﬀerent conception of objects is to view them as entirely world-bound; this
is embodied in the semantics of counterpart theory as originally conceived by
David Lewis (see [Lewis, 1968]). It can be shown to be more general than Kripke-
semantics, but it too carries ontological commitments. The third way is two view
objects (in type theoretic terms) as individual concepts. This makes them both
transcendental and world bound.
It can be shown that this semantics (in its
generalised form) is actually complete in the most general sense. A fourth way is
to abandon the notion of object altogether. This is the semantics advocated for
by Shehtman and Skvortsov [Skvortsov and Shehtman, 1993]. In this semantics, a
structure is an inﬁnite sequence of frames. These frames combine both the notion
of object and world in one; worlds can be identiﬁed with the elements at level 0;
objects are only approximated to a ﬁnite degree at each level. It is possible to
construct a frame with worlds and objects from it ([Bauer, 2000]).

946
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
PART I
Worlds without Objects
1
BASIC CONCEPTS OF MODAL PROPOSITIONAL LOGIC
The language of modal propositional logic consists of a countable set V = {pi :
i ∈N} of sentence letters, a set C of propositional constants, the connectives ⊤, ¬,
and ∧, and a set of so-called modalities or modal operators. A modality can
have an arbitrary ﬁnite arity. We consider here only the case of a single operator □
of arity 1. Many of the philosophical considerations do not depend on that choice.
For the technical side see [Kracht and Wolter, 1999]. A modal logic is a set L
which contains all Boolean tautologies, and is closed under ’modus ponens’ (MP):
from ϕ ∈L and ϕ →ψ ∈L infer ψ ∈L, and substitution (sub): from ϕ ∈L
infer σ(ϕ) ∈L. Here, σ is deﬁned from a function from variables to formulae;
σ(ϕ) is obtained by replacing each occurrence of a propositional variable pi by
some formula σ(pi). (This means that substitution is an admissible rule; a rule
is admissible in L if the tautologies of L are closed under this rule. (MP) is
actually a derived rule, that is, a rule applicable in reasoning from premisses.) L
is classical if the following rule is admissible.
(RE)
ϕ ↔χ
□ϕ ↔□χ
(1)
L is normal if it is classical, and additionally
1. □(p0 →p1) →(□p0 →□p1) ∈L,
2. and (MN) is admissible in L:
(MN)
ϕ
□ϕ
(2)
A Kripke-frame is a triple ⟨F, R, I⟩, where F is a set, the set of worlds, R ⊆F 2
the accessibility relation, and I : C →℘(F) a function mapping propositional
constants to subsets of F. In what is to follow, we shall usually assume C = ∅.9
A valuation is a function β : V →℘(F) which assigns a set of worlds to each
sentence letter.
A pointed Kripke-model is a triple ⟨F, β, w⟩, where F is a
(Kripke-) frame, β a valuation, and w a world. Truth of formulae in a model is
9Whenever propositional constants are left out of the language, a Kripke-frame is just a pair
⟨F, R⟩.

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
947
then deﬁned as follows: ⟨F, β, w⟩⊨⊤always holds, and
⟨F, β, w⟩⊨pi
:⇔
w ∈β(pi);
⟨F, β, w⟩⊨c
:⇔
w ∈I(c);
⟨F, β, w⟩⊨¬ϕ
:⇔
⟨F, β, w⟩⊭ϕ;
⟨F, β, w⟩⊨ϕ ∧χ
:⇔
⟨F, β, w⟩⊨ϕ and ⟨F, β, w⟩⊨χ;
⟨F, β, w⟩⊨□ϕ
:⇔
for all v such that w R v: ⟨F, β, v⟩⊨ϕ.
(3)
Write F ⊨ϕ if ⟨F, β, w⟩⊨ϕ for all β and w. Given a class K of frames, let
Th(K) := {ϕ : for all F ∈K : F ⊨ϕ}.
(4)
Th(K) is called the logic of K, for, whenever K is some class of Kripke-frames,
Th(K) is a normal modal logic. Conversely, if L is a normal modal logic, we may
deﬁne
Frm(L) := {F : for all ϕ ∈L : F ⊨ϕ}.
(5)
These deﬁnitions can be applied to any type of semantics. (In that case, if X is the
class of structures, we index Frm with X to avoid confusion.) These deﬁnitions
technically equate a modal logic with its set of axioms (or tautologies), and leaves
the set of rules invariant.
2
TRANSLATION INTO CLASSICAL LOGIC
In and of itself, modal logic does not embody the commitment to possible worlds
of any sort—rather, the doctrines of modal realism and anti-realism are subject
to considerable philosophical debate. For instance, while Charles Chihara’s book
on modal realism [Chihara, 1998] contains an elaborate attempt at constructing a
viable position of modal anti-realism based on the idea to explain modalities not
in terms of possible worlds but rather in terms of ‘how the world could have been’,
the bulk of David Lewis’s ‘On the Plurality of Worlds’ [Lewis, 1986] consists of an
extended argument of why we cannot legitimately employ ‘possible worlds talk’
and enjoy its beneﬁts for instance in the philosophy of language without giving it
a realistic interpretation [Holton, 2003].
However, both in technical philosophy and in mathematical logic, possible
worlds have become a de facto indispensable tool. It was observed that modal
laws can be made plausible by using the notion of a possible world and expli-
cating modal operators using quantiﬁcation over possible worlds. This led to the
well-known standard translation of modal logic into classical logic (see [van
Benthem, 1983]). By rendering the truth conditions given in (3) into formal logic
as well, we arrive at a translation into monadic second-order logic, which runs
as follows. For each proposition letter pi we introduce a monadic second-order
predicate letter Pi (which is a variable).

948
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
p†
i := Pi(w)
(¬ϕ)† := ¬ϕ†
(ϕ ∧χ)† := ϕ† ∧χ†
(2ϕ)† := (∀v)(w R v →ϕ†(v/w))
(6)
A formula ϕ is satisﬁable in a Kripke-frame ⟨F, R⟩if and only if ϕ† is satisﬁable
in ⟨F, R⟩(viewed as a model for second-order predicate logic) iﬀ(∃⃗P)ϕ† holds in
it, where ⃗P contains at least the monadic second-order variables free in ϕ†. Hence
F ⊨ϕ iﬀ(∀⃗P)ϕ† is valid in F. Thus frame validity is Π1
1. If this formula has
a ﬁrst-order equivalent then the propositional logic is complete with respect to
Kripke frames, by a result of Kit Fine [Fine, 1975].
Second-order logic adds quantiﬁers to modal logic that it otherwise does not
have. Notice that the formulae on the right hand side of (6) contain only two
variables. Thus, the translation is into the two-variable fragment of ﬁrst-order
logic whose satisﬁability problem is known to be decidable [Mortimer, 1975]. (Of
course, this does not imply the decidability of modal logics involving additional
axioms—this is a science on its own, compare [Ohlbach et al., 2001].) From a
philosophical point of view this translation raises questions. It can be used to
explain modal talk as talk of possible worlds in disguise; this is a reduction from
right to left. Modal logic is just talk about possible worlds in a syntactic disguise.
It cannot, however, be used to explain talk about possible worlds through modal
operators, because the latter is less expressive.
There are ﬁrst-order formulae
which have no equivalent in modal logic. This has been observed in [Lewis, 1968]
already, noting that this makes modal logic less expressive than it should be if it is
to render natural language statements. This point has been picked up by [Hazen,
1976], who extends modal logic by an actuality operator, and further by [Forbes,
1985], who allows to index possible worlds in order to be able to refer back to them.
The most expressive language is however that of nominals, introduced by Arthur
Prior, see also [Bull, 1968]. A comprehensive study of this language has been made
in [Blackburn, 1993]. Nominals are propositional variables that have to be true at
precisely one world—they can serve as names for worlds. This essentially reiﬁes
the worlds inside modal logic and allows the backward pointing devices argued
for in [Forbes, 1985] (possibly with the help of the universal modality, whose
interpretation is basically that of the ﬁrst-order quantiﬁer over worlds).
3
ONTOLOGY AND DUALITY THEORY
Ludwig Wittgenstein says in the Tractatus that the world is everything which
is the case, or, in modern terminology, a complete state of aﬀairs. A view that
identiﬁes worlds with complete (or partial) states-of-aﬀairs denies them their own
ontological status, a position for which David Lewis coined the term ‘linguistic

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
949
ersatzism’ [Lewis, 1986].10
Kripke-frames, on the other hand, treat worlds as
primitive objects. Prima facie this seems justiﬁed in the case of time points or
locations. They provide examples of entities that can in principle serve as worlds in
the sense of containers which are inhabited by objects and relations (see [Forbes,
1985]).
If worlds exist and are not simply states-of-aﬀairs then the possibility
arises of there being two diﬀerent worlds in which the same facts are true (call
them twin worlds). Again, whether this is a welcome situation is debated (see
below). In duality theory, one studies the construction of frames from algebras
and algebras from frames. It turns out that the two model structures are not
identical. In passing from frames to algebras, the distinction between twin worlds
is lost. On the other hand, the construction of a frame from an algebra may now
introduce new worlds to that frame. (They instantiate a complete state-of-aﬀairs
that is only ﬁnitely satisﬁed in the original frame.)
A Boolean algebra with an operator is a structure of the form B =
⟨B, 1, −, ∩, ■⟩, where ⟨B, 1, −, ∩⟩is a Boolean algebra. B is a modal algebra if
in addition
■1 = 1,
■(a ∩b) = ■a ∩■b
(7)
Given an assignment v : V →A, there is a unique homomorphism v which assigns
to every formula over V a value in A.
We write A ⊨ϕ if v(ϕ) = 1 for all
assignments v and Th(A) := {ϕ : A ⊨ϕ}. Th(A) is classical; it is normal iﬀA
is a modal algebra. [J´onsson and Tarski, 1951] have initiated the study of such
algebras and shown that they can be embedded in complete Boolean algebras. The
atoms of these algebras can be identiﬁed with the worlds. Given a logic, modal
algebras can be constructed as follows. Let T(V ) be the algebra of formulae over
the set of variables V . Put
ϕ ∼L χ :⇔ϕ ↔χ ∈L
(8)
L is classical iﬀ∼L is a congruence on T(V ). FL(V ) := T(V ) is an algebra, called
the canonical or Lindenbaum-algebra. It turns out that for countably inﬁnite
V ,
L = {ϕ : FL(V ) ⊨ϕ}
(9)
The construction of the algebra uses the language itself. Propositions are formulae
modulo equivalence, but there is no assumption on worlds nor states-of-aﬀairs.
Propositions form an algebra. From this algebra it is possible to construct worlds
as follows. Let U(A) be the set of ultraﬁlters of A. Put U R∗V if and only if
for all ■a ∈U we have a ∈V . This yields a frame. Unfortunately, the logic of
this frame might be diﬀerent from the logic of the algebra. It therefore becomes
necessary to deﬁne the following. For a ∈A let
a := {U ∈U(A) : a ∈U}
(10)
10Compare also Sider’s [Sider, 2002] for a more recent proposal in this direction.

950
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
The map a →a is an isomorphism from A onto a subalgebra of the powerset
algebra over ⟨U(A), R∗⟩, with the additional operator
■a := {U : ∀V ∈U(A) : if U R∗V then V ∈a}
(11)
The subalgebra can be proper, and can have a diﬀerent logic. The reason is that
the semantics of Kripke-frames is incomplete in the following sense.
Deﬁnition 1. Let L be a class of logics, and K a class of structures.
K is
complete for L if for every logic L ∈L, L = Th(FrmK(L)).
If K is complete for L then for any two diﬀerent L, L′ ∈L the class of associated
structures from K must be diﬀerent. Typically, one sets L to be the extensions of
some system (S4 for example). We shall take here L to be the class of all normal
modal logics. (9) shows that algebraic semantics is complete (for the set of classical
logics even). It has been shown in the early 1970s that there are logics which are not
completely characterised by their Kripke-frames. In [Thomason, 1972], Thomason
has proposed to reﬁne the class of structures as follows. A general frame is a
triple F = ⟨F, R, B⟩, where ⟨F, R⟩is a Kripke-frame and B ⊆℘(F) a system of
sets closed under intersection, complement and the operation
■a := {v : for all w: if v R w then w ∈a}
(12)
So, put
F+ := ⟨B, F, −, ∩, ■⟩
(13)
This is a modal algebra. A subset of F is called internal if it is in B. Valuations
into general frames may take only internal sets as values. Put
A+ := ⟨U(A), R∗, {a : a ∈A}⟩.
(14)
This is a general frame. A Kripke-frame ⟨F, R⟩can be viewed as the general frame
⟨F, R, ℘(W)⟩. From a general frame F we deﬁned the algebra F+, and from an
algebra A the general frame A+. In general, (A+)+ ∼= A, but (F+)+ is generally not
isomorphic to F. Completeness with respect to general frames is straightforward
to show, using the standard completeness results for algebraic logic and duality.
For a logic is always complete for its Lindenbaum algebra. General frames have
both worlds and an algebra of internal sets in them. We may view internal sets
as propositions. Then, a general frame is diﬀerentiated if from v ̸= w it follows
that there is an a such that v ∈a and w ̸∈a; it is tight if, whenever ■a ∈v also
a ∈w, then v R w; it is compact if  U ̸= ∅for every ultraﬁlter of internal sets.
F is descriptive if is diﬀerentiated, tight and compact. A+ always is descriptive.
A world w deﬁnes a state-of-aﬀairs H(w). v and w are twin worlds if v ̸= w
and H(v) = H(w).
F is diﬀerentiated iﬀthere are no twin worlds; it is tight
if accessibility is deﬁnable from possibility; and it is compact if every ﬁnitely
satisﬁable set is contained in some H(w). Together with diﬀerentiatedness this
means that S is an ultraﬁlter iﬀS = H(w) for some w. The internal sets may
be seen as the clopen (= closed and open) sets of a topological space; its closed
sets are the (possibly inﬁnite) intersections of internal sets. In a descriptive frame,
every singleton {w} is closed.

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
951
3.1
Logical consequence
The semantics is required to be adequate not only in the sense that it handles the
tautologies correctly, but that it identiﬁes the deductive rules properly. Again,
algebraic semantics takes the lead (see [W´ojcicki, 1988], [Czelakowski, 2001] for
the general theory of algebraic logic, and [Kracht, 2006] for a survey of modal
consequence). A logical matrix is a pair M = ⟨A, D⟩consisting of an algebra of
appropriate type and a set D ⊆A, the set of designated elements. A valuation
is a function v from the set of variables to the domain A; we can also think of it
as a homomorphism from the term algebra into A. ϕ is true in M under v if
v(ϕ) ∈D. Also, Γ ⊨M ϕ if every v which makes all formulae of Γ true also makes
ϕ true. M is a matrix for L if D is closed under the rules of L. Since the only
rule of inference is (MP), this comes down to requiring that D is a Boolean ﬁlter
and that all tautologies map to an element of D under every v. Filters correspond
in the dual frame to topologically closed sets of points. We can however specialise
to ultraﬁlters, which in the dual frame correspond to single worlds (more exactly,
singleton sets). For discussion see [Kracht, 1999].
Theorem 2. For every normal modal propositional logic L there is a class VL of
matrices such that if Γ ⊬L ϕ then there exists a M ∈VL such that Γ ⊭M ϕ.
In fact, we can always choose the matrices to be of the form ⟨FL(V ), U⟩, U an
ultraﬁlter. This creates the necessary structures from the language itself. Duality
theory can be applied to the ontology as follows. Either we look at worlds as
primitive objects and deﬁne facts as sets of worlds, or we consider facts as primitive
and deﬁne worlds as maximally consistent sets of facts (see [Brink and Rewitzki,
2002] for a discussion).
3.2
Situations and possibilities
In the philosophical and linguistic literature, often an object quite like a possible
worlds is used, namely a situation, see [Perry, 1986] and references therein. In
contrast to worlds, situations are only partial. Moreover, situations can be ‘small’
in that their description may require only a single sentence. Situations can be ac-
commodated as follows. Let A be a modal algebra. The members of the underlying
sets are called situations. Given a valuation β and a situation a, write
⟨A, a, β⟩⊨ϕ :⇔β(ϕ) ≥a
(15)
Technically, the deﬁnitions in [Perry, 1986] amount to taking as matrices only
those of the form ⟨A, F⟩, where F = {b : b ≥a} is a principal Boolean ﬁlter. If
that is the case, however, they are technically just a generalised version of worlds.
The use of situations has been defended in [Barwise and Perry, 1983; Barwise and
Perry, 1985]. The reasons for pressing for situations against possible worlds has
been in addition to the reasons just stated also the claim that possible worlds
semantics carries an ontological commitment of their existence. For a defense of
possible worlds against this criticism see [Stalnaker, 1986]. Notice that while the

952
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
Table 1. Worlds and Situations
entity
algebra
language
situation
ﬁlter
deductively closed set
world
ultraﬁlter
maximally consistent set
above matrices sacriﬁce bivalence, they do support the same tautologies as the
ones based on ultraﬁlters.
Thus, they spell out a supervaluationist account of
truth. A related approach is that of [Humberstone, 1981]. A possibility is a
partial function from propositional letters to truth-values. The interpretation (15)
is not truth-functional. Moreover, it is not classical; both ϕ and ¬ϕ can fail to
hold in a. Much has been made of this fact in situation theory. In the present
set-up, one can either declare situations to be primitive and construct worlds out
of situations, or do the converse. The latter strategy will then treat the truth of a
formula in a situation just like supervaluations. Supervaluations are however not
compositional. Compositional accounts can of course be given, but they support
less formulae than the supervaluation account (for example the law of excluded
middle). This is a dilemma also for quantum logic. Standardly, quantum logic
is supposed to be non-distributive since the algebras are orthomodular lattices. It
is however possible to use a supervaluation approach, simply allowing only special
ﬁlters as sets of designated elements (see [Bigaj, 2001]).
The correspondences are summarised in Table 1. Notice that from the stand-
point of duality there is no ontologically primary object. An element of the algebra
can be construed either as a set of worlds, or as a set of ultraﬁlters. Also, an ele-
ment corresponds to a ﬁnitely generated Boolean ﬁlter, hence a particular kind of
situation. We add that a general frame contains not only worlds and an accessibil-
ity relation but also an algebra of sets, whose members we may actually identify
as the situations.
4
POSSIBLE WORLDS AS AN ANALYTIC TOOL
Modal logic has proven to be a general tool to model nonclassical logic. This was al-
ready apparent in the work of C. I. Lewis from the 1920s [Lewis and Langford, 1932;
Parry, 1970]. Lewis’ systems S1–S5 were systems of strict implication, which
were attempts to capture the notion of relevant connection between premiss and
conclusion of ordinary language implications. Originally conceived as alternatives
to classical logic, it has been observed that one can reduce strict implication to
material implication by
ϕ ↠ψ := 2(ϕ →ψ)
(16)
Thus, the properties of ↠derive straight from the properties of 2.
This has
fostered the development of modal logic, because the attention turned to modal
systems that had a classical background logic rather than to weakenings of classical
logic. (Linear logic has brought weakenings back into the game, since the reduction

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
953
techniques do not work for resource conscious logics.)
This method was most
successful with the reduction of intuitionistic logic to modal logic. Kurt G¨odel
gave the following translation from intuitionistic language into monomodal logic
[G¨odel, 1932; G¨odel, 1933].
τ(p) := 2p
τ(ϕ ∧χ) := τ(ϕ) ∧τ(χ)
τ(ϕ ∨χ) := 2(τ(ϕ) ∨τ(χ))
τ(ϕ →χ) := 2(τ(ϕ) →τ(χ))
(17)
Falsum is mapped to falsum, and ¬χ := χ →⊥. This translation reduces in-
tuitionistic logic to modal logic. In the background, however, we have a second
reduction, that of modal logic to second-order logic, the standard translation. The
possible worlds interpretation that results from this cascaded reduction is actually
not dissimilar to the interpretation that Brouwer gave for his logic in the ﬁrst
place; the worlds exemplify stages of knowledge, and it is assumed that knowl-
edge grows as we move to an accessible state (which also happens to be a later
stage). Although Brouwer would have opposed a reduction of intuitionism to clas-
sical logic (he did oppose Heyting’s interpretation), the exactness of the reduction
shows that the interpretation is at least viable. Several decades of research have
culminated in the following result. Let Int be intuitionistic logic. An extension of
this logic is of the form Int + Δ, where Δ is some set of axioms. The system Grz
is deﬁned by
Grz := S4 ⊕2(2(p →2p) →p) →2p
(18)
Here, Grz ⊕Δ denotes the least normal logic containing both Grz and Δ.
Theorem 3 (Blok). The map Int + Δ →Grz ⊕{τ(δ) : δ ∈Δ} is an isomor-
phism from the lattice of intermediate logics onto the lattice of consistent normal
extensions of Grz.
For details see [Chagrov and Zakharyaschev, 1997]. This much should be enough
to demonstrate that modal logic is an exact tool to study intermediate logics. What
is more, the original intuitions supplied by Brouwer himself suggest that the formal
apparatus actually reﬂects the analytic notions rather well. Brouwer has spoken
about mathematics as a developing structure, where knowledge grows, so that once
a statement is accepted, it is accepted for good, while it may be rejected and later
come to be accepted. However, its negation is accepted at w only if the formula
is not accepted at any v later than w. In intuitionism, facts are always positive;
negative facts are in a sense absence of certain positive facts. This asymmetry
of positive and negative facts has been removed in the constructive logic N
of Nelson [Nelson, 1949].
In constructive logic, a formula can be true or false
or neither. It is accepted if it is always true and it is rejected if it always false.
This is used under the name ‘vivid logic’ in computer science (see [Pearce and
Wagner, 1990; Pearce and Wagner, 1991]). There is a general method to embed
intermediate logics into extensions of N, which allows to study intermediate logics

954
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
as special kinds of constructive logics; see [Vakarelov, 1977], and for general results
[Sendlewski, 1984; Sendlewski, 1990].
There are also other alternatives to classical logic that cannot be interpreted
in terms of modal logic since they are based on the use of the resources. This
is exempliﬁed in relevant logic ([Anderson and Belnap, 1975; Anderson et al.,
1992]) and linear logic of [Girard, 1987], see also [Troelstra, 1992]. Linear logic,
for example, has a connective ⊸; ϕ ⊸χ allows to deduce χ, but the use of this
inference means destroying the truth of the antecedent formula, so that it cannot
be used again. Actually, it is not impossible to interpret ⊸in classical logic. One
can give the translation:
if ϕ is true at t then χ will be true at u > t.
⊸is hiding the time parameter. It is clear in this interpretation that if ϕ and
ϕ ⊸χ hold, then the inference to χ means that χ holds at a later time point, but
then the truth of ϕ is not guaranteed any more.
5
ACCESSIBILITY
In the earliest models, which interpreted necessity as logical necessity, the universe
was just seen as a set of worlds, with one world singled out as the actual one.
However, diﬀerent interpretations of necessity require to put structure on this set.
5.1
Accessibility relations
For example, if 2 is read as ‘it will always be the case that’ then the set of worlds
must be ordered by temporal precedence. Thus, in addition to worlds we also
need an accessibility relation. The nature of this relation may be an empirical
matter, once the interpretation is decided upon. For example, it is an empirical
question how time is structured: it may be discrete, continuous, branching in the
future, branching in the past, endless; perhaps we ought to model it as part of
relativistic space time rather than just time by itself. These questions are nowadays
no longer pure speculation; the structure of space-time is a domain of physics, and
thus subject to exact inquiry. Nevertheless, the matter is far from settled. The
notion of ‘time’ continues to be elusive. We may deﬁne time either objectively or
operationally ([von Weizs¨acker, 1992] prefers the word phenomenologically).
An objective deﬁnition derives the temporal relation from a manifold, typically the
space-time continuum, the phenomenological deﬁnition instead uses operational
criteria in establishing the structure of time. The nature and dimensionality of the
space-time manifold is debated. An extreme example is the theory by Hugh Everett
([Everett III, 1956]) according to which the universe develops deterministically by
splitting itself into as many worlds as there are possible outcomes for the ‘next’
moment—the so-called many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. For
such an (objective!) view, probably the most faithful model is based on histories

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
955
(see §5.3). A more standard approach is to take the n-dimensional Minkowski
space. The logic of Minkowski space-time has been identiﬁed in all dimensions by
Robert Goldblatt in [Goldblatt, 1980] to be S4.2 for the reﬂexive relation, and
D4.2 ⊕♦p1 ∧♦p2 →♦(♦p1 ∧♦p2) [Shapirovsky and Shehtman, 2003] for the
irreﬂexive relation. It follows that, in space-time, the future and past operators
do not allow to discriminate diﬀerent dimensions.
An objective deterministic interpretation is quite compatible with phenomeno-
logical nondeterminism. The future may be open simply because we cannot have
access to enough facts that will exclude all but one possibility. Many philosophers
have been tempted to conclude that this does not apply to the past. Events of the
past leave traces (‘records’) and facts about the past can be answered by looking
at these records. However, as [von Weizs¨acker, 1985] points out, these records are
necessarily partial. Also, the records exist here and now and are used to ‘unravel’
the present state into a development that has brought it about (see also [Leyton,
1992] on cognitive aspects of this). This unravelling uses the laws of nature, the
very laws that we can only deduce by relying on past experience. This creates
an abyss for the foundations of physics that has troubled no lesser minds than
Einstein himself, see [von Weizs¨acker, 1992]. Objectively time may branch into
the future while it does not branch into the past; yet, technically it is not easy to
explain why that should be so. The only nonsymmetric law is the second law of
thermodynamics, which says that order decreases in direction of the future.
On the other hand, notice also that sometimes special interpretations of tem-
poral logic are used which do not depend on the physical nature of time, such as
the temporal logic of programs. Here, the fact that time is discrete is a design
feature of computers.
While temporal interpretations allow the independent study of the accessibil-
ity relation, this is not so for the epistemic modalities. Belief worlds cannot be
claimed to exist in the same way as future worlds, and their structure is most likely
derived from the belief structure of the agent(s). If A believes δ in v then every
belief-alternative w must make δ true. Here, the belief in δ comes ﬁrst, and the
accessibility is constructed. Perhaps this is the reason why epistemic modalities
generally fail most common logical laws, in contrast to temporal modalities. In-
deed, it has been argued among others by Quine that there is a diﬀerence between
temporal modalities and epistemic modalities [Quine, 1976]. While it makes sense
to attribute de re in temporal logic this is meaningless for belief because we lack
a notion of sameness of objects across worlds.
5.2
Neighbourhoods
There are alternatives to accessibility relations and the standard conception of
truth. [Segerberg, 1971] introduces the notion of a neighbourhood frame, which
is a pair ⟨W, N⟩, where W is a set of worlds and N a function from W to ℘(℘(W)).
As before, valuations are functions β : V →℘(W), and formulae are true in a frame
at a world relative to a valuation.

956
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
⟨⟨W, N⟩, β, w⟩⊨2ϕ :⇔{v : ⟨⟨W, N⟩, β, v⟩⊨ϕ} ∈N(w)
(19)
Neighbourhood frames are also called Scott-Montague frames, after [Scott, 1970]
and [Montague, 1968]. The theory of a class of neighbourhood frames is a classical
modal logic. Evidently, a Kripke-frame can be turned into a neighbourhood frame
(put N(w) := {S : S ⊇{v : w R v}}). The converse is not true, however. [Gerson,
1975b] has provided examples of neighbourhood-incomplete logics, and [Gerson,
1975a] has shown that there are logics containing S4 which are determined by
their neighbourhood frames but not by their Kripke-frames.
The logic of conditionals is an example of a logic for which standard rela-
tional semantics is inadequate. The semantics for counterfactuals is therefore
more complex. [Stalnaker and Thomason, 1970] for example use choice functions,
[Gabbay, 1972] introduces a relation that depends also on two propositions ([van
Fraassen, 1974] argues that conditional logic has ‘hidden variables’ in the sense
argued for in quantum mechanics).
David Lewis deﬁnes structures in which every world has a set of sets of worlds
(set of ‘spheres’) around it [Lewis, 1973]. The structures are special neighbourhood
frames, for it is assumed that the set of spheres around w are concentric; that is,
if S and T are spheres, then either S ⊆T or T ⊆S. Worlds within the same
sphere of w are thought of to be similar to the same degree to w. Without having
to specify numerical values for how similar one world is to the next, it is possible
to deﬁne that a world v is more similar to w than a world v′. This is the case if all
spheres around w which contain v also contain v′. Lewis also considers alternative
structures, for example with a comparative similarity relation, but shows that
they are interreducible [Lewis, 1971]. Now, ϕ > ψ is taken to be true at w if in all
worlds u most similar to w that make ϕ true, also ψ is true.
The notion of similarity between worlds is widely used. For instance, an idea
developed in [Suzuki, 1997] is to relativise accessibility by attaching the relations
with fuzzy numbers, thus talking about ‘degrees of accessibility’, an idea that
eventually turned into logics where accessibility is regimented by metric spaces or
similarity measures, compare e.g. [Kutz et al., 2003]. Quite often, one imagines a
world that is as similar as possible to ours, while something speciﬁc is diﬀerent.
So we consider worlds in which ϕ is true, despite the fact that it is not. The
spheres around the worlds are assumed by Lewis to be given. Epistemologically,
one would like to be able to say how to ﬁnd this structure, that is, to construe it
from properties of the worlds themselves. A primitive solution is that the spheres
around w are the worlds of Hamming-distance ≤n for every given n. (This means
that at most n values of the primitive letters can be changed in going from w to
a world in that sphere.) We could also say that the worlds in the spheres result
in the revision of the theory at w. Revision has been studied extensively in recent
decades, but this topic is outside the scope of this article.11
11But compare [Alchourr´on et al., 1985] for the proposal now referred to as the AGM theory
of revision (named after its inventors), and [Lindstr¨om and Segerberg, 2006] for an overview.

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
957
A related phenomenon that requires more than basic modal logic is the imper-
fective paradox, exempliﬁed in ‘The dog was crossing the road when it got hit
by a car.’ If the dog was hit by a car how can we sensibly attribute to the dog that
it was about to cross the road? David Dowty, in an attempt to explain the seman-
tics behind the imperfective paradox, takes recourse to inertia worlds [Dowty,
1977]. These are worlds which are very much like ours, in particular normal laws of
physics and everyday life hold. Angelika Kratzer develops another idea, whereby
the actual world lumps propositions together such that they cannot be given up
independently [Kratzer, 1989]. Kratzer makes this possible by introducing situ-
ations and a reﬁnement relation, the maximal members of which are the worlds.
All these are attempts at deﬁning accessibility from notions that are veriﬁable
hic-et-nunc. They are only gradually diﬀerent from causality in the sense that all
of these notions are derived from directly observed facts of the world. Causality
is diﬀerent only inasmuch as it is believed to be the source of the regularity, not
the other way around.
The clause (19) contains two quantiﬁers, an existential and a universal. More-
over, the function N is type-theoretically second-order, therefore allowing for
greater expressivity. The idea of modal operators with complex interpretive clauses
of any level has been pursued by Mark Brown, with applications to various inter-
pretations (group knowledge, ability, among other, see [Brown, 1988]). His inter-
pretations are diﬀerent from the one above, though. It can be shown that modal
logic of the ordinary sort can interpret these complex ones [Kracht and Wolter,
1999].
5.3
Histories
It has been argued that propositions are not true at a world simpliciter but only
at a history. This conception, called Ockhamist, has been revitalised by Arthur
Prior in [Prior, 1967] and formalised in [Burgess, 1979]. Call a history a maximal
set of worlds linearly ordered by time (this deﬁnition presupposes a particular
structure of the frame to begin with). A formula is evaluated in a frame at a pair
⟨h, v⟩where h is a history and v ∈h. Then
⟨⟨W, R⟩, h, v, β⟩⊨[F]ϕ
(20)
:⇔for all w ∈h such that v R w : ⟨⟨W, R⟩, h, w, β⟩⊨ϕ
⟨⟨W, R⟩, h, v, β⟩⊨[P]ϕ
(21)
:⇔for all w ∈h such that w R v : ⟨⟨W, R⟩, h, w, β⟩⊨ϕ
⟨⟨W, R⟩, h, v, β⟩⊨2ϕ
(22)
:⇔for all h′ such that v ∈h′ : ⟨⟨W, R⟩, h′, v, β⟩⊨ϕ
One may additionally complicate these frames by allowing only certain bundles
of histories to be values of propositions. In computer science these systems have

958
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
received growing attention. It has been shown only fairly recently that Ockhamist
temporal logic is more expressive [Reynolds, 2002] and complete axiomatisations
have been given among others in [Zanardo, 1985] for discrete time and (for real
lines and branching in the future) in [Reynolds, 2003]. A diﬀerent interpretation,
the Peircean interpretation (see [Burgess, 1978]) accepts a future statement as
true if and only if for for every history through the given world, it will be true at
a later point. This means that ϕ is certain to happen in the future. This can be
rendered in an Ockhamist interpretation as 2⟨F⟩ϕ.
PART II
The World of Objects
Combining modality with quantiﬁcation is a subtle aﬀair. According to Alonzo
Church [Church, 1951], the year 1946 should be considered to be the birth of
the discipline as a modern logical enterprise, with Ruth C. Barcan publishing ‘A
Functional Calculus of First Order Based on Strict Implication’ [Barcan, 1946] and,
almost simultaneously, Rudolf Carnap publishing ‘Modalities and Quantiﬁcation’
[Carnap, 1946], these two papers being the ﬁrst modern systematic treatments
mixing unrestricted quantiﬁcation as introduced to logic by Gottlob Frege with
modalities, taking up a subject that Aristotle left more than two millennia ago.
Barcan’s paper also introduced the now famous Barcan formulae which mix
de re modalities attributing a necessity to a thing (as in ‘Everything necessarily
exists’) with de dicto modalities, attributing necessity to what is said (as in ‘Nec-
essarily, everything exists’); a distinction which essentially goes back to Aristotle’s
distinction between composition and division [Parsons, 1995].
6
MODAL PREDICATE LOGIC
The languages of modal predicate logic that we shall consider ﬁrst diﬀer from the
language of modal propositional logic as follows. First, there are neither proposi-
tional variables nor propositional constants. Second, we shall distinguish between
ﬁrst-order and second-order languages of modal predicate logic which diﬀer
syntactically as well as with respect to the substitution principles assumed,
and which are deﬁned thus. In the ﬁrst-order case, we have a set U = {xi : i ∈N}
of object variables (we postpone the discussion of object constants to § 7) and,
instead of the propositional variables, a set of predicate constant letters to-
gether with a map Ω assigning to each letter P its arity Ω(P).
Though it is
possible to add function symbols, we shall not do so, as they are technically elim-
inable. In that case, terms are just variables. If Ω(P) = n, and the ti, 1 ≤i ≤n,

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
959
are terms, then P(t1, . . . , tn) is a proposition. A set L is a normal ﬁrst-order
modal predicate logic (ﬁrst-order MPL) if
1. L contains all instances of the axioms of predicate logic.
2. L contains the ﬁrst-order instantiations of the tautologies of K.
3. L is closed under (MP) and (MN).
Since L comprises standard predicate logic, it is closed under the usual substitution
of terms for variables; call this closure under ﬁrst-order substitution. For the
treatment of equality, see below, §6.3.
In the second-order case, we replace the propositional variables with sets {P n
i :
i ∈N} of predicate variables of arity n for each n. A set L of formulae in
this language, then, is called a normal second-order modal predicate logic
if it is closed under substitution of any formula ϕ(y1, · · · , yn) for an occurrence of
P n
i (x1, · · · , xn) in a formula χ; call this closure under second-order substitu-
tion.12
Notice that the second-order MPLs thus deﬁned are not truly second-order
since there are no second-order quantiﬁers. In general, the terms ‘modal predicate
logic’ or ‘ﬁrst-order modal logic’ are typically taken to mean second-order modal
predicate logic in the sense above, for instance in [Hughes and Cresswell, 1996]
and [Fitting and Mendelsohn, 1998].13
Much of the previous discussion of modal propositional logic transfers to the
predicate setting. It does, however, introduce complications of its own. In what is
to follow we shall review some of the proposals for semantics of modal predicate
logic that have been made. The standard Kripke-style semantics can obviously
never be complete for the reason that already not all propositional logics are
complete. The best one can hope for is therefore that a modal predicate logic
is complete on condition that its propositional counterpart is. Below, we shall
exhibit such a semantics.
While the notion of a predicate is generally taken to be unproblematic, the
notion of an object has been the subject of considerable controversy. Part of the
controversy can be retraced in type theory as follows. In addition to the type t
of truth values and the type of individuals e (for predicate logic) we introduce a
new type, s, that of possible worlds. Propositions have type s →t. The question
is: what type do we associate with object variables? Kripke assumes they have
type e simpliciter; others have argued they should be seen as having type s →e
(individual concepts). In the latter case, predicates may either be regarded
12This substitution must be formulated with care to prevent accidental capture of the yi. The
best way to do this is to rename any bound occurrence of yi, 1 ≤i ≤n, in χ prior to substitution.
For a detailed discussion consult [Kracht and Kutz, 2005].
13Other types of ﬁrst- or higher-order intensional logics that we will not discuss here include
Alonzo Church’s attempt to formalise Frege’s logic of sense and denotation [Church, 1951], and,
growing out of this, the work of Richard Montague [Montague, 1969], Daniel Gallin [Gallin, 1975],
and Melvin Fitting [Fitting, 2002b]; compare [Lindstr¨om and Segerberg, 2006] and [Bra¨uner and
Ghilardi, 2006] for more details.

960
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
as relations of individuals or as relations of individuals under a concept. In the
ﬁrst case, a binary predicate letter is interpreted as s →(e →(e →t)), in the
second case as s →((s →e) →((s →e) →t)). Once the types are ﬁxed, one
can actually infer from Henkin’s completeness proof for Simple Type Theory
[Henkin, 1950] a general completeness theorem for various semantics. However,
the resulting structures are rather unintuitive.
6.1
The classical view
Models for modal predicate logic are deﬁned by Saul Kripke as follows. A frame
is once again a pair ⟨F, R⟩, with F a set of worlds, and R ⊆F 2. Each world is
however now a pair w = ⟨Dw, Iw⟩, where Dw is a set (the domain of w) and Iw
an interpretation of the predicates and constants in Dw. If w R v then Dw ⊆Dv.
This means every valuation into Dw is a valuation into Dv as well. This allows
for a straightforward deﬁnition of the truth of 2ϕ:
⟨⟨F, R⟩, β, w⟩⊨2ϕ :⇔for all v  w : ⟨⟨F, R⟩, β, v⟩⊨ϕ
(23)
The condition on growing domains corresponds to the validity of the converse
Barcan formula 2∀xϕ(x) →∀x2ϕ(x). The converse of this implication, the
Barcan formula, ∀x2ϕ(x) →2∀xϕ(x), is not generally valid.14 It is, however,
if we have Dv = Dw for all v R w so that domains are eﬀectively constant. Another
principle generally true in these frames is the necessity of identity
(x = y) →2(x = y)
(24)
which is defended by Saul Kripke in the context of arguing for his causal theory
of reference [Kripke, 1972].15
It follows from the strong version of Leibniz’ Principle (see §6.3 below):
s = t →(ϕ(s/x) ↔ϕ(t/x))
(25)
In this interpretation, objects are transcendental, and so the question of trans-
world identity does not arise. This fact is responsible for the necessity both of
identity and nonidentity. Also, domains have to grow; objects cannot be removed
once they have been introduced.
The logic of these structures, QK, is characterised over the languages introduced
above by the following additional axioms.
1. The converse Barcan formula.
14This appeared ﬁrst in 1946 as Axiom 11 in Ruth C. Barcan’s [Barcan, 1946], although
as the notational variant 3∃xϕ(x) ↠∃x3ϕ(x) involving the existential diamond 3 and strict
implication.
15Which is closely related to Ruth Barcan Marcus’ theory of ‘contentless directly referential
tags’ account of proper names developed in her [Marcus, 1961], a famous discussion of which
appeared in [Marcus et al., 1962], listing R. B Marcus, W. V. Quine, S. Kripke, J. McCarthy,
and D. Føllesdal as discussants. For a historical account, compare [Smith, 1998].

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
961
2. x = y →2(x = y).
3. x ̸= y →2(x ̸= y).
If a strengthening is obtained by adding only purely modal propositional axioms,
we refer to it as quantiﬁed L, where L is the modal counterpart. Often, the
symbol QL is used. Other strengthenings involve interactions between quanti-
ﬁers, identity, and modal operators.
These are the most popular logics under
investigation. The remaining option, to just strengthen the predicate logical ax-
ioms, is rarely considered, partly because these axioms can easily be eliminated
by conditionalising the other axioms.
6.2
Free logic
There are many problems with the converse Barcan-formula. Obviously, objects
that exist in this world need not exist in others. One way to ﬁx this is to intro-
duce free logic (compare [Lambert, 1997] for an overview). Free logic adds to
predicate logic an existence predicate, denoted here by E, which is interpreted like
an ordinary 1-place predicate. The set I(E) is called the domain of existence,
and its members are said to exist. Objects outside of I(E) exist only in a weaker
sense. The standard quantiﬁers range only over existing objects. Therefore, some
laws of predicate logic, notably the law of universal instantiation, have to be
weakened.16 The axiomatisation is as follows. In addition to the axioms and rules
of K we assume (where fv(ϕ) denotes the variables free in ϕ)
1. If x ̸∈fv(ϕ), then ϕ →(∀x)ϕ is a tautology.
2.
(a) (∀x)E(x).
(b) If y is free for x in ϕ(x,⃗z) and y ̸∈⃗z, then
(∀x)ϕ(x,⃗z) →(E(y) →ϕ(y, ⃗z)) is a tautology.
3. The tautologies are closed under (UG): ϕ/(∀x)ϕ.
If equality is a symbol of the language, we add the following.
1. x = x is a tautology.
2. x = y →(ϕ(x) →ϕ(y//x)) is a tautology, where ϕ(y//x) denotes the result
of replacing one or more free occurrences of x by y, where y does not become
accidentally bound in that occurrence.
The last is the strong Leibniz’ Principle, see the discussion below. [Hintikka, 1969]
has observed that existence can be deﬁned by
E(x) ↔(∃y)(y = x)
(26)
16Historically, this weakening of the rule of universal instantiation goes back to the work of
Saul Kripke [Kripke, 1963] and Karel Lambert [Lambert, 1963].

962
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
Alternatively, one can introduce quantiﬁers  and , which range over the entire
universe, and deﬁne
(∀x)ϕ :=

x
E(x) →ϕ
(27)
(See for example [Hodes, 1986].) The diﬀerence between these two types of quan-
tiﬁers is often labelled possibilist () versus actualist (∀), cf.
[Prior, 1957;
Hughes and Cresswell, 1996].
Using free logic one can eliminate a problem that besets the standard semantics.
If domains have to grow, there is no way in which some object may cease to exist
at some point. However, we do want to say that Aristotle does not exist now,
even though at some point he did. Rather than trying to accommodate for this
using diﬀerent model structures, it seems better to use free logic. (The advice to
use free logic in the context of modal logic was explicitly given in [Scott, 1970],
compare also [Garson, 1991].) Once free logic is introduced we may even assume
that Dw = Dv if w R v, so that one may eﬀectively assume that all models have
the same domain. However, notice that free logic is more ﬂexible; neither the
Barcan formula nor its converse hold any more because objects can freely pass in
and out of existence. The converse Barcan formula holds only if Iw(E) ⊆Iv(E)
for w R v.
There are two ways to go from here. [Forbes, 1985] allows predicates to take
as values in a given world any set of n-tuples drawn from the domain, regardless
of their existence, thus contradicting the Falsehood Principle of Kit Fine [Fine,
1981] which states that the extension of a predicate at a given world is a set of
existing n-tuples. This principle can be reinstated in the form of the axioms

x1
· · ·

xn
(P(x1, . . . , xn) →E(x1) ∧· · · ∧E(xn))
(28)
for every primitive n-ary predicate letter P.
It should be clear, however, that the semantical problems related to nonexis-
tents or ﬁctional discourse in general (or talk of ‘impossible’ objects such as the
infamous ‘round square’ for that matter) are rather complex and not simply solved
by moving to free logic, as witnessed, for instance, by Gideon Rosen’s ‘Modal Fic-
tionalism’ [Rosen, 1990] (which builds on David Lewis’s counterpart theory while
trying to avoid its ontological commitments) or Terence Parsons’s ‘Nonexistent
Objects’ [Parsons, 1980].
6.3
Identity, substitution and Leibniz’ Law
Leibniz’ Law asserts that identicals are substitutable ‘salva veritate’. In modal
predicate logics, this applies both to propositions and to objects. We shall look at
propositions ﬁrst. Standardly, Leibniz’ Principle is rendered as follows, which we
call the strong Leibniz’ Law:
p ↔q ⊨L ϕ(p/r) ↔ϕ(q/r)
(29)

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
963
Boolean logic satisﬁes this. A modal logic satisﬁes (29) iﬀit satisﬁes
p ↔q ⊨□p ↔□q
(30)
Since the only rule of inference is (MP), this is equivalent to p →□p ∈L. The
notion is therefore trivialised. [Kracht, 2004] argues that Leibniz’ Principle is not
about accidental truth but about meaning. From this perspective, the principle
actually amounts to the admissibility of the rule (RE), repeated here for conve-
nience.
ϕ ↔χ
□ϕ ↔□χ
(31)
Leibniz’ Law in this form is valid in every classical, and hence in every normal
modal logic (as opposed to the strengthened version (29), which is valid only if
p →□p ∈L).
When talking about identity and Leibniz’ law with respect to objects, typically
Leibniz’ Principle is spelled out in the strong version. The weak version is this.
s = t
ϕ(s/x) ↔ϕ(t/x)
(32)
Notice that such a substitution principle is actually derivable in the case of classical
ﬁrst-order logic and more generally for any logic that is axiomatised by unrestricted
schemata. Nevertheless, by assuming unrestricted second-order substitution for a
given logic L one automatically extends the underlying modal theory of identity.
E.g., given that (x = y) →(P(x, x) →P(x, y)) is an admissible instance of
Leibniz’ Law, second-order substitution yields (x = y) →(2(x = x) →2(x = y))
and hence (x = y) →2(x = y). Actually, this situation is one of the reasons
for introducing a weaker base logic than the usual QK. [Kracht and Kutz, 2002]
worked with a system called FK which is a combination of propositional modal
logic K and positive free logic, PFL.17
If equality is introduced, the base logic is enriched by a weak form of Leibniz’
Law, which we called the Modal Leibniz’ Law. This basically results from the
usual Leibniz’ Law by restricting the Quinean principle of the ‘substitutability
of identicals’ to those instances that do not entail ‘transworld-identiﬁcations’ of
individuals of any kind. Brieﬂy, if x = y and the variable x appears free within the
scope of a modal operator, then either all or no occurrence of x may be replaced
by y. Hence, (x = y) →(2(x = x) →2(x = y)) is not an admissible substitution,
which blocks the provability of the necessity of identity.18
A natural solution to the above problem of generating possibly unintended
theorems involving equality is therefore to deal with second-order logics without
identity and to add a modal theory of identity, or, alternatively, to incorporate
17For a more detailed discussion and an argumentation why free logic is not only useful but
necessary, cf. [Kracht and Kutz, 2002] or [Kutz, 2000].
18Thus, the modal operators behave quite similar to what is known as an unselective binder
in linguistics.

964
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
the theory of identity into the logic while restricting substitution in an appropriate
way.
Since closure under second-order substitutions has a quite diﬀerent ﬂavour in
a propositional as opposed to a predicate logic setting, there are a number of
reasons to be interested in ﬁrst-order MPLs and to treat them as genuine logics.
We list just a few of them. First, if atomic propositions/predicates enjoy a special
status—like in certain logics of time—then substitution of complex formulae for
atoms may not be admissible. Actually, this was one of the reasons for Robert
Goldblatt to introduce a similar distinction in the propositional case and to call
it a ‘signiﬁcant conceptual change’ (compare his [Goldblatt, 1992]). Similarly for
the case where basic predicates may be intensional. Second, if one works with
a weak logic of identity, then a restriction of substitution is unavoidable. Last
but not least, if generalised semantics are considered, there are naturally deﬁned
frame classes whose logic is only ﬁrst-order closed. However, one can also argue
in favour of closure under second-order substitution as a deﬁning property of the
general concept of a ‘logic’, which has been attempted for the case of MPL in
[Bauer and Wansing, 2002].19
To make this discussion less theoretical, let us have a brief look at arguably
the most prominent logic for which general substitution fails: Rudolf Carnap’s
logic of logical truth (L-truth) [Carnap, 1946; Carnap, 1947]. Let us call the
propositional version of Carnap’s logic C, following Schurz [2001] where a detailed
discussion can be found. C as well as the quantiﬁed version QC of Carnap’s logic
are often mistaken to be versions of (quantiﬁed) S5, but they are in fact much
stronger and have rather unusual logical properties.
The source of the diﬀerences between S5 and C is, however, easily located.
While Carnap considers a sentence to be logically true if it is valid in a ﬁxed set W
of all possible interpretations of the language, in Kripke’s account [Kripke, 1959],
a sentence is logically true if it is valid in each variable subspace V ⊂W.20 Thus,
while in Carnap’s logic we have for every satisﬁable sentence A the logical truth 3A
as a theorem of C, Kripke’s S5 does not contain any nontrivial possibility theorems
at all. Whenever 3A is in S5, so is A. And exactly these nontrivial possibility
theorems of C account for the fact that substitution fails in general, as should
be obvious.21
As [Schurz, 2001] argues, if one identiﬁes necessity with logical
necessity then C is the only complete modal logic, compare also [Cocchiarella,
2002].
In fact, as Carnap [1946] and Thomason [1973] independently showed, S5 cor-
responds exactly to the substitutionally closed fragment of C.
19According to Alfred Tarski [Tarski, 1936], the idea to deﬁne logical truth syntactically as the
requirement of closure under all substitution instances goes back to Bernhard Bolzano, compare
also [Schurz, 1998].
20This was further analysed by Nino Cocchiarella [Cocchiarella, 1975] with his distinction
between primary and secondary semantics. Notice also the analogy to the frame/general frame
distinction.
21Clearly, ⊥cannot be substituted for A in 3A. It also follows that, unlike QS5, the theorems
of QC are not even recursively enumerable.

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
965
6.4
Completion
Propositional modal logics are not always complete with respect to Kripke-
semantics. The same holds a fortiori for modal predicate logics. There is a general
procedure for turning an algebraic model for the propositional language into a
model for the predicate language, which goes back to [Lawvere, 1969], and ulti-
mately to the completeness proof by Henkin for Simple Type Theory. This will
be discussed in § 11.
There is an idea analogous to the construction of a general frame: we start
with a Kripke-frame and restrict the interpretation of predicates. This is a purely
linguistic restriction; there is nothing in the ontology itself that suggests why such
a restriction is warranted. The technical details are as follows. We introduce a
‘tower’ of sets that represent the possible values for predicates. Before we can give a
precise deﬁnition, some technical preliminaries are necessary. If σ : {1, . . . , m} →
{1, . . . , n} is a map, and ⃗a is an n-tuple, put σ(⃗a) := ⟨aσ(1), . . . , aσ(m)⟩.
This
deﬁnes a map from n-tuples to m-tuples; it is lifted to sets as follows.
σ(c) := {σ(⃗a) : ⃗a ∈c}
(33)
Also, the cylindriﬁcation Em for m ≤n is deﬁned by
Em(c) := {⟨a1, . . . , an⟩: ∃d.⟨a1, . . . , am−1, d, am+1, . . . , an⟩∈c}
(34)
A generalised Kripke-frame is a structure ⟨W, R, C⟩, where ⟨W, R⟩is a Kripke-
frame and C = {Cn : n ∈N} is a sequence of sets Cn ⊆℘(Dn) satisfying the
following postulates.
1. Cn is a modal algebra for every n.
2. If c ∈Cn and σ : m →n then σ(c) ∈Cm.
3. If c ∈Cn and n ≥m then Em(c) ∈Cn.
We call such a system a tower. Now, the condition is that for a predicate P, the
interpretation Iw(P) is a member of Cn. The following clause is added.
⟨W, R, C, β, w⟩⊨P(xσ(1), . . . , xσ(m)) ⇔β(⟨x1, . . . , xm⟩) ∈σ(Iw(P))
(35)
By assumption, the interpretation of a formula is a member of the tower. The sets
of the tower do not change from world to world.
So far, we have discussed the syntactic deﬁnition of modal predicate logics,
some of the standard semantical approaches including Kripkean possible worlds
semantics and free logic, as well as related problems, as for instance the validity
of the Barcan formulae in standard semantics and the problems with substitution
and identity. Many of the more general semantics that have been proposed are
designed to deal with one or the other of these problems, with the eventual goal
of very general completeness theorems encapsulating a minimum of ontological

966
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
Shehtman/Skvortsov 1993
Standard Kripke Semantics
Constant Domains
Varying Domains
Functor Semantics
(General) Counterpart Frames
(General) Coherence Frames
Kracht/Kutz 2001
Kripke Bundle Semantics
Cartesian Metaframes
Modal Metaframes
Shirasu 1998
Counterpart Theory
Actualist Quantifiers
Kracht/Kutz 2000
Hyperdoctrinal Semantics/General Metaframes
Ghilardi 1989
Lewis 1968
Possibilist Quantifiers
Shehtman/Skvortsov 1990
Shehtman/Skvortsov 1993
Figure 1. An overview of various semantics for modal predicate logics ordered by
relative generality.
presuppositions, or—as Johan van Benthem has formulated it—referring to the
merits of completeness proofs in general, that ‘embody conditions of adequacy on
empirical theories in semantics’ [van Benthem, 1986].
The term Kripke-type semantics, as introduced in [Skvortsov and Shehtman,
1993], refers to a family of semantics that, rather than introducing purely algebraic
structures, tries to keep as much as possible of the basic intuitions of ‘possible
worlds semantics’ (the ‘geometric approach’) while transcending its scope [Kutz,
2003].
The main diﬀerences to the standard semantics are twofold: ﬁrst, instead of
taking a Kripke frame, that is, a set of possible worlds together with an accessi-
bility relation, and to enrich it by assigning domains to worlds, one starts with
a family of ﬁrst-order domains and adds some set of functions or relations be-
tween the domains, which in turn deﬁne accessibility between worlds. Hence, a
plain accessibility relation is no longer a primitive of the frame but rather depends
on (can be deﬁned by) the functions/relations being present. This leads to the
second fundamental diﬀerence, namely that there may indeed be many distinct
functions/relations between two given worlds, a feature that we will label ‘modes
of transgression’ in the context of counterpart semantics that we will investigate
in the next section. Figure 1 shows some of the diﬀerent proposed Kripke-type
semantics and their interdependencies. An arrow from A to B indicates that the
semantics A is a special case of (can be simulated by) semantics B.

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
967
7
COUNTERPART SEMANTICS.
David Lewis [Lewis, 1968] provided the ﬁrst formal theory of counterparts. It is
a two-sorted ﬁrst-order theory, whose sorts are objects and worlds, and which has
four predicates: W(x) says that x is a world, I(x, y) that x is in the world y, A(x)
that x is an actual object, and C(x, y) that x is a counterpart of y. The postulates
codify that every object is in one and only one world, that counterparts of objects
are objects, that no two diﬀerent objects of the same world can be counterparts
of each other, any object is a counterpart of itself, and that there is a world that
contains all and only the actual objects and which is nonempty.
The connection to the standard modal language is obtained by translating sen-
tences of MPL to the counterpart theory via the so-called Lewis translation (for
details compare [Lewis, 1968]).
For instance, an expression of the form [3ϕ(t1, . . . , tn)]v (‘3ϕ(t1, . . . , tn) holds
in world v’) is recursively translated to
∃w∃s1 . . . ∃sn(W(w) ∧I(s1, w) ∧C(s1, t1) ∧. . .
. . . ∧I(sn, w) ∧C(sn, tn) ∧[ϕ(s1, . . . , sn]w)
(36)
However, there are several problems related to this translation approach. First,
in its original form, counterpart theory does not validate all theorems of the small-
est quantiﬁed modal logic QK since it fails to generally support the principle of
Box distribution
2(ϕ →ψ) →(2ϕ →2ψ),
which is valid in all normal modal logics, compare [Hughes and Cresswell, 1996].
In fact, the simultaneous quantiﬁcation over both worlds and individuals in coun-
terpart theory obscures the notion of accessibility between worlds and thus leads
to the semantic refutability of certain K-theorems [Kutz, 2000].
Further, it has often been argued that the standard modal languages are not
expressive enough. For instance, the natural language sentence
‘There could be something that doesn’t actually exist’
can only be rendered in a language comprising an actuality operator A as well as
an existence predicate E [Hodes, 1984a; Hodes, 1984b], namely as 3∃x¬AE(x).22
Extensions of the modal language, however, require modiﬁcation to the Lewis
translation scheme, as has been attempted for instance by Graeme Forbes [Forbes,
1982] and Murali Ramachandran [Ramachandran, 1989].
But these translations are only partially faithful, as Fara and Williamson ar-
gue [Fara and Williamson, 2005] who translate inconsistent sentences of modal
22This example is related to an ontological objection raised by Plantinga [Plantinga, 1974] as
well as Konyndyk [Konyndyk, 1986], namely that the standard interpretation of modal language
implies the existence of ﬁctional, nonexistent objects, which is at odds with several varieties of
modal actualism. Compare also [Chihara, 1998].

968
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
predicate logic involving an actuality operator (interpreted in standard Kripke
semantics) to satisﬁable sentences of counterpart theory via diﬀerent translation
schemes. (Yet, this is not too surprising given that the semantics of counterpart
theory is more ﬂexible than the standard Kripkean semantics of modal predicate
logic.)
We will not follow this line of research here any further. Rather, we are inter-
ested in the ideas underlying counterpart theory as a semantical framework for
quantiﬁed modal logic in general, an approach that was initiated by Allen Hazen
[Hazen, 1979]. From this perspective, counterpart theory can be reformulated as
follows.
We assume that a frame is a collection of ﬁrst-order structures over pairwise
disjoint domains, and add a relation C on the union of the domains. If x and y are
from the same domain, then C(x, y) if and only if x = y. Thus, a counterpart
frame is a pair ⟨W, C⟩, where W is a set of worlds such that
Dv ∩Dw = ∅iﬀv ̸= w,
(37)
and C ⊆(
w∈W Dw)2 a relation such that, for each v
C ∩D2
v = {⟨x, x⟩: x ∈Dv}.
(38)
Instead of specifying actual objects we make use of the actual world. The formula
♦ϕ(⃗a) is true at w if there is a world v and counterparts ci for ai in v, i.e. ⟨ai, ci⟩∈
C(w, v) for all i, such that ϕ(⃗c) is true at v. The following are not theorems in
counterpart frames, though they are valid in standard constant-domain Kripke-
frames.
1. (x = y) →2(x = y)
2. (x ̸= y) →2(x ̸= y)
3. ∀x2ϕ(x) →2∀xϕ(x)
The necessity of identity and distinctness fail because counterpart relations need
not be functional nor do they need to be injective. Also, the Barcan formula is
not valid for there could be individuals in an accessible world w that are not the
counterpart of any individual in v (counterpart relations are not assumed to be
‘surjective’). The converse Barcan formula 2∀xϕ(x) →∀x2ϕ(x), however, is also
a theorem of counterpart theory, for if everything in w makes ϕ true so does a
fortiori everything that is a counterpart of something in v.
Notice that Lewis considers only counterpart relation from one world to another
world. However, there may be many ‘diﬀerent ways’ to move from one world to
another. This distinguishes Kripke-type semantics also signiﬁcantly from standard
counterpart theory (cf. [Lewis, 1968]) and its derived possible worlds semantics
(cf. [Hazen, 1979]).
That this feature of multiple functions or relations is not eliminable is due to the
fact that there are second-order closed MPLs that are complete only with respect

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
969
to frames having at least two counterpart relations between worlds, cf. [Kracht
and Kutz, 2005].
Counterparts need not be unique. An object can have several counterparts in
another world. Neither are counterpart relations assumed in general to be sym-
metric or transitive. If counterparts were unique both ways, the theory would be
exactly like that of Kripke’s, only that we have changed the ontology. Objects
in the Kripke-frames become equivalence classes of the counterpart relation. Al-
though that seems to be just a technical move, Lewis did try to identify criteria
for establishing whether an object is a counterpart of another. One principle may
be explicated as follows (see [Forbes, 1985]).
For c ∈Du and d ∈Dv, d is a counterpart of c only if nothing in v is
more similar to c as it is in u than is d as it is in v.
This is only a necessary condition and it is not clear what would be suﬃcient.
Furthermore, interpretations of counterparthood based on similarity face several
problems in general. For instance, as Feldman discusses in [Feldman, 1971], how
could we possibly translate a sentence such as ‘I could have been quite unlike what
I in fact am’ when counterparthood is understood solely as a relation of similarity?
Another problem is that the counterparts are deﬁned for each object individu-
ally. This creates technical problems. Suppose we only have equality, and axioms
that say ‘there are exactly three individuals’ and ‘there is exactly one world’.
Then the counterpart relations must be functions, despite the fact that the above
deﬁnition would predict that any object can serve as a counterpart for any given
object. Another problem is this. If similarity is deﬁned in terms of how many of
the properties the objects share, we can only use 1-place properties to determine
similarity and must exclude properties such as ‘a is father of b’. However, once we
have chosen a counterpart for b in the next world there is only one way to choose
a counterpart for a, despite the fact that prior to the choice of b, we might have
had more than one counterpart.
Thus, we see that we must actually specify the counterparts for all objects at
once. This leads to the presheaf semantics outlined in [Ghilardi, 1991]. The
original deﬁnitions worked only for extensions of S4, but they can be generalised
easily. Consider a category C. A category has objects, which are here considered
as worlds, and morphisms or maps between objects, which deﬁne what we call
modes of transgression. The idea is that from a world u there are several ways
to transgress into the world v.
Now, a presheaf is a functor F from C to the
category of sets and functions. This means that every world u is mapped to a set
F(u), and every map f : u →v is mapped to a function F(f) : F(u) →F(v).
There are two further conditions: F(f ◦g) = F(f) ◦F(g), and for the identity idu
we have F(idu) = idF (u). We consider for simplicity valuations at a single world.
If u is a world, then a valuation β at u is a function from the object variables to
F(u). The clause for the modal operator is as follows.
⟨F, u, β⟩⊨♦ϕ :⇔there is f : u →v such that ⟨F, v, F(f) ◦β⟩⊨ϕ
(39)

970
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
Thus, one thinks of F(f) as the function that takes each object in u into its
counterpart in v under the mode of transgression f. If β is a valuation at u, and
f : u →v a mode of transgression, then F(f) : F(u) →F(v) can be composed
with β to give a valuation at v. The following is valid in presheaf semantics:
1. All axioms of QS4 are tautologies.
2. (x = y) →2(x = y).
3. The tautologies are closed under (MP), Universal Generalisation and Leibniz’
Principle.
[Kracht and Kutz, 2002] take one more step of generalisation. Rather than using
functions, they employ once again relations, but allow a set of them. We give
a slight adaptation of the deﬁnitions of that paper to take care of the fact that
we now deal with possibilist quantiﬁers plus an existence predicate as opposed
to ‘proper’ free-logical quantiﬁers. Furthermore, we shall make more explicit the
world dependence of the universes.
Call a relation R ⊆M × N a CE-relation (CE stands for ‘counterpart exis-
tence’) if for all x ∈M there exists a y ∈N such that x R y and, likewise, for all
y ∈N there exists an x ∈M such that x R y. Since we assume free logic, this is
a harmless complication (it does not entail claims about existence, but is needed
to avoid truth-value gaps).
Deﬁnition 4. A poly-counterpart frame is a quadruple ⟨W, T, U, C⟩, where
W, T ̸= ∅are nonempty sets, U a function assigning to each v ∈W a nonempty
subset Uv of T (its domain) and, ﬁnally, C a function assigning to each pair of
worlds v, w a set C(v, w) of CE-relations from Uv to Uw. A pair ⟨W, I⟩is called
a counterpart structure if W is a counterpart frame and I an interpretation,
that is, a function assigning to each w ∈W and to each n-ary predicate letter a
subset of Un
w.
We say that v sees w in F if C(v, w) ̸= ∅—thus the notion of ‘accessibility’ is
completely reduced to the existence of a counterpart relation. A valuation is a
function η which assigns to every possible world v and every variable an element
from the universe Uv of v. We write ηv for the valuation η at v. A counterpart
model is a quadruple M = ⟨F, I, η, w⟩, where F is a counterpart frame, I an
interpretation, η a valuation and w ∈W. If ρ ∈C(v, w), write η
ρ→η if for all
x ∈V : ⟨ηv(x), ηw(x)⟩∈ρ. Truth in a counterpart model is deﬁned as follows. Let
v ∈W and η be a valuation.
⟨F, I, η, v⟩⊨3ϕ(⃗y) :⇔there are w ∈W, ρ ∈C(v, w) and η
such that η
ρ→η and ⟨F, I, η, w⟩⊨ϕ(⃗y)
(40)
This semantics can be enriched by towers in the sense above to obtain general
structures. The minimal logic of these structures can be axiomatised as follows.
On top of free logic and modal logic, we require the truth of the following principles
for identity.

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
971
1. x = x.
2. If y is free for ϕ(x), then x = y →(ϕ(x) ↔ϕ(y//x)), where ϕ(y//x) denotes
the result of replacing one or more free occurrences of x not in the scope of
a modal operator by y.
3. x = y ∧♦⊤→♦(x = y).
The last postulate is true generally of counterpart theory. However, it can hardly
be considered valid when one thinks of the quantiﬁers as quantifying over inten-
sional rather than extensional (trace-like) objects (see the discussion of constants
below). The necessity of identity, (x = y) →2(x = y), as well as the necessity
of diﬀerence are both invalid. To see the ﬁrst, let u be a world containing just a
with two counterparts b and c in v. Then we can choose for x the counterpart b
and for y the counterpart c.
Notice that for constants the situation is diﬀerent. For suppose that the lan-
guage contains constants and that they are interpreted by individual concepts.
Then neither principle is valid. For let in the same model the interpretation of d
be a in u and b in v, but for e it is a in u and c in v. Then (d = e)∧♦⊤→♦(e = e)
as well as (d = e) →2(d = e) are both invalid. This disparity of constants and
variables is a rather worrying aspect of counterpart semantics. Presheaf semantics
does not have this defect since counterparts are unique. On the other hand, in
presheaf semantics the necessity of identity is valid.
The modal Leibniz’ law of [Kracht and Kutz, 2002] allows for simultaneous
substitution of all free occurrences of x by y in 3χ (denoted by 3χ(y//x), provided
that x = y is true.

x.

y.x = y. →.3χ(x) →3χ(y//x)
(41)
Now, notice that in Kripke-semantics the rule of replacing constants for univer-
sally quantiﬁed variables is valid. In counterpart frames this creates unexpected
diﬃculties.
For suppose that constants are present and may be substituted for variables.
Then we may derive from (41), using the substitution of c for x and d for y:
(c = d ∧3⊤) →3(c = d)
(42)
Since a constant has a ﬁxed interpretation in each world, this means that if two
constants are equal in a world and there exists some accessible world, then there
will also be some accessible world in which they are equal. This is not generally
valid. What is happening here is a shift from a de re to a de dicto interpretation.
If we follow the traces of the objects, the formula is valid, but if we substitute
intensional objects, namely constants, it becomes refutable. Notice that this sit-
uation is also reﬂected in the way non-rigid constants are treated in [Fitting and
Mendelsohn, 1998]. There, the two possible readings of the above formula, the de

972
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
dicto and de re reading, are distinguished by actually binding the interpretation
of the constants to the respective worlds by using the term-binding λ-operator.23
Applied to Hesperus and Phosphorus, this means that if they are equal, then
there is a belief world of George’s in which they are equal. However, if George
believes that they are diﬀerent, this cannot be the case.
So, the counterpart
semantics cannot handle constants correctly—at least not in a straightforward
way, i.e., without restricting the possible values of constants in accessible worlds.
This paradox is avoided in Kracht and Kutz [2002] by assuming that the language
actually has no constants.
Counterpart theory as well as modal predicate logic were originally intended to
formalise natural language statements involving modalities, but their expressive
richness make them also obvious candidates for knowledge representation in arti-
ﬁcial intelligence. Thus, let us make a few comments about their computational
properties.
Counterpart theory is formulated as a ﬁrst-order theory. While the monadic
fragment [L¨owenheim, 1915] (containing only unary predicates) or the two-
variable fragment [Scott, 1962; Mortimer, 1975] of classical predicate logic are
decidable, the fragment of predicate logic with binary predicates and three vari-
ables is already undecidable [Sur´anyi, 1943], which means that only a very limited
fragment of counterpart theory is decidable.
When we move to modal predicate logic, though, the situation does not im-
prove. Kripke already showed in 1962 that the monadic fragment of MPL is un-
decidable [Kripke, 1962]. Later, it was shown that also the two-variable fragment
of practically all standard MPLs based on Kripkean constant domain semantics
are undecidable [Gabbay and Shehtman, 1993], which seemed to imply that the
decision problem for modal predicate logic is almost hopelessly diﬃcult.
Only
fairly recently has the search for decidable fragments of MPL been successful,
namely with the deﬁnition of so-called monodic fragments24 [Wolter and Za-
kharyaschev, 2001]. These are languages of MPL where at most one free variable
is allowed in the scope of a modal operator; and basically any extension of a decid-
able fragment of classical predicate calculus to its monodic modal language yields
a decidable formalism [Gabbay et al., 2003].
In general, more subtle combinations of languages have been studied, such as
fusions [Kracht and Wolter, 1991; Fine and Schurz, 1991] or products [Gabbay
et al., 2003] of modal logics (where modal predicate logic can be understood as
23λ-abstraction was introduced to modal logic by Robert Stalnaker and Richmond H. Thoma-
son in [Stalnaker and Thomason, 1968; Thomason and Stalnaker, 1968] and corresponds to
Bertrand Russell’s scoping device used to analyse deﬁnite descriptions, originating in [Rus-
sell, 1905] and systematically used in Principia Mathematica [Whitehead and Russell, 1910,
1912, 1913]. More recently, λ-abstraction was studied by Melvin Fitting [Fitting, 1999], who
also investigated modal languages that comprise λ-abstraction for constants but without allow-
ing quantiﬁcation, thus deﬁning languages that are situated between modal propositional and
predicate logics [Fitting, 2002a]. For a discussion compare also [Bra¨uner and Ghilardi, 2006].
24A ‘monody’ is a kind of music distinguished by having a single melodic line and accompani-
ment.

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
973
the product of ﬁrst-order predicate logic and modal propositional logic).
But
again, while fusions behave very nicely both computationally and logically, they
are rather inexpressive, and, on the other hand, products, being quite expressive,
are once again computationally very diﬃcult in general [Gabbay et al., 2003].
Interestingly, then, the general idea of counterpart relations being based on a
notion of similarity also gives rise to a framework of knowledge representation
languages that is rather expressive, natural from a semantical point of view, and
which is very well-behaved computationally, namely the theory of E-connections
[Kutz, 2004; Kutz et al., 2004]. In E-connections, a ﬁnite number of formalisms
talking about disjoint domains are ‘connected’ by relations relating entities in
diﬀerent domains, intended to capture diﬀerent aspects or representations of the
‘same object’. For instance, an ‘abstract’ object o of a description logic L1 can be
related via a relation R to its life-span in a temporal logic L2 (a set of time points)
as well as to its spatial extension in a spatial logic L3 (a set of points in a topologi-
cal space, for instance). As with poly-counterpart frames, the presence of multiple
relations between domains is essential for the versatility of this framework, the
expressiveness of which can be varied by allowing diﬀerent language constructs to
be applied to the connecting relations. E-connections approximate the expressiv-
ity of products of logics ‘from below’ and could, perhaps, be considered a more
‘cognitively adequate’ version of counterpart theory.
8
INDIVIDUAL CONCEPTS
We have noticed above that in many analyses there is an asymmetry between
variables and constants. This asymmetry is easily explained. A constant is stan-
dardly interpreted by an individual concept, while variables are often used to
refer to objects. In counterpart theory, objects are world bound, so the notion
of an object is diﬀerent from that of an individual concept. There are proposals
which argue that the values of variables should likewise be individual concepts.
Recent proposals to this eﬀect are the worldline frames of [Schurz, 1997] and the
coherence frames of [Kracht and Kutz, 2005].
A coherence frame is a quintuple ⟨W, R, O, T, τ⟩, where ⟨W, R, O⟩is a pred-
icate Kripke-frame, consisting of a set W of worlds, an accessibility relation R,
and a set O, the set of objects, and where T is a set, the set of things, and
τ : U × W →T a surjective function. We call τ the trace function and τ(o, w)
the trace of o in w. The set Tw = {t ∈T : t = τ(o, w), o ∈O} is the set of
things constituting the world w, i.e. the set of things which can bear properties.
In [Schurz, 1997], a worldline is deﬁned to be a function W →T. It turns out
that objects can be identiﬁed with worldlines, and we shall simplify our exposition
accordingly.
An interpretation is a function I mapping each predicate letter P of arity
Ω(P) to a function from W to T Ω(P )
w
and each constant symbol c to a member
of U. Let us call an interpretation I equivalential if for all ⃗a,⃗c ∈U Ω(P ) and

974
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
w ∈W, if τ(ai, w) = τ(ci, w) for all i < Ω(P) then ⃗a ∈I(P)(w) if and only
if ⃗c ∈I(P)(w). (This condition is enforced only for extensional predicates.) A
coherence structure, then, is a pair ⟨W, I⟩where W is a coherence frame and
I an equivalential interpretation. A coherence model is a triple ⟨C, β, w⟩, where
C is a coherence structure, β : V →U a valuation, w ∈W. Every term t evaluates
into a unique object ε(t) (which depends on the valuation).
⟨C, β, w⟩⊨P(⃗t)
:⇔
ε(⃗t) ∈Iw(P)
⟨C, β, w⟩⊨s = t
:⇔
τ(ε(s), w) = τ(ε(t), w)
⟨C, β, w⟩⊨ x.ϕ
:⇔
for some γ with γ ∼x β : ⟨C, γ, w⟩⊨ϕ
⟨C, β, w⟩⊨3ϕ
:⇔
there is w′  w such that ⟨C, β, w′⟩⊨ϕ
(43)
In worldline semantics, predicates are interpreted as sets of n-tuples of traces.
The following is put in place of the ﬁrst condition:
⟨C, β, w⟩⊨P(⃗t) :⇔⟨τ(ε(t1), w), · · · , τ(ε(tn), w)⟩∈Iw(P)
(44)
This allows to drop the condition of equivalentiality.
However, it removes the
ﬂexibility in dealing with intensional predicates. It is a matter of straightforward
veriﬁcation to show that all axioms and rules of the minimal MPL are valid in
a coherence frame. Moreover, the set of formulae valid in a coherence structure
constitutes a ﬁrst-order MPL. Notice that the fourth postulate for equality holds
in virtue of the special clause for equality and the condition that the interpretation
must be equivalential. For if ⟨C, β, w⟩⊨yi = yn, then τ(β(yi), w) = τ(β(yn), w).
So, if ⟨C, β, w⟩⊨P(y0, . . . , yn−1) for P ∈Π, then ⟨β(yi) : i < n⟩∈I(P)(w).
Let β′ ∼yi β be such that β′(yi) = β(yn).
By equivalentiality, ⟨β′(yi) : i <
n⟩∈I(P)(w). This means that ⟨C, β′, w⟩⊨P(y0, . . . , yn−1), and so ⟨C, β, w⟩⊨
[yn/yi]P(y0, . . . , yn−1). If F is a coherence frame, put F ⊨ϕ if ⟨F, I⟩⊨ϕ for all
equivalential interpretations I. Evidently, {ϕ : F ⊨ϕ} is a ﬁrst-order MPL.
The frames allow two objects to share the entire worldline, just as worlds can
support the same propositions. This means that in a coherence frame the objects
are not mere constructions, they exist in their own right. We say that o = o′ is
true at w if and only if τ(o)(w) = τ(o′)(w). It follows that the formula
x = y ∧♦⊤→♦(x = y)
(45)
is not valid in coherence frames, since there is no way to predict how the worldline
of an object develops from one world to the next. If we turn to predicates, their
interpretation is now a function I(P), which assigns to each world w a subset of
Dn
w. Thus predicates, like identity, are predicated not of the objects themselves,
but of the traces in their worlds. Thus if τ(o)(w) = τ(o′)(w) then o and o′ satisfy
the same nonmodal formulae. The semantics is generalised using towers. This
leads to the notion of a generalised coherence frame. Free logic is assumed as
well. [Kracht and Kutz, 2005] show that the semantics of generalised coherence
frames is complete for all modal predicate logics. Moreover, similar to the case of
standard Kripke semantics, a variant of the well-known Henkin construction yields

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
975
a general completeness result with respect to structures involving interpretations
(rather than with respect to frames). The diﬀerence, however, to standard Kripke
semantics is that coherence frames also cover various logics of identity. For details
compare [Kracht and Kutz, 2005].
This semantics eliminates on the one hand the asymmetry between variables
and constants and on the other the possibility of speaking of things (‘res’) sim-
pliciter. A thing can only be understood as the materialisation of an individual
concept, and is not conceptualised itself. This is especially noticeable in the light
of the criticism leveled against counterpart theory. It has namely been observed
that counterpart theory makes every actual property of an object at a world w a
necessary one, for the reason that no object of another world is identical to it (see
[Plantinga, 1974] for the argument and [Norton, 1976] for a rebuttal). Thus, the
condition that attributions are exclusively of the individual concept remove that
problem. The semantics based on the interpretation of variables as individual con-
cepts is complete and provides a rather elementary completeness proof for modal
predicate logic. Also, the notion of an individual concept is not more suspicious
than the counterpart theory. Counterpart relations can be seen as the traces of
these functions. On the other hand, given a counterpart relation, we can deﬁne
individual concepts in the following way. Given a counterpart relation C, a com-
patible worldline is any function f such that if v R w then f(v) C f(w). However,
if v R v it may become impossible to choose enough worldlines. However, one can
always ﬁrst unravel the counterpart frame before extracting the worldlines (see
[Kracht and Kutz, 2005]).
Note that since trace functions are assumed to be surjective, every trace has
to be the trace of some object. This is a natural condition, because objects are
considered to be the primary entity, and traces a derived notion. The notion of
equivalence is perhaps a curious one. It says that the basic properties of objects
cannot discriminate between objects of equal trace.
So, if Pierre believes that
London is beautiful and Londres is not, while at the same time Londres is London
[Kripke, 1979], we have two objects which happen to have the same trace in this
world, though not in any of Pierre’s belief worlds. Hence they must share all prop-
erties in this world. So, London and Londres can only be both beautiful or both
ugly. This seems very plausible indeed. From a technical point of view, however,
the fact that they cannot simply have diﬀerent properties is a mere stipulation on
our part. On the other hand, it is conceivable that there are basic predicates that
are actually intensional, which would mean that they fail the substitution under
(extensional) equality.
The diﬀerence with the counterpart semantics is that we have disentangled the
quantiﬁcation over objects from the quantiﬁcation over worlds. Moreover, objects
exist independently of worlds. Each object leaves a trace in a given world, though
it need not exist there.
Furthermore, two objects can have the same trace in
any given world without being identical. However, identity of two objects holds
in a world if and only if they have the same trace in it. If we also have function

976
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
symbols, the clauses for basic predicates and equality will have to be generalised
in the obvious direction.
9
OBJECTS IN COUNTERPART FRAMES
One of the main intuitions behind counterpart frames is that objects do not exist
in more than one world, they are, in Lewis’ terminology, worldbound. We call
such objects individuals. Variables are interpreted in them as individuals, with
no connection between the values at diﬀerent worlds assumed. A more abstract,
transworld notion of an object can only be reconstructed by following an indi-
viduals’s counterparts along the counterpart relations being present. It turns out,
however, that counterpart frames may have very few objects in this sense.
Deﬁnition 5 (Objects). Let F = ⟨W, T, U, C⟩be a counterpart frame. An ob-
ject is a function f : W →T such that (i) f(v) ∈Uv for all v ∈W, (ii) for each
pair v, w ∈W with C(v, w) ̸= ∅there is ρ ∈C(v, w) such that ⟨f(v), f(w)⟩∈ρ.
So, objects are constructed using the counterpart relation. If the trace b in
world w is a counterpart of the trace a in world v, then there may be an object
leaving trace a in v and trace b in w. If not, then not. However, there are frames
which are not empty and possess no objects. Here is an example. Let W = {v},
T = {a, b}, Uv = {a, b}, and C(v, v) = {ρ} with ρ = {⟨a, b⟩, ⟨b, a⟩}. It is easy to
see that this frame has no objects. The crux is that we can only choose one trace
per world, but when we pass to an accessible world, we must choose a counterpart.
This may become impossible the moment we have cycles in the frame.
Thus, the connection between coherence frames and counterpart frames is not
at all straightforward. Since the logic of a counterpart frame is a ﬁrst-order modal
predicate logic, one might expect that for every counterpart frame there is a coher-
ence frame having the same logic. This is only approximately the case. It follows
from Theorem 7 below that for every counterpart structure there is a coherence
structure having the same theory. This is not generally true for frames. However,
adopting a modiﬁcation of coherence frames proposed by Melvin Fitting in [Fit-
ting, 2003], namely balanced coherence frames (in [Fitting, 2003] the correspond-
ing frames are called Riemann FOIL frames in analogy to Riemann surfaces in
complex analysis), it can indeed be shown that for every counterpart frame there
is a balanced coherence frame validating the same logic (under a translation).
Let us begin by elucidating some of the connections between counterpart and
coherence frames. Note again that since counterpart structures as deﬁned above
do not interpret constants, we have to assume that the language does not contain
any constants.
First, ﬁx a coherence structure C = ⟨W, , U, T, τ, I⟩. We put Uv := {τ(o, v) :
o ∈U}.
This deﬁnes the domains of the world.
Next, for v, w ∈W we put
ρ(v, w) := {⟨τ(o, v), τ(o, w)⟩: o ∈U} and C(v, w) := ∅if v  w does not obtain;
otherwise, C(v, w) := {ρ(v, w)}.
Finally, ⟨τ(ai, w) : i < Ω(P)⟩∈I′(P)(w) iﬀ
⟨ai : i < Ω(P)⟩∈I(P)(w). Then ⟨W, T, U, C, I′⟩is a counterpart structure. We

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
977
shall denote it by CP(C). Notice that there is at most one counterpart relation
between any two worlds.
Conversely, let a counterpart structure N = ⟨W, T, U, C, I⟩be given. We put
v w iﬀC(v, w) ̸= ∅. U := T. Let O be the set of all objects o : W →T. Further,
τ(o, w) := o(w). This deﬁnes a coherence frame if the set of objects is nonempty.25
Finally, ⟨oi : i < Ω(P)⟩∈I′(P)(w) iﬀ⟨oi(w) : i < n⟩∈I(P)(w). It is easy to see
that this is an equivalential interpretation. So, ⟨W, , O, U, τ, I′⟩is a coherence
structure, which we denote by CH (N).
Unfortunately, the logical relation between these two types of structures is rather
opaque, not the least since the notion of satisfaction in them is diﬀerent. More-
over, the operations just deﬁned are not inverses of each other.
For example,
as we have already seen, there exist counterpart structures with nonempty do-
mains which have no objects. In this case CP(CH (N)) ≇N. Also let C be the
following coherence frame. W := {v, w, x, y}, T := {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}, U = {a, b},
 = {⟨v, w⟩, ⟨w, x⟩, ⟨x, y⟩}.
Finally, τ(a, −) : v →1, w →2, x →4, y →5,
τ(b, −) : v →1, w →3, x →4, y →6. Generating the counterpart frame we ﬁnd
that 2 and 3 are counterparts of 1, and 5 and 6 are counterparts of 4. Hence, there
are more objects in the counterpart frame than existed in the coherence frame, for
example the function v →1, w →2, x →4, y →6.
Deﬁnition 6 (Threads). Let N be a counterpart frame. A sequence ⟨(wi, ti) :
i < n⟩is called a thread if (1) for all i < n: wi ∈W, ti ∈Uwi, and (2) for all
i < n −1: wi  wi+1 and ⟨ti, ti+1⟩∈ρ for some ρ ∈C(wi, wi+1). N is rich in
objects if for all threads there exists an object o such that o(wi) = ti for all i < n.
Notice that if  has the property that any path between two worlds is unique
then N is automatically object rich. Otherwise, when there are two paths lead-
ing to the same world, we must be able to choose the same counterpart in it.
Using unravelling one can always produce an object rich structure from a given
one. Additionally, we can ensure that between any two worlds there is at most
one counterpart relation. We call counterpart frames that satisfy the condition
|C(v, w)| ≤1 for all worlds v, w ∈W Lewisian counterpart frames. The proof
of the following theorem makes use of the unravelling technique.
Theorem 7. For every counterpart structure N there exists a Lewisian counter-
part structure N′ rich in objects such that N and N′ have the same ﬁrst-order
modal theory.
For a proof, let N = ⟨⟨W, T, U, C⟩, I⟩be a counterpart structure. A path in N
is a sequence π = ⟨w0, ⟨⟨wi, ρi⟩: 0 < i < n⟩⟩such that ρi ∈C(wi−1, wi) for all
0 < i < n. We let e(π) := wn−1 and r(π) = ρn−1 and call these, respectively, the
end point and the end relation of π. Let W ′ be the set of all paths in N and
T ′ := T. Further, let U′
π := Ue(π) and for two paths π and μ put C′(π, μ) := r(μ)
if r(μ) ∈C(e(π), e(μ)) and empty otherwise. Finally, let P be an n-ary predicate
letter. Then I′(P)(π) := I(P)(e(π)). Now let N′ = ⟨⟨W ′, T ′, U′, C′⟩, I′⟩. This is
25Strictly speaking, we have to reduce the set U of traces to those elements t ∈T that actually
are the trace of some object o, but this makes no diﬀerence semantically.

978
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
a Lewisian counterpart structure and clearly rich in objects. It can be veriﬁed by
induction that if β is a valuation on N and w a world, and if β′ is a valuation on
N′ and π a path such that e(π) = w and β′
π(xi) = βw(xi), then ⟨N, β, w⟩⊨ϕ iﬀ
⟨N′, β′, π⟩⊨ϕ for all ϕ.
Notice by the way that for second-order closed logics this theorem is false. This
is so because the interpretation of a predicate in π must be identical to that of
μ if the two have identical end points. We will re-encounter this problem in the
next section when we will modify Kripkean semantics to match counterpart frames
in terms of generality. However, if we are interested in characterising MPLs by
means of models, it follows from the above result that we can restrict ourselves in
the discussion to Lewisian counterpart structures that are rich in objects.
But we can also strike the following compromise. Let us keep the counterpart
semantics as it is, but interpret formulae in a diﬀerent way. We say that M =
⟨⟨F, I⟩, β, v⟩is an objectual counterpart model, if F is a counterpart frame as
before, I is an objectual interpretation, that is, a counterpart interpretation
that additionally assigns objects to constant symbols, β an objectual valuation
into F, i.e., a function that assigns to each variable an object in a given world. In
this context, εv(o) := βv(o) if o is a variable and εv(o) = I(o)(v) if o is a constant
symbol.
Write β →⃗y
v,w β if for some ρ ∈C(v, w) we have ⟨βv(xi), βw(xi)⟩∈ρ for all xi ∈
⃗y. Furthermore, write β →⃗y
v,w γ if for some ρ ∈C(v, w) we have ⟨βv(xi), γw(xi)⟩∈
ρ for all xi ∈⃗y, where γ is an objectual valuation. Terms ti denote either variables
or constants, ⃗y tuples of variables and ⃗c tuples of constants. The symbol ⊨∗is
called the weak objectual truth-relation and is deﬁned thus:
⟨M, β, v⟩⊨∗R(⃗t)
:⇔
⟨εv(t0), . . . , εv(tn−1)⟩∈Iv(R)
⟨M, β, v⟩⊨∗3ϕ(⃗y,⃗c)
:⇔
there is β →⃗y
v,w γ : ⟨M, γ, w⟩⊨∗ϕ(⃗y,⃗c)
⟨M, β, v⟩⊨∗ y.ϕ(y,⃗c)
:⇔
there is β ∼y β : ⟨M, β, v⟩⊨∗ϕ(y,⃗c)
(46)
The strong objectual truth-relation ⊨† is like ⊨∗except for the clause for 3
which is now
⟨M, β, v⟩⊨† 3ϕ(⃗y,⃗c)
:⇔
there is β →⃗y
v,w β : ⟨M, β, w⟩⊨† ϕ(⃗y,⃗c)
(47)
These interpretations remove the asymmetry between variables and constants in
the sense that constants and variables are now assigned the same kind of values.
However, while the strong objectual interpretation brings us very close to coherence
semantics, the weak interpretation still bears essential properties of counterpart
semantics, namely that we may move via a counterpart relation to a new object.
More precisely we have the following:
Proposition 8. The rule of substituting constants for universally quantiﬁed vari-
ables is valid in the strong objectual interpretation. More speciﬁcally, for every
counterpart frame F
F ⊨† (

x.ϕ) →[c/x]ϕ.
(48)

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
979
Furthermore, there is an objectual counterpart model M such that
M ⊭† 
x.

y.(x = y) →(ϕ(x,⃗z) ↔ϕ(y, ⃗z))
(49)
Both claims are false for the weak objectual interpretation.
In object rich frames, the weak objectual interpretation gives the same theorems
as the standard interpretation:
Theorem 9. Let N be a counterpart structure rich in objects, v a world and let β
be an objectual valuation and β a counterpart valuation such that βv(xi) = βv(xi)
for all variables. Then for all ϕ:
⟨N, β, v⟩⊨∗ϕ
⇔
⟨N, β, v⟩⊨ϕ
(50)
10
DUAL ONTOLOGIES, OR, THE SEMANTICAL IMPACT OF
HAECCEITISM
No two philosophers agree on the nature of individuals, even when restricted to the
more mundane question of what a material object is. The same, unsurprisingly,
holds true for the notion of a modal individual—a concept which some would
even claim to be nonsensical or inconsistent, but which, nevertheless, is central to
the metaphysics of modality.
For instance, the discussion concerning the question of how spatio-temporal ob-
jects can persist in time, currently divided between adherents of endurantism
(also called 3-dimensionalism, the view that an object exists at a time by being
wholly present at that time, and persists by being wholly present at more than
one time [Jackson, 1998]) versus perdurantism (also called 4-dimensionalism,
roughly, the view that a material object has temporal as well as spatial parts, and
persists by having distinct temporal parts at diﬀerent times), consists essentially in
competing ontologies as concerns the notion of a spatio-temporal object [Parsons,
2000; Sider, 2001]—and these conceptions of object correspond roughly to the dif-
ferent ontologies as represented in coherence frames versus standard semantics.26
Obviously, this discussion can be specialised to the question whether objects in
Minkowski space-time should be considered as perduring or rather as enduring,
where, prima facie, special relativity seems to support the four-dimensional ontol-
ogy, compare [Balashov, 2000a; Balashov, 2000b].
Another metaphysical doctrine that has been subject to considerable inquiry
is (ﬁrst-order) haecceitism, the view that there might be worlds that are distin-
26There is some controversy on which terminology is more appropriate (or less confusing).
David Lewis and Mark Johnstone used the endurantism/perdurantism distinction [Lewis, 1986;
Johnston, 1987], while many later authors, including Theodore Sider [Sider, 2001], preferred the
3/4-dimensionalism distinction.

980
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
guishable only by what individuals play what roles,27 ﬁrst introduced by David
Kaplan [Kaplan, 1975], and elaborated on for instance by Joseph Melia [Melia,
1999] in connection with determinism and the ‘hole argument’ of Earman and
Norton [1987]. In [Melia, 1999], he deﬁnes D-haecceitism to be the view that
a theory may be indeterministic, even if all the diﬀerent possible futures open to
any world which makes the theory true are qualitatively identical. In [Melia, 2001;
Melia, 2003], Melia also discusses second-order haecceitism, which may be
deﬁned as the position that there could be distinct worlds that agree on which
second-order properties are occupied, but which disagree on which properties play
which roles.28
A recurrent theme of this article was the idea that a semantics for modal logic
should make as little ontological commitments as possible. It should not be neces-
sary to deﬁne a new semantics once you commit to a new theory of identity across
worlds, for example. The most ﬂexible semantics in this respect so far (without
moving to an algebraic semantics) was the generalised counterpart theory embod-
ied in the notion of a poly-counterpart frame. In the following, we analyse how
we can achieve the same kind of semantical generality while sticking to the more
conventional Kripkean picture of possible worlds semantics. Curiously, this mod-
iﬁcation of Kripkean semantics requires to build a notion of haecceitism into the
frames, namely the notion of a world-mirror, see below.
By the theorems above we can introduce the notion of an object into counterpart
frames, which then makes them rather similar to coherence frames.
However,
counterpart structures with object valuations are still diﬀerent from coherence
structures. A diﬀerent approach is to translate 3 in order to accommodate the
truth relation ⊨∗within the language of counterpart structures.
(3ϕ(y0, . . . , yn−1))γ :=
	
z0. . . .
	
zn−1.z0 = y0 ∧z1 = y1 ∧. . .
· · · ∧zn−1 = yn−1 ∧3ϕ(⃗z/⃗y)γ
(51)
Here, yi (i < n) are the free variables of ϕ and zi (i < n) distinct variables not
occurring in ϕ. This is actually unique only up to renaming of bound variables.
This translation makes explicit the fact that variables inside a 3 are on a par with
bound variables.
Proposition 10. Let N be a counterpart structure and x a world.
Then for
any ϕ:
⟨N, x⟩⊨ϕγ
⇔
⟨N, x⟩⊨ϕ
In object rich structures also ⊨and ⊨∗coincide, which makes all four notions the
same. So, while in counterpart structures the formulae ϕ and ϕγ are equivalent,
they are certainly not equivalent when interpreted in coherence structures.
27As expected, philosophers disagree on this notion. According to [Melia, 2003], David Lewis
[Lewis, 1986] and David Armstrong [Armstrong, 1989] should be regarded as anti-haecceitists,
while the later Kaplan [Kaplan, 1975] is a haecceistist. Brian Skyrms, on the other hand, accepts
haecceitism for actual entities, but not for merely possible ones [Skyrms, 1981].
28David Lewis and David Armstrong both accept this version of haecceitism.

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
981
In [Schurz, 1997], it is shown that worldline semantics provides for the same
class of frame complete logics in the absence of extra equality axioms as standard
constant domain semantics. It follows that the same holds for coherence frames.
This means that while coherence frames allow for a more natural treatment of non-
rigid designation for example, unlike counterpart frames, they do not enlarge the
class of frame complete logics unless one moves to the full second-order semantics
involving towers as sketched above.
But there is a diﬀerent approach to this
problem.
Instead of introducing algebras of admissible interpretations we can
assume that certain worlds are isomorphic copies of each other. So, we add to
the frames an equivalence relation between worlds and require that predicates are
always interpreted in the same way in equivalent worlds. This idea is due to Melvin
Fitting (see [Fitting, 2003]). Call a relation E ⊆W × W a world-mirror on F if
E is an equivalence relation and whenever v E w and v u1, there is a u2 such that
w  u2 and u1 E u2. Intuitively, two mirrored worlds v and w may be understood
as a situation seen from two diﬀerent perspectives (because v and w may have
‘diﬀerent histories’, but have the ‘same future’).
Deﬁnition 11. A pair ⟨F, E⟩is called a balanced coherence frame, if F =
⟨W, , U, T, τ⟩is a coherence frame and E is a world-mirror on F. An interpre-
tation I is called balanced, if it is equivalential and ⟨u0, . . . , un−1⟩∈Iv(P) iﬀ
⟨u0, . . . , un−1⟩∈Iw(P) for all n-ary relations P and for all worlds v, w such that
v E w. A balanced coherence model is a triple ⟨⟨B, I⟩, β, w⟩, where B is a
balanced coherence frame, I a balanced interpretation, β a valuation and w a
world.
Theorem 12. For every counterpart frame F there exists a balanced coherence
frame F∗such that for all formulae ϕ:
F ⊨ϕ
⇔
F∗⊨ϕγ.
(52)
The details of the proof are rather technical and can be found in [Kracht
and Kutz, 2005]. This result has interesting consequences. For example, since
counterpart semantics is frame complete with respect to all ﬁrst-order exten-
sions QL of canonical propositional modal logics L (compare [Ghilardi, 1992]),
the same holds true for the translation QLγ with respect to balanced coher-
ence frames.
Now, we noted above that coherence frames per se characterise
the same logics as standard constant domain semantics if no extra equality ax-
ioms are involved. But it is known that already rather simple canonical propo-
sitional logics have frame incomplete predicate extensions. In [Cresswell, 2001]
it is shown that to complete frame incomplete MPLs by adding appropriate ax-
ioms, one needs mixed de re formulae rather than substitution instances of purely
propositional formulae.
So, the above result gives a hint on where the source
for frame incompleteness with respect to standard semantics is to be found. In
particular, note that the translation .γ leaves propositional formulae untouched,
whereas de re formulae of the form 3ϕ(y0, . . . , yn−1) are transformed into formu-
lae  z0. . . .  zn−1. 
i<n zi = yi ∧3ϕ(⃗z/⃗y)γ, which are de re formulae involving

982
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
Table 2. Competing Ontologies
poly-counterpart
balanced standard
accessibility
relations between individuals
relations between worlds
objects
worldbound individuals
global universe of objects
identity
between individuals
equivalence between objects
predication
locally
globally (but admissible)
haecceitism
no
yes, world-mirrors
equality.
So what we need if we want to use standard possible worlds semantics to char-
acterise a large class of logics via frame completeness are basically three things:
ﬁrstly, the distinction between trace and object, secondly a diﬀerent understand-
ing of the modal operator as given by .γ, and, thirdly, the assumption that certain
worlds are copies of each other.
Let us make this claim more explicit. Given a standard constant domain frame
⟨W, , U⟩, we may add, as before, an equivalence relation E relating worlds. Fur-
thermore, we technically do not need traces but can add a family of equivalence
relations (μw)w∈W interpreting equality at each world. Let us call frames of the
form F = ⟨W, , U, (μw)w∈W , E⟩balanced standard frames. An interpretation
I is called admissible if interpretations agree on worlds related by E and, more-
over, they respect the equivalence relations μw in the sense that ⃗a ∈I(w)(P) iﬀ
⃗b ∈I(w)(P) whenever aiμwbi for all i. We may think of objects being related by
μw as indiscriminable with respect to world w and basic extensional predicates.
Call a valuation γ a w-ignorant ⃗x-variant of γ, if γ(xi)μwγ(xi) for all xi ∈⃗x. The
truth deﬁnition for balanced standard frames is as usual except for the equality
and modal clauses, which are as follows:
• ⟨F, I, γ, w⟩⊨x = y iﬀγ(x)μwγ(y);
• ⟨F, I, γ, w⟩⊨3ϕ(⃗x) iﬀthere is a w-ignorant ⃗x-variant γ and a world
v  w such that ⟨F, I, γ, v⟩⊨ϕ(⃗x);
It should be rather clear that there is a bijective correspondence between balanced
coherence frames and balanced interpretations on the one hand and balanced stan-
dard frames and admissible interpretations on the other. Furthermore, for every
⟨W, , U, T, τ, E⟩there is a ⟨W, , U, (μw)w∈W , E⟩such that for all ϕ
⟨W, , U, T, τ, E⟩⊨ϕγ iﬀ⟨W, , U, (μw)w∈W , E⟩⊨ϕ.
Hence, the following theorem is an immediate corollary to Theorem 12.
Theorem 13. For every poly-counterpart frame there is a balanced standard
frame having the same logic.
Table 2 gives a comparison of the diﬀerent ontologies embodied in poly-
counterpart frames versus balanced standard frames. It shows that if we want

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
983
to avoid counterpart theory but still strive for a semantics that is of the same
generality, we arrive at a framework where we not only have to give up numerical
identity and replace it with equivalence relations, but where we are also committed
to a certain form of haecceitism, namely the one that corresponds to the notion of
a world-mirror. (However, similar assumptions are arrived at in the many-worlds
interpretation of quantum mechanics, although, obviously, with entirely diﬀerent
motivations, compare [Tegmark, 2004].)
11
METAFRAMES
The most radical shift is presented in the semantics proposed by Valentin Sheht-
man and Dmitrij Skvortsov in [Skvortsov and Shehtman, 1993], which we alluded
to in §6.4. Once again, it turned out in retrospect that the idea had an algebraic
precursor in the hyperdoctrines of [Lawvere, 1969]. Though hyperdoctrines were
originally deﬁned as model structures for Int, the generalisation to other logics is
straightforward (see [Shirasu, 1998]). Consider the category Σ of natural numbers
and mappings between them. A modal hyperdoctrine is a covariant functor H
from Σ into the category MA of modal algebras. H(n) may be thought of as the
algebra of meanings of formulae containing n free variables. To be well–deﬁned, H
must satisfy among other the so–called Beck-Chevalley-condition, which en-
sures that cylindriﬁcation has the same meaning on all levels. We shall not spell
this out in detail; instead, we shall look at the natural dual F := (−)+ ◦H of
H, where (−)+ is deﬁned as in (14). This maps n into the frame dual of H(n).
F is a contravariant functor into the category GFr of generalised frames.
The
system {F(n) : n ∈N} provides a ‘tower’ of admissible systems of sets of their
respective frames.
In general, a metaframe is simply a contravariant functor
from the category Σ to the category of general frames. Here is a recipe to obtain
a metaframe which is adequate for the logic L. For every natural number n, let
H(n) be the algebra of the formulae which contain only x1 to xn free (under logical
equivalence); and let H(σ) be the result of substituting via σ. This deﬁnes a hy-
perdoctrine whose logic is L. To obtain a metaframe whose logic is L, simply take
M := (−)+ ◦H. The world of M(n) are the n-types of L, and they constitute the
worlds. The maps M(σ)+ are the pre-images under the substitutions. They are
p-morphisms between these frames. In general, for a metaframe M, M(0) may be
thought of as the frame of worlds in the usual sense. The frame of 1-types is diﬀer-
ent. First, since there is a map σ : 0 →1 (the empty map), there is a p-morphism
M(σ) : M(1) →M(0). This map associates a 0-type to every 1-type. We may
view each member of M(1) as a world bound individual, but only up to logical
equivalence. Similarly, M(2) contains the world bound pairs of individuals, up to
equivalence. An interpretation is a function ξ which maps every n-ary predicate
letter P to a member of the internal sets of M(n). Let v be in M(k) for some k,
and let σ : n →k.
⟨M, ξ, β, v⟩⊨P(xσ(1), . . . , xσ(n)) :⇔⟨β(x1), . . . , β(xk)⟩∈σ(ξ(P))
(53)

984
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
Notice that worlds of M(n) can support the truth or falsity of formulae only if
the free variables of that formula are within {x1, . . . , xn}. Thus, the clause for ∃
requires care, while the clause for ♦is actually straightforward. The problem with
the existential is that it requires to shift to another world v′, since eliminating the
quantiﬁer makes a variable free that need not be supported by v.
The method yields a metaframe M for each logic L. Moreover, if the propo-
sitional counterpart of L is canonical, so is L (simply pass from M(n) to the
corresponding full frame). Thus, from a technical point of view this construction
is rather well understood. Unfortunately, from a metaphysical point of view it is
not. It dispenses completely with the notion of an object and in some sense also
with that of an ordinary possible world. What we are left with is possible states-
of-aﬀairs relating n individuals. Notice that accessibility relations are deﬁned over
these states-of-aﬀairs for every n. So, if a and b are such state-of-aﬀairs at level n,
then a R b means that b is possible for a. Now, a can be expanded to a member of
M(n + 1), and it can be reduced to a member of M(n −1), and these operations
are p-morphisms. This allows to reconstruct some of the classical notions. First,
we can identify worlds as members of M(0). Given a world v and n > 0, the set
On(v) := M(n)−1(v) is the set of n-tuples of v. Now, ideally we would like to
think of On(v) as the n-fold cartesian product of O1(v). If that is so, [Skvortsov
and Shehtman, 1993] call the metaframe cartesian. [Bauer, 2000] has shown that
under mild conditions it is possible to construct a cartesian metaframe with the
same n-types for all n out of a given metaframe. It then follows that all modal
predicate logics are complete with respect to cartesian metaframes.
12
ESSENCE AND IDENTITY
An object is said to have a property P essentially if whenever x fails to have P
it also fails to exist.29 It has P accidentally in a world w if it has P. [Plantinga,
1974] has criticised counterpart theory of eliminating the distinction between ac-
cidental and essential properties of an object. [Burgess, 1978] paints a diﬀerent
picture. In his view, we can certainly speak of sortal objects and essential prop-
erties that these objects have even if there is no identity in the strict sense. The
problem is partly due also to the question of what an object actually is. In co-
herence frames objects are interpreted as individual concepts. Now, we eﬀectively
have two sorts of identiﬁcation: two objects can be identical in this world iﬀthey
have the same trace, while transworld identity is simply identity as object (identity
of the whole worldline). How this changes matter is best seen with the theory of
sets. [Forbes, 1985], as well as [Fine, 1977], expose a theory of sets, which embod-
ies the idea that the essence of the set X is the fact that it contains the elements
that it contains (extensionality). Moreover, if the fact that it has the given objects
as members is an essential property, then we should have the following postulate
to start, called membership rigidity.
29A discussion of various notions of ‘essence’ can be found in [Fine, 1995].

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
985
x ∈X →□(x ∈X),
x ̸∈X →□(x ̸∈X)
(54)
(Notice that since we do not work with a distinguished actual world, our principles
need not be preﬁxed by a box.) Additionally, it is assumed that x ∈X implies
the existence of both x and X (the falsehood principle):
(∀x)(∀X)(x ∈X →E(x) ∧E(X))
(55)
How can ﬁnally transworld identity be expressed? In counterpart theory we need
to go back and forth between worlds, assuring us that if x ∈X in w, say, then
this is the case in v (for the respective counterparts) and conversely. In coherence
frames we only need to state the principle in its original form.
(∀X)(∀Y )(X = Y ↔(∀x)(x ∈X ↔x ∈Y ))
(56)
However, in this reading identity depends on the world we are in. If X is the
set containing the morning star and the evening star, and Y the set containing
only the evening star, then X = Y is true at w iﬀ, in w, the trace of the evening
star is identical to the trace of the morning star.
Of course, it is possible to
retroactively introduce a stronger notion of identity, as with objects (see [Scott,
1970] on identity).
Coherence frames and worldline frames alike use identity in trace as a criterion
of identity at a world. However, from a metaphysical point of view the introduction
of traces is a dubious thing. What for example, is the trace of Yuri Gagarin in
this world right now? Or that of Clark Kent? How do we decide whether or not
Clark Kent is Superman on the basis of traces? If one is troubled by traces, one
may do without them. All it takes is to introduce a binary predicate Eq whose
interpretation is an equivalence relation in every world. The interpretation of Eq
will hardly be that of identity. This has caused great concern; however, it must be
borne in mind that Eq is a predicate of objects, not of individuals. All it takes is
to consider objects to exist independently of their realisation (‘individual’). This
move is virtually forced on us when we want to supply metaframe semantics for
logics that do not validate the necessity of identity (see [Kracht and Kutz, 2005]).
13
ON THE STATUS OF THE MODAL LANGUAGE
[McLeod, 2001] exposes three views one can have with regards to modal language;
one can be a primitivist, a eliminativist and a reductionist. A primitivist
holds that talk about modality is not reducible to anything else, and that modal
statements have the same status as nonmodal ones.
They are meaningful and
they do not lack truth values.
A reductionist believes that modal talk can
be eliminated by talk about something else, for example possible worlds. Such
a reduction might proceed along the lines of the standard translation. Finally,
an eliminativist denies the meaningfulness of modal talk altogether. For him,

986
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
modal talk is meaningless.
For example, one might hold that there is no way
to attach veriﬁcation procedures to modal statements in the way that one does
with ordinary, nonmodal statements. From a formal point of view, the reductionist
works with the presupposition that modal talk is just proxy for talk about possible
worlds, using the standard translation (6). But we have seen that modal logic
is incomplete; the second-order interpretation in Kripke-frames confuses certain
logics (namely the incomplete logics with their completion). The reductionist thus
is committed to the rejection of incomplete logics, unless he agrees to yet another
entity, the internal sets.
It is the task of the reductionist to either show that
the need for these sets does not arise (by showing that the logic of the modal
operator is complete), or, if he cannot do this, he is committed to a kind of entity
that we have shown to be equivalent in character with that of the propositions
themselves. This actually strengthens the primitivist position, since the primitivist
can point out that these objects he had in the ﬁrst place.
We do not aim at
discussing the eliminativist’s position here. It is mostly rejected on the grounds
that it fails to explain human communication. Suﬃce it to point out that even
Quine did consider certain interpretations of modal operators as unproblematic,
for example those relating to time and space. While he rejected an ‘intensional
ontology’ proper, he accepted modal discourse about real-world objects [Quine,
1976].
In his view, this does not constitute transgression into another world.
(This is implicit in other work as well.) It is unclear, though, which interpretation
of modality requires the addition of possible worlds in this sense, and which one
does not.
For example, suppose future is indeterminate and you might either
toss head or tail in the next moment.
Now, if that moment arrives and you
have tossed head, does the other outcome in which you tossed tail exist or not?
And, if it exists, does it exist in another world or in this one?
On the many
worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics it is really part of this world (despite
the name ‘many worlds interpretation’). If so, most counterfactual reasoning is
actually perfectly acceptable because it talks about how things are in some other
history. If one is inclined to reject this line because it is in principle impossible
to know what happens in another history, notice that veriﬁcationism frequently
employs procedures that cannot be carried out even in principle. The formulation
of these principles involves modal talk, as [McLeod, 2001] points out, so there
seems to be something irreducible about modal language.
Interestingly, notice
that much of set theory is founded around the idea that every potentially inﬁnite
chain deﬁnes an actual object. The natural numbers exist as soon as we have
the inﬁnite ascending chain of numbers 1, 2, 3, · · · .
Georg Cantor addressed
the distinction between potential and actual inﬁnity by saying that the principle
of potential inﬁnity cannot be formulated without conceiving of the totality of
numbers in the ﬁrst place (for example, by saying that for every number there is
a larger number).
Still, the interpretations of modality seem to present diﬀerent degrees of on-
tological commitment.
Also, they might operate on diﬀerent lines.
Epistemic
modalities seem to be very diﬀerent from what we may call ‘objective modalities’

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
987
in that the former may be at odds with Leibniz’ Principle of substituting equiva-
lent descriptions. Belief, for example, is highly problematic in this respect. Even
if the axioms of the natural numbers imply that Fermat’s conjecture is true, one
may believe the ﬁrst but not the second. On these grounds it seems that the at-
tempt to model belief via possible worlds is highly problematic. Jaakko Hintikka
[Hintikka, 1962] confronts the problem with the notion of implicit belief, but that
is not helpful since it fails to analyse the notion we are after, namely that of belief,
and substitutes it with a diﬀerent notion.
In a similar vein, talk of objects and counterparts is not simply problematic
as such. If we talk about time and space, the notion of an object seems to be
clear even to those who reject the notion of modality. However, even if there is
(seemingly or not) no talk of modality, the questions about the nature of objects
do not disappear, they just take a diﬀerent form. For example, why is this cat
today the same as that cat yesterday? The answer might go like this. There is a
continuous function from the location of that cat yesterday to the location of this
cat today, and at every instance between these time points, this function yields the
location of an object at that time point, and this object was a cat. (See [Quine,
1976] for a discussion.) However implausible it is to expect from anyone to really go
by this deﬁnition (rather than just checking whether this cat looks or acts the same
as that cat yesterday, supposing that our memory and perceptions are infallible
etc.), the question is whether this answer always works. Consider, for example,
artefacts, such as cars or bicycles.
They can be the same even though some
parts have been exchanged. It is not immediately clear how to apply the previous
deﬁnition in the case where you give your bicycle to a mechanic and get it back
tomorrow with some parts being exchanged. (Suppose your bicycle gets totally
disassembled—you have to say that it disappeared at that moment.) If we accept
that the bicycle you get back today is the same as the one you handed in yesterday,
you are additionally in for a Sorites type argument (see [Forbes, 1985]). However
this matter can be resolved, the answers to the questions of identity across time
do not seem to be less challenging than those of identity across worlds in general
[Simmons, 1991; Balashov, 2000b; Sider, 2001]. Additionally, the veriﬁcationist
answer we gave before does not even work in principle. Notice that if quantum
physics is correct, there is no way to check the continuity of the movement of any
object, not just elementary particles (compare also [Da Costa and Krause, 1997]).
There is, moreover, no object as such: there is just a vector in an inﬁnite Hilbert
space, of which the object is but one aspect (and the de Broglie wave another).
Below the uncertainty threshold just about any monstrosity can happen (creating
and destroying particles, for example). This means, at least in theory, that it is
impossible in principle to track the exact movement of that cat yesterday until it
becomes this cat today.

988
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Alchourr´on et al., 1985] C. Alchourr´on, P. G¨ardenfors, and D. Makinson. On the logic of theory
change. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 50, 510–530, 1985.
[Anderson and Belnap, 1975] A. R. Anderson and N. D. Belnap.
Entailment: The Logic of
Relevance and Necessity Vol 1. Princeton University Press, 1975.
[Anderson et al., 1992] A. R. Anderson, N. D. Belnap, and M. J. Dunn. Entailment: The Logic
of Relevance and Necessity Vol 2. Princeton University Press, 1992.
[Aristotle, 1989] Aristotle.
Prior Analytics.
Hackett Publishing Company,
Indianapo-
lis/Cambridge, 1989. translated, with introduction, notes, and commentary, by Robin Smith.
[Armstrong, 1989] D. M. Armstrong. A Combinatorial Theory of Possibility. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, 1989.
[Balashov, 2000a] Y. V. Balashov. Enduring and perduring objects in Minkowski space-time.
Philosophical Studies, 99, 129–166, 2000.
[Balashov, 2000b] Y. V. Balashov. Persistence and space-time: philosophical lessons of the pole
and barn. The Monist, 83(3), 321–340, 2000.
[Barcan, 1946] R. C. Barcan. A functional calculus of first order based on srict implication.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 11, 1–16, 1946.
[Barwise and Perry, 1983] J. Barwise and J. Perry. Situations and Attitudes. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge (Massachussetts), 1983.
[Barwise and Perry, 1985] J. Barwise and J. Perry. Shifting situations and shaken attitudes.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 8, 103–161, 1985.
[Bauer and Wansing, 2002] S. Bauer and H. Wansing. Consequence, counterparts and substi-
tution. The Monist, 85(4), 483–497, 2002.
[Bauer, 2000] S. Bauer. Metaframes, Typen und Modelle der modalen Pr¨adikatenlogik. Master’s
thesis, Fachbereich Mathematik, Humboldt–Universit¨at zu Berlin, 2000.
[Becker, 1960] O. Becker. Zur Rekonstruktion des Kyrieuon Logos des Diodoros Kronos. In
Josef Derbolav and Friedhelm Nicolin, editors, Erkenntnis und Verantwortung: Festschrift
f¨ur Theodor Litt zum 80. Geburtstag, pages 250–263. D¨usseldorf, 1960.
[van Benthem et al., 2006] J. van Benthem, P. Blackburn, and F. Wolter, editors. Handbook of
Modal Logic. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2006.
[van Benthem, 1983] J. van Benthem. Modal and Classical Logic. Bibliopolis, 1983.
[van Benthem, 1986] J. van Benthem. Essays in Logical Semantics. D. Reidel Publishing Com-
pany, Dordrecht, 1986.
[Bigaj, 2001] T. Bigaj. Three-valued logic, indeterminism, and quantum mechanics. Journal of
Philosophical Logic, 30, 97–119, 2001.
[Blackburn, 1993] P. Blackburn. Nominal tense logic. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic,
39, 56–83, 1993.
[Boche´nski, 2002] J.. M. Boche´nski.
Formale Logik.
Verlag Karl Alber, Freiburg, M¨unchen,
2002. 5th edition, ﬁrst edition 1956, english translation by Ivo Thomas, A History of Formal
Logic, University of Notre Dame Press, 1961.
[Bra¨uner and Ghilardi, 2006] T. Bra¨uner and S. Ghilardi. First-order modal logic. In Johan van
Benthem, Patrick Blackburn, and Frank Wolter, editors, Handbook of Modal Logic. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, 2006.
[Brink and Rewitzki, 2002] C. Brink and I. Rewitzki. Three dual ontologies. Journal of Philo-
sophical Logic, 31, 543–568, 2002.
[Brouwer, 1907] L. E. J. Brouwer. Over de Grondslagen der Wiskunde. PhD thesis, Amsterdam,
1907. Translation: “On the foundation of mathematics” in Brouwer, Collected Works, I, (A.
Heyting ed.), 1975, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp.11–101.
[Brouwer, 1908] L. E. J. Brouwer. De onbetrouwbaarheid der logische principes.
Tijdschrift
voor Wijsbegeerte, 2, 152–158, 1908. Translation: The unreliability of the logical principles,
Ibid. pp. 107–111.
[Brown, 1988] M. A. Brown. On the logic of ability. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 17, 1–26,
1988.
[Bull, 1968] R. A. Bull. On possible worlds in propositional calculus. Theoria, 34, 171–182,
1968.
[Burgess, 1978] J. P. Burgess. The unreal future. Theoria, 44, 157–179, 1978.
[Burgess, 1979] J. P. Burgess. Logic and time. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 44, 566–582, 1979.

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
989
[Carnap, 1946] R. Carnap. Modalities and quantiﬁcation. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 11, 33–64,
1946.
[Carnap, 1947] R. Carnap. Meaning and Necessity. A Study in Semantics and Modal Logic.
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1947.
[Chagrov and Zakharyaschev, 1997] A. Chagrov and M. Zakharyaschev. Modal Logic. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1997.
[Chihara, 1998] C. Chihara. The Worlds of Possibility. Modal Realism and the Semantics of
Modal Logic. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1998.
[Church, 1951] A. Church. A formulation of the logic of sense and denotation. In P. Henle,
H. M. Kallen, and S. K. Langer, editors, Structure, Method and Meaning: Essays in Honor
of H. M. Sheﬀer, pages 3–24. The Liberal Arts Press, New York, 1951.
[Cocchiarella, 1975] N. B. Cocchiarella.
On the primary and secondary semantics of logical
necessity. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 4(1), 13–18, 1975.
[Cocchiarella, 2002] N. B. Cocchiarella. Logical necessity based on Carnap’s criterion of ade-
quacy. Korean Journal of Logic, 5(2), 1–21, 2002.
[Copeland, 2002] J. Copeland. The genesis of possible worlds semantics. Journal of Philosoph-
ical Logic, 31(2), 99–137, 2002.
[Cresswell, 2001] M. J. Cresswell. How to complete some modal predicate logics. In Michael Za-
kharyaschev et al., editor, Advances in Modal Logic. Volume 2, Stanford, 2001. CSLI Publi-
cations.
[Czelakowski, 2001] J. Czelakowski.
Protoalgebraic Logics.
Number 10 in Trends in Logic.
Kluwer, 2001.
[Da Costa and Krause, 1997] N. C. A. Da Costa and D. Krause. An intensional Schr¨odinger
logic. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 38(2), 179–195, 1997.
[Divers, 2002] J. Divers. Possible Worlds. The Problems of Philosophy. Routledge, London and
New York, 2002.
[Dowty, 1977] D. Dowty. Towards a semantic analysis of verb aspect and the English “imper-
fective progressive”. Linguistics and Philosophy, 1, 54–78, 1977.
[Earman and Norton, 1987] J. Earman and J. Norton. What price space-time substantivalism?
The hole story. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 38, 515–525, 1987.
[Everett III, 1956] H. Everett III.
The theory of the universal wave function.
PhD thesis,
Princeton University, 1956.
[Fara and Williamson, 2005] M. Fara and T. Williamson. Counterparts and actuality. Mind,
114, 1–30, 2005.
[Feldman, 1971] F. Feldman. Counterparts. The Journal of Philosophy, 68, 406–409, 1971.
[Fine and Schurz, 1991] K. Fine and G. Schurz. Transfer theorems for stratiﬁed modal logics.
In Proceedings of the Arthur Prior Memorial Conference, Christchurch, New Zealand, 1991.
[Fine, 1975] K. Fine. Some connections between elementary and modal logic. In Stig Kanger,
editor, Proceedings of the Third Scandinavian Logic Symposium, pages 15–31. North–Holland,
1975.
[Fine, 1977] K. Fine.
Properties, propositions, and sets.
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 6,
135–191, 1977.
[Fine, 1981] K. Fine. Model theory for modal logic. Part III: existence and predication. Journal
of Philosophical Logic, 10, 293–307, 1981.
[Fine, 1995] K. Fine. Senses of essence. In [Sinnott-Armstrong, 1995, pp. 53–73].
[Fitting and Mendelsohn, 1998] M. Fitting and R. L. Mendelsohn. First-Order Modal Logic.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1998.
[Fitting, 1999] M. Fitting. On quantiﬁed modal logic. Fundamenta Informaticae, 39(1–2), 105–
121, 1999.
[Fitting, 2002a] M. Fitting. Modal logics between propositional and ﬁrst-order. Journal of Logic
and Computation, 12, 1017–1026, 2002.
[Fitting, 2002b] M. Fitting. Types, Tableaus and G¨odel’s God, volume 12 of Trends in Logic.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 2002.
[Fitting, 2003] M. Fitting. First-order intensional logic. In D. Niwinski and J. Wolenski, editors,
Proccedings of the Alfred Tarski Centenary Conference. Journal of Pure and Applied Logic
(Special Issue), 2003.
[Forbes, 1982] G. Forbes. Canonical counterpart theory. Analysis, 42, 33–37, 1982.
[Forbes, 1985] G. Forbes. The Metaphysics of Modality. Oxford Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1985.

990
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
[van Fraassen, 1974] B. C. van Fraassen. Hidden variables in conditional logic. Theoria, 40,
176–190, 1974.
[Gabbay, 1972] D. M. Gabbay. A general theory of the conditional in terms of a ternary operator.
Theoria, 38, 97–104, 1972.
[Gabbay and Shehtman, 1993] D. Gabbay and V. Shehtman. Undecidability of modal and in-
termediate ﬁrst-order logics with two individual variables.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 58,
800–823, 1993.
[Gabbay et al., 2003] D. Gabbay, A. Kurucz, F. Wolter, and M. Zakharyaschev.
Many-
Dimensional Modal Logics: Theory and Applications. Number 148 in Studies in Logic and
the Foundations of Mathematics. Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam, 2003.
[Gallin, 1975] D. Gallin. Intensional and Higher-Order Modal Logic. North-Holland, Amster-
dam, 1975.
[Garson, 1991] J. W. Garson. Applications of Free Logic to Quantiﬁed Intensional Logic. In
Karel Lambert, editor, Philosophical Applications of Free Logic, pages 111–144. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, New York, Oxford, 1991.
[Gerson, 1975a] M. Gerson.
An extension of S4 complete for neighbourhood semantics but
incomplete for relational semantics. Studia Logica, 34, 333–342, 1975.
[Gerson, 1975b] M. Gerson. The inadequacy of neighborhood semantics for modal logics. Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic, 40(2), 141–147, 1975.
[Ghilardi, 1991] S. Ghilardi. Presheaf semantics and independence results for some non-classical
ﬁrst-order logics. Archiv f¨ur mathematische Logik, 29, 125–136, 1991.
[Ghilardi, 1992] S. Ghilardi. Quantiﬁed extensions of canonical propositional intermediate log-
ics. Studia Logica, 51, 195–214, 1992.
[Girard, 1987] J.-Y. Girard. Linear logic. Theoretical Computer Science, 50, 1–102, 1987.
[G¨odel, 1932] K. G¨odel. Zum intuitionistischen Aussagenkalk¨ul. Anzeiger der Akademie der
Wissenschaften in Wien, 69, 65–66, 1932.
[G¨odel, 1933] K. G¨odel. Eine Interpretation des intuitionistischen Aussagenkalk¨uls. Ergebnisse
eines mathematischen Kolloquiums, 4, 39–40, 1933.
[G¨odel, 1995] K. G¨odel. Ontological proof. In Soloman Feferman, Jr. John W. Dawson, Warren
Goldfarb, Charles Parsons, and Robert N. Solovay, editors, Kurt G¨odel Collected Works,
Volume III, Unpublished Essays and Lectures, pages 403–404. Oxford University Press, New
York, 1995.
[Goldblatt, 1980] R. I. Goldblatt. Diodorean modality in Minkowski spacetime. Studia Logica,
39, 219–236, 1980.
[Goldblatt, 1992] R. I. Goldblatt. Logics of Time and Computation. Studies in Logic, Language
and Information. CSLI, Stanford, 1992. second edition.
[Goldblatt, 2003] R. I. Goldblatt. Mathematical modal logic: A view of its evolution. Journal
of Applied Logic, 1, 309–392, 2003.
[Hazen, 1976] A. Hazen. Expressive completeness in modal languages. Journal of Philosophcal
Logic, 5, 25–46, 1976.
[Hazen, 1979] A. Hazen.
Counterpart-theoretic semantics for modal logic.
The Journal of
Philosophy, 76, 319–338, 1979.
[Henkin, 1950] L. Henkin. Completeness in the Theory of Types. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
15, 81–91, 1950.
[Heyting, 1930] A. Heyting. Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Logik. Sitzungsberichte
der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, pages 42–56, 1930.
[Hintikka, 1962] J. Hintikka. Knowledge and Belief. An Introduction into the logic of the two
notions. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1962.
[Hintikka, 1964] J. Hintikka.
Aristotle and the ‘Master Argument’ of Diodorus.
American
Philosophical Quarterly, 1, 101–114, 1964.
[Hintikka, 1969] J. Hintikka. Existential presuppositions and their elimination. In Models for
Modalities. Selected Essays, pages 23–44. D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, 1969.
[Hodes, 1984a] H. Hodes. Axioms for actuality. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 13, 27–34, 1984.
[Hodes, 1984b] H. Hodes.
Some theorems on the expressive limitations of modal languages.
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 13, 13–26, 1984.
[Hodes, 1986] H. Hodes. Individual actualism and three valued modal logics. Part I: model-
theoretic semantics. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 15, 369–401, 1986.
[Holton, 2003] R. Holton.
David Lewis’s philosophy of language.
Mind & Language, 18(3),
286–295, 2003.

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
991
[Hughes and Cresswell, 1996] G. E. Hughes and M. J. Cresswell. A New Introduction to Modal
Logic. Routledge, London, 1996.
[Humberstone, 1981] L. Humberstone. From worlds to possibilities. Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 10, 313–339, 1981.
[Jackson, 1998] F. Jackson. Metaphysics by possible cases. In Mind, Method, and Conditionals:
Selected Essays, pages 133–153. Routledge, 1998.
[Johnston, 1987] M. Johnston.
Is there a problem about persistence?
Aristotelean Society
Supp., 61, 107–135, 1987.
[J´onsson and Tarski, 1951] B. J´onsson and A. Tarski. Boolean algebras with operators. Amer-
ican Journal of Mathematics, 73, 891–939, 1951.
[Kaplan, 1975] D. Kaplan. How to Russell a Frege-Church. Journal of Philosophy, 72, 716–729,
1975. reprinted in Loux, 1979.
[Kneale and Kneale, 1984] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic. Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1984. paperback edition, ﬁrst edition 1962.
[Konyndyk, 1986] K. Konyndyk. Introduction to Modal Logic. University of Notre Dame Press,
Notre Dame, Indiana, 1986.
[Kracht and Kutz, 2002] M. Kracht and O. Kutz. The semantics of modal predicate logic I.
counterpart-frames.
In Frank Wolter, Heinrich Wansing, Maarten de Rijke, and Michael
Zakharyaschev, editors, Advances in Modal Logic. Volume 3. World Scientiﬁc Publishing
Company, 2002.
[Kracht and Kutz, 2005] M. Kracht and O. Kutz. The semantics of modal predicate logic II.
Modal individuals revisited.
In Reinhard Kahle, editor, Intensionality, volume 22 of ASL
Lecture Notes in Logic, pages 60–97. A. K. Peters, Los Angeles, 2005.
[Kracht and Wolter, 1991] M. Kracht and F. Wolter. Properties of independently axiomatizable
bimodal logics. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 56, 1469–1485, 1991.
[Kracht and Wolter, 1999] M. Kracht and F. Wolter. Normal monomodal logics can simulate
all others. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 64, 99–138, 1999.
[Kracht, 1999] M. Kracht. Tools and Techniques in Modal Logic. Number 142 in Studies in
Logic. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1999.
[Kracht, 2004] M. Kracht. Notes on substitution in first-order logic. In Uwe Scheﬄer, editor,
First-Order Logic 75, pages 155–172, Berlin, 2004. Logos Verlag.
[Kracht, 2006] M. Kracht. Modal consequence relations. In Johan van Benthem, Patrick Black-
burn, and Frank Wolter, editors, Handbook of Modal Logic. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2006.
[Kratzer, 1989] A. Kratzer. An investigation into the lumps of thought. Linguistics and Phi-
losophy, 12, 607–653, 1989.
[Kripke, 1959] S. A. Kripke. A completeness theorem in modal logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
24(1), 1–14, 1959.
[Kripke, 1962] S. A. Kripke.
The undecidability of monadic modal quantiﬁcational theory.
Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 8, 113–116, 1962.
[Kripke, 1963] S. A. Kripke. Semantical considerations on modal logic. Acta Philosophica Fen-
nica, 16, 83–94, 1963.
[Kripke, 1972] S. A. Kripke.
Naming and necessity.
In Gilbert Harman and Donald David-
son, editors, Semantics of Natural Language, number 40 in Synthese Library, pages 243–355.
Reidel, Dordrecht, 1972.
[Kripke, 1979] S. A. Kripke. A puzzle about belief. In A. Margalit, editor, Meaning and Use,
pages 239–283. D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, Boston, 1979.
[Kutz et al., 2003] O. Kutz, H. Sturm, N.-Y. Suzuki, F. Wolter, and M. Zakharyaschev. Logics
of metric spaces. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic (TOCL), 4(2), 260–294, 2003.
[Kutz et al., 2004] O. Kutz, C. Lutz, F. Wolter, and M. Zakharyaschev. E-Connections of ab-
stract description systems. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 156(1), 1–73, 2004.
[Kutz, 2000] O. Kutz. Kripke–Typ Semantiken f¨ur die modale Pr¨adikatenlogik. Master’s thesis,
Fachbereich Mathematik, Humboldt–Universit¨at zu Berlin, 2000.
[Kutz, 2003] O. Kutz. New semantics for modal predicate logics. In Benedikt L¨owe, Wolfgang
Malzkorn, and Thoralf R¨asch, editors, Foundations of the Formal Sciences II: Applications
of Mathematical Logic in Philosophy and Linguistics, volume 17 of Trends in Logic, pages
151–162, Dordrecht, Boston, London, 2003. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
[Kutz, 2004] O. Kutz. E-Connections and Logics of Distance. PhD thesis, The University of
Liverpool, 2004.

992
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
[Lambert, 1963] K. Lambert.
Existential import revisited.
Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic, 4, 288–292, 1963.
[Lambert, 1997] K. Lambert. Free Logics: Their Foundations, Character, and Some Applica-
tions Thereof. Academia Verlag, Sankt Augustin, 1997.
[Lawvere, 1969] F. W. Lawvere. Adjointness in foundations. Dialectica, 23(3/4), 281–296, 1969.
[Lewis and Langford, 1932] C. I. Lewis and C. H. Langford. Symbolic Logic. Appleton-Century-
Crofts, New York, 1932.
[Lewis, 1918] C. I. Lewis. A Survey of Symbolic Logic. University of California Press, Berkeley,
1918.
[Lewis, 1920] C. I. Lewis. Strict implication—an emendation. Journal of Philosophy, Psychol-
ogy, and Scientiﬁc Methods, 17, 300–302, 1920.
[Lewis, 1968] D. K. Lewis. Counterpart theory and quantiﬁed modal logic. In Journal of Phi-
losophy, Vol. 65, pages 113–126. repr. in The Possible and the Actual, ed. Michael J. Loux,
Ithaca 1979; also in: David K. Lewis, Philosophical papers 1, Oxford 1983, 1968.
[Lewis, 1971] D. K. Lewis. Completeness and decidability of three logics of counterfactual con-
ditionals. Theoria, 36, 74–85, 1971.
[Lewis, 1973] D. K. Lewis. Counterfactuals. Blackwell, Oxford, 1973.
[Lewis, 1986] D. K. Lewis. On the Plurality of Worlds. Blackwell, 1986.
[Leyton, 1992] M. Leyton. Symmetry, Causality, Mind. MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.), 1992.
[Lindstr¨om and Segerberg, 2006] S. Lindstr¨om and K. Segerberg. Modal logic and philosophy.
In Johan van Benthem, Patrick Blackburn, and Frank Wolter, editors, Handbook of Modal
Logic. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2006.
[Linsky, 1971] L. Linsky, editor.
Reference and Modality.
Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1971.
[Loux, 1979] M. J. Loux, editor. The Possible and the Actual: Readings in the Metaphysics of
Modality. Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London, 1979.
[L¨owenheim, 1915] L. L¨owenheim. ¨Uber M¨oglichkeiten im Relativkalk¨ul. Mathematische An-
nalen, 76, 447–470, 1915.
[Lukasiewicz, 1957] J. Lukasiewicz. Aristotle’s Syllogistic from the Standpoint of Modern For-
mal Logic. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1957. 2nd edition.
[Marcus et al., 1962] R. Barcan Marcus, W. V. Quine, S. Kripke, D. Føllesdal, and J. McCarthy.
Discussion of the paper of Ruth B. Marcus.
Synthese, XIV, 132–143, 1962.
reprinted in
[Marcus, 1993].
[Marcus, 1961] R. Barcan Marcus.
Modalities and intensional languages.
Synthese, XIII(4),
303–322, 1961. reprinted in [Barcan, 1993].
[Marcus, 1993] R. Barcan Marcus. Modalities: Philosophical Essays. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1993.
[McLeod, 2001] S. McLeod. Modality and Anti-Metaphysics. Ashgate, Aldershot, 2001.
[Melia, 1999] J. Melia. Holes, haecceitism and two conceptions of determinism. British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 50, 639–664, 1999.
[Melia, 2001] J. Melia. Reducing possibilities to language. Analysis, 61(1), 19–29, 2001.
[Melia, 2003] J. Melia. Modality. Central Problems of Philosophy. Acumen, 2003.
[Montague, 1968] R. Montague. Pragmatics. In B. Klibansky, editor, Contemporary Philosophy:
A Survey, pages 102–122. La Nuova Italia Editrice, 1968.
[Montague, 1969] R. Montague. On the nature of certain philosophical entities. Monist, 53,
159–194, 1969. reprinted in [Montague, 1974; Chapter 5].
[Montague, 1974] R. Montague. Formal Philosophy:
Selected Papers of Richard Montague,
edited by Richmond H. Thomason. Yale University Press, New Haven and London, 1974.
[Mortimer, 1975] M. Mortimer. On languages with two variables. Zeitschrift f¨ur mathematische
Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 21, 135–140, 1975.
[Nelson, 1949] N. D. Nelson. Constructible falsity. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 14(1), 16–26,
1949.
[Norton, 1976] B. Norton. Is counterpart theory inadequate?
Journal of Philosophical Logic,
5, 79–89, 1976.
[Ohlbach et al., 2001] H. J. Ohlbach, A. Nonnengart, M. de Rijke, and D. M. Gabbay. Encoding
two-valued nonclassical logics in classical logic. In John Alan Robinson and Andrei Voronkov,
editors, Handbook of Automated Reasoning, pages 1403–1486. Elsevier and MIT Press, 2001.
[Orlov, 1928] I. E. Orlov. The calculus of compatibility of propositions. Mathematics of the
USSR, Sbornik, 35, 263–286, 1928. (Russian).

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
993
[Parry, 1970] W. T. Parry.
In memoriam: Clarence Irving Lewis (1883–1964).
Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic, 11(2), 129–140, 1970.
[Parsons, 1995] T. Parsons.
Ruth Barcan Marcus and the Barcan formula.
In [Sinnott-
Armstrong, 1995, pp. 3–11].
[Parsons, 1980] T. Parsons. Nonexistent Objects. Yale University Press, New Haven and London,
1980.
[Parsons, 2000] J. Parsons. Must a four-dimensionalist believe in temporal parts? The Monist,
83(3), 399–418, 2000.
[Patterson, 1995] R. Patterson.
Aristotle’s Modal Logic. Essence and Entailment in the
Organon. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995.
[Pearce and Wagner, 1990] D. Pearce and G. Wagner. Reasoning with negative information I:
strong negation in logic programs. In Language, Knowledge and Intentionality (Acta Philo-
sophica Fennica 49), pages 405–419. Helsinki, 1990.
[Pearce and Wagner, 1991] D. Pearce and G. Wagner. Logic programming with strong negation.
In Peter Schroeder-Heister, editor, Extensions of Logic Programming, number 475 in Lecture
Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 311–326. Springer, 1991.
[Perry, 1986] J. Perry. From worlds to situations. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 15, 83–107,
1986.
[Plantinga, 1974] A. Plantinga. The Nature of Necessity. Oxford Clarendon Press, 1974.
[Prior, 1955] A. N. Prior. Diodoran modalities. Philosophical Quarterly, 5, 205–212, 1955.
[Prior, 1957] A. N. Prior. Time and Modality. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1957.
[Prior, 1967] A. N. Prior. Past, Present and Future. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1967.
[Quine, 1947] W. V. O. Quine. The problem of interpreting modal logic. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 12(2), 43–48, 1947.
[Quine, 1953] W. V. O. Quine. Three grades of modal involvement. In Proceedings of the XIth
International Congress of Philosophy. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1953. Reprinted in The
Ways of Paradox, Random House, New York, 1966.
[Quine, 1976] W. V. O. Quine. Worlds away. Journal of Philosophy, 73, 859–863, 1976.
[Ramachandran, 1989] M. Ramachandran. An alternative translation scheme for counterpart
theory. Analysis, 49, 131–141, 1989.
[Reynolds, 2002] M. Reynolds. Axioms for branching time. Journal of Logic and Computation,
12, 679–697, 2002.
[Reynolds, 2003] M. Reynolds. An axiomatization of Prior’s Ockhamist logic of historical ne-
cessity. In Philippe Balbiani, Nobu-Yuki Suzuki, Frank Wolter, and Michael Zakharyaschev,
editors, Advances in Modal Logic, Vol. 4, pages 355–370. King’s College Publications, London,
2003.
[Rosen, 1990] G. Rosen. Modal fictionalism. Mind, 99, 327–354, 1990.
[Russell, 1905] B. Russell. On denoting. Mind, 14, 479–493, 1905.
[Schmidt, 2002] K. J. Schmidt. Die modale Syllogistik des Aristoteles. Mentis Verlag, Pader-
born, 2002.
[Schurz, 1997] G. Schurz.
The Is-Ought Problem:
An Investigation in Philosophical Logic,
volume 1 of Trends in Logic. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1997.
[Schurz, 1998] G. Schurz. Tarski and Carnap on logical truth—or: what is genuine logic. In Jan
Wolenski and Eckehart K¨ohler, editors, Alfred Tarski and the Vienna Circle—Austro-Polish
Connections in Logical Empiricism, pages 77–94. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht,
1998.
[Schurz, 2001] G. Schurz.
Carnap’s modal logic.
In W. Stelzner and M. St¨ockler, editors,
Zwischen traditioneller und moderner Logik. Nichtklassische Ans¨atze, pages 365–380. Mentis
Verlag, Paderborn, 2001.
[Scott, 1962] D. Scott. A decision method for validity of sentences in two variables. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 27, 477, 1962.
[Scott, 1970] D. Scott. Advice on modal logic. In K. Lambert, editor, Philosophical Problems
in Logic. Some Recent Developments, pages 143–174. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1970.
[Segerberg, 1971] K. Segerberg. An essay in classical modal logic. Mimeograph, Uppsala, 1971.
[Sendlewski, 1984] A. Sendlewski. Some investigations of varieties of N–lattices. Studia Logica,
43, 257–280, 1984.
[Sendlewski, 1990] A. Sendlewski. Nelson algebras through Heyting ones. Studia Logica, 49,
106–126, 1990.

994
Marcus Kracht and Oliver Kutz
[Shapirovsky and Shehtman, 2003] I. Shapirovsky and V. Shehtman.
Chronological future
modality in Minkowski spacetime. In Philippe Balbiani, Nobu-Yuki Suzuki, Frank Wolter,
and Michael Zakharyaschev, editors, Advances in Modal Logic, Vol. 4, pages 437–459. King’s
College Publications, London, 2003.
[Shirasu, 1998] H. Shirasu. Duality in superintuitionistic and modal predicate logics. In Mar-
cus Kracht et. al., editor, Advances in Modal Logic, Volume 1, pages 223–236. CSLI Publica-
tions, Stanford, 1998.
[Sider, 2001] T. Sider. Four-Dimensionalism: An Ontology of Persistence and Time. Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 2001.
[Sider, 2002] T. Sider. The Ersatz pluriverse. Journal of Philosophy, 99, 279–315, 2002.
[Simmons, 1991] P. M. Simmons. On being spread out in time: temporal parts and the problem
of change. In Wolfgang Spohn et. al., editor, Existence and Explanation, Dordrecht, 1991.
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
[Sinnott-Armstrong, 1995] W. Sinnott-Armstrong, ed. Modality, Morality, and Belief: Essays
in Honor of Ruth Barcan Marcus. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995.
[Skvortsov and Shehtman, 1993] D. P. Skvortsov and V. B. Shehtman. Maximal Kripke–type
semantics for modal and superintuitionistic predicate logics.
Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 63, 69–101, 1993.
[Skyrms, 1981] B. Skyrms. Tractarian nominalism. Philosophical Studies, 40, 199–206, 1981.
[Smith, 1998] Q. Smith.
Direct, rigid designation and a posteriori necessity: a history and
critique .
In James Fetzer and Paul Humphreys, editors, The New Theory of Reference:
Kripke, Marcus and its Origins, pages 137–178. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht,
1998.
[Stalnaker and Thomason, 1968] R. Stalnaker and R. H. Thomason. Abstraction in ﬁrst-order
modal logic. Theoria, 34, 203–207, 1968.
[Stalnaker and Thomason, 1970] R. Stalnaker and R. H. Thomason.
A semantic analysis of
conditional logics. Theoria, 36, 23–42, 1970.
[Stalnaker, 1986] R. Stalnaker. Possible worlds and situations. Journal of Philosophical Logic,
15, 109–123, 1986.
[Sur´anyi, 1943] J. Sur´anyi. Zur Reduktion des Entscheidungsproblems des logischen Funktio-
nenkalk¨uls. Mathematikai ´es Fizikai Lapok, 50, 51–74, 1943.
[Suzuki, 1997] N.-Y. Suzuki. Kripke frames with graded accessibility and fuzzy possible world
semantics. Studia Logica, 59, 249–269, 1997.
[Tarski, 1936] A. Tarski. ¨Uber den Begriﬀder logischen Folgerung. Actes du Congr´es Interna-
tional de Philosophie Scientiﬁque, 7, 1–11, 1936. translated as ‘On the Concept of Logical
Consequence’ in [Tarski, 1956; pp. 409–420].
[Tarski, 1956] A. Tarski. Logics, Semantics, Metamathematics, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1956.
[Tegmark, 2004] M. Tegmark. Parallel universes. In John D. Barrow, Paul C. W. Davies, and
Charles L. Harper, editors, Science and Ultimate Reality: Quantum Theory, Cosmology and
Complexity, pages 459–491. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004.
[Thom, 1979] P. Thom. Aristotle’s syllogistic. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 20(4),
751–759, 1979.
[Thom, 1996] P. Thom.
The Logic of Essentialism: An Interpretation of Aristotle’s Modal
Syllogistic. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1996.
[Thomason and Stalnaker, 1968] R. H. Thomason and R. Stalnaker. Modality and reference.
Noˆus, 2, 359–372, 1968.
[Thomason, 1972] S. K. Thomason. Semantic analysis of tense logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
37, 150–158, 1972.
[Thomason, 1973] S. K. Thomason. A new representation of S5. Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic, 14(2), 281–284, 1973.
[Troelstra, 1992] A. S. Troelstra. Lectures on Linear Logic. CSLI, Stanford, 1992.
[Vakarelov, 1977] D. Vakarelov. Notes on N–lattices and constructive logic with strong negation.
Studia Logica, 36, 109–125, 1977.
[von Weizs¨acker, 1985] C. F. von Weizs¨acker.
Der Aufbau der Physik.
Carl Hanser Verlag,
M¨unchen, 1985.
[von Weizs¨acker, 1992] C. F. von Weizs¨acker. Zeit und Wissen. Carl Hanser Verlag, M¨unchen,
1992.
[White, 1984] M. J. White. The necessity of the past and modal-tense logic incompleteness.
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 25(1), 59–71, 1984.

Logically Possible Worlds and Counterpart Semantics for Modal Logic
995
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910, 1912, 1913] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathe-
matica. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1910, 1912, 1913. 3 volumes.
[W´ojcicki, 1988] R. W´ojcicki. Theory of Logical Calculi. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1988.
[Wolter and Zakharyaschev, 2001] F. Wolter and M. Zakharyaschev.
Decidable fragments of
ﬁrst-order modal logics. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 66, 1415–1438, 2001.
[Zanardo, 1985] A. Zanardo.
A ﬁnite axiomatization of the set of strongly valid Ockhamist
formulas. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 14, 447–468, 1985.


MODAL REALISM
AND ITS ROOTS IN MATHEMATICAL
REALISM
Charles S. Chihara
INTRODUCTION
Modal Realism is the doctrine that, besides the actual world we live in, there are
other possible worlds. Someone who believes that such possible worlds exist is
called a Modal Realist. Since the thesis that there exist other possible worlds is
something that most non-philosophers ﬁnd utterly fantastic, one might well won-
der what would convince prominent philosophers to become Modal Realists. One
consideration that has led some philosophers to adopt such a metaphysical posi-
tion is to be found in Twentieth Century developments in modal logic. Brieﬂy
(and roughly), belief in possible worlds became attractive to a number of promi-
nent philosophers because reference to such worlds ﬁgured so prominently in the
mathematical semantics of modal logic — a kind of semantics that appeared to be
both logically and philosophically fruitful.1
In what follows, I shall explain how certain plausible theses about the nature
of mathematics were used to support key doctrines of two of our most eminent
modal realists: David Lewis and Alvin Plantinga. I shall argue, in particular,
that one central idea — the idea that the theorems of mathematics are genuine
truths about the world — underlies key parts of the above Modal Realists’ view
of modality.
In this paper, I shall not only explain how such central doctrines about math-
ematics support the above philosophers’ modal views, but I shall also argue that,
if these supporting doctrines can be undermined, then much of the attractiveness
of these versions of modal realism will dissolve. Then, I shall provide reasons for
rejecting the doctrines about mathematics that underlie the metaphysical views
about modality of these two philosophers.
In his An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, David Hume raised a
powerful and inﬂuential objection to the view that metaphysicians are able to
obtain a priori knowledge of matters of fact. Hume’s reasoning is based upon a
general principle which he argued had no exceptions. This is the principle that
asserts that no “matter of fact” can be known a priori. For the empiricist Hume,
1For a more detailed discussion of this idea, see [Chihara, 1998, 1–3].
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

998
Charles S. Chihara
“matters of fact” can only be known on the basis of sense experience, so if a
proposition is known a priori, he held that the proposition would have to be what
he called a “relation of ideas”. Using contemporary terminology, we can express
Hume’s position in roughly the following way: synthetic propositions can only be
known on the basis of sense experience, so if some proposition is truly known a
priori, then it would have to be an analytic truth.2
According to Hume’s analysis, the only analytic truths that can be known at
all are those of mathematics and logic. Thus, Hume concluded his An Enquiry
Concerning Human Understanding with the following words:
When we run over libraries, persuaded of these principles, what havoc
must we make?
If we take in our hand any volume; of divinity or
school metaphysics, for instance; let us ask, Does it contain any abstract
reasoning concerning quantity or number?
No. Does it contain any
experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence? No.
Commit it then to the ﬂames: for it can contain nothing but sophistry
and illusion.3
Awakened from his dogmatic slumbers by passages such as the above, Kant re-
sponded by arguing, in his Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, that the
truths of mathematics are synthetic, not analytic as Hume had thought. Since
Hume allowed that we can have a priori knowledge of the truths of mathemat-
ics, Kant could argue that Hume was simply mistaken in his belief that synthetic
propositions can only be known on the basis of sense experience. If Hume had seen
that mathematics yields a priori knowledge of synthetic truths, Kant suggests, the
“good company into which metaphysics would thus have been brought would have
saved it from the danger of a contemptuous ill-treatment, for the thrust intended
for it must have reached mathematics, which was not and could not have been
Hume’s intention.”4
1
DAVID LEWIS’S POSSIBLE WORLDS
In his book On the Plurality of Worlds, David Lewis responds to a serious objection
that had been raised to his modal realism in a way that is strikingly similar to
Kant’s response to Hume. To explain Lewis’s response to the objection, a brief
description of his metaphysical views on modality will now be provided.
Lewis accepts the widely accepted logical analysis of the modal operators in
terms of possible worlds according to which:
2Hume did not state his argument in terms of the expressions ‘analytic’ and ‘synthetic’, but
rather in terms of ‘relations of ideas’ and ‘matters of fact’. However, since Kant expressed his
response to Hume using the more contemporary terminology, I have expressed Hume’s objection
using the Kantian terminology.
3David Hume, An Enquiry Concernng Human Understanding (La Salle: Open /court, 1949):
p. 184.
4Immanuel Kant, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (New York: Liberal Arts Press,
1951): p. 18.

Modal Realism and Its Roots in Mathematical Realism
999
it is possible that φ
is true iﬀ
there is a possible world in which φ is true.
What is striking about Lewis’s analysis, however, is his understanding of the
consequent of the above biconditional. The clause should not be understood to be
a ﬁgurative or metaphorical way of explaining the operators. According to Lewis,
the clause expresses a straightforward existential condition: it says that there
literally exists a world in which that proposition is true — a world, perhaps, very
much like the one we live in, even containing planets on which real ﬂesh and blood
animals live and die.5 It follows from such an analysis of modal statements that,
if the modal statements we assume to be true are indeed true, then our “world”
— the vast universe we live in — is just one of many such “possible worlds” that
exist.
This account of possible worlds gives rise to the following problem: Supposedly,
there are these diﬀerent possible worlds, each one spatiotemporally isolated from
all the others; but presumably only one of these is the actual world. What distin-
guishes the actual world from the other merely possible ones? If all these possible
worlds exist, what makes one of them the actual world? Or to put it another
way: What does the actual world possess that the merely possible worlds lack?6
It cannot be existence, since all the possible worlds are supposed to exist.
Lewis has a simple response.
What ‘actual’ means depends upon who the
speaker is: If the speaker is a, then ‘the actual world’ refers to the one and only
world in which a exists. This doctrine is called the ‘indexical analysis of actuality’,
since ‘actual’ is regarded as an indexical term, in the way ‘I’, ‘this’, ‘here’, and
‘now’ are regarded as indexicals: What these terms refer to depends upon features
of the context of utterance [Lewis, 1986, 92]. In the case of ‘actual’, the feature
of the context of utterance that is relevant is the world in which the utterance is
made. From God’s point of view — assuming with Leibniz that God is not an
inhabitant of any world — all of the possible worlds are on a par. There is no
special world that is singled out as actual. Of course, from our point of view, our
world is special. It is actual. But that is analogous to saying that, from my point
of view, here is special: Here is where I am.
Possible objects are worldbound
I noted above that, according to Lewis, a speaker exists in one and only one
world. This may seem paradoxical. After all, according to standard versions of
5Thus, Lewis writes: “When I profess realism about possible worlds, I mean to be taken
literally. Possible worlds are what they are, and not some other thing. If asked what sort of
thing they are, I cannot give any kind of reply my questioner probably expects: that is, a proposal
to reduce possible worlds to something else.
I can only ask him to admit that he knows what sort of thing our actual world is, and then
explain that other worlds are more things of that sort, diﬀering not in kind but only in what
goes on at them.” [Lewis, 1979, 183–4].
6For a general discussion of this problem, see [Adams, 1979, 190–209].

1000
Charles S. Chihara
the semantics of modal logic, a person may exist in many possible worlds. But
in the semantical analysis developed by Lewis, each person is “world-bound”: If
person a exists in world w, and if world u ̸= w, then a does not exist in u. From the
perspective of Modal Realism, such a doctrine is surely right: If all these possible
worlds exist, and I am in one of them, how could I possibly be in any other world?
It is easy enough to see how there could be someone very much like me in some
other world; but no matter how much like me this person might be, he could not
be me if he is in another world. That just could not be me, since I am in this
world and he is in that world.
Counterpart theory
The sentence ‘Al Gore could have won the presidential election’ is true, according
to standard versions of possible worlds semantics, if and only if there is a possible
world at which Al Gore does win the presidential election. Since the above sentence
is clearly true, there must be a possible world, according to standard versions of
possible worlds semantics, in which Gore exists and does things. How, then, does
Lewis allow for the truth of such sentences, given his doctrine that every person
(indeed, every concrete thing) is world-bound? According to Lewis’s account of
modality, the above sentence is true if and only if there is a possible world in which
there is a counterpart of Gore who wins the presidential election.
What is a counterpart of Gore? A counterpart of Gore in world w resembles
Gore — indeed, resembles Gore more closely than does anything else that exists
in w — but it is not Gore.
But how does this counterpart of Gore represent
Gore as doing anything. Well, military personnel can use tiny models of soldiers,
tanks, trucks, and artillery to represent a battle. Similarly, a possible world can
have a real ﬂesh and blood person to represent Gore: “[B]y waving his arm, or
by winning the presidential election, the other-worldly [Gore] represents the this-
worldly [Gore] as waving or as winning” [Lewis, 1986, 194].7
Not surprisingly, Lewis’s views have met with a number of objections. In the
following section, I shall take up one of the most common of these objections.
The unknowability objection8
According to Lewis’s analysis, in order to know if any contrary-to-fact possibility
statement is true, we would need to know that there literally exists a possible world
of the sort characterized by Lewis. But such universes are completely beyond our
sensory grasp, since they are causally isolated from us: none of our scientiﬁc
instruments, no matter how advanced, could ever detect such a thing. Thus, the
objector argues, all such modal statements could never be known by us to be true.
And that surely is an absurdity.9
7For additional details of Lewis’s counterpart theory, see [Chihara, 1998, 78–81].
8The objection discussed in this section is called the “Unknowability Objection” in [Chihara,
1998, 87], where it is presented in much more detail.
9See [Chihara, 1998, 87-9], for references to works raising this objection.

Modal Realism and Its Roots in Mathematical Realism
1001
Lewis’s response to the objection brings to mind Kant’s response to Hume which
was discussed earlier: he puts forward mathematical knowledge as a case in which
“we can know that there exist countless objects causally isolated from us and
unavailable to our inspection” [Lewis, 1986, 109]. Having thus convinced himself
that we can have knowledge of causally inaccessible things, Lewis sees no insuper-
able barrier to obtaining knowledge of the existence and contents of other causally
inaccessible things such as possible worlds. Indeed, one might interpret Lewis to
be reasoning as follows. The reason supporters of the Unknowability Objection
think we could not have any knowledge of other worlds is because they believe
that it is not possible to have any knowledge of causally inaccessible things. But
mathematical knowledge of sets refutes this belief: Sets are causally inaccessible,
and yet we have knowledge of sets. By thus putting knowledge of possible worlds
in the good company of mathematical knowledge, he thought he could save his
own analysis of modality from the contemptuous ill-treatment implicit in the Un-
knowability Objection, writing: “Causal accounts of knowledge are all very well
in their place, but if they are put forward as general theories, then mathematics
refutes them”.10
Lewis’s mathematical realism
It can be inferred from the above discussion that Lewis was both a Modal Realist
(since he espoused belief in the existence of possible worlds) and also a Mathemat-
ical Realist (since he believed in the existence of mathematical objects). It can
also be seen that Lewis’s Modal Realism rests in a way upon his Mathematical Re-
alism, since his refutation of a crucial objection to his modal realism presupposes
the truth of his Mathematical Realism.
Notice that, in the case of the two responses considered above, theorems of math-
ematics are understood to express genuine truths. Both Kant and Lewis thought
that the theorems of mathematics assert what is the case, that is, they express
straightforward truths. Kant believed that mathematical theorems assert synthetic
truths, just as the scientiﬁc assertions of physicists assert synthetic truths. Lewis
thought that mathematical theorems state truths about mathematical objects —
entities that are causally isolated from us and unavailable to our inspection.
Let us divide Lewis’s belief that mathematical theorems assert truths about
mathematical objects into two sub-beliefs: (1) mathematical theorems are true
assertions; and (2) mathematical theorems are assertions about mathematical ob-
jects. It is clear that Lewis believed both (1) and (2) to be true. Basically, that
is why he believed that nominalists would have to maintain that mathematics is
false. Nominalists do not believe in the existence of mathematical objects such
as sets or classes. Thus, Lewis believes, the nominalist is committed to the po-
sition that the axioms and theorems of mathematics are false, thereby implying
that mathematics should be rejected. So Lewis regards the nominalist as reject-
10[Lewis, 1986, 109]. It should be noted that Lewis’s discussion of the unknowability objection
involved several other points not discussed above.

1002
Charles S. Chihara
ing mathematics for philosophical reasons — something that Lewis considered an
absurdity:
Rejecting classes means rejecting mathematics.
That will not do.
Mathematics is an established, going concern. Philosophy is as shaky
as can be. To reject mathematics on philosophical grounds would be
absurd [Lewis, 1991, 58].
Let us now consider why Lewis believed both (1) and (2). Start with (2), assuming,
for now, that Lewis has strong reasons for believing (1). Why did Lewis think that
mathematical theorems are assertions about mathematical objects? Evidently, it
was because Lewis took the sentences of mathematics at face value. Under the
most straightforward reading of the sentences of, say, set theory, the theorems of set
theory are statements about sets. Furthermore, the standard logical formalizations
of set theory yield just such a view of its theorems.
Consider now (1). Why did Lewis believe that the theorems of set theory are
true statements? I do not believe that Lewis ever seriously considered the possi-
bility that any genuine theorems of a well-established mathematical theory could
fail to be true. (He once wrote: “How would you like to go and tell the mathe-
maticians that they must change their ways, and abjure countless errors, now that
philosophy has discovered that there are no classes? . . . Not me!”11) In fact, few
philosophers have seriously questioned the view that mathematical theorems are
true. For example, John Burgess and Gideon Rosen signal their acceptance of the
central assumption in [Burgess and Rosen, 1997] when they advance a version of a
Realistic view of mathematics which they call “minimal anti-nominalism”(a view
they clearly advocate). “Having studied Euclid’s Theorem,” they write, “we are
prepared to say that there exist inﬁnitely many prime numbers”. Furthermore,
they understand Euclid’s theorem in the standard straightforward way that logi-
cians tend to understand such theorems, writing: “Moreover, when we say that
there exist inﬁnitely many prime numbers, we say so without conscious mental
reservations or purpose of evasion. . .” [Burgess and Rosen, 1997, 10–1]. Thus,
they are willing to accept the implications of their acceptance of the truth of the
theorem by also asserting that there are prime numbers (and hence that mathe-
matical objects exist).
In view of the fact that so many philosophers accept and believe, without any
serious investigation, the thesis under consideration — the thesis that the theo-
rems of mathematics are true — I shall call this thesis “the central assumption of
philosophy of mathematics” or “ the central assumption” for short.
Why the central assumption leads to mathematical realism
How does the central assumption lead to the Mathematical Realist’s belief in the
existence of mathematical objects? Using the Burgess-Rosen reasoning above as
a model, we can develop an explicit argument for the existence of mathematical
11[Lewis, 1991, 58].

Modal Realism and Its Roots in Mathematical Realism
1003
objects. In the following discussion, I shall use the term ‘classical mathematics’ to
include set theory, number theory, and the theory of functions of real and complex
numbers).
Argument T:
(Central assumption) The theorems of classical mathematics are true.
(E) Some of the theorems of classical mathematics assert the existence of mathe-
matical objects.
(Conclusion) There are mathematical objects.
Reasons for believing the central assumption
Why should we accept the central assumption? If one wants reasons for accepting
it, I shall give, in the following discussion, some of the principal ones.12 Lewis
once claimed: “Modal Realism is fruitful; that gives us good reason to believe that
it is true” [Lewis, 1986, 4]. Thus, it would be natural for him also to claim that,
since the axioms and theorems of classical mathematics are extremely fruitful,
that would give us good reason to believe that they are true. Certainly classical
mathematics is constantly being fruitfully used by scientists in ways that suggests
to us that the assertions of mathematics are truths. In particular, mathematics is
applied in science and engineering to draw conclusions upon which we rely in our
dealings with the world and other people. If the mathematical theorems were not
true, how could we rationally place so much conﬁdence in the conclusions that we
infer using mathematics? Are not the theorems of analysis used time and time
again in drawing empirically veriﬁable conclusions from scientiﬁcally established
statements. If the mathematical theorems used were not true, would we not be
basing our inferences upon falsehoods and thus shouldn’t we expect the bridges
we build using mathematics to collapse, shouldn’t the rockets we program using
mathematics go oﬀcourse, etc.? Perhaps one can see why Michael Resnik would
include the following as a premise in an argument he once produced:
(R-1) We are justiﬁed in drawing conclusions
from and within science only if we are justiﬁed in taking the
mathematics used in science to be true.13
Resnik did not attempt to supply a convincing justiﬁcation for accepting (R-1),
evidently because he believed that the claim is so obviously true.14
Another related reason for accepting the central assumption is based upon the
fact that many mathematical theorems seem to be directly veriﬁed to be true.
Consider, for example, the Fundamental Theorem of the Integral Calculus.
12Other reasons are given in [Chihara, 2004], e.g. see “Maddy’s mystery” (pp. 229-30, 291-2).
13[Resnik, 1997, 48].
14Actually, Resnik does put forward a kind of argument for (R-1) in [Resnik, 1998, 233], but
there he uses the premise that “science assumes . . . the truth of much mathematics”, which is
itself not justiﬁed.

1004
Charles S. Chihara
For any real-valued function of a real variable, f(x),
which is continuous in the interval (a, b),
if F(x) is an indeﬁnite integral of f(x), then
 b
a f(x)dx = F(b) −F(a)
This theorem not only has been successfully applied in countless ways for hun-
dreds of years, evidently it has also been conﬁrmed in a variety of empirical ways
by students and professionals alike, by graphing speciﬁc continuous functions and
empirically determining (or estimating) the areas under the graphs, say on engi-
neering paper. For example, it would seem that what the theorem says, regarding
the deﬁnite integral of the linear function f(x) = 2x + 7, with a = 3 and b = 7,
can be checked, empirically, by graphing the function in the interval (3, 7) and
counting the relevant squares.15
A closely related reason for accepting the central assumption is the undeniable
fact that mathematical theorems frequently convey valuable information to scien-
tists, engineers and researchers of many types (as the example of the Fundamental
Theorem illustrates) — a fact which further suggests that such theorems are true,
since declarative sentences that convey valuable information are, it would seem,
for the most part true.
Lewis’s version of the indispensability argument
Interestingly, even though Lewis believed the central assumption and certainly ac-
cepted (E), Lewis did not put forward a version of Argument T to justify his belief
in the existence of sets. Instead, he attempted to justify his belief in sets by giving
a “cost-beneﬁt” version of Quine’s Indispensability Argument. More speciﬁcally,
he argued that belief in the existence of sets is justiﬁed by the theoretical beneﬁts
that accrue to one’s overall theory of the world by assuming their existence. The
following quotation expresses Lewis’s reasoning:
We have only to believe in the vast hierarchy of sets, and there we ﬁnd
entities suited to meet the needs of all the branches of mathematics;
and we ﬁnd that the very meagre primitive vocabulary of set theory,
deﬁnitionally extended, suﬃces to meet our needs for mathematical
predicates; and we ﬁnd that the meagre axioms of set theory are ﬁrst
principles enough to yield the theorems that are the content of the sub-
ject. Set theory oﬀers the mathematician great economy of primitives
and premises, in return for accepting rather a lot of entities unknown
to Homo javanensis. It oﬀers an improvement in what Quine calls ide-
ology, paid for in the coin of ontology. It’s an oﬀer you can’t refuse.
15The above example is admittedly trivial. But it easy to produce examples in which the values
of far more complicated and sophisticated deﬁnite integrals are estimated by making empirical
estimations of areas under curves, yielding the type of “conﬁrmation” of the fundamental theorem
discussed above.

Modal Realism and Its Roots in Mathematical Realism
1005
The price is right; the beneﬁts in theoretical unity and economy are
well worth the entities.16
One may wonder why Lewis would give the above “cost-beneﬁt” justiﬁcation
when he could have used the neater Argument T in support of his Realism (es-
pecially, given that he accepted the premises of Argument T). As I shall explain
below, Lewis also gave a “cost-beneﬁt” argument to justify his belief in possible
worlds, so it is possible that he wanted to use his “cost-beneﬁt” argument for
belief in sets, because it could then serve as a sort of model for the kind of justi-
ﬁcation he was to give for his belief in possible worlds. Perhaps he thought that
the “cost-beneﬁt” justiﬁcation for possible worlds would gain in plausibility from
the logical form it shared with the justiﬁcation he gave for the case of sets — its
attractiveness would be enhanced by the aura of respectability surrounding the
mathematical case since: (1) there was already a strong inclination among many
philosophers to believe in sets; and (2) a similar sort of justiﬁcation for belief in
sets had been given by the highly respected philosophers Quine and Putnam.
In any case, here is how Lewis argued for the existence of possible worlds. He
proposed that, by assuming the existence of possible worlds, the philosopher can
reap signiﬁcant theoretical beneﬁts: by including possible worlds in our ontology,
we “ﬁnd the wherewithal to reduce the diversity of notions we must accept as
primitive, and thereby to improve the unity and economy of theory that is our
professional concern — total theory, the whole of what we take to be true.”.17
Lewis believed that “the price was right” — that the theoretical beneﬁts of as-
suming the existence of possible worlds would outweigh the cost of taking on such
an ontology, so that belief in possible world would be justiﬁed.18 Thus, we can see,
again, how Lewis’s views about possible worlds was inﬂuenced, in its development,
by his views about mathematical objects.
In what follows, I shall consider how certain crucial beliefs about the meta-
physics and epistemology of mathematics that underlie Lewis’s Modal Realism
also play key roles in Alvin Plantinga’s views about modality.
2
PLANTINGA’S THEORY OF POSSIBLE WORLDS
The Modal Realist Alvin Plantinga accepts a logical analysis of the modal opera-
tors in terms of possible worlds, as did Lewis, according to which:
16[Lewis 1986, 3-4].
For a more detailed discussion of this argument, see [Chihara, 1998],
Chapter 3, Section 3. I should mention that the above argument does not constitute Lewis’s sole
justiﬁcation for his belief in mathematical objects. In [Lewis, 1979, 182], Lewis gave a strange
“ordinary language” argument to justify his belief in possible worlds. This earlier argument has
received a great deal of criticism (for references, see [Chihara, 1998, 86, fn. 22].
17[Lewis, 1986, 4].
18[Lewis, 1986, 4]. For a critical appraisal of Lewis’s reasoning on this point, see [Chihara,
1998, Chapter 3, Section 8].

1006
Charles S. Chihara
it is possible that φ
is true iﬀ
there is a possible world in which φ is true.
However, Plantinga’s understanding of the consequent of the above bicondi-
tional diﬀers considerably from Lewis’s: for Plantinga, possible worlds are not the
sort of things that Lewis believed them to be. Plantinga’s possible worlds are ab-
stract entities: more speciﬁcally, they are like incredibly complicated propositions
that are so structurally complex that what they express could not possibly be com-
prehended by any ﬁnite mind. In what follows, I shall brieﬂy sketch Plantinga’s
account of possible worlds.
The ontology of Plantinga’s modal theory
(a) States of aﬀairs
The basic entities of Plantinga’s metaphysical theory of modality are states of
aﬀairs. States of aﬀairs are held to be the abstract entities that such phrases as
‘G. W. Bush serving on the US Supreme Court in 2004’ and ‘Laura Bush not being
pregnant in 2004’ supposedly refer to. Some states of aﬀairs obtain, others do not.
For example, the second of the two phrases I mentioned above supposedly refers
to a state of aﬀairs that obtains (since Laura Bush was never pregnant in 2004);
the ﬁrst one supposedly refers to a state of aﬀairs that does not obtain. Plantinga
seems to accept a sort of abstraction axiom: he holds that, given practically any
grammatically proper gerund phrase, there is a state of aﬀairs that the phrase
denotes. (It is not clear to this writer what gerund phrases, if any, are thought by
Plantinga to fail to denote existing states of aﬀairs).
(b) Possible worlds
The concept of state of aﬀairs is used to deﬁne what a possible world is.
For
Plantinga, a possible world is just a state of aﬀairs that is “fully determinate” (or
complete) in a way to be explained shortly. We ﬁrst deﬁne two relations among
the states of aﬀairs: for all states of aﬀairs S and S*, S includes S* iﬀS could
not obtain if S* did not obtain; and S precludes S* iﬀS could not obtain if S*
did obtain. Now a state of aﬀairs P is a possible world iﬀ, for every state of aﬀairs
S, P either includes S or precludes S. To say that a possible world w is actual (or
that w is an actual world) is to say that w obtains.
(c) Properties
In addition to states of aﬀairs, Plantinga’s metaphysical theory appeals to prop-
erties. For example, Socrates supposedly possessed the property of being married
to Xantippa. What does it mean to say that Socrates possesses a property F in
possible world w? It means that had w been actual, then Socrates would have
possessed F.

Modal Realism and Its Roots in Mathematical Realism
1007
Some properties that Socrates possess are said to be essential properties of
Socrates. A property F is an essential property of Socrates iﬀSocrates possess F
in every world in which he exists. A property F is an essence of Socrates iﬀF
is both an essential property of Socrates and also is not an essential property of
anything else. More generally, a property F is an essence iﬀthere is a possible
world in which there is an individual x such that: (a) F is an essential property
of x; and (b) there is no world x∗in which some other individual exists which is
such that F is an essential property of x∗.
Plantinga’s possible worlds analyses of modal notions
Two basic relationships of Plantinga’s metaphysics are the relationships of exem-
pliﬁcation and coexempliﬁcation.
A property F is exempliﬁed in a world w iﬀ
some individual would have had F had w been actual. Properties F and G are
coexempliﬁed in world w iﬀsome individual would have had both properties had
w been actual. The relationship of coexempliﬁcation is used to give some of the
basic semantical deﬁnitions of Plantinga’s modal system, such as the following:
♦(∃x)Fx
is true iﬀthere is a possible world w which is such that for some essence E, E and
F are coexempliﬁed in w.
(∃x)♦Fx
is true iﬀthere is some essence E which is exempliﬁed in the actual world and, for
some possible world w, E and F are coexempliﬁed in w.
From the above, one can form some idea of how Plantinga can provide the
semantics of a version of S5 quantiﬁcational modal logic.19
Plantinga uses his theory of states of aﬀairs to analyze a number of well-known
philosophical problems and positions such as the problem of transworld identity
and the doctrine that there is no coherent distinction between de re and de dicto
modal propositions.20 It can be seen that his views about the existence of, and
relationships between, the basic entities of his metaphysical system play an im-
portant role in his overall philosophical view of the world.
Some doubts about the existence of states of aﬀairs and worlds
First of all, consider the basic entities of Plantinga’s modal ontology: states of
aﬀairs. They are supposed to be abstract entities that neither exist in space nor
19See [Jager, 1982; Konyndyk, 1986] for details on how this can be done. One can ﬁnd a critical
discussion of these two works in [Chihara, 1998, 31–6].
20One can ﬁnd in [Davidson, 2003] many examples in which Plantinga makes use of his meta-
physical system in his theorizing about central issues in the philosophy of modality. Judging
from this collection of essays, it would seem that Plantinga was a philosopher who, early on, hit
upon some philosophical tools for carrying out fruitful conceptual analyses of modal reasoning
of all sorts.
Unfortunately, Plantinga was more concerned about exploiting the tools he had
discovered than with putting his ontological theory on a ﬁrm foundation.

1008
Charles S. Chihara
are detectable by our most advanced scientiﬁc instruments.
They are not the
theoretical entities of any widely accepted scientiﬁc theory. So why should we
believe in the existence of such strange entities? That there exist any such things
is not a self-evident truth.
And Plantinga has not put forward any empirical
evidence that any such entity in fact exists. Skepticism regarding the existence of
states of aﬀairs is certainly understandable.
There is a more general reason for questioning Plantinga’s postulation of states
of aﬀairs. Throughout the history of philosophy, philosophers have spun out meta-
physical theories populated by strange metaphysical entities, the postulation of
which is supported by the ﬂimsiest of empirical or scientiﬁc grounds. Today, all
such theories are viewed with skepticism.
Besides, even if one accepts the existence of states of aﬀairs, why should one
believe in the existence of possible worlds? Plantinga was convinced by Pollock of
“the nontriviality of the claim that there is at least one possible world”.21 So a
proof of the claim in question would be signiﬁcant.
Why might one doubt the existence of any possible worlds, even if one were
willing to accept both the existence of states of aﬀairs and the thesis that every
state of aﬀairs has a complement? The amount of structure that a possible worlds
must contain is absolutely mind-boggling.
Take the actual world.
Absolutely
everything that exists is supposedly in this world. Not only that, every fact about
every such thing is also in the world. Furthermore, Plantinga implies that every
possible fact about every possible thing is also in the actual world. He tells us that
every possible world is in every other possible world22 Thus, every possible world
contains the structure of every other possible world, which contains the structure
of every other possible world, and so on ad inﬁnitum. Why should we suppose
that any such incredibly complex entities exist?
Plantinga’s attempted proof of the existence of worlds
Plantinga tried to give a proof for the existence of at least one possible world,
utilizing the following premises:
1. There are states of aﬀairs.
2. Every state of aﬀairs has a complement.
3. Housdorﬀ’s maximal principle.23
4. [Giant set existence] Given any possible state of aﬀairs S, there exists a set
whose members are all those possible states of aﬀairs that include S.
21See [Plantinga, 1985, 327–9].
22See [Chihara, 1998, 123–4], for additional discussion of the structure of Plantinga’s possible
worlds.
23Housdorﬀ’s maximal principle, as formulated in standard versions of set theory, is equivalent
to the Axiom of Choice.

Modal Realism and Its Roots in Mathematical Realism
1009
5. [Conj] Given any set S of states of aﬀairs, there exists a state of aﬀairs that
obtains iﬀevery member of S obtains.
6. [Quasi-compactiness] For any set of possible states of aﬀairs α, if α has
a maximal linearly ordered subset, then α has a maximal linearly ordered
subset that has the quasi-compactness property.24
Critical comments about the proof
For reasons that will become apparent shortly, I feel that it is not necessary for us
to examine the details of Plantinga’s proof.25 Instead, let us consider some of its
premises.
Start with Quasi-compactness. Plantinga does not justify using this principle,
nor does he even suggests any plausible reasons for accepting it. Is it an obvious
truth? Evidently, Plantinga once thought so. But Christopher Menzel has given,
in detail, grounds for rejecting the principle.26 In any case, Plantinga later became
convinced by Menzel that he too should abandon the principle and, with it, his
proposed proof. We can conclude that this attempt to develop a convincing proof
for the existence of possible worlds is a failure.
Plantinga’s use of Housdorﬀ’s principle in this proof is especially signiﬁcant.
Given that the principle is a standard principle of set theory — one that is generally
accepted by set theorists all over the world — his use of the principle may appear
perfectly reasonable. However, including this principle as a premise in his proof,
along with the clearly metaphysical assertions [1], [2], [4], and [5], shows that
he also regards Housdorﬀ’s principle as a metaphysical truth, clearly indicating
Plantinga’s acceptance of the central assumption.
It is easy to see why I classify both Plantinga and Lewis as Mathematical
Realists. They both regard the existential theorems of set theory as metaphysical
truths that tell us what things exists in the way many scientiﬁc laws and principles
expressed in standard text books tell us what things exist in the physical universe.
Another proof based upon principles Plantinga accepted
Although Plantinga has failed to provided his readers with anything remotely like
a satisfactory proof of the existence of possible worlds, it is possible to construct a
much simpler proof of possible worlds from premises that he clearly accepted — a
proof that does not rely upon either Quasi-compactness or Housdorﬀ’s principle.
Instead, this proof proceeds from the Ausonderungs axiom of Zermelo-Fraenkel
24What Plantinga means by a ‘maximal linearly ordered subset’ is a set that is linearly ordered
by the proper inclusion relation and that is maximal in the sense that there is no linearly ordered
subset that properly includes it. A set S has the “quasi-compactness property” iﬀit has the
following property: S is possible iﬀevery ﬁnite subset of S is possible. A set of states of aﬀairs
is possible iﬀit is possible that all its members obtain.
25The reader can ﬁnd a sketch of the proof in [Chihara, 1998, 122–4].
26[Menzel, 1988].

1010
Charles S. Chihara
set theory and the following metaphysical principles all of which Plantinga clearly
accepted at the time he gave his own proof:
1. States of aﬀairs exist.
2. Every state of aﬀairs S has a complement S′.
3. If S is a state of aﬀairs, then necessarily either S or S′ obtains.
4. Given any possible state of aﬀairs S, there exists a set whose members are
all those possible states of aﬀairs that include S.
5. Given any set S of states of aﬀairs, the conjunction of that set exists.27
Problems with the proof
Now it is a relatively simple matter to prove that the above group of “safer”
principles used in this second proof is inconsistent with the axioms of set theory.
Thus, it can be seen that the system of principles Plantinga used in his theorizing
about modality runs into conﬂict with classical set theory. At one time, Plantinga
evidently thought he could obviate this sort of problem by rejecting Cantor The-
orem.28 However, it is hard to see how such a resolution of the problem could
be reconciled with Plantinga’s overall Platonic view of set theory,29 and evidently
Plantinga never developed this idea.
Can it be repaired?
Later, Plantinga became convinced by Menzel that he should abandon premise
[4].30 Unfortunately for Plantinga, dropping this premise from the list of princi-
ples he accepts will not save his system from conﬂict with the standard axioms of
set theory. It can be shown that, if one accepts the other principles of Plantinga’s
metaphysical system, one can still derive a contradiction with the theorems of set
theory.31 Furthermore, it is hard to see how one could trim the system so as to
yield a theory that, on the one hand, is consistent with set theory and, on the
other hand, will provide Plantinga with the kind of modal framework he needs to
achieve the analysis of modality that he has for so long championed. The problem
is that he has accepted a number of ontologically extravagant principles concern-
ing sets, properties, states of aﬀairs, and propositions, all of which are logically
interconnected in a way that results in a system that is not only inconsistent with
set theory, but also so complicated that it is hard to see how one could develop a
27See [Chihara, 1998, 125–6], for the details of this proof.
28See [Chihara, 1998, 128], for the relevant references.
29The rejection of Cantor’s Theorem is generally linked to severely limiting the Abstraction
Axiom along constructivistic lines such as proposed by Predicativists.
30This, I learned from a letter he wrote to me dated 11 September 1991.
31See [Chihara, 1998, 125–6].

Modal Realism and Its Roots in Mathematical Realism
1011
reasonable model theory for it.32 I conclude that the ontological system Plantinga
works with is a mess. I thus regard as remote, not only the probability of his
coming up with a reasonably secure and convincing proof of the existence of pos-
sible worlds, but even the prospects of his giving his present metaphysical system
the kind of relative model theoretic security that standard systems of set theory
have today. I thus view with considerable skepticism practically all of the substan-
tial conclusions about modality he has arrived at on the basis of his metaphysical
system.
The Mathematical Realism implicit in Plantinga’s Modal Realism
It is now time to take up a more fundamental feature of Plantinga’s Modal Real-
ism. Recall that underlying Plantinga’s arguments that there are possible worlds
is his acceptance of the central assumption and his Mathematical Realism. This
aspect of Plantinga’s ontological theory may not have appeared at all contro-
versial to Plantinga.
After all, a great many philosophers seem to accept the
central assumption and, of all the many diﬀerent sorts of entities that Plantinga
accepts, mathematical objects are probably accepted by the greatest number of
philosophers. And it is not just philosophers who believe in the existence of math-
ematical objects: so also do many mathematicians and logicians. Furthermore,
famous mathematicians, logicians, and philosophers have supported their belief
that there are mathematical objects by setting forth a variety of philosophical
arguments — a few of which have won, if not widespread approval, at least very
serious consideration.33 It should be noted that the Mathematical Realism im-
plicit in Plantinga’s account of modality is not just a feature of his failed proof
of the existence of possible worlds; it ﬁgures in many of his writings on modality
and is clearly a deeply entrenched part of his overall philosophical outlook, as the
reader can easily verify.34
Another aspect of Plantinga’s Mathematical Realism is revealed in his book
Warranted Christian Beliefs, where he tells us that, among our cognitive faculties,
one of the most important is reason:
Taken narrowly, reason is the faculty or power whereby we form a pri-
ori beliefs, beliefs that are prior to experience or, better, independent,
in some way, of experience. These beliefs include. . . simple truths of
arithmetic and logic, such as 2 + 1 = 3 and if all men are mortal and
Socrates is a man, then Socrates is mortal. They also include. . . more
32For additional details concerning my doubts about the coherence of Plantinga’s metaphysical
system, see [Chihara, 1998, 129–411].
33The most widely discussed of these arguments is Quine’s “indispensability argument”.
I
discuss this argument in great detail in [Chihara, 2004, Chapter 5].
34See, for example, [Plantinga, 2003, 48], where he explains what books and possible worlds
are using set theory. It is clear that a realistic attitude toward sets thoroughly suﬀuses the web
of ideas expressed in these passages. There is not even a shadow of a doubt expressed about the
existence of the sets being presupposed in the reasoning.

1012
Charles S. Chihara
controversial items such as the belief that there are. . . abstract ob-
jects.35
Notice that Plantinga classiﬁes the proposition that 2 + 1 = 3 as a truth. From
this quotation, one can see that Plantinga believed, as did Kant before him, that
we have a priori knowledge of mathematical truths. Furthermore, we even ﬁnd a
suggestion that we can come to know a priori that there are abstract objects such
as numbers.
Like Lewis’s view of modality, Plantinga’s metaphysical and epistemological
beliefs about mathematics form an essential part of the support for his Modal
Realism. Indeed, it is hard to imagine Plantinga putting forward the kind of proof
for the existence of possible worlds described above had he not understood proofs
in set theory in the Platonic way he clearly does. One can see how he has modeled
his reasoning about possible worlds on the pattern of set- theoretical proofs. In
a way that brings to mind the Kantian strategy for responding to Hume, the
widely held belief that set theorists are able to provide us with knowledge of the
abstract entities of the mathematical universe undoubtedly emboldened Plantinga
to imagine that he too could obtain remarkable ontological results about possible
worlds by reasoning as set theorists do.
The widespread acceptance of both the central assumption and also the realistic
view of mathematics is undoubted one reason both Lewis and Plantinga are so
insouciant about postulating and referring to such things as properties, states of
aﬀairs, and propositions — abstract entities that are, in logical features, so much
like those of sets that their postulation may appear, to anyone who already believes
in sets, to be a natural and unobjectionable step.
These metaphysical beliefs
about mathematics help clear the way for the lush ontology they proposed for
their modal theories. In both cases, their Mathematical Realism serves to enhance
the acceptability of the other kinds of metaphysical entities that their respective
modal theories require. Thus, casting doubt on their philosophical beliefs about
mathematics would also serve to cast doubt upon their versions of Modal Realism.
3
AN EXAMINATION OF ARGUMENT T
In this section, I shall attack the Realistic view of mathematics upon which the
above two Modal Realists base so much, by showing the dubiousness of Argument
T.36 This will be done, in particular, by undermining the grounds given earlier for
35[Plantinga, 2000, 146–7]. What he writes in another place in the book sheds further light on
his views about a priori knowledge: “ Among the things we know, some are self-evident. . . [where,
roughly] a proposition is self-evident if it is so utterly obvious that we can’t even understand it
without seeing that it is true. Examples would be propositions like 7 + 5 = 12. . . And the idea
is that reason, taken in this narrow sense, is the faculty or power whereby we see the truth of
self-evident propositions. Of course it is also reason whereby we see that one proposition implies
or entails another. . . (p. 113).”
36One might reply that Lewis’s “cost-beneﬁt” justiﬁcation for belief in sets would not be
undermined by such a result. However, I have already given a series of detailed objections to
that justiﬁcation in [Chihara, 1998, Chapter 3, Section 8].

Modal Realism and Its Roots in Mathematical Realism
1013
accepting its principal premise (the central assumption). I shall begin by showing
how a mathematical theorem can be used (or “applied”) in ordinary everyday
situations and in science to infer a factual empirically testable conclusion from
some factual empirically testable premises, even when the theorem itself is not
assumed to be a true statement. It will be shown that it is not the truth of the
theorem that is crucial in such cases of applications of mathematics but rather
another feature of the theorem which I call its “structural content”.
For purposes of clarity and simplicity, I shall start with the case of a theorem of
a ﬁrst-order mathematical theory (although the basic ideas apply to mathematical
theories expressed in ordinary languages). Thus, I shall ﬁrst assume that the math-
ematical theory to be considered is expressed as an axiomatized deductive theory
formalized in a ﬁrst-order logical language (as is Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory). I
shall also assume that the theory is given an appropriate sort of interpretation,
so that, under this interpretation, the sentences of the theory can be regarded as
making genuine assertions. The kind of interpretation I have in mind are the nat-
ural language interpretations that philosophically minded logicians have devised
for this purpose: I call them “natural language interpretations” (or “NL Interpre-
tations” for short). These are the “interpretations” of ﬁrst-order languages that
philosophically trained logicians are apt to consider when “translations” of the
logical language into some natural language are seriously contemplated. These
“interpretations” do more than what mathematical structures do: they not only
assign the relevant sort of sets and objects to the parameters of the logical language
in question, they also supply meanings or senses to the parameters. Interpretations
of this sort assign to each individual constants the sense of some English name
or deﬁnite description; and they provide each predicate of the language with the
sense or meaning of an English predicate, where English predicates are obtained
from English declarative sentences by replacing occurrences of names or deﬁnite
descriptions with occurrences of circled numerals. When a logical language is given
an NL interpretation, the sentences of the language can be regarded as expressing
statements that are true or false. For example, if the interpretation I assigns to
‘R2’ the sense of the English predicate ‘
is heavier than
’, and to ‘a’ and ‘b’ the
senses of ‘The Governor of California’ and ‘Gray Davis’ respectively, then the sen-
tence ‘R2ab’ expresses the statement ‘The Governor of California is heavier than
Gray Davis’. (It does not express the statement ‘Arnold Schwarzenagger is heavier
than Gray Davis’ even though what it expresses is true iﬀthe second statement
is true). I shall say that a logical language equipped with the meanings or senses
provided by an NL interpretation is an NL interpreted language.
Suppose now that a scientist (or engineer for that matter) applies a mathe-
matical theorem in drawing an empirically testable conclusion from a number of
empirically established premises. If the scientist’s reasoning is to be intelligible
and rational, must the theorem used in the inference be assumed to be a true
statement? Could the scientist’s inferences in question be rationally justiﬁed even
when that mathematical theorem is not assumed to be true?
➀
➁

1014
Charles S. Chihara
As a preliminary to answering the questions of the previous paragraph, I suggest
that, independently of whatever “ordinary” meaning a theorem of a mathematical
theory may have, it can be understood to have a kind of content, its “structural
content, which tells us what must hold in structures of a certain sort — the
particular sort in question depending upon the kind of structures with which the
theorem prover was concerned. Thus, to consider a speciﬁc case, suppose that φ
is a theorem of an axiomatized ﬁrst-order mathematical theory M. Then we know
from logic that φ must be satisﬁed by every ﬁrst-order structure that satisﬁes the
axioms of M. We can then infer the truth of the structural content of φ, which can
be expressed
Every model of M must also be a model of φ.37
Obviously, the structural content of φ can be seen to hold without having to
establish the truth of φ under its “ordinary interpretation”.
It will now be argued that, when typical applications of M are considered, there
is no need to assume that the theorems of M are true statements; it is suﬃcient
that the structural content of the theorem hold. To see how this could be, let us
now consider the case in which M is a speciﬁc axiomatized ﬁrst-order mathematical
theory, viz. Peano arithmetic (henceforth ‘PA’).38
Let the language of PA be extended to a many-sorted language so that there
are quantiﬁers for natural numbers and other quantiﬁers for empirical objects,
such that, when the new language is given an appropriate sort of NL interpre-
tation, empirical statements containing arithmetical terms are expressible in the
language.39 Consider now what entities must be assigned by an NL interpreta-
tion to the natural number terms in order for some sentences of the many-sorted
language being discussed to express true empirical statements. Any NL interpre-
tation of the target language must make assignments to both the arithmetical and
non-arithmetical constants of the language, as well as to the predicates and terms
that take both arithmetical and non-arithmetical variables. Thus, an appropriate
domain for the arithmetical quantiﬁers must be determined and referents must be
selected (with respect to this domain) for all the purely arithmetical constants,
terms, and predicates; a domain for the non-arithmetical quantiﬁers must also be
determined and referents must be selected (with respect to this latter domain) for
all the purely non-arithmetical constants, terms, and predicates; while at the same
time, referents must be selected (with respect to both of the above domains) for the
terms and predicates that take both arithmetical and non-arithmetical variables.
37For the case in which M is not a ﬁrst-order theory, one could reason (roughly) as follows:
Since φ is a theorem of M, φ must be provable from the axioms of M, and hence it must be a
consequence of these axioms. We can infer that any model of these axioms must be a model of
φ.
38I do not wish to leave the reader with the impression that my reasoning must be restricted to
only cases in which the mathematical theorem applied is a theorem of an axiomatized ﬁrst-order
theory. I have chosen to discuss the reasoning within such a framework for the sake of simplicity
and clarity.
39See [Enderton, 1972, Section 4.3] for a rigorous discussion of many-sorted logic.

Modal Realism and Its Roots in Mathematical Realism
1015
Suppose that there is some sentence of this language that can be reasonably
translated:
(1)
There are 3 horses in the barn
What must be assigned to the constant term that is being translated here by
the numeral ‘3’ in order that the sentence be true?
It has been convincingly
maintained by a number of philosophers classiﬁed as “Structuralist”, such as Paul
Benacerraf, Michael Resnik, Stewart Shapiro, and Geoﬀrey Hellman, that it does
not matter what speciﬁc entity ‘3’ denotes, so long as the entities that are denoted
by the natural number terms (the entities that form the domain of the arithmetical
quantiﬁers):
(a) form an ω-sequence (or what Bertrand Russell called a “progres-
sion”40);
and
(b) the elements of the progression are so related to one another that
the member of the progression denoted by ‘3’ is appropriately related
to the other members of the domain (it must be, so to speak, “the
successor of the successor of the successor of” the member denoted by
‘0’).
Thus, whether one takes the natural numbers to be the Zermelo ordinals
∅, {∅}, {{∅}}, . . .
or the von Neumann ordinals
∅, {∅}, {∅, {∅}}, . . .
the truth value of the empirical statement in question will not be aﬀected, since
it will be true iﬀthere is a one-one correspondence between the totality of horses
in the barn and the initial segment of either one of the above sequences consisting
of those members of the sequence that precede the entity denoted by ‘3’.41 It is
easy to see that the truth conditions of (1), and hence the empirical content of
(1), is not dependent upon what speciﬁc entity is assigned as the denotation of
‘3’. In so far as what is of concern is the empirical content of such sentences, it
does not matter what entities we pick to be the natural numbers — any progres-
sion will do: it is only how these entities are interrelated that counts. In other
words, regarding the referents needed for the arithmetical terms, so long as the
NL interpretation selects a progression as the natural numbers and ﬁxes appropri-
ate members of the progression as referents for the arithmetic constants, the truth
40[Russell, 1920, 8]. There are, of course, nonstandard models of Peano arithmetic, but for
reasons of avoiding unnecessary complications, I shall restrict the above thesis to considerations
of only “standard” models.
41This was implicitly argued by Benacerraf in (Benacerraf, 1965).

1016
Charles S. Chihara
values of the empirical statements will be correct.
Any NL interpretation that
satisﬁes the above conditions regarding both the empirical and the arithmetical
parts of the language, I shall call an “empirically adequate interpretation”, and I
shall refer to the above thesis about the referents of the arithmetical terms and
the arithmetical quantiﬁers, the “Structuralist Thesis”.
Now let I be an NL interpretation of this language such that each member of
G would naturally be translated into true English empirical sentences: we can
imagine that the non-arithmetical constants of the language have been assigned
appropriate elements with respect to some domain of physical entities.
What about the arithmetical part of the language? It is usual for the domain
of the arithmetical part to be speciﬁed in essentially the following way:
1. the domain is to consist of the non-negative integers;
2. a speciﬁc individual constant is to denote the number 0;
3. a speciﬁc unary successor operator is to denote the number-theoretic function
that yields as value, for any argument α, the immediate successor of α;
4. a speciﬁc binary addition operator is to denote the binary operation that
yields, for any ordered pair of non-negative numbers < α, β >, the sum of
α and β;
5. a speciﬁc binary multiplication operator is to denote the binary operation
that yields, for any ordered pair of non-negative numbers < α, β >, the
product of α and β.42
Now as philosophers, we should ask if the above speciﬁcation of the referents
for the arithmetical part of the language really yield a model of PA. Have we
actually speciﬁed genuine denotations for all the nonlogical arithmetical constants
of the language? No, we haven’t — at least if the nominalists are correct. Since
nominalists do not think there are such entities as non-negative integers, if they are
right, the above speciﬁcation of the referents of the arithmetical constants of the
target language has not succeeded in securing the required domain and referents
for all the nonlogical constants of the language (anymore than one succeeds if one
speciﬁes that the domain is to consist of all the unicorns that are to be found in
California). In that case, the NL interpretation speciﬁed above has not provided
each arithmetical sentence of the language with a meaning resulting in a true or
false sentence. Thus, the axioms of PA, expressed in the language so interpreted,
could not be correctly said to be true sentences. If the nominalists are right, then,
the above NL interpretation does not succeed in making the theorems of PA true
statements.
42The speciﬁcation I have given above is routinely given. For example, see [Mendelson, 1987,
121], where he goes on to say: “This interpretation is called the standard interpretation or
standard model”. A similar speciﬁcation of a model of PA is given by Enderton in his [Enderton,
1972, 174].

Modal Realism and Its Roots in Mathematical Realism
1017
What about the sentences of the language that are translated into straight-
forward empirical statements such as ‘There are 3 apples on the table’? If the
NL interpretation does not secure a referent for the arithmetical constant that is
translated by ‘3’, how can such a sentence be regarded as true? Well, we look at
the surface of the table and count all the apples on it: one, two, three. In this case,
we would all regard the sentence as true — without concerning ourselves about
what particular entity has been assigned as the referent of the word ‘three’. It
doesn’t matter what thing (if any) the word is supposed to denote, since, by the
Structuralist Thesis, any initial part of a progression would ﬁll the role needed for
the natural numbers — even the sequence of English words ‘one’, ‘two’, ‘three’,
‘four’, . . . would do. Obviously, the empirical statements only involve the natu-
ral numbers tangentially (if at all), and in ordinary situations, we do not concern
ourselves with the question of what particular referents have been or should be
selected for the natural numbers. Thus, whether or not the NL interpretation
selected has succeeded in picking out actual (existing) entities as referents of the
natural number terms is usually not even considered in determining the truth val-
ues of such empirical statements. Even the most committed nominalists would
not object to our taking the empirical statements of the above language as having
truth values.
The situation is very diﬀerent, however, in the case of the sentences of PA: those
sentences are supposed to be directly and crucially about the natural numbers.
If
no referents have been secured for the referential terms of those sentences, then it
is hard to see how the sentences can be correctly said to be about anything and
hence to be either true or false.
Even if the above reasoning is sound, it may still be wondered how, if none of
the theorems of PA have truth values, it can be correct to infer some empirical
sentence θ from the set of empirical sentences G on the basis of some theorem φ of
PA. If one does not take the theorem φ to be true, how can one rationally make
use of φ to infer θ from G? Recalling the arguments for the central assumption
discussed earlier, can one have any faith in empirical conclusions drawn from φ, if
φ is not known to be true?
With the aim of answering these questions, let us suppose that I is an NL
interpretation of this language that satisﬁes the set of sentences G in the way
described above. Let us also suppose that empirical sentence θ is deduced from G
using theorem φ as a premise. In the following, I shall make no assumption about
whether or not the NL interpretation has in fact secured referents for the domain
of PA and hence whether or not the sentence φ has a truth value, since from the
point of view of the nominalist, the axioms and theorems of PA (and hence φ
itself) are not true statements. Still, we know that, since φ is a theorem of PA,
its structural content must hold, that is, φ must be true in all models of PA. So
we can infer that φ must be true in all empirically adequate models of PA that
are “consistent with” I.
The above consistency condition needs a bit of explanation, since it is brought in
only to cover unnatural and probably perverse NL interpretations of the language.

1018
Charles S. Chihara
Suppose that the NL interpretation I had assigned the Eiﬀel Tower to some non-
arithmetical constant α and that what G said about α (under this interpretation)
blocked α from being a natural number. Then, any empirically adequate model
of PA that had the Eiﬀel Tower in its domain would conﬂict with interpretation
I. Such an empirically adequate model would, in a sense, be inconsistent with the
interpretation.
Still, if φ is true in all models of PA, then any empirically adequate model of
PA that is not “inconsistent with” I in the above way must satisfy φ. Thus, we
can infer from the above discussion that φ must be true in all empirically adequate
models of PA that are “consistent with” I.
Now it is possible to construct an NL interpretation K of the language that is
identical to I except for what it assigns to the domain of the arithmetical quantiﬁers
of the language and to the arithmetical constants of the language, such that K will
be an empirically adequate model of PA consistent with I.43 Since K is a model
of PA and since the structural content of φ is true, K must satisfy φ. From the
Structuralist Thesis, K must also satisfy G. Since θ is a consequence of G and φ, K
must satisfy θ. And since K diﬀers from I only in what these two interpretations
assign to the arithmetical domain and to the arithmetical constants, it follows by
the Structuralist Thesis that θ must be true under I. That is, θ must be a true
sentence. It can thus be concluded that the deduction in question can be rationally
justiﬁed without having to assume that φ is a true statement.
The above case of the use of a theorem of PA may appear very artiﬁcial since
the reasoning is carried out in a rigid, highly restricted formal language that
concerns only a relatively simple mathematical structure. So I would now like
to consider brieﬂy the case of the use of a mathematical theory expressed in a
natural language and involving a more complex kind of structure (analysis) than
the intended models of PA.
A theory of light rays
Imagine that a scientist, on the basis of her observations of light and shadows,
coupled with a number of experiments involving light sources, mirrors, and opaque
screens that have pinholes, constructs a mathematical theory44 in which ‘source’,
‘observer’, and ‘point of reﬂection’ are used to refer to points in Euclidean 3-space
with the standard metric. In the theory, a continuous curve connecting any two
points a and b is called a ‘path from a to b’. The term ‘path of a light ray from
point a to point b’ is used to refer to a special kind of path from a to b.
By
deﬁnition, a “path of a light ray from a to b” is the shortest path from a to b.
A light reﬂection instance consists of a path f, a plane p, and points a, b, and
c such that:
43Such an NL interpretation is constructible using the author’s Constructibility Theory, as is
shown in [Chihara, 2004, Chapter 7].
44The theory is presented in detail in “The Existence of Mathematical Objects” (forthcoming
in a collection of essays to be published by the Mathematical Association of America, edited by
Bonnie Gold and Roger Simons).

Modal Realism and Its Roots in Mathematical Realism
1019
c lies on p; a and b are not on p, but are both in the same half space
bounded by p; and f is the union of a path of a light ray from a to c
and a path of a light ray from c to b, all the parts of f being in the
same half space bounded by p.
Such an f is called a ‘path of reﬂection (relative to p) from a to b’; c is called a
‘point of reﬂection’ of f. The term ‘path of reﬂection’ functions as a parameter (as
do the nonlogical constants of a ﬁrst-order theory): in all models of the theory,
the term refers to paths satisfying the following axiom:
A path of reﬂection (relative to p) from a to b is the shortest possible
path from a to b that contains a point of reﬂection in p.
Not surprisingly, when the above parameter is suitably interpreted, the theory can
be understood to describe features of a simpliﬁed model of idealized light rays
traveling in a homogeneous medium. Thus interpreted, a theorem can be proved
which can be understood to say:
Any path of reﬂection will be such that the path’s angle of incidence
equals its angle of reﬂection.
We can see how this theory can be applied to actual physical situations involving
the behavior of light, by regarding paths of actual light rays to be approximately
that of paths of light rays from a source to an observer (as characterized above).
The physical situation would have to be ones in which the light analyzed would be
traveling in “homogeneous media” — say, reasonably clear (fogless, smokeless) air
— and being reﬂected by a ﬂat object, such as a mirror, approximating a plane
in certain geometrically relevant ways. In such a situation, we would have, in an
idealized way, a kind of empirical model of the theory. The paths of light rays in
such homogeneous media are in fact very close to straight lines (for most practical
purposes) so that the path of a light ray from point a to point b can be taken to
be the shortest distance between a and b. Furthermore, the geometric properties
of ﬂat mirrors can be made to be very close (at least for many practical purposes
relating to how light is reﬂected by mirrors) to those of planes, so that paths of
light rays reﬂecting oﬀsuch a mirror would be very close to what is described in
the principal axiom.
Now suppose that the parameter ‘path of reﬂection’ is left uninterpreted. In that
case, any theorem containing the parameter does not assert anything (anymore
than does the sentence of ﬁrst-order logic ‘Fa’ when the constants in it are not
interpreted), and hence it would not assert anything true or false about the actual
world. However, regardless of what incomplete meaning such a theorem will retain,
it will still have a structural content which can be shown to hold. Hence, any
model of the above theory would have to be a model of the theorem.
Then,
since the empirical model described above satisﬁes the axioms (at least as an
approximation), the “model” would have to satisfy the above theorem. This will

1020
Charles S. Chihara
allow us to conclude that a light ray striking a mirror at a 35 degree angle will
reﬂect oﬀthe mirror at (approximately) a 35 degree angle.45
We can now see how a mathematical theorem could be legitimately applied even
when the theorem used is not assumed to be a true assertions.46 Thus we can see
how one can undermine the Resnik premise (discussed earlier) that we are justiﬁed
in drawing conclusions from and within science only if we are justiﬁed in taking
the mathematics used in science to be true.
The fundamental theorem reexamined
The above example provides the means of understanding how there can be the kind
of “empirical veriﬁcation” of the Fundamental Theorem discussed earlier, without
having to assume that the theorem is a true statement. We have: on the one hand,
a purely mathematical theory (analysis) in which the Fundamental Theorem is
proved; and on the other hand, an empirical theory (say, about the printed squares
of engineering paper) according to which certain kinds of entities are deﬁnitely
related in ways that approximate, more or less accurately, the ways that various
elements of structures are asserted to be interrelated by the structural contents of
the axioms of analysis.47 It is natural to speak, in this context (as in the previous
example), of a sort of “empirical model” — one that is structurally identical, given
certain idealizations, to the models (or sub-models) of the mathematical theory.48
Then, the fact that the theorems of the mathematical theory are true of all the
models of the theory explains why the Fundamental Theorem would hold of the
“empirical model” used to carry out the “empirical veriﬁcation”. Thus, it is not
the actual truth of the Fundamental Theorem that is “empirically veriﬁed” but
rather only its structural content. It can be seen that this kind of “veriﬁcation” no
more presupposes the actual truth of the Fundamental Theorem itself than does
an “empirical veriﬁcation” of the previously discussed law of reﬂections of light
rays presuppose the truth of the theorem of the previously discussed mathematical
theory of light. In both cases, all that is really presupposed is the truth of the
structural contents of the respective mathematical theorems in questions.49
Some lessons to be learned
The above discussion leads naturally to the view that the theorems of practically
any mathematical theory need not be true to be applied in science and in every-
day situations. It undermines the strong conviction that is so prevalent among
45Since we can infer that the angle of reﬂection of the path of the actual light ray is (approxi-
mately) equal to its angle of incidence.
46For an indication of how the above theory can be developed into a more complex and versatile
theory, see [Maki and Thompson, 1973, Sec. 2.3.4].
47Cf. the example discussed in [Chihara, 2004, 285–6].
48Cf. [Chihara, 2004, Ch. 9, Sec. 12, especially fn. 59].
49For a detailed explanation of the underlying point being made here, see [Chihara, 2004, 9,
Sec. 12].

Modal Realism and Its Roots in Mathematical Realism
1021
philosophers that the theorems of mathematics are factual statements that have
to be true of the world (the central assumption) in order that they be applied in
science and engineering.50
There is a tendency among philosophers and mathematicians alike to think that
to deny that mathematical theorems are true statements is to imply that both
theorems and non-theorems alike fail to provide us with any useful information —
an implication that seems to be contradicted by the obvious fact that scientists and
engineers ﬁnd many mathematical theorems to be extremely informative. What
the above discussion brings out is that, even if a theorem is not true, it can still
have a kind of content (its structural content) that conveys valuable information
to scientists and engineers.51
4
CONCLUDING COMMENT
I am inclined to call the central assumption a “dogma” because it is held by so
many philosophers without any real investigation into the question at issue. Just
how deeply Lewis and Plantinga had seriously investigated the question of the
truth of mathematics before accepting the central assumption is not known by
me. But judging from their writings, I doubt that either of these philosophers
had ever seriously questioned this assumption.
In any case, noting that these
Modal Realists, in eﬀect, utilized the central assumption at crucial points in their
philosophizing about the metaphysics of modality (without even mentioning the
assumption about mathematics they were making) points to a serious area of vul-
nerability of their ontological systems. The above discussion shows how one can
reasonably question their fundamental assumptions about the nature of mathemat-
ics and thereby cast doubt upon the fragile and largely unexplored underpinnings
of their metaphysical views about modality.
50It might be objected that my refutations presuppose the truth of mathematics. For example,
does not the above reasoning concerning PA makes use of some elementary theorems of ﬁrst-
order model theory — a theory that relies upon set theory? My response to this objection is to
appeal to the Constructibility Theory of my book [Chihara, 1990]. The Constructibility Theory
was developed to be a theory that neither makes reference to, nor presupposes, the existence
of mathematical entities but that can still serve as a logical framework for the development of
much mathematical theory, including model theory. The model theory needed above can easily
be developed within the Constructibility Theory.
51Here, it might be objected that such apparent reference to structures runs counter to my
skepticism about mathematical objects. For if the nominalist is correct, how can there be any
models of mathematical theories?
Aren’t structures abstract entities on a par with sets and
properties? Furthermore, if there aren’t such things as stuctures, how can the structural content
of mathematical theorems have any real signiﬁcance? Here again, the Constructibility Theory
comes to the rescue by providing the nominalist with “constructability structures” — something
that the nominalist can use to make sense of applications of mathematical theorems in science
and to answer the above questions. For more details on this point, see [Chihara, 2004, Chapter
8].

1022
Charles S. Chihara
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Material for this paper was delivered in a series of three lectures I gave at the
Scuola Normale Superiore in Pisa in the third week of April of 2004. I am grateful
to those who attended the lectures and contributed many thoughtful comments
on the earlier material.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Benacerraf, 1965] P. Benacerraf. What numbers could not be. The Philosophical Review, 74,
47-73, 1965.
[Burgess and Rosen, 1997] J. Burgess and G. Rosen. A Subject With No Object: Strategies for
Nominalistic Interpretations of Mathematics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.
[Chihara, 1990] C. S. Chihara. Constructibility and Mathematical Existence. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1990.
[Chihara, 1998] C. S. Chihara. The Worlds of Possibility: Modal Realism and the Semantics of
Modal Logic. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
[Chihara, 2004] C. S. Chihara. A Structural Account of Mathematics. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2004.
[Davidson, 2003] M. Davidson, ed. Essays in the Metaphysics of Modality. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2003.
[Enderton, 1972] H. Enderton. A Mathematical Introduction to Logic. New York: Academic
Press, 1972.
[Jager, 1982] T. Jager. An actualist semantics for quantiﬁed modal logic. Notre Dame Journal
of Formal Logic, 23, 335–349, 1982.
[Konyndyk, 1986] K. Konyndyk. Introduction to Modal Logic. Notre Dame, Ind.: University of
Notre Dame Press, 1986.
[Lewis, 1979] D. Lewis. Possible worlds. In M. J. Loux (Ed.), The Possible and the Actual, pp.
182-189. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1979.
[Lewis, 1986] D. Lewis. On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1986.
[Lewis, 1991] D. Lewis. Parts of Classes. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1991.
[Maki and Thompson, 1973] D. P. Maki and M. Thompson. Mathematical Models and Applica-
tions. Englewood Cliﬀs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1973.
[Mendelson, 1987] E. Mendelson. Introduction to Mathematical Logic (3rd ed.). Monterey:
Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole Advanced Books, 1987.
[Menzel, 1988] C. Menzel. On an unsound proof of the existence of possible worlds. Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic, 30, 598 - 603, 1988.
[Plantinga, 1985] A. Plantinga. Replies to my colleagues. In J. Tomberlin & P. van Inwagen
(Eds.), Alvin Plantinga, pp. 313-396. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1985.
[Plantinga, 2000] A. Plantinga. Warranted Christian Belief. New York:
Oxford University
Press, 2000.
[Plantinga, 2003] A. Plantinga. World and essence. In M. Davidson (Ed.), Essays in the Meta-
physics of Modality, pp. 46-71. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
[Resnik, 1997] M. Resnik. Mathematics as a Science of Patterns. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1997.
[Resnik, 1998] M. Resnik. Holistic mathematics. In M. Schirn (Ed.), The Philosophy of Mathe-
matics Today, pp. 227-246, 1998. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[Russell, 1920] B. Russell. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (Second ed.). London:
Allen & Unwin, Ltd, 1990.

FREE LOGICS
John Nolt
1
THE BENEFITS OF FREEDOM
In classical predicate logic each singular term must denote some member of the
quantiﬁcational domain. Free logics annul this requirement. Their quantiﬁers,
like classical quantiﬁers, are interpreted over a speciﬁed domain, but their sin-
gular terms may denote either objects outside that domain or nothing at all. If
we regard the quantiﬁcational domain as the set of existing things, free logics are
logics whose singular terms need not denote existents. Just as modern syllogis-
tic widens the applicability of Aristotelian syllogistic by accommodating general
terms (e.g., ‘celestial sphere’ or ‘inﬁnitely large rational number’) that apply to
no existing thing, so free logic widens the applicability of classical predicate logic
by accommodating singular terms (e.g., ‘the ﬁrmament’ or ‘1/0’) that denote no
existing thing.
Application of classical predicate logic to statements whose singular terms are
not known to denote existing things may beg important questions.
Rendering
‘God’, for example, as g, we obtain by classical reasoning the remarkable theorem
∃x x = g. But the same reasoning also yields, alas, the existence of Godzilla. To
avoid such embarrassments, classical reasoners are obliged to conﬁrm the existence
of things named before naming them.1
But this obligation is irksome, so irksome that even mathematicians routinely
ﬂout it — using, for example, the expression ‘f(x)’ as a singular term even where
f is partial and the existence of f(x) unproved. They get away with this, usu-
ally, only by being discreetly inexplicit about the underlying logic — which is, in
consequence, not rigorously classical.
Singular terms of dubious denotation crop up not only in mathematics but also
in science (‘the center of the universe’, ‘the ether’, ‘Vulcan’2), in history (‘Homer’,
‘King Arthur’) in metaphysics (‘my mind’, ‘the One’, ‘nothingness’) and just about
everywhere else. As in mathematics, we may want to reason with such terms, even
without assurance that they refer to existing things.
1I am assuming here, as is usual, that the existential quantiﬁer is read “there exists.” Later
I’ll critique this assumption.
2‘Vulcan’ is the name given by Urbain Le Verrier — the nineteenth century astronomer who
performed the calculations that led to the discovery of Neptune — to a planet which, he believed,
orbited between Mercury and the sun, perturbing Mercury’s orbit.
He and others searched
unsuccessfully for Vulcan, which in fact does not exist. Mercury’s behavior was later explained
by (and helped to conﬁrm) the general theory of relativity.
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1024
John Nolt
Free logics enable us to do so by disallowing inferences whose validity depends
on the presumption that singular terms denote members of the quantiﬁcational
domain. Existential generalization:
A(t/x) ⊢∃xA
is a case in point.
For if t does not denote an object in the quantiﬁcational
domain then the truth of A(t/x) may not guarantee that this domain contains an
object that satisﬁes A. Without existential generalization, the assumption g = g
no longer implies ∃x x = g; thus we may use the name ‘God’ — or ‘Godzilla’ —
without existential presumption.
Universal instantiation (speciﬁcation):
∀xA ⊢A(t/x)
is likewise invalid; for even if every object in the domain of the universal quantiﬁer
satisﬁes A, if t does not denote a member of that domain, A(t/x) may be false.
Because free logics disallow some classical inferences but validate no inferences that
were classically invalid, they are weaker than the corresponding classical logics.
To distinguish terms that denote existing things from those that do not, free
logics often employ the one-place existence predicate, ‘E’ or ‘E!’. (I favor the
latter, because it is pronounced “E-shriek.”) For any singular term t, E!t is true
if t denotes an object in the domain of the existential quantiﬁer, false otherwise.
For free logics with identity, ‘E!’ is deﬁnable thus:
E!t =df ∃xx = t3
and hence need not be taken as primitive.
(‘E!’ is not deﬁnable if the identity
predicate is absent.4) Using ‘E!’ we can formulate weakened versions of existential
generalization:
A(t/x), E!t ⊢∃xA
and universal instantiation:
∀xA, E!t ⊢A(t/x)
that are valid in free logic. Here the classical presumption that singular terms
denote members of the quantiﬁcational domain becomes an explicit assumption,
E!t, that can be made or not made separately for each term t.
3There is one possible exception. If s = t is truth-valueless for all referring s and nonreferring
t, then (depending on the interpretation of quantiﬁers) ∃xx = t may be truth-valueless while E!t
is false. See the discussion of nonvalent free logics below.
4This was ﬁrst shown in Meyer, Bencivenga and Lambert [1982].

Free Logics
1025
2
THE EMPTY DOMAIN
A consequence of the classical presumption is that the domain must contain some-
thing for singular terms to denote. It must, in other words, be nonempty. Thus
classical logic treats many existential claims — not only ∃x x = t, but also, for
example, ∃x x = x, ∃xFx ∨∃x ∼Fx, even ∃x(Fx →∀yFy) — as logical truths.
But mere logic, it would seem, ought not to guarantee the existence of anything.
In Introduction to Mathematical Logic, Russell writes:
Among ‘possible’ worlds, in the Leibnizian sense, there will be worlds
having one, two, three, . . . individuals. There does not even seem any
logical necessity why there should even be one individual.5
And in a footnote he adds:
The primitive propositions in Principia Mathematica are such as to
allow the inference that at least one individual exists. But I now view
this as a defect in logical purity.
One might question Russell’s regard for purity. Still, in free logics where we need
no objects for singular terms to denote, why not allow the domain sometimes to
be empty? Quine [1954] calls logics that admit the empty domain inclusive. In an
inclusive logic no existentially quantiﬁed formula is valid.
Inclusive logics need not be free (though they must be if they employ individual
constants), nor need free logics be inclusive.
Inclusivity furthers the spirit of
freedom, however, by eliminating the last vestige of existential import from general
terms. In classical predicate logic, universal general terms (terms satisﬁed by all
members of the domain) still have existential import; that is, any inference of
the form ∀xA ⊢∃xA is valid.
But in inclusive logics the empty domain is a
counterexample to all such inferences.
Inclusive logics, whether free or not, have, however, their peculiarities. They
make universally quantiﬁed contradictions — ∀x(Fx & ∼Fx), for example —
contingent, since all universally quantiﬁed formulas are true in the empty domain.
This includes vacuously quantiﬁed formulas, if we allow them. Hence they invali-
date:
∀xA →A, where x is not free in A,
which is valid not only in classical logic but also in free logics that are not inclusive.
More troublesome is the loss of some of the laws of conﬁnement — e.g.:
∀x(P & A) ↔(P & ∀xA), where x is not free in P,
that are needed for the operations of prenexing (moving all quantiﬁers to the
beginning of a formula) or purifying (moving quantiﬁers in as close as possible to
5Russell [1919], p. 203.

1026
John Nolt
the variables they govern). This loss invalidates many equivalences that classical
logicians take for granted. The formula:
∀x(A ↔x = t),
for example, which is prominent in the theory of deﬁnite descriptions, is not equiv-
alent in inclusive logic, as it is in classical logic, to:
∀x(A →x = t) & A(t/x),
since in an empty domain with A(t/x) false, the former but not the latter is true.
Despite these complications, free logics are often inclusive. Free logicians are
generally romantics at heart, chaﬁng at the slightest existential presumption and
preferring the wild possibilities of emptiness to the neat regularities of classical
restraint.
3
PROOF THEORY
Inclusive free logic lends itself readily to natural deduction. The formation rules
are just those of classical predicate logic, but there must be an additional clause
for the existence predicate ‘E!’ if it is taken as primitive rather than deﬁned in
terms of the identity predicate. Either way, the quantiﬁer rules for the standard
bivalent system of inclusive free logic (for closed formulas) are as follows:
∀I:
Given a derivation of A(t/x) from E!t, where t is new and does not occur in
A, discharge E!t and infer ∀xA.
∀E:
From ∀xA and E!t infer A(t/x).
∃I:
From A(t/x) and E!t infer ∃xA.
∃E:
Given ∃xA and a derivation of a formula B from A(t/x) & E!t, where t is
new and does not occur in either A or B, discharge A(t/x) & E!t and infer
B from ∃xA.
(A(t/x) is the result of replacing all occurrences of x in A by t. If t does not
occur in A, then A(t/x) is just A.) Rules for the propositional operators are just
as in classical logic. No special introduction or elimination rules are needed for
‘E!’. If the identity predicate is present, its elimination rule is the usual principle
of substitutivity, but its introduction rule may be nonstandard.
Classical =I
permits the introduction (on no assumptions) of any statement of the form t = t.
But where t is nondenoting t = t may, on negative semantics (discussed below),
be untrue. On such semantics, =I can introduce statements of the form t = t
only on the assumption E!t. (An alternative, but equivalently restricted =I rule
introduces, on no assumptions, statements of the form ∀xx = x.) If, however, we
require all self-identities to be true, regardless of whether or not the term denotes,

Free Logics
1027
then =I can have its classical form, allowing us to introduce formulas of the form
t = t on no assumptions.
The same logic may be axiomatized by adding the following schemas to the
tautologies of classical propositional logic:
(A1)
A →∀xA
(A2)
∀x(A →B) →(∀xA →∀xB)
(A3)
∀xA →(E!t →A(t/x))
(A4)
∀xE!x
(A5)
∀xA(x/t) if A is an axiom.
(Once again, all formulas are presumed closed.) Modus ponens is the only neces-
sary rule of inference. (A1), (A2) and (A5) are also classical axioms. (A3) and
(A4) are peculiar to free logic. (A3) is a restricted form the classical principle of
speciﬁcation:
(Spec) ∀xA →A(t/x).
(A4) stipulates that the quantiﬁers range only over existing things.
Replacing
both (A3) and (A4) with (Spec) yields classical predicate logic.
If the identity predicate is included, we also need:
(A6)
s = t →(A →A(t//s))
(where A(t//s) is the result of replacing one or more occurrences of s in A by t)
and either
(A7)
∀x x = x,
if only those self-identity statements whose singular term denotes a member of the
quantiﬁcational domain need be true, or
(A7+) t = t,
if we want all self-identity statements to be true. (A1)–(A7) form the core of inclu-
sive free logic with identity (for closed formulas). A noninclusive free logic may be
obtained by adding to (A1)–(A7) the axiom ∃xE!x or its equivalent ∃xx = x. Ad-
ditional axioms or rules may be needed if we adopt special semantic conventions,
as will be explained below. If ‘E!’ is deﬁned in terms of the identity predicate,
(A3) becomes redundant, since it then follows from (A6) together with the other
axioms.
It is possible to develop free logic without either ‘=’ or ‘E!’. Such a logic retains
(A1), (A2) and (A5), but instead of (A3) and (A4) has:
(A3′)
∀y(∀xA →A(y/x))

1028
John Nolt
(A4′)
∀x∀yA →∀y∀xA
(A3′), like (A3), is a version of the law of speciﬁcation that restricts speciﬁcation
to objects within the domain of the quantiﬁers, though unlike (A3), it is expressed
without the use of ‘E!’. The quantiﬁer permutation axiom (A4′) is redundant
in the presence of the identity axioms but is independent of (A1),(A2),(A3′) and
(A5).6
Among free logics whose formulas may contain free variables, those that require
the variables to denote objects in the quantiﬁcational domain are known as E+-
logics; those that do not are called E-logics. Free variables in E-logics function
merely schematically, so that, for example, E-logics have the substitution rule:
A ⊢A(t/x)
while E+-logics do not. Conversely, E+-logics validate E!x, for any individual
variable x, while E-logics do not.7 In what follows, however, we shall generally
presume that formulas are closed, so that this distinction is irrelevant.
4
SINGLE VS. DUAL DOMAINS
Free logics diﬀer semantically on the question of whether singular terms that are
not assigned objects in the quantiﬁcational domain (hereafter called empty terms)
refer to objects not in the domain or to nothing at all. There are two main ap-
proaches, which I shall call dual-domain and single-domain semantics, respectively.
In a single-domain semantics the domain typically represents the class of existing
things, and empty singular terms have no referents. The interpretation function for
a single-domain semantics is, in other words, partial. In a dual-domain semantics
the interpretation function is usually total, but singular terms may refer to objects
outside the quantiﬁcational domain. These outlying objects are collected into a
second or outer domain, in contrast to which the usual quantiﬁcational domain
is described as inner. The inner domain typically represents the class of existing
things; the outer, correlatively, includes nonexistents.
Thus on a dual-domain
semantics all singular terms refer, but not all refer to existing things; the term
‘empty’ is therefore not equivalent to ‘nonreferring’ or ‘nondenoting’, as it is in
single-domain semantics. Some authors make the inner domain a subset of the
outer, which thus contains both existent and nonexistent objects; others make the
two disjoint.
Many authors call single-domain semantics ‘Russellian’ and dual-domain seman-
tics ‘Meinongian’, but these designations are misleading. Although the single/dual
contrast is reminiscent of their contrasting ontologies, neither philosopher invented
the semantics bearing his name. Moreover, the term “Meinongian semantics” has
6Fine [1983].
7For a more complete treatment of free logics with free variables, see Troesltra and van Dalen
[1988], vol. I, ch. 2, sec. 2.

Free Logics
1029
lately become ambiguous. Some authors now use it speciﬁcally to describe seman-
tics equipped with quantiﬁers over all the denizens of some rich Meinongian theory
of objects.8 But the outer domain of a dual-domain semantics need not (and usu-
ally does not) have its own quantiﬁers; and, though it may include incomplete and
impossible objects `a la Meinong, it may also, depending on the application, con-
tain only speciﬁc classes of nonexistents — for example: merely possible objects
(in alethic modal logics), objects existing only in the past or future (in tense log-
ics), undeﬁned quantities (in mathematics), error objects (in computer science),
or nonexisting theoretical entities (in philosophy and natural science).
Because the interpretation function of a dual-domain logic is typically total,
there must be something in the outer domain for singular terms to denote. There-
fore, the outer domain must, like the domains of classical logic, be nonempty. Both
single- and dual-domain semantics validate (A1)-(A7).
In addition to the single-/dual-domain divide, free logics diﬀer in how they
assign truth-values to atomic formulas containing empty singular terms. There
are three general approaches.
Call any formula containing one or more empty
singular terms referentially deﬁcient. Then a semantics for free logic is positive
if it allows some referentially deﬁcient atomic formulas not of the form E!t to be
true, negative if it requires all such formulas to be false, and nonvalent if it requires
them all to be truth-valueless.9 Dual-domain logics are usually positive, for there
is seldom reason to have an outer domain of nonexistent objects unless they can
satisfy predicates. Single-domain logics are usually negative or nonvalent, but may
be positive as well.
5
POSITIVE SEMANTICS
In a positive semantics, referentially deﬁcient atomic formulas may be either true
or false. Our deﬁnition does not rule out their having other truth-values as well, or
truth-value gaps; but additional truth-values add nothing of direct interest here,
and truth-valuelessness will be discussed in the section on nonvalent semantics
below. The positive semantics considered in this section are bivalent. In positive
dual-domain free semantics (where empty singular terms are assigned members of
the outer domain), predicates are interpreted over the union of the two domains,
and the truth-values of atomic formulas (whether referentially deﬁcient or not) are
computed in the usual Tarskian fashion: an atomic formula is true if and only if
the n-tuple of objects denoted by its singular terms, taken in order, is a member
of the predicate’s extension. In positive single-domain free logics (whose empty
8See, for example, Paniczek [1998] and [2001], Jacquette [1996], Lambert [1983], p. 97, or
Routley [1980].
9This classiﬁcation is Lambert’s [2003f], pp. 126-7. Others (e.g., Morscher & Simons [2001])
use ‘neutral’ instead of ‘nonvalent’, but Routley [1980], pp.
76 ﬀ., has claimed that term to
describe logics whose “existential” quantiﬁers do not express existence.
The term ‘neuter’ is
another alternative (e.g., in Lambert [1991], p. 9), but not a very happy one.

1030
John Nolt
singular terms are assigned no object at all), referentially deﬁcient atomic formulas
require some unconventional treatment.
In order to preserve the full logic of identity, self-identities are taken to be true
in positive free logics, regardless of whether or not the term denotes. Hence the
axiom (A7), which implies only identities between nonempty terms, is replaced in
positive logics with the stronger (A7+), which asserts all self-identity statements.
Given bivalence, s = t must be false when only one of s and t denotes. Hence
any bivalent semantics, whether positive or negative, validates the formula:
(E!s & ∼E!t) →
∼s = t.
But this requires no new axioms, for it follows from (A6).
When s and t are both empty, we may stipulate that s = t is always true, but
this is overly restrictive for some applications, and positive free logics often allow
identities between distinct empty terms to be either true or false. For examples,
see the section on deﬁnite descriptions below.
The simplest positive free semantics is a bivalent dual-domain semantics. Let L
be a ﬁrst-order language without sentence letters, with ‘∼’, ‘&’, ‘∀’, ‘E!’ and ‘=’
primitive and the other logical operators deﬁned as usual. Then a dual-domain
model for L may be deﬁned as a triple ⟨Di, Do, I⟩, consisting of a possibly empty
inner domain Di, a nonempty outer domain Do such that Di ⊆Do, and an inter-
pretation function I such that for every individual constant t of L, I(t) ∈Do and
for every n-place predicate P of L, I(P) ⊆Dn
o . Given a model M = ⟨Di, Do, I⟩,
truth-values are assigned by the valuation function V such that:
V(Pt1 . . . tn) = T iﬀ⟨I(t1), . . ., I(tn)⟩∈I(P); = F otherwise.
V(s = t) = T iﬀI(s) = I(t); = F otherwise.
V(E!t) = T iﬀI(t) ∈Di; = F otherwise.
V(∼A) = T iﬀV(A) = F; = F otherwise.
V(A & B) = T iﬀV(A) = T and V(B) = T; = F otherwise.
V(∀xA) = T iﬀfor any individual constant t not occurring in A and all
d ∈Di, V(t,d)(A(t/x)) = T; = F otherwise.
(Here V(t,d) is the valuation function on the model ⟨Di, Do, I∗⟩such that I∗is
just like I except that I∗(t) = d.) The logic deﬁned by the natural deduction
rules mentioned above together with the usual identity rules or by (A1)–(A6) and
(A7+) is sound and complete with respect to this semantics.10
The nonexistent objects of a dual-domain semantics often serve to generalize,
systematize and simplify theory. In this respect they function like the ideal points
at inﬁnity of projective geometry. Dual-domain semantics are, however, open to
the charge of ontological extravagance. Single-domain positive semantics avoid
this objection. The literature oﬀers two main varieties.11 The ﬁrst, introduced by
10The proof can be found in Leblanc and Thomason [1968].
11There are others, less general in application.
See, for example, the discussion of Scott’s
single-domain positive free semantics for Quine’s virtual theory of classes in the section on free

Free Logics
1031
van Fraassen [1966], bypasses the usual Tarski deﬁnition of truth for referentially
deﬁcient atomic formulas and assigns them truth-values directly by ﬁat. These
truth-value assignments are, however, mere preliminaries to the construction of
supervaluations and so will be discussed in the section on supervaluations below.
The second single-domain form of positive semantics is the “proto-semantics”
recently proposed by G. Aldo Antonelli [2000]. A proto-semantics provides two
ways of determining the truth-values of atomic formulas: a Tarksi-style determi-
nation for formulas whose terms all refer and a stipulated truth-value assignment
for referentially deﬁcient formulas. A model in proto-semantics is a triple ⟨D, ρ, I⟩,
where D is a possibly empty domain of objects (all of which are regarded as ex-
isting); ρ is a partial reference function such that for any individual constant t,
ρ(t) is either undeﬁned or a member of D; and I is an interpretation function that
assigns to each n-tuple (n ≥1) of individual constants a proto-interpretation. A
proto-interpretation is an assignment of a signed extension (that is, a pair ⟨E, S⟩
where E is an ordinary extension (a subset of Dn) and S is one of the two signs
+ or -) to each n-place predicate. The signs (+ for T and - for F) encode the
truth-values that atomic formulas take in case of reference failure. Let I be an in-
terpretation with reference function ρ, π be the proto-interpretation that I assigns
to the n-tuple ⟨t1, . . ., tn⟩of individual constants, and P be an n-place predicate
such that π(P) = ⟨E, S⟩. Then if at least one of t1, . . ., tn is empty, I makes the
atomic formula Pt1. . .tn true if S = + and false if S = -. But if t1, . . ., tn all
refer, then truth is determined conventionally; that is, I makes Pt1. . .tn true if
⟨t1, . . ., tn⟩∈E, false otherwise.
The proto-interpretations assigned to n-tuples of terms by a given interpreta-
tion are subject to two constraints: (1) all must all agree on the extensions they
assign to predicates; they therefore diﬀer from one another, if at all, only in their
assignments of signs, and (2) to preserve substitutivity of identicals, if individ-
ual constants s and t are assigned the same proto-interpretation, then any two
n-tuples of individual constants diﬀering only in that one has an occurrence of s
where the other has t must be assigned the same proto-interpretation.
Antonelli uses a substitutional interpretation of quantiﬁers, which requires that
for each member d of D, there be an individual constant cd that names it (i.e.,
ρ(cd) = d). Given a model M = ⟨D, ρ, I⟩, a valuation function V assigns truth-
values as follows:
Let I(⟨t1, . . ., tn⟩) = π and π(P) = ⟨E, S⟩. Then if ρ(ti) is undeﬁned for
some i, 1 ≤i ≤n, then V(Pt1. . .tn) = T if S = + and V(Pt1. . .tn) = F
if S = -. But if ρ(ti) is deﬁned for all i, 1 ≤i ≤n, then V(Pt1. . .tn) = T
if ⟨t1, . . ., tn⟩∈E and V(Pt1. . .tn) = F if ⟨t1, . . ., tn⟩/∈E.
V(s = t) = T iﬀeither both ρ(s) and ρ(t) are deﬁned and ρ(s) = ρ(t),
or both ρ(s) and ρ(t) are undeﬁned and I(s) = I(t); = F otherwise.
set theory below. There is also the truth-value semantics of LeBlanc [1971], but since it dispenses
with domains altogether and uses substitutional quantiﬁers, it is neither single-domain nor free
in the sense deﬁned above.

1032
John Nolt
V(E!t) = T iﬀρ(t) is deﬁned; = F otherwise.
V(∼A) = T iﬀV(A) = F; = F otherwise.
V(A & B) = T iﬀV(A) = T and V(B) = T; = F otherwise.
V(∀xA) = T iﬀfor all d ∈D, V(A(cd/x)) = T; = F otherwise.
Axioms (A1)–(A6) and (A7+) are all valid on proto-semantics, and Antonelli of-
fers soundness, completeness, compactness and interpolation theorems.
Proto-
semantics thus delivers a positive free logic while avoiding the ontological proﬂigacy
of outer domains — but at the cost of increased artiﬁce and semantic complexity.
It is subject, moreover, to a diﬃculty that infects all free positive semantics:
when applied, all such semantics force us (whether by interpretation of predicates
over outer domains, by ﬁat or by proto-interpretations) to decide the truth-values
of many referentially deﬁcient atomic formulas more or less arbitrarily.
Is the
statement ‘1/0 = 2/0’, for example, true? How about ‘2/0 > 1/0’ or ‘1/0 > 1’? It
is tempting to answer “no” to all such questions; but, given bivalence, that way lies
negative semantics. Answering “yes” to any of them yields a positive semantics,
but then we face the task of constructing an intelligible and consistent yet varied
set of answers to many such questions. Depending on the application, that may
not be worth the trouble.
6
NEGATIVE SEMANTICS
If it isn’t, we may prefer a negative semantics. Negative semantics answer all such
questions with a simple, appealing and uniform stipulation: all referentially deﬁ-
cient atomic formulas are false. Consequently, in any negative free logic containing
some version of ‘E!’ the following schema is valid:
(A−)
Pt1. . .tn →(E!t1& . . . &E!tn), where P is a primitive n-place predicate.
For completeness’ sake, negative free logics must include (A−) or its equivalent
as an additional axiom or rule.
Since the identity predicate, if taken as primitive, is an instance of P,
s = t →(E!s & E!t)
and
t = t →E!t
are instances of (A−).
The latter formula together with (A2), (A5) and (A7)
implies (A4), so that in a negative free logic with identity (A−) may replace (A4).
Moreover, since the converse formula:
E!t →t = t
follows from (A3) and (A7), negative free logics validate the equivalence:
t = t ↔E!t.

Free Logics
1033
E!t may therefore be deﬁned simply as t = t.
Because they make all referentially deﬁcient atomic formulas false, negative free
logics validate the principle of indiscernibility of nonexistents:
(∼E!s & ∼E!t) →(A →A(t//s)).
(Here, as in (A6), A(t//s) is the result of replacing one or more occurrences of s
in A by t.)
But this principle need not be posited as a separate axiom, for all its instances
follow from (A−).12
A negative single-domain model for a language L is a pair ⟨D, I⟩, consisting of
a possibly empty domain D and a partial interpretation function I such that for
each individual constant t of L either I(t) ∈D or I(t) is undeﬁned, and for every
n-place predicate P of L, I(P) ⊆Dn. Given a model M = ⟨D, I⟩, truth-values
are assigned by a valuation function V, deﬁned as follows:
V(Pt1. . .tn) = T iﬀI(t1), . . ., I(tn) are all deﬁned and ⟨I(t1), . . ., I(tn)⟩∈
I(P); = F otherwise.
V(s = t) = T iﬀI(s) and I(t) are both deﬁned and I(s) = I(t); = F
otherwise.
V(E!t) = T iﬀI(t) is deﬁned; = F otherwise.
V(∼A) = T iﬀV (A) = F; = F otherwise.
V(A & B) = T iﬀV(A) = T and V (B) = T; = F otherwise.
V(∀xA) = T iﬀfor any individual constant t not occurring in A and
all d ∈D, V(t,d)(A(t/x)) = T; = F otherwise.
(Here V(t,d) is the valuation function on the model ⟨D, I∗⟩such that I∗is just like
I except that I∗(t) = d.) The logic deﬁned by (A1)–(A7) and (A−) is sound and
complete with respect to this semantics.
In negative free logics referential deﬁciency guarantees the falsity only of atomic
formulas. Logical truth is thus severed from logical form. For let F be a prim-
itive one-place predicate; then although Ft →E!t is logically true, substitution
instances — ∼Ft →E!t, for example — in which F is replaced by a complex
predicate are contingent.
Tyler Burge has defended (A−) as a “methodological condition on investigations
of predication in natural language,” whose application he describes as follows:
count an expression an atomic [i.e., primitive] predicate in natural
language only if one is prepared to count simple singular sentences
containing it untrue whenever they also contain nondenoting terms.13
12This is true, at least, for negative logics without function symbols. In a negative logic with
function symbols, proof of the indiscernibility of nonexistents also requires the strictness axiom,
discussed in the section on deﬁnedness logics and programming languages below.
13Burge [1974] in Lambert [1991], p. 193.

1034
John Nolt
If, for example, we account the sentence ‘Chrissy loves Santa Claus’ true, then,
assuming Santa does not exist, we must on Burge’s view regard the predicate ‘loves’
as non-primitive.
But if natural languages have any primitive predicates, why
shouldn’t ‘loves’ be among them? It is doubtful, moreover, that the primitive/non-
primitive distinction can successfully be made in natural languages, for it is closely
bound up with the now largely discredited doctrine of logical atomism.
(A−)
cannot, in any case, be merely a methodological condition; for if only those models
are admissible that make all referentially deﬁcient atomic formulas false, then all
instances of (A−) are full-blooded logical truths.
A related anomaly is the dependence of the truth-values of referentially deﬁ-
cient statements upon our choice of primitives. Because negative free logic makes
referentially deﬁcient atomic formulas false, it makes their negations true. Now
consider a negative free logic interpreted over the domain of natural numbers that
takes as primitive a one-place predicate O meaning “is odd” and deﬁnes “is even”
by this schema:
Et =df∼Ot
For any nondenoting term t, Ot is false in this theory; hence Et is true. Take a
predicate meaning ‘is even’ as primitive instead and the truth-values are reversed.
But why should the truth-value of any such statement hinge on our choice of
primitives? Worse, why should our choice of primitives determine whether the
statements of the form ‘If t is even, then t exists’ are logical truths?
If we want reference failure to make atomic statements false but choice of prim-
itives seems too evanescent a matter on which to hang logical truth, we could
make any formula containing an empty term false.
A semantics implementing
this idea — call it a supernegative semantics — would validate no formulas con-
taining singular terms but would yield a logic that is ordinary in other respects.
(Ft ∨∼Ft, for example, would not be valid on a supernegative semantics, though
∀x(Fx ∨∼Fx) would be.) Such a semantics would be reminiscent of Russell’s
logic of names, which contextually analyzes names into deﬁnite descriptions, on
a wide-scope reading of the descriptions. This reading would likewise render all
schemata containing names invalid, since failure of the descriptions’ existence or
uniqueness conditions could always make these schemata false (see the discussion
of Russell’s theory of descriptions below). But no one, so far as I know, has advo-
cated supernegative semantics. Presumably this is because a free logic must not
merely block all inferences that are invalid if our dubious terms turn out not to
refer; it should also maximize preservation of inferences that are valid if they do
refer. Supernegative free logics would preserve too few.
But even ordinary negative free logics preserve too few. They invalidate, for
example, the formula t = t. Since formulas of this form are true when their singular
terms denote and since it is a matter of choice how they come out otherwise, why
not make them true either way? Then if we are reasoning with a dubious term t
that in fact denotes we won’t be blocked from inferring the logical truth t = t.
Moreover, while negative free logic preserves most other logical principles con-
taining singular terms, it falsiﬁes many nonlogical principles that depend on the

Free Logics
1035
semantic interrelations of primitive predicates. In negative free number theory, for
example, all referentially deﬁcient instances of the law of trichotomy:
s = t ∨s < t ∨t < s
are false, assuming that ‘<’ and ‘=’ are primitive. If we won’t tolerate falsiﬁcations
of familiar laws in logic, why tolerate them in number theory? The number theo-
rist’s singular terms (which include, for example, functional expressions for limits
that fail to denote if the limit does not exist) all aim to denote numbers that obey
the law of trichotomy. Why not arrange the semantics so that this law remains
true whether they achieve that aim or not? (We could, for example, stipulate that
all identities between nondenoting terms are true and that s < t is true whenever
s denotes and t does not.) That, however, would make our semantics positive.
At the very least, why not arrange things so that no instance of such desirable
principles as the law of trichotomy is ever false?
7
NONVALENT SEMANTICS
Nonvalent semantics avoid falsifying desirable principles by making all referentially
deﬁcient atomic formulas (except those of the form E!t) truth-valueless. Truth-
value gaps seem appropriate in a single-domain free semantics, for partial truth-
value assignments are a natural result of partial denotation assignments.
But nonvalence sets before us a bewildering multiplicity of semantic choices.
For example:
• When one disjunct is true and the other truth-valueless, should a disjunction
be true or truth-valueless?
• When one disjunct is false and the other truth-valueless, should a disjunction
be false or truth-valueless?
• When A is truth-valueless for each object in the domain, should ∃xA be false
or truth-valueless?
• When A is either false or truth-valueless for each object in the domain,
should ∃xA be false or truth-valueless?
Nonvalent semantics implementing each of these choices in various combinations
have appeared in the literature.14
Of the various nonvalent semantics, one of the simplest and most radical is the
No Input No Output (NINO) semantics advocated by Scott Lehman ([1994] and
[2000]), who attributes the basic idea to Frege.
On a NINO semantics, which
has only one domain, predicates and logical operators represent partial functions
that fail to yield a value if any of the semantic values (“input”) to which they
14For a summary, see Lehman [1994], p. 328.

1036
John Nolt
are applied is not deﬁned. Thus referentially deﬁcient atomic formulas (includ-
ing identity statements) are truth-valueless. (As usual, ‘E!’, if included in the
language, is an exception, since E!t is true if t is empty.) Disjunctions with a
truth-valueless disjunct also lack necessary input and are likewise truth-valueless.
But all quantiﬁed statements are either true or false, even if they contain empty
terms. This is because Lehman regards quantiﬁers as naming functions from par-
tial functions (the designata of open formulas) to truth-values. Since these partial
functions exist even when their output is undeﬁned for all inputs, the functions
represented by quantiﬁers always have input and hence always yield a truth-value
as output.
NINO semantics is akin to the supernegative semantics discussed above, but
rather than making all referentially deﬁcient formulas false, it makes them all
(except for quantiﬁed formulas) truth-valueless.
Thus it preserves more of the
structure of logic, for while on a supernegative semantics such classically valid
expressions as t = t and ∼(Ft & ∼Ft) are false if t is empty, and hence are in
no sense valid, on a NINO semantics they are merely truth-valueless and hence
remain weakly valid — i.e., not false on any model. Moreover, as on a superneg-
ative semantics, the formulas obtained from them by universal generalization are
strongly valid — i.e., true on all models.
NINO semantics makes some classical principles — e.g., ∃xA ∨∼∃xA —
strongly valid, most weakly valid, and some — e.g., ∃x x = t or ∃xA ∨∃x ∼A —
not even weakly valid. Lehman thinks weak validity is all we need and argues for
a logic based on weak rather than strong validity.
But disconcerting consequences follow. For one thing, if logical truth is weak
rather than strong validity, logically true statements need not even be true.15
Furthermore, a NINO logic based on weak validity is in some respects too strong.
The schema:
A(x/t) →∃xA,
for example, which free logicians reject, is weakly valid on NINO semantics.
If the NINO strategy thus seems unpromising, we may drop it, retain strong
validity as the logical standard, and design a nonvalent semantics to make as
many desirable laws as possible strongly valid. We can, for example, make all self-
identities true and account disjunctions true whenever a disjunct is true. But the
resulting logic will still be discouragingly weak, failing to validate such standard
principles as ∼(Ft & ∼Ft).
The problem is that truth-value gaps at the atomic level continue, despite such
semantic tinkering, to be transmitted to more complex formulas in ways that in-
validate desirable logical laws. To create stronger nonvalent logics (assuming a
strong conception of validity), we must more eﬀectively limit this upward trans-
mission of truth-valuelessness, enabling logical laws to remain true even when their
components lack truth-value.
15Lehman is aware of this consequence and accepts it. See Lehman [2001], p. 153.

Free Logics
1037
8
SUPERVALUATIONS
Supervalutions do just that.
The idea is that when reference failure deprives
atomic formulas of truth-value, complex formulas built from them should count as
true (or false) if all ways of “ﬁlling in” the missing truth-values agree in making
them so.
A supervaluation begins with a single-domain model M in which atomic formulas
have truth-value if and only if they are not referentially deﬁcient.
In Bas van
Fraassen’s original [1966] conception, we then consider various assignments of one
of the values T or F to each referentially deﬁcient atomic formula.
In order
to validate the laws of identity and quantiﬁcation, these assignments must meet
certain formal constraints, the details of which need not concern us here.16 Call
the original model M augmented by such a truth-value assignment a bivalent M-
model. Then, for example, if the term t is empty in M, the atomic formula Ft
will be truth-valueless on M but either true or false on each bivalent M-model;
hence the complex formula Ft ∨∼Ft will be true on all bivalent M-models.
Now the supervaluation of M is a partial assignment of truth-values to formulas
that makes a formula true if all bivalent M-models make it true, false if they all
make it false, and truth-valueless if they fail to agree. On the supervaluation of M,
for example, Ft is truth-valueless but Ft ∨∼Ft is true. A formula is logically true
on a supervaluational semantics if and only if it is true on all supervaluations. In
this way, supervaluations block the transmission of truth-value gaps from atomic
formulas to logical laws that contain them.
They do this so well, in fact, that (depending on the constraints we place on
the truth-value assignments augmenting M and how empty domains are handled)
they may validate all classical theorems.17 Van Fraassen shows, however, how to
construct bivalent M-models that validate only the theorems of positive free logic
(those implied by (A1)–(A6) and (A7+)).
Van Fraassen’s method of assigning truth values by ﬁat strikes some as con-
trived, but Ermanno Bencivenga has developed a more natural alternative.18 Like
van Fraassen, Bencivenga begins with single domain model M that is nonvalent,
except it makes all identities between denoting and nondenoting terms false, rather
than undeﬁned. He then assigns truth-values to complex referentially deﬁcient for-
mulas depending upon what their truth-values would be if their singular terms all
denoted. More speciﬁcally, he considers all complete supermodels of M (i.e., bi-
valent single-domain models whose domain is a superset S of the domain of M,
on which all singular terms denote members and each n-place predicate is true or
false of each n-tuple of memberss of S. Freedom is guaranteed by allowing the
quantiﬁers of these supermodels to range only over the original domain of M. The
supervaluation of M is then deﬁned as before: a formula is true on this supervalu-
ation if all complete supermodels of M make it true, false if they all make it false,
16For an account of the details, see Bencivenga [1985] pp. 402-3.
17See Bencivenga [1985] for details.
18Bencivenga [1981] and [1985]. See also Morscher and Simons [2001], pp. 14–18.

1038
John Nolt
and undeﬁned if they fail to agree. This semantics, like van Fraassen’s validates
all the theorems of positive free logic.19
There is, however, much not to like about supervaluations, no matter how they
are constructed. For one thing, they embody a strange conception — Bencivenga
[1985] calls it the “counterfactual theory” — of truth. Consider, for example, the
sentence ‘This car is a Ford’ in a context in which no car is indicated. Since ‘this
car’ is empty in that context, it is reasonable to regard the sentence as truth-
valueless. But then in the same context the disjunction ‘Either this car is a Ford
or this car is not a Ford’ seems equally truth-valueless.
The notion that this
disjunction is true because it would be true if ‘this car’ denoted (Bencivenga) —
or if ‘this car is a Ford’ had truth-value (van Fraassen) — is dubious at best.
Indeed, ‘the counterfactual theory of truth’ is, arguably, an oxymoron.
There are also logical diﬃculties. For one thing, substitutivity salva veritate
fails even at the propositional level under supervaluations.
Where A is truth-
valueless, A →A is logically true on a supervaluational semantics.
But if we
substitute a new truth-valueless formula atomic B for the second occurrence of A,
the result, A →B, is not true but truth-valueless. (This sort of failure is peculiar to
supervaluations; it can be avoided, for example, by handling referential deﬁciency
via a third truth-value in a truth-functional semantics.)
Supervaluational consequence, moreover, is too strong.
Though the formula
Ft →E!t is not logically valid in either van Fraassen’s or Bencivenga’s semantics,
both semantics make E!t true on every supervaluation on which Ft is true, thus
validating the inference from Ft to E!t. Therefore, although positive free logic is
sound and weakly complete on these semantics, it is not strongly complete.20 In
fact, by deﬁning a translation between supervaluational and second-order formulas,
Peter Woodruﬀ[1984] has shown that supervaluational predicate logics are in eﬀect
second order. It follows, then, not only that compactness fails for supervaluational
semantics but also that supervaluational consequence is not axiomatizable by any
extension of free logic.21
9
WHICH SEMANTICS?
Though nonvalent and supervaluational semantics yield disﬁgured logics, this is
not suﬃcient reason to dismiss them. For some applications, nothing elegant will
do. It does, however, establish a presumption in favor of either positive or negative
semantics.
But positive semantics, as I noted above, can be unwieldy in application, forcing
us to decide case by case the truth-values of referentially deﬁcient atomic formulas.
19Morscher & Simons [2001], pp. 17–18.
20A logic is strongly complete if for any ﬁnite set S of premises and conclusion C, if C is
semantically implied by S, then C is deducible from S in the logic; it is weakly complete if every
semantically valid formula is a theorem of the logic.
21Compactness holds if for any set S of formulas, S semantically implies formula C if and only
if some ﬁnite subset of S semantically implies C.

Free Logics
1039
Many of these cases may be “don’t cares” that we would rather ignore — and can
ignore in negative or nonvalent semantics. One way to retain the best features of
both positive and negative logics is to adopt the “default rule” that referentially
deﬁcient atomic formulas are false unless otherwise speciﬁed. Then, though the
resulting semantics is positive, allowing us to make referentially deﬁcient formulas
true whenever we please, there is, as in negative semantics, no need to bother about
the “don’t cares.” Moreover, because it is positive, this semantics also avoids both
the entanglement of logical truth with primitiveness that mars negative logics and
their nonstandard identity theory.
But no semantics is best for all applications. Positive semantics oﬀer the greatest
ﬂexibility and so tend to excel in applications close to natural language. But for
more formal tasks, the simplifying regimentation imposed by negative or nonvalent
logics may ﬁll the bill. And where unavoidable truth-value gaps eviscerate logic,
supervaluations can ameliorate the damage.
10
DEFINITE DESCRIPTIONS
Free logic has been most extensively and instructively applied in the theory of def-
inite descriptions. A deﬁnite description is, as Lord Russell intones, “a phrase of
the form the-so-and-so in the singular” — e.g.: ‘the smallest positive integer’, ‘the
current American President’, ‘the element with atomic number 23’. To formalize
deﬁnite descriptions, Russell borrowed Peano’s variable-binding description oper-
ator ‘ι’ (usually written inverted). When preﬁxed to a variable x and a formula A
in which x is free, ‘ι’ forms a singular term, ιxA, meaning “the x such that A.” In
Principia, deﬁnite descriptions are introduced for most contexts by the deﬁnition:
B(ιxA/y) =df ∃y(∀x(A ↔x = y) & B), x free in A, y free in B.22
That is, the A is B iﬀthere is one and only one A and it is B. This deﬁnition
produces scope ambiguities unless augmented by some device to mark the scope
of the description. But its chief drawback from the point of view of free logic is
that it builds an existence claim into every use of a deﬁnite description. That is,
it implies:
B(ιxA/y) →∃xA.
It is, however, often useful to reason with deﬁnite descriptions, as with proper
names, even when we are not sure that they describe one and only one existing
thing. Consider, for example, ‘the person I will marry’.
Russell introduces applications of the predicate ‘E!’ to deﬁnite descriptions by
contextual deﬁnition, as follows:
E!ιxA =df ∃!xA, x free in A.
22This is proposition 14.01 of Principia.

1040
John Nolt
The uniqueness quantiﬁer ‘∃!’ is in turn deﬁned as:
∃!xA =df ∃y∀x(A ↔x = y), x free in A,
a standard abbreviation that I shall employ again below.
In free description theories, by contrast, ‘E!’ is often a primitive predicate and
deﬁnite descriptions are genuine singular terms; neither is to be analyzed away by
contextual deﬁnition. Set abstraction terms, for example, or such mathematical
expressions as:
lim
x→∞f(x)
may thus be singular terms, not contextually deﬁned abbreviations, and yet they
may still be empty. This is an advantage, for contextual deﬁnition obscures logical
form.
Semantically, singular terms formed by the operator ‘ι’ function as follows: for
any object d in the quantiﬁcational domain, ιxA denotes d iﬀd is the one and
only object in the domain that satisﬁes A.
Thus ιxA is empty if there exists
more than one object satisfying A, or none. The denotation conditions for ιxA
can be expressed in a free object language as identity conditions, by means of the
following schema:
(LL)
∀y(y = ιxA ↔∀x(A ↔x = y)), x free in A,
which is known in honor of its presumed discoverer, Karel Lambert, as Lambert’s
Law.23 All theories of deﬁnite descriptions agree on its validity.
It might seem that (LL) could be simpliﬁed and at the same time generalized
to:
t = ιxA ↔∀x(A ↔x = t),
which aims to give the conditions under which an identity between any term
(empty or not) and a deﬁnite description is true. But together with (A7+), which
is valid in positive logics, this schema implies that there exists no more than one
object. For from the instance:
ιx(x = x) = ιx(x = x) ↔∀x(x = x ↔x = ιx(x = x)),
it follows by (A7+) that:
∀x(x = x ↔x = ιx(x = x)),
and hence that:
∀xx = ιx(x = x).24
23Quine [1997], p. 104, says that Peano used this principle an axiom, but gives no reference.
If Quine is right, then Peano was the discoverer and the law should bear his name. I have been
unable to ﬁnd any mention of such an axiom, however, in those of Peano’s works that are readily
available to me.

Free Logics
1041
Nor can (LL) be replaced by:
t = ιxA ↔∀x((A →x = t) & A(t/x)),
which Jaakko Hintikka [1959] once proposed as a principle of free description the-
ory. For, putting ιxA for t, this schema together with (A7+) implies unrestrictedly
that the A is an A — in symbols:
A(ιxA/x).
While superﬁcially plausible, this schema is inconsistent, for when we substitute
(Fx & ∼Fx) for A it immediately yields the contradiction:
Fιx(Fx & ∼Fx) & ∼Fιx(Fx & ∼Fx),
which Lambert calls the description paradox.
Adding (LL) to the free logic deﬁned by (A1)–(A7) gives the minimal free
deﬁnite description theory MFD. Some of its most important theorems are:
E!ιxA →A(ιxA/x)
E!ιxA ↔∃!xA
∀x(A ↔B) →∀y(y = ιxA ↔y = ιxB)
(E!ιxA & B(ιxA/x)) ↔∃y∀x((A ↔x = y) & B(y/x)),
where x is free in both A and B.
But given free logic’s restriction on speciﬁcation, the variable y in (LL) is in-
stantiable only by nonempty singular terms. MFD therefore fails to answer the
question, “When are identity statements between empty terms true?” There are
many possible answers, limited by the extremes “always” and “never.” “Never”
yields a negative free theory of deﬁnite descriptions, characterized by the theorems:
(∼E!s ∨∼E!t) →
∼s = t
t = ιxA →A(t/x)
and the Russell equivalence:
B(ιxA/y) ↔∃y(∀x(A ↔x = y) & B),
where B is restricted to atomic formulas — which restriction would in Russell’s
theory give description operators smallest possible scope. This negative free de-
scription theory may be axiomatized by adding (LL) to the negative free logic
24Nor is this schema appropriate for negative free logics, which have the weaker (A7) in place
of (A7+). For note that for any term t, the instance:
t = ιx(x = t) ↔∀x(x = t ↔x = t)
implies
t = ιx(x = t),
which in negative free logics implies E!t. This makes the logic classical.

1042
John Nolt
characterized by (A1)–(A3), (A5)–(A7) and (A-). It is, in fact, the closest free
cousin of Russell’s theory of deﬁnite descriptions, though its singular terms lack
existential import in nonatomic contexts and are not to be analyzed away by
contextual deﬁnition.25
Allowing identity statements between empty terms sometimes to be true yields
one or another positive theory — the simplest being the one on which they are
always true. This theory, which Lambert has dubbed FD2, can be axiomatized by
adding:
(FD2) (∼E!s & ∼E!t) →s = t.
to (LL) and (A1)–(A7). Important theorems of FD2 include:
(∼E!t & A(t/x)) →A(ιxA/x)
∀x(A ↔x = t) →A(ιxA/x)
ιx(x = t) = t
∼∃!xA →ιxA = ιx(x ̸= x),
where x is free in A and B.
In making all nonexistents identical, FD2, like negative free logic, makes them
all indiscernible. Moreover, it approximates Frege’s plan of choosing some arbi-
trary object to serve as the conventional denotation for all empty singular terms.
(But since Frege’s logic was not free, his implementation of the idea involved a
problematic identiﬁcation of nonexistent objects with an existent one; FD2 im-
proves on Frege’s idea in this respect.) FD2 can be modeled in a dual-domain
semantics with only one object in the outer domain.
Like negative free description theories, FD2 precludes there being two empty
descriptions ιxA and ιxB such that FιxA and FιxB diﬀer in truth-value. For
applications close to natural language however, we may want them to diﬀer. The
following statement, for instance, is true:
Le Verrier sought the planet causing perturbations in Mercury’s orbit,
while this one:
Le Verrier sought the fountain of youth
is false — though each apparently applies the same predicate phrase ‘Le Verrier
sought’ to an empty description.26
Thus while FD2 is handy for use in regimented theories that employ descrip-
tions, more natural applications may require a positive free description theory
on which identities between empty terms may be false. But then exactly which
identities between empty terms are to be false and which true? Answers to this
question are, as we have just seen, closely bound up with answers to another: how
do nonlogical predicates interact with empty deﬁnite descriptions?
25See Burge [1974] for additional details. See also Lambert [2001h].
26See note 2.

Free Logics
1043
Syntactic investigations of these questions have revealed a hierarchy of positive
free description theories between the minimal theory, MFD, which imposes no
restraints on the identity conditions of nonexistents and the maximal positive one,
FD2, which makes all nonexistents identical. The theorems of FD2 listed above,
for example, are pairwise nonequivalent, and each follows in MFD from the axiom
(FD2). Hence each, if added to MFD, deﬁnes a logic stronger than MFD but
weaker than FD2. Each therefore gives a partial answer to one or both of the
questions just mentioned. Many other such theories are known, but the structure
of the hierarchy is not fully known.27
These syntactic observations, however, provide little insight into the diﬀering
options as regards predication and identiﬁcation. For that we must turn to se-
mantics.
One plausible policy for making identity statements between empty terms some-
times true and sometimes false is to make ιxA = ιxB true (whether ιxA and ιxB
exist or not) if A and B have are coextensive (that is, if for all members d of the
domain of quantiﬁcation, d satisﬁes A if and only if d satisﬁes B). This may be
formalized by adding the axiom:
∀x(A ↔B) →ιxA = ιxB
to MFD. Lambert [2001a] calls the resulting system FDExt. Like FD2, FDExt
implies:
∼∃xA →ιxA = ιx(x ̸= x),
but unlike FD2, it does not imply:
∼∃!xA →ιxA = ιx(x ̸= x).
Richard Grandy [1972] has proposed a related but weaker theory on which ιxA =
ιxB is true if A and B are co-comprehensive (that is, if for all members d of the
union of the inner and outer domains, d satisﬁes A if and only if d satisﬁes B). This
is most perspicuously expressed, given a dual-domain semantics, by introducing
a universal quantiﬁer that ranges over the union of the two domains. Using the
generalized product symbol ‘Π’ for this quantiﬁer, we may add the axiom:
Πx(A ↔B) →ιxA = ιxB
to MFD to obtain Grandy’s theory, which Lambert [2001a] calls FDComp. FD-
Comp can also be formulated without outer domain quantiﬁers by adopting this
rule:
Given a proof of A(t/x) ↔B(t/x) that uses no assumption containing
t, infer ιxA = ιxB.
Both FDExt and FDComp lie within the hierarchy of systems that are intermediate
in strength between MFD and FD2. But they are only two of many. The variety
of positive free description theories seems inexhaustible.
27See Lambert [2001a] and [2003c] for further discussion.

1044
John Nolt
11
SET THEORY
Free logic sometimes permits a crisp separation of those axioms of a theory that
deal with the “essence” of their objects from those that deal with their existence.
Nowhere is this more evident than in free set theory.
Sets are deﬁned by their membership conditions, expressed as an open formula
in one free variable. Thus where only x is free in A, the set deﬁned by A is denoted
by the set abstract notation {x | A}. In languages containing both the deﬁnite
description operator ‘ι’ and the membership predicate ‘∈’, set abstract notation
can be deﬁned as follows:
{x | A} =df ιz∀x(x ∈z ↔A).
This deﬁnition elegantly links free set theory with free description theory, for given
(LL) it implies:
E!{x | A} →∀y(y ∈{x | A} ↔A(y/x)),
a restriction of the “na¨ıve” comprehension schema:
(Comp) ∀y(y ∈{x | A} ↔A(y/x))
to existing sets.
In classical logic, (Comp) is inconsistent, since by speciﬁcation the instance
∀y(y ∈{x | x /∈x} ↔y /∈y)
yields Russell’s paradox:
{x | x /∈x} ∈{x | x /∈x} ↔{x | x /∈x} /∈{x | x /∈x}.
In free logic, however, the speciﬁcation is invalid without the additional assumption
E!{x | x /∈x},
and this is not available. Thus in free logics (Comp) does not generate antinomies,
but instead merely yields nonexistence proofs for paradoxical sets.
Unrestricted (Comp) can be obtained in positive free deﬁnite description theo-
ries by adding the axiom:
∼E!{x | A} →∀y(y ∈{x | A} ↔A(y/x))
to MFD. But this axiom, which gives membership conditions for nonexistent sets,
is generally not consistent with those positive free description theories stronger
than MFD that impose their own diﬀerently motivated constraints on satisfaction
of predicates by nonexistent objects. FD2 is an obvious case in point.
It is not necessary to couch free set theory within free description theory, how-
ever, and for the remainder of this section I will set free description theory aside,
treating the set abstraction operator as primitive.
Together, (Comp) and the extensionality schema:

Free Logics
1045
(Ext)
∀z(z ∈s ↔z ∈t) →s = t
characterize the “essence” of all sets, whether existent or not — (Comp) giving
their membership conditions and (Ext) their identity conditions. These two princi-
ples, neither of which implies the existence of anything, therefore jointly constitute
the core of positive free set theories — which diﬀer from one another only in regard
to which sets they assume to exist or not to exist. Such a neat bifurcation between
axioms of essence and axioms of existence is impossible in classical logic, where
comprehension principles always have existential implications.28
The notion of a nonexistent set is not as odd as it may at ﬁrst appear, for the
existent/nonexistent dichotomy of free set theory is closely akin to the real/virtual
distinction of Quine’s virtual theory of classes. But while Quine [1963] introduces
set abstraction notation by contextual deﬁnition and so makes it eliminable —
roughly, t ∈{x | A} reduces to A(t/x) — free logics treat set abstracts as genuine
singular terms and provide them with an appropriate semantics. Dana Scott [1967]
has developed a free positive single-domain model for the virtual theory of classes
on which, to a ﬁrst approximation, the objects of the domain are interpreted as
existing sets, and classes of them that are subclasses but not members of the
domain are interpreted as nonexisting virtual classes. Scott’s semantics validates
(Ext) and (Comp); and because on Quine’s analysis members of virtual sets must
exist, even when the sets do not, it also validates the axiom:
s ∈t →E!s
These three axioms form the core of Quine’s theory, which may then be augmented
with various axioms of existence (pair set, power set, etc.) or nonexistence (e.g.,
foundation) to yield diverse set theories.
But not all free set theories validate this Quinean principle. Bencivenga ([1976]
and [1977]) has developed a theory according to which nonexistent sets can be
members of sets, both existing and nonexisting. Like Scott’s it begins with the
“essential” axioms (Ext) and (Comp). Combining these with free versions of stan-
dard set-theoretic axioms Bencivenga ushers us into a strange new set-theoretic
universe. Here we discover, for example, that each nonexisting set has an existing
singleton — though by (Ext) all these singletons are identical to the null set. This
prompts Bencivenga to introduce the additional axiom:
t ∈{t},
which gives the null set nonexistent members. Using a version of the foundation
axiom (which prohibits self-membership among existing sets) Bencivenga is fur-
ther able to show that the set of all existing sets does not exist. But it follows
from (COMP) and (EXT) that the set of all nonexisting sets does exist and, like
28One near exception to this is the comprehension principle of Quine’s virtual theory of classes
— a close relative of free set theory, as will be explained below. But because Quine’s logic is not
inclusive, even his comprehension principle has existential implications. See Quine [1997].

1046
John Nolt
singletons of nonexisting sets, is just the null set. Bencivenga suggests that the ex-
isting/nonexisting dichotomy of free set theory can do the same job as the set/class
distinction of such standard set theories as NGB (von Neumann-G¨odel-Bernays)
and that the latter may simply be the former misconstrued. But free set theory
has so far seen little use or development.
12
DEFINEDNESS LOGICS AND PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES
For mathematical applications involving partial functions (functions whose value
may be undeﬁned for some arguments), especially in computability theory, free
logic may take the form of a deﬁnedness logic.29 In deﬁnedness logics, function
symbols, such as the division sign, may represent algorithms, computer programs,
terms of a combinatorial logic, partial recursive functions, or the like. Because they
deal not with the existence or nonexistence of mathematical objects, but with the
deﬁnedness of operations given various inputs, deﬁnedness logics usually employ
the postﬁx deﬁnedness predicate ‘↓’ instead of the existence predicate ‘E!’. For a
given singular term t, t ↓is true if and only if the operation speciﬁed by t yields
some deﬁnite value.
What counts as a deﬁnite value diﬀers for diﬀering applications. It may, but
need not, be required that a computation halts. Thus, for example, on the domain
of integers, we may count (x/y) ↓as true if and only if y ̸= 0, though for some
values of integers x and y — 1 and 3, for example — the computation of the
resulting decimal, though well-deﬁned, never halts.
Though free, deﬁnedness logics tend not to be inclusive, since computability
theory has little use for the empty domain. Moreover, since it is diﬃcult to think
of uncompleted or undeﬁned computations as yielding objects — even nonexis-
tent ones — deﬁnedness logics are often of the single-domain variety. These are
typically negative.
Yet for application to deﬁnedness logics, negative semantics have an important
disadvantage: they rule out non-strict functions. (A function is non-strict if it may
yield a deﬁnite value even when its input includes undeﬁned quantities, strict oth-
erwise.) Non-strict operators are widely used in programming languages. Lambert
notes, for example, that the ternary operator ‘if V then x else y’ of the program-
ming language ML, which takes a truth-value and two numbers into a number,
represents a non-strict function, since it takes the value x when V = true, even if
y is undeﬁned.30 Such operators demand a positive semantics. Note, for example,
that from the singular term ‘if true then 1 else (1/0)’, which denotes the number
1, we may construct the atomic formula:
if true then 1 else (1/0) = 1,
which is true even though it contains the empty term 1/0. Yet referentially deﬁ-
cient atomic formulas can be true only in a positive logic.
29Feﬀerman [1995] provides an excellent account of deﬁnedness logics.
30Lambert [2001b], pp. 262–3.

Free Logics
1047
When function symbols are included in the language of a negative free logic, it
is necessary (if the logic is to remain negative) to add the axiom schema:
f(t1, . . ., tn)↓→(t1 ↓&. . .& tn ↓),
which asserts that f is strict.31
Non-strict functions can readily be handled by dual-domain logics. But Lam-
bert suggests that a positive single domain semantics such as the proto-semantics
of Antonelli (discussed above) may be preferable, since it avoids introducing mys-
terious entities whose eﬀect is to make partial or nonstrict functions strict and
total.
Yet there is no mystery in using dual-domain semantics to represent error han-
dling. When an undeﬁned term such as ‘1/0’ is encountered in the running of
a computer program, the program typically returns an error message. From a
semantic viewpoint, these undeﬁned terms may be regarded as denoting error ob-
jects, which might, for example, be various error messages. Collectively, these error
objects constitute an outer domain, but one that is metaphysically innocuous.32
13
MODAL AND TENSE LOGICS
Whereas for many applications the empty terms of free logic have no referent at all,
in quantiﬁed modal and tense logics they typically do refer, but their referents do
not exist in all possible worlds or at all times. The name ‘Aristotle’, for example,
certainly has a referent, but not in possible worlds in which Aristotle was never
conceived, nor in the actual world at times before Aristotle’s conception or after
his death. Thus, taking ‘Aristotle’ as a, the formula
∼∃x x = a
is true in some possible worlds and in the actual world at some times — including
the present. But it can be true at all only in a free logic. Hence quantiﬁed modal
or tense logics are generally free logics.
In modal and tense logics, each world or time has its own domain of objects
— the objects that exist in that world or at that time. Since worlds or times at
which nothing exists are rarely worth considering, free modal and tense logics are
generally noninclusive.
The problem of predication for nonexistents, always an issue for free logics, is
especially acute in modal and tense logics. Consider, for example, the statement
made at this moment by the present-tense sentence “Aristotle is Greek.” Three
mutually exclusive conventions seem plausible:
31This axiom is not a special case of (A−), as Beeson [1985] incorrectly asserts.
32For a detailed account of applications of free logic to program speciﬁcation and veriﬁcation,
see Gumb [2001]. Gumb and Lambert [1991] and [1996] are also helpful.

1048
John Nolt
This statement is true (Aristotle, though he no longer exists, still sat-
isﬁes the predicate ‘is Greek’),
All such statements are false, because the singular term ‘Aristotle’ has
no currently existing referent, and
All such statements are truth-valueless, for the same reason.
These conventions yield, respectively, positive, negative and nonvalent free logics.
Many applications seem to require a positive semantics. Consider, for example,
the following present-tense statements, all of which are apparently atomic in form
and true:
Aristotle is famous.
‘Aristotle’ refers to Aristotle (where ‘Aristotle’ is The Philosopher’s
name in contemporary English).
Aristotle is dead.
In a positive tense logic, however, we must — unless we are willing to abandon
the Tarskian analysis of truth in terms of satisfaction — assign to a one-place
predicate at a given time an extension that need not be a subset of the domain
of that time. (For example, we must include Aristotle in the current extension
of the predicate ‘is famous’, even though Aristotle does not now exist.) Thus we
may distinguish for each time an inner domain of objects existing at that time
and an outer domain containing objects that may satisfy predicates at that time
even though they do not then exist. As with tenses, so with alethic modalities:
one-place predicates may have extensions at a world that are not subsets of that
world’s domain. Hence positive free modal and tense logics tend to employ what
is in eﬀect a dual-domain semantics.
A bivalent Kripke model M for free positive modal or tense logic speciﬁes a set
W of objects representing worlds or times.33 Each such world or time w has its own
domain Dw, the set of things that exist at that world or time, and there is a two-
place interpretation function I that assigns denotations to names and extensions to
predicates at worlds. The worlds or times are ordered by an accessibility relation
R, which expresses relative possibility or temporal succession. Various conditions
on R, correspond to various modal logics. Truth is indexed to worlds and/or times,
and quantiﬁers range at a world or time only over that world’s or time’s domain.
Valuation clauses for positive free modal logic (taking the necessity operator ‘□’
as primitive) generally look something like this:34
33For a more detailed account of Kripke semantics, see Nolt [1997], chs. 12-13.
34Clauses for tense logic are essentially the same, except for the tense operators, whose function
need not concern us here. If alethic and tense operators are mixed, truth is indexed both to worlds
and to times. See Nolt [1997], pp. 365–80, for details.

Free Logics
1049
V(Pt1. . .tn, w) = T iﬀ⟨I(t1, w), . . ., I(tn, w)⟩∈I(P, w); = F otherwise.
V(s = t, w) = T iﬀI(s, w) = I(t, w); = F otherwise.
V(E!t, w) = T iﬀI(t, w) ∈Dw; = F otherwise.
V(∼A, w) = T iﬀV(A, w) = F; = F otherwise.
V(A & B, w) = T iﬀV(A, w) = T and V(B, w) = T; = F otherwise.
V(□A, w) = T iﬀfor all u such that wRuV(A, u) = T; = F otherwise.
V(∀xC, w) = T iﬀfor all d ∈Dw, V(t,d)(C(t/x), w) = T; = F otherwise.
(With regard to the last clause, C is presumed not to contain t and V(t,d) is the
valuation on the model M∗, which is just like M except that its interpretation
function I∗is such that for all w ∈W, I∗(t, w) = d.35)
In the least restrictive (and hence most widely applicable) versions of Kripke
semantics, domains may vary in size and may, but need not, have common mem-
bers. Membership of the same object in the domain of more than one world or time
models transworld identity or identity over time. Singular terms that are assigned
the same object at every world are called rigid designators. Rigid designators
(‘Aristotle’ may be an example) may denote objects not contained in the domains
of some times (e.g., the present) or worlds (e.g., worlds in which Aristotle’s parents
never met). Any logic that combines such rigid designators with quantiﬁers over
those domains must therefore be free.
But nonrigid designators (singular terms with world-relative denotation) de-
mand free logics, too, if there are times or worlds at which they fail to denote.
Deﬁnite descriptions (understood attributively) provide ready examples.
‘The
President of the United States’, for instance, is a temporally nonrigid designator
that denotes George W. Bush in 2004, Abe Lincoln in 1864, and nothing at times
prior to the inauguration of George Washington. Any tense logic that quantiﬁes
over the domains of pre-Washington times and treats this description as a genuine
singular term must be free. Indeed, short of rejecting objectual quantiﬁcation over
the domains of worlds or times altogether, the only way to make quantiﬁed modal
or tense logics with singular terms unfree is to impose the exorbitant requirement
that each term (rigid or not) have a referent within the domain of each time or
world. Freedom is, in general, the better option.
Positive free modal logics with rigid designators may be obtained simply by
adding appropriate modal axioms and rules to the standard positive free logic
deﬁned by (A1)–(A6) and (A7+). Such logics are, however, too strong for use
with nonrigid singular terms. For from □t = t, which is a theorem of positive free
modal logics, and the assumption E!t, we obtain ∃x□x = t. Hence:
E!t →∃x□x = t
35There are other ways of interpreting quantiﬁers, but this one, which treats quantiﬁcational
variables as rigidly designating at w members of Dw, is perhaps the simplest and most generally
useful.

1050
John Nolt
is a theorem of positive free modal logic. But this formula is valid only where t
is rigid. It follows that the quantiﬁer rules must be weakened, and perhaps other
adjustments made, in positive modal logics that allow nonrigid designators.36
For negative or nonvalent free modal or tense logics, predicates are interpreted
at a world or time only over the domain of that world or time, but singular terms
may still denote objects that at a given world or time do not exist. The resulting
semantics is therefore not single-domain (since singular terms may have referents
outside a world’s or time’s quantiﬁcational domain), but neither is it typically
dual-domain, for it does not permit objects outside that domain of quantiﬁcation
to satisfy predicates at that world or time.
Such negative and nonvalent logics thus separate two roles that in a non-modal
dual-domain semantics are both played by the outer domain: being a reservoir
of referents for empty terms and bounding the extensions of predicates. These
two roles may be separated in positive logics as well. For there are at least three
kinds of structures that might constitute an outer domain on a Kripkean modal
semantics, and each of these might play either role:
(i)
The outer domain might, like the inner, be world-relative, consisting for a
given world w of the union of the domains of all the worlds accessible from
w; hence it would include all objects possible relative to w.
(ii) The outer domain might be the same for all worlds, consisting of the union
of domains of all the worlds. Such a domain would include all objects that
are possible relative to any world
(iii) The outer domain might be a proper superset of the union of domains of all
the worlds — and hence include even impossible objects.
It is pointless to make the domain of predicate extensions wider than both the
domain of referents and the domain of quantiﬁcation (since in that case the extra
“width” of the predicate extensions has no eﬀect on truth), but any other combina-
tion is potentially useful. Thus we might, for example, draw predicate extensions
at w only from within the union of the domains of worlds accessible from w but
allow singular terms to denote “impossible” objects that exist in the domain of
no world. If t were to denote one of these impossibilia, then, assuming bivalence,
any atomic formula containing t would have to be false at every world. Such a
semantics would validate the principle:
Ft1. . .tn →(♦E!t1 & . . . & ♦E!tn), where F is primitive,
a modal analog of (A−).
Restricting the referents of rigidly designating singular terms to the sort of outer
domain deﬁned in convention (i) would raise the issue of which outer domain we
were talking about — since our language applies to all worlds, and under this
convention each world has its own outer domain. This question could be answered
36See Garson [1991], pp. 120-1 for an account of some of the options.

Free Logics
1051
in a Kripkean semantics by designating a particular world as actual, for then the
actual world’s outer domain can be regarded as the outer domain for purposes
of referring. (With a designated actual world we also have a non-world-relative
concept of truth — namely, truth in the actual world, and validity is deﬁned as
truth at the actual world in all models.) Such a semantics requires singular terms
to denote objects that are actually possible and hence validates the axiom ♦E!t.
But unless all worlds are assumed accessible from the actual world, it has the
disadvantage of permitting quantiﬁcation in worlds inaccessible from the actual
world over things that cannot be named. Still, convention (i) has applications, as
we will see in the next section.
If we deﬁne the domain of referents using convention (ii), then there is only one
such outer domain (whether we specify an actual world or not), and it is the same
for all worlds. This domain contains any object that exists in any possible world.
If we require the accessibility relation to be universal (so that the logic is S5) —
then, once again, the schema ♦E!t is valid for every term t.
Finally, if we deﬁne the domain of referents by convention (iii), ♦E!t will be
invalid, regardless of how we restrict accessibility. Thus by mixing and matching
diﬀerent kinds of outer domain we can produce various logics. More variety can
be added if we consider truth value gaps and supervaluations, quantiﬁcation over
individual concepts, and the like — but enough is enough.37
14
INTUITIONISTIC LOGICS
In intuitionistic mathematics an object is deemed to exist only if it is known to
be constructible by some deﬁnite process. Yet the standard intuitionistic logic,
the Heyting predicate calculus (HPC), validates ∃x x = t for every singular term
t. The proper applicability of HPC is therefore restricted to statements whose
singular terms all denote objects that are known to be constructible.
Yet, remarkably, the Kripke semantics originally developed for HPC, on which
HPC has repeatedly been “proved” sound and complete, actually renders HPC
unsound, for it provides counterexamples to the classical quantiﬁer rules and val-
idates instead a free intuitionistic predicate logic.38 The errors in several of the
published soundness proofs for HPC arise from a failure of the proﬀered versions of
Kripke semantics to guarantee that singular terms always denote objects that are
known to be constructible. To see why, we must take a glance at Kripke semantics
for intuitionistic logic.
37For treatment of these topics, see Garson [1991]. Other useful sources include: Cocchiarella
[1991], Schweitzer [2001] and Simons [2001]. Barba [1989] provides a supervaluational semantics
for modal free logic.
38See Posy [1982], p. 52 and endnotes 4 and 6, and Leblanc and Gumb [1983], footnote 31, p.
194. Posy and Leblanc and Gumb observe that the soundness proofs of both Kripke [1963] and
Thomason [1968] err in this way, though Posy mistakenly gives 1965 as the date of Thomason’s
article. The same error occurs in Troelstra and van Dalen [1988].

1052
John Nolt
Kripke semantics is bivalent, the values T and F expressing (for mathemati-
cal applications, at least) the ideas “proved” and “unproved,” respectively. As
in Kripke’s semantics for modal logic, each Kripke model contains a set W of
“worlds,” which in intuitionistic models are best understood as states of math-
ematical knowledge. Each world has its associated domain Dw (intuitively, the
set of all objects known to be constructible at w).
A two-place interpretation
function I assigns denotations to singular terms and extensions to predicates at
worlds. (Predicate extensions may be drawn just from the domain of the world it-
self or, for positive free logics, from some wider “outer” domain; see the discussion
of outer domains in the previous section.) I then induces, as usual, a valuation
assignment V from formulas and worlds to truth-values. The worlds are ordered
by a reﬂexive, transitive accessibility relation R.39 Intuitively, wRu signiﬁes that
u is epistemically possible relative to w — in other words, that whatever is proved
in w, and possibly more, is proved in u. We therefore stipulate that if wRu, then:
Dw ⊆Du,
for all sentence letters P, if I(P, w) = T, then I(P, u) = T, and
for all n-place predicates F(n ≥1), I(F, w) ⊆I(F, u).
Objects contained in the domains of worlds accessible from w are objects whose
construction is epistemically possible at w — objects, in other words, that might
be constructible for all that is known in w.
It is not necessary for our purposes to discuss the semantics of the propositional
operators, but we must consider the semantics of the quantiﬁers. While the exis-
tential quantiﬁer behaves as usual, the universal works like ‘□∀’. More precisely,
let M be a Kripke model with interpretation function I, and let t be any individual
constant t not occurring in A. Then:
V(∃xC, w) = T iﬀfor some d ∈Dw, V(t,d)(A(t/x), w) = T; = F other-
wise.
V(∀xC, w) = T iﬀfor all u such that wRu and all d ∈Du, V(t,d)(A(t/x), u) =
T; = F otherwise.
(Here, as in the previous section, C is presumed not to contain t and V(t,d) is the
valuation on the model M∗, which is just like M except that its interpretation
function I∗is such that for all w ∈W, I∗(t, w) = d.)
Whether the logic is free or not depends on what singular terms may denote. If
we require models to specify an actual world, treat truth as truth at that world,
and restrict denotation to objects within that world’s domain (intuitively, the
objects known to be constructible), then the resulting logic is HPC, which is not
free. But most versions of Kripke semantics (including those designed for HPC on
which the erroneous soundness proofs are based) do not thus restrict denotation.
They allow singular terms to denote either all objects in the domains of worlds
accessible from the actual world (which, of course, is possible only in that models
39Sometimes an antisymmetry requirement is added.

Free Logics
1053
specify an actual world), all objects in the union of domains of all the worlds, or
all objects in some still larger set that includes this union. These three options
correspond, respectively, to delimiting the domain of referents by conventions (i),
(ii) or (iii) of the previous section. In all three cases, the resulting logic is free.
This may seem implausible for convention (i). Given the semantic diﬀerence
between universal and existential quantiﬁers, it might seem that if singular terms
denoted only objects in the domains of worlds accessible from the actual world
(convention (i)), these objects would all be within the domain of the universal
quantiﬁer but perhaps not within the domain of the existential, so that the re-
sulting logic would validate speciﬁcation but not existential generalization. But
here the presumed extent of the universal quantiﬁer’s domain is mistaken. Despite
the universal quantiﬁer’s exotic semantics, its domain at w is just Dw. If term t
denotes an object that does not exist at w (i.e., is not in Dw) but does exist at
some world u accessible from w and ∀xA is true at w, then although A(t/x) must
be true at u, it needn’t be true at w. The situation is, then, as I noted in the
previous paragraph: even a convention-(i) semantics yields a free logic in which
both classical speciﬁcation and classical existential generalization are invalid.
Carl Posy [1982] has argued that such free intuitionistic logics are more “natu-
ral” than HPC. Whether or not they more natural, they certainly are more widely
applicable; for since they do not validate ∃x x = t, their singular terms need not
denote only objects that are known to be constructible.
Free intuitionistic logics also exhibit the usual variations arising from the dif-
ferences between positive, negative and nonvalent semantics and some less usual
variations arising from diﬀering conventions regarding predication. Posy [1982]
provides a thorough account of these.
15
FAILURE OF SUBSTITUTIVITY OF THE BICONDITIONAL40
Despite its utility for the applications just considered — and others not considered
— freedom has its price. One disadvantage of all reasonably strong free logics —
positive, negative or nonvalent — is that they violate the principle of substitutivity
of the biconditional. They do not, in other words, permit coextensive open formu-
las always to be substituted for one another salva veritate. (Two open formulas in
n free variables are coextensive if every n-tuple of members of the quantiﬁcational
domain satisﬁes one if and only if it satisﬁes the other.) This anomaly results from
the fact empty singular terms may yield diﬀerent truth-values when substituted for
the free variables of coextensive open formulas.41 Consider the substitution of an
empty term t for x in the three coextensive open formulas x = x, (x = x & E!x),
and (E!x →x = x). A positive free logic makes t = t true and (t = t & E!t) false,
a negative free logic makes t = t false and (E!t →t = t) true, and any reasonably
40This section is based on Lambert [2003e] and [2003g]. Lambert suggests a way of avoiding
failure of substitutivity by analysis of the notion of predication.
41In an E-logic, of course, the variables need not be assigned members of the quantiﬁcational
domain, but that is irrelevant here, since we are concerned with coextension.

1054
John Nolt
strong nonvalent free logic — NINO logics do not count as reasonably strong —
makes t = t truth-valueless and (E!t →t = t) true.
The loss is greatest in single-domain logics. Dual-domain logics provide some
compensation, for although their coextensive expressions are likewise not intersub-
stitutible salva veritate, their co-comprehensive expressions (i.e., those with the
same satisfaction conditions over the union of the inner and outer domains) are.
Co-comprehensiveness, however, is not expressible in an object language whose
formulas are closed,42 unless we introduce quantiﬁers over the outer domain — a
move that free logicians have generally opposed. But we have already met such
quantiﬁers in connection with Grandy’s theory of deﬁnite descriptions, and the
next section bolsters the case for their use.
16
AN EXPRESSIVE LIMITATION
Free logic, unlike classical logic, enables us to express contingent existence asser-
tions about particular individuals. This raises the hope that it might profoundly
illuminate philosophical arguments for individual existence. Not so. Consider, for
example, this simplistic and obviously valid (but not obviously sound) version of
the ontological argument:
God has all perfections.
Whatever has all perfections exists.
∴
God exists.
Classical logic accounts this argument valid — but irrelevantly, since its validity
stems from the logical truth of its conclusion. But in free logic, it is not even valid
— at least if we construe the second premise as ∀x(Px →E!x). For this formula is
in free logic (as in classical logic with E!x expressed as ∃y y = x) contentless — a
mere logical truth. To infer from the second premise by speciﬁcation the instance:
If God has all perfections, God exists,
which is needed to deduce the conclusion, we must in free logic add the question-
begging premise ‘God exists’.
This is not an isolated problem. Every statement of suﬃcient conditions for ex-
istence (e.g., ‘whatever thinks exists’, ‘anything that can be photographed exists’,
‘whatever interacts causally with existing things exists’ — even the seemingly ab-
surd ‘every conceivable object exists’) is vacuously true, so long as the quantiﬁer
ranges only over existing things. (It is, in fact, axiomatic by (A5) that everything
exists.) As a premise, any statement of suﬃcient conditions for existence is there-
fore otiose. To express existence conditions that may be false and hence contribute
substantively to an argument — we need quantiﬁers ranging over nonexisting as
well as existing things.
42It is, however, expressible in an E-logic.

Free Logics
1055
This is easily achieved in dual-domain frameworks: just let the quantiﬁers range
over the union of the inner and outer domains. But because that divorces quantiﬁ-
cation from existence and oﬀends tastes for desert landscapes, early attempts to
introduce quantiﬁers over nonexistents were often summarily dismissed.43 Grow-
ing appreciation of their usefulness has, however, made the recent literature more
sympathetic.44 It is now almost respectable to maintain that conﬂating “for at
least one” with “there exists” was a mistake. Alex Orenstein [1990], for example,
argues that the only way to account for the logical connection between generalized
conjunctions and what are commonly called “existential” quantiﬁers — he prefers
to call them “particular,” which neatly captures the duality with “universal” — is
to recognize that the latter do not express existence. Richard Routley goes even
further, insisting that free logic is just one of several steps in the elimination of
existential presuppositions — a project that will culminate only when quantiﬁers
are at last wholly free to range over domains containing nonexistents.45
In the section on deﬁnite descriptions I introduced the generalized product
symbol ‘Π’ for the universal quantiﬁer over the outer domain of referents. Here let’s
add the generalized sum symbol ‘Σ’ for its “existential” dual. These quantiﬁers
provide enough expressive power to handle typical arguments for the existence of
individuals. In particular, the simplistic ontological argument at the beginning of
this section becomes:
Pg, Πx(Px →E!x) ⊢E!g,
which is relevantly valid.
Since singular terms no longer denote anything outside the domain of quantiﬁ-
cation, the resulting logic is not free but classical. But, taking ‘E!’ as primitive,
we can deﬁne a separate set of free quantiﬁers, restricted to the domain of existing
things, as follows:
∀xA =df Πx(E!x →A)
∃xA =df Σx(E!x & A)
These quantiﬁers comply with (A1)–(A5), preserving in a wider context the free
logic with which we began.
But now comes a new epicycle and a new question. For suppose that the outer
domain is the set of all possible objects. Then attempts to express suﬃcient condi-
tions for possibility will, like our previous attempts to express suﬃcient conditions
for existence, yield only vacuity. So we might decide to quantify classically over
a still wider outer domain that includes impossible objects, add an analog of ‘E!’
that expresses possibility rather than existence, and introduce by deﬁnition re-
stricted quantiﬁers over the old domain of possible objects. The logic of these
deﬁned quantiﬁers over possibilia is formally identical to a free logic. Does that
make it one?
43Lejewski [1954] or Routley [1966], for example.
44Quantiﬁers that range over possible objects that need not actually exist have played an
increasingly prominent role in modal and intensional logics. Even broader nonactual domains
are subject to quantiﬁcation in the Meinongian literature mentioned in note 8.
45Routley [1980], pp. 77-81.

1056
John Nolt
17
WHAT IS A FREE LOGIC?
Not by the standard deﬁnitions, which identify the domain of quantiﬁcation with
the set of existing things. Bencivenga, for example, stipulates that
[a] free logic is a formal system of quantiﬁcation theory, with or without
identity, which allows for some singular terms in some circumstances to
be thought of as denoting no existing object, and in which quantiﬁers
are invariably thought of as having existential import.46
Morscher and Simons give this deﬁnition:
A logical system L is a free logic iﬀ
1. L is free of existential presuppositions with respect to the singular
terms of L,
2. L is free of existential presuppositions with respect to the general
terms of L, and
3. the quantiﬁers of L have existential import.47
And Lambert oﬀers this compact equivalent: “The expression ‘free logic’ is an
abbreviation for the phrase ‘free of existence assumptions with respect to its terms,
general and singular’.”48
Note, incidentally, that these deﬁnitions appear not to be equivalent. Morscher
and Simons’ and Lambert’s, unlike Bencivenga’s, require general terms not to
have existential import. This would seem to make all free logics inclusive, since,
as I noted above, universal general terms have existential import in nonempty
domains. But in fact all that these authors mean in denying existential import to
general terms (or predicates) is that general terms may be empty — a point that
all modern logicians take for granted. The deﬁnitions, as intended, are therefore
all equivalent.
Furthermore, to return to my main point, these authors all agree that in free
logics, at least, the domain of quantiﬁcation is the set of existing things. But the
discussion of the previous section suggests the following purely semantic charac-
terization of positive free logics: they are fragments of classical logics obtained by
restricting the quantiﬁers to a proper subset of the original domain. (Negative
or nonvalent free logics cannot be so characterized, since they make self-identity
statements untrue — a classical impossibility.) More precisely, consider a positive
free logic axiomatized by (A1)–(A6) and (A7+), whose primitive operators are ‘∼’,
‘→’, ‘∀’ and ‘E!’ and a classical logic using the same predicates, singular terms
and primitive operators, except that it has a new monadic predicate ‘E’ in place
46Bencivenga [1985], p. 375.
47Morscher and Simons [2001], p. 2.
48Lambert [2003f], p. 123.

Free Logics
1057
of ‘E!’. Now deﬁne a translation Tr from the free logic to the classical logic as
follows:
Tr(E!t) = Et
Tr(Ft1. . .tn) = Ft1. . .tn, where F is any other primitive predicate,
including ‘ =′
Tr(∼A) =
∼Tr(A)
Tr(A →B) = Tr(A) →Tr(B)
Tr(∀xA) = ∀x(Ex →Tr(A)).
Then for any formula A, A is a theorem of the free logic if and only if Tr(A) is a
theorem of the classical logic.49 This translation suggests a purely semantic con-
ception of positive free logic: it is just that part of classical logic whose quantiﬁers
are restricted to a special subset of the domain — intuitively, the set of “existing”
things. Freedom, on this conception, is restriction.
The translation, incidentally, illuminates the connection between free and in-
clusive logics, for emptiness of the domain of the free logic is represented in the
classical logic as the emptiness of the predicate ‘E’. The admissibility of the empty
domain is thus reduced to the fact that in classical predicate logic general terms
lack existential import.
Should we adopt this purely semantic characterization of positive free logic?
Clearly not, insofar as it utilizes classical quantiﬁcation over an outer domain.
Those who reject either dual-domain semantics or quantiﬁcation over nonexistent
entities may justly dissent. Yet a purely semantic characterization of free logic
(whether single-domain or dual-domain; positive, negative or nonvalent) is possible
— and, indeed, was given at the outset of this essay: free logics are logics whose
singular terms need not denote members of the quantiﬁcational domain. (If there
are two or more quantiﬁcational domains, as in dual-domain logics with quantiﬁers
over the outer domain, we must specify which domain and which quantiﬁers we
are talking about; a logic may be free with respect to some but not all of its
quantiﬁers.) This deﬁnition has the advantage of replacing a metaphysical criterion
(the terms of a free logic need not denote existents) by a clear semantic one (they
need not denote members of the quantiﬁcational domain), and on it the logic of
possibilia described in the previous section is free.
18
CONCLUSION
Though unsullied by existential commitment, free logic does not reveal a tidy
and compelling realm of logical truth. In fact, the whole business is disappoint-
ingly messy. Each new application requires new semantic decisions, and over each
decision pragmatic considerations hold sway: Should we allow empty domains?
Should we adopt a single-domain or dual-domain approach? If the latter, how
49This was ﬁrst shown by Meyer and Lambert [1968]. Bencivenga [1985], pp. 412-14, oﬀers a
helpful summary. See also Trew [1970].

1058
John Nolt
wide should we make the outer domain of referents, should we distinguish it from
the outer domain of predicates, and what identity conditions should we ascribe to
its nonexistent objects? Should we quantify over these objects? If free variables are
allowed, may they take values outside the quantiﬁcational domain or not? Should
the semantics be positive, negative or nonvalent? If positive, by what conventions
shall we assign truth-values to referentially deﬁcient formulas? If nonvalent, which
valuation rules should we choose, and should we base our logic on strong or weak
validity? If there are truth-value gaps, should we augment the semantics with
supervaluations? And so on . . . . Freedom does not extricate us from the general
ﬂux of ideas; it only creates new eddies within the ﬂux.
Nor have free logics yielded profound philosophical insights into reasoning about
the existence of particular things. They are, however, handier than classical logic
for many applications and practically indispensable for some — especially modal
and tense logics, where they have made reasoning about possible but nonactual or
past and future objects a good bit more intelligible. As regards the realm of the
nonexistent (where some would say there is nothing to learn), they have stimulated
the investigation of semantic conventions that can generalize, unify and simplify
theory. They sometimes enable us to separate questions of “essence” from those
of existence, as in free set theory. And ﬁnally, they have signiﬁcantly advanced
our understanding of the semantics of deﬁnite descriptions and facilitated a host
of more modest advances in other areas.
In logic, as elsewhere, freedom, though messy, is often desirable.50
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Antonelli, 2000] G. A. Antonelli. Proto-semantics for positive free logic, Journal of Philosoph-
ical Logic 29,3, pp. 277-94, 2000.
[Beeson, 1985] M. Beeson. Foundations of Constructive Mathematics, Berlin: Springer-Verlag,
1985.
[Barba, 1989] J. L. Barba. A modal version of free logic, Topoi 8, pp. 131-5, 1989.
[Bencivenga, 1976] E. Bencivenga. Set theory and free logic, Journal of Philosophical Logic 5,
pp. 1-15, 1976.
[Bencivenga, 1977] E. Bencivenga. Are arithmetical truths analytic: new results in free set the-
ory, Journal of Philosophical Logic 6, pp. 319-30, 1977
[Bencivenga, 1981] E. Bencivenga. Free semantics, in Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Sci-
ence 47, pp. 38-41, 1981. Revised version reprinted in [Lambert, 1991, 98-110].
[Bencivenga, 1985] E. Bencivenga. Free Logics, in D. Gabbay and F. Guenthner, eds., Handbook
of Philosophical Logic, vol. III: Alternatives to Classical Logic, Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1985.
[Burge, 1974] T. Burge. Truth and singular terms, Noˆus 8, pp. 309-25, 1974; reprinted in [Lam-
bert 1991, 189-204].
[Cocchiarella, 1991] N. B. Cocchiarella. Quantiﬁcation, time and necessity, in [Lambert, 1991,
242-256].
[Feferman, 1995] S. Feferman. Deﬁnedness, Erkenntnis 43,3, pp. 295-320, 1991.
[Fine, 1983] K. Fine. The permutation principle in quantiﬁcational logic, Journal of Philosoph-
ical Logic 12, pp. 33-7. 1983.
50I wish to thank the Logic Reading Group at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville —
Richard Gale, Jim Okapal, Christopher Pynes, and Jake Sumner — for helpful suggestions and
corrections to this paper and Sarah Kenehan for extensive help with the research.

Free Logics
1059
[Garson, 1991] J. W. Garson. ‘Applications of free logic to quantiﬁed intensional logic, in [Lam-
bert, 1991 111-42].
[Grandy, 1972] R. E. Grandy. A deﬁnition of truth for theories with intensional deﬁnite descrip-
tion operators, Journal of Philosophical Logic 1, pp. 137-55, 1972. Reprinted in [Lambert,
1991, 171-88].
[Gumb, 2001] R. D. Gumb. Free logic in program speciﬁcation and veriﬁcation, in [Morscher
and Heike, 2001, 157-93].
[Gumb and Lambert, 1991] R. D. Gumb and K. Lambert. Deﬁnitions in nonstrict positive free
logic (corrected), Modern Logic, 7, 25-55 and 435-440 (errata), 1991.
[Gumb and Lambert, 1996] R. D. Gumb and K. Lambert. A free logical foundation for nonstrict
functions, Proceedings of the CADE-13 Workshop on the Mechanization of Partial Functions,
pp. 39-46, 1996.
[Hintikka, 1959] J. Hintikka. Towards a theory of deﬁnite descriptions. Analysis 19, pp. 79-85,
1959.
[Jacquette, 1996] D. Jacquette. Meinogian Logic: The Semantics of Existence and Nonexis-
tence, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1996.
[Kripke, 1963] S. Kripke. Semantical analysis of intuitionistic logic I, in J. Crossley and M.
Dummett, eds., Formal Systems and Recursive Functions, Amsterdam, North Holland, pp.
92-129, 1963.
[Lambert, 1983] K. Lambert. Meinong and the Principle of Independence, Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1983.
[Lambert, 1991] K. Lambert, ed. Philosophical Applications of Free Logic, New York: Oxford
University Press, 1991.
[Lambert, 2001a] K. Lambert. Free logic and deﬁnite descriptions, in [Morscher and Heike, 2001,
37-47].
[Lambert, 2001b] K. Lambert. From predication to programming, Minds and Machines 11,2,
pp. 257-65, 2001.
[Lambert, 2003a] K. Lambert. Free Logic: Selected Essays, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2003.
[Lambert, 2003b] K. Lambert. Existential import, E! and ‘The’ in [Lambert, 2003a, 16-32].
[Lambert, 2003c] K. Lambert. Foundations of the hierarchy of positive free deﬁnite description
theories, in [Lambert, 2003a, 69-91].
[Lambert, 2003d] K. Lambert. The Hilbert–Bernays theory of deﬁnite descriptions, in [Lambert,
2003a, 44-68].
[Lambert, 2003e] K. Lambert. Nonextensionality, in [Lambert, 2003a, 107-21].
[Lambert, 2003f] K. Lambert. The philosophical foundations of free logic. in [Lambert, 2003a,
122-75].
[Lambert, 2003g] K. Lambert. Predication and extensionality, in [Lambert, 2003a, 92-106].
[Lambert, 2003h] K. Lambert. Russell’s version of the theory of deﬁnite descriptions, in [Lam-
bert, 2003a, 1-15].
[Leblanc, 1971] H. Leblanc. Truth value semantics for a logic of existence, Notre Dame Journal
of Formal Logic 12, pp. 153-68, 1971.
[Leblanc and Gumb, 1983] H. Leblanc and R. D. Gumb. Soundness and completeness proofs for
three brands of intuitionistic logic, in Essays in Epistemology and Semantics, Leblanc, Gumb
and Stern, eds., New York, Haven, 1983
[Leblanc and Thomason, 1968] H. Leblanc and R. H. Thomason. Completeness theorems for
some presupposition-free logics, Fundamenta Mathematicae 62, pp. 125-64. Reprinted in
Leblanc’s Existence, Truth and Provability, Albany: State University of New York Press,
1982, pp. 22-57, 1968
[Lehman, 1994] S. Lehman. Strict Fregean free logic, Journal of Philosophical Logic 23,3, pp.
307-336, 1994.
[Lehman, 2001] S. Lehman. No input, no output logic, in [Morscher and Hieke, 2001, 147-54].
[Lejewski, 1954] C. Lejewski. Logic and existence, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
5, 18, pp. 104-19, 1954. Reprinted in Dale Jacquette, ed., Philosophy of Logic: An Anthology,
Oxford, Blackwell, 2002, pp. 147-55.
[Meyer et al., 1982] R. K. Meyer, E. Bencivenga and K. Lambert. The ineliminability of E in
free quantiﬁcation theory without identity, Journal of Philosophical Logic 11, pp. 229-31,
1982.

1060
John Nolt
[Meyer and Lambert, 1968] R. K. Meyer and K. Lambert. Universally free logic and standard
quantiﬁcation theory, Journal of Symbolic Logic 33, pp. 8-26, 1968.
[Morscher and Hieke, 2001] E. Morscher and A. Hieke, eds. New Essays in Free Logic: In Hon-
our of Karel Lambert (Applied Logic Series, vol., 23), Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2001.
[Morscher and Simons, 2001] E. Morscher and P. Simons. Free logic: a ﬁfty-year past and an
open future, in [Morscher and Hieke, 2001].
[Nolt, 1997] J. Nolt. Logics, Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1997.
[Orenstein, 1990] A. Orenstein. Is existence what existential quantiﬁcation expresses? in Robert
B. Barrett and Roger F. Gibson, eds., Perspectives on Quine, Cambridge: Blackwell, pp. 245-
70, 1990.
[Pa´sniczek, 1998] J. Pa´sniczek. The logic of intensional objects: A Meinongian Version of Clas-
sical Logic, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1998.
[Pa´sniczek, 2001] J. Pa´sniczek. Can Meinongian logic be free? in [Morscher and Hieke, 2001,
227-36].
[Posy, 1982] C. J. Posy. A free IPC is a natural logic: strong completeness for some intuitionistic
free logics, Topoi 1, pp. 30-43, 1982. Reprinted in [Lambert, 1991, 49-81].
[Quine, 1954] W. V. O. Quine. Quantiﬁcation and the empty domain, Journal of Symbolic Logic
19, pp. 177-9, 1954.
[Quine, 1963] W. V. O. Quine. Set Theory and its Logic, Cambridge: Harvard, 1963.
[Quine, 1997] W. V. O. Quine. Free logic, description and virtual classes, Dialogue 36,1, pp.
101-8, 1997.
[Routley, 1966] R. Routley. Some things do not exist, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 7,
pp. 251-76, 1966.
[Routley, 1980] R. Routley. Exploring Meinong’s Jungle and Beyond, Canberra:
Australian
National Unversity, 1980.
[Russell, 1919] B. Russell. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, New York: Simon & Schus-
ter, 1919.
[Schweitzer, 2001] P. Schweitzer. Free logic and quantiﬁcation in syntactic modal contexts, in
[Morscher and Hieke, 2001].
[Scott, 1967] D. Scott. Existence and description in formal logic, in Ralph Schoenman, ed.,
Bertrand Russell, Philosopher of the Century, London, Allen and Unwin, pp. 181-200, 1967.
Reprinted in [Lambert, 1991, 28-48].
[Scott, 1979] D. Scott. Identity and existence in intuitionistic logic,’ in Fourman, M. P., Mulvey,
C. J. and Scott, D. S., eds., Applications of Sheaves, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 753, Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, pp. 660-696, 1979.
[Simons, 2001] P. Simons. Calculi of names: free and modal, in [Morscher and Hieke, 2001].
[Thomason, 1968] R. Thomason. On the strong semantical completeness of the intuitionistic
predicate calculus, Journal of Symbolic Logic 33, pp. 1-7, 1968.
[Trew, 1970] A. Trew. Nonstandard theories of quantiﬁcation and identity, Journal of Symbolic
Logic 35, pp. 267-94, 1970.
[Troelstra and van Dalen, 1988] A. S. Troelstra and D. van Dalen. Constructivism in Mathe-
matics, vol. 1 Amsterdam: North Holland, 1988.
[van Fraassen, 1966] B. C. van Fraassen. Singular terms, truth value gaps and free logic, Journal
of Philosophy 63, pp. 481-95, 1966. Reprinted in [Lambert, 1991, 82-97].
[Woodruﬀ, 1984] P. W. Woodruﬀ. On supervaluations in free logic, Journal of Symbolic Logic
49, pp. 943-50, 1984.

FICTIONS AND THEIR LOGIC
John Woods∗
1
LOGIC
The logic of ﬁction came into its own in the 1970s with the publication of a number of
seminal works.1 Fiction has been a stand-alone research programme for logicians only
since that time. The logician’s interest in ﬁction had a number of early motivations. How-
ever, in a quite general way, the logic of ﬁction programme arose out of failure. Fictional
discourse simply wouldn’t ﬁt existing systems. As Richard Routley once put it, “literary
phenomena rather convincingly show the inadequacy of most going formal semantics.”
[Routley, 1979, 3] In particular, the sentences of ﬁction have not been well-handled in the
more traditional theories of nondenoting terms, such as description theory, free logic or
supervaluational semantics. On the other hand, ﬁctional discourse appears to be tailor-
made for existence-neutral theories of quantiﬁcation. A third motivation is ﬁctionalism
in the philosophy of mathematics. If mathematical objects are to be likened to ﬁctional
objects, then it would seem to be incumbent on those who so propose that they give a
disciplined account of what it is to be an object of ﬁction. A fourth consideration is that
since it would appear that some ﬁctional truths are inconsistent, this may be some reason
∗[Woods and Alward, 2002] reﬂects my thinking about the ﬁctional some thirty years after my original work
in the period 1969 to 1974. In writing it, Alward and I brought diﬀerent inclinations to bear. For Alward, these
would be ﬁrst words in a continuing project on ﬁction. For me, they would be last words, a kind of valedictory.
Alward has turned out to be more prescient than I. He has extended his thinking considerably, and a book will
appear in a year or so [Alward, forthcoming]. But, in what can only be considered a surprising turn, I too have
continued to think about ﬁction, and I too have drifted from where I was in 2002. I shall mention just three of the
newer developments. The 2002 paper gives no detailed attention to what it would take for ﬁction to have a logic,
as opposed to a philosophical analysis of the kind a philosopher could furnish. In the present work, eﬀorts have
been made to repair this omission. In the 2002 chapter, stipulationism is ﬂirted with. Here it is embraced fully.
In 2002, I leaned toward the theoretical primacy of mathematical stipulationism over ﬁctional stipulationism
(with Alward demurring, but not in print.) I have now come to my senses. Mathematical stipulationism is a
harder nut to crack than literary stipulationism. Hats oﬀto Alward.
For expository ease, I have in a few places drawn modestly upon [Woods and Alward, 2002], with Alward’s and
Kluwer’s kind permission. Aside from these expository matters, the present chapter is a considerable departure
from earlier work. Errors are mine alone. Alward bears no responsibility for them. He will make his own in
[Alward, forthcoming].
1These include in chronological order [Woods, 1969; Gale, 1971; Routley, 1973; Coleman, 1973; Crittenden,
1973; Woods, 1974; Devine, 1974; Martin, Schotch, 1974; Blocker, 1974; Howell, 1974; Pavel, 1975; Gabriel,
1975; Parsons, 1975; Woltersdorﬀ, 1976; Howell, 1976; Urmson, 1976; Lewis, 1978; Walton, 1978a, 1978b;
Parsons, 1978; Woods and Pavel, 1979]. In addition to works expressly designed to accommodate the analysis
of ﬁctional discourse, various other contributions of the period bear on the issue somewhat tangentially, but with
interesting and inﬂuential things to say about ﬁction [Kripke, 1972; Kaplan, 1973; Plantinga, 1974].
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1062
John Woods
to construe logic dialetheically. Other motivations concern philosophy of language and
epistemology rather more centrally, but some of these also have a bearing on modal logic,
especially theories that postulate ﬁctive operators. A case in point is the apparent inability
of widely received theories of reference and of knowledge to account for our capacity to
refer to ﬁctional objects and to know something of them. Such theories are causal in their
orientation, and they to give rise to problems not unlike Benacerraf’s Dilemma in the phi-
losophy of mathematics [Benacerraf, 1973], which oﬀers us — so it is said — a diﬃcult
choice between “easy epistemology for unbelievable objects or implausible epistemology
for constructed objects”. [Thomas, 2002, 19].2 We shall return to these pre-existing logics
in §3.5 below
The ﬁrst issue for the aspiring logician of ﬁction is what a logic of ﬁction would be.
What would it be like for ﬁction to have a logic, and in what sense of the word ‘logic’?
Bearing on this is a distinction adumbrated — albeit not under this name — in the writings
of Frege. It is the distinction between a mathematical and a philosophical logic. What we
ﬁnd in the Begriﬀsschrift [1967] is mathematical logic. What we ﬁnd in “Sense and Ref-
erence” [1952] is philosophical logic. A philosophical logic investigates properties such
as reference, truth and inference in natural languages. Accordingly, there is a substantial
overlap between philosophical logic and the philosophy of language.
Reference ﬁgures signiﬁcantly in Frege’s mathematical and philosophical logics alike.
In his mathematical logic, it is a simplistic and rather na¨ıve concept. The reference of
names is represented by a primitive notion of object-designation. The reference of indi-
vidual variables is relativized to countable sequences of arbitrary objects; a variable vn
bears this primitive relation of denotation to the object occupying the nth place in that se-
quence, where ‘n’ is the variable’s index. Predicate symbols are taken to denote sequences
of abstract objects. Plural reference is seen as the quantiﬁcational binding of variables.
In reading Frege’s papers on the philosophy of language, one is struck at once by the
sophistication of its treatment of reference. While the theory retains a denotational cast
(in which referring, crudely speaking, is like labelling), considerable attention is paid
to semantic constraints, that is, to the role played by (something like) a referring term’s
meaning. Frege’s analysis of these semantic constraints focuses on the notion of Sinn.
But there is no place for Sinn in Frege’s mathematical logic.
PROPOSITION 1 (Underdetermination). Frege’s mathematical logic of reference under-
determines his philosophical logic of reference.
Underdetermination as such is nothing to get over-excited about. Even our best formal
models always leave some things out of account. What matters is whether reference is
well-enough handled to enable the logic to elucidate its own target properties, such as
2It is widely held that the best theory of knowledge to date is one in which knowledge arises from the
knower’s causal contact with the object of his knowledge (albeit, on occasion, a quite complex sort of causal
contact). It is also widely held that the best theory of truth to date is one in which the truth of a sentence, e.g.,
“Harry is a man” consists of the object denoted by “Harry” being an element in the class of objects denoted
by “is a man”. Similarly, “2 is a prime” would be true if and only if the number two were a member of the
set of prime numbers. The gist of Benacerraf’s Dilemma is this: If the causal theory of knowledge is right, it
is diﬃcult to see how mathematical knowledge is possible. For we seem not to have causal contact with such
objects.

Fictions and Their Logic
1063
entailment and logical truth. Another way of saying this is that reference is not a primary
objective for standard approaches to mathematical logic. It is more an instrumental ne-
cessity. One has to say something about reference in order to be able to say what one
wants to say about entailment. If we wished to have a full-blown conceptual analysis of
reference, it is clear that we would not ﬁnd it in Frege’s mathematical logic. We would
need to explore the relevant options in the philosophy of logic. If we came to be satisﬁed
that the right account could be found there, a further possibility would present itself. We
might return to some preferred mathematical logic in an eﬀort to determine whether, un-
der suitable adaptation, the philosophical account of reference could be accommodated
by the logic’s formalisms, or some natural enrichment of them.
Mathematical logics put a premium on mature and coherent formalization. The devil
is in the details, of course, but in a general way it can be said that formalizations are well-
speciﬁed uninterpreted languages on which a proof theory is deﬁnable and a model theory
is constructible. Formalizations are always formalizations of. In the case of mathematical
logic, what is sought for is a formalization of its primary or target properties — entailment,
logical truth, consistency, and so on. A formalization is coherent to the degree that it
has a comprehensive metatheory. A system’s metatheory is comprehensive to the extent
that it allows for nontrivial consideration of the standard metatheoretical issues. Is the
system consistent? Is it sound and complete? Are its target properties decidable? Is its
entailment relation compact? Does it have a deduction metatheorem? Is it extrapolative?
And so on. A formalization is mature to the extent that its answers to these questions are
well-developed and rigorous. Coherence and maturity are what one would expect to ﬁnd
in what Joke Meheus calls “decent logics” [Meheus et al., forthcoming].
A useful one-line summary of what has been said so far is that mathematical logic is
conceptual formalization, whereas philosophical logic is conceptual analysis. As we have
said, one question that the contrast gives rise to is whether a formalization of a property
underdetermines its correct conceptual analysis. If it does, a second question arises. Does
the underdetermination matter? Throughout the history of logic, there are numbers of
cases where it has been asserted that it matters very much, that it amounts to severe
conceptual distortion. (As Quine once said about the dialetheic approach to inconsistency,
it makes negation “unrecognizable.”) A case in point is the dispute between relevant and
classical logicians.3 In classical logic, entailment does not require that antecedents be
relevant to consequents. Against this, relevantists argue that, in the absence of a relevancy
connection between S and S ′, it cannot be the case that S entails S ′. Here we meet
with a question in the philosophy of logic. Naively put, it asks, “What is the true nature
of entailment?” Like most philosophical controversies, the present dispute has not been
graced with a deﬁnitive resolution. However, a kind of holding pattern can be mentioned
in passing. It involves a presumed pluralism in logic, according to which “entails” is
ambiguous as between classical entailment, which ﬁrst-order logic gets right, and relevant
entailment, which ﬁrst-order logic gets wrong.4
3And modal and intuitionistic logicians, as well as some paraconsistent logicians.
4Not to overlook intuitionistic entailment, (non-relevant) paraconsistent entailment, many-valued entailment,
dialetheic entailment, and so on.

1064
John Woods
We can see a certain strategic cunning in the pluralist manoeuvre. It keeps options for
the formalization of entailment open as long as the issue remains unresolved. It is as if the
mathematical logician is saying, “Look, if entailment is actually classical, then we have a
logic for it, namely, classical logic. On the other hand, if entailment is actually relevantist,
then we have a logic for it, namely, relevant logic. Until things settle down philosophi-
cally, it is best to keep an open mind.” As a response to unresolved conceptual conﬂict,
undoubtedly this has a certain attractiveness. But there is also a down-side. The extent to
which formalizations can proceed apace and succeed as mathematical constructions in the
absence of settled and mature conceptual constraints, they risk promiscuous ambiguation,
in which any coherent formalization of a notion captures a “sense” of it.5 Consider, for
example, the sheer number of modal logics. They are more or less interesting as mathe-
matical structures (and wonderfully interesting things to study), but it strains belief that
corresponding to each diﬀerent modal system is a diﬀerent meaning of “possible” in En-
glish. So we might have here a case in which, collectively, modal logic overdetermines
conceptual adequacy. Of course, there might be many more concepts of possibility than
are discernible in the give-and-take of natural language usage. But it is not obvious that
there are. This is a matter for the philosophy of language.
It is instructive to take note of two quite diﬀerent emphases that drive the work of
contemporary logic. One is abstract and experimental. It involves building mathematical
structures with a view to discovering the logical concepts that can be made to “fall out”
of it. It is an adequacy condition on such logics that they have a mature and coherent
formalization. In its most extreme form it is not a condition on their success that they get
even their target concepts “right”.6 “Right” is for philosophers.
The other option is philosophical. It takes seriously Eddington’s jape that theories are
“put-up jobs” (and Quine’s that they are “free for the thinking up”). They seek to constrain
this latitude by imposing conditions of conceptual adequacy. In actual practice, there is
ample evidence that both these forces are in play and that they operate under more or less
successful conditions of equilibrium. So in order to get your target concepts quite right, it
is necessary to get your ancillary or instrumental concepts somewhat right; that is to say,
right enough. Even so, in extremis the two emphases are miles apart.
It is easy to see these contrasts at work in analyses of ﬁctional discourse. Logicians
whose interests are primarily mathematical might see a logic of ﬁction as any mature
and coherent system of mathematical logic, in which referring terms and quantiﬁers for
objects of ﬁction, and truth and closure conditions for ﬁctional sentences are dealt with as
part of the logic’s overall handling of reference, truth and inference. The mere fact that the
theory is mature and coherent would count to some degree in favour of its provisions for
its ﬁctional elements. For what is wanted here is not just an account of the ﬁctional, but
an account that deserves the name of logic. But what really counts depends on what the
theory’s primary targets actually are. If, for example, the logic is chieﬂy concerned with
5Left unchecked, we would soon be met with “Anything Goes-Pluralism” (with apologies, in order, to Cole
Porter and David Stove [1999].
6The impulse to experiment abstractly resembles what drove non-Euclidean geometry before the comforts
of an empirically conﬁrmed relativity theory. Here, too, there was no intention of getting space right. That
Riemannian geometry did get (big) space right was an inadvertence, and a lucky break for physics.

Fictions and Their Logic
1065
giving an account of entailment and logical truth, it might well achieve a formalization of
those concepts under a number of diﬀerent conditions, including the following:
1. The account it gives of entailment and logical truth is mature and coherent and
conceptually adequate.
2. The account it gives of these notions is mature and coherent but conceptually inad-
equate.
3. The account it gives of entailment and logical truth for ﬁctional sentences is concep-
tually adequate, but fails to provide a conceptually adequate representation of still other
features of ﬁctional discourse, an understanding of which is essential for a philosophically
adequate representation of it.7
Needless to say, this trio is neither exhaustive nor strictly disjoint.
Perhaps we have said enough provisionally to identify three levels of logical treatment
of the ﬁctional.
Level 1 (Mathematical). A mathematical logic of the ﬁctional is a ﬁrst-level
logic to the extent that it is an adaptation of an existing logic without princi-
pled regard for the conceptual adequacy of the adaptations. What counts at
level 1 is that aspects of the ﬁctional are taken some note of and the resultant
system is a coherent and mature mathematical logic.
Level 2 (Conceptual). A philosophical logic of the ﬁctional is a conceptual
analysis of the concept of the ﬁctional. It would stand to a mathematical sys-
tem as Frege’s philosophy of language stands to his formal logic. Although
the nature of entailment and logical truth for ﬁctional sentences would be
among the theory’s targets, there would be an even greater emphasis on ref-
erence, quantiﬁcation and (nonlogical) truth, considered now not as an instru-
mental necessity but as target properties in their own right. The logic might
also engage further parameters of the philosophy of language, including a
role for context and user-agency. Accordingly, the theory would take on a
pragmatic dimension.
Level 3 (Conceptually Purpose-Built Formalization). At this level, a logic of
ﬁction is a mathematical structure whose primary target properties involve
all those features of a conceptually adequate account of the ﬁctional, as well
as the traditional targets of entailment and logical truth. Such a logic is gov-
erned by two kinds of adequacy condition. As a mathematical logic, it must
produce a mature and coherent account of its target properties. As a logic
sensitive to conceptual nuance, the treatment it aﬀords its further target prop-
erties must be philosophically adequate.
Some of the virtues and drawbacks of this trio are readily apparent. Counting for
level 1 approaches is their comparative familiarity and their known strengths prior to
adaptation. Counting against is the likelihood that their adaptive accounts of the ﬁctional
will not be conceptually adequate. Level 2 presents us with all the diﬃculties attaching
7For example, are ﬁctional beings incomplete? Are they ever impossibilia? What non-deductive inferences
are required for a reader to understand a ﬁctional text fully?

1066
John Woods
to unresolved disputes in philosophy. Level 3 raises questions as to where the limits of
mathematical modelling lie. Even so, diﬃculties and challenges aside, we are now in a
position to lay down a corresponding three-step investigation-procedure for the logic of
ﬁction. First step. Attempt to ﬁnd an existing mathematical logic which gives a mature
and coherent account of its primary properties. Check for conceptual adequacy under
ﬁctional adaptation. Second step. Whether it is found to be conceptually adequate or not,
verify this ﬁnding in a conceptual analysis of the ﬁctional. Third step. Take what you take
to be the best conceptual account of the ﬁctional and try to ﬁnd a mature and coherent
mathematical model for it. To the extent that this proves possible, we will have a mature,
coherent and philosophically adequate logic of ﬁction.
Before bringing this section to a close, it would be useful to introduce the idea of
minimal adaptations.
PROPOSITION 2 (Minimal adaptations). Let Σ be a system of mathematical logic. Let
Σ be extended by adding to its vocabulary ﬁctional terms and to its grammar ﬁctional
sentences. Let Σ f be the result of these changes. Then Σf is a minimal adaptation of Σ if
the model theory and proof theory pass to Σf unchanged except for input constraints.
COROLLARY 2(a) Clearly, if Σ itself does not count as a logic of ﬁction, then Σf is at
best a level 1 logic of ﬁction.
In a number of ways, the three-step investigation procedure embodies a rather na¨ıve
idealism. There is ample evidence that success at step two sometimes inhibits success
at step three. It is not diﬃcult to see why. The success of a conceptual analysis of a
property might well bring to the fore parameters that resist formalization. They might be
conceptually too rich for any extant or foreseeable symbolic representation to digest. Of
course, this is an important possibility. It presents us with two options. One is to throw
in the towel now. The other is to throw in the towel only after our best eﬀorts have failed.
(It is called the principle of best evidence).
2
TARGETS FOR A LOGIC OF FICTION
In considering whether the logic of ﬁction even has a chance, it is necessary, as I say, to
reﬂect on the target properties it is reasonable to suppose that such a logic would seek to
elucidate. We turn to that task now.
Systems of mathematical logic routinely set their sights on entailment and logical
truth. Should these be considered primary targets of a logic of ﬁction? Let us begin
with entailment. It certainly needs to be determined whether, and to what extent, ﬁctional
sentences are deductively closed under the standard logical operations. More basically
still, we should want to know something of the conditions under which ﬁctional sen-
tences entail one another, and the conditions, if any, under which a ﬁctional sentence
entails a non-ﬁctional sentence. Mainstream systems of mathematical logic also embed
certain standing assumptions about inference. In a system’s proof theory, any deduc-
tion of S from Σ = {S 1, S 2, . . ., S n} is taken to licence the inference ⌜If Σ, then S ⌝. If
S 1,...,S n are theorems, then the inference to S itself is mandated. Similarly, if the system’s

Fictions and Their Logic
1067
model theory determines that ⌜S 1 ∧S 2∧, . . ., ∧S n⌝entails S , the conditional inference ⌜If
S 1 ∧S 2∧, . . ., ∧S n, S ⌝is sanctioned. If the S i are logical truths, then the inference of S
itself is sanctioned. No one doubts that this is na¨ıve and rather unrealistic approach to
inference. It mandates that there be no extensional diﬀerence between the consequence a
set of sentences possesses and the consequences it is permitted (or required) to draw from
those sentences. It is easy to see that part of what logic of ﬁction should try to sort out is
the extent to which this view of inference holds water for ﬁctional discourse.
Although entailment and its associated notion of deductive inference make the cut as
target properties of a logic of ﬁction, it should be noted that comparatively little of what
makes for a conceptually adequate account of the ﬁctional will show up in the theory’s
provisions for these notions. The same applies to its logical truths. To the extent that the
logic caters for entailment, it will also cater for the associated logical truths. Apart from
that, the status of two such truths in particular will require special attention. The law of
excluded middle is challenged by accounts in which ﬁctional beings are incomplete, and
the law of noncontradiction is challenged by approaches in which ﬁctional entities have
logically inconsistent natures or perform logically impossible deeds. Overall, however,
PROPOSITION 3 (The marginality of deduction). Not a great deal of what is distinctive
about ﬁctional entities and their goings-on is captured by the strictly deductive apparatus
of their logic.
COROLLARY 3(a) In particular, the consequence relations that are most distinctive of
ﬁctional discourse are not truth-preserving.
We saw that in classical approaches to mathematical logic, the concepts of reference
and (ordinary, nonlogical) truth are not so much primary targets as instrumental necessi-
ties. Classical logic needs some kind of story about reference and truth in order to get the
main story of entailment and logical truth right, but you can be completely right about en-
tailment and logical truth without having to be completely right about reference and truth.
Similarly, you can be completely right about entailment without having to be completely
right about deductive inference.8 As we have said, by the lights of his own philosophi-
cal logic, the treatment of reference in Frege’s mathematical logic is deﬁcient. But it is
adequate, he thought, for the attainment of the mathematical logic’s primary targets.
This is very much not the case with ﬁction. Reference and truth are of central impor-
tance, both conceptually and formally. In the logic of ﬁction, reference and truth are not
instrumental necessities. They are theoretically primary. It is the same way with infer-
ence. The question of what can be inferred from a literary text is fundamental to what
[Parsons, 1980] calls the “maximal account” of it, in relation to which the written text is
a kind of extended enthymeme.
Doubtless there will be features of a comprehensive conceptual account of ﬁction, e.g.,
matters of style or the literary signiﬁcance of irony, that exceed the reach of anything that
could reasonably be called a logic. However,
8Similarly, a theory might produce a wholly credible analysis of entailment and logical truth, based in part
on counterintuitive treatments of, say, negation (in, e.g., a logic of ﬁrst-degree entailment).

1068
John Woods
PROPOSITION 4 (Target properties). Since entailment, logical truth, reference, (ordi-
nary) truth and inference are squarely within any logic’s ambit, we shall, as a ﬁrst pass,
make these the target properties of a logic of ﬁction.
3
INTUITIONS
The targets proposed by Proposition 4 are well-supported by the more basic of our pre-
theoretic intuitions about literary ﬁctions. The following ﬁve appear to be centrally im-
portant [Woods, 1974]:
A. Reference is possible to ﬁctional beings even though they do not exist.
B. Some sentences about ﬁctional beings and events are true.
C. Some inferences about ﬁctional beings and events are correct.
D. These three facts are made possible in a central way by virtue of the creative au-
thority of the authors of ﬁction. Indeed, the primary and originating criterion of
truth for ﬁctional sentences is the author’s sayso.
E. It is also possible for a ﬁctional truth to make reference to real things. For example,
“Sherlock Holmes lived in London” is true and refers to the actual capital city of
England.
If we wished to exploit an analogy with the axioms of naive set theory, we could speak of
these as axioms of intuitive theories of ﬁctionality or the intuitive axioms for ﬁction.
No one should think for long that the intuitive axioms are problem-free. It is true that
axiom A appears to take on a degree of corroboration from the structure of quantiﬁcation
in natural languages. In classical logic, “There are things that don’t exist” is an incon-
sistent (or in some versions a non-well-formed) sentence. In English, it is well-formed,
consistent and true. Nevertheless, philosophers have long struggled to produce accounts
of how we manage to achieve reference to existing objects. As I write, the leading such
theory — the causal theory — cannot be extended (or so it would appear)9 to putative
references to the nonexistent. If the causal theory of reference gives our best account of
reference, it is disappointing that reference to the nonexistent lacks as good a theory, if
any at all.
Perhaps the biggest problem that besets axiom B is that for well over a half-century
of tightly focused attention by philosophers of language and model-theoretic logicians,
truth is tied to reference. So if reference to the ﬁctional cannot be reconciled to our best
theory of reference (if any), neither can truth about the ﬁctional be handled by our best
theory of truth (if any). A second problem for B can be loosely described as follows.
Let S be any sentence from a story. Then the world is such that S is not true. In some
cases, the contradiction is more direct. For example, B allows us to say that we know that
Holmes lived in London. But what we know of London allows (indeed requires) us to say
9As witness e.g. [Kripke, 1972; Kaplan, 1973] and [Plantinga, 1974].

Fictions and Their Logic
1069
that he did not. One possibility is that these are only apparent contradictions, that they
disappear once the ambiguity of such sentences is duly noted. But where is the ambiguity?
The sentence, “Holmes lived in London”, gives no sign of lexical or syntactic ambiguity.
Perhaps it is an ellipsis of some kind. But if so, care needs to be taken in unpacking it lest
unnecessary damage be done to the axioms.10
Axiom C tells us that sound and accessible inferences exist from sets of ﬁctional sen-
tences. But if there are diﬃculties in deciphering what, if anything, they are about, and
linked diﬃculties in making out the conditions, if any, under which they could be true, it is
hardly surprising that similar uncertainties would aﬄict the matter of what inference rules
are correct for ﬁction. For example, if ‘a’ is “Prime Minister Blair” and ‘b’ is “Sherlock
Holmes”, then
Fa
∴
∃xFx
is a classically good inference, whereas
Fb
∴
∃xFx
is problematic. Of course, in this case the variable of quantiﬁcation may range over the
nonexistent as well as the existent. But this subjects inference to the same uncertainties
as attach to A.
Philosophers of language are familiar with Austin’s notion of a performative utterance.
It is widely agreed, for example, that in uttering, “I promise to wash the car” I have, in the
absence of particular reasons to the contrary, created a promise. I haven’t just said that I
promise; I’ve actually promised. Performative utterances have attracted some successful
attention in theories of speech acts [Austin, 1975; Searle, 1970; Grice, 1989]. There
would be a clear advantage if the creative aspect of an author’s sayso could be modeled
in a speech-act pragmatics. The trouble is that the statements by virtue of which ﬁctional
objects and events are created seem not to have the character of performatives.11
A further puzzle is whether, and how, an author’s sayso can make contradictions true.
Even if were able to deal with the kinds of contradictions mentioned above, this would not
help with the problem of directly authored contradictions such as the case in Ray Brad-
bury’s A Sound of Thunder in which Keith both is and is not elected president in one and
the same election in 2055. One might think that such sentences could be accommodated
in a dialetheic logic. Dialetheic logics aren’t particularly congenial to the providence of
axiom A, but perhaps this might be ﬁxed.
3.1
Pretense and make-believe
To date, the logic of ﬁction research programme has concentrated on literary ﬁctions, as
opposed to legal and mathematical ﬁctions, to name just two. Important as this focus
assuredly is, there is a potential drawback. It lends encouragement to the idea that a logic
10See here [Woods, 1974, chapter 2].
11This is disputed in [Åqvist, 2003].

1070
John Woods
of literary ﬁctions is somehow basic, or canonical, for ﬁctions of all types; in other words,
it appears to assume The Literary Primacy Thesis. Upon reﬂection, however, it is worth
pausing to consider whether we might be better served by thinking the opposite, namely,
that
PROPOSITION 5 (Fiction as generic). It might turn out to be the case that there is a
generic logic of ﬁction of which the logic of literary ﬁctions is a special case.12
I shall not at this stage attempt to decide the correctness of Proposition 5, or of The
Literary Primacy Thesis. For the time being I shall concentrate on theories of literary
ﬁctions, returning to Proposition 5 towards the end of the chapter.
Let us now supplement our intuitive axioms with some further commonplaces. A ﬁc-
tional fact is not a real fact. A ﬁctional person is no person at all. No ﬁctional event ever
occurred. Fictional properties don’t exist. These and other like features of the ﬁctional
are a natural setting for an intuition of broad appeal.
PROPOSITION 6 (The Pretense/Make-Believe Model). Fictional objects and facts are
the subjects (or contents) of pretense.
COROLLARY 6(a) Discourse that is nominally about ﬁctional objects and facts is a form
of make believe.13
The tug of the pretense/make-believe (PMB)-intuition draws emphatic attention to the
intuitive fact that when it comes to ﬁctional entities there is nothing there. It lays cor-
responding emphasis on the intuitive fact that ﬁctional discourse leaves no metaphysical
footprints.
A diﬃculty with the PMB approach is that it suggests a certain general playfulness.
Doubtless some pretendings — children in a game of Cops and Robbers for example —
are the sheerest play. How close the PMB-intuition drives the philosophical logic toward
these paradigms is something we shall have to consider with due care. This task is taken
up in §4.1.
3.2
Can’t help it realism and the impulse to reify
Against the PMB-intuition something equally strong countervails. For lack of a better
name, we’ll call it the objectual intuition (the O-intuition). It embeds the idea of axiom A:
PROPOSITION 7 (The O-model). In some nontrivial sense ﬁctional beings are indeed
objects and ﬁctional goings on are indeed events.14
Underwriting the O-intuition is the fact (or apparent fact) that unlike terms such as
“the present king of France”, which have no denotations at all, terms such as “Sherlock
Holmes” are genuinely denoting, albeit not of existent objects. Accordingly, as [Woods,
1974] points out, statements about Sherlock Holmes, unlike those “about” the present
12This is the position adopted by [Woods and Alward, 2002].
13An early example of authorial pretense analyses is [Searle, 1975]. See also [Scruton, 1974]. The leading
reader-appreciator analysis is [Walton, 1990]. [Lewis, 1983] is also a pretense theory.
14O-approaches include [Kripke, 1973; Routley, 1980; Woltersdorﬀ, 1980; Lewis, 1983; Zalta, 1983;
Deutsch, 1985; Lamarque and Olsen, 1994; Thomasson, 1998; van Inwagen, 2000] and [Zalta, 2000].

Fictions and Their Logic
1071
king of France, are bet-sensitive. There is a bet to be won or lost as to Holmes’ place
of residence. “221B Baker Street” wins. “2237 W. 14th Avenue” loses. Concerning the
present king of France all such bets are lost (vacuously).15 16
The O-intuition seems to be grounded in the kind of cognitive being the human animal
is. The human animal is a “can’t-help-it realist.”
PROPOSITION 8 (Can’t-help-it realism). Whether by nature or by nurture, the human
cognitive agent is rigged so as to take the realist stance, that is, to experience the world
realistically.
Perhaps it all has to do with survival, since the world is dangerous and realism is an
eﬃcient way of paying attention. In our Kantian moments, we might think that experienc-
ing the world realistically is a condition of there being experiences at all. Smart skeptics
(of whom Hume was one and Sextus not) fully well know that scepticism is not a livable
truth if indeed true, that one could no more experience the world as acausal, or as wholly
interior, or as mindless except for me, than jump over the moon.
PROPOSITION 9 (Smart scepticism). Smart sceptics, therefore, allow that even though
they may concede that realism is false, the human animal is a can’t-help-it realist.
Our can’t-help-it realism gives us natural occasion to reify. When seized by an on-
rushing tiger experience, we take it that a tiger is rushing on. Of course, this is no ordinary
postulation. It happens automatically and in a blink. Reiﬁcations elsewhere take longer.
A case in point is the reiﬁcation of ZF sets. When in 1902 Russell conveyed to Frege
the news that killed intuitive set theory dead, a philosophical crisis ensued. The critical
question was whether set theory could be rehabilitated and, if so, under what conditions.
Russell answers this question in The Principles of Mathematics [Russell, 1903]. In one
way, says Russell, set theory could not be rehabilitated. The paradox that bears his name
rendered it impossible to generate the axioms of sets by a philosophical analysis of the
idea of set. On the other hand, Russell supposes that a kind of rehabilitation could be
achieved by what he called mathematical deﬁnition, which he sees as a form of nominal
deﬁnition. In other words, the project of revealing the true natures of what sets actually
are was pole-axed by the Russell contradiction, but it remained possible to re-introduce
sets by stipulation. Russell was fully aware that stipulated objects are not free for the
asking. Stipulations were also invitations to use. Their mathematical legitimacy would
be decided by the mathematical research community. Russell’s own contributions to this
competition fell by the wayside, and in time ZF became the theory of choice (actually,
ZFC if the pun might be forgiven). ZF arose in the axiomatic stipulations of Zermelo as
early as 1908, but with the passing decades it came to be regarded as the authoritatively
correct description of the intuitive idea of set. It was a remarkable transition, from ﬁction
15Consider a case. If the present king of France is the king of France, then where does he live? Does he live
in Paris or Versailles? Or possibly in Avignon? Perhaps he’s in exile in Atlantic City? These are transparently
silly questions. All bets are oﬀ.
16In [Woods, 1974] the contrast between bet-sensitive and bet-insensitive terms is also reﬂected in the contrast
between nonesuches and non-existents. Whereas there is no such thing as the present king of France, there is
such a thing as Sherlock Holmes albeit not a thing that exists. The present king of France is a nobody. Holmes
is a somebody, albeit a nonexistent one. For doubts about these contrasts see [Griﬃn, 2005].

1072
John Woods
to fact. It was occasioned by impulse to reify that ﬂows unstoppably from our can’t-help-it
realism.
Can’t-help-it realism doesn’t settle the question of whether realism is true. It calls to
mind the distinction between strong and weak AI. According to strong AI computers (or
computer programs) have minds in just the way that humans do. Weak AI allows that
strong AI may be false, but holds that the study of mind is methodologically advantaged
by the assumption that it is true. We might draw a similar distinction between strong and
weak realism. Our own can’t-help-it realism is pairwise compatible with each. But it is
like weak realism. It suggests that, all things considered, we get a better appreciation of
how things are by experiencing the world realistically and of yielding to the impulse to
reify.
3.3
Modalities de dicto and de re
It is natutal to think of the tug between PBM and O-models as paralleling that between de
dicto and de re modalities. This has something to do with the interplay between quantiﬁers
and the syntactic devices that betoken the ﬁctional. One of the founding data of most
accounts of ﬁction is that, while it is true that none of it happened, there are nevertheless
well-individuated entities of which it is true. The PBM and O-orientations incline their
respective supporters to diﬀerent formulations of this fundamental insight. PMBists see it
on the model of
1. It is true in the story that ∃x(. . . x . . .).
Those of the O-persuasion are more drawn to
2. ∃x (it is true in the story that . . . x . . .).
If we put T F as short for “it is true in story S that”, the PMB-formulation becomes
3. T F∃x(. . . x . . .)
whereas the O-formulation comes out as
4. ∃xT F(. . .x. . .).
If we also followed the practice of a good many theorists of ﬁction in regarding T F as a
kind of modal operator on sentences, then the de dicto/de re parallelism is quite clear. In
(3) the ﬁctive modality is de dicto, having no occurrence within the scope of the quantiﬁer.
In (4) the modality is de re; it occurs in the scope of x. It is a virtue of (3) that its truth
leaves it undisturbed that the ﬁctional leave no metaphysical footprints.17
One of its
drawbacks is that it triﬂes with the intuition that there are well-individuated objects of
which the goings on in ﬁction are true, as well as the kindred intuitions that they are also
subject to truths emanating from us rather than from the story.18
17As Kendall Walton once remarked to me in conversation, it is of central importance to a correct account of
ﬁction that, while there may be objects of ﬁction, no object is an object of ﬁction, or could be.
18Richard Routley, also in conversation, once pointed out that, given that Agatha Christie admired Sherlock
Holmes, not only was there some object of which that is true, but that it is something made true by Christie, not
by Conan Doyle.

Fictions and Their Logic
1073
On the face of it, the O-interpretation is more accommodating. That Holmes is a well-
individuated object of which certain things are true is indicated by the quantiﬁer of (4)
in de re position. That the things that are true of it (or him) never happened — to him
or anyone — is ﬂagged by the ﬁctive operator on the scope of (4)’s quantiﬁer.19 It also
bears on the advantages and disadvantages of (3) and (4) that it is much more natural for us
denizens of the world to speak of Holmes and his ilk, and on their to-ing and fro-ing, in the
manner of (4); whereas (3) is held in reserve for when (4) is under philosophical challenge
of the sort pressed by no-object theorists such as Walton. In natural speech under normal
circumstances, quantiﬁers show a marked tendency to poke to the left. Doing so gives
syntactic expression to our fondness for reiﬁcation. Our leanings towards reiﬁcation ﬁnd
a safe harbour in attributions de re. Reiﬁcation is de re-iﬁcation. We might say that
in speech and thought we are predisposed to handle quantiﬁcation in modal contexts in
conformity to the Barcan formula. So conceived, quantiﬁers have a preference for the
left. As we are presently characterizing the presumed tension between (4) and (3), if we
found reason to doubt (4), then (3) would be the only alternative. We should reconsider
this. A further attraction of the O-model is the promise it holds out for reconciling the
two, roughly as follows:
5. For any interpretation under which (4) is true, (3) is also true.
6. There are interpretations under which (4) is true.
An interpretation under which both (4) and (3) are true is one in which, for the values of
the quantiﬁer in (4) objecthood is assured but actuality is not. I shall return to this point
in §§4.2 and 4.3.
The transition of ZF sets from ﬁctions to facts, reminds us of the necessity to recognize
a third intuition about ﬁctions. This is reﬂected in the S -model.
PROPOSITION 10 (The S-model). Fictional objects arise from stipulations and, in the
ﬁrst instance, ﬁctional truths are made true by stipulation.
The S -model brings into consideration a certain way of making of our can’t-help-
it realism (and the embedded disposition to reify) not only states of mind forced upon
us by nature and circumstance, but states of mind having genuinely objectual content.
This is precisely what they would be were it the case that stipulations that meet certain
minimal constraints are metaphysically creative. This was Hilbert’s view of mathematics,
for whom any consistent stipulation of a mathematical entity produced that entity, brought
it into being. Of course, there is something weaker to say about creative stipulations. It is
that stipulations aren’t creative in fact, but that our can’t-help-it realism induces us to see
them as such. So there is an important question to be considered. Do stipulated beings
leave metaphysical footprints or are they metaphysically more ephemeral than that? Here
too we see the de dicto/de re distinction. In purely instrumental versions, stipulations
verify sentences in the form ⌜T F∃x(. . . x . . .)⌝but not in the form ⌜∃xT F(. . . x . . .)⌝. In
objectual versions it is the other way round.
19(4) does not however seem to capture Christie’s admiration of Holmes, in as much as her admiration is a
fact of the world, not of ﬁction, and seems not to belong in the scope of the ﬁctive operator. I return to this
question in §5.4.

1074
John Woods
This would be a good place to make the present point more generally and to note that
PROPOSITION 11 (A slack trichotomy). Our three models are not all on a par, and are
not entirely disjoint.
It is easy to see why the PMB-model leaves no metaphysical footprints. But the same
might also be said of some versions of the O-model. If so, the model could postulate
genuine objects that nevertheless “aren’t there.” On the other hand, some versions of the
S -model have it that stipulated objects are indeed there (it’s just that they weren’t there
prior to stipulation.) Similarly, we might ﬁnd theories in which the objects are stipulated
yet their subsequent adventures are a matter of make-believe. If this is right, the PMB-
model is itself a hybrid. So there is some slack in the space occupied by the PMB, O and
S -models.
In the large literature that has grown up around these issues, perhaps [Walton, 1990] is
the purest expression of the view that there are no ﬁctional objects in any sense of “are” or
“object”, as are [Parsons, 1980; Jacquette, 1996] and [Griﬃn, 2005] the purest expression
of a strong realism towards the ﬁctional.20 Virtually everything else lies somewhere be-
tween these extremes, with the majority of these intermediate positions clustering around
a loosely structured notion of weak realism.
3.4
Fictional discourse
It is necessary to distinguish three distinct sort of ﬁctional discourse, all of which require
elucidation in a conceptually sensitive logic of ﬁction. Following [Currie, 1990] we will
say that ﬁctive discourse consist of those sentences which constitute ﬁctional texts [Doyle:
1981]:
• Holmes was sitting with his back to me, and I had given him no sign of my occu-
pation (p. 7).
• ‘Good!’ said Holmes. ‘Excellent!’ (p. 7).
• Sherlock Holmes waved our strange visitor into a chair (p. 12).
• Holmes stretched out his hand for the manuscript and ﬂattened it upon his knee (p.
14).
Metaﬁctive discourse consists of sentences that are not ﬁctive, but which may be inferred
or surmised from literary texts.
• Holmes was a detective
• Holmes lived in London
• Holmes solved the Case of the Speckled Band
• Holmes patronized Watson
20See also [Parsons, 1975], [Routley, 1979; Cast˜anada, 1979] and [Zalta, 1983].

Fictions and Their Logic
1075
• Holmes was a marvellous reasoner.
Such sentences appear to make claims true of the stories, yet false of the world, to speak
loosely.21 For example, it appears to be true of Holmes that he lived in London but not
true of London that Holmes lived there [Woods, 1969].
Transﬁctive discourse consists of sentences are also used to make claims about the
characters and events that occur in works of ﬁction, but they make particular claims about
their relations to things external to the works in which they occur.
• Holmes was admired by Agatha Christie
• Holmes was appropriated in a later novel, A Monstrous Regiment of Women, by
Laurie R. King
• Jeremy Brett caught nuances of Holmes’ personality better than any other actor to
date
Such sentences might be said to make claims that are true of the world, yet false of the
stories, still speaking loosely.22
A principal part of the logician’s task is to set forth the production rules of stories’
maximal accounts. Here the concept of presumption plays a key role. There is a widely
held intuition that the full story of, for example, The Hound of the Baskervilles is not
exhausted by the totality of the lines constituting Conan Doyle’s printed text, that is to
say, by the ﬁctive sentences to be found there. There is much there that it is left to the
reader to “ﬁll in” by way of metaﬁctive sentences. This, too, is a kind of closure exercise,
but it is closure under weaker consequence relations than that of deductive implication. So
a further requirement of the logic of ﬁction is to specify these consequence relations and
determine their closure-conditions. A case in point: It is nowhere recorded that Sherlock
Holmes had an aliamentary canal. Should we presume, metaﬁctively, that he did have
one? If so, on what basis? Do we repose our trust in the generalization that aliamentary
canals are standard equipment for people? Or should we allow that since ﬁctional people
aren’t people, what characteristically holds of people may well not hold of Holmes? In
that case, should we try to locate Holmes’ aliamentary canal in the generalization that all
ﬁctional people have them? The trouble is that it is precisely this that is in question here.
Consider a second case. With regard to transﬁctive or mixed sentences, such as “Lon-
don was the city of Holmes’ residence”, the quite general question arises as to what Lon-
don (and the world, for that matter) would have to have been like for that sentence to
be true. For example, do Holmes’ city and the world in which it resides obey the laws
of physics? Varying the example, it happens Cervantes’ Don Quixote was published in
two parts, one in 1605 and the other in 1615. Kepler’s ﬁrst two laws of planetary motion
were published in 1609; the third in 1619. Does this mean that the heavenly bodies under
which Don Quixote slept in the ﬁrst part described circular orbits, yet those of the second
part described elliptical orbits? [Woods, 1974, 65].
21Of course, a sentence of metaﬁctional discourse containing the name of a real person might turn out be true
of the world as well.
22A sentence of transﬁctive discourse might also turn out to be true of the story.

1076
John Woods
3.5
Diﬃculties with pre-existing accounts
3.5.1
Descriptivism
Many philosophers are of the view that Russell’s motivation in developing the theory of
descriptions [Russell, 1905] was as a means of handling the problem of negative existen-
tials [Cartwright, 1960]. If this is right, it is natural to look to Russell for instruction in
matters ﬁctional, since one of the problems thrown up by ﬁction is the nonexistence of
its objects. How, then, are we to express this negatively existential fact? As developed
by Russell and extended to names by Quine [1939], sentences about Holmes are false,
just as sentences “about” the present king of France are false, and the intuitive diﬀerence
between these referring expressions is wholly erased. In that regard, descriptivism won’t
do at all for ﬁction. It might also be remarked in passing that, although Russell was in-
terested in the problem of negative existentials, this was not in fact the motivation for
“On Denoting”. What Russell wanted the theory of descriptions for was to elucidate the
contrast between knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description. This is also
a question of direct salience for ﬁction. Given that we cannot be acquainted with him,
how is our knowledge of Holmes structured? “On Denoting” embeds a relevant question
for ﬁction, but gives the wrong answer. Accordingly,
PROPOSITION 12 (Minimal adaptations of the theory of descriptions). Since they are
minimal adaptations of conceptually inadequate logics, description logics are at best level
1 logics for ﬁction.
3.5.2
Free logics
A free logic in the narrow sense is a quantiﬁcational system whose domain of interpreta-
tion can be empty and whose individual terms need not denote (but when they do they
denote actual objects). Sentences containing nondenoting terms are classically truth-
valueless, thus violating axioms A and B. A narrowly free e-logic is a free logic with
a dedicated existence predicate [Lambert, 1963; 1963a; 1964] and [van Fraassen, 1966;
1966a].23 Such logic fails to preserve the contrast between terms for nonesuches, such as
“the present king of France”, and terms for somebodies that don’t exist, such as “Sherlock
Holmes” So these logics violate axiom A.
Free logics were purpose-built for nondenoting terms. The question here is whether
they can be adapted to include ﬁctional terms as a special case. Such a view of ﬁction is
conceptually inadequate, never mind its formal virtues. Accordingly,
PROPOSITION 13 (Minimal adaptations of free logics). Since they are minimal adapta-
tions of conceptually inadequate logics, free logics are at best level 1 logics for ﬁction.
Let us also add that a logic is a free logic in the broad sense if it admits nondenot-
ing terms without paraphrase or whose terms may denote non-actual individuals. (An
exception is Lejewski [Lejewski, 1954], which — rightly in my view — doesn’t tolerate
empty singular terms such as “the present king of France”.) Routley’s existence-neutral
23[Hailperin and Leblanc, 1959] is also a narrowly free e-logic. [Hintikka, 1959] is not, despite some simi-
larities. [Smiley, 1960] too resembles, without quite being, a narrowly free logic.

Fictions and Their Logic
1077
quantiﬁcation theory [Routley, 1966], is a broadly free e-logic. But such logics cannot ac-
commodate mixed sentences such as “Holmes lived in London”; hence they disconform
to axiom E.
3.5.3
Supervaluational logics
A supervaluation logic is a logic in which there is a way of assigning truth values to sen-
tences of a formal language which allows that some sentences are classically nonbivalent
and yet none of the standard theorems is lost [van Fraassen, 1966; Bencivenga, 1980;
1991]. But here too the intuitive contrast between “the present king of France” and “Sher-
lock Holmes” collapses.24 However, non-bivalence approaches to ﬁction persist. See,
e.g., [Taylor, 2000; Adams et al., 1997], and [Slater, 2002].
PROPOSITION 14 (Minimal adaptions of supervaluational logics). For reasons cited
above, supervaluational logics are at best level 1 logics for ﬁction.
3.5.4
Epsilon calculi
Of note here are [Slater, 1987] and [Slater, 2002], in which it is proposed that the in-
ducements of many-valued and supervaluational approaches to the logic of ﬁction can be
obviated by way of epsilon terms. In an epsilon calculus — which is a conservative ex-
tension of the predicate calculus — there corresponds to every predicate ‘F’ the epsilon
term ‘εxFx’, which denotes a given F provided there are some Fs, and “has an arbitrary
reference otherwise” [Slater, 2002, 181]. Epsilon calculi have the resources to explain
how it can be the case that something is the one and only F even though there is no such
thing. As Slater observes, this is a feature that makes the epsilon approaches an attractive
way of handling ﬁctional discourse. For although there is no such person as Holmes, it
was he and only he who solved The Case of the Speckled Band. Even given that Holmes
is the one and only person who is Holmes, the epsilon calculus oﬀers us the good advice
not to try to book an appointment with him, yet without having to give up on the question
of who solved The Case of the Speckled Band. A crucial test, as always, is whether the
epsilon approach preserves the distinction between the present king of France and Sher-
lock Holmes. The answer is that it doesn’t and it does. At the level of reference, “the
present king of France” and “the solver of The Case of the Speckled Band” are at par. At
the level of truth things are diﬀerent. The truth of e.g., Holmes’ residency is conveyed
by a map from {“Holmes lived in Baker Street”, i} to the truth-value 1. Here ‘i’ denotes
the stories that make this true. As for the residency of the present king of France, there
is nothing to be known; this is because there is no authorizing i for the present king of
France. Some readers will think that the requisite contrast is not deeply enough drawn
here. If we have it that he who presently reigns in France is the one and only who does,
and yet that there exists no one who presently reigns in France, and that he who solved
The Case of the Speckled Band is the one and only person who did, and yet there exists
no one who solved The Case of the Speckled Band, the diﬀerence between them is that
24We note in passing that neither free logic nor supervaluation semantics has had the legs intended for them
if we are to judge by, e.g., [Everett and Hofweber, 2000].

1078
John Woods
there are stories about the latter, and none so far about the former. As with Meinongian
approaches, the subjects of ﬁctions precede their ﬁctionalization. This is tantamount to a
violation of axiom D — that ﬁctional beings originate with their ﬁcationalizations. The
distinction between “Sherlock Holmes” and “The present king of France” is also lost here.
Accordingly
PROPOSITION 15 (Minimal adaptations of epsilon calculi). These too are at best level
1 logics for ﬁction.
3.5.5
Meinongian logics
Meinongianism also runs afoul of axiom D — the author’s sayso axiom. On this view,
all objects, ﬁctional or otherwise, are by virtue of their corresponding sets of properties.
Thus ﬁctional objects “were objects before they were written about; they were so to speak
only identiﬁed, or perhaps discovered, by the author, and writing about them did not
confer objecthood upon them” [Parsons, 1975, 79]. The requirement that ﬁctional objects
be run-of-the-mill Meinongian objects precludes it being the case that in a rather deep and
somewhat literal sense ﬁctional objects have a literary paternity; i.e., that they are created
by their authors.25
Particular note should be taken of Jacquette’s [1996]. It is a good example of a ma-
ture and coherent mathematical logic. It has a well-speciﬁed formal language, and the
requisite proof and model theories. The system is sound and complete. It has deduc-
tion, compactness and interpolation theorems. It is a three-valued logic in the manner of
Łukasiewicz. It is undoubtedly a “decent” logic in Meheus’ sense. It is inspired by a con-
ceptually mature metaphysical theory. It was purpose-built to accommodate Meinong’s
theory of objects, which notwithstanding the slurs of Russell is an intellectually robust
rival of the timorous ontologies of classical logic. Of special note is its satisfaction of
axiom A. In Jacquette’s hands, the logic of objects adapts in an apparently natural way
to the logic of ﬁction. It is a fair approximation of a level 3 logic of Meinonge. And
while it handles ﬁctional language with all the formal adeptness it aﬀords to Meinongian
language, it cannot be regarded as a level 3 logic of ﬁction. It is not adequate for the
conceptual demands of ﬁction. Its adaptation to the demands of ﬁction is minimal. I recur
to this point in greater detail in §4.2 to follow.
3.5.6
Theories of partial objects
Theories of partial objects [Landman, 1986] permit the introduction of formal objects with
out identity criteria in ATMS models that are designed to consider hypothetical objects
in the context of alternative abductions of bodies of evidence or data [de Kleer, 1986].
Informally, the basic idea is that in a criminal investigation, various possible theories of
the case are often considered. In an incriminating theory, an account of the ﬁndings is
predicated of some determinate individual. In a non-incriminating theory, an account
25[Kivy, 1993] argues that musical works are discovered and not created. Presumably similar arguments
could be mobilized on behalf of the thesis that ﬁctional characters pre-date authorial creative activity. Levinson,
however, has oﬀered reasons for balking at such arguments [Levinson, 1980].

Fictions and Their Logic
1079
of the case is predicated of some merely possible object. The theory of partial objects
develops a semantics for the sentences of such accounts that purport to refer to such
“objects”.
The partiality of hypothetical objects squares well with any theory of ﬁction in which
ﬁctional objects are incomplete. Even so, lost in the partial objects approach is the in-
tuition that ﬁctional beings, whether incomplete or not, are well-individuated by their
maximal accounts. So, here too, partial objects logic of ﬁction could at best be only a
level 1 logic.
3.5.7
Paraconsistent logics
The principal feature of paraconsistent logics is that they are contradiction-tolerant [da
Costa, 1998; Schotch and Jennings, 1989; Brown, 2000; Batens, 2000; Meheus et al,
forthcoming; Jacquette, 1998]. Paraconsistent consequence does not satisfy the classical
provision that a contradiction implies every statement. To the extent that axiom D —
and also axiom E — allow for intended contradictions to hold in a work of ﬁction, it is
certainly arguable that deductive closure in ﬁctional discourse is subject to paraconsistent
constraints. However, as they stand, such logics make no provision for axioms A, or for
B,C, D or E. Accordingly, any successful minimal adaptation would be at most a level 1
logic of ﬁction.
Here, too, we meet with strongly competing theoretical intuitions. Meinongians such
as Jacquette are at ease with the idea of nontrivial reasoning from inconsistent data-bases,
which they eﬀect with the device of predicate complementation. Theorists, such as Lewis,
who abjure the very idea of “allowable” inconsistencies, preclude nontrivial inferences
from inconsistencies by imposing severe constraints on ﬁctional reasoning as such. It
falls to the logician of ﬁctional to adjudicate these rivalries. Lewisen insights are further
explored in §4.1.
3.5.8
Dialetheic logics
Dialetheic logics are paraconsistent, with a diﬀerence. Whereas paraconsistent systems
are contradiction-tolerant, dialetheic logics are contradiction-aﬃrming [Routley and
Meyer, 1976; Priest, 1979; 1987; Armour-Garb; 2005; Woods, 2005]. If we persist in
the view that D and E have the force of verifying ﬁctional contradictions, deductive clo-
sure in ﬁction would have to be dialetheic, except as otherwise provided by their author’s
ﬁctive sentences. But notwithstanding [Heintz, 1979], dialetheic logics are not, as they
stand, especially congenial to ﬁctional objects and ﬁctional truths. Consequently, here
too, minimal adaptation would at best provide a level 1 logic of ﬁction.
With the dialetheic turn, we appear to lose the sympathies of virtually anyone who has
attempted an analysis of ﬁctional discourse. In fact, it is a dispute in which dialetheists
have a certain tactical advantage. Why, they will ask, if it is inferentially harmless to
admit contradictions to literary texts, what further harm would ﬂow from their sometimes
being true? All paraconsistentists agree that, whatever else, it should not be allowed that
from an inconsistency everything be inferred. But apparently it is possible to avoid the

1080
John Woods
disaster of ex falso quodlibet without forbidding the very idea of true contradictions.26
That being so, it remains an open question in the logic of ﬁction as to whether a ﬁctional
truth might be a contradiction.
3.5.9
Substitutional quantiﬁcation
We come now to an early attempt to move beyond level 1. Sentences containing quan-
tiﬁers are usually interpreted by assigning a value to a contained variable. Values are
construed as objects from the theory’s domain of discourse. However, when considered
substitutionally [Woods, 1974], terms (not objects) are assigned to quantiﬁed variables.27
By these lights, “Someone solved the Case of the Speckled Band” would be true just in
case, for some name N, “N solved the Case of the Speckled Band” would also be a true
sentence. If N were the name of Sherlock Holmes, the sentence would indeed be true.
One of the attractions of the substitutional approach to ﬁction is that it oﬀers an engaging
solution to the problem of negative existentials; it frees quantiﬁers from the burden of
existential import. Accordingly, “There are things that don’t exist” could turn out true
on the strength of the truth that Sherlock doesn’t exist, without the embarrassment of the
embedded name “Sherlock”’s having to denote an existent object. But there are problems.
One is to ﬁnd the right link between the reference of “Sherlock” and the truth of “Sherlock
solved the Case of the Speckled Band”. As mentioned above, it would appear that these
objectives can’t be met in the standard (and best to date) theories of reference and truth.
An alternative might be to fashion a theory of truth in the manner called for by C, and
leave ﬁctional names without referents. Doing so, however, would violate axiom A.
[Woods 1974] is purpose-built for ﬁction. It is a nonstandard modal extension of classi-
cal logic. Apart from the trouble occasioned by its failure to ﬁt axiom A, additional prob-
lems threaten. One is that it might fail to be mature and coherent mathematical logic. This
is, in eﬀect, precisely what the criticisms of [Howell, 1976; Parsons, 1978] and [Routley,
1979] claim. A further diﬃculty might be that the conceptual model that [Woods 1974]
takes pains to articulate is underdetermined by its own mathematical logic. Such indeed
is the case. For example, Woods’ formal logic makes no provision for inference relations
peculiar to the construction of maximal accounts.
3.5.10
A methodological reﬂection
As our brief examination of pre-existing logics makes clear, there is a natural tendency
among investigators to assimilate their ﬁndings to what is already known. We see in
this the guiding presence of the Can Do Principle. Can Do helps regulate the cogni-
tive economies in which scientiﬁc and other forms of enquiry occur. It is a principle of
methodological conservativism, bidding the researcher to transact his business with tools
he already commands and to repose his results in theories that are well-understood and
have stood the test of time. At bottom, Can Do is stout discouragement of re-inventions of
the wheel. It is a motivating force behind reductionism in most of its varieties and it is a
26This issue is explored in greater detail in [Woods, 2005].
27[Pavel, 1986; Doleˇzel, 1979] and [Currie, 1990].

Fictions and Their Logic
1081
presupposition of many attempts to unify knowledge. Like many good principles, Can Do
has a degenerate case. At its most extreme, Make Do is Can Do run amok. At its least ex-
treme, Make Do abuses the perfectly reasonable principle that often it is better to have an
imperfect theory than no theory at all. In the hands of Make-Do, wrong-headed theories
tend also to make the cut. Make Do inclines the theorist to employ tools that don’t ﬁt his
present task and to seek a home for his results in theories that cannot justiﬁably accom-
modate them, on the grounds that the appropriated tools and borrowed theories are well-
understood and have scored impressive successes in their rightful spheres of inﬂuence.
Accounts fashioned in this way suﬀer from what [Toulmin, 1953] calls procrusteanism.
It is an abiding diﬃculty of theoretical analysis that degenerate cases of Can Do are
so often not self-announcing and that they make themselves known only after the fact,
if at all. Similarly, some of the most fruitful reductions, as with Descartes’ algebraic re-
working of plane geometry, have been considered wildly implausible before the fact. In
general, we do not have a particularly reliable working command of the Can Do – Make
Do distinction. So one does the best one can and waits to see what happens. The logician’s
desire to get a handle on the ﬁctional is wistful occasion to bear these diﬃculties in mind.
Like it or not, he is caught in the tug of two forces. To the extent possible, he should
assimilate the account of ﬁction to what he already knows how to handle. To the extent
possible, he should also avoid the excesses of Make Do.28 Readers sympathetic to this
line will likely agree with Penelope Maddy on a similar issue.
. . .
philosophers seem occupationally disposed to analogies: mathemat-
ics is like a game, or mathematics is like ﬁctional story-telling, or mathe-
matical language is like metaphorical language . . . Let us imagine that [a
philosopher of mathematics] instead undertakes to characterize mathematics
directly, as itself; instead of trying to understand mathematics by analogy
with something more familiar, she tries to make mathematics itself more fa-
miliar. [Maddy, 2005, 364], emphases added).29
As we see, the usual run of pre-existing logics seem not to work convincingly for ﬁction.
Perhaps this was only to be expected. Perhaps a happier outcome will be achieved by a
logic that has been wrought with the imperatives of a conceptually adequate appreciation
of the ﬁctional ﬁrmly in mind. In the section to follow, we shall examine in some detail
the dominant conceptual models of the ﬁctional. Of the three, as we shall see, only the
S -model evades the depredations of Make-Do although, even there, not everything is clear
sailing. So we shall now ﬂag a negative thesis.
28Can Do and Make Do are discussed at greater length in [Woods, 2006]. But we might here note further
variations. As we have it so far, Can Do and Make Do are about the appropriation of existing theories in an
eﬀort to bring the analytical task at hand to heel. The same processes are also at work with regard to one’s
choice of an analytic vocabulary for a problem. Two quick examples will give the ﬂavour of this. First, it
is common among modal semanticists to analyse possible worlds as maximal consistent sets of propositions.
Modal sceptics such as Quine complain that the analyzing idiom of “proposition” is no better-understood than
the analysandum “possible world”. Secondly, it is still widely accepted to deﬁne “analytic sentence” as one that
converts to a logical truth upon the replacement of terms by synonyms. Intensionality sceptics (Quine again)
complain that the analyzing idiom ‘synonym’ is no better-understood than the analysandum ‘analytic’. In each
case, the sceptic is pressing a version of the Make Do complaint. (I cite these examples without prejudice.)
29Cf. Michael Oakeshott on what the poet does: he imagines poetically.

1082
John Woods
PROPOSITION 16 (PMB, O and Make-Do). The dominant versions of the PMB-model
and the O-model suﬀer, in varying degrees, from the debilitations of Make-Do.
4
EXAMINING THE BASIC CONCEPTUAL MODELS
The upshot of the forgoing discussion is that existing logics have not responded well un-
der minimal adaptation to the requirements of a logic of ﬁction. Even logics such as
[Woods, 1974], which was speciﬁcally constructed for ﬁction, fail to formalize a num-
ber of conceptually signiﬁcant features. In eﬀect, it too is a minimal adaptation. In the
present section, we turn our attention to the various ways in which ﬁctions have been
conceptualized, with particular reference to our three paradigms – the PMB-model, the
O-model and the S -model. If our objective is to have an account of ﬁction that is mathe-
matically mature and coherent, as well as conceptually adequate, it is necessary to begin
with the issue of conceptual adequacy, which is prior. It bears remarking that to date most
of the conceptual work on ﬁction has been produced independently of attempts to develop
formal structures in the manner of a level 3 approach.
4.1
PMB approaches
PMB approaches invoke a pair of inequivalent notions. One is pretense and the other is
make-believe. In some variations of the model, the two concepts are hand in glove. Even
so, as we shall later see, their disjointness should not be overlooked. Most examples of the
PMB approach arise from what we might call a propositional attitude orientation towards
the analysis of ﬁction.30 Here the basic idea is that fundamental to the creation of ﬁctions
and to their being responded to as ﬁctions is the role of the imagination, where imagining
is construed as a propositional attitude. Not all propositional attitude approaches conform
to the PMB-model, but PM-approaches are all propositional attitude approaches.
By far the currently dominant PMB-theory is that of Kendall Walton in his widely
acclaimed Mimesis as Make-Believe [Walton, 1990]. There is also something to be said
for the stronger claim that Walton’s is widely considered the best conceptual account of
ﬁction — the best of the PMB-type and better than what is on oﬀer in any of the competing
models. My interest here is with Walton’s theory as a paradigm of the PMB-model. Since
Walton is to some extent anticipated by John Searle’s paper, “The logical status of ﬁctional
discourse” [Searle, 1975], it is best to begin our discussion there.
4.1.1
Authorial pretense
According to Searle, pretense is the characteristic authorial attitude towards the sentences
they pen in story-telling. When Doyle ﬁrst wrote “‘Good!’ said Holmes. ‘Excellent!”’, he
made no assertion. Rather he pretended to assert that this is what Holmes said. Similarly,
when Doyle produced the sentence, “Holmes stretched out his hand for the manuscript
and ﬂattened it upon his knee”, he pretended that there existed and that he had referred
30Other propositional attitude approaches include [Smith, 1978; Gabriel, 1979; Oversteegen, 1982; Currie,
1990; Mooij, 1993] and [Everett and Hofweber, 2000].

Fictions and Their Logic
1083
to a real Sherlock Holmes. What makes this possible is that by “pretending to refer to
people and recount events about them, the author creates ﬁctional characters and events.”
[Searle, 1975, 33]. It should be noted that here Searle’s way of being a PMB-theorist
takes on aspects of the O-model. For, unlike Walton, who holds that Sherlock Holmes
is an object of no kind, Searle allows that Holmes is an object of some kind, namely,
the ﬁctional kind. Equally, whereas Walton holds that pretending to refer is reference of
no kind, Searle’s view is that in pretending to refer we do refer, albeit to something of a
kind diﬀerent from the pretended referent of the pretend-reference. This gives us what we
might call
PROPOSITION 17 (Searle’s Principle). Suppose that x doesn’t exist and yet pretending
to refer to x as real succeeds. Then in pretending to refer to x, one is in fact referring to
an unreal x.
Searle himself does not explicitly proclaim Searle’s Principle. But he is committed to
it. This being so, it is especially awkward that nowhere in [Searle, 1975] do we ﬁnd a
discussion of the principle’s putative truth conditions.
If Searle’s Principle leaves the ontological status of the ﬁctional Holmes in the dark,
also problematic is the following pair of issues.
• What is the reader’s role? Do readers engage in pretense? Is it the same pretense as
authors are involved in? If so, what explains this remarkable concurrence? If not,
how is co-reference possible?
• What is the critic’s role? When someone says that Jeremy Brett captured Holmes’
character better than Basil Rathbone, is the critic engaging in pretense? If so, what
is he pretending? If not, then must we not concede that pretense is not a condition
on reference to ﬁctional beings.
4.1.2
Appreciator make-believe
[Walton, 1990] is a more developed propositional attitude analysis than Searle’s. While
there are clear similarities between the two accounts, there is a notable diﬀerence. Searle
concentrates on an author’s attitude towards the sentences he produces. Walton empha-
sizes the attitudes of the reader. In so doing, Walton takes himself to have adapted the
model of a child’s game of make-believe. Accordingly, in reading a story, readers are
playing games. As in various kinds of games (but not all), in playing the game of reading,
readers make use of special kinds of props. What is more, the props of which readers avail
themselves are those that are (tacitly) authorized by the type of game that story-reading is.
Walton sees games of make-believe as governed by rules. In the case of the games that
constitute the reading of a story, the associated rules allow that certain propositions can
be imagined. These are the ﬁctional truths of the game. Walton also thinks that a prop in
a game of make-believe is, as provided by the rules of the game, an object that generates
these ﬁctional truths. In the case of the game of ﬁction, the role of prop is played by the
work on the text of the story. Accordingly,

1084
John Woods
PROPOSITION 18 (Waltonian works of ﬁction). A work of ﬁction is an object whose
function is to serve as a prop in a game of make-believe of the requisite type.
What is more,
A thing may be said to have the function serving a certain purpose, regardless
of the intentions of its maker, if things of that kind are typically or normally
meant by their makers to serve that purpose [Walton, 1990, 52].
Walton allows that stories make-true sentences in the form “It is true-in-t that S ”, where t
is a ﬁction and S a ﬁctive sentence. He gives their truth conditions as follows:
PROPOSITION 19 (Waltonian truth). A sentence of the form “It is true-in-t that S ” is
true iﬀﬁction t is such that one who engages in pretense of kind K in a game authorized
for it makes it ﬁctional of herself that she speaks truly. [Walton, 1990, 400].
An authorized pretense is a pretense of the requisite kind. But what is a pretense of the
requisite kind? As Walton sees it,
PROPOSITION 20 (Requisite pretense). A speaker displays the requisite kind of pre-
tense when in pretending to assert a ﬁctive or metaﬁctive sentence he actually asserts the
Waltonian paraphrase of it.
COROLLARY 20(a)
Speakers producing such sentences other than in the “spirit of
pretense” fail to display a pretense of the requisite type, but only go through the motions
of so doing [Walton, 1990, 402-404].31
Walton’s account is shot-through with obscurity. The problem is so bad that it calls
it sharply into question as to how Mimesis and Make-Believe could have attained and
preserved its status as the leading conceptual account of ﬁction. The obscurity problem
arises as follows. Central to Walton’s account are the terms pretense, make-believe and
prop. As used within the theory, it is arguable that not one of these terms retains its
customary meaning, yet their nonstandard, theoretical, uses are unexplained. Central as
they are to the Waltonian analysis, they give rise to
PROPOSITION 21 (Walton’s dilemma). Concerning the terms “pretense”, “make-believe”
and “prop”, one of two things is true. (1) In their application to Walton’s theory, they lack
their ordinary meanings, and their theoretical meanings are unexplained. (2) They have
ordinary meanings incompatible with the claims of the theory.
Let us begin with make-believe. Make-believe is what actors do to audiences (and
children, in certain of their games, do to one another). Christopher Plummer plays John
Barrymore in ways that get the audience to experience the action on stage as Barrymore’s
own. Plummer gets his audience to believe that this is happening to Barrymore. Hence
make-believe. One must not gainsay the genuine complexity of the relationship between
Plummer and his audience. In getting his audience to experience his behaviour on stage
as Barrymore’s and to care about it as Barrymore’s, something quite remarkable has
occurred. We might say that something similar occurs between Doyle and his readers.
Doyle’s sentences get readers to experience the events described as happening to Holmes
31Are they then pretending to pretend?!

Fictions and Their Logic
1085
and to care about them as aﬀecting Holmes. Yet not a word of Mimesis and Make-Believe
suggests that this is what Walton means by make-believe.
In a further of its common uses, “make-believe” carries connotations of the unreal.
It ranges from Plummer’s state of mind (make-believe grief), to models (make-believe
markets), and from them to props (a make-believe gun). But there is nothing here that
comes close to elucidating Walton’s idea of ﬁction as a game of make-believe. Of course,
there are games of make-believe. Cops and Robbers is a game of make-believe. But
it is folly to liken the reading of a story to Cops and Robbers. In playing a game of
Cops and Robbers it is not essential to its success (indeed it may be fatal to its success)
that spectators be doxastically and aﬀectively engaged — there is nothing here like being
convinced that Hamlet is a homosexual or hating Iago’s guts.32 Fiction stands apart from
this in two respects. One is that readers play no role remotely similar to that played by
any of the parties to a game of Cops and Robbers. The other is that a story fails if it fails
to engage its readers doxastically and aﬀectively.
Another vexation is Walton’s appropriation of the idea of a prop. “Prop” is a theatrical
term. It is short for “properties”. A prop is an object from the company’s properties
department. The task of the Royal Shakespeare Company’s properties department is to
dress the stage and equip the players with the objects and other physical wherewithal
required by the play. In most cases these are not only real objects, but real cases of the
type of object that the play calls for. When the play calls for a dinner table to be set,
the props department sets it with real plates. Similarly, curtains are usually real curtains,
chairs real chairs, beds real beds, and so on. There is in the idea of a prop not the shred
of a presumption of type-unreality.
Sometimes the objects called for by the play are too big, too heavy, too expensive or too
dangerous for use on stage. In that case, the props department will furnish stands-in for
the objects not present. An object stands in for an object not present by virtue of various
similarity relations, but also by virtue of its place in what is played out on stage. So a
cap-pistol can also be a prop, standing in for a .45. Equally, the stool that is broken over
the actor’s head can be a prop, standing in for the real thing, which, had it been present,
would have surely ended the performance. Although some props are pretend-objects,
such is only a contingent and occasional connection. Most props are not pretend-objects
of any kind. This makes Walton’s appropriation of the term rather perplexing.
Walton thinks that The Hound of the Baskervilles is a prop. Like the .45, it is a real
object. Like the .45, its “function” is to generate truths. In the performance of a play, the
actor playing Spike might be brandishing a .45, thus helping to engender the truth that
Spike is brandishing a .45. The text of The Hound of the Baskervilles also engenders a
truth. In Walton’s telling, it is true-in-The Hound of the Baskervilles that Holmes was a
detective because the prop, The Hound of the Baskervilles, is such that one who engages
in pretense of the requisite kind in a game authorized for it makes it ﬁctional of himself
that he speaks truly. Now whatever this might actually mean, it isn’t a jot necessary or
helpful to invoke the concept of prop. Of course, it can’t be ruled out that Walton has a
theoretically loaded sense of prop in mind. If so, he might have let us in on the secret.
32There is a large literature on ﬁctionally induced emotions. See, e.g., [Radford, 1975; Slater, 1993; Walton,
1990] and [Alward, forthcoming].

1086
John Woods
Pretense is central to Searle’s account of the author’s role, and to Lewis’ as well [1978;
1996]. Pretense is central to Walton’s account of the reader’s role. According to Searle
and Lewis, authors are taken to be pretending to be reporting the actual truth of what they
are writing about. Upon reﬂection however, there isn’t the slightest reason for thinking
that this is so. What is true is that when an author pens his lines, he is writing a story,
and that writing a story is a special kind of make-believe. The author writes the story in
the hope that its readers will be made to believe that what it ascribes to its characters is
actually happening to them. It is, again, exceedingly diﬃcult to fathom the mechanics of
such make-believe, but there is no denying its eﬃcacy or its power. People argue with
the greatest intensity about Hamlet’s character and motivation, and are reduced to tears at
Little Nell’s brutal death. If the ordinary meaning of “pretend” is to have any sway here,
we should have to accept that if these make-believes arose from the author’s pretense, then
it would have been the case that in creating the story, the author was intent on deceiving us.
If he was pretending to report the actual facts of the case, he would have been deceiving
us; and, for this to be true, we would have to think that he was reporting what actually
happened. It matters greatly that authorially intended make-beliefs succeed wildly even
in the face of his readers’ knowledge of what he has done, namely, write a story. So, for
the present sense of “pretend”, the last thing that the author is doing is pretending to do
what he is not doing in fact.33
Of course, other senses of “pretend” might also be considered. When, in a game of
Cops and Robbers, little Harry pretends to be Dick Tracy, he is not trying to deceive his
playmates that he is indeed that pointy-chinned sleuth. He is play-acting. He is playing
the role of Tracy. It is a condition of his doing this well that his playful behaviour be
somehow indicative of Tracy’s behaviour (he can’t play him as the Virgin Mary).34 When
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle sat down to write The Case of the Speckled Band, he was not
pretending to be reporting to his readers the adventures of Holmes. This is not to say that
in this story the adventures of Holmes are not reported at all. In fact, they are reported
by Watson. Somehow Doyle gets it to be the case that the events recounted by Watson
are true of Holmes;35 but, however this was done, it was not done by Doyle pretending
to report those doings as fact, as Lewis expressly claims. Neither was it done by Doyle
play-acting that he is reporting the actual fact that Watson is reporting the actual facts
about Holmes (and about himself; these stories are Watson’s memoirs).
Pretense, in both of the two senses under review, leaves no metaphysical footprints.
What Doyle was doing was writing the Holmes stories. He was making them up. Doing
this also leaves no metaphysical footprints. In writing his stories, Doyle constructed nar-
ratives. It is quite common to use narratives to deceive people, to lie to them. It is not
uncommon to use narratives for make-believe. But it is a massive disanalogy to equate
33Still, Walton is in celebrated company. Plato makes the same mistake in the Republic, in making the case
for the exclusion of the dramatic poets from the perfect civil society. Plato was entirely right to notice in the arts
a propensity to corrupt, but was entirely wrong in identifying the corruption as a form of lying.
34Perhaps he might play Tracy as Tracy pretending to be the Virgin Mary, but little Harry would have to be
one sophisticated little kid to do that.
35This is challenged by Holmes himself in the successor novels of Laurie R. King. An interesting complica-
tion.

Fictions and Their Logic
1087
story writing with pretense in either of these two senses, just on the grounds that the
narratives of ﬁction don’t leave metaphysical footprints.
The idea that authors are pretenders, in either of its two senses, has nothing to recom-
mend it. The kindred suggestion that readers also play such a role is, if anything, even
less worthy of a gentle reception. Readers might misread a work of ﬁction, taking it as
an historical narrative, although such confusions are much rarer, and harder to fall into,
than one might think. But when a reader reads a work knowing it to be a work of ﬁction,
there is a certain psychological state that it is necessary for him to be in, a certain mode
of concomitant susceptibility. He must be moved to take the story’s claims as true of its
characters and he must be capable of being aﬀectively engaged by those characters and
the events that befall them. No doubt the full story of this psychological complexity is
a long way from being told. But we know its rudiments. The appropriate response of a
reader to a work of ﬁction is one in which he accepts the story’s attributions as true recog-
nizing all the while that the events attributed and the subjects to which they are ascribed
are not real. (Hence, “the willing suspension of disbelief.”)
Another leading PMB-theorist is Lewis.36 Lewis is equivocal about ﬁction. He pro-
duces two accounts, whose diﬀerences are apparent in the following two truth deﬁnitions.
First,
PROPOSITION 22 (Lewisean truth I). A sentence in the form ‘In ﬁction f, φ’ is non-
vacuously true iﬀsome world where f is told as known fact and φ is true diﬀers less from
our actual world, on balance, than does any world where f is told as known fact and φ is
not true (1983, 270].37
Second,
PROPOSITION 23 (Lewisean truth II). A sentence of the form. “In ﬁction f, φ” is non-
vacuously true iﬀwhenever w is one of the collective belief worlds of the community of
origin of f, then some world where f is told as known fact and φ is true diﬀers less from
the world w, on balance, than does any world where f is told as known fact and φ is not
true (p. 273).
The idea of a collective belief world plays an important role in the speciﬁcation of
maximal accounts, and we shall have occasion to return to it later. Suﬃce it to say for
now that collective belief worlds are populated by background beliefs. A background
belief is one which more or less everyone in the author’s community accepts, virtually
everyone believes that everyone accepts, and so on. Lewis also requires such beliefs to be
jointly consistent.
It is easy to see that for Lewis, too, pretense is essential to the analysis. A ﬁctional story
is one told as known fact, but storytelling is pretense; the story-teller pretends that he is
recounting a story he knows to be true. Lewis’ approach is also a heavily consistentist
one. It may be that in f, S and that in f, ∼S , but it cannot be true of any f and S that in
f, S ∧∼S . On the face of it, this cannot be right. In A Sound of Thunder, Keith both is
and is not elected president in the same election.
36Critics of Lewis include [Byrne, 1993; Currie, 1990; LePoidevin, 1995; Phillips, 1999; Priest, 1997;
Jacquette, 2001]. Of the favourably-minded camp, [Hanley, 2004] thinks better of Lewis’ account than Lewis
himself does.
37Note the similarity between “true in f” and “T F”.

1088
John Woods
Even so, Lewis won’t have it. What is true in A Sound of Thunder is some subset of
its ﬁctive sentences. Lewis considers two ways in which ﬂat-out sentential contradictions
might be disabled. One is the method of intersection, and the other the method of union.
Much of the criticism that Lewis’ theory attracts is directed at this refusal of authorially
validated in-ﬁction contradictions. This, too, is an issue that I’ll take up later. Here it
is enough to emphasize the point that for Lewis authors of ﬁction are pretending to tell
the truth, and when, in fact, there isn’t the slightest reason to think that this is what they
themselves think that they are doing. If it is true that this is what they are doing, is it not
surpassing strange that David Lewis would know it but Miguel Cervantes would not, and
that Kendall Walton would know it, but Henry James wouldn’t have had a clue? Of course,
here too there is a possible explanation of these aﬀronting asymmetries. There is a sense
of “pretense” known to Lewis and Walton but unknown to Cervantes and James (and, we
may suppose, virtually everyone else) for which it is indeed the case that what Cervantes
and James were doing is pretending to tell the truth. But what sense of “pretense” is that?
Whatever we are to take them to mean, Walton’s notions of pretense, make-believe
and prop are embedded in an overarching concept of game. It is true, of course, that
some games are games of pretending and make-believe, and that some such games in-
volve the use of pretend-objects used as props. The concept of game has achieved a high
importance in Anglo-American philosophy since the 1950s. Wittgenstein’s likening of
the speaking a language to the playing of a game has attracted enormous philosophical
attention [Wittgenstein, 1956; Kripke, 1982]. Contractarian approaches to ethics and po-
litical theory also brim with the game theory of von Neumann and Morgenstern [1944]
and Nash [1950]. Logic itself has taken on a game-theoretic character, beginning with the
pioneering work of Hintikka [1974]38. It would not be going too far to say that games are
by now the objects of detailed, carefully reﬁned and rather powerful theories. Not that
the analysis of games is entirely a fait accompli. As I write, it is still a work in progress
and a growth industry.39 The sheer importance of the philosophical analysis of games
embeds a twofold attraction. To the extent that it is considered a safe harbour, it invites
the working researcher to repose his own theories there, to try to eﬀect a kind of reduction
of the issues he is working on (say, the analysis of X) to the theory of games. To the
extent to which the theory of games is still a work in progress, it invites the reduction
of (say) the analysis of X to the theory of games also as a contribution to the theory of
games (in the manner, for example, of the Stone Representation Theorem [Stone, 1937]).
There is much to commend in such assumptions. If the theory of X is indeed subsumed
by the theory of games, then locating X within the theory of games is an eﬃcient way of
achieving genuine elucidations of the structure of Xhood. But if, by chance, X doesn’t
reduce to the theory of games, then a game-theoretic analysis of Xs is at best a conceptual
distortion and at worst a profound mistake.
38In [1974] Hintikka mentions that he ﬁrst presented the idea of a logic as a game in his 1964 John Locke
Lectures at Oxford.
39In November 2005, at King’s College London, the prestigious De Morgan Conference on Logic was devoted
entirely to game-theoretic logic.

Fictions and Their Logic
1089
In Proposition 16 we ﬂagged a negative thesis about some widely received analyses
of the ﬁctional. In this regard, Walton’s contributions to this approach, as indeed are all
pretense theories, is a disappointment. There is straighter way of saying this.
PROPOSITION 24 (Games and Make-Do). The employment within the PMB-model of
the notion of game shows indications of Make-Do.
There is nothing in Walton’s writings to suggest that any such reduction was ever in
his mind. And certainly, it would be a considerable stretch to represent Mimesis as Make-
Believe as a contribution to the philosophical analysis of games. Still, games are at the
centre of Walton’s approach to ﬁction. So it cannot be dismissed out of hand that he
might have been drawn to this assimilation unawares. (After all, weren’t we just now
considering that Cervantes and James were pretending unawares?) What really counts, of
course, is whether the concept of game plays any kind of load-bearing role in the logic of
ﬁction. It takes little reﬂection to see that there is nothing good to be said for assimilation.
In none of the ordinary meanings (pace Wittgenstein) of “game”, is what an author is
up to in writing a story a game and what a reader is up to in reading a story (knowing
it to be one) a game. Some philosophers are of the view that Wittgenstein greatly over-
played the similarities between games and language-use. In this they may well be right.
But it cannot seriously be doubted that in conceiving of story-telling and story-reading
as games, Walton has transgressed every ordinary meaning of “game”. It is possible, of
course, that he intends an unordinary or technical sense of this word. If so, he would have
done well to tell us about it.
A further sense of “pretense” can now be considered, at the juncture where the PMB-
model and the S -model converge. Given the sense now in play, pretense arises from one
person’s proposal to say and another person’s acceptance of it. Its natural idioms are “let
us say that . . . ”, “we put it that . . . ”, “we take it that . . . ” and the like. Such expres-
sions are the common currency of working mathematicians, especially when introducing
concepts by nominal deﬁnition (or what [Russell, 1903] calls mathematical deﬁnition, as
opposed to philosophical analysis). Such sayings, puttings and takings are stipulative.
In mathematical contexts, stipulation is subject to a two-phase process. First there is the
form of words and the speech acts that bring the stipulated object into view. Second, there
is a judgement by the intended audience (here, it is the relevant research community) as
to whether this is a usable stipulation, whether it integrates with what is presently known
and facilitates the unearthing of new theorems. Hilbert appears to have thought that phase
one was primary and autonomous. Russell appears to have thought that in the absence of
phase-two communal acceptance, whatever had been wrought at phase one would atrophy
and eventually die out. The idiom of taking gives us occasion to re-visit the de dicto/de
re distinction. We remarked earlier that in our own discourse about the ﬁctional the de
re mode of expression is the more natural. If we allow that what an author’s stipulations
make true is that
3. T F∃x(. . .x. . .),
we nevertheless ﬁnd it natural to take it that
3. ∃xT F(. . .x. . .)

1090
John Woods
When we turn to a more detailed discussion of the S -model in §4.3, it will be important
to re-acknowledge the dual character of mathematical stipulationism — its objectual or
quasi-objectural orientation and its purely instrumental orientation. Even so, the present
take on taking is worth keeping in mind.
4.2
Meinongian logics
One of the basic approaches to the O-model of ﬁction is to treat ﬁctional objects as a
special subclass of Meinongian objects. Roughly speaking, a Meinongian object is any-
thing that might be the object of someone’s thought. Such objects are separate from the
content of the thoughts that “intend” them. Those that inhabit space and time are said
to exist. Those that have an abstract character, such as numbers or the propositional
contents of sentences, are said to subsist. But there are also objects, such as Sherlock
Holmes, that neither exist nor subsist. Some objects, such as Berkeley’s round square
are impossible. Some objects are incomplete (“. . . there is no fact of the matter about
Inspector Lestrade’s blood type.” [Lewis, 1983, 270].) Some impossible objects are also
incomplete, (the round square, again, which is neither blue nor not blue.) Meinongian
ontologies are of considerable interest to O-minded logicians of ﬁction. Two of the best
Meinongian logics are [Parsons, 1975, 1980] and [Jacquette, 1996, 2006].
4.2.1
Parsons’ logic of ﬁction
Parsons invokes a central distinction among actual objects, or things that are, between
those that are existent and those that are nonexistent. In this approach, correlated with
each nonempty set of properties there is a distinct, speciﬁc object in [Parsons, 1975, 75].
Uniquely correlated with the set of properties {p: Madame Curie has p} is Madame Curie,
and uniquely correlated with the set {goldenness, mountainhood} is the golden mountain.
In the case of both existent and nonexistent objects, the set consists of those properties
that the correlated object has. If no restrictions are placed on the properties that can be
members of the sets correlated with objects, severe diﬃculties arise. In addition to the
golden mountain, a nonexistent object, there would be a nonexistent object correlated
with the set {goldenness, mountainhood, being existent}. And in addition to the round
square, an impossible nonexistent object, there would be the possible round square. To
avoid such diﬃculties, Parsons restricts the properties of sets with which objects, existent
and nonexistent, are correlated to what he calls nuclear properties. Nuclear properties are
ordinary properties of objects such as roundness and being red, whereas extranuclear (or
nonnuclear) properties are special properties such as being existent, being possible, and
being thought of by Meinong. Fictional objects — objects “native” rather than “immi-
grant” to ﬁction — are, on Parsons’ view, a subclass of the class of nonexistent objects.
They are the objects correlated with sets of the following sort:
{p: according to (the ‘maximum’ account of) the Conan Doyle stories, Sher-
lock Holmes has p} [Parsons, 1975, 80].
More generally, where x is a ﬁctional object:

Fictions and Their Logic
1091
x = the object correlated with {p: according to the relevant body of literature,
x has p}.
One ﬁnal feature of Parsons’ view worth pointing out concerns the relations that hold
between nonexistent objects native to ﬁction and existent objects that are immigrants to
ﬁction. Parsons concedes that when a ﬁctional objects stands in relation to an existent
objects, the existent object does not stand in the corresponding relation to the creature of
ﬁction. Even if Holmes has the property of having had tea with Prime Minister Gladstone,
Gladstone will lack the property of having had tea with Holmes [Woods, 1969; Parsons,
1980, 60].
Parsons’ assumption that a distinct, genuine and well-individuated object is correlated
with each nonempty set of nuclear properties is problematic. Some readers might ﬁnd
this an over-generous criterion of objecthood, and others could wonder whether, say, unit
sets of properties are ever property-rich enough adequately to individuate. Not only is
there no particular reason to think that there is just one object that is red and has no other
(nuclear) properties — corresponding to the set {being red} — it is dubious that redness
alone ever makes a substantive enough contribution to its bearer so as to confer genuine
individuality upon it. What is more, when imported into Parsons’ account of ﬁctional
objects, this assumption implies that characters who receive identical descriptions in a
given work of ﬁction are the same character in that work [Howell, 1983, 170].40
A further diﬃculty concerns Parsons’ claim that ﬁctional objects are ontically incom-
plete41. For all properties such that neither they nor negations are in Holmes’ representing
set, Holmes is indeterminate with respect to those properties [Parsons, 1975, 84]. But on
the face of it, it is not credible to say that Sherlock Holmes neither lacked nor possessed
an alimentary canal, a liver, ten toes, two elbows or a mother; that he neither went to
school nor not, that he neither did nor did not comport himself with Watson and the world
in ways not expressly chronicled by Doyle. A view that rendered the indeterminacy of
Holmes had a mole on his back
and
Holmes lacked a mole on his back
in ways compatible with the truth of
Holmes either had or lacked a mole on his back
might well be acceptable. But Parsons’ account fails to meet even this weaker condition
[Howell, 1979, 136].
Roughly speaking, nuclear properties are constitutive properties, such as a thing’s
physical attributes. Nonnuclear properties do not ﬁx the object’s kind. These include
40There is also the question of whether Parson’s luxuriant ontology isn’t occasion of unintended conse-
quences, such as conﬁrmation of the ontological argument for God’s existence [Woods, 1986].
41Similarly, while it is true that Holmes lived in London, it seems not to be true of London that Holmes lived
there. The idea of objectual incompleteness originates with [Meinong, 1915]. It is also a theme developed in
[Ingarden, 1931] and, quite recently in [Akiba, 2000]. Cf. [Parsons, 1982; Lear, 1982; Simons, 1999].

1092
John Woods
self-identity, existence, possibility and the like.42 So, whether numbers exist or not is
something that leaves it undisturbed that the kind of thing they are is numbers. The
nuclear-nonnuclear distinction is important for characterizing impossible and incomplete
objects. An object is said to be impossible when it has a nuclear property and its com-
plement. An object is said to be incomplete when it lacks a nuclear property and its
complement. The distinction itself is not clearly determined43 and it is a matter of contro-
versy as to whether some of the properties Parsons counts as nuclear really are ordinary
properties of objects at all [Howell, 1983, 167-168].
Additional diﬃculties arise as a result of the asymmetries Parsons posits in relations
that obtain between existent and nonexistent objects. Although in a ﬁctional work the very
same properties may be attributed to an immigrant object as are attributed to an object
native to the work, the latter will have but the former will lack these properties [Howell,
1983, 171]. These asymmetries pose intractable problems for an adequate account of
transﬁctive discourse — claims about the relations of characters and events that occur in
works of ﬁction to existent things external to the works in which they occur.
In certain respects Jacquette’s is an improvement on Parsons’ treatment of Meinonge
(after all, Parsons has broad shoulders). A particular advantage is that Jacquette oﬀers a
formal deﬁnition of nuclear and nonnuclear properties. He also furnishes the reader with a
plausible, though informal, means of making the distinction between them recognizable.
The formal deﬁnition draws on a distinction between sentence negation, represented by
∼and predicate complementation represented by neg. If S is a sentence, its negation
⌜∼S ⌝is a sentence. If Q is a predicate, its complement neg Q is a predicate. If Q is a
nuclear-property predicate, then negation and complementation are irreducibly diﬀerent.
If κ is a nonnuclear predicate, then sentence negation and predicate complementation are
everywhere interdeﬁnable. [Jacquette, 2006, section 5.1]. A property is nonnuclear if
any only if it is deﬁnable via logical operators and uninterpreted predicate symbols and
nothing else. A property is nuclear if and only if it is not nonnuclear.
Jacquette’s Meinongian logic is a quantiﬁcational extension of the basic Łukasciewicz
3-valued system. As remarked earlier it is consistent, sound and complete. Compactness,
deduction and extrapolation theorems are provable. Much of classical logic is preserved.
The set theory of the logic’s semantics is nonstandard and paradox-free, notwithstanding
that it has an unrestricted comprehension axiom.
4.2.2
Jacquette’s logic of ﬁction
Fictional objects arise from the creative endeavors of their authors.
As a
story is created, the author determines by free assumption the nuclear prop-
erties of its characters. These are what John Woods in The Logic of Fiction
calls the characters’ ‘sayso’ properties. [Jacquette, 1996, 256].
42The nuclear-nonnuclear distinction originates with Mally, not Meinong. See [Rapaport, 1978] and [Zalta,
1983, xi-xii].
43Another hard case: the property of being ﬁctional. How plausible is it that being ﬁctional or real is imma-
terial to whether Holmes is or is not a man?

Fictions and Their Logic
1093
What is more,
The author is the primary and often the only source of what nuclear properties
characters do or do not have. (p. 257)
On the face of it, this is rousing endorsement of axiom D, the author’s sayso axiom. But
appearances to the contrary, nothing remotely like axiom D is sustainable in a Meinon-
gian theory of objects. Let Σ the set of all and only the nuclear properties of male human
beings. Holmes, as it happens, is constituted by a particular subset of those properties.
But since Doyle did not create those properties, and those properties constitute Holmes, it
cannot in any strictness be said that Doyle created Holmes. Given the way that Meinon-
gian truth works can it be the case that whereas the objects of ﬁction precede an author’s
creative intervention, the truths about those objects are precisely what are conferred by it.
Every truth about Holmes is ﬁxed by the properties he has and the relations he bears to
others, and others to him. Not only do the properties constitutive of Holmes precede au-
thorial intervention, so do the properties constitutive of Holmes’ history. So a Meinongian
logic of ﬁction violates D, the sayso axiom.
[Woods, 1969] draws attention to the previously remarked apparent asymmetry in re-
lations that normally one would have taken as symmetric. If it is true of Holmes that he
lived in London, why would it not also be true of London that Holmes lived there? But
surely it is not true of London that Holmes lived there. Certainly “. . . a stake-out on
Baker Street would have obtained no trace of Holmes” [Routley, 1981, 563]. Jacquette
cites with approval Routley’s own proposed solution, which he calls “contextualism”. The
sentence, “Holmes lived in London” is analyzed as “According to the detective stories of
Arthur Conan Doyle it is true that Holmes lived in London”, and the sentence “London
was where Holmes lived” is analyzed as “According to the detective stories of Arthur Co-
nan Doyle it is true that London is where Holmes lived”. Routley’s intuitions tell him that
the ﬁrst paraphrase is true and that the second paraphrase is false. Jacquette’s intuitions
conﬁrm this solution. I can only say that I am at a loss to understand these intuitions.44
Here is why.
Routley’s device of contextualization takes many forms in the literature. One of the
most prominent of these is the postulation of the ﬁctive operator T F carrying essentially
the Routleyian meaning “it is ﬁctionally the case in story F that” or “it holds in story
F that”. Routley’s paraphrases are meant to elucidate our pre-theoretical impressions
that “Holmes lived in London” is true and “London is where Holmes lived” is false.
But “According to the detective stories of Arthur Conan Doyle it is true that Holmes
44[Woods, 1969] proposes a diﬀerent solution, by invoking a distinction between what is true of an object and
what is true and history-constitutive of it. Accordingly, that he lived in London is true and history-constitutive
of Holmes, whereas that this is where Holmes lived is true but not history-constitutive of London. The two
sentences are true together and false together but they diﬀer with respect to history-constitutiveness. Symmetry
is preserved in the ﬁrst instance, but not in the second . Looking closely at Routley’s example of the false
member of the pair, we see that he blurs this very distinction. “According to the detective stories of Arthur
Conan Doyle it is true of London that it was lived in by Holmes”, equivocates as between “it is true that
London was lived in by Holmes” and “it is history-constitutive of London that it was lived in by Holmes”. The
distinction is pre-ﬁgured in Frege’s notion of Sinn. Roughly speaking the Sinn of ‘r’ gives that part of its history
that individuates r. Accordingly, “was lived in by Holmes” is not part of ‘London’s’ Sinn.

1094
John Woods
lived in London” is no warrant that Holmes did live in London unless Doyle’s sayso is
authoritative. It would be authoritative if Doyle’s sayso made it true that Holmes lived
in London. But, as we have seen, that is the last thing that Doyle’s sayso can do if the
Meinongian theory of objects is correct and Holmes is a Meinongian object.
This leaves wide open the question of how to interpret the authorial role of Doyle.
Doyle may be the primary source of information about Holmes, but, on the Meinongian
account, he cannot be the source of the truths about Holmes. Properly understood, the
author is reporting facts that the antecedently present Holmes already has. Yet it seems
equally essential that whatever else might be the case, the author not take himself to be
doing this; rather that he take himself to be satisfying the sayso axiom D. It is not impos-
sible that this is what happens. Perhaps literary authorship is indeed a kind of delusion in
which, in thinking that he is making it all up, an author chances upon a set of antecedently
constituted facts, which deluded readers, in their turn, take as facts constituted by the au-
thor. The delusional theory of literary creativity cannot be dismissed out of hand. For one
thing, it is almost certainly the only safe harbour for Meinongians. However, perhaps one
might be permitted to observe that, true or false, the delusional theory must be the most
rococo theory of literary creativity on record.45
The nuclear-nonnuclear distinction is fundamental to the Meinongian approach to ﬁc-
tional impossibilia. What is wanted is a conception of the logically impossible whose
positive instantiation does no violence to the law of noncontradiction. Accordingly, that
the round square is both round and square implies that it is both round and not round and
square and not square. But “x is round and not round” is formalized not as “x is round
and ∼x is round”, but as “x is round and neg x is round”. Since “x is round and neg
x is round” does not imply “x is round and ∼x is round”, the round square may safely
be constituted with no disturbance to the law. Since ﬁctional objects are special cases of
Meinongian objects, they too are subject to these same constraints. While some ﬁctional
objects are impossibilia, the law of noncontradiction remains intact.
As we have seen, other theories of the ﬁctional allow for logically impossible ﬁctional
objects without the necessity to call upon a distinction between sentence-negation and
predicate-complementation. In these cases, a preferred device is the ﬁctive sentence op-
erator T F (“It is true in story F that . . . “). T F operates somewhat like a modal operator.
It allows not only chat
T F(S )
and
1. T F(∼S )
but also that
2. T F(S ∧∼S )
45When we were considering pretense theories in the manner of Walton and Lewis, we reﬂected on the
possibility that in writing Don Quixote, Cervantes was deluding himself that he was not pretending to tell the
truth. The delusionality posited by the present case is oppositely directed. What is now under the glass is
whether, by Meinongian lights, Cervantes was deluding himself in thinking that he wasn’t telling the truth.

Fictions and Their Logic
1095
none of which violates the law of noncontradiction. It will not have escaped notice that
Meinongians such as Routley and Jacquette are also drawn to a device something like the
ﬁctive operator, expressed by the clause “According to the story [ies] of so-and-so it is
true that . . . “. With this at hand, it is diﬃcult to see why ﬁctional sentence-contradictions
cannot also be allowed, since they are expressible in the form
4. According to the story [ies] of so-and-so it is true that S ∧∼S .
On the face of it, sentences embodying the Routley modality are sentences that acknowl-
edge the authority of axiom D, the author’s sayso axiom. If that were actually so, then
sentential contradictions are true in ﬁction, and are so without disturbing the repose of
the non-ontradiction law. Certainly such would be the dominant view of the contradiction
about Keith being elected and not elected President in one and the same election. But in
the hands of Meinongians, Keith is an item subject to whatever constraints are imposed
on all objects by Meinong’s theory. One is that in no sense does any object violate the
law of noncontradiction. So it is pre-determined that if indeed Keith is a Meinongian
object, Keith was not concurrently elected and not elected President, notwithstanding that
precisely this is what happened in A Sound of Thunder. Accordingly, the truth of “Ac-
cording to Bradbury’s story it is true that Keith was elected and not elected President” is
wholly irrelevant to what Keith did or did not do. But if that is so, the Routleyan device
“according to the story [ies] of so-and-so, it is true that . . . ” is also inert in the context
of symmetrical relations that lose their symmetry in ﬁctional contexts. This takes us back
four-square to the sayso axiom. Not only do authors not validate contradictory goings-on
among the ﬁctional, there is nothing whatever that they make true of them. What, then, is
to be said about the asymmetry between it being true of Holmes that he lived in London,
yet not true of London that this is where Holmes lived? The original intuition of [Woods,
1969] comes close to being right for Meinongians. For, by Meinongian lights, Holmes
is constituted by his properties, and London by its properties. Holmes is constituted in
part by the relational property of living in London, but London’s counterpart property is
not that of having been lived in by Holmes. It is rather the property of having been rep-
resented as having been lived in by Holmes. There appears to be a general rule for this.
PROPOSITION 25 (Asymmetries). For any x and y, if x is a ﬁctional object and y a
real object, then if it is constitutive of y that it is represented as bearing R to x, then it is
constitutive of x that it does bear R to y.
As was originally surmised, we now have the wherewithal to represent in a natural way
the intuition that, whereas Holmes lived in London, he really didn’t. True by the author’s
sayso are
5. Holmes lived in London.
6. London is where Holmes lived.
History-constitutive by the author’s sayso is
7. Holmes lived in London.

1096
John Woods
History-constitutive by the up-shot46 of the author’s sayso is the sentence
7. London is represented as the place where Holmes lived.
But what is not history-constitutive by the author’s sayso or its upshot is
8. London is where Holmes lived.
4.2.3
What authors create
The Meinongian ontological constraints have the force of restricting an author’s creative
wherewithal to making stories rather than making true the propositions which the story
advances. So constrained, authors create neither their objects nor the truths about them.
Authors create stories about such objects in which various such truths are told of them.
Accordingly,
PROPOSITION 26 (Meinongian creativity). Given that ﬁctional objects are Meinongian
objects and that what is true of them are Meinongian truths, an author’s creative endeav-
our is wholly restricted to making ﬁctions of such objects by the telling of such truths.
COROLLARY 26(a)
Fictional creativity has neither ontological nor alethic import.
Therefore, it is necessary to read “T F” more on the model of “according to the Associated
Press” rather than on the model of “according to the Supreme Court”.
With Proposition 26 in hand, Meinongians would appear to have the wherewithal to
answer the objection that in their failure to satisfy axiom D, Meinongian theories are just
wrong. For it now be rejoined, with some plausibility, that, as we presently have it, there
is something quite right about D and yet also something wrong. What is right about it
is that there is something that the author freely creates. What is wrong about it is the
presumption that what it creates are objects and truths about them, when in fact all that it
creates are stories.
This is a powerful suggestion. It has an unmistakable strategic appeal, and it general-
izes in interesting ways. Not only does it oﬀer a principled basis for rejecting the intuition
embedded in axiom D, it also tells equally against what many regard as the foundational
contrast for a logic of ﬁction, the contrast between non-existents and nonesuches, and the
allied distinction between bet-sensitivity and its bet-insensitivity. On the present sugges-
tion there is indeed a distinction between the present king of France and Sherlock Holmes.
In the old way of thinking, the contrast was ontological. Nothing whatever is denoted by
“the present king of France”, whereas Sherlock Holmes is a somebody who happens not
to exist. What is more, rooted in these ontological arrangements are explanations of ad-
ditional epistemic and semantic commonplaces. We know who Holmes is and what he
did and suﬀered, but concerning the present king of France, there is nothing to be known.
Sherlock Holmes is a well-individuated entity, whereas with the present king of France,
there is nothing that begins to count as individuating. Sherlock Holmes manages a brisk
46Upshot is transﬁctive. The sentence, “London is represented as the place where Holmes lived” neither
occurs in the text of any Holmes story nor is inferable from the sentences that do. It is inferable, in fact, from
our knowledge that Doyle borrowed London for a guest-appearance in his stories.

Fictions and Their Logic
1097
trade with the truth values, truth and falsity (both of them), whereas the present king of
France is paradigmatic occasion of truth-valuelessness.
Might there not, however, be another way of explaining these contrasts without the
necessity of positing an ontic chasm between Sherlock Holmes and the present king of
France? As Slater suggests (also Griﬃn), the chief diﬀerence between the two lies in
the contingent fact that there are stories about the one and, so far, none about the other.
They are the source of what is known (and knowable) about Holmes, they are what makes
for Holmes’ individuation, and they are what constitutes what is true of him. If there
are explanations that we were prepared to accept, then a number of previous criticisms
would lapse. In particular, it might now be possible to rehabilitate accounts of ﬁction
in whose base logics the ontic contrast between Holmes and the rootless monarch is not
honoured — whether free logics, epsilon calculi, supervaluational logics or Meinongian
logics. True, the distinction between the two would have to be drawn somewhere; but
presumably this would be taken care of once the story component is folded into the base
logic.
Axiom A embodies the powerful intuition that what sets Holmes part from the present
king of France is that “Holmes” refers to Holmes and “the present king of France” refers
to nothing. Accordingly, there is such a thing as Holmes, but no such thing as the present
king of France. If this is so, if this is indeed the diﬀerence we are questing after, it
certainly looks like an ontic diﬀerence. There are things that don’t exist. Holmes is one
of them. The present king of France (if the fa¸con de parler may be allowed) is not. If the
explanations presently proposed were allowed to stand, it would appear that axiom A has
lost its moorings. Whether this is actually so is a matter to which we shall return. Suﬃce
it to say for now that
PROPOSITION 27 (Doubting the axioms). As the conceptual account of the ﬁctional
evolves and deepens, the idea that the intuitive axioms are somehow sacrosanct loses
some of its original luster.
4.2.4
Worlds
[Jacquette, 1996] contains a general account of mixed sentences, in which Parsons’ con-
trast between “native” and “immigrant” objects is put to good use. Migrancy is a consid-
erable occurrence in ﬁction. Examples abound.
We may think of Socrates in Aristophanes’ The Clouds, Napoleon and the
Battle of Borodino in Tolstoy’s War and Peace, De Soto and La Salle and
the conquest of New Spain in Edward Dahlberg’s The Sorrows of Priapus (p.
258).
A further example is Democritus of Abdera, conﬁned by Dante in the Inferno to an upper
circle of hell. Migrants are objects depicted in ﬁction. It is the real Democritus, rather
than a ﬁctional character of the same name, who occurs in Dante’s poem. Being thus
depicted is one of the real Democritus’ nuclear properties, as proposed in [Woods, 1969].

1098
John Woods
Democritus has the converse intentional nuclear property of being supposed
by Dante (and Dante’s readers) to occupy an upper circle of hell [Jacquette,
1996, 259].
According to Jacquette, we must say that
In creating a work of ﬁction, the author freely invents an alternative incom-
plete so-being for immigrant existent and native or immigrant nonexistent
objects relative to a particular story-context or ﬁctional world (p. 259).
Fictional worlds? A story is a ﬁctional world? Perhaps when speaking in the casual ways
of light conversation this can be said. Can it also be said with deliberate philosophical
intent? No. Jacquette’s logic for Meinonge contains a modal fragment, and rightly. If
the golden mountain is golden and a mountain, then we may safely presume that it is
possibly golden and possibly a mountain. If something is possibly golden, then we may
safely suppose that it is not the case that it is necessarily not the case that it is golden.
Jacquette adapts a standard Kripke semantics for the modal expressions of his logic. It is
a semantics in which the modalities are conceived of in Abelardian fashion. Something
is possibly true at a world when it is true in at least one world possible with respect to it.
Something is necessarily true at a world when it is false in every world possible relative
to it. At the core of this treatment is the primitive concept of possible worlds and an
alternativeness relation varying through the standard relational properties of reﬂexivity,
symmetry, transitivity and extendability. In some treatments of ﬁction, the careers of
ﬁctional characters play out in ﬁctional worlds. For some theorists, ﬁctional worlds are
proper subsets of possible worlds. For others they are disjoint from them. On this latter
view, what distinguishes a possible world from a ﬁctional world is that ﬁctional worlds
can accommodate impossibilia, and possible worlds cannot. In some approaches, ﬁctional
worlds overlap with what modal logicians call nonnormal worlds. Nonnormal worlds
are worlds in which everything is possibly possible and nothing is necessary (and the
necessitation rule fails).
As a technical device, the notion of possible worlds has proved all but indispensable
for the mathematical logic of the alethic modalities of necessity and possibility. It is well
to bear in mind that giving a conceptually adequate elucidation of the idea of possible
worlds is not a prime target of any known — or foreseeable — modal mathematical logic.
Modal logicians have the same primary targets as classical logicians. They too, want
to know what entailment is, and logical truth and consistency. Their diﬀerence is that
modal logicians want to know how these properties ﬁt languages enriched by the addition
of modal expressions. It comes as no setback to these ambitions that the very idea of a
possible world is the centre of a vigorous philosophical dissensus. In a recently published
primer on nonclassical logics, Graham Priest touches on the several points of contention
in this debate. He allows that
The preceding considerations hardly settle the matter of the nature of possible
worlds. There are many other suggested answers (most of which are some
variation on one or other of the themes that I have already mentioned); and
there are many objections to the suggestions I have raised, other than the

Fictions and Their Logic
1099
ones I have given, as well as possible replies to the objections I have raised;
philosophers can have hours of fun with possible worlds. This will do for the
present though [Priest, 2001, 32].47
Of course it will do. The mathematical logics of the modals are logics of entailment and
logical truth, and the like. Since these properties are now deﬁnable for modal languages,
some attention must be given to how modal expressions might be interpreted. But the
treatment of modal terms has in such logics about the same importance as the treatment
of reference in the Begriﬀsschrift. In both cases they are there rather more as instrumental
necessities than full-bore, conceptually adequate analyses. There is another way of say-
ing the same thing. No one wanting to have a rich and conceptually robust analysis of
reference would dream of ﬁnding it in the Begriﬀsschrift. Equally, no one wanting a rich
and conceptually robust analysis of possible worlds would dream of ﬁnding it in S5 (or
worse, S2).
We have been at some pains to argue that what is urgently required for a credible logic
of ﬁction is a logic that embeds a conceptually adequate — a rich and robust philosophical
analysis — of the concept of ﬁctionality. Any attempt at achieving such an analysis by
way of the philosophically half-baked mathematician’s device of possible worlds is asking
for trouble. It is trouble born of an over-careless fondness for devices that chance to be
lying about. It suggests the menacing presence of Make-Do.
According to Jacquette,
The semantic device of ﬁctional world-indexing in modal Meinongian logic
implements the story-contextual interpretation of a ﬁctional object’s nuclear
properties, so that by Kripke-style stipulation Democritus [according to
Dante] languishes in the inferno, not in the actual world, but in an accessible
ﬁctional Meinongian world [1966, 259].
He adds,
The same world-indexing requirements for transworld identity of existent and
nonexistent native and immigrant Meinongian worlds of the modal Meinon-
gian semantic model [1966, 259].
Actually, I think not.
PROPOSITION 28 (Good-bye to worlds). All going possible worlds semantics leave a
conceptually adequate logic of ﬁction signiﬁcantly underdetermined. This being so, a
number of our better-regarded candidates will have to be re-considered.48
COROLLARY 28(a)
If Proposition 28 is right, the disinclination to invoke a worlds
semantics for ﬁction might well be attended by a corresponding inclination to reconsider
the value of conceptualizing T F as a modal operator.
47For the present? No; for the whole book, as it turns out.
48Not only Meinongian approaches but those of [Plantinga, 1974; Kaplan, 1973; Gabriel, 1979] and [Lewis,
1983]. The same is true of ﬁctional worlds treatments in the manner of [Howell, 1979; Pavel, 1986] and
[Woltersdorﬀ, 1980]. In [Wolttersdorﬀ, 1980] ﬁctional worlds are conjunctions of possible states of aﬀairs and
ﬁctional characters, considered as kinds rather than individuals.

1100
John Woods
4.2.5
The incomplete and the impossible
It is clear from the literature that intuitions diﬀer about the incompleteness and impossi-
bility of ﬁctional entities. But it may safely be said that anyone drawn to the view that
ﬁctional objects are incomplete should make a case for it, and that such a case would be
at its most strong if it proceeded from an analysis of the concept of a ﬁctional object.
As even a casual review of the problem of maximal accounts makes plain, a good many
of the attributes that readers ascribe to ﬁctional characters are ascribed neither by ﬁctive
sentences nor by sentences in their deductive closures. So it is not just that either Holmes
had an alimentary canal or lacked one; he had one (also ten toes, a mother and a brain
stem). The problem begins to bite with properties that have no place in the maximal ac-
count, such as having had a tummy ache following Holmes’ third-year birthday party. Of
course, it might actually be the case with beings such as Holmes neither to have had nor
to have been spared such unpleasantness. But what would be lost if we treated these cases
in more familiar ways, in the way for example that we do with Julius Caesar? Here we
haven’t the slightest diﬃculty in representing his incompleteness as epistemic rather than
ontic. Of course, we say, either Caesar had such a tummy-ache or was spared it, but which
it is we’ll never know. What is it about the nature of the ﬁctional that obviates this same
kind of epistemic explanation? It cannot, for one thing, be that by their very natures, ﬁc-
tional objects are resistant to familiar inferences or, roughly, inferences from what Lewis
calls “collective belief worlds” [Lewis, 1983, 273]. This cannot be, since familiar infer-
ence is precisely what maximal accounts brim with. So Holmes has an alimentary canal,
since Holmes is a human animal and that’s what human animal’s have.
However we resolve to handle this question, we should again note that it is pre-settled
in the logic of Meinongian objects. If we allow that ﬁctional objects are Meinongian, then
the incompleteness of the ﬁctional is established. But it was settled by what Meinong
thought objects could and could not be, not by what he thought ﬁctional objects had to
be. In choosing a Meinongian account of objects as our base logic for ﬁction, we risk
miring the logic of ﬁction at level 1. For while the logic of Meinonge is backed by a
rich conceptual analysis of objecthood (and so makes a claim on level 3), the analysis of
Meinonge might not suﬃce for the ﬁctional. For this reason it is insuﬃcient to have the
ontic incompleteness of the ﬁctional settled by what is not, after all, a theory of ﬁctions.
Another notable constraint which a Meinongian logic also predetermines precludes
even the ﬁctional violation of the law of noncontradiction. Virtually everyone who writes
about the logic of ﬁction is a consistentist. For them, it goes without saying that the law of
noncontradiction is unbreachable. It is not in the slightest degree unusual that this should
also be Meinong’s view. Dialetheism (the doctrine that some contradictions are true as
well as false) is the furthest thing from Meinong’s mind. Equally, however, many who
write about the logic of ﬁction are open to examples of the Keith kind, and ready to allow
that Keith’s concurrent election and non-election is a sentential contradiction that is true
in ﬁction. As we have noted, one of the prime motives for introducing ﬁctive qualiﬁers
T Finto the analysis of ﬁction is to accommodate just such a possibility. So, whereas
Keith was elected ∧∼Keith was elected
cannot be true,

Fictions and Their Logic
1101
T F (Keith was elected ∧∼Keith was elected)
is true and was made true by Bradbury’s story. Meinongians such as Routley and Jacquette
appear to give the nod to ﬁctive qualiﬁers. Routley’s “According to the stories of so-and-
so” seems clearly to function as T F does. Jacquette is even more emphatic, apparently.
As a story is created, the author determines by free assumption the nuclear
properties of its characters . . . The author stipulates what is supposed to be
true of the people, places, and events of the narrative, which by the Meinon-
gian [principle of the] independence of so-being makes it true that these ﬁc-
tions have the nuclear properties bestowed on them by their creator. (p. 259.
Emphasis added.)
We have already noted the ambiguity of this claim. For those drawn to axiom D, the
author’s sayso axiom, Jacquette’s words invite the interpretation that authors create the
objects that their stories are about, and that authors make the sentences that are true of
them true. On the contrary, as we have seen, Jacquette is a Meinongian. Holmes is
constituted independently of Doyle’s stories, as were whatever is true of him. Doyle’s
“free assumption” does not extend to any object that isn’t already available — or to any
proposition not already true of it. And it is this, precisely, that explains why neither Doyle
nor Bradbury nor whomever else can make it true by free assumption that T F(Keith was
elected ∧∼Keith was elected.) In fact,
PROPOSITION 29 (The concurrence of T F-truth and truth). In a Meinongian logic of
ﬁction, for all sentences S, ⌜T F(S )⌝is true only if S is true.
COROLLARY 29(a)
Accordingly, in Meinongian logics of ﬁction the operator T F is
semantically inert, which is a further reason not to construe them as modal operators.
Here, too, we are met with the problem of which is the tail and which is the dog, and
which wags which. If sentential contradictions are to be barred from ﬁction, it is natural
to prefer that this be justiﬁed by how ﬁction is rather than by how Meinongian objects
are. Meinong’s view is that if we allow contradictions to be true in ﬁction, we must allow
them to be true without qualiﬁcation. Proposition 26 tells us quite generally that this
is precisely what a Meinongian theory of ﬁctional truth does require. So we have two
options in our quest to accommodate Holmes. We can capitulate to the Meinongians. Or
we can look elsewhere.
We have come to a point at which Jacquette’s, Walton’s and Lewis’ quite diﬀerent po-
sitions (see [Jacquette, 2001], acquire a degree of convergence. It is a consequence of
Walton’s position that only real objects can be ﬁctional (e.g., London), whereas no ob-
ject whatever is Holmes. Likewise, it is a consequence of Jacquette’s position that the
only truths that can be ﬁctional truths are non-ﬁctional truths. A further point of con-
vergence involves Lewis. Like Jacquette, Lewis is adamant that no sentence of the form
⌜T F(S ∧∼S )⌝is ever true. It is easy to see what draws Jacquette to this view. It is en-
tirely a matter of his pre-commitments. Jacquette commits the analysis of the ﬁctional to
the already standing logic of Meinonge. The logic of Meinonge is a consistentist logic;
hence no sentence of the form ⌜S ∧∼S ⌝is true there. By Proposition 26, for any S

1102
John Woods
such that ⌜T F(S )⌝is true, S itself must be true. Anyone thinking that the exclusion of
⌜T F(S ∧∼S )⌝from a theory of ﬁction is just a mistake can pin the blame of Jacquette’s
mistake on his having insuﬃciently adapted the logic of Meinonge. In Lewis’ case, it is
not so clear as to where the blame should be laid. Lewis proposes to handle the problem
of apparently true contradictions in ﬁction in one or other of two ways. By the method in-
tersection, let F be an inconsistent ﬁction and R a consistent revision of it. Then ⌜T F(S )⌝
is true if and only if S occurs in every R of F. Where this method employs the device of
revision, the method of union pivots on fragmentation. Where t is an inconsistent story, C
is some consistent part of it. Then ⌜T F(S )⌝is true if and only if S occurs in it at least one
C of F.
A good many of Lewis’ critics see the expulsion of contradictions by these methods as
ad hoc [Currie, 1990, 69]. Others complain that it mangles our concept of the ﬁctional to
insist on these exclusions [Byrne, 1993, 26]. In his agile defence of Lewis against these
charges, Richard Hanley allows that
If it’s possible for it to be ﬁctional that a contradictory-proposition is ﬁc-
tional, then it might by Lewis’ own analyses be possible for a contradictory
proposition to be ﬁctional [Hanley, 2004, 120].
Hanley considers whether this possibility might be conﬁrmed by a thought-experiment
in the manner of [Currie, 1990, 69], in which we suppose that there is a story in which
someone refutes G¨odel’s theorem. Currie thinks this example is decisive against Lewis.
Who would not agree? Not Hanley. He thinks that in imagining that there might be such
a story, it is as likely that one is begging the question against Lewis in calling it a story as
it is that in that imagined story a contradiction is true. What Hanley demands is an extant
story in which contradictions are made true.
Hanley’s charge of question-begging is hardly to be credited. There is no known ac-
count of it in which that is what Currie is up to. In its most general sense one party X begs
the question against another party Y if and only if X adopts as a premiss in his argument
against Y a proposition P in fulﬁllment of the following four conditions.
1. P is damaging to Y’s case.
2. P is unconceded by Y.
3. P is not a consequence of what Y does concede.
4. P cannot be attributed to Y as a default.49
Hanley is here standing in for Lewis. He represents Lewis as holding that it is a condition
on storyhood that no contradiction is true in it. For Currie simply to say, “Well here’s a
story with a true contradiction in it”, would indeed be to beg the question. But suppose
Currie’s reasoning were, “There is a proposition that is in the presumptive closure of other
49For example, P is not in the collective belief world of X and Y, P is not a matter of common knowledge, P
is not in the presumptive closure of propositions that Y expressly concedes.

Fictions and Their Logic
1103
things you have said about ﬁction, namely, the “story” imagined in the Currie thought-
experiment is actually a story. And since it is a story in which a contradiction is true, it
cannot be the case that contradictions can’t be true in stories.”
It is true, of course, that determining what is the presumptive closure of David Lewis’
concessions is not an exact science. Far easier to determine what is in the presumptive
closure of Hanley’s beliefs. Hanley concedes that Lewis’ no-contradiction policy might
well fail should there be an actual piece of ﬁction in which someone refutes G¨odel’s
theorem. Hanley considers a number of candidates: Flatland, Peter Rabbit, At Swim-
Two-Birds, Sylvan’s Box, the Holmes stories themselves.50 One could reﬂect on these
rejections with proﬁt. But there is no need. Hanley makes it clear that if there were an
extant story in which G¨odel’s proof is refuted, then Lewis’ constraint would be imperiled.
This is extremely helpful. It tells us how to proceed against Lewis.
PROPOSITION 30 (Contra Lewis). Find an author who will make it the case that there
is an extant story that executes the story-line of Currie’s thought experiment — that is,
making it the case that such a story exists by writing it.
Suppose Hanley (or Lewis) were now to say, “But you’ve begged the question”. Per-
haps that would be the point to move on to other things.
Incompleteness is a further point of convergence between Jacquette and Lewis. Con-
sider the sentence, “Inspector Lestrade has blood type O”. Both authors allow that it might
be the case that “T F(Lestrade has type-O-blood)” is false and that “T F (Lestrade does not
have type-O blood)” is false. But they won’t allow that “T F (Lestrade has type-O blood
∨∼Lestrade has type-O blood)” is false. Both are suﬃciently classical logicians to want
it left undisturbed that if ⌜T F(S ∨∼S )⌝is always true then ⌜T F(S ∧∼S )⌝is always
false. We have surmised that Jacquette’s refusal of true contradictions in ﬁction ﬂow from
his pre-commitment to a Meinongian ontology. We have complained that this is an ar-
rangement in which the tail of the receiving theory wags the dog of ﬁction. Perhaps this
was wrong. Perhaps there is another explanation that applies to Jacquette and Lewis alike.
They are determined that Lestrade’s indeterminancy of blood-type not overturn to the law
of excluded middle, and they are suﬃciently classical about logic to want the tie between
excluded middle and noncontradiction to stand. Whatever we might think of such an ex-
planation, we now ﬁnd ourselves at a point at which the convergence of the two accounts
blows apart. Jacquette negotiates the problem of indeterminacy without loss of excluded
middle by the device of predicate complementation. Lewis shuns the device (or anyhow
does not avail himself of it) and makes do with restrictions on closure, betokened by the
operator T F. There is a marked diﬀerence between the two. That the falsity of ⌜T F(S )⌝
and ⌜T F(negS )⌝does not overturn ⌜T F(S ∨∼S )⌝is made intelligible by the semantics
of neg and ∼. That the falsity of the same pair does not overturn the law is also said to lie
in the providence of T F. Perhaps it does. But it is unclear as to how.
50Also to be considered is “The Mischief of Ricardo Bosque”, by Djaitch da Bloo, reprinted in [Woods, 2003]
at pages 226-227.

1104
John Woods
4.3
The S-model
The earliest published version of stipulationism in the Western tradition is Genesis. In
it the Almighty speaks the world into being. In the beginning was the Word. No other
creation story comes so close to making it literally the case that the Creator is the author
of our being. In the holy writings it is also said that humans were created in the image
of God. Nearly all theologians agree that, whatever the details, the fact of mankind in
God’s image is constituted by the sharing of certain attributes which, in the ﬁrst order of
things, would be considered distinctive of the divinity. Perhaps we might think that the
authorship of truths is one of those similarities. Well, this is theology, and what is wanted
here is logic.
Mathematics is a good place to start. Mathematicians are dab hands at speaking things
into being. This, anyhow, is a fact of such presumptive weight as to stand as a pre-
analytic datum for philosophical theories of mathematics. As such, it must receive the
endorsement of theory or cause must be shown as to why it should be over-ridden by
it. In the century just past, perhaps the most aggressive sponsor of this view is Hilbert.
Hilbert famously proposed that “if it can be proved that the attributes assigned to a concept
can never lead to a contradiction by application of a ﬁnite number of logical processes,
I say that the mathematical existence of the concept . . . is thereby proved.”51 By the
existence of a concept K of something x, Hilbert means the existence of that thing as
conceived of as falling under K. While there is room to interpret these lines in the manner
of Meinong — in which case every (consistent) descriptive term would be guaranteed a
denotation — it lies closer to Hilbert’s actual practice to take to heart the qualiﬁcation,
“the attributes assigned [by the mathematician] to the concept”.52 In that case, Hilbert’s
view is that when a mathematician asserts or presupposes the existence of a mathematical
object, it is necessary and suﬃcient for the truth of that assertion or that presupposition
that the purported object be provably consistent. On this non-Meinongian interpretation,
it is clear that stipulation plays a central role in Hilbert’s philosophy of mathematics.
A mathematical object exists if a mathematician consistently says so or if what he says
consistently presupposes it.
Fictionalism in the philosophy of mathematics has a larger literature than can be done
justice to here. Some commentators see [Vaihinger, 1935] as providing a general philo-
sophical background, but this is far from a universally held position. Among more or less
contemporary investigators, one could mention, among several others, [Balaguer, 1996;
Bunge, 1997; Field, 1980; Hodes, 1984; Korner, 1967; Resnik, 1997; Tharp, 1989; Tiles,
1998; Torretti, 1981; von Freytag-Loringhoﬀ, 1951; Wagner, 1982; Wang, 1986] and
[Thomas, 2000; 2005]. It is sometimes held by mathematical ﬁctionalists that the way
to proceed with a ﬁctionalist theory of mathematics is to appropriate, and, if necessary,
adapt, a good theory of literary ﬁction. This, again, is the Literary Primacy Thesis, called
into question in Proposition 5, and to which we shall return in due course.53
51Quoted in [Davis, 2000, 90-91].
52Quoted in [Davis, 2000, 90].
53See, for example, [Hoﬀman, 1999]. See also [Resnik, 1997, 184ﬀ]: “Positing mathematical objects involves
nothing more mysterious than the ability to write novels . . . ”.

Fictions and Their Logic
1105
As we have said, truth-by-stipulation lies open to varying degrees of ontological au-
dacity. At its most careful, stipulating that P is making it the case that P is true in some
system Σ within which the theorist makes his stipulation. Thus P is Σ-true and corre-
spondingly describes objects that exist-in-Σ. Hyphenation is a wholly natural way of
marking the stipulator’s ontological caution. It is also much the standard way of sparing
the teeming pluralism of present-day logic from the inconsistencies that would ﬂow from
the unhyphenated truth of all their contending inventions.
Still, as any student of even the recent history of mathematics knows full well, it is not
uncommon that a portion or entire branch of mathematics might originate with a body
of hyphenated truths sanctioned by stipulation together with their consequences under
agreed proof procedures, only in the fullness of time to lose their hyphens en route to
an established canonicity. The suppression of hyphens is facilitated by two conditions in
particular. One is the omnipresence of the realist stance. The other is acceptance by the
research community, driven by the dynamic of epistemic integration.
Re-visiting our earlier example, in the immediate aftermath of the death of naive set
theory, Russell sought for a consistent rehabilitation of it [Russell, 1903]. Essential to
his purpose was a distinction between philosophical and mathematical analyses. Russell
thought that the paradox of sets that bears his name made a philosophical analysis of
sethood impossible. This was because the paradox demonstrated that the very concept
of set was inconsistent. This left mathematical analysis, which is what Russell actually
resorted to. In its most basic sense, mathematical analysis is nominal deﬁnition, which is
a form of stipulation.
Russell, in eﬀect, saw that stipulations produced hyphenated truths, and that communal
acceptance eliminates them. When this happens, as appears to have been the case with
ZFC, the theory in question is, or approximates to being, a received theory. A received
theory is a set of stipulated truths, and others proved from them, whose acceptance by
the appropriate disciplinary community or disciplinary culture, induces in such groups
hyphenation-blindness. Typically, community-acceptance embeds a successful attempt
to integrate the hypthenated truths in an established branch of knowledge. Also integral
to this blindness is the sheer psychological allure of the realist stance, abetted by the
conditions under which later generations are introduced to such truths (they are introduced
to them as objective mathematical facts). It is a powerful leaning. Stipulated truths are
hyphenated truths. If, as sometimes happens, these become received truths, those who
see them so fail to see their hyphens; in fact, fail to see their hyphens even if they are
made aware of the received theory’s stipulative origins. In this some may detect grave
defections from rationality and honesty. We see the psychological dominance of the realist
stance.54 Realism, we said, is an especially eﬃcient way of paying attention. Beings like
us ﬁnd it as natural as breathing to experience the world as external; and even when, in
particular ranges of cases, it is experienced internally, the internalities are experienced as
occurrences in a more capacious and embracing externality. Can’t-help-it-realism is not
54Hyphenation-blindness generally comes in degrees. From the stipulatively bold “true-in-S ” (e.g., “true-
in-intuitionistic logic”), there is a further stage, which we might call adverbilization (e.g., “intuistionistically
true”), thence to adjectivism (“an intuitionistic truth”), and ﬁnally, in the absence of rival abjectivisms, we have
substantiation (e.g., “true”).

1106
John Woods
a metaphysical theory. It is a habit of mind. Judging from its historical circumstances,
its mathematical inﬂuence is often more extreme than in ﬁctional cases. In each case, we
tend to be Barconists; that is, given truths in the form
3. T F∃x(. . .x. . .)
we ﬁnd it natural to reformulate them as truths in the form
4. ∃xT F(. . .x. . .).
In one good meaning of the term, we take (3) as (4). But if the actual evolution of ZFC is
anything to go on, truths in the form
3′. ZFC ∃x(. . .x. . .)
are now taken as
4′. ∃x(. . .x. . .)
in which one ﬁnds no occurrence of the ZFC-operator or of ZFC-hyphenation. Twice-
over this should give us pause. Even in the case of something as settled and mainstream
as ZFC, perhaps (4Σ) is a bit much. It is more than a bit much for ﬁction.
There are two main ways of being a Hilbertian stipulationist. One can hold that stip-
ulations give rise to bona ﬁde objects. Or one can make the lesser claim that stipulations
make reference possible. Roughly speaking, the ﬁrst way embeds a de re fondness for (4).
The second holds back in the de dicto manner of (3). Each possibility has something to be
said for it. In the ﬁrst instance, except for their discursive origins, stipulated objects are
on a par with any other created thing, whether widget or skyscraper. If pressed to explain
how speaking such objects into existence is possible, the stipulationist may plead that it
lies in the nature of (certain kinds of) mathematical objects to be created thus. Of course,
in so saying he sets himself for Moli`ere’s dormitive virtue riposte. But aside from that,
there is something rather impressive about his position. He can attach his stipulationism
to the dominant view of reference, the causal theory. If reference to a thing depends on
one’s being an element in a chain of events, preceding links of which have had causal
contact with it [Kripke, 1980], the condition is met here. For this is a view on which the
object in question has a causal origination, and whose creation is a directly witnessable
event.
The second is a more circumspect alternative. It imbibes the ontological caution of
something like substitutional quantiﬁcation. It preserves the intuition that mathematical
ﬁctions leave no metaphysical footprints. And, in seeking to preserve the intuition that
sentences ostensibly about such objects can nevertheless be true, it tries to have the very
cake that it eats.55 In eﬀect, it shifts the Hilbertian emphasis from objects to sentences,
decreeing that anything provable about them is true. As a bonus, it also attaches itself to
a Fregian notion of reference, according to which the reference of a term is determined
55Cf. Azzouni’s thin posits x, concerning which ‘there are xs’ can be true without there being xs [Azzouni,
1994; 2004].

Fictions and Their Logic
1107
by its Sinn, its sense, and it does so in ways that encourage a needed reﬁnement of the
general doctrine. Let ‘a’ be a purported mathematical object, and let P be the set of its
provable sentences. Let j be the point at which a and P make their way into working
mathematics. Then at j the sense of ‘a’ is ﬁxed by some subset of P. If sense determines
reference, the reference of ‘a’ is set by P.
One of the complaints made by causalists against Frege’s account of reference is that
it leaves it inadequately unexplained as to how it can be that referring terms actually pick
out objects. Frege thinks that one doesn’t understand a referring term ‘r’ unless one un-
derstands who (or what) r is, where r is whatever, in the context at hand, ‘r’ uniquely
denotes. If the task is to know what the reference of the term is, it is clearly insuﬃcient
to understand the ordinary meaning of it (if it has one). One perfectly well understands
the meaning of “the present king of France” even though it is a referential disaster. What
Sinn contributes is, in the context at hand, are bundles of true sentences which, if simul-
taneously satisﬁable at all, could only be uniquely satisﬁed. Thus those sentences make
it possible to know who or what the reference of ‘r’ is. Since there are no true sentences
about the present king of France, there is nothing to constitute the reference of “the present
king of France”. So it is the lack of such truths, not the lack of an object, that makes “the
present king of France” a referential wipe-out. It is the same way with “Elizabeth II”.
Knowing who its reference is made possible by relevant chunks of her biography — her
Sinn. It may be directly necessary for the existence of those particular truths that the ref-
erence of “Queen Elizabeth” be a real object, but it is not directly necessary to knowing
who the reference of “Elizabeth II” is that Elizabeth II be a real object. It is precisely this
that the present, more circumspect, form of stipulation exploits. In providing a common
explanation of knowing what the references of, say, “the smallest transﬁnite cardinal” and
“Elizabeth II” are, it places the question of the criterial importance of objecthood where
it belongs, in the theory of truth.
On Frege’s approach, reference is likened to a function, with terms as arguments and
objects as values. The theory is meant to answer two questions.
1. What does it take to understand ‘r”s reference.
2. What does it take for ‘r’ to pick out r?
A common part of the answers to these questions is Sinn. Concerning 1), it is insuﬃcient
that I understand the meaning of ‘r’. It is also required that I be acquainted with ‘r”s Sinn.
Concerning 2), it is insuﬃcient that ‘r’ has an understandable reference (Sinn) in order
that ‘r’ refer to r. I know what the reference of ‘Sherlock Holmes’ is and I know that no
object is denoted by it. The Sinn of ‘r’ does not suﬃce for it to be true that r is the object
‘r’ denotes. Sinn is necessary for it to be the fact that ‘r’ denotes r, if indeed r is the
object ‘r’denotes. By these lights, knowing ‘r”s reference is one thing, and knowing ‘r”s
referent is another. In Frege’s treatment the distinction is overlooked. Frege wanted to
preserve the intuition that ‘r’ lacks a reference if it lacks a referent, i.e., and object which
‘r’ picks out. One of the valuable byproducts of the problem of ﬁctionality is the ease
with which it makes the present distinction a useful one to have. For we now have the
wherewithal to make a threefold contrast between ‘the present king of France’, ‘Sherlock
Holmes’ and ‘Saul A. Kripke’.

1108
John Woods
1. ‘the present king of France’ lacks Sinn and therefore lacks reference and therefore
lacks a referent.
2. ‘Sherlock Holmes’ has Sinn and therefore has reference, but, given its Sinn, lacks a
referent.
3. ‘Saul A. Kripke’ is a triple-threat. It has Sinn, reference and a referent.
Does this beg the question against Frege? Frege thought that reference was functional and
that values had to be well-individuated objects. On a quick reading, it may seem that it is
precisely this feature that our present suggestion over-runs. The appearance is misleading.
In Frege’s theory, whenever ‘r’ refers, it must be true that
• ∃!x (‘r’ refers to x).
Reference for Frege is quantiﬁcationally rooted, and uniquely so. The same, however, is
true for ﬁction. It is part of the Sinn of ‘Sherlock Holmes’ that it refers to a character
generated by a ﬁctional text. Accordingly,
• ∃!xT F (‘r’ refers to x)
We see in this trichotomy reason to invoke the distinction between objectual and sub-
stitutional quantiﬁcation. In the standard case, the quantiﬁcation gives an object to which
‘r′ refers. In the ﬁctional case, the quantiﬁcation gives an object in which ‘r’ refers. So in
both cases, objects are essential to reference, albeit objects of a markedly diﬀerent kind.
It is easy to see that substitutional quantiﬁcation also extends a welcoming hand to all
forms of de re discourse about the ﬁctional. In
4. ∃xT F(. . .x. . .)
we have de re attribution without the objects. Instantiation restores T F to left-most posi-
tion. Every truth about the values of (4)’s quantiﬁer is a truth de dicto.
For good or ill, substitutional quantiﬁcation gives a theory of truth without objects. It
is not everyone’s cup of tea, needless to say. But is very far from being dismissible out of
hand; there is a lot that counts in its favour. (See, e.g. [McKeon, 2005]). It is at least a
theory with legs, and as such is streets ahead of any logic of ﬁction yet devised.
Earlier we mentioned the perplexing fact that beings like us are capable of believing
things we know to be false to be true of the ﬁctional and of being emotionally stirred by
things that we know didn’t occur. There is a tendency among literary theorists to liken
these phenomena to delusions or other forms of mental relapse. It takes little reﬂection
to see the inadequacy of such assumptions. If in watching a performance of Christopher
Plummer as King lear, I slip into the delusion that this is all actually happening I cannot
be said to be following the play. If, in the grip of the excitement at Reichenbach Falls,
I lose all sight of its literary origins, I cannot be said to be understanding the story. It
is true that an expertly performed play or an expertly crafted story is something that we
can lose ourselves in. It is a condition of this happening that we understand the work that
absorbs us. It is a condition on such understandings that in having them the works retain

Fictions and Their Logic
1109
their recognizable ﬁctionality. Interacting with a work of ﬁction is doing two things at
once. It is believing things that one knows to be untrue and it is being moved by things
that have not happened. So we speak of the things that we believe as holding in the story
and of the things that move us as occurring there. Let us call such beliefs and such aﬀects
double-aspected. Accordingly,
PROPOSITION 31 (Essential double-aspectness). It is a condition on one’s understand-
ing a work of ﬁction that the beliefs and emotions to which it gives rise are double-
aspected.
As it happens, it is an advantage rather than a liability, that a ﬁctional name’s Sinn
should embody some sign of ﬁctional origination. What this tells us in simple English is
that you cannot know who Holmes is unless you know that he is ﬁctional. Since this is
tantamount to saying that you cannot know who Holmes is without knowing that he isn’t
anything, then
PROPOSITION 32 (The double-aspectness of Sinn). Our understanding of the Sinn of
ﬁctional names is likewise double-aspected.
Something like the distinction between the objectual and the referential senses of stipu-
lationism attends the distinction between idealism and instrumentalism in the foundations
of mathematics. The ﬁrst term of the latter contrast is in play in the early debate over the
philosophical legitimacy of the axiom of choice.
On the one hand, metaphysical elements tinge the famous debate between
Hadamard and French School of Baire, Borel and Lebesque — do sets exist
objectively, independently of us, or do they exist only insofar as they have
been deﬁned or constructed by us? — in other words, there was a conﬂict
between something like Robust Realism and a version of Idealism [Maddy,
2005, 355-356].
On the idealist approach, the objects of mathematics — sets, for example — are ideal
objects, the fruit of the mathematicians’ deﬁnitions. In one variation, sometimes called
“conceptual realism”, these are objects in the theorist’s mind. It is possible in principle
to be one or other of two kinds of mathematical idealist, or conceptual realist (shades of
Kant). One might be an across-the-board idealist, holding that all mathematical objects
are human intellectual artifacts. Or one might also take a realist position with regard to
parts of mathematics and reserve one’s idealist leanings for the more recherch´e bits. For
instrumentalists, something like this latter distinction is mandatory. Some part P of math-
ematics is taken as privileged in some way, and some further part I — the instrumental
part — is justiﬁed solely by the contributions it makes to proofs in P. One way of instan-
tiating the P−I divide is by taking P as ﬁnitistic mathematics in the sense of [Tait, 1981].
Thus ﬁnitism is number theory formalized in primitive recursive arithmetic PRA.56 It is
possible to proceed to I from P in two ways, instrumentally or idealistically.
[W]e can add stronger arithmetical principles, which seems to amount to
adding more induction, or we can ﬁrst expand the language with variable for
56Either as an equational rendition or a ﬁrst order theory. See here [Caldon and Ignjatovi, 2005].

1110
John Woods
new types of objects (e.g., sets) and then add new arithmetical principles for
these objects [Caldon and Ignjatovi´c, 2005, 779].
The second way is the way of idealism. It also ﬂags an ambiguity in the word “instru-
mentalism.” The second way is also the way of instrumentalism to the extent to which the
contributions of its postulated objects to its I-rules is justiﬁed by the I-rules yield in PRA,
the privileged part of mathematics. The ﬁrst way is also the way of instrumentalism, but
in a purer sense. Proof rules are mere instruments. If the contributions they make to PRA
justify their use in I, then, since the rules introduce no new objects, their use is entirely
as proof instruments. So, roughly speaking, the diﬀerence between an idealist instru-
mentalism and a pure instrumentalism in extending PRA to I is the diﬀerence between
instrumentally successful rules that supplement the objects of PRA and instrumentally
successful rules involving no objects not in PRA.
It is well to keep in mind that both idealistically instrumental and nominalistically in-
strumental sets of proof instruments are judged solely on the basis of their contributions
to PRA. While it is possible to assimilate the stipulations of the S -model of ﬁction to
either strand of this instrumentalism, there is nevertheless an over-arching dissimilarity
that might tend to count against the S -model generically. In both forms, idealist or pure,
the stipulations of I are justiﬁed by the extent to which they facilitate the demonstration
of new facts about PRA. For this analogy to hold in the case of literary ﬁctions, the stip-
ulations of The Hound of the Baskervilles would be legitimized only by the extent that
they facilitated the production of new facts about the world. Now it is quite true that the
world is made diﬀerent by the fact that Arthur Conan Doyle penned The Hound of the
Baskervilles, as well as by the fact that it has had legions of readers and critics. But, in
the general case, the truths that hold in The Hound of the Baskervilles don’t hold in the
world, and those that do hold in the world were not made so to do by The Hound of the
Baskervilles. So a question for the S -theorist of ﬁction is wherein does the “justiﬁcation”
of the truths of The Hound of the Baskervilles lie?
Perhaps the dissimilarity might be discounted through judicious generalization. I is
justiﬁed by the contribution it makes. What matters most is that it is a contribution, not
where it is made. No one in his right mind thinks that the truths of The Hound of the
Baskervilles make a contribution to our knowledge of the world (to the history of Dart-
moor, for example). But they do make a story. That is their primary contribution; that
is what they are for. As with mathematics, there are two ways in which one might be an
instrumentalist about this. One might opt for idealism and ascribe to the author’s stipu-
lations not only the truths of The Hound of the Baskervilles but also some new objects
to serve as their subjects. Alternatively, one might elect the course of pure or nominalis-
tic instrumentalism, plumping for the idea that whereas The Hound of the Baskervilles is
constituted by its author’s stipulated truths, these are truths that — in the manner of sub-
stitutional quantiﬁcation — require no objects other than names. Here again we see some
convergence. In Waltonian versions of the PMB-model, there are no ﬁctional objects. The
same is true of purely instrumental versions of the S -model. In these variations, ﬁction
leaves no metaphysical footprints. With regard to a story’s characters, there is nothing
there.

Fictions and Their Logic
1111
Unless the present discussion has been seriously wrong-headed, it would appear that
we have ample grounds for proposing that
PROPOSITION 33 (Giving the nod to the S-model). Of all the going approaches, there
is a version of stipulationism that is best for literary ﬁctions.
PROPOSITION 34 (Quantiﬁcation as substitutional). In the variation that works for ﬁc-
tion, the S -model allows for de re quantiﬁcation into ﬁctional contexts, provided that
quantiﬁcation is substitutional.
PROPOSITION 35 (Reference without referents).
In this same variation, the S -model
is (as it were) tailor-madet for the distinction between a term’s having a reference and its
having a referent, and for the allied notion that a term’s reference is set by its Sinn, and
its referent, too, but only if it has one.
5
MAXIMAL ACCOUNTS
Maximal accounts when adjoined to a text’s ﬁctive sentences give the full story that it tells.
In most of the work done to date, conditions on maximality are usually thought of as given
recursively by closure clauses on sets of ﬁctive sentences. We are now in a position to
see that this is a duly restrictive way in which to construe maximality, much in the way
that the lingering preference for deductive closure is an unduly restrictive way to construe
ﬁctive closure. It goes without saying that maximality owes a good deal to what follows
from what in ﬁctional settings. It owes at least as much to background assumptions. Sets
of background assumptions are what Lewis calls collective belief worlds. Its beliefs are
those that everyone in the community shares, more or less everyone believes everyone
shares, and so on. A community’s background assumptions encompass what is “common
knowledge” there, including its accumulated store of lore about what things are actually
like. It includes the belief that Saul A. Kripke has an alimentary canal, because it is
known that Saul A. Kripke is a human and that having alimentary canals is part of what
humans are like. The beliefs in a community’s background assumptions come in varying
degrees of strength, but over all they reﬂect an interesting epistemic division. By and
large the generalizations are held with greater conﬁdence than its instantiations. This is
as it should be, epistemically speaking.
These observations are designed to capture the following kind of situation. We know
very well that it is generally (though not universally) true that Americans are not ﬂat-
earthers. We know every bit as well that Saul A. Kripke is an American. It does not
follow that Kripke is not a ﬂat-earther, but it is something that we may safely presume on
suﬀerance. In other words, it is a default that Saul A. Kripke is not a ﬂat-earther, whereas
it is a fact that he is a human and a fact, albeit a generic one, that Americans aren’t ﬂat-
earthers.57 So we may say that “Saul A. Kripke is not a ﬂat-earther” is in the presumptive
closure of a beliefs shared by readers of this chapter, and many others besides.
57Concerning genericity, [Carlson and Pelletier, 1995] is required reading. See also [Gabbay and Woods,
2005, chapter 7]

1112
John Woods
A further feature of background assumptions is that they are largely tacit. No one
thinks that it is realistic for anyone whose background is that of the readers of this chapter
to set out to produce a complete inventory of it. At a certain level, therefore, it is true to
say that it is epistemically indeterminate as to what the contents of one’s background are.
Hence an ambiguity in “know” presents itself. All sorts of things that I know (by common
knowledge) I cannot enumerate or specify on demand, or perhaps ever. For those cases, I
do not know what I know by common knowledge. To a degree, the tacitness of common
knowledge is oﬀ-set by the eﬃcacy of retrieval-to-surface mechanisms in beings like us.
A cognitive economy of tacit knowledge is like a manufacturing or retail economy run on
the principle of just-in-time. But even here elements of taciticity persist. In forming the
belief that, Saul A. Kripke is presumably no ﬂat-earther, the presence of the genericization
that Americans aren’t ﬂat-earthers may itself be tacit, and usually is.
Background assumptions are an attempt to carve out a portion of a usually much larger
set of background facts. Roughly speaking, the background facts of anything I chance to
know about the world is how the world actually is, whether I know it or not. Common
knowledge, therefore, is knowledge of a proper subset of background facts. As measured
by our own common experience, both sets are vast — well-beyond our capacity for spe-
ciﬁc direct-command manipulation. In our common experience, we haven’t the slightest
diﬃculty in acknowledging their existence and their salience. In particular, we have lit-
tle inclination to ontologize their epistemic indeterminacies, or to confuse, as mediaeval
philosophers would say, ordo cognescendi with ordo essendi. Accordingly,
PROPOSITION 36 (The parasitism of ﬁction). Except where the contrary is indicated by
a story’s ﬁctive sentences, authors tacitly include in their maximal accounts (a) the back-
ground facts, e.g., facts as to how the world actually is, and (b) background beliefs, i.e.,
common knowledge shared by author and reader. What this shows is the extraordinary
degree to which ﬁction is parasitic on the world.
COROLLARY 36(a)
In making their respective passages from the world to the story,
background sentences become true-in-the story, hence also T F-true in the world.
COROLLARY 36(b) Just as the epistemic indeterminacies of backgrounds are not ontol-
ogized (in the world), neither need they be in ﬁction. Thus ﬁctions incorporate complete
worlds, and incomplete, though large, epistemic subworlds of them.
Maximal accounts arise from recursive interplay between and among ﬁctive sentences,
background facts, background beliefs, and consequences thereof. Maximal accounts sub-
sume the closures of such sentences. We have already laid the stage for recognition of
a four-fold ambiguity in the notion of the closures in ﬁctional texts. Corresponding to
the distinction between the consequences a story has and the consequences that should
be drawn from it is a distinction between a story’s propositional closure and its inferen-
tial closure. Within this contrast are the various grades of closure, corresponding to the
various grades of consequence: deductive, inductive, statistical, abductive, presumptive,
plausibilistic and so on. Let L1, . . . Ln be logics for these consequence relations. The
question is whether to embed them in the logic of ﬁction. There is no strategic advantage
in not doing so. Let the sentences of the maximal account imply whatever they will. It
suﬃces that they not be given a free-ride into it. In other words maximality should not

Fictions and Their Logic
1113
be closed under consequence. This is tantamount to saying that only inferential closures
should be seen as involved in the construction of maximal accounts. This is entirely the
right way of seeing things, at least as an approximation. 58
Even so, a second distinction now presses for attention. Whose inferences belong in
the inferential closures of a story? As with the requisite collective belief worlds of a
given text, Lewis thinks that it is those shared by author and reader alike. There are
two things wrong with this. One is that it leaves it undetermined as to how conﬂicting
inferences might be decided. In Faust it is true that Faust makes a pact with the devil.
It may also have been the case that Goethe believed that the world was such that human
beings could make pacts with the devil, literally. As such, this goes into the maximal
account of Goethe’s poem as a background consideration — as part of how the world is.
Yet for many readers of the poem, this is at best a dramatically interesting superstition,
never mind that they would concede that just this actually occurred in the poem. There
is an answer to this. Goethe doesn’t get to decide theological questions except ﬁctively,
just as Cervantes doesn’t get to decide astronomical questions except ﬁctively. Whatever
Cervantes or anyone else may have thought, the motion of the heavenly bodies of part one
of Don Quixote are elliptical, not circular, unless otherwise provided by the sentences of
the text. This notwithstanding that part one was published prior to Kepler’s breakthrough
and only part two afterwards.
There are two questions about inferential closure, not one. Of course, we want to know
what inferences we as readers and critics should draw from a text’s ﬁctive sentences and
its background considerations. But there is also the question of what inferences Holmes
and his ilk draw about the events of the story. In some respects, Holmes is better placed
than we to ﬁll in the maximal account. He knows more about late-Victorian London that
we do, and about the myriad facts of his own life. This being so, Holmes will be privy
to consequences of such facts that can only escape us. On the other hand, the ﬁctive
sentences of stories are often arranged so as to give the epistemic advantage to readers.
Readers of Oedipus can see the trouble coming from miles away, but Oedipus has no clue
until the madly bitter end. Intuitively, we want to count inferences that Oedipus doesn’t
make or that contradict those that he made mistakenly. To this end the nod goes to the
reader. But in light of the ﬁrst diﬃculty, it can only be a qualiﬁed nod. The best com-
promise would be that the requisite inferences are those drawn by anyone combining the
advantages of readers and of characters within the ﬁction. A good, though not perfect
approximation to this is the third-person narrator of stories in which reader and author
are near-contemporaries.This can’t be all there is to it, needless to say. Some narrators,
often in ﬁrst-person cases, are mistaken in various ways. In very old stories, the Homeric
poems for example, there is much that I will miss that (even) Achilles will not. These
are diﬃculties of a sort that commend themselves to the device of the ideal observer. An
ideal observer is someone in the world who has mastery of a text’s ﬁctive sentences and
who is counterfactually present in the story and positioned there in ways that facilitate
his drawing the appropriate inferences. Because both reader and ﬁctional character are
58Of course, don’t the facts of the world have their own consequences independently of whether we have the
resources or occasion to draw them? Yes, but we may take it that the facts of the world include the facts of their
closures.

1114
John Woods
diﬀerentially disadvantaged, readers and characters will draw diﬀerent subsets of the in-
ferences that the ideal observer is able to draw. But, for all that, these will in the general
case be a substantial overlap.
5.1
Contra ideal observers
Some readers will take the resort to ideal observers as a retrograde step, if not a cri du
coeur. Fiction is a hard enough problem (they will say) without the added burden of coun-
terfactual in-ﬁction observers. For anyone still drawn to a worlds approach to ﬁction, the
present strategy presents us with two levels of modality, one made necessary by the ﬁc-
tional and the other made necessary by the counterfactual, the upshot of which is that
we are now required to chart the connections between non-ﬁctional possible worlds and
ﬁctional worlds. I am myself rather sympathetic to this complaint. I have tried to say why
the worlds approach to ﬁction is misbegotten. I admit to having similar doubts about the
conceptual (as opposed to mathematical) adequacy of a worlds approach to counterfac-
tality. Running a possible worlds account for counterfactuals in ﬁction involves running
a ﬁctional worlds account of the possible worlds account that takes care of counterfactu-
ality. This is not to say that such interactions are beyond us; but, as Quine would say, the
returns had better be good. Upon reﬂection, it is better to be realistic. There is a great
deal that is true in ﬁction that we shall never know. There is a great deal in the world that
we shall never know. In particular, there are lots of inferences that Holmes and his ilk do
(and should) draw from whatever it is that they have knowledge of. Since in lots of cases
what they have knowledge of extends to what we lack knowledge of, we will not know
how to infer what inferences it was right for them to draw from such knowledge. This is
nothing to be over-concerned about. It is just another patch of epistemic indeterminacy in
our understanding of Holmes and his doings. Nor need this indeterminacy leave a gaping
hole in our appreciation of the kind of man Holmes is and the nature of his doings. For
in all things, Holmes is as much like us in his nature and his actions and passions as is
compatible with the ﬁctive sentences of the stories and his status as a ﬁctional being.
We have already seen that a stipulationist approach allows for, but does not demand, a
substitutional account of quantiﬁcation. Here, too, it is essential to distinguish between
the quantiﬁcations we ourselves make and those made by Holmes and his ilk. Bearing on
this is the parasitism of ﬁction on the world. To the extent that its ﬁctive sentences allow
it, quantiﬁcation there should be like quantiﬁcation here. There is no particular reason to
attribute to Holmes substitutional quantiﬁcations except for those cases in which Holmes
is trying to quantify over what he has trouble in recognizing as real. Like us, Holmes too
is subject to nominalistic provocation. When this happens, we should not deny him the
utility of substitutional quantiﬁcation.
Holmes is a nominalistic provocation for us. Although we know who he is and what he
did, we also know that he is not there and that none of what has ever happened happened
to him. This is an interesting duality, for which the truth of “There are lots of things that
don’t exist” is a godsend, and which (on my telling) “Holmes does not exist” instantiates
and “The present king of France does not exist” does not. Retaining this intuition requires
a view of quantiﬁcation that restricts the values of bound variables to referring terms that

Fictions and Their Logic
1115
have sense. Perhaps this would not be a well-motivated restriction generally, but it works
well here. For here truth is primary and objects are nothing.
5.2
Contra a ﬁctive modality
In §4.2.5, we noted that in Meinongian contexts, it is hard to see what the semantic im-
port of T F might be. We went so far as to suggest that in such contexts T F is “semanti-
cally inert”, thereby leaving the impression that this was something that told against the
Meinongian analysis of ﬁction. As we now see, although this may be a consequence that
Meinongians would be prepared to accept, for the rest of us it is a disaster. T F is needed
to mark the fact that for any sentence in the closure of any set of sentences containing a
ﬁctive sentence is false, and yet true in the story. One of the attractions of this is com-
patability with the T-schema. If the T-schema is adequate for sentences about the world,
it is also adequate for the sentences of ﬁction, except where contra-indicated by its ﬁctive
sentences. Accordingly, we have it that
“Holmes is Watson’s friend” is true iﬀHolmes is Watson’s friend.
In other words, “Holmes is Watson’s friend” is false. What is not false is that “Holmes
is Watson’s friend” is true-in-the story. “Holmes is Watson’s friend” is true-in-the story
iﬀit is a member of the story’s maximal account M. “But that’s not truth”, some will
complain. The reply to make is: Of course it is not truth, and this is nothing to complain
of. If it is true that T F(S ), then T F(S ). But we do not have it that if T F(S ) then S .
T F is a way of keeping our assertions contradiction-free. More generally, it is a way
of keeping our assertions falsity-free. In uttering ⌜T F(S )(∧∼S )⌝I leave the law of
noncontradiction untriﬂed with. This gives us no occasion to apply emergency measures
from dialetheic logic. ⌜T F(S ∧∼S )⌝is true if ⌜S ∧∼S ⌝εM.
There remains the question of the place of ⌜S ∧∼S ⌝in ﬁction, concerning which a
certain caution is wise counsel indeed. In “The Mischief of Ricardo Bosque”, its author
da Bloo provides that every sentence is true. A good part of the story involves an attempt
to depict Ricardo’s day-to-day reaction to the storied fact of absolute inconsistency. “The
Mischief” is not, I think, a very satisfactory story on literary grounds, but it gives no
oﬀence on the score of what it obliges its readers to count as true in it. Since, every
sentence S is true in the story, we must allow that for every sentence S, T F(S ), where F is
“The Mischief of Ricardo Bosque”. However, there is nothing to indicate that Bradbury’s
story is one in which everything is true. If this is right, there are two options to consider.
Option (1). Allow the propositional closure of A Sound of Thunder to be as classical
as you please; in which case, we concede that everything whatever follows from “Keith
was elected President in 2055 ∧∼(Keith was elected President in 2055)”. Restrict the
inferential closure (and accordingly, the maximal account) dialetheically, in the manner,
say, of Priest’s LP [Priest, 1979].
Option (2). Subject the propositional and the inferential closures to the same dialetheic
constraint.

1116
John Woods
It is interesting to note that neither from the point of view of what readers must concede
to or from the point of view of what a story’s characters must attest to is there the slightest
diﬀerence between option (1) and option (2). As far as we are concerned, all that is true
in A Sound of Thunder are the sentences in its M. From the point of view of Keith and
his ilk all that is true is in the inferential closure of what they know of themselves and
their situations. In more generalized contexts, there might be diﬀerential advantages in
keeping one’s options open, or in plumping for one or the other. But this is not something
that concerns us here.
All this has a bearing on the advisability of construing T F as a sentential modal op-
erator. No doubt one of the attractions of so doing is that there exist well-understood
semantic theories for the modals. In §4.2.4 I attempted to show that possible worlds’ se-
mantics leave the logic of ﬁction in a conceptually underdetermined shape. Far and away,
the best to be said of a possible worlds (or a ﬁctional worlds) approach to ﬁction is that we
have a fairly good command of worlds when considered as abstract mathematical struc-
tures. One senses here the presence of Make Do. Dropping the pretense that a semantics
of worlds oﬀers conceptual elucidations of the semantic dimension of ﬁction, deprives the
T F-as modal-operator assumption of much of its attractiveness. For if a modal operator
requires a possible worlds semantics, and a possible worlds semantics tells us nothing
(conceptually) about ﬁction, what can a modal operator tell us about ﬁction?
We would be better advised to conjure up a role for T F that more closely comports with
actual practice. We should aim for a construal that allows for the propositional identity
of the S that the story makes true, and the S that the reader accedes to. But it is also
necessary to pay close attention to variations in truth-attribution. So while my utterance
of “Keith was elected President in 2055 ∧∼(Keith was elected President in 2055)” has
the same propositional content that it has in the maximal account of Bradbury’s story, it is
essential that what is true there not be confused with what is true here. These objectives
do not require the postulation of modalities. Labels will do.
Although labels have only recently been studied in a systematic way,59 they are a far
from unfamiliar device. Among logicians, labels are most commonly used in recording
the derivation histories of lines in proofs, and in marking the roles played by formulas
not introduced by derivation from prior lines, as in axiomatic, conditional, indirect and
reductio proofs. Then, too, we saw in our discussion of the S -model of §4 that truth by
stipulation gives rise to hyphenation. If a theorist stipulates the truth of S in his theory T,
then all else being well, S is true-in-T. Another abundant source is conjecture. Every time
a theorist completes an abductive inference, he does two things. For some proposition H,
he conjectures that H is true (knowing that he does not know that it is); and, secondly, he
releases H for inferential duty in the domain of enquiry within which the conjecture has
arisen. In each of these cases — the theoretical stipulation case and the scientiﬁc con-
jecture case — the proposition in question may in time ﬁnd itself wholly integrated into
some or other body of knowledge. When that happens, H’s ancestry is overlooked. But
until it does happen, it is essential that its ancestry not be overlooked. When Planck made
the momentous conjecture of quanta in 1900, he released the quantum hypothesis for fur-
ther work in the physics of light. It proved a transformation of physics. Large classes of
59[Gabbay, 1996]. For a brief informal survey, see [Gabbay and Woods, 2003, chapter 13].

Fictions and Their Logic
1117
sentences were now derivable with the aid of the quantum hypothesis, and each of them
retained the conjectural status of the hypothesis that abetted them until such time as in-
dependent experimental corroboration became available. Prior to that, it had to be kept in
mind that all of this new physics was itself conjectural. Hence the importance of labels.
Labels are an idealization of the more or less settled informal practice of not taking the
experimentally unconﬁrmed propositions of ﬂedgling quantum physics as demonstrably
true in the world, rather than demonstrably true-in-quantum theory. Quantum theory is
pretty wild conceptually, but it is not ﬁction. There were good reasons to want to integrate
quanta into established science. When it happened, science was considerably enriched by
it. With the creations of ﬁction, on the other hand there is nothing for them to integrate
into (except, in limited cases, each other.).
We saw T F as a sentence operator that converts a falsehood to a modal truth, and for
this to be true, we took it as given that a modal semantics would have to be dreamed up
for T F. Of course, I now see that as a mistake. T F is not a semantically loaded modality.
It is a label. This is as it should be. There is nothing semantic about the fact that whereas
S is false, T F(S ). S is false precisely because it is not the case that S . That is a semantic
fact about S.T F(S ) precisely because S εM. That is not a semantic fact about S . Again, if
T F(S ), it does not follow, and in large classes of cases it is false, that S .
5.3
An advantage of mathematical stipulationism?
In [Woods and Alward, 2002] much ado was made about a problem that is fundamental
to ﬁction and only contingently an issue for mathematics. This, we suggested, was an
asymmetry of suﬃcient import to tip the scales in favour of mathematical ﬁctions rather
than literary ﬁctions as oﬀering up the more generic or canonical model, thus ending the
career of The Literary Primacy Thesis. The putative asymmetry arises from the fact that
by and large literary ﬁctions are rivals of the world, that what they make true the world
has already made false. It is true that on occasion a mathematician’s stipulations will con-
tradict some antecedently proferred theorem or deﬁnition, but by and large mathematical
stipulations go where others have not yet gone.
There is a further reason to question the importance we attempted to give the asymme-
try between literary and mathematical ﬁctions. For consider all those creative stipulations
in mathematics for which there was no antecedently available claim that it contradicts.
Mathematics is the natural home of negation-as-failure. Any S yet to ﬁnd a home in
mathematics is such that ⌜∼S ⌝holds by default. Accordingly, any fresh stipulation will
contradict an existing default. No one thinks that a default should be impervious to con-
tradicting demonstrations. But removal by stipulation is another matter. So we have it that
the asymmetry all but vanishes. For many sentences of ﬁction, there is an antecedently
existing fact to the contrary. For most sentences of stipulative mathematics there is a pre-
sumptively antecedent fact to the contrary. This presents us with something quite close to
a level playing ﬁeld when it comes to handling those contradictions. It is not a problem.
We handle them with labels.

1118
John Woods
5.4
The transﬁctive
There is as yet no place in this analysis for transﬁctive truths, such as that Holmes was
admired by Agatha Christie. This is a sentence that could not have been true in the absence
of truths in the maximal accounts of the Holmes stories. Like certain of the sentences in
the maximal accounts, transﬁctive sentences depend on the ﬁctional, but with a diﬀerence.
These latter are true in ﬁction but not in the world, whereas transﬁctive truths are true in
the world but not in ﬁction. So the dependency is diﬀerent.
The paradigm of a transﬁctive truth is
2. Reader R knows who Holmes is and what he did.
All else is variation — Christie’s admiration, King’s appropriation, and Brett’s dramatic
representation. One of the attractions of the S -model is that it suﬃces to know who
Holmes is to know the reference of “Holmes”. This is done via Sinn, the individuating
sentences of the maximal account. A reader’s knowledge of who Holmes is is a matter of
his knowing with respect to those sentences S that T F(S ) is true. He knows that T F(S ) is
true if he knows that S εM. Similarly, someone knows what Holmes did when he knows
who Holmes is and knows with respect to those sentences S that give the action of the
story that T F(S ) is likewise true. Here, too, one knows that T F(S ) is true if one knows
that S εM.
Knowing who Holmes is diﬀerent from knowing Holmes. The same is true of Saul
A. Kripke. Knowing Kripke demands acquaintance with an object. Knowing who he
is requires acquaintance with ‘Saul A. Kripke”s Sinn. With ‘Holmes’ this is all we get.
There is no object for us to acquire acquaintance of. Knowing Holmes seems to require it
to be true that
∃x (John knows x).
But this is false. It would also seem that admiring Holmes is like this too, requiring that
it be true that
∃x (Christie admires x)
But this too is false. How, then, can it be that Christie’s admiring Holmes is modeled
on her knowing who Holmes is. The answer is that it suﬃces for Christie to admire
Holmes that she ﬁnds Holmes to be admirable; and it suﬃces for this that she thinks that
T F(Holmes is admirable). It is much the same way with King’s appropriation of Holmes
in her own A Monstrous Regiment of Women, and of Brett’s capturing nuances of Holmes’
personality. In the one case, the Holmes of Doyle’s telling is the Holmes of King’s. In the
Doyle stories “There exists an x such that x is denoted by ‘Holmes”’ is true. In the King
stories, “There exists an y such that y is denoted by ‘Holmes”’ is also true. In King’s story
but not Doyle’s y = x. So some of the sentences true in King’s story are not so in Doyle’s.
Brett’s ﬁdelity to Holmes’ personality is similarly dealt with. Two conditions need to
be met. One is that Brett must know what Holmes is like. The other is that he must be
able to capture these features in the way that he plays Holmes on television. Knowing

Fictions and Their Logic
1119
what Holmes is like is knowing the requisite propositions in the form ⌜T F(K (Holmes))⌝
And knowing how to capture K-ness is simply a matter of the actor’s trade-craft.
Perhaps it will not have escaped notice that each of our intuitive axioms makes a trans-
ﬁctive claim. If it cannot accommodate the intuitive axioms, that will be reason to doubt
the our present account. We said earlier that we should prepare ourselves for the even-
tuality that our intuitions will prove to have been misconceived. Certainly such was the
lesson of the inconsistency that brought down intuitive set theory. It is quite true that these
might have to be given up, but they should not be given up cavalierly.
Axiom A tells us that we refer to ﬁctional beings even though they do not exist. We have
already seen that the S -model accommodates a view of reference according to which one
can know the reference of “Sherlock Holmes” without its having a referent. We have also
seen that in combination with substitutional quantiﬁcation we may give such reference de
re formulation in the manner of ⌜∃xT F (‘r’ denotes x)⌝.
Axiom B tells us that there are true sentences about the ﬁctional. Again, we have seen
that the S -model allows us to say that the only truth in a story are those that are true
independently of it. All else is untrue. Yet everything in a story’s maximal account is
true-in-the story.T Fpreserves all that is desirable in B if we are also going to allow that
the truths of stories leave no metaphysical footprints.
Axiom C is about inference. I have already said my piece about inference in the earlier
discussion of maximal accounts. The rough rule of thumb is that inference within ﬁction
be as near as like inference in the world as the ﬁctive sentences permit. In the particular
case of ⌜S ∧∼S ⌝occurring in a story, the surrounding sentences of the maximal account
will serve as context. In a story such as “The Mischief”, one infers that everything is true
in the story. In a story such as A Sound of Thunder, inference is paraconsistent — indeed
dialetheic. A further tip: anything inferred from a sentence, labeled ‘T F’ is itself labeled
‘T F’. Storied truths don’t achieve cheap or unfettered entr´e to the world.
Axiom D provides that a story’s ﬁctive truths and those in their inferential closures are
made true by the author. The truth is that they are made true in the story by the author. In
some versions, D also has it that the author provides an ontology for his stories, a realm
of nonexistent objects and happenings. There is a version of the S -model that allows for
this; but not every variation does. In its purely instrumental form, all we can say (or would
want to) is that authors provide ontologies in their stories — objects and events that are
real in the stories, our acknowledgement of which is protected by the label ‘T F’.
Finally, E reminds us that real entities may be borrowed for guest appearances in ﬁc-
tion. This is true, but it is a truth of an appropriately distinctive form. For example,
∃x (x = London ∧T F(. . .(London)).
Accordingly, whereas it is possible that
∃x(x = London ∧T F(. . .(London))
is part of the Sinn of ‘London’, nothing in the form of ‘T F (. . . (London))’ is part of it.
One of the virtues of the S -model is that it preserves the ﬂavour of the intuitive axioms
while at the same time allowing for reﬁnements driven by the foundational fact that the
ﬁctional leaves no metaphysical footprints. A further virtue is that it leaves more or

1120
John Woods
less standard approaches to reference, truth and inference intact, taking care of needed
qualiﬁcations by way of labels. What this helps us see is how close to a logic of non-
ﬁctions a logic of ﬁction turns out to be. This is as it should be. Fiction is parasitical on
the world, with which it achieves a kind of partnership. But it is an arrangement in which
it is very much the case that the world is the senior partner.
When we say that ﬁction leaves no metaphysical footprints, we nominalize the ﬁc-
tional, that is, we drift towards a nominalistic account of it. One of the diﬃculties thrown
up by nominalism is that of integrating its nominalities with the tough customers of the
real world. Such integration comprehends drawings of the real by the merely nominal,
which is ludicrous on its face. Attempts to minimize this diﬃculty which trade-oﬀontic
integration for predictive yield gets a kind of instrumentalism up and running. But, as
we have tried to show, there is no virtue in this for ﬁction. Not only do the nominalia of
ﬁction not trade blows with the denizens of the world, there is absolutely no predictive
gain in integrating their truths. What is wanted is a form of stipulationism in which the
truths of ﬁction leave no metaphysical footprints and no predictive ones either.
The S -model provides that the objects of ﬁction are a fa¸con de parler. Given the way
that natural languages are constructed, given that they deeply embed the realist stance, it
is only natural that we see our relationships with Holmes and his ilk on the model of our
relationships with Saul A. Kripke and his ilk. Perhaps this is a place at which to revisit the
previously derided idea of ﬁction as pretense, although not with a view to recanting my
earlier criticism. In our untutored and pre-theoretical moments we report our experience
of Holmes objectually. But no one is in any doubt that such reports are a fa¸con de parler.
Readers of “The Hound of the Baskervilles” do not lose sight of the fact that none of this
actually happened. And yet, in some cases — looking for it in the Doyle oeuvre might
not be the best place — we are deeply moved by what we read. This is not a fa¸con de
parler. We are not pretending to be deeply moved, or playing at it or making-believe that
we are. What is remarkable is that knowing that the denotation of “Ophelia” is a fa¸con de
parler we are greatly moved by her death. It is a trick, of course, a lovely gift of a trick.
We are able to be moved by what we know isn’t there. Our understanding of such things
is double-aspected.60
The proposition that we are able to be moved by what we know isn’t there gives great
oﬀence to philosophers of many stripes, who are moved to back-pedal with a certain
earnestness. So we postulate (or borrow) nonexistent but otherwise wholly legitimate
objects — the objects of Meinong’s jungle, the objects of possible worlds, the objects of
ﬁctional worlds the objects of idealist stipulations. At every turn, these are rehabilitations
induced by the objectural biases in-built to language and experience. By and large, these
are biases that serve us well, but in the matter of our experience of ﬁction they lead us
into error.
There are logicians galore for whom this is the right way of proceeding. But it is not
the right way of proceeding for ﬁction, as I have been trying to show. Truth in ﬁction
is not a matter of relations between ﬁctional sentences and various kinds of set-theoretic
structures (jungles, worlds, whatever). Truth in ﬁction is a matter entirely of membership
60An astute analysis of aﬀective responses to ﬁction is [Alward, forthcoming, chapter 2].

Fictions and Their Logic
1121
in M. Again, people will complain. “That is not real truth”, they will say. They are
entirely right. It is truth in ﬁction.
In recommending an instrumental stipulationism for literary ﬁction, we make a large
investment in ﬁction’s parasitical nature. Perhaps it is natural to read axiom D as heavily
creative. Certainly, it is nothing but right to acknowledge the pivotal role of the author
in stocking the M of his story with its enabling ﬁctive sentences. But the great bulk of
what is encompassed by M is furnished by the world. What stories are like draws heavily
on what the world is like; and the passage of what the world is like into ﬁction is one
in which the ﬁctive operator is picked up in a largely honoriﬁc and book-keeping sense.
In their stories, authors need the world to be a certain way in order that the action of the
story might unfold as the author intends. The default position is that the world in the
story is our world, save only as may be required by its ﬁctive sentences. In this regard,
understanding a story is like revising a set of beliefs in something like the manner of
[Gabbay, Pigozzi and Woods]. Fictive sentences serve both as new inputs and modularity
triggers. Someone who understands that The Hound of the Baskervilles is a story will not
revise his belief set on the strength of the truth of “Sherlock Holmes waved our strange
visitor into a chair”, but rather on the strength of that fact that T F(Sherlock Holmes waved
our strange visitor into a chair). But he will produce his version of the maximal account
in reverse, with “Sherlock Holmes waved our strange visitor into a chair” making the cut
and “T F(Sherlock Holmes waved our strange visitor into a chair” not. The fact remains
that most of what goes into it is already in the world. A great deal of what would occasion
the revision of my beliefs also requires membership in a story’s M. When this happens,
the author borrows the world for a guest appearance in his story.
Fiction hasn’t the slightest prospect of being integrated with our knowledge of the
world. Equipping its stipulations with features designed to ease such integration is worse
that a waste of time; is also a mistake. It encourages the idea that, in creating stories,
authors create objects. In so saying, we learn a useful lesson about “in”. It is true in Japan
that one drives on the left. From this it follows that “One drives on the left” is a sentence
contingently true in the world. In the Holmes stories, Holmes is a bit of a prig. But it is
not the case that “Holmes is a prig” is contingently true of the world. “Holmes is a prig”
is true-in-ﬁction, but true nowhere. Fiction leaves no metaphysical footprints.
6
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
For astute and helpful comments, I am indebted to conversations with Dale Jacquette,
Kendall Walton, Nicholas Griﬃn, Dov Gabbay, Matthew McKeon, Hartley Slater, Peter
Alward, Mohan Matthen and Ori Simchen. I thank the Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council of the United Kingdom for ﬁnancial support, and Carol Woods and Jane
Spurr for technical assistance.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Adams et al., 1997] F. Adams, G. Fuller and R. Stecker. The semantics of ﬁctional names, in Paciﬁc Philo-
sophical Quarterly, volume 78, pp. 128-148, 1997.

1122
John Woods
[Akiba, 2000] K. Akiba. Indeﬁniteness of mathematical objects, Philosophia Mathematica volume 3, pp. 26-
46, 2000.
[Alward, to appear] P. Alward. Attitudes Towards Fiction, to appear.
[Åqvist, 2003] L. Åqvist. Some remarks on performatives in the law, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Law, pp. 105-
124, 2003.
[Armour-Garb, 2005] B. Armour-Garb. Wrestling with (and without) dialetheism, Australasian Journal of Phi-
losophy, vol., 83, pp. 87-102, 2005.
[Austin, 1975] J.L. Austin. How to Do Things with Words, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1975.
[Azzouni, 1994] J. Azzouni. Mathematical Myths, Mathematical Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1994.
[Azzouni, 2004] J. Azzouni. Deﬂating Existential Consequence: A Case for Nominalism, New York: Oxford
University Press, 2004.
[Balaguer, 1996] M. Balaguer. A ﬁctionalist account of the indispensable applications of mathematics, Philo-
sophical Studies, volume 83, pp. 291-314, 1996.
[Batens, 2000] D. Batens. A survey of inconsistency-adaptive logics, edited by D. Batens, C. Mortenson, G.
Priest and J.P. van Bendegem, Frontiers of Paraconsistent Logic, pp. 49-73, Baldock, UK: Research Studies
Press, 2000.
[Benacerraf, 1973] P. Benacerraf, Mathematical truth, Journal of Philosophy, volume LXX, pp. 661-679, 1973.
[Bencivenga, 1980] E. Bencivenga. Free semantics for deﬁnite descriptions, Logique et Analyse, volume 92,
pp. 393-405, 1980.
[Bencivenga, 1991] E. Bencivenga. Free semantics, in K. Lambert, editor, Philosophical Applications of Free
Logic, New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 98-111, 1991.
[Blocker, 1974] H.G. Blocker. The truth about ﬁctional entities, Philosophical Quarterly, volume 24, pp. 27-
36, 1974.
[Brown, 2000] B. Brown. Simple natural deduction for weakly aggregative paraconsistent logics, in Dov M.
Gabbay, editor, Frontiers of Paraconsistent Logics, Baldock, UK: Research Studies Press, 2000.
[Bunge, 1997] M. Bunge. Moderate mathematical ﬁctionalism, in Philosophy of Mathematics, E. Agazzi and
G. Darvas, editors, pp. 51-71, Dordrecht and Boston: Kluwer, 1997.
[Byrne, 1993] A. Byrne. Truth in ﬁction: the story continued, Australasian Journal of Philosophy, volume 71,
pp. 24-35, 1993.
[Caldon and Ignjatovi´c, 2005] P. Caldon and A. Ignjatovi´c. On mathematical instrumentalism, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, pp. 778-794, 2005.
[Carlson and Pelletier, 1995] G. N. Carlson and F. J.Pelletier, editors. The Generic Book, Chicago: Chicago
University Press, 1995.
[Cartwright, 1960] R. Cartwright, Negative Existentials, Journal of Philosophy, volume 57, pp. 629-639, 1960.
[Castaneda, 1979] H.-N. Cast˜anada. Fiction and reality: Their fundamental connections, in Formal Semantics
and LiteraryTheory, pp. 31-62, John Woods and Thomas Pavel, editors, a special issue of Poetics, volume 8,
1979.
[Coleman, 1973] F.X.J. Coleman. A few observations on ﬁctional discourse, in Aesthetics and Language,
edited by B.R. Tilghman, pp. 31-42, Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1973.
[Crittenden, 1973] C. Crittenden. Thinking about non-being, Inquiry, volume 16, pp. 290-312, 1973.
[Currie, 1990] G. Currie. The Nature of Fiction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
[da Costa, 1998] N.C.A. da Costa. Paraconsistent logic, in Stanisaw J´askowski Memorial Symposium, pp. 29-
35, Department of Logic, Nicholas Copernicus University of Torun, 1998.
[Davis, 2000] M. Davis. Engines of Logic: Mathematicians and the Origin of the Computer, New York: Nor-
ton, 2000.
[de Kleer, 1986] J. de Kleer. An assumption-based TMS, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 28, pp. 157-200, 1986.
[Deutsch, 1985] H. Deutsch. Fiction and fabrication, Philosophical Studies, volume 47, pp. 201-211, 1985,
[Devine, 1974] P.E. Devine. The logic of ﬁction, Philosophical Studies, volume 26, pp. 389-399, 1974.
[Doleˇzel, 1979] L. Doleˇzel. Extensional and intuitional narrative worlds, Formal Semantics and Literary The-
ory, pp. 193-211, editors, John Woods and Thomas Pavel, a special of Poetics, volume 8, 1979.
[Donnellan, 1966] K. Donnellan. Reference and deﬁnite descriptions, Philosophical Review, volume 77, pp.
281-304, 1966.
[Conan Doyle, 1981] A. Conan Doyle. The Hound of the Baskervilles, London: Penguin Books. Originally
published in 1902 by George Newnes, 1981.
[Everett and Hofweber, 2000] A. Everett and T. Hofweber. editors, Empty Names: Fiction and the Puzzles of
Non-existence, Stanford: CSLI Publications, 2000.
[Field, 1980] H. Field. Science Without Numbers: A Defense of Nominalism, Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1980.

Fictions and Their Logic
1123
[Frege, 1952] G. Frege. On sense and reference, Translations from the Writings of Gottlob Frege, pp. 56-78,
Peter T. Geach and Max Black, editors, Oxford: Blackwell, 1952.
[Frege, 1967] G. Frege. Begriﬀsschrift ein der arithmeteschen nachgehildete Formelsprache des reinen Denk-
ins, in From Grege to G¨odel, Jean van Heijenoort, editor, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1967.
[Gabbay, 1996] D. M. Gabbay. Labelled Deductive Systems, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.
[Gabbay and Woods, 2003] D. M. Gabbay and John Woods. Agenda Relevance: A Study in Formal Pragmat-
ics, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2003.
[Gabbay and Woods, 2005] D. M. Gabbay and John Woods. The Reach of Abduction: Insight and Trial, Ams-
terdam: Elsevier, 2005.
[Gabriel, 1975] G. Gabriel. Fiktion und Warheit, Stuttgart: Fromman-Holzboog, 1975.
[Gabriel, 1979] G. Gabriel. Fiction — a semantic approach, in Formal Semantics and Literary Theory, John
Woods and Thomas G. Pavel, editors, pp. 245-255, a special issue of Poetics, volume 8, Amsterdam: North-
Holland, 1979.
[Gale, 1971] R.M. Gale. The ﬁctive use of language, Philosophy, volume 46, pp. 324-340, 1971.
[Grice, 1989] P. Grice. Studies in the Way of Words, Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1989.
[Griﬃn, 2005] N. Griﬃn. Through the Woods to Meinong’s jungle, in Mistakes of Reason: Essays in Honour
of John Woods, edited by Kent A. Peacock and Andrew D. Irvine, pp. 15-32, Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, to appear in 2005.
[Hailperin and Leblanc, 1959] T. Hailperin and H. Leblanc. Nondesignating singular terms, The Philosophical
Review, volume 68, pp. 239-243, 1959.
[Hanley, 2004] R. Hanley. As good as it gets: Lewis on truth in ﬁction, in Lewisean Themes: The Philosophy
of David K. Lewis, pp. 113-129, Frank Jackson and Graham Priest, editors, New York: Oxford University
Press, 2004.
[Heintz, 1979] J. Heintz. Reference and inference in ﬁction, pp. 85-89, in John Woods and Thomas Pavel,
editors, Formal Semantics and Literary Theory, a special issue of Poetics, volume 8, 1979.
[Hintikka, 1959] J. Hintikka. Existential presuppositions and existential commitments, The Journal of Philos-
ophy, pp. 125-137, volume 56, 1959.
[Hodes, 1984] H. T. Hodes. Logicism and the ontological commitments of arithmetic, Journal of Philosophy,
pp. 123-149, volume 81, 1984.
[Hoﬀman, 1999] S. Hoﬀman. Mathematics as Makebelieve: A Constructive Empiricist Account, Ph.D Thesis,
University of Alberta, 1999.
[Howell, 1974] R. Howell. The logical structure of pictorial representation, Theoria, pp. 76-109, volume 40,
1974.
[Howell, 1976] R. Howell. Review of John Woods: The Logic of Fiction, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism, pp. 354-355, volume 34, 1976.
[Howell, 1979] R. Howell. Fictional objects: How they are and how they aren’t, in Formal Semantics and
Literary Theory, pp. 50-72, John Woods and Thomas Pavel, editors, a special issue of Poetics, volume 8,
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1979.
[Howell, 1983] R. Howell. Review of Non-Existent Objects, Journal of Philosophy, pp. 163-173, volume
80,1983.
[Ingarden, 1931] R. Ingarden. Das literarische Kunstwerk. Eine Untersuchung aus dem Grenzgebiet der On-
tologie, Logik und Literaturwissenschaft, Halle: Neimeyer, 1931.
[Jacquette, 1996] D. Jacquette. Meinongian Logic: The Semantics of Existence and Nonexistence, Berlin: Wal-
ter de Gruyter, 1996.
[Jacquette, 1998] D. Jacquette. Paraconsistent logical consequence, Journal of Applied Non-Classical Logics,
volume 8, pp. 337-351, 1998.
[Jacquette, 2001] D. Jacquette. Truth and ﬁction in David Lewis’ critique of Meinongian semantics, Metaphys-
ica, volume 2, pp. 73-106, 2001.
[Jacquette, to appear] D. Jacquette. Logic for Meinongian object theory semantics, in Dov M. Gabbay and John
Woods, editors, Handbook of the History of Logic, volume 5, Logic From Russell to Gentzen, Amsterdam:
Elsevier, to appear in 2006.
[Kaplan, 1973] D. Kaplan. Bob and Carol and Ted and Alice, in Approaches to Natural Language, edited by
Jaakko Hintikka, J.M. Moravcsik and Patrick Suppes, pp. 490-518, Dordrecht: Reidel, 1973.
[Kivy, 1993] P. Kivy. The Fine Art of Repetition: Essays in the Philosophy of Music, New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1993.
[K¨orner, 1967] S. K¨orner. On the relevance of post-G¨odelian mathematics to philosophy, in Problems in the
Philosophy of Mathematics, Imre Lakatos, editor, pp. 133-137, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1967.
[Kripke, 1972] S. Kripke. Naming and necessity, in Semantics and Natural Language, edited by Donald David-
son and Gilbert Harman, pp. 253-355, 763-769, Dordrecht: Reidel, 1972.

1124
John Woods
[Kripke, 1973] S. Kripke. Reference and Existence, unpublished typescript. Presented as the John Locke Lec-
tures, Oxford University, 1973.
[Kripke, 1979] S. Kripke. Speaker’s reference and semantic reference, in Contemporary Perspectives in the
Philosophy of Language, edited by Peter A. French, Theodore E. Uehling Jr., and Howard K. Wettstein, pp.
6-27, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1979.
[Kripke, 1982] S. Kripke. Wittgenstein’s Private Language Argument, Oxford: Blackwell, 1982.
[Landman, 1986] F.W. Landman. Towards a Theory of Information: The Status of Partial Objects in Semantics,
Dordrecht: Foris, 1986.
[Larmarque and Olsen, 1994] P. Larmarque and S. Olsen. Truth, Fiction and Literature, A Philosophical Per-
spective, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994.
[Lambert, 1963a] K. Lambert. Notes on E!III: A theory of descriptions, Philosophical Studies, volume 13, pp.
51-59, 1963a.
[Lambert, 1963b] K. Lambert. Existential import revisited, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, volume 4,
pp. 288-292, 1963b.
[Lambert, 1964] K. Lambert. Notes on E!IV: A reduction in free quantiﬁcation theory with identity and de-
scriptions, Philosophical Studies, volume 15, pp. 85-88, 1964.
[le Poidevin, 1995] R. Le Poidevin. Worlds within worlds? The paradoxes of embedded ﬁction, British Journal
of Aesthetics, volume 35, pp. 227-238, 1995.
[Lear, 1982] J. Lear. Aristotle’s philosophy of mathematics, Philosophical Review, volume 91, pp. 161-192,
1982.
[Lejewski, 1954] C. Lejewski. Logic and existence, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, volume 5,
pp. 104-119, 1954.
[Levinson, 2000] S. C. Levinson. Presumptive Meanings: The Theory of Generalized Conversational Implica-
ture, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.
[Lewis, 1978] D. Lewis. Truth in ﬁction, American Philosophical Quarterly, volume 15, pp. 37-46, 1978.
[Lewis, 1983] D. Lewis. Philosophical Papers, volume 1, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983.
[Maddy, 2005] P. Maddy, Mathematical existence, The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, volume 11, pp. 351-376,
2005.
[Martin and Schotch, 1974] R. Martin and P. Schotch. The meaning of ﬁctional names, Philosophical Studies,
volume 26, pp. 377-388, 1974.
[McKeon, 2005] M. McKeon. On the substitutional approach to logical consequence, in Mistakes of Reason:
Essays in Honour of John Woods, edited by Kent A,. Peacock and Andrew D. Irvine, Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, to appear in 2005.
[Meheus et al., forthcoming] J. Meheus, L. Verhoeven, M. Van Dyck and D. Provijn. Ampliative adaptive log-
ics and the foundation of logic-based approaches to abduction, in Logical and Computational Aspects of
Model-Based Reasoning, Lorenzo Magnani, Nancy J. Nersessian and Claudio Puzzi, editors, Dordrecht and
Boston: Kluwer, forthcoming.
[Meinong, 1915] A. Meinong. ¨Uber M¨oglichkeit und Warhscheinlichkeit, Leipzig: Barth, 1915.
[Mooij, 1993] J.J.A. Mooij. Fictional Realities: The Uses of Literary Imagination, Amsterdam and Philadel-
phia: John Benjamins, 1993.
[Nash, 1950] J. Nash. Equilibrium, in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, volume 36, pp.
48-49, 1950.
[Neale, 1990] S. Neale. Descriptions, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990.
[Oversteegen, 1982] J.J. Oversteegen. Beperkingen, Methodlogische recepten en andere voorondelen in de
moderne literatuurwetenschap, Utrecht: HES Uitgevers, 1982.
[Parsons, 1975] T. Parsons. A Meinongian analysis of ﬁctional objects, Grazer Philosophische Studien, volume
1, pp. 73-86, 1975.
[Parsons, 1978] T. Parsons. Review of J. Woods’ The Logic of Fiction, Synthese, volume 39, pp. 155-164,
1978.
[Parsons, 1980a] T. Parsons. Non-Existent Objects, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1980a.
[Parsons, 1980b] T. Parsons. A prolegomenon to Meinongian semantics, Journal of Philosophy, volume 77,
pp. 561-586, 1980b.
[Parsons, 1982] C. Parsons. Objects and logic, The Monist, volume 65, pp. 491-516, 1982.
[Pavel, 1975] T. Pavel. ‘Possible worlds’ in literary semantics, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism,
volume 34, pp. 165-176, 1975.
[Pavel, 1986] T. Pavel. Fictional Worlds, Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1986.
[Phillips, 1999] J. F. Phillips. Truth and inference in ﬁction, Philosophical Studies, volume 94, pp. 273-293,
1999.
[Plantinga, 1974] A. Plantinga. The Nature of Necessity, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1974.

Fictions and Their Logic
1125
[Priest, 1979] G. Priest. The logic of paradox, Journal of Philosophical Logic, volume 8, pp. 219-241, 1979.
[Priest, 1987] G. Priest. In Contradiction: A Study of the Transconsistent, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic, 1987.
[Priest, 1997] G. Priest. Sylvan’s box: a short story and ten morals, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic,
volume 38, pp. 573-582, 1997.
[Priest, 2001] G. Priest. An Introduction to Non-Classical Logic, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2001.
[Quine, 1939] W.V. Quine. Designation and existence, The Journal of Philosophy, volume 36, pp. 701-709,
1939.
[Radford, 1975] C. Radford. How can we be moved by the fate of Anna Karenina? I, The Aristotelian Society,
volume XLIX, pp. 67-80, Supplementary 1975.
[Rapaport, 1978] W. J. Rapaport. Meinongian theories and a Russellian paradox, Noˆus, 12, pp. 153-158, 1978.
[Recanati, 1993] F. Recanati. Direct Reference, Oxford: Blackwell, 1993.
[Resnik, 1997] M. Resnik. Mathematics as a Science of Patterns, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997.
[Routley, 1966] R. Routley. Some things do not exist, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic volume 7, pp.
251-276, 1966.
[Routley and Routley, 1973] R. Routley and V. Routley. Rehabilitating Meinong’s theory of objects, Revue
Internationale de Philosophie, volume 27, pp. 224-254, 1973.
[Routley and Meyer, 1976] R. Routley and R. K. Meyer. Dialectical logic, classical logic and the consistency
of the world, Studies in Soviet Thought, vol. 16, pp. 1-25, 1976.
[Routley, 1979] R. Routley. The semantic structure of ﬁctional discourse, in Formal Semantics and Literary
Theory, pp. 3-30, John Woods and Thomas Pavel, editors, a special issue of Poetics, volume 8, 1979.
[Routley, 1981] R. Routley. Exploring Meinong’s Jungle and Beyond: An Investigation of Noneism and the
Theory of Items, Canberra: Australian National University, 1981.
[Russell, 1937] B. Russell. The Principles of Mathematics, London: George Allen and Unwin, 1903. Second
edition published in 1937.
[Salmon, 1998] N. Salmon. Nonexistence, Noˆus, volume 32, pp. 277-319, 1998.
[Schotch and Jennings, 1989] P. Schotch and R. Jennings. On detonating, in Graham Priest, Richard Routley,
Jean Norman, editors, Paraconsistent Logic: Essays on the Inconsistent, pp. 306-327, Munich: Philosophia
Verlag, 1989.
[Scruton, 1974] R. Scruton. Art and Imagination: A Study in the Philosophy of Mind, New York: Barnes and
Noble, 1974.
[Searle, 1970] J. Searle. Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1970.
[Searle, 1975] J. Searle. The logical status of ﬁctional discourse, New Literary History, volume 6 pp. 319-332,
1975.
[Simons, 1999] P. Simons. On what there isn’t: The Meinong-Russell dispute, in Bertrand Russell: Critical
Assessments, Andrew Irvine, editor, volume III of Language, Knowledge and the World, pp. 69-100, London:
Routledge, 1999.
[Slater, 1987] H. Slater. Fictions, British Journal of Aesthetics, volume 27, pp. 143-155, 1987.
[Slater, 1993] H. Slater. The incoherence of the aesthetic response, British Journal of Aesthetics, volume 33,
pp. 168-172, 1993.
[Slater, 2002] H. Slater. Logic Reformed, Bern: Peter Lang, 2002.
[Smiley, 1960] T. Smiley. Sense without denotation, Analysis, volume 20, pp. 125-135, 1960.
[Herrnstein Smith, 1978] B. Herrnstein Smith. On the Margins of Discourse, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1978.
[Stone, 1937] W.H. Stone. Applications of the theory of Boolean rings to general topology, Transactions of the
American Mathematical Society, volume 41, pp. 375-481, 1937.
[Stove, 1999] D. Stove. Cole Porterism: The jazz age in the philosophy of science, Against the Idols of the
Age, edited by Roger Kimball, pp. 3-32 New Brunswick NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1999.
[Strawson, 1950] P.F. Strawson. On referring, Mind, volume 59, pp. 320-344, 1950.
[Suppes, 1962] P. Suppes. Models of data, in Ernest Nagel, Patrick Suppes and Alfred Tarski (eds.), Logic,
Methodology and Philosophy of Science, Stanford: Stanford University Press pp. 287-301, 1962.
[Tait, 1981] W.A. Tait. Finitism, Journal of Philosophy, volume 78, pp. 524-546, 1981.
[Taylor, 2000] K. Taylor. Emptiness without compromise, in Empty Names: Fictions and the Puzzles on Non-
existence, edited by Anthony Everett and Thomas Hofweber, pp. 17-36, Stanford: CSLI Publications, 2000.
[Tharp, 1989] L. Tharp. Myth and mathematics: A conceptualistic philosophy of mathematics I, Synthese,
volume 81, pp. 167-201, 1989.
[Thomas, 2000] R.S.D. Thomas. Mathematics and ﬁction I: Identiﬁcation, Logique et Analyse, volume 43, pp.
301-340, 2000.

1126
John Woods
[Thomas, 2005] R.S.D. Thomas. Mathematics and ﬁction II: Analogy, Logique et Analyse, volume 45, pp.
185-228, 2005.
[Thomasson, 1998] A. Thomasson. Fiction and Metaphysics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1998.
[Tiles, 1988] M. Tiles. Scientiﬁc dreamspace: Symbolic forms and scientiﬁc theories, International Studies in
Philosophy of Science, volume 2, pp. 189-204, 1988.
[Torretti, 1981] R. Torretti. Three kinds of mathematical ﬁctionalism, in Scientiﬁc Philosophy, Joseph Agassi
and Robert S. Cohen, editors, pp. 399-414, Dordrecht and Boston: Reidel, 1981.
[Toulmin, 1953] S. Toulmin. The Philosophy of Science: An Introduction, London: Hutchinson, 1953.
[Urmson, 1976] J.O. Urmson. Fiction, American Philosophical Quarterly, volume 13, pp. 153-157, 1976.
[Vaihinger, 1935] H. Vaihinger. The Philosophy of ‘As If’: A System of the Theoretical Practical and Religious
Fictions of Mankind, 2nd edition. Translated by C.K. Ogden, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1935.
[van Fraassen, 1966a] B. van Fraassen. The completeness of free logic, Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik
und Grundlagen der Mathematik, volume 12, pp. 219-234, 1966a.
[van Fraassen, 1966b] B. van Fraassen. Singular terms, truth-value gaps, and free logic, The Journal of Philos-
ophy, volume 63, pp. 481-494, 1966b.
[van Inwagen, 2000] P. van Inwagen. Quantiﬁcation and ﬁctional discourse, Empty Names: Fiction and the
Puzzles of Non-existence, Anthony Everett and Thomas Hofweber, editors, pp. 235-247, Stanford: CSLI
Publications 2000.
[van Neumann and Morgensern, 1944] J. van Neumann and O. Morgenstern. Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1944.
[von Feytag-L¨oringhoﬀ, 1951] B. von Freytag-L¨oringhoﬀ. Philosophical Problems of Mathematics, translated
by Amethe von Zeepelin, New York: Philosophical Library, 1951.
[Wagner, 1982] S. Wagner. Arithmetical ﬁction, Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly, volume 63, pp. 255-269,
1982.
[Walton, 1987a] K. Walton. How remote are ﬁctional worlds from the real world?, The Journal of Aesthetics
and Art Criticism, volume 37, pp. 11-23, 1978a.
[Walton, 1978b] K. Walton. On fearing ﬁctions, Journal of Philosophy, volume 75, pp. 5-27, 1978b.
[Walton, 1990] K. Walton. Mimesis as Make-Believe, Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.
[Wang, 1986] H. Wang. Beyond Analytic Philosophy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986.
[Wittgenstein, 1958] L. Wittgenstein. Philosophical Investigations, G.E.M. Anscombe, translator, New York:
Macmillan, 1958.
[Woltersdorﬀ, 1976] N. Woltersdorﬀ. Worlds of works of art, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism,
volume 35, pp. 121-142, 1976.
[Woods, 1969] J. Woods. Fictionality and the logic of relations, The Southern Journal of Philosophy, volume
7, pp. 51-64, 1969.
[Woods, 1974] J. Woods. The Logic of Fiction: Philosophical Soundings of Deviant Logic, The Hague and
Paris: Mouton, 1974.
[Woods and Pavel, 1979] J. Woods and T. G. Pavel. editors, Formal Semantics and Literary Theory. A special
issue of Poetics, volume 8, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1979.
[Woods, 1986] J. Woods. God, genidentity and existential parity, Grazer Philosophische Studien, 25-26, pp.
181-196, 1986.
[Woods, 2005] J. Woods. Dialectical considerations on the logic of contradiction I, Logic Journal of the IGPL,
volume 8, pp. 231-260, 2005.
[Woods, forthcoming] J. Woods. Probability in the law, forthcoming.
[Zalta, 1983] E. N. Zalta. Abstract Objects: An Introduction to Axiomatic Metaphysics, Dordrecht and Boston:
Reidel, 1983.
[Zalta, 2000] E. N. Zalta. The road between pretense theory and abstract object theory, in Empty Names: Fic-
tion and the Puzzles of Non-existence, Anthony Everett and Thomas Hofweber, editors, pp. 117-147, Stan-
ford: CSLI Publications, 2000.

COUNTERFACTUALS, CAUSATION,
AND PREEMPTION
John Collins
1
INTRODUCTION
A counterfactual is a conditional statement in the subjunctive mood. For example:
If Suzy hadn’t thrown the rock, then the bottle wouldn’t have shattered.
The philosophical importance of counterfactuals stems from the fact that they seem to be
closely connected to the concept of causation. Thus it seems that the truth of the above
conditional is just what is required for Suzy’s throw to count as a cause of the bottle’s
shattering. If philosophers were reluctant to exploit this idea prior to 1970, it was be-
cause of a widespread feeling that the truth-conditions of the counterfactual conditional
were not suﬃciently well understood. The development of a formal semantics for coun-
terfactuals by Robert Stalnaker [1968] and David Lewis [1973b] stands as a major recent
achievement in philosophical logic.
§2 presents the standard Stalnaker-Lewis semantics for the counterfactual conditional
and develops some of the logical features of counterfactuals. §3 presents Lewis’s original
counterfactual theory of causation [Lewis, 1973a], and explains the problems that even-
tually led him to abandon the theory in its original form. The remainder of the article
surveys the current state of counterfactual theories of causation, by presenting, in §§4, 5,
and 6, three recent contending accounts, due to Lewis [2000; 2004a], Yablo [2002; 2004]
and Hall [2004a; 2004b].
The discussion does not aim to be exhaustive, but focuses on the central issue of pre-
emption, which has proved to be the major hurdle for counterfactual theories. For a more
complete picture, the reader is referred to the papers in the collection edited by Collins,
Hall, and Paul [2004a]. The present article aims to provide an brief introduction to this
currently very lively area of applied philosophical logic. For a more comprehensive in-
troductory survey, Hall and Paul [forthcoming] is also highly recommended.
The contemporary literature on counterfactuals and causation includes a vast and po-
tentially bewildering collection of examples and counterexamples. The present article
focuses on six central types of example, which are labeled (E1)–(E6) so that the reader
may more easily distinguish them from other less important particular cases mentioned in
passing.
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1128
John Collins
2
THE LOGIC OF COUNTERFACTUALS
The counterfactual ‘If A were true, then C would be true’ with antecedent A and conse-
quent C is sometimes written ‘A  C’ in order to distinguish it from other kinds of
conditional statement. For example the counterfactual must be distinguished from both
the material conditional of ﬁrst-order logic, and the “strict conditional” of entailment. The
truth-functional material conditional ‘A →C’ is logically equivalent to ‘∼A∨C’ and thus
has truth-conditions weaker than those of the corresponding counterfactual conditional.
Not every counterfactual with a false antecedent or a true consequent is true. The strict
conditional, on the other hand, is too strong; it might be true that:
If this match had been struck, it would have lighted.
but the lighting of the match is not logically entailed by its being struck.
A correct account of the semantics of the counterfactual will then, presumably, locate
it somewhere between these two extremes. But where? One obvious thought is that
‘A  C’ is true if and only if C is entailed not by A alone, but by A in conjunction with
certain other truths, including, perhaps, the laws of nature. Thus it might well be that the
lighting of the match is entailed by its being struck, in conjunction with the laws of nature,
and certain other true matters of fact — for example the presence of suﬃcient oxygen in
the atmosphere.
The problem with this idea is that there is no single ﬁxed set of truths that will do the
job for all A and C. That is because counterfactuals are nonmonotonic. In other words the
inference pattern:
A  C
so:
(A&B)  C
is invalid. It may be true, for example, that the match would light if struck, and yet not
true that it would light if struck in the absence of oxygen.
But the counterfactual conditional will only serve as a ﬁt tool for philosophical analysis
if we have a ﬁrm grasp of its logic and truth-conditions. In a famous essay critical of
philosophical use of the counterfactual idiom, Nelson Goodman framed the challenge
this way. In evaluating the truth of the counterfactual ‘A  C’ we want to hold ﬁxed all
those truths that are “cotenable” with the truth of the antecedent A. Yet what might it mean
for a proposition to be cotenable with A other than that the proposition is one that would
still be true even if A were true? If one hopes to provide a semantics for counterfactuals
in terms of what is cotenable with a given antecedent, then one had better not rest this on
a counterfactual analysis of cotenability [Goodman, 1947].
It was the work of Stalnaker [1968] and Lewis [1973], which in turn grew out of the
development of possible world semantics for modal logic in the 1960s, that ﬁrst con-
vinced some of the skeptics that counterfactual conditionals were indeed philosophically
respectable.
The Stalnaker-Lewis approach starts from the assumption that the set of all possible
worlds may be weakly ordered with respect to the “comparative similarity” of those world
to the actual world. Since this ordering is transitive and connected, it is useful heuristically
to think of it as a comparative “closeness” relation. If A is any proposition, call a world

Counterfactuals, Causation, and Preemption
1129
at which A is true an A-world. Then, in Lewis’s formulation, the truth-condition for the
counterfactual may be stated in this way:
‘A  C’ is true if and only if some (A&C)-world is more similar to the
actual world than any (A& ∼C)-world is.
If we simplify things by assuming that for each A there is always a single A-world most
similar to the actual world, then the condition becomes:
‘A  C’ is true if and only if C is true at the most similar A-world to the
actual world.
Now similarity is itself a philosophically problematic concept, but even without settling
on any particular criteria for making comparative judgments, we can see how much of
the logic of counterfactuals follows simply from the fact that any candidate similarity
ordering, like a closeness ordering, must be connected and transitive.
We can see, for example, why strengthening the antecedent of a counterfactual may
lead from truth to falsehood. The fallacy is akin to that made by a person who infers from
the fact that there is no bank in the closest town to here, that there is no bank in the closest
town to here with a restaurant. We can also see immediately that contraposition fails for
the counterfactual conditional, i.e. that the inference
A  C
so:
∼C ∼A
is fallacious. It doesn’t follow from the fact that the closest town with a restaurant has no
bank that the closest town with a bank has no restaurant.
A similar exploitation of the analogy with spatial closeness will convince us that coun-
terfactuals are not transitive. That is, we can add to our list of counterfactual fallacies the
following:
A  B
B  C
so:
A  C
Moving beyond these purely logical points, however, more will need to be said about
the comparative similarity relation. The problem is that similarity admits of diﬀerent
respects. One possible state of aﬀairs may be more similar to actuality than another in
one respect, and less similar to actuality in another. Often it is the context of utterance
that determines the particular similarity ordering that a speaker has in mind. But insofar
as we want counterfactuals to provide objective truth-conditions for causal statements,
this question of context-dependence is fairly pressing. How are the various respects of
similarity to be weighed in order to enable a single overall comparison?
It seems clear that similarities with respect to the laws of nature should generally out-
weigh similarities with respect to accidental matters of fact. But this cannot be an invari-
able rule. For if, as we are assuming, the laws of nature are deterministic in both temporal
directions, any supposed change in the way things presently are, will be propagated, via
the laws, into a divergent past as well as a divergent future. Matching the past history

1130
John Collins
of the actual world is very important for similarity, it appears, even if the match can be
obtained only by allowing a minor localized violation of the laws of nature (a “small
miracle”).
This is not to deny that we are sometimes prepared to speak as though things would
have been diﬀerent in the past had they been diﬀerent now. For example I might say:
“If I had jumped out the window just now, there would have to have been a safety net in
place, I’m not crazy!” But note the “have to have been” construction in that sentence that
serves as a syntactic indicator of the appropriateness of the backtracking interpretation
(see [Lewis, 1979]). The point is simply that this backtracking interpretation is nonstan-
dard. Causes always, or at least typically, precede their eﬀects. Surely this asymmetry
should be reﬂected by a corresponding asymmetry in the counterfactuals. But since the
temporal asymmetry of causation seems to be a merely contingent feature of the actual
world, it seems wrong to build this asymmetry into the analysis of counterfactuals by
stipulation. Lewis [1979] pursues the more ambitious goal of identifying criteria for a
comparative similarity relation that rule out backtracking in worlds like the actual world,
but without making backward causation an a priori impossibility.
Here is the rough idea. Suppose that c is some event that actually occurred at time t,
and consider a counterfactual whose antecedent asks us to suppose that c hadn’t occurred.
A non-backtracking reading of this counterfactual will be ensured provided that all the
closest possible worlds to the actual world at which c doesn’t occur are worlds in which
(i) past history up until some point shortly before time t perfectly matches the history
of the actual world, and (ii) this perfect match results from a small “divergence” mira-
cle. And this is correct, Lewis suggests, because our world happens to be such that there
is no possible world w in which (i) c fails to occur, (ii) the future of w after time t ex-
actly matches the actual future, and (iii) this match results from a small “reconvergence”
miracle.
A important recent paper by Adam Elga has raised a serious diﬃculty for Lewis’s
attempt to rule out backtracking contingently. Elga argues that statistical mechanics pro-
vides examples which demonstrate that reconvergence to the actual world requires no
greater violation of the laws than divergence from it does. See Elga [2000], Albert and
Loewer [2005].
3
THE COUNTERFACTUAL THEORY OF CAUSATION
An early statement of a counterfactual analysis of causation can be found in the work of
David Hume [1748, Section VII], where he writes:
we may deﬁne a cause to be an object followed by another, and where all the
objects, similar to the ﬁrst are followed by objects similar to the second. Or,
in other words, where, if the ﬁrst object had not been, the second never had
existed.
In fact, of course, the passage just quoted contains two quite diﬀerent accounts of the
causal relation. While the second sentence treats causation in counterfactual terms, the

Counterfactuals, Causation, and Preemption
1131
ﬁrst expresses an idea that is closer to what has become known as a regularity theory of
causation.
Regularity theories tended to be the more favored of these two broad approaches prior
to the development of the Stalnaker-Lewis semantics for the counterfactual. See, e.g.
Mackie [1965]. A regularity analysis of causation states, roughly, that:
One event c is a cause of another event e just in case c is a member of some
minimal set of actual events that are jointly suﬃcient, given the laws of na-
ture, for the occurrence of the eﬀect.
But regularity theories of causation have always faced diﬃculties. One is the problem
of distinguishing cause from eﬀect. For if e is caused by c, there will often be a set of
conditions including e which, in conjunction with the laws, entail that c occurs.
Another diﬃculty is the problem of distinguishing genuine causes from ineﬃcacious
epiphenomenal by-products of a causal process. If d and e are independent eﬀects of some
common cause c, then it may well be the case that d belongs to a minimal set of conditions
which, along with the laws, are suﬃcient for e. Then d, which is a epiphenomenal by-
product of the process by which c caused e, will be incorrectly counted as a cause of e.
In his seminal article [1973a], Lewis pointed out that a counterfactual analysis of the
causal relation is at a distinct advantage over a regularity theory in both of these cases.
Given an appropriate ban on a backtracking interpretation of the relevant counterfactuals,
one may simply deny the truth of the counterfactuals that might otherwise cause problems.
Suppose that e wouldn’t have occurred if c hadn’t occurred. Might it also be the case that
if e hadn’t occurred then c wouldn’t have? Not unless the latter conditional is understood
in the backtracking sense. Similarly, if d and e are independent eﬀects of a common cause
c, then the only reason one might be tempted to believe that if d hadn’t occurred then e
wouldn’t have occurred is if one thinks that if d hadn’t occurred then neither would c.
Once again, this would involve an illicit backtracking reading of the latter conditional.
Say that one event e is counterfactually dependent on another event c when e wouldn’t
have occurred if c hadn’t. The simplest counterfactual analysis of causation would simply
construe causation as counterfactual dependence.
But this simplest account cannot be correct, as is demonstrated by the following exam-
ple:
(E1)
Early Preemption Suzy throws a rock at a bottle. The rock hits the bottle and
shatters it. Billy was standing by with a second rock. Had Suzy not thrown her rock, Billy
would have shattered the bottle by throwing his rock.
The problem here is that the shattering of the bottle is indeed caused by Suzy’s throw,
despite the fact that the shattering is not counterfactually dependent on the throw. Ac-
cording to Lewis, the key to reinstating the throw as cause is to recognize that there is
a chain of events initiated by the throw and terminating in the shattering, such that each
event in the chain is counterfactually dependent on the one before it. Call such a chain of
events a chain of counterfactual dependence. In this case, each event in the chain is the
event of Suzy’s rock being located in mid-ﬂight at some point between her hand and the
bottle. Although Billy was standing by with appropriate intent and deadly aim, no such
chain of events connects his standing by with the shattering.

1132
John Collins
In cases like Early Preemption we have a chain of counterfactual dependence leading
from a cause to an eﬀect, without the eﬀect being counterfactually dependent on the cause.
The problem with preemption, then, seems to stem directly from something we noted in
the previous section: the non-transitivity of the counterfactual conditional. While causa-
tion appears to be a transitive relation, counterfactual dependence is not.
If this diagnosis of the problem is correct, then the ﬁx is very straightforward. We
should simply take causation to be the ancestral of the counterfactual dependence relation.
Thus we arrive at Lewis’s [1973] counterfactual analysis of causation.
(C1)
Suppose that c and e are distinct events, and let C and E respectively be the
propositions that the events c and e occur. Then e is counterfactually dependent on c
when the following two counterfactual conditionals are true:
(i)
C  E
(ii) ∼C ∼E
(C2)
A causal chain is a ﬁnite sequence of actual events such that each event in the
sequence is counterfactually dependent on the previous event.
(C3)
One event is a cause of another if and only if there is a causal chain leading from
the ﬁrst to the second.
Note that it is precisely the failure of contraposition for the counterfactual conditional
that leaves room for the ban on backtracking, by allowing that e may be counterfactually
dependent on c without c also being counterfactually dependent on e.
This original analysis was designed to deal with cases of preemption like (E1). How-
ever the phenomenon of preemption has proved to be a far more serious diﬃculty for the
counterfactual theory of causation than Lewis believed it to be in 1973.
The problem is that there are varieties of preemption that cannot be dealt with by the
transitivity strategy. Here is one such:
(E2)
Late Preemption Billy and Suzy both throw rocks at a bottle. Suzy’s rock gets
there ﬁrst, hitting the bottle and shattering it. Billy’s rock ﬂies through the now empty
space where the bottle was standing.
This example diﬀers in one key respect from the previous case. In Late Preemption
no stepwise dependent chain of events can be traced from Suzy’s throw to the shattering
of the bottle. For consider all the events in the process initiated by Suzy’s throw prior to
the shattering, that is: Suzy’s rock being located at various positions at various times in
mid-ﬂight. The shattering fails to depend on any such event, because, had Suzy’s rock
failed to be there, the bottle would still have been shattered by Billy’s rock.
Here is another way of seeing the diﬀerence between the Early and Late Preemption
examples. In cases like Early Preemption, the possible process initiated by the preempted
standby that would otherwise have led to the eﬀect, is cut oﬀby the process leading
from the preempting cause to the eﬀect, at some time before the eﬀect occurs. In Late
Preemption, this “cutting-oﬀ” takes place only when the eﬀect occurs. (This way of
looking at things explains the “early/late” terminology.)

Counterfactuals, Causation, and Preemption
1133
Furthermore, as Jonathan Schaﬀer discovered, there are possible cases of preemption
that do not involve any kind of cutting-oﬀat all. In Schaﬀer’s example of “Trumping
Preemption” the absence of any cutting, either early or late, is guaranteed simply by
stipulating that the causal process in question works by action at a distance.
(E3)
Trumping Preemption The laws of magic are such that what happens at midnight
is determined by the ﬁrst spell cast the previous day. At noon Merlin casts the ﬁrst spell
of the day: a spell to turn the Prince into a frog. At six that evening Morgana casts a spell
to turn the Prince into a frog. At midnight the Prince turns into a frog.
This example also causes problems for Lewis’s 1973 theory. The transﬁguration of
the prince is not counterfactually dependent on Merlin’s spell, since if Merlin had not
cast the spell, the prince would still have been turned into a frog by Morgana’s spell. In
addition, there is no chain of counterfactual dependence leading from Merlin’s spell to
the transﬁguration, since the example stipulates that none is required.
It is tempting to dismiss such fantastic cases as being too far-fetched to be relevant to
any discussion of causation as it is in the actual world. But this would be too hasty a
dismissal. The fanciful nature of Schaﬀer’s story merely helps make the causal structure
of the example clear. The important point is that it seems perfectly possible that, for all
we know, some actual cases of causation work that way. Since the possibility of causation
by trumping preemption cannot be ruled out a priori, a theory of causation will only be
adequate if it can deal with such cases.
4
CAUSATION AS INFLUENCE
One tempting thought is that the problems facing the counterfactual theory might be
solved by taking events to be modally “fragile”, i.e. by claiming that any diﬀerence in
time, or manner of occurrence makes for a numerically distinct event. In our Late Pre-
emption example, the bottle would still have been shattered had Suzy not thrown her rock,
but it would have been shattered a moment later by Billy’s rock, and, presumably, shat-
tered in a slightly diﬀerent way. Thus, if the actually occurring shattering is construed as
a modally fragile event (i.e. an event with a particularly rich essence) then the counter-
factual dependence of the actual shattering on Suzy’s throw is restored, since, had Suzy’s
throw not taken place, the shattering that would have occurred instead would have been a
diﬀerent shattering; a numerically distinct event.
This “fragility strategy” is discussed by Lewis in various places (e.g. [1986b, 193–199;
2004a, 85–90]. As Lewis recognizes, there are various reasons for rejecting the approach.
For one thing, the “uncommonly stringent” conditions of occurrence that the fragility
strategy imposes are at odds with our ordinary standards of event identity. Lewis points
out that we are usually quite happy to allow that one and the same event might have been
delayed, as, for example, when a seminar talk is postponed rather than cancelled [2004a,
86].
Secondly, the fragility strategy produces spurious cases of causation, as in Lewis’s
example of the “Poison and the Pudding”. Suppose a poison kills its victim more slowly
and painfully when taken on a full stomach. The victim eats some pudding and then

1134
John Collins
drinks the poison. If the victim’s actual death is construed as modally fragile, then it is an
event that would not have occurred had the pudding not been eaten. Yet the eating of the
pudding was not a cause of his death. [Lewis 1986b, 198-199].
Still, the central idea of fragility has a role to play in Lewis’s [2000; 2004a] revised
account of “causation as inﬂuence”. While remaining neutral about the ordinary identity
conditions for events, Lewis proposes that we introduce a new technical term to refer
to events construed as modally fragile. Say that an alteration of an event is either the
very fragile version of the event that actually occurs, or a fragile alternative to it that
diﬀers slightly with respect to time or manner of occurrence. Lewis then suggests that
we “look at the pattern of counterfactual dependence of alterations of the eﬀect upon
alterations of the cause”. Say that event c inﬂuences event e when there is a substantial
range c1, c2, c3, . . . of alterations of c, and a substantial range e1, e2, e3, . . . of alterations
of e, such that if c1 had occurred then e1 would have occurred, and if c2 had occurred
then e2 would have occurred, and so on [Lewis, 2004a, 91].
Our original notion of
counterfactual dependence was a notion of “whether–whether” dependence. One event is
dependent on another is this sense just in case whether or not the event occurs depends on
whether or not the other occurs. But there are other varieties of dependence. Lewis’s idea
is that we should think of degree of causal inﬂuence as being determined by the extent to
which whether, when, and how one thing happens depends counterfactually on whether,
when, and how, something else happens. Hall and Paul have usefully labeled this idea the
“counterfactual covariation” theory of causation [Hall and Paul, forthcoming)]
As in Lewis’s original counterfactual theory, causation is now taken to be the ancestral
of the inﬂuence relation. One event c causes another event e if and only if there is a chain
of stepwise inﬂuence from c to e.
Let’s see how this idea works in our case of Late Preemption. If we consider small
alterations to the time of Suzy’s throw, we obtain corresponding alterations to the time
of shattering (provided of course that the throw is not so much delayed that Billy’s rock
gets there ﬁrst). Or consider small alterations to the manner in which Suzy throws her
rock; alterations, perhaps, to the velocity and direction of her throw. Throughout a range
in which the velocity is still great enough for her rock to beat Billy’s to the bottle, and
Suzy’s aim is still accurate enough to score a fairly direct hit, alterations to the throw
will produce a counterfactually covarying range of alterations to the shattering. So the
shattering is inﬂuenced by Suzy’s throw.
Not so for Billy’s throw. Unless we imagine Billy’s throw suﬃciently altered in time
or manner so that his rock reaches the target before Suzy’s does, the extent to which the
time and manner of the shattering depends on alterations to the time and manner of the
throw is completely negligible. This, claims Lewis, is why Suzy’s throw counts as a cause
of the shattering and Billy’s does not.
Lewis also suggests that the analysis of causation as inﬂuence provides a solution to
the problem of Trumping Preemption. Although there is no inﬂuence of the whether-
whether or when-when variety, the transformation of the prince is nevertheless inﬂuenced
by Merlin’s spell since the manner of transformation covaries with the kind of spell cast.
For example: had Merlin uttered “Presto! Prince-to-possum!” instead of “Presto! Prince-
to-frog!” at noon, then the prince would have turned into a possum, rather than a frog, at

Counterfactuals, Causation, and Preemption
1135
midnight. On the other hand, what happened at midnight was in no way dependent on
whether, when, or how Morgana acted in the late afternoon.
However this solution to the Trumping problem seems to turn on inessential and elim-
inable features of Schaﬀer’s original example. If we suppose that Merlin’s options are
limited to a single spell that he may cast (standard prince-to-frog) and a single time of
day he may cast it (noon), then the transﬁguration of the prince is no longer inﬂuenced,
in Lewis’s sense, by Merlin’s spell, though of course Merlin’s spell is still its cause. (See
Collins [2000], in Collins, Hall, and Paul [2004a, 114]. The idea is due to Jacob Rosen).
This is a counterexample to the necessity of the inﬂuence theory. Other counterexamples
to the necessity of the inﬂuence theory can be constructed from cases of Early or Late
Preemption by ensuring that the preempted backup would have brought about the eﬀect
in exactly the same manner and at exactly the same time. See Strevens [2003] and Yablo’s
“Smart Rock” example reported in Hall [2004a, 237].
Schaﬀer has argued that the idea behind our ﬁrst counterexample to necessity can also
be developed into a counterexample to suﬃciency. Add to the story of Merlin’s limited
options the fact that Morgana has a vast range of possible spells to cast, and available
times at which to cast them. And now suppose Morgana stands by, silently watching, just
before noon as Merlin prepares to cast his spell. Then, claims Schaﬀer, the transﬁguration
at midnight is inﬂuenced by Morgana’s silent watching (given her vast range of options)
though her watching is not among its causes. The point here seems less clear than in the
previous case, since Schaﬀer must counter the suggestion that Morgana’s watching is a
cause — by omission — of the prince’s becoming a frog. For more details, see Schaﬀer
[2001]. Collins [2000] suggests that Lewis’s own “Poison and Pudding” example was
already a counterexample to the suﬃciency of the causation as inﬂuence account.
5
DE FACTO DEPENDENCE.
In our Early Preemption example, the shattering of the bottle was not counterfactually
dependent on Suzy’s throw, which, nevertheless, caused it. Yet note this: holding ﬁxed
the fact that Billy does not throw his rock, the shattering does depend on Suzy’s throw.
That is, if Suzy hadn’t thrown her rock and Billy had still not thrown his rock either,
then the bottle would not have shattered. Stephen Yablo [2002; 2004] suggests we say
that the shattering has a “de facto dependence” on Suzy’s throw, and count Suzy’s throw
as a cause of the shattering in virtue of this de facto dependence. A version of Yablo’s
proposal will be developed in this section. Closely related accounts have been proposed
by Judea Pearl [2000] and Christopher Hitchcock [2001].
In Late Preemption the same idea seems to work. Holding ﬁxed the fact that Billy’s
rock doesn’t hit the bottle, the shattering depends on Suzy’s throw. That is, if Suzy hadn’t
thrown her rock, and yet Billy’s rock still hadn’t hit the bottle, then the bottle would not
have shattered. Admittedly, this last counterfactual is a little weird. Since no backtracking
is allowed, and we are holding ﬁxed the fact that Billy’s rock doesn’t hit the bottle, the
antecedent is asking us to suppose that Billy’s rock is thrown just as it actually was, that it
follows the same deadly-accurate trajectory toward the bottle (which is still there when it

1136
John Collins
arrives, since Suzy hasn’t thrown her rock) but then, somehow — miraculously! — fails
to hit it.
Clearly some restrictions will have to be placed on the kind of proposition that may
be held ﬁxed, otherwise everything will turn out to depend on everything else given some
suitably cooked-up background condition. For consider any simple and unproblematic
case of causation: Billy acting alone throws a rock that shatters a bottle. Let B be the
proposition that Billy throws the rock. Now let L be any other true proposition. L may
be completely unrelated to, and independent of, the process that leads to the shattering of
the bottle, for example the proposition that far away from the scene of the bottle breaking
a certain leaf ﬂutters down to the ground from a tree. Now let G be the proposition: B or
not-L. Holding this proposition G ﬁxed, the shattering of the bottle depends on the fall of
the leaf.
In fact, for any pair of actual events whatsoever, we can simply let G be the proposition
that either both of the events occur or neither does. Holding this proposition G ﬁxed, each
of the events depends on the other. Allowing the choice of these kinds of background
conditions would trivialize the de facto dependence proposal. Yablo proposes to bar such
choices on the grounds that are not suﬃciently “natural”, but he does not fully explain
what naturalness amounts to in this context. The two examples just given suggest that it
may be the disjunctiveness of the proposition in question that renders it unnatural, and
that such background conditions are to be barred for the same reasons that disjunctive
events are disallowed on many theories of events.
Even with this restriction, however, the proposal as sketched so far founders on cases
of the following kind (due originally to Hartry Field):
(E4)
Self-Countering Threat Billy places a bomb under Suzy’s desk. Suzy notices the
bomb and takes cover before it explodes. Suzy survives uninjured.
Holding ﬁxed the true, and perfectly natural, proposition that there was an explosion
under Suzy’s desk, Suzy’s survival de facto depends on Billy’s planting of the bomb. That
is, if Billy hadn’t planted the bomb, and yet there had still been an explosion under her
desk, then the bomb would not have been there for Suzy to notice, so she would not have
taken cover, and hence would not have survived uninjured. Again, one should not be put
oﬀby the fact that this last counterfactual shares the strangeness of the corresponding
counterfactual in our discussion of the Late Preemption example. Since no backtracking
is allowed, and we are holding ﬁxed the fact that there is an explosion under Suzy’s desk,
the antecedent is asking us to suppose that although there is nothing under Suzy’s desk to
lead her to take cover, there is, nevertheless, an explosion there.
Thus the proposal developed so far rules Billy’s planting of the bomb to be a cause of
Suzy’s survival. But this seems quite incorrect, for it was Billy’s action that threatened
Suzy’s survival in the ﬁrst place. Billy’s action can be thought of as a self-countering
threat because it both threatens to prevent something, and also prevents that threat from
succeeding. Intuitively: self-countering threats to an event’s occurrence don’t count as
causes of it.
Yablo’s strategy in the face of this problem is to attempt a principled explanation of the
sense in which the dependence in these cases is “artiﬁcial”.

Counterfactuals, Causation, and Preemption
1137
His proposal is this: Suppose that E depends on C given H. Then say that the depen-
dence of E on C given H is artiﬁcial if and only if every proposition that E depends on
given that not-C is also something that E depends on given H. As Yablo puts it, the idea
here is that the dependence on C is artiﬁcial just in case C “addresses some need” that is
simply added to what would, if C had been false, have been all the needs.
Let’s see how this works in our example of Self-Countering Threat. We want the
dependence of Suzy’s survival on the bomb planting, given the explosion, to turn out to
be artiﬁcial. Is it? Well consider all those things that Suzy’s survival would have depended
on if Billy hadn’t placed the bomb under her desk. Remember: we are now not holding
ﬁxed the fact of the explosion. In this “fallback scenario” as Yablo calls it, Suzy’s survival
depends on the usual mundane sorts of thing that all of us require in order to get through
the day intact. It depends, for example, on her heart and lungs continuing to function
normally, on her not being struck by lightning, and so on and so forth. Now the point is
that all of these quite mundane things on which Suzy’s survival depends in the fallback
scenario, are also things on which her survival depends given that there is an explosion
under her desk. No use avoiding the bomb blast and then suﬀering a fatal heart attack. It
follows that the dependence of Suzy’s survival on the planting of the bomb (holding the
explosion under the desk ﬁxed) is an artiﬁcial dependence.
But of course this ﬁx is useless if it robs us of what we thought we had already obtained:
a solution to the problem of Late Preemption. Returning to that example we must check
that the dependence of the shattering on Suzy’s throw, given that Billy’s rock does not hit
the bottle, does not also turn out to be artiﬁcial.
This dependence will prove to be artiﬁcial only if every event on which the shattering
would have depended had Suzy not thrown her rock, is also an event that the shattering
depends on given that Billy’s rock doesn’t hit the bottle. Now suppose that Suzy had
not thrown her rock. Then the bottle would still have been shattered by Billy’s rock, and
the shattering would have depended on Billy’s throw. But is Billy’s throw also an event
on which the shattering depends, given that Billy’s rock does not hit the bottle? An odd
question, perhaps, but one that is not diﬃcult to answer in the negative if we keep the
meaning of the “given that” locution ﬁrmly in mind. For clearly, if Billy had not thrown
his rock, and Billy’s rock had not hit the bottle, then the bottle would still have been
shattered (by Suzy’s) rock. So the de facto dependence of the shattering on Suzy’s throw,
given that Billy’s rock does not hit the bottle, is not an artiﬁcial one.
Now anything can be made to look dependent on anything else, if we are allowed
to hold ﬁxed background conditions that are not suﬃciently natural. That a similar trick
might be used to show that every dependence is artiﬁcial, is the thought behind the framing
of clause (D3) in the following formulation of Yablo’s de facto dependence account of
causation:
(D1)
Say that E depends on C given G when the following counterfactual is true: If C
were false and yet G were still true, then E would be false.
(D2) Say that the dependence of E on C given G is artiﬁcial when every proposition on
which E would depend if C were false is also a proposition on which E depends given G.

1138
John Collins
(D3) Say that the proposition E de facto depends on C if and only if there is some true
proposition G, such that E depends non-artiﬁcially on C given G, and such that G is more
natural than any proposition H, given which the dependence of E on C is artiﬁcial.
Finally the proposal is that:
(D4)
One event c is a cause of another event e if and only if the proposition that e occurs
de facto depends on the proposition that c occurs.
One advantage that Yablo claims, if very tentatively, for the de facto dependence ac-
count, is that, unlike other approaches, it is “not at an absolute loss” when it comes to
dealing with the Trumping Preemption examples. [Yablo, 2004, 134].
The idea here is that we can demonstrate the de facto dependence of the prince’s trans-
formation on Merlin’s spell by holding ﬁxed the proposition that no-one casts a spell
before Merlin does. If Merlin had cast no spell then, given that no-one casts a spell before
Merlin does, the prince wouldn’t have turned into a frog.
Is this dependence artiﬁcial? Only if every event on which the transformation would
have depended had Merlin cast no spell, is also an event the transformation depends on
given that no-one casts a spell before Merlin. Is this true? Well, if Merlin had cast no
spell, the prince’s transformation would have depended on Morgana’s six o’clock spell.
But given that no-one casts a spell before Merlin, does the transformation depend on
Morgana? No, because if Morgana had cast no spell, then Merlin would still have cast his
(this being compatible with the proposition being held ﬁxed) and the prince would still
have turned into a frog.
But the real problem with this proposal for dealing with Trumping Preemption on the
de facto dependence account seems to be with the degree of naturalness of the proposed
background condition, rather than with the artiﬁciality of the resulting dependence. To say
that no-one casts a spell before Merlin is simply equivalent to saying that either Merlin
casts the ﬁrst spell, or there is no spell cast at all. The proposed condition is exposed as
disjunctive!
But de facto dependence faces its own diﬃculties as well. It is not clear, for one thing,
that Yablo has really succeeded in making clear the “E depends on C given G” locution;
recall those weird counterfactuals that arose in the discussion of the examples. The same
diﬃculty, it should be noted, also faces Pearl’s and Hitchcock’s version of the theory,
though in those cases the problem is made less visible, since a solution to it is simply
assumed to have been built into the framework in which a particular causal situation is to
be modeled.
A second problem facing the theory has to do with the crucial notion of “naturalness”,
which Yablo has not fully succeeded in explaining.
Finally, Hall and Paul [forthcoming] have constructed a new and interesting case of
preemption that appears to make trouble for the de facto dependence theory.
(E5)
Partial Preemption Billy and Suzy are together attempting to push a heavy box
across the ﬂoor. Billy is stronger than Suzy. He could shift the box all by himself if
he really wanted to. Suzy couldn’t. But Billy is also lazier than Suzy. When he sees
that Suzy is using all of her strength, Billy decides to exert less eﬀort than he might, and

Counterfactuals, Causation, and Preemption
1139
he applies a force insuﬃcient on its own to move the box. Nevertheless their combined
eﬀorts succeed in shifting it.
Suzy’s push and Billy’s push are, intuitively, joint causes of the shifting. Yet the shift-
ing fails to depend on Suzy’s push, since had Suzy not pushed, Billy would have pushed
harder and moved the box by himself.
Now let G be the proposition that Billy believes that he can exert less eﬀort than he
might, since Suzy is using all of her strength. Given G, the shifting depends on Suzy’s
push. But Yablo’s account must deem this dependence artiﬁcial, since every event on
which the shifting would have depended had Suzy not pushed, is also an event on which
the shifting depends given that Billy believes he can exert less eﬀort than he might.
6
THE BLUEPRINT STRATEGY
A third recent proposal that shows some promise in addressing the problems posed by the
various preemption cases is the “blueprint strategy” developed and defended by Ned Hall
(in [Hall, 2004a; 2004b]).
The idea behind the blueprint strategy is that we should hold fast to the thought that
causation is an intrinsic matter; that whether or not a process is a causal one ought to
depend only on the intrinsic nature of the process itself, and on the laws of nature.
In some ways the blueprint strategy might be thought of as a more sophisticated de-
scendent of Lewis’s 1986 account of causation as “quasi-dependence” (see [Lewis, 1986b,
193-212]) although, as we shall see, development of the strategy will turn out to require a
quite radical break with the whole tradition of thinking of causation in terms of counter-
factual dependence.
Here are the details of the quasi-dependence theory. Call a possible process that exactly
matches all of the intrinsic properties of another process a duplicate of that process. If a
possible process that is a duplicate of some process P exists in a possible world that has
the same laws of nature as the world in which P is located, call it an isonomic duplicate of
P. If causation is an intrinsic matter, then any isonomic duplicate of a causal process must
also be a causal process. Suppose that some actual process is an isonomic duplicate of a
possible process whose last event depends counterfactually on its ﬁrst. Then say that the
last event of the actual process is quasi-dependent on its ﬁrst event. A causal chain is then
taken to be any chain of events in which each event is either counterfactually dependent
or quasi-dependent on the preceding event. One event is a cause of another if and only if
there is a causal chain leading from the one to the other.
If this idea can be made to work, then it oﬀers a ready solution to the problem of
Late Preemption. The shattering of the bottle does not depend counterfactually on Suzy’s
throw, because of the backup process initiated by Billy when threw his rock a moment
later. Yet it is not hard to ﬁnd an isonomic duplicate of the process leading from Suzy’s
throw to the shattering, for which the counterpart shattering depends counterfactually on
the counterpart of Suzy’s throw. Just consider a possible scenario that is exactly like the
actual one except that Billy does not throw his rock. The quasi-dependence theory thus
correctly counts our case of Late Preemption as causal. Hall seeks to procure the same

1140
John Collins
kind of solution to the preemption problem. In the example just discussed, the process
initiated by Suzy’s counterpart that leads to the shattering of the bottle’s counterpart is
an example of what Hall calls a causal blueprint for the actual process it duplicates.
The blueprint process is uncontroversially causal, and we then appeal to the thesis that
causation is an intrinsic matter in order to establish that the problematic actual process is
a causal one too.
It is important here that a process be understood as something more than just an arbi-
trary chain or sequence of events. For it is simply not true that any isonomic duplicate of
a chain of counterfactual dependence is a causal chain, as can be seen from the following
example:
Dominoes: A large number of dominoes, standing on end, are arranged in a line so that
when I push the ﬁrst domino over it strikes the second, which falls and topples the third,
and so on. The fall of the last domino is counterfactually dependent on the fall of the ﬁrst
one. But now consider a similar setup in which all except the ﬁrst two and the last two
dominoes have been removed. I topple the ﬁrst domino so that it hits the second, and then
later push over the second last domino so that it hits the ﬁnal one. We can imagine this
done in such a way that the pair of events consisting of the fall of the second and the fall
of the ﬁnal domino is an isonomic duplicate of the corresponding pair of events in the
original setup. Yet the ﬁrst of these two events does not cause the second.
Examining this case, we can that it is crucial that the structure of events duplicated
include all the causal intermediaries of any pair of events in the structure. Less obvious,
perhaps, is the fact that, unless all the causes contributing to the eﬀect are included, a
causal process leading up to some event may have an isonomic duplicate that is not a
cause of the counterpart event, as the following example shows:
Voting: Billy, Suzy, and their friend Biﬀare voting on a proposal. Their votes are submit-
ted electronically and a light goes on as soon as the machine receives either two yes votes
or two no votes. Scenario (A): Billy and Suzy simultaneously press their yes buttons and
the light goes on. Biﬀabstains. Scenario (B): Billy, Suzy, and Biﬀall press voting buttons
simultaneously. Suzy votes yes, Billy and Biﬀvote no. The light goes on. Suzy’s pressing
her yes button was a (joint) cause of the light’s going on in (A) but not in (B). (Based on
a schematic example in [Hall, 2004b, 272–273].)
If we assume that there is neither backward causation nor causation at a temporal dis-
tance, this further condition may framed as the requirement that the structure of events to
be duplicated consist of some event e along with all of the causes of e traced back to some
earlier time.
One further adjustment needs to be made. The demand that the causal structures be
perfect duplicates of one another is too strict. In our Late Preemption case, for example,
the suggested blueprint process seems adequate despite the fact that it is a less than perfect
intrinsic match of the original. But we are entitled to ignore the minute diﬀerences in
the trajectory of Suzy’s rock, due to subtle diﬀerences in the surrounding air currents,
gravitational ﬁeld and so on, that result from Billy’s not throwing.

Counterfactuals, Causation, and Preemption
1141
Putting all of this together, we arrive at Hall’s formulation of the Intrinsicness thesis:
Intrinsicness: Suppose that S is a structure of events consisting of event e, together with
all of its causes back to some earlier time. Let S ′ be a structure of events that intrinsically
matches S in relevant respects, and that exists in a world with the same laws. Let e′ be
the event in S ′ that corresponds to e in S . Let c be some event in S distinct from e, and
let c′ be the event in S ′ that corresponds to c. Then c′ is a cause of e′. [Hall, 2004b, 264]
Of course, this is only part of what has to be done. We want to claim that in prob-
lem cases like the preemption examples, causation amounts to duplication of a possible
structure whose causal credentials are unproblematic (since the preempted backup pro-
cesses are absent). But to complete the story, a defender of the blueprint strategy must
explain what it is that constitutes the causal relation in the unproblematic situation in
the ﬁrst place. An obvious idea would be to appeal here to counterfactual dependence
as a suﬃcient condition for causation in the blueprint, as Lewis hoped to do during the
period in which he defended the quasi-dependence account. Then we could apply the
Dependence thesis to establish that some blueprint is indeed a causal structure, and use
the Intrinsicness thesis to carry this result over to solve the problematic preemption cases.
But unfortunately the obvious idea doesn’t work, for the simple reason that the In-
trinsicness thesis is incompatible with the claim that counterfactual dependence suﬃces
for causation. Taken together they lead to unacceptable results. This can be seen from
examples of causation by double prevention, cases in which one event causes another
by preventing something that would have prevented the eﬀect from occurring. And in-
deed the problem of double prevention was one of the reasons that Lewis abandoned the
quasi-dependence account. (See [Lewis, 2004, 83–85].)
(E6)
Double Prevention: A ball is thrown towards a fragile windowpane. Billy attempts
to catch the ball to prevent it from hitting the window, but Suzy trips Billy, preventing him
from catching the ball. The windowpane is shattered.
If Suzy hadn’t tripped Billy, the windowpane wouldn’t have been shattered. So if coun-
terfactual dependence suﬃces for causation, the tripping counts as one of the causes of
the shattering. But note that the causal credentials of the tripping rely partly on factors
extrinsic to the actual structure S of events that includes the shattering and all of its causes
traced back to the time at which the ball was thrown. For example, the tripping counts
as a cause only because of the absence of anything else that would have prevented Billy
from catching the ball, had Suzy failed to trip him. Suppose Biﬀhad been present and
ready to prevent the catch by shoving Billy aside. Then the tripping would not have been
a cause of the shattering. Yet this new scenario (with Biﬀpresent) contains a duplicate of
S embedded within it. Hence if we maintain both the Dependence thesis and the Intrinsic-
ness thesis, we will misclassify the new scenario as also being one in which the tripping
causes the shattering.
It would appear that either Intrinsicness or Dependence has to go. But Hall suggests
a third way out. We may avoid the dilemma if we allow that the concept of cause is not
univocal. He argues that there are in fact two concepts of causation [Hall, 2004a]. One of
these — causation as production — satisﬁes Intrinsicness and is the concept of causation

1142
John Collins
that the blueprint strategy is intended to elucidate. When we are inclined to judge that
the causal relation is transitive, it is causation as production that we have in mind. On
the other hand we have causation as dependence. When we have the intuition that double
prevention is a kind of causation, when we are inclined to think that counterfactual de-
pendence suﬃces for causation, and when we judge that an absence (the failure of events
to occur) can both cause and be caused, it is causation in the sense of mere dependence
that we are thinking of.
The blueprint strategy, then, applies only to causation in the sense of production. And it
will involve a radical break from the counterfactual tradition. Hall currently suggests that
we might use a version of the regularity theory, rather than counterfactual dependence, as
a criterion for establishing the causal credentials of a blueprint. See Hall [2004b].
Are there really two distinct concepts of cause? One should, in general, be deeply
suspicious of this sort of conceptual bifurcation strategy as a way of solving philosophical
problems. As Lewis comments:
the many concept hypothesis . . . requires distinctions in our thinking that
sometimes we do not make, need not make, and are in no position to make. If
one event directly causes another, for instance, that is causation in one sense;
whereas if one event causes another indirectly, in a case of double prevention
(or in some still more indirect case) that is causation in a diﬀerent sense. But
when we neither know nor care whether the causation we have in mind is
direct or indirect, what concept of causation are we employing then? [Lewis,
2004b, 286]
Lewis goes on to provide an example where we “neither know nor care” whether we are
dealing with production or mere dependence. Air brakes on a train work by double pre-
vention, vacuum brakes by production. Yet the judgment that one may cause the train to
stop by pulling the emergency brake cord does not wait upon investigation of the contents
of the black box to which the cord is attached. Jonathan Schaﬀer points out that the trig-
ger mechanism of a gun also typically works by double prevention. No-one, however, is
tempted to conclude from this that pulling the trigger of a gun cannot cause it to ﬁre, or
only causes it to ﬁre in some secondary sense of “cause”. (See [Schaﬀer, 2000b; Maudlin,
2004, 438].)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Albert and Loewer, 2005] D. Albert and B. Loewer. Counterfactuals and the second law, in Huw Price and
Richard Corry (eds.) Russell’s Republic: the Place of Causation in the Constitution of Reality, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2005.
[Collins, 2000] J. Collins. Preemptive prevention, Journal of Philosophy 97: 223-234, 2000. Reprinted in
Collins, Hall and Paul (eds.) 2004a: 107-117.
[Collins et al., 2004a] J. Collins, N. Hall, and L. A. Paul (eds.). Causation and Counterfactuals, Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 2004.
[Collins et al., 2004b] J. Collins, N. Hall, and L. A. Paul. Counterfactuals and causation: history, problems,
and prospects, in Collins, Hall, and Paul (eds.), 1-57, 2004.
[Elga, 2000] A. Elga. Statistical mechanics and the asymmetry of counterfactual dependence, Philosophy of
Science (suppl. vol. 68, PSA 200): 313-324, 2000.

Counterfactuals, Causation, and Preemption
1143
[Goodman, 1947] N. Goodman. The problem of counterfactual conditionals, Journal of Philosophy 44, 113-
128, 1947. Reprinted in Nelson Goodman Fact, Fiction, and Forecast. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press (1979).
[Hall, 2000] N. Hall. Causation and the price of transitivity, Journal of Philosophy 97: 198-222, 2000.
Reprinted in Collins, Hall, and Paul (eds.) 2004a: 181-203.
[Hall, 2004a] N. Hall. Two concepts of causation, in Collins, Hall, and Paul (eds.), 225-276, 2004.
[Hall, 2004b] N. Hall. The intrinsic character of causation, in Dean Zimmerman (ed.) Oxford Studies in Meta-
physics, Vol. 1, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 255-300, 2004.
[Hall and Paul, forthcoming] N. Hall and L. A. Paul. Causation and the Counterexamples: A Traveler’s Guide,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, forthcoming.
[Hitchcock, 2001] C. Hitchcock. The intransitivity of causation revealed in equations and graphs, Journal of
Philosophy 98, 273-299, 2001,
[Hume, 1902] D. Hume. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1902 (1748)..
[Lewis, 1973a] D. Lewis. Causation, Journal of Philosophy 70: 556-67, 1973. Reprinted in Lewis 1986a: 159-
172.
[Lewis, 1973b] D. Lewis. Counterfactuals, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1973.
[Lewis, 1979] D. Lewis. Counterfactual dependence and time’s arrow”. Noˆus 13: 455-476, 1979. Reprinted
with Postscripts in Lewis 1986a: 32-66.
[Lewis, 1986a] D. Lewis. Philosophical Papers, Volume II, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986.
[Lewis, 1986b] D. Lewis. Postscripts to ‘Causation’, in [Lewis, 1986a, 172-213].
[Lewis, 1986c] D. Lewis. Causal explanation, in [Lewis, 1986a, 214-240].
[Lewis, 2000] D. Lewis. Causation as inﬂuence (abridged version), Journal of Philosophy 97, 182-197, 2000.
[Lewis, 2004a] D. Lewis. Causation as inﬂuence (full version), in [Collins et al., 2004a, 75-106].
[Lewis, 2004b] D. Lewis. Void and object, in [Collins et al., 2004a, 277-290].
[Mackie, 1965] J. L. Mackie. Causes and Conditions, American Philosophical Quarterly 2, 245-264, 1965.
[Maudlin, 2004] T. Maudlin. Causation, counterfactuals, and the third factor, in [Collins et al. 2004a, 419-443].
[McDermott, 1995] M. McDermott. Redundant causation, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 46,
523-544, 1995.
[Pearl, 2000] J. Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2000.
[Schaﬀer, 2000a] J. Schaﬀer. Trumping preemption, Journal of Philosophy, 97: 165-181, 2000. Reprinted in
[Collins et al., 2004a, 59-73].
[Schaﬀer, 2000b] J. Schaﬀer. Causation by disconnection”, Philosophy of Science 67, 285-300, 2000.
[Schaﬀer, 2001] J. Schaﬀer. Causation, inﬂuence, and eﬄuence, Analysis 61: 11-19, 2001.
[Stalnaker, 1968] R. Stalnaker. A theory of conditionals. In Nicholas Rescher (ed.), Studies in Logical Theory.
Oxford: Blackwell, 1968.
[Strevens, 2003] M. Strevens. Against Lewis’s new theory of causation: a story with three morals, Paciﬁc
Philosophical Quarterly 84: 398-412, 2003.
[Yablo, 2002] S. Yablo. De facto dependence, Journal of Philosophy 99: 130-148, 2002.
[Yablo, 2004] S. Yablo. Advertisement for a sketch of an outline of a prototheory of causation, in [Collins et
al., 2004a, 119-137].


LOGIC, MATHEMATICS, AND THE
NATURAL SCIENCES
Neil Tennant
1
INTRODUCTION
This paper is in two parts. The ﬁrst part sets out a ‘minimalist’ position regarding
the correct logic by means of which one may pursue the hypothetico-deductivist
method in natural science. It is argued that intuitionistic relevant logic (IR) is
adequate. A requirement of reﬂexive stability is that such an argument should be
conducted within the conﬁnes of the very logic whose methodological adequacy
is to be established. The second part of the paper (§6) addresses an objection in
principle that has been raised by John Burgess [2005a], [2005b]) to the reﬂexive
stability of the argument for IR.
2
THE QUESTION OF THE ADEQUACY OF CONSTRUCTIVE METHODS
FOR HYPOTHETICO-DEDUCTIVISM IN NATURAL SCIENCE
Dummett [1991, 320–1] writes
Investigation might reveal that a constructivist version of a mathe-
matical theory was perfectly adequate for the applications made of it
within natural science. . . These questions have scarcely been raised, let
alone answered, by either mathematicians, philosophers or physicists.
This claim of Dummett’s is not quite accurate. Investigation had already revealed,
at least by the time he published the claim, that a constructivist version of a
mathematical theory is adequate for all the applications to be made of the theory
within natural science.1 Or, to be more precise: investigation had already revealed
that, in the overall context of the hypothetico-deductive method in natural science,
constructivist logical reasoning is adequate for the applications to be made even
of classical mathematics. Indeed, the investigation reveals exactly how and why
one does not err, even by constructivist lights, in deriving and applying strictly
1See [Tennant, 1987], Chapter 18, ‘Intuitionistic Relevant Logic is Adequate for Popperian
Science’.
Those ideas were developed further in [Tennant, 1997], Chapters 12 and 13.
The
original source of publication of the treatment in Chapter 18 of [Tennant, 1987] is [Tennant,
1985].
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1146
Neil Tennant
classical mathematical theorems; and how and why, for all the use that might be
made of strictly classical mathematics, it is a ladder that the constructivist can
kick away and ultimately forswear.
This claim is complicated, and perhaps surprising. The aim here is to make it
clearer and completely plausible.
The basic idea is that, in so far as one is concerned to be able to produce all
possible refutations of empirical theories, the underlying logic can, without loss
of generality, be taken to be very weak indeed.
Either Johannson’s system of
minimal logic or the author’s system of intuitionistic relevant logic will do. The
mathematical theorems that are applied in the course of physical theorizing turn
out, on this account, to be deductive halfway houses: they stand as conclusions
of purely mathematical arguments (often strictly classical ones), but stand as
premises in the applied scientiﬁc context within which an empirical refutation is
formulated. Upon constructivizing (and relevantizing) the reductio involved in the
refutation of an empirical theory, the erstwhile mathematical theorem might be
elided. Yet the mathematical axioms will still be in force, helping to sustain the
overall reductio. And the logic of the reductio, is, to repeat, weak.
This provides a satisfactory aﬃrmative answer to the question whether ‘a con-
structivist version of a mathematical theory [i]s perfectly adequate for the applica-
tions made of it within natural science’. It also aﬀords a constructive explanation
of why it is that one can trust strictly classical mathematics when it is applied in
the context of empirical theorizing. All that the classical aspect of the underlying
logic is securing is a possibly shorter, more convenient proof. But, as the overall
result shows, empirical refutations rely only on the constructive content of the
underlying mathematical axioms. Strictly classical mathematical results that are
applied within scientiﬁc theorizing are — to repeat — ladders that can be kicked
away, once they have served their expeditious purpose (in securing the predictions
that are eventually refuted).
3
REFUTATION OF EMPIRICAL THEORIES
When an explicitly formulated theory fails a well-deﬁned and well-controlled ex-
perimental test, it is refuted. Moreover, so long as we trust the evidence and the
controls that applied to the experimental conditions, it stays refuted. Note that by
saying that it is the theory (that is, the collection of high-level hypotheses) that
has failed the test, we are already supposing that the Poincar´e–Duhem–Quine
problem has been resolved. That is, we are agreed that the boundary condition
statements were true (the experiment was properly controlled) and that the exper-
imental observations were correct (we made no mistakes in reading our measuring
apparatus, and it functioned correctly, etc.). Since what was observed conﬂicted
with what was predicted (by ﬂawless logical reasoning) from the theory and the
boundary condition statements, we have concluded that it was the theory that was
at fault:

Logic, Mathematics, and the Natural Sciences
1147
Theory (hypotheses) +
Boundary condition statements +
Auxiliary assumptions about measuring apparatus

 
!
...
Predictions , Observations

 
!
...
⊥
If we do not revise our evaluations of past evidential statements in the light of
any new ones, then future consistent extensions of present evidence will leave the
refuted theory refuted.
The slogan ‘Once proved, always proved’ in mathematics can be explicitly re-
stricted (without loss) so as to encompass only consistent extensions of our present
axiomatic basis. That is to say, there is by default a consistency requirement on
the axiomatic basis of mathematics. In the logico-mathematical case: if axioms X
enable us to prove theorem A, then future axioms X+X′ — which of course we
assume to be consistent — enable us to prove theorem A.
There is also by default a similar consistency requirement on whatever is sup-
posed to constitute the ‘total evidence’ for or against any empirical theory. In
every domain, consistency is a prerequisite for truth.
The slogan ‘Once empirically refuted, always empirically refuted’, can be justi-
ﬁed analogously as follows: if evidence E refutes theory T, then future evidence
(E+E′) — which of course we assume to be consistent — also refutes theory T.
With a logico-mathematical assertion P there can be neither retraction nor
revision, unless some mistake is revealed in what had been taken as a proof of P.
‘Once proved, always proved’ is the motto here. Knowledge (properly pedigreed)
is strictly cumulative over time. And the deductive logic governing such assertions
is monotonic on its premises. That is, if X is a subset of Y , and X logically
implies A, then Y logically implies A. In the logico-mathematical case, the subset
X of premises that consistently expands to become the set Y may be thought
of as the foundational basis for one’s assertions. Such sets provide the ultimate
grounding or support for one’s conclusions A. When X consists of mathematical
axioms only, we say that A is a mathematical theorem. (When X is empty, we say
that A is a logical theorem.) Our certainty in the mathematical axioms transmits,
via logical deduction, to the theorems as well. Certainty transmits along lines of
logical implication, from premises to conclusions.
The deductive logic governing empirical claims based on empirical evidence
is also monotonic, despite the fact that the history of scientiﬁc theorizing may
reveal ‘oscillations’ in the fortunes of either an empirical hypothesis, or an evi-
dential statement. The claim about monotonicity here is not to be interpreted
as resting on a na¨ıve epistemological analogy between mathematical axioms and
evidential statements. Of course the former are far more certain than are the lat-
ter. Indeed, mathematical axioms are often self -evident and necessary; whereas

1148
Neil Tennant
evidential statements are never so. The crucial diﬀerence between the two cases,
however, is this. In the empirical case, unlike the mathematical case, the direc-
tion of logical implication (with respect to which such monotonicity holds) runs
counter to the direction of evidential support. When we ‘base’ a (consistent) scien-
tiﬁc theory X on empirical evidence E (consisting of true observation statements)
we require (roughly)2 that X should logically imply E, not vice versa. This log-
ical implication is, to be sure, monotonic on the premises. But the premises X
(forming our scientiﬁc theory) are what, in this context, require the support! And
it is the conclusion E that is supposed to provide it. The support that E aﬀords
X is not just a matter of X’s logically implying E. The latter is necessary, but
not suﬃcient, for the empirical evidence E to support the empirical theory X.
Another condition is that X should (perhaps in conjunction with further as-
sumptions B) logically imply further observational conclusions E∗. The observa-
tion sentences E∗should be ones concerning which we have as yet no ﬁrm opinion.
Such observational conclusions E∗logically inferred from X and B are the pre-
dictions of X (modulo B) that can be used to test X. The test will take place
by arranging circumstances for which B holds, and then seeing whether E∗holds
too. The conditions B are called boundary conditions for such experimental test-
ing. When the experiment is conducted, there are, ideally, two outcomes: E∗is
seen to hold, or E∗is seen not to hold. In the former case, the theory X is cor-
roborated, for X’s prediction (that E will hold in circumstances B) is borne out.
Moreover, E will also have been explained by X in the circumstances B. In the
latter case, where E is seen not to hold, the premises X are collectively refuted.
We shall return presently to consider how decisive such refutation may be for any
particular member of X. Just which members of X ought to be retracted in the
light of such a refutation of X as a whole is in general a rather vexed question.
A third necessary condition for the empirical evidence E to support the em-
pirical theory X is that the evidence within E should be gathered from various
domains, and that the formulation of X should be economical and abstract enough
not to reﬂect such diversity explicitly, but to do so only implicitly, by way of de-
ductive application via the boundary conditions B. That is, X should provide
unifying explanations of disparate phenomena.
X should be of wide evidential
scope. An example would be the way that Newtonian dynamics and the theory
of gravitation (as such X) can be applied to provide explanations of such diverse
phenomena as apples falling from trees, projectiles following roughly parabolic tra-
jectories, spinning tops precessing, ocean tides correlating with the position of the
Moon, the motions of pendula, the orbits of the planets, the eﬃcacy of aerofoils,
the vibrations of a plucked string, the formation of sand-dunes, ripples on a pond,
sonic booms, and many other such phenomena.
2Quine would prefer to say that we require X to yield ‘pegged observational conditionals’ of
the form ‘if O1 and . . . and On then O’. Some of the evidence E has to be accepted at face value,
in the form of various Oi. The rest of E would then have to be covered via detachment using
these conditionals. Obviously there will be a premium on minimizing the former and maximizing
the latter. Cf. [Quine, 1990].

Logic, Mathematics, and the Natural Sciences
1149
A fourth necessary condition (which is related to the third) is that X should be
simple. This is a notoriously diﬃcult virtue to analyse or explicate, but scientists
do have strong intuitions about whether particular theories are simple. Theories
can fail to be simple in various ways: they can be too ad hoc; they can amount to
little more than restatement of the evidence; they can postulate too many kinds
of hidden entity to perform the explanatory job at hand; they can extrapolate
from their data points in ‘unsmooth’ ways. We shall not be too concerned here
to detain the reader with any attempt to explicate simplicity further. It is not
important, for present purposes, that one be able to do so.
We were considering the logic of scientiﬁc explanation, and how the direction of
theoretical explanation runs counter to the direction of evidential support. Theory
X in circumstances B explains evidence E only if E provides evidential support,
in circumstances B, for the theory X.
And this amounts to no more than E
following logically from the conjunction of X with B. We do not intend to say
anything about how the evidence mounts up, or about how certain evidential
statements can be more important than others. We do not oﬀer the prospect of
any further metatheoretical development of the relation of support, either in the
form ‘E1 would be better evidence for X than would E2’ or in the form ‘E would
be better evidence for X1 than it would be for X2’. Again, this is not needed
for present purposes. Nor do we intend to say anything about conﬁrmation or
probabiliﬁcation of hypotheses by evidence, and Bayesian conditionalization.
It is enough to conﬁne our treatment to the strictly hypothetico-deductive model
of explanation. For it is clear that it is a workable model in so far as it goes. The
extent to which it does not accommodate all the intuitions that scientists and
methodologists may have about how theories relate to the evidence does not con-
cern us.
All that is important is that one recognize the fundamental features
captured by the hypothetico-deductive model. It is quite conceivable that there
should be thinkers and reasoners who exploited and relied on those features and
those features alone. Their thought about the external world and its deep regular-
ities, and their quest for theoretical explanations of empirical phenomena, could
be just as cogent and urgent as ours. Moreover, their scientiﬁc successes could be
just as impressive as ours, and they could use their theories just as we do, as guides
to life, as a means to anticipate courses of events, as considerations in choice of
future actions, and as sources of technological innovation.
We are not trying to provide a full account of human scientiﬁc rationality.
That would be way beyond the scope of our concerns. Rather, we are isolating
an essential logical core to our competence as empirical theorizers — a core which
could, arguably, serve as the total competence of some species of rational agent,
in so far as empirical theorizing is concerned, even if it falls short as an account
of our own full competence in that regard.
Given this strictly limited and modest concern, we are accordingly under no
obligation to essay upon the abductive ‘logic’ of discovery or of scientiﬁc inven-
tion. We oﬀer no account of how a scientiﬁc intellect, confronted with a range of
evidence, would come up with a high-level theory that successfully explains it and

1150
Neil Tennant
that can be tested against the further predictions that it makes. We are content
to leave that process mysterious and untouched. We are interested only in what
happens, logically, after the theory has been formulated. We are interested here
only in the deductive logic of theory testing.
Similarly, we are content to deal only with a very regimented language, namely,
the language of ﬁrst-order logic. Even if this language should prove (pace Quine)
to be inadequate for the expression of all our thought about the empirical world,
it is nevertheless clear that there can be systematic thought, framed in a ﬁrst-
order language, about the empirical world, and that the essential features of the
hypothetico-deductive model of explanation will be in place when the logical de-
ducibility relation3 in that language is taken as the relation involved in prediction
and explanation.
Every logically contingent statement that ventures logically beyond the present
observational evidence is vulnerable to empirical refutation.
But usually it is
vulnerable in the company of others. When we have derived absurdity from a set of
evidential statements in conjunction with a set of conjectural statements, we have
many ways of proceeding from there. We may retract one or more of the evidential
statements; and likewise with the conjectural statements. In general, we might be
able to contract to any one of several consistent subsets of (evidence+conjectures).
How we respond to refutations (proofs of absurdity) is, again, a matter more of
the ‘logic’ of scientiﬁc discovery than it is a matter of the logic of testing. The
refutation consummates the test; something has failed. Whether the failure is to
be located among the conjectures venturing beyond the evidence, or in the so-
called ‘evidence’ itself, is a matter that need not detain us. Let ∆contain all the
premises involved in the refutation. Thus ∆embraces conjectures (hypotheses)
and evidential statements alike. The refutation of ∆is decisive, in the sense that
any further evidence Γ leaves it untouched. If, now, we hold to the evidential
statements in ∆, the hypotheses forming the rest of ∆stay jointly refuted, despite
the accumulation of the new evidence Γ. So: as the tribunal of experience recruits
more members (observation statements held true) and speaks with one voice (is
logically consistent), we can say of the theories that founder on this evidence: once
refuted, always refuted.
4
THE ANTI-REALIST CONSTRUAL OF EMPIRICAL CLAIMS THAT
CANNOT BE PROVED
The anti-realist content of the unprovable empirical generalization that all F’s
are G’s is really this: Nature will not confound the assertion that all F’s are
G’s. That is, Nature will not yield a case of an F that is not a G. In general,
the anti-realist content of any empirical assertion P of which, by virtue of its
general or hypothetical nature, we can say a priori that it cannot admit of proof,
3Or perhaps some suitably constrained subrelation thereof.

Logic, Mathematics, and the Natural Sciences
1151
is: Nature will not refute P.4
For such a belief will only ever be entertained
as an explanatory hypothesis, and as a generator of predictions; and, as such,
is subject only to refutation, not proof. Refutation, however, would always be
modulo some set of assumptions that were ﬁrmer than the belief P in question. The
Poincar´e–Duhem–Quine problem is simply that of how we focus on the particular
P that we might take to have been refuted, once we have a disproof of a set
of assumptions containing it. But that is a problem for applications. All that
our deductive logic can be expected to provide is the various disproofs of these
sets of assumptions as the intellectual opportunity or need arises. Now to this
end, the construal of any (unprovable) empirical assertion P as being to the eﬀect
that Nature will not refute P makes the system IR of intuitionistic relevant logic
perfectly adequate for empirical science, with its deductive testing of explanatory
and predictive hypotheses against the evidence. If we agree that we may turn any
claim of the form ∀x(Fx→Gx) into the corresponding form ¬∃x(Fx∧¬Gx), then
we can supply in IR all the disproofs needed for empirical science. For, in the
language based on ¬, ∧, ∨, →, and ∃, we have the metatheorem:
METATHEOREM 1. If ∆can be disproved in classical logic, then ∆can be
disproved in IR.
That is all very well, says the objector; but what about the case where one is
drawing out a logical consequence in the form of a prediction which has not yet
been refuted? How does the anti-realist using only IR match that? The answer
is that if one has derived the prediction P from the assumptions ∆using classical
logic, then in IR one can at least derive ¬¬P from ∆. ¬¬P is the regimentation
of ‘Nature will not refute P’. And this is the appropriate propositional attitude
to have, according to the anti-realist, towards the prediction P, which cannot, on
the basis of the present evidence, admit of proof. The ‘proof’ by means of which
we make the prediction P will of course involve as undischarged assumptions the
higher-level hypotheses of our explanatory empirical theory; and since these as-
sumptions cannot admit of proof, nothing that depends on them for ‘proof’ is
really proved.
The only genuine proof one could ever have for a prediction P
would be based on various atomic axioms that will only be available in the future,
once events have run their course. Our theories can enjoy no proof in the present,
but at best withstand the test of time. If and when the countervailing evidence
comes in the form of ¬P, however, then there is nothing to choose between the
following two logical passages:
4The classicist is committed to this immediately by maintaining that ‘All F’s are G’s’ is
logically equivalent (in particular, entailed by) ‘It is not the case that some F is not a G’.
Popper, for example, urges that one use the latter in place of the former when regimenting our
scientiﬁc theories. For the anti-realist, for whom ‘It is not the case that some F is not a G’ does
not in general entail ‘All F’s are G’s’, greater discrimination is called for. Thus when the latter
form of words is used for the formulation of a scientiﬁc hypothesis, our proposed reading secures
the logical licence that is generally withheld.

1152
Neil Tennant
∆
... via classical logic
¬P
P
⊥
∆
via IR
...
¬¬P
¬P
⊥
Another objection worth disposing of here is the following allegation of circularity:
‘You say that the content of an empirical assertion P of which, by virtue of its
general or hypothetical nature, we can say a priori that it cannot admit of proof, is:
Nature will not refute P. But to understand the latter, we need ﬁrst to understand
P itself.’ This objection implies that our account is unable to provide the content
P independently, so that it can later be embedded in the context ‘Nature will not
refute . . . ’.
But this is to misunderstand the overall division of conceptual labour. The
content of P is already available via composition out of the meanings of its con-
stituent expressions. The latter, in turn, have had their meanings conferred on
them by the inferential liaisons that they enjoy within the empirical theory (if
they are empirical terms) or by the rules of inference that govern them (if they
are logico-mathematical terms). That yields us the sentential content P. Now,
when we advance to consider an assertion of P, we are free to append a further
analysans to P, in order to capture the special illocutionary force involved.
5
THE FATE OF STRICTLY CLASSICAL THEOREMS OF APPLIED
MATHEMATICS
Past debate over the adequacy of constructive or intuitionistic mathematics for
natural science has focused on the question whether particular theorems ﬁnding
application in natural science can be proved by strictly constructive or intuition-
istic means. A standard way of alleging the inadequacy of constructive methods
would be as follows:
The classical mathematical theorem ϕ ﬁnds application within such-
and-such branch of empirical science. (It is used to explain phenomena,
derive predictions, etc.) But ϕ is not a theorem of constructive mathe-
matics. Hence constructive mathematics is inadequate for the demands
of actual, current, scientiﬁc practice.
The constructivist might challenge the claim of constructive unprovability (as, for
example, [Bridges and Richman, 1999] contra [Hellman, 1993]). But even if that
were to fail, another possible response by the constructivist might then be to show
that some constructive theorem ‘close enough’ in spirit to ϕ might nevertheless
suﬃce, given certain circumstances revealed by inspection of the mathematics in
question.
For example, it might be argued that it would suﬃce for predictive
purposes if one could approximate the classicist’s real values by means of intu-
itionistically ratiﬁable rational values that are accurate to within a reasonable
margin.

Logic, Mathematics, and the Natural Sciences
1153
The situation regarding constructivism is analogous to that regarding relevan-
tism. Relevant logicians have held out the prospect of ‘relevantizing’ mathematics,
that is, of deriving all mathematical theorems from the axioms by means of their
favored system of (classical) relevant logic. The underlying contention is that in-
tuitive mathematical reasoning is always fundamentally ‘relevant’, hence that its
formalization in a suitably chosen relevant logic should not result in any signiﬁcant
loss of mathematical theorems. The problem, however, especially for proponents
of systems of relevant logic lying in the neighborhood of the system R of Anderson
and Belnap, is that they could relevantize theories such as arithmetic only piece-
meal. They lacked any general metatheorem to the eﬀect that every classically
proved theorem could be proved from the axioms by means of relevant logic.
The diﬀerence, in the intuitionistic case, is that of course we know that certain
theorems of classical mathematics will be lost upon adoption of an intuitionistic or
constructive logical system. So the intuitionist who wishes to claim that there is
no great loss as far as applied mathematics is concerned needs to take a closer look
at the exact logical needs of the scientiﬁc theorist seeking to apply mathematical
theorems in pursuit of empirical predictions that may be tested by observation
and experiment.
The line of argument proposed in this paper is intended to accomplish two
aims. First, it is intended to bypass or circumvent the sort of dispute between
the classicist and the constructivist that has taken place between Hellman and
Bridges. As Bridges [1999, 440] puts it,
constructive mathematics is none other than mathematics carried out
with intuitionistic logic.
And, one might add (by way of generalizing this dictum),
constructive hypothetico-deductive theory-testing is none other than
hypothetico-deductive theory-testing carried out with intuitionistic
logic.
The second aim is to show in one fell swoop, rather than piecemeal, that there
is absolutely no loss of intuitionistic (resp. classical) mathematical content upon
adopting the relevant logic IR (resp. CR).
Let us take a closer look, then, at the logical needs of the scientiﬁc theorist.
The aim of the hypothetico-deductivist is to derive, from the scientiﬁc hypotheses
being tested, predictions that may conﬂict with, or disagree with, or contradict
one’s observations and measurements. The overall structure of such a reductio ad
absurdum is as follows:

1154
Neil Tennant
Mathematical axioms
Π
Mathematical theorems, Scientiﬁc hypotheses, Boundary conditions

 
!
Σ
Predictions, Observations/measurements

 
!
Θ
⊥
A mathematical theorem might be needed, say, to provide a characteristic form
of solution for the particular kind of diﬀerential equation that might be used in
the statement of a scientiﬁc hypothesis. Such an hypothesis might deal with the
time-evolution of various co-varying physical magnitudes, stating in mathematical
terms the precise relationships among them, and how they change with respect
to one another.
The strictly mathematical proofs Π furnish the mathematical
theorems (from one’s mathematical axioms) that are desired for such applications
within natural science.
From the point of view of the practising scientist, un-
concerned with foundational matters in mathematics, it is good to have a ready
supply of mathematical theorems ‘oﬀthe shelf’, whose a priori credentials have
been taken care of by the mathematicians. The theoretical scientist who simply
‘applies’ the available mathematics is usually concerned only with the next level
down in our schema: with the subsequent derivations Σ of predictions (about the
outcome of possible experiments), based on the scientiﬁc hypotheses and state-
ments of whatever boundary and initial conditions will be controlled for in those
experiments. It is then left to the experimentalists to carry out such experiments,
and to gather and analyze the resulting data. Any eventual conﬂict between pre-
diction and observation would be brought out at the lowest level in our schema, in
the derivation Θ of absurdity (⊥). If the prediction concerned, say, features of the
statistical distribution of measured values, then the data-processing involved in
showing that the prediction is confuted might be quite complex; but Θ would still
be a relatively low-level proof within computational mathematics. If, however, the
prediction concerned some simple observable, such as ‘It will land here’, and the
observation turned out to be ‘It landed way over there’, then Θ would consist of
but a single step of inference to ⊥.
Unlike the mathematician, who is concerned only with the subproof Π, and un-
like the theoretical scientist, who is concerned only with the subproof Σ, and unlike
the experimentalist, who is concerned only with the subproof Θ, the philosophical
methodologist is concerned with the whole schema consisting of Π, Σ and Θ. A
question that naturally arises is whether, whenever a strictly classical theorem ϕ

Logic, Mathematics, and the Natural Sciences
1155
stands as the conclusion of some classical subproof Π, and as an assumption for
some (possibly classical) subproof Σ:
Mathematical axioms
Π
Mathematical theorem ϕ, Scientiﬁc hypotheses, Boundary conditions

 
!
Σ
Predictions, Observations/measurements

 
!
Θ
⊥
on the way to a derivation of ⊥via the proof Θ that draws on the outcomes of
observations, there might not be an alternative, fully constructive, deductive route
to ⊥from the same set of overall assumptions.
The answer to this question is aﬃrmative, and fully general. Any reductio ad
absurdum that proceeds via a ‘strictly classical’ mathematical theorem can be
eﬀected with intuitionistic relevant logic. That is, the system IR will furnish a
proof of ⊥from the combined premises: mathematical axioms, scientiﬁc hypothe-
ses, initial and boundary conditions, and observations/measurements. In such an
IR-proof, the passage via the strictly classical theorem ϕ will have been avoided
altogether. The classical theorem is never, strictly speaking, necessary for the pre-
cipitation of ⊥! Indeed, it is never, strictly speaking, necessary for the derivation
of any decidable prediction. Since predictions are always of decidable matters of
fact, we can summarize by saying that strictly classical mathematical theorems are
in principle otiose for the purposes of natural science.
This is a startling result; but it is guaranteed by our constructively provable
Metatheorem 1.
Intuitively, what happens is this. One takes the fully formalized proof
Π(ϕ)Σ(Prediction)Θ⊥
and one constructivizes it, using the constructive method furnished by the con-
structive proof of the G¨odel–Gentzen–Glivenko theorem. Call the resulting proof
Ξ. (Note that Ξ will not contain any subproof establishing ϕ as a theorem, since,
ex hypothesi, ϕ is a strictly classical theorem.) Then one normalizes Ξ (a pro-
cess which in general takes superexponential time, as a function of the length of
Ξ); and ﬁnally one extracts the relevant kernel of Ξ (i.e., a proof in the system
IR) by applying the linear-time transformation described in [Tennant, 1992] (for
the propositional case) and [Tennant, 1994] (for the ﬁrst-order case). What this

1156
Neil Tennant
transformation does, essentially, is delete all applications of the Absurdity Rule
(Ex Falso Quodlibet), and slightly massage applications of remaining rules (such
as conditional proof, and proof by cases) so that they count as applications of
those rules as stated for IR.
The constructivization and relevantization of reductio proofs described above is
made possible by (i) the embeddability, via a suitable translation, of classical logic
into intuitionistic logic, and (ii) the relevantizability of proofs with epistemic gain.
The fully general form of (ii) is given by the following metatheorem.
METATHEOREM 2. If ϕ can be deduced from ∆in classical [resp., intuitinistic]
logic, then either ϕ or ⊥can be deduced from (some subset of) ∆in the classical
[resp., intuitionistic] system IR.
It is an important feature of proofs in the systems IR and CR that they are
in normal form (if natural deductions) or cut-free (if sequent proofs). Moreover,
the natural deductions in either system may not contain applications of the absur-
dity rule; and the sequent proofs in either system may not contain any dilutions
(or weakenings). The two systems otherwise involve only slight tweaking of the
rules for the logical operators, so as to oﬀset the deductive sacriﬁces that would
otherwise have to be made upon eschewing the types of inferential moves just
mentioned. (For a fuller treatment of both the natural deduction and sequent
formulations of IR and CR see Tennant [1997, ch. 10].
6
MEETING AN OBJECTION OF BURGESS
In [Burgess, 2005a, 734–740], Burgess sets out a summary of the foregoing position,
which he calls perfectionism, and enters an important (but rhetorical) objection.
(The gist of his criticism is reprised, con brio, in [Burgess, 2005b].) The label ‘per-
fectionism’ is perfectly welcome, if it helps to identify the position in its essentials.
Burgess rightly points out that deductive progress in mathematics is cumulative,
involving the interpolation of lemmas en route to mathematical theorems from
one’s axioms. Typically we chain together proofs, choosing lemmas so as to reduce
the deductive workload — massively. That way, theorems are put within reach
that would otherwise be practically inaccessible, were we to limit ourselves to
cut-free proofs not involving inferential passage to, and then from, our chosen
lemmas. Those are the facts of mathematical life; that is how mathematicians
actually proceed.
So, given that all the proofs in the relevant systems IR and CR are cut-free,
it would not in general be practicable to insist that proofs of mathematical the-
orems should actually be carried out within IR or CR. Let us focus on classical
mathematics and the system CR, for the present purpose of discussing Burgess’s
objection to the reformist’s contention that CR is the correct (because suitably
relevant) system of logic for classical mathematics. (Note that at this point the
discussion focuses on mathematics; but we shall not lose sight of the broader theme
of scientiﬁc reasoning in general, and whether IR is adequate for it.)

Logic, Mathematics, and the Natural Sciences
1157
The reformist (or ‘perfectionist’, in Burgess’s terminology) claims that there is
no loss incurred by restricting oneself to CR — on the contrary, there is possible
epistemic gain to be had. (See Metatheorem 2 above.) Burgess maintains that
this claim is ‘unsurprisingly not uncontroversial’ (p. 739, fn. 6). His evaluation of
the dialectical situation is as follows (pp. 739–740):
. . . in general, Cut can be eliminated only at the cost of making proofs
infeasibly long.[fn] So even though in principle almost anything clas-
sically provable will be perfectionistically provable or else something
even better will be, in practice the proofs mathematicians actually
give not only do fail to adhere to the restriction of perfectionsim, but
must do so if they are to be kept to a humanly comprehensible length.
The perfectionist might then reply that in practice mathematicians
could go on working as they do now, since Tennant’s work shows that
in principle everything or almost everything they are doing could be
justiﬁed from a perfectionist standpoint.
The trouble with this re-
sponse is that it relies on a theorem . . . for which only a classically
and not a perfectionistically acceptable “proof” has been given. How
far can a logician who professes to hold that perfectionism is the correct
criterion of valid argument, but who freely accepts and oﬀers standard
mathematical proofs, in particular for theorems about perfectionist
logic itself, be regarded as sincere or serious in objecting to classical
logic? This question will be left open for the reader to ponder . . . .
Now, all that is relevant to an assessment of the disagreement between Burgess
and myself is the following set of high-level assertions:
1. The reformist (relevantist) R is claiming that the correct logic is some system
R (or set R of proofs) properly contained in the system C of the conservative
(classicist) C.
2. R, the reformist, (informally) proves a metatheorem Φ(R), to the eﬀect
that the proofs in R suﬃce in principle for all the mathematics that C
wishes to prosecute. (This is Metatheorem 2 above: any proof Θ that the
conservative C produces has an austere counterpart ρΘ in the reformist’s
system R.) Let the most natural formalization, in R, of R’s informal proof
of his metatheorem be called Π.
3. The reformist R agrees with the conservative C that many a result that C
can prove in C enjoys, in R, only infeasibly long proofs.
Both Burgess and I agree on 1, 2 and 3. But we disagree on further reﬂections
that Burgess enters on the heels of 2. In the passage quoted above, the crucial
complaint that Burgess makes is as follows:
. . . [R] relies on a theorem . . . for which only a classically and not a
perfectionistically acceptable “proof” has been given. [My emphasis
— NT]

1158
Neil Tennant
In [2005b], Burgess expresses this objection in a slightly diﬀerent fashion:
The rules of the cut-free system cannot be the whole story about what
guides usage. For if they were, then the cut rule — used in practice
throughout intuitionistic as well as classical mathematics — would not
be accepted until the cut elimination theorem had been given a cut-free
proof. But all the proofs of that theorem that have actually been given
use the informal counterpart of the cut rule. To be sure, these proofs
are constructive, and implicitly provide a recipe for converting a proof
with cut into one without, which recipe could in principle be applied
to the very proof of cut elimination itself. But the recipe results in a
superexponential increase in the length of proofs, and would give a cut-
free proof of cut elimination having a number of steps probably greater
than the number of elementary particles in the visible universe.
In
practice no proof this long ever will be given by anyone. [My emphasis
— NT]
The debate between the reformist R and the conservative C now takes more deﬁ-
nite shape. Burgess’s critical view (on C’s behalf) now consists of the claims 1, 2
and 3, but with the following rider to 2: the austere formalization ρΠ (in R)
of Π must be infeasibly long.
This rider I deny, on behalf of the reformist R. Burgess oﬀers no proof (by
whatever the prevailing standards of rigorous but informal mathematical proof
we are abiding by) for the claim that the speciﬁc proof in R of the metatheorem
Φ(R) must itself be infeasibly long. In direct rebuttal, I oﬀer the conjecture that its
formalization, as a natural deduction in normal form, within a system of iterated
inductive deﬁnitions, would actually be eminently surveyable. The reformist R is
perfectly entitled to use such a proof system; it has been oﬀered as the natural
formalization of a signiﬁcant fragment of intuitionistic mathematics. One must
not confuse (as Burgess appears to have done)
(a) the known risk of exponential blow-up in length of object-system proofs
upon normalization (or cut-elimination), the precise extent of which of course
depends on the structural niceties of the particular abnormal proof that one
is trying to normalize, with
(b) the unsubstantiated conjecture that the particular proof Π, at the metalevel,
of the metatheorem Φ(R), would itself, upon normalization, become unfea-
sibly long.
This unsubstantiated conjecture is, I believe, unsubstantiable — indeed, refutable.
A refutation would consist in simply producing a normalized proof ρΠ of Φ(R),
in the form of a user-friendly computer-printout of a proof-term, or a token of the
natural deduction on a large enough webpage — up, down and across which the
human veriﬁer could scroll at leisure.
Metatheorem 2 follows easily from the fact that all proofs Σ of ϕ from ∆can
be normalized (even if not in general feasibly), and then relevantized, so as to

Logic, Mathematics, and the Natural Sciences
1159
produce a proof ρΣ, in the system R, of either ϕ or ⊥from (some subset of) ∆. I
believe that this transformability result admits of feasible proof, in normal form, in
some appropriate (relevantized) metasystem R* of iterated inductive deﬁnitions.
In support of this contention I can only oﬀer, at this stage, three admittedly
inconclusive considerations.
First, pace Burgess, I do not see a plethora of cuts that need to be eliminated
from within the usual inductive metaproofs of cut-elimination that are to be found
in textbooks of proof-theory.
They strike me as being already pretty close to
normal form.
Secondly, such proof-theoretic intuitions as I have developed in frequent pur-
suit of fully formalized proofs in normal form of interesting mathematical theorems
make me optimistic about the prospect of furnishing an R-proof of the metatheo-
rem.
Thirdly, there is the further consideration — not irrelevant or inconsequential
in this setting — of the automation of proof-search. Fully automated proof-search
proceeds in such a way that the output is always a proof in normal form. Com-
puters could easily be recruited to the task of both producing and verifying a
proof-term in normal form whose conclusion is Φ(R), should it turn out that the
task were too much for the mental powers and digital dexterity of a human math-
ematician.
In pursuit of this goal, one could legitimately resort to interactive
theorem-proving, in order to increase one’s chances of success. The proof arrived
at would still have its (computationally veriﬁable) formal credentials unimpeached,
despite the inputs from the human user that might have been practically necessary
in order to enable its discovery.
Should C (or Burgess himself) scoﬀat this foreshadowed prospect of intellectual
prosthetics, let me oﬀer a tu quoque. Consider points 1–3 above with the following
interpretation:
(i) C contains just the informal proofs, in mathematical English, of the kind that
one ﬁnds in mathematical textbooks and journals. These are proofs in which
one resorts to abbreviatory devices such as ‘w.l.o.g.’, ‘by a similar argument’,
‘the remaining cases are dealt with similarly’, and helps oneself liberally to
‘single steps’ of logical argumentations that are massively compiled, when
considered as transitions within a formal logical system.
(ii) R contains only fully formalized natural deductions in the system LK, say,
of Gentzen.
It is remarkable what blow-up in the length of ‘proof’-tokens is involved in the
simple (and supposedly — for Burgess — unproblematic) transition from C-proofs
to R-proofs, for various quite simple mathematical theorems.
So if computer-
unaided feasibility were his crie du jour, Burgess could well be hoist with his own
petard. For then the conservative C working ‘in’ the system C of fully formalized
proofs (involving, to be sure, cuts galore) might well be a ﬁgment of the classical
methodologist’s imagination.

1160
Neil Tennant
Whether one were to succeed by oneself, unaided by cybernetic deskmates,
in writing down a normal-form proof of Φ(R), or needed to resort instead to
automated proof-search and -veriﬁcation in order to produce a token (soft or hard)
of such a proof, the direct or indirect success involved would be an adequate
dialectical counter to Burgess’s assertion that the austere formalization ρΠ
(in R) of Π must be infeasibly long.
Suppose, then, that a feasible austere proof ρΠ is available for the metatheorem
Φ(R). What would this enable the reformist R to maintain, philosophically or
methodologically? I believe it would put R in a very interesting position, which
deserves to be expounded brieﬂy.
First, R could maintain that the system R really is the correct logic, on meaning-
theoretic grounds, and on grounds of its (now feasibly!)
proven adequacy for
mathematics and science. Secondly, R could graciously concede point 3 above,
and draw his interlocutor’s attention to the striking fact that — despite R’s really
being the correct logic — honest and sincere deducers nevertheless resort to cut
(i.e., to the interpolation of lemmas between their axioms and their theorems). R
can now oﬀer a pragmatic explanation of this striking fact. They reason using cut,
according to R, because his very own metatheorem — feasibly proven! — shows
that whatever they can prove using cut can be proved (austerely, and perhaps with
epistemic gain) in R, even if only in principle. If, in fact, it were to be infeasible,
for particular C-proofs, to render them as austere and possibly gainful R-proofs,
we now understand why reasoners resort to C-proofs. For many a desired theorem,
they have to, in order to get any semblance of the deductive job done. Moreover,
since they are usually working within a system whose consistency is a well-tested
article of faith, they know with that degree of certainty that any result proved by
means of a C-proof Θ will be true in all interpretations of the axioms used in Θ.
In an analogous way the pragmatist nominalist can explain why we incur com-
mitment to numbers as theoretical objects. It is because their introduction, into
our ontology, by the linguistic devices of numerical reference and quantiﬁcation
enables us to prove, very eﬃciently, empirical predictions from empirical premises
whose number-eschewing proofs would be tortuously long. Undertaking these Pla-
tonistic commitments enables the mathematizing reasoner to furnish shorter and
often more elegant proofs of predictions from his physical theory.
This is the
central idea of Hartry Field’s [1980]. It is worked out in considerable detail via
conservative extension results. These aim to show that grafting mathematics onto
a ‘synthetic’ theory enables one to prove only such synthetic claims from synthetic
premises as are provable (albeit much more laboriously) within the synthetic the-
ory without resorting to the deductive shortcuts aﬀorded by the mathematics.
Similarly, I have argued, in [Tennant, 1996],5 that when R is the intuitionist
and C (as usual) is the classicist, R can give a pragmatic explanation of why C
resorts to strictly classical inferential moves not countenanced within intuitionistic
logic. Such moves are explained as expressive of high-level, realist, metaphysical
5Burgess appears, in his review [2005b] of The Taming of The True, to be unaware of this
aspect of my overall view.

Logic, Mathematics, and the Natural Sciences
1161
commitments — commitments to the determinacy of the world in the contextually
relevant regards. Undertaking these commitments enables the classical reasoner
to furnish shorter and often more elegant proofs of results that the intuitionist
would be able to prove only in a much more laborious (albeit more informative)
way. Moreover, the intuitionist can prove, intuitionistically, an impressive array
of results of the general form ‘If there is a C-proof of ⊥from ∆, then there is an
R-proof (i.e., an intuitionistic proof) of ⊥from ∆’. These are known as relative
consistency theorems, and the important point is that they are intuitionistically
provable. They are the intuitionist’s way, from within the ‘limitations’ of his own
vantage point, of explaining why no great epistemic disaster is going to befall the
classical mathematician who uses the full system C of classical logic in order to
reach results that have no constructively acceptable warrant for assertion.
We see, then, that the ‘austere eschewer’ R — whether he be a nominalist es-
chewing numbers, or an intuitionist eschewing classical moves of inference, or a
relevantist (‘perfectionist’) eschewing cuts, ex falso quodlibet and kindred irrel-
evancies or potential sources of irrelevance — has a uniform way of explaining
why it is that the conservative opposition incurs commitment to numbers, reasons
classically about them, and uses cut when doing so. The ‘philosophically suspect’
maneuvers are all made in the name of greater eﬃciency and greater scope in our
mathematical and scientiﬁc theorizing. The challenge is to ﬁnd an austere vantage
point from which one can explain, in austere terms, how this has come to pass;
and from within the ‘limitations’ of which one can show that no great epistemic
disaster will befall those who are tempted to go beyond the austere canons R of
correct reasoning, and to adopt the more expansive system C as a methodolog-
ically optimizing extension. This extension is motivated by a ﬁrm belief in the
consistency of mathematics; a commitment to abstracta; and a realist conviction
that the world is determinate in various regards. The challenge, to repeat, is to
make austere sense of all this. And I do not believe that Burgess’s unsubstanti-
ated conjecture about the feasibility of a particular metaproof is an insuperable
obstacle to doing so.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Bridges and Richman, 1999] D. Bridges and F. Richman. A constructive proof of Gleason’s
Theorem. Journal of Functional Analysis, 162:287–312, 1999.
[Bridges, 1999] D. Bridges. Can constructive mathematics be applied in physics?
Journal of
Philosophical Logic, 28(5):439–453, 1999.
[Burgess, 2005a] J. Burgess. No Requirement of Relevance. In Stewart Shapiro, editor, The
Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mathematics and Logic, pages 727–750. Oxford University
Press, New York, 2005.
[Burgess, 2005b] J. Burgess. Review of Neil Tennant, The Taming of The True. Philosophia
Mathematica, 13:202–215, 2005.
[Dummett, 1991] M. Dummett. Frege: Philosophy of Mathematics. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1991.
[Field, 1980] H. Field. Science Without Numbers: A Defence of Nominalism. Basil Blackwell,
Oxford, 1980.

1162
Neil Tennant
[Hellman, 1993] G. Hellman.
Gleason’s Theorem is not constructively provable.
Journal of
Philosophical Logic, 22:193–203, 1993.
[Quine, 1990] W. V. O. Quine. The Pursuit of Truth. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1990.
[Tennant, 1985] N. Tennant. Minimal logic is adequate for popperian science. British Journal
for Philosophy of Science, 36:325–329, 1985.
[Tennant, 1987] N. Tennant. Anti-Realism and Logic: Truth as Eternal. Clarendon Library of
Logic and Philosophy, Oxford University Press, 1987.
[Tennant, 1992] N. Tennant. Autologic. Edinburgh University Press, 1992.
[Tennant, 1994] N. Tennant. Intuitionistic mathematics does not need ex falso quodlibet. Topoi,
pages 127–133, 1994.
[Tennant, 1996] N. Tennant. The Law of Excluded Middle is Synthetic A priori, if Valid. Philo-
sophical Topics, 24:205–229, 1996.
[Tennant, 1997] N. Tennant. The Taming of The True. Oxford University Press, 1997.

DEFAULT REASONING
Nicholas Rescher
1
DEFAULT INFERENCE
The topic of default reasoning aﬀords some instructive insights into the nature of
the relationship between theoretical and practical reasoning. A default in logic
is a fall-back position in point of conclusion-drawing — one to which we can
appropriately take resort when things go wrong. But of course things ought not
to go wrong in logic. So what is going on here?
Orthodox inferential reasoning proceeds via logically valid inference processes
which, as such, do — and must — lead to true conclusions when the premises are
true. By contrast, default reasoning — which involves an information-gap between
premises and conclusion — is such that premises that are true will lead to plausible
(though possibly false) conclusions.
The logical validity of inference rules in standard (truth-functional) logic is
determined on an input-output basis, a valid rule being one that will invariably
yield true outputs (conclusions) from true premisses. All such inference rules will
faithfully and unfailingly transmit the truth of premisses to the conclusions. By
contrast, the inference processes of default logic are such that the truth of the
premisses does not assure that of the conclusion but will at most establish that
conclusion as plausible.
Such inferences are ampliative: the conclusion can go
beyond what the premisses provide, thanks to a shortfall of information. And this
means that such reasonings are fallible and can — and occasionally will — lead
from true premises to false conclusions.
We shall represent logically valid deducibility (in its classical construction) by ⊨,
and by contrast use ⊨to represent the plausible inferability at issue with default
reasoning.
Some examples of inference-processes in default logic are as follows:
1. p is highly likely ⊨p
2. p is very likely, q is very likely ⊨p&q is very likely
3. there is strong evidence in favor of p and no more than weak evidence against
it ⊨p
4. p has obtained in all past instances ⊨p will obtain in the next instance
Dale Jacquette
Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods
c
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Logic
General editors:
Volume editor:
⃝2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1164
Nicholas Rescher
If all we are told of some number is that it is a prime, we would, plausibly enough,
conclude that it is not an even integer — even though we are aware that this
conclusion will prove false once out of an inﬁnity of cases (viz. that of the number
two).
As these examples indicate, the inference processes of default logic can all be
assimilated to a deductive pattern of the following structure (which does clearly
obtain as valid in traditional logic):
•
In all ordinary (normal, standard, commonplace) cases,
whenever P, then Q.
•
P obtains in the case presently at hand
•
⟨The present case is an ordinary (normal, standard, etc.)
one.⟩
∴
Q obtains in the present case
Here that third, usually tacit and thereby enthymematic, premiss plays a pivotal
role.
And it is, in general, able to do so not because we have secured it as a
certiﬁed truth, but simply because it is a plausible (albeit defeasible) presumption
that is strongly supported by the available evidence; though it is not, of course,
guaranteed. Default reasoning accordingly rests on arguments which would be
valid if all of their premisses — explicit and tacit alike — were authentic truths,
which they are not, since at least one of the critical premisses of the argument is
no more than a mere presumption.
Such a defeasible presumption is emphatically not to be regarded as an estab-
lished truth, but merely something that holds only provisionally, as long as is
no counter-indicatively conﬂicting information comes to light. Against this back-
ground the procedure that is deﬁnitively characteristic of default reasoning is:
To treat what is generally (normally, standardly, generally, usually,
etc.) the case as if it were the case always and everywhere, and there-
fore as applicable in the present instance.
Here, in eﬀect, ignorance is bliss: where there is no good reason to see the case
at hand as being out of the ordinary, we simply presume it to be an ordinary
one in the absence of visible counter-indications. Such reliance on a principle of
presumption to the eﬀect that what generally holds also holds here in the case
presently at hand that deﬁnes the modus operandi of default reasoning.1
2
FACING THE PROSPECT OF ERROR
Of course such plausible presumption can go awry. For it may well happen that
the situation at hand fails to be standard and representative as the enthymematic
comportment of the argument requires. This is brought out vividly in John Godfry
1Regarding default reasoning and its ramiﬁcations see [Horty, 2000; Harper, 1981; Kyburg
and Teng, 2001; Rott, 2001; Bochman, 2001; Pollock, 1991; Reiter, 1987; Rescher, 1980].

Default Reasoning
1165
Saxe’s poem “The Blind Men and the Elephant” which tells the story of certain
blind sages, those “six men of Indostan/To learning much inclined/Who went to see
the elephant/(Though all of them were blind).” One sage touched the elephant’s
“broad and sturdy side” and declared the beast to be “very like a wall.” The
second, who had felt its tusk, announced the elephant to resemble a spear. The
third, who took the elephant’s squirming trunk in his hands, compared it to a
snake; while the fourth, who put his arm around the elephant’s knee, was sure
that the animal resembled a tree.
A ﬂapping ear convinced another that the
elephant had the form of a fan; while the sixth blind man thought that is had the
form of a rope, since he had taken hold of the tail.
And so these men of Indostan,
Disputed loud and long;
Each in his own opinion
Exceeding stiﬀand strong:
Though each was partly in the right,
And all were in the wrong.
None of those blind sages was altogether in error; it is just that the facts at their
disposal were nontypical and unrepresentative in a way that gave them a biased
and misleading picture of reality. It is not that they did not know truth, but rather
that an altogether plausible inference from the truth they knew propelled them
into error.
But since such a policy of typicality presumption may well lead us down the
primrose path into error, how is it ever to be justiﬁed?
The answer here lies
precisely in the consideration that what is at issue is not a truth-claim but a policy
or procedure. And such policies of procedure are not justiﬁed in the theoretical
(i.e., factual) order but in the practical or pragmatic order of deliberation. The
validation at issue runs roughly as follows:
1. We have questions to which we need a (satisfactory) answer, and in the face
of this we take the stance that —
2. We are rationally entitled to use a premiss that holds good promise of ﬁnding
one (i.e., is eﬀective or more eﬀective than the other available alternatives)
even though it may occasionally fail.
On this basis we proceed subject to the idea that if and when things go wrong, this
is a bridge we can cross when we get there, invoking “explanations” and excuses
to indicate the unusual (anormal, extraordinary) circumstances of the case.
Even as in real life we cannot manage our aﬀairs sensibly without running risks,
so in cognitive life one must, on occasion, take the risk of error in stride, since
the inevitable result of a radical nothing-risk policy is the nothing-have of radical
skepticism. And this situation is particularly prominent in inductive contexts.

1166
Nicholas Rescher
3
INDUCTION AS DEFAULT REASONING
The term “induction” is derived from the Latin rendering of Aristotle’s epagˆogˆe —
the process for moving to a generalization from its speciﬁc instances.2 Gradually
extended over an increasingly wide range, induction can be seen as a question-
answering device encompassing virtually the whole range of non-deductive reason-
ing. Thus consider a typical inductive argument — that from “All the magnets
we have examined attract iron ﬁlings” to “All magnets attract iron ﬁlings.” It
would be deeply problematic to regard this as a deductive argument that rests
on the (obviously false) premiss: “What is the case in all examined instances is
universally the case”. Rather, what we have here is a plausible presumption that
takes the cases in hand to be typical and generally representative in the absence
of concrete counterindications — that is, an instance of default reasoning.
Induction, so regarded, is accordingly not so much a process of inference as
one of presumption-based truth-estimation. We clearly want to accomplish our
explanatory gap-ﬁlling in the least risky, the minimally problematic way, as deter-
mined by plausibilistic considerations. This is illustrated by such examples as:
•
There is smoke yonder
•
Usually, where(ever) there’s smoke, there’s ﬁre
•
⟨The present situation ﬁts the usual run⟩
∴
There is ﬁre yonder
or again
•
Two thirds of the items in the sample are defective
•
⟨The sample is representative of the whole⟩
∴
Two thirds of the items in the whole population are defec-
tive
(Here the enthymematically tacit premisses needed to make the argument de-
ductively cogent have been indicated.)
Its reliance on a presumption of typicality, normalcy, or the like, means that
any inductive process is inherently chancy. Induction rests on presumption-geared
default reasoning and its conclusions are thus always at risk to further or better
data since what looks to be typical or representative may in due course turn out
not to be so.
4
DEFAULT REASONING AS NONMONOTONIC
In virtue of the fact that default reasonings rest on a presumption of normality,
typicality, or the like, it may well transpire that while a premises implies a certain
conclusion nevertheless the conjunction of this premise with some further proposi-
tions may fail to do so. Such implications are called non-monotonic because while
2See [Ross, 1949, 47-51].

Default Reasoning
1167
“If p then q” obtains, nevertheless it can happen that q sometimes fails to obtain
in certain circumstances, where p holds, so that:
p ⇒q need not yield (p&r) ⇒q
Additional information can destabilize default implications.
Clearly, the reason why the monotonicity-characterizing principle
• Whenever p ⇒q, then (p&r) ⇒q
works in deductive context, is that here there is then no normality linkage between
p and q which requires the addition of further material that may or may not be
forthcoming as per a stipulation of normalcy or of “all things equal” in the case of
inductive reasonings. The reliance of default reasoning on a presumption of nor-
mality, typicality, or the like, means that throughout this domain new information
can undo earlier ﬁndings.
Thus consider the claim
—
If you are in America, then you might be in New York.
This is, of course, perfectly correct. But it will not do to “strengthen” the an-
tecedent as per
—
If you are in America and you are in Texas, then you might be in New York.
The conclusions we arrive at with nonmonotonic implication relations are no more
than presumption.
For in making the inference we have to presume that the
situation is not one where some yet unseen conclusion-averting circumstance comes
into operation.
This state of aﬀairs also means that with nonmonotonic implications modus
ponenes fails: the combination of p and p ⇒q need not demonstrate that q
obtains but may do no more than to establish a presumption to that eﬀect.
Nonmonotonicity is thus a standard feature of default inference as is illustrated
by contrasting
—
If I had put sugar in the tea then it would have tasted ﬁne
with
—
If I had put sugar and cayenne pepper in the tea, then it would have tasted
ﬁne.
Or again, contrast:
—
If you greet him, he will answer politely.
with
—
If you greet him with an insult, he will answer politely.

1168
Nicholas Rescher
After all, that ﬁrst implication eﬀectively (but tacitly) comes to
—
If you greet him in the usual and ordinary way, he will answer politely
and the antecedent of the second implication violates that initial condition.
With default inferences we have to do with what is, from the standpoint of
standard logic, a decidedly eccentric mode of reasoning. For no qualiﬁcation addi-
tional to the antecedent as such can abrogate what a valid monotonic implication
implies: the antecedent will, in and of itself, suﬃce to guarantee the consequent.
But whenever that “inevitably (invariably unavoidably, etc.)” becomes weakened
to “generally, usually, probably, possibly, etc.),” the monotonicity that is requisite
for authentic implication is lost. To obtain a conclusion we must now suppose
that nothing untoward is hidden from our sight — that nothing unmentioned
intervenes. And this always brings the factor of presumption upon the scene.
5
SOME COMFORTING CONSIDERATIONS
But what if those normality presumptions should prove unjustiﬁed? How are we
to proceed in the context of conclusions arrived at by reasoning that we see as
potentially misleading? The short answer is: Cautiously! But a somewhat more
informative response lies in the important prospect of blurring that conclusion —
making it less speciﬁed and detailed. As stated at the outset default reasoning calls
for the possibility of resort to a fall-back position. And in managing our cognitive
risk’s we can always fall back upon vagueness and its inherent qualiﬁcations.
With default reasoning in general and induction in particular we run the risk
that our conclusions may run awry thanks to our reliance on (generally tacit)
suppositions of normality or typicality that may fail in the circumstances at hand.
To oﬀset the risk error we can resort to the introduction of decreasing deﬁniteness
for the sake of increasing security. Thus instead of reasoning
•
q is highly likely wherever p
•
In the present case p obtains
•
The present case looks to be a typical, majority-conforming
one
⟨Looks are not deceiving here⟩
∴
In the present case q obtains
we would instead reason to
• In the present case q probably obtains
Thereby taking a sensible step in the direction of safety. But of course likelihoods
do not answer yes/no questions, and where such questions confront us we have
little choice but to resort (circumstances permitting) to chance the risks of the
presumption of typicality/normality that characterizes default reasoning. There
are, however, some promising precautions here.

Default Reasoning
1169
After all, a fundamental feature of inquiry is represented by the following ob-
servation:
THESIS 1. Insofar as our thinking is vague, truth is accessible even in the face of
error.
Consider the situation where you correctly accept P-or-Q. But — so let it be
supposed — the truth of this disjunction roots entirely in that of P while Q is quite
false. However, you accept P-or-Q only because you are convinced of the truth
of Q; it so happens that P is something you actually disbelieve. Yet despite your
error, your belief is entirely true.3 Consider a concrete instance. You believe that
Mr. Kim Ho is Korean because you believe him to be a North Korean. However he
is, in fact, a South Korean, something you would ﬂatly reject. Nevertheless your
belief that he is Korean is unquestionably correct. Thanks to the indeﬁniteness of
that disjunctive belief at issue, the error in which you are involved, although real,
is not so grave as to destabilize the truth of your belief.
This example illustrates a more far-reaching point.
THESIS 2. There is, in general, an inverse relationship between the precision
or deﬁniteness of a judgment and its security: detail and probability stand in a
competing relationship.
It is a basic principle of epistemology that increased conﬁdence in the correctness
of our estimates can always be purchased at the price of decreased accuracy. We
estimate the height of the tree at around 25 feet. We are quite sure that the tree
is 25±5 feet. We are virtually certain that its height is 25±10 feet. But we are
completely and absolutely sure that its height is between 1 inch and 100 yards.
Of this we are completely sure, in the sense that we deem it absolutely certain,
secure beyond the shadow of a doubt, as certain as we can be of anything in the
world, so sure that we would be willing to stake our life on it, and the like. With
any sort of estimate, there is always a characteristic trade-oﬀrelationship between
the evidential security of the estimate on the one hand (as determinable on the
basis of its probability or degree of acceptability), and the informative deﬁniteness
(exactness, detail, precision, etc.) of its asserted content on the other. Vaguer and
looser statements are for that very reason more secure because they embody larger
margins of error. This relationship between security and deﬁniteness is graphically
characterized by a curve of the general form of an equilateral hyperbola. (See
Display 1.) and this sort of relationship holds just a well for our truth estimates
as of others.
This state of aﬀairs has far-reaching consequences. It means, in particular, that
no secure statement about objective reality can say exactly and in complete detail
how matters stand universally always and everywhere. To capture the full com-
plexity of the truth of the matter of things by means of language we must often
proceed by way of “warranted approximation.” In general we can be sure of how
things “usually” are and how they “roughly” are, but not how they always and
3Examples of this sort indicate why philosophers are unwilling to identify knowledge with
true belief.

1170
Nicholas Rescher
increased security
(decreasing risk)
increased
deﬁniteness
Figure 1. The Security/Deﬁniteness Relationship
Note: The overall quality of the information provided by a claim hinges on
combining its security with its deﬁniteness. Given suitable ways of measuring
security (s) and deﬁniteness (d) the curve at issue can be supposed to be an
equilateral hyperbola obtained with s × d as constant.
exactly are. And this impels our reasoning in the direction of presuppositions of
normalcy, typicality, and the like, which are characteristic of default argumenta-
tion.
But be this as it may, the present considerations indicate that “inductive infer-
ence” as traditionally conceived aﬀords a paradigm instance of default reasoning,
which itself emerges in their light as an exercise in standard deductive inference
subject to a recourse to the potentially defeasible presumption of typicality.
Yet how is the adoption of a potentially defeasible thesis to qualify as ratio-
nally appropriate? The answer, as noted above, lies in the general principle of risk
management. For what is at issue with presumption is at bottom less an endorse-
ment of the truth than the implementation of a policy. And rationality here —
as elsewhere in matters of practical procedure — pivots on the principle of a fa-
vorable balance of potential beneﬁt over potential loss. In many situations default
reasoning aﬀords our best-available pathway to our ultimately very practical need
for information — for answering in a cogent and epistemically responsible way a
question that we need to resolve. For in truth-estimation as in so much of life we
have to rest content with doing the best one can actually manage to achieve in the
circumstances.

Default Reasoning
1171
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Bochman, 2001] A. Bochman. A Logical Theory of Nonmonotonic Inference and Belief Change.
Berlin: Springer Verlag. 2001.
[Harper, 1981] W. L. Harper. A sketch of some recent developments in the theory of conditionals.
In Harper, L.G. Pearson and Robert Stalnaker, eds. IFS: Conditionals, Belief, Decision,
Chance and Time. Dordrecht: D. Reidel. 1981.
[Horty, 2000] J. Horty. Common-sense reasoning. The Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
London: Routledge. 2000.
[Kyburg and Teng, 2001] H. E. Kyburg and C. M. Teng. Uncertain Inference. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2001.
[Pollock, 1991] J.L. Pollock. A theory of defeasible reasoning. International Journal of Intelli-
gent Systems, 6, 33-54. 1991.
[Reiter, 1987] R.B. Reiter. Nonmonotonic reasoning, Annual Review of Cognitive Science, 2,
147-186. 1987.
[Rescher, 1980] N. Rescher. Induction. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 1980.
[Ross, 1949] W.D. Ross. Aristotle’s Prior and Posterior Analytics. Oxford:
The Clarendon
Press. 1949.
[Rott, 2001] H. Rott. Choice and Inference: A Study of Belief Revision and Nonmonotonic
Reasoning. Oxford: The Clarendon Press. 2001.


INDEX
T F , 1100
A-normal structures, 901
0-Model, 1070
Abar, C. A. A. P., 872
abductive inference, 1116
Abe, J. M., 874, 903
Abelardian, 1098
absolute, 633–634
absolute inﬁnity, 525, 526, 533–536,
545
abstract entity, 454, 479
abstract fuzzy deduction system, 712
abstract fuzzy semantics, 713
abstract objects, 423
abstraction, 484
accessibility relation, 927–929, 944,
946, 954
accuracy, 58
Ackermann, W., 57, 208, 415, 417,
418, 419, 425, 431, 436, 441,
500–503, 511, 519, 723, 725,
726, 772, 773, 778
Ackermann function, 513, 772,
778, see complexity
Ackermann property, 773
actual inﬁnity, 523–548
actual world, 1099
actuality operator, 967
actuarial reasoning, 164
Aczel, P., 390, 517, 529
Adams, F., 1077
adjectivism, 1105
adjointness condition, 698
admissible rule, 738, 773, 946
γ, 773
cut, 738, 739, 741, 756, 760, 761,
781, 784
adverbilization, 1105
Aegean Sea, 160
Agatha Christie, 1075
Ajdukiewicz, K., 921
Akama, S., 874
Akiba, K., 1091
Alcˆantara, L. P., 872
ℵ1-like ordering, 599, 606
ℵα, 530
alethic modality, 1098
algebra of conﬁdence, 890
algebraic methods of formal logic, 134
algebraic methods of mathematical logic,
135
algebraic semantics, 218, 686
algorithmic compleixty, 169
algorithmic methods of mathemati-
cal logic, 135
∀, constructive interpretation, 554–
557
Allis, V., 572
allowable inconsistencies, 1079
Allwein, G., 777
α-model, 680
alteration, 1134
alternative set theory (AST), 528, 562
Alves, E. H., 828, 870
Alward, P., 1061, 1085, 1117
Alzheimer illness, 874
ambiguity, 159, 1064
analysis, 142
analytic tableaux, 729, 777, 781
for fde, 729
for classical logic, 729
∧, constructive interpretation, 553–
555

1174
Index
Anderson, A. R., 208, 220, 346, 375,
723, 724, 726, 729, 731, 732,
746, 747, 773, 775, 780
Andrews, P. B., 923
Angel, L., 577
annotated atoms, 859, 886
annotated clause, 867
annotated logic, 796, 858, 859, 863,
867, 874, 876, 886
inductive, 884
Anscombe, G. E. M., 44, 143
Anselm, 147, 149–152
Anselm’s ontological argument,
146, 149
applied logic, 41, 43, 793
appreciator make-believe, 1083
˚Aqvist, L., 1069
Arai, T., 435, 436
Archimedes, 46
argument, 132
analysis, 122–123
complex, 108–109
construction, 126
convergent, 122
criticism, 126
disputational sense, 102
evaluation, 124–125
evidence-accumulating, 123
forms, 47, 58
identiﬁcation, 121
linked, 122
reason-giving sense, 102
simple, 107–108
subordinate, 109
suppositional, 110–114
Argument T, 1003
argumentation, 118
argumentation scheme, 124, 125
Aristotle, 41, 42, 45, 47, 133–135, 166,
170, 523, 535, 567, 570, 681,
943, 958
Aristotelian logic, 43–45, 57, 131,
135, 792
arithmetic, 50
arithmetisation of analysis, 527
Armour-Garb, B., 1079
Armstrong, D., 980
Arruda, A. I., 792, 804, 808, 810, 837,
870, 872
artiﬁcial dependence, 1137
artiﬁcial intelligence, 208, 858, 875,
884
As-S¯ır¯af¯ı, 44
assignment, 590
asymmetry, 1093, 1095
ATMS model, 1078
Auerbach, D., 435
Aurifaber, J., 48
Austin, J. L., 1069
author’s sayso axiom, 1068, 1069, 1078,
1082, 1092, 1093, 1094, 1096
Avigad, J., 414, 418, 437, 440
Avila, B. C., 874
axiom of choice, 497, 516–518, 591
axiom of foundation, 517
axiom of inﬁnity, 512
axiom of reducibility, 463, 481, 510
axiom of separation, 516
axiomatic method, 411, 412
axiomatic calculus, 723
relevance logics formalized as, 733,
736, 740, 754, 756, 761, 762,
774, 777, 779, 780, 784
axioms, 50–52
Azzouni, J., 1107
B (combinator), 733, 734, 738, 748,
751
simple type of, 733, 745, 754, 776
B′ (combinator), 733, 734, 736–738,
748, 750, 751, 757, 780
simple type of, 733, 745, 747, 754,
779
B (basic relevance logic), 774–775
B´eziau, J. -Y., 871, 903
background assumption, 1112
backtracking, 1130, 1131, 1136
backward causation, 1130

Index
1175
bad arguments, 42, 43, 47, 59
Baire, R., 531, 552
Balaguer, M., 531
balanced coherence frame, 981
balanced standard frame, 982
Bambrough, R., 167, 168
Banach, S., 568
Banach–Tarski paradox, 497
Bar-Hillel, Y., 921
barbara, 45, 49
Barcan, R. C., 958
Barcan formula, 930, 960, 1073
Barconists, 1105
Barreto, M. M. G., 875, 903
Barwise, J. K., 728
Barwise, J., 41, 137, 389–391, 607,
608
basic t-norm logic, 703
Batens, D., 837, 873, 1079
Bayesian probability, 890
Bays, T., 364
Bazhanov, A. A., 793
Beall, JC, 343, 361, 368, 373, 375–
377, 402, 403
Beardsley, M. C., 122, 133
Becker’s postulate, 147
Beeson, M. J., 548, 554–557, 564
Begriﬀsschrift, 50–52, 498
Behmann, H., 414, 415
belief revision, 68
belief systems, 857
Bell, J. L., 527, 528
Belnap, N. D. Jr., 208, 224, 339, 375,
392, 395, 396, 723, 724, 726,
729, 731, 747, 755, 773–775,
777, 780, 781, 784
Benacerraf, P., 468, 527, 571, 572,
619, 620
Benacerraf’s Dilemma, 1061, 1062
Benardete, J. A., 525, 565, 567, 570,
574, 576
Bencivenga, E., 147, 1077
van Benthem, J. F. A. K., 966
Bernays, P., 411, 415, 417–419, 421–
426, 431, 432, 441, 449, 463,
501, 503, 505, 518, 543, 551,
564
Bernays-Sch¨onﬁnkel classes, 610
Bernoulli, J., 840
bet-sensitive, 1070, 1096
Beth operation, 599
Bibel, W., 876, 879
bilattice, 697, 858
Bimb´o, K., 739, 751, 778
binary opartions, 218
Birkhoﬀ, G., 794, 892
Bishop, E., 546, 548, 554, 558, 563,
564
Bishop, M. A., 164
BIV, see Bivalence
bivalence, 327, 328
bivalent truth value semantics, 137
BL-algebra, 703
Black, M., 162, 163, 572
Blackburn, S., 403, 926
Blair, H., 858, 874
Blair, J. A., 101, 119
Blau, U., 689, 692
Blocker, H. G., 1061
Bloo, D. da, 1103, 1115
blueprint strategy, 1139, 1141, 1142
Boˇcvar, D. A., 682, 689
Boche´nski, J. h M., 943
Boethius of Dacia, 41, 43
Bohr, N., 792, 893, 894, 896
the Como lecture, 894
Bolzano, B., 42, 43, 53, 527–529, 964
Bolzano’s Program, 76
bookkeeping axioms, 711
Boole, G., 41, 43, 48, 49, 497
Boolean algebras, 133, 890, 949
Boolos, G., 441, 542–543, 746, 929
Born, M., 795
bottom-up theories of constructive proof,
555–556, 558
Boukreev, A., 164
boundaries, physical, 568

1176
Index
bounded, 605
bounded occurrence, 602
Bourbaki, N., 54, 840, 849
box distribution, 967
Bradbury, R., 1069, 1095, 1100, 1115
Brady, R. T., 724, 747
brain, 42, 51, 58
Brandom, R., 367
Brecher, R., 147
Brett, J., 1075, 1083
Bridges, D., 548, 554, 564
Brouwer, L. E. J., 165, 411, 415, 416,
498, 525, 531, 546, 547, 550,
553, 564, 794, 944, 953
Brown, B., 1079
Brown, M., 957
Buchsbaum, A. T. C., 875
Bueno, O., 857
Bunder, M., 871, 873
Bunge, M., 1104
Burali-Forti’s paradox, 843
Burge, T., 341, 386, 387, 404
Burley, W., 47
Byrne, A., 1087, 1102
C (combinator), 736, 750, 760
simple type of, 776, 779, 780
Caiero, R. da C., 831
Caldon, P., 435, 1110
can do principle, 1080
can’t-help-it realism, 1070, 1071, 1073,
1105
canonical algebra, 949
Cantini, A., 405
Cantor, G., 412, 726, 413, 497, 498,
516, 518, 525, 527–546, 551,
727, 986
Cantor’s diagonal argument, 539,
540
Cantor’s ﬁnitism, 534
Cantor’s generating principles for
sets, 539
Cantor’s na¨ıve set theory, 830
Cantor’s paradox, 843
Cantor’s theorem, 616
Cao, T. Y., 578
cardinal numbers, transﬁnite, 529–530
cardinality quantiﬁer, 598
Carlson, G. N., 1112
Carnap, R., 160, 161, 207, 457, 476,
504, 918, 919, 924, 925, 928,
931, 937, 939, 940, 958, 964
Carnielli, W. A., 870, 872, 903
Carroll, L., 133, 168
cartographers, 161
Cartwright, N., 1076
Casadio, C., 921
Cast˜anada, H.-N., 1075
categorial grammar, 921
categorical
second order analysis, 900
second order arithmetics, 900
propositions, 829
Cauchy, A.-L., 840
causal
chain, 1132
theory, 1068
theory of reference, 960
causality, 479
causation, 1127, 1131–1133
as inﬂuence, 1134, 1135, 1140
central assumption, 1002–1004, 1009,
1011–1012, 1017, 1021
Cervantes, M., 1075, 1088, 1094, 1113
chaining, 121
Chang, C. C., 601
Chapuis, A., 405
characterise system E, 215
characteristic for a system, 220
Characterization principle, 151
Chellas, B. F., 354, 926
Chesterton, G. K., 157, 158
Chihara, C., 947
choice sequences, 563
Chomsky, N., 60, 560
Chuaqui, R., 851

Index
1177
Church, A., 53, 54, 411, 498, 511–
513, 519, 723, 727, 735, 749,
779, 781, 812, 835, 914, 920,
922, 935, 936, 958, 959
Church’s thesis, 513, 514, 516
Clarke, B. L., 567
class, 48, 481
as a basis for sets, 536–537
classical bivalent truth value, 140
classical logic, 156, 165, 171, 206, 208,
212, 213, 723, 725, 729, 1067,
1068, 1080
in curricula, 723
in relevance logics, 723, 769, 773,
784
classical logicians, 1103
classical predicate logic, 213, 214
closure, 1075
closure-condition, 1075
cognitive economy, 1111
cognitive science, 42, 52, 59
Cohen, P. J., 518, 540
coherence, 1063, 1065, 1066
Coleman, F. X. J., 1061
collective belief world, 1087, 1100
Collins, J., 1127, 1135
colloquial, 142
combinator, see B, B′, C, I, K, M, S,
S′, W
combinatorial view of sets, 543–544
combinatory logic, 723, 727, 749, 779
common experience, 1112
common knowledge, 89, 1111
communication, 68
community-acceptance, 1105
compact, 602
compact sets, 524
compactness theorem, 499, 507, 519
comparative similarity, 1128
competence-performance distinction,
560–561
complementary
literals, 880
propositions, 896
theories, 894, 896
complete, 1092
complete world, 1112
completeness, 411, 415, 500, 502, 503,
506, 507
of modal logics, 743, 757
of propositional logic, 415
of relevance logics, 731, 745, 746,
748, 760–762, 767, 768, 775,
778, 781, 782
complex literals, 886
complexity, 612, 730, 772, 778
of validity in fde, 730
of validity in classical logic, 730
primitive recursive in the Acker-
mann function, 772
compositionality, 913, 915, 916, 925,
934
comprehension axiom, 517, 1092
comprehension principle, 531–532
computability theory, 42, 515
computational limits, 59
concept, 915–918, 923–925, 928, 936,
937, 940
conceptual analysis, 1063–1066, 1076,
1081, 1082, 1099, 1110
condensed detachment, 748, 753, 754
conditional, 147
logic, 78
proof, 163
conﬁdence function, 890
Coniglio, M. E., 872
connectionist, 170
connections, 881
connective
external, 690
internal, 690
strong, 690
weak, 691
consecution calculus
LR◦t
+ , 737, 784
LT ◦t
+ , 754–758, 760, 761
LT→, 741
LT ◦t
→, 739–740, 742, 755

1178
Index
relevance logics formalized as, 737,
739–742, 755, 760, 761, 768
consequence, 1067, 1075, 1112
abductive, 1112
deductive, 1112
inductive, 1112
plausibilisitc, 1112
presumptive, 1112
statistical, 1112
relations, 1112
conservative extension, 740, 741, 746,
756, 762, 781, 784
conservativity, 430–431
consistency, 1092
and inconsistent multiplicities, 533
minded theory, 435
proof, 412–415, 417–419, 425, 428,
430–437, 439, 441, 508
theory, 791, 797
constants, 589
constitutive properties, 1092
constructibility structures, 1021
constructibility theory, 1021
constructible hierarchy, 518
constructive logic, 953
constructive mathematics, 794
constructivism, 525, 546
context principle, 459
contextualization, 1093
contingentia futura, 681
continuity, its role in supertasks, 571–
572
continuum hypothesis, 498, 516
continuum, the structure of, 566–567
contradiction, 141–145, 147, 149, 150,
417, 797, 809, 1069, 1079
-aﬃrming, 1079
data base, 215
intended, 1079 subitem ontic view
of, 899
real world, 873, 899
-tolerant, 1079
truth, 899
contraposition, 163, 1129, 1132
conventionalism, 857
converse Barcan formula, 960
Cooke, M. C., 575
Copeland, J., 927
cops and robbers, 1070, 1085, 1086
coriander, 42
correct logic, 205, 206, 217
correct system, 208
correspondence theory, 454
Costa Leite, A., 903
Costa, N. C. A. da, 1079
Cotogno, P., 571
countably compact, 602
counterfactual, 78, 956, 1127–1130,
1132, 1133
analysis of causation, 1132
dependence, 1131, 1133, 1134, 1141,
1142
counterpart
frame, 968
structure, 970
theory, 929, 1000
counting algorithm, as a basis for arith-
metic, 548–552
creative authority, 1068
Cresswell, M. J., 926, 939
critical reasoning, 134, 135
Crittenden, C., 1061
cube lattice, 221
cumulative hierarchy of sets, 542
Currie, G., 1074, 1080, 1082, 1087,
1102
Curry, H. B., 723, 727, 733, 738, 749,
779
Curry’s paradox, 345–347, 351,
356, 357, 368, 373, 374, 378,
379, 398, 830
cut (rule), 738, 741, 756, 784
admissible, 739, 743, 760, 761,
781
single and multiple, 738
cylindriﬁcation, 965

Index
1179
D (rule), see condensed detachment
D’Ottaviano, I. M. L., 871
da Costa, N. C. A., 793, 844, 851,
857, 870–872
Dalla Chiara, M. L., 840, 849–851
data bases, 208, 211, 212, 214, 217
Dauben, J. W., 528
David, M., 403
Davidson, D., 478
Davies, E. B., 571
Davis, M., 513
Dawar, A., 611
D-completeness, 751–754
of T→, 754
of BCI, 776
de dicto/de re distinction, 958, 1089,
1107, 1108
de re-iﬁcation, 1073
de facto dependence, 1135–1138
De Morgan, A., 497
De Morgan laws, 871
De Morgan monoid, 782
De Morgan negation, 729, 731,
762, 773, 781, 782
De Rijk, L. M., 47
decent logic, 1063, 1078
decidability, 500, 730, 740, 769, 775
and philosophical interest, 769
of L (and fragments), 778
of T, E, R (and fragments), 736,
768, 769, 781
of typability, 749
decision problem, 206, 215, 411, 415,
500, 501, 514, 515
Dedekind, J. W. R., 51, 412, 413,
448, 510, 527, 528, 531, 549,
550
deduction, 1067
deduction theorem, 727, 735
for R→, 735
for T→, 735
deductive
closure, 1079, 1100
inference., 205
invalidity, 143, 152
logical invalidity, 152
theory, 53, 55, 56
validity, 133
default, 1111, 1117
logic, 46
position, 1121
deﬁnite descriptions, 149, 972
deﬁnition, 41, 42, 46, 52, 60, 167
defuzziﬁcation method, 875
degree
introduction rule, 712
of truth, 166
of conﬁdence, 884, 889
of unsolvability, 516
dense open orderings, 591
deontic logic, 898
dependence artiﬁcial, 1138
derivations and proofs, 554
derived rule, 752, 756
Descartes, R., 59, 901, 943
descriptions, 817, 872, 1076
designated element, 951
designated truth degrees, 679
determinable, 161, 162, 176
Detlefsen, M., 414, 420, 433–435
Deutsch, H., 1070
deviant logic, 165, 166
Devine, P. E., 1061
Dewey, J., 851
diagonal constructions, 143
diagram, 123
box-arrow, 110
language, 827
diagramming, 133, 135
Dialectica interpretation, 437
dialectical tier, 118
dialetheic 326, 367–376, 385, 404, 793,
873, 874, 1100, 1115
approach, 900
logic, 1069, 1079
dialogue, persuasion
permissive, 124
restrictive, 124

1180
Index
D´ıez, G. F., 557–558
dilemma, 139–141
3-dimensionalism, 979
4-dimensionalism, 979
Diodorus Cronus, 943
Dirac, P. A. M., 792
discourse representation theory, 82
discretion, 159
discursive logic, 792
discussive connectives, 846, 857
discussive logic, 792, 796, 844, 851,
855, 858
and empirical truth, 851
ﬁrst-order calculus, 848
disjunction property, 757
disjunctive syllogism, 213, see γ
Divers, J., 930
Doleˇzel, L., 1080
domain of existence, 961
double prevention, 1141, 1142
double-aspectness, 1108
Dowden, B., 367
downward L¨owenheim-Skolem theo-
rem, 592, 593
Dowty, David, 957
dtruth, see truth
Du Bois Reymond, 842
dual gaggle semantics, 757–761, see
relational semantics
Dubikajtis, L., 844, 871
Dugundji, J., 220
Dummett, M., 384, 452, 458, 525,
535, 544, 548, 554–557, 559,
564, 567, 569, 913
Dunn, J. M., 724, 729, 731, 736–738,
741, 743, 751, 755, 758, 763,
764, 772–774, 777, 781–783,
785
Duns Scotus law, 794
Dylan, B., 550
dynamic
epistemic logic, 90
logic, 68
predicate logic, 82
semantics, 82
E model structure, 206, 210, 211, 220,
224
E (logic of entailment), 724, 735, 779–
781
E-valid, 212
e-logic
broadly free, 1077
E-postulates, 210, 215
early preemption, 1131, 1132
Earman, J., 577–578
Ebecken, N. F. F., 875
E-connections, 973
ecp, see Exhaustive Characterization
Project
Eddington, 1064
Edgington, D., 166
Ehrenfeucht, A., 595
Einstein, A., 165, 955
Elamrani-Jamal, A., 44
elementary extension, 592
elementary substructure, 592
Elga, A., 1130
elimination argument, EA, 213
elimination of quantiﬁers, 519
eliminativist, 985
ellipsis, 1069
embedding, 121
Emmy, the robot, 874
empirical model, 1019
empirical truth, 850
empiricists, 479
Ems, 210–218
endurantism, 979
Engel, S. M., 151
English predicate, 1013
entailment, 143, 205, 208, 211, 213,
217, 723, 729–782, see im-
plication, 1065, 1067
Epimenides, 136, 137
epiphenomenal by-product, 1131
epistemic
inconsistency, 875

Index
1181
indeterminacy, 1111, 1112
integration, 1105
logic, 89, 165
subworld, 1112
epistemicist, 155, 165, 170
epistemological case against actual in-
ﬁnity, 547
epistemology, 50, 52
ϵ-calculus, 417, 418, 1077, 1097
ϵ-substitution method, 417, 430, 436
ϵ0, 419, 435, 436
epsilon term, 1077
equality, 815
errors, as an argument against con-
structivism, 551, 560
Essenin-Volpin, A. S., 815
Etchemendy, J., 137, 389–391, 506,
918
Euclid, 46, 164
geometry, 132, 831
Euler, 133
diagrams, 58
European Union, 160
evaluated formulas, 710
Everett, A., 1082
Everett, H., 954
evidence in constructive logic, 556–
558
Ewald, W., 527
ex falso quodlibet, 1080
examination of argument T, 1012–1021
excluded middle, 139, 140, 563
exhaustive characterization project, 328,
330, 331, 334, 339, 343, 344,
347, 348, 359, 367, 369, 371,
375, 376, 383, 387, 389, 391,
396, 402
existence, 1076, 1090, 1092
existence predicate, 1076
existence-neutral, 1061
existential quantiﬁer, 133, 163
∃, constructive interpretation, 552, 554–
555
expansion, 589
expert systems, 865, 890
explanation, 77
explicit mathematics, 437
expulsion of contradictions, 1102
extension, 463, 916, 918–920, 922–
932, 934–940
extensionality, 150, 151
extensional logic, 918
extensional semantics, 921
extranuclear properties, 1090
fa¸con de parler, 1120
fallacy, 42, 47, 49, 125, 145
Falsehood Principle, 962
falsity free fragments, 708
familiar inference, 1100
family resemblance, 167, 170
faultless disgreement, 169
Faust, 1113
fde, 213
fde, see ﬁrst-degree entailment
feasibility, 526, 551, 558–564
feasible arithmetic, 561–563
Feferman, S., 51, 340, 344, 345, 435–
609
ﬁctional
creativity, 1096
discourse, 1064, 1074
entities, 1099
object, 1090, 1100, 1110
stipulationism, 1061
world, 1097, 1098, 1114, 1120
ﬁctionalism, 1104
ﬁctive
operator, 1093
discourse, 1074
modality, 1072, 1114
operator, 1072, 1073
qualiﬁer, 1100
Fidel, M., 825
Field, H., 342, 343, 346–361, 363,
367, 369, 372–374, 377, 379,
381, 392, 397, 400, 420, 525,
1104, 1136

1182
Index
Fields medal, 892
ﬁlter, 758, 765, 767, 778, 784
Fine, K., 329, 367, 743, 758, 945, 948,
962
ﬁnite
annotation property, 862
characteristic matrix, 220
matrices, 217
model property, 757, 769, 778597
model theory, 610
occurrence property, 602
trivializable, 809
ﬁnitism, 416, 420–427, 525, 1110
ﬁnitistic, 209, 218
Finocchiaro, M., 123
(ﬁrst) incompleteness theorem, 504
ﬁrst degree entailment, 213, 729–731,
754
in T, E, R, L, 774
perfect interpolation in, 731
ﬁrst incompleteness theorem, 506
ﬁrst-order
deﬁnable, 517
languages, 56
like logics, 608
logic, 46, 58, 498–500, 519, 589
Fitch Paradox, 92
Fitch-style calculus for T→, 746–748
Fitting, M., 339, 859, 943, 959, 972,
976, 981
ﬂea algebras, 709
Fletcher, P., 525, 526, 558
Flum, J., 607
Fodor, J. A., 560
‘for any’ versus ‘for all’, 553, 557
Forbes, G., 967
formal, 132, 136, 471, 1064
dialectic, 124
language, 49, 137
logic, 131, 133–136, 206
logical properties, 133
provability, 206
reasoning, 206
semantics, 205–207, 209, 210, 213,
218
-informal logic, 134
foundational reduction, 438–439
four-valued semantics, 729, see seman-
tics of relevance logics
Fourier series, 842
Fraassen, B. van, 1077
Fraenkel, A. A., 449, 516, 517, 587
fragility strategy, 1133
free logic, 961, 1076, 1097
in the broad sense, 1076
in the narrow sense, 1076
Frege, G., 41, 43, 48–52, 56, 60, 134,
411, 413, 414, 421, 429, 433,
441, 449, 497, 498, 510, 526,
527, 531, 536, 537, 551, 725,
913–920, 923–926, 934, 936,
940, 941, 958, 1062, 1067,
1093, 1107, 1108
Frege’s Basic Law V, 531
Frege’s context principle, 531
Frege’s maneuver, 915, 916, 920,
923
Fregian, 1107
French, S., 795, 857
Friedman, H., 439, 607
Friedman, K. S., 572
Fuhrken, G., 599
Fuller, G., 1077
fully absolute, 609
function, 914–916, 918–924, 926, 930–
932, 934–937, 939
function symbols, 589
functional interpretation, 437
fundamental logic, 206
fundamental theorem of the integral
calculus, 1003
fusions of modal logics, 972
future contingent propositions, 166
fuzzy logic, 166, 167, 865, 873, 875
G¨odel, K., 44, 51, 55, 60, 412, 418,
419, 431–435, 437, 439–441,
449, 475, 498, 502–506, 510,

Index
1183
512, 513, 515–518, 793
G¨odel logic, 683, 687
Gabbay, D. M., 1112, 1117, 1121
Gabriel, G., 1061, 1082, 1099
Gaifman, H., 384, 404
Gale, R. M., 1061
Gallin, D., 932, 934, 935, 959
game, 68, 84, 92, 93, 1081, 1083, 1088
γ (rule), 773
admissible in T, E, R, 773
Gamut, L. T. F., 926, 930, 932
gap, 694
gap-1 theorem, 601
gap-2 theorem, 601
Gardner, M., 158
Garth Mountain, 160
gates, 880
general frame, 950
compact, 950
descriptive, 950
diﬀerentiated, 950
logic system, 602
recursive functions, 513–516
tight, 950
generalised
continuum hypothesis, 516
coherence frame, 974
Kripke-frame, 965
quantiﬁers, 67
generalists, 164
genericity, 1111, 1112
Genesis, 1103
Gentzen, G., 55, 411, 419, 432, 435–
437, 441, 505, 508, 509, 519
Gentzen’s consistency proof, 514
genuine logic, 207, 209
genus/diﬀerentia distinction, 167
geometry, 46
George, A., 551, 559
George, R., 122
Gerla, G., 710, 712
Giambrone, S., 738, 740, 755, 768
Giaquinto, M., 429, 430
Gilbert, M. A., 105
Girard, J.-Y., 724, 779
Giuntini. R., 840
Glanzberg, M., 386–389, 399
glut, 694
God, 146, 147, 149–152
G¨odel, K., 542, 564, 726, 783
G¨odel’s ‘Dialectica’ interpretation,
555
G¨odel’s completeness theorem, 497
Goethe, 1113
Goguen, J., 166
Goldbach’s conjecture, 555, 565, 573,
574
Goldblatt, R., 929, 955, 964
golden mountain, 1090, 1098
Goldfarb, W. D., 936
Goldman, A. I., 124
Gonseth, F.
on the nature of logic, 795
good argument
dialectical criteria for, 116–117
Good Samaritan paradox, 898
Goodman, N. D., 557–558, 1128
Grana, N., 872
Granger, G. G., 796
Greenough, P., 403
Grice, P., 1069
Griﬃn, N., 1074, 1097
Grim, P., 328
Groarke, L., 58, 104
Grohe, M., 611
ground literal, 876
Gr¨unbaum, A., 567, 568, 570–572
Grundgesetzte der Arithmetik, 510
Grundlagen der Mathematik, 505
Grundz¨uge der theoretischen Logik, 500
Guaspari, D., 435
Gupta, A., 339, 392, 395, 396, 402,
405
H (intuitionistic logic), 728, 737, 740,
757
implicational fragment of, 749,
754

1184
Index
in L, 778, 779
in R+, 783
philosophical import of, 783
Haack, S., 159
haecceitism
D-haecceitism, 980
ﬁrst-order haecceitism, 979
second-order haecceitism, 980
H´ajek, P., 702, 709
Halbach, V., 403, 405
Hale, B., 441, 465
Hall, N., 1127, 1134, 1139, 1142
Hallett, M., 414, 429, 430, 534, 541,
542, 544, 545, 551
Hamblin, C. L., 116, 124–125
Hanf number, 603
Hanf, W. P., 604
Hanle algebra, 846
Hanley, R., 1087, 1102, 1103
Harman, G., 380
Harrington, L., 440
Harrison, C., 571
Hartshorne, C., 147, 149, 150
Hausdorﬀ, F., 516
Hazen, A., 968
Heck, R., 441
Heintz, J., 1079
Heisenberg, W., 897
uncertainty principle, 896
Hellman, G. H., 525, 565
Hellman, G., 748
Henkin, L., 497, 507, 519, 923, 960
Henkin semantics, 923
Henkin set, 827
Henry, D. P., 149
Herbrand, J., 419, 513
Herbrand base, 867
Herbrand interpretations, 867, 868
hereditary right maximal terms, 750
simple types of, 750
heredity lemma, 744, 759, 764
Herzberger, H., 352, 392
heuristic, 206, 210, 220, 225
Heyting, A., 546, 548, 550, 552, 553,
944
Heyting algebras, 687
Hick, J., 147
Hilbert, D., 44, 53, 54, 57, 207, 208,
433, 434, 441–1104
Hilbert spaces, 524
Hilbert’s program 411–441
and instrumentalism, 428–435
history of, 412–419
Hilbert’s ﬁrst problem, 517
Hilbert’s second problem, 516
Hilbert–Bernays’ theorem, 814
Hilbertian, 1107
Hindley, J. R., 723, 749, 776
Hintikka, J., 928, 939, 987, 1088
history, 957
history-constitutive, 1093, 1096
Hitchcock, C., 1138
Hodes, H. T., 1104
Hofweber, T., 439
homomorphism, 914
hoops, 708
Hopkins, J., 147
horizon problem, 525–526, 546, 563,
564
Horsten, L., 403, 405
Hovweber, T., 1082
Howell, R., 1061, 1080, 1091, 1092,
1099
HRMz-terms, see hereditary right max-
imal terms
Hrushovski, E., 49
Hughes, G. E., 926
Hume, D., 479, 1130
Hume’s Principle, 465
Huntington, E. V., 497, 498
Hurford, J. R., 51
Husserl, E., 60, 414
Hyde, D., 329
hyper-literal, 878, 886, 887
hyper-reals, 841
hyphenation, 1104, 1116
hyphenation-blindness, 1105
hyphenated truth, 1105

Index
1185
hypothetical object, 1079
I (combinator), 733, 736, 738, 749,
750, 751, 780
simple type of, 723, 733, 751, 776
Ibn S¯ın¯a, 41
ideal observer, 1113
idealisation, 559–561
idealism, 1110
idealist
instrumentalism, 1110
stipulation, 1120
identity of indiscernibles, 795
identity sign, 133
Ignjatovi´c, A., 434, 435, 1110
ill-behaved formulas, 799
illative
conclusion indicator, 106
core 118
premise indicator, 106
imaginary logic, 792, 794
immigrant object, 1090, 1092, 1097
impossibilia, 1098
imperfect consistency, 212, 214, 215
imperfective paradox, 957
implication, 723, 729–784, see entail-
ment
→(implication), 723, 729
⇒, constructive interpretation, 554–
558
impossibilia, 1065, 1094
impossibility, 1099
impredicative, 416, 488
impredicativity of constructive proof,
557
inclusion conditiuon, 211
incompleteness, 215, 216, 1099, 1103
theorem, 412, 418–419, 431–435,
440, 441, 503, 505
ﬁrst, 418, 433, 434
second, 418, 431, 432
inconsistent, 141, 1104
objects, 901, 902
reasoning, 901
theory, 791, 797
indeﬁnitely extensible concepts, 544
indeterminacy, 1103
Indian logic, 42
indispensability argument, 438
individual, 959, 976
concept, 945, 959, 973
individuation, 1097
induction, 463
contentual, 425
Poincar´e on, 414
transﬁnite, 425, 435, 436
inertia worlds, 957
inexactitude, 157
inference, 41, 46, 105, 117–118, 1064,
1066, 1067, 1068, 1119
inference rule, 163
inferential closure, 1112
inﬁnitary logic, 54, 593
inﬁnite, 488
sums, potential and actual views
of, 523, 567, 576
quantiﬁer, 592
variable, 841
inﬁnitesimal, 524, 525, 841
variable, 840
informal, 132
informal logic, 58, 131, 133–136
Ingarden, R., 1091
ingenuity, 169
inherent ambiguity, 871
inheritance networks, 859
inner model, 517
instrumental, 1110, 1120
necessity, 1063, 1065
stipulationism, 1120
instrumentalism
and Hilbert’s program, 431
and Hilbert’s program, 428–435
intensionality, 150
intensional 151
logic, 925, 930–932, 934–936, 938
modal fallacy, 146
interaction, 68

1186
Index
internal set, 950
interpolation (Craig), 731, 770
perfect, 731
intrinsicness, 1141, 1142
introspection, 56, 60
intuition, 50, 56, 478, 411, 415, 420,
430, 525, 558
and ﬁnitism, 426
Kantian, 423
intuitionistic logic, 791, 794, 814, 897
Brouwer-Heyting system, 794
contained in C1, 803
minimal calculus, 814
intuitionistic propositional logic, 797
intuitive axiom, 1097
intuitive axioms for ﬁction, 1068
invalidity, 134
Inwagen, P. van, 1070
irregular verbs, 160
irregular words, 164
iterative conception of sets, 533, 541–
545
J¨asche, G. B., 42
Ja´skowski, S., 792, 793, 844
Ja´skowski logic, 844, 871
Jacquette, D., 149, 331, 1074, 1078,
1079, 1087, 1092, 1097, 1099–
1101
James, H., 1088
James, W., 851
Janssen, T. M. V., 913, 916
Jennings, R., 1079
Jensen, R. B., 601
Jeroslow, R., 435
Johnson, R. H., 101, 118, 122, 126
Johnson, W. E., 161, 167
Johnstone, M., 979
Johnstone, P. T., 567
join, 218, 219, 221
justifying formal logic, 207
K (combinator), 733, 736, 749, 779
simple type of, 723, 727, 735, 749,
777
K¨unne, W., 403
Kaestner, C. A. A., 876
Kant, I., 42, 43, 51, 57, 58, 134, 146,
149, 151, 152, 164, 478, 1110
Kant’s 100 gold Thalers, 151
Kaplan, D., 327, 980, 1061, 1068, 1099
Keisler, H. J., 595
Kelley-Morse set theory, 830
Kepler, J., 157
Kifer, M., 858, 859
Kilwardby, R., 42, 44, 45
King, L. R., 1075, 1087
Kitcher, P., 421, 423, 429
Kleene, S. C., 498, 511–513, 515, 519,
555, 556, 682, 689, 802
Kleer, J. de, 1078
Kneale, M., 943
Kneale, W., 943
knowledge
acquaintance, 1076
description, 1076
ordering, 696
Kock, A., 528
Koetsier, T., 572
Kolmogorov, A. N., 552, 554
Koons, R., 384, 386, 404
Kotas,J., 871
Krabbe, E. C. W., 125
Kracht, M., 943
Krause, D., 876
Kreisel, G., 48, 426–609
Kremer, M., 340
Kremer, P., 340
Kripke, S., 138, 143, 326, 330–335,
337–345, 347, 348, 350–352,
354, 356, 357, 359, 360, 363,
367, 369, 371, 373, 383, 392,
736, 763, 927, 928, 937, 945,
960, 961, 964, 1061, 1068,
1070, 1088, 1098, 1107
Kripke model, 856
Kripke semantics, 847, 873
Kripke structure, 846, 847, 851
Kripke-frame, 946

Index
1187
Kripkean, 141
pointed Kripke-model, 946
Krishnaprasad, T., 859
Kronecker, L., 412–413, 531, 563
Kutz, O., 943
L (linear logic), 775–779
l’Hospital principle, 840, 842, 843
L¨owenheim, L., 587
L¨owenheim number, 603
L¨owenheim, L., 499, 598
L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem, 498–
499, 519, 587, 590, 616, 645–
647
L´opez-Escobar, E. G. K., 605, 607
labels, 1116, 1117
Lake, J., 539, 540
Lakoﬀ, G., 170
Lamarque, P., 1070
λ
deﬁnability, 512–515
abstraction, 933
calculus, 511, 723, 737, 749–751,
779, see combinatory logic
conversion, 923
operator, 133
Lambert, K., 961
Landman, F. W., 1078
language, 134, 136, 140, 146
late preemption, 1132–1134, 1137, 1139,
1140, 1141
lattice, 218–220
Law of Excluded Middle (LEM), 327,
330, 331, 337, 342, 345, 347,
349–351, 356, 357, 359, 360,
367–369, 375, 380, 384, 385,
1067
law of noncontradiction, 1067, 1094,
1095, 1100
Lawvere, W., 50
Lear, J., 523, 567, 1091
learning, 87
legal obligations, 898
Leibniz, G. W., 41, 45, 46, 48, 49, 58,
529, 795, 944
Leibniz Law, 962
Modal Leibniz Law, 963
strong Leibniz Law, 962
weak Leibniz Law, 963
Lejewski, C., 1076
LEM, see Law of Excluded Middle
Levy, A., 597, 609
Lewis translation, 967
Lewis, C. I., 369, 373, 926, 944, 952
Lewis, D., 479, 529, 929, 937, 939,
945, 948, 956, 962, 967, 979,
980, 1061, 1070, 1079, 1086–
1088, 1090, 1094, 1099, 1101,
1103, 1128, 1130, 1132, 1133,
1139, 1141, 1142
Lewisean truth I, 1087
Lewisean truth II, 1087
Lewisian counterpart frames, 977
liar, 143, 145
dilemma inference, 143
metaparadox, 140, 141
paradox, 136–145
sentence, 138–146
sentence dilemma, 139, 140
sentences, 137
limitation of size, as a basis for sets,
537–541
Lindenbaum, A., 507
Lindenbaum algebra, 686, 949
Lindstr¨om, P., 451, 499, 588, 607
Lindstr¨om’s theorem, 607
linear logic, 954
linguistic ersatzism, 949
literacy primacy thesis, 1069, 1104,
1117
literals
complementary, 881
Lobachewski, N., 792
logic, 42, 52, 602
C, 964
PFL, 963
QC, 964

1188
Index
QK, 960
QL, 961
S3, 944
Grz, 953
Int, 953
N, 953
QS4, 970
S4.2, 955
S4, 953, 956, 969
logic of K, 947
algebraic, 414
of conditionals, 956
deontic, 898
of ﬁction, 1061, 1065–1067, 1069,
1074, 1078, 1099, 1100, 1112
ﬁrst-order, 415
imaginary, 792
informal, 101
of Minkoski space-time, 955
modal, 898
nature of, 793
and physics, 892
pluralism, 902
pure, 51
possibilistic, 875
scientiﬁc acceptance, 857
of science, 857
of truth, 857
logic, universal, 51
of the world, 901
logical
antinomy, 145
concepts, 43, 45, 51, 56, 57
consequence, 55, 56, 680
constants, 206
constants, constructive interpre-
tation, 553–558
empiricism, 892
entailment, 208, 211, 217
fatalims, 166
form, 67, 133, 135, 142
matrix, 951
necessity, 964
pluralism, 902
positivism, 473
relations, 131
signs, 215
truth, 53, 964, 1065, 1067
valid, 679, 686
logicism, 50, 415, 420
logistic paradigm, 53–56
Lopari´c, A., 825, 870
Loux, M. J., 930
Lozinskii, E, L., 859
Luce, A. A., 57
Ludwig, G., 893
Lukasiewicz, J., 166, 680, 684, 687,
693, 792, 829, 844, 871, 943,
1078
Lukasiewicz algebras, 687
Lukasiewicz logic, 687, 684
Luria, A. R., 59
Lynch, M., 384
M (combinator), 738, 741, 779
simple type of, 749
M and M, 616
M¨uller, A., 422
Mackie, J. L., 1131
Maddy, P., 527, 542–543, 1081, 1110
make-believe, 1084–1087
make-do, 1081, 1082, 1088, 1099, 1115
Malcolm, N., 146
Mally, 1092
Malt’sev, A. I., 507, 519
Mancosu, P., 414, 418, 423, 430
Manin, Y. I., 842
many worlds interpretation, 954, 986
many-valued logic, 166
Marconi, D., 870, 873
Marcos, J., 872
Marcus, G. F., 51
Marcus, Ruth Barcan, 960
Mares, E. D., 373, 724, 732, 781
Marin, R. L., 333, 403
Markov, A. A., 558
Mars, 157
Martin, D. A., 49

Index
1189
Martin, R. L., 137, 330, 333, 335,
338, 340, 403, 1061
Martin-L¨of, P., 555, 556
Martins, A. T., 875
Master Argument, 943
material conditional, 145
⊃(material implication), 726, 727,
728
deﬁnition, 1071
induction, 155, 210
logic, 44, 46, 49, 131, 135, 1062,
1063, 1065–1067, 1080, 1099
multiplicity, 142
stipulationism, 1061
Matilal, B. K., 42
matrices, 879
as trees, 877
contradictory, 880
valid, 880
matrix connection method, 876
matrix suitable for a system, 220
matrix tables, 221
Matt¯a ibn Y¯unus, 44
mature, 1063, 1065, 1066
Maudlin, T., 340, 344
maximal account, 1067, 1075, 1079,
1080, 1090, 1100, 1111, 1113,
1115, 1119
maximality, 1111
Mayberry, J. P., 527, 534, 538–542,
549–550
McGee, V., 330, 339, 348, 349, 398
McGill, A. C., 147
McGill, N. J., 874
McKeon, M., 1108
McRobbie, M. A., 777, 778, 781, 782
meaning, 136, 459, 913–917, 924, 935,
939
medieval logicians, 41, 44, 47
meet, 218, 219, 221
Meheus, J., 1063, 1078, 1079
Meinong, A., 449, 1104, 1091
Meinongian creativity, 1096
Meinongian logic, 1078, 1090, 1097,
1101
Meinongian object, 1090, 1094,
1095, 1100
Meinongian ontology, 1103
Meinongian world, 1099
Mekler, A., 595
Melia, J., 980
Mendelson, E., 918
mental language, 48, 60, 160
Meredith, C. A., 752
mereology, 165, 529, 569
metalanguage, 43, 45, 55, 58, 136,
142, 143, 207, 209, 213
metamathematics, 54, 416
metaparadox, 140, 145
metaphysical footprint, 1070, 1072,
1073, 1087, 1107, 1110, 1119,
1121
method
of constants, 519
of intersection, 1088
of union, 1088, 1102
Meyer, R. K., 212, 345, 724, 754, 758,
763, 764, 773–775, 777, 778,
781–783, 1079
Michelson, A. A., 792
Michelson–Morley’s interferometer, 792
migrancy, 1097
Mikenberg, I., 851
minimal adaptation, 1066, 1076–1079
Minkowski space-time, 955
Mints, G., 436
Mir´o-Quesada, F., 793
Mirimanoﬀ, D., 542
misleading form thesis, 69
Mitchell, O. H., 526
mixed sentence, 1075
ML language, 883
modal, 146
algbera, 949
context, 150, 1073
hyperdoctrine, 983
individual, 979
logic, 165, 166, 723, 743, 746,

1190
Index
757, 768, 777, 780, 898, 926,
946, 1128
KB, 763
S4, S4.2, S4.3, 763
classical, 946
normal, 946
necessity operator, 133
operator, 1094, 1101, 1115
operators, 946
predicate logic, 958
ﬁrst-order, 959
second-order, 959
propositional logic, 946
modality, 946
de dicto, 1072
de re, 1072
modally fragile, 1133, 1134
model, 679, 710
classes, 679
structure, 210
structure semantics, 220
structures, 217
theory, 41, 519
modes of transgression, 969
modist grammar, 48
modularity trigger, 1121
modus tollens, 147, 149
Moh Schaw-Kwei’s paradox, 830
monad, 841
monadic fragment, 972
Monk, R., 144
monotonicity, 67
Montague, R., 930–935, 959
Montague Grammar, 913
Montague’s Thesis, 74
Montague, R. M., 597
Mooij, J. J. A., 1082
Moore pragmatic paradox, 144
Moore, G. E., 144, 415, 456
Moore sentence, 144, 146
Moore’s paradox, 144
Moore, G. H., 529
moral dilemmas, 898
moral obligations, 898
morality and law, 898
More, T., 47
Morgenstern, O., 1088
Morley, E. W., 792
Morley, M. D., 605, 607
Mortensen, C., 843, 871, 873
Mortimer, M., 598
most general common instance (mgci),
752, 753
Mostowski, A., 595, 599
1 Mostowski Collapse, 620
MTL-algebras, 705
µ-recursiveness, 514, 515
Musicante, M. A., 876
MV-algebras, 687
N, the set of natural numbers, 523,
524, 548
na¨ıve idealism, 1066
na¨ıve set theoretical, 145
Nakamatsu, K., 874
narrow free e-logic, 1076
Nash equilibria, 89
native, 1090
native objects, 1097
natural
deduction, 58, 508
language, 134, 135
language interpretations, 1013
logic, 72
numbers, 547, 548
reasoning, 851
speech, 1073
necessitation rule, 1098
necessity, 924, 926
of identity, 960
negation, 729, 769, 773
-as-failure, 1117
complement, 219
De Morgan, 729, 731, 762, 773,
782
ortho-, 762, 784
strong negation, 804
the nature of, 794

Index
1191
negative existential, 1076, 1080
neighbourhood frame, 955
Nelson’s inconsistent logic, 874
Nelson, L., 414, 423
Nelson, J. O., 147
Nelson, N. D., 953
neo-Fregean, 464
neural nets, 170
Newton, I., 157, 165, 527
cosmology, 792
second law, 850
Nietzsche, F., 156, 157
no-class theory, 467, 471
no-counterexample interpretation, 440
Nobre, E. F., 876
nominal deﬁnition, 1088
nominalism, 48, 478, 1119
nominalistic instrumentalism, 1110
nominalistic provocation, 1114
nominalization, 900, 1119
non-Aristotelian logics, 792
non-Euclidean geometry, 132, 792
non-individuals, 795
in the quantum domain, 796
Non-Triviality Project, 328, 330, 334,
337, 339–344, 347, 348, 356,
367, 371, 375, 376, 381, 383,
386, 389, 391, 395, 402
nonbivalent, 1077
nondenoting terms, 1076
nonexistence, 1149, 51, 1069, 1076,
1090, 1092
nonmonotonic logic, 79, 1128
nonnormal world, 1098
nonnuclear proerties, 1092
nonstandard
analysis, 44, 528
arithmetic, 561
many-valued logics, 137
models, 503
nontrivial, 897
normal Ems, 213
normal form theorem, 514
normal negation, 219
Norman, J., 142
Norton, J. D., 577
¬, constructive interpretation, 554
ntp, see Non-Triviality Project
nuclear property, 1090–1093, 1097, 1101
nuclear–nonnuclear, 1094
number, 52, 60, 162
Ny¯aya logic, 42
O-interpretation, 1072
O-intuition, 1070, 1071
O-model, 1072–1074, 1082, 1083
Oakshott, M., 1082
object, 945, 973, 976
language, 43, 142, 143, 207
metalanguage, 138
native, 1092
variables, 958
objecthood, 1078
objectual quantiﬁcation, 1108
Ockhamist, 957
Ogden, C. K., 142
Olsen, S., 1070
Ω(x), 617
ΩE(x), 626
ΩM(x), 626
ω-consistency, 504, 506
ω1, the ﬁrst uncountable ordinal num-
ber, 538
ω-rule, 432, 434
omission, 1135
ontically incomplete, 1091
ontological argument, 149, 150, 152
ontological case against actual inﬁn-
ity, 547
open textured, 169
operational semantics, 743–746, 777,
see semi-lattice semantics, se-
mantics of relevance logics
∨, constructive interpretation, 553–
555
order-type, 530
ordinal analysis, 432, 436
ordinal sum, 701

1192
Index
ordinary language, 135
ordo cognescendi, 1112
ordo essendi, 1112
origins, 211
overcomplete theory, 856
Oversteegen, J. J., 1082
Owen, G. E. L., 567, 569
P´eter, R., 511
para-analyser, 874
paraclassic logic, 793, 851, 894, 895,
897, 898
paraclassic deduction, 894
paraclassic theory, 898
paracomplete, 325, 326, 329–331, 334–
339, 342–351, 356, 357, 359–
361, 364, 366–370, 372, 375,
378–381, 398, 401, 404, 874,
888
paraconsistent, 143, 325, 326, 328–
330, 343, 353, 357, 361, 366–
368, 370, 374, 375, 378–380,
382, 398, 400, 401, 404
dC-systems, 872
C-systems, 796
algebraization, 871
agnostic interpretation, 902
applications, 794, 865, 874
Aristotle’s syllogistic, 829
Boolean algebra, 839
complementarity, 894
dialectics, 873
calculi C=
ω , 815
calculi of descriptions, 817
calculi Cn, 797
consequence, 1079
decidability, 870
deontic, 898
executing queries, 870
ﬁeld of knowledge, 902
forerunners, 792
fuzzy systems, 875
hierarchy of calculi, 807
higher-order systems, 872
in computer sciences, 858
in Informatics, 875
inductive, 884
its role in science, 792
logic, 142, 791, 1079
logic of partial truth, 851
as ‘supplement’ to classical logic,
795
mathematics, 796, 840
Mathematical Reviews, 793
modal, 829
model for the diﬀerential and in-
tegral calculus, 842
model theory, 828
negation in, 798
origins of the name, 792, 793
paraclassic logic, 898
philosophical signiﬁcance, 898
predicates, 829
program, 881
‘pure’ logic, 794
quantiﬁcation, 811
quantum logic, 840, 892
reductio ad absurdum principle,
800
‘rival’ to classical logic, 795
robot, 874
set theory, 791, 830, 831, 901
syllogistic, 828
taxonomy, 872
theory of v.b.t.o., 872
three valued systems, 871
valuation, 843
World Congresses on Paraconsis-
tency, 793, 902
paradox, 137
Cantor’s, 726, 727
geometric, 567–569
kinematic, 569–575
of collision, 576–578
of conserved quantities, 575–576
positive and negative, 723, 727
semantic, 537
set-theoretic, 531–532

Index
1193
Zeno’s, 567–571, 576
PARALOG, 874
paralogic, 897, 898
paranormal, 350, 361–366, 369, 381
parasitical, 1114, 1120
Parikh, R., 561–563
Paris, J., 440
Parmenides, 158
Parry, W. T., 874
Parsons, C., 387, 388, 423, 426, 544,
1061, 1067
Parsons, T., 372, 962, 1074, 1075,
1078, 1080, 1090–1092, 1097
Partee, B., 932
partial
object, 1078
preemption, 1139
recursive function, 515
truth, 851, 857, 901, 902
particularists, 164
particulars, 479
Pascal, B., 41
Pasch, M., 497
path through a matrix, 880
Patterson, D., 382
Paul, L. A., 1127, 1134, 1139
Pauli’s exclusion principle, 897
Pavel, T., 1061, 1080, 1099
Pavelka, J., 710
Pavelka-style approach, 710
PBM-model, 1072
PC, 208
Pe˜na, L., 871, 873
Peano, G., 41, 49, 449, 497, 498, 502,
510
Peano arithmetic, 419, 420, 432,
435, 437–440, 503, 505, 507,
508
Pearl, J., 1138
Peckhaus, V., 414
Peirce, C. S., 45, 46, 49, 134, 497,
499, 526, 528, 567, 792, 851
Peirce’s law, 723, 736, 806, 832
Peircean, 958
Pelletier, F. J., 916, 1112
Penrose, R., 158
Pequeno, T., 875
perdurantism, 979
Peressini, A., 565
P´erez Laraudogoitia, J., 576–578
perfect recall, 91
performative utterance, 1069
persistence, 979
Peter of Ailly, 60
Phillips, J. F., 1087
philosophical
analysis, 1071, 1088
logic, 1062, 1063, 1065
semantics, 145
philosophy of language, 1062
philosophy of mathematics, 1061, 1104
physical inﬁnity, 564–579
in relation to mathematical in-
ﬁnity, 525, 564–566
physical theories, 849
structures for, 849
Picard and Gousart’s treatise, 840
picture theory of meaning, 142
Pigozzi, G., 1121
Pinker, S., 164, 165
Pinter, C., 871
Pinto, R. C., 117
Placek, T., 553
Plantinga, A., 147, 151, 1061, 1068,
1099
Plato, 156, 158, 167, 1086
Platonism, 485, 525, 527
plenitudinous, 531
Plummer, C., 1084, 1085, 1108
pluralism, 1063, 1104
PMB-model, 1070, 1074, 1082, 1088,
1110
Pohlers, W., 436
Poincar´e, J. H., 414, 531, 537, 540,
550
pointless topology, 567
points at inﬁnity, 528
polarity of a literal, 876

1194
Index
Pollard, S., 539
Pollock, J., 884
poly-counterpart frame, 970
polynomial-time computability, 561
Poncelet’s imaginary geometry, 831
Popper, K. R., 792
Porter, C., 1064
positive free logic, 963
positive implicational logic, 723, 748,
749
R→’s relation to, 723
possibilistic logic, 875
possibility, 925–927, 929, 944, 952,
1092
possible object, 1079
possible worlds, 743, 757, 785, 925,
927–930, 1099, 1114, 1128
possible worlds semantics, see re-
lational semantics, dual gag-
gle semantics
Post, E., 498, 501, 514, 515, 680
Post algebras, 688
Post completeness, 725, 727
Post logic, 685, 688
postulates, 217
for model structures, 210
potential inﬁnity, 523–525, 546–564
versus actual inﬁnity, 548–552
¶(S), the power set of S, 532
power set axiom, 532, 540–541, 543
Pozsgay, L., 544
pragmatic, 47, 49, 136, 152
theory, 856
truth, 844, 851
valid formulas, 854
validity
extended to higher-order (modal)
languages, 855
the logic of, 855
precisiﬁcation, 160, 163
predicate, 146
complementation, 1092, 1103
constants, 958
logic, 207, 214, 215
variables, 959
-quantiﬁcational calculus, 134
predication, 452
predicativity, 537, 540
preemption, 1127, 1132
presheaf semantics, 969
presumptive closure, 1111
pretense, 1070, 1082–1084, 1086–1088
Priest, G., 142, 143, 149, 151, 360,
367–373, 375, 376, 398, 404,
873, 899, 900, 1079, 1087,
1098
primitive recursion, 423, 426
and ﬁnitism, 425–426
arithmetic, 425, 427, 435, 437,
438, 439, 1110
primitivist, 985
principal types, 723, 733, 735, 736,
749, 752, 754, 776, 779, see
simple types
principle of
bivalence, 675
compositionality, 675
explosion, 794, 872
noncontradiction, 792, 798
Prior, A., 166, 948, 957
probability logic, 46
process logic, 56
procrusteanism, 1081
product algebras, 687
product logic, 684, 687
production, 1142
products of modal logics, 972
projective geometry, 770–771
PROLOG, 874, 882
proof, 476
as normal natural-deduction deriva-
tion, 555
canonical, 555
constructive, 552–558
⊢, the constructive proof relation, 552
decidability of, 555–557
proof search, 41
proof theory, 41

Index
1195
complexity of proofs, 440
consequence, 55
ordinal analysis, 436
proof theoretic reduction, 438
reverse mathematics, 439
speed up, 435
proofs, in axiomatic calculus
in T→, 733–735
traversing vs ordinary, 733–734
prop, 1083, 1085. 1088
proper classes, 517
propositional
attitude, 1082, 1083
closure, 1112
constants, 946
logic, 501
matrices, 876
prototypes, 170
provability degree, 711
pseudo-questions, 474
Pseudo-Scotus, 794
Ψ(f, x), 634, 637
psychologism, 60, 913, 915
Pudl´ak, P., 440, 562
pure instrumentalism, 1110
pure logic, 793
Purtill, R. L., 147
Putnam, H., 438
Px, 210–212, 217
Pylyshyn, Z. W., 560
Pythagoreans, 158
quadratic polynomial equations, 135
quantiﬁcation, 1061, 1114
prime formulas, 812
substitutional, 1111
theory, 497
quantiﬁer, 524, 528, 1073
actualist, 962
bounded and unbounded, 538
inﬁnite disjunctions and conjunc-
tions, 526, 565
interpreting functions, 677
possibilist, 962
rank, 589
quantum logic, 794, 795, 952
the logic of quantum theory, 893
quasi
-concrete, 423
-dependence, 1139–1141
-matrix, 823
-truth, 901
question-begging, 1102
Quine, W. V. O., 52–55, 59, 369, 438,
478, 537, 900, 926, 936–938,
986, 1063, 1064, 1076, 1081,
1114
Quine’s NF, 830, 832
Quine’s ontological commitment,
902
quota model, 168
R, the set of real numbers, 524, 528
R (logic of relevant implication), 723,
735, 760, 769, 781–785
R¨ustow, A., 137
Rabc, 210, 211, 215, 220, 224
Radford, C., 1085
Raggio, A., 871
Ramachandran, M., 967
ramiﬁed theory of types, 488
Ramsey, F. P., 396, 441, 449, 611
Ramus, P., 41
random, 165, 169
Rapaport, W. J., 1092
Rathbone, B., 1083
Rathjen, M., 436
Read, S., 149
realisability, 555
realism, 526, 1071, 1072
realist stance, 1105
reasoning
defeasible, 874, 884
fuzzy, 886
nonmonotonic, 874, 884
styles, 67
received theory, 1105
Reck, E., 414

1196
Index
reductio, 149, 151, 208, 212–215
recursion theory, 498, 510,515, 516,
519
recursively enumerable set, 514
reducibility for constructive proof, 557–
558
reduct, 589
reductionist, 985
reference, 136, 479, 1064, 1067, 1068,
1107, 1111, 1119
referent, 1107, 1111
Reﬂection Theorem, 597
regularity theory of causation, 1131
reiﬁcation, 1071, 1073
Reinhardt, W. N., 330, 340
relation symbols, 589
relational semantics, 757–782, see semi-
lattice semantics, semantics
of relevance logics
gaggle kind, 757, 758, 761, 763
Kripke-style, 757, 763, 778
philosophical interpretation of, 763
Routley–Meyer-style, 758, 763–
768, 775, 777, 781, 782
relations, 133
relative computability, 515
relativization, 589
relevance logic, 147, 870, 873, 954,
1064 see B, T, E, L, R,
completeness, semantics (four-
valued, semi-lattice, opera-
tional, dual gaggle, relational),
classical logic
modalities in, 773, 775, 777, 780
relevant
arithmetic, 774
entailment, 1063
predication, 774
replacement axiom, 517, 532, 541, 543,
544
representation, choice of, 52
Rescher, N., 367
residuation, 699, 737, 742, 743, 760–
762, 783, 784
Resnik, M., 414, 429, 1104
Restall, G., 346, 347, 364, 723, 724
restricted functional calculus, 500
reverse mathemtaics, 439
rhetoric of argumentation, 131
rhetorical fallacy, 134
Richardson, H., 147
Richman, F., 548, 554, 564
Riemann FOIL frames, 976
Rijke, M. de, 940
ring species, 161
R-mingle (semi-relevant logic), 729,
758
Robinson, A., 44, 507, 519, 528
robotics, 890
Romantics, 156, 157
Rosch, E., 170
Rosen, G., 962
Rosser provability, 434
Rosser, J. B., 498, 506, 511, 512, 514
round square, 1090
Routley, R., see Sylvan, R.
Routley, R., 142, 212, 346, 367, 373,
871, 873, 1061, 1070, 1072,
1075, 1077, 1079, 1080, 1093,
1100
Routley–Meyer-style semantics, 758,
763, 768, 775, 777, 781, 782
Russell, B., 46, 50, 145, 156, 157, 170,
208, 411, 413–415, 449, 498,
510, 525, 527, 532, 536–538,
540, 551, 557, 566, 573, 817,
833, 972, 1071, 1076, 1078,
1088, 1105
Russell’s antinomy, 497
Russell relations, 838
Russell set, 794, 796, 836, 900,
902
Russell’s paradox, 145, 397, 413,
451, 510
semantical properties, 397
set-theoretic, 396
Rxyz, 211
Ryckman, T., 430

Index
1197
S (combinator), 737, 749, 750
simple type of, 736, 749, 779
S′ (combinator), 737, 748, 750
simple type of, 736, 779
S-implication, 700
S-model, 1073, 1082, 1088, 1090, 1103,
1110, 1116, 1118–1120
safety-critical systems, 58
Salmon, W. C., 567, 573
salve veritate, 150
Sanford, D., 166
satisﬁability problem, 597
satisﬁable, 590
saving the appearances, 851
Sazonov, Y. V., 561, 562
Sch¨utte, K., 436
Schaﬀer, J., 1133, 1135, 1142
Schantz, R., 403
Schlick, M., 474
Schopenhauer, F., 42
Schotch, P., 1061, 1079
Schr¨oder, E., 414, 497
Schr¨odinger, E., 795
Schufreider, G., 147
Schurz, G., 964, 974
Schweber, S. S., 578
science, 132
Scott, D. S., 555
Scott–Montague frames, 956
Scruton, R., 1070
sea-battle, 166
Searle, J. R., 103, 1069, 1070, 1082,
1083, 1086
Searle’s Principle, 1083
second clauses, 556–558
second incompleteness theorem, 505,
508
second-order logic, 55, 502, 503, 592
self-contradictory, 144
self-countering threat, 1136, 1137
self-identity, 1092
Sellars, W., 478
semantic, 48, 133, 136–139, 141, 143,
146, 205–207, 209, 210, 213,
218, 220
analysis, 145
case against actual inﬁnity, 548,
565
completeness, 501
consequence, 55, 821, 827
formal, 41
interpretation, 67
metaparadox, 139, 141
paradox, 143
relations, 133, 146
semantically inert, 1115
semantic web, 49
valuations, 821
semantics of relevance logics, see four-
valued, dual gaggle, relational,
operational and semi-lattice
semantics
semi-lattice semantics 746–748
sense, 915, 917, 918
sentence negation, 1092
sentence schema, 55
sentence-contradictions, 1095
sentential contradictions, 1095, 1101
sentential logic, 210
sentential modal operator, 1115
separation axiom, 532, 541, 544
sequent calculus, 737, 739, see conse-
cution calculus
sequents, 508, 509
set theory, 41, 50, 54, 133, 145, 431
paradoxes of, 413
sets, 528, 530–546
Shaﬀer, J., 151
Shapiro, L., 405
Shapiro, S., 372, 923
Sheard, M., 405
Shehtman, V., 945
Shelah, S., 607
Ship of Thesus, 168
Shoenﬁeld, J. R., 54, 542–543, 843
Sider, T., 979
Sieg, W., 414, 415, 418, 421, 423, 429
Sigwart, C., 60

1198
Index
similarity, 530, 956, 1130
Simmons, K., 386, 387
Simons, P., 1091
simple pragmatic structure, 852, 853
simple types, 723, 748–754, 960, see
combinator
Simpson, S., 439
Sinn, 1062, 1107–1109, 1118, 1119
situation, 944, 951
ethicists, 164
semantics, 82
Skolem, T., 499–502, 506, 510, 511,
516, 518, 550–551, 587, 615
Skolem’s Paradox, 587, 615–647
Skvortsov, D., 945
Skyrms, B., 137, 384, 405, 980
Slater, H., 1077, 1085, 1097
slingshot argument, 913, 920
slippery slope, 168
small, 602
small matrices, 206
Smiley, T., 220
Smiley 8-value, 216, 221, 224
Smiley matrix, 213, 220
Smith, B. H., 568, 569, 1082
smooth inﬁnitesimal analysis, 528
Smory´nski, C., 433
Smullyan, R., 331, 339, 729, 731
Snow, C. P., 132
Soames, S., 330, 382
Sochor, A., 529, 537, 562
Socrates, 167, 169
Solovay, R. M., 435
Sorensen, R. A., 155, 159, 161
sorites, 155, 157
sound, 1092
soundness
of modal logics, 743, 757
of relevance logics, 731, 744, 746,
748, 759, 760, 765, 768, 775,
777, 781, 782
Souza, E. G., 831
species of structure, 849
spectrum, 588, 595
speech acts
assertives premissing, 103–105, 106
concluding, 106
commissives, 103–105
declaratives, 103–105
directives, 103–105
expressives, 103–105
pragmatics, 1069
speed, 58
speed up, 435
square of opposition, 131, 133, 134
squeeze lemma, 766
St. Anselm, 146
Stalnaker, R., 1127, 1128
Stalnaker–Lewis semantics, 1131
standard semantics, 686, 923
standard translation, 947
Stanovich, K. E., 59
state-of-aﬀairs, 950
statistics, 42
Stecker, R., 1077
Stegm¨uller, W., 54
Stein, H., 414
Steiner, M., 414
Stenning, K., 51
stipulation, 1071, 1073, 1089, 1103–
1105, 1107, 1110, 1111, 1114
Stokes, G. G., 792
Stone, W. H., 1088
Stone representation theorem, 1088
Stove, D., 1064
stratiﬁcation of constructions, 557–
558
Strawson, P., 170
strict ﬁnitism, 206, 210, 224
strict implication, 926, 952
strong AI, 1072
Strong Kleene, 333, 335–342, 344–346,
350–354, 363, 370, 375
strong negation, 804, 861, 887
structural content, 1013–1014, 1018–
1021
structural rules, 79
structuralist, 484, 1015–1018

Index
1199
structuralist thesis, 1016–1018
structure, 589
subformula property, 739, 740, 784
subjective probability, 890
Subrahmanian, V. S., 858, 859, 874
substantiation, 1105
substitution principles, 958
ﬁrst-order, 959
second-order, 959
substitutional, 1114
substitutional quantiﬁcation, 1080, 1107,
1108
substructure, 589
S, the successor function, 547
suitable for E, 214
suitable for a system, 210, 214, 220,
225
Sundholm, G., 556
supertasks, 565, 571–575
supervaluational logic, 1077, 1097
supervaluationism, 163
Suppes, P., 849
surveyable, 206, 210
syllogism, 44–46, 58, 67, 133, 135,
828
argument, 133
logic, 134, 135
Sylvan, R., 724, 758, 763, 774, 778,
782
symbolic logic, 135, 136
symbolisms, 135
syntactic consequence
proper, 857
syntax, 49, 133
syntax v. semantics, 47, 48
system E, 205, 208, 211, 213, 215,
217, 220
system imprisonment, 66
system R, 215
Slupecki, J., 682
T-schema, 1115
T F , 1072, 1094, 1096, 1101, 1103,
1108, 1112, 1115–1117
T (ticket entailment), 731–774
T, F, 916, 918, 919, 923
t (truth), 738, 739, 740, 755, 757,
760, 776
t-norm algebra, 698, 699
tableaux techniques, 213
tacit knowledge, 1111
Taﬀ’s Well, 160
Tait, W. W., 422, 425–427, 440, 525,
549, 551, 1110
Takeuti, G., 432, 436
taking, 1089
target properties, 1062, 1066, 1067
targets, 1064, 1066
Tarski*, 382, 383, 386, 387, 398, 404
Tarski, A., 49, 53–57, 137, 138, 142,
327, 328, 331, 334, 344, 382,
456, 498, 506, 507, 519, 567,
568, 593, 594, 710, 712, 850,
853, 918, 964
Tarski’s theory of truth, 143
Tarskian, 138
Tarskian hierarchy, 141
Tarskian semantic hierarchy, 143
Tarskian structure of metalanguage,
143
Tarski-Knaster theorem, 868
tautology, 139, 144–146, 150
tautology of propositional logic, 141
Taylor, K., 1077
teaching logic, 53, 54, 57–59
temporal assymetry of causation, 1130
temporal logic of programs, 955
textbooks, 53, 54
Tharp, L. H., 544, 1104
the lattice FOUR, 866, 877, 881
the lattice SQUARE, 866
The Word, 1103
the world, 1121
theorem
compactness, 1092
deduction, 1092
extrapolation, 1092
theorem proving methods, 876

1200
Index
theory, 68, 808
complementary, 896
conﬁdence, 889
consistent, 791, 809
descriptions, 487
dynamics, 85
games, 1088
inconsistent, 791, 792, 809
light rays, 1018–1020
objects, 1078
paraconsistent, 809
possibility, 890
trivial, 791
truth, 1107
types, 488, 498, 510, 921
thin posit, 1107
things, 973
Thistlewaite, P. B., 778, 782
Thom, P., 45
Thomas, R. S. D., 1104
Thomason, S. K., 964
Thomson, J., 568, 571, 573
thread, 977
three-valued logic, 871, 1078
Tich´y, P., 929, 935, 936
ticket entailment, 724, 729–774, see
axiomatic and consecution cal-
culi
D-completeness of T→, 754
fde fragment of, 729–731
and HRMz-terms, 750, 751
Fitch-style calculus for, 746–747
implicational fragment of, 733–
737
intensional fragment of, 737–743
positive fragment of, 754–762
semantics of, 743, 746, 748, 757–
768
Tierney, M., 50
Tiles M., 1104
token-type distinction, 547
top-down theories of constructive proof,
556–558
topic neutrality, 162
toposes, 50
Toraldo di Francia, G., 849–851
Torretti, R., 1104
Toulmin, S. E., 122, 1081
tower, 965
trace (of an object), 973
trace function, 973
transfer theorem, 588
transﬁctive discourse, 1075
transﬁctive sentence, 1075
transﬁnite, 525, 526, 533–536
transﬁnite iteration, 539, 541
transﬁxive, 1117
transform of a formula, 813
transitive, 1129, 1132, 1142
model, 620, 633–636
translation, 160
transworld accessibility relation, 147
transworld identity, 945
Treaty of Lausanne, 160
Triad rule, 212–214, 224, 225
trivial, 895, 897
trivial theory, 797
seetheory: trivial, 791
trivialization of a calculus, 806
Troelstra, A. S., 548, 554, 559, 563
Trout, J. D., 164
trumping preemption, 1133, 1135, 1138
truth, 59, 136, 137, 139, 140, 143–
146, 474, 913, 918, 919, 946,
1064, 1067–1069
contextual, 384–387
determinate, 349, 351, 358–360,
366, 398
dtruth, 325–331, 333, 334, 337,
339–348, 350–354, 356–358,
360–372, 375, 377–381, 383,
385, 388, 392
degree functions, 677
degrees, 677
ﬁction, 1120
indexical, 386, 387
L-truth, 964
ordering, 696

Index
1201
revision-theoretic, 392, 393, 395,
396
situational, 389–391
stipulation, 1104, 1116
strong (-er), 350, 351, 353, 356–
360, 362, 369, 372, 377, 381
table, 137
value gaps, 137, 141, 163
value predications, 138
values, 208, 210, 913, 915, 916,
919–921, 924
valueless, 1076
Tupailo, S., 436
Turing, A. M., 411, 498, 514, 515
Turing computability, 515
Turing machine, 514, 515, 794
twin worlds, 949
two cardinal theorems, 600
two-sorted type theory, 935
two-variable fragment, 972
types, 455
ultraﬁlter, 951
ultraproduct, 506, 519
unary operation, 218
uncertainty, 874
undecidability, 498, 502, see decid-
ability
undecidable predicate logic, 215
undecidable statements, 503, 506
undeﬁnability, 498, 503
Unger, P., 163
universal, 479
instantiation, 961
machine, 515
modality, 948
set, 833
unsolvability, 514
updating, 90
upward L¨owenheim-Skolem-Tarski the-
orem, 594
Urbas, I., 871
urelement, 517, 518
urelements, 517
Urmson, J. O., 1061
Urquhart, A., 215, 743, 746, 769, 770,
778, 781
use theory, 163
V¨a¨an¨anen, J., 607
Vago, C., 859
vague propositions, 884
vagueness, 793, 885
Vaihinger, H., 1104
valid, 60, 134, 145, 205, 208, 212, 215,
217, 679
deductive inference, 139
inference, 133
matrix, 220
semantics, 140
valuation, 211, 821, 826, 886, 946
scheme, 334
van Dalen, D., 548, 554, 559
van Fraassen, B., 340, 385, 900
van Stigt, W. P., 546, 564
variable assignment, 211
variable sharing, 772, 781, 782
in relevance logics, 724, 731, 772,
782
missing in classical logic, 727
Varzi, A. C., 329, 569
Vasiliev, N. I., 792–794
imaginary geometry, 792
Vaught, R. L., 594, 599, 601, 606
Veblen, O., 497
Venn, 133, 134
Venn diagramming, 135
veriﬁcation criterion, 459
veriﬁcationism, 986
vicious circle principle, 537, 540
Vienna Circle, 474
Vieu, L., 569
Visser, A., 339, 367, 403, 435
vocabulary, 589
von Neumann, J., 417, 418, 430, 431,
441, 449, 505, 517, 527, 794,
892, 1088
von Neumann Hierarchy, 596

1202
Index
Vopˇenka, P., 529, 537, 562
W (combinator), 733, 736–738, 750,
751
simple type of, 733, 745, 769, 777
W∗(combinator)—seoM, 785
Wagner, S., 1104
Wajsberg, M., 682
Walton, D. N., 117, 122–123, 126
Walton’s dilemma, 1084
Waltonian truth, 1084
Walton, K., 1061, 1070, 1073, 1074,
1082, 1083, 1085, 1086, 1088,
1094, 1101
Wang, H., 542–544
Wang’s paradox, 157
warning rule, 884, 890–892
weak
absolute, 609
AI, 1072
Kleene, 335, 340
realism, 1074
second-order logic, 592
Webb, J., 414
Weierstrass, K., 528
Weinberg, S., 577, 578
Weinstein, S., 564
well-behaved formulas, 799
well-foundedness, in supertasks, 574
well-individuated object, 1107, 1108
well-ordered sets, 530, 535
well-ordering number, 605
Wesson, P. S., 576
Weyl, H., 53, 56, 415, 416, 428–430,
498, 531, 537, 540, 550, 552,
565, 573
Whitehead, A. N., 50, 411, 414, 449,
498, 537
William of Ockham, 48
Williamson, T., 155
Wilson chamber, 851
Wittgenstein, L., 142–145, 167–169,
463, 565, 948, 1088
Wittgensteinian, 206
Wolf, R. G., 874
Woltersdorﬀ, N., 1061, 1070, 1099
Woodger, J. H., 138
Woodruﬀ, P., 330, 333, 335, 338, 340
Woods, J., 126, 1061, 1068, 1075, 1079,
1080, 1091–1093, 1095, 1097,
1103, 1112, 1117, 1121
world-line matrices, 216, 218–220
world-mirror, 981
worldbound, 976
worlds, 944, 946, 1097
Wright, C., 169, 384, 441, 465, 559
Wu, J., 859
Xia, Z., 576
Yablo, S., 351, 356, 367, 574, 1136–
1139
Yamashita, M., 872
Yaq¯ub, A., 405
Yessenin-Volpin, A. S., 559, 561
Zach, R., 415, 418, 425, 428
Zadeh, L., 876, 890
Zalta, E. N., 1070, 1075, 1092
Zeno, 565–571, 576
Zermelo, E., 50, 413–414, 449, 498–
500, 503, 516, 532, 533, 540,
542, 587, 1071
Zermelo’s axiomatization of set
theory, 497
Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZFC),
517, 532, 830, 833, 842, 863,
892, 1071, 1073, 1105, 1107
hyphenation, 1107
operator, 1107
Zimmerman, T. E., 935
Zink, J., 528, 567
Zorn’s lemma, 767

