Philosophers’
Imprint
volume 16, no. 1
january 2016
LOGICALLY SIMPLE
PROPERTIES AND
RELATIONS
Jan Plate
Université de Neuchâtel
© 2016 Jan Plate
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 3.0 License
<www.philosophersimprint.org/016001/>
1.
Introduction
Metaphysicians generally agree that not all predicates are created
equal. In the Parmenides, young Socrates afﬁrms that there are Forms
of the beautiful, the just, and the good, but denies that there is a Form
of hair or of mud. In classical Indian metaphysics, Udayana’s follow-
ers distinguished ‘real’ universals (j¯ati) from those that are merely
‘constructed’ (up¯adhi).1 And in recent Western philosophy, Goodman
(1955) has distinguished projectible from non-projectible predicates,
Armstrong (1978) predicates that correspond to universals from those
that don’t, Shoemaker (1980) genuine from ‘mere Cambridge’ prop-
erties, and David Lewis (1983; 1986) perfectly natural attributes from
those that are less than perfectly natural.2 It is easy to notice that in
each of these distinctions, one of the two respective classes of pred-
icates (or universals, etc.) is in some way privileged. The distinction
that this paper is concerned with also ﬁts into this roster. I shall try to
give an account of it, and offer the beginnings of an argument for the
view that it would make for a viable substitute for Lewis’s distinction
between the perfectly and the less-than-perfectly natural attributes.
Although Lewis’s writings contain various remarks designed to ex-
plain what it is for an attribute to be perfectly natural, he has provided
no ofﬁcial analysis of this notion, and was apparently willing to treat
it as a primitive.3 Those parts of Lewis’s philosophy that make use of
1.
Bartley (2001, 543).
2.
For the sake of brevity, the term ‘attribute’ is here (following Carnap [1942])
used interchangeably with ‘property or relation’, practically regardless of
context. So I shall speak of ‘Lewis’s concept of a perfectly natural attribute’,
irrespective of the fact that (i) Lewis himself tends not to use the word
‘attribute’, and (ii) the conception of attributes operative in this paper is
markedly different from Lewis’s.
3.
Cf. Lewis (1983, 347), (1986, 63). For Lewis’s attempts at explicating perfect
naturalness, see, e.g., his (1983, 346f.), (1986, 60f.), and (2009, 204). As for
taking the notion as a primitive: it is of course possible to take instead the
concept of comparative naturalness as primitive, and then to say that any
given property or relation is perfectly natural just in case no attribute is
more natural than it. However, the difference between the two approaches
will not matter much for our purposes.

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
the notion of a perfectly natural attribute are thereby rendered vulner-
able to the charge of resting on an esoteric and even obscure concept.4
By contrast, there is no reason whatsoever to take the concept of a
logically simple attribute as primitive. Since the account that will here
be given of the distinction between logically simple and complex at-
tributes amounts to an analysis (at least on one understanding of this
term), it will be possible to make non-trivial general claims about log-
ically simple attributes that can be regarded as analytically true, rather
than to be based on speculation and/or complex ‘job descriptions’—i.e.,
descriptions of the different kinds of theoretical work that the respec-
tive concept is supposed to do—that are only questionably satisﬁed.
Inevitably, the account will make use of some primitive notions of its
own, such as those of state of affairs, negation, and conjunction. But I
think that these will not be particularly hard to grasp. Like the concept
of parthood (and despite their technical-sounding names), they seem
to have their origin not so much in arcane metaphysics as in fairly
commonplace thought and talk.5
In the ﬁrst place, then, the concept of a logically simple attribute
is arguably less obscure than Lewis’s concept of perfect naturalness.
In the second place, it promises to be able to do some of the theoreti-
cal work that Lewis has assigned to the latter concept. One of the most
salient examples of this sort of work is provided by the ‘best system’ ac-
count of lawhood, as presented in Lewis’s ‘New Work’ and elsewhere.6
4.
Cf. Taylor (1993) and Witmer, Butchard & Trogdon (2005, 329). The discus-
sions in Schaffer (2004), Ainsworth (2009, §6), and Dorr & Hawthorne (2013)
are also relevant.
5.
This seems fair to say, at any rate, if talk about ‘situations’, ‘goings-
on’, ‘traits’, ‘features’, etc., qualiﬁes as ‘fairly commonplace’. As Russell
(1918/19, §3) discovered, people may not like to admit into their ontologies
states of affairs that are negations or disjunctions of other states of affairs.
But this does not mean that talk of, e.g., the negation of a state of affairs is
unintelligible. If anything, it seems to support the contrary claim.
6.
The account has roots in the work of Mill (1882, bk. 3, ch. 4) and Ramsey
(1928). Lewis’s ﬁrst version of it is given in his (1973, 73), without the reﬁne-
ments introduced in ‘New Work’ and ‘Humean Supervenience Debugged’.
The account has been criticized by, e.g., Tooley (1977), Armstrong (1983),
As is well known, the basic idea of this account is to identify the laws
of nature with the regularities that earn “inclusion in the ideal system”
(op. cit., p. 367), a set of true sentences that is closed under strict im-
plication and which best balances strength (i.e., information content)
and simplicity of axiomatization. As is also well known, this basic idea
faces the objection that maximum strength can be achieved by a very
simple axiom ‘∀x Fx’ if the predicate ‘F’ picks out some condition that
is (i) satisﬁed by all entities in the actual world and (ii) not satisﬁed
by all entities in any other possible world.7 Lewis’s solution to this
problem is to impose a constraint on the primitive vocabulary of the
systems in question: they must be formulated in such a way that each
undeﬁned predicate corresponds to a perfectly natural attribute.8
I want to suggest that this role, which is in Lewis’s account played
by the notion of a perfectly natural attribute, can be proﬁtably assigned,
instead, to the concept of a logically simple attribute. (For the sake of
brevity, the qualiﬁer ‘logically’ will in the following often be omitted.)
At least three reasons render such a move worth considering: First,
Carroll (1994), and Maudlin (2007). Generally sympathetic, though still crit-
ical, discussions can be found in, e.g., Loewer (2007), Cohen & Callender
(2009), and Eddon & Meacham (2015). The account has been endorsed by
Sider (2011, 22f.).
7.
In Lewis’s own words (ibid.): “Given system S, let F be a predicate that
applies to all and only things at worlds where S holds. Take F as primitive,
and axiomatise S (or an equivalent thereof) by the single axiom ∀x Fx.”
Hence one could let S be a system that holds only at the actual world
(thereby making S maximally strong, as well as true), and then let F be a
predicate that applies to all and only the things in the actual world. But
evidently, if we are going to take ‘∀xFx’ as our axiomatization of S, then
we needn’t be so restrictive in our choice of F: it is enough to choose F in
such a way that it is true of all entities in the actual world and not true of
all entities in any other world.
8.
Cf. Lewis (1983, 367f.). An alternative solution, which Lewis also hints at,
is to “replace strict implication by deducibility in some speciﬁed calculus”
(p. 368). He then dismisses it on the ground that it “seems unnecessary
given [the adopted solution], and seems incapable of solving our problem
by itself”. Whether or not this is so, Lewis’s preferred solution certainly
constitutes a natural approach, provided that an ‘elite vocabulary’ of the
sort he envisions is in principle available.
philosophers’ imprint
- 2 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
as already mentioned, the concept of a logically simple attribute is
amenable to analysis, which should alleviate any worries about the
intelligibility of this concept. Second, the account to be offered in this
paper will give the logically simple attributes a legitimate claim to be
regarded as fundamental, owing in part to a strong analogy between
that account and an adequate analysis of mereological simplicity. And
third, the account will allow us to show (on the basis of the framework
to be described in section 2) that the logically simple attributes are in
at least one important way sparse. (We will see in the Conclusion why
this matters.)
Apart from the analysis of lawhood, the concept of a logically sim-
ple attribute may also be usefully employed in the analysis of dupli-
cation. According to Lewis (1986, 61), two entities are duplicates iff
“(1) they have exactly the same perfectly natural properties, and (2)
their parts can be put into correspondence in such a way that corre-
sponding parts have exactly the same perfectly natural properties, and
stand in the same perfectly natural relations”. Here again, the concept
of a perfectly natural attribute can proﬁtably be replaced with that of
a logically simple attribute. For it is plausible to say (though I shall
not argue for it in this paper) that simple attributes are both intrinsic
and purely qualitative (i.e., not ‘impure’). Consequently, if two entities
have exactly the same simple properties and their parts can be put into
correspondence in such a way that corresponding parts have exactly
the same simple properties and stand in the same simple relations,
then those entities will be perfectly alike in their intrinsic qualitative
proﬁles, which in turn makes it plausible to regard them as duplicates.
It is less clear whether the concept of a logically simple attribute
can replace that of a perfectly natural attribute also in all other appli-
cations that Lewis has proposed for the latter. But this need not nec-
essarily speak against the usefulness of our concept, since those pro-
posed applications are not always uncontroversial. It is questionable,
for instance, whether the problem of drawing the distinction between
intrinsic and extrinsic properties is best addressed by relying (as in
Langton & Lewis [1998] and Lewis [2001]) on the notion of naturalness
to sort the ‘disjunctive’ properties from the non-disjunctive ones. And
at any rate, if the concept of a simple attribute can ﬁll the roles that
the concept of a perfectly natural attribute plays in Lewis’s accounts
of lawhood and duplication, it will thereby already be able to do a
considerable amount of important philosophical work—as witness, for
example, the crucial place that the concept of duplication occupies in
Lewis’s (1983, 368f.) counterfactual account of causation. This should
be enough to justify our interest in it.
The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 provides a sketch
of the framework on which the account of logical simplicity will be
based, and section 3 presents the account itself, together with some
results that follow from it, in particular with regard to the sparseness
of the simple attributes. The Conclusion then brieﬂy reﬂects on the
prospects of a best-system account of lawhood in which perfect nat-
uralness is replaced with (logical) simplicity. Since the sketch of the
framework in section 2 is going to form a vital part of the paper, it will
be useful to add here a few remarks on the framework itself.
In a nutshell, the framework consists of a rudimentary ontology of
attributes and states of affairs, together with a formal language whose
main function will be to provide a way of constructing expressions by
which attributes and states of affairs can be referred to, in such a way
that these expressions reveal (to a greater or lesser extent) the ‘logical
structure’ of their respective referents. What is meant by ‘logical struc-
ture’ will become clearer as we go, but it will be worth keeping in mind
that it should not be thought of as anything mereological, except on a
very broad conception of the part–whole relation.9 Another notewor-
thy feature of the framework lies in the fact that it treats attributes and
states of affairs as sui generis, rather than to reduce them, à la Montague
(1969) or Lewis (1986), to set-theoretic constructions over a space of
possible worlds. This departure from possibilist treatments is mainly
motivated by familiar skepticism about possible worlds.10 Instead of
9.
Cf. Fine (2010).
10. In addition, an argument by Eddon (2011) suggests that non-hyperintensional
philosophers’ imprint
- 3 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
an abundance of possible worlds, the framework commits itself to an
abundance of attributes and states of affairs, insofar as it admits states
of affairs that are negations, conjunctions, etc., of other states of affairs,
and allows for attributes to be rather freely ‘generated’ from states of
affairs via λ-abstraction. No detailed defense of this ontology will be
attempted in this paper, but the following two considerations may be
worth ﬂagging.
First, it is true that, if we could assume that attributes in general
(as opposed to this or that subclass of them) are very sparse, so that
no attribute is the negation of any other, or the conjunction of any two
attributes, etc.,11 then we might just say that any attribute whatsoever
is logically simple, and spare ourselves any further trouble of working
out an account of what it is for an attribute to be logically simple. But
the assumption of an extremely sparse ontology of attributes is not
uncontroversial, and so it should be at least somewhat worthwhile to
see how we might make sense of the notion of a (logically) simple
attribute on the assumption of an abundant ontology of attributes.12
conceptions of attributes, such as those of Lewis and Montague, suffer from
the defect of conﬂating intrinsic with extrinsic properties. Her argument can
be straightforwardly adapted to the case of simple vs. complex attributes.
Thus, let P be any property that is had by some set-sized number of entities.
On Lewis’s conception, on which properties are sets of possibilia, P could
then be identiﬁed with the ‘disjunctive’ property of being identical with x1
or with x2 or. . ., where the xi are all the possible entities that have P. On
Montague’s conception, on which properties are functions from possible
worlds to extensions, P could similarly be identiﬁed with the property of
being identical with x1
1 or x2
1 or . . . in w1 or identical with x1
2 or x2
2 or . . . in w2
or. . ., where the wi are all the worlds in which P has a non-empty extension
and, for any given world wi, the xj
i are all the entities that have P in wi.
Since such disjunctive properties do intuitively not count as simple, it thus
appears that a conception of attributes along the lines of Lewis or Montague
forces us to treat all properties (or more precisely, all properties that are
instantiated by a set-sized number of possibilia; this qualiﬁcation is needed
if we cannot have disjunctions of greater-than-set-sized length) as complex.
This consequence may well be considered problematic.
11. See Dorr (2002, §4.2) for a fully explicit formulation of a sparseness claim
of this sort.
12. Also see the related remarks in section 3.1 below.
Of course, this is not a defense of an abundant ontology itself, but
rather only a way of motivating our use of such an ontology.
Second, with a view to actually defending an abundant ontology
of attributes, one might appeal to a deﬂationist meta-ontology, pos-
sibly along the lines of Carnap (1950), Eklund (2008), or Thomasson
(2015). However, rather than to adopt any particular meta-ontological
proposal, I would here only like to venture a very brief remark on how
natural it is to believe in the existence of logically complex attributes.
We can probably all agree that it is extremely natural to believe that
there are mereologically complex things (i.e., things with proper parts),
and that in fact most of the physical objects that we consciously deal
with in our everyday lives are mereologically complex. But now, if one
accepts this view, and moreover allows that there are such things as
properties and relations, then it should seem equally natural to hold
the analogous view that there are logically complex attributes, and
that in fact most of the attributes that we consciously deal with in our
daily thought and talk are logically complex.13 For, just as it would be
highly implausible to think of our utterances of expressions like ‘this
desk’, ‘that watch’, etc., as referring to mereologically simple things, so
it would also be implausible to think of our utterances of expressions
like ‘desk’, ‘watch’, ‘black’, ‘water’, etc., as having as their semantic val-
ues logically simple—i.e., to a very ﬁrst approximation: metaphysically
unanalyzable—attributes.
If this last consideration is correct, it will be all the more worthwhile
to have a clear grasp of what it is for an attribute to be (or to fail to be)
logically complex.
13. The ‘consciously’ should be taken with a grain of salt: roughly, the phrase
is here to be understood in the sense that one consciously deals with an
attribute A at a time t iff one employs at t a concept that corresponds to A,
in the sense of ‘corresponds’ in which, e.g., the concept expressed by ‘is a
horse’ corresponds to the property of being a horse. For example, if I think
of this desk that it is black (making use of the—or a—concept of blackness),
then I thereby consciously deal with the property of being black.
philosophers’ imprint
- 4 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
2.
Sketch of a Framework
2.1
Preliminaries
The framework to be sketched in this section can be thought of as
falling into two parts: on the one hand a rudimentary ontology of at-
tributes and states of affairs, and on the other hand a system of ex-
pressions (a ‘language’) by which attributes and states of affairs can be
referred to.
With regard to the ontology, the main thing to note is that the con-
cept of a state of affairs plays in it an absolutely central role, since
the framework’s commitment to an abundance of attributes depends
directly on its commitment to an abundance of states of affairs (from
which attributes are ‘generated’ by way of λ-abstraction).14 In contrast
to the way in which states of affairs would be conceived of in a possi-
bilist framework, they are here not regarded as set-theoretic construc-
tions over a space of possible worlds. Nor are they in a straightforward
sense taken to be ‘structured’ entities, if this were to mean that each
state of affairs is constructed in one and only one way from the set
of its basic constituents. Instead, to borrow a term from Hodes (1982),
states of affairs are here conceived of as ‘polymorphous’.15
With regard to the formal language, it is worth foreshadowing that
we will use formulas as names of states of affairs,16 while λ-expressions
will be used as names of attributes. Thus, we may for instance use
‘λx (x = x)’ as a name for the property of self-identity, and write
‘(Socrates = Socrates)’ to refer to the state of affairs that Socrates is
Socrates. This goes for the formal language as well as for the ‘meta-
language’ in which this paper is written (i.e., English, modulo certain
additions). Accordingly, formulas and λ-expressions will here function
14. The legitimacy of the notion of a state of affairs has been defended by
a number of philosophers. One way of defending it is along the lines of
Pollock (1967). To defuse potential worries concerning ‘the slingshot argu-
ment’, one could in addition draw on Oppy (1997). There is also, of course,
the need to avoid certain paradoxes, on which see footnote 36 below.
15. For related discussion, see Swoyer (1998, 299f.) and Bynoe (2011).
16. Cf. Suszko (1975).
as noun-phrases: each of them can appear as the subject of a sentence
or as an object of a verb-phrase.17 Something analogous holds for the
formal language, in that formulas and λ-expressions are there allowed
to appear ‘in subject-position’, i.e., as elements of an argument-list.18
In the following subsection, I will ﬁrst describe the formal language,
focusing solely on its syntactic aspects. In section 2.3, I will turn to the
semantics of this language and to the ontological assumptions presup-
posed by the semantics. In section 2.4, I will then state a sufﬁcient
condition for the identity of states of affairs. This condition will be
weak enough to allow for relatively ﬁne-grained distinctions among
states of affairs (as well as attributes), so that the overall framework
can be fairly regarded as ‘hyperintensional’, at least in spirit. (This last
point will be brieﬂy discussed in section 2.5.) Readers who are not
interested in the technical details may wish to read only section 2.3.1
before skipping ahead to section 2.4; the concepts of interpretation and
equivalence introduced there will be relevant throughout section 3.
2.2
The Formal Language
The system of expressions that we will use in order to refer to attributes
and states of affairs is an inﬁnitary version of the standard language
of ﬁrst-order logic, with the following stock of primitive symbols:
1. Variables: italicized letters (lower- or uppercase) of the Latin alpha-
bet, with or without subscripts.
2. Non-logical constants: unitalicized one-word English nouns, singu-
lar verbs (e.g., ‘sleeps’), and adjectives, as well as hyphenated
phrases (such as ‘teacher-of’), with or without subscripts. Hyphen-
ated phrases are introduced on an ad hoc basis.
17. In consequence of this, when expressions of the formal language will be
‘mentioned’ rather than ‘used’, I shall not follow the logicians’ convention
of omitting quotation marks. Rather, single quotes will be used for ‘literal’
quotation (as well as scare quotes), and corner-quotes will be used for quasi-
quotation.
18. For a more detailed deﬁnition, see p. 7 below.
philosophers’ imprint
- 5 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
3. The logical constant ‘I’, which is used to denote the identity relation.
4. The operators ‘¬’, ‘∧’, ‘∃’, and ‘λ’.
5. The parentheses ‘(’ and ‘)’, and the comma.
In addition, we adopt several abbreviatory devices. In particular, for
any terms t1, t2, . . ., the expression ⌜(t1 ∨t2 ∨. . .)⌝will abbreviate
⌜¬(¬t1 ∧¬t2 ∧. . .)⌝, ⌜(t1 →t2)⌝will abbreviate ⌜¬(t1 ∧¬t2)⌝, ⌜(t1 ↔
t2)⌝will abbreviate ⌜(¬(t1 ∧¬t2) ∧¬(¬t1 ∧t2))⌝, and the formula
⌜¬∃v1, v2, . . . ¬ϕ⌝may be abbreviated as ⌜∀v1, v2, . . . ϕ⌝. Finally, the
formula ⌜I(t1, t2)⌝may be written as ⌜(t1 = t2)⌝and the formula
⌜¬I(t1, t2)⌝as ⌜(t1 ̸= t2)⌝. As usual, outermost parentheses may be
omitted.
Since the language is meant to be free from arbitrary restrictions of
expressive power, we allow among other things for inﬁnitely long for-
mulas and an inexhaustible supply of variables. ‘Inexhaustible’ means
here that there are more variables than can be contained in any one
formula. We achieve this by allowing ordinal numbers to play the role
of subscripts. Thus, a subscript of a variable need not be conceived
of as a bona ﬁde symbol but can instead be thought of as an ordinal
number.19 (Of course, to write down a variable that has an ordinal as
a subscript, one will still have to use some symbol or other to rep-
resent the subscript.) Since not just variables but also constants can
have subscripts, we will apply the same policy to the subscripts of con-
stants, and thereby help ourselves to an inexhaustible supply of con-
stants as well. The underlying set theory for all this is ZFCU (Zermelo–
Fraenkel set theory with choice and urelements), supplemented by an
19. In fact, one can go even further and think of all expressions of the for-
mal language as pure sets, in the manner of Gödel codes. The original
Gödel codes—natural numbers used to represent expressions in a ﬁnitary
language of arithmetic—would of course be far too few to serve an analo-
gous purpose in the case of the present inﬁnitary language. The pure sets
present a natural alternative, since, for each set-sized cardinality κ, there
are at least κ-many of them.
open-ended list of large-cardinal axioms.20
Before we proceed, it will be useful to introduce some terminology.
First of all, talk of occurrences and containment, as applied to expres-
sions, should be understood in a sufﬁciently liberal sense that every
expression contains an occurrence of itself and thus, by extension, con-
tains itself. Occurrences should be thought of as ‘bound’ to the expres-
sions that contain them, in the sense that each occurrence is contained
in exactly one expression. By contrast, an occurrence may be contained
in more than one occurrence. Thus, the second occurrence of ‘x’ in the
formula ‘∃x loves(Sam, x)’ is contained in only one expression—viz.,
that same formula—but is contained in two formula-occurrences, viz.,
ﬁrst, the occurrence of ‘∃x loves(Sam, x)’ in itself and, second, the oc-
currence of ‘loves(Sam, x)’ in the former.
The concept of a variable-occurrence’s being bound by a given
operator-occurrence can be deﬁned in the usual way, provided it is
kept in mind that both ‘λ’ and ‘∃’ (and only these) are variable-binding
operators. A variable-occurrence will be said to be bound simpliciter iff
it is bound by some operator-occurrence; otherwise it will be said to
be free. In addition, a variable-occurrence will be said to be bound in
a given expression or occurrence γ iff it is bound by some operator-
occurrence within γ. On this basis, the more general concept of a free
term-occurrence can be introduced as follows: If o is an occurrence of
a term and γ an expression—or occurrence of an expression—that con-
tains o, then o is bound or free in γ according as o does or does not
contain a variable-occurrence that is free in o but bound in γ. In the
special case in which γ is not just an occurrence but rather the unique
expression that contains o, we will say that o is bound or free sim-
pliciter. For example, the ﬁrst but not the second occurrence of ‘F(x)’
in ‘F(x) ∧∃x F(x)’ is free. Another consequence is that occurrences of
constants are always free.
20. In addition, we will occasionally make use of the informal notion of a class.
For more on this, see, e.g., Jech (2002, 5f.).
philosophers’ imprint
- 6 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
We will further say that an occurrence of a term stands at subject-
position just in case it is an element of an argument-list, i.e., of a paren-
thesis-enclosed, comma-delimited list of one or more term-occurrences
that is preceded by an occurrence of an atomic term or λ-expression.21
For example, in the formula ‘loves(x, y)’, the variables ‘x’ and ‘y’ both
occur at subject-position, but the constant ‘loves’ doesn’t. The com-
plementary concept is that of predicate-position: an occurrence of a
term stands at predicate-position just in case it immediately precedes an
argument-list.
The notions of term, formula, and λ-expression can be recursively
introduced as follows:
(T) A term is anything that is a variable, constant, formula, or λ-
expression. (In addition, we call a term atomic iff it is a variable
or constant.)
(F1) An expression ⌜t(t1, t2, . . .)⌝is a formula iff (i) t is a variable, con-
stant, or λ-expression and (ii) t1, t2, . . . are one or more terms.22
21. The notions of term and λ-expression that have been invoked here will
be formally introduced in the next paragraph. This may seem to give rise
to a certain circularity, since the deﬁnition of ‘term’ will make use of the
notions of formula and λ-expression, and the deﬁnitions of ‘formula’ and
‘λ-expression’ will in turn (viz., in (F4) and (L)) make use of the concept
of subject-position. But this circularity is harmless given the recursive char-
acter of these deﬁnitions. Readers who are not convinced may take the
right-hand side of the present deﬁnition of ‘stands at subject-position’ and
insert it at the appropriate places in (F4) and (L) below.
22. Unless otherwise indicated, an ellipsis (i.e., ‘. . .’) is here always used,
roughly speaking, to abbreviate a sequence of arbitrary and possibly in-
ﬁnite length. In particular, (F1) might alternatively have been written as
follows:
(F1′) For any cardinality κ, an expression ⌜t(t1, t2, . . .
|
{z
}
κ-many
)⌝is a formula iff (i) t
is a variable, constant, or λ-expression and (ii) t1, t2, . . .
|
{z
}
κ-many
are one or more
terms.
The same pattern should be applied to (F3), (F4), and (L) below.
(F2) An expression ⌜¬t⌝is a formula iff t is a variable, constant, or for-
mula.
(F3) An expression ⌜(t1 ∧t2 ∧. . .)⌝is a formula iff t1, t2, . . . are two
or more variables, constants, or formulas. (Outermost parentheses
may be omitted.)
(F4) An expression ⌜∃v1, v2, . . . ϕ⌝is a formula iff v1, v2, . . . are one or
more pairwise distinct variables and ϕ is a formula such that, for
each vi (with i = 1, 2, . . .): vi has at least one free occurrence in ϕ,
and each free occurrence of vi in ϕ stands at subject-position.
(F5) Every formula belongs to one of the four types of expression de-
scribed in (F1)–(F4).
(F6) Every formula is of only ﬁnite ‘depth’, as measured by the number
of its levels of parentheses.23
(L) A λ-expression is any expression ⌜(λv1, v2, . . . ϕ)⌝, where ϕ is a for-
mula and v1, v2, . . . are one or more pairwise distinct variables such
that, for each vi (with i = 1, 2, . . .): vi has at least one free occurrence
in ϕ, and each free occurrence of vi in ϕ stands at subject-position.
(The parentheses may be omitted if the λ-expression does not stand
in predicate-position.)
For example, the expression ‘λx, y loves(x, y)’ is a λ-expression, but
‘λx, y loves(x, x)’, ‘λx ¬x’, and ‘λx, y x(y)’ are not. By (F4), analogous
restrictions hold for quantiﬁed formulas (i.e., formulas beginning with
‘∃’ or ‘¬∃’).24
23. For example: the depth of ‘x’ is 0, the depth of ‘P(x)’ is 1, and the depth of
‘(P(x) ∧Q(x))’ is 2.
24. Cf. (F4) above. The restriction that λ-variables should occur only in subject-
position has a precedent in Menzel (1993) and is in part motivated by the
need to avoid semantic paradox. (Cf. below, footnote 36.) While the restric-
tion is not arbitrary, it still implies a signiﬁcant limitation of expressive
power. E.g., the property of being an instantiated property might, if it exists,
be perspicuously denoted by an expression ‘λP ∃x P(x)’; but in the present
framework that expression would be ill-formed. So it may be desirable to
philosophers’ imprint
- 7 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
With the help of the concepts just introduced, we can now deﬁne
two further concepts that will be useful below:
• If ⌜λv1, v2, . . . ϕ⌝is a λ-expression, then the formula ϕ will be re-
ferred to as the body or matrix of that expression, while v1, v2, . . .
will be referred to as its λ-variables.
• A term-occurrence o will be said to stand at sentence-position iff o
does not stand in predicate-position and at least one of the follow-
ing three conditions is satisﬁed:
(i) o is preceded by an occurrence of ‘¬’.
(ii) o precedes or is preceded by an occurrence of ‘∧’.25
(iii) o is preceded, for some variables v1, v2, . . ., by an occurrence of
either ⌜∃v1, v2, . . .⌝or ⌜λv1, v2, . . .⌝.
As can be seen from the above deﬁnitions of ‘formula’ and ‘λ-
expression’, the present language deviates in a number of respects
from the ordinary language of ﬁrst-order logic. In particular, the fol-
lowing points are worth noting:
• Formulas and λ-expressions can occur in subject-position.
• There is no distinction between individual constants and predicates.
• The language is inﬁnitary in the following respects: it allows for
inﬁnitely long argument-lists and inﬁnitely long conjunctions, and
occurrences of ‘∃’ and ‘λ’ can bind inﬁnitely many variables.
• Variables can appear in sentence- and predicate-position (and so
expressions like ‘¬x’, ‘x(y)’, and even ‘x(y(z))’ all count as formu-
las), even though the language does not allow for quantiﬁcation into
extend the framework in a way that somehow circumvents the mentioned
restriction while at the same time avoiding paradox.
25. Note that ‘∨’, ‘→’, and ‘≡’ have been introduced as merely abbreviatory
devices, and need therefore not be dealt with separately at this point.
predicate- or sentence-position.
To make the last point more palatable, it is helpful to observe, ﬁrst
of all, that it makes perfectly good sense to allow constants to appear
in sentence- as well as in predicate-position. For example, if a con-
stant c denotes a certain state of affairs s, then it is natural to treat
⌜¬c⌝as denoting the negation of s. Second, there seems to be no com-
pelling reason to treat the syntax of variables any differently from that
of constants, except that variables but not constants can be bound by
variable-binding operators. Hence, it is natural to allow variables to
appear—just like constants—in both predicate- and sentence-position,
regardless of whether it is possible to quantify into either of these two
kinds of position.26
2.3
Semantics and Ontology
2.3.1
Identity, interpretations, and variable-assignments
We begin with an ontological assumption concerning the relation of
identity, to which we add a corresponding ‘meaning-postulate’:
(O1) There exists exactly one dyadic relation of identity, aka the identity
relation.
(M1) For any entities x and y, the instantiation of the identity relation by
x and y obtains iff x is numerically the same entity as y.
The notions of relation, instantiation, and obtainment that are used
in these two statements will be introduced shortly (in section 2.3.2).
26. To be sure, if a constant does not denote a state of affairs, it will admittedly
make little sense to have it occur in sentence-position. This is for instance
reﬂected in the fact that, under the semantics speciﬁed in the next subsec-
tion, the formula ⌜¬c⌝is denotationless relative to any interpretation under
which c does not denote a state of affairs. Formulas are thus allowed to lack
a denotation, and the same goes for λ-expressions. (This is another respect
in which the present language differs from that of classical logic.) Further-
more, since we allow for denotationless formulas, there is no compelling
reason to prohibit denotationless constants, and nor do we prohibit them.
An adequate logic for the present language would therefore have to be a
version of free logic.
philosophers’ imprint
- 8 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
The reason why (O1) and (M1) are presented at this early stage, rather
than only after these concepts have been properly introduced, lies in
the fact that the existence of the identity relation is presupposed by the
following deﬁnition of ‘interpretation’:
(I) An interpretation is any partial function (understood as a set of or-
dered pairs) from constants to entities that maps the constant ‘I’ to
the identity relation.
In other words, an interpretation is any set S of ordered pairs such that
(i) for any ordered pair (x, y) ∈S, x is a constant, and (ii) S contains the
pair (‘I’, I), where I is the identity relation.27 Similarly (though more
straightforwardly), we will say that a variable-assignment is any partial
function from variables to entities.
In the following, all talk of denotation should be understood as
relativized to an interpretation and a variable-assignment. That is, it
should be kept in mind that terms in general have or lack a denota-
tion only relative to an interpretation and variable-assignment. This
relativization will often be left implicit. By way of abbreviation, if ‘I’
refers to an interpretation and ‘g’ to a variable-assignment, we will
write ‘A denotesI,g B’ to mean the same as ‘A denotes B relative to I
and g’. With this notation in hand, we can formulate our ﬁrst semantic
stipulation:
(S1) A constant or variable α has a denotation relative to an interpreta-
tion I and a variable-assignment g iff α is in the domain of either I
27. Traditionally, interpretations are allowed to vary not only with respect to
the denotations they assign to non-logical constants, but also with respect
to the domains of quantiﬁcation they assign to the primitive quantiﬁer(s) of
the respective language. This complication is here omitted. Instead, any oc-
currence of the quantiﬁer ‘∃’ is in the present framework intended to range
over everything there is. (This quantiﬁcation is to be understood as unre-
stricted; we can leave it open, however, whether it should also be under-
stood as ‘absolutely general’. On the question of absolutely general quan-
tiﬁcation, cf. the essays collected in Rayo & Uzquiano [2006], as well as, e.g.,
Williamson [2003] and Studd [2015].)
or g. In this case, α denotesI,g the entity to which it is mapped by
either I (if it is a constant) or g (if it is a variable).
Finally, if two expressions denote the same entity relative to an inter-
pretation I and a variable-assignment g, we will say that these expres-
sions are coreferential relative to I and g, or more brieﬂy: coreferentialI,g.
2.3.2
Instantiations
The ﬁrst class of states of affairs that we have to be concerned with
is that of instantiations of attributes. A typical example is the instantia-
tion by Hypatia (or alternatively: Hypatia’s instantiation) of the prop-
erty of being human, i.e., the state of affairs that Hypatia is human.
Like other states of affairs, instantiations may exist even if they do
not obtain. Thus, if we say that there exists the state of affairs that
Hypatia is human, this should not be read as implying that Hypa-
tia is human. To imply the latter, one would rather have to say that
the state of affairs in question obtains. More generally, if A is an at-
tribute and x1, x2, . . . are entities, we will say that x1, x2, . . . (in this
order) instantiate A iff the instantiation of A by x1, x2, . . . obtains. The
concepts of instantiation and obtainment that are used here will be
treated as primitive, as will the concept of a state of affairs; nonethe-
less we shall below adopt a ‘meaning-postulate’ that aims to clarify the
concept of instantiation by stipulating that each instantiation is a state
of affairs.28 Finally, the locution ‘instantiation of . . . by . . .’ should be
read as referentially transparent. Thus, if the expressions ε1, ε2, ε3, . . .
respectively refer to the same entities as the expressions ζ1, ζ2, ζ3, . . .,
then the predicate ⌜is an instantiation of ε1 by ε2, ε3, . . . ⌝will be coex-
tensive with ⌜is an instantiation of ζ1 by ζ2, ζ3, . . .⌝.
28. It might be wondered why this postulate makes no use of modal notions.
(In particular, it might be wondered why it does not state that necessar-
ily, every instantiation is a state of affairs. Analogous questions can be
raised about the other meaning-postulates in this section, starting with (M1)
above.) Brieﬂy put, the reason is that modal notions are in my view to be
explicated on the basis of logical concepts (together with a concept of a
state of affairs and a concept of essence), rather than vice versa.
philosophers’ imprint
- 9 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
On the basis of the concept of instantiation, we can deﬁne the no-
tion of an attribute as well as that of a κ-adic attribute, where κ is any
cardinal number greater than zero. In particular, we will say that some-
thing is an attribute iff it has an instantiation, and that an attribute A
is κ-adic (or alternatively: that κ is an adicity of A) iff there exists an
instantiation of A by some (not necessarily distinct) entities x1, x2, . . .
|
{z
}
κ-many
.
To avoid this two-dimensional notation, we may alternatively say that
an attribute A is κ-adic iff A has an instantiation by a sequence of en-
tities of length κ: these two deﬁnitions should be read as notational
variants of each other. The notions of property and relation can now
be (re-)deﬁned as follows: a property is any monadic attribute, and a
relation is any attribute that has an adicity greater than one.
In the next step, we can formulate our main ontological assumption
regarding instantiations of attributes, accompanied by the meaning-
postulate already hinted at:
(O2) For any κ-adic attribute A and any sequence of length κ of entities
x1, x2, . . ., there exists exactly one instantiation of A by x1, x2, . . . (in
this order).
(M2) Every instantiation is a state of affairs.
Further, we adopt the following stipulation with respect to the seman-
tics of formulas (more will be added below):
(S2) A formula ⌜t(t1, t2, . . .
|
{z
}
κ-many
)⌝has a denotation relative to an interpreta-
tion I and a variable-assignment g iff t denotesI,g a κ-adic attribute
A and the terms t1, t2, . . . respectively denoteI,g (not necessarily dis-
tinct) entities x1, x2, . . . . In this case, the formula denotesI,g the in-
stantiation of A by x1, x2, . . . (in this order).
For example, suppose that ‘human’ is a constant denotingI,g the prop-
erty of being human, and that ‘Hypatia’ is a constant denotingI,g Hy-
patia. Then the formula ‘human(Hypatia)’ will denoteI,g Hypatia’s in-
stantiation of the property of being human.
In connection with instantiations, and more generally concerning
the relationship between attributes and states of affairs, we will make
three additional assumptions. Like (M2), these may also best be re-
garded as meaning-postulates, since they help to specify how the rele-
vant technical terms are to be understood:29
(P1) For any attribute A, there exists at least one cardinal number κ ≥1
such that A is κ-adic.
(P2) No attribute has more than one adicity.30
(P3) If A and B are two κ-adic attributes, then there exists at least one
sequence of length κ of entities x1, x2, . . . such that the instantiation
of A by x1, x2, . . . (in this order) is distinct from the instantiation of
B by x1, x2, . . . (in this order).
In a nutshell, this last postulate states that no attribute shares all its
instantiations with any other. Obviously this allows that two attributes
29. The present usage of the word ‘assumption’ is fairly inclusive, covering any
sort of postulate as well as assumptions in the ordinary sense of the word.
30. This postulate has something of a predecessor in Armstrong’s (1978, 94)
Principle of Instantial Invariance: “For all n, if a universal is n-adic with re-
spect to a particular instantiation, then it is n-adic with respect to all its
instantiations”. (Note, however, that Armstrong’s concept of an instantia-
tion refers only to obtaining states of affairs, whereas the present concept is
more general in that it also applies to non-obtaining states of affairs.)
It is true that (P2) denies the existence of ‘multigrade attributes’, such as
might be thought to correspond to predicates like ‘is surrounded by’ or ‘are
arranged in a circle’, and it is also true that the existence of multigrade at-
tributes cannot easily be ruled out a priori (cf. MacBride [2005, §2]; the same
goes for what MacBride calls ‘varigrade relations’). However, I think that
there is little positive reason to complicate our ontology by the admission
of such attributes. As far as I can see, we do not lose anything of substance
if we say that multigrade predicates fail to correspond to attributes, pro-
vided that we can draw on the resources of set theory. For example, instead
of postulating some multigrade relation allegedly expressed by the verb ‘is
surrounded by’, we can make do with the dyadic relation that is instan-
tiated by an entity x and a set Y just in case (say) each possible route of
escape for x is blocked by some member of Y.
philosophers’ imprint
- 10 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
may share some of their instantiations. For instance, if R is a non-
symmetric relation and x some entity, then the property of bearing R to
x is plausibly distinct from the property of being borne R to by x, and
yet the instantiation by x of the ﬁrst property may well be identical
with x’s instantiation of the second.31
2.3.3
Conjunction and negation
Apart from instantiations of attributes, we also assume that there are
negations and conjunctions of states of affairs. As in the case of (O2),
the relevant ontological assumptions are accompanied by meaning-
postulates and stipulations regarding the semantics of formulas:
(O3) For any state of affairs s, there exists exactly one negation of s.
(M3) For any state of affairs s, a negation of s is a state of affairs that
obtains iff s does not obtain.
(S3) A formula ⌜¬t⌝has a denotation relative to an interpretation I and
a variable-assignment g iff t denotesI,g a state of affairs s. In this
case, the formula denotesI,g the negation of s.
(O4) For any states of affairs s1, s2, . . ., there exists exactly one conjunc-
tion of them.
(M4) For any states of affairs s1, s2, . . ., a conjunction of them is a state of
affairs that obtains iff each one of the si (with i = 1, 2, . . .) obtains.
(S4) A formula ⌜t1 ∧t2 ∧. . .⌝has a denotation relative to an interpre-
tation I and a variable-assignment g iff each one of the ti (with
i = 1, 2, . . .) denotesI,g a state of affairs si. In this case, the formula
denotesI,g the conjunction of the si.
In interpreting these statements, it should be kept in mind that
the locutions ‘negation of . . .’ and ‘conjunction of . . .’ are referentially
transparent. For example, if the expressions ε and ζ refer to the same
31. In fact, in the present framework, x’s instantiation of the ﬁrst property is
identical with its instantiation of the second. (Cf. p. 15 below.)
state of affairs, then the predicate ⌜is a negation of ε⌝will be coexten-
sive with ⌜is a negation of ζ⌝; and analogously for ‘conjunction of’.
2.3.4
Quantiﬁcation
We further assume the existence of ‘quantiﬁcational’ states of affairs:
(O5) For any attribute A, there exists an existential quantiﬁcation of A.
(M5) For any attribute A, an existential quantiﬁcation of A obtains iff there
exist some entities x1, x2, . . . that instantiate A.
(S5) A formula ⌜∃v1, v2, . . . ϕ⌝has a denotation relative to an in-
terpretation I and a variable-assignment g iff the λ-expression
⌜λv1, v2, . . . ϕ⌝denotesI,g an attribute. In this case, the formula
denotesI,g the existential quantiﬁcation of that attribute.
The locution ‘existential quantiﬁcation of . . .’ should of course be taken
to be referentially transparent.
It is tempting to read ‘∃’ as ‘there exists’ and, correspondingly, to in-
terpret quantiﬁed formulas as formal counterparts of existence claims
in English. This would not be entirely correct. For instance, suppose
it is stipulated that I be an interpretation that assigns to the constant
‘Pegasus’ the same entity (if any) that the word ‘Pegasus’ refers to
in English. (In addition, let g be an arbitrary variable-assignment.)
Then, assuming that ‘Pegasus’ does not in fact refer to anything in
English, no entity will under I be assigned to that constant, and con-
sequently, by (S1), ‘Pegasus’ will not have a denotation relative to I
and g. By (S2), (S3), and (S5), it will further follow that the formula
‘¬∃x (x = Pegasus)’ does not denoteI,g anything and accordingly fails
to be true relative to I and g, despite its being apparently true in En-
glish that “Pegasus doesn’t exist”.32 This should not be considered a
defect, however, since it has not been our aim that the semantics of
the existential quantiﬁer should in all respects conform to the ordinary
usage of ‘exists’.33
32. For the relevant deﬁnition of ‘truth’, see p. 13 below.
33. For related discussion, see, e.g., Plantinga (1974, ch. 8) and Ray (2014).
philosophers’ imprint
- 11 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
2.3.5
λ-Abstraction
We now turn to the semantics of λ-expressions. To formulate the rele-
vant stipulation, it will be useful to have some notation for the modiﬁ-
cation of variable-assignments. Thus, if g is some variable-assignment,
v1, v2, . . . are κ-many pairwise distinct variables, and x1, x2, . . . κ-many
pairwise distinct entities, we will write ‘g[x1/v1, x2/v2, . . .]’ to refer to
the variable-assignment that is just like g except that v1 is mapped to
x1, v2 is mapped to x2, and so on. With this notation in hand, we can
stipulate that
(S6) A λ-expression ⌜λ v1, v2, . . .
|
{z
}
κ-many
ϕ⌝has a denotation relative to an inter-
pretation I and a variable-assignment g iff there exists a sequence of
length κ of entities x1, x2, . . . such that ϕ has a denotation relative to
I and g[x1/v1, x2/v2, . . .]. In this case, the λ-expression denotesI,g a
κ-adic attribute A such that, for any sequence of length κ of entities
y1, y2, . . ., the instantiation of A by y1, y2, . . . (in this order) is the
state of affairs that is relative to I and g[y1/v1, y2/v2, . . .] denoted
by ϕ.34
Note that the second sentence (“In this case...”) implies an ontological
assumption about the abundance of attributes.35 To illustrate the im-
port of this assumption, let ϕ be the formula ‘black(x) ∧horse(x)’, let
34. The existence of such a state of affairs is guaranteed by our ontological as-
sumptions and the recursive semantics of formulas (including (S6) itself),
together with the fact that (i) by hypothesis, there exists at least one se-
quence of entities x1, x2, . . . such that ϕ has a denotation relative to I and
g[x1/v1, x2/v2, . . .] and (ii) by the syntax of λ-expressions, the variables
v1, v2, . . . occur in ϕ only at subject-position. (To see the relevance of this
latter restriction, note that, by (S2), a formula ⌜t(u)⌝has a denotation rela-
tive to a given interpretation I and variable-assignment g only if t denotesI,g
a property. So, if ϕ were a formula ⌜t(u)⌝, where u is some term and t is one
of the vi, then it would not be the case that for every κ-sequence y1, y2, . . .,
there exists a state of affairs that is relative to I and g[y1/v1, y2/v2, . . .]
denoted by ϕ.)
35. To have a label for it, call it ‘(O6)’. I trust that there is no need to write up
(O6) separately from (S6), since it can be straightforwardly derived from
the latter.
I be an interpretation that maps the constant ‘black’ to the property of
being black and the constant ‘horse’ to the property of being a horse, and
let g be a variable-assignment that maps the variable ‘x’ to some entity
x. Then ϕ denotesI,g the state of affairs that x is a black horse. By the
second sentence of (S6), it now follows that there exists a monadic at-
tribute (in other words, a property) A whose instantiation by any given
entity y is the state of affairs that y is a black horse. Moreover, by (P3)
(p. 10 above), there exists only one such attribute. It will thus be appro-
priate to refer to A as ‘the property of being a black horse’. This point
generalizes to all other λ-expressions, and in this way it is guaranteed
that each denoting λ-expression has a deﬁnite referent.36
36. In connection with the need to avoid paradox, it may be worth elaborating
brieﬂy on what (S6) does not entail. In particular, due to the restriction that
the variables v1, v2, . . . should occur in ϕ only at subject-position, one of the
things that do not follow from (S6) is the existence of a property P such
that, for any entity x, the instantiation of P by x is identical with x itself. In
other words, it does not follow from (S6) that there exists what one might
call a property of obtainment, which (if our formation rule for λ-expressions
had been more liberal) might have been denoted by ‘λx x’. Likewise, it does
not follow from (S6):
• that there exists a property of non-self-instantiation, which might have
been denoted by ‘λx ¬x(x)’ and whose existence would have given rise
to a form of Russell’s paradox;
• that there exists, for any state of affairs s, a property of being a property
that instantiates itself only if s obtains, which might have been denoted by
⌜λx (x(x) →ϕ)⌝(where ϕ is a formula that denotes s and in which
‘x’ does not occur free) and whose existence would have given rise to a
form of Curry’s paradox;
• that there exists a property, which might have been denoted by
‘λx ∃P (¬P(x) ∧(x = ∀y P(y)))’, of being an entity x such that, for some
property P, it is both the case that x does not have P and that x is the state
of affairs that everything has P, whose existence would have threatened to
give rise to a version of the Russell–Myhill paradox. (I say ‘threatened’
because the paradox requires the premise, which our framework in its
present form does not provide, that no two properties P and Q are such
that the state of affairs ∀x P(x) is identical with ∀x Q(x).)
Finally, it does not follow from (S6) that, for every arbitrary subclass of
some more-than-set-sized collection (such as the ordinals), there exists the
property of being a member of that subclass, which would have given rise to
philosophers’ imprint
- 12 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
With the help of λ-expressions, one can easily deﬁne concepts
of negation, conjunction, and disjunction that apply to attributes.
Thus, if A is a κ-adic attribute, then the likewise κ-adic attribute
λx1, x2, . . . ¬A(x1, x2, . . .) will be referred to as the negation of A,
and may also be written as ‘∼A’.37 Further, if A1, A2, . . . are some
attributes, all of the same adicity, then λx1, x2, . . .
 A1(x1, x2, . . .) ∧
A2(x1, x2, . . .) ∧. . .

will be referred to as the conjunction of those at-
tributes, and λx1, x2, . . .
 A1(x1, x2, . . .) ∨A2(x1, x2, . . .) ∨. . .

as their
disjunction. The conjunction may also be written as ‘A1 & A2 & . . .’, and
the disjunction as ‘A1 v A2 v . . .’. Finally, if A and B are two κ-adic
attributes, then ‘(A ≡B)’ may be used as a name for the attribute
λx1, x2, . . .
 A(x1, x2, . . .) ↔B(x1, x2, . . .)

.
2.4
Coarse-Grainedness
We now have to add one more postulate, which will state a sufﬁcient
condition for the identity of states of affairs. Although it will superﬁ-
cially apply only to states of affairs, it will also have consequences for
the individuation of attributes.
To formulate this postulate, we will require some additional termi-
nology. First, a term will be said to be semantically well-formed iff there
exist an interpretation and a variable-assignment relative to which it
has a denotation. Second, a formula will be said to be true (false) rel-
ative to a particular interpretation I and variable-assignment g iff it
denotesI,g an obtaining (non-obtaining) state of affairs. Relatedly, a for-
mula will be said to be logically true iff it is true relative to every in-
cardinality-related worries not unlike the paradoxes discussed by Kaplan
(1995) and Uzquiano (2015).
37. The use of λ-expressions for the purpose of denoting relations has been
criticized by Peter van Inwagen, who claims that “we do not understand
abstraction names of dyadic relations unless those relations are symmet-
rical” (2006, 468). I agree with this assessment insofar as I think that our
understanding of relations in general—symmetrical and otherwise—could
stand improvement. (For relevant discussion, see, e.g., Fine [2000] and Dorr
[2004].) But fortunately, no deep understanding of the general metaphysics
of relations will be needed for the purposes of this paper.
terpretation and variable-assignment. A concept of entailment suitable
for our purposes can now be deﬁned as follows:
(E) A formula ϕ entails a formula ψ iff ϕ is semantically well-formed
and, for any interpretation I and variable-assignment g, the follow-
ing two conditions are satisﬁed:
(i) If ϕ has a denotation relative to I and g, then so does ψ.
(ii) If ϕ is true relative to I and g, then so is ψ.
As usual, two formulas ϕ and ψ will be said to be equivalent iff they
entail each other.38
It may be instructive to consider in some detail how it follows from
our assumptions that any formula ϕ is equivalent to its double nega-
tion ⌜¬¬ϕ⌝. To this end, let I and g be any interpretation and variable-
assignment. If ϕ has relative to I and g any denotation at all, it will
denoteI,g a state of affairs, as can be seen from the formation rules in
section 2.2 together with the semantic stipulations (S1)–(S6) and the
meaning-postulates (M1)–(M5). (For example, (S2) and (M2) together
entail that a formula ⌜t(t1, t2, . . .)⌝denotes, if anything, a state of af-
fairs.) On the other hand, if ϕ does not denoteI,g anything, then it fol-
lows from (S3) that ⌜¬¬ϕ⌝will not denoteI,g anything, either; and vice
versa. So we now only have to consider the case in which ϕ denotesI,g
a state of affairs s. From (S3), it then follows that ⌜¬¬ϕ⌝denotesI,g the
negation of the negation of s, which, by (M3), obtains iff the negation
of s fails to obtain. But, again by (M3), the negation of s fails to obtain
iff s itself obtains. So the negation of the negation of s obtains iff s itself
38. The present concept of entailment is to some extent related to William
Parry’s (1933; 1972) concept of analytic implication as well as to Casimir
Lewy’s (1976) concept of analytic entailment. (Thanks here to Kit Fine.) To
see the analogy to Parry’s concept, one has to bear in mind the constraints
that (S1)–(S6) impose on a given term’s having a denotation relative to a
given interpretation and variable-assignment. Under these constraints, and
given clause (i) of (E), a formula can entail another only if the second for-
mula does not contain any free occurrence of any variable or non-logical
constant that does not also have a free occurrence in the ﬁrst.
philosophers’ imprint
- 13 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
does. Consequently, if ϕ has a denotation relative to I and g, then ϕ is
true relative to I and g if and only if ⌜¬¬ϕ⌝is. This argument gener-
alizes to any interpretation and variable-assignment, and so it follows
that ϕ is equivalent to ⌜¬¬ϕ⌝.
Using the concept of equivalence introduced above, we can now
formulate our postulate as follows:
(P4) For any states of affairs s and t, for any interpretation I and variable-
assignment g, and for any formulas ϕ and ψ: if s and t are respec-
tively denotedI,g by ϕ and ψ, and ϕ is equivalent to ψ, then s is
identical with t.
In other words, no two states of affairs are denoted (relative to the
same interpretation and variable-assignment) by equivalent formulas.
This stipulation is motivated by the thought that states of affairs are in
a certain sense ‘worldly’: they are states of affairs, not mere represen-
tations of affairs—just as properties are ways for things to be, and not
ways for things to be described. This ‘worldly’ aspect of the present
conception of states of affairs (and attributes) calls for an identity crite-
rion under which states of affairs are individuated in as coarse-grained
a manner as possible. Correspondingly, it calls for as strong a version
of (P4) as possible. Certain limiting considerations, however, favor the
present version of (P4) over its even stronger alternatives. Consider
for instance Socrates’ self-identity, i.e., the state of affairs that Socrates
is self-identical, or in symbols, (Socrates = Socrates): intuitively, it
seems absurd to say that this state of affairs is identical with Plato’s
self-identity. But the formulas ‘Socrates = Socrates’ and ‘Plato = Plato’
are classically equivalent and denote, relative to a suitable interpreta-
tion and variable-assignment, the two states of affairs just mentioned.
Hence, a strengthened version of (P4), according to which no two states
of affairs are denoted by classically equivalent formulas, would have
had the intuitively absurd consequence that Socrates’ self-identity is
the same as Plato’s.
For another example, consider on the one hand the state of affairs
that everything black is black and, on the other, the state of affairs
that every horse is a horse. Relative to a suitable interpretation and
variable-assignment, these states of affairs are respectively denoted
by ‘∀x (black(x) →black(x))’ and ‘∀x (horse(x) →horse(x))’. But
these two formulas are again classically equivalent, and so, under the
strengthened version of (P4) mentioned in the previous paragraph, the
state of affairs that everything black is black counts as identical with
the state of affairs that every horse is a horse. This consequence, too, is
intuitively absurd,39 and it is avoided by (P4) only due to its reliance
on the non-classical concept of entailment deﬁned in (E).40
A noteworthy corollary of (P4) is the thesis that all logically true
formulas, such as ‘I = I’ and ‘∀x (x = x)’, denote one and the same
state of affairs, given that all logical truths are equivalent. This con-
sequence may at ﬁrst seem unpalatable: shouldn’t the self-identity of
the identity relation be distinct from the state of affairs that everything
is self-identical? This is a natural doubt to have if one focuses on the
syntactic difference between the two expressions. However, given the
39. That is, as long as it is granted that horsehood and blackness are not ana-
lyzable in terms of each other, which, at least prima facie, seems to be a safe
assumption. (On the notion of analyzability, see section 3.5 below.)
40. In view of the relative complexity of (E), it may be wondered whether we
might not instead have adopted a simpler concept of entailment, which
could have been deﬁned as follows:
(E∗) A formula ϕ entails a formula ψ iff ϕ is semantically well-formed and,
for every interpretation I and variable-assignment g, the following con-
dition is satisﬁed: if ϕ is true relative to I and g, then so is ψ.
Although this deﬁnition is simpler than (E), it should arguably not be pre-
ferred, since it conﬂicts with the intuition that Socrates’ self-identity is dis-
tinct from Plato’s. To see this, suppose we had adopted (E∗) instead of (E).
This would in the ﬁrst place have had the result that any two semantically
well-formed formulas that denote an obtaining state of affairs relative to
no interpretation and variable-assignment, such as ‘¬I(Socrates, Socrates)’
and ‘¬I(Plato, Plato)’, would have counted as equivalent. Hence, the non-
self-identity of Socrates would under (P4) have counted as identical with
the non-self-identity of Plato. But by (O3), we would then have had to say
that the negation of Socrates’ non-self-identity is identical with the nega-
tion of the non-self-identity of Plato. By (S3) and (P4), which allow us to
remove double negation signs, it would ﬁnally have followed that Socrates’
self-identity is identical with Plato’s, contradicting the mentioned intuition.
philosophers’ imprint
- 14 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
‘worldly’ aspect of the present conception of states of affairs, it would
be less misleading to focus instead on what the truth of the respective
formula ‘requires of the world’.41 And in the relevant sense, the truth
neither of ‘I = I’ nor of ‘∀x (x = x)’ requires anything of the world;
and so they should not be taken to denote distinct states of affairs.42
By contrast, the truth of ‘Socrates = Socrates’ requires the existence of
Socrates but not that of Plato, and the truth of ‘Plato = Plato’ requires
the existence of Plato but not that of Socrates.
By stating a sufﬁcient condition for the identity of states of affairs,
(P4) provides a sufﬁcient condition for the identity of attributes as well.
Thus, let A and B be any κ-adic attributes, and suppose that, relative
to some interpretation I and variable-assignment g, A and B are re-
spectively denoted by the λ-expressions L1 and L2, where, for some
κ-many variables v1, v2, . . . and two equivalent formulas ϕ and ψ, L1 is
identical with ⌜λv1, v2, . . . ϕ⌝and L2 is identical with ⌜λv1, v2, . . . ψ⌝.
In addition, let y1, y2, . . .
|
{z
}
κ-many
be some arbitrary (and not necessarily dis-
tinct) entities. By (S6), we then have that A’s instantiation by y1, y2, . . .
(in this order) is the state of affairs denoted by ϕ relative to I and
g[y1/v1, y2/v2, . . .]. Analogously, B’s instantiation by y1, y2, . . . will be
the state of affairs denoted by ψ relative to I and g[y1/v1, y2/v2, . . .].
By (P4), given that ϕ and ψ are equivalent, it now follows that these
states of affairs are one and the same. But y1, y2, . . . was an arbitrary
κ-sequence of entities. So, for any κ-sequence of entities, A’s instantia-
tion by that sequence is the same as B’s. Hence, by (P3), A is identical
with B.
41. Talk of ‘what is required of the world’ plays a prominent role in, e.g., Rayo
(2008; 2009; 2013) and Williams (2010; 2012).
42. If we were what Rayo (2009) calls ‘traditional Platonists’, we should say
that the truth neither of ‘I = I’ nor of ‘∀x (x = x)’ requires anything of the
world other than the existence of the identity relation. (For recall that ‘∀x (x =
x)’ is shorthand for ‘¬∃x ¬I(x, x)’, and would thus not have a denotation
if ‘I’ did not denote a dyadic relation.) But it would then still turn out that
these two formulas do not differ from each other with respect to what their
truth requires.
2.5
Hyperintensionality
An assumption vaguely similar to (P4) can already be found in Witt-
genstein’s Tractatus: “If p follows from q and q from p, they are one and
the same proposition” (5.141).43 As long as the ‘follows from’ in this
assertion is understood in the relatively weak sense of classical entail-
ment, the corresponding conception of propositions will be (merely) in-
tensional rather than hyperintensional. By contrast, (P4) is compatible
with a hyperintensional conception of states of affairs (and thus also of
attributes), given that it employs a stronger notion of entailment and
thereby leaves open the possibility that classically equivalent formulas
may denote distinct states of affairs.44
To be sure, the fact that our postulate allows for such ﬁner-grained
distinctions does not yet mean that the present framework also com-
mits us to them. For example, it does not commit us to the claim that
Socrates’ self-identity is distinct from Plato’s. For this reason, it may in
the end not be appropriate to call the present framework hyperinten-
sional ‘in letter’, but it certainly is in spirit. For, by employing a concept
of equivalence that is stronger than that of classical logic, (P4) is delib-
erately formulated in such a way as to make room for distinctions of
the (relatively) ﬁne-grained sort just alluded to. The framework could
be easily rendered hyperintensional also ‘in letter’ by adding to it a
further postulate that entails at least some such distinctions. The task
of formulating such a postulate will here be left for another occasion.45
43. Other authors who have adopted assumptions similar to (P4) include Car-
nap (1942, 92), Hacking (1967, 165), Stalnaker (1976, 72f.), Pollock (1984, 54),
and Olson (1987, 91). Alvin Plantinga appears tacitly to assume a related
principle—which, in his terminology, could be stated as, ‘No two states of
affairs include each other’—when he argues (1974, §4.1) that there is at most
one actual world.
44. Usually, the contrast between ‘merely intensional’ and ‘hyperintensional’ is
not spelled out with the help of the contrast between classical and non-
classical concepts of entailment, but rather (at least in part) with the help
of modal notions. (For example, see Cresswell [1975, 25] and Nolan [2014,
151].) However, this difference does not matter for present purposes.
45. For the relevance of the present non-classical concept of entailment for the
project of this paper, see footnote 60 below (p. 23).
philosophers’ imprint
- 15 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
3.
Simple Attributes
We are now in a position to approach the main task of this paper, viz.,
the analysis of the concept of a logically simple attribute.46 The analy-
sis itself will be presented in section 3.3; readers are welcome to skip
ahead, as the ﬁrst two subsections merely aim to forestall several objec-
tions. In particular, section 3.1 tries to forestall objections regarding the
choice of framework and the general character of the to-be-proposed
account of attribute simplicity, while section 3.2 develops an analysis
of mereological simplicity in the same abstract or ‘indirect’ style that
will also characterize the former account. The point of this exercise
will be to show that our account of attribute simplicity is analogous to
an adequate analysis of mereological simplicity. It is hoped that this
analogy will persuade the reader that it won’t be inappropriate to ap-
ply the term ‘logically simple’ to all and only those attributes that are
classiﬁed as such by our account.
3.1
Preliminary Objections and Replies
Some readers may object to the very project of developing an analysis
of the concept of a logically simple attribute, on the ground that the
meaning of the term ‘logically simple’ (as applied to attributes) has as
yet not been properly ﬁxed. Accordingly, they may regard it simply
as a technical term awaiting stipulative deﬁnition. There is certainly
something to this charge, for the term in question is a technical term,
and we are apparently somewhat free to give it a stipulative deﬁnition.
But only somewhat: after all, we all have some rough idea of what it is
for something to be ‘simple’, and the adverb ‘logically’ certainly also
has some cognitive signiﬁcance, however vague. So one would expect
that their combination will likewise have some more or less tangible
meaning. For this reason, I will here continue to represent the task of
this section as one of analysis rather than stipulative deﬁnition. But at
46. As above, the qualiﬁer ‘logically’ will be treated as optional. In addition,
rather than to speak of ‘logical simplicity, as applied to attributes’, I will
typically use the term ‘attribute simplicity’.
the same time, it should be clear that this project is not so much an ex-
ercise in descriptive semantics as an attempt at systematic philosophy:
the ulterior aim is to carve out a philosophically valuable notion, and
not to construct a faithful description of linguistic usage.
If it could be assumed that the ‘logical’ construction of attributes
out of others—e.g., by forming their negations or conjunctions—never
leads in a circle, then the task of analyzing the concept of a logically
simple attribute would be rather easy. For in that case, one might sim-
ply say that an attribute is logically simple iff it is not the negation,
nor the conjunction or disjunction (etc.), of any other attributes.47 This
straightforward approach requires, however, an extremely ﬁne-grained
individuation of attributes. For instance, any property P would have
to be distinguished from its ‘double negation’ ∼∼P; and for any prop-
erties P and Q, the disjunction of P & Q and P & ∼Q would have to
be distinguished from P itself. In the present framework, attributes are
not this ﬁnely individuated, mainly as a result of the postulate (P4)
(p. 14 above), according to which no two states of affairs are denoted
by equivalent formulas.48 A friend of the straightforward approach just
47. Given a suitable account of what it is for something to be a ‘constituent’ of
an attribute, one could say, even more straightforwardly, that an attribute
is simple iff it has no (proper) constituents. Analyses along these lines can
be found, e.g., in Armstrong (1978, 67) and Heil (2003, §14.6).
48. To see that every property P is in the present framework identical to its
double negation, note that the formula ‘P(x)’ is (in the sense speciﬁed on
p. 13 above) equivalent to ‘¬¬P(x)’. Thus, by (P4) and the semantics of
formulas, these two formulas will relative to any given interpretation and
variable-assignment denote either the same state of affairs or nothing at
all. The identity of P and ∼∼P then follows with the help of (P3) and the
semantics of λ-expressions. (Cf. the proof at the end of section 2.4.) To see
that, moreover, some properties P and Q are such that P is identical with
the disjunction of P & Q and P & ∼Q, let P be some arbitrary property and
let Q be the property of being the only entity (in symbols: λx ¬∃y (y ̸= x)).
Since ‘P(x)’ is equivalent to the disjunction
 P(x) ∧¬∃y (y ̸= x)
 ∨
 P(x) ∧¬¬∃y (y ̸= x)

,
it follows from the semantics of λ-expressions together with the assump-
tions of our framework that P is then identical with the disjunction of P & Q
and P & ∼Q.
philosophers’ imprint
- 16 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
alluded to might thus wonder whether it would not be better to reject
(P4) and to adopt instead a more ﬁne-grained conception of attributes
and states of affairs. A similar point might be made by an adherent of
Armstrong’s (1978) theory of universals, according to which the only
logically complex universals are conjunctions of other universals. For
if the only logical relation that holds between distinct universals is the
one that holds between a conjunctive universal and its conjuncts, then
why not say that the simple attributes are precisely those universals
that are not conjunctive? The task would be easier still if we did not
believe even in conjunctive universals, for then we could say that the
simple attributes are just the universals.
I would respond to these considerations as follows. To the Arm-
strongian, it can be replied that, even if her theory of universals is
correct, it nonetheless has not yet been conclusively established, and
nor is it easy to see on what basis it could be established.49 (The same
may be said about the ‘hyper-Armstrongian’ who rejects even the ex-
istence of conjunctive universals.) As long as this situation persists, it
would surely be a good thing to have an account of attribute simplicity
that does not rely on the assumption that the only way for a universal
to be logically complex is to be a conjunction of other universals, or
on the even stronger assumption that there are no logically complex
universals at all.
Essentially the same response can be given to what one might call
the non-Armstrongian proponent of a (very) ﬁne-grained conception
of attributes. Qua non-Armstrongian (as the term will be used here),
such a theorist believes that there are not only conjunctive attributes
but also, e.g., disjunctive and/or negative ones. But by virtue of her
ﬁne-grained conception of attributes (where ‘ﬁne-grained’ is to be un-
derstood in the sense of implying a denial of (P4)), she would for ex-
ample deny that any properties P and Q are such that the disjunction
49. This is perhaps reﬂected in the fact that Armstrong himself has, albeit re-
luctantly, come to allow the existence of negative and disjunctive universals
in his (1997, 28). (Also cf. his [1978, 119].)
of P & Q and P & ∼Q is identical with P. Arguments for such a view
can be produced, but are not conclusive.50 As long as this is the case, it
50. The most prominent argument is due to Sober (1982), who discusses a cer-
tain hypothetical device that would be more aptly described as a ‘triangu-
larity detector’ than as a ‘trilaterality detector’, even though triangularity
and trilaterality are “mathematically equivalent in standard geometric the-
ories” (p. 183). In a somewhat similar vein, Ralf Bader (2013, 538) maintains
that, for some properties P and Q (where P is intrinsic and Q extrinsic),
P v Q should be distinguished from P v (∼P & Q), on the ground that the
former but not the latter can be “had both intrinsically and extrinsically” by
one and the same entity. And ﬁnally, a closely related argument, which has
been suggested to me by Alex Skiles, is based on considerations of ground-
ing: Let s1, s2, and s3 be three obtaining states of affairs (or ‘facts’) that may
respectively be denoted by the formulas ‘cube(Max)’, ‘cube(Max) ∧∃y (y ̸=
Max)’, and ‘cube(Max) ∨(cube(Max) ∧∃y (y ̸= Max))’. In English, s1 may
be described as the fact that Max is a cube, s2 as the fact that Max is an
accompanied cube, and s3 as the fact that Max is either a cube or an accom-
panied cube. By (P4), s1 is identical with s3. But it seems plausible to say
that, while s1 is not grounded in s2, s3 is. In other words, it seems true to
say that the fact that Max is either a cube or an accompanied cube, unlike
the ‘simple’ fact that Max is a cube, is grounded in the fact that Max is an
accompanied cube. It would then follow that s1 and s3, as described, are
not in fact one and the same state of affairs, contrary to (P4).
An adequate discussion of these three arguments (and others like them)
would here lead too far aﬁeld, but at least prima facie, they can all be an-
swered by roughly the same kind of consideration. Thus, to begin with the
ﬁrst argument, we can defensibly maintain that a triangularity detector is
eo ipso a trilaterality detector (on a fairly literal reading, at least); for there
does not appear to be any compelling reason to think that the justiﬁcation
for treating the terms ‘triangularity detector’ and ‘trilaterality detector’ as
non-interchangeable has anything to do with the relatively arcane matter
of how to individuate properties, rather than merely with the differences
in which the devices thereby designated function, which are respectively
hinted at by those two terms. In other words, what makes us call a given de-
vice a ‘triangularity detector’ rather than a ‘trilaterality detector’ may well
only have to do with, roughly speaking, how the behavior of the device
might best be explained, which in turn has to do with the respective Sinn
of ‘triangularity’ and ‘trilaterality’, and not only—that is, not exclusively—
with the reference of these terms. Something analogous may be said about
the ascription of predicates like ‘has P intrinsically’ and ‘has P extrinsically’
(where ‘P’ is to be replaced by a name of a property) and for the truth of
sentences like ‘X is grounded in Y’, where ‘X’ and ‘Y’ are to be replaced
by names of states of affairs. Thus, insofar as it is true to say of some entity
that it has the property P v Q both intrinsically and extrinsically, but not
true to say of the same entity that it has the property P v (∼P & Q) both
philosophers’ imprint
- 17 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
would certainly be desirable to have an analysis of attribute simplicity
that harmonizes with a coarser-grained conception of attributes, and in
particular with a conception under which (P4) is true. More precisely:
it would be desirable to have an analysis that, for at least one plausible
coarser-grained conception C, does not yield, when combined with the
postulates characterizing C (such as, say, (P4)), any consequences that
are either wildly implausible or imply that the distinction between sim-
intrinsically and extrinsically, this need not be taken to mean that ‘P v Q’
and ‘P v (∼P & Q)’ denote distinct properties. Instead, the truth or falsity
of those predications may depend merely on the way in which the property
P v Q is respectively represented. And similarly, nothing compels us to treat
the putative difference in truth-value between
(1) The fact that Max is a cube is grounded in the fact that Max is an ac-
companied cube
and
(2) The fact that Max is either a cube or an accompanied cube is grounded
in the fact that Max is an accompanied cube
as indicating a difference between what is respectively denoted by ‘the fact
that Max is a cube’ and ‘the fact that Max is either a cube or an accompanied
cube’, rather than merely a difference in representation. (For considerations
in favor of the representational relativity of grounding-talk, see Schnieder
[2010] and Jenkins [2011]. Also cf. Schnieder [2006] and Krämer & Roski
[2015].)
Having said all this, I should also note that there are cases in which
it would be absurd to explain away a putative distinction between two at-
tributes (or states of affairs) as a mere difference in representation. For ex-
ample, suppose the argument to be countered by this sort of move has the
conclusion that the property of being red is distinct from the property of
being green, on the premise that there are things that have the one property
but not the other. If we were to apply here the above strategy with a view to
defending the (absurd) claim that ‘being red’ and ‘being green’ really pick
out one and the same property P, we would have to say that, whenever
we commonly regard a given entity x as having the property of being red
but not the property of being green, all that is really going on is that x has
the property P relative to the description ‘being red’ but not relative to the
description ‘being green’. But this latter claim is of course glaringly implau-
sible. After all, the way we are struck by a green thing really is different
from the way we are struck by a red thing, and this difference apparently
requires explanation by the ‘things themselves’, rather than by mere differ-
ences in description.
ple and complex attributes is theoretically useless.51 Moreover, even if
some ﬁne-grained conception of attributes should turn out to be more
theoretically useful than any of its coarser-grained competitors, this
would not yet mean that none of those competitors has enough theo-
retical utility to make it worthwhile to see how that distinction might
be drawn if we have adopted one of them instead.
To forestall a further objection, I should start by conceding that
(as has already been hinted at) the analysis of attribute simplicity to
be proposed below will be constructed in a somewhat abstract or ‘in-
direct’ fashion. More speciﬁcally, the analysis will explicate its target
not—or at least not exclusively—by talking directly about the respec-
tive attributes and their ‘constituents’, but rather by talking about the
λ-expressions by which those attributes are denoted. The reason for
this is twofold and entirely pragmatic. First, a λ-expression provides
a very compact, and hence convenient, way of describing how a given
attribute is logically related to other attributes.52 And second, the in-
direct approach allows us to ‘abstract away’ from the ways in which
complex attributes are metaphysically (as opposed to logically) related
to their respective constituents. For example, in saying that a given
property P is denoted by the λ-expression ‘λx (Q1(x) ∧Q2(x))’ (rela-
tive to an interpretation and variable-assignment relative to which ‘Q1’
and ‘Q2’ respectively denote the two properties Q1 and Q2), we are
in no way required to specify how exactly P is ‘made up’ from Q1 and
Q2. For example, we do not have to specify whether P stands in some
fundamental relation to both Q1 and Q2, or whether, instead, it is fun-
damentally related to some state of affairs or other kind of entity that
has Q1 and Q2 as constituents.
51. The latter would be the case if, e.g., one could derive from those postulates
that under the proposed analysis there are no logically simple attributes at
all.
52. Cf. Swoyer (1998, 300): “[T]he role of the syntactic structure of a complex
predicate is not to exhibit the internal structure of a relation [where ‘relation’
applies in Swoyer’s usage also to properties]; it is to disclose that relation’s
niche in the logical network of relations.”
philosophers’ imprint
- 18 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
Related to the previous objection, it might be thought that under the
to-be-proposed analysis, given its heavy use of λ-expressions, the logi-
cal simplicity or complexity of any particular attribute will be a matter
of some highly contingent linguistic factors. For instance, since the
analysis will presuppose the existence of ‘linguistic items’ such as con-
stants, variables, and operators, it may seem to have the consequence
that the simplicity of a given attribute depends on what constants and
variables there are. But—the worry continues—what constants or vari-
ables there are should have no bearing at all on whether a particular
attribute is complex or simple. This objection rests on the natural as-
sumption that, where the analysis talks of variables and constants, etc.,
it will commit itself to the existence of ‘linguistic items’ in the usual
sense of the phrase. However, to assume this is to overlook that we can
also adopt a much more abstract conception of our formal language
and its expressions. On such a conception, there will be no obstacle to
identifying variables, constants, and other expressions with pure sets,
roughly in the manner of Gödel codes.53 It is this more abstract con-
ception that should be taken to be operative in the following.
To guard against yet another objection, the next subsection develops
an account of mereological simplicity that, rather than to talk directly
about mereological fusions and their parts, is framed in terms of ‘mere-
ological descriptions’. The close analogy between this account and the
analysis of attribute simplicity on offer in section 3.3 will hopefully as-
suage any suspicions that the attributes satisfying the to-be-proposed
analysans cannot rightly be referred to as ‘logically simple’.
3.2
An ‘Indirect’ Account of Mereological Simplicity
A natural way to frame a mereological description of a particular entity
is to write down a list of some of its parts, such that the entity in
question is the fusion of those parts. Since a “list of parts” is obviously
only a list of names of parts, it may sometimes happen (unless the
underlying language is ‘Lagadonian’) that a given list contains two
53. Cf. footnote 19 above.
names of one and the same entity. Also, since a list is not a set, it
may happen that it contains the same name twice. As for the names
themselves, there are various possibilities, but let us suppose that each
name can take one of two forms: it can be either atomic (i.e., a variable
or constant), or it can itself be a mereological description. Finally, to
avoid ambiguity, it is desirable that the list be preceded or otherwise
accompanied by some operator whose job is to signal that the overall
expression—i.e., the list together with the operator—should be read as
denoting the fusion of the listed objects.54
To develop a simple system of descriptions along these lines, let us
make the following recursive stipulations:
• An m-term is either a variable, a constant, or a Σ-expression. (In
addition, we call an m-term atomic iff it is either a variable or a
constant.)
• An m-list is a parenthesis-enclosed, comma-delimited list of m-
terms, of length ≥1 and ﬁnite ‘depth’ (as determined by the num-
ber of its levels of parentheses).
• A Σ-expression is an expression ⌜Σ ϕ⌝, for some m-list ϕ. (This m-list
will also be referred to as the Σ-expression’s matrix.)
Σ-expressions are designed to be the mereological counterparts of λ-
expressions. That is, just as λ-expressions may be said to function as
more or less detailed ‘logical’ descriptions of the attributes denoted
by them, so Σ-expressions provide more or less detailed mereological
descriptions of their respective referents.
Let us further stipulate that, for any interpretation I, variable-
assignment g, and m-terms t1, t2, . . ., a Σ-expression ⌜Σ (t1, t2, . . .)⌝has
a denotation relative to I and g just in case each one of the ti has a
denotation relative to I and g, in which case that expression denotesI,g
54. The fusion of some entities x1, x2, . . . may here be taken to be the unique
entity that has each one of the xi as a part and is such that each one of its
parts overlaps at least one of the xi. (Cf. Hovda [2009].)
philosophers’ imprint
- 19 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
the fusion of those entities that are respectively denotedI,g by the ti. For
example, relative to an interpretation that assigns Socrates to ‘Socrates’
and Plato to ‘Plato’, the expression ‘Σ (Socrates, Plato)’ denotes the fu-
sion of Socrates and Plato. We will adopt the usual axioms of classical
mereology, and accordingly assume that there is no ‘null individual’.
Under this assumption, an entity x is mereologically simple (i.e., atomic)
iff x has no proper parts, or in other words: iff each part of x is iden-
tical with x. An adequate analysis of mereological simplicity in terms
of Σ-expressions can therefore be stated as follows:
(MS) An entity x is mereologically simple iff, for any interpretation I,
variable-assignment g, and Σ-expression S: if S denotesI,g x, then
each m-term in S denotesI,g x.
So, for instance, if a Σ-expression ⌜Σ (t1, t2)⌝is to denote a mereo-
logically simple entity relative to an interpretation I and a variable-
assignment g, then both t1 and t2 have to denoteI,g x.
Although (MS) may admittedly not be a cognitively adequate anal-
ysis of mereological simplicity, it can nonetheless claim to be a priori
extensionally adequate, provided that talk of m-terms and Σ-expressions
is given a suitably abstract reading.55 When the term ‘adequate’ is in
55. See above, p. 19. To a ﬁrst approximation, the phrase ‘a priori extensionally
adequate’ can be unpacked exactly as one would expect, viz., in such a way
that it applies to a given analysis A iff it can be ascertained a priori that A’s
analysandum is coextensive with its analysans. (The role that is here given
to the a priori is one of the things that distinguish the ‘philosophical’ type
of analysis currently at issue from the ‘logico-metaphysical’ type that will
be discussed in section 3.5 below.) The notion of the a priori is however no-
toriously unclear, and moreover it is open to doubt whether the extensional
adequacy of a proposed philosophical analysis can be strictly speaking as-
certained unless one already has a deﬁnition of the respective analysandum
to hand (in which case extensional adequacy can be established by proving
the equivalence of the deﬁniens and the proposed analysans). For this rea-
son, it would presumably be better to understand that phrase in a more lib-
eral way, viz., as applying to exactly those analyses that are (i) extensionally
adequate and (ii) such that their extensional adequacy does not depend on
any empirical fact. (The relevant notion of dependence may, at least roughly,
be taken to be that of counterfactual dependence, while an ‘empirical fact’
may be understood to be any fact outside of logic, mathematics, and se-
the following used without qualiﬁcation, it should be understood in
precisely this sense. This is not to suggest, however, that all we can
reasonably want of our analyses is that they should be a priori exten-
sionally adequate. Among other things, we will ordinarily also want
them to be free of circularity.
(MS) is useful in that it serves as a straightforward example of an
‘indirect’ analysis that is nonetheless adequate. However, it does not yet
provide us with a way of seeing how one might construct an adequate
account of what it is for an attribute to be logically simple.56 To arrive
at an analysis of mereological simplicity that is more suitable for our
purposes, we may instead begin with the following, somewhat naïve
account:
(MS′
0) An entity x is mereologically simple iff, for any interpretation I,
variable-assignment g, and Σ-expression S: if S denotesI,g x, then,
for some atomic m-term t, the matrix of S is identical with ⌜(t)⌝.
By stipulating that t be an atomic m-term (so that, in particular, t cannot
be a Σ-expression), this analysis tries to ensure that its right-hand side
mantics.) This eliminates any epistemological requirement: an analysis can
count as ‘a priori extensionally adequate’ even if its extensional adequacy is
impossible to ascertain.
56. If one were to hew very close to (MS) in an attempt to analyze the notion of a
logically simple attribute, one would arrive at something like the following:
(∗) An attribute A is logically simple iff, for any interpretation I, variable-
assignment g, and λ-expression L: if L denotesI,g A, then each of the
constants and variables that occur free in L denotesI,g A.
However, this analysis can be quickly seen to fail. For, given (P4) and
the other assumptions of our framework, any property P is relative to
some interpretation I and variable-assignment g denoted by a λ-expression
⌜λx (F(x) ∨G(x))⌝, where F and G are constants or variables that respec-
tively denoteI,g P & Q and P & ∼Q, for some suitable property Q (cf. foot-
note 48 above); and it will usually not be the case that P is identical with
both P & Q and P & ∼Q (or indeed either of them). An analogous point can
be made for attributes of any higher adicity. Hence, given (P4), every at-
tribute whatsoever is under (∗) classiﬁed as logically non-simple, which is
clearly undesirable.
philosophers’ imprint
- 20 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
is not satisﬁed by just any old entity. With or without this restriction,
however, the analysis suffers in fact from the opposite defect: its right-
hand side fails to be satisﬁed by anything at all. This is because, for any
given entity x, there exist an interpretation I, a variable-assignment
g, and an atomic m-term t such that x is for example denotedI,g by
⌜Σ (t, t)⌝, whose matrix is distinct from ⌜(t)⌝. This is a very basic ex-
ample of what will in the following be referred to as a redundancy
problem: the misclassiﬁcation of an entity as in some sense complex
due to the redundant complexity of some of its representations.
At ﬁrst blush, the present redundancy problem can be solved
by replacing the ‘identical with’ in (MS′
0) with an ‘equivalent to’,
where two m-lists ϕ and ψ are considered equivalent just in case
they contain exactly the same atomic m-terms. So, for example, the
m-lists ‘(Socrates, Socrates)’ and ‘(Socrates)’ are equivalent in this
sense, and the same goes for ‘(Socrates, Σ (Plato, Aristotle))’ and
‘(Plato, Σ (Socrates, Aristotle))’. But this maneuver constitutes only a
partial remedy. For suppose that u and v are two atomic m-terms that,
relative to some interpretation I and variable-assignment g, both de-
note a certain entity x. As a result of the semantics of Σ-expressions, the
substitution of coreferential m-terms within a given Σ-expression’s ma-
trix leaves the denotation of the overall expression unchanged. Hence,
x will be denotedI,g not only by ⌜Σ (u, u)⌝but also, e.g., by ⌜Σ (u, v)⌝;
and for any atomic m-term t (including u and v), ⌜(u, v)⌝is evidently
not equivalent to ⌜(t)⌝, given that u and v are distinct. This is an exam-
ple of what I shall call an obfuscation problem: while the complexity
of ⌜Σ (u, v)⌝is no less redundant than that of ⌜Σ (u, u)⌝, the redun-
dancy is in the former case obfuscated by the use of the additional
m-term v. In general, an obfuscation problem can be regarded as a
complication of the corresponding redundancy problem: to solve it,
we have to reﬁne our solution of the latter.
Let us say that a Σ-expression is problematic just in case there is no
atomic m-term t such that the expression’s matrix is equivalent to ⌜(t)⌝.
The fact that any given entity is, as we have just seen, denoted by a
problematic Σ-expression shows that (MS′
0) is not an adequate analysis
of mereological simplicity, even in the amended version in which the
‘identical with’ is replaced with ‘equivalent to’. Fortunately, it is easy
to see how (MS′
0) can be repaired: before we classify a given entity
as composite (i.e., not mereologically simple) on account of its being
denoted by a certain problematic Σ-expression, we must ﬁrst check
whether that expression cannot be transformed into an unproblematic
expression by way of replacing some of the m-terms in its matrix with
other m-terms that are coreferential with the former. Whenever the
expression can in this way be transformed into an unproblematic one,
the fact that a given entity is denoted by it should not count against
that entity’s simplicity. Thus, for instance, the fact that in the previous
paragraph the entity x is denotedI,g by ⌜Σ (u, v)⌝should not count
against the simplicity of x, for by replacing the occurrence of v with
the coreferentialI,g m-term u, we obtain the unproblematic expression
⌜Σ (u, u)⌝.
A plausible restriction on this sort of substitution requires that
the to-be-replaced m-terms should always be atomic. This serves to
rule out the replacement of Σ-expressions by atomic m-terms, which
would otherwise make for an all-too easy way of turning prob-
lematic Σ-expressions into unproblematic ones. For example, if t is
a constant that is relative to a given interpretation and variable-
assignment coreferential with the Σ-expression ‘Σ (Socrates, Plato)’,
then, by replacing the latter with t, the problematic nested Σ-
expression ‘Σ (Σ (Socrates, Plato))’ could be turned into the unprob-
lematic ⌜Σ (t)⌝. But it clearly seems unjustiﬁed to say that an entity’s
being denoted by ‘Σ (Σ (Socrates, Plato))’ should not count against that
entity’s simplicity, given that Socrates is distinct from Plato.
Based on the above discussion, we can now formulate an improved
version of (MS′
0) that constitutes an adequate analysis of mereological
simplicity. To solve the obfuscation problem in the way suggested, it
will be convenient ﬁrst to introduce the auxiliary concept of an m-
term’s reduction. Roughly speaking, a reduction of a given m-term t is
the result of replacing in t zero or more occurrences of atomic m-terms
with coreferential other m-terms. More formally:
philosophers’ imprint
- 21 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
(MR) An m-term t′ is a reduction of an m-term t relative to an interpreta-
tion I and a variable-assignment g iff t′ is the result of replacing in t
zero or more occurrences of atomic m-terms by occurrences of other
m-terms in such a way that the following condition is satisﬁed:
(∗) For each replaced occurrence o and every m-term τ: if o is an oc-
currence of τ, then the m-term that replaces o is coreferentialI,g
with τ.
For example, if I is an interpretation and g a variable-assignment such
that ‘Bob’ is coreferentialI,g with ‘Sam’, then ‘Σ (Sam, Sam)’ will rela-
tive to I and g be a reduction of ‘Σ (Bob, Sam)’. If t is an atomic m-term,
then, by condition (∗), any reduction of t relative to I and g will be ei-
ther t itself or some other m-term that is coreferentialI,g with t. More
generally, condition (∗) ensures that any reduction of an m-term t rel-
ative to I and g is coreferentialI,g with t, provided that t itself has a
denotation relative to I and g.
With the help of this concept of reduction, the notion of mereologi-
cal simplicity can be analyzed as follows:
(MS′
1) An entity x is mereologically simple iff, for any interpretation I,
variable-assignment g, and Σ-expression S: if S denotesI,g x, then,
for some atomic m-term t, S has relative to I and g a reduction
whose matrix is equivalent to ⌜(t)⌝.
Or equivalently (though slightly more complicated):
(MS′
2) An entity x is mereologically simple iff, for any interpretation I,
variable-assignment g, and Σ-expression S: if S denotesI,g x, then
there exist an interpretation I′ ⊇I, a variable-assignment g′ ⊇g,
and an atomic m-term t such that S has relative to I′ and g′ a reduc-
tion whose matrix is equivalent to ⌜(t)⌝.
It is easy to see that both of these analyses are adequate.
Proof sketch: For the sake of brevity, we will focus on (MS′
1). Recall that an
analysis counts as adequate just in case it is ‘a priori extensionally adequate’.
(See footnote 55 for clariﬁcation.) So, to show that (MS′
1) is adequate, it sufﬁces
to give an a priori proof (more precisely: a proof whose soundness does not
depend on any empirical fact) of the thesis that an entity is mereologically
simple iff it satisﬁes the right-hand side of (MS′
1). The reader may convince
herself that the following is such a proof.
For the left–to-right direction, let x be any mereologically simple entity, and
let I, g, and S be (respectively) an interpretation, variable-assignment, and Σ-
expression such that S denotesI,g x. Since x, being mereologically simple, is the
fusion of no other things than x itself, it follows that
(1) Any atomic m-term in the matrix of S denotesI,g x.57
Further, from the syntax of Σ-expressions (in particular, from the fact that any
m-list has to be of only ﬁnite ‘depth’ and contain at least one element), it can
be inferred that
(2) The matrix of S contains at least one atomic m-term.
But from (1) and (2), we can conclude that there exists at least one atomic m-
term t that denotesI,g x and is contained in the matrix of S. Again using (1), it
follows that S has relative to I and g a reduction whose matrix is equivalent
to ⌜(t)⌝. So any mereologically simple entity satisﬁes the right-hand side of
(MS′
1).
For the right-to-left direction, we prove the contrapositive. Let x be any
entity that is not mereologically simple, which is to say that x has a proper part
y. There will then exist atomic m-terms t and u, as well as an interpretation
I and a variable-assignment g, such that x and y are respectively denotedI,g
57. This step of the argument makes essential use of the somewhat contentious
assumption that there is no null individual, which may raise doubts about
its a priori character. To address this worry, the framework described in this
section would have to be altered in three respects. First, the notion of mere-
ological simplicity would have to be redeﬁned, to the effect that an entity is
mereologically simple iff it has no proper parts other than the null individ-
ual. (Assuming that parthood is antisymmetric, which is presumably not in
question, and given that any null individual would by deﬁnition be a part
of everything whatsoever, there can be only one null individual, since any
two of them would have to be part of each other.) Second, we would have to
introduce a special constant, say, ‘0’, and redeﬁne the notion of interpreta-
tion by saying that an interpretation is a function F from constants to entities
that satisﬁes the following constraint: if there is a null individual, then F
assigns that individual to ‘0’, and if there is none, then F assigns nothing to
‘0’. Third, we would have to redeﬁne the notion of equivalent m-lists, to the
effect that two m-lists are equivalent iff, ignoring occurrences of ‘0’, they
contain exactly the same atomic m-terms.
With these changes in place, it could again be shown, by an argument
fairly similar to the present one (except for some additional steps) and with-
out relying on the assumption that there is no null individual, that the
analyses (MS′
1) and (MS′
2) are extensionally adequate.
philosophers’ imprint
- 22 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
by t and u. Moreover, since y is a part of x, the Σ-expression ⌜Σ (t, u)⌝will
also denoteI,g x. Now let τ be any atomic m-term that denotesI,g x. Since y
is only a proper part of x, no m-term coreferentialI,g with u will contain an
m-term denotingI,g x. A fortiori, no m-term coreferentialI,g with u will contain
τ. But by the syntax of Σ-expressions, any m-term must contain at least one
atomic m-term. So any m-term coreferentialI,g with u must contain some
atomic m-term other than τ. This in turn means that ⌜Σ (t, u)⌝will relative to I
and g have no reduction whose m-list is equivalent to ⌜(τ)⌝. From the way in
which this has just been shown, we can now draw the following, more general
conclusion: For any atomic m-term τ that denotesI,g x, the Σ-expression
⌜Σ (t, u)⌝has relative to I and g no reduction whose matrix is equivalent to
⌜(τ)⌝. But x is of course denotedI,g by ⌜Σ (t, u)⌝. Hence x fails to satisfy the
right-hand side of (MS′
1), as required.
3.3
An Analogous Analysis of Attribute Simplicity
The development of (MS′
2) provides a useful guideline for the analysis
of the concept of a logically simple attribute. As above, we can begin
with a fairly naïve approximation (notice the analogy to (MS′
0)):
(AS0) An attribute A is logically simple iff, for any interpretation I, variable-
assignment g, and λ-expression L: if L denotesI,g A, then, for some
atomic term F, the matrix of L is identical with ⌜F(v1, v2, . . .)⌝,
where v1, v2, . . . are (in this order) the λ-variables of L.58
By stipulating that F be an atomic term (so that, in particular, F can-
not be a λ-expression), this analysis tries to ensure that its right-hand
side is not satisﬁed by just any old attribute. With or without this
restriction, however, the analysis suffers in fact from the opposite de-
fect: under the assumptions of the present framework—notably (P4)—
its right-hand side fails to be satisﬁed by anything at all. This is be-
cause, for any given property P (and analogously for any given re-
lation), there exist an interpretation I, a variable-assignment g, and
an atomic term F such that P is for example denotedI,g by the λ-
expression ⌜λx (F(x) ∧F(x))⌝. The reason for this, in turn, lies in
the fact that the formula ⌜F(x) ∧F(x)⌝is equivalent to ⌜F(x)⌝(in
58. The speciﬁcation “in this order” is here meant to imply that, for some for-
mula ϕ, L is identical with ⌜λv1, v2, . . . ϕ⌝.
the sense of ‘equivalent’ introduced in section 2.4). For, by (P3) and
(P4) together with the semantics of λ-expressions, it follows from the
equivalence of ⌜F(x) ∧F(x)⌝and ⌜F(x)⌝that, relative to any given in-
terpretation and variable-assignment, the λ-expressions ⌜λx F(x)⌝and
⌜λx (F(x) ∧F(x))⌝will denote either the same property or nothing at
all.59 What this shows is that we have here again a redundancy prob-
lem, just as in the above discussion of (MS′
0).
At ﬁrst blush, this defect can be repaired by replacing the ‘identi-
cal with’ in (AS0) with an ‘equivalent to’, where the relevant notion
of equivalence is the one that is used in (P4).60 However, this ma-
neuver constitutes only a partial remedy. For suppose that G and H
are two constants that, relative to some interpretation I and variable-
59. Cf. footnote 48 above.
60. Why not choose instead a concept of equivalence that is stronger or weaker
than the one used in (P4)? The reason for not choosing a stronger concept
(i.e., one under which some pairs of formulas that are equivalent in the
sense at issue in (P4) fail to count as equivalent) is relatively straightfor-
ward: choosing a stronger concept would only mean—if it would have any
effect at all—that the proposed solution would fail to address all the cases
that give rise to the present redundancy problem.
The reason for not choosing a weaker, i.e., more liberal, concept (such as
that of classical equivalence) is a little more subtle. In the ﬁrst place, the
use of a weaker concept would not leave our account of attribute simplicity
with any fatal defects. However, it would (if it would have any effect at
all) have the consequence that under the resulting account an unnecessarily
broad class of attributes would be classiﬁed as logically simple. Although
this would not be fatal, it would render the corresponding notion of sim-
plicity markedly less signiﬁcant. To use a crude analogy, it would be a
bit as if we had decided to adopt a concept of mereological simplicity un-
der which an entity counts as mereologically simple iff it has at most two
proper parts. Moreover, if the alternative equivalence relation were chosen
to be sufﬁciently weak, then a certain desirable sparseness result for log-
ically simple attributes would no longer hold. (See section 3.5 below, in
particular footnote 76.) For these reasons, the arguably best choice at this
point is to use the same concept of equivalence as is used in (P4).
It should be noted that these considerations are independent from the
question of which particular notion of equivalence is at play in (P4). Thus, if
that postulate had made use of a different concept C, then the result of these
considerations would have been that our account of attribute simplicity
should similarly employ C.
philosophers’ imprint
- 23 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
assignment g, both denote a certain property P. As a result of the se-
mantics of λ-expressions, the substitution of coreferential terms within
the matrix of a given λ-expression leaves the denotation of the overall
expression unchanged (provided that certain restrictions concerning
bound variables are observed—see below). Hence, P will be denotedI,g
not only by ⌜λx (G(x) ∧G(x))⌝but also, e.g., by ⌜λx (G(x) ∧H(x))⌝;
and for any atomic term F (including G and H), the formula ⌜G(x) ∧
H(x)⌝is obviously not equivalent to ⌜F(x)⌝, given that G and H are
distinct. So we have here an obfuscation problem, and to solve it, we
will have to reﬁne our solution of the present redundancy problem.
Let us call a λ-expression L problematic just in case there is no
atomic term F such that L’s matrix is equivalent to ⌜F(v1, v2, . . .)⌝,
where v1, v2, . . . are (in this order) the λ-variables of L. The fact that
any given attribute is, as we have just seen, denoted by a problematic
λ-expression shows that (AS0) should not be regarded as an adequate
analysis of attribute simplicity, even in the amended version in which
the ‘identical with’ is replaced with ‘equivalent to’. Fortunately, it is
easy to see how (AS0) can be repaired: before we classify a given at-
tribute as logically complex (i.e., non-simple) on account of its being
denoted, relative to some interpretation I and variable-assignment g,
by a certain problematic λ-expression, we must ﬁrst check whether
that expression cannot be transformed into an unproblematic expres-
sion by way of replacing some of the terms in its matrix with other
terms that are coreferentialI,g with the former. Whenever the expres-
sion can in this way be transformed into an unproblematic one, the
fact that a given attribute is denoted by it should not count against that
attribute’s simplicity. Thus, for instance, the fact that in the previous
paragraph the property P is denotedI,g by ⌜λx (G(x) ∧H(x))⌝should
not count against the simplicity of P, for by replacing the occurrence
of H with the coreferentialI,g constant G we obtain the unproblematic
expression ⌜λx (G(x) ∧G(x))⌝.
A plausible restriction on this sort of substitution requires that the
to-be-replaced terms should always be atomic. This serves to rule out
the replacement of non-atomic terms—most notably λ-expressions—
by atomic terms, which would otherwise make for an all-too easy
way of turning problematic λ-expressions into unproblematic ones.
For example, if F is a constant that is relative to a given interpre-
tation and variable-assignment coreferential with the λ-expression
‘
 λx (black(x) ∧horse(x))

’, then, by replacing the latter with F,
the problematic nested λ-expression ‘λx
 λx (black(x) ∧horse(x))
(x)’
could be turned into the unproblematic expression ⌜λx F(x)⌝. But it
seems quite unjustiﬁed to say that an attribute’s being denoted by
‘λx
 λx (black(x) ∧horse(x))
(x)’ should not count against that at-
tribute’s simplicity.
Based on the above discussion, we can now formulate an improved
version of (AS0) that constitutes an adequate analysis of attribute sim-
plicity. To solve the present obfuscation problem in the way suggested,
it will be convenient ﬁrst to introduce the auxiliary concept of a term’s
reduction. Roughly speaking, a reduction of a given term t is the re-
sult of replacing in t zero or more occurrences of atomic terms with
coreferential other terms. More precisely:
(R) A term t′ is a reduction of a term t relative to an interpretation I and
a variable-assignment g iff t′ is the result of replacing in t zero or
more occurrences of atomic terms by occurrences of other terms, in
such a way that the following three conditions are satisﬁed:
(i) For each replaced occurrence o and any term τ: if o is an
occurrence of τ, then the term with which o is replaced is
coreferentialI,g with τ.
(ii) There is no substitution of bound variable-occurrences.
(iii) No replacing term-occurrence contains a variable-occurrence
that is ‘captured’ as a result of the replacement.61
61. Less succinctly, this condition can be put as follows: There is no term-
occurrence o in t′ that (i) replaces an occurrence of an atomic term in t
and (ii) contains a variable-occurrence that is bound by an occurrence of a
variable-binding operator (i.e., either ‘λ’ or ‘∃’) within t′ but outside of o.
philosophers’ imprint
- 24 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
For example, if I is an interpretation and g a variable-assignment
such that ‘Bob’ is coreferentialI,g with ‘Sam’, then ‘R (Sam, Sam)’ will
relative to I and g be a reduction of ‘R (Bob, Sam)’. The conditions
(i)–(iii) ensure that any reduction of a term t relative to I and g is
coreferentialI,g with t itself, provided that t itself has a denotation rel-
ative to I and g. In this respect, (R) is exactly analogous to (MR), with
the differences being merely a result of the fact that λ-expressions have
a more complex syntax and semantics than Σ-expressions.
A few other consequences of (R) are also worth noting. First, rel-
ative to any interpretation and variable-assignment, every term is a
reduction of itself. Second, if a term t′ is a reduction of a term t, then
any reduction of t′ (relative to the same interpretation and variable-
assignment) is likewise a reduction of t. We can thus say that, for any
given interpretation and variable-assignment, the corresponding ‘re-
duction relation’ is both reﬂexive and transitive.62
With the help of the concept of reduction deﬁned in (R), the notion
of a logically simple attribute can now ﬁnally be analyzed as follows:
(AS) An attribute A is logically simple iff, for any interpretation I, variable-
assignment g, and λ-expression L: if L denotesI,g A, then there ex-
ist an interpretation I′ ⊇I, a variable-assignment g′ ⊇g, and an
atomic term F such that L has relative to I′ and g′ a reduction whose
matrix is equivalent to ⌜F(v1, v2, . . .)⌝, where v1, v2, . . . are (in this
order) the λ-variables of L.
Thus, if P is a simple property, and if I, g, and L are (respectively) an
interpretation, a variable-assignment, and a λ-expression such that L
denotesI,g P, then there must exist an interpretation I′ ⊇I, a variable-
assignment g′ ⊇g, and a λ-expression L′ such that (i) L′ is a reduction
of L relative to I′ and g′, and (ii) for some atomic term F, the matrix
62. This talk of ‘reduction relations’ should be understood in the mathematical
sense of ‘relation’ (i.e., as referring simply to classes of ordered pairs), rather
than in the metaphysical sense that is at issue in the rest of this paper.
of L′ is equivalent to ⌜F(v)⌝, where v is the λ-variable of L (and hence
also of L′).
For a more concrete example, let P be the property of being an un-
married man, let g be some variable-assignment, and let I be an inter-
pretation that respectively maps the two constants ‘man’ and ‘married’
to the property of being a man and the property of being married. As
a result, P will relative to I and g be denoted by the λ-expression
‘λx (man(x) ∧¬married(x))’. Let L be this λ-expression, and suppose
we wish to know whether P might be logically simple. Given (AS), the
answer depends (among other things) on whether, for some interpre-
tation I′ ⊇I and variable-assignment g′ ⊇g, the terms ‘man’ and
‘married’ can in L be replaced with other terms in such a way that
(i) the resulting λ-expression is relative to I′ and g′ a reduction of L,
and (ii) the matrix of this reduction is equivalent to ⌜F(x)⌝, for some
atomic term F. If such a replacement is possible, then the fact that P is
denoted by L will not count against the simplicity of P (which is not
to say that P may not still fail to be simple); but if no such replacement
should be possible, then P is indeed not simple. One way to paraphrase
this is to say that the question of whether P is simple depends on the
‘metaphysics’ of the properties of being a man and being married. More
speciﬁcally, as we will see in section 3.5 below, the question depends
on whether these two properties are analyzable in terms of the identity
relation and/or P itself.
To adjudicate whether (AS) is adequate, it is useful to assess the
extent to which (AS) is analogous to (MS′
2). In comparing the two anal-
yses, it will be apparent that the disanalogies are indeed few and lim-
ited, and can all be accounted for by the fact that λ-expressions have
an in several ways more complicated syntax and semantics than Σ-
expressions.63 Due to the strong analogy between the two analyses, the
attributes that satisfy the right-hand side of (AS) can be appropriately
63. To wit, there are the following disanalogies:
philosophers’ imprint
- 25 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
referred to as in some sense simple, while all others can be appropri-
ately referred to as in the corresponding sense complex. And the partic-
ular sense in which these attributes are simple or complex will presum-
ably best be referred to as ‘logical’ (or perhaps ‘logico-metaphysical’),
given that the operators with the help of which λ-expressions are con-
structed are themselves probably best characterized as logical operators.
As a result, (AS) can reasonably be regarded as extensionally adequate:
for, by what has just been said, the attributes that satisfy its right-hand
side are appropriately referred to as logically simple (and can thus be
regarded as falling under its analysandum), while all others are ap-
propriately referred to as logically complex. Moreover, since we have
• The deﬁnition of ‘reduction’ for terms, i.e., (R), differs from its mereo-
logical counterpart (MR) (p. 22 above) by two additional clauses. The
need for these clauses arises quite straightforwardly from the fact that
λ-expressions can (and do) contain variable-binding operators.
• On the right-hand side of (MS′
2), the Σ-expression S is required to have
a reduction whose matrix is equivalent to ⌜(t)⌝, but on the right-hand
side of (AS), the λ-expression L is instead required to have a reduction
whose matrix is equivalent to ⌜F(v1, v2, . . .)⌝, where v1, v2, . . . are the λ-
variables of L. The need for this additional complication stems simply
from the fact that ‘λ’ is, unlike ‘Σ’, a variable-binding operator.
In addition, the reader will have noticed that, in developing (AS), we have
left out the step that would have been analogous to the construction of
(MS′
1). If this step had not been omitted, we would ﬁrst have constructed
an analysis of attribute simplicity whose right-hand side (in analogy to
the right-hand side of (MS′
1)) would not have quantiﬁed over any super-
sets of the respective interpretation I and variable-assignment g. But that
analysis would have been inadequate, due to the following disanalogy be-
tween Σ-expressions and λ-expressions. If a Σ-expression denotes a given
mereologically simple entity x relative to an interpretation I and a variable-
assignment g, then that Σ-expression will have to contain at least one atomic
term that also denotesI,g x. (This is, in a nutshell, the reason why (MS′
1) is
equivalent to (MS′
2).) By contrast, due to our postulate (P4), a λ-expression
that denotes a given attribute A need not contain any atomic term that
also denotes A. (Cf. footnote 56 above.) So, to prevent (AS) from having
the consequence that no attribute is logically simple, the right-hand side of
(AS) must in its consequent quantify over interpretations and/or variable-
assignments that are supersets of, respectively, I and g. (For reasons of
symmetry, I have here chosen to quantify over supersets both of I and of g.)
reached this result by a priori reasoning, (AS) can be regarded as ade-
quate tout court (in the sense speciﬁed on p. 20 above).
Apart from being adequate, (AS) has the desirable feature of being
ﬂexible enough to yield sensible results when combined with differ-
ent conceptions of attributes. For instance, suppose we wish to adopt a
very ﬁne-grained conception on which attributes are distinct from their
double negations. The proper way to do this with minimal changes to
the rest of the framework would be to modify our deﬁnition of ‘entails’
(p. 13 above) in such a way that, under the revised deﬁnition, any for-
mula ϕ is inequivalent to its double negation ⌜¬¬ϕ⌝. Such a change
would in the ﬁrst place lead to a weakening of (P4), with the desired
result that any attribute A would count as distinct from ∼∼A. In ad-
dition, since the term ‘equivalent’ is also used in (AS), and the sense
it has there should be taken to be the same as the sense it has in (P4)
(for reasons described in footnote 60 above), the revised deﬁnition of
‘entails’ would have the further consequence that the double negation
of a simple attribute would no longer count as simple.64
Of course, no matter how coarse- or ﬁne-grained a conception of
attributes (AS) is combined with, it will not tell us anything very con-
crete as to which attributes are logically simple. For unless we supply
some concrete information about the metaphysics of speciﬁc attributes,
we will not receive any verdict as to whether, say, the property of being
an electron is logically simple, any more than we can expect to learn
from an adequate account of mereological simplicity whether cats or
horses are mereologically simple. However, it can reasonably be asked
whether the account, when combined with the framework of section 2,
allows us to show that the class of the simple attributes is closed un-
der certain operations, and also whether it allows us to show that the
64. As may be expected, the same goes for the single negation of a simple at-
tribute. For with (P4) weakened as indicated, the proof for the thesis (C2)
in section 3.4 below, according to which the negation of a simple attribute
(other than the identity relation) is again simple, will not go through.
philosophers’ imprint
- 26 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
simple attributes are in some ways sparse. These questions will be ad-
dressed in the following two subsections.
3.4
Closure
A relatively straightforward consequence of (AS) is to the effect that
the converse of any simple dyadic relation is also simple.
Proof sketch: Let R be any simple dyadic relation; we have to show that
the converse of R is also simple. Suppose ﬁrst that R is identical with the
identity relation, I. Given that, for any variables u and v, ⌜u = v⌝is equivalent
to ⌜v = u⌝, it follows from (P3) and (P4) (together with the semantics of λ-
expressions) that I is identical with its own converse. Hence, given that R is
identical with I, R is identical with its own converse. But R is simple, and so it
follows that the converse of R is simple.
Suppose next that R is distinct from I. We will use the following corollary
of (AS):
(ASC) Any attribute A other than the identity relation is logically simple iff, for
any interpretation I, variable-assignment g, constant F, and λ-expression
L: if A is denotedI,g by both F and L, then L has relative to I and g a
reduction whose matrix is equivalent to F(v1, v2, . . .), where v1, v2, . . . are
(in this order) the λ-variables of L.
That this follows from (AS) can be seen as follows. Consider the biconditional
⌜ϕ iff ψ⌝, where ϕ is the right-hand side of (AS) and ψ the right-hand side of
(ASC). To show that (ASC) follows from (AS), it is enough to show that this
biconditional follows from the assumption that A is an attribute other than the
identity relation. So let A be any such attribute. The left-to-right direction of
the mentioned biconditonal can then easily be veriﬁed using the transitivity of
reduction together with the fact that, relative to any interpretation, the constant
‘I’ denotes no attribute other than the identity relation (and hence does not
denote A), and the right-to-left direction is trivial.65
65. To see why (ASC) has to include the qualiﬁcation “other than the identity
relation”, note that, for any variables u and v, the formula ⌜I(u, v)⌝is equiv-
alent to ⌜I(u, v) = I(u, u)⌝. As a result, it follows from the assumptions of
our framework that the identity relation I is denoted by ‘λx, y (I(x, y) =
I(x, x))’ (or, written without the use of ‘=’: ‘λx, y I(I(x, y), I(x, x))’). Let
L be this λ-expression, let I and g be an interpretation and a variable-
assignment, and let F be a non-logical constant. Clearly, L does not have
a reduction relative to I and g whose matrix is equivalent to ⌜F(x, y)⌝, but
it does have a reduction (viz., itself) whose matrix is equivalent to ‘I(x, y)’.
Hence, without the requirement that A be distinct from I, the right-hand
side of (AS) will not imply the right-hand side of (ASC).
Given that I is denoted by ‘λx, y I(I(x, y), I(x, x))’, it follows from the
Let now I, g, F, and L be, respectively, an interpretation, a variable-
assignment, a constant, and a λ-expression such that the converse of R, i.e.,
λx, y R(y, x), is denotedI,g by both F and L. Let ϕ be the matrix of L, and let
v1 and v2 (in this order) be L’s λ-variables, so that L = ⌜λv1, v2 ϕ⌝. By (AS),
it is sufﬁcient to show that L has relative to I and g a reduction whose matrix
semantics of λ-expressions that the negation of the identity relation, i.e.,
∼I or the ‘distinctness relation’, is denoted by ‘λx, y ¬I(I(x, y), I(x, x))’. By
what has just been said, this latter λ-expression, call it ‘L∼’, does not have
a reduction (relative to any interpretation and variable-assignment) whose
matrix is equivalent to ⌜F(x, y)⌝, for any atomic term F. Hence, the distinct-
ness relation is not logically simple in the sense of (AS). It would be other-
wise if, for some constant D, we had deﬁned the concept of interpretation
in such a way that an interpretation is a (partial) function from constants
to entities that maps ‘I’ to I and D to ∼I; for in this case, the matrix of L∼
would have been equivalent to ⌜D(x, y)⌝. We can thus see that the logical
simplicity of the distinctness relation is under (AS) made to depend on an
arbitrary feature of our framework or, more precisely, on an arbitrary fea-
ture of our deﬁnition of ‘interpretation’, which is arguably undesirable. To
remedy this defect, we could weaken the right-hand side of (AS) to obtain
the following, more complicated analysis:
(AS′) An attribute A is logically simple iff, for any interpretation I, variable-
assignment g, and λ-expression L: if L denotesI,g A, then there exist an
interpretation I′ ⊇I, a variable-assignment g′ ⊇g, a formula ϕ, and an
atomic term F that satisfy the following two conditions:
(i) L has relative to I′ and g′ a reduction whose matrix is equivalent to
ϕ.
(ii) For any variables v1, v2, . . .: if v1, v2, . . . are (in this order) the λ-
variables of L, then ⌜λv1, v2, . . . ϕ⌝has relative to I′ and g′ a re-
duction whose matrix is equivalent to ⌜F(v1, v2, . . .)⌝.
To see how this repairs the mentioned defect of (AS), consider again L∼,
and let ϕ be the formula ⌜¬I(x, y)⌝: the matrix of L∼is then equivalent
to ϕ, so that, a fortiori, L∼has a reduction (relative to any interpretation
and variable-assignment) whose matrix is equivalent to ϕ; and for a suit-
able interpretation I, variable-assignment g, and atomic term F (where F
denotesI,g ∼I), the λ-expression ⌜λx, y ϕ⌝has relative to I and g a reduc-
tion ⌜λx, y ¬(λx, y ¬F(x, y))(x, y)⌝, whose matrix is equivalent to ⌜F(x, y)⌝.
Thus, the fact that the distinctness relation is denoted by L∼does not pose
an obstacle to its being classiﬁed as logically simple under (AS′).
Insofar as (AS′) fails to be sensitive to an arbitrary feature of our frame-
work, it is arguably superior to (AS). On the other hand, it is also signiﬁ-
cantly more complicated, and the ﬂaw of (AS) that is here under discussion
only seems to affect (in the present framework) the classiﬁcation of the dis-
tinctness relation. For this reason, I propose that we stick with (AS).
philosophers’ imprint
- 27 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
is equivalent to ⌜F(v1, v2)⌝. To this end, let ϕ′ be the result of replacing in ϕ
the free occurrences of v1 with occurrences of v2 and vice versa, if necessary
after a renaming of bound variables, so that any replacing occurrences of v1
and v2 are also free.66 Since L denotesI,g the converse of R, it follows from the
semantics of λ-expressions that ⌜λv2, v1 ϕ′⌝also denotesI,g the converse of R;
and so ⌜λv1, v2 ϕ′⌝denotesI,g R itself. Let L′ be this latter λ-expression, let G
be a constant not in the domain of I (and hence not occurring in L or L′, nor
identical with ‘I’), and let I′ be an interpretation that is just like I, except that it
maps G to R. (Conceiving of interpretations as classes of ordered pairs, we thus
have I′ = I ∪{(G, R)}.) Since L′ denotes R relative to I and g, it follows that
L′ denotes R also relative to I′ and g. Moreover, since R is simple and distinct
from I, it follows from (ASC) that L′ has relative to I′ and g a reduction whose
matrix is equivalent to ⌜G(v1, v2)⌝. It is then clear, given how L′ results from
L, that L has relative to I′ and g a reduction L′′ whose matrix is equivalent to
⌜G(v2, v1)⌝. Let now ϕ′′ be the matrix of L′′, and let ψ be the result of replacing
in ϕ′′ every occurrence of G with ⌜(λx, y F(y, x))⌝. Since G is coreferentialI′,g
with ⌜(λx, y F(y, x))⌝, and since F is a constant, it follows that ⌜λv1, v2 ψ⌝is a
reduction of L′′—and hence of L—relative to I′ and g. Since G occurs neither
in ψ nor in L, ⌜λv1, v2 ψ⌝is a reduction of L also relative to I and g. Moreover,
since G is distinct from the logical constant ‘I’, and since ϕ′′ is equivalent to
⌜G(v2, v1)⌝, it can be seen that ψ is equivalent to ⌜(λx, y F(y, x))(v2, v1)⌝and
hence to ⌜F(v1, v2)⌝. So L has relative to I and g a reduction whose matrix is
equivalent to ⌜F(v1, v2)⌝, as required.
This result can be straightforwardly generalized using the concept of
an attribute’s ‘permutations’, which is itself a generalization of the con-
cept of a dyadic relation’s converse:
(P) A permutation of a κ-adic attribute A is any attribute that is, rela-
tive to some interpretation I and variable-assignment g, denoted by
⌜λv1, v2, . . . F(u1, u2, . . .)⌝, where F is a constant that denotes A rel-
ative to I and g, and where the vi and ui are, respectively, κ-many
pairwise distinct variables such that {u1, u2, . . .} = {v1, v2, . . .}.
In the special case in which A is dyadic, it has two permutations, viz.,
A itself and its converse. The above result can now be given the follow-
ing, more general form, whose proof can be easily obtained from the
previous one:
66. For example, if ϕ is ⌜(G(v1) ∧∃v1 H(v1, v2))⌝, for two constants G and H,
then ϕ′ will be ⌜(G(v2) ∧∃u H(u, v1))⌝, for some variable u distinct from
v1.
(C1) For any logically simple relation R, any permutation of R is logi-
cally simple.
Similarly it can be shown that:
(C2) For any logically simple attribute A other than the identity relation,
the negation of A is logically simple.
Proof sketch: The proof is structurally nearly identical to the second part of
the previous one. To avoid clutter, we will consider only the case in which A is
a simple dyadic relation; the argument will easily generalize to other adicities.
Let I, g, F, and L be, respectively, an interpretation, a variable-assignment,
a constant, and a λ-expression such that the negation of A is denotedI,g by
both F and L. Let ϕ be the matrix of L, and let v1 and v2 (in this order) be L’s
λ-variables, so that L = ⌜λv1, v2 ϕ⌝. By (AS), it is sufﬁcient to show that L has
relative to I and g a reduction whose matrix is equivalent to ⌜F(v1, v2)⌝. Since L
denotesI,g the negation of A, it follows straightforwardly from the assumptions
of our framework (in particular (P3) and (P4)), together with the semantics of
λ-expressions, that ⌜λv1, v2 ¬ϕ⌝denotes A itself. Let now G be a constant not
in the domain of I (and hence neither occurring in ϕ nor identical with ‘I’),
and let I′ be an interpretation that is just like I, except that it maps G to A.
Since the λ-expression ⌜λv1, v2 ¬ϕ⌝denotes A relative to I and g, it denotes
A also relative to I′ and g. Moreover, since A is simple and distinct from I,
it follows from (ASC) (see previous page) that ⌜λv1, v2 ¬ϕ⌝has relative to I′
and g a reduction whose matrix is equivalent to ⌜G(v1, v2)⌝. It is then clear
that L, i.e., ⌜λv1, v2 ϕ⌝, has relative to I′ and g a reduction L′ whose matrix is
equivalent to ⌜¬G(v1, v2)⌝. Let ϕ′ be the matrix of L′, and let ψ be the result
of replacing in ϕ′ every occurrence of G with ⌜(λx, y ¬F(x, y))⌝. Since G is
relative to I′ and g coreferential with ⌜(λx, y ¬F(x, y))⌝and F a constant, it
follows that ⌜λv1, v2 ψ⌝is a reduction of L′—and hence of L—relative to I′ and
g. Given that G occurs neither in ψ nor in L, ⌜λv1, v2 ψ⌝is a reduction of L also
relative to I and g. Moreover, since G is distinct from ‘I’ and ϕ′ is equivalent to
⌜¬G(v1, v2)⌝, it can be seen that ψ is equivalent to ⌜¬(λx, y ¬F(x, y))(v1, v2)⌝
and hence to ⌜F(v1, v2)⌝. So L has relative to I and g a reduction whose matrix
is equivalent to ⌜F(v1, v2)⌝, as required.
Thus, the class of the logically simple attributes is closed under per-
mutation, and the class of the logically simple attributes (other than
identity) is closed also under negation.67 This latter result marks a sig-
niﬁcant contrast between the concept of a logically simple attribute and
67. N.B.: This talk of the “logically simple attributes other than identity” is not
meant to presuppose that the identity relation is logically simple.
philosophers’ imprint
- 28 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
Lewis’s concept of perfect naturalness, for Lewis was rather strongly
committed to the view that the negation of a perfectly natural attribute
is not itself perfectly natural.68 It should be kept in mind, however, that
(C2) is not a consequence of (AS) alone, but rather a consequence of
(AS) in combination with our moderately coarse-grained conception of
attributes. If Lewis had embraced a suitably ﬁne-grained conception of
attributes, for instance along the lines sketched in his (1986, 56f.), then
he might conceivably have found (AS) to be an adequate account of
perfect naturalness; for under such a conception it would no longer
be true that the double negation of an attribute is identical with the
attribute itself, so that the proof for (C2) could not be completed. But
in the end, Lewis did not adopt a ﬁne-grained conception of attributes,
while he was consistently committed to the view that the negations
of perfectly natural attributes are not themselves perfectly natural. So
it remains problematic to think of Lewis’s notion of a perfectly natu-
ral attribute as coextensive with that of a simple attribute (even apart
from the fact that, in Lewis’s system, properties and relations are not
sui generis entities but rather set-theoretic constructions over a space of
possibilia).
An objector might at this point argue that, since (AS) in combina-
tion with the assumptions of our framework leads to the result that
the negation of a simple attribute (other than identity) is again simple,
there must be something wrong either with (AS) or with our frame-
work.69 As far as I can see, this objection may take one of two forms.
First, it may be based on the idea that the negation of a simple
attribute just cannot be simple. To this, it can be replied that it is not
clear on what grounds one could hold that “the negation of a simple at-
tribute just cannot be simple”, unless the objector takes it to be indepen-
dently plausible that some Armstrongian (or hyper-Armstrongian70)
theory of universals is true, and identiﬁes the simple attributes with
68. E.g., see his (2009, 204).
69. Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pressing this issue.
70. Cf. p. 17 above.
those universals. But whether any such theory is true is itself very
much an open question. It accordingly seems to be good policy, where
possible, not to rely on such a theory—a policy that Lewis adhered to,
for example, when he tried to explicate his concept of perfect natural-
ness.71
Second and more interestingly, the objection may rest on the
premise that there is a very deep and important distinction to be drawn
between ‘positive’ and ‘negative’ attributes, and that it would be desir-
able if this distinction were reﬂected by our account of attribute sim-
plicity (e.g., in such a way that only ‘positive’ attributes can count as
simple). I suspect that something like this worry will be at the root of
at least some philosophers’ skepticism about (C2). An effective way to
respond to it would be to ask where the conviction comes from that
“there is a very deep and important distinction to be drawn between
positive and negative attributes”. Possibly, it comes again from a com-
mitment to something like an Armstrongian theory of universals. In
this case, it can once more be replied that it would be good to see how
far we can get without relying on such a theory. But alternatively (and
perhaps additionally), the conviction may come from some empirical
observations that militate in favor of a sharp divide between positive
and negative attributes.
The thesis that there must be some such distinction to be drawn is
admittedly hard to deny, for it seems clear that there must be something
that makes it natural to regard properties such as being blue, being an
electron, and being human as ‘positive’ while their respective negations
are regarded as ‘negative’. But it is not clear how metaphysically deep
this distinction really cuts. The very fact that the divide between pos-
itive and negative attributes is such a pretheoretically obvious feature
of our Lebenswelt should probably be taken as a sign that the distinc-
tion is not exactly fundamental. (For how likely is it that truths of
fundamental metaphysics can be so easily read off the phenomena?72)
71. For similar considerations, see section 3.1 above.
72. There is also the question of how widely the distinction is applicable: the
philosophers’ imprint
- 29 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
Moreover, one can arguably give an account of this distinction that is
at least prima facie more plausible, insofar as it does not presuppose
that we have such easy access to deep metaphysical facts. On this ac-
count, what makes a given attribute ‘positive’ or ‘negative’ is simply
the role it plays in the natural order of things (to the extent that we
have epistemic access to it). For example, as a matter of physical law
or possibly because of the metaphysics of the relevant properties, it
never happens that something that is blue all over is also yellow all
over, but things that are non-blue can as easily be yellow as they can
be non-yellow. Likewise, it never happens that an electron is also a
human being, but there are many non-electrons that are human and
even more that are non-human. What examples like these suggest is
that the attributes we are tempted to call ‘positive’ are just those that
are more restrictive than their respective negations as to what other
attributes they can—within the bounds of nomological necessity—be
coinstantiated with. If this points at least roughly in the direction of
an adequate account of the distinction between positive and negative
attributes, then there seems to be no compelling reason to think that
the distinction has anything to do with logical simplicity.
3.5
Analyzability and Sparseness
Whereas (C2) implies that the simple attributes are in at least one way
more abundant than one might have expected, a further consequence
of (AS) implies that the simple attributes are in at least one important
way sparse. To formulate this consequence, we ﬁrst have to introduce
some further terminology. It will be useful to begin with a basic notion
of analyzability:
(A) An entity x is analyzable in terms of an entity y iff there exist an
interpretation I, a variable-assignment g, and terms t and u such
predicate ‘has eternal life’ rings positive while ‘is immortal’ rings negative—
but apparently, both predicates correspond to the very same property. (Cf.
Frege [1919, 150f.].)
that t contains a free occurrence of u and x and y are respectively
denotedI,g by t and u.
Thus, if the property of being a bachelor is (relative to some interpre-
tation) denoted by ‘λx (man(x) ∧¬married(x))’, where the constant
‘married’ denotes (relative to that same interpretation) the property of
being married, then we can derive from this that the property of being a
bachelor is analyzable in terms of the property of being married.
The concept of analyzability, as deﬁned in (A), can be fairly de-
scribed as ‘logico-metaphysical’. For if two entities x and y are respec-
tively denoted by two terms t and u, and t contains a free occurrence
of u, then t will have to be some formula or λ-expression, unless it is
identical with u. This contrasts with any notion of analyzability that
can be given (in some framework other than the present one) a deﬁni-
tion that is on the one hand analogous to (A) but on the other hand
such that t is in it allowed to be, e.g., a set-expression ⌜{. . . , u, . . .}⌝or
some expression ⌜F(. . . , u, . . .)⌝, where F may denote an arbitrary func-
tion. It also contrasts, for obvious reasons, with any aprioristic notion
of analyzability, i.e., with any notion under which an entity x counts
as ‘analyzable’ in terms of an entity y just in case it is somehow a priori
that x can be adequately analyzed in terms of y. For, to take a standard
example, it is hardly an a priori fact that the property of being water is
analyzable in terms of such properties as being oxygen, being a proton,
being a quark, etc.73
73. Nominalists might here object that science has never told us anything at all
about the alleged property of being water; instead, it has merely told us that
‘to be water is to be H2O’, or perhaps even only that every portion of water
is at the same time a portion of H2O. This latter hypothesis, however—that
all we’ve been told is that ‘water’ and ‘H2O’ are coextensive—can presum-
ably be dismissed on the basis of considerations like those given by Rayo
(2013, 18ff.). This leaves us with the ﬁrst hypothesis: that we’ve learned
nothing more than that ‘to be water is (or: “just is”) to be H2O’. This hy-
pothesis is certainly correct insofar as science does not explicitly commit us
to the existence of properties. However, given that we accept an abundant
ontology of attributes, and in particular assuming that there exists such a
thing as the property of being water, the at ﬁrst blush most natural way in
which a claim such as ‘To be water is to be H2O’ may be understood (or at
philosophers’ imprint
- 30 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
It may be worth pointing out that the present concept of logico-
metaphysical analyzability is rather broad. For instance, every entity
is under (A) analyzable in terms of itself; and given (P3) and (P4), it
further follows that every attribute and every state of affairs is analyz-
any rate, the best way in which it may be assimilated into our framework)
is to understand it as saying that the property of being water is identical
with the property of being H2O, which is another way of saying that being
water is the property of consisting of some number of oxygen atoms and twice
that number of hydrogen atoms, bound together in such-and-such ways. (This is
a simpliﬁcation; but of course, to say that to be water is to be H2O is itself
fairly inaccurate—cf. Tahko [2015] and references therein.)
This procedure of assimilating ‘just is’ statements (to use Rayo’s term) to
‘property identities’ is not the only way in which we can understand such
claims. It had better not; for, as Dorr (MS) points out (essentially repeating
an argument by Correia [2006, 761f.]), trying to understand the following
claim in terms of properties leads straight into trouble:
(∗) To be a non-self-instantiator is (or “just is”) to fail to instantiate oneself.
If one were to interpret this as stating that the property of being a non-
self-instantiator is identical with the property of failing to instantiate oneself,
one would be led into Russell’s paradox. Dorr takes this to be a reason for
adopting a primitive ‘just is’ operator. But arguably, this move will not be
forced upon us as long as we have at our disposal the concept of a state
of affairs. For it seems that, with the help of this concept, (∗) can tolerably
well be paraphrased as follows:
(†) For any entity x and any state of affairs s: x is a non-self-instantiator in
s iff x fails to instantiate itself in s.
The locution ‘x ϕs in s’ that is employed in this paraphrase can be read as
shorthand for ‘s is a sufﬁcient condition for its being the case that x ϕs’.
It is then a further question whether this notion of sufﬁciency should be
regarded as a primitive (presumably of one’s semantic framework, along
with, e.g., the concept of denotation), or whether it can be explicated in
other terms. At any rate, the notion can be expected to be useful in provid-
ing something like a semantics for the monadic predicates of the language
under consideration. For instance, we can say that, for any entity x and any
state of affairs s: s is a sufﬁcient condition for its being the case that x is a
non-self-instantiator iff either (a) x is not a property and s is identical with
s ∧(x = x), or (b) x is a property and s is identical with s ∧¬x(x).
To someone who has adopted a ‘just is’ operator as a piece of primitive
terminology, any proposal to paraphrase (∗) by something along the lines
of (†) may appear misguided from the outset. But such a way of looking at
the matter seems to be warranted only if one has sufﬁcient reason to think
that a primitive ‘just is’ operator is in fact needed.
able in terms of its own negation as well as in terms of the identity
relation.74 The notion is thus considerably broader than our ordinary
usage of ‘analyzable’ may suggest. Unsurprisingly, it is transitive: if an
entity x is analyzable in terms of some entity that is again analyzable
in terms of some entity y, then x is likewise analyzable in terms of y.
In the next step, we have to introduce the notion of an entity’s being
‘fully analyzable’ in terms of a set of entities:
(FA) An entity x is fully analyzable in terms of a set S iff the following
two conditions are satisﬁed:
(i) x is analyzable in terms of each member of S.
(ii) There exist an interpretation I, a variable-assignment g, and a
term t such that: x is denotedI,g by t, and every variable or con-
stant that has a free occurrence in t denotesI,g a member of S.
Trivially, every entity x is fully analyzable in terms of the set {x}; and
no entity whatsoever is fully analyzable in terms of the empty set. (The
latter fact is in part due to the syntax of formulas and λ-expressions,
which requires that each formula or λ-expression contain at least one
free occurrence of a variable or constant.) Further, if x is an attribute
or state of affairs that is fully analyzable in terms of some set S, then x
will also be fully analyzable in terms of S ∪{I}; but the converse need
not hold.75
Finally, on the basis of the concept just introduced, we can deﬁne
the concept of a ‘purely logical’ entity:
(PL) An entity is purely logical iff it is fully analyzable in terms of {I}.
74. For example, any state of affairs s is identical with s ∧(s = s), and any
property P is identical with λx (P(x) ∧(x = x)).
75. To forestall a possible misunderstanding, note that ‘I’ but not ‘{I}’ is an
expression of the formal language described in section 2. Like all expres-
sions of that language, ‘I’ should here be interpreted in accordance with
the semantics speciﬁed in section 2.3, and should thus be taken to denote
the identity relation. Consequently, ‘{I}’ should be taken to denote the set
that has the identity relation as its only member.
philosophers’ imprint
- 31 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
The purely logical entities include, for example, the identity relation,
the property of being self-identical, and the state of affairs that every-
thing is self-identical. Clearly, every purely logical entity is either an
attribute or a state of affairs.
Our sparseness claim can now be stated as follows:
(S) For any attribute A and for any entity x: if A is analyzable in terms
of x, but x is neither purely logical nor fully analyzable in terms of
{A, I}, then A is logically complex.
Proof sketch: Let A and x be as described in the antedecent of (S), and sup-
pose for reductio that A is logically simple. Since A is analyzable in terms of x,
there will exist an interpretation I, a variable-assignment g, a λ-expression L,
and a constant c such that the following three conditions are satisﬁed:
(1) L denotesI,g A.
(2) c denotesI,g x.
(3) L contains a free occurrence of c.
Given that A is simple, it follows from (1) by (AS) that there exist an interpre-
tation I′ ⊇I, a variable-assignment g′ ⊇g, a λ-expression L′, and an atomic
term F such that:
(4) L′ is relative to I′ and g′ a reduction of L, and
(5) The matrix of L′ is equivalent to ⌜F(v1, v2, . . .)⌝, where v1, v2, . . . are the
λ-variables of L (as well as of L′).76
From (1) and (4), it now follows that L′ denotesI′,g′ A. Hence, given (5) and
our postulates (P3) and (P4) (together with the semantics of λ-expressions), we
have that
(6) F denotesI′,g′ A.
Meanwhile, from (2)–(4), we can infer that there exists a term t (not necessarily
distinct from c) such that:
(7) t denotesI′,g′ x, and
76. As in the rest of this paper, the relevant notion of equivalence is the one
speciﬁed in section 2.4 above. (Cf. also footnote 60, p. 23.) This is of im-
portance here because the inference that yields (10) below would not go
through if we were instead operating with the classical concept of equiva-
lence.
(8) L′ results from L by replacing (possibly among other things) a free occur-
rence of c with t.
Given (4) and (8), we further have:
(9) For any term τ: if τ occurs free in t, then τ occurs free also in the matrix of
L′ and is not identical with any of L’s λ-variables.
And from (5) we can infer that:
(10) For any atomic term τ: if τ occurs free in the matrix of L′, then τ is identical
with ‘I’ or F or one of L’s λ-variables.
Together with (9), this yields:
(11) For any atomic term τ: if τ occurs free in t, then τ is identical with either
‘I’ or F.
From (6), (7), and (11), it now follows that
(12) x is either purely logical or fully analyzable in terms of {A} or {A, I}.
But by hypothesis, x is neither purely logical nor fully analyzable in terms of
{A, I}. Hence,
(13) x is fully analyzable in terms of {A}.
Now this means that x is either identical with A or denoted (relative to a
suitable interpretation and variable-assignment) by a formula or λ-expression.
In either case, x is an attribute or state of affairs that is fully analyzable in terms
of {A}. But then it follows that x is fully analyzable in terms of {A, I}, contrary
to hypothesis. This completes the reductio.
As a corollary, we can note the following:
(SC) For any attribute A and any entities x and y: if A is analyzable in
terms of both x and y, neither x nor y is purely logical, and at least
one of x and y is not analyzable in terms of the other, then A is
logically complex.
Proof: Let A, x, and y be as described in the antecedent of (SC), and suppose
for reductio that A is logically simple. Given that A is simple and analyzable in
terms of both x and y, it follows from (S) that both x and y are either purely
logical or fully analyzable in terms of {A, I}. But by hypothesis, neither x nor
y is purely logical, and so it follows that both x and y must be analyzable in
terms of A. By the transitivity of analyzability, we then have that x and y are
analyzable in terms of each other, contrary to hypothesis.
philosophers’ imprint
- 32 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
Thus, if A and B are any two κ-adic attributes of which neither is
purely logical, and at least one of which is not analyzable in terms of
the other, then their various Boolean combinations—such as (A & B),
(A v B), and (A ≡B)—are all logically complex. For example, suppose
(as seems plausible) that the properties of being unmarried and being a
man both fail to be purely logical, and that at least one of them fails
to be analyzable in terms of the other. It then follows from (SC) that
the property of being an unmarried man, i.e., the conjunction of the two
properties in question, is complex.77
As this example illustrates, (S) does not deliver any verdict on the
complexity of a given attribute without some input as to what entities
are analyzable in terms of which attributes. An objector might now in-
sist that something more needs to be said as to how one can tell whether
a given entity is analyzable in terms of such-and-such attributes. She
may grant that we already have some fairly good idea of how scientiﬁc
inquiry can lead to the insight that the property of being water is an-
alyzable in terms of the properties of being hydrogen and being oxygen,
or to the realization that the property of being green is analyzable in
terms of certain attributes having to do with the reﬂection (as well as
emission and transmission) of visible light. But on the face of it, the
scientiﬁc methods that yield such results do not seem likely to allow
us to rule out any thesis to the effect that a given attribute or state of
affairs is analyzable in terms of such-and-such attributes. For example,
it is far from clear what scientiﬁc methods could be used to rule out the
thesis that the property of being green is identical with the ‘gruesome’
disjunction of, on the one hand, the property of being green and observed
before the year 2050 AD and, on the other hand, the property of being
green and observed during or after the year 2050 AD. The putative problem
77. The same conclusion can also be reached by a slightly different route. For
one may plausibly suppose that the property of being unmarried (or alter-
natively, the property of being a man) is neither purely logical nor fully
analyzable in terms of {bachelor, I}, where ‘bachelor’ denotes the property
of being an unmarried man. It then follows directly from (S) that being an
unmarried man is complex.
lies of course in the fact that this disjunction is a priori coextensive with
the property of being green, so that it is on the face of it unclear how
anyone might, by scientiﬁc methods or otherwise, drive an epistemic
wedge between the two.
In response to this worry, it is tempting to suggest that it sees an
epistemological problem where there is only a problem of semantics.
For it might be replied that the question is not: ‘How can we tell
whether the property of being green is analyzable in terms of such-
and-such other properties?’, but rather: ‘What would be a reasonable
property for our predicate “green” to pick out?’. And a reasonable se-
mantics for a given natural language will presumably not assign to the
predicates of that language any needlessly complex semantic values.
In particular, a reasonable semantics of English will not assign to the
word ‘green’ a property (P & Q) v (P & ∼Q) where P alone would do
just ﬁne.78
78. Some readers may suspect that the interpretive maxim at play here—viz.,
that one should avoid unmotivated complexity in the semantic values one
ascribes to the expressions of a language—can also be appealed to in argu-
ing that a naïve student of arithmetic should normally be regarded as en-
gaged in addition rather than ‘quaddition’. (For discussion of related ideas,
see Kripke [1982, 38f.] and, e.g., Lewis [1983, 374–77], Humphrey [1999],
and Williams [2007]. The issue is also drawn attention to by Sider [2011,
§3.2].) But the matter is hardly straightforward. In the ﬁrst place, it is not
obvious what kind of semantic value is under discussion. If the semantic
value of ‘plus’ is the class of all tuples (x, y, z) such that z = x + y, then this
value is on the face of it far more complex than, e.g., the class of all tuples
(x, y, z) such that: x, y ∈{1, . . . , 500}; z = x + y for x, y ∈{1, . . . , 100}; and
z = 5 for x, y ∈{101, . . . , 500}. For this second class has only ﬁnitely many
members. Nor is the situation any clearer if ‘plus’ is instead taken to refer
to an algorithm, for what goes on in a person’s head when doing arithmetic
can presumably be quite complicated (even on the ‘algorithmic level’): for
instance, he or she may employ different strategies depending on whether
the numbers involved are large or small, etc. For these reasons, the idea
that one should interpret the naïve student of arithmetic as engaged in ad-
dition rather than quaddition simply “because addition is simpler” strikes
me as dubious. Still, it is arguable that considerations of simplicity have
some role to play in this connection. In particular, they may plausibly be
appealed to in deciding which features of a given cognitive process should
be considered ‘malfunctions’. (This might be further elaborated into some-
thing like a Lewisian best-system account of cognitive semantics.) But this
philosophers’ imprint
- 33 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
I think that this response is by and large correct—but only if the
objector is right in assuming that the property of being green is distinct
from the mentioned disjunction. On reﬂection, however, it is not so
obvious that this assumption is true. After all, our physical knowledge
is far from complete. So it is conceivable (albeit somewhat implausible)
that, as we dig deeper into the physics and metaphysics of being green
and being observed before the year 2050 AD, it will eventually emerge that
any entity in terms of which the latter property is analyzable is also an
entity in terms of which being green is analyzable. And if this should
be the case, then, given the assumptions of our framework (notably,
again, (P3) and (P4)), it will have to be conceded that being green is
indeed identical with the ‘gruesome’ disjunction mentioned above.79
To conclude this section, let us very brieﬂy consider whether there
might be ‘logically gunky’ attributes and states of affairs. Since, by def-
inition, an entity is mereologically gunky iff it has no atomic (i.e., mere-
ologically simple) parts,80 we should analogously say that an attribute
or state of affairs is logically gunky iff it is not analyzable in terms of
any logically simple attribute or state of affairs.81 Prima facie it may well
seem epistemically possible that there should exist some attributes or
states of affairs that are gunky in this sense. In the present framework,
however, the hypothesis that there exists such ‘logical gunk’ conﬂicts
with the rather plausible assumption that the identity relation is log-
ically simple.82 In fact, it even conﬂicts with the weaker assumption
would clearly not be an application of the maxim in question, which only
concerns the simplicity of semantic values.
79. The word ‘gruesome’ arguably constitutes something of an exaggeration
here, since the disjunction in question is a priori coextensive with the (rela-
tively) well-behaved property of being green. It is thus a far cry from such
paradigmatically ‘gruesome’ attributes as the property of being grue.
80. Cf. Lewis (1991, 20).
81. An analysis of the concept of a logically simple state of affairs will be given
at the beginning of the next section.
82. To see the plausibility of this assumption, suppose it were false. Then the
identity relation would have to be denoted, relative to some interpretation
I and variable-assignment g, by some λ-expression L that does relative to I
that the identity relation is logically non-gunky. For, as already men-
tioned, every attribute and state of affairs is in the present framework
analyzable in terms of the identity relation. So, if the identity relation is
logically non-gunky, then, by the transitivity of ‘is analyzable in terms
of’, every attribute or state of affairs is logically non-gunky as well.
4.
Conclusion
In the previous section, we have developed an account of logical sim-
plicity as applied to attributes. With the help of the assumptions of the
framework described in section 2, we have then derived some conse-
quences of this account. In particular, we have shown that the permu-
tations and negations of logically simple attributes (at least where the
latter are distinct from the identity relation) are again simple, and we
have also derived a useful sparseness result.
From here, we can go on in a number of directions. Most press-
ingly, we can (and should) investigate in detail the various philosophi-
cal applications to which the distinction between simple and complex
attributes lends itself. Most temptingly, we can (and should) explore
what other distinctions can be drawn by following a similar approach.
To begin with the latter, a particularly low-hanging fruit is the distinc-
tion between simple and complex states of affairs. This distinction can
be drawn in almost perfect analogy to the way in which we have (in sec-
tion 3.3) drawn the distinction between simple and complex attributes.
For we can say that
(SAS) A state of affairs s is logically simple iff, for any interpretation I,
variable-assignment g, and formula ϕ: if ϕ denotesI,g s, then there
and g not have a reduction whose matrix is equivalent to ⌜I(v1, v2)⌝, where
v1 and v2 are L’s λ-variables. But what might L be? Or, more pointedly:
what could the attributes or other entities be that are made reference to in
L’s matrix—entities in terms of which the identity relation is supposedly
analyzable? It is extremely difﬁcult to see what those entities could be, and
this perplexity can hardly be attributed to some lack of knowledge as to
how identity can be analyzed. After all, it does not seem as if the present
concept of identity were particularly thick and mysterious.
philosophers’ imprint
- 34 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
exist an interpretation I′ ⊇I, a variable-assignment g′ ⊇g, and an
atomic term t such that ϕ has relative to I′ and g′ a reduction that
is equivalent to ⌜¬¬t⌝.83
Somewhat further aﬁeld, we can try to put our framework to use in
developing analyses of a range of concepts that correspond to different
kinds of complex attribute, such as that of a disjunctive attribute, a
relational property, or an extrinsic property.
But more urgent than these further projects is (arguably) an inves-
tigation into the philosophical work that can be done with the help
of the distinction between simple and complex attributes. The proba-
bly most salient question is whether our distinction can do the same
work as Lewis’s distinction between perfectly natural and less-than-
perfectly natural attributes. Two potential applications that fall under
this rubric have already been hinted at in the Introduction: ﬁrst, a best-
system account of lawhood, and second, an account of duplication
along the lines of Lewis (1986, 61). A third potential application, in
meta-semantics, has been alluded to in the previous section (p. 33). Let
us consider the ﬁrst of these applications in somewhat greater detail.
83. For the relevant concept of reduction, see p. 24 above; for the relevant con-
cept of equivalence, see p. 13. The double negation sign on the last line
should be taken to be nothing more than a technical trick, needed here
merely to obtain from t a formula that is guaranteed to denote the same
state of affairs as t itself (as long as t itself denotes a state of affairs). To
be sure, part of what guarantees this is our postulate (P4), and if (P4) were
weakened to allow for a very ﬁne-grained conception of attributes, then
some other solution would have to be found. For instance, one might stip-
ulate that, for any term t, the expression ⌜[t]⌝is a formula, and has a de-
notation relative to an interpretation I and a variable-assignment g if and
only if t denotesI,g a state of affairs, in which case ⌜[t]⌝denotesI,g that same
state of affairs. The ‘¬¬t’ on the last line of (SAS) could then be replaced
with ‘[t]’.
It may also be worth pointing out in this connection that what Russell
(1918/19, §1) calls ‘atomic facts’—i.e., facts “which consist in the posses-
sion of a quality by some particular thing”—are not logically simple in the
present sense. For all we know, there might not exist any simple states of
affairs at all; but it is hard to imagine what form (short of an oracle) any
evidence for or against their existence might take.
As mentioned in the Introduction, Lewis’s appeal to the concept
of a perfectly natural attribute in the context of his account of law-
hood was motivated by the need to avoid the consequence that an
axiom like ‘∀x F(x)’ would be included in an ideal system, where the
atomic predicate ‘F’ stands, e.g., for a property P that is instantiated
by all and only those things that exist in the actual world. This moti-
vation has force regardless of whether one buys into an ontology of
possible worlds or accepts the existence of a property P as just de-
scribed. For essentially the same problem will also arise if P is merely
a ‘mighty’ property, where a κ-adic attribute A is mighty just in case
there exists a λ-expression L such that (i) A is relative to some interpre-
tation and variable-assignment denoted by L and (ii) the matrix of L,
or some variant of it, provides an extremely detailed description of the
universe.84,85 (Just how detailed the description would have to be is
admittedly no precise matter.) The axiom ‘∀x F(x)’ would then still be
very strong, and may strictly imply various regularities that we would
not wish to regard as laws of nature. In Lewis’s account, this problem
is dealt with by the requirement that the respective system’s primi-
tive vocabulary should only refer to perfectly natural attributes. Sup-
pose now that we instead adopt the analogous requirement in which
‘perfectly natural’ is replaced with ‘logically simple’. If this modiﬁed
requirement is to solve the problem, it will have to turn out that all
mighty properties are logically complex.
84. Since L is a λ-expression, each of its λ-variables will have to occur free in its
matrix (see p. 7 above), and so any ‘description’ that L’s matrix provides of
the world will have to take the form of an open sentence. Accordingly, the
term ‘description’ should here be understood in a somewhat loose sense.
85. If ϕ is the matrix of L, then a ‘variant’ of ϕ should be taken to be any
formula that is entailed by either ⌜ϕ ∧ψ⌝or ⌜¬ϕ ∧ψ⌝, where ψ is some
comparatively simple further formula. (As a special case, ⌜¬ϕ⌝is a variant
of ϕ.) To see the need for this generalization, suppose that ϕ is equivalent
to a certain conditional ⌜ψ →χ⌝, where ψ is comparatively simple and χ
(rather than ϕ itself) provides a “detailed description of the universe”. The
property denoted by ⌜λv ϕ⌝(where v is L’s λ-variable) will then pose es-
sentially the same problem for a best-system account of lawhood as would
be posed if ϕ itself provided that description.
philosophers’ imprint
- 35 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
Does our account have this consequence? In light of the sparseness
result (S) of section 3.5, the answer seems to be ‘yes’; for that result sug-
gests that mighty properties are indeed complex. Recall that, according
to a corollary of (S), no simple attribute is analyzable in terms of any
two entities of which neither is purely logical and at least one fails to
be analyzable in terms of the other.86 Meanwhile, if a given attribute is
to count as ‘mighty’, then, by deﬁnition, that attribute will have to be
denoted (relative to some interpretation and variable-assignment) by a
λ-expression whose matrix is such that either it or some variant of it
provides an extremely detailed description of the universe. It is reason-
able to expect that most formulas of this sort will make reference to at
least two attributes that are such that neither of them is purely logical
and at least one of them fails to be analyzable in terms of the other.
(A prima facie plausible example for such a pair of attributes would be
the property of being a photon and the relation of being one meter apart.)
If L is a λ-expression whose matrix is a formula of this sort, then (S)
entails, via the mentioned corollary, that the attribute denoted by L is
logically complex.
In this way, (S) establishes the logical complexity of a very broad
range of mighty attributes. Although there is more to be said here,
these considerations hopefully begin to make it seem plausible that
the concept of a logically simple attribute can serve as a workable sub-
stitute for the concept of a perfectly natural attribute in the context
of a Lewis-style account of lawhood. And if it is workable, it is ar-
guably superior: for as we have seen, the concept of a logically simple
attribute is amenable to analysis, and that analysis requires neither a
primitive notion of naturalness or fundamentality, nor an Armstron-
gian (or otherwise ‘sparse’) ontology of universals. In addition, there
is an epistemological argument in the ofﬁng. For as long as we operate
with a primitive concept of perfect naturalness, it will be hard to see
86. For the deﬁnitions of ‘analyzable’ and ‘purely logical’, see the ﬁrst half of
section 3.5.
why scientiﬁc inquiry should ever tend to yield theories whose basic
predicates pick out perfectly natural attributes.87
By contrast, the concept of a logically simple attribute ﬁts seam-
lessly into the (at least prima facie) attractive conception of scientiﬁc
inquiry as a quest for theories that are at the same time powerful,
elegant, and true. Granted, we may never be able to know with cer-
tainty that a given attribute is in fact logically simple, since we may
never be able deﬁnitely to exclude the possibility of further analysis.
But if a scientist (or team of scientists) hits upon a theory that is not
only elegant, powerful, and empirically adequate, but also—like the fa-
mous Eightfold Way classiﬁcation of elementary particles—formulated
in terms of attributes that, for all we know, might well be logically sim-
ple (vulgo: unanalyzable), then it should be reasonable to expect that
those attributes will tend to be on the logically simple side, rather than
to be extremely complex.88 The rationale for this is simply that simpler
87. Cf. Cohen & Callender (2009, 13):
The fundamentalist [i.e., the adherent of Lewis’s best-system account
of lawhood with its reliance on the concept of perfect naturalness]
might [defend her view] by adapting an argument used to defend
scientiﬁc realism. [...] Consider, for instance, the famous “no mira-
cles” argument for realism that infers from the remarkable success
of science to its truth. Even if one accepts this inference, this doesn’t
give the fundamentalist what she needs. For it is consistent with the
correctness of the inference that the generalization ⌜(x)(Fx ⊃Gx)⌝
is successful and true in both possible worlds considered, but a law
in only one of them. The argument must be not only that success
and truth are correlated (as per the standard no-miracles argument)
but that success and perfect naturalness are correlated. We don’t see
any reason to believe this is so.
Apart from this consideration, I borrow from Cohen and Callender also the
example of the ‘Eightfold Way’ classiﬁcation of particles that will be made
use of in the next paragraph.
88. This formulation evidently makes use of a concept of degrees of logical com-
plexity. Fortunately, given the analysis of logical simplicity presented in
section 3.3, it is now not difﬁcult to see how this concept might be expli-
cated. A natural ﬁrst step would be to construct an analysis of the ‘binary’
notion of a logically complex attribute, which can be obtained by simply
negating the right-hand side of that earlier analysis:
philosophers’ imprint
- 36 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
theories of the universe are ceteris paribus to be preferred over more
complex ones.
The best-system account of lawhood that results from replacing
Lewis’s notion of perfect naturalness with the concept of a logically
simple attribute can be regarded as a ﬁrst step toward answering the
larger question of what role the latter concept should play in a general
theory of fundamentality. Plausibly enough, logically simple attributes
are in some sense fundamental. But what exactly is their place in the
overall picture? Should we aim for some unifying account of funda-
mentality in which a single notion takes center stage?89 Or can we live
equally well (if not better) with a more heterogeneous account that is
instead based on several more or less disparate notions?90 If we can
help it, we should arguably avoid the use of new and esoteric primi-
(AC) An attribute A is logically complex iff there exist an interpretation I, a
variable-assignment g, and a λ-expression L such that (i) L denotesI,g A,
and (ii) for any interpretation I′ ⊇I, variable-assignment g′ ⊇g, and
atomic term F: L has relative to I′ and g′ no reduction whose matrix
is equivalent to ⌜F(v1, v2, . . .)⌝, where v1, v2, . . . are (in this order) the
λ-variables of L.
In addition, one would need a suitable quantitative concept of complexity
for formulas. A fairly straightforward option would be to say that, for any
cardinality κ, a formula ϕ is of complexity κ iff κ is the number of occurrences
of logical operators within ϕ. In the next step, one could adapt the right-
hand side of (AC) to obtain the following account:
(DC) An attribute A has a logical complexity of at least κ iff there exist an inter-
pretation I, a variable-assignment g, and a λ-expression L such that (i) L
denotesI,g A, and (ii) for any interpretation I′ ⊇I, variable-assignment
g′ ⊇g, and atomic term F: L has relative to I′ and g′ no reduction whose
matrix is equivalent to a formula of a complexity less than κ.
On this basis, the logical complexity of an attribute A may be deﬁned as the
least upper bound of those cardinalities κ that are such that A has a logical
complexity of at least κ.
89. Such a view has recently been advanced, e.g., by Schaffer (2009) and Sider
(2011). Along with Rosen (2010) and others, Schaffer maintains that the
notion of metaphysical grounding should be regarded as primitive. By con-
trast, Correia (2013) explores ways in which metaphysical grounding might
be analyzed in terms of essence.
90. Cf., e.g., Koslicki (2015).
tives, but it remains to be seen whether a comprehensive account of
fundamentality can be constructed without them.
Finally, there is the question of how best to deal with Lewis’s con-
cept of a perfectly natural attribute if it should indeed turn out not to
serve any theoretical purpose that is not equally well or better served
by our concept of a logically simple attribute.91 Ignoring minor vari-
ations, there seem to be two possible views that one might take. On
the one hand, one might hold that in the imagined scenario, given the
relative obscurity of Lewis’s concept, there would simply be no further
need for it, so that the best way forward would be to let it fall into dis-
use. On the other hand, one might hope that the concept can be ‘saved’
through explication. In this vein, one might for instance propose that
we recognize the perfectly natural attributes as precisely those that are
both logically simple and ‘positive’ in the sense hinted at in section 3.4.
If this or some alternative analysis of the concept of a perfectly nat-
ural attribute were to become generally accepted, then there would
presumably be no reason not to use the term ‘perfectly natural’ in ac-
cordance with that analysis. But if, on the contrary, no analysis were to
become generally accepted, then the concept would apparently retain
its accustomed obscurity, and it would again seem best—as on the ﬁrst
view—to abandon its use.92
91. Although this is at the present stage a rather hypothetical question, it can
arguably still be useful to consider, if only to shed some light on the dialec-
tical thrust of this paper.
92. The central ideas of section 3.3 and a version of the framework described
in section 2 can already be found in my dissertation, written at Washington
University in St. Louis under the supervision of Thomas Sattig. I am fur-
ther indebted to Claudio Calosi, Nikk Efﬁngham, Kit Fine, Dan Marshall,
Gideon Rosen, Nathan Wildman, the participants of an eidos seminar at
which an earlier version of this paper was discussed (in particular, Akiko
Frischhut, Ghislain Guigon, and Jan Walker), and especially to Fabrice Cor-
reia and Alex Skiles. I am also grateful to six anonymous referees (two each
for Erkenntnis, Mind, and this journal) and to audiences at a workshop in
Cambridge and at the Eighth European Congress of Analytic Philosophy
in Bucharest. The writing of this paper was generously supported by the
DAAD during a stay at the University of Tübingen, as well as by the Swiss
National Science Foundation (project CRSII1–147685).
philosophers’ imprint
- 37 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
References
Ainsworth, P. M. (2009). Newman’s Objection. The British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science, 60, 135–71.
Armstrong, D. M. (1978).
A Theory of Universals.
Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Armstrong, D. M. (1983). What Is a Law of Nature? Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Armstrong, D. M. (1997). A World of States of Affairs. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Bader, R. M. (2013). Towards a Hyperintensional Theory of Intrinsical-
ity. The Journal of Philosophy, 110, 525–63.
Bartley, C. (2001). Udayana. In O. Leaman (ed.), Encyclopedia of Asian
Philosophy (pp. 542–44). London: Routledge.
Bynoe, W. (2011).
Against the Compositional View of Facts.
Aus-
tralasian Journal of Philosophy, 89, 91–100.
Carnap, R. (1942). Introduction to Semantics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Carnap, R. (1950). Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology. Revue inter-
nationale de philosophie, 4, 20–40. Reprinted with minor changes in
Carnap, Meaning and Necessity, 2nd edition, Chicago: The University
of Chicago Press, 1956.
Carroll, J. W. (1994). Laws of Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Cohen, J. & Callender, C. (2009).
A Better Best System Account of
Lawhood. Philosophical Studies, 145, 1–34.
Correia, F. (2006). Generic Essence, Objectual Essence, and Modality.
Noûs, 40, 753–67.
Correia, F. (2013). Metaphysical Grounds and Essence. In M. Hoeltje,
B. Schnieder, & A. Steinberg (eds.), Varieties of Dependence (pp. 271–
96). Munich: Philosophia.
Cresswell, M. J. (1975). Hyperintensional Logic. Studia Logica, 34, 25–
38.
Dorr, C. (2002).
The Simplicity of Everything.
PhD thesis, Princeton
University.
Dorr, C. (2004). Non-Symmetric Relations. In D. W. Zimmerman (ed.),
Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, volume 1 (pp. 155–92). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dorr, C. (MS). To Be F Is to Be G. Unpublished manuscript.
Dorr, C. & Hawthorne, J. (2013). Naturalness. In K. Bennett & D. W.
Zimmerman (eds.), Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, volume 8 (pp. 3–
77). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Eddon, M. (2011). Intrinsicality and Hyperintensionality. Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research, 82, 314–36.
Eddon, M. & Meacham, C. J. G. (2015).
No Work for a Theory of
Universals. In B. Loewer & J. Schaffer (eds.), A Companion to David
Lewis (pp. 116–37). Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell.
Eklund, M. (2008).
The Picture of Reality as an Amorphous Lump.
In T. Sider, J. Hawthorne, & D. W. Zimmerman (eds.), Contemporary
Debates in Metaphysics (pp. 382–96). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Fine, K. (2000). Neutral Relations. The Philosophical Review, 109, 1–33.
Fine, K. (2010). Towards a Theory of Part. The Journal of Philosophy, 107,
559–89.
Frege, G. (1919). Die Verneinung. Beiträge zur Philosophie des deutschen
Idealismus, 3/4, 143–57.
Goodman, N. (1955). Fact, Fiction, and Forecast. Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press.
Hacking, I. (1967). Possibility. The Philosophical Review, 76, 143–68.
Heil, J. (2003). From an Ontological Point of View. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Hodes, H. T. (1982). The Composition of Fregean Thoughts. Philosoph-
ical Studies, 41, 161–78.
Hovda, P. (2009). What Is Classical Mereology? Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 38, 55–82.
Humphrey, J. A. (1999). Quine, Kripke’s Wittgenstein, Simplicity, and
Sceptical Solutions. The Southern Journal of Philosophy, 37, 43–55.
van Inwagen, P. (2006). Names for Relations. Philosophical Perspectives,
20, 453–77.
philosophers’ imprint
- 38 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
Jech, T. (2002). Set Theory (2nd ed.). Berlin: Springer.
Jenkins, C. S. (2011).
Is Metaphysical Dependence Irreﬂexive?
The
Monist, 94, 267–76.
Kaplan, D. (1995).
A Problem in Possible-World Semantics.
In
W. Sinnott-Armstrong, D. Raffman, & N. Asher (eds.), Modality,
Morality, and Belief: Essays in Honor of Ruth Barcan Marcus (pp. 41–52).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Koslicki, K. (2015). The Coarse-Grainedness of Grounding. In K. Ben-
nett & D. W. Zimmerman (eds.), Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, vol-
ume 9 (pp. 306–44). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Krämer, S. & Roski, S. (2015). A Note on the Logic of Worldly Ground.
Thought, 4, 59–68.
Kripke, S. A. (1982). Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Langton, R. & Lewis, D. K. (1998). Deﬁning ‘Intrinsic’. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 58, 333–45.
Lewis, D. K. (1973). Counterfactuals. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Lewis, D. K. (1983). New Work for a Theory of Universals. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy, 61, 343–77.
Lewis, D. K. (1986). On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, D. K. (1991). Parts of Classes. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, D. K. (1994). Humean Supervenience Debugged. Mind, 103,
473–90.
Lewis, D. K. (2001). Redeﬁning ‘Intrinsic’. Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research, 63, 381–98.
Lewis, D. K. (2009). Ramseyan Humility. In D. Braddon-Mitchell &
R. Nola (eds.), Conceptual Analysis and Philosophical Naturalism (pp.
203–22). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lewy, C. (1976). Meaning and Modality. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Loewer, B. (2007). Laws and Natural Properties. Philosophical Topics, 35,
313–28.
MacBride, F. (2005). The Particular–Universal Distinction: A Dogma of
Metaphysics? Mind, 114, 565–614.
Maudlin, T. (2007).
The Metaphysics within Physics.
Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Menzel, C. (1993).
The Proper Treatment of Predication in Fine-
Grained Intensional Logic. Philosophical Perspectives, 7, 61–87.
Mill, J. S. (1882). A System of Logic. New York: Harper.
Montague, R. (1969). On the Nature of Certain Philosophical Entities.
The Monist, 53, 159–94.
Nolan, D. (2014). Hyperintensional Metaphysics. Philosophical Studies,
171, 149–60.
Olson, K. R. (1987). An Essay on Facts. Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Oppy, G. (1997). The Philosophical Insigniﬁcance of Gödel’s Slingshot.
Mind, 106, 121–42.
Parry, W. T. (1933).
Ein Axiomensystem für eine neue Art von Im-
plikation (analytische Implikation). Ergebnisse eines mathematischen
Kolloquiums, 4, 5–6.
Parry, W. T. (1972).
Comparison of Entailment Theories.
Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 37, 441–42.
Plantinga, A. (1974). The Nature of Necessity. Oxford: Clarendon.
Plate, J. (2012). Essence and Ontology. PhD thesis, Washington Univer-
sity in St. Louis.
Pollock, J. L. (1967). The Logic of Logical Necessity. Logique et Analyse,
10, 307–23.
Pollock, J. L. (1984). The Foundations of Philosophical Semantics. Prince-
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ramsey, F. P. (1928). Universals of Law and of Fact. In D. H. Mellor
(ed.), F. P. Ramsey: Philosophical Papers (pp. 140–4). Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Ray, G. (2014).
The Problem of Negative Existentials Inadvertently
Solved. In M. García-Carpintero & G. Martí (eds.), Empty Representa-
tions (pp. 262–74). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rayo, A. (2008).
On Specifying Truth-Conditions.
The Philosophical
Review, 117, 385–443.
Rayo, A. (2009).
Towards a Trivialist Account of Mathematics.
In
O. Bueno & Ø. Linnebo (eds.), New Waves in Philosophy of Mathematics
philosophers’ imprint
- 39 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

jan plate
Simple properties and relations
(pp. 239–60). New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Rayo, A. (2013). The Construction of Logical Space. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Rayo, A. & Uzquiano, G. (2006). Absolute Generality. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Rosen, G. (2010). Metaphysical Dependence: Grounding and Reduc-
tion. In B. Hale & A. Hoffmann (eds.), Modality (pp. 109–35). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Russell, B. (1918/19). The Philosophy of Logical Atomism. The Monist,
28–29. Reprinted in R. C. Marsh (ed.), Logic and Knowledge, London:
Routledge, 1956.
Schaffer, J. (2004). Two Conceptions of Sparse Properties. Paciﬁc Philo-
sophical Quarterly, 85, 92–102.
Schaffer, J. (2009). On What Grounds What. In D. J. Chalmers, D. Man-
ley, & R. Wasserman (eds.), Metametaphysics (pp. 347–83). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Schnieder, B. (2006). ‘By Leibniz’s Law’: Remarks on a Fallacy. The
Philosophical Quarterly, 56, 39–54.
Schnieder, B. (2010). A Puzzle about ‘Because’. Logique et Analyse, 53,
317–43.
Shoemaker, S. (1980). Causality and Properties. In P. van Inwagen (ed.),
Time and Cause (pp. 109–35). Dordrecht: Reidel.
Sider, T. (2011). Writing the Book of the World. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Sober, E. (1982). Why Logically Equivalent Predicates May Pick out
Different Properties. American Philosophical Quarterly, 19, 183–89.
Stalnaker, R. C. (1976). Possible Worlds. Noûs, 10, 65–75.
Studd, J. P. (2015). Absolute Generality and Semantic Pessimism. In
A. Torza (ed.), Quantiﬁers, Quantiﬁers, and Quantiﬁers: Themes in Logic,
Metaphysics, and Language (pp. 339–66). Heidelberg: Springer.
Suszko, R. (1975). Abolition of the Fregean Axiom. In R. Parikh (ed.),
Logic Colloquium, volume 453 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics (pp. 169–
239). Heidelberg: Springer Verlag.
Swoyer, C. (1998). Complex Predicates and Logics for Properties and
Relations. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 27, 295–325.
Tahko, T. E. (2015). Natural Kind Essentialism Revisited. Mind, 124,
795–822.
Taylor, B. (1993). On Natural Properties in Metaphysics. Mind, 102,
81–100.
Thomasson, A. L. (2015). Ontology Made Easy. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Tooley, M. (1977). The Nature of Laws. Canadian Journal of Philosophy,
7, 667–98.
Uzquiano, G. (2015). Recombination and Paradox. Philosophers’ Imprint,
15(19).
Williams, J. R. G. (2007). Eligibility and Inscrutability. The Philosophical
Review, 116, 361–99.
Williams, J. R. G. (2010). Fundamental and Derivative Truths. Mind,
119, 103–41.
Williams, J. R. G. (2012). Requirements on Reality. In F. Correia &
B. Schnieder (eds.), Metaphysical Grounding (pp. 165–85). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Williamson, T. (2003). Everything. Philosophical Perspectives, 17, 415–65.
Witmer, D. G., Butchard, W., & Trogdon, K. (2005). Intrinsicality with-
out Naturalness. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 70, 326–50.
Wittgenstein, L. (1921/1961). Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
philosophers’ imprint
- 40 -
vol. 16, no. 1
(january 2016)

