Skills to Pay the Bills
98
 
Problem Solving and Critical Thinking
Everyone experiences problems from time to time.  Some of our problems are big and complicated, while 
others may be more easily solved.  There is no shortage of challenges and issues that can arise on the job. 
Whether in an office or on a construction site, experiencing difficulties with the tasks at hand or with co-
workers, the workplace presents ongoing challenges on a daily basis. Whether these problems are large or 
small, they need to be dealt with constructively and fairly.  Having the necessary skills to identify solutions to 
problems is one of the skills that employers look for in employees.
Employers say they need a workforce 
fully equipped with skills beyond the 
basics of reading, writing, and arithmetic 
to grow their businesses.  These skills 
include critical thinking and problem 
solving, according to a 2010 Critical 
Skills Survey by the American 
Management Association and others.
Problem solving and critical thinking refers to the ability to use 
knowledge, facts, and data to effectively solve problems.  This 
doesn’t mean you need to have an immediate answer, it means 
you have to be able to think on your feet, assess problems and 
find solutions. The ability to develop a well thought out solution 
within a reasonable time frame, however, is a skill that 
employers value greatly. 
Employers want employees who can work through problems on their own or as an effective member of a 
team. Ideal employees can think critically and creatively, share thoughts and opinions, use good judgment, 
and make decisions.  As a new employee, you may question why an organization follows certain steps to 
complete a task.  It may seem to you that one of the steps could be eliminated saving time, effort, and 
money.  But you may be hesitant to voice your opinion.  Don’t be; employers are usually appreciative when 
new employees are able to offer insight and fresh perspective into better and more efficient ways of doing 
things.  It is important to remember, however, that as someone new to the organization, you may not always 
have the full picture, and thus there may be factors you are unaware of that dictate that things be done in a 
particular way.  Another important thing to remember is that when you are tasked with solving a problem, you 
don’t always need to answer immediately.  
The activities in this section focus on learning how to solve problems in a variety of ways in the workplace. 
Participants will hear about how to properly tell the difference among criticism, praise, and feedback and 
reacting appropriately.  The section will also review strategies for making ethical decisions, solving problems 
on a team with others, and learning how to take into account others’ perceptions when assessing actions or 
statements in the workplace.
A note to facilitators:  Building self-determination skills, such as goal setting, decision-making, self-
advocacy, and problem solving should be included in career planning for all youth.  Youth with disabilities 
and/or other (perceived) barriers to employment and/or disconnected youth will tend to have a resiliency 
not always experienced by their same aged peers  – and not always easily seen or understood by themselves 
or by adults. You are encouraged to use the activities in this section to help young people explore how the 
obstacles they (or those they know) may face in life can pose an opportunity for developing and 
demonstrating maturity, responsibility, and wisdom.  Providing young people with safe opportunities to 
explore how their personal resiliency can be used to develop enhanced problem solving and conflict 
resolutions skills is a opportunity many adults may shy away from, but one that may ultimately be a gift.

Mastering Soft Skills for Workplace Success 
99
21. Praise, Criticism, or Feedback
JUST THE FACTS: In a work setting, we give and receive many different types of information. The 
purpose of this activity is to help participants determine the differences between criticism, praise, and 
feedback – not only how to offer it, but how to receive it as well.  
 
Time
20 minutes 
 
Materials
 Directions
Discuss the difference between praise, criticism, and feedback and ask participants for 
examples of each.  
•     Praise:  an expression of approval
•     Criticism:  an expression of disapproval based on perceived mistakes or faults
•      Feedback:  information about a person’s performance of a task – used primarily as a 
basis for improvement
Divide the group into pairs of two. Read the following statements aloud – one at a time. It 
is suggested that the facilitator use different voice tones to truly help participants 
differentiate the intended meaning of each sentence (which, by the way, can certainly 
vary). After each statement, give each pair 10 seconds to decide whether the statement is 
criticism, praise, or feedback. Someone from each team should hold up the card that 
represents a collective decision. If chart paper and sentence strips were used, participants 
could move around the room to match each statement to what they believe to be the 
correct match.
1.   Mr. Jones told me how much he appreciated your thank you note after the job 
interview. He thought it was a great personal touch.
2.  Your desk is such a mess. Are you sure you are not trying to grow your own paper?
3.  I noticed that you’ve been coming in late the last couple of days.
4.  How many times do I have to tell you how to file these documents?
5.  You look great today.
6.   It would work better for me if I could explain my version of the story out loud before 
you ask questions.
•     One set of “Praise | Criticism | Feedback” cards for each group.  Alternatively, you 
might choose to hang three pieces of chart paper – each with one of the words on it. 
Slips of paper could be made with the statements below.  

Skills to Pay the Bills
100
7.  You’ve improved a lot this week.
8.  I found it difficult to evaluate this resume because it was messy.
9.   I liked it much better when we got to choose the projects instead of being assigned to one.
With the larger group, discuss the different ways people may react or respond differently 
to praise, criticism, and feedback.  It is inevitable that we will all receive criticism at some 
point on the job, and the way in which we respond can impact our own attitude and the 
attitudes of those with whom we work.  Discuss with the group how they, personally, 
respond differently to praise vs. feedback vs. criticism.   
Conclusion
Take the opportunity to rephrase the way in which any of the above statements were 
made.  How might rephrasing get a different response or reaction?   If you had to make a 
rule for how you would like to receive feedback and criticism, what would that rule be? 
 
 
Journaling Activity
How does it make you feel when others criticize the work you do?  Are you able to respond 
to feedback differently?  Think about a time when you criticized someone else.  What 
happened?  How did that situation ultimately make you feel?    
 
Extension Activity
Often times, the inability to give and/or receive criticism and feedback might cause 
conflict in the workplace.  Reach out to the National Institute for Advanced Conflict 
Resolution (http://www.niacr.org/pages/about.htm) to find local, no-cost training 
opportunities or workshops for participants. You might also try your state or county’s 
mediation center (often connected to juvenile services) to see what programs are offered. 
 

Mastering Soft Skills for Workplace Success 
101
PRAISE
CRITICISM
FEEDBACK

Skills to Pay the Bills
102
22.  Workplace Ethics
JUST THE FACTS: We all have our own set of values or standards of behavior that we operate by on a 
daily basis.  However, we may not always feel we can apply these same principles or standards while at 
work.  The purpose of this lesson is to help participants learn some of the steps necessary to make 
ethical decisions on the job.  
Time
30 minutes
Materials
Directions
Ask participants the following questions – and discuss answers with the group:  How do you 
make decisions?  Is decision-making a skill that was taught to you?  Do you have personal 
rules for decision-making?  If you have rules, do these rules change if you are making 
decisions at home, at school, with friends, or at work?  
Now, let’s discuss ethics.  What are ethics?  [Possible answer to be discussed:  a set of 
(often unspoken – and generally understood) moral principles relating to a specified group, 
field, or form of conduct; a group of moral principles, standards of behavior, or set of 
values regarding proper conduct in the workplace].  
Ethics on the job often deal with a code of conduct or a set of principles for BOTH the 
employer and the employee.  Ask for and offer some examples of workplace ethics from 
both the EMPLOYER and the EMPLOYEE.  For example: 
A list of work ethics for an employer or a company might be:
•      To provide a safe work environment for staff and employees 
•      To treat employees with dignity and respect
•      To provide a fair wage for the services rendered
•      To handle all business transactions with integrity and honesty
•      Activity 22 – one copy for each participant (or group).  These materials were adapted  
from Lesson Planet:  Tools For Success: A Study in Employer/Personnel Issues, Ethics, 
and Professional Behavior (Alabama Learning Exchange)

Mastering Soft Skills for Workplace Success 
103
A list of work ethics for an employee might include:
•      To show up on time
•      To tend to company business for the whole time while at work
•      To treat the company’s resources, equipment, and products with care
•      To give respect to the company; that means honesty and integrity
Ask the group what types of ethical issues might come up at work?
Choose one of the scenarios in Activity 22 for group discussion (be sure to read the 
introduction first).  Read the scenario aloud (and have copies for those who would like to 
read it as well).   With the group, walk through a basic process for ethical decision-making.  
Four-Step Process for Making Ethical Decisions at Work:
1.  Define the problem (or ethical situation).
2.   List the facts that appear to be most significant to the decision (and consider who is 
affected).
3.  List two or three possible solutions (and how these solutions could impact each person).
4.  Decide on a plan of action.
Divide the group into four smaller groups (and have each group choose one of the 
remaining scenarios).  Each group should take no more than 10 minutes to read, discuss, 
and have a plan in place for discussion.  
Conclusion
Do you think these situations really happen on the job – in real life?  Share how the 
decision-making process worked for each group. Were these easy problems to solve? 
Journaling Activity
When it comes to decision-making, there are some people who like to make decisions by 
themselves, while others would like to talk things through with someone else.  Which type 
of person are you? Give an example or two.  What are some of the pros and cons associated 
with each type of decision-maker?
Extension Activity
Have the group create additional “case studies” to share with each other for problem 
solving practice.  Participants might ask an adult they know to offer a “real life” example 
of an ethical dilemma they have faced.  These should be shared with the group.
You might also consider expanding the discussion to include more examples of sexual 
harassment on the job.  Unfortunately, this is not an uncommon issue for teens to be 
dealing with on the job.  

Skills to Pay the Bills
104
Activity 22. Workplace Ethics: Case Studies
For each of the following case studies, assume you are employed by a large computer company, with 
approximately 1,000 employees.  The company is located in your town.  Read each case study and 
follow the four steps for making ethical decisions.  You will be discussing your decision-making process 
(and your ultimate decision) with the group. 
Case 1:  LaKeisha is an administrative assistant in the Human Resources Department.  Her good friend 
Michael is applying for a job with the company and has agreed to be a reference for him.  Michael asks 
for advice on preparing for the interview.  LaKeisha has the actual interview questions asked of all 
applicants and considers making him a copy of the list so he can prepare.
Case 2:  Emily works in the Quality Control Department.  Once a year, her supervisor gives away the 
company’s used computers to the local elementary school.  The company does not keep records of 
these computer donations.  Emily really needs a computer.  Her supervisor asks her to deliver 12 
computers to the school.
Case 3:  Marvin is an assistant in the Building Services Department.  He has just received a new work 
computer and is excited to try it out.  His supervisor has a strict policy about computer usage (for 
business purposes only), but Marvin wants to learn the email software.  He figures one good way to do 
this is to send emails to his friends and relatives until he gets the hang of it.  He has finished all of his 
work for the day and has 30 minutes left until his shift is over.  His supervisor left early.
Case 4:  Jennie was recently hired to work as a receptionist for the front lobby.  As receptionist, she is 
responsible for making copies for the people in her office.  Her son, Jason, comes in and needs some 
copies for a school project.  He brought his own paper and needs 300 copies for his class.  If he doesn’t 
bring the copies with him, he will fail the project.  The company copier does not require a security key, 
nor do they keep track of copies made by departments.
Case 5:  Nonye works in the Customer Service Support Department and spends a lot of his day 
responding to email.  One day he got a message from an email address he didn’t recognize.  It said, 
“I’d like to get to know you better, outside of work.”  Nonye had no idea who sent it, so he deleted it.  
A few days later, he received another message from the same source.  Nonye ignored the message 
again, thinking they would stop. He mentioned these emails to one of his co-workers, who responded, 
“You’re lucky to have a fan.” The messages continue to come every few days and he’s feeling pretty 
weirded out.  
 

Mastering Soft Skills for Workplace Success 
105
Activity 22. Continued - Steps to Solving Ethical Dilemmas
Identify the problem or ethical issue:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What are the facts?   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What are some possible solutions?   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What are you going to do?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Also consider….how will you know if your decision was the right one?

Skills to Pay the Bills
106
23.  Problem Solving on a Team 
JUST THE FACTS: Working together to solve problems is not always easy.  The purpose of this activity 
is to have participants explore how effective teams might address problems that occur among its 
members.
Time
30 minutes
Materials
•    Activity 23 
Directions
There are times when getting a team of people to work together successfully on a job or at 
school can be a challenge.  Occasionally one person might display a bad attitude (for one 
reason or another) and cause the team to be less than productive.  Activity 23 presents 10 
different situations where the action of one team member is interfering with the team’s 
success.  
Divide a large group into smaller groups.  Have participants act out or create a skit for 
each situation – providing both positive and negative alternatives for working through and 
solving each problem.  Participants should take turns being the “difficult” team member. 
Participants can compare skits and responses and, ultimately, decide (as a larger group) on 
the best way(s) to handle each situation. 
Conclusion
Should each person on the team be “dealt” with in the same way? Are there ever any  
exceptions?  Explain.  
Journaling Activity
Think about a time when you were on a team and one member of the team wasn’t con-
tributing.  How was the situation handled?  What might you have done differently?  If you 
are a team leader, what can you do to help all team members contribute?  
Extension Activity
Using the problems listed in Activity 23, invite employers in to talk about how these 
situations are handled at their place of employment.  
 

Mastering Soft Skills for Workplace Success 
107
Activity 23. Problem Solving on a Team
It’s hard work to keep a team working well together.  What would you say to or do about a team member 
in the following situations?
1. 
Is always late.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
Whispers to others or starts side conversations during discussions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. 
Gets upset when his/her recommendations are not followed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. 
Hogs the conversation/discussion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. 
Leaves before the job/work is done.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 
Constantly tells jokes and gets people off track. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. 
Refuses to work with another “certain” team member. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. 
Won’t share in the leadership role. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. 
Falls asleep. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. 
Just sits there.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Skills to Pay the Bills
108
JUST THE FACTS: Perception is one’s ability to see, hear, or become aware of something through our 
senses.  It is a way of understanding or interpreting something.  Sometimes the way we perceive the 
actions or statements of those around us may or may not reflect what is actually intended. This is 
generally due to our previous life experiences and/or what we believe.  The purpose of this activity is to 
get participants to reflect on and consider different perceptions and how to be proactive in making 
decisions based on those perceptions.
24.  Perception vs. Reality 
Time
15 minutes
Materials
•    Activity 24
 
•    Optional:  Flip chart and markers 
Directions
Write the following on a flip chart OR have one copy of the sentence for each participant: 
FINISHED FILES ARE THE RESULT OF YEARS OF SCIENTIFIC STUDY COMBINED 
WITH THE EXPERIENCE OF YEARS.
Ask the group to count the number of “Fs” in the sentence (allow 15 seconds).  On average, 
most people will only spot three or four of the Fs in the sentence.  There are actually six. 
(The brain tends to skip the word “of,” or perceive it as “versus”).  Point:  One’s perception 
may not always be correct.  
Read the following short paragraphs aloud (or ask a youth participant to read):  
 1.
 Bob’s daughter is on the basketball team, but she doesn’t get to play much.  His 
daughter works hard and never complains, but Bob believes this is yet another 
injustice in his life and his daughter is not getting a fair shake.  Bob becomes 
annoyed and irritated.  He angrily confronts the coach, embarrassing his daughter. 
 2.
 John’s daughter is on the basketball team, but she doesn’t get to play much. His 
daughter works hard and never complains. John believes that the coach wants to 
win and most likely plays the girls that will help him reach that goal. John feels 
proud of his daughter’s commitment to the team despite not getting to play very 
much. John offers to help his daughter improve her basketball skills.

Mastering Soft Skills for Workplace Success 
109
Is there any difference in the events as they were described?  What is the critical factor in 
the different ways each person reacted?  PERCEPTION!  Bob believed the coach’s actions 
were totally unfair – and John believed the coach was generally fair.  Why might each 
person perceive the situation differently?  
Now, discuss the four situations listed in Activity 24.  How might different people react to 
these situations?  What might their reactions be based on?  If a friend found him or herself 
in one of these situations, what advice would you offer? 
Conclusion
As a group, discuss some of the strategies you might use when faced with a situation similar 
to the ones in this activity.  Is there always a right or wrong way to respond?  Are there 
certain things you should always try to do?  If so, what are they?  
Journaling Activity
Think about how you perceive yourself and how others perceive you.  Do you think both are 
the same?  Explain. What are some things you can you do to change others’ perception of 
you?
Extension Activity
Use Google Images (or a similar search engine) to locate different posters or illustrations of 
perception vs. reality.  Print them out and offer reasoning as to why perceptions and 
realities might not always be the same.
 

Skills to Pay the Bills
110
Activity 24 - Perception Vs. Reality
WHAT WOULD YOU DO?
1. 
 Your boss is talking to another employee as you walk into work.  You have reason to believe they 
are talking about you.  This makes you feel uncomfortable and upset.
2. 
 A close friend gets to go on a senior trip, all expenses paid.  You are jealous that this friend does 
not have to pay a dime – his or her parents are paying for everything.  You consider not going 
because you have to pay for part of your trip and do not think it is fair. 
3. 
 At work, you developed a new way to organize the filing system that makes it easier for the 
office staff to find documents.  You think your supervisor is going to take all the credit.
4. 
 You are a nurse.  The patient you are working with is ungrateful and rude, is always finding fault 
in everything you do, and is making your life miserable.
 

Mastering Soft Skills for Workplace Success 
111
25.  Tell Me About a Time When...
JUST THE FACTS:  Thinking on your feet is an important part of getting and keeping a job.  
Interviewers will often ask “behavioral” questions in addition to technical questions about actual job 
skills.  Often times, these open-ended questions will begin with, “Tell me about a time when….”  Being 
prepared for these types of questions – and having a plan for answering them – is an important skill.  
The purpose of this lesson is to introduce a strategy that participants can use to answer these types of 
questions calmly and effectively.  
Time
30 minutes
Materials
•    Activity 25 (one for each participant)
Directions
Ask participants the following questions:
1.   Who has been on a job interview?
2.   What types of questions were you asked?
3.   Were you ever asked questions that started with, “Tell me about a time when you…?”
Discuss with participants that many of today’s employers ask certain types of questions to see 
how well people can think on their feet.  Sometimes these questions are easy to answer and 
other times, not so much.  There is a strategy to use called STAR to help guide you through 
the process of answering these questions in a clear and complete way.  Use the description on 
Activity 25 to describe this technique.  Before asking participants to work on their own 
answers, use the following as an example of how the method works.
Question:  Tell me about a time when you provided customer service to an upset client.
S - (Situation/Task) 
I was volunteering as an office assistant in the payroll department of a local nonprofit 
organization.  An angry employee came to my desk and explained that his check amount was 
too low and that he wasn’t able to pay rent on time because of the mistake.

Skills to Pay the Bills
112
A - (Action)
I promised the man that I would work with him to figure out what happened and what 
could be done. I compared the payroll records logbook with the computer payroll database.  
I discovered a data error, which explained the incorrect amount.  I explained what 
happened and was able to put in a request to give the man a check for his missing balance. 
 
R - (Result)
The employee thanked me and even asked to speak with my supervisor about how helpful I 
was.
Offer participants the opportunity to work with one or a few peers.  Encourage them to 
practice answering these questions and learning from each other.  The more these types of 
questions are practiced, the easier they will be in an actual work or college interview. 
Conclusion
What was the easiest part of this activity?  What was the most difficult part of this activity?  
How might you practice the STAR technique?  Do you think it would be worth practicing?  
Why or why not?
Journaling Activity
Part of learning how to answer behavioral questions using the STAR method is recognizing 
your own skills and the areas where you have improved.   Do you feel comfortable talking 
about your skills? If yes, how did you reach this level of comfort?  If no, how can you learn 
to develop this level of comfort?
Extension Activity
Arrange for participants to meet with a series of employers for mock interviews.  Ask 
employers to use a sampling of the behavioral interview questions they use most 
frequently when interviewing potential candidates. Part of self-improvement is self-
reflection.  How can you use this activity to improve your soft skills overall? 
 

Mastering Soft Skills for Workplace Success 
113
Activity 25. Tell me About a Time When...
Use the STAR strategy below to guide you in answering the sample interview questions, “Tell me about 
a time when you…”
Situation (or Task):  Describe the situation that you were in or the task that needed to be 
accomplished.  Be specific and give enough detail so that the interviewer understands.  The situation 
could be from a previous job, a volunteer experience, school, or another relevant environment.
Action you took:  Describe the action you took.  Be sure to keep the focus on you!  Even if you’re 
discussing a group project or effort, talk about what YOU did – not the efforts of the entire team.  
Don’t say what you might do or what you might have done.  Say what you DID.
Results you achieved:  What happened?  How did the event end?  What did you accomplish?  What did 
you learn?
TELL ME ABOUT A TIME WHEN YOU:
      …did not agree with a teacher or supervisor?  How did you handle the situation? 
      …were able to use persuasion to successfully convince someone to see things your way. 
      …were faced with a stressful situation that demonstrated your coping skills.
      …used good judgment and logic to solve a problem.
      …set a goal and were able to meet or achieve it.
      …had to conform to a policy with which you did not agree.
      …had too many things to do and were required to prioritize your tasks.
      … were able to successfully deal with another person even when that individual may not have 
personally liked you (or vice versa).
      …tried to accomplish something and failed.
      …had to deal with a very upset customer or co-worker.
      …you motivated others.
 

