James W. Heisig
Remembering the Kanji 1
A Complete Course on How Not to Forget  
the Meaning and Writing of Japanese Characters

remembering the kanji 1

by the same author
Remembering the Kana: A Guide to Reading and Writing the Japanese Syllabaries 
in 3 Hours Each. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2007 (1987)
Remembering the Kanji 2: A Systematic Guide to Reading Japanese Characters. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2008 (1987)
Remembering the Kanji 3: Writing and Reading Japanese Characters for Upper-
Level Proﬁ ciency (with Tanya Sienko). Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 
2008 (1994)
Kanji para recordar i: Curso mnemotécnico para el aprendizaje de la escritura y 
el signiﬁ cado de los caracteres japoneses (with Marc Bernabé and Verònica 
Calafell). Barcelona: Herder Editorial, 2005 (2001)
Kanji para recordar ii: Guía sistemática para la lectura de los caracteres japone-
ses (with Marc Bernabé and Verònica Calafell). Barcelona: Herder Editorial, 
2004
Kana para recordar: Curso mnemotécnico para el aprendizaje de los silabarios 
japoneses (with Marc Bernabé and Verònica Calafell). Barcelona: Herder 
Editorial, 2005 (2003)
Die Kanji lernen und behalten 1. Bedeutung und Schreib weise der japanischen 
Schrift zeichen (with Robert Rauther). Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Kloster-
mann Verlag, 2006 (2005)
Die Kanji lernen und behalten 2. Systematische Anleitung zu den Lesungen der 
japanischen Schrift zeichen (with Robert Rauther). Frankfurt am Main: Vitto-
rio Klostermann Verlag, 2006
Die Kana lernen und behalten. Die japanische Silbenschrift  lesen und schreiben
in je drei Stunden (with Klaus Gresbrand). Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio 
Klostermann Verlag, 2006
Kanji: Imaginar para aprender (with Rafael Shoji). São Paulo: jbc Editora, 2008

Remembering the Kanji
vol. 1
A Complete Course on How Not to Forget
the Meaning and Writing
of Japanese Characters
James W. Heisig
fifth edition
University of Hawai‘i Press
honolulu

Copyright © 1977, 1985, 1986, 2001, 2007 by James W. Heisig
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions
thereof in any form without the written permission of the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
Fourth edition: 22nd printing, 2006
Fift h edition:  1st printing, 2007
2nd printing, 2008
12  11  10  09  08 
6  5  4  3  2 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Heisig, James W., 1944- 
Remembering the kanji : a complete course on how not to forget the meaning 
and writing of Japanese characters / James W. Heisig. — 5th ed.
v. <1> ; cm.
Includes indexes.
ISBN 978-0-8248-3165-3 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1.  Japanese language—Orthography and spelling. 2.  Chinese characters—
Japan. 3.  Japanese language—Textbooks for foreign speakers—English.  I. Title. 
PL547.H4 2007
495.6’82421—dc22
2006103109
Th e typesetting for this book was done at the Nanzan Institute for Religion and Culture.
University of Hawai‘i Press books are printed on acid-free paper and meet the guidelines 
for permanence and durability of the Council on Library Resources.

Contents
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Note to the 4th Edition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
part one: Stories (Lessons 1–12)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
part two: Plots (Lessons 13–19)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  115
part three: Elements (Lessons 20–56)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  177
Indexes
i. Kanji  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  409
ii. Primitive Elements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  427
iii. Kanji in Stroke Order  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  431
iv. Key Words and Primitive Meanings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  442
v


Introduction
The aim of this book is to provide the student of Japanese with a simple 
method for correlating the writing and the meaning of Japanese characters in 
such a way as to make them both easy to remember. It is intended not only for 
the beginner, but also for the more advanced student looking for some relief 
to the constant frustration of forgetting how to write the kanji and some way 
to systematize what he or she already knows. By showing how to break down 
the complexities of the Japanese writing system into its basic elements and 
suggesting ways to reconstruct meanings from those elements, the method 
oﬀ ers a new perspective from which to learn the kanji.
Th ere are, of course, many things that the pages of this book will not do 
for you. You will read nothing about how kanji combine to form compounds. 
Nor is anything said about the various ways to pronounce the characters. 
Furthermore, all questions of grammatical usage have been omitted. Th ese 
are all matters that need specialized treatment in their own right. Meantime, 
remembering the meaning and the writing of the kanji—perhaps the single 
most diﬃ  cult barrier to learning Japanese—can be greatly simpliﬁ ed if the 
two are isolated and studied apart from everything else.
What makes forgetting the kanji so natural is their lack of connection with 
normal patterns of visual memory. We are used to hills and roads, to the faces 
of people and the skylines of cities, to ﬂ owers, animals, and the phenomena 
of nature. And while only a fraction of what we see is readily recalled, we are 
conﬁ dent that, given proper attention, anything we choose to remember, we 
can. Th at conﬁ dence is lacking in the world of the kanji. Th e closest approxi-
mation to the kind of memory patterns required by the kanji is to be seen 
in the various alphabets and number-systems we know. Th e diﬀ erence is that 
while these symbols are very few and oft en sound-related, the kanji number in 
the thousands and have no consistent phonetic value. Nonetheless, traditional 
methods for learning the characters have been the same as those for learning 
alphabets: drill the shapes one by one, again and again, year aft er year. What-
ever ascetic value there is in such an exercise, the more eﬃ  cient way would 
be to relate the characters to something other than their sounds in the ﬁ rst 
place, and so to break ties with the visual memory we rely on for learning our 
alphabets.
1

2 | introduction
Th e origins of the Japanese writing system can be traced back to ancient 
China and the eighteenth century before the Christian era. In the form in 
which we ﬁ nd Chinese writing codiﬁ ed some 1,000 years later, it was made up 
largely of pictographic, detailed glyphs. Th ese were further transformed and 
stylized down through the centuries, so that by the time the Japanese were 
introduced to the kanji by Buddhist monks from Korea and started experi-
menting with ways to adapt the Chinese writing system to their own language 
(about the fourth to seventh centuries of our era), they were already dealing 
with far more ideographic and abstract forms. Th e Japanese made their own 
contributions and changes in time, as was to be expected. And like every 
modern Oriental culture that uses the kanji, they continue to do so, though 
now more in matters of usage than form.
So fascinating is this story that many have encouraged the study of ety-
mology as a way to remember the kanji. Unfortunately, the student quickly 
learns the many disadvantages of such an approach. As charming as it is to see 
the ancient drawing of a woman etched behind its respective kanji, or to dis-
cover the rudimentary form of a hand or a tree or a house, when the character 
itself is removed, the clear visual memory of the familiar object is precious 
little help for recalling how to write it. Proper etymological studies are most 
helpful aft er one has learned the general-use kanji. Before that, they only add 
to one’s memory problems. We need a still more radical departure from visual 
memory.
Let me paint the impasse in another, more graphic, way. Picture yourself 
holding a kaleidoscope up to the light as still as possible, trying to ﬁ x in mem-
ory the particular pattern that the play of light and mirrors and colored stones 
has created. Chances are you have such an untrained memory for such things 
that it will take some time; but let us suppose that you succeed aft er ten or 
ﬁ ft een minutes. You close your eyes, trace the pattern in your head, and then 
check your image against the original pattern until you are sure you have it 
remembered. Th en someone passes by and jars your elbow. Th e pattern is lost, 
and in its place a new jumble appears. Immediately your memory begins to 
scramble. You set the kaleidoscope aside, sit down, and try to draw what you 
had just memorized, but to no avail. Th ere is simply nothing left  in memory 
to grab hold of. Th e kanji are like that. One can sit at one’s desk and drill a 
half dozen characters for an hour or two, only to discover on the morrow that 
when something similar is seen, the former memory is erased or hopelessly 
confused by the new information.
Now the odd thing is not that this occurs, but rather that, instead of openly 
admitting one’s distrust of purely visual memory, one accuses oneself of a 
poor memory or lack of discipline and keeps on following the same routine. 

introduction | 3
Th us, by placing the blame on a poor visual memory, one overlooks the possi-
bility of another form of memory that could handle the task with relative ease: 
imaginative memory.
By imaginative memory I mean the faculty to recall images created purely 
in the mind, with no actual or remembered visual stimuli behind them. When 
we recall our dreams we are using imaginative memory. The fact that we 
sometimes conﬂ ate what happened in waking life with what merely occurred 
in a dream is an indication of how powerful those imaginative stimuli can 
be. While dreams may be broken up into familiar component parts, the com-
posite whole is fantastical and yet capable of exerting the same force on per-
ceptual memory as an external stimulus. It is possible to use imagination in 
this way also in a waking state and harness its powers for assisting a visual 
memory admittedly ill-adapted for remembering the kanji.
In other words, if we could discover a limited number of basic elements 
in the characters and make a sort of alphabet out of them, assigning to each 
its own image, fusing them together to form other images, and so building 
up complex tableaux in imagination, the impasse created by purely visual 
memory might be overcome. Such an imaginative alphabet would be every 
bit as rigorous as a phonetic one in restricting each basic element to one basic 
value; but its grammar would lack many of the controls of ordinary language 
and logic. It would be like a kind of dream-world where anything at all might 
happen, and happen diﬀ erently in each mind. Visual memory would be used 
minimally, to build up the alphabet. Aft er that, one would be set loose to roam 
freely inside the magic lantern of imaginative patterns according to one’s own 
preferences.
In fact, most students of the Japanese writing system do something similar 
from time to time, devising their own mnemonic aids but never developing 
an organized approach to their use. At the same time, most of them would 
be embarrassed at the academic silliness of their own secret devices, feeling 
somehow that there is no way to reﬁ ne the ridiculous ways their mind works. 
Yet if it does work, then some such irreverence for scholarship and tradition 
seems very much in place. Indeed, shift ing attention from why one forgets cer-
tain kanji to why one remembers others should oﬀ er motivation enough to 
undertake a more thorough attempt to systematize imaginative memory.
Th e basic alphabet of the imaginative world hidden in the kanji we may 
call, following traditional terminology, primitive elements (or simply primi-
tives). Th ese are not to be confused with the so-called “radicals” which form 
the basis of etymological studies of sound and meaning, and now are used for 
the lexical ordering of the characters. In fact, most of the radicals are them-

4 | introduction
selves primitives, but the number of primitives is not restricted to the tradi-
tional list of radicals.
Th e primitives, then, are the fundamental strokes and combinations of 
strokes from which all the characters are built up. Calligraphically speaking, 
there are only nine possible kinds of strokes in theory, seventeen in practice. 
A few of these will be given primitive meanings; that is, they will serve as fun-
damental images. Simple combinations will yield new primitive meanings 
in turn, and so on as complex characters are built up. If these primitives are 
presented in orderly fashion, the taxonomy of the most complex characters is 
greatly simpliﬁ ed and no attempt need be made to memorize the primitive 
alphabet apart from actually using it.
Th e number of primitives, as we are understanding the term, is a moot 
question. Traditional etymology counts some 224 of them. We shall draw 
upon these freely, and also ground our primitive meanings in traditional 
etymological meanings, without making any particular note of the fact as 
we proceed. We shall also be departing from etymology to avoid the confu-
sion caused by the great number of similar meanings for diﬀ erently shaped 
primitives. Wherever possible, then, the generic meaning of the primitives 
will be preserved, although there are cases in which we shall have to specify 
that meaning in a diﬀ erent way, or ignore it altogether, so as to root imag-
inative memory in familiar visual memories. Should the student later turn 
to etymological studies, the procedure we have followed will become more 
transparent, and should not cause any obstacles to the learning of etymolo-
gies. Th e list of elements that we have singled out as primitives proper (Index 
ii) is restricted to the following four classes: basic elements that are not kanji, 
kanji that appear as basic elements in other kanji with great frequency, kanji 
that change their meaning when they function as parts of other kanji, and 
kanji that change their shape when forming parts of other kanji. Any kanji 
that keeps both its form and its meaning and appears as part of another kanji 
functions as a primitive, whether or not it occurs with enough frequency to 
draw attention to it as such.
Th e 2,042 characters chosen for study in these pages (given in the order of 
presentation in Index i and arranged according to the number of strokes in 
Index iii) include the basic 1,850 general-use kanji established as standard by 
the Japanese Ministry of Education in 1946,1 roughly another 60 used chieﬂ y 
in proper names, and a handful of characters that are convenient for use as 
primitive elements. Each kanji is assigned a key word that represents its basic 
1 In 1981 an additional 95 characters were added to this list. Th ey have been incorporated 
into the later editions of this book.

introduction | 5
meaning, or one of its basic meanings. Th e key words have been selected on 
the basis of how a given kanji is used in compounds and on the meaning it has 
on its own. Th ere is no repetition of key words, although many are nearly syn-
onymous. In these cases, it is important to focus on the particular ﬂ avor that 
that word enjoys in English, so as to evoke connotations distinct from similar 
key words. To be sure, many of the characters carry a side range of conno-
tations not present in their English equivalents, and vice versa; many even 
carry several ideas not able to be captured in a single English word. By sim-
plifying the meanings through the use of key words, however, one becomes 
familiar with a kanji and at least one of its principal meanings. Th e others can 
be added later with relative ease, in much the same way as one enriches one’s 
understanding of one’s native tongue by learning the full range of feelings and 
meanings embraced by words already known.
Once we have the primitive meanings and the key word relevant to a par-
ticular kanji (cataloged in Index iv), the task is to create a composite ideo-
gram. Here is where fantasy and memory come into play. Th e aim is to shock 
the mind’s eye, to disgust it, to enchant it, to tease it, or to entertain it in any 
way possible so as to brand it with an image intimately associated with the key 
word. Th at image, in turn, inasmuch as it is composed of primitive meanings, 
will dictate precisely how the kanji is to be penned—stroke for stroke, jot for 
jot. Many characters, perhaps the majority of them, can be so remembered 
on a ﬁ rst encounter, provided suﬃ  cient time is taken to ﬁ x the image. Oth-
ers will need to be reviewed by focusing on the association of key-word and 
primitive elements. In this way, mere drill of visual memory is all but entirely 
eliminated.
Since the goal is not simply to remember a certain number of kanji, but 
also to learn how to remember them (and others not included in this book), 
the course has been divided into three parts. Part one provides the full asso-
ciative story for each character. By directing the reader’s attention, at least for 
the length of time it takes to read the explanation and relate it to the written 
form of the kanji, most of the work is done for the student, even as a feeling for 
the method is acquired. In Part two, only the skeletal plots of the stories are 
presented, and the individual must work out his or her own details by draw-
ing on personal memory and fantasy. Part three, which comprises the major 
portion of the course, provides only the key word and the primitive meanings, 
leaving the remainder of the process to the student.
It will soon become apparent that the most critical factor is the order of 
learning the kanji. Th e actual method is simplicity itself. Once more basic 
characters have been learned, their use as primitive elements for other kanji 
can save a great deal of eﬀ ort and enable one to review known characters at 

6 | introduction
the same time as one is learning new ones. Hence to approach this course hap-
hazardly, jumping ahead to the later lessons before studying the earlier ones, 
will entail a considerable loss of eﬃ  ciency. If one’s goal is to learn to write the 
entire list of general-use characters, then it seems best to learn them in the 
order best suited to memory, not in order of frequency or according to the 
order in which they are taught to Japanese children. Should the individual 
decide to pursue some other course, however, the indexes should provide all 
the basic information for ﬁ nding the appropriate frame and the primitives 
referred to in that frame.
It may surprise the reader casually leaﬁ ng through these pages not to ﬁ nd 
a single drawing or pictographic representation. Th is is fully consistent with 
what was said earlier about placing the stress on imaginative memory. For one 
thing, pictographs are an unreliable way to remember all but very few kanji; 
and even in these cases, the pictograph should be discovered by the student 
by toying with the forms, pen in hand, rather than given in one of its histori-
cal graphic forms. For another, the presentation of an image actually inhibits 
imagination and restricts it to the biases of the artist. Th is is as true for the 
illustrations in a child’s collection of fairy tales as it is for the various phenom-
ena we shall encounter in the course of this book. Th e more original work the 
individual does with an image, the easier will it be to remember a kanji.
Before setting out on the course plotted in the following pages, attention 
should be drawn to a few ﬁ nal points. In the ﬁ rst place, one must be warned 
about setting out too quickly. It should not be assumed that because the ﬁ rst 
characters are so elementary, they can be skipped over hastily. Th e method 
presented here needs to be learned step by step, lest one ﬁ nd oneself forced 
later to retreat to the ﬁ rst stages and start over; 20 or 25 characters per day 
would not be excessive for someone who has only a couple of hours to give to 
study. If one were to study them full-time, there is no reason why the entire 
course could not be completed successfully in four to six weeks. By the time 
Part one has been traversed, the student should have discovered a rate of 
progress suitable to the time available.
Second, the repeated advice given to study the characters with pad and 
pencil should be taken seriously. While simply remembering the characters 
does not, one will discover, demand that they be written, there is really no 
better way to improve the aesthetic appearance of one’s writing and acquire a 
“natural feel” for the ﬂ ow of the kanji than by writing them. Th e method will 
spare one the toil of writing the same character over and over in order to learn 
it, but it will not supply the ﬂ uency at writing that comes only with constant 
practice. If pen and paper are inconvenient, one can always make do with the 
palm of the hand, as the Japanese do. It provides a convenient square space for 

introduction | 7
jotting on with one’s index ﬁ nger when riding in a bus or walking down the 
street.
Th ird, the kanji are best reviewed by beginning with the key word, pro-
gressing to the respective story, and then writing the character itself. Once 
one has been able to perform these steps, reversing the order follows as a mat-
ter of course. More will be said about this later in the book.
In the fourth place, it is important to note that the best order for learning 
the kanji is by no means the best order for remembering them. Th ey need to be 
recalled when and where they are met, not in the sequence in which they are 
presented here. For that purpose, recommendations are given in Lesson 5 for 
designing ﬂ ash cards for random review.
Finally, it seems worthwhile to give some brief thought to any ambitions 
one might have about “mastering” the Japanese writing system. Th e idea arises 
from, or at least is supported by, a certain bias about learning that comes from 
overexposure to schooling: the notion that language is a cluster of skills that 
can be rationally divided, systematically learned, and certiﬁ ed by testing. Th e 
kanji, together with the wider structure of Japanese—and indeed of any lan-
guage for that matter—resolutely refuse to be mastered in this fashion. Th e 
rational order brought to the kanji in this book is only intended as an aid to 
get you close enough to the characters to befriend them, let them surprise 
you, inspire you, enlighten you, resist you, and seduce you. But they cannot be 
mastered without a full understanding of their long and complex history and 
an insight into the secret of their unpredictable vitality—all of which is far too 
much for a single mind to bring to the tip of a single pen.
Th at having been said, the goal of this book is still to attain native proﬁ -
ciency in writing the Japanese characters and associating their meanings with 
their forms. If the logical systematization and the playful irreverence con-
tained in the pages that follow can help spare even a few of those who pick 
the book up the grave error of deciding to pursue their study of the Japanese 
language without aspiring to such proﬁ ciency, the eﬀ orts that went into it will 
have more than received their reward.
Kamakura, Japan
10 February 1977

Note to the 4th Edition
In preparing a new layout and typesetting of this fourth edition, I was 
tempted to rethink many of the key words and primitive meanings, and to 
adjust the stories accordingly. Aft er careful consideration and review of the 
hundreds of letters I have received from students all over the world, as well as 
the changes that were introduced in the French and Spanish versions of the 
book,2 I have decided to let it stand as it is with only a few exceptions.
Th ere are, however, two related questions that come up with enough fre-
quency to merit further comment at the outset: the use of this book in con-
nection with formal courses of Japanese and the matter of pronunciation or 
“readings” of the kanji.
Th e reader will not have to ﬁ nish more than a few lessons to realize that 
this book was designed for self-learning. What may not be so apparent is that 
using it to supplement the study of kanji in the classroom or to review for exam-
inations has an adverse inﬂ uence on the learning process. Th e more you try to 
combine the study of the written kanji through the method outlined in these 
pages with traditional study of the kanji, the less good this book will do you. I 
know of no exceptions.
Virtually all teachers of Japanese, native and foreign, would agree with me 
that learning to write the kanji with native proﬁ ciency is the greatest single 
obstacle to the foreign adult approaching Japanese—indeed so great as to be 
presumed insurmountable. Aft er all, if even well-educated Japanese study the 
characters formally for nine years, use them daily, and yet frequently have 
trouble remembering how to reproduce them, much more than English-speak-
ing people have with the infamous spelling of their mother tongue, is it not 
unrealistic to expect that even with the best of intentions and study methods 
2 Th e French adaptation was prepared by Yves Maniette under the title Les kanji dans 
la tête: Apprendre à ne pas oublier le sens et l’écriture des caractères japonais (Gramagraf 
sccl, 1998). Th e Spanish version, prepared in collaboration with Marc Bernabé and Verònica 
Calafell, is Kanji para recordar: Curso mnemotécnico para el aprendizaje de la escritura y el 
signiﬁ cado de los caracteres japoneses (Barcelona: Editorial Herder, 2001). Aft er the issuance 
of this new edition, a German version was published in collaboration with Robert Rauther, 
Die Kanji lernen und behalten 1: Bedeutung und Schreibweise der japanischen Schrift zeichen 
(Frankfurt: Klostermann, 2005, 2006).

note to the 4th edition | 9
those not raised with the kanji from their youth should manage the feat? Such 
an attitude may never actually be spoken openly by a teacher standing before 
a class, but as long as the teacher believes it, it readily becomes a self-fulﬁ lling 
prophecy. Th is attitude is then transmitted to the student by placing greater 
emphasis on the supposedly simpler and more reasonable skills of learning to 
speak and read the language. In fact, as this book seeks to demonstrate, noth-
ing could be further from the truth.
To begin with, the writing of the kanji is the most completely rational part 
of the language. Over the centuries, the writing of the kanji has been sim-
pliﬁ ed many times, always with rational principles in mind. Aside from the 
Korean hangul, there may be no writing system in the world as logically struc-
tured as the Sino-Japanese characters are. Th e problem is that the usefulness 
of this inner logic has not found its way into learning the kanji. On the con-
trary, it has been systematically ignored. Th ose who have passed through the 
Japanese school system tend to draw on their own experience when they teach 
others how to write. Having begun as small children in whom the powers of 
abstraction are relatively undeveloped and for whom constant repetition is 
the only workable method, they are not likely ever to have considered reor-
ganizing their pedagogy to take advantage of the older student’s facility with 
generalized principles.
So great is this neglect that I would have to say that I have never met a 
Japanese teacher who can claim to have taught a foreign adult to write the 
basic general-use kanji that all high-school graduates in Japan know. Never. 
Nor have I ever met a foreign adult who would claim to have learned to write 
at this level from a native Japanese teacher. I see no reason to assume that the 
Japanese are better suited to teach writing because it is, aft er all, their lan-
guage. Given the rational nature of the kanji, precisely the opposite is the case: 
the Japanese teacher is an impediment to learning to associate the meanings 
of the kanji with their written form. Th e obvious victim of the conventional 
methods is the student, but on a subtler level the reconﬁ rmation of unques-
tioned biases also victimizes the Japanese teachers themselves, the most 
devoted of whom are prematurely denied the dream of fully international-
izing their language.
Th ere are additional problems with using this book in connection with 
classroom study. For one thing, as explained earlier in the Introduction, the 
eﬃ  ciency of the study of the kanji is directly related to the order in which they 
are learned. Formal courses introduce kanji according to diﬀ erent principles 
that have nothing to do with the writing. More oft en than not, the order in 
which Japan’s Ministry of Education has determined children should learn 
the kanji from primary through middle school, is the main guide. Obvi-

10 | note to the 4th edition
ously, learning the writing is far more important than being certiﬁ ed to have 
passed some course or other. And just as obviously, one needs to know all 
the general-use kanji for them to be of any use for the literate adult. When it 
comes to reading basic materials, such as newspapers, it is little consolation to 
know half or even three-quarters of them. Th e crucial question for pedagogy, 
therefore, is not what is the best way to qualify at some intermediate level of 
proﬁ ciency, but simply how to learn all the kanji in the most eﬃ  cient and reli-
able manner possible. For this, the traditional “levels” of kanji proﬁ ciency are 
simply irrelevant. Th e answer, I am convinced, lies in self-study, following an 
order based on learning all the kanji.
I do not myself know of any teacher of Japanese who has attempted to use 
this book in a classroom setting. My suspicion is that they would soon aban-
don the idea. Th e book is based on the idea that the writing of the kanji can be 
learned on its own and independently of any other aspect of the language. It is 
also based on the idea that the pace of study is diﬀ erent from one individual to 
another, and for each individual, from one week to the next. Organizing study 
to the routines of group instruction runs counter to those ideas.
Th is brings us to our second question. Th e reasons for isolating the writing 
of the kanji from their pronunciation follow more or less as a matter of course 
from what has been said. Th e reading and writing of the characters are taught 
simultaneously on the grounds that one is useless without the other. Th is only 
begs the basic question of why they could not better, and more quickly, be 
taught one aft er the other, concentrating on what is for the foreigner the sim-
pler task, writing, and later turning to the more complicated, the reading.
One has only to look at the progress of non-Japanese raised with kanji to 
see the logic of the approach. When Chinese adult students come to the study 
of Japanese, they already know what the kanji mean and how to write them. 
Th ey have only to learn how to read them. Th e progress they make in com-
parison with their Western counterparts is usually attributed to their being 
“Oriental.” In fact, Chinese grammar and pronunciation have about as much 
to do with Japanese as English does. It is their knowledge of the meaning and 
writing of the kanji that gives the Chinese the decisive edge. My idea was sim-
ply to learn from this common experience and give the kanji an English read-
ing. Having learned to write the kanji in this way—which, I repeat, is the most 
logical and rational part of the study of Japanese—one is in a much better 
position to concentrate on the oft en irrational and unprincipled problem of 
learning to pronounce them.
In a word, it is hard to imagine a less eﬃ  cient way of learning the reading 
and writing of the kanji than to study them simultaneously. And yet this is the 

note to the 4th edition | 11
method that all Japanese textbooks and courses follow. Th e bias is too deeply 
ingrained to be rooted out by anything but experience to the contrary.
Many of these ideas and impressions, let it be said, only developed aft er I 
had myself learned the kanji and published the ﬁ rst edition of this book. At the 
time I was convinced that proﬁ ciency in writing the kanji could be attained in 
four to six weeks if one were to make a full-time job of it. Of course, the claim 
raised more eyebrows than hopes among teachers with far more experience 
than I had. Still, my own experience with studying the kanji and the relatively 
small number of individuals I have directed in the methods of this book, bears 
that estimate out, and I do not hesitate to repeat it here.
A word about how the book came to be written. I began my study of the 
kanji one month aft er coming to Japan with absolutely no previous knowledge 
of the language. Because travels through Asia had delayed my arrival by sev-
eral weeks, I took up residence at a language school in Kamakura and began 
studying on my own without enrolling in the course already in progress. A 
certain impatience with my own ignorance compared to everyone around 
me, coupled with the freedom to devote myself exclusively to language stud-
ies, helped me during those ﬁ rst four weeks to make my way through a basic 
introductory grammar. Th is provided a general idea of how the language was 
constructed but, of course, almost no facility in using any of it.
Through conversations with the teachers and other students, I quickly 
picked up the impression that I had best begin learning the kanji as soon as 
possible, since this was sure to be the greatest chore of all. Having no idea at 
all how the kanji “worked” in the language, yet having found my own pace, I 
decided—against the advice of nearly everyone around me—to continue to 
study on my own rather than join one of the beginners’ classes.
Th e ﬁ rst few days I spent poring over whatever I could ﬁ nd on the history 
and etymology of the Japanese characters, and examining the wide variety 
of systems on the market for studying them. It was during those days that 
the basic idea underlying the method of this book came to me. Th e following 
weeks I devoted myself day and night to experimenting with the idea, which 
worked well enough to encourage me to carry on with it. Before the month 
was out I had learned the meaning and writing of some 1,900 characters and 
had satisﬁ ed myself that I would retain what I had memorized. It was not long 
before I became aware that something extraordinary had taken place.
For myself, the method I was following seemed so simple, even childish, 
that it was almost an embarrassment to talk about it. And it had happened 
as such a matter of course that I was quite unprepared for the reaction it 
caused. On the one hand, some at the school accused me of having a short-
term photographic memory that would fade with time. On the other hand, 

12 | note to the 4th edition
there were those who pressed me to write up my “methods” for their beneﬁ t. 
But it seemed to me that there was too much left  to learn of the language for 
me to get distracted by either side. Within a week, however, I was persuaded at 
least to let my notes circulate. Since most everything was either in my head or 
jotted illegibly in notebooks and on ﬂ ash cards, I decided to give an hour each 
day to writing everything up systematically. One hour soon became two, then 
three, and in no time at all I had laid everything else aside to complete the 
task. By the end of that third month I brought a camera-ready copy to Nan-
zan University in Nagoya for printing. During the two months it took to pre-
pare it for printing I added an Introduction. Th rough the kind help of Mrs. 
Iwamoto Keiko of Tuttle Publishing Company, most of the 500 copies were 
distributed in Tokyo bookstores, where they sold out within a few months. 
Aft er the month I spent studying how to write the kanji, I did not return to 
any formal review of what I had learned. (I was busy trying to devise another 
method for simplifying the study of the reading of the characters, which was 
later completed as a companion volume to the ﬁ rst.3) When I would meet a 
new character, I would learn it as I had the others, but I have never felt the 
need to retrace my steps or repeat any of the work. Admittedly, the fact that 
I now use the kanji daily in my teaching, research, and writing is a distinct 
advantage. But I remain convinced that whatever facility I have I owe to the 
procedures outlined in this book.
Perhaps only one who has seen the method through to the end can appreci-
ate both how truly uncomplicated and obvious it is, and how accessible to any 
average student willing to invest the time and eﬀ ort. For while the method is 
simple and does eliminate a great deal of wasted eﬀ ort, the task is still not an 
easy one. It requires as much stamina, concentration, and imagination as one 
can bring to it.
James W. Heisig
Barcelona, Spain
21 December 2000
3 Remembering the Kanji 2: A Systematic Guide to Reading Japanese Characters (Hono-
lulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 22nd impression, 2007). A German edition appeared under 
the title Die Kanji lernen und behalten 2: Systematische Anleitung zu den Lesungen der japa-
nischen Schrift zeichen (Frankfurt: Klostermann, 2006). Th e second volume was later fol-
lowed by Remembering the Kanji 3: Writing and Reading Japanese Characters for Upper-Level 
Proﬁ ciency (Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 3rd impression, 2007), prepared with 
Tanya Sienko.

part one
Stories


Lesson 1
Let us begin with a group of 15 kanji, all of which you probably knew before 
you ever cracked the covers of this book. Each kanji has been provided with a 
single key word to represent the basic meaning. Some of these characters will 
also serve later as primitive elements to help form other kanji, when they will 
take a meaning diﬀ erent from the meaning they have as kanji. Although it is 
not necessary at this stage to memorize the special primitive meaning of these 
characters, a special remark preceded by a star (*) has been appended to alert 
you to the change in meaning.
Th e number of strokes of each character is given in square brackets at the 
end of each explanation, followed by the stroke-by-stroke order of writing. It 
cannot be stressed enough how important it is to learn to write each kanji in its 
proper order. As easy as these ﬁ rst characters may seem, study them all with a 
pad and pencil to get into the habit from the very start.
Finally, note that each key word has been carefully chosen and should not 
be tampered with in any way if you want to avoid confusion later on.
 
1 
one
 一 
 In Chinese characters, the number one is laid on its side, unlike 
the Roman numeral i which stands upright. As you would 
expect, it is written from left  to right. [1]
一
*  As a primitive element, the key-word meaning is discarded, 
since it is too abstract to be of much help. Instead, the single 
horizontal stroke takes on the meaning of floor or ceiling, 
depending on its position: if it stands above another primi-
tive, it means ceiling; if below, ﬂ oor.

16 | remembering the kanji 1
 
2 
two
 二 
 Like the Roman numeral ii, which reduplicates the numeral 
i, the kanji for two is a simple reduplication of the horizontal 
stroke that means one. Th e order of writing goes from above to 
below, with the ﬁ rst stroke slightly shorter. [2]
丁 七
 
3 
three
 三 
 And like the Roman numeral iii, which triples the numeral i, 
the kanji for three simply triples the single horizontal stroke. In 
writing it, think of “1 + 2 = 3” (一+ 二= 三) in order to keep the 
middle stroke shorter. [3]
万 丈 三
 
4 
four
 四 
 Th is kanji is composed of two primitive elements, mouth 口 and 
human legs 乳, both of which we will meet in the coming les-
sons. Assuming that you already knew how to write this kanji, 
we will pass over the “story” connected with it until later.
 Note how the second stroke is written left -to-right and then 
top-to-bottom. Th is is consistent with what we have already seen 
in the ﬁ rst three numbers and leads us to a general principle that 
will be helpful when we come to more complicated kanji later 
on: write north-to-south, west-to-east, northwest-to-
southeast. [5]
上 下 不 与 丐
 
5 
ﬁ ve
 五 
 As with four, we shall postpone learning the primitive elements 
that make up this character. Note how the general principle we 
just learned in the preceding frame applies to the writing of the 
character for ﬁ ve. [4]
丑 且 丕 世

lesson 1 | 17
 
6 
six
 六 
 Th e primitives here are top hat and animal legs. Once again, we 
glide over them until later. [4]
丗 丘 丙 丞
 
7 
seven
 七 
 Note that the ﬁ rst stroke “cuts” through the second. Th is distin-
guishes seven from the character for spoon 匕 (frame 444), in 
which the horizontal stroke stops short. [2]
両 並
*  As a primitive, this form takes on the meaning of diced, i.e., 
“cut” into little pieces, consistent both with the way the char-
acter is written and with its association with the kanji for cut 
切 to be learned in a later lesson (frame 85).
 
8 
eight
 八 
 Just as the Arabic numeral “8” is composed of a small circle fol-
lowed by a larger one, so the kanji for eight is composed of 
a short line followed by a longer line, slanting towards it but 
not touching it. And just as the “lazy 8” ∞ is the mathematical 
symbol for “inﬁ nity,” so the expanse opened up below these two 
strokes is associated by the Japanese with the sense of an inﬁ -
nite expanse or something “all-encompassing.” [2]
丨 个
 
9 
nine
 九 
 If you take care to remember the stroke order of this kanji, you 
will not have trouble later keeping it distinct from the kanji for 
power 力 (frame 858). [2]
中 丱

18 | remembering the kanji 1
*  As a primitive, we shall use this kanji to mean baseball team 
or simply baseball. Th e meaning, of course, is derived from 
the nine players who make up a team.
 
10 
ten
 十 
 Turn this character 45º either way and you have the x used for 
the Roman numeral ten. [2]
串 丶
*  As a primitive, this character sometimes keeps its meaning of 
ten and sometimes signiﬁ es needle, this latter derived from the 
kanji for needle 針 (frame 274). Since the primitive is used in 
the kanji itself, there is no need to worry about confusing the 
two. In fact, we shall be following this procedure regularly.
 
11 
mouth
 口 
 Like several of the ﬁ rst characters we shall learn, the kanji for 
mouth is a clear pictograph. Since there are no circular shapes 
in the kanji, the square must be used to depict the circle. [3]
丸 丹 主
*  As a primitive, this form also means mouth. Any of the range 
of possible images that the word suggests—an opening or 
entrance to a cave, a river, a bottle, or even the largest hole in 
your head—can be used for the primitive meaning.
 
12 
day
 日 
 Th is kanji is intended to be a pictograph of the sun. Recalling 
what we said in the previous frame about round forms, it is easy 
to detect the circle and the big smile that characterize our sim-
plest drawings of the sun—like those yellow badges with the 
words, “Have a nice day!” [4]
丼 丿 乂 乃

lesson 1 | 19
*  Used as a primitive, this kanji can mean sun or day or a 
tongue wagging in the mouth. Th is latter meaning, inciden-
tally, derives from an old character outside the standard list 
meaning something like “sayeth” and written almost exactly 
the same, except that the stroke in the middle does not touch 
the right side (曰, frame 578).
 
13 
month
 月 
 Th is character is actually a picture of the moon, with the two 
horizontal lines representing the left  eye and mouth of the 
mythical “man in the moon.” (Actually, the Japanese see a hare 
in the moon, but it is a little farfetched to ﬁ nd one in the kanji.) 
And one month, of course, is one cycle of the moon. [4]
久 之 乍 乎
*  As a primitive element, this character can take on the sense of 
moon, ﬂ esh, or part of the body. Th e reasons for the latter two 
meanings will be explained in a later chapter.
 
14 
rice ﬁ eld
 田 
 Another pictograph, this kanji looks like a bird’s-eye view of a 
rice ﬁ eld divided into four plots. Be careful when writing this 
character to get the order of the strokes correct. You will ﬁ nd 
that it follows perfectly the principle stated in frame 4. [5]
乏 乕 乖 乗 乘
*  When used as a primitive element, the meaning of rice ﬁ eld is 
most common, but now and again it will take the meaning of 
brains from the fact that it looks a bit like that tangle of gray 
matter nestled under our skulls.
 
15 
eye
 目 
 Here again, if we round out the corners of this kanji and curve 
the middle strokes upwards and downwards respectively, we get 
something resembling an eye. [5]

20 | remembering the kanji 1
乙 九 乞 也 乢
*  As a primitive, the kanji keeps its sense of eye, or to be more 
speciﬁ c, an eyeball. When placed in the surroundings of a 
complex kanji, the primitive will sometimes be turned on its 
side like this: 罒.
Although only 9 of the 15 kanji treated in this lesson are formally listed as prim-
itives—the elements that join together to make up other kanji—some of the 
others may also take on that function from time to time, only not with enough 
frequency to merit learning them as separate primitive elements and attaching 
special meanings to them. In other words, whenever one of the kanji already 
learned is used in another kanji, it will retain its key-word meaning unless we 
have assigned it a special primitive meaning.
Lesson 2
In this lesson we learn what a “primitive element” is by using the ﬁ rst 15 char-
acters as pieces that can be ﬁ tted together to form new kanji—19 of them to 
be exact. Whenever the primitive meaning diﬀ ers from the key-word meaning, 
you may want to go back to the original frame to refresh your memory. From 
now on, though, you should learn both the key-word and the primitive mean-
ing of new kanji as they appear. An Index of primitive elements has been 
added at the end of the book.
 
16 
old
 古 
 Th e primitive elements that compose this character are ten and 
mouth, but you may ﬁ nd it easier to remember it as a picto-
graph of a tombstone with a cross on top. Just think back to one 
of those graveyards you have visited, or better still, used to play 
in as a child, with old inscriptions on the tombstones.
 Th is departure from the primitive elements in favor of a picto-

lesson 2 | 21
graph will take place now and again at these early stages, and 
almost never aft er that. So you need not worry about cluttering 
up your memory with too many character “drawings.” [5]
亂 亅 了 予 争
*  Used as a primitive element, this kanji keeps its key-word 
sense of old, but care should be taken to make that abstract 
notion as graphic as possible.
 
17 
I
 吾 
 Th ere are a number of kanji for the word I, but the others tend 
to be more speciﬁ c than this one. Th e key word here should 
be taken in the general psychological sense of the “perceiving 
subject.” Now the one place in our bodies that all ﬁ ve senses are 
concentrated in is the head, which has no less than ﬁ ve mouths: 
2 nostrils, 2 ears, and 1 mouth. Hence, ﬁ ve mouths = I. [7]
亊 事 二 于 云 互 五
 
18 
risk
 冒 
 Remember when you were young and your mother told you 
never to look directly into the sun for fear you might burn out 
your eyes? Probably you were foolish enough to risk a quick 
glance once or twice; but just as probably, you passed that bit of 
folk wisdom on to someone else as you grew older. Here, too, 
the kanji that has a sun above and an eye right below looking up 
at it has the meaning of risk (see frame 11). [9]
井 亘 亙 些 亡
 
19 
companion
 朋 
 Th e ﬁ rst companion that God made, as the Bible story goes, was 
Eve. Upon seeing her, Adam exclaimed, “Flesh of my ﬂ esh!” And 
that is precisely what this kanji says in so many strokes. [8]
亢 交 亥 亦 亭

22 | remembering the kanji 1
 
20 
bright
 明 
 Among nature’s bright lights, there are two that the biblical 
myth has God set in the sky: the sun to rule over the day and 
the moon to rule the night. Each of them has come to represent 
one of the common connotations of this key word: the sun, the 
bright insight of the clear thinker, and the moon, the bright 
intuition of the poet and the seer (see frame 13). [8]
亶 仂
 
21 
chant
 唱 
 Th is one is easy! You have one mouth making no noise (the 
choirmaster) and two mouths with wagging tongues (the mini-
mum for a chorus). So think of the key word, chant, as monas-
tery singing and the kanji is yours forever (see frame 11). [11]
仇 从 他
 
22 
sparkle
 晶 
 What else can the word sparkle suggest if not a diamond? 
And if you’ve ever held a diamond up to the light, you will 
have noticed how every facet of it becomes like a miniature 
sun. Th is kanji is a picture of a tiny sun in three places (that is, 
“everywhere”), to give the sense of something that sparkles on 
all sides. Just like a diamond. In writing the primitive elements 
three times, note again how the rule for writing given in frame 
4 holds true not only for the strokes in each individual element 
but also for the disposition of the elements in the character as a 
whole. [12]
仝 代 仮
 
23 
goods
 品 
 As in the character for sparkle, the triplication of a single ele-
ment in this character indicates “everywhere” or “heaps of.” 
When we think of goods in modern industrial society, we think 
of what has been mass-produced—that is to say, produced for 

lesson 2 | 23
the “masses” of open mouths waiting like ﬂ edglings in a nest to 
“consume” whatever comes their way. [9]
件 仼 伃
 
24 
spine
 呂 
 Th is character is rather like a picture of two of the vertebrae in 
the spine linked by a single stroke. [7]
伉 伊 伍 伎 伏 伐 休
 
25 
prosperous
 昌 
 What we mentioned in the previous two frames about 3 of 
something meaning “everywhere” or “heaps of” was not meant 
to be taken lightly. In this kanji we see two suns, one atop the 
other, which, if we are not careful, is easily confused in memory 
with the three suns of sparkle. Focus on the number this way: 
since we speak of prosperous times as sunny, what could be 
more prosperous than a sky with two suns in it? Just be sure to 
actually see them there. [8]
伯 伸
 
26 
early
 早 
 Th is kanji is actually a picture of the ﬁ rst ﬂ ower of the day, 
which we shall, in deﬁ ance of botanical science, call the sun-
ﬂ ower, since it begins with the element for sun and is held up on 
a stem with leaves (the pictographic representation of the ﬁ nal 
two strokes). Th is time, however, we shall ignore the pictograph 
and imagine sunﬂ owers with needles for stems, which can be 
plucked and used to darn your socks.
 Th e sense of early is easily remembered if one thinks of the 
sunﬂ ower as the early riser in the garden, because the sun, 
showing favoritism towards its namesake, shines on it before all 
the others (see frame 10). [6]
伽 佃 但

24 | remembering the kanji 1
*  As a primitive element, this kanji takes the meaning of sun-
ﬂ ower, which was used to make the abstract key word early 
more graphic.
 
27 
rising sun
 旭 
 Th is character is a sort of nickname for the Japanese ﬂ ag with 
its well-known emblem of the rising sun. If you can picture two 
seams running down that great red sun, and then imagine it 
sitting on a baseball bat for a ﬂ agpole, you have a slightly irrev-
erent—but not altogether inaccurate—picture of how the sport 
has caught on in the Land of the Rising Sun. [6]
佇 位 低 住 佐 佑
 
28 
generation
 世 
 We generally consider one generation as a period of thirty (or 
ten plus ten plus ten) years. If you look at this kanji in its com-
pleted form—not in its stroke order—you will see three tens. 
When writing it, think of the lower horizontal lines as “addi-
tion” lines written under numbers to add them up. Th us: ten 
“plus” ten “plus” ten = thirty. Actually, it’s a lot easier doing it 
with a pencil than reading it in a book. [5]
体 何 佖 佗 余
 
29 
stomach
 胃 
 You will need to refer back to frames 13 and 14 here for the 
special meaning of the two primitive elements that make up 
this character: ﬂ esh (part of the body) and brain. What the kanji 
says, if you look at it, is that the part of the body that keeps the 
brain in working order is the stomach. To keep the elements 
in proper order, when you write this kanji think of the brain as 
being “held up” by the ﬂ esh. [9]
佞 佳

lesson 2 | 25
 
30 
nightbreak
 旦 
 While we normally refer to the start of the day as “daybreak,” 
Jap anese commonly refers to it as the “opening up of night” into 
day. Hence the choice of this rather odd key word, nightbreak. 
Th e single stroke at the bottom represents the ﬂ oor (have a peek 
again at frame 1) or the horizon over which the sun is poking 
its head. [5]
佼 使
 
31 
gall bladder
 胆 
 Th e pieces in this character should be easily recognizable: on 
the left , the element for part of the body, and on the right, the 
character for nightbreak, which we have just met. What all of 
this has to do with the gall bladder is not immediately clear. But 
all we need to do is give a slight twist to the traditional bibli-
cal advice about not letting the sun set on your anger (which 
ancient medicine associated with the choler or bile that the 
gall bladder is supposed to ﬁ lter out), and change it to “not 
letting the night break on your anger” (or your gall)—and the 
work of remembering the kanji is done. And the improvement 
is not a bad piece of advice in its own right, since anger, like so 
many other things, can oft en be calmed by letting the sun set 
on it and then “sleeping it oﬀ .” [9]
侊 侒
 
32 
span
 亘 
 “Sunrise, sunset, sunrise, sunset…” goes the song of the Fiddler 
on the Roof. You can almost see the journey of the sun as it 
moves from one horizon (the ﬂ oor) to its noonday heights in 
the sky overhead (ceiling) and then disappears over the other 
horizon—day aft er day, marking the span of our lives. [6]
侔 供 依

26 | remembering the kanji 1
We end this lesson with two ﬁ nal pictographic characters that happen to be 
among the easiest to recognize for their form, but among the most diﬃ  cult 
to write. We introduce them here to run an early test on whether or not you 
have been paying close attention to the stroke order of the kanji you have been 
learning.
 
33 
concave
 凹 
 You couldn’t have asked for a better key word for this kanji! Just 
have a look at it: a perfect image of a concave lens (remember-
ing, of course, that the kanji square oﬀ  rounded things), com-
plete with its own little “cave.” Now all you have to do is learn 
how to write it. [5]
侠 価 侫 侭 侮
 
34 
convex
 凸 
 Maybe this helps you see how the Japanese have no trouble 
keeping convex distinct from concave. Note the odd feeling of 
the third stroke. If it doesn’t feel all that strange now, by the time 
you are done with this book, it will. Th ere are very few times 
you will have to write it. [5]
侯 侵 侶 便 係
Lesson 3
After Lesson 2, you should now have some idea of how an apparently com-
plex and diﬃ  cult kanji can be broken down into simple elements that make 
remembering it a great deal easier. Aft er completing this lesson you should have 
a clearer idea of how the course is laid out. We merely add a couple of primi-
tive elements to the kanji we already know and see how many new kanji we can 
form—in this case, 18 in all—and when we run out, add more primitives. And 
so on, until there are no kanji left .

lesson 3 | 27
In Lesson 3 you will also be introduced to primitive elements that are not 
themselves kanji but only used to construct other kanji. These are marked 
with a star [*] instead of a number. Th ere is no need to make a special eﬀ ort to 
memorize them. Th e sheer frequency with which most of them show up should 
make remembering them automatic.
 
*  
walking stick
 丨 
 Th is primitive element is a picture of just what it looks like: a 
cane or walking stick. It carries with it the connotations of lame-
ness and whatever else one associates with the use of a cane. 
Rarely—but very rarely—it will be laid on its side. Whenever 
this occurs, it will always be driven through the middle of 
some other primitive element. In this way, you need not worry 
about confusing it with the primitive meanings of one. [1]
促
 
* 
a drop of
 
俄 
 Th e meaning of this primitive is obvious from the ﬁ rst moment 
you look at it, though just what it will be a drop of will diﬀ er 
from case to case. Th e important thing is not to think of it as 
something insigniﬁ cant like a “drop in the bucket” but as some-
thing so important that it can change the whole picture—like a 
drop of arsenic in your mother-in-law’s coﬀ ee. [1]
俄
*  In general, it is written from right to left , but there are times 
when it can be slanted left  to right. At other times it can be 
stretched out a bit. (In cases where you have trouble remem-
bering this, it may help to think of it as an eyedropper drip-
ping drops of something or other.) Examples will follow in 
this lesson.
 
35 
olden times
 旧 
 A walking stick is needed for days of olden times, since days, 
too, get old—at least insofar as we refer to them as the “good old 

28 | remembering the kanji 1
days.” Th e main thing here is to think of “good old days” when 
you hear the key word olden times. Th e rest will take care of 
itself. [5]
俉 俐
 
36 
oneself
 自 
 You can think of this kanji as a stylized pictograph of the nose, 
that little drop that Mother Nature set between your eyes. Th e 
Jap anese refer to themselves by pointing a ﬁ nger at their nose—
giving us an easy way to remember the kanji for oneself. [6]
俑 俔 俗 俘 俚 俛
*  Th e same meaning of oneself can be kept when this kanji is 
used as a primitive element, but you will generally ﬁ nd it bet-
ter to give it the meaning of nose or nostrils, both because it 
accords with the story above and because it is the ﬁ rst part of 
the kanji for nose (frame 678).
 
37 
white
 白 
 Th e color white is a mixture of all the primary colors, both for 
pigments and for light, as we see when a prism breaks up the 
rays of the sun. Hence, a single drop of sun spells white. [5]
保 俟 信 俣 俤
*  As a primitive, this character can either retain its meaning 
of white or take the more graphic meaning of a white bird or 
dove. Th is latter stems from the fact that it appears at the top 
of the kanji for bird, which we shall get to later (frame 1941).
 
38 
hundred
 百 
 Th e Japanese refer to a person’s 99th birthday as a “white year” 
because white is the kanji you are left  with if you subtract one 
from a hundred. [6]
俥 修 俯 俳 俵 俶

lesson 3 | 29
 
39 
in
 中 
 Th e elements here are a walking stick and a mouth. Remember 
the trouble your mother had getting medicine in your mouth? 
Chances are it crossed her mind more than once to grab some-
thing handy, like your grandfather’s walking stick, to pry open 
your jaws while she performed her duty. Keep the image of get-
ting something in from the outside, and the otherwise abstract 
sense of this key word should be a lot easier than trying to 
spoon castor oil into a baby’s mouth. [4]
俸 俺 俾 俿
 
40 
thousand
 千 
 Th is kanji is almost too simple to pull apart, but for the sake of 
practice, have a look at the drop above and the ten below. Now 
put the elements together by thinking of squeezing two more 
zeros out of an eyedropper alongside the number ten to make it 
a thousand. [3]
倅 倆 倉
 
41 
tongue
 舌 
 Th e primitive for mouth and the character for thousand natu-
rally form the idea of tongue if one thinks of a thousand mouths 
able to speak the same language, or as we say, “sharing a com-
mon tongue.” It is easy to see the connection between the idiom 
and the kanji if you take its image literally: a single tongue being 
passed around from mouth to mouth. [6]
個 倍 倏 們 倒 倔
 
42 
measuring box
 升 
 Th is is the character for the little wooden box that the Japanese 
use for measuring things, as well as for drinking saké out of. 
Simply imagine the outside as spiked with a thousand sharp 
needles, and the quaint little measuring box becomes a drinker’s 
nightmare!

30 | remembering the kanji 1
 Be very careful when you write this character not to confuse it 
with the writing of thousand. Th e reason for the diﬀ erence gives 
us a chance to clarify another general principle of writing that 
supersedes the one we mentioned in frame 4: when a single 
stroke runs vertically through the middle of a char-
acter, it is written last. [4]
倖 候 倚 倞
 
43 
rise up
 昇 
 Our image here is made up of two primitive elements: a sun 
and a measuring box. Just as the sun can be seen rising up in 
the morning from—where else—the Land of the Rising Sun, 
this kanji has the sun rising up out of a Japanese measuring 
box—the “measuring box of the rising-up sun.” [8]
倣 倨
 
44 
round
 丸 
 We speak of “round numbers,” or “rounding a number oﬀ ,” 
meaning to add an insigniﬁ cant amount to bring it to the near-
est 10. For instance, if you add just a wee bit, the tiniest drop, to 
nine, you end up with a round number. [3]
倩 倪 倫
*  As a primitive, this element takes the meaning of a fat man. 
Th ink of a grotesquely fat man whose paunch so covers the 
plate that he is always getting hit by the pitch. Hence a round 
baseball player becomes a fat man.
 
45 
measurement
 寸 
 Th is kanji actually stood for a small measurement used prior 
to the metric system, a bit over an inch in length, and from 
there acquired the sense of measurement. In the old system, it 
was one-tenth of a shaku (whose kanji we shall meet in frame 
1070). Th e picture, appropriately, represents one drop of a ten 
(with a hook!). [3]

lesson 3 | 31
倬 倭 倶
*  As a primitive, we shall use this to mean glue or glued to. Th ere 
is no need to devise a story to remember this, since the primi-
tive will appear so oft en you would have to struggle hard not 
to remember it.
 
46 
specialty
 専 
 Ten . . . rice ﬁ elds . . . glue. Th at is how one would read the primi-
tive elements of this kanji from top to bottom. Now if we make 
a simple sentence out of these elements, we get: “Ten rice ﬁ elds 
glued together.”
 A specialty, of course, refers to one’s special “ﬁ eld” of endea-
vor or competence. In fact, few people remain content with a 
single specialty and usually extend themselves in other ﬁ elds as 
well. Th is is how we come to get the picture of ten ﬁ elds glued 
together to represent a specialty. [9]
倹 偀 偂 偃 偆 假 偈 偉 偏
 
47 
Dr.
 博 
 At the left  we have the needle; at the right, the kanji for specialty, 
plus an extra drop at the top. Th ink of a Dr. who is a specialist 
with a needle (an acupuncturist) and let the drop at the top rep-
resent the period at the end of Dr.
 In principle we are trying to avoid this kind of device, which 
plays on abstract grammatical conventions; but I think you will 
agree, aft er you have had occasion to use the right side of this 
kanji in forming other kanji, that the exception is merited in 
this case. [12]
嘉 嘔 嘖 嘗 嘘 嘛 嘩 嘯 
嘱 嘲 嘴 嘶
*  Th e primitive form of this kanji eliminates the needle on the 
left  and gets the meaning of an acupuncturist.

32 | remembering the kanji 1
We have already seen one example of how to form primitives from other primi-
tives, when we formed the nightbreak out of sun and ﬂ oor (frame 30). Let us 
take two more examples of this procedure right away, so that we can do so from 
now on without having to draw any particular attention to the fact.
 
* 
divining rod
 卜 
 Th is is a picture of a divining rod, composed of a drop and 
a walking stick, but easy enough to remember as a pictograph. 
Alternately, you can think of it as a magic wand. In either case, 
it should suggest images of magic or fortune-telling.
 Nowadays it is written in the stroke order given here when 
it appears as a primitive, but until recently the order was oft en 
reversed (in order to instill correct habits for more stylized cal-
ligraphy). [2]
偐 偕
*  Although it falls outside of the list of general-use kanji, this 
element is actually a kanji in its own right, having virtually 
the same meaning as the kanji in the next frame.
 
48 
fortune-telling
 占 
 Th is is one of those kanji that is a real joy of simplicity: a divin-
ing rod with a mouth—which translate directly into fortune-
telling.
 Note how the movement from top to bottom (the movement 
in which the kanji are written) is also the order of the elements 
which make up our story and of the key word itself: ﬁ rst divin-
ing rod, then mouth. Th is will not always be possible, but where 
it is, memory has almost no work at all to do. [5]
偖 做 停 健 偬
 
49 
above
 上 
 Th e two directions, above and below, are usually pointed at with 
the ﬁ nger. But the characters do not follow that custom, so we 
have to choose something else, easily remembered. Th e prim-

lesson 3 | 33
itives show a magic wand standing above a ﬂ oor—“magically,” 
you might say. Anyway, go right on to the next frame, since the 
two belong together and are best remembered as a unit, just as 
the words above and below suggest each other. [3]
偰 偲 側
 
50 
below
 下 
 Here we see our famous miraculous magic wand hanging, all 
on its own, below the ceiling, as you probably already guessed 
would happen. In addition to giving us two new kanji, the two 
shapes given in this and the preceding frame also serve to ﬁ x 
the use of the primitives for ceiling and ﬂ oor, by drawing our 
attention successively to the line standing above and below the 
primitive element to which it is related. [3]
偵 偶 偸
 
51 
eminent
 卓 
 Th e word eminent suggests a famous or well-known person. So 
all you need to do—given the primitives of a magic wand and a 
sunﬂ ower—is to think of the world’s most eminent magician as 
one who uses a sunﬂ ower for a magic wand (like a ﬂ ower-child 
who goes around turning the world into peace and love). [8]
偽 傀 傅 傍 傑 傔 傘 備
 
* 
mist
 聢 
 Here is our second example of a primitive composed of other 
primitives but not itself a kanji. At the bottom is the primi-
tive (also a kanji) for early or sunﬂ ower. At the top, a needle. 
Conveniently, mist falls early in the morning, like little needles 
of rain, to assure that the sunﬂ ower blooms early as we have 
learned it should. [8]
傚 催 傭 傲 傳 傴 債 傷

34 | remembering the kanji 1
 
52 
morning
 朝 
 On the right we see the moon fading oﬀ  into the ﬁ rst light of 
morning, and to the left , the mist that falls to give nature a 
shower to prepare it for the coming heat. If you can think of the 
moon tilting over to spill mist on your garden, you should have 
no trouble remembering which of all the elements in this story 
are to serve as primitives for constructing the character. [12]
傷 僉
Lesson 4
At the risk of going a little bit too fast, we are now going to introduce ﬁ ve 
new primitive elements, all of which are very easy to remember, either because 
of their frequency or because of their shape. But remember: there is no reason 
to study the primitives by themselves. Th ey are being presented systematically 
to make their learning automatic.
 
* 
animal legs
 亀 
 Like the four that follow it, this primitive is not a kanji in its own 
right, though it is said to be derived from 八, the character we 
learned earlier for eight. It always comes at the bottom of the 
primitive to which it is related. It can mean the legs of any kind 
of animal: from a grizzly bear’s paws to an octopus’s tentacles 
to the spindle shanks of a spider. (Th e one animal not allowed is 
our friend homo sapiens, whose legs ﬁ gure in the next frame.) 
Even where the term “legs” will apply metaphorically to the legs 
of pieces of furniture, it is best to keep the association with ani-
mal legs. (You may review frame 6 here.) [2]
乾 亀
 
* 
human legs
 聡 
 Notice how these human legs are somewhat shapelier and more 
highly evolved than those of the so-called “lower animals.” Th e 

lesson 4 | 35
one on the left , drawn ﬁ rst, is straight; while the one on the right 
bends gracefully and ends with a hook. Th ough they are not 
likely to suggest the legs of any human you know, they do have 
something of the look of someone out for a stroll, especially if 
you compare them to animal legs.
 If you had any trouble with the kanji for the number four, now 
would be the time to return to it (frame 4). [2]
乱 乳
 
* 
wind
 几 
 Th is primitive gets its name from the full kanji for the wind 
(frame 524). It is called an “enclosure” because other elements 
are oft en drawn in the middle of it, though it can also be com-
pressed together so that there is no room for anything in it. Th e 
main thing to remember when writing this element is that the 
second stroke bends outwards, like a gust of wind blown from 
above. In addition to the basic meaning of wind, we shall also 
have occasion to use the image of a weather vane. Th e deriva-
tion is obvious. [2]
僑 僕
 
* 
bound up
 勹 
 Like wind, the element meaning bound up is also an enclosure 
that can wrap itself around other elements or be compressed 
when there is nothing to enclose. When this latter happens—
usually because there is not enough room—and it is set on top, 
the little hook at the end is dropped oﬀ , like this: 聴.
 Th e sense of bound up is that of being “tied and gagged” or 
wrapped up tightly. If you have trouble remembering when it 
serves as an enclosure (with the hook) and when not (without 
the hook), you might think of the former as a chain and the lat-
ter as a rope. [2]
僖 僘

36 | remembering the kanji 1
 
* 
horns
 僞
 
 Th is primitive element always appears at the top of the ele-
ment to which it is related, and is always attached, or almost 
attached, to the ﬁ rst horizontal line to come under it. Th e horns 
can never simply be left  hanging in the air. When there is no 
line available, an extra horizontal stroke (like a one) is added. 
Th e ﬁ nal kanji of this lesson gives an example.
 Th e meaning of this element is wide enough to embrace the 
horns of bulls, rams, billy goats, and moose, but not the fam-
ily of musical instruments. As with other elements with such 
“open” meanings, it is best to settle on one that you ﬁ nd most 
vivid and stick with that image consistently. [2]
僚 僞
 
53 
only
 只 
 When we run across abstract key words like this one, the best 
way to get an image it to recall some common but suggestive 
phrase in which the word appears. For instance, we can think 
of the expression “it’s the only one of its kind.” Th en we imagine 
a barker at a side-show advertising some strange pac-man like 
creature he has inside his tent, with only a gigantic mouth and 
two wee animal legs. [5]
僣 僥 僧 僭 僮
 
54 
shellﬁ sh
 貝 
 To remember the primitive elements that make up this kanji, 
an eye and animal legs, you might be tempted to think of it as a 
pictograph of a shellﬁ sh with its ridged shell at the top and two 
little legs sticking out of the bottom. But that might not help you 
recall later just how many ridges to put on the shell. Better to 
imagine a freakish shellﬁ sh with a single, gigantic eye roaming 
the beaches on its slender little legs, scaring the wits out of the 
sunbathers. [7]
僴 僵 價 僻 儀 儁 儂

lesson 4 | 37
*  When used as a primitive, in addition to shells, the meanings 
oyster and clam will oft en come in handy.
 
55 
upright
 貞 
 Now take the last primitive, the shellﬁ sh, and set a magic wand 
over it, and you have the kanji for upright. Aft er all, the clam 
and the oyster are incapable of walking upright. It would take 
a magician with his wand to pull oﬀ  such a feat—which is pre-
cisely what we have in this kanji. [9]
儉 償
 
56 
employee
 員 
 How do we get a mouth over a shellﬁ sh to mean an employee? 
Simple. Just remember the advice new employees get about 
keeping their mouths shut and doing their job, and then make 
that more graphic by picturing an oﬃ  ce building full of white-
collar workers scurrying around with clams pinched to their 
mouths. [10]
儲 允
 
57 
see
 見 
 Th e elements that compose the character for see are the eye 
ﬁ rmly ﬁ xed to a pair of human legs. Surely, somewhere in your 
experience, there is a vivid image just waiting to be dragged up 
to help you remember this character…. [7]
元 兄 充 兆 兇 先 光
 
58 
newborn babe
 児 
 Th e top part of the kanji in this frame, you will remember, is 
the character for olden times, those days so old they needed a 
walking stick to get around. Western mythical imagination has 
old “Father Time” leaning on his sickle with a newborn babe 
crawling around his legs, the idea being that the circle of birth-
and-death goes on.

38 | remembering the kanji 1
 Th is is the ﬁ rst of three times that the kanji for olden times will 
appear in this book as a primitive element in another kanji, so 
try to make the most of it. [7]
兊 兎 児 兒
 
59 
beginning
 元 
 “In the beginning…” starts that marvelous shelf of books we 
call the Bible. It talks about how all things were made, and tells 
us that when the Creator came to humanity she made two of 
them, man and woman. While we presume she made two of 
every other animal as well, we are not told as much. Hence we 
need only two and a pair of human legs come to the kanji that 
means beginning. [4]
兔 党 兜 兢
 
60 
page
 頁 
 What we have to do here is turn a shellﬁ sh into a page of a book. 
Th e one at the top tells us that we only get a rather short book, 
in fact a book of only one page. Imagine a title printed on the 
shell of an oyster, let us say “Pearl of Wisdom,” and then open 
the quaint book to its one and only page, on which you ﬁ nd a 
single, radiant drop of wisdom, one of the masterpiece poems of 
nature. [9]
兤 入 全 兩 兪 八 公 六 兮
*  As a primitive, this kanji takes the unrelated meaning of a 
head (preferably one detached from its body), derived from 
the character for head (frame 1441).
 
61 
stubborn
 頑 
 Th is character refers to the blockheaded, persistent stubborn-
ness of one who sticks to an idea or a plan just the way it was 
at the beginning, without letting anything that comes up along 
the way alter things in the least. Th e explanation makes “sense,” 
but is hard to remember because the word “beginning” is too 

lesson 4 | 39
abstract. Back up to the image we used two frames ago—Adam 
and Eve in their Eden—and try again: Th e root of all stubborn-
ness goes back to the beginning, with two brothers each stub-
bornly defending his own way of life and asking their God to 
bless it favorably. Abel stuck to agriculture, Cain to animal-rais-
ing. Picture these two with their giant, swelled heads, each vying 
for the favors of heaven, a stubborn grimace on their faces. No 
wonder something unfortunate happened! [13]
具 册
 
62 
mediocre
 凡 
 While we refer to something insigniﬁ cant as a “drop in the 
bucket,” the kanji for mediocre suggests the image of a “drop in 
the wind.” [3]
墮 墲 墳
 
63 
defeat
 負 
 Above we have the condensed form of bound up, and below the 
familiar shellﬁ sh. Now imagine two oysters engaged in shell-to-
shell combat, the one who is defeated being bound and gagged 
with seaweed, the victor towering triumphantly over it. Th e 
bound shellﬁ sh thus becomes the symbol for defeat. [9]
冏 冗
 
64 
ten thousand
 万 
 Japanese counts higher numbers in units of ten thousand, unlike 
the West, which advances according to units of one thousand. 
(Th us, for instance, 40,000 would be read “four ten-thousands” 
by a Japanese.) Given that the comma is used in larger numbers 
to bind up a numerical unit of one thousand, the elements for 
one and bound up naturally come to form ten thousand.
 Th e order of strokes here needs special attention, both because 
it falls outside the general principles we have learned already, 
and because it involves writing the element for bound up in an 
order opposite to the one we learned. If it is any consolation, 

40 | remembering the kanji 1
this happens every time these three strokes come together. [3]
写 冝 冠
 
65 
phrase
 句 
 By combining the two primitives bound up and mouth, it is easy 
to see how this character can get the meaning of a phrase. Aft er 
all, a phrase is nothing more than a number of words bound up 
tightly and neatly so that they will ﬁ t in your mouth. [5]
冢 冤 冥 冦 冨
 
66 
texture
 肌 
 Ever notice how the texture of your face and hands is aﬀ ected 
by the wind? A day’s skiing or sailing makes them rough and 
dry, and in need of a good soft  cream to soothe the burn. So 
whenever a part of the body gets exposed to the wind, its texture 
is aﬀ ected. (If it is any help, the Latin word hiding inside texture 
connotes how something is “to the touch.”) [6]
冷 冾
 
67 
decameron
 旬 
 Th ere simply is not a good phrase in English for the block of 
ten days which this character represents. So we resurrect the 
classical phrase, decameron, whose connotations the tales of 
Boccaccio have done much to enrich. Actually, it refers to a 
journey of ten days taken by a band of people—that is, a group 
of people bound together for the days of the decameron. [6]
凅 凌
 
68 
ladle
 勺 
 If you want to bind up drops of anything—water, soup, lemon-
ade—you use something to scoop these drops up, which is what 
we call a ladle. See the last drop left  inside the ladle? [3]

lesson 5 | 41
働 像
 
69 
bull’s eye
 的 
 Th e elements white bird and ladle easily suggest the image of 
a bull’s eye if you imagine a rusty old ladle with a bull’s eye 
painted on it in the form of a tiny white bird, who lets out a little 
“peep” every time you hit the target. [8]
凝 処
 
70 
neck
 首 
 Reading this kanji from the top down, we have: horns . . . nose. 
Together they bring to mind the picture of a moose-head hang-
ing on the den wall, with its great horns and long nose. Now 
while we would speak of cutting oﬀ  a moose’s “head” to hang 
on the wall, the Japanese speak of cutting oﬀ  its neck. It’s all a 
matter of how you look at it. Anyway, if you let the word neck 
conjure up the image of a moose with a very l-o-n-g neck hang-
ing over the ﬁ replace, whose horns you use for a coat-rack and 
whose nose has spigots left  and right for scotch and water, you 
should have no trouble with the character.
 Here we get a good look at what we mentioned when we ﬁ rst 
introduced the element for horns: that they can never be left  
ﬂ oating free and require an extra horizontal stroke to prevent 
that from happening, as is the case here. [9]
凧 凩 凪 凬 凭 凰 凱 凵 凶
Lesson 5
That is about all we can do with the pieces we have accumulated so far, but 
as we add each new primitive element to those we already know, the number of 
kanji we will be able to form will increase by leaps and bounds.
If we were to step outside of the standard list, we would see that there are 

42 | remembering the kanji 1
actually any number of other kanji that we could learn at this time. Just to give 
you an idea of some of the possibilities (though you should not bother to learn 
them now), here are a few, with their meanings: 唄 (pop song), 泪 (teardrops), 吋 
(inch), 肘 (elbow), 叱 (scolding).
While many of the stories you have learned in the previous lessons are actu-
ally more complex than the majority you will learn in the later chapters, they 
are the ﬁ rst stories you have learned, and for that reason are not likely to cause 
you much diﬃ  culty. By now, however, you may be wondering just how to go 
about reviewing what you have learned. Obviously it won’t do simply to ﬂ ip 
through the pages you have already studied, because the order already gives 
them away. Th e best method is to design for yourself a set of ﬂ ash cards that 
you can add to as you go through the book.
If you have not already started doing this on your own, you might try it 
this way: Buy heavy paper (about twice the thickness of normal index cards), 
unlined and with a semigloss ﬁ nish. Cut it into cards of about 9 cm. long and 
6 cm. wide. On one side, make a large ball-pen drawing of one kanji in the top 
two-thirds of the card. (Writing done with fountain pens and felt-tip pens tends 
to smear with the sweat that comes from holding them in your hands for a long 
time.) On the bottom right-hand corner, put the number of the frame in which 
the kanji appeared. On the back side, in the upper left -hand corner, write the 
key word meaning of the character. Th en draw a line across the middle of the 
card and another line about 2 cm. below it. Th e space between these two lines 
can be used for any notes you may need later to remind you of the primitive 
elements or stories you used to remember the character. Only ﬁ ll this in when 
you need to, but make a card for every kanji as soon as you have learned it. 
Th e rest of the space on the card you will not need now, but later, when you 
study the readings of the characters, you might use the space above the double 
lines. Th e bottom half of the card, on both sides, can be left  free for inserting 
kanji compounds (front side) and their readings and meanings (back side).
A ﬁ nal note about reviewing. You have probably gotten yourself into the 
habit of writing the character several times when memorizing it, whether you 
need to or not; and then writ-
ing it more times for kanji 
that you have trouble remem-
bering. Th ere is really no need 
to write the kanji more than 
once, unless you have trouble 
with the stroke-order and 
want to get a better “feel” for 
it. If a kanji causes you trou-
ble, spend time clarifying the 
偸
50
below
floor with magic
wand below

lesson 5 | 43
imagery of its story. Simply rewriting the character will reinforce any latent sus-
picions you still have that the “tried and true method” of learning by repeating 
is the only reliable one—the very bias we are trying to uproot. Also, when you 
review, review only from the key word to the kanji, not the other way 
around. Th e reasons for this, along with further notes on reviewing, will come 
later.
We are now ready to return to work, adding a few new primitives one by 
one, and seeing what new characters they allow us to form. We shall cover 24 
new kanji in this lesson.
 
71 
ﬁ sh guts
 乙 
 Th e kanji shown here actually represents the “second” position 
in the old Chinese zodiac, which the Japanese still use as an 
alternate way of enumeration, much the same way that English 
will revert to Roman numerals. Among its many other mean-
ings are “pure,” “tasteful,” “quaint,” and—get this!—ﬁ sh guts. 
Since it is a pictograph of a ﬁ shhook, it should not be hard to 
associate it with the key word. [1]
凸
*  We will keep ﬁ shhook as the primitive meaning. Its shape will 
rarely be quite the same as that of the kanji. When it appears 
at the bottom of another primitive, it is straightened out, 
almost as if the weight of the upper element had bent it out 
of shape: 肌. And when it appears to the right of another ele-
ment, the short horizontal line that gets the shape started is 
omitted and it is stretched out and narrowed, all for reasons 
of space and aesthetics: 肋. Examples follow.
 
72 
riot
 乱 
 In a riot, manners are laid aside and tempers get short, even in 
so courtesy-conscious a land as Japan. Th is kanji shows what 
happens to a rioting tongue: it gets “barbed” like a ﬁ shhook, and 
sets to attacking the opposition, to hook them as it were. [7]
刃 刄

44 | remembering the kanji 1
 
73 
straightaway
 直 
 Begin with the top two primitives, needle and eye. Together they 
represent the eye of a needle. Below them is a ﬁ shhook that has 
been straightened out and its barb removed so that it can pass 
through the eye of the needle. [8]
分 切 刈 刊 刋 刎 刑 刔
 
* 
tool
 聲 
 Although this primitive is not very common, it is useful to 
know, as the following examples will show. Conveniently, it is 
always drawn at the very bottom of any kanji in which it ﬁ g-
ures. Th e ﬁ rst stroke, the horizontal one, is detached from any-
thing above it, but is necessary to distinguish tool from animal 
legs. Th e sense of the element is a carpenter’s tool, which comes 
from its pictographic representation of a small table with legs 
(make them animal legs if you need a more graphic image), so 
that any element lying on top of it will come to be viewed as a 
tool in the hands of a carpenter. [3]
刕 列 初
 
74 
tool
 具 
 Here is the full kanji on which the last frame is based. If you 
can think of a table full of carpenter’s tools of all sorts, each 
equipped with its own eye so that it can keep a watch over what 
you are doing with it, you won’t have trouble later keeping the 
primitive and the kanji apart. [8]
刪 刮 到 刳
 
75 
true
 真 
 Here again we meet the composite element, eye of the needle, 
which here combines with tool to give us a measure of what is 
true and what is not. [10]
制 刷 剃 削

lesson 5 | 45
 
* 
by one’s side
 聳 
 Th is primitive has the look of ten, except that the left  stroke is 
bent down toward the left . It indicates where your hands (your 
ten ﬁ ngers) fall when you let them droop: by your side.
 Th e stroke order of this character can be reversed; but which-
ever stroke is written second, that stroke should be drawn lon-
ger than the other. Th e diﬀ erence is slight, and all but unno-
ticeable in printed characters, but it should be learned all the 
same. [2]
剖 剛 ･ 剥 剩
 
76 
craft 
 工 
 Th e pictograph of an I beam, like the kind that is used in heavy 
construction work on buildings and bridges, gives us the char-
acter for craft  in general. [3]
前 剏 剔
*  As a primitive element, the key word retains the meaning of 
craft  and also takes on the related meanings of I beam and 
artiﬁ cial.
 
77 
left 
 左 
 By combining the primitive and the kanji of the last two 
frames and reading the results, we get: by one’s side . . . craft . 
Conveniently, the left  has traditionally been considered the 
“sinister” side, where dark and occult craft s are cultivated. Note 
how the second stroke droops over to the left  and is longer than 
the ﬁ rst. [5]
剖 剛 剞 剣 剤
 
78 
right
 右 
 When thinking of the key word right, in order to avoid con-
fusion with the previous frame, take advantage of the double-
meaning here, too. Imagine a little mouth hanging down by 
your side—like a little voice of conscience—telling you the 

46 | remembering the kanji 1
right thing to do. Here the second stroke should reach out to 
the right and be drawn slightly longer than the ﬁ rst. [5]
剥 剩 剪 副 剰
 
79 
possess
 有 
 Th e picture here is of someone with a slab of meat dangling 
by the side, perhaps from a belt or rope tied around the waist. 
Th ink of it as an evil spirit in possession of one’s soul, who 
can be exorcized only by allowing fresh meat to hang by one’s 
side until it begins to putrefy and stink so bad that the demon 
departs. Take careful note of the stroke order. [6]
剱 割 剳 剴 創 剽
 
80 
bribe
 賄 
 To the left  we have the primitive for a shellﬁ sh, and to the right 
the kanji we just learned for possess. Keep the connotation 
of the last frame for the word possess, and now expand your 
image of shells to include the ancient value they had as money 
(a usage that will come in very helpful later on). Now one who 
is possessed by shells is likely to abandon any higher principles 
to acquire more and more wealth. Th ese are the easiest ones to 
bribe with a few extra shells. [13]
劑 加
 
81 
tribute
 貢 
 A tribute has a kind of double-meaning in English: honor paid 
freely and money collected by coercion. Simply because a ruler 
bestows a noble name on a deed is hardly any consolation to 
the masses who must part with their hard-earned money. Little 
wonder that this ancient craft  of getting money by calling it a 
tribute has given way to a name closer to how it feels to those 
who pay it: a tax. [10]
助 労

lesson 5 | 47
 
82 
paragraph
 項 
 To the right we see a head and to the left  an element that means 
craft . When we think of a paragraph, we immediately think of a 
heading device to break a text into parts. (Th ink of the elaborate 
heads oft en seen at the start of medieval manuscripts and the 
task becomes easier still.) Just where and how to do it belongs to 
the writer’s craft . Hence, we deﬁ ne paragraphing as the “head-
ing craft ” to remember this character. [12]
劼 勒
 
83 
sword
 刀 
 Although this kanji no longer looks very much like a sword, it 
does have some resemblance to the handle of the sword. Th is is 
to our advantage, in that it helps us make a distinction between 
two primitive elements based on this kanji. [2]
動 勗
*  In the form of the kanji, this primitive means a dagger. When 
it appears to the right of another element, it is commonly 
stretched out like this 刂 and takes the sense of a great and 
flashing saber, a meaning it gets from a character we shall 
learn later (frame 1671).
 
84 
blade
 刃 
 Th ink of using a dagger as a razor blade, and it shouldn’t be 
hard to imagine cutting yourself. See the little drop of blood 
clinging to the blade? [3]
勘 務 勛
 
85 
cut
 切 
 To the right we see the dagger and next to it the number seven 
whose primitive meaning we decided would be diced (frame 
7). It is hard to think of cutting anything with a knife with-
out imagining one of those skillful Japanese chefs. Only let us 

48 | remembering the kanji 1
say that he has had too much to drink at a party, grabs a dag-
ger lying on the mantelpiece and starts dicing up everything in 
sight, starting with the hors d’oeuvres and going on to the fur-
niture and the carpets…. [4]
勝 勞 募 勠
 
86 
seduce
 召 
 A sword or dagger posed over a mouth is how the character 
for “beckoning” is written. Th e related but less tame key word 
seduce was chosen because it seemed to ﬁ t better with the—how 
shall we put it?—Freudian implications of the kanji. (Observe 
if you will that it is not sure whether the long slender object is 
seducing the small round one or vice versa.) [5]
勣 勲
*  Th e primitive meaning remains the same: seduce. Just be sure 
to associate it with a very concrete image.
 
87 
shining
 昭 
 Let the key word suggest shining one’s shoes, the purpose of 
which is to seduce the sun down on them for all to see. [9]
勹 匁
 
88 
rule
 則 
 Th e character depicts a clam alongside a great and ﬂ ashing 
saber. Th ink of digging for clams in an area where there are 
gaming rules governing how large a ﬁ nd has to be before you 
can keep it. So you take your trusty saber, which you have care-
fully notched like a yardstick, crack open a clam, and then mea-
sure the poor little beastie to see if it is as long as the rules say it 
has to be. [9]
匏 匕

lesson 5 | 49
 
* 
wealth
 聯 
 To prepare for following frame, we introduce here a somewhat 
rare primitive meaning wealth. It takes its meaning from the 
common image of the overwealthy as also being overfed. More 
speciﬁ  cally, the kanji shows us one single mouth devouring all 
the harvest of the ﬁ elds, presumably while those who labor in 
them go hungry. Th ink of the phrase exactly as it is written 
when you draw the character, and the disposition of the ele-
ments is easy. [9]
化 匚 匤
 
89 
vice-
 副 
 Th e key word vice has the sense of someone second-in-com-
mand. Th e great and ﬂ ashing saber to the right (its usual loca-
tion, so you need not worry about where to put it from now 
on) and the wealth on the left  combine to create an image of 
dividing one’s property to give a share to one’s vice-wealth-
holder. [11]
匿 區 十
 
90 
separate
 別 
 In the Old East, the samurai and his saber were never sepa-
rated. Th ey were constant companions, like the cowboy of the 
Old West and his six-shooter. Th is character depicts what must 
have been the height of separation-anxiety for a samurai: to be 
bound up with a rope and unable to get at his saber leaning only 
a few feet away from him. Look at that mouth bellowing out for 
shame and sorrow!
 Note the order in which the element for tied up is written—
just as it had been with the character for ten thousand. [7]
卆 升 午 半

50 | remembering the kanji 1
 
91 
street
 丁 
 Th e picture here is of a street sign on a long pole: Hollywood 
and Vine, if you please, or any street that immediately conjures 
up the image of a street sign to you. [2]
卍 卑
*  Used as a primitive, we change the meaning of the key word 
and take the shape to signify a nail or a spike. Should it hap-
pen, on reviewing, that you ﬁ nd the pictographs get jumbled, 
then think of jerking a street sign out of the ground and using 
it as a nail to repair your garage roof.
 
92 
village
 町 
 Street signs standing at the corner of the rice ﬁ elds depict the 
village limits. (Remember what was said earlier: when used as 
a primitive, a kanji may either take its primitive meaning or 
revert to the original meaning of its key word.) [7]
卒 卓 協 南 単 博 卜
 
93 
can
 可 
 Remember the story about the “Little Engine that Could” when 
you hear this key word, and the rest is simple. See the deter-
mined little locomotive huﬃ  ng and puﬃ  ng up the mountain—
”I think I can, I think I can...”—spitting railroad spikes out of its 
mouth as it chews up the line to the top. [5]
卞 占 卦 卩 卮
 
94 
place on the head
 頂 
 Th e key word is actually a formal metaphor meaning “humble 
acceptance.” Reading oﬀ  the two primitive elements in the order 
of their writing, we have: nail . . . head. As in “hitting the nail 
on the head.” Now one presumes that most people can handle 
metaphors, but if you were to run into a dimwit working in a 
hardware store who only knew the literal meaning of things, 

lesson 6 | 51
and were to ask him, in your best Japanese, to place on your 
head a nail, he might miss the point and cause you considerable 
torment. [11]
印 卿
Lesson 6
The last group of primitives took us pretty far, and probably forced you to 
pay more attention to the workings of imagination. In this lesson we shall con-
centrate on primitives that have to do with people.
As you were reminded in frame 92, even those kanji that are given special 
meanings as primitives may also retain their key word meaning when used as 
primitives. Although this may sound confusing, in fact it turns out to be conve-
nient for making stories and, in addition, helps to reinforce the original mean-
ing of the character.
 
95 
child
 子 
 Th is kanji is a pictograph of a child wrapped up in one of those 
handy cocoons that Japanese mothers ﬁ x to their backs to carry 
around young children who cannot get around by themselves. 
Th e ﬁ rst stroke is like a wee head popping out for air; the second 
shows the body and legs all wrapped up; and the ﬁ nal stroke 
shows the arms sticking out to cling to the mother’s neck. [3]
厂 厄 厓
*  As a primitive, the meaning of child is retained, though you 
might imagine a little older child, able to run around and get 
into more mischief.

52 | remembering the kanji 1
 
96 
cavity
 孔 
 Probably the one thing most children fear more than anything 
else is the dentist’s chair. Once a child has seen a dentist holding 
the x-rays up to the light and heard that ominous word cavity, 
even though it is not likely to know that the word means “hole” 
until it is much older, it will not be long before those two syl-
lables get associated with the drill and that row of shiny hooks 
the dentist uses to torture people who are too small to ﬁ ght 
back. [4]
厖 厘 厚 原
 
97 
complete
 了 
 Learn this character by returning to frame 95 and the image 
given there. Th e only diﬀ erence is that the “arms” have been 
left  oﬀ  (actually, only tucked inside). Th us a child with its arms 
wrapped up into the back-sack is the picture of a job success-
fully completed. [2]
厠 厥
 
98 
woman
 女 
 You have probably seen somewhere the form of a squatting 
woman drawn behind this character, with two legs at the bot-
tom, two arms (the horizontal line) and the head poking out 
the top. A little farfetched, until you draw the character 
and feel the grace and flow of the three simple strokes. 
Remembering the kanji is easy; being able to write it beau-
tifully is another thing. [3]
厦 厨 厩
*  Th e primitive meaning is the same: woman.
 
99 
fond
 好 
 Th e phrase “to be fond of someone” has a natural gentleness 
about it, and lends a tenderness to the sense of touching by giv-

lesson 6 | 53
ing us the related term “to fondle.” Th e character likens it to a 
woman fondling her child. [6]
厰 厶
 
100 
likeness
 如 
 Pardon me if I revert to the venerable old Dr. Freud again, but 
his eye for symbolism is oft en helpful to appreciate things that 
more earthy imaginations once accepted more freely but that 
we have learned to cover over with a veneer of etiquette. For 
instance, the fact that things like the mouth of a cave served 
as natural ritual substitutes for the opening through which a 
woman gives birth. Hence, in order to be reborn as an adult, one 
may have to pass through the psychological equivalent of the 
womb, that is, something that bears a likeness to the opening of 
the woman from whom you were born. [6]
參 及
 
101 
mama
 母 
 Look closely at this kanji and you will ﬁ nd the outline of the 
kanji for woman in it, the second stroke of which has been 
expanded to make space for the two breasts that make her a 
mama. Likening this sound to a baby nursing at its mother’s 
breast has aﬀ orded some scholars of comparative linguistics a 
way to explain the presence of the same word across a wide 
range of language-groups. [5]
友 双 反 収 叔
*  As a primitive we shall add the meaning of breasts in accord 
with the explanation given above. Take careful note of the fact 
that the form is altered slightly when this kanji serves as a 
primitive, the ﬁ nal two dots joining together to form a longer 
stroke. An example follows in the next frame.

54 | remembering the kanji 1
 
102 
pierce
 貫 
 If one is asked to think of associations for the word pierce, 
among the ﬁ rst to come to mind is that of piercing one’s ears 
to hold earrings, a quite primitive form of self-mutilation that 
has survived into the 21st century. Th e kanji here is read, top to 
bottom: mama . . . oyster. All you need to do is imagine piercing 
an ear so that it can hold a mother-of-pearl (actually, a mama-
of-pearl) you have just wrested from an oyster. [11]
取 受 叙 叛 句
 
103 
elder brother
 兄 
 By now kanji like this one should “look like” something to you 
even though it is more of an “ideogram” than a “pictograph.” 
Th e large mouth on top and the human legs below almost jump 
oﬀ  the page as a caricature of elder brother, the one with the 
big mouth (or if you prefer a kinder image, the one who “has the 
say” among all the children). [5]
只 召
*  As a primitive this character will take the meaning of teen-
ager, in accord with the familiar image of the big mouth and 
the gangling, clumsy legs.
 
104 
overcome
 克 
 In this frame we get a chance to use the kanji we just learned in 
its primitive meaning of teenager. Th e needle on top indicates 
one of the major problems confronting the teenager growing 
up in today’s world: drugs. Many of them will fall under the 
shadow of the needle at some time during those tender years, 
but only when a whole generation rises up and decides that “We 
Shall Overcome” the plague, will the needle cease to hang over 
their heads, as it does in this character. [7]
叮 右

Lesson 7
In this lesson we turn to primitive elements having to do with quantity. We 
will also introduce a form known as a “roof,” a sort of overhead “enclosure” that 
comes in a variety of shapes. But let us begin slowly and not get ahead of our-
selves, for it is only aft er you have mastered the simple forms that the appar-
ently impenetrable complexities of later primitives will dissolve. Th e primitives 
we give here will immediately suggest others, on the basis of what we have 
already learned. Hence the somewhat haphazard order among the frames of 
this lesson.
 
105 
little
 小 
 The sense of little in this character is not the same as “a little 
bit.” That meaning comes in the next frame. Here little means 
“small” or “tiny.” Th e image is one of three little drops, the ﬁ rst of 
which (the one in the middle) is written larger so that the kanji 
has some shape to it. Th e point of writing it three times is to rub 
the point in: little, little, nothing but little. [3]
叶 号 司
*  The primitive of the same shape keeps the same meaning. 
Written above a horizontal line, its form is slightly altered, the 
last two strokes turning inwards like this: 聹.
 
106 
few
 少 
 First we need to look at the fourth stroke, the drop at the bot-
tom that has been extended into a longer diagonal stroke lean-
ing left . Th is happens because a single, isolated drop will never 
appear beneath its relative primitive in its normal size, for fear 
it would drop oﬀ  and get lost. As for the meaning, let the tiny 
drop indicate a further belittling of what is already little—thus 
making it a few of something little. [4]

56 | remembering the kanji 1
叺 吁 吃 各
 
107 
large
 大 
 Here we have a simple pictograph of a person, taking up the 
space of an entire character and giving it the sense of large. It 
should not be too hard to locate the two legs and outstretched 
arms. [3]
合 吉 吊
*  As a primitive, we need a diﬀ erent meaning, since the element 
representing the human person will come up later. Th erefore, 
this shape will become a large dog or, if you prefer, a St. Ber-
nard dog. In frame 238 we will explain why this choice was 
made.
 
* 
cliﬀ 
 厂 
 Th is primitive means precisely what it looks like: a steep cliﬀ . 
You can almost see someone standing at the top looking down 
into the abyss below. [2]
吋 同
 
108 
many
 多 
 “Many moons ago,” begins much of Amerindian folklore—a 
color ful way of saying “Once upon a time” and a great deal of 
help for remembering this kanji. Here we have two moons (three 
of them would take us back to the beginning of time, which is 
further than we want to go), lacking the ﬁ nal stroke because 
they are partially hidden behind the clouds of time. [6]
名 后 吏 吐 向 君
 
109 
evening
 夕 
 Just as the word evening adds a touch of formality or romanti-
cism to the ordinary word “night,” so the kanji for evening takes 

lesson 7 | 57
the ordinary looking moon in the night sky and has a cloud pass 
over it (as we saw in the last frame). [3]
吝 吟 吠
*  Th e primitive keeps the same meaning and connotation as 
the kanji.
 
110 
eventide
 汐 
 In the next lesson we will meet the character for morning-tide 
and the element for drops of water. Meantime we have a perfect 
blend of picture and idea in this kanji to play on the English 
word for nightfall, eventide: drops of water inching their way up 
the shore in the evening. [6]
否 吩 含 听 吭 吮
 
111 
outside
 外 
 On the left , the primitive for evening, and on the right, that 
for the magic wand. Now, as every magician worth his abraca-
dabra knows, bringing your magic wand out into the evening 
air makes your magic much more powerful than if you were to 
stay indoors. Hence, evening and magic wand takes you natu-
rally outside. [5]
吹 吼
 
112 
name
 名 
 Perhaps you have heard of the custom, still preserved in certain 
African tribes, of a father creeping into the tent or hut of his 
newborn child on the night of the child’s birth, to whisper into 
its ear the name he has chosen for it, before making his choice 
public. It is an impressive naming custom and ﬁ ts in tidily with 
the way this character is constructed: evening . . . mouth. At eve-
ning time, a mouth pronounces the name that will accompany 
one throughout life. [6]
呀 呈

58 | remembering the kanji 1
 
113 
stone
 石 
 With a mouth under a cliﬀ , what else could we have here but 
the entrance to a secret cavern, before which a great stone has 
been rolled so that none may enter. Perhaps it is the hiding 
place where Ali Baba and his band of thieves have stored their 
treasures, in which case that magic word known to every school 
child who ever delighted over the tales of the Arabian Nights 
should be enough to push the stone aside. But take care—the 
cliﬀ  is steep, and one slip will send you tumbling down into the 
ravine below. [5]
 Th is is the one and only time that the second stroke in cliﬀ  will 
reach over to the middle of the horizontal stroke. If you think of 
the edge jutting outwards (in keeping with the story above), the 
problem should be taken care of.
呉 告 呎 呑 呟
*  Th e stone is a quite common primitive element, which is not 
restricted to great boulders but used of stones or rocks of any 
size or shape.
 
114 
resemblance
 肖 
 Th e word resemblance should suggest, among other things, a 
son’s resemblance to his father. A “chip oﬀ  the old block” is the 
way we oft en put it, but the character is more simple. It speaks 
of a little bit of ﬂ esh. [7]
呰 呶
*  When used as a primitive, the sense of resemblance is replaced 
by that of spark or candle. (If you want an explanation: the 
kanji for moon also carries a secondary sense of ﬁ re, which 
we omitted because we are keeping that meaning for other 
primitives.)
 
115 
nitrate
 硝 
 Th e word nitrate should immediately suggest a beaker of nitric 
acid, which, as every high-school chemistry student knows, 

lesson 7 | 59
can eat its way through some pretty tough substances. Here we 
imagine pouring it over a rock and watching the sparks ﬂ y as it 
bores a hole through the rock. [12]
咀 咏
 
116 
smash
 砕 
 We begin with the two elements on the right, baseball and nee-
dle. Since they will be coming together from time to time, let us 
give the two of them the sense of a game of cricket in which a 
needle is laid across the wicket. Th en imagine using a rock for 
a ball. A smash hit would probably splinter the bat in all direc-
tions, and a smashing pitch would do the same with the needle 
wicket. [9]
咤 咨 咫
 
117 
sand
 砂 
 Good sand for beaches has few or no stones in it. Th at means 
that all of us whose feet have been spoiled by too much time in 
shoes don’t have to watch our step as we cavort about. [9]
咸 品
 
118 
plane
 削 
 Long before the invention of the carpenter’s plane, people 
used knives and machetes (or here, sabers) to smooth out their 
woodwork. If you have ever seen the process, you will have 
been amazed at the speed and agility with which the adept can 
plane a hunk of wood into shape. Indeed, you can almost see 
the sparks ﬂ y from their sabers. [9]
員 哥
 
119 
ray
 光 
 Th ere are really only 2 primitives here, little and human legs. 
Th e 4th stroke that separates them is added for reasons of aes-

60 | remembering the kanji 1
thetics. (If that doesn’t make sense, try writing the kanji without 
it and see how ugly the results look, even to your beginner’s 
eye.)
 Now if you have wondered what those little particles of “dust” 
are that dance around in the light-rays that come through the 
window and fall on your desk, try imagining them as little and 
disembodied human legs, and you should have no trouble with 
this character. [6]
哦 哨 哩 哭 哮 哲
 
120 
plump
 太 
 “Plump” is one of those delightful English words that almost 
sound like their meaning. No sooner do you hear it than you 
think of a round and ample-bodied person falling into a sofa like 
a large drop of oil plopping into a ﬁ shbowl—kerrrr-plump! [4]
哺 哽 哿 唄
 
121 
utensil
 器 
 Th e picture in this kanji is not a pleasant one. It shows a large 
and ﬂ uﬀ y St. Bernard dog stretched out on a table all stuﬀ ed and 
stewed and garnished with vegetables, its paws in the air and an 
apple in its mouth. At each corner of the table sits an eager but 
empty mouth, waiting for the utensils to arrive so the feast can 
begin. [15]
唏 唕 售 唯 唱 唹 啄
 
122 
stinking
 臭 
 Th is character is a bit friendlier to the animal world than the 
last one. Our friend the St. Bernard is alive and well, its nose 
in the air sniﬃ  ng suspiciously aft er something stinking some-
where or other. [9]
啖 啝

lesson 7 | 61
 
123 
exquisite
 妙 
 Th e primitive for woman is on the left  (there and at the bottom 
of another primitive is where you will always ﬁ nd her), and to 
the right the element for few. When we refer to a woman as 
exquisite, we mean to praise her as the sort of person we meet 
but few and far between. 
 If you are interested in etymologies, it might help to recall that 
the Latin phrase lying at the root of the English word exquisite 
carries this same sense of “seeking out” the rare from the ordi-
nary. [7]
啼 善
 
124 
focus
 省 
 When we think of focusing on something, we usually take it in 
a metaphorical sense, though the literal sense is not far behind. 
It means to block out what is nonessential in order to ﬁ x our eye 
on a few important matters. Th e kanji suggests picking up a few 
things and holding them before one’s eye in order to focus on 
them better. [9]
喊 喜
 
125 
thick
 厚 
 When we refer to someone as thick-skinned or thick-headed, 
we are usually quick to add—even if only under our breath—
something about their upbringing. Perhaps it is because deep 
down we cherish the belief that by nature people are basically 
tender and sensitive.
 Be that as it may, the Japanese character for thick depicts a 
child abandoned out on the wild cliﬀ s, exposed to the heat of the 
sun, and thus doomed to develop a head and skin as thick as the 
parent who left  it there. [9]
喝 喞 喩 喬

62 | remembering the kanji 1
 
126 
strange
 奇 
 Th e elements we are given to work with here are St. Bernard dog 
and can. Lots of phrases pop to mind to attach these words to 
the keyword, but they end up too abstract because of the word 
can. 
 It is important in such cases (and there will be plenty of 
them as we go along) to stick closely to the elements, in this 
case, mouth and nails. Now all we need do is create a ﬁ ctitious 
“Strange But True” column in the Sunday funnies, featuring a 
St. Bernard whose mouth has been nailed shut because he was 
hitting the brandy keg around his neck too hard. [8]
営 嗚
Lesson 8
Four basic elements, it was once believed, make up the things of our uni-
verse: earth, wind, ﬁ re, and water. We have already met the element for wind, 
and now we shall introduce the others, one by one, in a somewhat longer than 
usual lesson. 
Fortunately for our imaginative memories, these suggestive and concrete 
primitives play a large role in the construction of the kanji, and will help us 
create some vivid pictures to untangle some of the complex jumbles of strokes 
that follow.
 
127 
stream
 川 
 We have taken the image of a river stream over into English to 
describe things that fall down in straight lines, or ripple along 
in lines. All of this is more than evident in the kanji given here, 
a pictograph of a stream. [3]
嗜 嗟 嗣

lesson 8 | 63
*  As a primitive, this character adds to the meaning of stream 
the more vivid image of a ﬂ ood. Note, however, that there are 
certain small changes in the writing of the element, depend-
ing on where it appears relative to other elements:
on the left , it is written 川
on the top, it is written 巛
on the bottom, it is written 職
 
128 
state
 州 
 Here we see drops of land (little islets) rising up out of a stream, 
creating a kind of sandbar or breakwater. Ever wonder how the 
state-line is drawn between states separated by a river? If there 
were little drops of land as in the kanji, there’d be nothing to it. [6]
嗤 嗷 嗹 嗽 嗾 嘆
 
129 
obey
 順 
 In primitive language, this character would read stream . . . 
head. And that turns out to be convenient for remembering its 
meaning of obey. Either one obeys the person who is head of an 
organization or else obeys by following the stream of opinion 
(“current” practice, we call it). Both these senses come together 
in this kanji. [12].
嘸 噂 噌 噴
 
130 
water
 水 
 Th is character, which looks a bit like a snowﬂ ake, is actually 
a pictograph of water—not any particular body of water or 
movement of water, but simply the generic name for water. 
Should you have any diﬃ  culty remembering it, simply think of 
a walking stick being dropped vertically into the water, sending 
droplets out in all four directions. Th en all you need to learn is 
how to write it in proper order. [4]
噸 噺 嚀 嚆

64 | remembering the kanji 1
*  As a primitive, this character can keep its form, or it can be 
written with three drops to the left  of another primitive, like 
this: 氵. Th is latter, as we will see, is far more common.
 
131 
icicle
 氷 
 Th e appearance of the primitive for water in its full form tells 
us that we have something to do with water here. Th e extra drop 
to the left , added as a second stroke, changes the picture from a 
splash caused by a walking stick dropped into water to form an 
icicle. 
 If it helps, when you hold an icicle up to the light, you can 
usually see little crystallizations of ﬁ ve-pointed stars inside of 
it, which is the shape we have in this kanji. [5]
嚇 嚊 嚏 嚔 嚠
 
132 
eternity
 永 
 Th is kanji also uses the full form of water, though its meaning 
seems to have nothing at all to do with water. Remember what 
William Blake said about seeing “inﬁ nity in a grain of sand and 
eternity in an hour”? Well, reading this character from top to 
bottom, we see “eternity in a drop of water.” [5]
嚢 嚥 嚮 嚴 嚶
 
133 
spring
 泉 
 Call to mind the image of a fresh, bubbling spring of water, 
and you will probably notice how the top of the spring you are 
thinking of, the part where the “bubbling” goes on, is all white. 
Happily, the white is just where it should be, at the top, and the 
water is at the bottom. [9]
囃 囈 囎 囑 囓
*  We will keep this image of a spring when using this kanji as a 
primitive, but not without ﬁ rst drawing attention to a slight 
change that distinguishes the primitive from the kanji. Th e 
ﬁ nal 4 strokes (the element for water) are abbreviated to the 

lesson 8 | 65
three small drops that we learned earlier as the kanji for little, 
giving us: 聽.
 
134 
meadow
 原 
 Th ough the kanji is broad enough to embrace both meanings, 
the meadow you should imagine here is not a ﬂ atland plain but 
a mountain meadow in the Austrian Alps. (Perhaps the open-
ing scene of “Th e Sound of Music” will help.) Simply think of 
little springs bubbling up across the meadow to form a sort of 
path that leads you right to the brink of a precipitous cliﬀ . Now 
if you can see Schwester Maria skipping along merrily, dodging 
in and out of the springs, and then falling headlong over the 
cliﬀ , you have a ridiculous story that should help ﬁ x this kanji 
in memory. [10]
囘 団 囱
 
135 
petition
 願 
 A meadow and a head are all we are given to work with in the 
kanji for petition. Since the key word already suggests some-
thing like a formal request made of some higher power, let us 
imagine a gigantic Wizard-of-Oz head located in the middle of 
the ﬂ owery meadow we used in the last frame. Th en just picture 
people kneeling hopefully before it, petitioning for whatever it 
is they want. (Th e scarecrow wanted brains, the lion, courage, 
and the tin man a heart. What about you?) [19]
圉 土
 
136 
swim
 泳 
 Th e primitive to the left , you will recall from frame 130, repre-
sents water. To the right, we see the kanji for eternity. Knowing 
how much children like swimming, what could be a better 
image of eternal bliss than an endless expanse of water to swim 
in without a care in the world? [8]
在 圻

66 | remembering the kanji 1
 
137 
marsh
 沼 
 Unlike the meadow with its cliﬀ s, the marshlands are low and 
near a source of water that feeds them until they get soggy 
through and through. Why certain land becomes marshy is 
probably due to the fact that it felt thirsty, and so tried its best 
to seduce the water over to its side. But, like most inordinate 
seductions, the last state of the victim is worse than the ﬁ rst. 
Hence the slushy marsh. [8]
均 坑
 
138 
open sea
 沖 
 Th is kanji could hardly be simpler. Th e key word open sea read-
ily suggests being out in the middle of a great body of water. 
Th inking of it in this way should avoid confusion with the kanji 
for “open,” which we will meet later on. [7]
坤 坪
 
139 
creek
 江 
 Unlike the river, the ocean, the lake, and the pond, the creek is 
oft en no more then a dribble of water trickling down a small 
gully. While the geological history of the larger bodies of water 
is hard to surmise sometimes, all of us know from our child-
hood how creeks are made. You probably even dug one or two 
in your time. All you need to do is ﬁ nd a mainstream of water 
somewhere and dig a little path into dry land. Th e creek is thus 
a lesson in water-craft , as this kanji would agree. [6]
垈 垓
 
140 
soup
 汁 
 To make soup, one begins with water and then starts adding 
things to it, oft en left overs from the icebox. Th is is how the thick 
soup or stew called “seven-in-one” is made. Th is kanji does it 
three better, giving us a ten-ingredient soup. [5]

lesson 8 | 67
垣 垪
 
141 
tide
 潮 
 Before we get to explaining this character, take a look at it and 
see if you can ﬁ gure out the primitive elements on your own…. 
On the left  is the water—that much is easy. On the right we have 
only one primitive, the kanji for morning learned back in frame 
52. See how an apparently complex kanji falls apart neatly into 
manageable pieces?
 To get the meaning of the key word tide, just think of it in 
connection with the character for eventide that we learned back 
in frame 110. Here we have the morning-tide, its complement.
 By the way, if you missed the question about the number 
of primitives, it is probably because you forgot what we said 
earlier about kanji becoming primitives, independently of the 
pieces that make them up. As a rule, look for the largest kanji 
you can write and proceed from there to primitives stranded on 
their own. [15]
垳 埜
 
142 
source
 源 
 With the advice of the last frame in mind, it is easy to see water 
and meadow in this character for source. Both in its etymology 
(it has a common parent with the word “surge”) and in popular 
usage, source suggests the place water comes from. In this kanji, 
it is under the meadow, where we just saw it breaking the sur-
face in those bubbly little springs. [13]
埣 堊
 
143 
lively
 活 
 When we speak of a lively personality or a lively party, we 
immediately think of a lot of chatter. Th is kanji depicts the idea 
of lively by having tongues babble and splash around like ﬂ ow-
ing water. [9]

68 | remembering the kanji 1
堙 堰
 
144 
extinguish
 消 
 Among the many things water is useful for is extinguishing 
ﬁ res, and that is just what we have here. First of all, take the 
water at the left  as the drops of water that are used to depict 
water in general. In the best of all possible worlds, the most eﬃ  -
cient way to extinguish a ﬁ re would be to see that each drop of 
water hits one spark of the conﬂ agration. An unthinkable bit of 
utopian ﬁ re ﬁ ghting, you say to yourself, but helpful for assign-
ing this key word its primitives. [10]
堵 塑
 
145 
but of course
 況 
 Th is key word is a connector used to link contrasting phrases 
and sentences together with much the same ﬂ avor as the English 
phrase but of course. Just picture yourself ready to go oﬀ  on 
your ﬁ rst date as a teenager, and having your mother grill you 
about your manners and ask you embarrassing questions about 
your hygiene. “Did you have a good shower?” “But of course…,” 
you reply, annoyed. So water and teenager combine to give us 
but of course. [8]
塗 塢
 
146 
river
 河 
 Th e character in this frame represents a step up from the stream 
we met in frame 127; it is a full-sized river. Th e water to the left  
tells us what we are dealing with, and the can at the right tells 
us that our “little engine that could” has now become amphibi-
ous and is chugging down the Mighty Mississip’ like a regular 
riverboat. [8]
塰 境

lesson 8 | 69
 
147 
overnight
 泊 
 When you stop at an inn for an overnight rest, all you expect is 
a bit of water for a wash and a set of clean white sheets to wrap 
your weary bones in. [8]
増 墫
 
148 
lake
 湖 
 Water . . . old . . . ﬂ esh. You have heard of legends of people being 
abandoned in the mountains when they had become too old to 
work. Well, here is a legend about people being set adrift  in the 
waters of a stormy lake because their ﬂ esh had gotten too old to 
bear the burdens of life. [12]
墺 壇 壓
 
149 
fathom
 測 
 Connoting the measurement of the depth of water, the key 
word fathom begins with the water primitive. To its right, we 
see the compound-primitive for rule (frame 88) which we 
learned in the sense of a “ruler” or “measure.” Hence, when we 
rule water we fathom it. What could be simpler? But be careful; 
its simplicity is deceptive. Be sure to picture yourself fathoming 
a body of water several hundred feet deep by using a ruler of 
gargantuan proportions. [12]
壘 壮
 
150 
soil
 土 
 I don’t like it any more than you do, but this kanji is not the 
pictograph it is trumped up to be: a mound of soil piled on the 
ground. All I can recommend is that you memorize it as it is. 
Anyway, it will be occurring with such frequency that you have 
almost no chance of forgetting it, even if you try. [3]
壯 声 壱

70 | remembering the kanji 1
*  As a primitive, the sense of soil is extended to that of ground 
because of its connection with the kanji for the same (frame 
515). From there it also takes the added meanings of dirt and 
land.
 
151 
spit
 吐 
 We have here a rather small mouth (it is always compressed 
when set on the left ) next to a much larger piece of dirt. It is not 
hard to imagine what you might do if you got a mouth full of 
dirt. As least I know what I would do: spit it out as fast and far 
as I could! [6]
壹 壼
 
152 
pressure
 圧 
 One of the things that causes the erosion of soil is the excessive 
pressure of the topsoil on the lower soil. Th is can be caused by 
any number of things from heavy rainfall to heavy buildings to 
the absence of suﬃ  cient deep-rooted vegetation to hold the lay-
ers together. Here we see a steep cliﬀ  without a tree in sight. Th e 
slightest pressure on it will cause a landslide, which, with a little 
help from your imagination, you will be able to see happening 
in this character. [5]
夂 夋
 
153 
cape
 埼 
 Th e cape pictured here is a jut of land like Cape Cod. Th e soil 
on the left  tells us we have to do with land, and the strange on 
the right tells us it is a cape where unusual things go on. Put a 
haunted house on it, an eerie sky overhead, and a howling wind 
rustling through the trees, and you have yourself a picture of 
Cape Strange (or, if you prefer, Cape Odd). [11]
外 大

lesson 8 | 71
 
154 
hedge
 垣 
 Th e hedge depicted in this frame is not your ordinary run-of-
the-suburbs shrubbery, but the miraculous hedge of briar roses 
that completely spanned the castle grounds in which Sleeping 
Beauty lay for a hundred years, so that none but her predestined 
beloved could ﬁ nd his way through it. [9]
夫 夳
 
155 
squared jewel
 圭 
 Now I am going to do something unusual. Th e character in this 
frame is going to get one meaning and the primitive another, 
with no relation at all between the two. In time, I hope you will 
see how helpful this is.
 Th e kanji key word, squared jewel, depicts a mammoth pre-
cious stone, several feet high, made by piling up large heaps of 
soil on top of one another. Not something you would want to 
present your betrothed on your wedding day, but a good image 
for remembering this rare character, used chieﬂ y in personal 
names nowadays. [6]
夸 夾 奄 奇 奈 奉
*  As a primitive, we shall use this character to mean ivy, that 
creepy vegetation that covers the surface of the ground to 
form a sort of “second” ground that can get somewhat tricky 
to walk on without tripping.
 
156 
seal
 封 
 Th ink of the key word seal as referring to a letter you have writ-
ten and are preparing to close. Instead of using the traditional 
wax seal, you glue a sprig of ivy on the outside. In this way the 
elements ivy and glue give you a curious and memorable way to 
seal your secret letters. [9]
奔 奘

72 | remembering the kanji 1
 
157 
horizon
 涯 
 Aft er seeing a constant horizon of water, water everywhere for 
months at sea, could there be anything more delightful to the 
eyes than to look astern and see the ivy-clad cliﬀ s of land on a 
new horizon? Of course, you’d need the eyes of a stellar tele-
scope to recognize that the vegetation was in fact ivy, but the 
phrase “ivy-clad cliﬀ s” has such a nice ring to it that we won’t 
worry about such details. [11]
奝 奢 奪
 
158 
Buddhist temple
 寺 
 You have heard of people “attaching” themselves to a particular 
sect? Here is your chance to take that metaphor literally and 
imagine some fellow walking into a Buddhist temple with a 
fervent resolve to attach himself to the place. Since there is 
plenty of unused land around the precincts, he simply picks out 
a suitable patch, brushes the soles of his feet with glue, steps 
down ﬁ rmly, and so joins the Buddhist temple as a “permanent 
member.” [6]
女 好
 
159 
time
 時 
  “What is time?” asked St. Augustine in his memoirs. “Ask me 
not, and I know. Ask me, and I cannot tell you.” Here we have 
the kanji’s answer to that perennial riddle. Time is a sun ris-
ing over a Buddhist temple. It sounds almost like a Zen kōan 
whose repetition might yield some deep secret to the initiated. 
At any rate, imagining a monk seated in meditation pondering 
it might help us remember the character. [10]
妄 妛
 
160 
level
 均 
 Th e level this key word refers to is not the carpenter’s tool but 
rather the even surface of a thing. It pictures soil being scooped 

lesson 8 | 73
up into a ladle and then made level (apparently because one is 
measuring soil). Th e excess drops of soil are brushed oﬀ  the top, 
which accounts for the added drop at the ladle’s edge. [7]
妤 妬 妲
 
161 
ﬁ re
 火 
 Just as sitting before a ﬁ re enlivens the imagination and lets 
you see almost anything you want to in the ﬂ ames, this kanji is 
so simple it lets you see almost any sort of ﬁ re you want to see. 
It no longer makes a good pictograph, but I invite you to take 
a pencil and paper and play with the form—ﬁ rst writing it as 
shown below and then adding lines here and there—to see what 
you can come up with. Everything from matchbooks to ciga-
rette lighters to volcanic eruptions to the destruction of Sodom 
and Gomorrah have been found here. No doubt you, too, will 
ﬁ nd something interesting to bend your memory around these 
four simple strokes. [4]
妹 妺 妻 妾
*  To avoid confusion later on, it is best to keep to the meaning 
of a ﬁ replace (or hearth) or a raging conﬂ agration like a forest 
ﬁ re for this kanji’s primitive meaning. Another primitive ele-
ment for ﬁ re, based on this one, is written 灬 and will mean 
ﬂ ames, cauldron, cooking ﬁ re, or an oven ﬁ re.
 
162 
inﬂ ammation
 炎 
 A ﬁ re belongs in the hearth, not over it. When the ﬁ re spreads 
to the rest of the house, we have an inﬂ amed house. And as 
with any inﬂ ammation—including those that attack our bod-
ies—the danger is always that it might spread if not checked. 
Th is is the sense behind the reduplication of the element for 
ﬁ re, one atop the other [8]
姆 姉 始  姍 姑 姓 委 姙

74 | remembering the kanji 1
 
163 
anxiety
 煩 
 Th e existential condition of anxiety that arises from the inevi-
table frustration of our worldly passions is contained in this 
character. Th e head is set aﬁ re, causing deep torment of spirit 
(and a whopper of a headache). [13]
姚 姜 姥 姦 娉
 
164 
thin
 淡 
 Th e primitives in this kanji read: water . . . inﬂ ammation. Taking 
inﬂ ammation in its medical sense, the ﬁ rst water-related inﬂ am-
mation that pops into mind is dehydration, the principal symp-
tom of which is that it makes one shrivel up and look very, very 
thin. If that is hard to remember, try thinking it backwards: a 
very thin chap passes by and you imagine him suﬀ ering from 
(being inﬂ amed with) dehydration (hence the element for 
water). [11]
娚 娶
 
165 
lamp
 灯 
 Since it is very hard to read by the ﬁ replace without going blind 
from the ﬂ ickering of the ﬂ ames or burning up from the heat, 
our ancestors invented a way to nail down a bit of that ﬁ re, just 
enough to light up the text of their evening newspapers and no 
more. Voilà! Th e lamp. [6]
婆 婚
 
166 
farm
 畑 
 Looking at the primitives, a ﬁ replace and a rice ﬁ eld, we ﬁ nd the 
essential ingredients for a farm: a warm hearth to sit by at night, 
and a well-plowed ﬁ eld to grow one’s crops in by day. [9]
婬 媼

lesson 8 | 75
 
167 
disaster
 災 
 Of all of nature’s disasters, this kanji picks out two of the worst: 
ﬂ oods and ﬁ res. To recall the disposition of the elements, think 
of nature’s solution to nature’s own problem: a great ﬂ ood pour-
ing down over a great forest ﬁ re. [7]
媽 媾 嫁 嫌
 
168 
ashes
 灰 
 Th e kanji for ashes naturally includes the primitive for ﬁ re, or 
more speciﬁ cally, a ﬁ replace. Now what do you do with that 
bucket of ashes you have just cleaned out of the ﬁ replace? You 
walk to the edge of a cliﬀ  and tip it upside down, watching as 
they are swept away in the wind like a swarm of gray mosqui-
toes. Th us the ﬁ re, once it has turned to ashes, ends up at the 
bottom of the cliﬀ . [6]
嫖 嫦
 
169 
spot
 点 
 If you look into the ﬂ ickering of a ﬁ re for a long time and then 
turn aside, you will see spots before your eyes. Although nobody 
ever thought of such a thing before—as least as far as I know, 
they didn’t—imagine using those spots as a technique for for-
tune-telling. Th e old witch sits before her cauldron and watches 
the spots that show up when she turns to look at you, and from 
that tells your fortune. Th ink of it as a kind of spot-check on 
your future. [9]
嬋 嬌 嬖 嬢 嬪
 
170 
illuminate
 照 
 Although the range of possible meanings that the kanji for 
illuminate can have is about as rich as the connotations of the 
English word, we need to focus on just one of them: to make 
something shine. If you glaze a pot and put it into the oven to 
ﬁ re it, you in fact illuminate it. Hence the kanji for illuminate 

76 | remembering the kanji 1
compares the kanji for shining with the primitive element for 
the oven’s ﬁ re. [13]
嬶 子 孖
 
171 
ﬁ sh
 魚 
 Th e composition of this kanji shows three elements, which we 
list in the order of their writing: bound up . . . rice ﬁ eld . . . cooking 
ﬁ re. Not much to work with at ﬁ rst sight. But we can join them 
together by thinking of a three-part story: ﬁ rst a ﬁ sh is caught 
and bound up on a line with its unfortunate school-mates; when 
the ﬁ sherman gets home, he cuts oﬀ  the head and tosses it, with 
the entrails, out into the rice ﬁ elds for fertilizer; and the rest he 
sets in a skillet over a cooking ﬁ re for his supper. [11]
料 斤 斬
 
172 
ﬁ shing
 漁 
 To the story we have just made about ﬁ sh, this kanji for the pro-
fession of ﬁ shing adds yet another element before the others: 
namely the water, where the ﬁ sh was happily at home before 
being caught, disemboweled, and eaten. Be sure to get a clear 
image of the water when you put it all together. [14]
新 旌
Lesson 9
Although the study of the four basic elements undertaken in the last les-
son brought us a lot of new characters—46 in all—we have only scratched the 
surface as far as water, earth, wind, and ﬁ re are concerned. Perhaps by now it 
is clear why I said at the beginning of this lesson that we are lucky that they 
appear so frequently. Th e range of images they suggest is almost endless.
In this chapter our focus will be on a few new “roof” and “enclosure” primi-

lesson 9 | 77
tives. But ﬁ rst, a primitive-kanji that we might have included in the last group 
but omitted so as not to be distracted from the four elements. With just that one 
element we can pick up no less than 7 new kanji with no trouble at all.
 
173 
ri
 里 
 Th at’s right—a ri. Don’t bother looking it up in your English 
dictionary; it’s a Japanese word for measuring distances. One 
ri is about 4 kilometers or 2.5 miles. Th e kanji depicts how the 
measure came to be used. Atop we see the rice ﬁ eld, and below 
the element for land. Th ose four sections you see in the rice 
ﬁ eld (and which we made mention of when ﬁ rst we introduced 
the character in frame 14) are actually measurements of land, 
much the same as farm-sections in the United States have given 
us the notion of a “country mile.” Th e land division based on the 
size of a rice ﬁ eld is called a ri. [7]
字 存 孚 孛 孜 孝 孟
*  To get a more concrete primitive meaning for this kanji, we 
shall refer to it as a computer, a meaning deriving from the 
kanji for logic, which we will meet in Lesson 12.
 
174 
black
 黒 
 Like most things electrical, a computer, too, can overheat. Just 
imagine ﬂ ames pouring out of it and charring the keyboard, the 
monitor, and your desk a sooty black color. [11]
季 孤 孥 学 孩 孫 孮 孱 孳
孵 學
 
175 
black ink
 墨 
 Besides meaning black ink, this kanji also appears in the word 
for an inked string that is pulled taut and snapped to mark a 
surface, much the same as one might used a chalked string. 
Here it is used to mark oﬀ  the dirt with black lines for a football 
game (played, I presume, on a white ﬁ eld). [14]

78 | remembering the kanji 1
宏 官
 
176 
carp
 鯉 
 Th ese are the same carp you see in Japanese “carp streamers.” 
Only here we ﬁ nd a small home computer or two strung on the 
line by a father anxious for his son not only to have the courage 
and determination of a carp swimming upstream, but also the 
eﬃ  ciency and memory of a computer. Ugh. [18]
宨 宸
 
177 
quantity
 量 
 Th ink of quantity as having to do with measuring time and dis-
tance, and the rest is simple: you have a quantity of time in the 
new day that begins with nightbreak, and a quantity of distance 
in the rural ri. [12]
寂 寃 寐
 
178 
rin
 厘 
 No doubt you will ﬁ nd it in your heart to forgive me for forcing 
yet another Japanese word on you in this frame. It is not the last 
time it will happen in this book, but I can assure you they are 
used only when absolutely necessary.
 One rin is equal to about 1/1000 of a yen—or rather was worth 
that much when it still made economic sense to mint them. 
While inﬂ ation took its toll on this kanji as a monetary unit, it 
survived with the not at all surprising sense of something “very, 
very tiny.”
 Th e kanji shows a cliﬀ  with a computer under it, apparently 
because it has been pushed over into the abyss by someone fed 
up with the thing. Th e total market value of one home computer 
that has fallen over rock and bramble for several hundred feet: 
about one rin! [9]
寓 寡

lesson 9 | 79
 
179 
bury
 埋 
 When we speak of burying something (or someone, for that 
matter), we usually mean putting them under ground. Only 
here, we are burying our beloved computer that has served 
us so well these past years. Behind us a choir chants the “Dies 
irae, dies illa” and there is much wailing and grief among the 
bystanders as they pass by to shovel a little dirt into what will be 
its ﬁ nal resting place. R.I.P. [10]
寥 寮
Before going any further, we might pause a moment to look at precisely where 
the primitive elements were placed in the kanji of the last frame: the ground 
to the left  and the computer to the right. Neither of these is an absolutely ﬁ xed 
position. Th e kanji for spit (frame 151), for instance, puts ground on the right, 
and that for plains (frame 1596) will put the computer on the left . While there is 
no reason to bother memorizing any “rules,” a quick glance through a few gen-
eral guidelines may help. Use them if they help; if not, simply adjust the story 
for a problem character in such a way as to help you remember the position of 
the elements relative to one another. 
In any case, here are the guidelines that follow from the kanji treated up to 
this point:
1.  Many kanji used regularly as primitives have a “strong” position or two 
from which they are able to give a basic “ﬂ avor” to the character. For ex-
ample, ground at the left  (or bottom) usually indicates something to do 
with earth, soil, land, and the like; ﬁ re at the bottom in the form of the four 
dots, or at the left  in its compressed kanji form, usually tells us we have to 
do with heat, passion, and the like; a mouth at the left  commonly signiﬁ es 
something to do with eating, coughing, spitting, snoring, screaming, and 
so forth. Where these elements appear elsewhere in the kanji, they do not 
have the same overall impact on its meaning as a rule.
2.  Some primitive elements always have the same position in a kanji. We 
saw this earlier in the case of the primitive meaning head (frame 60) and 
that for the long saber (frame 83), as well as in the three drops of water 
(frame 130).
3.  Enclosures like cliﬀ  (see frame 125) and bound up (frame 63) are always 
set above whatever it is they enclose. Others, as we shall see later, “wrap 
up” a kanji from the bottom.

80 | remembering the kanji 1
4.  All things being equal, the element with the fewer strokes (usually the 
more common element) has ﬁ rst rights to the “strong” position at the left  
or bottom. (Note that the left  and bottom cannot both be the dominant 
position in the same character. Either one or the other of them will domi-
nate, usually the left .) Th e characters for nitrate (frame 115) and chant 
(frame 21) illustrate the point.
 
* 
hood
 冂 
 In addition to the basic meaning of hood, this shape can be 
used for a glass canopy, such as that used to serve “pheasant 
under glass.” Note its diﬀ erence from the element for wind: the 
second stroke is hooked inwards here. To help remember this 
detail, think of the wind as blowing “out” and a glass canopy as 
keeping something “in.” Among the related images suggested by 
this primitive are: a monk’s cowl, a riding hood, a helmet, and 
an automobile hood. [2]
寰 寳
 
180 
same
 同 
 Th e primitives given are one and mouth under a hood. Take the 
key word to connote the sameness that characterizes the life in 
a community of monks. Th ey all have the same habits, includ-
ing the “habit” they wear on their backs. Here we see the monk’s 
cowl, drawn down over the eyes so that all you can see when 
you look at him is a mouth. But since monks also speak their 
prayers in common, it is but a short step to think of one mouth 
under a hood as the kanji for the sameness of monastic life. [6]
寶 寸 寿
*  As a primitive, this kanji will mean monks dressed in a com-
mon habit.
 
181 
den
 洞 
 Th e key word den refers to an animal lair hollowed out in the 
side of a mountain. Now if we keep to the image of the monas-

lesson 9 | 81
tic life as an image for same, we can picture a den of wild beasts 
dressed up in habits and living the common life in a mountain 
cavern. To bring in the element of water we need only give them 
a sacred “puddle” in the center of their den, the focus of all their 
pious attentions. [9]
射 尊
 
182 
trunk
 胴 
 Th e word trunk refers to the part of the body that is left  when 
you have “truncated” all the limbs. I can hardly think of any 
reason for doing so, unless one were lumberjacking corpses 
and needed to have them all properly pruned and made the 
same so they could be ﬂ oated downstream without causing a 
body-jam. [10]
小 尠
 
183 
yonder
 向 
 Something referred to as “over yonder” is usually far oﬀ  in the 
distance and barely within sight—like a wee drop in the dis-
tance—and is usually an expression used in giving directions 
or pointing something out. Hence this kanji begins with a drop. 
Th en we ﬁ nd a sort of transparent helmet with no eyes or nose, 
but only a prominent mouth under it, obviously an extraterres-
trial. And what is it jabbering on about with its mouth open like 
that? Why, about his spaceship way over yonder with its fuel 
tank on empty. [6]
尢 尨 尸
 
184 
esteem
 尚 
 Above we see the primitive for little attached to one of those 
glass canopies you might use to display a family heirloom. Th e 
littleness is important, because what is in fact on display is the 
shrunken, stuﬀ ed, and mounted mouth of an esteemed ances-
tor. We may be used to esteeming the words our forebears leave 
behind, but here we also esteem the very mouth that spoke 

82 | remembering the kanji 1
them. I leave it to you to imagine a suitable place in your room 
for displaying such an unusual conversation piece. [8]
尻 尽 局
 
* 
house
 宀 
 Th is extremely useful primitive element depicts the roof of a 
house. You can see the chimney at the top and the eaves on 
either side without much trouble. It is a “crown” element, which 
means that it is invariably set atop other things. Examples fol-
low immediately. [3]
屁 居 屆
 
185 
character
 字 
 Here is the character for character itself. Not just kanji, but 
any written character from hieroglyphs to Sanskrit to our own 
Roman alphabet. It shows us simply a child in a house. But let us 
take advantage of the double meaning of the key word to note 
that just as a child born to a Japanese house is given characters 
for its name, so it is also stamped with the character of those 
who raise it from infancy on. [6]
屈 届 屋 屍 屎 屏
 
186 
guard
 守 
 Th e notion of guarding something easily brings to mind the 
image of someone standing guard, like the royal soldiers in 
front of Buckingham Palace or the Pope’s Swiss Guard. Th e 
whole idea of hiring guards is that they should stick like glue to 
your house to protect it from unwanted prowlers. So go ahead 
and glue a guard to your house in imagination. [6]
屓 屠

lesson 9 | 83
 
187 
perfect
 完 
 In order not to confuse the key word perfect with others 
nearly synonymous in meaning, pull it apart to have a look at 
its native Latin roots. Per-factum suggests something so “thor-
oughly made or done” that nothing more needs to be added 
to it. Now look at the kanji, which does something similar. We 
see a house that has been made perfectly from its beginnings in 
the foundation to the roof on the top. Now return to frame 97 
and make sure not to confuse this key word with the kanji for 
complete. [7]
履 山
 
188 
proclaim
 宣 
 Under the primitive for house we meet the kanji for span. Th ink 
of the key word in its religious sense of missionary preach-
ing: “proclaiming the good news to all nations” and “shout-
ing it from the housetops.” Th at should be enough to help you 
remember this simple kanji, used in fact both for traditional 
missionary work as well as for one of its contemporary replace-
ments: advertising. [9]
岌 岨
 
189 
wee hours
 宵 
 As the key word hints, the kanji in this frame refers to the late 
evening or early morning hours, well aft er one should be in 
bed asleep. It does this by picturing a house with a candle in it. 
Th e reason is obvious: whoever is living there is “burning the 
candle at both ends,” and working night aft er night into the wee 
hours. [10]
岬 岻
 
190 
relax
 安 
 To be told that the place of the woman is in the house may not 
sit well with modern thought, but like all cultural habits the 

84 | remembering the kanji 1
Chinese characters bear the birthmarks of their age. So indulge 
yourself in a Norman Rockwell image of relaxing aft er a hard 
day’s work: the scruﬀ y and weary woman of the house slouched 
asleep in the living room chair, her hair in curlers and a duster 
lying in her lap. [6]
峅 峠
 
191 
banquet
 宴 
 To carry on from the last frame, we note the entire day of work 
that comes between a woman and her house in preparing for a 
dinner banquet, pictorially “interrupting” her relaxation. [10]
峩 峰 峺
 
192 
draw near
 寄 
 Let the idea of drawing near suggest something dangerous or 
eerie that one approaches with fear and trembling. Here we 
see a strange house—perhaps the haunted House of Usher that 
Edgar Allen Poe immortalized, or the enchanted Gingerbread 
House that lured Hansel and Gretel to draw near. [11]
崇 崘
 
193 
wealth
 富 
 Here we have the original character on which the primitive ele-
ment for wealth is based. In keeping with the story introduced 
back then, note how all the wealth is kept under the roof of the 
same house. [12]
崛 嵐
 
194 
savings
 貯 
 To avoid confusing this frame with the last one, try to think 
of savings as actual money. Th e only diﬀ erence is that our 
currency is not paper bills but shells, a not uncommon unit 
of exchange in older civilizations. Th e nail under the roof of 

lesson 10 | 85
the house points to a hiding place in the raft ers on which one 
strings up one’s shells for safekeeping. [12]
嶄 嶌 嶝
Lesson 10
Of the several primitive elements that have to do with plants and grasses, 
we introduce two of the most common in this lesson: trees and ﬂ owers. In most 
cases, as we shall see, their presence in a “strong” position (in this case, to the 
left  and at the top, respectively) helps give a meaning to the kanji. Where this is 
not the case, we shall do our best to make it so.
 
195 
tree
 木 
 Here we see a pictograph of a tree, showing the main trunk in 
the long vertical stroke and the boughs in the long horizontal 
stroke. Th e ﬁ nal two strokes sweep down in both directions to 
indicate the roots. Although it may look similar at ﬁ rst sight to 
the kanji for water (frame 130), the order in which it is written 
is completely diﬀ erent and this aﬀ ects its ﬁ nal appearance. [4]
嵒 嵓 嵜 嵩
*  As a primitive, this kanji can mean tree or wood. When the last 
two strokes are detached from the trunk (膈), we shall change 
its meaning to pole, or wooden pole.
 
196 
grove
 林 
 Learn this frame in connection with the next one. A grove is 
a small cluster of trees. Hence the simple reduplication of the 
kanji for tree gives us the grove. [8]
嶢 嶬 嶮 嶷 嶼

86 | remembering the kanji 1
 
197 
forest
 森 
 A forest is a large expanse of trees, or “trees, trees everywhere,” to 
adopt the expression we used back in frames 22 and 23. [12]
巍 巖 巡
 
198 
Japanese Judas-tree
 桂 
 Unless you are a botanist, you are not likely to know what a 
Japanese Judas-tree looks like, and probably never even heard 
of it before, but the name is suﬃ  ciently odd to make remem-
bering it easy. Using the primitives as our guide, we deﬁ ne it 
as a tree with ivy growing down its branches in the shape of a 
hangman’s rope. [10]
巧 巳
 
199 
oak
 柏 
 Th is kanji calls to mind the famous myth of the “golden bough.” 
As you may recall, what made the sacred oak in the forest of 
Diana the Huntress outside of Rome “golden” were the white 
berries of the mistletoe that grew in the branches of the tree. 
When the light of the sun shone through them, they turned yel-
low and the branch to which they clung appeared to be made of 
gold. (If you don’t know the story, take a break today and hunt 
it down in a dictionary of myth and fable. Even if you forget the 
kanji—which, of course, you won’t—the story of the mistletoe 
and the fate it brought to Balder the Beautiful is one you are 
sure to remember.) [9]
巻 帆
 
200 
frame
 枠 
 You might think of the frame this character refers to as the sort 
of frame we have created by drawing a dark line around this 
kanji and its explanation. Th en think of that line as made of 
very thin wood; and ﬁ nally note how each time the line bends it 
forms a 90° angle, thus giving us the nine and the ten. [8]

lesson 10 | 87
帖 帚 帝
 
201 
treetops
 梢 
 As the days grow shorter and shorter, or so the northern 
European myth goes, the fear grows that the sun will take its 
leave of us altogether, abandoning the world to total dark-
ness. Fixing candles to the branches of evergreen trees, it was 
believed, would lure the sun back (like things attracting like 
things), whence the custom of the lighted tree that eventually 
found its way into our Christmas customs. Th e story is a lot 
longer and more complex than that, but it should help to ﬁ x 
the image of climb ing high up into the treetops to ﬁ x candles 
on the tree. [11]
帯 幀
 
202 
shelf
 棚 
 One oft en thinks of books as “good companions,” but here it 
is the shelf we store them on that is the companion. Th e rea-
sons should be obvious: it is made of the same stuﬀ , wood, and 
spends a lot more time with them than we do! Here again, be 
careful not to let the rationality of the explanation get in the 
way before you turn it into a proper story. [12]
幇 幢
 
203 
apricot
 杏 
 Since apricots can be eaten just as they fall from the trees, pic-
ture this mouth agape at the bottom of a tree (just as the ele-
ments have it), waiting for apricots to fall into it. [7]
平 并
 
204 
paulownia
 桐 
 Since you probably don’t know what a paulownia tree is, we 
shall let the key word suggest the phrase “the Little Brothers 

88 | remembering the kanji 1
of St. Paulownia.” It is a short step to associate the tree with the 
monks to its right. (For the curious, the name of this oriental 
tree really comes from a Russian princess, Anna Pavlovna.) [10]
幻 広
 
205 
plant
 植 
 You have no doubt seen how people practicing the Japanese art 
of bonsai take those helpless little saplings and twist them into 
crippled dwarves before they have a chance to grow up as they 
should. Th e more proper way to plant a young tree and give it 
a fair shake in life is to set it into the earth in such a way that it 
can grow up straight. [12]
序 座
 
206 
wither
 枯 
 What makes a tree begin to wither up, and perhaps even die, is 
a kind of arteriosclerosis that keeps its sap from ﬂ owing freely. 
Usually this is due to simple old age, as this character shows 
us. Be sure to picture a wrinkled old tree, withering away in a 
retirement center so that the commonsense explanation does 
not take over. [9]
庶 廃
 
207 
crude
 朴 
 As all magicians who have passed their apprenticeship know, 
one makes one’s wand out of a hazel branch and is careful 
not to alter the natural form of the wood. For the magic of 
the wand derives its power from its association with the hid-
den laws of nature, and needs therefore to be kept in its crude, 
natural state. [6]
廏 廓

lesson 10 | 89
 
208 
town
 村 
 Th e character for village was associated with rice ﬁ elds (frame 
92). Th at for town, a step up on the evolutionary path to cities, 
shows a circle of trees glued together to measure oﬀ  the conﬁ nes 
of a town. [7]
廝 廡
 
209 
inter-
 相 
 Th e preﬁ x inter- stirs up associations of cooperation among 
people. From there we read oﬀ  the elements: tree . . . eye. With 
only a slight leap of the imagination, those two words call to 
mind the scriptural proverb about ﬁ rst taking the block of tim-
ber out of one’s own eye before helping your neighbors remove 
the splinters in their eyes. What more useful rule for inter-
human relationships, and what more useful tool for remember-
ing this kanji! [9]
廩 廴
 
210 
desk
 机 
 We need to ﬁ x imagination here on two things to learn the kanji 
for desk: the wonderful rough wood of which it has been hewn 
and the wind that blows across it, sending your papers ﬂ ying all 
over the room. Th ese two elements, written in that order, dictate 
how to write the character. [6]
建 廼
 
211 
book
 本 
 Recalling that books are made of paper, and paper made of 
trees, one might think of a book as a slice of a tree. Can you see 
the “cross-cut” in the trunk of the tree? Picture it as a chain-saw 
cutting you out a few books with which to start your own pri-
vate library. [5]
弃 弄

90 | remembering the kanji 1
 
212 
tag
 札 
 Th e tags you see hanging on trees in public places in Japan are 
helpful to identify what sort of trees they are. Next time you see 
one, imagine the bit of wire that ﬁ xes the tag to the branch as a 
large ﬁ shhook. really imagine it, illogical as it is, and you will 
never have trouble with this kanji again. [5]
弌 弍
 
213 
calendar
 暦 
 Look at this character in reverse order, from bottom up. First we 
see the primitive for days, an appropriate enough way to begin a 
calendar. Next we see a grove of trees growing under a cliﬀ . Th e 
laws of nature being what they are, the trees would be stunted 
under such conditions, unless they were strong enough to keep 
growing upwards until they passed through the layers of rock 
and soil, right up to the surface. Now imagine that in those little 
boxes marking oﬀ  the days on your wall calendar, you see that 
very process taking place step by step: 365 or so time-lapse pic-
tures of that grove of trees each month, from January under the 
cliﬀ  to December on top of the cliﬀ . Th e story is not as com-
plex as it sounds, particularly if you happen to have a calendar 
nearby and can ﬂ ip through it with this image in mind. [14]
 弐 弛 弦
 
214 
plan
 案 
 Without much eﬀ ort, the elements relax . . . tree suggest a ham-
mock strung between two trees in your backyard, and you 
stretched out in it, hands folded behind your head, planning 
something or other. Aft er all, it’s something we all do from time 
to time: kick up our legs on the nearest piece of furniture and 
daydream about the best plan of action to take. Be sure to relate 
the relaxation to the tree, so that you don’t end up with some-
thing else in its place (like “legs” or “desk” or “table”). [10]
弱 弼

lesson 10 | 91
 
215 
parch
 燥 
 Parchment, made from animal skins, was the most common 
form of writing material used until the beginning of the nine-
teenth century. When paper took over, a method was devised 
to make artiﬁ cial parchment from wood pulp. Th e ﬁ re at the 
left  and in the “strong” position reminds us of the root word, 
“parch,” since nothing dries, puckers, wrinkles, and scorches 
quite like ﬁ re. And here is how we put it all together. Take 
a sheet of paper (a “wood-good,”), wet it, and hold it over a 
hearth in your mind’s eye. Now watch as it parches the paper, 
leaving it with a strange and bumpy surface resembling parch-
ment. [17]
彈 彜 彦
 
216 
not yet
 未 
 As the key word suggests, this kanji has to do with something 
not quite over and done with. More concretely, it shows us a tree 
that is not yet fully grown. Th e extra short stroke in the upper 
branches shows new branches spreading out, leaving one with 
the feeling that the tree has a ways to go yet before it reaches 
maturity. In other words, the kanji conveys its mean ing picto-
graphically, playing on the earlier pictograph of the tree. [5]
彧 彩 彪 彫 彬
 
217 
extremity
 末 
 Th is character is best learned in connection with that of the 
previous frame. Th e ﬁ rst stroke shows a branch that is longer 
than the main branch, indicating that the tree has reached the 
extremity of its growth, so that its branches stop spreading 
and start drooping downwards. Be sure to keep this imagery in 
mind, to avoid confusing this key word with synonyms that will 
appear later. [5]
彭 彰 影 彳 彷

92 | remembering the kanji 1
 
218 
splash
 沫 
 Th e splash this kanji refers to is the dash of water against the 
rocks, with all the foam and spray that this creates. If you think 
of a splash in this sense as a wave that has run its full course and 
reached its extremity, namely the seashore, and if you think of 
it pictorially in your mind’s eye, this somewhat rare (but oh-so-
easy-to-learn) kanji is yours for good. [8]
彿 径
 
219 
ﬂ avor
 味 
 When a tree has not yet ﬁ nished growing, it produces fruit with 
a full ﬂ avor. When the oﬃ  cial taster (the professional mouth to 
the left ) determines that full ﬂ avor has been reached, the tree 
is pruned back so that it remains permanently not yet grown. A 
neat little agricultural trick and an easy way to see the sense of 
ﬂ avor hidden in this character. [8]
很 徑
 
220 
younger sister
 妹 
 Th e younger sister in the family is the woman in the family 
who, like the newest branch in a tree, is not yet old enough or 
mature enough to do everything the elder sister can do (see 
frame 413). [8]
得 御
 
221 
vermilion
 朱 
 Th at red-orange color we call vermilion is found in nature dur-
ing the fall when the leaves lose their sugar and begin to change 
color. Th is kanji depicts the very last leaf on a tree in the fall (the 
drop hung in the ﬁ rst stroke), the leaf that has not yet fallen as 
it one day must. Look at its color—vermilion. (Well, not really. 
Th e truth is, vermilion is made from a mercuric sulﬁ de, but I’m 
sure you will agree that autumn leaves are a lot easier to work 
with.) [6]

lesson 10 | 93
徨 復 循 徭 微 徳
 
222 
stocks
 株 
 Th e stocks bought and sold on the market by the tens of mil-
lions each day get their name from a comparison to a healthy 
tree, in which one takes “stock” in the hopes that it will grow and 
produce more and more trees like itself. Usually good stocks 
are referred to as “blue chip,” but here we are asked to asso-
ciate the key word with the color vermilion, perhaps because 
one can assess the value of a tree from the color of its autumn 
leaves. [10]
徼 忖
 
* 
ﬂ ower
 艹 
 We are not yet equipped with all the pieces necessary to learn 
the character for ﬂ ower, so shall have to content ourselves here 
with the ﬁ rst three strokes, which represent the primitive of 
the same meaning. Concentrate on the actual “bloom” of the 
ﬂ ower, and keep a particular ﬂ ower in mind. Try a rose, a tulip, 
or a daisy, since none of them will have their own kanji. Th ink 
about it well, since once you have decided on your ﬂ ower of 
choice, you will be using it in a rather large number of stories 
later on. [3]
志 忘 忙
 
223 
young
 若 
 Here we see a ﬂ ower held in the right hand. You can imagine 
yourself in a magic garden where ﬂ owers picked with the right 
hand grant eternal youth; and those picked with the left , pre-
mature senility. Go ahead, pick one with each hand and watch 
what happens. [8]
応 忝 忞 忠 忤 忱

94 | remembering the kanji 1
 
224 
grass
 草 
 Perhaps you know the custom of seeding grass randomly or in 
some particular pattern with the ﬂ ower called the crocus, which 
blooms for a few days each year in early spring. As the grass 
begins to turn green again aft er winter has passed, these tiny 
ﬂ owers dot up here and there. Now just look out your window 
at a patch of grass somewhere and think what a nice idea it 
would be to have your name spelled out in ﬂ owers once as a sort 
of early harbinger of spring. [9]
忻 怒
 
225 
suﬀ ering
 苦 
 Th e picture of suﬀ ering we are given here is that of a ﬂ ower that 
has grown old. When a ﬂ ower ages, it pales and dries up, and 
probably even suﬀ ers. If you think that plants are incapable of 
such feelings, then ask yourself why so many people believe that 
talking to their ﬂ owers helps them bloom better. [8]
怙 怡
 
226 
tolerant
 寛 
 Th e house of ﬂ owers or “hothouse” has become a metaphor for 
a narrow-minded, biased, and intolerant attitude distrustful of 
change. Tolerance, in contrast, is open-minded and welcomes 
novelty. Th e way to encourage tolerance in those who lack it 
is ﬁ rst to have them see through their own hothouse attitudes, 
which is the very counsel we are given in this kanji. [13]
性 怪 恃
 
227 
dilute
 薄 
 Take a good look at this kanji: the “strong” element here is really 
the ﬂ ower, not the water as you might have thought on ﬁ rst 
glance. To the right is the acupuncturist from frame 47. Taking 
the key word to connote diluting the vital humors of the body, 
we can imagine our acupuncturist performing his task with 

lesson 10 | 95
ﬂ owers in place of needles, and using their hollow stems to pipe 
water into the body of the patient. [16]
恒 恚 恪
 
228 
leaf
 葉 
 Th ree elements are given here: ﬂ ower . . . generation . . . tree. Th e 
ﬁ rst and last seem logical enough, since it is the leaf that feeds 
the ﬂ owers on a tree. Th e element for generation interposed 
between the two suggests that the movement of a tree from one 
generation to the next is like its “turning over a new leaf.” [12]
恭 悁 悉
 
* 
graveyard
 莫 
 Th e element shown here should be taken to represent a modern 
graveyard. Gone are the cobwebs and gnarled trees, the tilted 
headstones and dark, moonless nights that used to scare the 
wits out of our childhood imaginations. Instead, we see brightly 
colored ﬂ owers placed before the tombstones, the sun shining 
gloriously overhead, and a cuddly St. Bernard sitting at the gate 
keeping watch. [10]
悌 悖 悛
 
229 
imitation
 模 
 Ah, but haven’t modern graveyards become a parody of their 
ancestors! Th e ﬂ owers are plastic, the writing on the stones is 
unimaginative and cold, and the whole thing looks more like 
a marble orchard than a right and proper graveyard. Th is kanji 
continues with the modernization trend by picturing imita-
tion trees in the graveyard. But of course, how convenient! Th ey 
don’t need pruning or fertilizing, their leaves don’t fall, and they 
remain the same color all year long. [14]
悦 悼

96 | remembering the kanji 1
 
230 
vague
 漠 
 Th ink of the key word as having to do with something viewed 
through a haze, or in the twilight and from a distance, so that 
only its outlines are vaguely discernible. Now we are back again 
to the essence of the true graveyard. Th e water may be taken as 
the sound of waves dashing up against the rocks or the drip-
ping of moisture on cold rock—anything that helps you associ-
ate vagueness with the graveyard and keep it distinct from the 
imitation we met in the last frame. [13]
惆 惠
 
231 
grave
 墓 
 Th e mounds of soil with crude wooden crosses set at their head 
suggests those boot-hill graves we all know from cowboy lore. 
Th e only odd thing about this kanji is that the soil comes under 
the graveyard, rather than to its left , where we might expect. Just 
think of the bodies as “lying under boot-hill” if you have any 
trouble.
 By the way, this is not the ﬁ rst time, nor will it be the last, 
that we learn a kanji whose key word is the same, or almost the 
same, as a primitive element based on it, but whose shape dif-
fers somewhat. Th ere is no cause to worry. By using the primi-
tive in a variety of other characters, as we have done here, the 
confusion will be averted as a matter of course. In most cases, 
as here, the primitive element is taken from a part of the fuller 
kanji. [13]
惶 惺
 
232 
livelihood
 暮 
 Imagine that you have chosen the occupation of the keeper of a 
graveyard and spend your days tending to other’s deadhood in 
order to make your means of livelihood. [14]
意 暮

lesson 11 | 97
 
233 
membrane
 膜 
 Th e part of the body ﬁ rst aﬀ ected by a stroll through a haunted 
graveyard is the skin, which gets goose bumps. But we save the 
word “skin” for another kanji, and use the odd word “mem-
brane” here. Th ink of being so scared through and through that 
the goose ﬂ esh moves from the outside in, giving you goose 
membranes. [14]
愧 慂
 
234 
seedling
 苗 
 To avoid confusion with the image of rice seedlings to appear 
later, we shall take these seedlings out of their agricultural set-
ting in the rice ﬁ elds and into the frame of Brave New World 
surgery, where “ideas” or “values” are being implanted into 
brains like seedlings to insure a harmonious society. Th en you 
need only imagine them taking root and breaking out into 
ﬂ ower right through the tops of the skulls of people walking 
around on the streets. [8]
慈 慎
Lesson 11
Now that we have made our way through well over 200 characters, it is time 
to pause and consider how you are getting on with the method introduced in 
this book. While this lesson will be a short one (only 15 new kanji) you might 
want to spend some time reviewing your progress in the light of the remarks 
that follow. In them I have tried to draw out the main principles that have been 
woven into the fabric of the text from frame to frame and lesson to lesson. I do 
so by looking at some of the typical problems that can arise:
If you can remember the key word when you see the kanji, but have trouble 
remembering the kanji when you have only the key word to go on…

98 | remembering the kanji 1
Probably you did not take seriously the advice about studying these stories 
with a pad and pencil. If you try to shortcut the process by merely learning to 
recognize the characters for their meaning without worrying about their writ-
ing, you will ﬁ nd that you have missed one bird with two stones, when you 
could have bagged two with one. Let me repeat: study only from key word to 
kanji; the reverse will take care of itself.
If you ﬁ nd yourself having to go back to a kanji, once you have written it, to 
make corrections or additions…
My guess is that you are asking your visual memory to do the work that 
belongs to imaginative memory. Aft er Lesson 12, you will be given more leeway 
to create your own images and stories, so it is important that you nip this prob-
lem in the bud before going any further. A small step in the wrong direction on 
a journey of 2,000 kanji will land you in deep trouble in no time. Here are the 
steps you should be following each time you come to a new frame:
 
1.  Read the key word and take note of the particular connotation that has 
been given it. Th ere is only one such meaning, sometimes associated with 
a colloquial phrase, sometimes with one of the several meanings of the 
word, sometimes with a well-known cultural phenomenon. Th ink of that 
connotation and repeat it to yourself. When you’re sure you’ve got the 
right one, carry on.
 
2.  Read through the particular little story that goes with the key word and 
let the whole picture establish itself clearly.
 
3.  Now close your eyes, focus on those images in the story that belong to 
the key word and primitive elements, and let go of the controls. It may 
take a few seconds, sometimes as long as a minute, but the picture will 
start to change on its own. Th e exaggerated focal points will start to take 
on a life of their own and enhance the image with your own particular 
experiences and memories. You will know your work is done when you 
have succeeded in creating a memorable image that is both succinct and 
complete, both faithful to the original story and yet your very own.
 
4.  Open your eyes and repeat the key word and primitive elements, keeping 
that image in mind. Th is will clear away any of the fog, and at the same 
time make sure that when you let go you didn’t let go of the original story, 
too.
 
5.  In your mind, juxtapose the elements relative to one another in line with 
your image or the way they normally appear in the characters.
 
6.  Take pencil and paper and write the character once, retelling the story as 
you go.

lesson 11 | 99
Th ese are basically the same steps you were led through in reading the sto-
ries, even though they were not laid out so clearly before. If you think back to 
the kanji that “worked” best for you, you will ﬁ nd that each of these steps was 
accomplished perfectly. And if you look back at the ones you are forgetting, 
you should also be able to locate which step you skipped over. In reviewing, 
these same steps should be followed, with the only clue to set the imagination 
in motion being the key word.
If you ﬁ nd you are forgetting the relative position of the elements in a kanji…
Before all else, go back and reread the frame for that character to see if there 
were any helpful hints or explanatory notes. If not, return to the frame where 
the particular primitives were ﬁ rst introduced to see if there is any clue there. 
And if this is not the problem, then, taking care not to add any new words or 
focal points to your story (since they might end up being elements later on), 
rethink the story in such a way that the image for each element actually takes 
the position it has in the kanji itself. Th is should not happen oft en, but when it 
does, it is worth spending a few minutes to get things sorted out.
If you are confusing one kanji with another…
Take a careful look at the two stories. Perhaps you have made one or the 
other of them so vivid that it has attracted extraneous elements to itself that 
make the two kanji images fuse into one. Or again, it may be that you did not 
pay suﬃ  cient attention to the advice about clarifying a single connotation for 
the key word.
Whether or not you have had all or only a few of these problems, now is the 
time to review the ﬁ rst 10 lessons keeping an eye out for them. Put aside any 
schedule you may have set yourself until you have those lessons down perfectly, 
that is, until you can run through all 6 steps outlined above for every character, 
without a hitch. Th e most important thing in this review is not really to see 
whether you are remembering the characters, but to learn how to locate prob-
lems and deal with them.
One ﬁ nal note before you close the book and begin running your review. 
Everyone’s imagination works diﬀ erently. Each has its own gift s and its own 
defects. Th e more you pay attention to how you imagine things, the more likely 
you are to ﬁ nd out what works best for you—and more importantly, why. Th e 
one thing you must distrust, if the system outlined in this book is to work for 
you, is your ability to remember kanji just as they are, without doing any work 
on them. Once you start making exceptions for characters you “know” or “have 
no trouble with” or “don’t need to run through all the steps with,” you are headed 
for a frustration that will take you a great deal of trouble to dig yourself out of. 
In other words, if you start using the method only as a “crutch” to help you only 

100 | remembering the kanji 1
with the kanji you have trouble with, you will quickly be limping along worse 
than ever. What we are oﬀ ering here is not a crutch, but a diﬀ erent way to walk.
Th at said, let us pick up where we left  oﬀ . In this lesson we turn from primi-
tive elements having to do with plants to those having to do with animals, 4 of 
them in all.
 
235 
portent
 兆 
 Here we have a pictograph of the back of a turtle, the two slop-
ing vertical strokes representing the central ridge and the four 
short strokes the pattern. Th ink of reading turtle shells as a 
way to foretell the future, and in particular things that portend 
coming evils. [6]
族 旒 旗 旙 旛 无
*  When this character is used as a primitive in its full form, we 
keep the key-word sense of a portent. When it appears to the 
left  in its abbreviated form (namely, the left  half only, 丬), we 
shall give it the pictographic sense of a turtle.
 
236 
peach tree
 桃 
 To associate the peach tree with the primitive for a portent, 
recall the famous Japanese legend of Momotarō, the Peach Boy. 
It begins once upon a time with a ﬁ sherman and his wife who 
wanted badly to have a child, but none was born to them. Th en 
one day the old man caught a giant peach, out of which jumped 
a healthy young lad whom they named Peach Boy. Th ough the 
boy was destined to perform heroic deeds, his birth also por-
tended great misfortune (how else could he become a hero?). 
Th us the tree that is associated with a portent of coming evil 
comes to be the peach tree. [10]
慙 慥
 
237 
stare
 眺 
 To give someone the “evil eye” is to stare at them, wishing them 
evil. Th e roots of the superstition are old and almost universal 

lesson 11 | 101
throughout the cultures of the world. In this kanji, too, being 
stared at is depicted as an eye that portends evil. [11]
慯 慶
 
238 
dog
 犬 
 We know that the kanji for large takes on the meaning of the St. 
Bernard dog when used as a primitive. In this frame we ﬁ nally 
see why. Th e drop added as a fourth and ﬁ nal stroke means that 
we have to do with a normal-sized dog, which, compared to the 
St. Bernard, is no more than a drop in the kennel. [4]
慷 慾 憂 憇
*  As a primitive this character can take two meanings. In the 
form given here it will mean a very small dog (which we shall 
refer to as a chihuahua for convenience sake). When it takes 
the form 犭 to the left  of a character, we shall give it the mean-
ing of a pack of wild dogs.
 
239 
status quo
 状 
 Did you ever hear the legend of the turtle who fell madly in 
love with a chihuahua but could not have her because their two 
families did not like the idea of their children intermarrying? 
Like all classic stories of ill-fated love, this one shows how the 
young upset the status quo with an emotion older and more 
power ful than anything their elders have devised to counter it: 
blind love. [7]
憊 憎 憐 憘
 
240 
silence
 黙 
 Oddly enough, the character for silence shows us a black chi-
huahua. Actually, the cute little critter’s name is Darkness, as 
I am sure you remember from the famous song about silence 
that begins, “Hello, Darkness, my old friend.…”
 Note how the four dots reach all the way across the bottom of 
the character. [15]

102 | remembering the kanji 1
憬 憺 懇
 
241 
sort of thing
 然 
 Th e key word in this frame refers to a suﬃ  x that gives the word 
before it an adjectival quality; hence we refer to it as “sort of 
thing.” Reverting to the time when dog was more widely eaten 
than it is today (see frame 121), we see here a large cauldron 
boiling over an oven ﬂ ame with the ﬂ esh of a chihuahua being 
thrown into the whole concoction to make it into a “hot-diggity, 
dog-diggity” sort of thing. [12]
懈 應 懊 懋 懣 懶
 
242 
reed
 荻 
 You’ve no doubt seen cattails, those swamp reeds with a furry 
ﬂ ower to them like the tail of a cat. Th is might just turn out to 
be a good way to get rid of a troublesome pack of wild dogs: 
lure them into a swamp of these reeds with the cattail ﬂ ow-
ers and then set ﬁ re to the swamp. Take care to focus on the 
ﬂ ower rather than the “cattail” to avoid confusion with frame 
244 below. [10]
懺 懼 懽 懾 戉
 
243 
hunt
 狩 
 One of the worst problems you have to face when you go hunt-
ing is to guard your take from the wild dogs. If you imagine 
yourself failing at the task, you will probably have a stronger 
image than if you try to picture yourself succeeding. [9]
戊 戌 戍 戔
 
244 
cat
 猫 
 Knowing how much dogs love to chase cats, picture a pack of 
wild dogs planting “cat-seedlings,” watering them, and fertilizing 
them until they can be harvested as a crop of cats for them to 

lesson 11 | 103
chase and torment. If you begin from the key word and think of 
a “crop of cats,” you will not confuse this story with the appar-
ently similar story of two frames ago. [11]
戛 戯
 
245 
cow
 牛 
 Can you see the “doodle” of a cow that has just been run over by 
a steamroller? Th e small dot in the ﬁ rst stroke shows its head 
turned to one side, and the next two strokes, the four legs. [4]
戰 戲 戳 戴
*  As a primitive, the same sense of cow is kept. Note only that 
when it is placed over another element, its tail is cut oﬀ , giv-
ing us 肉. In this case, and when the element appears on the 
left , the stroke order is changed.
 
246 
special
 特 
 Despite the strong phonetic similarity, there will be no problem 
keeping the key word special distinct from the character we 
met earlier for specialty (frame 46), since the latter has imme-
diate connotations lacking in this kanji. 
 Anyway, we shall let the key word of this frame refer to some-
thing in a special class all its own—like the sacred cows of India 
that wander freely without fear of being butchered and ground 
into hamburger. Even though the practice is originally a Hindu 
one, and in any case no longer followed among the majority of 
Japanese Buddhist monks, the Buddha’s refusal to take the life 
of any sentient being makes it only ﬁ tting that the cows should 
be placed on the sacred grounds of a Buddhist temple in this 
kanji. [10]
戸 戻 房 所 才
 
247 
revelation
 告 
 Folklore throughout the world tells us of talking animals who 
show a wisdom superior to that of human beings, and that same 
tradition has found its way into television shows and cartoons 

104 | remembering the kanji 1
right into our own century. Th is character depicts revelation 
through the mouth of a cow, suggesting oracular utterances 
about truths hidden to human intelligence. [7]
扎 打 払 托 扠
 
248 
before
 先 
 Take this key word in its physical, not its temporal, sense (even 
though it refers to both). If you have a cow with human legs, as 
the elements show us here, it can only be because you have two 
people in a cow-suit. I always thought I’d prefer to be the one 
standing before, rather than the one that holds up the rear and 
becomes the “butt” of everyone’s laughter. [6]
扣 扨 扮 托 扶 批
 
249 
wash
 洗 
 Th is character is so logical that one is tempted to let the ele-
ments speak for themselves: water . . . before. But we have 
already decided we will not allow such rationalism to creep into 
our stories. Not even this once.
 Instead, let us change the character from the Peanuts comic 
strip called “Pigpen,” who is always preceded by a little cloud of 
dust and grime, and rename him “Wash-Out.” Everywhere he 
walks, a spray of water goes before him to sanitize everything he 
touches. [9]
承 把
Lesson 12
In this the ﬁ nal lesson of Part one we introduce the useful compound primi-
tive for metals and the elements needed to form it, in addition to picking up a 
number of stray characters that have fallen by the wayside.

lesson 12 | 105
 
* 
umbrella
 抓 
 Th e actual kanji on which this primitive meaning umbrella is 
based will not show up until frame 1026. Th ink of it as a large 
and brightly-colored beach umbrella. If you compare this with 
frame 8, you will notice how the two strokes touch here, while 
the kanji for eight would leave a gaping leak in the top. [2]
抑 抒
 
250 
jammed in
 介 
 Th e idea of something getting jammed into something else 
is depicted here by having a walking stick get jammed into an 
umbrella frame by someone shoving it into an already occupied 
slot in the umbrella stand at the door. First notice the vertical 
strokes: on the left  is the curved umbrella handle, and on the 
right the straight walking stick. Now try to imagine the two 
parties tugging at their respective properties like two kids on a 
wishbone, creating a scene at the entrance of an elegant restau-
rant. [4]
抑 抒 抔 投
 
251 
world
 界 
 As the world gets jammed with more and more people, there is 
less and less space. Imagine yourself taking an air ﬂ ight over a 
world so densely populated that every bit of it is sectioned oﬀ  
like a gigantic checkerboard (the rice ﬁ elds). If you look closely 
at the character, you should be able to see a kind of movement 
taking place as still more is being jammed into that already 
narrow space. [9]
抜 抬
 
252 
tea
 茶 
 As everyone knows, tea is made from tea leaves. But the tea 
plant itself has its own ﬂ owers, which can be quite beautiful and 
add a special ﬂ avor to the tea, as the Chinese found out already 

106 | remembering the kanji 1
over 4,600 years ago. With the image of a terrace of ﬂ owering 
tea bushes in mind, picture a number of brightly painted and 
very l-o-n-g wooden poles (frame 195) placed here and there in 
their midst, with a tiny umbrella at the top to shade the delicate-
tasting tea ﬂ owers. [9]
抹 押 抽 拂 担 拆
 
* 
meeting
 拊 
 Th is compound primitive depicts a meeting as a massive gath-
ering of people under one umbrella. Th e full kanji from which 
this derives will be introduced later in frame 752. Th e impor-
tant thing here is to picture the scene just described and associ-
ate it with the word meeting. [3]
拈 拉 拊
 
253 
ﬁ t
 合 
 Th e kanji for ﬁ t reads literally, top to bottom, as a meeting 
of mouths—which is a rather descriptive way of speaking of 
a romantic kiss. We all know what happens when there is no 
meeting of minds and when people’s ideas don’t ﬁ t with one 
another. But this kanji invites us to imagine what happened 
to the romance of a certain unfortunate couple whose mouths 
didn’t ﬁ t. [6]
拏 拒
 
254 
pagoda
 塔 
 On the left  we see a mound of dirt, and to the right ﬂ owers 
made to ﬁ t together. Th e two sides combine to create a great 
pagoda made of dirt, with flowers by the tens of thousands 
ﬁ tted together for the rooﬁ ng of each of the layers. Be sure to 
put yourself in the scene and ﬁ t a few of the ﬂ owers in place 
yourself so that the image works its way into memory with full 
force. [12]
拗 招 拭

lesson 12 | 107
 
255 
king
 王 
 See what you can do to come up with a pictograph of a king’s 
scepter here that suits your own idea of what it should look like. 
You might even begin with the basic element for I beam and 
then try to ﬁ t the remaining third stroke in. [4]
拮 拯 拱 拳
*  As a primitive, this can mean either king or scepter, but it will 
usually be taken to mean ball, as an abbreviation of the char-
acter in the next frame.
 
256 
jewel
 玉 
 Note the drop here in the king’s scepter, which is exactly what 
you would expect it to be: a precious jewel handed down from 
of old as a symbol of his wealth and power. [5]
拾 拿
*  As a primitive, we can use this to mean either jewel or ball. 
When it appears anywhere other than on the left side of a 
kanji, it generally takes the same shape as here. On the left , 
it will be lacking the ﬁ nal stroke, making it the same as the 
character in the previous frame, 馬.
 
257 
treasure
 宝 
 Every house has its treasure, as every thief knows only too well. 
While the things we treasure most are usually of sentimental 
value, we take the original sense of the term treasure here and 
make it refer to jewels kept in one’s house. [8]
指 挙
 
258 
pearl
 珠 
 Take care to keep the meaning of this kanji distinct from that 
for jewel. Th ink of the most enormous pearl you have ever seen, 
a great vermilion-colored ball sitting on your ring—and mak-

108 | remembering the kanji 1
ing it extremely diﬃ  cult to move without falling over from the 
weight of the thing. [10]
挿 捕
 
259 
present
 現 
 Do not think of a “gift ” here, but of the present moment, as dis-
tinct from the future and the past. Th e kanji gives us a ball in 
which we see the present—obviously a crystal ball that enables 
us to see things going on at the present in faraway places. [11]
捨 捺
 
260 
lunatic
 狂 
 A lunatic is literally one driven mad by the light of the moon, 
and the most famous of the “looneys” are the legendary lycan-
thropes or “wolfmen.” Sometimes the transformation is only 
a temporary phenomenon, sometimes it is permanent. In the 
latter case, the poor chap takes oﬀ  on all fours to live with the 
beasts. To remember this kanji, imagine one of these lycan-
thropes going looney and setting himself up as king of a pack 
of wild dogs that roams about and terrorizes innocent suburban 
communities. [7]
掃 掎
 
261 
emperor
 皇 
 An emperor, as we all know, is a ruler—something like a king 
but higher in status. Th e white bird perched above the king, 
elevating him to imperial heights, is the messenger he sends 
back and forth to the gods to request advice and special favors, 
something that white birds have long done in folklore through-
out the world. [9]
掛 探

lesson 12 | 109
 
262 
display
 呈 
 Th e trick to remembering this character lies in associating the 
key word with the line from the nursery rhyme about 4 and 20 
blackbirds baked in a pie: “Wasn’t this a dainty dish to set before 
the king?” If we think of display in terms of that famous line, 
and the king with his head thrown back and his mouth wide 
open as 4 and 20 blackbirds ﬂ y in one aft er the other, we shall 
have satisﬁ ed both the elements and their position. [7]
控 掫
 
263 
whole
 全 
 Wholeness suggests physical and spiritual health, “having your 
act together.” Th e kanji-image for wholeness depicts being “king 
under your own umbrella,” that is, giving order to your own 
life. I know it sounds terribly abstract, but what could be more 
abstract than the word whole? [6]
掲 掾
 
264 
plug
 栓 
 Here we think of plug in the sense of a cork or stopper used 
to seal the mouth of a bottle, water faucet, or something with 
liquid running out of it. Forgetting the abstract picture of the 
former frame, let us work with all the primitive units: tree . . . 
umbrella . . . ball. Imagine a tree with a faucet in the side out of 
which tennis balls are ﬂ owing, bouncing all over the ground by 
the hundreds. You ﬁ ght your way up to it and shove your giant 
beach umbrella into the tree to plug it up. [10]
揆 揚
 
265 
logic
 理 
 We ﬁ rst referred to this character back in frame 173, to which 
you might want to return to have a peek. Th e image of logic we 
are given is something like a central jewel in a computer, like 
the jewels in old clocks that keep them running smoothly. Try 

110 | remembering the kanji 1
to picture yourself making your way through all the rams and 
roms and approaching this shining jewel, a chorus of voices 
and a blast of trumpets in the background heralding the great 
seat of all-knowing logic. [11]
揩 損
 
266 
lord
 主 
 “A man’s home is his castle,” goes the proverb from an age where 
it was the male who was lord of the household. Fundamentally, 
it means only that every one of us is a bit (or drop) of a king in 
our own environment. As for the positioning of the elements, if 
you take care to “read oﬀ ” the primitives in this way, you won’t 
end up putting the drop down below, where it turns the kanji 
into a jewel. [5]
挟 振
*  As a primitive element, we set the key word aside entirely and 
take it as a pictograph of a solid brass candlestick (with the 
drop representing the ﬂ ame at the top).
 
267 
pour
 注 
 Picture pouring water from a lighted candlestick. What could 
be more ridiculous, or simpler, as a way to recall this kanji? [8]
搖 搬
 
268 
pillar
 柱 
 Th e pillar referred to here is the wooden beam that stands at the 
entrance to a traditional Japanese house. Carve it in imagina-
tion into the shape of a gigantic candlestick and your work is 
done. [9]
携 摠

lesson 12 | 111
 
269 
gold
 金 
 If this were not one of the most common characters you will 
ever have to write, I would apologize for having to give the 
explanation that follows. Anyway, we want to depict bars of 
gold bullion with an umbrella overhead to shade them from the 
heat (and perhaps to hide them as well). Th e bullion is made by 
melting down all the scepters of the kingdom, drop by drop, and 
shaping them into bars. [8]
摧 摩 摯 摶 摸 摺 撃 撈
*  As a primitive, it means not only gold but any metal at all.
 
270 
pig iron
 銑 
 Pig iron refers to iron in the crude form in which it emerges 
from the smelting furnaces. Of all the various forms metal can 
take, this one shows us metal before it has been reﬁ ned. Imagine 
two photographs labeled “before” and “aft er” to show the pro-
cess. [14]
撥 撲
 
271 
bowl
 鉢 
 Let bowl suggest a large and heavy golden bowl into which you 
are throwing all the books you own to mash them into pulp, 
for some outrageous reason you will have to think up your self. 
[13]
操 據
 
272 
copper
 銅 
 Picture an order of monks serving as chaplains for the police 
force. Th eir special habit, made of protective metal, is distin-
guished by a row of copper buttons just like the “cops” they 
serve. [14]
擯 擽

112 | remembering the kanji 1
 
273 
angling
 釣 
 Th e character we learned for ﬁ shing (frame 172) refers to the 
professional, net-casting industry, while the angling of this 
character refers to the sport. Th e odd thing is that your angling 
rod is a golden ladle which you are using to scoop goldﬁ sh out 
of a river. [11]
攤 攬
 
274 
needle
 針 
 In frame 10 we referred ahead to this full character from which 
the primitive for needle (on the right) derives. Since we already 
expect that needles are made of metal, let us picture a set of 
solid gold darning needles to complete the kanji. [10]
攻 政
 
275 
inscription
 銘 
 Take inscription in the sense of the name you ask the jeweler 
to carve on a gold bracelet or inside a gold ring to identify its 
owner or communicate some sentimental message. It will help 
if you can recall the ﬁ rst time you had this done and the feelings 
you had at the time. [14]
敖 敢
 
276 
tranquilize
 鎮 
 Th e ﬁ rst lie-detector machines of the twentieth century worked 
by wiring pieces of metal to the body to measure the amount of 
sweat produced when questions were asked. It was discovered 
that nervousness produced more sweat, indicating subcon-
scious reactions when the truth was getting too close for com-
fort. Nowadays, people can take drugs that tranquilize them in 
such a way as to neutralize the eﬀ ect of the device, which is why 
other means have had to be developed. [18]
敷 斑

lesson 12 | 113
With that, we come to the end of Part one. Before going on to Part two, it 
would be a good idea to return now to the Introduction and read it once 
again. Anything that did not make sense at ﬁ rst should now be clear.
By this time, too, you should be familiar with the use of all the Indexes. If 
not, take a few minutes to study them, since you will no doubt ﬁ nd them useful 
in the pages ahead.


part two
Plots


Lesson 13
By this time, if you have been following along methodically frame by frame, 
you may find yourself growing impatient at the thought of having to read 
through more than 2,000 of these little stories. You probably want to move at a 
quicker pace and in your own way. Take heart, for that is precisely what we are 
going to start doing in Part two. But if you happen to be one of those people 
who are perfectly content to have someone else do all the work for them, then 
brace yourself for the task that lies ahead.
We begin the weaning process by abbreviating the stories into simple plots, 
leaving it up to you to patch together the necessary details in a manner similar 
to what we did in Part one. As mentioned in the Introduction, the pur-
pose of the longer stories was to impress on you the importance of recreating 
a complete picture in imagination, and to insure that you did not merely try to 
associate words with other words but with images. Th e same holds true for the 
kanji that remain.
Before setting out on our way again, a word of caution is in order. Left  to its 
own, your imagination will automatically tend to add elements and see con-
nections that could prove counterproductive in the long run. For example, you 
might think it perfectly innocent and admissible to alter the primitive for old to 
old man, or that for cliﬀ  to cave. In fact, these changes would be confusing when 
you meet the kanji and primitives with those meanings later on. You would 
return to the earlier kanji and ﬁ nd that everything had become one great con-
fusion.
You may have experienced this problem already when you decided to alter 
a story to suit your own associations. Th at should help you appreciate how hard 
it is to wipe out a story once you have learned it, particularly a vivid one. To 
protect yourself against this, stick faithfully to the key words as they are given, 
and try not to move beyond the range of primitive meanings listed. Where such 
confusion can be anticipated, a longer story will be presented as a protective 
measure, but you will have to take care of the rest.
We start out Part two with a group of 23 characters having to do with 
travel, and the primitives that accompany them: a road, a pair of walking legs, 
and a car.

118 | remembering the kanji 1
 
*  
road
 ⻌ 
 Th e road envisioned here is a road for traﬃ  c, or a path or walk-
way. Th e natural sweep of these three simple strokes should be 
easy to remember, as it appears so oft en. [3]
旡 既 日
 
277 
road-way
 道 
 Th e key word carries both the sense of a road for transit and a 
way or method of doing something, but the former is better for 
forming an image. Th e primitives read: the neck of a road. Th ink 
of a crowded road-way where traﬃ  c has come to a standstill—
what we commonly refer to as a “bottleneck.” [12]
旻 昀 昂 昃
 
278 
guidance
 導 
 When we accept someone’s guidance, we permit ourselves to 
be glued to a certain road or way of doing something, and try to 
“stick” to it. [15]
昞 昤
 
279 
crossing
 辻 
 Take the ﬁ rst two strokes in the sense we gave them back in 
frame 10, as the pictograph of a cross, and set it on a road to 
create a “crossing.” [5]
昧 昮
 
280 
swift 
 迅 
 Here we see a crossing in the form of a barbed ﬁ shhook, sug-
gesting a swift er alternate not only to the roundabouts used in 
Europe but also to the “cloverleaf” design used on superhigh-
ways in the United States. [6]

lesson 13 | 119
是 昱 昴 昻
 
281 
create
 造 
 Th ink of creating as making something out of nothing. Th en 
recall how the way of revelation laid out in the Bible begins with 
the story of how God created the world out of a dark and cha-
otic nothingness. [10]
晉 晒
 
282 
urge
 迫 
 To urge someone to do something, you make the way as appeal-
ing as possible, perhaps even whitewashing it a bit. [8]
晟 晥
 
283 
escape
 逃 
 When escaping from something or someone, one always feels 
as if one is not going fast enough, like a turtle on an expressway. 
(Since the turtle is on the road and not on the left , it can keep its 
full kanji shape as given in frame 235.) [9]
景 晴
 
284 
environs
 辺 
 To keep the environs clean and safe, you could cement daggers 
in the road, blades pointed upwards, so that no polluting traﬃ  c 
could pass by. You could, if you were an ecologically minded 
terrorist. [5]
智 暄
 
285 
patrol
 巡 
 A virtual deluge of motorcycle police washing down a road is 
this kanji’s image for a patrol. [6]

120 | remembering the kanji 1
暇 暈 暉 暖
 
286 
car
 車 
 You may keep the whole range of connotations for this key 
word, car, provided it does not interfere with the pictograph. 
Look for the front and back wheels (the ﬁ rst and last horizontal 
strokes) and the seat in the carriage in the middle. As an exer-
cise, try to isolate the primitives on your own and make a story 
out of them. [7]
暗 暘 暙 暝 暠 暢 暦
*  Car, cart, wagon, and vehicle may all be used as primitive 
meanings.
 
287 
take along
 連 
 What you are meant to take along in this kanji are not things 
but people. Th e image of the car on the road should ground 
your image for picking up your friends to take them along to 
wherever you are going. [10]
暼 曁
 
288 
rut
 軌 
 Combine the primary and secondary meanings of this key word 
to form your story. Begin with the car whose tires get caught in 
a rut and spin without going anywhere. Th en go on to the base-
ball team who can’t win a game because it has fallen into a rut 
of losing. [9]
曜 曠
 
289 
transport
 輸 
 On the left  we see a vehicle used for transport. On the right, 
we see a new tangle of elements that need sorting out. Th e ﬁ rst 
three strokes, you will remember, are the primitive for meeting. 
Below it we see the elements for ﬂ esh and saber, which com-

lesson 13 | 121
bine to create a compound element for a butcher and his trade. 
Together they give us the image of a “trucker’s convoy.” [16]
曵 曹 曽 替
 
290 
in front
 前 
 We waited to introduce this character until now, even though 
we had all the elements, because it helps to reinforce the odd 
kanji of the last frame. Picture the butcher hacking away with 
his knife at a slab of meat on his table with a pair of ram’s horns 
placed in front of him (or on his head, if you prefer).
 Th ere is no need to worry about confusing this kanji with that 
for before (frame 248), since it will not appear as a primitive in 
any other character used in this book. [9]
最 會 月 朎 朔
 
*  
walking legs
 夂 
 We call this element walking legs because it indicates “legs in 
motion,” whether you want to think of them as jogging or walk-
ing in long strides, as the shape seems to suggest. Be careful how 
you write it, with the ﬁ rst two strokes like a stylized “7.” [3]
朕 朖 朗
 
291 
each
 各 
 “Suum cuique” goes the popular Latin proverb. A certain disease 
of the English language makes it almost impossible to translate 
the phrase without gender bias. In any event, here we see some-
one walking with his/her mouth between his/her walking legs, 
giving us an image of “To each his/her own.” [6]
望 朝 朞 期 朦 朧
*  Th e sense of the proverb should help when using this kanji as 
a primitive; otherwise, reduce it to its original elements. But 
do not associate it in any way with the word “every,” which 
we shall meet later in another context.

122 | remembering the kanji 1
 
292 
status
 格 
 If you can imagine trees as status symbols (as they might well 
be for those living in Japan’s congested modern cities, where 
greenery has become something of a luxury item), then each 
might be aiming to have his/her own tree, just to keep up with 
the Suzukis. [10]
本 朷
 
293 
abbreviation
 略 
 Each ﬁ eld has its own abbreviations (chemistry, philosophy, 
sports, etc.). Needless to say, the "stronger" primitive—that is to 
say, the simpler and more oft en used one—takes the dominant 
position on the left , even though the story would read them oﬀ  
the other way around. [11]
杁 村
 
294 
guest
 客 
 When you are a guest in a courteous town, each household has 
its own way of welcoming you, and each house becomes your 
home. [9]
杙 杢
 
295 
forehead
 額 
 As Miss Manners will be the ﬁ rst to tell you, out of respect, one 
does not look straight into the eyes of one's guests, but focus 
on the top button of their collar. Here, however, you are told to 
look above the eyes to the forehead of your guest. [18]
枉 枠
 
296 
summer
 夏 
 In the summer, fatigued by the heat, your head hangs down 
nearly as far as your walking legs, or rather, your “dragging legs.” 

lesson 14 | 123
Note how the walking legs (instead of “animal legs”) are the 
only thing that distinguishes this character from that for page 
(frame 60). [10]
杣 杤 杯 杲
 
297 
dispose
 処 
 Both the stretching out of the walking legs and the little bit of 
wind tucked in on the right suggest using one’s legs to kick 
something out of the way, or dispose of it. [5]
枡 枢 枦 枩 枯
 
298 
twig
 条 
 Geppetto made walking legs for his little Pinocchio from two 
twigs of a tree, giving him a set of “twiggy” shanks. [7]
枳 枴 架 枷 枸 枹 枻
 
299 
fall
 落 
 When water falls, it splishes and splashes; when ﬂ ower petals 
fall, they ﬂ oat gently in the breeze. To each thing its own way of 
falling. [12]
柄 柎 柘
Lesson 14
We may now go a step further in our streamlining, this time in the stroke-order 
of the kanji. From here on in, only the order in which the composite primitive 
elements are written will be indicated; if you are not sure of the writing of any 
of the particulars in a given character, you will have to hunt it down yourself. 
Index ii should help. New primitives and unusual writings will be spelled out 

124 | remembering the kanji 1
as before, however. At any rate, you should always count the strokes of the 
character when you learn it, and check your results against the number given in 
square brackets in each frame.
Th e next group of primitives, around which this lesson is designed, have to 
do with lids and headgear.
 
*  
crown
 冖 
 Th is pictograph of a simple crown is distinguished from the 
roof only by the absence of the chimney (the ﬁ rst drop at the 
top). It can be used for all the principal connotations of the 
word crown. We will meet the full character from which this 
element is derived later on, in frame 304. [2]
柚 柝
 
300 
superﬂ uous
 冗 
 Picture a weather vane beneath a regal crown, spinning round 
and round. It is not only superﬂ uous but makes a perfect ass 
out of the one who wears it. [4]
柞 柢
 
301 
army
 軍 
 Th e crowned vehicle depicted here is a “chariot,” symbol of an 
army. [9]
柯 柱
*  Used as a primitive this kanji means only chariot.
 
302 
radiance
 輝 
 Take advantage of the ﬁ rst syllable of the key word to think of 
the ray of light to the left . Now add the glittering chariot that is 
emitting those rays and you have radiance. [15]
柳 柴

lesson 14 | 125
 
303 
carry
 運 
 A row of “sweet” chariots “swinging low” to our roads is a sure 
sign that the Lord is “comin’ for to carry” someone home. [12]
柵 査
 
304 
crown
 冠 
 By having the crown pass from one age to the next, a people 
keeps itself glued to its beginnings. [9]
柾 柿 栁
 
305 
dream
 夢 
 To have a dream aft er going to bed is really the crown to a per-
fect evening. Th e ﬂ ower petals over the eyes (instead of the “sand” 
that Westerners are used to ﬁ nding there when they awake in 
the morning) only conﬁ rms the image of a pleasant dream sug-
gested by the rest of this rather complex kanji. [13]
忻 桍 桎 桐
 
*  
top hat
 亠 
 Th e broad rim and tall top of the top hat is pictured graphically 
here in these two simple strokes.
 At this point, by the way, you can revert back to frame 6. If 
you have had any trouble with that character, you now have the 
requisite elements to make a story: Six suggests the number of 
spider’s legs; just set a tall silk top hat on the crawling creature 
and you have your character. [2]
栃 栂
 
*  
whirlwind
 肛 
 A formal high silk top hat resting atop a weather vane represents 
a whirlwind. To keep it distinct from the primitive for wind, try 
to picture the vortex, or tornado-like spinning movement, of a 
whirlwind. Th e next frame should help. [4]

126 | remembering the kanji 1
栄 栓 栔
 
306 
pit
 坑 
 A whirlwind begins to dig its way into the soil like a drill until it 
makes a deep pit. [7]
棚 棟
 
307 
tall
 高 
 Recalling an image from frame 183, ﬁ rst see the mouth under 
the extraterrestrial’s glass hood, and then the mouth under the 
top hat of one of his mates who has tried on the strange earth-
ling’s headgear only to ﬁ nd that it makes him look much, much 
taller than everyone else. [10]
桁 桂 桃
*  As a primitive, this character keeps its sense of tall and its 
position at the top of other primitives, but its writing is abbre-
viated to the ﬁ rst 5 strokes: 胆.
 
308 
receive
 享 
 Tall children receive more attention. Tall children grow up to 
make better wide receivers. Take your pick, depending on 
whether you prefer child psychology or American football. At 
any rate, be sure you have some particular tall child in mind, 
someone who really was outstanding and always attracting 
attention, because he or she will come in handy in the next two 
frames. [8]
栖 栗
 
309 
cram school
 塾 
 Cram schools are aft er-hours educational institutions where 
kids can do concentrated preparing for their coming entrance 
examinations or drill what they missed during regular class 
hours. Th e exceptions are the tall children who are out on the 

lesson 14 | 127
school grounds practicing sports, and the fat ones who are out 
there burning oﬀ  calories. So this character depicts those who 
do not go to the cram schools, rather than those who do. [14]
栞 校 栢
 
310 
mellow
 熟 
 Th e tall and fat children from the last frame are here cast into 
a cauldron over an oven ﬂ ame until they have suﬃ  ciently mel-
lowed that they can return to the normal life of a student. [15]
柤 柧 柩
 
311 
pavilion
 亭 
 Th ink of all the pavilions at County Fairs or World Expos 
you have wandered into or seen advertised in the media, and 
you will no doubt see rising up among them the towering tall 
crowned nail (the crown being a revolving restaurant)—that 
architectural monstrosity that has become a symbol of science 
and technology at such events. [9]
栲 栴 核
 
312 
capital
 京 
 Th ink of some tall, domed capital building with swarms of little 
folk gathered around its base, probably demonstrating for their 
government’s attention. [8]
根 格
 
313 
refreshing
 涼 
 Since few things are as refreshing on a warm day as a cool 
shower (the water), here we picture a capital building treating 
itself to one, and in full view of everyone. [11]
栽 桀

128 | remembering the kanji 1
 
314 
scenery
 景 
 Scenery is depicted as a sun rising over a capital, which is as 
close as some city dwellers get to natural scenery for years at a 
time! [12]
棋 棍
 
315 
whale
 鯨 
 Th e whale swallows a whole school of ﬁ sh, who turn their new 
abode into a proper little ﬁ sh-capital. [19]
棏 棒
 
*  
lidded crock
 馨 
 Soil over the mouth of a container gives us a piece of clay pot-
tery with its lid. Behold the lidded crock. [6]
棔 棕
 
316 
cottage
 舎 
 A lidded crock with an umbrella overhead gives us a mixture of 
the modern and the nostalgic in this design for a cottage. [8]
棗 棘
 
317 
circumference
 周 
 Look more closely at your lidded crock and you will see little 
ruler marks along its bottom edge. Th is is so you can use it to 
calculate the circumference of your motorcycle helmet: just 
begin at a ﬁ xed point and turn the lidded crock around and 
around, keeping it ﬂ ush against the side of the helmet, until you 
come back to your starting point. If you kept track of how many 
turns and part-turns your lidded crock made, you now know the 
circumference. [8]
桑 桒 桓 桔

lesson 14 | 129
*  As a primitive, this character can take the added signiﬁ cance 
of a lap.
 
318 
week
 週 
 Picture a circular road with 7 markers on it, one for each day of 
the week. When you have walked one complete lap on this road, 
you shall have completed one week. [11]
桙 桜
 
319 
gentleman
 士 
 Th e shape of this kanji, slightly diﬀ ering from that for soil by 
virtue of its shorter ﬁ nal stroke, hints at a broad-shouldered, 
slender-waisted warrior standing at attention. When feudalism 
collapsed, these warriors became Japan’s gentlemen. [3]
桝 桟 档
*  Th e primitive meaning reverts to the more colorful image of 
the samurai, Japan’s warrior class.
 
320 
good luck
 吉 
 Here we see a samurai standing on a street with an open mouth, 
which people walk up to and look down deep inside of for good 
luck. [6]
桧 桴
*  As a primitive, we shall take this shape to mean an aerosol 
can, from the mouth and the very tightly-ﬁ tting lid (note how 
it diﬀ ers here from the lidded crock).
 
321 
robust
 壮 
 Robust is seen as a turtle turned samurai. [6]
桶 桷

130 | remembering the kanji 1
 
322 
villa
 荘 
 Th e villa pictured here is ﬁ lled with exotic ﬂ owers at every turn, 
and has a pair of turtle-samurai standing before its gates. [9]
桾 桿 梁
 
323 
sell
 売 
 A samurai, out of a job, is going door-to-door selling little 
windup crowns with human legs that run around on the ﬂ oor 
looking like headless monarchs. [7]
梃 梅 梍
Lesson 15
In this lesson we consider a group of primitives associated one way or 
another with schooling. Be sure to give your stories enough time to come to life 
in imagination, because your images will need a lot more vividness than these 
brief “plots” allow for. You know that you are not giving enough time when 
you ﬁ nd yourself memorizing deﬁ nitions rather than playing with images.
 
*  
schoolhouse
 股 
 Here we see a little red schoolhouse with the 3 dots on the roof. 
As you write it in the following frames, you should acquire a 
“feel” for the way the ﬁ rst two short strokes move left  to right, 
and the third one right to left . Write it twice now, saying to 
yourself the ﬁ rst time as you write the ﬁ rst 3 strokes, “In the 
schoolhouse we learn our a-b-cs,” and the second time, “In the 
schoolhouse we learn our 1-2-3s.” [5]
梏 梓 梔 梗 梛

lesson 15 | 131
 
324 
study
 学 
 Th e child in the little red schoolhouse is there for one reason 
only: to study. Anyone who has gone through the schooling 
system knows well enough that study is one thing and learning 
quite another again. In the kanji, too, the character for learning 
(frame 574) has nothing to do with the schoolhouse. [8]
條 梟
 
325 
memorize
 覚 
 Th e idea of memorizing things is easily related to the school-
house; and since we have been at it for more than a hundred 
pages in this book, the idea that memorizing involves seeing 
things that are not really there should make it easy to put the 
two elements together. [12]
梠 梢
 
326 
ﬂ ourish
 栄 
 Th e botanical connotations of the word ﬂ ourish (to bud and 
burst into bloom, much as a tree does) are part of the ideal of 
the schoolhouse as well. [9]
梦 梧
 
*  
brush
 聿 
 Th is primitive element, not itself a kanji, is a pictograph of a 
writing brush. Let the ﬁ rst 3 strokes represent the hairs at the 
tip of the brush, and the following two strokes the thumb and 
foreﬁ nger that guide it when you write. Note how the long ver-
tical stroke, cutting through everything, is drawn last. Th is is 
standard procedure when you have such a stroke running the 
length of a character. However, as we saw in the case of cow, 
when this primitive appears on top of another primitive, its 
“tail” is cut oﬀ , giving us 肢. [6]
梨 梭 梯 械 梱 梳

132 | remembering the kanji 1
 
327 
write
 書 
 Th e sage talks rapidly with his tongue wagging in his mouth, 
while the brush of the scribe runs apace to write down the mas-
ter’s words. [10]
梵 梶 梹 梺 梼 棄 棊
 
328 
haven
 津 
 Seeing the tiny boats of poor mortals tossed about in a stormy 
sea like so many corks, the All-Merciful took its brush and drew 
little inlets of water where the hapless creatures might seek 
shelter. And so it is that we have havens. [9]
桄 框
 
*  
taskmaster
 攵 
 First ﬁ nd the long rod (the ﬁ rst stroke), held in the hand of 
someone seated (the next 3 strokes, not unlike the pictograph 
for woman, but quite diﬀ erent from that for walking legs intro-
duced in Lesson 13). Th e only thing left  to do is conjure up the 
memory of some taskmaster (or taskmistress) from your past 
whom you will “never forget.” [4]
棠 棡 棣 棧
 
329 
breed
 牧 
 When it is time to breed new cattle, the bull is usually willing 
but the cow is oft en not. Th us the taskmaster to the right forces 
the cow into a compromising position, so to speak, so that she 
and her mate can breed. [8]
森 棯
 
330 
aggression
 攻 
 Th e special craft  of successful taskmasters is their ability to 
remain constantly on the aggressive, never allowing their 
underlings a moment to ponder a counter-aggression. [7]

lesson 15 | 133
棲 棹
 
331 
failure
 敗 
 Th e taskmaster is acknowledging the failure of a clam to make 
the grade in some marine school or other. [11]
椀 椁
 
332 
a sheet of
 枚 
 English counts thin, ﬂ at objects, like bed linen and paper, in 
sheets. Th e kanji does this with a taskmaster whipping a tree 
into producing sheets against its will. [8]
椋 椌
 
333 
happenstance
 故 
 Call it fate or providence or plain old Lady Luck, happenstance 
is the oldest taskmaster we know. It nearly always has its way. [9]
検 椡
 
334 
awe
 敬 
 Standing in awe of someone, you get self-conscious and may 
try to speak in ﬂ owery phrases out of veneration or fear. Th e 
task master at the right is drilling you in the practice of your 
“honoriﬁ cs.” [12]
椹 椽 椿
 
335 
say
 言 
 Of all the things we can do with our mouth, speech requires 
the greatest distinctness and clarity. Hence the kanji for say has 
four little sound-waves, to show the complexity of the task. [7]
楊 楓 楔 楕 楙 楚 楜

134 | remembering the kanji 1
*  Th is kanji, which appears oft en as a primitive, can mean say-
ing, speech, or words, depending on which is most useful.
 
336 
admonish
 警 
 Here you have a perfect example of how an apparently impos-
sible snarl of strokes becomes a snap to learn once you know 
its elements. Th e idea of being admonished for something 
already sets up a superior-inferior relationship between you 
and the person you are supposed to stand in awe of. While you 
are restricted to answering in honoriﬁ cs, the superior can use 
straightforward and ordinary words. [19]
楝 楞
 
337 
plot
 計 
 Words and a meter’s needle combine to form the sense of plot: 
to talk over plans and to calculate a course of action. [9]
楠 楡
 
338 
prison
 獄 
 Although we did not make note of it at the time, the kanji for 
dog is also a low-grade term for a spy. And later (frame 1414) 
we will meet another association of criminals with dogs. Th e 
prison here depicts a pack of wild dogs (the long-timers and 
hardened criminals) into which the poor little chihuahua (ﬁ rst-
oﬀ ender) has been cast. Th e only thing he has to protect himself 
against the pack are his shrill and frightened words. [14]
楢 楨 楪
 
339 
revise
 訂 
 Aft er completing the ﬁ rst draft , you revise it by nailing down 
your words and “hammering” them into shape. [9]
楫 業

lesson 15 | 135
 
340 
chastise
 討 
 Words spoken to chastise us stick to us like glue in a way no 
other words can. [10]
楮 楯
 
341 
instruction
 訓 
 Th e personalism connoted by the word instruction, as opposed 
to “teaching” or “discipline,” suits the picture here of words guid-
ing one’s progress like the gentle ﬂ owing of a stream. Even the 
etymology of the word instruction suggests the sense of “pour-
ing into”. [10]
楳 楴
 
342 
imperial edict
 詔 
 Th e imperial edict, spoken with the force of unquestionable 
law, is made up of words intended to seduce the masses—be it 
through fear or respect—to follow obediently. [12]
極 楷
 
343 
packed
 詰 
 A piece of writing that is pregnant with meaning and needs to 
be reread several times to be understood we refer to colloqui-
ally as “packed.” Th e character sees the words as sealed tightly 
inside an aerosol can. [13]
楸 楹
 
344 
tale
 話 
 Th at the words of the tongue should come to mean a tale is clear 
from the etymology: a tale is something “talked,” not something 
read from a book. [13]
楼 楽

136 | remembering the kanji 1
 
345 
recitation
 詠 
 Listening to the words of poets reciting their poetry is like 
being transported for a moment into eternity where the rules of 
everyday life have been suspended. [12]
楾 榁
 
346 
poem
 詩 
 Since silence is treasured so highly at a Buddhist temple the 
words spoken there must be well chosen. Perhaps this is why 
the records of the monks oft en read to us like poems. Before 
going on, back up a frame and make sure you have kept poem 
and recitation distinct in your mind. [13]
概 榊
 
347 
word
 語 
 Whereas the character for say focused on the actual talking, the 
kanji for words stresses the fact that although it is I who say 
them, the words of a language are not my own. You can see 
the clear distinction between I and words just by looking at the 
kanji. [14]
榎 榑
 
348 
read
 読 
 In the age of advertising, most words we read are out to sell 
some product or point of view. [14]
榔 榕
 
349 
tune
 調 
 A complete tune is composed not only of a succession of notes 
but also of one lap of the words that go with it. [15]
榘 榛

lesson 16 | 137
 
350 
discuss
 談 
 In almost every attempt to discuss an issue, the fervor of one’s 
convictions comes to the surface and creates an inﬂ ammation 
of words (if you will, the “cuss” in discuss). [15]
榜 榠
 
351 
consent
 諾 
 Th e words of the young do not have legal validity unless backed 
up by “parental consent.” [15]
榧 榮
 
352 
rebuke
 諭 
 Th e stern tone of a rebuke is seen here in the image of words 
spoken at a meeting of butchers (see frame 289) waving their 
choppers at one another and “cutting one another down” as 
only butchers can. [16]
榱 榲
Lesson 16
In this short lesson of 17 characters we come to an interesting cluster of prim-
itive elements—unique among all those we have met or will meet throughout 
this book—built up step by step from one element. Be sure to study this lesson 
as a unit in order to appreciate the similarities and diﬀ erences of the various 
elements, which will appear frequently later on.
 
*  
arrow
 弋 
 Here we see a pictograph of a long and slightly warped arrow. By 
extending the short ﬁ nal stroke in both directions, you should 

138 | remembering the kanji 1
see the arrowhead without any diﬃ  culty. Th e hook at the bot-
tom represents the feathers at the butt end. When it serves as 
a semi-enclosure for other primitives, the ﬁ rst stroke is drawn 
longer, as we shall see in the following frames. [3]
榴 榻 榾
 
353 
style
 式 
 Take style in its sense of some fashion design or model. Th en let 
the element arrow and craft  stand for the well-known style of 
shirts known as “Arrow shirts” because of the little arrow sewn 
on each one. [6]
榿 槁 槃
 
354 
test
 試 
 When a manufacturer produces a new style for the market, the 
ﬁ rst thing that is done is to run a test on consumers, asking 
them to speak their opinions frankly about the product. Never 
mind the anachronism (the kanji was there well before our cap-
italistic market system) if it helps you remember. [13]
槎 槐
 
*  
quiver
 肥 
 Th is primitive is easy to remember as depicting something 
used to bring all one’s arrows together into one handy place: the 
quiver. [4]
槓 様 槙 槝
 
355 
ii (two)
 弐 
 We use the Roman numeral ii here to stress that this kanji is an 
older form of the kanji for two. Th ink of two arrows in a quiver, 
standing up like the numeral ii. [6]
槞 槢 槧 槨 槫 槭

lesson 16 | 139
 
*  
ﬁ esta
 戈 
 Th e picture in this primitive is what we may call a “tassled 
arrow.” A decorative tassle is strung on the shaft  of an arrow to 
indicate that it is no longer a weapon but a symbol of a ﬁ esta. 
As before, the ﬁ rst stroke is extended when it serves as a semi-
enclosure. [4]
濡 濤 濫 濬
 
356 
range
 域 
 From its original meaning of a deﬁ ned area or zone, a range has 
also come to mean a grazing land where cowboys roam and do 
whatever it is they do with cows. When the herds have all been 
driven to market, there is a great homecoming ﬁ esta like that 
pictured here. As soon as the cowboys come home, home on the 
range, the ﬁ rst thing they do is kiss the ground (the mouth on 
the ﬂ oor), and then get on with the ﬁ esta. [11]
棺 槲 槹 槻 槽
 
357 
burglar
 賊 
 From a burglar’s point of view, a ﬁ esta is an occasion to take out 
the old lockpicking needle and break into the unattended safe 
ﬁ lled with the family shells (the old form of money, as we saw in 
frames 80 and 194). [13]
槿 樀 樁 樂
 
*  
Th anksgiving
 肩 
 I choose the word Th anksgiving as only one possible way of 
making this primitive more concrete. Th e sense, as its compos-
ite primitives make clear, is of a “land ﬁ esta,” or a harvest feast. 
If you choose a word of your own, make sure it does not conﬂ ict 
with ﬁ esta. [6]
樅 樊 樋 樌 樒 樓

140 | remembering the kanji 1
 
358 
plantation
 栽 
 On a fruit plantation it is the trees that one is particularly grate-
ful for at the time of Th anksgiving. Imagine yourself inviting a 
few representative trees from the ﬁ elds and orchards to join you 
around the table to give thanks. [10]
樔 樗 標
 
359 
load
 載 
 One loads bales on a wagon or cart in preparation for the great 
Hay Ride that follows the Th anksgiving dinner each year. [13]
樣 権 横
 
*  
parade
 戊 
 Note ﬁ rst the order of the writing. Th e ﬁ rst stroke, added to 
ﬁ esta, gives us a full-ﬂ edged enclosure, because of which we 
should always think of this as a parade of something or other, 
namely whatever is inside the enclosure. [5]
樛 樞 樟 模 樢
 
360 
overgrown
 茂 
 Th e sense of the key word overgrown is of something grow-
ing luxuriously, though not necessarily in excess—in this case a 
whole parade of weeds (outcaste ﬂ owers). By way of exception, 
the ﬂ owers take their normal place over the enclosure. [8]
樫 樮
 
361 
turn into
 成 
 Let the phrase “turn into” suggest some sort of a magical change. 
What happens here is that the parade marching down main 
street turns into a dagger-throwing bout between competing 
bands. Note how only one stroke has to be added to make the 
change. [6]

lesson 16 | 141
樰 樵 樶 樸 樹 樺
 
362 
castle
 城 
 In this frame, we see a mound of dirt that is being turned into 
a castle (the way you may have done as a child playing on the 
beach). [9]
樽 橄
 
363 
sincerity
 誠 
 Th e sure sign of sincerity is that one’s mere words are turned 
into deeds. [13]
橆 橇
 
*  
march
 戌 
 As distinct from the parade, the march points to a formal dem-
onstration, whose emotions are generally a far cry from the 
happy spirit of the parade. Th e inclusion of the one gives the 
sense of the singlemindedness and unity of the group joined in 
the march. As was the case with parade, the primitive inside the 
enclosure indicates who or what is marching. [6]
橈 橋 橘 橙 機 橡
 
364 
intimidate
 威 
 Here we see a march of women demonstrating on behalf of 
equal rights, something extremely intimidating to the male 
chauvinist population. [9]
橢 橦 橫
 
365 
destroy
 滅 
 Picture a march of ﬂ ames demonstrating against the Fire Depart-
ment for their right to destroy, but being doused with water by 
the police riot squads. [13]

142 | remembering the kanji 1
橲 橳 橸 橾
 
366 
dwindle
 減 
 A group of unquenchable mouths sets out on a march across 
the country, drinking water wherever they can ﬁ nd it until 
the water supply has dwindled to a trickle, triggering a national 
disaster. [12]
槊 構 槌 槍
 
*  
ﬂ oat
 肪 
 Th e ﬂ oats that are such an important part of a ﬁ esta are shown 
here by the addition of the two extra horizontal strokes, which 
you may take as a quasi-pictographic representation of the plat-
form structure of a ﬂ oat. [6]
櫛 櫞 櫟 櫢 櫤 櫨
 
367 
scaﬀ old
 桟 
 Prior to the use of metal, trees were once cut down and bound 
together for use as scaﬀ olding material. In the case of the kanji 
shown here, what is being constructed is not a skyscraper but a 
simple ﬂ oat. [10]
橿 檀
 
368 
coin
 銭 
 Th ose special gold-colored tokens minted each year for the 
Mardi Gras and thrown into the crowds from people on the 
ﬂ oats give us the kanji for coins. [14]
檄 檍

lesson 17 | 143
 
369 
shallow
 浅 
 An entourage of ﬂ oats going from one town to the next must 
always seek a shallow place to cross the water. Try to picture 
what happens if they don’t. [9]
檎 檐
Lesson 17
Because of the rather special character of that last group of primitives (7 in 
all), it might be a good idea not to rush too quickly into this lesson until you are 
sure you have them all learned and ﬁ tted out with good images. Now we will 
take up another set of primitives built up from a common base, though fewer in 
number and lacking the similarity of meaning we saw in the last lesson.
 
370 
stop
 止 
 Th e character for stop is easiest to learn as a pictograph, though 
you have to take a moment to see it. Take it as a rather crude 
drawing of a footprint: the ﬁ rst 3 strokes represent the front of 
the foot and the last the heel. Th e big toe (stroke 2 sticking out 
to the right) on the right indicates that this is a left  foot. [4]
檗 檜 檠 檢
*  Although the meaning of stop will be retained, we will return 
oft en to the pictographic meaning of footprint.
 
371 
walk
 歩 
 Footprints that follow one another a few at a time indicate walk-
ing. [8]
檣 檪 檬 檮 檳 檸 檻 櫁

144 | remembering the kanji 1
 
372 
ford
 渉 
 To ford a body of water means to walk across it. [11]
櫂 櫃 櫑
 
373 
repeatedly
 頻 
 Th e image of something occurring repeatedly, over and over 
again, is of having one’s head walked on. [17]
櫓 櫚
 
374 
agreement
 肯 
 Seeing footprints on someone’s ﬂ esh indicates a rather brutal 
way of having secured that person’s agreement. [8]
櫪 櫺
 
375 
undertake
 企 
 To undertake a project is to take some idea ﬂ oating in the air 
and stop it so that it can be brought down to earth and become 
a reality. Here we see some undertaking made to stop under a 
beach umbrella. [6]
櫻 欄 欅 權 欒 欖
 
376 
curriculum
 歴 
 Th at same grove of trees we met in frame 213 shows up here in 
the character for curriculum (in the sense of a record of one’s 
life or academic achievements, the curriculum vitae). Instead 
of the grove making its way slowly through the surface of the 
cliﬀ  as before, here we see it stopped, much the same as a cur-
riculum vitae calls a halt to the calendar and talks only about 
the past. [14]
欝 欟 欠

lesson 17 | 145
 
377 
warrior
 武 
 With a quiver of arrows set on one’s back, the goal of the war-
rior depicted here is not to attack but merely to stop the attack 
of others: the oldest excuse in history! [8]
次 欣 欧 欲 欷 欸 欹 欺
 
378 
levy
 賦 
 A certain portion of shells (money) is collected by the warrior 
from the local villages as he passes through to defray the costs 
of keeping the land safe, and this is called a levy. [15]
欽 款
 
379 
correct
 正 
 “A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step,” says 
the Chinese proverb. Here we see one footprint, complement-
ing that proverb with the sound advice that if the ﬁ rst step 
is not made correctly, the whole point of the journey will be 
forfeited. Th is is the ideal that teachers are supposed to have in 
correcting their students, and parents in correcting their chil-
dren. [5]
歃 歇 歉 歌 歎
 
380 
evidence
 証 
 Words that testify to the correctness of some fact are classiﬁ ed as 
evidence. (Here we see a good example of how the more com-
mon primitive element takes the “strong” position to the left , 
even though it has more strokes.) [12]
歐 歓
 
381 
politics
 政 
 To the many deﬁ nitions for politics that already exist, this char-
acter oﬀ ers yet another: correct taskmastering. Th ink about what 

146 | remembering the kanji 1
the primitives tell us. On the one hand, we see the pessimistic 
wisdom that politics has to do with taskmastering, maneuver-
ing people with or without their will. And on the other, we see 
the campaign assurances that this duty can be performed cor-
rectly if only the right candidate is given a chance. [9]
歔 歙
 
*  
mending
 肬 
 Th is primitive diﬀ ers from the kanji for correct only by the 
movement added to the last two strokes, the “-ing” of mending 
if you will. But take a more concrete sense, like mending holes 
in socks. [5]
歛 歟 歡 止 正
 
382 
determine
 定 
 Determination, in the sense of settling on a certain course of 
action, is likened here to mending one’s house. [8]
此 武
 
383 
lock
 錠 
 Metal of itself doesn’t lock. It needs to be so determined by a 
locksmith. Now make a concrete image of that. [16]
歩 歪
 
384 
run
 走 
 Running, we are told here, mends the soil. Observe in the fol-
lowing frames how this kanji can embrace other elements from 
below, much the same way as the element for road does. Note, 
too, that in order to do this, the ﬁ nal stroke needs to be length-
ened. [7]
歯 歳

lesson 17 | 147
 
385 
transcend
 超 
 When one is running aft er something, the goal that seduces one 
is said to transcend the seeker. [12]
歴 歸
 
386 
proceed
 赴 
 In proceeding to a new city or a new job, something in you runs 
ahead with excitement, and something else holds you back, like 
a divining rod built into your psyche warning you to check 
things out carefully before rushing in too wildly. [9]
歹 死
 
387 
surpass
 越 
 Here we see two parades in competition, each trying to surpass 
the other by running at high speed from one town to the next. 
Note the little “hook” at the end of the ﬁ rst stroke of the element 
for parade. Th is is the only time it appears like this in the kanji 
treated in this book. [12]
歿 殀
 
388 
just so
 是 
 In this kanji we are shown someone spending an entire day at 
mending one stocking, because they want the job done “just so.” 
Be sure to make a clear image of a ﬁ nicky old fusspot to make 
the abstract idea as concrete as possible. [9]
殃 殄
 
389 
topic
 題 
 In many kinds of research, one can ﬁ nd information on a given 
topic only if the headings are prepared just so. [18]
殆 殉

148 | remembering the kanji 1
 
390 
dike
 堤 
 A dike is a successful bit of engineering only if the amount of 
earth piled up is measured just so for the height and pressure of 
the water it is meant to contain. [12]
殊 残
 
*  
stretch
 廴 
 Th e primitive meaning to stretch might at ﬁ rst seem similar 
to that for road. Take a moment to study it more carefully and 
you will see the diﬀ erence. Like road, this character holds other 
primitives above its sweeping ﬁ nal stroke. [3]
殍 殕 殖
 
391 
build
 建 
 To construct a building, you ﬁ rst draw a set of plans (the writ-
ing brush) and then s-t-r-e-t-c-h your drawing out to scale in 
reality. [9]
殘 殞
 
392 
prolong
 延 
 Th is character is a kind of pictographic image of how prolong-
ing is a clever way of stopping things by trying to stretch them 
out a little bit at a time (the extra drop at the top of stop). Be sure 
to get a concrete image of this process, by imagining yourself 
prolonging something you can really, physically, stretch. [8]
殤 殪
 
393 
nativity
 誕 
 Th e key word of course calls to mind the feast of Christmas. 
As the famous poem at the start of St. John’s gospel tells us, the 
nativity we celebrate at Christmas had its origins at the very 
start of time and governs all of human history: it represents the 
prolongation of the eternal Word in time and space. [15]

lesson 18 | 149
殫 殯
 
*  
zoo
 疋 
 To avoid confusion with the other animals that will be showing 
up, this primitive will signify a zoo. Except for the downward 
hook at the end of the ﬁ rst stroke, this element is indistinguish-
able from mending. Perhaps by now you have developed a quick 
eye for such details. If not now, you will before long. [5]
殱 殲 殳 殴 段
 
394 
cornerstone
 礎 
 Th is character depicts a cornerstone as a stone set at the end of 
a wildlife preserve (the “zoo in the grove”). [18]
殷 殺 殻
 
395 
bridegroom
 婿 
 What makes a man a bridegroom is obviously a woman and her 
dowry, here presented as a small zoo (animals were oft en used 
for this purpose in earlier societies) and a month away from it 
all (the “honeymoon”). [12]
殼 殿 毀
Lesson 18
The three groups of characters brought together in this rather long lesson 
are clustered around three sets of primitives dealing respectively with cloth and 
garments, weather, and postures.

150 | remembering the kanji 1
 
396 
garment
 衣 
 At the top we see the top hat, and at the bottom a pictographic 
representation of the folds of a garment. If you break the 
“4-fold” fold into 2 sets of 2 strokes, you will ﬁ nd it easier to 
remember. [6]
毅 毆 毋 母 毎 毒
*  Used as a primitive, the additional meanings of cloak or scarf 
will come in handy. What has to be noted particularly are the 
changes in shape the kanji can undergo when it becomes an 
element in other kanji. In fact, it is the most volatile of all the 
kanji we shall treat, and for that reason deserves special atten-
tion here.
   When it appears to the left , it looks like this: 衤, and we shall 
take it to mean cloak. At the bottom, when attached to the 
stroke immediately above it, the ﬁ rst two strokes (the top hat) 
are omitted, giving us: 背, which we shall take to mean a scarf. 
   On rare occasions, the element can be torn right across the 
middle, with the ﬁ rst 2 strokes appearing at the top and the 
last 4 at the bottom of another primitive or cluster of primi-
tives: 胎, in which cases we shall speak of a top hat and scarf. 
   And ﬁ nally, of course, it can keep its original kanji shape, 
along with its original meaning of garment in general.
   Note that when any of the above forms have something 
beneath them (as in frame 402), the third from ﬁ nal stroke is 
“unhooked,” like this: 胖.
 
397 
tailor
 裁 
 You might think here of garments that have been specially 
tailored for Th anks giving celebrations to look like traditional 
Pilgrim garb. [12]
毓 比 毖 毘 毛
 
398 
attire
 装 
 Th e character for attire can be remembered as a picture of what 
we may call a “turtle-samurai” sweater. At the top we see the 
turtle-samurai and at the bottom the element for garment. [12]

lesson 18 | 151
毟 毫 毬
 
399 
back
 裏 
 An innocent looking top hat and scarf lying there in front of 
you, turned over, reveal a hidden computer sewn into the back 
of each—obviously the tools of a master spy. Such experiences 
teach one always to have a look at the back side of things. [13]
毯 毳 氈
 
400 
demolition
 壊 
 Th e right half of this character shows a garment woven so ﬁ ne 
that it can pass through the eye of a needle, ﬁ ttingly draped 
around the slithering, ethereal form of a poltergeist. In this 
frame, our eerie visitor brushes its robes against a nearby block 
of apartments and completely demolishes them, razing them to 
the ground. [16]
氏 民 氓
 
401 
pathetic
 哀 
 A drunken sod in a tattered top hat and soiled silk scarf with 
a giant mouth guzzling something or other gives us a pathetic 
character role in which W. C. Fields might ﬁ nd himself right at 
home. [9]
气 気 氛
 
402 
distant
 遠 
 A distant ﬁ gure on the road is such a blur it looks like a lidded 
crock wearing a silk scarf. [13]
氣 氤 水

152 | remembering the kanji 1
 
403 
monkey
 猿 
 Th is clever little monkey has captured an entire pack of wild 
dogs, locked them inside a lidded crock, and wrapped the whole 
thing up in a silk scarf to present to the dogcatcher. [13]
氷 永 氾
 
404 
ﬁ rst time
 初 
 Th e primitives here take care of themselves: cloak and dagger. 
What I leave to you is to decide on an appropriate connotation 
for “ﬁ rst time” to take advantage of them. [7]
氿汀 汁 求 汊 汋
 
*  
towel
 巾 
 Th e basic meaning of this primitive is a bolt of cloth, from 
which we derive the meaning of a towel. [3]
汎 汏
 
405 
linen
 布 
 Th e maid, towels by her side, distributes the linen. [5]
汐 汕 汗
 
406 
sail
 帆 
 A sail made of a towel makes a mediocre vessel. [6]
汜 汚
 
407 
hanging scroll
 幅 
 A towel owned by the wealthiest tycoon in the world is made 
into a hanging scroll aft er his death and auctioned oﬀ  to the 
highest bidder. [12]

lesson 18 | 153
汜 汝
 
408 
cap
 帽 
 Because of the risk involved (of getting the sun in one’s eyes), 
one puts together a makeshift  cap out of a dirty old towel. [12]
汞 江 池
 
409 
curtain
 幕 
 A dirty towel draped over the entrance to the old graveyard is 
painted to look like the curtain of death that leads to the other 
world. [13]
汢 汨
 
410 
canopy
 幌 
 A large towel stretched overhead with only a few of the sun’s 
rays breaking through represents a canopy over one’s bed. [13]
濆 濔 濕
 
411 
brocade
 錦 
 A strip of white towel and some scraps of metal have the mak-
ings of a primitive kind of brocade. [16]
汪 汯 汰
 
412 
market
 市 
 Dressed in nothing but a bath towel and top hat, one sets oﬀ  to 
the marketplace in search of a bargain or two. [5]
汲 汳 決 汽 汾

154 | remembering the kanji 1
 
413 
elder sister
 姉 
 Of all the women of the family, it is the elder sister who has the 
duty to go to market to do the shopping. [8]
沁 沂
 
414 
lungs
 肺 
 One is surprised, strolling through the market, to ﬁ nd among 
the meats hung out for sale a slab marked: lungs. [9]
沃 沆
 
*  
apron
 肭 
 Th e towel that has edges jagged like little crowns is the cook’s 
apron. [5]
沈 沌
 
415 
sash
 帯 
 Th e part of the apron where one ﬁ nds the buckle (represented 
pictorially by the ﬁ rst 5 strokes) is on the sash. [10]
沍 沐 沒 沓 沖 沙 沚
 
416 
stagnate
 滞 
 People that have been “sashed” to something (whether their 
mother’s apron strings or a particular job) for too long become 
like water that has stopped moving: they start to stagnate. [13]
沛 没
 
*  
belt
 冂 
 Th is primitive, clearly derived from that for towel, is always 
hung on another vertical stroke, and takes the meaning of a 
belt. [2]

lesson 18 | 155
沢 沫
 
417 
thorn
 刺 
 Th orns grow on a bush here that has wrapped itself around a 
tree like a belt, cutting into the poor tree like little sabers. [8]
沮 沱 河 沸 油 沺 治 沼
 
418 
system
 制 
 Th is kanji show a unique system for leading cows to the slaugh-
terer’s saber: one ties a belt about their waist and ﬁ xes that belt 
to an overhead cable, pulling the cow up into the air where it 
hangs suspended, helpless against the fate that awaits it. [8]
沽 沾 沿 況 泄 泅 泉 泊
 
419 
made in…
 製 
 A label indicating that a garment was made in u.s.a. or Taiwan 
or Japan is itself a symbol for the systematization of the garment 
industry. [14]
泌 泓
 
*  
rising cloud
 云 
 Th is primitive is meant to depict in graphic fashion a cloud of 
something rising upwards, like vapor or smoke or dust. [4]
法 泗 泙 泚
 
420 
revolve
 転 
 As the wheels of the car revolve, they kick up small rising clouds 
of dust and debris behind them. [11]
泛 泝

156 | remembering the kanji 1
 
421 
technique
 芸 
 Th e secret technique of making a rising cloud of smoke turn 
into a bouquet of ﬂ owers is shown here. [7]
泡 波
 
422 
rain
 雨 
 Th is kanji, also a primitive, is one of the clearest instances we 
have of a complex pictograph. Th e top line is the sky, the next 3 
strokes a pair of clouds, and the ﬁ nal 4 dots the rain collected 
there and waiting to fall. [8]
泣 泥 注 泪 泯 泰 泱 泳
*  As a primitive it can mean either rain or weather in general. 
Because it takes so much space, it usually has to be contracted 
into a crown by shortening the second and third strokes into 
a crown like this: 胙. 
 
423 
cloud
 雲 
 Here is the full character for cloud from which the primitive 
for a rising cloud derives. Clouds begin with vapors rising up in 
small clouds from the surface of the earth, and then gathering 
to make clouds that eventually dump their rain back on the 
earth. [12]
洄 洋
 
424 
cloudy weather
 曇 
 We refer to days when the sun is covered by the clouds as cloudy 
weather. [16]
洌 洒
 
425 
thunder
 雷 
 Th e full rumble and roar and terror of thunder is best felt not 
with your head tucked under your pillow safe in bed, but 

lesson 18 | 157
out in an open rice ﬁ eld where you can get the real feel of the 
weather. [13]
洗 洙
 
426 
frost
 霜 
 Th ink of frost as a cooperative venture, an inter-action of the 
malevolent forces of weather that sit around a conference table 
and ﬁ nally decide to allow a very light amount of moisture to 
fall just before a short and sudden freeze. [17]
洛 洞
 
*  
ice
 冫 
 Th e condensation of the three drops we have been using to 
mean water into two drops signals the solidifying of water into 
ice. Note that when this primitive appears to the left , it is writ-
ten like the last two strokes of the element for water, 冫, whereas 
under another primitive, it is written like the ﬁ rst two strokes of 
the water primitive: 胚. [2]
洟 津
 
427 
winter
 冬 
 Walking legs slipping on the ice are a sure sign of winter. [5]
洩 洪
 
428 
heavens
 天 
 Th is character is meant to be a pictograph of a great man, said 
to represent the Lord of the Heavens. (You may, of course, use 
the elements ceiling and St. Bernard instead.) [4]
洫 洲 洳 洵
*  Th e primitive can mean either the heaven of eternal bliss or 
the general term for sky, the heavens. Pay special attention to 

158 | remembering the kanji 1
the fact that in its primitive form the ﬁ rst stroke is written 
right to left , rather like the ﬁ rst stroke of thousand (frame 
40), rather than left  to right, giving us: 夭.
 
*  
angel
 喬 
 Th e sense of the primitive, angel, derives from the primitive for 
heavens replacing the top hat in the character for tall. [12]
洶 洸
 
429 
bridge
 橋 
 Th e bridge shown here is made of trees in their natural form, 
except that the trunks have been carved into the forms of angels, 
a sort of “Ponte degli Angeli.” [16]
活 洽
 
430 
attractive
 嬌 
 Associating a particularly attractive woman you know with an 
angel should be no problem. [15]
派 流
 
431 
stand up
 立 
 Th is picture of a vase standing up has its meaning extended to 
represent the general posture of anything standing up. [5]
浄 浅 浙 浚 浜
*  Used as a primitive, it can also mean vase. Using its kanji 
meaning, think of something standing up that is normally 
lying down, or something standing up in an unusual way.
 
432 
cry
 泣 
 One cries and cries until one is standing up knee-deep in water 
(or until one has a vase-full of water). [8]

lesson 18 | 159
浣 浤
 
433 
badge
 章 
 Try to imagine a club badge pinned to your lapel in the form of 
a mammoth sunﬂ ower protruding from a wee little vase. [11]
浦 浩
 
434 
vie
 競 
 Two teenagers are seen here standing up to one another, vying 
for the attention of their peers. [20]
浪 浬 浮
 
435 
sovereign
 帝 
 An uncommon, but not altogether unlikely picture of a reign-
ing sovereign has him standing up in his apron, presumably 
at the behest of his sovereign (she who is to be obeyed), who 
needs help with washing the dishes. [9]
浯 浴 海
 
436 
juvenile
 童 
 Th is frame shows up the image of a juvenile hacker standing on 
top of a computer, or rather jumping up and down on it, because 
it refused to come up with the right answer. [12]
浸 浹
 
437 
pupil
 瞳 
 Begin with the double meaning of the key word pupil: “student” 
and the “apple of one’s eye.” Now all you have to do is dwell 
on the phrase “juvenile of one’s eye” (the meaning here) until it 
provides you with an image. [17]

160 | remembering the kanji 1
涅 涇
 
438 
bell
 鐘 
 Th is bell is made of cheap metal, and so badly made that when 
you ring it, it lets out a noise like the “bellowing” of juveniles 
who aren’t getting their own way. [20]
消 涌
 
439 
make a deal
 商 
 See the peddler standing atop his motorcycle helmet as if it were 
a soapbox, hawking his wares to passersby. Th e legs and mouth 
represent the tools of the trade of making a deal any way you 
can. [11]
涎 涓 涕 涖
 
*  
antique
 啇 
 Th e primitive meaning antique, not itself a kanji, depicts a vase 
kept under a glass hood because it is very, very old. [11]
涙 涛 涜
 
440 
legitimate wife
 嫡 
 Th e phrase legitimate wife would have no meaning if there 
were not such things as “illegitimate wives,” taken because one’s 
legal woman has turned into an antique. Th e very oﬀ ense of the 
idea should help you remember the kanji. [14]
涬 涯
 
441 
suitable
 適 
 Can you imagine anything less suitable to do with one’s pre-
cious antiques than to display them in the middle of a crowded 
road-way? [14]

lesson 18 | 161
液 涵
 
442 
drip
 滴 
 Picture water dripping on what you thought were precious 
antiques, only to ﬁ nd that the artiﬁ cial aging painted on them is 
running! [14]
涸 涼
 
443 
enemy
 敵 
 Picture your most precious antique (it doesn’t matter how old 
it really is, so long as it is the oldest thing you own) being 
knocked over by your most unlikable taskmaster, and you 
have a good picture of how people make themselves enemies 
for life. [15]
淀 淅
 
444 
spoon
 匕 
 Th is character, a pictograph of a spoon, is easy enough to 
remember, provided you keep it distinct from that for seven, 
where the ﬁ rst stroke is written left  to right (the opposite of 
here) and cuts noticeably across the second. [2]
淆 淇
*  As a primitive, this kanji can take on the additional meaning 
of someone sitting on the ground, of which it can also be con-
sidered a pictograph. In this case, the second stroke does not 
cut through the ﬁ rst at all, as in the following frame.
 
445 
north
 北 
 Th e cold air from the north is so strong that we see two people 
sitting on the ground back to back, their arms interlocked so 
they don’t blow away. (Pay special attention to the drawing of 
the ﬁ rst 3 strokes.) [5]

162 | remembering the kanji 1
淋 淌 淏 淑 淒
 
446 
stature
 背 
 One’s stature is measured according to the “northern-most” 
part of the body. [9]
淕 淘
 
447 
compare
 比 
 With two spoons, one in each hand, you are comparing your 
mother’s cooking with your mother-in-law’s. [4]
淙 淞 淟
 
448 
descendants
 昆 
 By comparing apes with anthropoids, we not only discover the 
latter have descended from those progenitors educated in the 
higher branches, but that the very idea of seeing everything 
descended from everything else, one way or another, means 
that there is “nothing new under the sun.” [8]
淡 淤
 
449 
all
 皆 
 Th ink of the housewives in tv commercials “comparing the 
whiteness” of their laundry across the fence, a typical adver-
tisement for the popular detergent known as All. (If you don’t 
know the brand, surely you’ve heard the phrases “all-purpose 
detergent” or “all-temperature detergent.”) [9]
淦 淨
 
450 
mix
 混 
 Mixed marriages, this character suggests, water down the 
quality of one’s descendants—the oldest racial nonsense in the 
world! [11]

lesson 18 | 163
濟 濠
 
*  
siesta
 曷 
 Conjure up the classic portrait of the Latin siesta: a mucha-
cho sitting on the ground, propped up against some building, 
bound up from neck to ankles in a serape, one of those great, 
broad-rimmed mariachi hats pulled down over his face, and the 
noonday sun beating down overhead. Always use the complete 
image, never simply the general sense of siesta. [8]
淪 淫 淬
 
451 
thirst
 渇 
 As you pass by the muchacho taking the siesta, he cries out that 
he is thirsty and asks for something to drink. So you turn the 
water hose on him. [11]
淮 深
 
452 
audience
 謁 
 Imagine an audience with the emperor or the pope in which all 
those in attendance are sitting down, leaning against the wall, 
sleeping like our muchacho on siesta, as the honorable host 
delivers his speech. [15]
淲 淳
 
453 
brown
 褐 
 Th e color of the serape or cloak of our muchacho on siesta is a 
dull brown, the color this kanji indicates. [13]
淵 混
 
454 
hoarse
 喝 
 When the muchacho on siesta looks up and opens his mouth to 
talk, his voice is so hoarse you cannot understand him. [11]

164 | remembering the kanji 1
淸 淹
 
455 
delicious
 旨 
 Something is so downright delicious that one spends the entire 
day with a spoon in hand gobbling it up. [6]
淺 添
 
456 
fat
 脂 
 Th is kanji tells us that if you feed the ﬂ esh with too many deli-
cious things, it soon picks up a thick layer of fat. [10]
淼 清
 
457 
i (one)
 壱 
 Th e Roman numeral i—like that for ii we met earlier in frame 
355—is only rarely used now. In the midst of all the samurai, we 
notice one in particular sitting on the ground with a crown on 
his head, indicating that he is “number i” in the current rank-
ings. [7]
渇 済 渉
 
*  
reclining
 育 
 Th e picture is obvious: the ﬁ rst stroke represents the head, and 
the second the body of someone reclining. You may also use 
the synonyms lying or lying down. [2]
渤 渟
 
458 
every
 毎 
 “Behind every successful person lies a woman…,” who usually 
turns out to be one’s mama! [6]
渊 渋

lesson 18 | 165
 
459 
cleverness
 敏 
 Behind every successful taskmaster, the cleverness of a fox to 
outwit his charges. [10]
渓 渕
 
460 
plum
 梅 
 Behind every Jack Horner’s pie maker, a tree full of plums. [10]
渙 渚
 
461 
sea
 海 
 Behind every drop of water, a sea from which it originated. [9]
減 渝
 
462 
beg
 乞 
 See someone lying down in a public place with a hook in place 
of a hand, begging a morsel of rice or a few pence. [3]
渟 渠
 
463 
drought
 乾 
 In times of drought anything at all will do. Here we see the vic-
tims begging for just a little mist for relief. [11]
渡 渣
 
*  
double back
 肴 
 Either the idea of turning around and heading back during one’s 
travels, or of folding an object in half will do. Th e kanji depicts 
someone doubling back to the nearest inn to lie down and rest 
a weary pair of walking legs aft er a full day’s voyage. [9]
渦 渧 温

166 | remembering the kanji 1
 
464 
abdomen
 腹 
 If you double back (fold over) most animals—or people, for that 
matter—in the middle, the part of the body where the crease 
comes is the abdomen. [13]
渫 測
 
465 
duplicate
 複 
 In its original and etymologically transparent sense, to dupli-
cate something means to double it back with a fold, like the fold 
of a cloak. [14]
渭 渮
 
466 
lack
 欠 
 Th e pictograph hidden in this character is of someone yawn-
ing. Th e ﬁ rst stroke shows the head thrown back; the second, 
the arm bent at the elbow as the hand reaches up to cover the 
mouth; and the last two, the legs. Since yawning shows a lack of 
something (psychologically, interest; physiologically, sleep), the 
connection is plain to see. [4]
港 游 渹 渺
 *  When used as a primitive element, this kanji can mean 
either yawn or lack.
 
467 
blow
 吹 
 To blow is really no more than a deliberate eﬀ ort to make one’s 
mouth lack all the air that is in it. [7]
渼 渾

lesson 18 | 167
 
468 
cook
 炊 
 Better to picture what happens when you do not pay attention 
to your work in the kitchen. Here we see a blazing ﬁ re and an 
inattentive, yawning cook who let things get out of control. [8]
湃 湊
 
469 
song
 歌 
 Th e song in this kanji is being sung by a chorus line of can-can 
girls. Why it should be eliciting nothing but yawning from the 
audience, I leave to you to decide. [14]
濘 濛
 
470 
soft 
 軟 
 If the cushions of one’s car are too soft , one may begin yawning 
at the wheel. [11]
湍 湎
 
471 
next
 次 
 Th is key word connotes the “next in line” of a succession of 
people or things. Let there be a lack of ice on the hottest day 
of summer, and you stand impatiently in line waiting for the 
distributor to call out “Next!” [6]
湖 湘
*  As a primitive, this character can either retain its key word 
meaning of next or the related meaning of second.
 
472 
briar
 茨 
 Earlier we made mention of the story of Briar Rose (or “Sleeping 
Beauty,” as we called her in frame 154) and drew attention to the 
briar hedge that grew up all about her castle. But in the second 
part of the story, these briars blossomed into ﬂ owers. Hence her 

168 | remembering the kanji 1
name, Briar Rose. Be careful not to confuse this character with 
that for thorn (frame 417). [9]
湛 湜
 
473 
assets
 資 
 Th e ﬁ rst shells (money) you earn, you use to pay your debts. 
From then on, the next shells you accumulate become your 
assets. [13]
湟 湧
 
474 
ﬁ gure
 姿 
 Th is kanji depicts a woman’s ﬁ gure as a sort of second self. [9]
湫 湮
 
475 
consult with
 諮 
 To seek the words of a second mouth is to consult with someone 
about something. [16]
湯 湲 湶
Lesson 19
We conclude Part two by picking up most of the remaining primitives that 
can be built up from elements already at our disposal, and learning the kanji 
that are based on them. When you have completed this section, run through all 
the frames from Lesson 13 on, jotting down notes at any point you think help-
ful. Th at way, even if you have not made any notations on your review cards, 
you will at least have some record of the images you used.

lesson 19 | 169
 
*  
muzzle
 咅 
 Th e element for muzzle shows a vase ﬁ xed over a mouth, per-
haps with a rubber band running around the back of the head 
to keep it in place. [8]
湾 湿
 
476 
compensation
 賠 
 Picture a clam used as a muzzle to quiet the complaints of a 
ﬁ sherman’s widow asking compensation for her husband lost 
at sea. [15]
満 溂
 
477 
cultivate
 培 
 Th e barrel hoops used by many Japanese farmers to stretch clear 
plastic over row of vegetables in a garden patch in the hopes of 
cultivating bigger and bigger vegetables is a way of muzzling 
the soil. [11]
溌 溏
 
478 
divide
 剖 
 To “divide and conquer” you use a saber and a muzzle. [10]
源 準
 
479 
sound
 音 
 Th e kanji for sound depicts something standing in the air over a 
tongue wagging in a mouth, much the same as a sound does for 
the briefest of moments before disappearing. [9]
溘 溜
*  Th e primitive from this kanji also means simply a sound.

170 | remembering the kanji 1
 
480 
darkness
 暗 
 When “darkness covered the earth” at the beginning of time, 
there was neither sun nor sound. [13]
溝 溟
 
481 
rhyme
 韻 
 Poetry restricted to verses that rhyme oft en ﬁ nds it has to aban-
don clarity of thought in order to make the rhyme of the words 
work. In this kanji’s picture, one becomes a kind of “sound-
employee.” [19]
溢 溥
 
*  
kazoo
 ┷ 
 Th is primitive’s special usefulness lies not in its frequency but 
in its simpliﬁ cation of a few otherwise diﬃ  cult kanji. It pictures 
the sound of a ﬁ esta, namely a kazoo. Note how the element for 
sound is written ﬁ rst, the ﬁ ft h stroke extended so that it can be 
used in the element for ﬁ esta. [12]
溶 溷 滂 滉
 
482 
discriminating
 識 
 A person of discriminating intellect can tell the diﬀ erence 
between mere kazoo-buzzing and words spoken wisely. [19]
滋 滌
 
*  
mirror
 竟 
 Th is primitive gets its meaning from the following frame. It 
shows a pair of human legs and a tongue-wagging mouth look-
ing at a mirror standing on the wall, asking perhaps who might 
be the fairest of them all. [11]
滑 滓 澁

lesson 19 | 171
 
483 
mirror
 鏡 
 Aft er lakes but before glass, polished metal was used for mir-
rors. Th ese metal mirrors are recalled in this character for a 
mirror. [19]
滔 滕
 
484 
boundary
 境 
 Imagine the boundary of a plot of land marked with gigantic 
mirrors enabling the landowner to keep trespassers in sight at 
all times. [14]
滝 滞
 
485 
deceased
 亡 
 A top hat hanging on a hook in the front hall, right where the 
deceased left  it the day he died, reminds us of him and his 
kanji. [3]
滬 滯
*  In addition to deceased, the primitive meaning of to perish 
will also be used for this character.
 
486 
blind
 盲 
 If one’s eyes perish before death, one remains blind for the rest 
of life. [8]
滲 滴
 
487 
delusion
 妄 
 Th e “ideal woman” one daydreams about is no more than a 
delusion. Hence, perish the thought of her. [6]
滷 滸

172 | remembering the kanji 1
 
488 
laid waste
 荒 
 Th e ﬂ owers that perish in the ﬂ ood are taken here as symbols of 
an area that has been laid waste. [9]
滾 滿 漁
 
489 
ambition
 望 
 Th e story of ambition talks of a king walking under the per-
ishing (or “waning”) moon dreaming great dreams about his 
kingdom. (Th e roots of ambition are from the same word as 
“ambulate,” meaning to walk about.) [11]
漂 漆 漉
 
490 
direction
 方 
 Spinning a dagger about on its hilt on the top of a top hat—
waiting to see in which direction it points when it comes to 
rest—one leaves to fate where one is going next. Take care in 
writing this character. [4]
漏 漑 澂
*  As a primitive, this character will take the sense of a compass, 
the instrument used to determine direction.
 
491 
disturb
 妨 
 Imagine a compass that is disturbed every time a woman passes 
by, sending the needle spinning madly round and round. [7]
漓 演
 
492 
boy
 坊 
 Th e character for a boy shows us a Boy Scout cleaning the dirt 
out of his compass—the more dirt, the better. [7]
漕 漠

lesson 19 | 173
 
493 
perfumed
 芳 
 Here we see a special compass used to pick out those ﬂ owers 
most suited for making good perfumes. [7]
漢 漣
 
494 
obese
 肪 
 If you eat too much, you may need a compass to ﬁ nd your way 
around the obese mass of ﬂ esh that piles up in your midsection. 
Compare this with the stories for round (frame 44) and fat 
(frame 456), similar in meaning but distinct in imagery. [8]
漫 漬
 
495 
call on
 訪 
 When making a courtesy call on a dignitary, one has to gauge 
one’s words with great care. Hence the need for a compass. [11]
漱 漲
 
496 
set free
 放 
 Th e taskmaster sets an unruly servant free, giving him no more 
than a quick glance at the compass and a boot from behind. [8]
漸 漾
 
497 
violent
 激 
 Some cosmic taskmaster hovering overhead whips up the waves 
to make them dash violently against the shore. In the white 
foam that covers the water we see a broken compass ﬂ oating, all 
that remains of a shipwreck. [16]
漿 潁 潅 潔

174 | remembering the kanji 1
 
*  
devil
 胄 
 Th e two horns on the head of the teenager are enough to suggest 
to most parents of adolescents a good image of a devil. [7]
潘 潛
 
498 
undress
 脱 
 To undress is to expose the ﬂ esh and tempt the devil in the eyes 
of one’s onlookers. Ignore the moral if you want, but not the 
devil. [11]
潜 潟
 
499 
explanation
 説 
 Not inappropriately, this character likens an explanation to the 
devil’s own words. [14]
潤 潦
 
500 
pointed
 鋭 
 Metal that has been pointed (as an awl, a pick, a nail, or a knife) 
tends to serve the devil’s purposes as well as civilization’s: our 
tools are also our weapons. [15]
潭 潮
 
501 
formerly
 曽 
 Th is primitive (named for its associations with the kanji of the 
following frame) is composed of a pair of horns growing out of 
a brain with a tongue wagging in the mouth beneath. Th ink of 
“former” in connection with administrators or heads of state 
who have just left  oﬃ  ce but continue to make a nuisance of 
themselves by advertising their opinions on public policy. [11]
潯 潰 潴

lesson 19 | 175
*  Th e primitive meaning, increase, comes from the next frame. 
Always think of something multiplying wildly as you watch.
 
502 
increase
 増 
 Th is kanji depicts an increase of soil, multiplying so fast that it 
literally buries everything in its path. [14]
潸 潺
 
503 
presents
 贈 
 Th e presents oﬀ ered here are money that increases each time 
you give it away. Do not confuse with the temporal word “pres-
ent” (frame 259). [18]
潼 澀
 
504 
east
 東 
 As a “Western” language, English identiﬁ es the east with the ris-
ing sun. In more fanciful terms, we see the sun piercing through 
a tree as it rises in the east. [8]
澄 澆 澈 澎 澑 澗 澡 澣
*  Both the direction east and the part of the world called “the 
East” are primitive meanings of this character.
 
505 
ridgepole
 棟 
 If the piece of wood in the roof known as the ridgepole points 
east, the sunrise will be visible from the front door. [12]
澤 澪
 
506 
frozen
 凍 
 Th e whole secret to breaking the ice with the East is to peek 
behind those mysteriously “frozen smiles.” [10]

176 | remembering the kanji 1
澱 澳
 
*  
porter
 壬 
 Let the extended dot at the top represent the load that the sam-
urai is carrying in his role as the master’s porter. [4]
澵 澹
 
507 
pregnancy
 妊 
 A woman who is in her pregnancy is a bit like a porter, bearing 
her new companion wherever she goes. [7]
激 濁
 
508 
courts
 廷 
 Th ose who rule the courts, the porters of justice and order, are 
oft en found to stretch the law to suit their own purposes. Recall 
the kanji for prolong from frame 392 and keep it distinct. [7]
濂 濃

part three
Elements


We come now to the third major step in our study of the kanji: the invention 
of plots from primitive elements. From now on, the ordering of the remaining 
characters according to their primitives will be taken care of, but the reader will 
be required to do most of the work. As before, particularly diﬃ  cult kanji will be 
supplied with supplementary hints, plots, or even whole stories.
You should now have a feel for the way details can be worked into a kanji 
story so as to create a more vivid ambience for the primitive elements to inter-
act. What may be more diﬃ  cult is experimenting with plots and discarding 
them until the simplest one is ﬁ xed on, and then embellished and nuanced. 
You may ﬁ nd it helpful occasionally to study some of the earlier stories that 
you found especially impressive, in order to discover precisely why they struck 
you, and then to imitate their vitality in the stories you will now be inventing. 
Equally helpful will be any attention you give to those characters whose stories 
you have found it diﬃ  cult to remember, or have easily confused with those of 
other characters. As you progress through this ﬁ nal section, you may wish even 
to return and amend some of those earlier stories. But do it with the knowledge 
that once a story has been learned, it is generally better to review it and perhaps 
repair it slightly than to discard it entirely and start over.
 Lesson 20
To begin our work with the primitives alone, let us take six kanji of varying 
diﬃ  culty that use primitives we have already learned, and that have been kept 
apart deliberately for the sake of this initial sally into independent learning.
 
509 
dye
 染 
 Water . . . nine . . . tree. From those elements you must com-
pose a plot for the key word, dye. Here, as elsewhere, any of 
the alternate meanings of the primitives may be used, provided 
they do not require a position other than that of the kanji in 
question. [9]

180 | remembering the kanji 1
濮 濯 濱
 
510 
burn
 燃 
 Hearth . . . sort of thing. Beware of letting the simple reading 
oﬀ  of the primitive elements do your work for you. Unless you 
make a vivid image of something burning and relate it just as 
vividly to those primitive meanings, you can count on forget-
ting this character very quickly. [16]
濳 濵
 
511 
v.i.p.
 賓 
 Th e v.i.p. indicated here is an important guest making a visit. 
Th e elements are: house . . . ceiling . . . few . . . shells. [15]
濶 濺 濾 瀁
 
512 
year-end
 歳 
 Stop . . . march . . . little. Be sure not to forget that ﬁ nal dot in the 
element for march. [13]
瀅 瀇 瀉 瀋
 
513 
prefecture
 県 
 Above, an eye and a ﬁ shhook, and below the primitive for little. 
Although apparently the simplest of these ﬁ rst six kanji, when 
you begin to work on its plot and story you will soon ﬁ nd out 
that the number of strokes and visual complexity of a kanji does 
not make it easier or harder to remember. It is the primitives you 
have to work that are the critical factor, as in this case where the 
meaning of the key word is so seemingly distant from the ele-
ments. Remember, you can always break larger elements down 
(eye of a needle into eye and ﬁ shhook) if you think it helps. [9]
瀏 瀑

lesson 21 | 181
 
514 
horse chestnut
 栃 
 A tree . . . cliﬀ  . . . ten thousand. [9]
瀕 瀘 瀚
Lesson 21
If you found some of the characters in the last brief lesson diﬃ  cult to work 
with, I assure you that it will get easier with time, indeed already with this long 
lesson. More important is to take heed that as it does get easier you don’t skip 
over the stories too quickly, trusting only in the most superﬁ cial of images. If 
you spend up to ﬁ ve minutes on each character focusing on the composition of 
the primitives into a tidy plot, and then ﬁ lling out the details of a little story, you 
will not be wasting time, but saving yourself the time it takes to relearn it later.
 
*  
scorpion
 也 
 Th is primitive is a pictograph of the scorpion, the ﬁ rst 2 strokes 
representing its head and pincers, the last stroke its barbed tail, 
in which you may recognize the ﬁ shhook. [3]
瀛 瀝 瀞
 
515 
ground
 地 
 Soil and a scorpion (an “earth animal”). Th is is, of course, the full 
character from which the primitive for ground derives. [6]
瀟 瀦
 
516 
pond
 池 
 Water . . . scorpion. It would be easy to slip into a “lazy image” 
in cases like this one, picturing, let us say, a scorpion near the 
water. But if you picture rather a scorpion letting its venom out 

182 | remembering the kanji 1
drop by drop until it has made a whole pond of the stuﬀ , the 
image is more likely to remain ﬁ xed. [6]
瀧 瀨
 
517 
insect
 虫 
 Work with the pictograph as you wish. [6]
瀬 瀰 瀲 瀾
*  As a primitive, this insect will refer to the whole insect king-
dom;, it can be speciﬁ ed for each kanji that contains it.-
 
518 
lightning bug
 蛍 
 Schoolhouse . . . insect. [11]
灌 灑
 
519 
snake
 蛇 
 Insect . . . house . . . spoon. [11]
灘 灣 火
 
520 
rainbow
 虹 
 Insect . . . craft . [9]
灯 灰
 
521 
butterﬂ y
 蝶 
 Insect . . . generation . . . tree. [15]
灸 灼 災
 
522 
single
 独 
 Th ink of this key word in connection with bachelorhood. Th e 
elements: wild dogs . . . insect. [9]

lesson 21 | 183
炅 炉
 
523 
silkworm
 蚕 
 Heavens . . . insect. Be sure to do something about the position 
of the two elements. [10]
焉 焄
 
524 
wind
 風 
 Windy . . . drops of . . . insects. Hint: think of the last two primi-
tives as representing a swarm of gnats, those tiny drops of pesky 
insects. [9]
炊 炎 炒
 
525 
self
 己 
 Th e kanji carries the abstract sense of the self, the deep-down 
inner structure of the human person that mythology has oft en 
depicted as a snake—which is what the kanji shows pictograph-
ically. Be sure to keep it distinct from the similar key words, 
oneself (frame 36) and I (frame 17). [3]
炙 炫 炬
*  As a primitive element, this kanji can be used for the snake—
of which it is a pictograph—or any of the various concrete 
sym bolic meanings the snake has in myth and fable. [3]
 
526 
rouse
 起 
 Run . . . snake. [10]
炭 炮
 
527 
queen
 妃 
 Woman . . . snake. [6]

184 | remembering the kanji 1
炯 炳
 
528 
reformation
 改 
 Pluralizing the snake and focusing on a single taskmaster may 
help recommend the image of Ireland’s most famous reformer, 
St. Patrick, who, legend has it, drove away the snakes from the 
land. [7]
炸 点
 
529 
scribe
 記 
 Words . . . snake. [10]
為 炻
 
530 
wrap
 包 
 Bind up . . . snake. [5]
烈 烋
*  Th e primitive meaning of wrap should always be used with 
the snake in mind to avoid confusion with similar terms. Just 
let “wrap” mean “with a snake coiled about it.”
 
531 
placenta
 胞 
 Part of the body . . . wrap. [9]
烏 烙
 
532 
cannon
 砲 
 Stones . . . wrap. [10]
烝 烟

lesson 21 | 185
 
533 
bubble
 泡 
 Water . . . wrap. [8]
烱 烹
 
534 
tortoise
 亀 
 Th is is not a turtle (see frame 235) but a tortoise, however you 
wish to picture the diﬀ erence. Let the “bound up” at the top refer 
to the head, and the two suns, with a long tail running through 
it, to the shell. [11]
焔 焙 焚
*  As a primitive, this kanji is abbreviated to its bottom half, 者, 
and comes to mean eel. (If it is any help, this kanji in its full 
form can also be remembered through its abbreviation’s 
primitive meaning.)
 
535 
electricity
 電 
 Rain/weather . . . eel. [13]
焜 無
 
536 
dragon
 竜 
 Vase . . . eel. In order not to confuse this kanji with the zodia-
cal sign of the dragon, which we will meet later (frame 2008) 
and use as a primitive, you might think here of a paper parade 
dragon. [10]
焦 然
 
537 
waterfall
 滝 
 Water . . . vase . . . eels. To avoid the confusion mentioned in the 
previous frame, the character learned there for dragon should 
not be used as a primitive. [13]

186 | remembering the kanji 1
焼 煆 煇
 
*  
sow
 豕 
 Let this primitive represent a fat sow. Easier than pulling it apart 
into smaller elements is remembering its shape as a highly styl-
ized pictograph. Practice its 7 strokes a few times before going 
on to examples of its use in the next six frames. [7]
煉 煌 煎 煕 煖 煙 煜
 
538 
pork
 豚 
 Flesh . . . sow. [11]
煢 煤
 
539 
pursue
 逐 
 Sows . . . road. [10]
煥 煦
 
540 
consummate
 遂 
 Th e horns atop the sow suggest a boar at work in the back-
ground. Add the element for a road. Now create a story whose 
meaning is: consummate. [12]
照 煩 煬
 
541 
house
 家  Th is is the full character whose primitive form we learned 
already. To help a little, this kanji recalls the times when the 
“domestic” animals were, as the word itself suggests, really kept 
in the house. Hence: house . . . sow. [10]
煮 煽

lesson 21 | 187
 
542 
marry into
 嫁  Th e kanji in this frame demonstrates the traditional Japanese 
approach to marriage: it is the woman who leaves her family for 
another household, thus marrying into a man’s family. [13]
熄 熈
 
543 
overpowering
 豪 
 Tall . . . crowned . . . sow. [14]
熊 熏 熔
 
*  
piglets
 胛 
 Th is abbreviation of the full primitive for a sow, quite naturally, 
means piglets. [5]
熕 熙 熟 熨 熬
 
*  
piggy bank
 昜 
 Th is very helpful primitive element is worth the few moments 
it takes to learn it. Just remember that each day you put a few 
pennies into the back of the little piglet on your bureau that you 
call a piggy bank. [9]
熱 熹
 
544 
intestines
 腸 
 Flesh . . . piggy bank. [13]
熾 燁
 
545 
location
 場 
 Soil . . . piggy bank. [12]
燃 燈

188 | remembering the kanji 1
 
546 
hot water
 湯 
 Water . . . piggy bank. [12]
燉 燎
 
547 
sheep
 羊 
 Th is pictograph shows the animal horns at the top attached to 
the head (3rd stroke), the front and back legs (strokes 4 and 5) 
and body (ﬁ nal stroke). [6]
燐 燒 燔
*  Th e primitive meaning of sheep can add the further connota-
tions given in the following frame. As we saw with the cow, 
the “tail” is cut oﬀ  when it is set immediately over another ele-
ment: 胝. Note the change in stroke order, as exempliﬁ ed in 
the following frame.
 
548 
beauty
 美 
 Try to think of what the Chinese were on to when they associ-
ated the idea of beauty with a large sheep. [9]
餮 餽 餾 饂 饅
 
549 
ocean
 洋 
 Water . . . sheep. Be sure to keep the stories and key word of this 
kanji distinct from those for sea. (frame 461). [9]
營 燠
 
550 
detailed
 詳 
 Words/speaking . . . sheep. [13]
燥 燦

lesson 21 | 189
 
551 
fresh
 鮮 
 Fish . . . sheep. [17]
燧 燬
 
552 
accomplished
 達 
 Th e key word is meant to connote someone “skilled” at some-
thing. On the road we ﬁ nd soil over a sheep. You may have to 
work with this one a while longer. [12]
燭 燮 燵
 
553 
envious
 羨 
 Sheep . . . water . . . yawn/lack. Although this character looks 
rather simple, special care should be taken in learning it 
because of the proximity of the ﬁ nal two elements to the char-
acter for next, which we learned in frame 471. Note, too, that 
the water comes under the sheep, rather than on its own to the 
left . [13]
燹 燻 燼
 
*  
wool
 胞 
 Th is rather uncommon primitive is made by pulling the tail of 
the sheep to one side to create a semi-enclosure. Th e meaning 
of wool is derived from the fact that the shearer is holding the 
sheep by the tail in order to trim its wool. [7]
燾 燿
 
554 
distinction
 差 
 Wool . . . craft . [10]
爆 爍

190 | remembering the kanji 1
 
555 
don
 着 
 I cannot resist doing this one for you, since it clearly describes 
donning (putting on) one’s clothes as “pulling the wool over 
one’s eyes.” [12]
爐 爛
 
*  
turkey
 隹 
 Th is primitive is best remembered as an old turkey, complete 
with pipe and monocle. Its writing is somewhat peculiar, so take 
note of the order of the strokes. Let the ﬁ rst four strokes stand 
for the turkey’s head, neck, and drooping chin. Th e remainder 
can then be pictographic of the plumage. [8]
爨 爪 爬 爭 爰 爲 爵 父
 
556 
solely
 唯 
 Mouth . . . turkey. [11]
爺 爻
 
557 
char
 焦 
 Turkey . . . oven ﬁ re. [12]
爼 爽
 
558 
reef
 礁 
 Rocks . . . char. [17]
爾 爿
 
559 
gather
 集 
 Turkeys . . . atop a tree. [12]
牀 牆

lesson 21 | 191
 
560 
quasi-
 准 
 Ice . . . turkey. [10]
片 版
 
561 
advance
 進 
 Turkey . . . road. [11]
牋 牌
 
562 
miscellaneous
 雑 
 Baseball . . . trees . . . turkey. [14]
牒 牘 牙
 
563 
female
 雌 
 Th is character for female forms a pair with that for male, which 
we will learn later (frame 743). Th e elements: footprint . . . spoon 
. . . turkey. [14]
牛 牝 牟
 
564 
semi-
 準 
 Th ink of this in terms of the semiﬁ nals of some sports competi-
tion. Water . . . turkeys . . . needle. [13]
牡 牢 牣
 
565 
stirred up
 奮 
 St. Bernard dog . . . turkey . . . rice ﬁ eld/brains. [16]
牧 物 牲

192 | remembering the kanji 1
 
566 
rob
 奪 
 Whereas burglary (frame 357) implies clandestine appropria-
tion of another’s property, robbery refers to taking by force. Th e 
primitive elements: St. Bernard dog . . . turkey . . . glue. [14]
牴 特 牽
 
567 
assurance
 確 
 On the left  you see the rock, which is familiar enough. But pay 
attention to the right. Taking careful note of the unusual stroke 
order that has the “chimney” on the house doubled up with the 
ﬁ rst stroke of the turkey, we may see the right side as a turkey 
house (or “coop”).
 We shall see this pattern only on one other occasion (frame 
1943), but even for these two characters it is well worth the trou-
ble to single it out as a primitive. [15]
牾 犀 犁 犂
 
568 
noon
 午 
 With a bit of stretching, you might see a horse’s head pointing 
left ward in this character. Th at gives the primary meaning of 
the Chinese zodiacal sign of the horse, which corresponds to 
the hour of noon. Note how this kanji primitive diﬀ ers from 
that for cow (frame 245). [4]
犒 犖 犠 犢
*  As a primitive, this character gets the meaning of a horse. Any 
horse image will do, except that of a team of horses, which will 
come later (frame 1978) and get its own primitive.
 
569 
permit
 許 
 Words . . . horse. [11]
犧 犬

lesson 21 | 193
 
*  
Pegasus
 胡 
 By combining the horse (giving a twist to its ﬁ nal stroke a bit to 
the left  to keep the strokes from overlapping) with the turkey, 
we get a ﬂ ying horse or Pegasus. Be sure not to confuse with 
the rarer element for turkey house (隺) that was introduced in 
frame 567. [11]
犯 犱
 
570 
delight
 歓 
 Again I cannot resist sharing my own associations. If you’ve 
ever seen Disney’s animated interpretation of classical music, 
“Fantasia,” you will recall what was done there with Beet hoven’s 
“Pastoral Symphony” (the 6th), and the ﬂ ying horses that ﬁ g-
ured in it. Th e mares are bathing in the stream and the stallions 
begin to gather. As dusk sets in, the ﬂ ying horses all start yawn-
ing and pair oﬀ  for the night: a perfectly delightful portrait of 
delight. [15]
犲 状
 
571 
authority
 権 
 Tree . . . Pegasus. [15]
犹 犾
 
572 
outlook
 観 
 Pegasus . . . see. [18]
狂 狃
 
573 
feathers
 羽 
 From the pictograph of two bird-wings, we get feathers. [6]
狄 狆 狎 狐

194 | remembering the kanji 1
*  Th e related image of wings can be added as a primitive mean-
ing. It can also take the form 致 when used as a primitive, as 
we shall see in frames 576 and 577.
 
574 
learn
 習 
 Feathers . . . white bird. [11]
狒 狗
 
575 
the following
 翌 
 Feathers . . . vase. Be sure to contrast the connotation of this key 
word with that for next (frame 471). [11]
狙 狛
 
576 
weekday
 曜 
 Day . . . feathers . . . turkey. [18]
狠 狡 狢
 
577 
laundry
 濯 
 Water . . . feathers . . . turkey [17]
狩 独 狭
Lesson 22
This is a good time to stop for a moment and have a look at how primitive 
elements get contracted and distorted by reason of their position within a kanji. 
Reference has been made to the fact here and there in passing, but now that 
you have attained greater ﬂ uency in writing, we may address the phenomenon 
more systematically.

lesson 22 | 195
1.  At the left , a primitive will generally be squeezed in from the sides 
and slanted upwards. For instance, gold 金 comes to be written 胤 
when it functions as the primitive for metal. Or again, tree has its 
kanji form 木 ﬂ attened into 胥 when it comes to the left .
2.  Long strokes ending in a hook, which would normally ﬂ ow out grace-
fully, are squeezed into angular form when made part of a primitive 
at the left . We see this in the way the kanji for ray 光 gets altered to 胯 
in the kanji for radiance 輝. In like manner, the spoon that is spread 
out on the right side of compare 比 is turned in on itself on the left . 
Certain characters are pressed down and widened when weighted 
down by other elements from above. Such is the case, for example, 
with woman, which is ﬂ attened into 胱 when it appears in the lowest 
position of banquet 宴.
3.  A long vertical stroke cutting through a series of horizontal lines is 
oft en cut oﬀ  below the lowest horizontal line. We saw this in chang-
ing the cow 牛 to ﬁ t it in revelation 告, the sheep 羊 to ﬁ t in beauty 美, 
and the brush 聿 that appeared in the kanji for write 書.
4.  Th e long downward swooping stroke that we see in ﬁ re is an exam-
ple of another group of distortions. Crowded in by something to its 
right, it is turned into a short stroke that bends downwards: 胴. Hence 
ﬁ re 火 and lamp 灯.
5.  Again, we have seen how horizontal lines can double up as the bot-
tom of the upper primitive and the top of the lower primitive. For 
instance, when stand 立 comes in the primitive for make a deal 商.
6.  Finally, there are situations in which an entire kanji is changed to 
assume a considerably altered primitive form. Water 水, ﬁ re 火, and 
portent 兆 thus become 氵, 灬, and 肇 in other characters. Because the 
full forms are also used as primitives, we have altered the meaning 
or given distinctions in meaning in order to be sure that the story in 
each case dictates precisely how the character is to be written.
From this chapter on, the stroke order will not be given unless it is entirely 
new, departs from the procedures we have learned so far, or might otherwise 
cause confusion. Should you have any trouble with the writing of a particular 
primitive, you can refer to Index ii which will direct you to the page where that 
primitive was ﬁ rst introduced.
With that, we carry on.

196 | remembering the kanji 1
 
*  
pent in
 囗 
 Th is primitive depicts a corral or pen surrounding something, 
which is thus pent in. [3]
狷 狸 狹
 
578 
sayeth
 曰 
 Pent in . . . one. Th e key word refers to famous sayings of 
famous people, and is the origin for the primitive meaning of 
a tongue wagging in the mouth that we learned in frame 12. Th e 
size of this kanji, a relatively rare one, is what distinguishes it 
from day. [4]
狼 狽 猊
 
579 
quandary
 困 
 Pent in . . . trees. [7]
猖 猗 猛 猜 猝 猟 猤
 
580 
harden
 固 
 Old . . . pent in. Leave the people out of your story to avoid com-
plications later when we add the element for person to form a 
new kanji (frame 973). [8]
 
581 
country
 国 
 Jewels . . . pent in. [8]
 
582 
group
 団 
 Glued . . . pent in. [6]
 
583 
cause
 因 
 St. Bernard dog . . . pent in. [6]

lesson 22 | 197
 
584 
matrimony
 姻 
 Woman . . . cause. Th ink here of the “state of matrimony” and 
you will not confuse it with other characters involving mar-
riage, one of which we have already met (frame 542). [9]
 
585 
park
 園 
 Pent in . . . lidded crock . . . scarf. [13]
 
586 
-times
 回 
 Th e suﬃ  x “-times” refers to a number of repetitions. Its ele-
ments: a mouth . . . pent in. Hint: you may ﬁ nd it more helpful 
to forget the primitives and think of one circle revolving inside 
of another. [6]
猥 猩 猪
 
587 
podium
 壇 
 Soil/ground . . . top hat . . . -times . . . nightbreak. With kanji as 
diﬃ  cult as this one, it generally pays to toy with the various 
connotations of its primitives before settling on one image. Aim 
for as much simplicity as you can. [16]
 
*  
cave
 广 
 Th is primitive combines the cliﬀ  (the last 2 strokes) with the 
ﬁ rst dot we use on the roof of the house. Together they make a 
“cliﬀ  house” or cave. It “encloses” its relative primitives beneath 
it and to the right. [3]
猫 献 猯
 
588 
store
 店 
 Cave . . . fortune-telling. [8]
猴 猶

198 | remembering the kanji 1
 
589 
warehouse
 庫 
 Cave . . . car. [10]
 
590 
courtyard
 庭 
 Cave . . . courts. [10]
 
591 
government oﬃ  ce
 庁 
 Cave . . . a spike. [5]
 
592 
bed
 床 
 Cave . . . tree. [7]
 
593 
hemp
 麻 
 Cave . . . grove. If it helps, this is the hemp marijuana comes 
from. [11]
 
594 
grind
 磨 
 Hemp . . . stone. [16]
猷 猾
 
595 
heart
 心 
 Th is character, a pictographic representation of the heart, is 
among the most widely used primitives we shall meet. [4]
猿 獄 獅 獎
*  As a primitive, it can take three forms, to which we shall 
assign three distinct meanings.
   In its kanji-form, it appears beneath or to the right of its 
relative primitive and means the physical organ of the heart. 
   To the left, it is abbreviated to three strokes, 忄, and means 
a wildly emotional state of mind. 
   
And ﬁ nally, at the very bottom, it can take the form 胸, in 
which case we give it the meaning of a valentine.

lesson 22 | 199
 
596 
forget
 忘 
 Perish . . . heart. [7]
 
597 
endure
 忍 
 Blade . . . heart. Endure here means long-suﬀ ering patience. [7]
 
598 
acknowledge
 認 
 Words . . . endure. [14]
 
599 
mourning
 忌 
 Snake . . . heart. [7]
 
600 
intention
 志 
 Samurai . . . heart. [7]
 
601 
document
 誌 
 Words . . . intention. [14]
 
602 
loyalty
 忠 
 In the middle of a . . . heart. [8]
 
603 
shish kebab
 串 
 Th is pictograph of two pieces of meat on a skewer, a shish 
kebab, will help us in the next frame. [7]
獏 獗 獣
 
604 
aﬄ  icted
 患 
 Shish kebab . . . heart. [11]
 
605 
think
 思 
 Brains . . . heart. [9]

200 | remembering the kanji 1
 
606 
grace
 恩 
 Take grace in its sense of a favor freely bestowed, not in its 
meaning of charming manners or ﬂ uid movement. Th e primi-
tives: cause . . . heart. [10]
 
607 
apply
 応 
 Cave . . . heart. Th e sense of the key word here is of something 
appropriate that ﬁ lls a particular need, and hence “applies.” [7]
 
608 
idea
 意 
 Sound . . . heart. [13]
 
609 
concept
 想 
 To distinguish this kanji from that of the previous frame, focus 
on the sense of the “con-” in the word “concept.” Its elements 
are: inter- . . . heart. [13]
 
610 
breath
 息 
 Nose . . . heart. [10]
 
611 
recess
 憩 
 tongue . . . nose . . . heart. Th e sense of breath from the last frame 
should not be used; it could lead you to put only the nose over 
the heart and leave the tongue oﬀ  to one side. [16]
 
612 
favor
 恵 
 Ten . . . ﬁ elds (or: needle . . . brains) . . . heart. [10]
 
613 
fear
 恐 
 Craft  . . . mediocre . . . heart. [10]
 
614 
beguile
 惑 
 Th e ﬁ rst three elements, ﬁ esta . . . mouth . . . ﬂ oor, appeared 
together once already in frame 356. Beneath them, once again, 
the heart. [12]

lesson 22 | 201
 
615 
emotion
 感 
 Mouths . . . marching . . . heart. [13]
 
616 
melancholy
 憂 
 Head . . . crown . . . heart . . . walking legs. Two things merit 
mention here. First, the doubling-up of the last stroke of head 
with the top of the crown serves to make the whole more aes-
thetically beautiful. It happens so rarely that the exceptions are 
easily learned. Second, try to make a single image out of the 
four elements. (Religious statuary of melancholy ﬁ gures should 
oﬀ er plenty of suggestions.) [15]
獨 獪 獰 獲
 
617 
widow
 寡 
 House . . . head . . . dagger. Immediately we get another instance 
of a very odd exception. Notice how the ﬁ nal stroke of the head 
is lengthened, giving the ﬁ nal two strokes a chance to stretch 
out and make room for the dagger that ﬁ ts in beneath. [14]
獵 獷 獸 獺 獻
 
618 
busy
 忙 
 State of mind . . . perish. [6]
航 舫 般 舮 舳 舵
 
619 
ecstasy
 悦 
 State of mind . . . devil. [10]
 
620 
constancy
 恒 
 State of mind . . . span. [9]

202 | remembering the kanji 1
 
621 
lament
 悼 
 To keep this character distinct from others of similar connota-
tion, one need only think of the Prophet Jeremiah whose poetry 
gave an eminence to the state of mind we call lamentation. [11]
 
622 
enlightenment
 悟 
 I know of an Indian religious sect which teaches that enlighten-
ment is to be had by covering the eyes with one’s index ﬁ ngers, 
the ears with the thumbs, and the mouth with the little ﬁ ngers. 
While these diﬀ er a bit from the ﬁ ve holes that we used to rep-
resent the “I” (frame 17), the idea of achieving a special state 
of mind by covering those ﬁ ve places can help you learn this 
kanji. You might try the position out while you are learning this 
character. [10]
 
623 
dreadful
 怖 
 State of mind . . . linen. [8]
 
624 
disconcerted
 慌 
 State of mind . . . laid waste. [12]
 
625 
repent
 悔 
 State of mind . . . every (see frame 458). [9]
 
626 
hate
 憎 
 State of mind . . . increase. [14]
 
627 
accustomed
 慣 
 State of mind . . . pierce. [14]
 
628 
pleasure
 愉 
 State of mind . . . butchers (see frame 289). [12]

lesson 22 | 203
 
629 
lazy
 惰 
 State of mind . . . left  (i.e. “sinister”) . . . ﬂ esh. [12]
 
630 
humility
 慎 
 State of mind . . . truth. [13]
 
631 
remorse
 憾 
 State of mind . . . emotion. Hint: the etymology of “remorse” 
indicates a memory that returns again and again to “bite at” 
one’s conscience and disturb one’s peace of mind. [16]
 
632 
recollection
 憶 
 State of mind . . . idea. [16]
 
633 
pining
 慕 
 Graveyard . . . valentine. Note carefully the stroke order of the 
valentine primitive. [14]
玄 率 玉 王 玖
 
634 
annexed
 添 
 Water . . . heavens . . . valentine. [11]
 
635 
invariably
 必 
 First note the stroke order of this character, which did not really 
evolve from the heart, even though we take it that way. If one 
takes it as a pictograph “dividing” the heart in half, then one has 
one of those invariably true bits of human anatomy: the fact 
that each heart is divided into two halves. [5]
玩 玲 玳 玻 玽
 
636 
ooze
 泌 
 Water . . . the invariably divided heart. [8]

Lesson 23
When you finish this lengthy lesson you shall have passed well beyond one-
third of our way through this book. Here we focus on elements having to do 
with hands and arms. As always, the one protection you have against confusing 
the elements is to form clear and distinct images the ﬁ rst time you meet them. 
If you make it through this chapter smoothly, the worst will be behind you and 
you should have nothing more to fear the rest of the way.
 
637 
hand
 手 
 Any way you count them, there are either too many or too few 
ﬁ ngers to see a good pictograph of a hand in this character. But 
that it is, and so you must. [4]
珀 珂 珈 珉
*  Keep to the etymology when using this kanji as a primitive: a 
single hand all by itself.
 
638 
watch over
 看 
 Hand . . . eyes. [9]
珊 珍
 
639 
chafe
 摩 
 Hemp . . . hand. [15]
 
640 
ego
 我 
 Hand . . . ﬁ esta. Note how the second stroke of the hand is 
stretched across to double up as the ﬁ rst stroke of the tasseled 
arrow we use for ﬁ esta. Compare to frames 17, 36, and 525. [7]

lesson 23 | 205
珎 珒 珖 珞 珠 珣 珥
 
641 
righteousness
 義 
 Sheep . . . ego. [13]
 
642 
deliberation
 議 
 Words . . . righteousness. [20]
 
643 
sacriﬁ ce
 犠 
 Cow . . . righteousness. Do not use the image of an animal sac-
riﬁ ce here, as that will have its own character later on. [17]
 
*  
ﬁ ngers
 扌 
 Th is alternate form of the primitive for hand we shall use to 
represent ﬁ nger or ﬁ ngers. It always appears at the left . [3]
珪 班 珮
 
644 
rub
 抹 
 Fingers . . . extremity. [8]
 
645 
embrace
 抱 
 Fingers . . . wrap. [8]
 
646 
board
 搭 
 Th e key word refers to boarding vessels for travel. Its elements 
are: ﬁ nger . . . ﬂ owers . . . ﬁ t together (see frame 254). [12]
 
647 
extract
 抄 
 Fingers . . . a few. [7]
 
648 
confront
 抗 
 Fingers . . . a whirlwind. [7]

206 | remembering the kanji 1
 
649 
criticism
 批 
 Finger . . . compare. [7]
 
650 
beckon
 招 
 Finger . . . seduce. [8]
 
651 
clear the land
 拓 
 Fingers . . . rocks. [8]
 
652 
clap
 拍 
 Fingers . . . white. [8]
 
653 
strike
 打 
 Finger . . . spike. [5]
 
654 
arrest
 拘 
 Fingers . . . phrase. [8]
 
655 
discard
 捨 
 Fingers . . . cottage. [11]
 
656 
kidnap
 拐 
 Finger . . . mouth . . . dagger. [8]
 
657 
pinch
 摘 
 Finger . . . antique. [14]
 
658 
challenge
 挑 
 Fingers . . . portent. [9]
 
659 
ﬁ nger
 指 
 Finger . . . delicious. [9]

lesson 23 | 207
 
660 
hold
 持 
 Fingers . . . Buddhist temple. [9]
 
661 
fasten
 括 
 Finger . . . tongue. [9]
 
662 
brandish
 揮 
 Finger . . . chariot. [12]
 
663 
conjecture
 推 
 Fingers . . . turkey. [11]
 
664 
hoist
 揚 
 Fingers . . . piggy bank. [12]
 
665 
propose
 提 
 Fingers . . . just so. [12]
 
666 
damage
 損 
 Finger . . . employee. [13]
 
667 
pick up
 拾 
 Fingers . . . ﬁ t together. Compare frame 646. [9]
 
668 
shouldering
 担 
 Th e key word of this frame refers to shouldering a burden of 
some sort. Its elements are: ﬁ ngers . . . nightbreak. [8]
 
669 
foothold
 拠 
 Fingers . . . dispose. [8]

208 | remembering the kanji 1
 
670 
sketch
 描 
 Fingers . . . seedling. [11]
 
671 
maneuver
 操 
 Fingers . . . goods . . . tree. [16]
 
672 
touch
 接 
 Fingers . . . vase . . . woman. [11]
 
673 
put up a notice
 掲 
 Fingers . . . siesta. [11]
 
674 
hang
 掛 
 Fingers . . . ivy . . . magic wand. [11]
 
*  
two hands
 胼 
 Let this primitive represent a union of two hands, both of which 
are used at the same time. Whenever this element appears at the 
bottom of its relative primitive, the top line is omitted, whether 
or not there is a horizontal line to replace it. [4]
珵 珸 現 球
 
675 
polish
 研 
 Stone . . . two hands. [9]
 
676 
commandment
 戒 
 Two hands . . . ﬁ esta. [7]
琅 理 琇
 
677 
contraption
 械 
 Tree . . . commandment. [11]

lesson 23 | 209
 
678 
nose
 鼻 
 Let me share a rather grotesque image to help with this kanji. 
Imagine taking your two hands and reaching up into someone’s 
nostrils. Once inside you grab hold of the brain and yank it out. 
At the end, you would have a picture something like that of this 
character, the full kanji for nose. [14]
 
679 
punish
 刑 
 Two hands . . . saber. [6]
 
680 
mould
 型 
 Punish . . . soil. In cases like this, you might ﬁ nd it easier to 
break the character up into its more basic elements, like this: 
two hands . . . saber . . . soil. [9]
 
681 
genius
 才 
 Whatever one is particularly adept at—one’s special “genius”—
one can do very easily, “with one ﬁ nger” as the phrase goes. Th is 
kanji is a pictograph of that one ﬁ nger. Note how its distinctive 
form is created by writing the ﬁ nal stroke of the element for 
ﬁ ngers backwards. [3]
琉 琢 琥
*  Th e primitive meaning, genie, derives from the roots of the 
word genius. Use the genie out in the open when the primitive 
appears to the right of or below its relative primitive; in that 
case it also keeps its same form. At the left , the form is altered 
to 能, and the meaning becomes a genie in the bottle.
 
682 
property
 財 
 Clam . . . genie. [10]
 
683 
lumber
 材 
 Tree . . . genie. [7]

210 | remembering the kanji 1
 
684 
suppose
 存 
 Genie in the bottle . . . a child. Hint: focus on the key word’s con-
notation of “make believe”. [6]
琦 琩 琪 琮
 
685 
exist
 在 
 Genie in the bottle . . . soil. [6]
 
686 
from
 乃 
 Th is pictograph of a clenched ﬁ st is another of the “hand-
primitives.” Take note of its rather peculiar drawing. Try to 
think of drawing a ﬁ st (the primitive meaning) “from” this 
character to give yourself a connotation for the otherwise 
abstract key word. [2]
琲 琳
*  Th e primitive meaning is taken from the pictograph: a ﬁ st.
 
687 
portable
 携 
 Fingers . . . turkey . . . ﬁ st. [13]
 
688 
reach out
 及 
 Th e addition of a ﬁ nal stroke transforms this character from 
the primitive for a clenched ﬁ st into the kanji for reaching out, 
much as a stroke of kindness can oft en turn anger into accep-
tance. [3]
琴 琵 琶
*  As a primitive, this shall stand for outstretched hands. Only 
take care not to confuse it with that for beg (frame 462)

lesson 23 | 211
 
689 
suck
 吸 
 Mouth . . . outstretched hands. Hint: use the image of a nursing 
baby. [6]
 
690 
handle
 扱 
 Finger . . . outstretched hands. [6]
 
*  
arm
 脂 
 Th e picture of an arm dangling from the trunk of the body 
gives us the element for arm, or tucked under the arm (relative 
to the element below it). Examples of both usages follow. Unlike 
most primitives, the kanji that bears the same meaning (frame 
1418) has absolutely no connection with it. [2]
琺 琿
 
691 
length
 丈 
 Th e length whose measure this kanji depicts extends from the 
tip of one hand to the tip of the other with arms at full length. 
Notice the ﬁ nal stroke, which cuts across the vertical second 
stroke to distinguish it from large (frame 107). [3]
瑁 瑕 瑙
 
692 
history
 史 
 A mouth . . . tucked under the arm. [5]
瑚 瑛 瑜
 
693 
oﬃ  cer
 吏 
 One . . . mouth . . . tucked under the arm. [6]
 
694 
grow late
 更 
 Th e implication behind the meaning of grow late is that things 
are changing in the same way that the day turns into night. Th e 
elements: ceiling . . . sun . . . tucked under the arm. [7]

212 | remembering the kanji 1
瑞 瑟 瑠
 
695 
stiﬀ 
 硬 
 Rocks . . . grow late. [12]
 
696 
or again
 又 
 Like the several abbreviations in Roman script to indicate “and” 
(+, &, etc.), this short two-stroke kanji is used for the similar 
meaning of or again. [2]
瑢 瑣
*  As a primitive, it will mean crotch, as in the crotch of the arm. 
Or whatever.
 
697 
pair
 双 
 Th e crotch reduplicated gives us a pair. [4]
 
698 
mulberry
 桑 
 Crotches, crotches everywhere . . . tree. Hint: think of a group of 
children playing an original version of “Here We Go ’Round the 
Mulberry Bush.” [10]
 
699 
vessels
 隻 
 Th e key word indicates the Japanese generic term for counting 
ships. Its elements: turkey . . . crotch. [10]
 
700 
safeguard
 護 
 Words . . . ﬂ owers . . . vessels. [20]
 
701 
seize
 獲 
 A pack of wild dogs . . . ﬂ owers . . . vessels. Do not confuse this 
with the character for arrest (frame 654). [16]

lesson 23 | 213
 
702 
guy
 奴 
 Woman . . . crotch. [5]
 
703 
angry
 怒 
 Guy . . . heart. [9]
 
704 
friend
 友 
 By one’s side . . . crotch. [4]
絎 絏 結 絖
 
705 
slip out
 抜 
 Fingers . . . friend. [7]
 
*  
missile
 殳 
 Although modern connotations are more suggestive, this prim-
itive simply refers to something thrown as a weapon. Its ele-
ments: wind . . . crotch. [4]
瑪 瑯
 
706 
throw
 投 
 Fingers . . . missile. [7]
 
707 
drown
 没 
 Water . . . missile. [7]
 
708 
establishment
 設 
 Words . . . missile. [11]
 
709 
beat
 撃 
 Car . . . missile . . . hand. [15]

214 | remembering the kanji 1
瑰 瑳 瑶
 
710 
husk
 殻 
 Samurai . . . superﬂ uous . . . missile. [11]
瑾 璃 璉
 
711 
branch
 支 
 Needle . . . crotch. [4]
璋 璞
 
712 
skill
 技 
 Fingers . . . branch. [7]
 
713 
bough
 枝 
 Tree . . . branch. Take a moment to focus on the diﬀ erences 
between a bough, a branch, and a twig (frame 298). [8]
 
714 
limb
 肢 
 Part of the body . . . branch. [8]
 
*  
spool
 圣 
 Here we see a simpliﬁ ed drawing of a spool (the element for 
earth at the bottom) with threads being wound about it tightly 
(the crotch at the top). You may remember it either pictographi-
cally or by way of the primitives. [5]
璟 璢
 
715 
stalk
 茎 
 Flower . . . spool. [8]

lesson 23 | 215
 
716 
suspicious
 怪 
 State of mind . . . spool. [8]
 
717 
lightly
 軽 
 Car . . . spool. [12]
 
718 
uncle
 叔 
 Above . . . little . . . crotch. [8]
璧 環 璽
 
719 
coach
 督 
 Uncle . . . eye. [13]
 
720 
loneliness
 寂 
 House . . . uncle. [11]
 
721 
graceful
 淑 
 Water . . . uncle. [11]
 
722 
anti-
 反 
 Cliﬀ  . . . crotch. [4]
 
723 
slope
 坂 
 Ground . . . anti-. [7]
 
724 
plank
 板 
 Tree . . . anti-. [8]
 
725 
return
 返 
 Anti- . . . road. [7]

216 | remembering the kanji 1
 
726 
marketing
 販 
 Shells/money . . . anti-. [11]
 
727 
claw
 爪 
 Th is character is a pictograph of a bird’s claw, and from there 
comes to mean animal claws in general (including human ﬁ n-
gernails). [4]
瓊 瓏 瓔 瓜
*  As a primitive, we shall use the graphic image of a vulture, a 
bird known for its powerful claws. It generally appears above 
another primitive, in which case it gets squeezed into the 
form 爫.
 
728 
gentle
 妥 
 Vulture . . . woman. [7]
 
*  
ﬂ edgling
 脆 
 Th e vulture and child combine to create the image of an aerie 
full of ﬂ edglings. [7]
瓠 瓢
 
729 
milk
 乳 
 Fledglings . . . hook. [8]
 
730 
ﬂ oating
 浮 
 Water . . . ﬂ edglings. [10]
 
731 
leader
 将 
 Turtle . . . vulture . . . glue. [10]

lesson 23 | 217
 
732 
exhort
 奨 
 Leader . . . St. Bernard dog. Do not confuse with urge (frame 
282). [13]
 
733 
pick
 採 
 Unlike pick up (frame 667), this character is used for picking 
fruits from trees. Its elements: ﬁ nger . . . vulture . . . tree. [11]
 
734 
vegetable
 菜 
 Flower . . . vulture . . . tree. [11]
 
*  
birdhouse
 脇 
 Th e claw and crown of the roof of a house (whose chimney is 
displaced by the claw) combine to give us a birdhouse. [6]
瓣 瓦
 
735 
accept
 受 
 Birdhouse . . . crotch. [8]
 
736 
impart
 授 
 Fingers . . . accept. [11]
 
737 
love
 愛 
Birdhouse . . . heart . . . walking legs. [13]
瓧 瓩 瓮
 
*  
elbow
 厶 
 Th is pictograph of an arm bent at the elbow is obvious. [2]
瓰 瓱

218 | remembering the kanji 1
 
738 
pay
 払 
 Finger . . . elbow. [5]
 
739 
wide
 広 
 Cave. . . elbow. [5]
 
740 
broaden
 拡 
 Fingers . . . wide. Th e connection with the previous character is 
very close. Beware. [8]
 
741 
mineral
 鉱 
 Metal . . . wide. [13]
 
742 
valve
 弁 
 Elbow . . . two hands. [5]
 
743 
male
 雄 
 By one’s side . . . elbow . . . turkey. Its match is in frame 563. [12]
 
744 
pedestal
 台 
 Elbow . . . mouth. [5]
 
745 
neglect
 怠 
 Pedestal . . . heart. [9]
 
746 
reign
 治 
 Water . . . pedestal. [8]
 
747 
commence
 始 
 Woman . . . pedestal. [8]
 
748 
womb
 胎 
 Part of the body . . . pedestal. [9]

lesson 23 | 219
 
749 
window
 窓 
 House . . . human legs . . . elbow . . . heart. [11]
瓲 瓶 瓷 瓸
 
750 
gone
 去 
 Soil . . . elbow. [5]
甁 甃
 
751 
method
 法 
 Water . . . gone. [8]
 
* 
wall
 脈 
 Th e elbow hanging under a ceiling will become our element for 
a wall. [3]
絛 絜 絞
 
752 
meeting
 会 
 Meeting . . . wall. Th is is the full character for meeting, from 
which the abbreviated primitive that we met back in Lesson 12 
gets its name. [6]
甄 甅
 
753 
climax
 至 
 Wall . . . soil. Th e key word allows for the full variety of connota-
tions: to peak, to arrive at the end, and the like. [6]
甌 甍
 
754 
room
 室 
 House . . . climax. [9]

220 | remembering the kanji 1
 
755 
arrival
 到 
 Climax . . . saber. [8]
 
756 
doth
 致 
 Th e archaic English form for “does” indicates a humble form of 
the verb “to do.” It is made up of climax and taskmaster. [10]
 
757 
mutually
 互 
 When you draw this character think of linking two walls 
together, one right side up and the other upside down. [4]
絡 絢 絣 給
 
* 
infant
 脳 
 Th is primitive can be seen as an abbreviation of the full primi-
tive for child, the second stroke dividing the head from the body 
much as it does in 子 and the other strokes condensing the long 
form so that it can be used atop its relative primitive. We change 
the meaning to infant to facilitate keeping the full form and its 
abbreviation distinct. [4]
甎 甑
 
758 
abandon
 棄 
 Infant . . . buckle (see frame 415) . . . tree. [13]
甓 甕 甘
 
759 
bring up
 育 
 Since the key word has to do with raising children to be strong 
both in mind and body, it is easy to coordinate the primitive 
elements: infant . . . meat. [8]
 
760 
remove
 撤 
 Fingers . . . bring up . . . taskmaster. [15]

lesson 24 | 221
甚 甜 甞
 
761 
allot
 充 
 Infant . . . human legs. [6]
 
762 
gun
 銃 
 Metal . . . allot. [14]
 
763 
sulfur
 硫 
 Rock . . . infant . . . ﬂ ood. [12]
 
764 
current
 流 
 Water . . . infant . . . ﬂ ood. Be sure to distinguish the two water- 
primitives from one another in making your story. [10]
 
765 
license
 允 
 Elbow . . . human legs. [4]
 
766 
tempt
 唆 
 Mouth . . . license . . . walking legs. [10]
絨 絮 統
Lesson 24
After that long excursus into arm and hand primitives, we will take a 
breather in this lesson with a much easier group built up from the kanji for exit 
and enter.

222 | remembering the kanji 1
 
767 
exit
 出 
 Th e kanji for exit pictures a series of mountain peaks coming 
out of the earth. Learn it together with the following frame. [5]
生 産 甥 甦 用
 
768 
mountain
 山 
 Note the clearer outline of a triangular mountain here. [3]
紗 紘 紙
 
769 
bungling
 拙 
 Fingers . . . exit. [8]
 
770 
boulder
 岩 
 Mountain . . . rock. [8]
 
771 
charcoal
 炭 
 Mountain . . . ashes. [9]
 
772 
branch oﬀ 
 岐 
 Mountains . . . branch. [7]
 
773 
mountain pass
 峠 
 Mountain . . . above . . . below. [9]
級 紛 紜
 
774 
crumble
 崩 
 Mountain . . . companion. [11]
 
775 
secrecy
 密 
 House . . . invariably . . . mountain. [11]

lesson 24 | 223
絲 絳 絵
 
776 
honey
 蜜 
 House . . . invariably . . . insect. [14]
 
777 
storm
 嵐 
 Mountain . . . winds. [12]
 
778 
promontory
 崎 
 Mountain . . . strange. Hint: you might save yourself the trouble 
of a story here simply by recalling the kanji for cape (frame 153) 
and toying around with the diﬀ ering images suggested by the 
key words promontory and cape. [11]
 
779 
enter
 入 
 Th is character is meant to be a picture of someone walking 
left ward, putting one leg forward in order to enter someplace. 
Since the “in” side of a character is the left , it should be easy to 
remember the writing of this character. [2]
甫 甬
*  As a primitive, the meaning of the key word is expanded to 
include: to go in, to put in, to come in, and the like. It generally 
appears atop its relative primitive, where, unlike the element 
for umbrella 聿, the two strokes do not touch each other, mak-
ing it virtually the same as the kanji for eight. When it appears 
in any other position, however, it retains its original form.
 
780 
crowded
 込 
 Enter . . . road. [5]
 
781 
part
 分 
 Go in . . . dagger. [4]

224 | remembering the kanji 1
絶 絹
 
782 
poverty
 貧 
 Part . . . shells/money. [11]
 
783 
partition
 頒 
 Part . . . head. [13]
 
784 
public
 公 
 Come in . . . elbows. Use the key word in its adjectival sense, not 
as a noun. [4]
 
785 
pine tree
 松 
 Tree . . . public. [8]
 
786 
venerable old man
 翁 
 Public . . . feathers. [10]
 
787 
sue
 訟 
 Words . . . public. [11]
 
788 
valley
 谷 
 Go in . . . an umbrella . . . a mouth. Because of space restric-
tions, the element for go in is shortened in this character. If you 
stand on your head and look at this kanji, the image of a valley 
stands out more clearly: the mouth of the river whose water 
ﬂ ows down at the intersection of the two mountains, with the 
ﬁ nal two strokes adding the element of perspective. Now get 
back on your feet again and see if the image still remains clear. 
If not, then return to the primitives and make a story in the 
usual way. [7]
素 紡 索

lesson 24 | 225
 
789 
bathe
 浴 
 Water . . . valley. [10]
 
790 
contain
 容 
 Th is character depicts a house so large that it can contain an 
entire valley. [10]
 
791 
melt
 溶 
 Water . . . contain. [13]
 
792 
longing
 欲 
 Valley . . . yawn. Be sure to keep the key word distinct from pin-
ing (frame 633). [11]
 
793 
abundant
 裕 
 Th is character shows the typical cloak of valley folk, which, 
unlike the tailor-made, high-fashion overcoats of city folk, is 
loose-ﬁ tting and free-form. Hence the key word’s meaning of 
abundant. [12]
 
*  
gully
 脹 
 As an abbreviation of the kanji for a valley, this primitive gets 
its meaning as a small valley or gully. [5]
甯 田
 
794 
lead (metal)
 鉛 
 Metal . . . gully. [13]
 
795 
run alongside
 沿 
 Water . . . gully. Th e key word is meant to refer to things like riv-
ers and railway tracks that run alongside something else. [8]

Lesson 25
The following group of kanji revolve about primitive elements having to do 
with human beings. We shall have more to add to this set of primitives before 
we are through, but even the few we bring in here will enable us to learn quite a 
few new characters. We begin with another “roof” primitive.
 
*  
outhouse
 脾 
 Th e combination of the element for little, the basic “roof” 
structure here (in which the chimney was overwritten, as it was 
in the element for birdhouse), combined with the “window” 
(mouth) below, gives this element its meaning of outhouse. 
Although the window is not an essential part of an outhouse, I 
think you will agree that its inclusion is a boon to the imagina-
tion, greatly simplifying the learning of the characters in which 
it appears. [8]
由 甲 申
 
796 
prize
 賞 
 Outhouse . . . shellﬁ sh. [15]
 
797 
party
 党 
 Th ink of this key word as referring to a political party, not a 
gala aﬀ air. Its elements: human legs . . . sticking out of an out-
house window. [10]
 
798 
hall
 堂 
 Outhouse . . . land. [11]

lesson 25 | 227
 
799 
usual
 常 
 Outhouse . . . towel. [11]
 
800 
skirt
 裳 
 Th e key word refers to an ancient skirt once used as part of a 
woman’s costume. Th e primitives you have to work with are: 
outhouse . . . garment. [14]
 
801 
manipulate
 掌 
 Outhouse . . . hand. [12]
 
802 
pelt
 皮 
 Th e simplest way to remember this character is to see it as built 
up from that for branch. Th e ﬁ rst stroke can then stand for 
something “hanging” down from the branch, namely its bark or 
pelt. Th e barb at the end of the second stroke is the only other 
change. Merely by concentrating on this as you write the follow-
ing small cluster of characters should be enough to ﬁ x the form 
in your mind. By way of exception, you might doodle around 
with the kanji’s form to see what you can come up with. [5]
男 甸 町 画 甼
 
803 
waves
 波 
 Water’s . . . pelt. [8]
 
804 
old woman
 婆 
 Waves . . . woman. [11]
 
805 
expose
 披 
 Fingers . . . pelt. [8]
 
806 
rend
 破 
 Rock . . . pelt. [10]

228 | remembering the kanji 1
 
807 
incur
 被 
Cloak . . . pelt. [10]
畄 畆
 
*  
bone
 歹 
 Th is character is meant to be a pictograph of a bone attached to 
a piece of ﬂ esh (or vice versa.) Th e ﬁ rst stroke serves to keep it 
distinct from the character for evening (frame 109). [4]
畉 畊 畋 界
 
808 
remainder
 残 
 Bones . . . (parade) ﬂ oat. [10]
 
809 
martyrdom
 殉 
 Bones . . . decameron. [10]
 
810 
particularly
 殊 
 Bones . . . vermilion. [10]
 
811 
augment
 殖 
 Bones . . . straightaway. [12]
 
812 
ﬁ le
 列 
 Bones . . . saber. Th e sense of the key word is of people or things 
lined up in a row. [6]
 
813 
split
 裂 
 File . . . garment. [12]
 
814 
ardent
 烈 
 File . . . oven ﬁ re. [10]

lesson 25 | 229
 
815 
death
 死 
 Bones . . . spoon. Note how the ﬁ rst stroke is extended to the 
right, forming a sort of “roof” overhead. [6]
 
816 
interment
 葬 
 Flowers . . . death . . . two hands. Compare bury (frame 
179).[12]
 
*  
sunglasses
 舛 
 Th ese two elements are actually the full form whose abbrevia-
tion we learned as the character for measuring box in frame 
42. To the left , we see the familiar shape of evening, and to the 
right a completely new shape. Th e meaning we have assigned, 
sunglasses, is entirely arbitrary. [7]
畍 畏 畑 畔 瑩 留 畚
 
817 
wink
 瞬 
 Eye . . . birdhouse . . . sunglasses. [18]
 
818 
ear
 耳 
 Th e pictograph for the ear looks much like that for eye, but note 
how the stroke order gives it a diﬀ erent look. [6]
紫 紬 紮 累 細 紲
 
819 
take
 取 
 Ear . . . crotch. [8]
 
820 
gist
 趣 
 Run . . . take. [15]
 
821 
utmost
 最 
 Sun . . . take. [12]

230 | remembering the kanji 1
 
822 
snapshot
 撮 
 Finger . . . utmost. Th is character is used for taking photographs. 
Note how, conveniently, the element for “take” is included in 
it. [15]
 
823 
shame
 恥 
 Ear . . . heart. It is most rare to have the heart at the right, rather 
than at the bottom. Take advantage of this fact when you com-
pose your story. [10]
 
824 
post
 職 
 Th e key word refers to one’s occupation, or position of employ-
ment. Its elements: ear . . . kazoo. [18]
 
825 
holy
 聖 
 Ear . . . mouth . . . king. [13]
 
826 
daring
 敢 
 Spike . . . ear . . . taskmaster. [12]
 
827 
listen
 聴 
 Ear . . . needle . . . eye . . . heart. Compare frame 400 for this 
and the following kanji, and then once again when you get to 
frame 885. [17]
 
828 
pocket
 懐 
 State of mind . . . needle . . . eyes . . . garment. [16]
 
*  
mandala
 曼 
 Sun . . . eye . . . crotch. [11]
畛 畜 畝

lesson 25 | 231
 
829 
ridicule
 慢 
 State of mind . . . mandala. [14]
 
830 
loose
 漫 
 Water . . . mandala. [14]
 
831 
buy
 買 
 Eye . . . shellﬁ sh. [12]
 
832 
placement
 置 
 Eye . . . straightaway. [13]
 
833 
penalty
 罰 
 Eye . . . words . . . saber. [14]
 
834 
rather
 寧 
 House . . . heart . . . eye . . . spike. [14]
 
835 
voiced
 濁 
 Th e key word for this kanji connotes the “muddying” eﬀ ect on a 
soft  consonant brought about by vibrating the vocal chords. For 
example, in English a “j” is voiced while a “sh” is unvoiced. In 
Japanese, the し is changed to じ when it is voiced. Th e primi-
tives are: water . . .eye . . . bound up . . . insect. [16]
 
836 
ring
 環 
 Jewel . . . eye . . . ceiling . . . mouth . . . scarf. Th e number of ele-
ments is large here, so take care. Learn it in conjunction with 
the next frame, since these are the only two cases in this book 
where the combination of elements to the right appears. [17]
 
837 
send back
 還 
 Road . . . eye . . . ceiling . . . mouth . . . scarf. [16]

232 | remembering the kanji 1
 
838 
husband
 夫 
 Th e kanji for a husband or “head of the family” is based on 
the kanji for large and an extra line near the top for the “head.” 
Recall the kanji for heavens already learned back in frame 428, 
and be sure to keep your story for this kanji diﬀ erent. [4]
畠 畢 畤 略
 
839 
aid
 扶 
 Fingers . . . husband. [7]
 
840 
mountain stream
 渓 
 Water . . . vulture . . . husband. [11]
 
841 
standard
 規 
 Husband . . . see. [11]
 
842 
exchange
 替 
 Two husbands . . . day. [12]
 
843 
approve
 賛 
 Two husbands . . . shells. [15]
 
844 
submerge
 潜 
 Water . . . exchange. [15]
 
845 
lose
 失 
 ”To lose” here takes the sense of “misplace,” not the sense of 
defeat, whose kanji we learned in frame 63. It pictures a hus-
band with something falling from his side as he is walking 
along, something he loses. [5]
畦 畧

lesson 25 | 233
*  As a primitive, this character can also mean to drop.
 
846 
iron
 鉄 
 Metal . . . to drop. [13]
 
847 
alternate
 迭 
 To drop . . . road. [8]
 
848 
retainer
 臣 
 Th is kanji is actually a pictograph for an eye, distorted to make 
it appear that the pupil is protruding towards the right. Th is 
may not be an easy form to remember, but try this: Draw it 
once rather large, and notice how moving the two vertical lines 
on the right as far right as possible gives you the pictograph of 
the eye in its natural form. Th e “pop-eye” image belongs to an 
Emperor’s retainer standing in awe before his ruler. [7]
畩 番 畫 畭 畯 異 畳
*  As a primitive, the meaning of the key word becomes slave.
 
849 
princess
 姫 
 Woman . . . slave. [10]
 
850 
storehouse
 蔵 
 Flowers . . . parade . . . slaves. [15]
絽 綀 綉 綏
 
851 
entrails
 臓 
 Part of the body . . . storehouse. [19]
經 継

234 | remembering the kanji 1
 
852 
intelligent
 賢 
 Slave . . . crotch . . . shellﬁ sh. [16]
 
853 
strict
 堅 
 Slave . . . crotch . . . soil. [12]
 
854 
look to
 臨 
 Slave . . . reclining . . . goods. Th e key word suggests both looking 
ahead to something and “seeing to” what is at hand. Consistent 
with everything that we have learned about the role of the key 
word, this means that you must choose one meaning and stick 
to it. [18]
 
855 
perusal
 覧 
 Slaves . . . reclining . . . ﬂ oor . . . see. [17]
 
856 
gigantic
 巨 
 Th is kanji depicts a gigantic “pop-eye,” which accounts for its 
shape. Be sure not to confuse it with the slave (retainer) we just 
learned. [5]
続 綛 綜 綟 綠
 
857 
repel
 拒 
 Fingers . . . gigantic. [8]
 
858 
power
 力 
 With a little imagination, one can see a muscle in this simple, 
two-stroke character meaning power. [2]
畴 當
*  As a primitive, either muscle or power can be used.

lesson 25 | 235
 
859 
man
 男 
 Rice ﬁ elds . . . power. Th is character is the gender-speciﬁ c man, 
not the generic human person of frame 951. [7]
 
860 
labor
 労 
 Schoolhouse . . . power. [7]
 
861 
recruit
 募 
 Graveyard . . . power. [12]
 
862 
inferiority
 劣 
 Few . . . muscles. [6]
 
863 
achievement
 功 
 Craft  . . . power. [5]
 
864 
persuade
 勧 
 Pegasus . . . power. [13]
 
865 
toil
 努 
 Guy . . . muscle. [7]
 
866 
encourage
 励 
 Cliﬀ  . . . ten thousand . . . power. [7]
 
867 
add
 加 
 Muscles . . . mouth. Th is is the only case in which the primitive 
for muscle appears on the left ; note should be taken of the fact 
in composing one’s story. [5]
 
868 
congratulations
 賀 
 Add . . . shells. [12]

236 | remembering the kanji 1
 
869 
erect
 架 
 Add . . . trees. Hint: if you ever played with an “Erector Set” or 
“Tinker Toys” as a child, don’t pass up the opportunity to relate 
it to this kanji’s key word and the element for trees. [9]
 
870 
armpit
 脇 
 Part of the body . . . muscles (three of which give us “triceps” or 
“muscles on top of muscles”). You will want to keep the kanji 
distinct from the one that follows by paying attention to the 
positioning of the elements. [10]
 
871 
threaten
 脅 
 Triceps . . . meat. [10]
 
872 
co-
 協 
 Th is preﬁ x should be kept distinct from inter  (frame 209) and 
mutual (frame 757). Its elements: needle . . . triceps. [8]
 
873 
going
 行 
 By joining the top four strokes, you should get a picture of the 
front current of a river, the stream trailing behind. Hence the 
character for going. [6]
畷 畸 畿 疂 疆 疇
*  As a primitive, this character has two forms. Reduced to the 
left  side only, 彳, it can mean a column, going, or a line of some-
thing or other. When the middle is opened up to make room 
for other elements, it means a boulevard. 
 
874 
rhythm
 律 
 Th is character depicts a calligrapher’s brush and its rhythmic 
sway as it ﬂ ows down a column writing kanji on the way. [9]
 
875 
restore
 復 
 Going . . . double back. [12]

lesson 25 | 237
 
876 
gain
 得 
 Column . . . nightbreak . . . glue. [11]
 
877 
accompany
 従 
 Column . . . animal horns . . . mending. [10]
 
878 
junior
 徒 
 Line . . . run. [10]
 
879 
wait
 待 
 Line . . . Buddhist temple. [9]
 
880 
journey
 往 
 Column . . . candlestick. Th is character has the special sense of 
journeying to someplace or other. [8]
 
881 
subjugate
 征 
 Column . . . correct. [8]
 
882 
diameter
 径 
 Line . . . spool. [8]
 
883 
he
 彼 
 Going . . . pelt. Th is kanji refers to the third person singular per-
sonal pronoun, generally in its masculine form. [8]
 
884 
duty
 役 
 Going . . . missile. [7]
 
885 
benevolence
 徳 
 Going . . . needle . . . eye . . . heart. Refer back now to the note in 
frame 827. [14]

238 | remembering the kanji 1
 
886 
penetrate
 徹 
 Line . . . bring up . . . taskmaster. [15]
 
887 
indications
 徴 
 Line . . . mountain . . . king . . . taskmaster. [14]
疉 疊 疋 疎
 
888 
penal
 懲 
 Indications . . . heart. [18]
 
889 
delicate
 微 
 Line . . . mountain . . . ceiling . . . human legs . . . taskmaster. [13]
 
890 
boulevard
 街 
 Th is is the character from which the sense of boulevard men-
tioned in frame 873 derives. Its elements: boulevard . . ivy. [12]
 
891 
equilibrium
 衡 
 Boulevard . . . bound up . . . brains . . . St. Bernard dog. [16]
疏 疑 疔 疚 疝
Lesson 26
We return once again to the world of plants and growing things, not yet to 
complete our collection of those primitives, but to focus on three elements that 
are among the most commonly found throughout the kanji.
Now and again, you will no doubt have observed, cross-reference is made to 
other kanji with similar key words. Th is can help avoid confusion if you check 
your earlier story and the connotation of its respective key word before pro-

lesson 26 | 239
ceeding with the kanji at hand. While it is impossible to know in advance which 
key words will cause confusion for which readers, I will continue to point out 
some of the likely problem cases.
 
*  
wheat
 禾 
 Th is primitive element will be made to stand for wheat. It con-
notes a special grain, more expensive than ordinary rice and so 
reserved for special occasions. Alternatively, it can mean cereal. 
Its form is like that for tree, except for the dot at the top to rep-
resent a spike of wheat blowing in the wind. [5]
疣 疥 疫 疱 疲
 
892 
draft 
 稿 
 Th e key word connotes the preliminary composition of a plan 
or manuscript. Its elements: wheat . . . tall. [15]
 
893 
earnings
 稼 
 Wheat . . . house. [15]
 
894 
extent
 程 
 Wheat . . . display . Do not confuse with extremity (frame 217) 
or boundary (frame 484). [12]
. 
895 
tax
 税 
 Wheat . . . devil. [12]
 
896 
immature
 稚 
 Wheat . . . turkey. [13]
 
897 
harmony
 和 
 Wheat . . . mouth. [8]

240 | remembering the kanji 1
 
898 
shift 
 移 
 Wheat . . . many. [11]
 
899 
second
 秒 
 Th e reference here is to a second of time. Th e elements: wheat . . . 
few. [9]
 
900 
autumn
 秋 
 Wheat . . . ﬁ re. [9]
 
901 
distress
 愁 
 Autumn . . . heart. [13]
 
902 
private
 私 
 Wheat . . . elbow. Like the characters for I (frame 17) and ego 
(frame 640), this kanji is also representative of the subject, 
with the special connotation of privacy. [7]
 
903 
regularity
 秩 
 Wheat . . . drop. [10]
 
904 
secret
 秘 
 Cereal . . . invariably. [10]
 
905 
appellation
 称 
 Wheat . . . reclining . . . little. [10]
 
906 
proﬁ t
 利 
 Wheat . . . saber. Be careful not to confuse with gain (frame 
876) or earnings (frame 893). [7]
 
907 
pear tree
 梨 
 Proﬁ t . . . tree. [11]

lesson 26 | 241
 
908 
harvest
 穫 
 Wheat . . . ﬂ owers . . . vessels. Compare frames 700 and 701 for 
the right side. [18]
 
909 
ear of a plant
 穂 
 Wheat . . . favor. [15]
 
910 
rice plant
 稲 
 Wheat . . . vulture . . . olden times. [14]
 
911 
incense
 香 
 Wheat . . . sun. [9]
 
912 
seasons
 季 
 Wheat . . . child. [8]
 
913 
committee
 委 
 Wheat . . . woman. [8]
 
914 
excel
 秀 
 Wheat . . . ﬁ st. [7]
 
915 
transparent
 透 
 Excel . . . road-way. [10]
 
916 
entice
 誘 
 Words . . . excel. Compare beckon (frame 650), to urge (frame 
282), seduce (frame 86), and encourage (frame 866) when 
choosing your connotation. [14]
 
917 
cereals
 穀 
 Samurai . . . crown . . . wheat . . . missile. [14]

242 | remembering the kanji 1
 
918 
germ
 菌 
 Flowers . . . pent in . . . wheat. [11]
 
919 
rice
 米 
 Th is kanji has a pictographic resemblance to a number of grains 
of rice lying on a plate in the shape of a star. [6]
疳 疵 疸 疹 疼 疽
*  As a primitive, it keeps its meaning of rice, and is meant to 
connote a very ordinary, commonplace grain, in contrast to 
the primitive for wheat that we just learned. (Th is meaning 
accords well with Japan, where the output of rice far exceeds 
that of wheat.)
 It occasionally takes the shape 脊 when it stands on its own, 
or is joined to a line above. In this case, we shall have it refer 
speciﬁ cally to grains of rice. Th is primitive is not to be con-
fused with the similar-looking primitive for water. While 
the stroke orders are nearly alike, grains of rice has 5 strokes, 
while water only has 4 because it joins the second and third 
strokes into one.
 Finally, we may note that by itself the kanji for rice is an 
abbreviation used for the United States, which can then also 
serve as an alternate reading for the main primitive form, if 
you so wish.
 
920 
ﬂ our
 粉 
 Rice . . . part. [10]
 
921 
sticky
 粘 
 Rice . . . fortune-telling. [11]
 
922 
grains
 粒 
 Rice . . . vase. [11]

lesson 26 | 243
 
923 
cosmetics
 粧 
 Rice . . . cave . . . soil. [12]
 
924 
astray
 迷 
 Road . . . United States. [9]
 
925 
chic
 粋 
 Rice . . . game of cricket. (See frame 116.) [10]
 
926 
provisions
 糧 
 Rice . . . quantity. [18]
 
927 
chrysanthemum
 菊 
 Flower . . . bound up . . . rice. [11]
 
928 
core
 奥 
 A drop . . . pent in . . . rice . . . St. Bernard dog. Notice that the 
horizontal line of the bottom primitive doubles up as the ﬁ nal 
stroke for pent in. [12]
 
929 
number
 数 
 Rice . . . woman . . . taskmaster. [13]
 
930 
watchtower
 楼 
 Tree . . . rice . . . woman. [13]
 
931 
sort
 類 
 Rice . . . St. Bernard dog . . . head. [18]
 
932 
lacquer
 漆 
 Water . . . tree . . . umbrella . . . grains of rice. [14]

244 | remembering the kanji 1
 
933 
Esq.
 様 
 Th e abbreviation Esq. will help associate this character with the 
honoriﬁ c form of address to which it belongs. Its elements are: 
tree . . .sheep . . . grains of rice. Note that the ﬁ nal vertical stroke 
in the element for sheep is extended to form the ﬁ rst stroke for 
grains of rice. [14]
疾 痂 痃
 
934 
request
 求 
 Let the drop in the upper right-hand corner of this character 
close the right angle oﬀ  to make an arrowhead. Whenever we 
ﬁ nd the needle with that drop in an element that has no other 
special meaning, we will take advantage of this primitive mean-
ing. At the bottom, we see the grains of rice, the vertical line 
doubling up for the two elements. Do not confuse with petition 
(frame 135). [7]
 
935 
ball
 球 
 Ball . . . request. [11]
 
936 
salvation
 救 
 Request . . . taskmaster. [11]
 
937 
bamboo
 竹 
 Bamboo grows upwards, like a straight nail, and at each stage 
of its growth (which legend associates with the arrival of the 
new moon) there is a jointed rootstock (the ﬁ rst stroke). Two 
such bamboo stalks are pictured here. [6]
病 症 痊 痍 痒 痔
*  As a primitive, the meaning remains the same, but the vertical 
lines are severely abbreviated so that they can take their place 
at the top where, like ﬂ owers, they are always to be found.

lesson 26 | 245
 
938 
laugh
 笑 
 Bamboo . . . heavens. [10]
 
939 
bamboo hat
 笠 
 Bamboo . . . vase. [11]
 
940 
bamboo grass
 笹 
 Bamboo . . . generation. [11]
 
941 
muscle
 筋 
 Bamboo . . . part of the body . . . power. Here we see how the 
primitive meaning of muscle was derived from the kanji for 
power. [12]
 
942 
box
 箱 
 Bamboo . . . inter-. [15]
 
943 
writing brush
 筆 
 Bamboo . . . brush. [12]
 
944 
cylinder
 筒 
 Bamboo . . . monk. [12]
 
945 
etc.
 等 
 Bamboo . . . Buddhist temple. [12]
 
946 
calculate
 算 
 Bamboo . . . eyes . . . two hands. [14]
 
947 
solution
 答 
 Bamboo . . . ﬁ t. [12]

246 | remembering the kanji 1
 
948 
scheme
 策 
 Bamboo . . . belted tree (see frame 417). [12]
 
949 
register
 簿 
 Bamboo . . . water . . . acupuncturist. [19]
 
950 
fabricate
 築 
 Bamboo . . . craft  . . . mediocre . . . wood/tree. [16]
Lesson 27
This lesson will take us beyond the halfway mark. From there on, it will all 
be downhill. Th e ﬁ nal uphill push will involve what appears to be the simplest 
of primitive elements. It was withheld until now because of the diﬃ  culty it 
would have caused earlier on.
 
951 
person
 人 
 Th e character for enter (frame 779) showed someone walking 
inwards (in terms of the direction of writing). Th e one for per-
son, shown here, represents someone walking outwards. [2]
痕 痘
*  As a primitive, it can keep its kanji form except when it 
appears to the left  (its normal position), where it is made to 
stand up in the form 脛.
 The primitive meaning is another matter. The abstract 
notion of person so oft en has a relation to the meaning of the 
kanji that confusion readily sets in. So many of the previous 
stories have included people in them that simply to use person 
for a primitive meaning would be risky. We need to be more 
speciﬁ c, to focus on one particular person. Try to choose some-

lesson 27 | 247
one who has not ﬁ gured in the stories so far, perhaps a color-
ful member of the family or a friend whom you have known 
for a long time. Th at individual will appear again and again, 
so be sure to choose someone who excites your imagination.
 
952 
assistant
 佐 
 Person . . . left . [7]
 
953 
however
 但 
 Person . . . nightbreak. [7]
 
954 
dwell
 住 
 Person . . . candlestick. [7]
 
955 
rank
 位 
 Person . . . vase. [7]
 
956 
go-between
 仲 
 Person . . . in. [6]
 
957 
body
 体 
 Person . . . book. [7]
 
958 
remote
 悠 
 Person . . . walking stick . . . taskmaster . . . heart. [11]
 
959 
aﬀ air
 件 
 Person . . . cow. [6]
 
960 
attend
 仕 
 Person . . . samurai. Th e key word means to wait on someone or 
serve them. [5]

248 | remembering the kanji 1
 
961 
other
 他 
 Person . . . scorpion. [5]
 
962 
prostrated
 伏 
 Person . . . chihuahua. [6]
 
963 
transmit
 伝 
 Person . . . rising cloud. Hint: the Amerindians’ smoke signals 
can help provide a good image for this kanji, whose key word is 
meant to include transmissions of all sorts. [6]
 
964 
Buddha
 仏 
 Person . . . elbow. [4]
 
965 
rest
 休 
 Person . . . tree. Do not confuse with relax (frame 190).[6]
 
966 
provisional
 仮 
 Person . . . anti-. [6]
 
967 
chief
 伯 
 Person . . . white dove. [7]
 
968 
vulgar
 俗 
 Person . . . valley. Th e key word should be taken in its older 
sense of “popular” or “commonplace.” [9]
 
969 
faith
 信 
 Person . . . words. [9]
 
970 
excellent
 佳 
 Person . . . ivy. To distinguish from excel (frame 914), eminent 
(frame 51), esteem (frame 184), and exquisite (frame 123), 
give the key word its own unique connotation. [8]

lesson 27 | 249
 
971 
reliant
 依 
 Person . . . garment. [8]
 
972 
example
 例 
 Person . . . ﬁ le. [8]
 
973 
individual
 個 
 Person . . . harden. [10]
 
974 
healthy
 健 
 Person . . . build. [11]
痙 痛 痞
 
975 
side
 側 
 Person . . . rule. See frame 88 for help. [11]
 
976 
waiter
 侍 
 Person . . . Buddhist temple. Th e key word is deceptively mod-
ern, but the character itself is another way of writing “samu-
rai.” Be careful not to confuse with the kanji for attend (frame 
960).[8]
 
977 
halt
 停 
 Person . . . pavilion. [11]
 
978 
price
 値 
 Person . . . straightaway. [10]
 
979 
emulate
 倣 
 Person . . . set free. [10]

250 | remembering the kanji 1
 
980 
overthrow
 倒 
 Person . . . arrival. [10]
 
981 
spy
 偵 
 Person . . . upright. [11]
 
982 
Buddhist priest
 僧 
 Person . . . increase. [13]
 
983 
hundred million
 億 
 Person . . . idea. [15]
 
984 
ceremony
 儀 
 Person . . . righteousness. [15]
 
985 
reparation
 償 
 Person . . . prize. [17]
 
986 
hermit
 仙 
 Person . . . mountain. [5]
 
987 
sponsor
 催 
 Hermit . . . turkey. Note what has happened to the mountain in 
the element for hermit. In order to make room for the turkey, it 
was raised and condensed. [13]
 
988 
humanity
 仁 
 To refer to the fullness of humanity that can only be achieved 
in dialogue with another (person . . . two), Confucius used this 
character. [4]
 
989 
scorn
 侮 
 Every . . . person. [8]

lesson 27 | 251
 
990 
use
 使 
 Person . . . oﬃ  cer. [8]
 
991 
convenience
 便 
 Person . . grow late. Hint: this kanji also means that unmention-
able material that one disposes of when one goes to the “conve-
niences." [9]
 
992 
double
 倍 
 Person . . . muzzle. Do not confuse with the kanji for duplicate 
(frame 465). [10]
 
993 
tenderness
 優 
 Person . . melancholy. [17]
 
994 
fell
 伐 
 Person . . . ﬁ esta. Hint: recall the German legend of the English 
missionary, Saint Boniface, who felled the sacred oak tree dedi-
cated to Th or at Geismar (in lower Hessia), occasioning a great 
ﬁ esta for the Christians in the neighborhood to mark the defeat 
of their pagan competition. Be sure to ﬁ t your special person 
into the story if you use it. [6]
 
995 
inn
 宿 
 House . . . person . . . hundred. [11]
 
996 
wound
 傷 
 Person . . . reclining . . . piggy bank. [13]
 
997 
protect
 保 
 Person . . . mouth . . . tree. [9]

252 | remembering the kanji 1
 
998 
praise
 褒 
 Top hat and scarf . . . protect. Note that the "tree" in protect 
becomes a wooden pole here. [15]
 
999 
greatness
 傑 
 Person . . . sunglasses . . . tree. [13]
 1000 
adhere
 付 
 Person . . . glue. Th e few cases in which this character serves as 
a primitive should include some connotation of “adhering to” 
that distinguishes it from “glued to.” Two examples follow. [5]
 1001 
token
 符 
 Bamboo . . . adhere. [11]
 1002 
municipality
 府 
 Cave . . . adhere. [8]
 1003 
responsibility
 任 
 Person . . . porter. [6]
 1004 
fare
 賃 
 Responsibility . . . shells/money. [13]
 1005 
substitute
 代 
 Person . . . arrow. [5]
 1006 
sack
 袋 
 Substitute . . . garment. [11]
 1007 
lend
 貸 
 Substitute . . . shells/money. [12]

lesson 27 | 253
 1008 
change
 化 
 Person . . . spoon. [4]
 1009 
ﬂ ower
 花 
 Flower . . . change. [7]
 1010 
freight
 貨 
 Change . . . shells. [11]
 
1011 
lean
 傾 
 Change . . . head. Th e key word has the sense of leaning on or 
toward someone or something. [13]
 
1012 
what
 何 
 Person . . . can. [7]
 
1013 
baggage
 荷 
 Flowers . . . what. [10]
 
1014 
sagacious
 俊 
 Person . . . license . . . walking legs. [9]
 
1015 
bystander
 傍 
 Person . . . stand . . . crown . . . compass. [12]
 
1016 
long time
 久 
 Th is character uses the diagonal sweep of the second stroke to 
double up for bound up and a person. Th ink of a mummy, and 
the key word will not be far behind. [3]
痢 痣 痩

254 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1017 
furrow
 畝 
 Th ink of the three kinds of furrows shown here in this char-
acter—a top hat’s rim, a rice ﬁ eld’s ridges, and the wrinkles that 
show you’ve been around a long time. [10]
 
1018 
captured
 囚 
 Person . . . pent in. [5]
 
1019 
inside
 内 
 Person . . belt. Note that we cannot use the primitive meaning of 
hood here because the person runs through the element, not 
under it. [4]
痰 痲
 1020 
third class
 丙 
 Th ose no-frills ﬂ ights the airlines oﬀ er to attract customers 
should help create an image from ceiling . . . person . . . belt. Th e 
kanji meaning “inside” should not be used because of its prox-
imity to the element for “in.” [5]
 
1021 
design
 柄 
 Tree . . . third class. [9]
 1022 
meat
 肉 
 Let this doubling of one of the elements for “inside” yield the 
sense of “insides” to approach the key word, meat. Th e abbrevi-
ated form of this character gave us the primitive meaning of 
ﬂ esh or part of the body for the kanji 月. [6]
 
1023 
rot
 腐 
Municipality . . . meat. [14]

lesson 28 | 255
 
*  
assembly line
 从 
 Th e duplication of the kanji for person gives us this primitive 
for assembly line. Perhaps you can imagine clones of your cho-
sen person rolling oﬀ  an assembly line in a factory. [4]
 1024 
sit
 座 
 Cave . . . assembly line . . . soil. [10]
饑 饒 饕 饗 首
 
1025 
graduate
 卒 
 Top hat . . . assembly line . . . needle. [8]
 1026 
umbrella
 傘 
 Umbrella . . . two assembly lines . . . needle. [12]
馗 馘 香 馞 馥
Lesson 28
In this lesson we pick up a group of unconnected characters and elements 
that have fallen between the cracks of the previous lessons, mainly because of 
the rarity of the characters themselves, of their primitive elements, or of the 
way in which they are written. In a later lesson, we will do this once again.
 1027 
monme
 匁 
 Th is character obliges us to use a Japanese key word for want of 
an English equivalent. It refers to an old unit of weight, equal 
to about 3.75 grams. Th e word is only slightly more useful in 
modern Japanese than cubits and kites are in modern English. 
Its primitives, if you look closely, are: bound up . . . arm. [4]

256 | remembering the kanji 1
痳 痴 痺
 
*  
plow
 腆 
 Take this as a pictograph of a plow. [2]
瑤 纖
 1028 
by means of
 以 
 Picture a person dragging a plow behind, and the drop of sweat 
which falls from his brow as he does his work. Th ink of him (or 
her, for that matter) making a living “by means of the sweat of 
their brows.” [5]
 1029 
similar
 似 
 Be sure to keep this key word distinct from likeness (frame 
100). Its elements: person . . . by means of. [7]
 
*  
puzzle
 并 
 Th ink of this element as a picture puzzle in which the pieces 
interlock. Its elements: horns . . . two hands. [6]
痼 痾 痿 瘁
 1030 
join
 併 
 Th e sense of the key word is one of joining things together that 
were previously separate. Its elements: person . . . puzzle. [8]
 
1031 
tile
 瓦 
 Ceiling . . . plow . . . ﬁ shhook . . . a drop of. [5]
綮 綯 綰 綱 網
 
1032 
ﬂ ower pot
 瓶 
 Puzzle . . . tile. [11]

lesson 28 | 257
 
1033 
Shinto shrine
 宮 
 Way back in Lesson 2 we learned the character for spine. Th e 
two other characters in which it is used we can now learn 
together in this and the following frame. Here a Shinto shrine 
is composed of house and spine. [10]
 1034 
occupation
 営 
 Schoolhouse . . . spine. [12]
 
1035 
virtuous
 善 
 Sheep . . . horns . . . mouth. Pay special attention to the writing of 
this character. [12]
綴 綵 綷 綸
 1036 
year
 年 
 In an odd fashion, the kanji for year joins together the element 
for horse, on the top, and the right half of the element for sun-
glasses. Th ink of it as a horse wearing sunglasses with one of the 
lenses popped out. We will use this latter image again, so learn it 
now and save yourself the trouble later. [6]
綺 綻 綽 維 綾 綿
 
1037 
night
 夜 
 First of all, be sure not to confuse the connotations of night 
with those of evening (frame 109) and nightbreak (frame 30). 
Its elements: top hat . . person . . .walking legs . . . drop. [8]
緇 緊 緋 総
 1038 
ﬂ uid
 液 
 Water . . . night. [11]

258 | remembering the kanji 1
 1039 
hillock
 塚 
 Soil . . . crown . . . sow. Compare frame 543. [12]
 
*  
shredder
 腋 
 Th e element on the left  looks like rice with a belt running 
through it, but we would do best to think of it in terms of its 
writing order: little . . . belt . . . little. On the right, of course, the 
taskmaster. [12]
瘉瘋瘍瘟
 1040 
cash
 幣 
 Shredder . . . towel. [15]
 
1041 
abuse
 弊 
 Shredder . . . two hands. [15]
 1042 
yell
 喚 
 Th e mouth on the left  is obvious. Th e rest is harder. Try this: 
four St. Bernard dogs bound up in a bunch. Together they should 
supply a clear enough portrait of a yell, provided you are careful 
to see all four of them. Note how the ﬁ nal stroke of the four is 
supplied by the long horizontal stroke of the St. Bernard. [12]
 1043 
interchange
 換 
 Fingers . . . four St. Bernard dogs bound up. [12]
 1044 
dissolve
 融 
 Ceiling . . . mouth . . . hood . . . human legs . . . spike . . . insect. Th is 
is the maximum number of elements to appear in any story in 
the book. [16]
瘠 瘡

Lesson 29
We come now to a rather simple group of primitives, built up from the three 
elements that represent banners, knots, and ﬂ ags. 
 
*  
banner
 腎 
 Here we have a unique enclosure made up of two elements: 
compass and reclining. Th ink of the banner as a standard for 
rallying around; then imagine a crowd reclining before a com-
pass (presumably to give them a “direction” in life). [6]
瘢 瘤
 1045 
alms
 施 
 Banner . . . scorpion. [9]
 1046 
rotation
 旋 
 A banner . . . a zoo. Hint: think of a merry-go-round. [11]
 1047 
play
 遊 
 Banners . . . children . . . road. [12]
 1048 
trip
 旅 
 Let the last 4 strokes, which are also the concluding strokes to 
the character for garment, represent a rag as its primitive mean-
ing. We shall meet this only on one other occasion. Th is gives 
us as our elements: banner . . . rag. [10]
緑 緒 緕 緖 緘

260 | remembering the kanji 1
 1049 
not
 勿 
 First take the primitive meaning of this character: knot. Th ink 
of it as the piglet minus its body (the horizontal stroke), that is, 
the curly tail that looks like a knot. As an exception, we will use 
the homonym to remember the abstract key word, not. [4]
線 緜 緝 緞
 1050 
thing
 物 
 Cow . . . knot. [8]
 
1051 
easy
 易 
 Sun . . . knot. [8]
 
1052 
grant
 賜 
 Shells . . . easy. [15]
 
*  
ﬂ ag
 尸 
 Th e pictographic representation of this element is obvious. 
Provided you can hold your imagination in check for the ﬁ rst 
example, you might best imagine your own national ﬂ ag in 
composing your stories. [3]
瘧 瘰 瘴
 
1053 
urine
 尿 
 Flag . . . water. [7]
 1054 
nun
 尼 
 Flag . . . spoon. [5]
 
1055 
mud
 泥 
 Water . . . nun. [8]

lesson 29 | 261
 1056 
fence
 塀 
 Soil . . . ﬂ ag . . . puzzle. [12]
 
1057 
footgear
 履 
 Flag . . . restore. [15]
 1058 
roof
 屋 
 Flag . . . climax. Note that this kanji has no relation to the draw-
ing of a “roof” used in the primitive for house (page 82). [9]
 1059 
grip
 握 
 Fingers . . . roof. [12]
 1060 
yield
 屈 
 Flag . . . exit. [8]
 
1061 
dig
 掘 
 Fingers . . . yield. [11]
 1062 
ditch
 堀 
Soil . . . yield. [11]
 1063 
reside
 居 
 Flag . . . old. Do not confuse with dwell (frame 954). [8]
 1064 
set
 据 
 Fingers . . . reside. [11]
 1065 
stratum
 層 
 Flag . . . increase. [14]

262 | remembering the kanji 1
 1066 
bureau
 局 
 Flag . . . phrase. Note how the ﬂ ag’s long stroke doubles up for 
the ﬁ rst stroke of phrase. [7]
 1067 
slow
 遅 
 Flag . . . sheep . . . road. [12]
 1068 
leak
 漏 
 Water . . . ﬂ ag . . . rain. [14]
 1069 
printing
 刷 
 Flag . . . towel . . . saber. [8]
 1070 
shaku
 尺 
 Th e key word shaku has actually come into English in the word 
shakuhachi, the ancient Japanese ﬂ ute that measured “one 
shaku and eight sun” (the “sun” being about an inch in length). 
Since the shaku is about one foot in length, this makes about 
20 inches. Let the ﬁ nal sweeping stroke be like a tape measure 
added to the ﬂ ag. [4]
艢 艤
* As a primitive, this will mean the shakuhachi ﬂ ute.
 
1071 
exhaust
 尽 
 Shakuhachi . . . ice. [6]
 1072 
swamp
 沢 
 Water . . . shakuhachi. [7]
 
1073 
translate
 訳 
 Words . . . shakuhachi. [11]

lesson 29 | 263
 1074 
choose
 択 
 Fingers . . . shakuhachi. [7]
 
1075 
daytime
 昼 
 Shakuhachi . . . nightbreak. [9]
 1076 
door
 戸 
Ceiling . . . ﬂ ag. [4]
 1077 
shoulder
 肩 
 Door . . . ﬂ esh. [8]
 1078 
tassel
 房 
 Door . . . compass. [8]
 1079 
fan
 扇 
 Door . . . wings. [10]
 1080 
hearth
 炉 
 Hearth ﬁ re . . . door. [8]
 
1081 
re-
 戻 
 Th e key word signals a “coming back” or return to some place 
or activity. Its elements: door . . . St. Bernard dog. [7]
 1082 
tears
 涙 
 Water . . . re- . Do not confuse with cry (frame 432). [10]
 
1083 
employ
 雇 
 Door . . . turkey. Be sure to keep distinct from both employee 
(frame 56) and use (frame 990). [12]

264 | remembering the kanji 1
 1084 
look back
 顧 
 Employ . . . head. [21]
 1085 
disclose
 啓 
 Door . . . taskmaster . . . mouth. [11]
Lesson 30
In this lesson we pick up a series of primitives related pictographically to 
one another and based on the image of a seed. But ﬁ rst we include a stray ele-
ment that does not really ﬁ t into any of our other categories but is very useful in 
forming some common and elementary kanji (in fact, 18 of them already at this 
point), namely, the altar.
 1086 
show
 示 
 Although the elements two and little are available for the using, 
it may be easier to remember this character as a picture of an 
altar. Something placed atop the altar is put on show for all to 
see. [5]
*  As a primitive, this kanji means altar. At the left , the abbre-
viated form that this element takes is made by chopping the 
altar in half and leaving only one dot behind to represent 
the right side. Th e new appearance of this primitive form, 礻, 
should be kept distinct from that for cloak, 衤, identical except 
for the one ﬁ nal short stroke.
 1087 
salutation
 礼 
 Th is key word refers to the polite bows and ceremonious forms 
of salutation so important in Japanese culture. Its elements: 
altar . . . ﬁ shhook. [5]

lesson 30 | 265
 1088 
auspicious
 祥 
 Altar . . . sheep. [10]
 1089 
celebrate
 祝 
 Altar . . . teenager. [9]
 1090 
blessing
 福 
 Altar . . . wealth. [13]
 
1091 
welfare
 祉 
 Altar . . . footprint. [8]
 1092 
company
 社 
 Altar . . . soil. Th e company referred to here is that of the mod-
ern business world. [7]
 1093 
inspection
 視 
 Altar . . . see. [11]
 1094 
Nara
 奈 
 We choose the city of Nara as the key word in this case because 
this kanji, frequently used in proper names, appears in Nara; 
and also because of Nara’s famed religious monuments, which 
help us with the primitives: St. Bernard dog . . . altar. [8]
 1095 
military oﬃ  cer
 尉 
 Flag . . . altar . . . glue. [11]
 1096 
consolation
 慰 
 Military oﬃ  cer . . . heart. [15]
 1097 
goodwill
 款 
 Samurai . . . altar . . . yawning. [12]

266 | remembering the kanji 1
 1098 
prohibition
 禁 
 Grove . . . altar. [13]
 1099 
collar
 襟 
Cloak . . . prohibition. [18]
 1100 
religion
 宗 
 House . . . altar. [8]
 
1101 
adore
 崇 
 Mountain . . . religion. [11]
 
1102 
ritual
 祭 
 Flesh . . . crotch . . . altar. Note how the second element is cut 
short, giving a tent-like eﬀ ect to the character. [11]
 
1103 
guess
 察 
 “Guess” here has the sense of a measured conjecture. Its ele-
ments: house . . . ritual. [14]
 
1104 
grate
 擦 
 Fingers . . . guess. [17]
 
1105 
wherefore
 由 
 Th e “wherefore” of this kanji explains the reason or origin of 
a thing. It does this graphically by depicting a seed in a rice 
ﬁ eld sending up a single sprout, which is the whole why and 
wherefore of the seed’s falling in the earth and dying. (When 
the ﬂ ower appears, you will recall from frame 234, we have a 
full seedling.) [5]
饉 饋 饌 饐

lesson 30 | 267
*  As a primitive, in conformity to the explanation above, this 
kanji will be taken to mean shoot or sprout.
 
1106 
pluck
 抽 
 Fingers . . . sprout. [8]
 
1107 
oil
 油 
 Water . . . sprout. [8]
 
1108 
sleeve
 袖 
 Cloak . . . sprout. [10]
 
1109 
mid-air
 宙 
 House . . . shoot. [8]
 
1110 
deliver
 届 
 Flag . . . sprout. [8]
 
1111 
ﬂ ute
 笛 
 Bamboo . . . sprout. [11]
 
1112 
axis
 軸 
 Car . . . shoot. [12]
 
1113 
armor
 甲 
 Th is kanji reverses the element for sprout, giving the image of 
roots being sent down into the earth by a seed planted in the 
rice ﬁ eld. From there you must invent a connection to the key 
word, armor. [5]
瘻 療
*  Th e primitive meaning is roots. Important to that word is the 
image of “pushing downwards,” as roots do.

268 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1114 
push
 押 
 Fingers . . . roots. Compare and contrast with pluck (frame 
1106). [8]
 
1115 
headland
 岬 
 Like the cape (frame 153) and the promontory (frame 778), 
the headland refers to a jut of land. Its elements: mountain . . . 
roots. [8]
 
1116 
insert
 挿 
 Fingers . . . thousand . . . roots. Observe how the writing order 
does not follow the elements in order, because the ﬁ nal stroke is 
used for two diﬀ erent elements. [10]
締 緡 緤 編
 
1117 
speaketh
 申 
 Th e olde English is used here to indicate a humble form of 
the third person singular of the verb “to speak.” It is written 
by a tongue wagging in the mouth with a walking stick rammed 
through it and coming out at both ends. [5]
癆 癇
*  While this kanji has obvious aﬃ  nities to the “seed” group, it 
also happens to be the zodiacal sign of the monkey (the one 
who speaketh no evil, among other things). We shall therefore 
take monkey as its primitive meaning.
 
1118 
expand
 伸 
 Person . . . monkey. [7]
 
1119 
gods
 神 
 Altar . . . monkey. [9]

lesson 31 | 269
 
1120 
search
 捜 
 Fingers . . . monkey . . . crotch. [10]
 
1121 
fruit
 果 
 Th e ﬁ nal stage of the seed is reached when the plant has reached 
its full growth (the tree) and comes to fruition, producing fruit 
full of new seeds that can return to the earth and start the pro-
cess all over again. Th e main thing to notice here is the element 
for brains at the top, which might prove more helpful than rice 
ﬁ eld for creating an image. [8]
 
1122 
confectionary
 菓 
 Flowers . . . fruits. [11]
 
1123 
chapter
 課 
 Words . . . fruit. [15]
 
1124 
naked
 裸 
Cloak . . . fruit. [13]
Lesson 31
By now you will have learned to handle a great number of very diﬃ  cult kanji 
with perfect ease and without fear of forgetting. Some others, of course, will 
take review. But let us focus on the ones you are most conﬁ dent about and can 
write most ﬂ uently, in order to add a remark about what role the stories, plots, 
and primitives should continue to play even aft er you have learned a character 
to your own satisfaction.
Th is course has been designed to move in steps from the full-bodied story 
(Part one) to the skeletal plot (Part two) to the heap of bones we call primi-
tive elements (Part three). Th is also happens roughly to be the way memory 
works. At ﬁ rst the full story is necessary (as a rule, for every kanji, no matter 

270 | remembering the kanji 1
how simple it appears), in that it enables you to focus your attention and your 
interest on the vivid images of the primitives, which in turn dictate how you 
write the character. Once the image has strutted through the full light of imagi-
nation, it will pass on, leaving its footprints on the interstices of the brain in 
some mysterious way. And those footprints are oft en enough of a clue about 
the nature of the beast to enable you to reconstruct the plot in broad outlines. 
Should you need to, you can nearly always follow the tracks back to their source 
and recall your whole story, but that is generally unnecessary. Th e third stage 
occurs when even the plot is unnecessary, and the key word by itself suggests 
a certain number of primitive meanings; or conversely, when seeing a kanji at 
once conjures up a speciﬁ c key word. Here again, the plot is still within reach if 
needed, but not worth bothering with once it has fulﬁ lled its task of providing 
the proper primitive elements.
Th ere is yet a fourth stage to be reached, as you have probably realized by 
now, but one you ought not trust until you have completed the full list of the 
kanji given here. In this stage, the primitive elements are suggested according 
to form without any immediate association to meaning. Quite early on, you will 
recall, we insisted that visual memory is to be discarded in favor of imaginative 
memory. It may now be clear just why that is so. But it should also be getting 
clear that visual memory deserves a suitable role of some sort or other, once it 
has a solid foundation. Th is is a process not to be rushed, however appealing its 
rewards in terms of writing ﬂ uency.
Insofar as you have experienced these things in your own study, fears about 
the inadequacy of the key words should be greatly allayed. For in much the 
same way that the character slowly ﬁ nds its way into the fabric of memory and 
muscular habits, the key word will gradually give way to a key concept distinct 
from the particular English word used to express it. Hence the substitution of 
a Japanese word—or even a number of words—will prove no stumbling block. 
Quite the contrary, it will help avoid confusion between key words with family 
resemblances.
In short, the number of steps required to learn the Japanese writing sys-
tem has not been increased by what we have been doing. It has simply become 
more pronounced than it is in traditional methods of drawing and redrawing 
the kanji hundreds of times until they are learned, and in that way the whole 
process has become much more eﬃ  cient. Pausing to think about just what your 
mind has been doing through this book should make the ideas mentioned in 
the Introduction much more plausible now than they must have seemed way 
back then.
But we must be on our way again, this time down a road marked “tools.”

lesson 31 | 271
 
1125 
ax
 斤 
 Th is character represents a picture of an ax, the two vertical 
lines being the handle and the horizontal strokes of the blade. 
Note the writing order carefully. [4]
癈 癌 癒 癖
 
1126 
chop
 析 
 Tree . . . ax. [8]
 
1127 
place
 所 
 Door . . . ax. [8]
 
1128 
pray
 祈 
 Altar . . . ax. [8]
 
1129 
near
 近 
 Ax . . . road. Be careful not to confuse with draw near (frame 
192) or bystander (frame 1015). [7]
 
1130 
fold
 折 
 Fingers . . . ax. Hint: make an image out of the Japanese art of 
“origami” (paper-folding). [7]
 
1131 
philosophy
 哲 
 Fold . . . mouth. [10]
 
1132 
departed
 逝 
 Th e connotation is of a “dearly departed” who has passed away. 
Th e elements: fold . . . road. [10]
 
1133 
vow
 誓 
 Fold . . . words. [14]

272 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1134 
temporarily
 暫 
 Car . . . ax . . . days. [15]
 
1135 
steadily
 漸 
 Water . . . car . . . ax. [14]
 
1136 
severance
 断 
 Fishhook . . . rice . . . ax. [11]
 
1137 
substance
 質 
 Two axes . . . shells. [15]
 
1138 
reject
 斥 
 Ax . . . a drop of. [5]
 
1139 
accusation
 訴 
 Words . . . reject. [12]
 
*  
saw
 乍 
 Th e saw in this primitive is distinguished from the primitive for 
ax by the extra “teeth” on the blade. [5]
癢 癧 癨 癩 癪
 
1140 
yesterday
 昨 
 Day . . . saw. [9]
 
1141 
lie
 詐 
 Th e lie in this character refers to falsehoods and ﬁ bs. Its ele-
ments: words . . . saw. [12]
 
1142 
make
 作 
 Person . . . saw. [7]

lesson 31 | 273
 
*  
broom
 ⺕ 
 Th e pictographic representation here is of the bristles on the 
head of a broom. [3]
癘 癜 癡
 
1143 
snow
 雪 
 Rain that undergoes a change so that it can be swept aside with 
a broom is snow. [11]
 
1144 
record
 録 
 Metal . . . broom . . . grains of rice. Note how the ﬁ nal stroke of the 
broom is extended slightly when an element below is attached 
directly to it. [16]
 
1145 
inquire
 尋 
 Broom . . . craft  . . . mouth . . . glue. [12]
 
1146 
hurry
 急 
 Bound up . . . broom . . . heart. [9]
 
1147 
calm
 穏 
 Wheat . . . vulture . . . broom . . . heart. [16]
 
1148 
encroach
 侵 
 Person . . . broom . . . crown . . . crotch. Gather the elements on the 
right into a composite image that can serve you in the next two 
frames. [9]
 
1149 
immersed
 浸 
 Water . . . broom . . . crown . . . crotch. [10]

274 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1150 
lie down
 寝 
 Do not confuse this key word with either the element for reclin-
ing or the character for prostrated (frame 962). Its primitive 
elements are: house . . . turtle . . . broom . . . crown . . . crotch. [13]
 
1151 
lady
 婦 
 Woman . . . broom . . . apron. [11]
 
1152 
sweep
 掃 
 Fingers . . . broom . . . apron. [11]
 
1153 
hit
 当 
 Little . . . broom. [6]
 
*  
rake
 腑 
 A single vertical stroke transforms broom into a rake. When an 
element comes below the rake, the vertical stroke is shortened, 
as we have seen before with other similar primitives such as 
sheep and cow. Moreover, when something comes above the 
rake and joins to it at the top, the vertical stroke begins at the 
top horizontal stroke, as in the following two frames. [4]
癬 癰 癲
 
1154 
contend
 争 
 Bound up . . . rake. [6]
 
1155 
clean
 浄 
 Water . . . contend. [9]
 
1156 
matter
 事 
 Th is key word here refers to abstract matters. Th e elements are: 
one . . . mouth . . . rake. Note how the rake handle reaches out the 
top and bottom of the character. [8]

lesson 31 | 275
 
1157 
T’ang
 唐 
 Th e key word here refers of course to the T’ang Dynasty in 
China (and not to the name of the drink astronauts take with 
them into outer space, though this could be useful for the next 
frame). Its elements: cave . . . rake . . . mouth. [10]
 
1158 
sugar
 糖 
 Rice . . . T’ang. [16]
 
*  
sieve
 腔 
 A rake and the grains of rice at the bottom give us a hint of win-
nowing, which relates clearly to the meaning of a sieve. [8]
癶 癸
 
1159 
sane
 康 
 Cave . . . sieve. [11]
 
1160 
apprehend
 逮 
 Th ink of apprehending criminals. Th e elements are: sieve . . . 
road. [11]
 
*  
mop
 尹 
 Th e only thing distinguishing a mop from a rake is the bent 
handle that does not cut through the top horizontal stroke. It 
depicts the swish-swash motion of a mop. [4]
緩 緬 緯 緲
 
1161 
Italy
 伊 
 Used chieﬂ y in proper names, and given the sound “i,” this kanji 
can be remembered as an abbreviation of Italy, for which it is 
still used today in Japan. Its primitives: person . . . mop. [6]

276 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1162 
old boy
 君 
 Th e somewhat highbrow British term of address is chosen here 
to represent the kanji for a form of address used towards one’s 
juniors. It is composed of: mop . . . mouth. [7]
 
1163 
ﬂ ock
 群 
 Old boys . . . sheep. [13]
 
*  
comb
 而 
 Th e pictograph of a comb is clearly visible in this primitive ele-
ment. [6]
発 登 發 白 百 皀
 
1164 
-proof
 耐 
 Th e key word is a suﬃ  x used to indicate “safe from” or “pro-
tected against,” as in the words rustproof, waterproof, and ﬁ re-
proof. It is composed of: comb . . . glue. [9]
 
1165 
demand
 需 
 Th e sense of demand is best captured by thinking of the eco-
nomic principle of “supply and demand.” Th e primitives: rain . . .  
comb. [14]
 
1166 
Confucian
 儒 
 Person . . . demand. [16]
 
1167 
edge
 端 
 Vase . . . mountain . . . comb. [14]
 
*  
shovel
 凵 
 Th is enclosure—which embraces its relative primitive from the 
bottom—is a pictograph of the scoop of a shovel. When room 
permits, the arms are extended upwards to nearly the same 
height as the relative element it holds. [2]

lesson 31 | 277
皂 皃
 
1168 
both
 両 
 Ceiling . . . belt . . . mountain. Note that the writing order follows 
the order in which the primitives are given here. [6]
 
1169 
full
 満 
 Water . . . ﬂ owers . . . both. Given the abstract nature of this last 
primitive, you may want to borrow the image from the previous 
frame. [12]
 
1170 
brush-stroke
 画 
 In forming an image for the key word, it is helpful to know that 
this kanji is used for artistic representations such as completed 
paintings, as well as for the number of brush-strokes in a char-
acter (as, for instance, in Indexes ii and iii at the end of this 
book). Its elements are: ceiling . . . sprout . . . shovel. [8]
皿 盂 的 皆 皇
 
1171 
tooth
 歯 
 Footprint . . . rice . . . shovel. [12]
 
1172 
bend
 曲 
 Picture yourself grabbing hold of the two strokes poking out 
the top of the kanji and wrenching them apart, thus giving the 
sense of bend. If you think of them as deriving from the ele-
ment for brains beneath (of course, the middle stroke has been 
reduplicated and pulled out to where it can be grabbed hold of), 
you can associate the key word with bending someone’s mind 
to your own point of view. [6]
 
1173 
cadet
 曹 
 Th is character is written in the order of its elements: one . . . 
bend . . . sun. [11]

278 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1174 
encounter
 遭 
 Cadet . . . road. [14]
 
1175 
rowing
 漕 
 Water . . . cadet. [14]
 
1176 
vat
 槽 
 Tree . . . cadet. [15]
 
1177 
Big Dipper
 斗 
 Th e Big Dipper here is of course the constellation of Ursa Major, 
of which this kanji is a sort of pictographic representation. [4]
皈 皋 皎 皐
*  Since we already have a primitive element for a “dipper”—
namely, the ladle—we shall let this one stand for a measuring 
cup. By the way, it would make a rather large one, since the 
kanji is also used for a measure of about 18 liters!
 
1178 
fee
 料 
 Measuring cup . . . rice. [10]
 
1179 
department
 科 
 Th ink here of the faculty or department you entered in univer-
sity, using the elements: measuring cup . . . wheat. [9]
 
1180 
map
 図 
 Pent in . . . Big Dipper. Hint: among the songs dating from the 
days of slavery that have become part of American folklore is 
one called “Follow the Drinking Gourd.” It referred to the night-
time travel of runaway slaves (those pent in) who had no maps 
other than the stars to guide them, among them the bright and 
predominant Big Dipper, the “Drinking Gourd.” [7]

lesson 32 | 279
 
1181 
utilize
 用 
 Meat . . . walking stick. Be sure to keep this key word distinct 
from that for use (frame 990). Th e stroke order is exactly as 
you would expect it from the order of the primitive elements as 
given. [5]
*  As a primitive element, we shall substitute the image of a 
screwdriver, perhaps the most utilized of all tools around the 
house.
 
1182 
comfortable
 庸 
 Cave . . . rake . . . screwdriver. [11]
 
1183 
equip
 備 
 Person . . . ﬂ owers . . . cliﬀ  . . . screwdriver. In cases like this you 
can jumble up the primitive into any order that seems best for 
the composition of a story, provided you feel conﬁ dent about 
the relative position that those primitives take to one another 
in the completed character. [12]
Lesson 32
In this lesson we pick up a few primitives of quantity to complement those 
we learned in Lesson 7, as well as some others related closely to elements 
learned earlier.
 
*  
salad
 腕 
 Th e element for ﬂ owers joins with the long horizontal stroke 
beneath it to create the picture of a bowl of salad. [4]

280 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1184 
once upon a time
 昔 
 Salad . . . days. Th is is the character with which Japanese fairy 
tales commonly begin. [8]
 
1185 
confused
 錯 
 Metal . . . once upon a time. [16]
 
1186 
borrow
 借 
 Person . . . once upon a time. [10]
 
1187 
pity
 惜 
 State of mind . . . once upon a time. Th e sense of the key word is 
that of a lost opportunity or bad turn of aﬀ airs, as in the phrase 
“What a pity!” [11]
 
1188 
set aside
 措 
 Fingers . . . once upon a time. [11]
 
1189 
scatter
 散 
 Salad . . . ﬂ esh . . taskmaster. [12]
 
1190 
twenty
 廿 
 Th e two tens joined at the bottom by a short line is actually the 
old character for twenty, which we might as well learn since we 
need its primitive form. It is written the same as salad, except 
for the shorter ﬁ nal stroke. [4]
綢 綣 綫 綬
 
*  
caverns
 腟 
 Th e primitive for caverns diﬀ ers from that for cave by the pres-
ence of the primitive for twenty, suggesting a maze of under-
ground caves. [7]

lesson 32 | 281
 
1191 
commoner
 庶 
 Caverns . . . oven ﬁ re. [11]
 
1192 
intercept
 遮 
 Commoner . . . road. [14]
 
1193 
seat
 席 
 Caverns . . . towel. [10]
 
1194 
degrees
 度 
 Th is key word refers to a gradation of measurement, not to aca-
demic diplomas. Its primitives: caverns . . . crotch. [9]
 
1195 
transit
 渡 
 Water . . . degrees. [12]
 
*  
haystack
 卉 
 Th e three needles stacked up give us a haystack (in which it 
may be harder to ﬁ nd the hay than the needles). In the rare case 
in which there is nothing underneath this element, as in the 
following frame, the last three strokes are written virtually the 
same as two hands—that is, the second stroke sweeps down 
slightly to the left . [5]
皓 皖 皙
 
1196 
bustle
 奔 
 Th e hustle and bustle of this character is depicted by a St. 
Bernard dog and a haystack. [8]
 
1197 
erupt
 噴 
 Mouth . . . haystack . . . clams. [15]

282 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1198 
tomb
 墳 
 Soil . . . haystack . . . clams. In order not to confuse this kanji 
with that for a grave (frame 231), something like the image of 
an Egyptian tomb should be adopted, with all its special con-
notations. [15]
 
1199 
aroused
 憤 
 State of mind . . . haystack . . . clams. [15]
 
*  
straw man
 尭 
 Th e two human legs added to the haystack (with the horizon-
tal stroke to keep the two parts distinct from one another and 
avoid an ugly tangle) give us a straw man. [8]
羅 羆 羇
 1200 
bake
 焼 
 Hearth . . . straw man. Take care to distinguish this kanji from 
cook (frame 468) and burn (frame 510) when you compose 
your story. [12]
 
1201 
daybreak
 暁 
 Sun . . . straw man. [12]
 1202 
half
 半 
 Although the writing order is diﬀ erent, one can remember the 
appearance of this character by seeing it as a little needle—the 
kind used for splitting hairs in half. (Again, according to rule, 
little takes a stroke beneath it in order to be placed over an ele-
ment that has no horizontal line at the top.) [5]
网 罔 罕 罘 罟
 
1203 
consort
 伴 
 Person . . . half. [7]

lesson 32 | 283
 1204 
paddy ridge
 畔 
 Rice ﬁ eld . . . half. Th e key word here refers to the ridges that rise 
up between the sections of a rice paddy. [10]
 
1205 
judgment
 判 
 Half . . . saber. You might recall the famous judgment of King 
Solomon, who oﬀ ered to slice a baby in two with a saber to give 
half to each of the mothers who claimed it as her own. [7]
 
*  
quarter
 腥 
 Th is character simply splits the vertical stroke of a half in half 
once again, to get a quarter. In so doing, it spreads the split 
stroke out to form a sort of enclosure under which its main 
relative primitive will be placed. It can be used either in its sub-
stantive or verbal meaning. [6]
皚 皛 皜
 1206 
ticket
 券 
 Quarter . . . dagger. [8]
 1207 
scroll
 巻 
 Quarter . . . snake. Th e key word refers to a manuscript rolled up 
into a scroll, not to a hanging scroll (frame 407). [9]
 1208 
sphere
 圏 
 Th is key word refers to a realm or orbit, not to a ball. Its ele-
ments: pent in . . . scroll. [12]
 1209 
victory
 勝 
 Moon . . . quarter . . . muscle. [12]
 
1210 
wisteria
 藤 
 Flower . . . moon . . . quarter . . . rice grains. [18]

284 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1211 
facsimile
 謄 
 Moon . . . quarter . . . words. [17]
 
1212 
one-sided
 片 
 Th is kanji is based on the pictograph of a tree with some 
branches going upwards and others hanging down, split right 
down the middle. When that picture’s right side is isolated, it 
becomes the kanji for one-sided, in the sense of only one part 
of a whole. [4]
皞 皦 皮 皰
 
1213 
printing block
 版 
 Although this character also carries the sense of an “edition” of 
a publication, the elements, one-sided and anti-, more readily 
suggest its other meaning of a printing block. [8]
 
1214 
of
 之 
 Th is character is now used chieﬂ y in proper names, and is best 
learned as the character closest to the hiragana え, though in 
fact it has no relation to it. [3]
*  In order to give this kanji a more concrete meaning when it is 
used as a primitive element, think of it as referring to building 
blocks with the hiragana written on them, much the same as 
the a-b-c blocks you played with as a child.
 
1215 
destitution
 乏 
 Drop of . . . building blocks. [4]
 
1216 
turf
 芝 
 Flowers . . . building blocks. [6]
 
1217 
negative
 不 
 You may play with the primitives of this kanji as you wish (ceil-
ing . . . person . . . a drop of), but you will probably ﬁ nd that its 

lesson 33 | 285
simplicity, and its frequency, make it easy to remember just as it 
is. [4]
練 緻 縁 縄
 
1218 
negate
 否 
 Negative . . . mouth. [7]
 
1219 
cupfuls
 杯 
 Tree . . . negative. [8]
Lesson 33
We turn now to the weapons that remain to be examined. To the saber, the 
dagger, and the arrow, we add three more primitives to complete the list: the 
spear, the snare, and the slingshot.
 1220 
dart
 矢 
 When shot high into the heavens, the dart gets so small it looks 
like a mere drop. Although this character could as well mean 
“arrow,” it has no connection with the primitive of that mean-
ing. Hence the new key word. [5]
 
1221 
rectify
 矯 
 Dart . . . angel. Compare your stories for correct (frame 379), 
revise (frame 339), and reformation (frame 528). [17]
 
1222 
tribe
 族 
 Banner . . . dart. [11]

286 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1223 
know
 知 
 Dart . . . mouth. [8]
 1224 
wisdom
 智 
 Know . . . sun. [12]
 
1225 
halberd
 矛 
 Th e halberd’s battle-ax head and long shaft  are depicted here. 
Take care with the number and order of the strokes. [5]
皴 皷 皸 皹 皺
 1226 
tender
 柔 
 Halberd . . . tree. [9]
 
1227 
task
 務 
 Halberd . . . taskmaster . . . muscle. [11]
 
1228 
fog
 霧 
 Weather/rain . . . task. [19]
 
*  
spear
 
腦 
 Th is weapon, which has the appearance of the long saber but 
is drawn slightly diﬀ erently, depicts a spear. It appears very 
rarely—in fact, only twice and both instances are given in the 
following frames. [2]
 
1229 
squad
 班 
 Spear . . . two balls. [10]
 
1230 
homecoming
 帰 
 Spear . . . broom . . . apron. Th e character for lady (frame 1151) 
shares the same right side as this character, which does not bode 
for a very happy homecoming. [10]

lesson 33 | 287
 
1231 
bow
 弓 
 Th is character pictures the bent wooden bow. Later we will 
learn how to make the bowstring that goes with it (frame 1386). 
If you stretch this character out and see the indentation on the 
left  as its handle, the pictography should be clearer. [3]
纎 纏 纐
 
1232 
pull
 引 
 Bow . . . walking stick. [4]
 
1233 
condolences
 弔 
 A bow . . . wrapped around a walking stick. [4]
 
1234 
vast
 弘 
 Bow . . . elbow. [5]
 
1235 
strong
 強 
 Vast . . . insect. Note how the elbow of vast is shrunken and ele-
vated to make room for the insect beneath. [11]
 
1236 
weak
 弱 
 Two bows . . with ice on them. [10]
 
*  
dollar sign
 弗 
 Composed of two walking sticks running through a bow, this 
character is infrequent as a primitive, and yet easy to remem-
ber for what it looks like (which is also what the Japanese 
adopted it to mean in days gone by): the dollar sign, $. When 
it is written under another element, the ﬁ rst vertical stroke is 
abbreviated to a short “tail” as the ﬁ nal stroke, and the second 
vertical stroke is cut oﬀ  at the top. Examples follow in frames 
1239 and 1240. [5]
盆 盈 益 盍

288 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1237 
seethe
 沸 
 Water . . . dollar sign. [8]
 
1238 
expense
 費 
 Dollar sign . . . shells/money. [12]
 
1239 
No.
 第 
 Th e key word No. is the abbreviation for “number.” Its elements: 
bamboo . . . dollar sign. [11]
 1240 
younger brother
 弟 
 Horns . . . dollar sign. [7]
 
*  
snare
 丂 
 Th e simple snare composed of a piece of vine and a bent twig is 
depicted here as a sort of abbreviation of the bow, to which it is 
related. [2]
盒 盖
 
1241 
adroit
 巧 
 Craft  . . . snare. [5]
 1242 
nickname
 号 
 Mouth . . . snare. [5]
 
1243 
decay
 朽 
 Tree . . . snare. Do not confuse with rot (frame 1023). [6]
 1244 
boast
 誇 
 Words . . . St. Bernard dog . . . ceiling . . . snare. [13]

lesson 34 | 289
 
1245 
dirty
 汚 
 Water . . . two . . . snare. Note that the ﬁ rst stroke for snare dou-
bles up with the ﬁ rst stroke for two. [6]
盗 盛 盜
 
*  
slingshot
 腫 
 Th e slingshot diﬀ ers from the snare by virtue of the ﬁ rst stroke, 
which you may take as the strip of rubber you pull back on, to 
make the slingshot sling. [2]
盒 盞
 1246 
bestow
 与 
 Slingshot . . . one. Later on we shall learn the character for give 
(frame 1897), but even at this point it is a good idea to distin-
guish this key word from impart (frame 736) and grant (frame 
1052). [3]
盞 盟
 1247 
copy
 写 
 Crown . . . bestow. [5]
Lesson 34
Although we still have a number of primitives left  relating to human activi-
ties, we may at this point pick up what remain of those having to do speciﬁ cally 
with people and parts of the human body.

290 | remembering the kanji 1
 1248 
somebody
 身 
 Th e key word somebody was chosen to convey the double 
meaning of this kanji: body and person. Its composition is 
based on the nose (which, you will recall, is also the kanji for 
oneself). Th e extension of the bottom and far right strokes of 
that element, together with the unusual diagonal stroke, forms 
the pictograph of somebody with a prominent paunch. [7]
盡 監 盤 盥 盧 盪 目
 1249 
shoot
 射 
 “I shot an arrow into the air, And it landed I know not where” 
goes the poem. (Th e poor poet obviously loses a lot of arrows.) 
Th is kanji, however, tells us where it did land. Its elements: 
somebody . . . glued to. [10]
 
1250 
apologize
 謝 
 Words . . . shoot. [17]
 
1251 
old man
 老 
 First, do not confuse this character with venerable old man 
(frame 786), which is far more rarely used. Th e character for 
an old man begins with an abbreviation of the character for 
somebody, the nose having been shortened into a simple criss-
cross of lines. But there is another, simpler way to remember it 
all: the soil drawn ﬁ rst indicates that one has come close to the 
age when “dust to dust” begins to take on a personal meaning; 
the diagonal walking stick for getting around; and the spoon for 
being spoon-fed. [6]
盲 直 相
*  As a primitive, the meaning is the same, but the final two 
strokes are omitted so that they can be replaced with other 
elements: 臘.

lesson 34 | 291
 
1252 
consider
 考 
 Old man . . . slingshot. Remember: you already have kanji for 
discriminating (frame 482), deliberation (frame 642), and 
think (frame 605). [6]
 
1253 
ﬁ lial piety
 孝 
 Old man . . . child. [7]
 
1254 
teach
 教 
 Filial piety . . . taskmaster. [11]
 
1255 
torture
 拷 
 Fingers . . . consider. [9]
 
1256 
someone
 者 
 Old man . . . sun. Th is key word looks diﬃ  cult because of its 
proximity to somebody. In fact, it is a very common kanji that 
will cause you no diﬃ  culty at all. Its meaning should be seen as 
the human referent for the abstract noun “something.” [8]
 * As a primitive it means a puppet-on-a-string.
 
1257 
boil
 煮 
 Puppet . . . oven ﬁ re. [12]
 
1258 
renowned
 著 
 Flowers . . . puppet. [11]
 
1259 
signature
 署 
 Eye . . . puppet. [13]
 1260 
sultry
 暑 
 Th e key word refers to the heat of summer. Its elements: sun . . . 
puppet. [12]

292 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1261 
various
 諸 
 Words . . . puppet. Do not confuse with miscellaneous (frame 
562). [15]
 
1262 
boar
 猪 
 Pack of wild dogs . . . puppet. [11]
 
1263 
strand
 渚 
 Th e strand referred to here is the stretch of land along a beach 
or shoreline. Its elements are: water . . . puppet. [11]
 1264 
gamble
 賭 
 Shells/money . . . puppet. [15]
 
*  
scissors
 腮 
 Th is primitive is based on that for husband. Th e two extra 
strokes represent a pair of scissors he is carrying around. [6]
盻 盾 省 眄
 
1265 
gorge
 峡 
 Mountain . . . scissors. [9]
 1266 
cramped
 狭 
 Pack of wild dogs . . . scissors. [9]
 
1267 
sandwiched
 挟 
 Fingers . . . scissors. Do not confuse with the kanji for pinch 
(frame 657). [9]
 
*  
maestro
 腰 
 To remember with this primitive meaning, you might picture 
a tuxedo-clad maestro waving his baton about wildly. Th e 
baton is, of course, the little drop at the top. And the two boxes 

lesson 34 | 293
attached to the long vertical stroke may represent his tuxedo 
tails, if you wish. [6]
眇 眈 眉 看 県 眛
 1268 
chase
 追 
 Maestro . . . road. [9]
 1269 
expert
 師 
 Maestro . . . ceiling . . . towel. [10]
 1270 
commander
 帥 
 Maestro . . . towel. [9]
 
1271 
bureaucrat
 官 
 By replacing the maestro’s baton (the drop) with the roof of a 
house, we have his equivalent in the institutional world of big 
government: the bureaucrat. [8]
 
1272 
coﬃ  n
 棺 
 Wood . . . bureaucrat. [12]
 
1273 
pipe
 管 
 Bamboo . . . bureaucrat. [14]
 
1274 
father
 父 
 Th e kindness and hard work of the ideal father is seen in this 
abbreviation of the taskmaster that leaves oﬀ  his rod or whip 
(the ﬁ rst stroke) and replaces it with the sweat of the father’s 
brow (the two drops at the top). [4]
眞 真 眠 眤

294 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1275 
mingle
 交 
 Top hat . . . father. [6]
 1276 
merit
 効 
 Mingle . . . power. Note the distinct connotations that separate 
merit from achievement (frame 863). [8]
 
1277 
contrast
 較 
 Cars . . . mingle. [13]
 
1278 
exam
 校 
 Tree . . . mingle. [10]
 
1279 
leg
 足 
 Mouth . . . mending. Note that the last stroke of mouth and the 
ﬁ rst of mending overlap. [7]
*  As a primitive on the left, it is amended to 脣. Its meaning 
remains leg, but should be thought of as a wooden leg in 
order to avoid confusion with other similar elements, namely 
human legs, animal legs, and walking legs.
 1280 
stimulate
 促 
 Person . . . leg. [9]
 
1281 
long-distance
 距 
 Wooden leg . . . gigantic. [12]
 
1282 
path
 路 
 Wooden leg . . . each. [13]
 
1283 
dew
 露 
 Rain . . . path. [21]

lesson 34 | 295
 1284 
hop
 跳 
 Wooden leg . . . portent. [13]
 
1285 
leap
 躍 
 Wooden leg . . . feathers . . . turkey. [21]
 1286 
tread
 践 
 Wooden leg . . . parade ﬂ oat. [13]
 
1287 
step
 踏 
 Th e meaning of this character is virtually identical with that of 
the last frame. Be sure to come up with distinct connotations 
suggested by phrases in which each is commonly used. Wooden 
leg . . . water . . . sun. [15]
 1288 
skeleton
 骨 
 Th is kanji and primitive refers to the part of the body composed 
of the bones and their joints. Th e top part of the kanji, terminat-
ing in the element for crown, is a pictograph of a bone joint. I 
leave it to you to put the pieces together, so to speak. [10]
眥 眦 眩 眷 眸 眺
 1289 
slippery
 滑 
 Water . . . skeleton. [13]
 1290 
marrow
 髄 
 Skeleton . . . possess . . . road. [19]
 
*  
jawbone
 咼 
 Th e meaning of this primitive is taken from the combination of 
“the joint” above and the mouth in the cowl below. [9]
縅 縉 縊 縋 縒 縛 縞

296 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1291 
calamity
 禍 
 Altar . . . jawbone. [13]
 
1292 
whirlpool
 渦 
 Water . . . jawbone. [12]
 
1293 
overdo
 過 
 Jawbone . . . road. [12]
Lesson 35
The next group of primitives we shall consider has to do with topography 
and exhausts the list of those remaining in that category.
 
*  
pinnacle
 阝 
 Th is key word has been chosen because of its connotation of 
“the highest point,” thereby suggesting the image of the highest 
point in a village, that is, a hill or mountain on which sacred 
or festive events take place. If you have a clear image of the 
Athenian acropolis, you might use it to express this element for 
a pinnacle. Note that this primitive appears only on the left . On 
the right, as we shall see later, the same form takes a diﬀ erent 
meaning. [3]
眼 着 睆
 1294 
Heights
 阪 
 Th is character is used for proper names, much as the English 
word “Heights” is. Its primitives: pinnacle . . . anti-. [7]

lesson 35 | 297
 
1295 
Africa
 阿 
 Th is kanji, an abbreviation for Africa, is now used chieﬂ y for its 
sound, “a,” not unlike the kanji for Italy and the sound “i” that 
we met earlier (frame 1161). Its composite elements are: pin-
nacle . . . can. [8]
 1296 
occasion
 際 
 Pinnacle . . . ritual. [14]
 
1297 
hinder
 障 
 Pinnacle . . . badge. [14]
 1298 
follow
 随 
 Pinnacle . . . possess . . . road. [12]
 1299 
auxiliary
 陪 
 Pinnacle . . . muzzle. [11]
 1300 
sunshine
 陽 
 Diﬀ erent from the primitive for sun (which ﬁ gures in the char-
acter) and the kanji for ray (frame 119), the key word sunshine 
is meant to convey the meaning of the masculine principle in 
nature, or “Yang.” (Th e dark is viewed mythically as the femi-
nine principle; see frame 1592.) From there it comes to mean 
sun also. Th e elements are: pinnacle . . . piggy bank. [12]
 
1301 
line up
 陳 
 Pinnacle . . . east. [11]
 
1302 
ward oﬀ 
 防 
 Pinnacle . . . compass. [7]
 
1303 
aﬃ  xed
 附 
 Pinnacle . . . adhere. [8]

298 | remembering the kanji 1
 1304 
Inst.
 院 
 Th is key word, the abbreviation for Institution, represents the 
use of that word as a suﬃ  x aﬃ  xed to certain buildings and orga-
nizations. Its primitive elements: pinnacle . . . perfect. [10]
 
1305 
camp
 陣 
 Pinnacle . . . car. [10]
 1306 
regiment
 隊 
 Pinnacle . . . animal horns . . . sow. [12]
 
1307 
crash
 墜 
 Regiment . . . ground. [15]
 1308 
descend
 降 
 Pinnacle . . . walking legs . . . sunglasses with a lens popped out. 
Distinguish from fall (frame 299) and crash, which we con-
sidered in the previous frame. [10]
 1309 
story
 階 
 Th e story of this character refers to ﬂ oors in a building. Th e ele-
ments: pinnacle . . . all. [12]
 
1310 
highness
 陛 
 Th is key word indicates a title of address to royalty. Its elements: 
pinnacle . . . compare . . . ground. [10]
 
1311 
neighboring
 隣 
 Pinnacle . . . rice . . . sunglasses. [16]
 
1312 
isolate
 隔 
 Pinnacle . . . ceiling . . . mouth . . . glass canopy . . . human legs . . . 
spike. You might want to compare the kanji for dissolve (frame 
1044). [13]

lesson 35 | 299
 
1313 
conceal
 隠 
 Pinnacle . . . vulture . . . broom . . . heart. Compare the elements 
at the right to the kanji for calm (frame 1147). [14]
 
1314 
degenerate
 堕 
 Pinnacle . . . possess . . . ground. [12]
 
1315 
collapse
 陥 
 Pinnacle . . . bound up . . . olden times. [10]
 
1316 
hole
 穴 
 House . . . eight. [5]
*  As a primitive, this kanji uses an alternate form: the primitive 
for eight is replaced with that for human legs.
 
1317 
empty
 空 
 Hole . . . craft . [8]
 
1318 
withdraw
 控 
 Fingers . . . empty. [11]
 
1319 
stab
 突 
 Hole . . . St. Bernard dog. [8]
 
1320 
research
 究 
 Hole . . . baseball. [7]
 
1321 
plug up
 窒 
 Hole . . . climax. [11]
 
1322 
stealth
 窃 
 Hole . . . cut. [9]

300 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1323 
depression
 窪 
 Hole . . . water . . . ivy. Th e depression referred to here is a sunken 
place in the ground, rather than in one’s spirits. [14]
 
1324 
squeeze
 搾 
 Fingers . . . hole . . . saw. [13]
 
1325 
kiln
 窯 
 Hole . . . sheep . . . oven ﬁ re. [15]
 
1326 
hard up
 窮 
 Hole . . . somebody . . . bow. [15]
 
*  
paper punch
 腱 
 Th is primitive simply discards the ﬁ rst stroke of that for hole 
to become a paper punch. When found at the top of its relative 
primitive, it undergoes the same change, the eight becoming 
human legs (see frame 1316). [4]
 
1327 
grope
 探 
 Fingers . . . paper punch . . . tree. [11]
 
1328 
deep
 深 
 Water . . . paper punch . . . tree. [11]
 
1329 
hill
 丘 
 Since this supposedly pictographic representation of a hill 
looks like anything but, picture a row of axes driven into the 
ground up to their heads, and see if that doesn’t present you 
with a more memorable image of hill—at least a riskier one 
sliding down! [5]

lesson 36 | 301
 
1330 
Point
 岳 
 Th ink of the key word as referring to proper names of moun-
tains, but do not confuse with mountain peak (frame 773). Th e 
elements are: hill . . . mountain. [8]
 
1331 
soldier
 兵 
 Hill . . . animal legs. [7]
 
1332 
seacoast
 浜 
 Water . . . soldier. [10]
Lesson 36
The primitive for thread is one of the most common in all the kanji. Th is 
means that you are likely to be putting it where it doesn’t belong and forgetting 
to include it where it does—all the more reason to give it a vivid image each 
time. Fortunately, nearly all the thread-related kanji to be covered in this book 
will appear in this lesson, so you can learn them all at once.
 
1333 
thread
 糸 
 Remember when your granny used to ask you to bend your 
arms at the elbows and hold them out so that she could use 
them like a rack to hold a skein of string or yarn (here thread) 
while she rolled it up into a little ball? Now can you see the two 
elbows (with the second stroke doubling up) at the top, and the 
character for little below? [6]
睇 睚 睛 睡 督 睥
 
1334 
weave
 織 
 Th read . . . kazoo. [18]

302 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1335 
darning
 繕 
 Th read . . . virtuous. [18]
 
1336 
shrink
 縮 
 Th read . . . inn. [17]
 
1337 
luxuriant
 繁 
 Cleverness . . . thread. [16]
 
1338 
vertical
 縦 
 Th read . . . accompany. [16]
 
1339 
line
 線 
 Th read . . . spring. [15]
 1340 
tighten
 締 
 Th read . . . sovereign. [15]
 
1341 
ﬁ ber
 維 
 Th read . . . turkey. [14]
 
1342 
gauze
 羅 
 Eye . . . ﬁ ber. [19]
 
1343 
practice
 練 
 Th read . . . east. [14]
 1344 
thong
 緒 
 Th read . . . puppet. Although we usually think of a thong as 
coming at the end of a piece of string, this character’s meaning 
allows for it to come at the beginning as well. [14]

lesson 36 | 303
 
1345 
continue
 続 
 Th read . . . sell. [13]
 1346 
picture
 絵 
 Th read . . . meeting. [12]
 
1347 
overall
 統 
 Th read . . . allot. [12]
 
1348 
strangle
 絞 
 Th read . . . mingle. [12]
 1349 
salary
 給 
 Th read . . . ﬁ t. [12]
 
1350 
entwine
 絡 
 Th read . . . each. [12]
 
1351 
tie
 結 
 Th read . . . aerosol can. [12]
 
1352 
end
 終 
 Th read . . . winter. [11]
 
1353 
class
 級 
 Th reads . . . outstretched hands. [9]
 
1354 
chronicle
 紀 
 Th read . . . snake. [9]
 
1355 
crimson
 紅 
 Th read . . . craft . [9]

304 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1356 
settlement
 納 
 Th read . . . inside. [10]
 
1357 
spinning
 紡 
 For the kanji that means the spinning of thread and other ﬁ bers 
we have the elements: thread . . . compass. [10]
 
1358 
distract
 紛 
 Th read . . . part. [10]
 
1359 
introduce
 紹 
 Th read . . . seduce. [11]
 1360 
sūtra
 経 
 Th read . . . spool. [11]
 
1361 
sire
 紳 
 Th read . . . monkey. [11]
 
1362 
promise
 約 
 Consider for a moment the etymology of the word “promise” in 
order to notice its roots in the activity of putting one thing (e.g., 
one’s word of honor) in place of another (e.g., the fulﬁ llment of 
a task). For as it turns out, this character also means “to abridge, 
economize, and abbreviate”—all activities that involve putting 
one thing in place of another. With that in mind, we may now 
work with the elements: thread . . . ladle. [9]
 
1363 
dainty
 細 
 Th read . . . brains. [11]
 
1364 
accumulate
 累 
 Rice ﬁ eld . . . threads. Make use of the position of the elements to 
distinguish this kanji from that of the previous frame. [11]

lesson 36 | 305
 
1365 
cord
 索 
 Needle . . . a crown . . . thread. [10]
 1366 
general
 総 
 Th is kanji, meaning universal or widespread, is composed of 
three elements: thread . . . public . . . heart. [14]
 
1367 
cotton
 綿 
 Th read . . . white . . . towels. [14]
 
1368 
silk
 絹 
 Th read . . . mouth . . . ﬂ esh. [13]
 
1369 
winding
 繰 
 Th read . . . goods . . . tree. [19]
 
1370 
inherit
 継 
 Th read . . . rice . . . ﬁ shhook. Compare frame 1136. [13]
 
1371 
green
 緑 
 Th read . . . broom . . . rice grains. [14]
 
1372 
aﬃ  nity
 縁 
 Th read . . . broom . . . sow. [15]
 
1373 
netting
 網 
 Th read . . . glass canopy . . . animal horns . . . perish. [14]
 
1374 
tense
 緊 
 Slave . . . crotch . . . thread. [15]

306 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1375 
purple
 紫 
 Footprint . . . spoon . . . thread. [12]
 
1376 
truss
 縛 
 Th reads . . . acupuncturist. [16]
 
1377 
straw rope
 縄 
 Th read . . . eels. [15]
 
*  
cocoon
 幺 
 Th e two triangular shapes here and their ﬁ nal stroke are 
intended as a pictograph of a cocoon, spun in circles and tied 
up at the end. It is like the character for thread, except that the 
silkworm’s actual product has not yet emerged clearly at the 
bottom. [3]
縟 縡 縢
 
1378 
infancy
 幼 
 Cocoon . . . muscle. [5]
 
1379 
behind
 後 
 Line . . . cocoon . . . walking legs. [9]
 1380 
faint
 幽 
 Two cocoons . . . mountain. Observe how the two vertical strokes 
of the mountain are extended upwards to serve as a kind of 
enclosure. [9]
縣 縦 縫 縮 縱
 
1381 
how many
 幾 
 Two cocoons . . . person . . . ﬁ esta. [12]

lesson 36 | 307
睦 睨 睫 睹
*  As a primitive, this kanji will mean an abacus, the bead-
instrument used in the Orient to calculate how many.
 
1382 
mechanism
 機 
 Tree . . . abacus. [16]
 
1383 
mysterious
 玄 
 Top hat . . . cocoon. [5]
 
1384 
livestock
 畜 
 Mysterious . . . rice ﬁ eld. [10]
 
1385 
amass
 蓄 
 Flowers . . . livestock. [13]
 
1386 
bowstring
 弦 
 Bow . . . mysterious. [8]
 
1387 
hug
 擁 
 Fingers . . . mysterious . . . turkey. Note that the top hat is extended 
across both elements, though it belongs only to the cocoon. Th is 
means that you may either use mysterious—as we did here—or 
take the three elements separately. [16]
 
1388 
nourishing
 滋 
 Water . . . double-mysterious. Note the doubling up of the ele-
ment for top hat in the primitive for mysterious and assign it a 
special image, as it will come up in the next two frames. [12]
 
1389 
mercy
 慈 
 Double-mysterious . . . heart. [13]

308 | remembering the kanji 1
 1390 
magnet
 磁 
 Stone . . . double-mysterious. [14]
 
1391 
lineage
 系 
 Th e single stroke added to the beginning of the primitive for 
thread gives the image of threads woven into a single cord. 
Hence the meaning, lineage. [7]
*  As a primitive, we shall give this kanji the meaning of yarn, as 
the uniting of many threads into a single strand is most obvi-
ous with yarn.
 
1392 
person in charge
 係 
 Person . . . yarn. [9]
 
1393 
grandchild
 孫 
 Child . . . yarn. [10]
 
1394 
suspend
 懸 
 Prefecture . . . yarn . . . heart. [20]
Lesson 37
Earlier we created an image for seal (frame 156). Here we come to a set of 
primitives based on the shape of a seal and deriving their meanings from the 
notion of stamping or sealing.
 
*  
stamp
 卩 
 Th is character is a kind of pictograph of a stamp that may best 
be imagined as a postage stamp to distinguish it from other 
stamp-like things to come up later. [2]

lesson 37 | 309
睾 睿
 
1395 
instead
 却 
 Gone . . . stamp. [7]
 1396 
shins
 脚 
 Part of the body . . . instead. Th is character has more or less the 
same meaning as that for legs learned back in frame 1279. It can 
also indicate the part of the legs from the shins down, which 
explains the choice of the key word. [11]
 
1397 
wholesale
 卸 
 Th e left  primitive is a union of a horse and footprint. To the 
right, the stamp. [9]
縲 縵 縶 縷 縹
 
1398 
honorable
 御 
 Line . . . wholesale. [12]
 
1399 
clothing
 服 
 Flesh . . . stamp . . . crotch. Note how the stamp is stretched out 
here. [8]
 1400 
fate
 命 
 Th is character connotes life in general, but also the particular 
life to which one is fated by virtue of the distinctive character 
with which one is born. Its elements are: ﬁ t . . . stamp. Th e bot-
tom portion of ﬁ t is nudged to the left  in order to make room 
for the stamp. [8]
 
*  
chop-seal
 腹 
 Th e chop-seal is the engraved piece of wood or stone used 
in the Orient to certify documents. Unlike the stamp, the top 
stroke here reaches a good distance to the left  of its vertical 

310 | remembering the kanji 1
stroke. When it appears at the top of another primitive, it is 
abbreviated to 脩. [2]
瞋 瞎
 
1401 
orders
 令 
 Meeting . . . chop-seal. [5]
 1402 
zero
 零 
 Rain . . . orders. [13]
 1403 
age
 齢 
 Th is character is used to express the years of one’s age. Its ele-
ments: teeth . . . orders. [17]
 1404 
cool
 冷 
 Ice . . . orders. [7]
 1405 
jurisdiction
 領 
 Orders . . . head. [14]
 1406 
small bell
 鈴 
 Gold . . . orders. [13]
 1407 
courage
 勇 
 Chop-seal . . . male. [9]
 1408 
traﬃ  c
 通 
 Chop-seal . . . utilize . . . road. By combining the ﬁ rst two primi-
tives into a single image, you will be able to use that image in a 
few instances later, one of which comes immediately. [10]
 1409 
jump
 踊 
 Wooden leg . . . chop-seal . . . utilize. [14]

lesson 37 | 311
 
1410 
doubt
 疑 
 Spoon . . . dart . . . chop-seal . . . zoo. [14]
 
1411 
mimic
 擬 
 Fingers . . . doubt. [17]
 
1412 
congeal
 凝 
 Ice . . . doubt. [16]
 
*  
ﬁ ngerprint
 腴 
 Th e primitive for ﬁ ngerprint is like that for stamp except that 
the second stroke bends back towards the right, like an arm. [2]
瞑 瞞
 
1413 
pattern
 範 
 Bamboo . . . car . . . ﬁ ngerprint. [15]
 
1414 
crime
 犯 
 Wild dogs . . . ﬁ ngerprint. [5]
 
1415 
unlucky
 厄 
 Cliﬀ  . . . ﬁ ngerprint. [4]
 
1416 
dangerous
 危 
 Bound up . . . unlucky. [6]
 
*  
mailbox
 腸 
 Evening . . . ﬁ ngerprint. [5]
 
1417 
address
 宛 
 House . . . mailbox. [8]

312 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1418 
arm
 腕 
 Part of the body . . . address. [12]
 
1419 
garden
 苑 
 Flowers . . . mailbox. [8]
 1420 
grudge
 怨 
 Mailbox . . . heart. [9]
 
*  
receipt
 腺 
 Th is primitive element is actually the mirror-image of that for 
stamp, but since Japanese does not permit a stroke to go to the 
left  and bottom in one swoop, the visual similarity is not per-
fectly clear. If you play with the idea with pen and paper, its 
logic will become obvious. [3]
瞠 瞥 瞬
 
1421 
willow
 柳 
 Tree . . . receipt . . . stamp. [9]
 1422 
egg
 卵 
 Receipt . . . stamp . . . and a drop in each side to represent a little 
smear of egg yoke. Th e third stroke is drawn slightly higher to 
close the egg up tightly and keep the yoke inside. [7]
馭 馮 馳 馴 馼 駁 駄
 
1423 
detain
 留 
 Receipt . . . dagger . . . rice ﬁ eld. [10]
 1424 
trade
 貿 
 Receipt . . . dagger . . . shells. Do not confuse with make a deal 
(frame 439) or wholesale (frame 1397). [12]

lesson 38 | 313
 
*  
staples
 腿 
 Th is primitive represents a number of small staples, like the 
kind commonly used in an oﬃ  ce and at school. [4]
瞭 瞰 瞳 瞶
 
1425 
stamp
 印 
 At last we come to the general character meaning stamp. Its 
elements: staples . . . stamp. [6]
 1426 
entertain
 興 
 Here we see a wheel of fortune that has been tampered with. 
On both sides you see the staples separating one number’s slot 
from the next, and between them the character for the same—
indicating that it has been rigged to repeat the same number. 
Th e tool below refers to the wheel itself. A dandy form of enter-
tainment, especially if you are the owner of the wheel. [16]
Lesson 38
The next cluster of kanji has to do with primitives related to the activities 
of eating and drinking.
 
1427 
sign of the bird
 酉 
 Th ough we shall later encounter the kanji for bird, we introduce 
this one for the tenth sign of the zodiac mainly because of its 
use as a primitive, where it has a diﬀ erent meaning. [7]
瞹 瞻 瞼 瞽 瞿 矇 矍
*  As a primitive, it means whiskey bottle. In its pictograph, you 
can see the loosely corked lid, the bottle, and the contents 

314 | remembering the kanji 1
(about one-third full). You might also think of the Spanish 
“porrón,” a decanter shaped like a long-necked bird.
 1428 
saké
 酒 
 Water . . . whiskey bottle. [10]
 1429 
bartending
 酌 
 Whiskey bottle . . . ladle. [10]
 1430 
fermentation
 酵 
 Whiskey bottle . . . ﬁ lial piety. [14]
 
1431 
cruel
 酷 
 Whiskey bottle . . . revelation. [14]
 
1432 
repay
 酬 
 Whiskey bottle . . . state. [13]
 
1433 
dairy products
 酪 
 Whiskey bottle . . . each. [13]
 1434 
vinegar
 酢 
 Whiskey bottle . . . saw. [12]
 
1435 
drunk
 酔 
 Whiskey bottle . . . baseball . . . needle. [11]
 1436 
distribute
 配 
 Whisky bottle . . . snake. [10]
 
1437 
acid
 酸 
 Whiskey bottle . . . license . . . walking legs. [14]

lesson 38 | 315
 
1438 
waver
 猶 
 Wild dogs . . . animal horns . . . whiskey bottle. [12]
 
1439 
revered
 尊 
 Animal horns . . . whiskey bottle . . . glue. [12]
 1440 
beans
 豆 
 Th is kanji depicts a pot of beans, although it looks more like a 
table on which the pot is resting. [7]
矗 矚 矛 矜
*  As a primitive, this kanji will also mean table.
 
1441 
head
 頭 
 Here we meet at last the full kanji on which the primitive for 
head is based. Th e elements: table . . . head. [16]
 1442 
short
 短 
 Dart . . . table. [12]
 1443 
bountiful
 豊 
 Bend . . . table. Th ink of a bountiful harvest, and you will not be 
far from the meaning of this character. [13]
 
*  
drum
 膀 
 Th e element for drum shows a samurai over a table. Th e top 
stroke of the table appears to be missing, but actually it has dou-
bled up with the ﬁ nal stroke of the element for samurai. [9]
 1444 
drum
 鼓 
 Th e full kanji for the drum adds a branch, apparently to serve as 
a drumstick, to the primitive for drum. [13]

316 | remembering the kanji 1
 1445 
rejoice
 喜 
 Drum . . . mouth. [12]
 1446 
timber-trees
 樹 
 Trees . . . drum . . . glue. [16]
 1447 
dish
 皿 
 Th e kanji for a dish is, clearly, the pictograph of a painted or 
carved bowl, seen from the side. [5]
矢 矣 知 矧 矩
 1448 
blood
 血 
 Th e drop in the dish is blood. It is similar to the drop we saw 
earlier on the dagger in the character for blade (frame 84). [6]
 1449 
basin
 盆 
 Part . . . dish. [9]
 1450 
alliance
 盟 
 Bright . . . dish. [13]
 
1451 
steal
 盗 
 Next . . . dish. [11]
 
1452 
warm
 温 
 Water . . . sun . . . dish. [12]
 
1453 
oversee
 監 
 Slaves . . . reclining . . . ﬂ oor/one . . . dish. [15]
 
1454 
overﬂ ow
 濫 
 Water . . . oversee. [18]

lesson 38 | 317
 
1455 
specimen
 鑑 
 Metal . . . oversee. [23]
 1456 
ﬁ erce
 猛 
 Wild dogs . . . child . . . dish. [11]
 
1457 
boom
 盛 
 Here boom refers to something that is popular and prospering. 
Its elements: turn into . . . dish. [11]
 
1458 
salt
 塩 
 Ground . . . reclining . . . mouth . . . dish. [13]
 
*  
silver
 艮 
 We give this element the meaning of silver from the kanji in the 
following frame. Both the original pictographic representation 
and the primitive elements that make it up are more trouble to 
hunt out than they are worth. It is best simply to learn it as is. 
In doing so, take careful note of the stroke order, and also the 
fact that when this element appears on the left , the penultimate 
stroke is omitted, giving us simply 臙. [6]
短 矮 矯 石 矼 砂
 
1459 
silver
 銀 
 Metal . . . silver. [14]
砌 砒
 1460 
resentment
 恨 
 State of mind . . . silver. [9]
 
1461 
root
 根 
 Tree . . . silver. [10]

318 | remembering the kanji 1
 1462 
instant
 即 
 Silver . . . stamp. [7]
 
1463 
baron
 爵 
 Vulture . . . eye . . . silver . . . glue. [17]
 1464 
node
 節 
 Bamboo . . . instant. [13]
 1465 
retreat
 退 
 Road . . . silver. [9]
 1466 
limit
 限 
 Pinnacle . . . silver. [9]
 1467 
eyeball
 眼 
 Eye . . . silver. [11]
 1468 
good
 良 
 Drop of . . . silver. [7]
*  As a primitive, use the image of a saint’s halo. As with silver, 
when this element is drawn on the left , the penultimate stroke 
is omitted, giving us 臚.
 1469 
melodious
 朗 
 Halo . . . moon. [10]
 1470 
wandering
 浪 
 Water . . . halo. [10]
 
1471 
daughter
 娘 
 Woman . . . halo. [10]

lesson 38 | 319
 1472 
eat
 食 
 If halo and umbrella aren't enough, break the halo down into 
drop and silver—or “silverware,” an additional primitive. [9]
*  As a primitive the kanji means eating or food. As with silver, 
on the left  the ﬁ nal two strokes are combined into one.
 
1473 
meal
 飯 
 Food . . . anti-. [12]
 
1474 
drink
 飲 
 Food . . . yawn. [12]
 
1475 
hungry
 飢 
 Food . . . wind. [10]
 1476 
starve
 餓 
 Food . . . ego. [15]
 1477 
decorate
 飾 
 Food . . . reclining . . . towel. [13]
 1478 
Bldg.
 館 
 Th e abbreviation of Building suggests that this kanji is used in 
proper names, as indeed it oft en is. Keep your connotation dis-
tinct from Inst. (frame 1304) when working with the elements: 
food . . . bureaucrat. [16]
 1479 
foster
 養 
 Sheep . . . food. Th e key word has the sense of promoting the 
development of something, especially in a psychological or 
spiritual sense. [13]
 1480 
sated
 飽 
 Eat . . . wrap. [13]

320 | remembering the kanji 1
 
*  
waitress
 兂 
 If you draw this character once, you will see that its ﬁ rst three 
strokes resemble the form for receipt (except that the sec-
ond stroke ends more parallel to the ﬁ rst), with its last stroke 
stretched to form the ﬁ rst of the two human legs. From this we 
give it its meaning of a waitress (who should not be confused 
with the waiter back in frame 976). [4]
研 砕 砠 砡
 
1481 
previously
 既 
 Silver . . . waitress. Do not confuse this kanji’s key word with 
before (frame 248). [10]
 
1482 
outline
 概 
 Roots . . . waitress. Note that the kanji meaning of the two primi-
tives to the right is not used here because we shall later meet a 
primitive meaning beforehand and want to preempt any confu-
sion. Th e same holds true in the following frame. [14]
 
1483 
rue
 慨 
 Resentment . . . waitress. [13]
Lesson 39
A number of primitives relating to plant life remain to be considered, and we 
shall devote the next two pages to doing so. In the following pages, as indeed in 
the rest of the book, we shall meet several elements whose use is quite limited. 
Nevertheless, it is better to learn them as primitives both in order to acquaint 
yourself better with the way the Japanese writing system repeats certain com-
binations of elements, and in order later to facilitate the learning of charac-
ters outside the compass of these pages.

lesson 39 | 321
 1484 
even
 平 
 Th is character is easiest remembered as a pictograph of a water 
lily ﬂ oating on the surface of the water, which gives it its mean-
ing of even. Th e fourth stroke represents the calm, smooth sur-
face of a pond, and the ﬁ nal stroke the long stem of the plant 
reaching underwater. [5]
砥 砦 砧 砲 破
*  As a primitive, this kanji can keep its pictographic meaning of 
a water lily.
 
1485 
call
 呼 
 Mouth . . . water lily. Note: this is the one time that the “stem” has 
a barb at the end. Work this fact into your story. [8]
 1486 
two-mat area
 坪 
 Th is kanji belongs to an old Japanese system of measurement 
and indicates an area of about 36 square feet, or the area taken 
up by two tatami mats. Its elements: ground . . . water lily. [8]
 1487 
evaluate
 評 
 Words . . . water lily. [12]
 
*  
sheaf
 膳 
 Th ese two strokes are a crude drawing of a bundle of stalks 
bound together into a sheaf. [2]
砺 砿
 1488 
reap
 刈 
 Sheaf . . . saber. [4]
 1489 
hope
 希 
 Sheaf . . . linen. [7]

322 | remembering the kanji 1
 1490 
villain
 凶 
 Sheaf . . . shovel. [4]
硅 硎
 
1491 
bosom
 胸 
 Part of the body . . . bound up . . . villain. [10]
 1492 
detach
 離 
 Top hat . . . villain . . . belt . . . elbow . . . turkey. Th is is potentially 
one of the most diﬃ  cult characters to remember. Tackle it posi-
tively and let the image “sink in” by carrying it around with you 
today and calling it up in your spare moments. [18]
 
1493 
kill
 殺 
 Sheaf . . . tree . . . missile. [10]
 
*  
earthworm
 屯 
 Drop of . . . shovel . . . ﬁ shhook. [4]
硝 硤 硫 硬
 1494 
genuine
 純 
 Th read . . . earthworm. [10]
 1495 
dull
 鈍 
 Metal . . . earthworm. [12]
 1496 
spicy
 辛 
 Th e character in this frame pictures food whose taste is so hot 
and spicy that it makes the hairs on your body stand up as 
straight as needles. [7]
*  As a primitive, we shall use this meaning of spicy, except 
when the two extra strokes are added to the bottom, giving it 

lesson 39 | 323
the form of a tree: 臟. Th en we take its alternate meaning of a 
red pepper plant. Th e connection is obvious.
 1497 
resign
 辞 
 Tongue . . . spicy. [13]
 1498 
catalpa
 梓 
 Tree . . . spicy. [11]
 1499 
superintend
 宰 
 House . . . spicy. [10]
 
*  
ketchup
 辟 
 One way American children learn to cope with food they are 
forced to eat against their will is to smother it with ketchup. We 
can see this depicted in the mouth with the ﬂ ag over it (in this 
case, the Stars and Stripes), set alongside the element for spicy 
(all of which is not far removed from the original meaning it 
had as a character on its own: “false”). [13]
縺 縻 總
 1500 
wall
 壁 
 Ketchup . . . ground. [16]
 
1501 
evade
 避 
 Ketchup . . . road. [16]
 
1502 
new
 新 
 Red pepper . . . ax. [13]
 
1503 
ﬁ rewood
 薪 
 Flowers . . . new. [16]

324 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1504 
parent
 親 
 Red pepper . . . see. [16]
 
1505 
happiness
 幸 
 Simply by turning the dot at the top of the primitive for spicy 
into a cross shape, we move from things bitter and spicy to 
things happy. [8]
 1506 
tenacious
 執 
 Happiness . . . fat man. [11]
 
1507 
report
 報 
 Happiness . . . stamp . . . crotch. Compare frame 1399. [12]
 
*  
cornucopia
 膵 
 Considering the lack of circular lines, this kanji is not a bad pic-
tograph of a cornucopia. Despite the appearance of the printed 
form, what looks like the ﬁ rst two strokes are actually written as 
one. [2]
硯 硲
 
1508 
shout
 叫 
 Mouth . . . cornucopia. [5]
 1509 
twist
 糾 
Th read . . . cornucopia. [8]
 
1510 
income
 収 
 Cornucopia . . . crotch. Keep distinct from both fare (frame 
1004) and salary (frame 1349). [4]
 
1511 
lowly
 卑 
 A drop of . . . brains . . . cornucopia. [8]

lesson 39 | 325
 
1512 
tombstone
 碑 
 Rock . . . lowly. [13]
 
*  
rice seedling
 圥 
 As we mentioned back in frame 234, rice seedlings get an ele-
ment all their own: soil and human legs becomes an ideograph 
of the spikelets of rice bunched together for implanting in the 
muddy soil of the paddy. [5]
 
1513 
land
 陸 
 Th e sense of land carried by this kanji is distinct from soil 
(frame 150) and ground (frame 515) in that it is meant to rep-
resent land seen from a distance, that is, land as opposed to 
“water.” Its elements: pinnacle . . . rice seedlings . . . ground. [11]
 
1514 
intimate
 睦 
 Eye . . . rice seedlings . . . ground. [13]
 
1515 
forces
 勢 
 Rice seedlings . . ground . . . fat man . . . muscle. [13]
 
1516 
heat
 熱 
 Rice seedlings . . . ground . . . fat man . . . oven ﬁ re. [15]
 
1517 
diamond
 菱 
 Named aft er a diamond-shaped ﬂ ower (the water caltrop), this 
key word refers to things shaped like a diamond. Its elements: 
ﬂ ower . . . rice seedlings . . . walking legs. [11]
 
1518 
mausoleum
 陵 
 Pinnacle . . . rice seedlings . . . walking legs. [11]

326 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1519 
sign of the hog
 亥 
 Th is kanji is the 12th sign of the Chinese zodiac: the sign of the 
hog. It is best learned by thinking of an acorn-eating hog in 
connection with the primitive meaning given below. [6]
硴 硺 硼 碁 碆 碇
*  Th e top hat represents the external shape of the acorn, and 
the unusual but easily written complex of strokes beneath it 
(which you might also see as distortions of an elbow and per-
son) stands for the mysterious secret whereby the acorn con-
tains the oak tree in a nutshell.
 
1520 
nucleus
 核 
 Tree . . . acorn. [10]
 
1521 
engrave
 刻 
 Acorn . . . saber. [8]
 
1522 
above-stated
 該 
 Words . . . acorn. [13]
 
1523 
censure
 劾 
 Acorn . . . muscle. [8]
 
*  
resin
 膈 
 Th is tree has become a pole (that is, a tree with its branches not 
touching) because most of its branches have been pruned oﬀ  
by a naive but greedy gardener anxious to siphon oﬀ  its resin 
(the drop at the top, written as the ﬁ nal stroke) as quickly as 
possible. [5]
罸 罹 羂 羃

lesson 39 | 327
 
1524 
mention
 述 
 Resin . . . road. [8]
 
1525 
art
 術 
 Boulevard . . . resin. [11]
 
*  
celery
 膏 
 Th is primitive looks very close to that for salad, except that an 
extra horizontal line has been included, reminiscent I should 
think of the long celery sticks in your salad. [5]
罨 罩 罪 罫
 
1526 
cold
 寒 
 House . . . celery . . . animal legs . . . ice. [12]
 
*  
grass skirt
 膊 
 Th is unusual looking grass skirt is composed of a top hat and 
scarf, and eight celery sticks. [13]
置 罰 署 罵
 
1527 
brew
 醸 
 Whiskey bottle . . . grass skirt. [20]
 
1528 
defer
 譲 
 Words . . . grass skirt. [20]
 
1529 
lot
 壌 
 Ground . . . grass skirt. Th e lot of this key word refers to a por-
tion of land. [16]
 
1530 
lass
 嬢 
 Woman . . . grass skirt. [16]

Lesson 40
The remainder of plant-related primitives are built up from combina-
tions of vertical and horizontal lines, representing respectively plants and the 
earth from which they spring. Accordingly it would be a good idea to study 
the remaining elements of this section at a single sitting, or at least so to review 
them before passing on to the next grouping.
 
*  
grow up
 膸 
 As the plant grows up it sprouts leaves and a stalk, which are 
depicted here over a single horizontal stroke for the soil. Th ink of 
something (its relative primitive) growing up in a ﬂ ash to many 
times its normal size, much like little Alice in Wonderland, who 
grew up so fast she was soon larger than the room in which she 
was sitting. [4]
碌 碍 碎 碑
 
1531 
poison
 毒 
 Grow up . . . breasts. [8]
 
1532 
elementary
 素 
 Grow up . . . thread. [10]
 
1533 
barley
 麦 
 Grow up . . . walking legs. [7]
 
1534 
blue
 青 
 Grow up . . . moon. [8]

lesson 40 | 329
 
1535 
reﬁ ned
 精 
 Rice . . . blue. [14]
 
1536 
solicit
 請 
 Words . . . blue. [15]
 
1537 
feelings
 情 
 State of mind . . . blue. Do not confuse with emotion (frame 
615). [11]
 
1538 
clear up
 晴 
 Take the key word in its associations with the weather (unless 
that tempts you to include the primitive for weather, which 
doesn’t belong here). Its elements: sun . . . blue. [12]
 
1539 
pure
 清 
 Water . . . blue. [11]
 1540 
quiet
 静 
 Blue . . . contend. Do not confuse with calm (frame 1147). [14]
 
1541 
blame
 責 
 Grow up . . . oyster. [11]
 
1542 
exploits
 績 
 Th read . . . blame. [17]
 
1543 
volume
 積 
 Wheat . . . blame. Th is key word has to do with measurement, 
and should be kept distinct from the kanji for quantity (frame 
177)—even though the meanings are similar. [16]

330 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1544 
bond
 債 
 Person . . . blame. Th e key word refers to ﬁ nancial bonds. [13]
 
1545 
pickling
 漬 
 Water . . . blame. [14]
 
1546 
surface
 表 
 Grow up . . . scarf. Th is character represents the “outside” of a 
garment, just as the kanji for back (frame 399) depicted the 
“inside” or lining. [8]
 
1547 
bag
 俵 
 Keep this kanji distinct from that for sack (frame 1006). Its ele-
ments are: person . . . surface. [10]
 
1548 
undeﬁ led
 潔 
 Water . . . grow up . . . dagger . . . thread. Do not confuse with 
upright (frame 55). [15]
 
1549 
pledge
 契 
 Grow up . . . dagger . . . St. Bernard dog. Th e connotation of this 
character should be kept distinct from that for vow (frame 
1133) and promise (frame 1362). [9]
 
1550 
consume
 喫 
 Mouth . . . pledge. [12]
 
1551 
harm
 害 
 House . . . grow up . . . mouth. [10]
 
1552 
control
 轄 
 Car . . . harm. Hint: the image of an auto going “out of control” 
may help keep this key word distinct from others like it, such as 
manipulate (frame 801). [17]

lesson 40 | 331
 
1553 
proportion
 割 
 Harm . . . saber. [12]
 
1554 
constitution
 憲 
 Th e key word refers to the fundamental guiding principles of a 
government or other organization. Its elements: House . . . grow 
up . . . eyes . . . heart. [16]
 
1555 
life
 生 
 A single drop added to the element for grow up gives us the 
character for life. [5]
*  As a primitive, we may think of a microscopic cell, that mirac-
ulous unit that grows up to become a living being.
 
1556 
star
 星 
 Sun . . . cell. [9]
 
1557 
surname
 姓 
 Woman . . . cell. [8]
 
1558 
sex
 性 
 State of mind . . . cell. [8]
 
1559 
animal sacriﬁ ce
 牲 
 Cow . . . cell. [9]
 1560 
products
 産 
 Vase . . . cliﬀ  . . . cell. [11]
 
1561 
hump
 隆 
 Th is character, used for everything from little humps of hills 
to camel humps, easily suggests the hunch on the pig’s back 
and hind parts where the best cuts of meat are to be found 
(and hence the English expression for luxury, “living high oﬀ  

332 | remembering the kanji 1
the hog”). Th e elements we have to work with are: pinnacle . . . 
walking legs . . . cell. [11]
 
*  
bushes
 丰 
 Whatever image you contrived for the character meaning hedge 
(frame 154), choose something diﬀ erent and clearly distin-
guishable for this primitive for bushes. Th e element itself diﬀ ers 
from that for grow up only in the extension of the single verti-
cal stroke beneath the ﬁ nal horizontal stroke and in the order 
of writing. Th ough we shall meet only one instance of it in this 
chapter and one more later on, it is worth noting that when this 
element appears on the side, the ﬁ nal stroke is sloped somewhat 
to the left : 膺. [4]
績 繁
 
1562 
summit
 峰 
 Mountain . . . walking legs . . . bushes. [10]
 
1563 
sew
 縫 
 Th read . . . walking legs . . . bushes . . . road. [16]
 
1564 
worship
 拝 
 Fingers . . . bush . . . suspended from the ceiling. [8]
 
1565 
longevity
 寿 
 Bushes . . . glue. [7]
 1566 
casting
 鋳 
 Metal . . . longevity. As you probably guessed from the elements, 
the key word refers to the casting of metals. [15]
 
*  
Christmas tree
 耒 
 Th e addition of the ﬁ nal two strokes to the element for bushes 
gives the sense of a tree that is also a bush. Hence, the Christmas 
tree. [6]

lesson 40 | 333
碚 碣
 
1567 
enroll
 籍 
 Bamboo . . . Christmas tree . . . once upon a time. [20]
 
*  
bonsai
 臂 
 Th e element for bushes has an extra stroke added (drawn from 
the point where the second and ﬁ ft h strokes touch when it 
“encloses” something beneath, otherwise from the point where 
the fourth and ﬁ ft h strokes intersect) to give the image of the 
crutches Japanese gardeners use to hold up a tree that is being 
bent into shape. From there it is but a short leap to the small 
bonsai plants that imitate this art in miniature. [5]
紿 終 絃 組 絅
 
1568 
springtime
 春 
 Bonsai . . . sun. [9]
 
1569 
camellia
 椿 
 Tree . . . springtime. [13]
 
1570 
peaceful
 泰 
 Bonsai . . . rice grains. [10]
 
1571 
play music
 奏 
 Bonsai . . . heavens. [9]
 
1572 
reality
 実 
 House . . . bonsai. [8]
 
*  
cornstalk
 膽 
 Th e element for bushes extended the vertical stroke beneath 
the ﬁ nal horizontal stroke; the cornstalk omits that ﬁ nal stroke 

334 | remembering the kanji 1
altogether, leaving only the stalk and the leaves bursting forth 
on all sides. [3]
碓 碕 碗
 
1573 
dedicate
 奉 
 Bonsai . . . cornstalk. Use a ritualistic, religious meaning. [8]
 
1574 
stipend
 俸 
 Person . . . dedicate. [10]
 
1575 
rod
 棒 
 Tree . . . dedicate. [12]
 
*  
cabbage
 膤 
 Th e ﬂ ower, the mouth, and the element for grow up combine 
here to create the primitive for cabbage. [10]
碧 碨 碪 碫 碬 碮
 
1576 
discreet
 謹 
 Words . . . cabbage. [17]
 
1577 
diligence
 勤 
 Cabbage . . . muscle. [12]
 
*  
scarecrow
 膨 
 By twisting the ﬁ nal two strokes of our cabbage into a pair of 
legs, we get a scarecrow with a cabbage for a head. [10]
碯 碱 碲 碳 碴 確

lesson 40 | 335
 
1578 
Sino-
 漢 
 Water . . . scarecrow. Th e key word has come to refer to things 
Chinese in general, including the kanji themselves (for which 
this character is used). [13]
 
1579 
sigh
 嘆 
 Mouth . . . scarecrow. [13]
 1580 
diﬃ  cult
 難 
 Scarecrow . . . turkey. [18]
 
*  
silage
 膜 
 Th e drawing of this element is diﬃ  cult to do smoothly, and 
should be practiced carefully. It is a pictograph of all sorts of 
plants and grasses thrown together to make silage. Th e verti-
cal stroke is drawn here with a broken line to indicate that it 
will always double up with another primitive element’s vertical 
stroke. [6]
碼 碾 磁 磅 磆 磊
 
1581 
splendor
 華 
 Flower . . . silage . . . needle. [10]
 
1582 
droop
 垂 
 A drop of . . . silage . . . walking stick . . . ﬂ oor. Th e character is 
written in the order of its elements. [8]
 
1583 
drowsy
 睡 
 Eyes . . . droop. [13]
 
1584 
spindle
 錘 
 Metal . . . droop. [16]

336 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1585 
ride
 乗 
 Th e simplest way to remember this character is to ﬁ nd the 
sprig of wheat in it, hidden because it doubles up with one 
stroke of silage. [9]
 
1586 
surplus
 剰 
 Ride . . . saber. [11]
Lesson 41
Only a few of the primitives relating to time and direction remain. It is to 
these that we turn our attention in this lesson.
 
1587 
now
 今 
 Th e ﬁ nal stroke of this kanji is a rare shape, which we have not 
met before and will only meet in this character and others that 
include it as a primitive. We are more accustomed to seeing it 
straightened out as part of other shapes—for instance, as the 
second stroke of mouth. If you need any help at all with this 
character, you may picture it as two hands of a clock pointing to 
what time it is now. Th e element above it, meeting, should easily 
relate to that image. [4]
*  We shall use clock as the primitive meaning of this character, 
in line with the above explanation.
 
1588 
include
 含 
 Clock . . . mouth. [7]
 
1589 
versify
 吟 
 As we have already learned characters for poem (frame 346), 
chant (frame 21), and song (frame 469), it is important to pro-

lesson 41 | 337
tect this key word with an image all its own. Its elements are the 
same as those above; only the position has changed: mouth . . . 
clock. [7]
 1590 
wish
 念 
 Clock . . . heart. [8]
 
1591 
harp
 琴 
 A pair of jewels . . . clock. [12]
 
1592 
shade
 陰 
 Just as the sunshine (frame 1300) represents the masculine 
principle in nature (Yang), the shade stands for the feminine 
principle (Yin). Its elements are: pinnacle . . . clock . . . rising 
cloud. [11]
 
1593 
beforehand
 予 
 Th ink of this character as identical to the halberd (frame 1225) 
except that the ﬁ nal stroke has been omitted. Return to that 
character and devise some image to take this diﬀ erence into 
account. [4]
 
1594 
preface
 序 
 Cave . . . beforehand. [7]
 
1595 
deposit
 預 
 Beforehand . . . head. [13]
 
1596 
plains
 野 
 Th is character refers to rustic life and rustic ﬁ elds primarily, 
and from there gets derived meanings. Its elements: computer 
. . . beforehand. [11]

338 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1597 
concurrently
 兼 
 At the top we have the animal horns and the single horizon-
tal stroke to give them something to hang onto. Below that, we 
see one rake with two handles. Finally, we see a pair of strokes 
splitting away from each of the handles, indicating that they are 
both splitting under the pressure. Th e composite picture is of 
someone holding down two jobs concurrently, using the same 
kit of tools to move in two diﬀ erent directions and ending up in 
a mess. Take the time to ﬁ nd this sense in the kanji and it will 
be easy to remember, despite initial appearances. [10]
磋 磐 磑 磔 磚 磧 磨 磬
磯 磴
 
1598 
dislike
 嫌 
 Woman . . . concurrently. [13]
 
1599 
sickle
 鎌 
 Metal . . . concurrently. [18]
 1600 
self-eﬀ acing
 謙 
 Words . . . concurrently. [17]
 
1601 
bargain
 廉 
 Cave . . . concurrently. [13]
 1602 
west
 西 
 To our way of counting directions, the west always comes 
fourth. So it is convenient to ﬁ nd the character for four in this 
kanji. But since we want only one of the four directions, the west 
adds the one at the top and sucks the human legs a bit out of 
their mouth in the process. [6]
磽 礁 礇 礎

lesson 41 | 339
*  As a primitive, the meaning of west can be expanded to refer 
to the Old West of cowboy-movie fame, just as the meaning 
of the character for east was expanded into the East. Note, 
however, that in its primitive form the legs are straightened 
out and reach down to the bottom of the mouth. Hence, we 
get the shape 臠. With the exception of one kanji, given in the 
following frame, this element always appears at the top of its 
relative primitives.
 1603 
value
 価 
 Person . . . Old West. [8]
 1604 
need
 要 
 Old West . . . woman. [9]
 1605 
loins
 腰 
 Part of the body . . . need. [13]
 1606 
ballot
 票 
 Old West . . . altar. [11]
 1607 
drift 
 漂 
 Water . . . ballot. [14]
 1608 
signpost
 標 
 Tree . . . ballot. [15]
 1609 
chestnut
 栗 
 Old West . . . tree. [10]
 
1610 
transition
 遷 
 West . . . St. Bernard dog . . . snake . . . road. [15]

340 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1611 
capsize
 覆 
 West . . . restore. [18]
 
1612 
smoke
 煙 
 Hearth . . . Old West . . . ground. [13]
 
1613 
south
 南 
 Belt . . . happiness. Note how the belt runs through the middle of 
happiness. [9]
礑 礒 礙
 
1614 
camphor tree
 楠 
 Tree . . . south. [13]
 
1615 
oﬀ ering
 献 
 South . . . chihuahua. [13]
Lesson 42
This next collection of characters is based on the primitive for gates. From 
there we shall go on to consider other elements related to entrances and barri-
ers in general.
 
1616 
gates
 門 
 Th e pictograph of two swinging gates is so clear in this kanji 
that only its stroke order needs to be memorized. In case you 
should have any trouble, though, you might doodle with the 
shapes on a piece of paper, taking care to note the diﬀ erence 
in the stroke order of the two facing doors. Th e gates usually 

lesson 42 | 341
serve as an enclosure, and are written before whatever it is 
they enclose. [8]
示 礼 社 祀 祁 祇 祈 祉
*  As a primitive, we shall continue to give it the meaning of 
gates, but recommend the image of swinging doors (like the 
kind once common at entrances to saloons) to distinguish it 
from the primitive for door.
 
1617 
question
 問 
 Gates . . . mouth. [11]
 
1618 
review
 閲 
 Gates . . . devil. Keep the connotation of this key word distinct 
from those of inspection (frame 1093), revise (frame 339), and 
perusal (frame 855). [15]
 
1619 
clique
 閥 
 Gates . . . fell. [14]
 1620 
interval
 間 
 Gates . . . sun/day. Th is interval applies to time and space alike, 
but the latter is better for creating an image. [12]
 
1621 
simplicity
 簡 
 Bamboo . . . interval. [18]
 
1622 
open
 開 
 Gates . . . two hands. [12]
 
1623 
closed
 閉 
 Gates . . . genie. [11]

342 | remembering the kanji 1
 1624 
tower
 閣 
 Gates . . . each. [14]
 
1625 
leisure
 閑 
 Gates . . . tree. [12]
 1626 
hear
 聞 
 Gates . . . ear. Compare the story you invented for the kanji 
meaning listen (frame 827). [14]
 
1627 
wet
 潤 
 Water . . . gates . . . king. [15]
 1628 
column
 欄 
 Tree . . . gates . . . east. [20]
 1629 
ﬁ ght
 闘 
 Gates . . . table . . . glue. Do not confuse with contend (frame 
1154). [18]
 1630 
godown
 倉 
 Th e single gate is used here not in order to represent one gate, 
but many of them, indeed a meeting of gates. Add mouth (as an 
entrance here) and you end up with godown. Th at should help 
keep this character distinct from warehouse (frame 589). [10]
 
1631 
genesis
 創 
 Godown . . . saber. [12]
 
1632 
un-
 非 
 Th is key word, a negating preﬁ x, is a doodle of a heavy iron pole 
with bars extending in both directions, to create the picture of a 
jail cell. From there to “un-” is but a short step. [8]
祐 祓 祕 祖 祗 祚 祝 神

lesson 42 | 343
*  As a primitive, we shall draw on the explanation above for the 
meaning of jail cell.
 
1633 
haiku
 俳 
 Th is character is used for the haiku, the 17-syllable poem that 
is one of Japan’s best-known literary forms. Its elements: person 
. . . jail cell. [10]
 
1634 
repudiate
 排 
 Fingers . . . jail cell. [11]
 
1635 
sad
 悲 
 Jail cell . . . heart. [12]
 
1636 
guilt
 罪 
 Eye . . . jail cell. [13]
 
1637 
comrade
 輩 
 Jail cell . . . car. [15]
 
1638 
front door
 扉 
 Door . . . jail cell. [12]
 
*  
key
 膾 
 Th is element gets its name and meaning from its pictographic 
representation of a key. Th e shape should be familiar: it is none 
other than the third and fourth strokes of the kanji for ﬁ ve. [2]
繃 繆
 
1639 
marquis
 侯 
 Person . . . key . . . dart. Hint: the pun suggested by the pronun-
ciation of the key word and the primitive for key may come in 
helpful. [9]

344 | remembering the kanji 1
 1640 
climate
 候 
 Marquis . . . walking stick. Note where the walking stick is posi-
tioned in this kanji. [10]
 
*  
guillotine
 臈 
 Th is element depicts a large, sharpened key coming down on 
the head of a criminal St. Bernard. [4]
繊 繋 繍
 
1641 
decide
 決 
 Th e etymology of decide (de-cidere = cut oﬀ  ) will help here; 
the elements are: water . . . guillotine. [7]
 1642 
cheerful
 快 
 State of mind . . . guillotine. [7]
 
*  
locket
 韋 
 Th e vertical stroke added here (the third stroke) turns the 
primitive element for a key into a locket. Below that, we ﬁ nd 
a square container (the mouth) and sunglasses with one of the 
lenses popped out. Note that in the primitive element for locket 
the ﬁ nal vertical stroke of sunglasses reaches all the way through 
to touch the mouth. [10]
礦 礪 礫
 
1643 
admirable
 偉 
 Person . . . locket. [12]
 1644 
diﬀ erence
 違 
 Locket . . . road. [13]

lesson 43 | 345
 
1645 
horizontal
 緯 
 Th read . . . locket. [16]
 1646 
defense
 衛 
 Boulevard . . . locket. Do not confuse with ward oﬀ  (frame 1302), 
protect (frame 997), guard (frame 186), or safeguard (frame 
700). [16]
 1647 
Korea
 韓 
 As with Italy (frame 1161) and Africa (frame 1295), this char-
acter simply abbreviates the full name of Korea. Its elements: 
mist . . . locket. [18]
Lesson 43
The next few primitives are only loosely related in the sense that they all 
have to do with qualities of material objects in one way or another.
 1648 
dry
 干 
 It is best to see this kanji as a pictograph of a revolving circular 
clothesline (viewed from the side). Spin it around quickly in 
your mind’s eye to give it the connotation of to dry. [3]
舞 舟 舩
* Th e primitive meaning is clothesline.
 1649 
liver
 肝 
 Part of the body . . . dry. [7]

346 | remembering the kanji 1
 1650 
publish
 刊 
 Dry . . . saber. [5]
 
1651 
sweat
 汗 
 Water . . . dry. [6]
 
1652 
ﬂ ats
 軒 
 Th is kanji, a counter for houses, is made up of cars . . . dry. [10]
 
1653 
beach
 岸 
 Mountain . . . cliﬀ  . . . dry. [8]
 
1654 
tree trunk
 幹 
 Mist . . . umbrella . . . dry. Th e meaning of this key word extends 
beyond tree trunks to represent the main stem or line of any-
thing from railway lines to managerial staﬀ s. Th is should help 
distinguish it from the stories used earlier for book (frame 211) 
and body (frame 957), both of which made use of the image of 
a tree trunk, as well as the kanji for trunk (frame 182). [13]
 
*  
potato
 于 
 Note how this element diﬀ ers from dry in virtue of the small 
hook at the end of the third stroke. [3]
祟 祠 祢
 
1655 
potato
 芋 
 Flowers . . . potato. [6]
 1656 
eaves
 宇 
 House . . . potato. [6]

lesson 43 | 347
 
1657 
too much
 余 
 Umbrella . . . potato . . . little. Th e last stroke of potato and the 
ﬁ rst of little coincide in this character. [7]
*  Since the phrase “too much” is overly abstract, we shall take 
the image of a scale whose indicator spins round and round 
on the dial because too much weight has been set on it. It will 
help to use this image in learning the kanji itself.
 
1658 
exclude
 除 
 Pinnacle . . . scale. [10]
 
1659 
gradually
 徐 
 Line . . . scale. [10]
 1660 
confer
 叙 
 Scale . . crotch. Th e key word has to do with conferring ranks, 
titles, and awards. It should not be confused with bestow (frame 
1246) or impart (frame 736). [9]
 
1661 
route
 途 
 Scale . . . road. [10]
 1662 
diagonal
 斜 
 Scale . . . measuring cup. [11]
 
1663 
paint
 塗 
 Water . . . scale . . . ground. [13]
 1664 
bundle
 束 
 In the same way that we were able to see the sun in the tree 
within the kanji for east, here we see a square container in the 
shape of a mouth. [7]

348 | remembering the kanji 1
 1665 
trust
 頼 
 Bundle . . . head. [16]
 1666 
rapids
 瀬 
 Water . . . bundle . . . head. [19]
 1667 
imperial order
 勅 
 In order to keep this character distinct from that for an imperial 
edict (frame 342), we must draw again on a pun. Th ink of the 
order here as a mail order or an order of pizza phoned in by the 
Emperor for delivery to the imperial palace. Th en it will not be 
hard to put together bundle and muscle to form a story about an 
imperial order. [9]
 1668 
alienate
 疎 
 Zoo . . . bundle. Note that the element for zoo is ﬂ attened out on 
the left  just as leg (frame 1279) had been. Th is is the only time 
we will meet this form in this book. [12]
 1669 
quick
 速 
 Bundle . . . road. [10]
 1670 
organize
 整 
 Bundle . . . taskmaster . . . correct. [16]
 
*  
awl
 膩 
 We include this element here because of its visible similarity 
to the element for bundle. Be sure to make a distinct image out 
of its composite ingredients: meeting . . . mouth . . . person. Th e 
stroke order follows the order of the elements exactly, but note 
how the person runs through the mouth. [8]
繖 繙 繚 繝

lesson 43 | 349
 
1671 
saber
 剣 
 Awl . . . saber. As we promised way back in frame 83, here at last 
is the kanji on which the primitive element of the same name is 
based. [10]
 
1672 
precipitous
 険 
 Pinnacle . . . awl. [11]
 
1673 
examination
 検 
 Tree . . . awl. [12]
 
1674 
frugal
 倹 
 Person . . . awl. [10]
 
1675 
heavy
 重 
 Th ousand . . . ri. Note how the long vertical stroke doubles up to 
serve both elements. [9]
祥 票 祭 祷 祺 祿 禀 禁 禄
 1676 
move
 動 
 Heavy . . . muscle. [11]
 
1677 
meritorious deed
 勲 
 Move . . . oven ﬁ re. So as not to confuse this kanji with the gen-
eral character for merit (frame 1276), you may associate the 
key word with military decorations and medals of distinction, 
both of which it is used for. [15]
 1678 
work
 働 
 Person . . . move. Do not confuse with labor (frame 860). [13]
 1679 
species
 種 
 Wheat . . . heavy. [14]

350 | remembering the kanji 1
 1680 
collide
 衝 
 Boulevard . . . heavy. [15]
 
1681 
fragrant
 薫 
 Flowers . . . heavy . . . oven ﬁ re. Do not confuse with incense 
(frame 911) or perfumed (frame 493). [16]
Lesson 44
We may now pick up the remainder of the enclosure primitives, leaving only 
a few related to animals, which we will take up toward the end of the book, in 
Lesson 55. Th is lesson should give you a chance to review the general prin-
ciples governing enclosures.
 
*  
sickness
 疒 
 Th e enclosure shown in this frame is composed of a cave with 
ice outside of it. It is used for a number of kanji related to sick-
ness. If you want to picture a caveman nursing a hangover with 
an ice-pack, that should provide enough help to remember the 
shape of this element and its meaning. [5]
禅 禊 禍
 
1682 
ill
 病 
 Sickness . . . third class. [10]
 
1683 
stupid
 痴 
 Know . . . sickness. [13]

lesson 44 | 351
 1684 
pox
 痘 
 Sickness . . . beans. [12]
 
1685 
symptoms
 症 
 Sickness . . . correct. [10]
 1686 
rapidly
 疾 
 Be sure to keep this character distinct from quick (frame 1669) 
and swift  (frame 280). Picture a succession of poison darts (the 
sort that inﬂ ict sickness) ﬂ ying out rapid-ﬁ re from a blowgun, 
so that “rapid-ﬁ re” can conjure up the proper image. [10]
 1687 
diarrhea
 痢 
 Sickness . . . proﬁ t. [12]
 1688 
tired
 疲 
 Sickness . . . pelt. [10]
 1689 
epidemic
 疫 
 Sickness . . . missile. [9]
 1690 
pain
 痛 
 Sickness . . . chop-seal . . . utilize. [12]
 
1691 
mannerism
 癖 
 Sickness . . . ketchup. [18]
 
*  
box
 匚 
 Th is enclosure, open at the right, represents a box lying on its 
side. When it is not used as an enclosure, its form is cramped to 
look like this: 臣. You may distinguish its meaning by picturing it 
then as a very small box. [2]
禎 福

352 | remembering the kanji 1
 1692 
hide
 匿 
 Box . . . young. [10]
禎 禔 禛
 
1693 
artisan
 匠 
 Box . . . ax. [6]
 1694 
doctor
 医 
 Box . . . dart. [7]
 
1695 
equal
 匹 
 Box . . . human legs. [4]
 1696 
ward
 区 
 Th e ward referred to here is a subdivision of a large city. Its ele-
ments: box . . . sheaves. When used as a primitive element, it may 
be helpful at times to break it up into these same composite 
elements. [4]
 1697 
hinge
 枢 
 Tree . . . ward. [8]
 1698 
assault
 殴 
 Ward . . . missile. [8]
 1699 
Europe
 欧 
 Ward . . . yawn. Like the kanji of frame 1647, this character is an 
abbreviation of the name of a geographical region. [8]
 1700 
repress
 抑 
 Fingers . . . box . . . stamps. [7]

lesson 44 | 353
 
1701 
faceup
 仰 
 Th is character is used both for lying on one’s back faceup, and 
for looking up to someone with respect and awe. Its elements: 
person . . . box . . . stamps. [6]
 1702 
welcome
 迎 
 Box . . . stamps . . . road. [7]
 
*  
teepee
 癶 
 Th e dots at the top of this tent are the wooden poles protruding 
outside the canvas walls of a teepee. [5]
禝 禦 禧 禪 禮
 
1703 
ascend
 登 
 Teepee . . . table. Do not confuse with rise up (frame 43). [12]
 1704 
lucidity
 澄 
 Water . . . ascend. [15]
 
1705 
discharge
 発 
 Th is key word refers to the discharging of guns, trains, people, 
and even words. Th e elements: teepee . . . two . . . human legs. 
Contrast the writing with frame 59. [9]
 1706 
abolish
 廃 
 Cave . . . discharge. [12]
 
*  
pup tent
 尞 
 Th e St. Bernard dog and its overlapping with the element for 
teepee are enough to suggest the meaning of this primitive 
element: a pup tent. Th e combination of sun and little at the 
bottom can be seen as a little opening or ﬂ ap through which the 
sun shines in the morning to let you know it’s time for getting 
up. [12]

354 | remembering the kanji 1
禰 禳 禹 禺
 1707 
colleague
 僚 
 Person . . . pup tent. Choose some connotation of the key word 
that will keep it distinct for you from companion (frame 19), 
friend (frame 704), consort (frame 1203), and comrade (frame 
1637). [14]
 1708 
dormitory
 寮 
 House . . . pup tent. [15]
 1709 
heal
 療 
 Sickness . . . pup tent. [17]
Lesson 45
We come now to a class of elements loosely associated with shape and form. 
We then append what remains of elements having to do with color.
 
*  
shape
 彡 
 Th e three simple strokes of this element actually represent the 
form or shape of the hair of one’s beard. But we keep the simple 
sense of a shape, or its verb “to shape,” in order to avoid confu-
sion later when we meet an element for hair. When using this 
element, be sure to visualize yourself shaping the thing in ques-
tion, or better still, twisting it out of shape. [3]
 
1710 
carve
 彫 
 Th e two primitives here, circumference and shape, belong natu-
rally to the special connotations that diﬀ erentiate carving from 
engraving (see frame 1521). [11]

lesson 45 | 355
 
1711 
shape
 形 
 Two hands . . . shape. [7]
 
1712 
shadow
 影 
 Scenery . . . shape. [15]
 
1713 
cedar
 杉 
 Tree . . . shape. [7]
 
1714 
coloring
 彩 
Vulture . . . tree . . . shape. [11]
 
1715 
patent
 彰 
 Badge . . . shape. Th e key word is synonymous with “clear” or 
“openly expressed.” [14]
 
1716 
lad
 彦 
 Vase . . . cliﬀ  . . . shape. [9]
禽 禾 禿
 
1717 
face
 顔 
 Lad . . . head. [18]
 
1718 
ought
 須 
 Shape . . . head. Th is is the only time that shape is placed to the 
left  of its relative element, the head. [12]
 
1719 
swell
 膨 
 Part of the body . . . drum . . . shape. Compare expand (frame 
1118). [16]

356 | remembering the kanji 1
 1720 
visit
 参 
 Elbow . . . St. Bernard dog . . . shape. [8]
 
1721 
wretched
 惨 
 A state of mind . . . visit. [11]
 
1722 
discipline
 修 
 Person . . . walking stick . . . taskmaster . . . shape. [10]
 
1723 
rare
 珍 
 Jewel . . . umbrella . . . shape. [9]
 1724 
checkup
 診 
 Words . . . umbrella . . . shape. Th e key word refers to a medical 
examination. [12]
 
1725 
sentence
 文 
 Under the familiar top hat we see a crisscross pattern or design, 
like that found on woodwork or garments. Th is should make 
an ugly enough image to help remember it. It can be associated 
with sentence by thinking of a sentence as a grammatical pat-
tern. [4]
紳 紵 紹 紺
*  The primitive meaning for this character will be plaid, the 
familiar crisscross pattern frequently used in textiles.
 
1726 
vis-à-vis
 対 
 Plaid . . . glue. [7]
 
1727 
family crest
 紋 
 Th read . . . plaid. [10]

lesson 45 | 357
 
1728 
mosquito
 蚊 
 Insect . . . plaid. [10]
 
*  
fenceposts
 脉 
 Th is element means just what it looks like: two fenceposts. Th ey 
enclose whatever comes between them, as distinct from a pair 
of walking sticks (see frame 250). [2]
 
1729 
adjusted
 斉 
 Plaid . . . fenceposts . . . two. Do not confuse with just so (frame 
388). [8]
 
1730 
dose
 剤 
 Adjust . . . saber. Th ink of this as a dose of medicine. [10]
 
1731 
ﬁ nish
 済 
 Water . . . adjust. Do not confuse with complete (frame 97), end 
(frame 1352), or perfect (frame 187). [11]
 
1732 
puriﬁ cation
 斎 
 Plaid . . . fenceposts . . . altar. Th is is a “religious” puriﬁ cation, 
which distinguishes it from the simple kanji for pure (frame 
1539). [11]
 
1733 
solemn
 粛 
 Sieve . . . fenceposts. Take special care in writing this charac-
ter, even though it follows the general rules we learned back in 
frame 4. [11]
秀 私 秉 秋
 
*  
sparkler
 膿 
 As the pictograph itself immediately suggests, this element 
depicts spreading out or scattering from a focal point. To cap-

358 | remembering the kanji 1
ture this meaning, we choose the image of a sparkler. It will 
oft en have another primitive put at its center point. [4]
科 秒 秕 秘
 
1734 
bases
 塁 
 Th e kanji of this frame refers to the four bases that are placed at 
the corners of a baseball inﬁ eld. Th e elements: ﬁ eld . . . sparkler 
. . . ground. [12]
 
1735 
music
 楽 
 Dove . . . sparkler . . . tree. [13]
 
1736 
medicine
 薬 
 Flowers . . . music. [16]
 
1737 
ratio
 率 
 Mysterious . . . sparkler . . . ten. Do not confuse with proportion 
(frame 1553). [11]
 
1738 
astringent
 渋 
 Water . . . footprint . . . sparkler. [11]
 
1739 
vicarious
 摂 
 Fingers . . . ear . . . sparkler. Do not confuse with substitute 
(frame 1005). [13]
 1740 
center
 央 
 Th e elements depict a St. Bernard with its head and paws keep-
ing their stick-like form, but with the middle or center of its 
body ﬁ lled out in a box-like shape. [5]
 
1741 
England
 英 
 Flowers . . . center. Th is is another abbreviation used to identify 
a country by the pronunciation of the kanji. [8]

 
1742 
reﬂ ect
 映 
 Sun . . . center. [9]
 
1743 
red
 赤 
 Ground . . . dagger . . . little. Th e two strokes of the dagger take 
the place of the middle stroke of little. [7]
租 秡 秣 秤
*  As a primitive on the left, this kanji keeps the same form. 
Elsewhere, the first two strokes are abbreviated to a single 
dot, giving us 亦. Th is latter form will take the meaning of an 
apple.
 
1744 
pardon
 赦 
 Red . . . taskmaster. [11]
 
1745 
unusual
 変 
 Apple . . . walking legs. [9]
 
1746 
tracks
 跡 
 Wooden leg . . . apple. [13]
 
1747 
barbarian
 蛮 
 Apple . . . insects. [12]
 
1748 
romance
 恋 
 Apple . . . heart. [10]
 
1749 
gulf
 湾 
 Water . . . apple . . . bow. [12]
 
1750 
yellow
 黄 
 Salad . . . sprout . . . animal legs. [11]
lesson 45 | 359

360 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1751 
sideways
 横 
 Tree . . . yellow. [15]
 
*  
mosaic
 巴 
 Th is element is shaped roughly like the snake, but pay attention 
to the diﬀ erence when writing it. [4]
秦 秧 秩 秬
 
1752 
grasp
 把 
 Fingers . . . mosaic. [7]
 
1753 
color
 色 
 Bound up . . . mosaic. [6]
 
1754 
discontinue
 絶 
 Th read . . . color. [12]
 
1755 
glossy
 艶 
 Bountiful . . . color. [19]
 
1756 
fertilizer
 肥 
 Flesh . . . mosaic. [8]
Lesson 46
A number of containers of various sorts can be gathered together here. Most 
of them have limited use as primitives, but none of them should cause any par-
ticular diﬃ  culty.

lesson 46 | 361
 
1757 
sweet
 甘 
 Th is kanji is a pictograph of a small wicker basket. (Th e extra 
short stroke in the middle helps keep it distinct from the char-
acter for twenty.) All one needs to add is some image of sweet 
cakes or breads carried in the basket, and the union of picture 
and meaning is complete. Take care not to confuse with confec-
tionary (frame 1122). [5]
称 移 稀 稈 程
*  As a primitive, the pictograph’s meaning of a wicker basket is 
used, a small one like the kind used for picnics.
 
1758 
navy blue
 紺 
 Th read . . . wicker basket. [11]
 
1759 
so-and-so
 某 
 Th e key word here refers to the adjective for an unspeciﬁ ed per-
son or thing. Its elements: wicker basket . . . tree. [9]
 1760 
conspire
 謀 
 Words . . . so-and-so. [16]
 
1761 
mediator
 媒 
 Woman . . . so-and-so. [12]
 
*  
bushel basket
 其 
 As the two legs at the bottom suggest, this bushel basket is a 
large container, standing on the ﬂ oor. Its ﬁ rst four strokes indi-
cate that it is made of wicker, much like the small wicker basket 
introduced just above. To make room for something inside of 
the bushel basket, the legs at the bottom are attached to the 
ﬁ nal horizontal stroke and extended to make an enclosure. [8]
稍 税 稏 稐 稑 稒 稔

362 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1762 
deceit
 欺 
 Bushel basket . . . yawn. [12]
 
1763 
chess piece
 棋 
 Tree . . . bushel basket. [12]
 1764 
national ﬂ ag
 旗 
 Banner . . . bushel basket. [14]
 
1765 
period
 期 
 Bushel basket . . . month. As the month indicates, this has to do 
with periods of time. [12]
 1766 
Go
 碁 
 Bushel basket . . . stones. Th e key word refers to the Japanese 
game played with black and white colored stones on a lined 
board. [13]
 
1767 
fundamentals
 基 
 Bushel basket . . . soil. [11]
 1768 
tremendously
 甚 
 Bushel basket . . . equal. Note how the ﬁ rst stroke of equal dou-
bles up with the sixth stroke of the bushel basket, and how the 
animal legs of the bushel basket are dropped to make room for 
the human legs of equal. [9]
 1769 
intuition
 勘 
 Tremendously . . . muscle. [11]
 1770 
withstand
 堪 
 Soil . . . tremendously. [12]

lesson 46 | 363
 
*  
purse
 膕 
 By adding a single stroke at the bottom of the kanji for in, we 
get a sort of pictograph of a purse. [5]
 
1771 
precious
 貴 
 Purse . . . shells. [12]
 
1772 
bequeath
 遺 
 Precious . . . road. [15]
 
1773 
dispatch
 遣 
 Th is kanji takes away the maestro’s baton and replaces it with 
a purse. Th e road represents his being dispatched on his way 
as an obvious misﬁ t. You will remember that when he did have 
his baton, he was being chased down the road by his fans. All of 
which shows what a diﬀ erence a single stroke can make! [13]
 
1774 
dance
 舞 
 Th e top two strokes show someone reclining, and the next six 
are a pictograph of an oaken tub ribbed with metal strips, like 
the kind once used for bathing. At the bottom, the sunglasses 
round oﬀ  the character. [15]
稗 稘 稙 稚 稜
 
1775 
nothingness
 無 
 Th is character is the Japanese character for the supreme phil-
osophical principle of much Oriental thought: nothingness. 
Make use of the oaken tub from the previous frame, and add to 
that the oven ﬁ re at the bottom. [12]

Lesson 47
The several primitives we turn to next are all related to the position and dis-
position of things. Th e classiﬁ cation is somewhat arbitrary since we are getting 
hard pressed to organize the left over primitives into tidy categories. In addition, 
from this lesson on, most references to key words with possibly confusing simi-
larities will be omitted. Try to think of them yourself as you are going through 
these characters.
 
*  
shelf
 且 
 Th e pictographic representation in the primitive shown here is 
a small stand with horizontal shelves. Th us we give it the gen-
eral meaning of a shelf. It diﬀ ers from the kanji and primitive 
for an eye only in its ﬁ nal stroke, which extends beyond the two 
vertical strokes at both ends. Th ink of it as a shelf for special 
keepsakes or a glass bureau for knickknacks, keeping it distinct 
from the kanji we learned in frame 202. [5]
 1776 
association
 組 
 Th read . . . shelf. [11]
 
1777 
coarse
 粗 
 Rice . . . shelf. [11]
 
1778 
tariﬀ 
 租 
 Wheat . . . shelf. [10]
 1779 
ancestor
 祖 
 Altar . . . shelf. [9]

lesson 47 | 365
 1780 
thwart
 阻 
 Pinnacle . . . shelf. [8]
 
1781 
investigate
 査 
 Tree . . . shelf. [9]
 
1782 
help
 助 
 Shelf . . . power. Th e reason why the shelf appears on the left  
here is that the right side is the normal position for power, the 
stronger primitive. Indeed, the only exception in all the kanji is 
the character for add (frame 867). [7]
 
1783 
best regards
 宜 
 Th is kanji is a polite way of expressing one’s best regards to 
another. Its elements: house . . . shelf. [8]
 1784 
tatami mat
 畳 
 Rice ﬁ eld . . . crown . . . shelf. [12]
 
1785 
row
 並 
 Th is character represents a slightly stylized duplication of the 
kanji for stand up. By lengthening the sixth and seventh strokes, 
you will see how this is done. [8]
稟 稠 種 稱 稲 稷 稻 稼
*  Th e primitive meaning remains the same as that of the kanji, 
but special attention has to be given to the varieties of shape 
this element can undergo. It is the most diﬃ  cult one you will 
meet in this book. When it appears beneath its relative prim-
itive, the top three strokes are omitted, though the third hori-
zontal stroke may be doubled up with the bottom horizontal 
stroke of the element above it: 脯. atop its relative primitive, 
it can keep its kanji shape. When it does not, the top three 
strokes are removed and all of them are replaced below the 
primitive’s bottom line: 脱. We shall acknowledge this latter 

366 | remembering the kanji 1
transformation by changing its meaning to upside down in a 
row.
 1786 
universal
 普 
 Row . . . sun. [12]
 
1787 
musical score
 譜 
 Words . . . universal. [19]
 1788 
damp
 湿 
 Water . . . sun . . . row. [12]
 1789 
appear
 顕 
 Sun . . . row . . . heads. [18]
 1790 
slender
 繊 
 Th read . . . Th anksgiving . . . row. [17]
 
1791 
spirits
 霊 
 Rain . . . two . . . row. Th is character will refer only to the inhabit-
ants of the “spirit world,” and not to moods or temperaments, 
for which we will learn another character in frame 1885. [15]
 
1792 
profession
 業 
 In a row upside down . . . not yet. [13]
答 策 筝
 
1793 
slap
 撲 
 Fingers . . . upside down in a row . . . husbands. [15]
 1794 
me
 僕 
 Th is key word is yet another synonym for “I,” somewhat more 
familiar in tone. As a rule, it is a word that boys and men use to 

lesson 47 | 367
refer to themselves. Its elements: person . . . husbands . . . in a row 
upside down. [14]
 
1795 
together
 共 
 Salad . . . animal legs. [6]
*  Th e primitive retains the meaning of together. Imagine things 
strung together like ﬁ sh on a line, beads on a thread, or what-
ever. Th e main thing is to avoid putting them in a straight 
row, which would confound this element with the previous 
one. As we saw with bushel basket, this primitive can join its 
legs to the ﬁ nal horizontal stroke and stretch them to form an 
enclosure.
 1796 
submit
 供 
 Submit here is a transitive verb, meaning to oﬀ er or present. Its 
elements: person . . . strung together. [8]
 
1797 
uncommon
 異 
 Brains . . . together. [11]
 1798 
wing
 翼 
 Feathers . . . uncommon. [17]
 1799 
deluge
 洪 
 Water . . . strung together. [9]
 1800 
harbor
 港 
 Deluge . . . snakes. [12]
 
1801 
outburst
 暴 
 Sun . . . strung together . . . rice grains. [15]
 1802 
bomb
 爆 
 Fire . . . outburst. [19]

368 | remembering the kanji 1
 1803 
respect
 恭 
 Strung together . . . valentine. [10]
 1804 
elect
 選 
 Two snakes . . . strung together . . . road. [15]
 1805 
Mr.
 殿 
 Flags . . . strung together . . . missile. [13]
Lesson 48
This next lesson is composed of characters whose primitives are grouped 
according to shape rather than meaning. Each of them makes use, in one way or 
another, of squares and crossing lines. While this might have brought confusion 
earlier, we know enough primitives at this stage to introduce them together 
without risking any confusion.
 1806 
well
 井 
 Recalling that there are no circular strokes, and that the shape 
of the square and the square within a square (frame 586) have 
already been used, it should be relatively easy to see how this 
character can be consider a pictograph of a well. [4]
繞 繦 繧 繩
 1807 
surround
 囲 
 Well . . . pent in. [7]
 1808 
till
 耕 
 Christmas tree . . . well. [10]

lesson 48 | 369
 1809 
Asia
 亜 
 In this kanji, the abbreviation for Asia, you should be able to see 
the character for mouth behind the Roman numeral ii. [7]
繪 繭 繰 繹
 
1810 
bad
 悪 
 Asia . . . heart. [11]
 
1811 
circle
 円 
 Th is kanji, also used for Yen, is one you are not likely to need 
to study formally, since you can hardly get around in Japan 
without it. Th e connection is that the yennies, like pennies, are 
circular in shape. In any case, the elements are: glass canopy . . . 
walking stick . . . one. [4]
稽 稾 稿 穀
 
1812 
angle
 角 
 Bound up . . . glass canopy . . . walking stick . . . two. If you write 
the character once, you will see why we avoided using the ele-
ment for soil, which would prompt you to write it in improper 
order. [7]
穂 穃 穆 穉
*  As a primitive, imagine the tool used by draft smen and car-
penters to draw right-angles.
 
1813 
contact
 触 
 Angle . . . insect. [13]
 
1814 
unravel
 解 
 Angle . . . dagger . . . cow. [13]

370 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1815 
again
 再 
 Jewel . . . with a belt hung on it. Note how the belt is drawn right 
aft er the ﬁ rst stroke of jewel. [6]
積 穎 穏 穐 穗
 
*  
funnel
 冓 
 Celery . . . again. [10]
穡 穢 穣 穩 穫
 
1816 
lecture
 講 
 Words . . . funnel. [17]
 
1817 
subscription
 購 
 Shells . . . funnel. Th e key word is meant to suggest magazine 
subscriptions and the like. [17]
 
1818 
posture
 構 
 Tree . . . funnel. [14]
 
1819 
gutter
 溝 
 Water . . . funnel. [13]
 
*  
scrapbook
 臀 
 Glass canopy . . . ﬂ ower. It is most rare to see the ﬂ ower come 
under its relative element. Note how it is straightened out to ﬁ ll 
the space available. [5]
穰 穴 究 穹 空
 1820 
argument
 論 
 Words . . . meeting . . . scrapbook. Th e argument here is a process 
of academic reasoning, not a personal quarrel or spat. [15]

lesson 48 | 371
 
1821 
ethics
 倫 
 Person . . . meeting . . . scrapbook. [10]
 
1822 
wheel
 輪 
 Car . . . meeting . . . scrapbook. [15]
 
1823 
partial
 偏 
 Person . . . door . . . scrapbook. Th e sense of the key word is that 
of having a bias or preference for someone or something. [11]
 1824 
everywhere
 遍 
 Door . . . scrapbook . . . a road. [12]
 
1825 
compilation
 編 
 Th read . . . door . . . scrapbook. [15]
 
1826 
tome
 冊 
 Th is key word is a counter for books. It diﬀ ers from scrapbook 
both in the writing order and in the extension of the second 
horizontal stroke. [5]
穽 穿 突
 
1827 
code
 典 
 We introduce this character here because of its connection to 
the book-related kanji treated above. It is based on the charac-
ter for bend (frame 1172), whose last stroke is lengthened to 
coincide with the ﬁ rst stroke of the element for tool. [8]

Lesson 49
A few primitives having to do with groupings and classiﬁ cations of people 
remain to be learned, and we may bring them all together here in this short 
lesson.
 
1828 
family name
 氏 
 Pay close attention to the stroke order of the elements when 
learning to write this character. Th e elements: a long drop . . . 
ﬁ shhook . . . a one . . . ﬁ shhook. [4] 
窃 窄 窈 窒
 
1829 
paper
 紙 
 Th read . . . family name. [10]
 
1830 
marriage
 婚 
 Woman . . . family name . . . day. [11]
 
*  
calling card
 氐 
 Family name . . . ﬂ oor. [5]
 
1831 
lower
 低 
 Person . . . calling card. [7]
 
1832 
resist
 抵 
 Fingers . . . calling card. [8]

lesson 49 | 373
 
1833 
bottom
 底 
 Cave . . . calling card. [8]
 
1834 
people
 民 
 In place of the drop at the start of the character for family name, 
we have a mouth, which makes you think of the “vox populi.” [5]
窓 窕 窖 窗 窘
 
1835 
sleep
 眠 
 Eyes . . . people. [10]
 
*  
dog tag
 甫 
 Th is primitive refers to all sorts of identiﬁ cation tags, but dog 
tag is chosen for its descriptiveness. On the top we see the 
arrowhead, joined to the screwdriver below by the lengthened 
vertical stroke. [7]
窟 窩 窪 窮 窯
 
1836 
catch
 捕 
 Fingers . . . dog tag. [10]
 
1837 
bay
 浦 
 Water . . . dog tag. [10]
 
1838 
bullrush
 蒲 
 Flowers . . . bay. [13]
 
1839 
shop
 舗 
 Cottage . . . dog tag. Th e key word refers to the noun, not the 
verb. [15]

374 | remembering the kanji 1
 1840 
supplement
 補 
 Cloak . . . dog tag. [12]
 
*  
city walls
 阝 
 On the left , and rather more pressed in its form, this element 
meant the high spot of a village, or its pinnacle. On the right 
side, in the form shown here, it means the lowest part of the city, 
around which its walls rise up as a protection against invaders. 
Hence we nickname this element: city walls. [3]
 
1841 
residence
 邸 
 Calling card . . . city walls. [8]
 1842 
enclosure
 郭 
 Receive . . . city walls. [11]
 
1843 
county
 郡 
 Old boy . . . city walls. [10]
 1844 
outskirts
 郊 
 Mingle . . . city walls. [9]
 
1845 
section
 部 
 Muzzle . . . city walls. [11]
 1846 
metropolis
 都 
 Someone . . . city walls. [11]
 1847 
mail
 郵 
 Droop . . . city walls. [11]
 1848 
home country
 邦 
 Bushes . . . city walls. [7]

lesson 50 | 375
 1849 
hometown
 郷 
 Cocoon . . . silver . . . city walls. [11]
 
1850 
echo
 響 
 Hometown . . . sound. [20]
 
1851 
son
 郎 
 Halo . . . city walls. [9]
 
1852 
corridor
 廊 
 Cave . . . son. [12]
Lesson 50
In this lesson we simply present an assortment of left over primitives that 
were not introduced earlier for want of a proper category or because we had 
not enough elements to give suﬃ  cient examples of their use.
 
*  
drag
 臉 
 Although not a pictograph in the strict sense, this primitive 
depicts one stroke pulling another along behind it. Note how it 
diﬀ ers from cliﬀ  and person because of this dragging eﬀ ect, not 
to mention the fact that the ﬁ rst stroke is written right to left , 
almost as if it were a long drop. When this element comes under 
a diﬀ erent element, the strokes are drawn apart like this: 船. [2]
窰 窶
 
1853 
shield
 盾 
 Dragging . . . ten eyes. [9]

376 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1854 
sequential
 循 
 Line . . . shield. [12]
 
1855 
faction
 派 
 Water . . . drag . . . rag. Back in frame 1048 we indicated that this 
latter primitive would come up once again, as it does in this and 
the following two frames. [9]
 
1856 
vein
 脈 
 Part of body . . . drag . . . rag. [10]
 
1857 
masses
 衆 
 Blood . . . drag . . . rag. [12]
 
1858 
parcel post
 逓 
 Drag . . . cornstalk . . . belt . . . road. [10]
 
1859 
grade
 段 
 Th e kanji connoting rank or class shows us a new element on the 
left : the familiar primitive for staples with an additional stroke 
cutting through the vertical stroke. It is easiest in these cases to 
make a primitive related to what we already know. Hence, we 
call it a staple gun. To the right, missile. [9]
窺 窿 竃 竄 竅 竇 竈 竊 立
 1860 
forge
 鍛 
 Metal . . . grade. [17]
 
1861 
empress
 后 
 Drag . . . one . . . mouth. [6]

lesson 50 | 377
 
*  
clothes hanger
 膂 
 Th is element, which looks something like a backwards hook, we 
will call a clothes hanger. Used as an enclosure, it begins fur-
ther to the left . [1]
 1862 
phantasm
 幻 
 Cocoon . . . clothes hanger. [4]
 
1863 
director
 司 
 Clothes hanger . . . one . . . mouth. [5]
 1864 
pay respects
 伺 
 Th is honoriﬁ c form of call on (frame 495) is made up of: per-
son . . . director. [7]
 
1865 
parts of speech
 詞 
 Th e key word, parts of speech, refers to nouns, verbs, adjective, 
adverbs, and so on. Th e elements: words . . . directors. [12]
 1866 
domesticate
 飼 
 Eat . . . director. Th e sense is of rearing of animals. [13]
 
1867 
heir
 嗣 
 Mouth . . . scrapbook . . . director. [13]
 1868 
boat
 舟 
 Aft er the drop and the glass canopy, we come to a combination 
of three strokes that we met only once before, in the character 
for mama (frame 101). Th e pictographic meaning we gave it 
there has no etymological relationship to this character, but use 
it if it helps. [6]
竍 竏 竑 竒 竓 竕

378 | remembering the kanji 1
 1869 
liner
 舶 
 Th e type of boat connoted by this key word is a large ocean-
going liner. Th e important thing here is to work with the ele-
ments boat and dove to make an image distinct from that of the 
former frame. Don’t count on size alone to distinguish the boat 
from the liner. [11]
 1870 
navigate
 航 
 Boat . . . whirlwind. [10]
 
1871 
carrier
 般 
 Boat . . . missile. [10]
 
1872 
tray
 盤 
 Carrier . . . dish. [15]
 
1873 
conveyor
 搬 
 Fingers . . . carrier. [13]
 
1874 
ship
 船 
 Boat . . . gully. [11]
 
1875 
warship
 艦 
 Boat . . . oversee. [21]
 1876 
rowboat
 艇 
 Boat . . . courts. [13]
 
1877 
melon
 瓜 
 Th e only thing that distinguishes this from the claw is the elbow, 
made by doubling up the third stroke and adding a fourth. [5]
站 竚 竝 竟 章

lesson 51 | 379
 
1878 
arc
 弧 
 Bow . . . melon. [8]
 1879 
orphan
 孤 
 Child . . . melon. [8]
Lesson 51
As we said we would do back in Lesson 28, we now leave the beaten path 
to gather up those characters left  aside because they form exceptions to the 
rules and patterns we have been learning. Th e list is not large and has a num-
ber of repeating patterns. Aside from the few others we shall interpose in the 
next section where they belong, and three characters appended at the very 
end, this will complete our collection of special characters. Th is is probably 
the most diﬃ  cult lesson of the book.
 1880 
cocoon
 繭 
 Th ough it’s a good thing that the primitive for cocoon has been 
radically abbreviated from this, its full form as a kanji, the story 
it holds is a charming one. Th e silkworm (insect) eats the leaves 
of the mulberry bush (the ﬂ owers), digests them and transforms 
them into thread with which it spins about itself, in mystic wis-
dom, its own coﬃ  n (the hood). Th e dividing line that separates 
the two elements helps the picture of the little worm cutting 
itself oﬀ  from contact with the outside world, but as a character 
stroke, it is a clear exception. [18]
竡 竢 竣 童 竦
 
1881 
beneﬁ t
 益 
 Poised over the dish is a pair of animal horns that are attached 
to a pair of animal legs by a single horizontal stroke. [10]

380 | remembering the kanji 1
竧 竪 竫
 
1882 
spare time
 暇 
 Th e element for day on the left  is logical enough. Next to it we 
see staples being held in a mouth (one stroke is doubled up), 
indicating working on one’s hobby or handicraft s at home in 
one’s spare time. Th e small box at the top right is facing back-
wards, or more properly “inside out.” Finally, we have the crotch 
at the bottom. [13]
竭 端 竰 競 竸
 
1883 
spread
 敷 
 At the top we have the arrowhead whose vertical line joins it to 
the rice ﬁ eld (or brains) below it. Beneath it, the compass; and to 
the right, the taskmaster. [15]
竹 竺 竿
 1884 
come
 来 
 Th is odd but common kanji is built up of the character for not 
yet into which a pair of animal horns has been inserted. [7]
笂 笄 笆 笈 笊 笋 笏
 
1885 
spirit
 気 
 Th e spirit in this character refers to the changeable moods and 
airs of one’s personality as well as to the more essential com-
bination of vital forces that distinguish things and individuals 
one from the other. Its elements are: reclining . . . ﬂ oor . . . ﬁ sh-
hook . . . sheaf. Do not confuse with spirits (frame 1791). [6]
 1886 
vapor
 汽 
 Th ink of this character as a sibling of that for spirit. Simply 
replace sheaves with drops of water on the left  in order to get 
vapor. [7]

lesson 51 | 381
 
1887 
ﬂ y
 飛 
 Th e two large hooks have little propellers (the two drops on each 
hook) attached to them for ﬂ ying. Beneath is the measuring box, 
which serves as the body of this ﬂ ying contraption. Th e stroke 
order will cause some problems, so take care with it. [9]
笑 笘 笙 笛 笞 笠 笥 符 笨
 1888 
sink
 沈 
 Th e technique for sinking used in this kanji is unique. Rather 
than the biblical image of tying a millstone about the victim’s 
neck, here we see a crown tied about one leg before the unfortu-
nate party is tossed into the water. [7]
 1889 
wife
 妻 
 Ten . . . rakes . . . woman. [8]
第 笳 笵 笶 笹 筅
 1890 
decline
 衰 
 Let this key word connote the decline and fall of the Roman 
Empire. It shows a fellow in a top hat and scarf, trying hard to 
look happy by putting a walking stick in his mouth sideways to 
twist his face into a grotesque but semipermanent smile. [10]
筆 筈 等 筋 筌 筍 筒
 
1891 
inmost
 衷 
 Between the top hat and the scarf you will see the character for 
in which is truncated at the bottom so as not to interfere with 
the scarf. You can think of this character as forming a pair with 
the one just learned in the last frame: there the in (the walking 
stick in the mouth) was set on its side; in this character it is set 
upright. [10]
椥 椦 椨 椪 椰 椴 椶

382 | remembering the kanji 1
 1892 
mask
 面 
 Imagine a mask over your head with eyes peeping not only out 
of the normal place, but from all over the head, a hundred in all 
(the element for eye displacing the ﬁ ft h stroke of that for hun-
dred). [9]
筥 筧 筬 筮 筰 筱 筴 筵 筺
 
1893 
leather
 革 
 Aft er the ﬂ owers at the top (painted on the leather for decora-
tion), we see the element for car with the middle stroke left  out. 
Th ink of the seats having been taken out so that they can be 
reupholstered with this decorated leather. [9]
箆 箇 箋 箍 箏 箒 箔 箕 算
 1894 
shoes
 靴 
 Leather . . . change. [13]
 
1895 
hegemony
 覇 
 Old West . . . leather . . . moon. [19]
 1896 
voice
 声 
 Th e samurai at the top is familiar enough. Th e combination 
beneath, which looks like a ﬂ ag with a line running through it, 
is not. Try to devise some way to take note of it, and pay atten-
tion to the writing. [7]
箘 箙 箚 箜 箝
 
1897 
give
 呉 
 Th e complex of strokes in this kanji is unusual and diﬃ  cult, 
because of the fourth stroke, which is rare (see frames 33 and 
34). Th e mouth and tool are already familiar. [7]

lesson 51 | 383
箞 箟 管
 1898 
recreation
 娯 
 Woman . . . give. [10]
 1899 
mistake
 誤 
 Words . . . give. [14]
 1900 
steam
 蒸 
 Th e ﬂ ower at the top and the ﬂ oor with the oven ﬁ re beneath are 
familiar. Th e problem is what comes in between. It is formed by 
the character for complete, whose vertical stroke doubles up as 
the ﬁ rst stroke of water. [13]
箪 箭 箱 箴 箸
 
1901 
acquiesce
 承 
 Th e sense of passive acceptance or reception of information 
is contained in this key word. Th e form is based on the mid-
dle portion of the preceding character, with three additional 
strokes, best thought of as the kanji for three. [8]
節 篁 範 篆 篇 築 篋 篌
 1902 
bin
 函 
 Th is is the character from which the element for shovel derives. 
Within it comes the element for snare, with the sparkler sur-
rounding it. [8]
篏 篝 篠 篤 篥 篦 篩 篭
 1903 
poles
 極 
 Th e poles this key word refers to are the extremities of the earth 
or the terminals of an electric ﬁ eld. Th e elements are: tree . . . 
snare . . . mouth . . . crotch . . . ﬂ oor. [12]

384 | remembering the kanji 1
篳 篶 篷 簀 簇 簍 簑 簒
Lesson 52
The final grouping of kanji revolves about elements related to animals. It is 
a rather large group, and will take us all of four lessons to complete. We begin 
with a few recurring elements related to parts of animal bodies.
 1904 
tusk
 牙 
 If you play with this primitive’s form with pencil and paper, you 
will see that it begins with a box-like shape, and ends with the 
ﬁ nal two strokes of the halberd, a convenient combination for 
the tusk protruding from the mouth of an animal. [4]
纈 纉 纊 續
*  Since this kanji has 4 strokes, you would expect that as a 
primitive it would also have 4—but in fact it has 5 in the fol-
lowing two frames (the second stroke between divided into 2 
strokes) and reverts to 4 again in frame 1907.
 1905 
bud
 芽 
 Flowers . . . tusk. [8]
 1906 
wicked
 邪 
 Tusk . . . city walls. [8]
 1907 
gracious
 雅 
 Tusk . . . an old turkey. [12]

lesson 52 | 385
 
*  
animal tracks
 釆 
 Having already met the primitive for human footprints, we now 
introduce the one for animal tracks. Its elements are simply: a 
drop of . . . rice. [7]
 1908 
interpretation
 釈 
 Animal tracks . . . shakuhachi. [11]
 1909 
turn
 番 
 Th is key word has been chosen for its overlay of several mean-
ings similar to those of the kanji: a turn of duty, a round, a num-
ber, and so forth. Its composite elements: animal tracks . . . rice 
ﬁ eld. [12]
*  As a primitive element, we choose the image of a pair of dice 
which it is your turn to throw.
 
1910 
hearing
 審 
 Th e hearing referred to in this character relates to trials in the 
courts. Th e elements: house . . . dice. [15]
 
1911 
ﬂ ip
 翻 
 Dice . . . feathers. [18]
 
1912 
clan
 藩 
 Flowers . . . water . . . dice. [18]
 
1913 
fur
 毛 
 Th is character simply reverses the direction of the ﬁ nal stroke 
of hand to produce fur. If you reverse your hand and put its 
palm down, you will have the side on which fur grows. [4]
簔 簗 簟 簡

386 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1914 
decrease
 耗 
 Christmas tree . . . fur. [10]
 
1915 
tail
 尾 
 Flag . . . fur. [7]
 
*  
lock of hair
 乇 
 Th is element is clearly derived from that for fur. By leaving out 
the second stroke, we get simply a lock of hair. [3]
 
1916 
home
 宅 
 House . . . lock of hair. [6]
 
1917 
consign
 託 
 Words . . . lock of hair. [10]
 
*  
tail feathers
 膚 
 So as not to confuse this primitive element with the character 
for feathers, think of the extravagant tail-feather plumage of the 
peacock. Th e form itself is too pictographic to need breaking 
down further. [5]
簣 簧
 
1918 
do
 為 
 Th is character rightly belongs to the previous lesson, but we 
held it until now because of the ﬁ nal element, the tail feath-
ers. Aft er the drop at the outset, the next three strokes are com-
pletely novel and should be given special attention. [9]
簪 簫 簷 簸 粥 簽
 
1919 
falsehood
 偽 
 Person . . . do. [11]

lesson 52 | 387
 
*  
hairpin
 膠 
 Here we have a quasi-pictograph of the colorful and decorated 
clips used to bind up long hair. Note its similarity to the scarf, 
which diﬀ ers only by the addition of one stroke. [4]
簾 簿 籀 籃
 1920 
long
 長 
 In line with the story of the preceding frame, the hair that needs 
the hairpin is long. [8]
耿 聆 聊 聒 聖 聘 聚 聞
*  Th e primitive of this kanji has two more shapes in addition to 
that of the kanji itself. Above its relative primitive, it is abbre-
viated to the form 臭 and will mean hair. Further abbreviated 
to 臧, it will mean the long, mangy mane of an animal.
 
1921 
lengthen
 張 
 Bow . . . long. [11]
 
1922 
notebook
 帳 
 Towel . . . long. [11]
 
1923 
dilate
 脹 
 Flesh . . . long. [12]
 1924 
hair of the head
 髪 
 Hair . . . shape . . . friend. [14]
 
1925 
unfold
 展 
 Flag . . . salad . . . hairpin. [10]

388 | remembering the kanji 1
 1926 
miss
 喪 
 Soil . . . two mouths . . . hairpin. Hint: see spit (frame 151). Th e 
key word carries the wide range of meanings readily associated 
with it: error, loss, absence, and so on. [12]
駅 駆 駇 駈 駐 駑
Lesson 53
We turn now to the animals themselves, beginning with the smaller animals. 
Because of the fair number of limited-use primitives, this lesson will supply a 
larger than normal number of stories in complete or semi-complete form.
 
*  
owl
 膝 
 We have met these three strokes before. When they come under 
another stroke, they represent a claw, and thence a vulture. And 
when placed atop a roof structure, they create a schoolhouse. 
Th e owl has something to do with both: it is a bird of prey, and 
it has come to be associated with learning. [3]
 
1927 
nest
 巣 
 Owl . . . fruit. [11]
 1928 
simple
 単 
 Owl . . . brain . . . needle. Th e sense is “not complex.” [9]
籌 籍 籏 籐 籔 籖
 1929 
war
 戦 
 Simple . . . ﬁ esta. [13]

lesson 53 | 389
 1930 
Zen
 禅 
 Altar . . . simple. [13]
 
1931 
bullet
 弾 
 Bow . . . simple. [12]
 
1932 
cherry tree
 桜 
 Tree . . . owl . . . woman. [10]
 
1933 
animal
 獣 
 Owl . . . rice ﬁ eld . . . one . . . mouth . . . chihuahua. [16]
 
1934 
brain
 脳 
 Part of the body . . . owl . . . villain. By way of exception, the kanji 
for brain has no connection with the primitive for brains. [11]
 
1935 
trouble
 悩 
 State of mind . . . owl . . . villain. [10]
 
1936 
stern
 厳 
 Owl . . . cliﬀ  . . . daring. [17]
 
1937 
chain
 鎖 
 Metal . . . little . . . shells. We have saved this character until now 
in order to draw attention to the visual diﬀ erence between the 
owl and little. By now your eyes should be so accustomed to 
these apparently inﬁ nitesimal diﬀ erences that the point is obvi-
ous. [18]
 
1938 
raise
 挙 
 Owl . . . tool . . . hand. [10]

390 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1939 
reputation
 誉 
 Owl . . . tool . . . saying. [13]
 1940 
game hunting
 猟 
 Pack of wild dogs . . . owl . . . wind . . . cornstalk. [11]
 
1941 
bird
 鳥 
 Dove . . . one . . . tail feathers. Th is is, of course, the character 
from which we derived the primitive meaning of dove. Note the 
lengthening of the second stroke. [11]
籘 籟 籠 籤 籥
 1942 
chirp
 鳴 
 Mouth . . . bird. [14]
 
1943 
crane
 鶴 
 Turkey house . . . bird. Th e ﬁ rst element appears on only one 
other occasion, back in frame 567. [21]
 1944 
crow
 烏 
 Th e only thing that distinguishes this character from that for 
bird is the omission of the one stroke that makes it white. Which 
is logical enough, when you consider that there are no crows of 
that color. [10]
 
1945 
vine
 蔦 
 Flower . . . bird. [14]
 1946 
pigeon
 鳩 
 Baseball . . . bird. [13]
 1947 
chicken
 鶏 
 Vulture . . . husband . . . bird. [19]

lesson 53 | 391
 1948 
island
 島 
 Th e bird’s tail is tucked under here, because it has come to stop 
on a mountain to rest from its journey across the waters. Th us 
the kanji comes to mean an island. [10]
 
*  
migrating ducks
 膰 
 Th is primitive is simplicity itself. It depicts bird claws that are 
joined to one another. Note the extra horizontal stroke in friend-
ship, which gives the appearance of a “two” in the middle of the 
kanji, further emphasizing the togetherness of the migrat ing 
ducks. [9]
籬 米 籵 籾
 1949 
warmth
 暖 
 Unlike the connotation of warm weather learned for an earlier 
key word, (frame 1452), this key word will be used to refer to 
the warmth of human congeniality. Its elements are: sun . . . 
migrating ducks. [13]
 1950 
beautiful woman
 媛 
 Woman . . . migrating ducks. [12]
 
1951 
abet
 援 
 Fingers . . . migrating ducks. [12]
 
1952 
slacken
 緩 
 Th read . . . migrating ducks. [15]
 
1953 
belong
 属 
 Flag . . . gnats (see frame 524) . . . with a belt. [12]
粁 粂 粃 粉 粋

392 | remembering the kanji 1
 
1954 
entrust
 嘱 
 Mouth . . . belong. [15]
 
1955 
accidentally
 偶 
 Th e person on the left  is familiar. As for the right side, we may 
combine the insect with a brain (observe the writing) and a belt 
to create the Talking Cricket who served as Pinocchio’s con-
science. (Th e belt is there because he pulls it oﬀ  to give unre-
pentant little Pinocchio a bit of “strap” now and again.) [11]
粍 粐 粒 粕 粗
 
1956 
interview
 遇 
 Talking Cricket . . . road. [12]
 
1957 
foolish
 愚 
 Talking Cricket . . . heart. [13]
 
1958 
corner
 隅 
 Pinnacle . . . Talking Cricket. [12]
 
*  
mountain goat
 屰 
 Th e animal horns and mountain unite, quite naturally, to give us 
a mountain goat. Th e extension of the ﬁ nal stroke indicates its 
tail, which only shows up when it has something under it. In an 
overhead enclosure, it is to be pictured as standing still, so that 
its tail droops down and out of sight. [6]
粘 粛 粞
 
1959 
inverted
 逆 
 Mountain goat . . . road. [9]

lesson 53 | 393
 1960 
model
 塑 
 Th is kanji depicts the art of modeling clay or wood into a ﬁ gure 
of your choice. Th e elements for composing it are: mountain 
goat . . . moon . . . soil. [13]
 
1961 
Mount
 岡 
 Here we see a mountain goat “mounted” under a glass canopy. 
In this and the following frames, think of a particular Mount 
you know. [8]
 1962 
steel
 鋼 
 Metal . . . Mount. [16]
 
1963 
hawser
 綱 
 Th read . . . Mount. [14]
 1964 
sturdy
 剛 
 Mount . . . saber. [10]
 
1965 
tin can
 缶 
 Th ough the meaning has no reference to animals, the parts do: 
horse with a mountain underneath. [6]
 1966 
pottery
 陶 
 Pinnacle . . . bound up . . . tin can. [11]
 
*  
condor
 舖 
 Vulture . . . king . . . mountain. By now you should be used to 
ﬁ nding two elements double up on a stroke, as is the case here 
with king and mountain. [9]
粡 粢 粤

394 | remembering the kanji 1
 1967 
swing
 揺 
 Fingers . . . condor. [12]
 1968 
Noh chanting
 謡 
 Words . . . condor. [16]
 1969 
concerning
 就 
 Capital . . . chihuahua with a human leg in place of one of its 
paws. [12]
 
*  
skunk
 豸 
 Th is primitive represents a skunk by combining the claw with 
the ﬁ rst part of the element for a sow. Note how the ﬁ nal stroke 
of claw is turned and lengthened to double up with the ﬁ rst 
stroke of the sow. [7]
纛 纜 缶 缸 缺 罅 罇
 1970 
sociable
 懇 
 Skunk . . . silver . . . heart. [17]
 
1971 
groundbreaking
 墾 
 Th e groundbreaking referred to here is not for the erection of 
new buildings but for the opening of farmlands. Th e elements: 
skunk . . . silver . . . soil. [16]
 
1972 
excuse
 免 
 Th is character is used for excusing oneself for a failure of cour-
tesy. Th e elements are: bound up . . . sun (oddly enough, laid on 
its side) . . . human legs. [8]
粧 粨 粫 粭 粮 粱 粲 粳
*  For the primitive meaning, we shall refer to this character as a 
rabbit, for which the old form of the character is 兔. [8]

lesson 54 | 395
 
1973 
elude
 逸 
 Rabbit . . . road. [11]
 
1974 
nightfall
 晩 
 Sun . . . rabbit. [12]
 
1975 
exertion
 勉 
 Rabbit . . . muscle. Notice how the last stroke of rabbit is stretched 
out to underlie the element for muscle. [10]
 1976 
elephant
 象 
 A rabbit’s head with the body of a sow represents an elephant. 
Little wonder that the kanji also means “phenomenon”! [12]
 
1977 
statue
 像 
 Person . . . elephant. [14]
Lesson 54
Now that we have come as far as the elephant, we may continue on with more 
of the larger animals. Fortunately, this group will cause us much less of a head-
ache than the preceding series, since there are fewer new primitives and their 
use is more frequent.
 1978 
horse
 馬 
 Let the extra vertical stroke in the mane combine with the ﬁ rst 
vertical stroke to give an image of the horse’s long neck. Th e 
only odd thing is the tail feathers at the end, but that should 
present a good image to remember the character by. Th e fact 
that the last stroke of mane and the ﬁ rst of tail feathers coincide 
should no longer surprise you. [10]

396 | remembering the kanji 1
粹 粽 精 糀 糂 糅 糊 糎
糒 糖
*  As a primitive, this kanji will mean a team of horses as distinct 
from the single horse whose primitive we met earlier.
 1979 
pony
 駒 
 Team of horses . . . phrase. In American slang, a pony is an 
underground translation of a classical text, which students who 
cannot manage the diﬃ  cult phrases of the original language 
consult and pass on from one generation to the next. [15]
 1980 
veriﬁ cation
 験 
 Team of horses . . . awl. [18]
 
1981 
equestrian
 騎 
 Team of horses . . . strange. [18]
 
1982 
parking
 駐 
 Team of horses . . . candlestick. [15]
 
1983 
drive
 駆 
 Team of horses . . . ward. [14]
 1984 
station
 駅 
 Team of horses . . . shakuhachi. [14]
 
1985 
boisterous
 騒 
 Team of horses . . . crotch . . . insect. [18]
 1986 
burdensome
 駄 
 Team of horses . . . plump. [14]

lesson 54 | 397
 
1987 
wonder
 驚 
 Awe . . . team of horses. [22]
 1988 
fervent
 篤 
 Bamboo . . . team of horses. [16]
 1989 
inﬂ ation
 騰 
 Meat . . . quarter . . . team of horses. [20]
 1990 
tiger
 虎 
 Th e kanji in this frame recalls the famous Bengali fable about 
the group of magicians (the magic wand) who decided to make 
a tiger. It seems that each of them knew how to make one part 
of the beast, so they pooled their talents and brought all the 
pieces (diced into pieces) together, at which point the fabricated 
tiger promptly ate its makers up (the bodiless human legs). 
Whatever the parable’s signiﬁ cance for modern civilization and 
its arsenals, it should help with this kanji.
 Oh yes, we should not forget that cliﬀ -like element. Th ink of it 
as an abbreviation of the primitive for zoo (the ﬁ rst and fourth 
strokes, actually), in order to ﬁ t the tiger somewhere into the 
picture. In fact, the abbreviation is perfectly logical, since the 
bottom elements usurp the room for the rest of the primitive 
for zoo. [8]
糘 糜 糞 糟 糠 糢 糧 糯
*  As a primitive element itself, the human legs are also swal-
lowed up, but the meaning of tiger is kept, and the whole 
serves as a roof for what comes beneath, 臨, giving the tiger 
something else to eat.
 
1991 
captive
 虜 
 Tiger . . . male. [13]

398 | remembering the kanji 1
 1992 
skin
 膚 
 Tiger . . . stomach. [15]
 
1993 
void
 虚 
 Tigers . . . row. [11]
 1994 
frolic
 戯 
 Void . . . ﬁ esta. [15]
 
1995 
uneasiness
 虞 
 Tiger . . . give. [13]
 1996 
prudence
 慮 
 Tiger . . . think. [15]
 1997 
drama
 劇 
 Tiger . . . sow . . . saber. [15]
 1998 
tyrannize
 虐 
 Tiger . . . box with a one in it (or a backwards broom, if that 
makes it easier). [9]
 1999 
deer
 鹿 
 Drawn on the walls of a complex of caves near Niaux in south-
ern France are a number of animal likenesses dating from the 
Upper Paleolithic period. Among them we ﬁ nd pictures of deer, 
some of them showing men in deer masks. By comparing their 
drawings to real deer, Stone Age people hoped to acquire power 
over the animal in the hunt; and by comparing themselves to 
the deer, to take on that animal’s characteristics. But time has 
locked with a “double-key” (the extra stroke through the ele-
ment for key) the real secret of this art form from us, and we 
can only surmise such meanings. But more important than the 
enigmas of the troglodytic mind is the way in which caves, a 
double-key, and comparing gives us the kanji for deer. [11]

lesson 54 | 399
糲 糴 糵 糶 糸 糺
*  As a primitive, this kanji is abbreviated much the same as the 
tiger was: the lower element is dropped to leave room for a 
replacement: 自. Its meaning, however, remains the same. 
Th ere are a very few cases (see frame 2002) in which there is 
no abbreviation. When this happens, we may keep the image 
suggested by the above explanation: painting of a deer.
 2000 
recommend
 薦 
 Flowers . . . deer . . . one . . . tail feathers. Note the doubling up in 
these last two elements as in frame 1941. [16]
 2001 
jubilation
 慶 
 Deer . . . crown (note the doubling up) . . . heart . . . walking legs. 
You may recall that we met the relative primitives at the bottom 
here before, in the kanji for melancholy (frame 616). [15]
 2002 
lovely
 麗 
 Th e painting of a deer itself with its form and color is enough 
to ﬁ ll the bill for an image of something lovely. But to give a bit 
of contrast, we see two mediocre drawings from a later age on 
two patches of ceiling above. Note that the drop in mediocre has 
been lengthened somewhat and the second stroke drawn down 
straight. [19]
 2003 
bear
 熊 
 Elbow . . . meat . . . spoon atop spoon . . . oven ﬁ re. [14]
 2004 
ability
 能 
 Try relating this kanji to that of the previous frame. For instance, 
you might imagine that the test of ability envisioned here is 
removing the bear from the oven ﬁ re. [10]
 2005 
attitude
 態 
 Ability . . . heart. [14]

Lesson 55
The final grouping of kanji is based on primitives related to fantastical ani-
mals and beings. We begin with two animals belonging to the zodiac.
 2006 
sign of the tiger
 寅 
 House . . . ceiling . . . sprout . . . animal legs. Compare, and do not 
confuse with, the keyword in frame 1750. [11]
 2007 
performance
 演 
 Water . . . sign of the tiger. [14]
 2008 
sign of the dragon
 辰 
 Cliﬀ  . . . two . . . hairpins. [7]
 2009 
embarrass
 辱 
 Sign of the dragon . . . glue. [10]
 2010 
quake
 震 
 Weather . . . sign of the dragon. [15]
 
2011 
shake
 振 
 Fingers . . . sign of the dragon. [10]
 2012 
with child
 娠 
 Woman . . . sign of the dragon. Th e key word is a synonym for 
pregnant, whose character we met earlier (frame 507). Although 
the two kanji are oft en used together, they should be kept dis-
tinct. [10]

lesson 55 | 401
 
2013 
lips
 唇 
 Sign of the dragon . . . mouth. [10]
 2014 
agriculture
 農 
 Bend . . . sign of the dragon. [13]
 
2015 
concentrated
 濃 
 Among other things, the key word refers to the thick consis-
tency of liquids. Its elements: water . . . agriculture. [16]
 
*  
golden calf
 臆 
 Th e story is told of the people of the Exodus that, disstisﬁ ed 
with Moses’ leadership, they colleted their gold ornaments and 
melted them down to fashion a golden calf for an idol. Th e ani-
mal horns and heavens here represent that god of theirs. [6]
 2016 
send oﬀ 
 送 
 Road . . . golden calf. [9]
 2017 
connection
 関 
 Gates . . . golden calf. [14]
 2018 
blossom
 咲 
 Mouth . . . golden calf. [9]
 2019 
ghost
 鬼 
 Drop of . . . brains . . . human legs . . . elbow. [10]
 2020 
ugly
 醜 
 Whiskey bottle . . . ghost. [17]
 2021 
soul
 魂 
 Rising cloud of . . . ghosts. [14]

402 | remembering the kanji 1
 2022 
witch
 魔 
 Hemp . . . ghost. [21]
 2023 
fascination
 魅 
 Ghost . . . not yet. [15]
 2024 
clod
 塊 
 Soil . . . ghost. [13]
 2025 
attack
 襲 
 Vase . . .meat . . . slingshot (doubled up with) snake . . . three . . . 
garment. Th e top half of this character is the old form for the 
kanji in frame 536. [22]
系 糾 紀 紂 約 紅 紆 紊 紋
Lesson 56
This final lesson is intended to complete preparations for learning new kanji 
not treated in these pages. A group of 14 such kanji has been reserved for this 
purpose and arranged in four groups typifying the kinds of problems you can 
run into. Aside from help with unusual stroke order and the indication of the 
total number of strokes in square brackets, no hints will be given.
Th e ﬁ rst and simplest group will be composed of those whose parts you will 
recognize immediately from characters already learned. We list seven examples, 
each representing one of the principles governing primitives.
 2026 
upbraid
 嚇 
 [17]

lesson 56 | 403
 2027 
majestic plural
 朕 
 [10]
 2028 
atmosphere
 雰 
 [12]
 2029 
item
 箇 
 [14]
 2030 
tempering
 錬 
 [16]
 
2031 
abide by
 遵 
 [15]
 2032 
quit
 罷 
 [15]
Secondly, you may run into characters that you learned as primitives, but 
whose meaning is completely unrelated to the primitive meaning we adopted. 
In learning the meaning of the kanji, be careful not to forget what it stands for 
when used as a primitive element.
 2033 
barracks
 屯 
 [4]
 2034 
moreover
 且 
 [5]
In the third place, you will meet kanji using combinations of elements that you 
can make into a new primitive with its own particular meaning. Recall a previ-

404 | remembering the kanji 1
ous kanji in which this combination appears and adjust your story to reinforce 
your new invention.
 2035 
seaweed
 藻 
[19]
 2036 
slave
 隷 
 [16]
 2037 
healing
 癒 
 [18]
Finally, there are shapes that were not covered in this book. You are on your 
own here, but it may help to consult a kanji dictionary to see whether any of the 
parts might not be a character with a speciﬁ c and useful meaning. Th e cluster 
of strokes forming 臼 in frame 2039 is a perfect illustration of this.
 2038 
cinnabar
 丹 
 [4]
 2039 
lagoon
 潟 
 [15]
Scattered here and there throughout the foregoing 55 lessons several ﬁ gures of 
the Sino-Japanese zodiac were introduced. We conclude this lesson, and the 
book, with the remaining ﬁ gures. In all, there are twelve animals, several of 
which take their writing from other characters quite unrelated in meaning. So 
far, then, we have learned the following: rat (子), tiger (寅), dragon (辰), horse 
(午), ram (未), monkey (申), bird (酉), dog (戌), and hog (亥). Th is leaves three for 
the learning.

lesson 56 | 405
 2040 
sign of the cow
 丑 
 [4]
納 紐 純 紕
 2041 
sign of the hare
 卯 
 [5]
 2042 
sign of the snake
 巳 
 [3]

Valeant beneﬁ ci,
Poenas dent maleﬁ ci!

 
 
Indexes


index i
Kanji
Th e following Index includes all the kanji presented in this book, in the order of 
their appearance. Th ey are printed in one of the typical block-form type styles 
used in Japan to teach children the proper form for drawing kanji by hand with a 
pen or pencil—the same form used in this book to show proper stroke-order.
 一  二  三  四  五  六  七  八  九  十
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10
 口  日  月  田  目  古  吾  冒  朋  明
 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20
 唱  晶  品  呂  昌  早  旭  世  胃  旦
 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30
 胆  亘  凹  凸  旧  自  白  百  中  千
 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40
 舌  升  昇  丸  寸  専  博  占  上  下
 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50
 卓  朝  只  貝  貞  員  見  児  元  頁
 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60
 頑  凡  負  万  句  肌  旬  勺  的  首
 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70
 乙  乱  直  具  真  工  左  右  有  賄
 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 
76 
77 
78 
79 
80
409

410 | index i: kanji
 貢 
項  刀  刃  切  召  昭  則  副  別
 
81 
82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 
88 
89 
90
 丁  町  可  頂  子  孔  了  女  好  如
 
91 
92 
93 
94 
95 
96 
97 
98 
99 
100
 母  貫  兄  克  小  少  大  多  夕  汐
 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110
 外  名  石  肖  硝  砕  砂  削  光  太
 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120
 器  臭  妙  省  厚  奇  川  州  順  水
 
121 
122 
123 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 
130
 氷  永  泉  原  願  泳  沼  沖  江  汁
 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 
140
 潮  源  活  消  況  河  泊  湖  測  土
 
141 
142 
143 
144 
145 
146 
147 
148 
149 
150
 吐  圧  埼  垣  圭  封  涯  寺  時  均
 
151 
152 
153 
154 
155 
156 
157 
158 
159 
160
 火  炎  煩  淡  灯  畑  災  灰  点  照
 
161 
162 
163 
164 
165 
166 
167 
168 
169 
170
 魚  漁  里  黒  墨  鯉  量  厘  埋  同
 
171 
172 
173 
174 
175 
176 
177 
178 
179 
180
 洞  胴  向  尚  字  守  完  宣  宵  安
 
181 
182 
183 
184 
185 
186 
187 
188 
189 
190
 宴  寄  富  貯  木  林  森  桂  柏  枠
 
191 
192 
193 
194 
195 
196 
197 
198 
199 
200

index i: kanji | 411
 梢  棚  杏  桐  植  枯  朴  村  相  机
 201 
202 
203 
204 
205 
206 
207 
208 
209 
210
 本  札  暦  案  燥  未  末  沫  味  妹
 
211 
212 
213 
214 
215 
216 
217 
218 
219 
220
 朱  株  若  草  苦  寛  薄  葉  模  漠
 
221 
222 
223 
224 
225 
226 
227 
228 
229 
230
 墓  暮  膜  苗  兆  桃  眺  犬  状  黙
 
231 
232 
233 
234 
235 
236 
237 
238 
239 
240
 然  荻  狩  猫  牛  特  告  先  洗  介
 241 
242 
243 
244 
245 
246 
247 
248 
249 
250
 界  茶  合  塔  王  玉  宝  珠  現  狂
 
251 
252 
253 
254 
255 
256 
257 
258 
259 
260
 皇  呈  全  栓  理  主  注  柱  金  銑
 
261 
262 
263 
264 
265 
266 
267 
268 
269 
270
 鉢  銅  釣  針  銘  鎮  道  導  辻  迅
 
271 
272 
273 
274 
275 
276 
277 
278 
279 
280
 造  迫  逃  辺  巡  車  連  軌  輸  前
 
281 
282 
283 
284 
285 
286 
287 
288 
289 
290
 各  格  略  客  額  夏  処  条  落  冗
 
291 
292 
293 
294 
295 
296 
297 
298 
299 
300
 軍  輝  運  冠  夢  坑  高  享  塾  熟
 
301 
302 
303 
304 
305 
306 
307 
308 
309 
310
 亭  京  涼  景  鯨  舎  周  週  士  吉
 
311 
312 
313 
314 
315 
316 
317 
318 
319 
320

412 | index i: kanji
 壮  荘  売  学  覚  栄  書  津  牧  攻
 
321 
322 
323 
324 
325 
326 
327 
328 
329 
330
 敗  枚  故  敬  言  警  計  獄  訂  討
 
331 
332 
333 
334 
335 
336 
337 
338 
339 
340
 訓  詔  詰  話  詠  詩  語  読  調  談
 
341 
342 
343 
344 
345 
346 
347 
348 
349 
350
 諾  諭  式  試  弐  域  賊  栽  載  茂
 
351 
352 
353 
354 
355 
356 
357 
358 
359 
360
 成  城  誠  威  滅  減  桟  銭  浅  止
 
361 
362 
363 
364 
365 
366 
367 
368 
369 
370
 歩  渉  頻  肯  企  歴  武  賦  正  証
 
371 
372 
373 
374 
375 
376 
377 
378 
379 
380
 政  定  錠  走  超  赴  越  是  題  堤
 
381 
382 
383 
384 
385 
386 
387 
388 
389 
390
 建  延  誕  礎  婿  衣  裁  装  裏  壊
 
391 
392 
393 
394 
395 
396 
397 
398 
399 
400
 哀  遠  猿  初  布  帆  幅  帽  幕  幌
 401 
402 
403 
404 
405 
406 
407 
408 
409 
410
 錦  市  姉  肺  帯  滞  刺  制  製  転
 
411 
412 
413 
414 
415 
416 
417 
418 
419 
420
 芸  雨  雲  曇  雷  霜  冬  天  橋  嬌
 421 
422 
423 
424 
425 
426 
427 
428 
429 
430
 立  泣  章  競  帝  童  瞳  鐘  商  嫡
 
431 
432 
433 
434 
435 
436 
437 
438 
439 
440

index i: kanji | 413
 適  滴  敵  匕  北  背  比  昆  皆  混
 441 
442 
443 
444 
445 
446 
447 
448 
449 
450
 渇  謁  褐  喝  旨  脂  壱  毎  敏  梅
 
451 
452 
453 
454 
455 
456 
457 
458 
459 
460
 海  乞  乾  腹  複  欠  吹  炊  歌  軟
 461 
462 
463 
464 
465 
466 
467 
468 
469 
470
 次  茨  資  姿  諮  賠  培  剖  音  暗
 471 
472 
473 
474 
475 
476 
477 
478 
479 
480
 韻  識  鏡  境  亡  盲  妄  荒  望  方
 481 
482 
483 
484 
485 
486 
487 
488 
489 
490
 妨  坊  芳  肪  訪  放  激  脱  説  鋭
 491 
492 
493 
494 
495 
496 
497 
498 
499 
500
 曽  増  贈  東  棟  凍  妊  廷  染  燃
 
501 
502 
503 
504 
505 
506 
507 
508 
509 
510
 賓  歳  県  栃  地  池  虫  蛍  蛇  虹
 
511 
512 
513 
514 
515 
516 
517 
518 
519 
520
 蝶  独  蚕  風  己  起  妃  改  記  包
 
521 
522 
523 
524 
525 
526 
527 
528 
529 
530
 胞  砲  泡  亀  電  竜  滝  豚  逐  遂
 
531 
532 
533 
534 
535 
536 
537 
538 
539 
540
 家  嫁  豪  腸  場  湯  羊  美  洋  詳
 
541 
542 
543 
544 
545 
546 
547 
548 
549 
550
 鮮  達  羨  差  着  唯  焦  礁  集  准
 
551 
552 
553 
554 
555 
556 
557 
558 
559 
560

414 | index i: kanji
 進  雑  雌  準  奮  奪  確  午  許  歓
 
561 
562 
563 
564 
565 
566 
567 
568 
569 
570
 権  観  羽  習  翌  曜  濯  曰  困  固
 
571 
572 
573 
574 
575 
576 
577 
578 
579 
580
 国  団  因 
姻  園  回  壇  店  庫  庭
 
581 
582 
583 
584 
585 
586 
587 
588 
589 
590
 庁  床  麻  磨  心  忘  忍  認  忌  志
 
591 
592  
593 
594 
595 
596 
597 
598 
599 
600
 誌  忠  串  患  思  恩  応  意  想  息
 601 
602 
603 
604 
605 
606 
607 
608 
609 
610
 憩  恵  恐  惑  感  憂  寡  忙  悦  恒
 
611 
612 
613 
614 
615 
616 
617 
618 
619 
620
 悼  悟  怖  慌  悔  憎 
慣  愉  惰  慎
 
621 
622 
623 
624 
625 
626 
627 
628 
629 
630
 憾  憶  慕  添  必  泌  手  看  摩  我
 
631 
632 
633 
634 
635 
636 
637 
638 
639 
640
 義  議  犠  抹  抱  搭  抄  抗  批  招
 641 
642 
643 
644 
645  
646 
647 
648 
649 
650
 拓  拍  打  拘  捨  拐  摘  挑  指  持
 
651 
652 
653 
654 
655 
656 
657 
658 
659 
660
 括  揮  推  揚  提  損  拾  担  拠  描
 661 
662 
663 
664 
665 
666 
667 
668 
669 
670
 操  接  掲  掛  研  戒  械  鼻  刑  型
 671 
672 
673 
674 
675 
676 
677 
678 
679 
680

index i: kanji | 415
 才  財  材  存  在  乃  携  及  吸  扱
 681 
682 
683 
684 
685 
686 
687 
688 
689 
690
 丈  史  吏  更  硬  又  双  桑  隻  護
 691 
692 
693 
694 
695 
696 
697 
698  
699 
700
 獲  奴  怒  友  抜  投  没  設  撃  殻
 701 
702 
703 
704 
705 
706 
707 
708 
709 
710
 支  技  枝  肢  茎  怪  軽  叔  督  寂
 
711 
712 
713 
714 
715 
716 
717 
718 
719 
720
 淑  反  坂  板  返  販  爪  妥  乳  浮
 
721 
722 
723 
724 
725 
726 
727 
728 
729 
730
 将  奨  採  菜  受  授  愛  払  広  拡
 
731 
732 
733 
734 
735 
736 
737 
738 
739 
740
 鉱  弁  雄  台  怠  治  始  胎  窓  去
 
741 
742 
743 
744 
745 
746 
747 
748 
749 
750
 法  会  至  室  到  致  互  棄  育  撤
 
751 
752 
753 
754 
755 
756 
757 
758 
759 
760
 充  銃  硫  流  允  唆  出  山  拙  岩
 
761 
762 
763 
764 
765 
766 
767 
768 
769 
770
 炭  岐  峠  崩  密  蜜  嵐  崎  入  込
 
771 
772 
773 
774 
775 
776 
777 
778 
779 
780
 分  貧  頒  公  松  翁  訟  谷  浴  容
 
781 
782 
783 
784 
785 
786 
787 
788 
789 
790
 溶  欲  裕  鉛  沿  賞  党  堂  常  裳
 
791 
792 
793 
794 
795 
796 
797 
798 
799 
800

416 | index i: kanji
 掌  皮  波  婆  披  破  被  残  殉  殊
 801 
802 
803 
804 
805 
806 
807 
808 
809 
810
 殖  列  裂  烈  死  葬  瞬  耳  取  趣
 
811 
812 
813 
814 
815 
816 
817 
818 
819 
820
 最  撮  恥  職  聖  敢  聴  懐  慢  漫
 
821 
822 
823 
824 
825 
826 
827 
828 
829 
830
 買  置  罰  寧  濁  環  還  夫  扶  渓
 
831 
832 
833 
834 
835 
836 
837 
838 
839 
840
 規  替  賛  潜  失  鉄  迭  臣  姫  蔵
 841 
842 
843 
844 
845 
846 
847 
848 
849 
850
 臓  賢  堅  臨  覧  巨  拒  力  男  労
 
851 
852 
853 
854 
855 
856 
857 
858 
859 
860
 募  劣  功  勧  努  励  加  賀  架  脇
 861 
862 
863 
864 
865 
866 
867 
868 
869 
870
 脅  協  行  律  復  得  従  徒  待  往
 
871 
872 
873 
874 
875 
876 
877 
878 
879 
880
 征  径  彼  役  徳  徹  徴  懲  微  街
 
881 
882 
883 
884 
885 
886 
887 
888 
889 
890
 衡  稿  稼  程  税  稚  和  移  秒  秋
 891 
892 
893 
894 
895 
896 
897 
898 
899 
900
 愁  私  秩  秘  称  利  梨  穫  穂  稲
 901 
902 
903 
904 
905 
906 
907 
908 
909 
910
 香  季  委  秀  透  誘  穀  菌  米  粉
 
911 
912 
913 
914 
915 
916 
917 
918 
919 
920

index i: kanji | 417
 粘  粒  粧  迷  粋  糧  菊  奥  数  楼
 
921 
922 
923 
924 
925 
926 
927 
928 
929 
930
 類  漆  様  求  球  救  竹  笑  笠  笹
 
931 
932 
933 
934 
935 
936 
937 
938 
939 
940
 筋  箱  筆  筒  等  算  答  策  簿  築
 941 
942 
943 
944 
945 
946 
947 
948 
949 
950
 人  佐  但  住  位  仲  体  悠  件  仕
 
951 
952 
953 
954 
955 
956 
957 
958 
959 
960
 他  伏  伝  仏  休  仮  伯  俗  信  佳
 961 
962 
963 
964 
965 
966 
967 
968 
969 
970
 依  例  個  健  側  侍  停  値  倣  倒
 971 
972 
973 
974 
975 
976 
977 
978 
979 
980
 偵  僧  億  儀  償  仙  催  仁  侮  使
 981 
982 
983 
984 
985 
986 
987 
988 
989 
990
 便  倍  優  伐  宿  傷  保  褒  傑  付
 991 
992 
993 
994 
995 
996 
997 
998 
999 
1000
 符  府  任  賃  代  袋  貸  化  花  貨
 1001 
1002 
1003 
1004 
1005 
1006 
1007 
1008 
1009 
1010
 傾  何  荷  俊  傍  久  畝  囚  内  丙
 1011 
1012 
1013 
1014 
1015 
1016 
1017 
1018 
1019 
1020
 柄  肉  腐  座  卒  傘  匁  以  似  併
 1021 
1022 
1023 
1024 
1025 
1026 
1027 
1028 
1029 
1030
 瓦  瓶  宮  営  善  年  夜  液  塚  幣
 1031 
1032 
1033 
1034 
1035 
1036 
1037 
1038 
1039 
1040

418 | index i: kanji
 弊  喚  換  融  施  旋  遊  旅  勿  物
 1041 
1042 
1043 
1044 
1045 
1046 
1047 
1048 
1049 
1050
 易  賜  尿  尼  泥  塀  履  屋  握  屈
 1051 
1052 
1053 
1054 
1055 
1056 
1057 
1058 
1059 
1060
 掘  堀  居  据  層  局  遅  漏  刷  尺
 1061 
1062 
1063 
1064 
1065 
1066 
1067 
1068 
1069 
1070
 尽  沢  訳  択  昼  戸  肩  房  扇  炉
 1071 
1072 
1073 
1074 
1075 
1076 
1077 
1078 
1079 
1080
 戻  涙  雇  顧  啓  示  礼  祥  祝  福
 1081 
1082 
1083 
1084 
1085 
1086 
1087 
1088 
1089 
1090
 祉  社  視  奈  尉  慰  款  禁  襟  宗
 1091 
1092 
1093 
1094 
1095 
1096 
1097 
1098 
1099 
1100
 崇  祭  察  擦  由  抽  油  袖  宙  届
 1101 
1102 
1103 
1104 
1105 
1106 
1107 
1108 
1109  
1110
 笛  軸  甲  押  岬  挿  申  伸  神  捜
 1111 
1112 
1113 
1114 
1115 
1116 
1117 
1118 
1119 
1120
 果  菓  課  裸  斤  析  所  祈  近  折
 1121 
1122 
1123 
1124 
1125 
1126 
1127 
1128 
1129 
1130
 哲  逝  誓  暫  漸  断  質  斥  訴  昨
 1131 
1132 
1133 
1134 
1135 
1136 
1137 
1138 
1139 
1140
 詐  作  雪  録  尋  急  穏  侵  浸  寝
 1141 
1142 
1143 
1144 
1145 
1146 
1147 
1148 
1149 
1150
 婦  掃  当  争  浄  事  唐  糖  康  逮
 1151 
1152 
1153 
1154 
1155 
1156 
1157 
1158 
1159 
1160

index i: kanji | 419
 伊  君  群  耐  需  儒  端  両  満  画
 1161 
1162 
1163 
1164 
1165 
1166 
1167 
1168 
1169 
1170
 歯  曲  曹  遭  漕  槽  斗  料  科  図
 1171 
1172 
1173 
1174 
1175 
1176 
1177 
1178 
1179 
1180
 用  庸  備  昔  錯  借  惜  措  散  廿
 1181 
1182 
1183 
1184 
1185 
1186 
1187 
1188 
1189 
1190
 庶  遮  席  度  渡  奔  噴  墳  憤  焼
 1191 
1192 
1193 
1194 
1195 
1196 
1197 
1198 
1199 
1200
 暁  半  伴  畔  判  券  巻  圏  勝  藤
 1201 
1202 
1203 
1204 
1205 
1206 
1207 
1208 
1209 
1210
 謄  片  版  之  乏  芝  不  否  杯  矢
 1211 
1212 
1213 
1214 
1215 
1216 
1217 
1218 
1219 
1220
 矯  族  知  智  矛  柔  務  霧  班  帰
 1221 
1222 
1223 
1224 
1225 
1226 
1227 
1228 
1229 
1230
 弓  引  弔  弘  強  弱  沸  費  第  弟
 1231 
1232 
1233 
1234 
1235 
1236 
1237 
1238 
1239 
1240
 巧  号  朽  誇  汚  与  写  身  射  謝
 1241 
1242 
1243 
1244 
1245 
1246 
1247 
1248 
1249 
1250
 老  考  孝  教  拷  者  煮  著  署  暑
 1251 
1252 
1253 
1254 
1255 
1256 
1257 
1258 
1259 
1260
 諸  猪  渚  賭  峡  狭  挟  追  師  帥
 1261 
1262 
1263 
1264 
1265 
1266 
1267 
1268 
1269 
1270
 官  棺  管  父  交  効  較  校  足  促
 1271 
1272 
1273 
1274 
1275 
1276 
1277 
1278 
1279 
1280

420 | index i: kanji
 距  路  露  跳  躍  践  踏  骨  滑  髄
 1281 
1282 
1283 
1284 
1285 
1286 
1287 
1288 
1289 
1290
 禍  渦  過  阪  阿  際  障  随  陪  陽
 1291 
1292 
1293 
1294 
1295 
1296 
1297 
1298 
1299 
1300
 陳  防  附  院  陣  隊  墜  降  階  陛
 1301 
1302 
1303 
1304 
1305 
1306 
1307 
1308 
1309 
1310
 隣 
隔  隠  堕  陥  穴  空  控  突  究
 1311 
1312 
1313 
1314 
1315 
1316 
1317 
1318 
1319 
1320
 窒  窃  窪  搾  窯  窮  探  深  丘  岳
 1321 
1322 
1323 
1324  
1325 
1326 
1327 
1328 
1329 
1330
 兵  浜  糸  織  繕  縮  繁  縦  線  締
 1331 
1332 
1333 
1334 
1335 
1336 
1337 
1338 
1339 
1340
 維  羅  練  緒  続  絵  統  絞  給  絡
 1341 
1342 
1343 
1344 
1345 
1346 
1347 
1348 
1349 
1350
 結  終  級  紀  紅  納  紡  紛  紹  経
 1351 
1352 
1353 
1354 
1355 
1356 
1357 
1358 
1359 
1360
 紳  約  細  累  索  総  綿  絹  繰  継
 1361 
1362 
1363 
1364 
1365 
1366 
1367 
1368 
1369 
1370
 緑  縁  網  緊  紫  縛  縄  幼  後  幽
 1371 
1372 
1373 
1374 
1375 
1376 
1377 
1378 
1379 
1380
 幾  機  玄  畜  蓄  弦  擁  滋  慈  磁
 1381 
1382 
1383 
1384 
1385 
1386 
1387 
1388 
1389 
1390
 系  係  孫  懸  却  脚  卸  御  服  命
 1391 
1392 
1393 
1394 
1395 
1396 
1397 
1398 
1399 
1400

index i: kanji | 421
 令  零  齢  冷  領  鈴  勇  通  踊  疑
 1401 
1402 
1403 
1404 
1405 
1406 
1407 
1408 
1409 
1410
 擬  凝  範  犯  厄  危  宛  腕  苑  怨
 1411 
1412 
1413 
1414 
1415 
1416 
1417 
1418 
1419 
1420
 柳  卵  留  貿  印  興  酒  酉  酌  酵
 1421 
1422 
1423 
1424 
1425 
1426 
1427 
1428 
1429 
1430
 酷  酬  酪  酢  酔  配  酸  猶  尊  豆
 1431 
1432 
1433 
1434 
1435 
1436 
1437 
1438 
1439 
1440
 頭  短  豊  鼓  喜  樹  皿  血  盆  盟
 1441 
1442 
1443 
1444 
1445 
1446 
1447 
1448 
1449 
1450
 盗  温  監  濫  鑑  猛  盛  塩  銀  恨
 1451 
1452 
1453 
1454 
1455 
1456 
1457 
1458 
1459 
1460
 根  即  爵  節  退  限  眼  良  朗  浪
 1461 
1462 
1463 
1464 
1465 
1466 
1467 
1468 
1469 
1470
 娘  食  飯  飲  飢  餓  飾  館  養  飽
 1471 
1472 
1473 
1474 
1475 
1476 
1477 
1478 
1479 
1480
 既  概  慨  平  呼  坪  評  刈  希  凶
 1481 
1482 
1483 
1484 
1485 
1486 
1487 
1488 
1489 
1490
 胸  離  殺  純  鈍  辛  辞  梓  宰  壁
 1491 
1492 
1493 
1494 
1495 
1496 
1497 
1498 
1499 
1500
 避  新  薪  親  幸  執  報  叫  糾  収
 1501 
1502 
1503 
1504 
1505 
1506 
1507 
1508 
1509 
1510
 卑  碑  陸  睦  勢  熱  菱  陵  亥  核
 1511 
1512 
1513 
1514 
1515 
1516 
1517 
1518 
1519 
1520

422 | index i: kanji
 刻  該  劾  述  術  寒  醸  譲  壌  嬢
 1521 
1522 
1523 
1524 
1525 
1526 
1527 
1528 
1529 
1530
 毒  素  麦  青  精  請  情  晴  清  静
 1531 
1532 
1533 
1534 
1535 
1536 
1537 
1538 
1539 
1540
 責  績  積  債  漬  表  俵  潔  契  喫
 1541 
1542 
1543 
1544 
1545 
1546 
1547 
1548 
1549 
1550
 害  轄  割  憲  生  星  姓  性  牲  産
 1551 
1552 
1553 
1554 
1555 
1556 
1557 
1558 
1559 
1560
 隆  峰  縫  拝  寿  鋳  籍  春  椿  泰
 1561 
1562 
1563 
1564 
1565 
1566 
1567 
1568 
1569 
1570
 奏  実  奉  俸  棒  謹  勤  漢  嘆  難
 1571 
1572 
1573 
1574 
1575 
1576 
1577 
1578 
1579 
1580
 華  垂  睡  錘  乗  剰  今  含  吟  念
 1581 
1582 
1583 
1584 
1585 
1586 
1587 
1588 
1589 
1590
 琴  陰  予  序  預  野  兼  嫌  鎌  謙
 1591 
1592 
1593 
1594 
1595 
1596 
1597 
1598 
1599 
1600
 廉  西  価  要  腰  票  漂  標  栗  遷
 1601 
1602 
1603 
1604 
1605 
1606 
1607 
1608 
1609 
1610
 覆  煙  南  楠  献  門  問  閲  閥  間
 1611 
1612 
1613 
1614 
1615 
1616 
1617 
1618 
1619 
1620
 簡  開  閉  閣  閑  聞  潤  欄  闘  倉
 1621 
1622 
1623 
1624 
1625 
1626 
1627 
1628 
1629 
1630
 創  非  俳  排  悲  罪  輩  扉  侯  候
 1631 
1632 
1633 
1634 
1635 
1636 
1637 
1638 
1639 
1640

index i: kanji | 423
 決  快  偉  違  緯  衛  韓  干  肝  刊
 1641 
1642 
1643 
1644 
1645 
1646 
1647 
1648 
1649 
1650
 汗  軒  岸  幹  芋  宇  余  除  徐  叙
 1651 
1652 
1653 
1654 
1655 
1656 
1657 
1658 
1659 
1660
 途  斜  塗  束  頼  瀬  勅  疎  速  整
 1661 
1662 
1663 
1664 
1665 
1666 
1667 
1668 
1669 
1670
 剣  険  検  倹  重  動  勲  働  種  衝
 1671 
1672 
1673 
1674 
1675 
1676 
1677 
1678 
1679 
1680
 薫  病  痴  痘  症  疾  痢  疲  疫  痛
 1681 
1682 
1683 
1684 
1685 
1686 
1687 
1688 
1689 
1690
 癖  匿  匠  医  匹  区  枢  殴  欧  抑
 1691 
1692 
1693 
1694 
1695 
1696 
1697 
1698 
1699 
1700
 仰  迎  登  澄  発  廃  僚  寮  療  彫
 1701 
1702 
1703 
1704 
1705 
1706 
1707 
1708 
1709 
1710
 形  影  杉  彩  彰  彦  顔  須  膨  参
 1711 
1712 
1713 
1714 
1715 
1716 
1717 
1718 
1719 
1720
 惨  修  珍  診  文  対  紋  蚊  斉  剤
 1721 
1722 
1723 
1724 
1725 
1726 
1727 
1728 
1729 
1730
 済  斎  粛  塁  楽  薬  率  渋  摂  央
 1731 
1732 
1733 
1734 
1735 
1736 
1737 
1738 
1739 
1740
 英  映  赤  赦  変  跡  蛮  恋  湾  黄
 1741 
1742 
1743 
1744 
1745 
1746 
1747 
1748 
1749 
1750
 横  把  色  絶  艶  肥  甘  紺  某  謀
 1751 
1752 
1753 
1754 
1755 
1756 
1757 
1758 
1759 
1760

424 | index i: kanji
 媒  欺  棋  旗  期  碁  基  甚  勘  堪
 1761 
1762 
1763 
1764 
1765 
1766 
1767 
1768 
1769 
1770
 貴  遺  遣  舞  無  組  粗  租  祖  阻
 1771 
1772 
1773 
1774 
1775 
1776 
1777 
1778 
1779 
1780
 査  助  宜  畳  並  普  譜  湿  顕  繊
 1781 
1782 
1783 
1784 
1785 
1786 
1787 
1788 
1789 
1790
 霊  業  撲  僕  共  供  異  翼  洪  港
 1791 
1792 
1793 
1794 
1795 
1796 
1797 
1798 
1799 
1800
 暴  爆  恭  選  殿  井  囲  耕  亜  悪
 1801 
1802 
1803 
1804 
1805 
1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 
1810
 円  角  触  解  再  講  購  構  溝  論
 1811 
1812 
1813 
1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820
 倫  輪  偏  遍  編  冊  典  氏  紙  婚
 1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830
 低  抵  底  民  眠  捕  浦  蒲  舗  補
 1831 
1832 
1833 
1834 
1835 
1836 
1837 
1838 
1839 
1840
 邸  郭  郡  郊  部  都  郵  邦  郷  響
 1841 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1845 
1846 
1847 
1848 
1849 
1850
 郎  廊  盾  循  派  脈  衆  逓  段  鍛
 1851 
1852 
1853 
1854 
1855 
1856 
1857 
1858 
1859 
1860
 后  幻  司  伺  詞  飼  嗣  舟  舶  航
 1861 
1862 
1863 
1864 
1865 
1866 
1867 
1868 
1869 
1870
 般  盤  搬  船  艦  艇  瓜  弧  孤  繭
 1871 
1872 
1873 
1874 
1875 
1876 
1877 
1878 
1879 
1880

index i: kanji | 425
 益  暇  敷  来  気  汽  飛  沈  妻  衰
 1881 
1882 
1883 
1884 
1885 
1886 
1887 
1888 
1889 
1890
 衷  面  革  靴  覇  声  呉  娯  誤  蒸
 1891 
1892 
1893 
1894 
1895 
1896 
1897 
1898 
1899 
1900
 承  函  極  牙  芽  邪  雅  釈  番  審
 1901 
1902 
1903 
1904 
1905 
1906 
1907 
1908 
1909 
1910
 翻  藩  毛  耗  尾  宅  託  為  偽  長
 1911 
1912 
1913 
1914 
1915 
1916 
1917 
1918 
1919 
1920
 張  帳  脹  髪  展  喪  巣  単  戦  禅
 1921 
1922 
1923 
1924 
1925 
1926 
1927 
1928 
1929 
1930
 弾  桜  獣  脳  悩  厳  鎖  挙  誉  猟
 1931 
1932 
1933 
1934 
1935 
1936 
1937 
1938 
1939 
1940
 鳥  鳴  鶴  烏  蔦  鳩  鶏  島  暖  媛
 1941 
1942 
1943 
1944 
1945 
1946 
1947 
1948 
1949 
1950
 援  緩  属  嘱  偶  遇  愚  隅  逆  塑
 1951 
1952 
1953 
1954 
1955 
1956 
1957 
1958 
1959 
1960
 岡  鋼  綱  剛  缶  陶  揺  謡  就  懇
 1961 
1962 
1963 
1964 
1965 
1966 
1967 
1968 
1969 
1970
 墾  免  逸  晩  勉  象  像  馬  駒  験
 1971 
1972 
1973 
1974 
1975 
1976 
1977 
1978 
1979 
1980
 騎  駐  駆  駅  騒  駄  驚  篤  騰  虎
 1981 
1982 
1983 
1984 
1985 
1986 
1987 
1988 
1989 
1990
 虜  膚  虚  戯  虞  慮  劇  虐  鹿  薦
 1991 
1992 
1993 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000

426 | index i: kanji
 慶  麗  熊  能  態  寅  演  辰  辱  震
 2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010
 振  娠  唇  農  濃  送  関  咲  鬼  醜
 2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020
 魂  魔  魅  塊  襲  嚇  朕  雰  箇  錬
 2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
2028 
2029 
2030
 遵  罷  屯  且  藻  隷  癒  丹  潟  丑
 2031 
2032 
2033 
2034 
2035 
2036 
2037 
2038 
2039 
2040
 卯  巳
 2041 
2042

index ii
Primitive Elements
Th is Index lists all the primitive elements treated in this book. It does not include 
those primitives treated as kanji on their own in the preceding pages, except 
where the writing and meaning of the primitive diﬀ ers from that of the original 
kanji. Th e primitives are arranged according to the number of strokes and the 
number beneath each entry refers to the page on which the primitive element is 
ﬁ rst introduced.
 1 画 
促 
俄  罧  罠  羌 
 
 
27 
27 
43 
43 
377
 2 画 
偕  亀  乳  僕  僘  料  僞  剛  羯
 
 
32 
34 
34 
35 
35 
35 
36 
45 
47
  
同 寳 抒 柝 栂 沫 津 胚 渟
 
 
56 
80 
105 
124 
125 
154 
157 
157 
164
  
琿  瓱  羣  纖  皃  羲  盖  盞  睿
 
 
211 
217 
246 
256 
276 
286 
288 
289 
308
  
瞎  脩  瞞  砿  硲  繆  福  舸  脉
 
 
309 
310 
311 
321 
324 
343 
351 
351 
357
  
窶  船
 
 
375 
375
 3 画 初  翻  羔  羞  羚  屆  忙  羨  義
 
 
44 
55 
63 
63 
64 
82 
93 
100 
101
427

428 | index ii: primitive elements
  
拊  日  朗  榾  殖   汏 瀞  狹  猯
 
 
106 
118 
121 
137 
148 
152 
181 
196 
197
  
般  珮  琪  絞  畿  瘴  癡  癰  睆..
 
 
198 
205 
210 
219 
236 
260 
273 
273 
296
   縢  瞬  碗  祢  羈  ..睆  羸  羝
 
 
306 
312 
334 
346 
354 
374 
386 
388
 4 画 翳  老  翼  托  栔  棧  槝  濬  耗
 
 
53 
73 
85 
103 
125 
132 
138 
139 
150
  
泚  耨  澹  耀  球  瑯  瓠 甑  界
 
 
154 
158 
176 
198 
208 
213 
216 
220 
228
  
羡  椛  耽  耡  癲  緲  羹  直  羽
 
 
255 
257 
259 
264 
274 
275 
279 
290 
300
  
瞶  砡  硬  碑  繁  組  繍  秘  秬
 
 
313 
320 
322 
328 
332 
332 
344 
358 
360
  
籃
 
 
387
 5 画  耆  栖  梛  樢  正  段  耳   汊 沌
 
 
20 
126 
130 
140 
146 
149 
149 
150 
154
  
沖  者  熬  璢  田  疲  耻  癪  皙
 
 
154 
185 
187 
214 
225 
239 
242 
272 
281
    盍  耋  翔  砃  翁  羃  罫  絅  禍
 
 
287 
287 
311 
317 
325 
326 
327 
333 
350
  
禮  翆  翊  空  翌  椏  簧  聖
 
 
353 
363 
364 
370 
372 
376 
386 
387

index ii: primitive elements | 429
 6 画 棕  梳  棄  樓  橡  櫨  耘  燕 狒
 
 
128 
131 
131 
139 
141 
142 
150 
188 
574
  
瓦  瘁  瘤  皀  皜  眄  眛  砂  舶
 
 
217 
256 
259 
276 
283 
292 
293 
317 
318
  
碣  磊  譌  耐  罷  椄  粞  糢  翠
 
 
333 
335 
339 
359 
363 
365 
392 
397 
401
  
而
 
 
404
 7 画 潛  烽  煜  燿  瓢  畚  翅  窯  習
 
 
174 
183 
186 
189 
216 
229 
280 
373 
385
  
耒  罇  糸
 
 
387 
394 
398
 8 画  傷 耕  洄  淬  湿  父  申  癸  羇
 
 
33 
65 
156 
163 
169 
190 
226 
275 
282
   繝  稔  策
 
 
348 
361 
365
 9 画 匤  翡  温  熹  縞  翕  翰  籾  翦
 
 
49 
133 
165 
187 
295 
315 
322 
391 
392
  
粤
 
 
393
 10 画 翩  悛  翫  碮  確  礫  穫
 
 
47 
95 
193 
334 
334 
344 
370
 11 画 涜  澁  犱  畝
 
 
160 
170 
193 
231

430 | index ii: primitive elements
 12 画 洸  滉  瘟  禺
 
 
158 
170 
259 
353
 13 画 總  罵
 
 
323 
327

1 画
  一 
1
  乙 
71
2 画
  丁 
91
  七 
7
  乃 
686
  九 
9
  了 
97
  二 
2
 人 人 
951
  八 
8
  入 
779
  刀 
83
  力 
858
  匕 
444
 十 十 
10
  又 
696
3 画
  万 
64
  丈 
691
  三 
3
  上 
49
  下 
50
  与 
1246
  丸 
44
  久 
1016
  之 
1214
  乞 
462
  子 
95
  亡 
485
  凡 
62
  刃 
84
  勺 
68
  千 
40
  及 
688
 口 口 
11
  土 
150
  士 
319
  夕 
109
  大 
107
 女 女 
98
  寸 
45
  小 
105
  山 
768
  川 
127
  工 
76
  己 
525
  巳 2042
  干 
1648
  弓 
1231
  才 
681
4画
  不 
1217
  丑 2040
  中 
39
  丹 2038
  乏 
1215
  予 
1593
 二 互 
757
  五 
5
  井 1806
 亻 仁  988
  今 
1587
  介 
250
  仏 
964
  允 
765
  元 
59
 八 公 
784
  六 
6
  内 
1019
  円 
1811
  冗 
300
  凶 1490
 刀 分 
781
  切 
85
  刈 
1488
  勿 1049
  匁 
1027
 匕 化 1008
  匹 
1695
  区 
1696
 十 升 
42
  午 
568
  厄 
1415
 又 友 
704
  双 
697
  反 
722
  収 
1510
 大 天 
428
  太 
120
  夫 
838
  孔 
96
  少 
106
  尺 1070
  屯 
2033
 幺 幻 
1862
  廿 
1190
  引 
1232
  弔 
1233
  心 
595
  戸 
1076
  手 
637
  支 
711
  文 
1725
 斗 斗 
1177
  斤 
1125
  方 
490
  日 
12
  曰 
578
  月 
13
  木 
195
  欠 
466
  止 
370
 比 比 
447
  毛 
1913
  氏 
1828
  水 
130
  火 
161
  爪 
727
  父 
1274
index iii
Kanji in Stroke Order
Here you will ﬁ nd  all the kanji treated in this book, grouped by the number of 
strokes. Th e ordering within each stroke-number group follows the standard dic-
tionary practice of arranging the kanji according to “radicals.”  
431

432 | index iii: kanji in stroke order
 片 片 
1212
  牙 1904
  牛 
245
  犬 
238
 王 王 
255
5 画
  且 2034
  世 
28
  丘 
1329
  丙 1020
  主 
266
 亻 以 
1028
  仕 
960
  他 
961
  付 1000
  仙 
986
  代 
1005
  令 
1401
  兄 
103
  冊 
1826
 冖 写 
1247
  冬 
427
  処 
297
 凵 凸 
34
  出 
767
  凹 
33
  刊 
1650
  功 
863
  加 
867
  包 
530
  北 
445
  半 
1202
  占 
48
  卯 
2041
  去 
750
 口 古 
16
  句 
65
  只 
53
  叫 
1508
  召 
86
  可 
93
  台 
744
  号 
1242
  史 
692
  右 
78
  司 
1863
 囗 囚 
1018
  四 
4
  圧 
152
  外 
111
 大 央 
1740
  失 
845
  奴 
702
  尼 
1054
  左 
77
  巧 
1241
  巨 
856
 巾 市 
412
  布 
405
  平 
1484
  幼 
1378
  庁 
591
  広 
739
  弁 
742
  弘 
1234
  必 
635
  打 
653
  払 
738
  斥 
1138
  旦 
30
  旧 
35
 木 未 
216
  末 
217
  本 
211
  札 
212
 止 正 
379
  母 
101
  民 
1834
  氷 
131
  永 
132
  汁 
140
  瓜 
1877
  犯 
1414
  玄 
1383
  玉 
256
  瓦 
1031
  甘 
1757
 生 生 
1555
  用 
1181
  田 
14
  由 
1105
  甲 
1113
  申 
1117
  白 
37
  皮 
802
  皿 
1447
  目 
15
  矛 
1225
  矢 
1220
 石 石 
113
  示 1086
  礼 
1087
  穴 
1316
  立 
431
 ⻌ 辺 
284
  辻 
279
  込 
780
6 画
  両 
1168
  争 
1154
  亘 
32
 亠 交 
1275
  亥 
1519
 亻 仮 
966
  仰 
1701
  仲 
956
  件 
959
  任 
1003
  企 
375
  伊 
1161
  伏 
962
  伐 
994
  休 
965
  会 
752
  伝 
963
 儿 充 
761
  兆 
235
  先 
248
  光 
119
  全 
263
  共 
1795
  再 
1815
  刑 
679
  列 
812
  劣 
862
  匠 
1693
 卩 印 
1425
  危 
1416
 口 各 
291
  合 
253
  吉 
320
  同 
180
  名 
112
  后 
1861
  吏 
693
  吐 
151
  向 
183
  吸 
689
 囗 回 
586
  因 
583
  団 
582
 土 在 
685
  圭 
155
  地 
515
  壮 
321
  多 
108
 女 好 
99
  如 
100
  妃 
527
  妄 
487
 子 字 
185
  存 
684
 宀 宅 
1916
  宇 
1656
  守 
186
  安 
190
 寸 寺 
158
  尽 
1071
  州 
128
 彐 当 
1153
  帆 
406
  年 
1036
 戈 式 
353
  弐 
355
  忙 
618
 弋 成 
361
  扱 
690
  旨 
455
  早 
26
  旬 
67
  旭 
27
  曲 
1172
  肌 
66
  有 
79
 木 朱 
221
  朴 
207
  机 
210
  朽 
1243
  次 
471
 歹 死 
815
  毎 
458
  気 
1885
  汐 
110
  汗 
1651
  汚 
1245
  江 
139
  池 
516
 火 灯 
165
  灰 
168
  百 
38
  竹 
937

index iii: kanji in stroke order | 433
  米 
919
  糸 
1333
  缶 
1965
  羊 
547
  羽 
573
  老 
1251
  考 
1252
  耳 
818
  肉 
1022
  自 
36
  至 
753
  舌 
41
  舟 
1868
  色 
1753
 艹  芋 
1655
  芝 
1216
  虫 
517
  血 
1448
  行 
873
  衣 
396
  西 
1602
 ⻌ 巡 
285
  迅 
280
7 画
  串 
603
  乱 
72
 二 亜 1809
 亻 伯 
967
  伴 
1203
  伸 
1118
  伺 
1864
  似 
1029
  位 
955
  低 
1831
  住 
954
  佐 
952
  体 
957
  但 
953
  何 
1012
  余 
1657
  作 
1142
 儿 克 
104
  児 
58
  兵 
1331
 冫 冷 1404
  初 
404
  判 
1205
  別 
90
  利 
906
 力 助 
1782
  努 
865
  励 
866
  労 
860
  医 
1694
 卩 即 
1462
  却 
1395
  卵 
1422
 口 君 
1162
  吟 
1589
  否 
1218
  含 
1588
  吹 
467
  吾 
17
  呂 
24
  呈 
262
  呉 
1897
  告 
247
 囗 困 
579
  囲 
1807
  図 
1180
 土 坂 
723
  均 
160
  坊 
492
  坑 
306
 士 声 
1896
  壱 
457
  売 
323
  妊 
507
  妙 
123
  妥 
728
  妨 
491
 子 孝 
1253
  完 
187
 寸 対 
1726
  寿 
1565
  尾 
1915
  局 1066
  尿 
1053
 山 岐 
772
  希 
1489
 广 序 
1594
  床 
592
  廷 
508
 弓 弟 
1240
  形 
1711
  役 
884
  忌 
599
  忍 
597
  志 
600
  忘 
596
  応 
607
  快 
1642
 戈 我 
640
  戒 
676
  戻 
1081
 扌 扶 
839
  批 
649
  技 
712
  抄 
647
  把 
1752
  抑 1700
  投 
706
  抗 
648
  折 
1130
  抜 
705
  択 
1074
 攵 改 
528
  攻 
330
  更 
694
 月 肖 
114
  肝 
1649
 木 杉 
1713
  杏 
203
  材 
683
  村 
208
  束 
1664
  条 
298
  来 
1884
  求 
934
  汽 
1886
  決 
1641
  沈 
1888
  沖 
138
  没 
707
  沢 
1072
 火 災 
167
  状 
239
  狂 
260
  男 
859
  町 
92
  社 
1092
 禾 秀 
914
  私 
902
  究 
1320
 糸 系 
1391
  良 
1468
 艹 花 1009
  芳 
493
  芸 
421
  臣 
848
  見 
57
  角 
1812
  言 
335
  谷 
788
  豆 1440
  貝 
54
  赤 
1743
  走 
384
  足 
1279
  身 
1248
  車 
286
  辛 1496
  辰 2008
 ⻌ 迎 
1702
  近 
1129
  返 
725
   邦 
1848
  酉 
1429
  里 
173
  麦 
1533
  阪 
1294
  防 
1302
8 画
  並 
1785
  乳 
729
  事 
1156
 亠 享 
308
  京 
312
 亻 佳 
970
  併 
1030
  使 
990
  例 
972
  侍 
976
  供 
1796
  依 
971
  価 
1603
  侮 
989
 八 具 
74
  典 
1827
  免 
1972
  函 
1902
  到 
755
  制 
418
  刷 1069
  券 
1206
  刺 
417
  刻 
1521
 力 効 
1276
  劾 
1523
 十 卑 
1511
  卒 
1025

434 | index iii: kanji in stroke order
  卓 
51
  協 
872
 厶 参 
1720
  叔 
718
 又 取 
819
  受 
735
 口 周 
317
  味 
219
  呼 
1485
  命 1400
  和 
897
  固 
580
  国 
581
 土 坪 
1486
  垂 
1582
  夜 
1037
 大 奇 
126
  奈 
1094
  奉 
1573
  奔 
1196
 女 妹 
220
  妻 
1889
  姉 
413
  始 
747
  姓 
1557
  委 
913
 子 季 
912
  孤 
1879
  学 
324
 宀 宗 
1100
  官 
1271
  宙 
1109
  定 
382
  宛 
1417
  宜 
1783
  宝 
257
  実 
1572
  尚 
184
 尸 居 
1063
  屈 1060
  届 
1110
 山 岡 
1961
  岩 
770
  岬 
1115
  岳 
1330
  岸 
1653
 干 幸 
1505
 广 底 
1833
  店 
588
  府 1002
  延 
392
  弦 
1386
  弧 
1878
 彳 彼 
883
  往 
880
  征 
881
  径 
882
  忠 
602
  念 
1590
  怖 
623
  性 
1558
  怪 
716
 戸 房 
1078
  所 
1127
  承 
1901
  披 
805
  抱 
645
  抵 
1832
  抹 
644
  押 
1114
  抽 
1106
  担 
668
  拍 
652
  拐 
656
  拒 
857
  拓 
651
  拘 
654
  拙 
769
  招 
650
  拝 
1564
  拠 
669
  拡 
740
 攵 放 
496
  斉 
1729
 日 昆 
448
  昇 
43
  昌 
25
  明 
20
  易 
1051
  昔 
1184
 月 朋 
19
  服 
1399
  肢 
714
  肥 
1756
  肩 
1077
  肪 
494
  肯 
374
  育 
759
 木 杯 
1219
  東 
504
  松 
785
  板 
724
  析 
1126
  林 
196
  枚 
332
  果 
1121
  枝 
713
  枠 
200
  枢 
1697
 欠 欧 
1699
  武 
377
  歩 
371
  殴 
1698
  毒 
1531
  沫 
218
  河 
146
  沸 
1237
  油 
1107
  治 
746
  沼 
137
  沿 
795
  況 
145
  泊 
147
  泌 
636
  法 
751
  泡 
533
  波 
803
  泣 
432
  泥 
1055
  注 
267
  泳 
136
 火 炉 1080
  炊 
468
  炎 
162
  版 
1213
 牛 牧 
329
  物 
1050
 田 画 
1170
  的 
69
 目 盲 
486
  直 
73
  知 
1223
  祈 
1128
  祉 
1091
  突 
1319
  空 
1317
  糾 
1509
  者 
1256
  舎 
316
 艹 苑 
1419
  芽 
1905
  苗 
234
  若 
223
  苦 
225
  英 
1741
  茂 
360
  茎 
715
  虎 1990
  表 
1546
 ⻌ 迫 
282
  迭 
847
  述 
1524
  邸 
1841
  邪 1906
  金 
269
  長 
1920
  門 
1616
  阻 
1780
  阿 
1295
  附 
1303
  雨 
422
  青 
1534
  非 
1632
9 画
  乗 
1585
  亭 
311
 亻 係 
1392
  侯 
1639
  俊 
1014
  侵 
1148
  便 
991
  促 
1280
  俗 
968
  保 
997
  信 
969
 冂 冒 
18
  冠 
304
  則 
88
  削 
118
  前 
290
 力 勅 
1667
  勇 
1407
  南 
1613
  卸 
1397
 厂 厘 
178
  厚 
125
  叙 1660
 口 咲 
2018
  哀 
401
  品 
23
 土 型 
680
  垣 
154
  城 
362

index iii: kanji in stroke order | 435
  変 
1745
 大 契 
1549
  奏 
1571
  女 姻 
584
  姿 
474
  威 
364
 宀 客 
294
  室 
754
  宣 
188
  専 
46
 羝 単 
1928
  屋 
1058
  封 
156
 山 峠 
773
  峡 
1265
  巻 
1207
  帥 
1270
  帝 
435
 幺 幽 
1380
  度 
1194
  建 
391
  彦 
1716
 彳 待 
879
  律 
874
  後 
1379
  怒 
703
  思 
605
  怠 
745
  急 
1146
  怨 
1420
  恒 
620
  恨 1460
  悔 
625
  括 
661
  拷 
1255
  拾 
667
  持 
660
  指 
659
  挑 
658
  挟 
1267
 攵 政 
381
  故 
333
  施 
1045
 日 星 
1556
  映 
1742
  春 
1568
  昨 
1140
  昭 
87
  是 
388
  昼 
1075
 月 肺 
414
  胃 
29
  胆 
31
  背 
446
  胎 
748
  胞 
531
 木 栄 
326
  枯 
206
  査 
1781
  架 
869
  柄 
1021
  柏 
199
  某 
1759
  染 
509
  柔 
1226
  柱 
268
  柳 
1421
  栃 
514
  段 
1859
  泉 
133
  洋 
549
  洗 
249
  洞 
181
  津 
328
  洪 
1799
  活 
143
  派 
1855
  浄 
1155
  浅 
369
  海 
461
 火 炭 
771
  為 
1918
  点 
169
  牲 
1559
  狭 
1266
  狩 
243
  独 
522
  珍 
1723
 甘 甚 
1768
 田 界 
251
  畑 
166
  疫 
1689
  発 
1705
 白 皆 
449
  皇 
261
  盆 1449
 目 看 
638
  県 
513
  盾 
1853
  省 
124
  相 
209
 石 砂 
117
  研 
675
  砕 
116
  祖 
1779
  祝 
1089
  神 
1119
 禾 秋 
900
  科 
1179
  秒 
899
 穴 窃 
1322
 糸 紀 
1354
  約 
1362
  紅 
1355
  級 
1353
 美 美 
548
  耐 
1164
  臭 
122
 艹 茨 
472
  茶 
252
  草 
224
  荒 
488
  荘 
322
 臨 虐 
1998
  虹 
520
  要 1604
 言 訂 
339
  計 
337
  貞 
55
  負 
63
  赴 
386
 車 軌 
288
  軍 
301
 ⻌ 迷 
924
  追 
1268
  退 
1465
  送 
2016
  逃 
283
  逆 
1959
  郊 
1844
  郎 
1851
  限 1466
 里 重 
1675
  面 
1892
 革 革 
1893
  音 
479
  頁 
60
  風 
524
  飛 
1887
  食 
1472
  首 
70
  香 
911
10 画
 亻 修 
1722
  俳 
1633
  俵 
1547
  俸 
1574
  倉 
1630
  個 
973
  倍 
992
  倒 
980
  候 1640
  借 
1186
  倣 
979
  値 
978
  倫 
1821
  倹 
1674
  党 
797
 八 兼 
1597
 冫 准 
560
  凍 
506
  剖 
478
  剛 
1964
  剣 
1671
  剤 
1730
 力 勉 
1975
  匿 
1692
  原 
134
 口 員 
56
  唆 
766
  哲 
1131
  唇 
2013
  唐 
1157
  埋 
179
 夂 夏 
296
 女 姫 
849
  娘 
1471
  娠 
2012
  娯 
1898
  孫 
1393
 宀 宮 
1033
  宰 
1499
  害 
1551
  宴 
191
  宵 
189
  家 
541
  容 
790
 寸 射 
1249
  将 
731
  展 
1925
 山 峰 
1562
  島 
1948
  差 
554

436 | index iii: kanji in stroke order
 巾 席 
1193
  帯 
415
  帰 
1230
 广 座 
1024
  庫 
589
  庭 
590
 弓 弱 
1236
 彳 徐 
1659
  徒 
878
  従 
877
  恋 
1748
  悦 
619
  恐 
613
  恥 
823
  恩 
606
  恭 
1803
  息 
610
  恵 
612
  悟 
622
  悩 
1935
  扇 
1079
  挙 
1938
  振 
2011
  挿 
1116
  捕 
1836
  捜 
1120
 攵 敏 
459
  旅 
1048
  既 
1481
 斗 料 
1178
 日 時 
159
  書 
327
 月 胸 
1491
  望 
489
  脅 
871
  脇 
870
  脂 
456
  朕 2027
  胴 
182
  能 2004
  脈 
1856
  朗 
1469
 木 案 
214
  桜 
1932
  核 
1520
  格 
292
  桂 
198
  校 
1278
  根 
1461
  栽 
358
  桟 
367
  株 
222
  栓 
264
  桑 
698
  桃 
236
  桐 
204
  梅 
460
  栗 1609
 歹 残 
808
  殊 
810
  殉 
809
  殺 
1493
  泰 
1570
  消 
144
  浸 
1149
  浜 
1332
  浮 
730
  浦 
1837
  浴 
789
  流 
764
  涙 
1082
  浪 
1470
  烏 
1944
  烈 
814
  特 
246
  珠 
258
  班 
1229
  畜 
1384
 田 畔 
1204
  畝 
1017
  留 
1423
  疾 
1686
  症 
1685
  疲 
1688
  病 
1682
  益 
1881
  真 
75
  眠 
1835
 石 破 
806
  砲 
532
  祥 
1088
 禾 称 
905
  租 
1778
  秘 
904
  秩 
903
  竜 
536
  笑 
938
 米 粋 
925
  粉 
920
 糸 索 
1365
  紙 
1829
  純 
1494
  素 
1532
  納 
1356
  紋 
1727
  紡 
1357
  紛 
1358
  翁 
786
 耒 耕 
1808
  耗 
1914
 至 致 
756
  航 
1870
  般 
1871
 艹 華 
1581
  荷 
1013
  荻 
242
 虫 蚕 
523
  蚊 
1728
  衰 
1890
  衷 
1891
  袖 
1108
  被 
807
 
腰 師 
1269
 言 記 
529
  訓 
341
  託 
1917
  討 
340
 貝 貢 
81
  財 
682
  軒 
1652
  起 
526
 辰 辱 2009
 ⻌ 逝 
1132
  造 
281
  速 
1669
  逐 
539
  通 1408
  逓 
1858
  途 
1661
  透 
915
  連 
287
  郡 
1843
 酉 酌 
1429
  酒 
1428
  配 
1436
  針 
274
  院 
1304
  陥 
1315
  降 
1308
  除 
1658
  陣 
1305
  陛 
1310
 隹 隻 
699
  飢 
1475
  馬 
1978
  骨 
1288
  高 
307
  鬼 
2019
11 画
 乙 乾 
463
 亻 偏 
1823
  停 
977
  健 
974
  側 
975
  偵 
981
  偶 
1955
  偽 
1919
  副 
89
  剰 
1586
 力 動 
1676
  勘 
1769
  務 
1227
 口 唯 
556
  唱 
21
  商 
439
  問 
1617
  啓 
1085
  喝 
454
 土 域 
356
  執 
1506
  培 
477
  基 
1767
  埼 
153
  堀 
1062
  堂 
798
 女 婆 
804
  婚 
1830
  婦 
1151
 宀 宿 
995
  寂 
720
  寄 
192
  寅 2006
  密 
775
  尉 
1095
  巣 
1927
  崇 
1101
 山 崎 
778
  崩 
774
 巾 帳 
1922
  常 
799
  康 
1159
  庶 
1191
  庸 
1182

index iii: kanji in stroke order | 437
 弓 張 
1921
  強 
1235
 彡 彩 
1714
  彫 
1710
  得 
876
  悠 
958
  患 
604
  悪 
1810
  悼 
621
  情 
1537
  惜 
1187
  惨 
1721
  捨 
655
  据 1064
  掃 
1152
  授 
736
  排 
1634
  掘 
1061
  掛 
674
  採 
733
  探 
1327
  接 
672
  措 
1188
  控 
1318
  推 
663
  描 
670
  掲 
673
 攵 救 
936
  教 
1254
  敗 
331
  斎 
1732
  斜 
1662
  断 
1136
 方 旋 1046
  族 
1222
 日 曹 
1173
  曽 
501
 月 脱 
498
  脚 
1396
  脳 
1934
  豚 
538
 木 梓 
1498
  梢 
201
  梨 
907
  械 
677
  欲 
792
  殼 
710
  液 
1038
  涯 
157
  渇 
451
  渓 
840
  混 
450
  済 
1731
  渋 
1738
  淑 
721
  渚 
1263
  渉 
372
  深 
1328
  清 
1539
  淡 
164
  添 
634
  涼 
313
  猪 
1262
  猫 
244
  猛 
1456
  猟 1940
 玄 率 
1737
 王 球 
935
  現 
259
  理 
265
  瓶 
1032
  産 
1560
 田 異 
1797
  略 
293
 皿 盛 
1457
  盗 
1451
 目 眼 
1467
  眺 
237
  祭 
1102
  票 1606
  章 
433
 穴 窓 
749
  窒 
1321
  移 
898
 竹 第 
1239
  笛 
1111
  符 
1001
  笠 
939
  笹 
940
 米 粗 
1777
  粘 
921
  粒 
922
 糸 経 
1360
  紺 
1758
  細 
1363
  終 
1352
  紹 
1359
  紳 
1361
  組 
1776
  累 
1364
 羽 習 
574
  翌 
575
 聿 粛 
1733
  船 
1874
  舶 
1869
 艹 菓 
1122
  菊 
927
  菌 
918
  菜 
734
  著 
1258
  菱 
1517
 
臨 虚 
1993
 虫 蛍 
518
  蛇 
519
  術 
1525
  袋 1006
 見 規 
841
  視 
1093
 言 許 
569
  訟 
787
  設 
708
  訪 
495
  訳 
1073
 貝 貨 
1010
  貫 
102
  責 
1541
  販 
726
  貧 
782
 赤 赦 
1744
 車 軟 
470
  転 
420
 ⻌ 逸 
1973
  進 
561
  週 
318
  逮 
1160
  郭 
1842
  郷 
1849
  都 
1846
  部 
1845
  郵 
1847
  酔 
1435
 釆 釈 
1908
  野 
1596
  釣 
273
  閉 
1623
   陰 
1592
  険 
1672
  陳 
1301
  陶 
1966
  陪 
1299
  陸 
1513
  隆 
1561
  陵 
1518
 雨 雪 
1143
  頂 
94
  魚 
171
  鳥 
1941
  鹿 
1999
  麻 
593
  黄 
1750
  黒 
174
  亀 
534
12 画
 亻 傍 
1015
  傘 
1026
  備 
1183
  偉 
1643
  割 
1553
  創 
1631
 力 勝 
1209
  募 
861
  勤 
1577
  博 
47
 口 善 
1035
  喚 
1042
  喜 
1445
  喪 
1926
  喫 
1550
  営 
1034
 囗 圏 
1208
 土 堕 
1314
  堤 
390
  堪 
1770
  報 
1507
  場 
545
  塀 
1056
  塁 
1734
  塔 
254
  塚 
1039
  堅 
853
 大 奥 
928
 女 婿 
395
  媒 
1761
  媛 
1950
 宀 富 
193
  寒 
1526
 寸 尊 
1439
  尋 
1145
 尤 就 
1969
 尸 属 
1953
  嵐 
777
 巾 帽 
408

438 | index iii: kanji in stroke order
  幅 
407
  幾 
1381
 广 廃 
1706
  廊 
1852
 弓 弾 
1931
  衆 
1857
 彳 御 
1398
  復 
875
  循 
1854
  悲 
1635
  惑 
614
  惰 
629
  慌 
624
  愉 
628
  扉 
1638
  掌 
801
  提 
665
  揚 
664
  換 
1043
  握 
1059
  揮 
662
  援 
1951
  揺 
1967
  搭 
646
 攵 敢 
826
  散 
1189
  敬 
334
 日 普 
1786
  暁 
1201
  景 
314
  晴 
1538
  最 
821
  晶 
22
  替 
842
  智 
1224
  晩 
1974
  暑 
1260
 月 腕 
1418
  朝 
52
  期 
1765
  脹 
1923
 木 棋 
1763
  棒 
1575
  棚 
202
  棟 
505
  森 
197
  検 
1673
  棺 
1272
  植 
205
  極 
1903
 欠 欺 
1762
  款 
1097
  殖 
811
  温 
1452
  渦 
1292
  減 
366
  湖 
148
  港 1800
  滋 
1388
  湿 
1788
  測 
149
  渡 
1195
  湯 
546
  満 
1169
  湾 
1749
 火 焼 1200
  煮 
1257
  焦 
557
  然 
241
  無 
1775
  猶 
1438
  琴 
1591
 田 畳 
1784
  番 1909
  疎 
1668
  痛 1690
  痘 
1684
  痢 
1687
 癶 登 
1703
  着 
555
  短 
1442
 石 硬 
695
  硝 
115
  硫 
763
 禾 税 
895
  程 
894
  童 
436
 竹 筋 
941
  策 
948
  等 
945
  筒 
944
  答 
947
  筆 
943
 米 粧 
923
 糸 絵 
1346
  給 
1349
  結 
1351
  絞 
1348
  紫 
1375
  絶 
1754
  統 
1347
  絡 
1350
 艹 落 
299
  葬 
816
  葉 
228
  蛮 
1747
 行 街 
890
  裁 
397
  装 
398
  裂 
813
  補 
1840
  裕 
793
 見 覚 
325
 言 詠 
345
  詐 
1141
  証 
380
  詔 
342
  詞 
1865
  診 
1724
  訴 
1139
  評 
1487
  象 
1976
 貝 賀 
868
  貴 
1771
  貸 1007
  貯 
194
  買 
831
  費 
1238
  貿 
1424
 走 越 
387
  超 
385
  距 
1281
 車 軽 
717
  軸 
1112
 ⻌ 運 
303
  過 
1293
  遇 
1956
  遂 
540
  達 
552
  遅 
1067
  道 
277
  遊 
1047
  遍 
1824
  酢 
1434
 里 量 
177
 金 鈍 
1495
 門 開 
1622
  閑 
1625
  間 
1620
  階 
1309
  隅 
1958
  随 
1298
  隊 
1306
  陽 
1300
 隹 集 
559
  雇 
1083
  雅 
1907
  雄 
743
 雨 雲 
423
  雰 2028
 頁 項 
82
  須 
1718
  順 
129
  飲 
1474
  飯 
1473
  歯 
1171
13 画
 亻 催 
987
  傑 
999
  債 
1544
  傷 
996
  傾 
1011
  働 
1678
  僧 
982
 力 勢 
1515
  勧 
864
 口 嗣 
1867
  嘆 
1579
  園 
585
 土 塊 2024
  塑 1960
  塗 
1663
  塩 
1458
  墓 
231
 夕 夢 
305
  奨 
732
 女 嫁 
542
  嫌 
1598
 宀 寛 
226
  寝 
1150
 巾 幌 
410
  幕 
409
 干 幹 
1654
  廉 
1601
  微 
889
  愁 
901
  想 
609
  意 
608
  愚 
1957
  愛 
737
  感 
615
  慈 
1389
  慎 
630

index iii: kanji in stroke order | 439
  慨 
1483
 戈 戦 
1929
  損 
666
  搬 
1873
  携 
687
  搾 
1324
  摂 
1739
 支 鼓 1444
  数 
929
  新 
1502
 日 暇 
1882
  暖 
1949
  暗 
480
 月 腸 
544
  腹 
464
  腰 
1605
 木 楽 
1735
  棄 
758
  業 
1792
  椿 
1569
  楠 
1614
  楼 
930
 止 歳 
512
  殿 
1805
  滑 
1289
  漢 
1578
  源 
142
  溝 
1819
  準 
564
  滞 
416
  漠 
230
  滅 
365
  蒲 
1838
  溶 
791
  滝 
537
 火 煙 
1612
  煩 
163
  照 
170
  献 
1615
  猿 
403
  痴 
1683
  盟 
1450
  睡 
1583
  督 
719
  睦 
1514
 石 碁 
1766
  碑 
1512
  禁 1098
  禍 
1291
  禅 
1930
  福 1090
  稚 
896
 竹 節 
1464
 糸 継 
1370
  絹 
1368
  続 
1345
  罪 
1636
  署 
1259
  置 
832
  群 
1163
 美 義 
641
  羨 
553
 耳 聖 
825
  艇 
1876
 艹 蒸 1900
  蓄 
1385
 
臨 虞 
1995
  虜 
1991
  裏 
399
  褐 
453
  裸 
1124
 角 解 
1814
  触 
1813
 言 該 
1522
  詰 
343
  誇 
1244
  試 
354
  詩 
346
  詳 
550
  誠 
363
  誉 
1939
  話 
344
 辛 辞 
1497
 豆 豊 
1443
 貝 資 
473
  賊 
357
  賃 1004
  賄 
80
 ⻊ 跡 
1746
  践 
1286
  跳 
1284
  路 
1282
 車 較 
1277
  載 
359
 辰 農 
2014
 ⻌ 遠 
402
  遣 
1773
  違 
1644
 酉 酬 
1432
  酪 
1433
 金 鉛 
794
  鉱 
741
  鉄 
846
  鉢 
271
  鈴 1406
 雨 電 
535
  雷 
425
  零 
1402
  隔 
1312
 革 靴 
1894
 頁 頑 
61
  頒 
783
  預 
1595
  飼 
1866
  飾 
1477
  飽 1480
 鳥 鳩 
1946
14 画
 亻 像 
1977
  僕 
1794
  僚 
1707
 口 鳴 
1942
 土 塾 
309
  境 
484
  増 
502
  墨 
175
 大 奪 
566
  嫡 
440
  寡 
617
  寧 
834
  蜜 
776
 尸 層 
1065
  彰 
1715
 彳 徳 
885
  徴 
887
  態 2005
  慕 
633
  慢 
829
  憎 
626
  慣 
627
  摘 
657
  歌 
469
  旗 
1764
 日 暮 
232
  暦 
213
  膜 
233
 木 概 
1482
  模 
229
  構 
1818
  様 
933
 止 歴 
376
  穀 
917
  演 2007
  漁 
172
  漬 
1545
  漆 
932
  漸 
1135
  漕 
1175
  滴 
442
  漂 
1607
  漫 
830
  漏 1068
  熊 2003
  獄 
338
 疋 疑 
1410
  磁 
1390
  察 
1103
 禾 種 
1679
  稲 
910
 穴 窪 
1323
 立 端 
1167
  罰 
833
 竹 箇 2029
  管 
1273
  算 
946
 米 精 
1535
 糸 維 
1341
  綱 
1963
  緒 
1344
  総 
1366
  綿 
1367
  網 
1373
  緑 
1371
  練 
1343
  聞 
1626
 肉 腐 
1023
 艹 蔦 
1945
  裳 
800
  製 
419
  複 
465
 言 語 
347
  誤 
1899
  誌 
601
  誓 
1133
  説 
499
  読 
348
  認 
598
  誘 
916
 豕 豪 
543
 ⻊ 踊 1409
 ⻌ 遮 
1192
  遭 
1174
  適 
441

440 | index iii: kanji in stroke order
 酉 酵 
1430
  酷 
1431
  酸 
1437
 金 銀 
1459
  銃 
762
  銭 
368
  銑 
270
  銅 
272
  銘 
275
 門 閣 
1624
  関 
2017
  閥 
1619
  隠 
1313
  際 
1296
  障 
1297
 隹 雑 
562
  雌 
563
  需 
1165
 青 静 
1540
  領 
1405
 馬 駅 
1984
  駆 
1983
  駄 
1986
  髪 
1924
 鬼 魂 
2021
  鼻 
678
15 画
 亻 儀 
984
  億 
983
  劇 
1997
 口 嘱 
1954
  器 
121
  噴 
1197
 土 墜 
1307
  墳 
1198
  嬌 
430
  審 
1910
  寮 
1708
 寸 導 
278
  履 
1057
  幣 1040
  弊 
1041
  影 
1712
  徹 
886
  慰 1096
  慶 2001
  憂 
616
  慮 
1996
  憤 
1199
  戯 
1994
  撃 
709
  摩 
639
  撮 
822
  撤 
760
  撲 
1793
 攵 敵 
443
  敷 
1883
  暫 
1134
  暴 
1801
 木 横 
1751
  槽 
1176
  権 
571
  標 1608
 欠 歓 
570
  潔 
1548
  潤 
1627
  潟 2039
  潜 
844
  潮 
141
  澄 
1704
  熟 
310
  勲 
1677
  熱 
1516
 皿 監 
1453
  盤 
1872
  確 
567
 禾 稼 
893
  稿 
892
  穂 
909
 穴 窮 
1326
  窯 
1325
  罷 
2032
 竹 箱 
942
  範 
1413
 糸 縁 
1372
  緩 
1952
  緊 
1374
  縄 
1377
  線 
1339
  締 
1340
  編 
1825
  舞 
1774
  舗 
1839
 艹 蔵 
850
  膚 
1992
  蝶 
521
 行 衝 1680
  褒 
998
 言 謁 
452
  課 
1123
  諸 
1261
  請 
1536
  諾 
351
  誕 
393
  談 
350
  調 
349
  論 
1820
 貝 賛 
843
  賜 
1052
  賭 
1264
  質 
1137
  賞 
796
  賠 
476
  賓 
511
  賦 
378
  趣 
820
 ⻊ 踏 
1287
  輝 
302
 車 輩 
1637
  輪 
1822
 ⻌ 遺 
1772
  遵 
2031
  遷 
1610
  選 
1804
 金 鋭 
500
  鋳 
1566
  閲 
1618
 雨 震 2010
  霊 
1791
  養 
1479
  餓 
1476
 馬 駒 
1979
  駐 
1982
  魅 
2023
 黒 黙 
240
16 画
 亻 儒 
1166
 冫 凝 
1412
 土 墾 
1971
  壁 
1500
  壌 
1529
  壇 
587
  壊 
400
  奮 
565
 女 嬢 
1530
  憩 
611
  憲 
1554
  憶 
632
  懐 
828
  憾 
631
  操 
671
  擁 
1387
 攵 整 
1670
  曇 
424
 木 機 
1382
  橋 
429
  激 
497
  濁 
835
  濃 
2015
  膨 
1719
  樹 1446
 火 燃 
510
  獣 
1933
  獲 
701
  磨 
594
 禾 穏 
1147
  積 
1543
 竹 築 
950
  篤 
1988
  糖 
1158
 糸 縦 
1338
  縛 
1376
  繁 
1337
  縫 
1563
 臼 興 
1426
 艹 薫 
1681
  薪 
1503
  薦 2000
  薄 
227
  薬 
1736
  虫 融 1044
  衡 
891
  衛 
1646
  親 
1504
 貝 賢 
852
 言 諮 
475
  謀 
1760
  諭 
352
  謡 
1968
  輸 
289
 ⻌ 還 
837
  避 
1501
  緯 
1645
 金 錦 
411
  鋼 
1962
  錯 
1185
  錠 
383
  錘 
1584
  錬 2030
  録 
1144
  隣 
1311

index iii: kanji in stroke order | 441
  隷 2036
 頁 頭 
1441
  頼 
1665
  館 
1478
17 画
 亻 償 
985
  優 
993
  厳 
1936
  嚇 2026
  懇 
1970
  擦 
1104
  擬 
1411
  濯 
577
  燥 
215
  爵 
1463
  犠 
643
 王 環 
836
  療 
1709
  瞳 
437
  矯 
1221
  礁 
558
  翼 
1798
 糸 縮 
1336
  績 
1542
  繊 
1790
  聴 
827
  覧 
855
 言 謄 
1211
  謙 1600
  講 
1816
  謝 
1250
  謹 
1576
  購 
1817
 車 轄 
1552
  醜 2020
  鍛 1860
  霜 
426
 頁 頻 
373
  鮮 
551
  齢 
1403
18 画
  懲 
888
  曜 
576
  濫 
1454
  癒 
2037
  癖 
1691
  瞬 
817
  礎 
394
  穫 
908
 竹 簡 
1621
  糧 
926
  織 
1334
  繕 
1335
  翻 
1911
  繭 
1880
  職 
824
 艹 藤 
1210
  藩 
1912
  襟 1099
  覆 
1611
 臣 臨 
854
  観 
572
  贈 
503
 金 鎌 
1599
  鎖 
1937
  鎮 
276
  闘 
1629
  離 
1492
  難 
1580
  韓 
1647
 頁 題 
389
  額 
295
  顔 
1717
  顕 
1789
  類 
931
 馬 騎 
1981
  騒 
1985
  験 
1980
  鯉 
176
19 画
  瀬 1666
  爆 
1802
 竹 簿 
949
  繰 
1369
  羅 
1342
  臓 
851
  艶 
1755
 艹 藻 
2035
  覇 
1895
  識 
482
  譜 
1787
  警 
336
 金 鏡 
483
  霧 
1228
  韻 
481
 頁 願 
135
  髄 
1290
  鯨 
315
  鶏 
1947
  麗 2002
20 画
  懸 
1394
  欄 
1628
  競 
434
  籍 
1567
 言 議 
642
  譲 
1528
  護 
700
  醸 
1527
 金 鐘 
438
  響 
1850
  騰 
1989
21 画
  艦 
1875
  躍 
1285
  露 
1283
 頁 顧 
1084
  鶴 
1943
  魔 2022
22 画
  襲 
2025
  驚 
1987
23 画
  鑑 
1455

i (one)  
壱 457
ii (two)  
弐 
355
A
abacus 
 
307
abandon 
棄 758
abbreviation 
略 293
abdomen 
腹 464
abet 
援 1951
abide by 
遵 2031
ability 
能 2004
abolish 
廃 1706
above 
上 
49
above-stated 
該 1522
abundant 
裕 793
abuse 
弊 1041
accept 
受 
735
accidentally 
偶 1955
accompany 
従 877
accomplished 
達 
552
accumulate 
累 1364
accusation 
訴 1139
accustomed 
慣 627
achievement 
功 863
acid 
酸 1437
acknowledge 
認 598
acorn 
 
326
acquiesce 
承 1901
acupuncturist 
 
31
add 
加 867
address 
宛 1417
adhere 
付 1000
adjusted 
斉 1729
admirable 
偉 1643
admonish 
警 336
adore 
崇 1101
adroit 
巧 1241
advance 
進 
561
aerosol can 
 
129
aﬀ air 
件 959
aﬃ  nity 
縁 1372
aﬃ  xed 
附 1303
aﬄ  icted 
患 604
Africa 
阿 1295
again 
再 1815
again, or 
又 696
age 
齢 1403
aggression 
攻 330
agreement 
肯 374
agriculture 
農 2014
aid 
扶 839
alienate 
疎 1668
all 
皆 449
alliance 
盟 1450
allot 
充 761
alms 
施 1045
altar 
 
264
alternate 
迭 847
amass 
蓄 1385
ambition 
望 489
ancestor 
祖 1779
angel 
 
158
angle 
角 1812
angling 
釣 273
angry 
怒 703
animal 
獣 1933
animal legs 
 
34
animal sacriﬁ ce 
牲 1559
animal tracks 
 
385
annexed 
添 634
anti- 
反 722
antique 
 
160
anxiety 
煩 
163
apologize 
謝 1250
appear 
顕 1789
appellation 
称 905
apple 
 
359
apply 
応 607
apprehend 
逮 1160
approve 
賛 843
apricot 
杏 203
apron 
 
154
arc 
弧 1878
ardent 
烈 814
argument 
論 1820
arm 
 
211
arm 
腕 1418
index iv
Key Words and Primitive Meanings
Th is ﬁ nal Index contains a cumulative list of all the key words and primitive 
meanings used in this book. Key words are listed with their respective kanji and 
frame number. Primitive meanings are listed in italics and are followed only by the 
number of the page (also in italics) on which they are ﬁ rst introduced.
442

index iv: key words and primitive meanings | 443
armor 
甲 1113
armpit 
脇 870
army 
軍 301
aroused 
憤 1199
arrest 
拘 654
arrival 
到 755
arrow 
 
137
arrowhead 
 
137
art 
術 1525
artiﬁ cial 
 
45
artisan 
匠 1693
ascend 
登 1703
ashes 
灰 168
Asia 
亜 1809
aside, set 
措 1188
assault 
殴 1698
assembly line 
 
255
assets 
資 473
assistant 
佐 952
association 
組 1776
assurance 
確 567
astray 
迷 924
astringent 
渋 1738
atmosphere 
雰 2028
attack 
襲 2025
attend 
仕 960
attire 
装 398
attitude 
態 2005
attractive 
嬌 430
audience 
謁 452
augment 
殖 
811
auspicious 
祥 1088
authority 
権 571
autumn 
秋 900
auxiliary 
陪 1299
awe 
敬 334
awl 
 
348
ax 
斤 1125
axis 
軸 1112
B
babe, newborn 
児 
58
back 
裏 399
bad 
悪 1810
badge 
章 433
bag 
俵 1547
baggage 
荷 1013
bake 
焼 1200
ball 
 
107
ball 
球 935
ballot 
票 1606
bamboo 
竹 937
bamboo grass 
笹 940
bamboo hat 
笠 939
banner 
 
259
banquet 
宴 
191
barbarian 
蛮 1747
bargain 
廉 1601
barley 
麦 1533
baron 
爵 1463
barracks 
屯 2033
bartending 
酌 1429
baseball (team) 
 
18
bases 
塁 1734
basin 
盆 1449
bathe 
浴 789
bay 
浦 1837
beach 
岸 1653
beans 
豆 1440
bear 
熊 2003
beat 
撃 709
beautiful woman 媛 1950
beauty 
美 548
beckon 
招 650
bed 
床 592
before 
先 248
beforehand 
予 1593
beg 
乞 462
beginning 
元 
59
beguile 
惑 614
behind 
後 1379
bell 
鐘 438
bell, small 
鈴 1406
belong 
属 1953
below 
下 
50
belt 
 
154
bend 
曲 1172
beneﬁ t 
益 1881
benevolence 
徳 885
bequeath 
遺 1772
best regards 
宜 1783
bestow 
与 1246
Big Dipper 
斗 1177
bin 
函 1902
bird 
鳥 1941
bird, sign of the 
酉 1427
bird, white 
 
28
birdhouse 
 
217
black 
黒 
174
black ink 
墨 
175
bladder, gall 
胆 
31
blade 
刃 
84
blame 
責 1541
Bldg.  
館 1478
blessing 
福 1090
blind 
盲 486
block, printing 
版 1213
blocks, building 
 
284
blood 
血 1448
blossom 
咲 2018
blow 
吹 467
blue 
青 1534
blue, navy 
紺 1758
boar 
猪 1262
board 
搭 646
boast 
誇 1244
boat 
舟 1868
body 
体 957
boil 
煮 1257
boisterous 
騒 1985
bomb 
爆 1802
bond 
債 1544
bone 
 
228
bonsai 
 
333
book 
本 
211
boom 
盛 1457
borrow 
借 1186
bosom 
胸 1491
both 
両 1168
bottom 
底 1833
bough 
枝 713
boulder 
岩 770
boulevard 
 
236
boulevard 
街 890
bound up 
 
35
boundary 
境 484
bountiful 
豊 1443
bow 
弓 1231
bowl 
鉢 271
bowstring 
弦 1386
box 
 
351

444 | index iv: key words and primitive meanings
box 
箱 942
box, measuring 
升 
42
boy 
坊 492
brain 
脳 1934
brains 
 
19
branch 
支 711
branch oﬀ  
岐 772
brandish 
揮 662
breasts 
 
53
breath 
息 610
breed 
牧 329
brew 
醸 1527
briar 
茨 472
bribe 
賄 
80
bridegroom 
婿 395
bridge 
橋 429
bright 
明 
20
bring up 
育 759
broaden 
拡 740
brocade 
錦 411
broom 
 
273
brother, elder 
兄 103
brother, younger 
弟 1240
brown 
褐 453
brush 
 
131
brush, writing 
筆 943
brush-stroke 
画 1170
bubble 
泡 533
buckle 
 
154
bud 
芽 1905
Buddha 
仏 964
Buddhist priest 
僧 982
Buddhist temple 
寺 
158
build 
建 391
building blocks 
 
284
bullet 
弾 1931
bullrush 
蒲 1838
bull’s eye 
的 
69
bundle 
束 1664
bungling 
拙 769
burdensome 
駄 1986
bureau 
局 1066
bureaucrat 
官 1271
burglar 
賊 357
burn 
燃 510
bury 
埋 179
bushel basket 
 
361
bushes 
 
382
bustle 
奔 1196
busy 
忙 618
but of course 
況 145
butcher 
 
121
butterﬂ y 
蝶 521
buy 
買 831
by means of 
以 1028
by one’s side 
 
45
bystander 
傍 1015
C
cabbage 
 
334
cadet 
曹 1173
calamity 
禍 1291
calculate 
算 946
calendar 
暦 
213
calf, golden 
 
401
call on 
訪 495
call 
呼 1485
calling card 
 
372
calm 
穏 1147
camellia 
椿 1569
camp 
陣 1305
camphor tree 
楠 1614
can 
可 
93
can, aerosol 
 
129
can, tin 
缶 1965
candle 
 
58
candlestick 
 
110
cannon 
砲 532
canopy 
幌 410
canopy, glass 
 
80
cap 
帽 408
cape 
埼 
153
capital 
京 312
capsize 
覆 1611
captive 
虜 1991
captured 
囚 1018
car 
車 286
carp 
鯉 176
carrier 
般 1871
carry 
運 303
cart 
 
120
carve 
彫 1710
cash 
幣 1040
casting 
鋳 1566
castle 
城 362
cat 
猫 244
catalpa 
梓 1498
catch 
捕 1836
cauldron 
 
73
cause 
因 583
cave 
 
197
caverns 
 
280
cavity 
孔 
96
cedar 
杉 1713
ceiling 
 
15
celebrate 
祝 1089
celery 
 
327
cell 
 
331
censure 
劾 1523
center 
央 1740
cereal 
 
239
cereals 
穀 917
ceremony 
儀 984
chafe 
摩 639
chain 
 
35
chain 
鎖 1937
challenge 
挑 658
chamber, public 
堂 798
change 
化 1008
chant 
唱 
21
chapter 
課 1123
char 
焦 557
character 
字 
185
charcoal 
炭 771
chariot 
 
124
chase 
追 1268
chastise 
討 340
checkup 
診 1724
cheerful 
快 1642
cherry tree 
桜 1932
chess piece 
棋 1763
chestnut 
栗 1609
chestnut, horse 
栃 514
chic 
粋 925
chicken 
鶏 1947
chief 
伯 967
chihuahua 
 
101
child 
子 
95
child, with 
娠 2012
chirp 
鳴 1942
choose 
択 1074

index iv: key words and primitive meanings | 445
chop 
析 1126
chop-seal 
 
309
Christmas tree 
 
332
chronicle 
紀 1354
chrysanthemum 
菊 927
cinnabar 
丹 2038
circle 
円 1811
circumference 
周 317
city walls 
 
374
clam 
 
37
clan 
藩 1912
clap 
拍 652
class 
級 1353
claw 
爪 727
clean 
浄 1155
clear the land 
拓 651
clear up 
晴 1538
cleverness 
敏 459
cliﬀ  
 
56
climate 
候 1640
climax 
至 753
clique 
閥 1619
cloak 
 
150
clock 
 
336
clod 
塊 2024
closed 
閉 1623
clothes hanger 
 
377
clothesline 
 
345
clothing 
服 1399
cloud 
雲 423
cloud of, rising 
 
155
cloudy weather 
曇 424
co- 
協 872
coach 
督 719
coarse 
粗 1777
cocoon 
 
306
cocoon 
繭 1880
code 
典 1827
coﬃ  n 
棺 1272
coin 
銭 368
cold 
寒 1526
collapse 
陥 1315
collar 
襟 1099
colleague 
僚 1707
collide 
衝 1680
color 
色 1753
coloring 
彩 1714
column 
 
236
column 
欄 1628
comb 
 
276
come 
来 1884
come in 
 
223
comfortable 
庸 1182
commander 
帥 1270
commandment 
戒 676
commence 
始 747
committee 
委 913
commoner 
庶 1191
companion 
朋 
19
company 
社 1092
compare 
比 447
compass 
 
172
compensation 
賠 476
compilation 
編 1825
complete 
了 
97
computer 
 
77
comrade 
輩 1637
concave 
凹 
33
conceal 
隠 1313
concentrated 
濃 2015
concept 
想 609
concerning 
就 1969
concurrently 
兼 1597
condolences 
弔 1233
condor 
 
393
confectionary 
菓 1122
confer 
叙 1660
confront 
抗 648
Confucian 
儒 1166
confused 
錯 1185
congeal 
凝 1412
congratulations 
賀 868
conjecture 
推 663
connection 
関 2017
consent 
諾 351
consider 
考 1252
consign 
託 1917
consolation 
慰 1096
consort 
伴 1203
conspire 
謀 1760
constancy 
恒 620
constitution 
憲 1554
consult with 
諮 475
consume 
喫 1550
consummate 
遂 540
contact 
触 1813
contain 
容 790
contend 
争 1154
continue 
続 1345
contraption 
械 677
contrast 
較 1277
control 
轄 1552
convenience 
便 991
convex 
凸 
34
conveyor 
搬 1873
cook 
炊 468
cooking ﬁ re 
 
73
cool 
冷 1404
copper 
銅 272
copy 
写 1247
cord 
索 1365
core 
奥 928
corner 
隅 1958
cornerstone 
礎 394
cornstalk 
 
333
cornucopia 
 
324
correct 
正 379
corridor 
廊 1852
cosmetics 
粧 923
cottage 
舎 316
cotton 
綿 1367
country 
国 581
country, home 
邦 1848
county 
郡 1843
courage 
勇 1407
courts 
廷 508
courtyard 
庭 590
cow 
牛 245
cow, sign of the 
丑 2040
cowl 
 
80
craft  
工 
76
cram school 
塾 309
cramped 
狭 1266
crane 
鶴 1943
crash 
墜 1307
create 
造 281
creek 
江 139
crest, family 
紋 1727
cricket, game of 
 
59
Cricket, Talking 
 
392
crime 
犯 1414

446 | index iv: key words and primitive meanings
crimson 
紅 1355
criticism 
批 649
crock, lidded 
 
128
crossing 
辻 279
crotch 
 
212
crow 
烏 1944
crowded 
込 780
crown 
 
124
crown 
冠 304
crude 
朴 207
cruel 
酷 1431
crumble 
崩 774
cry 
泣 432
cultivate 
培 477
cup, measuring 
 
278
cupfuls 
杯 1219
current 
流 764
curriculum 
歴 376
curtain 
幕 409
cut 
切 
85
cylinder 
筒 944
D
dagger 
 
47
dainty 
細 1363
dairy products 
酪 1433
damage 
損 666
damp 
湿 1788
dance 
舞 1774
dangerous 
危 1416
daring 
敢 826
darkness 
暗 480
darning 
繕 1335
dart 
矢 1220
daughter 
娘 1471
day 
日 
12
daybreak 
暁 1201
daytime 
昼 1075
death 
死 815
decameron 
旬 
67
decay 
朽 1243
deceased 
亡 485
deceit 
欺 1762
decide 
決 1641
decline 
衰 1890
decorate 
飾 1477
decrease 
耗 1914
dedicate 
奉 1573
deed, meritorious 勲 1677
deep 
深 1328
deer 
 
398
deer 
鹿 1999
deer, painting of 
 
399
defeat 
負 
63
defense 
衛 1646
defer 
譲 1528
degenerate 
堕 1314
degrees 
度 1194
deliberation 
議 642
delicate 
微 889
delicious 
旨 455
delight 
歓 570
deliver 
届 1110
deluge 
洪 1799
delusion 
妄 487
demand 
需 1165
demolition 
壊 400
den 
洞 
181
departed 
逝 1132
department 
科 1179
deposit 
預 1595
depression 
窪 1323
descend 
降 1308
descendants 
昆 448
design 
柄 1021
desk 
机 210
destitution 
乏 1215
destroy 
滅 365
detach 
離 1492
detailed 
詳 550
detain 
留 1423
determine 
定 382
devil 
 
174
dew 
露 1283
diagonal 
斜 1662
diameter 
径 882
diamond 
菱 1517
diarrhea 
痢 1687
dice 
 
385
diced 
 
17
diﬀ erence 
違 1644
diﬃ  cult 
難 1580
dig 
掘 1061
dike 
堤 390
dilate 
脹 1923
diligence 
勤 1577
dilute 
薄 227
direction 
方 490
director 
司 1863
dirt 
 
70
dirty 
汚 1245
disaster 
災 167
discard 
捨 655
discharge 
発 1705
discipline 
修 1722
disclose 
啓 1085
disconcerted 
慌 624
discontinue 
絶 1754
discreet 
謹 1576
discriminating 
識 482
discuss 
談 350
dish 
皿 1447
dislike 
嫌 1598
dispatch 
遣 1773
display 
呈 262
dispose 
処 297
dissolve 
融 1044
distant 
遠 402
distinction 
差 554
distract 
紛 1358
distress 
愁 901
distribute 
配 1436
disturb 
妨 491
ditch 
堀 1062
divide 
剖 478
divining rod 
 
32
do 
為 1918
doctor 
医 1694
document 
誌 601
dog 
犬 238
dog, sign of the 
(戌) 404
dog tag 
 
373
dollar 
 
287
domesticate 
飼 1866
don 
着 555
door 
戸 1076
door, front 
扉 1638
dormitory 
寮 1708
dose 
剤 1730
doth 
致 756
double 
倍 992

index iv: key words and primitive meanings | 447
double back 
 
165
doubt 
疑 1410
dove 
 
28
Dr. 
博 
47
draft  
稿 892
drag 
 
375
dragon 
竜 536
dragon, sign 
  of the 
辰 2008
drama 
劇 1997
draw near 
寄 192
dreadful 
怖 623
dream 
夢 305
drift  
漂 1607
drink 
飲 1474
drip 
滴 442
drive 
駆 1983
droop 
垂 1582
drop of 
 
27
drop, to 
 
233
drought 
乾 463
drown 
没 707
drowsy 
睡 1583
drum 
 
315
drum 
鼓 1444
drunk 
酔 1435
dry 
干 1648
ducks, migrating 
 
391
dull 
鈍 1495
duplicate 
複 465
duty 
役 884
dwell 
住 954
dwindle 
減 366
dye 
染 509
E
each 
各 291
ear 
耳 818
ear of a plant 
穂 909
early 
早 
26
earnings 
稼 893
earthworm 
 
322
east 
東 504
easy 
易 1051
eat 
食 1472
eaves 
宇 1656
echo 
響 1850
ecstasy 
悦 619
edge 
端 1167
edict, imperial 
詔 342
eel 
 
185
egg 
卵 1422
ego 
我 640
eight 
八 
8
elbow 
 
217
elder brother 
兄 103
elder sister 
姉 413
elect 
選 1804
electricity 
電 535
elementary 
素 1532
elephant 
象 1976
elude 
逸 1973
embarrass 
辱 2009
embrace 
抱 645
eminent 
卓 
51
emotion 
感 615
emperor 
皇 261
employ 
雇 1083
employee 
員 
56
empress 
后 1861
empty 
空 1317
emulate 
倣 979
enclosure 
郭 1842
encounter 
遭 1174
encourage 
励 866
encroach 
侵 1148
end 
終 1352
endure 
忍 597
enemy 
敵 443
England 
英 1741
engrave 
刻 1521
enlightenment 
悟 622
enroll 
籍 1567
enter 
入 779
entertain 
興 1426
entice 
誘 916
entrails 
臓 851
entrust 
嘱 1954
entwine 
絡 1350
envious 
羨 553
environs 
辺 284
epidemic 
疫 1689
equal 
匹 1695
equestrian 
騎 1981
equilibrium 
衡 891
equip 
備 1183
erect 
架 869
erupt 
噴 1197
escape 
逃 283
Esq.  
様 933
establishment 
設 708
esteem 
尚 184
etc.  
等 945
eternity 
永 132
ethics 
倫 1821
Europe 
欧 1699
evade 
避 1501
evaluate 
評 1487
even 
平 1484
evening 
夕 109
eventide 
汐 110
every 
毎 458
everywhere 
遍 1824
evidence 
証 380
exam 
校 1278
examination 
検 1673
example 
例 972
excel 
秀 914
excellent 
佳 970
exchange 
替 842
exclude 
除 1658
excuse 
免 1972
exertion 
勉 1975
exhaust 
尽 1071
exhort 
奨 732
exist 
在 685
exit 
出 767
expand 
伸 1118
expense 
費 1238
expert 
師 1269
explanation 
説 499
exploits 
績 1542
expose 
披 805
exquisite 
妙 123
extent 
程 894
extinguish 
消 144
extract 
抄 647
extremity 
末 217
eye 
目 
15
eye of a needle 
 
44
eyeball 
 
20

448 | index iv: key words and primitive meanings
eyeball 
眼 1467
eyedropper 
 
27
F
fabricate  
築 950
face 
顔 1717
faceup 
仰 1701
facsimile 
謄 1211
faction 
派 1855
failure 
敗 
331
faint 
幽 1380
faith 
信 969
fall 
落 299
falsehood 
偽 1919
family crest 
紋 1727
family name 
氏 1828
fan 
扇 1079
fare 
賃 1004
farm 
畑 166
fascination 
魅 2023
fasten 
括 661
fat 
脂 456
fat man 
 
30
fate 
命 1400
father 
父 1274
fathom 
測 149
favor 
恵 612
fear 
恐 613
feathers 
羽 573
feathers, tail 
 
386
fee 
料 1178
feelings 
情 1537
fell 
伐 994
female 
雌 563
fence 
塀 1056
fenceposts 
 
357
fermentation 
酵 1430
fertilizer 
肥 1756
fervent 
篤 1988
few 
少 106
ﬁ ber 
維 1341
ﬁ eld, rice 
田 
14
ﬁ erce 
猛 1456
ﬁ esta 
 
139
ﬁ ght 
闘 1629
ﬁ gure 
姿 474
ﬁ le 
列 812
ﬁ lial piety 
孝 1253
ﬁ nger 
指 659
ﬁ ngerprint 
 
311
ﬁ ngers 
 
205
ﬁ nish 
済 1731
ﬁ re 
火 
161
ﬁ replace 
 
73
ﬁ rewood 
薪 1503
ﬁ rst time 
初 404
ﬁ sh 
魚 
171
ﬁ sh guts 
乙 
71
ﬁ shhook 
 
43
ﬁ shing 
漁 
172
ﬁ st 
 
210
ﬁ t 
合 253
ﬁ ve 
五 
5
ﬂ ag 
 
260
ﬂ ag, national 
旗 1764
ﬂ ats 
軒 1652
ﬂ avor 
味 219
ﬂ edgling 
 
216
ﬂ esh 
 
19
ﬂ ip 
翻 1911
ﬂ oat 
 
142
ﬂ oating 
浮 730
ﬂ ock 
群 1163
ﬂ ood 
 
63
ﬂ oor 
 
15
ﬂ our 
粉 920
ﬂ ourish 
栄 326
ﬂ ower 
 
93
ﬂ ower 
花 1009
ﬂ ower pot 
瓶 1032
ﬂ uid 
液 1038
ﬂ ute 
笛 1111
ﬂ y 
飛 1887
ﬂ ying horse 
 
193
focus 
省 124
fog 
霧 1228
fold 
折 1130
follow 
随 1298
following, the 
翌 575
fond 
好 
99
food 
 
319
foolish 
愚 1957
footgear 
履 1057
foothold 
拠 669
footprint 
 
143
forces 
勢 1515
ford 
渉 372
forehead 
額 295
forest 
森 197
forge 
鍛 1860
forget 
忘 596
formerly 
曽 501
fortune-telling 
占 
48
foster 
養 1479
four 
四 
4
fragrant 
薫 1681
frame 
枠 200
free, set 
放 496
freight 
貨 1010
fresh 
鮮 
551
friend 
友 704
frolic 
戯 1994
from 
乃 686
front door 
扉 1638
front, in 
前 290
frost 
霜 426
frozen 
凍 506
frugal 
倹 1674
fruit 
果 1121
full 
満 1169
fundamentals 
基 1767
funnel 
 
370
fur 
毛 1913
furrow 
畝 1017
G
gain 
得 876
gall bladder 
胆 
31
gamble 
賭 1264
game hunting 
猟 1940
game of cricket 
 
59
garden 
苑 1419
garment 
衣 396
gates 
門 1616
gather 
集 559
gauze 
羅 1342
general 
総 1366
generation 
世 
28
genesis 
創 1631
genie 
 
209
genie in the bottle 
 
209

index iv: key words and primitive meanings | 449
genius 
才 681
gentle 
妥 728
gentleman 
士 
319
genuine 
純 1494
germ 
菌 918
ghost 
鬼 2019
gigantic 
巨 856
gist 
趣 820
give 
呉 1897
glass canopy 
 
80
glossy 
艶 1755
glue 
 
31
gnats 
 
183
Go 
碁 1766
go in 
 
223
goat, mountain 
 
392
go-between 
仲 956
godown 
倉 1630
gods 
神 1119
going 
行 873
gold 
金 269
golden calf 
 
401
gone 
去 750
good 
良 1468
good luck 
吉 320
goods 
品 
23
goodwill 
款 1097
gorge 
峡 1265
government oﬃ  ce 庁 
591
grace 
恩 606
graceful 
淑 
721
gracious 
雅 1907
grade 
段 1859
gradually 
徐 1659
graduate 
卒 1025
grains 
粒 922
grains of rice 
 
242
grandchild 
孫 1393
grant 
賜 1052
grasp 
把 1752
grass 
草 224
grass, bamboo 
笹 940
grass skirt 
 
327
grate 
擦 1104
grave 
墓 
231
graveyard 
 
95
greatness 
傑 999
green 
緑 1371
grind 
磨 594
grip 
握 1059
grope 
探 1327
ground 
 
70
ground 
地 
515
groundbreaking 
墾 1971
group 
団 582
grove 
林 196
grow late 
更 694
grow up 
 
328
grudge 
怨 1420
guard 
守 186
guess 
察 1103
guest 
客 294
guidance 
導 278
guillotine 
 
344
guilt 
罪 1636
gulf 
湾 1749
gully 
 
225
gun 
銃 762
gutter 
溝 1819
guy 
奴 702
H
haiku 
俳 1633
hair 
 
387
hair of the head 
髪 1924
hair, lock of 
 
387
hairpin 
 
387
halberd 
矛 1225
half 
半 1202
hall 
堂 798
halo 
 
318
halt 
停 977
hand 
手 637
handle 
扱 690
hands, outstretched  
210
hands, two 
 
208
hang 
掛 674
hanging scroll 
幅 407
happenstance 
故 
333
happiness 
幸 1505
harbor 
港 1800
hard up 
窮 1326
harden 
固 580
hare, sign of the 
卯 2041
harm 
害 1551
harmony 
和 897
harp 
琴 1591
harvest 
穫 908
hat, bamboo 
笠 939
hate 
憎 626
haven 
津 328
hawser 
綱 1963
haystack 
 
281
he 
彼 883
head 
 
38
head 
頭 1441
head, place on the 頂 
94
headland 
岬 1115
heal 
療 1709
healing 
癒 2037
healthy 
健 974
hear 
聞 1626
hearing 
審 1910
heart 
心 595
hearth 
 
73
hearth 
炉 1080
heat 
熱 1516
heavens 
天 428
heavy 
重 1675
hedge 
垣 
154
hegemony 
覇 1895
Heights 
阪 1294
heir 
嗣 1867
helmet 
 
80
help 
助 1782
hemp 
麻 593
hermit 
仙 986
hide 
匿 1692
highness 
陛 1310
hill 
丘 1329
hillock 
塚 1039
hinder 
障 1297
hinge 
枢 1697
history 
史 692
hit 
当 1153
hoarse 
喝 454
hog, sign of the 
亥 1519
hoist 
揚 664
hold 
持 660
hole 
穴 1316
holy 
聖 825

450 | index iv: key words and primitive meanings
home 
宅 1916
home country 
邦 1848
homecoming 
帰 1230
hometown 
郷 1849
honey 
蜜 776
honorable 
御 1398
hood 
 
80
hop 
跳 1284
hope 
希 1489
horizon 
涯 
157
horizontal 
緯 1645
horns 
 
36
horse 
 
192
horse 
馬 1978
horse chestnut 
栃 514
horse, sign of the (午) 404
horses, team of 
 
396
hot water 
湯 546
hours, wee 
宵 189
house 
 
82
house 
家 541
how many 
幾 1381
however 
但 953
hug 
擁 1387
human legs 
 
34
humanity 
仁 988
humility 
慎 630
hump 
隆 1561
hundred 
百 
38
hundred million 
億 983
hungry 
飢 1475
hunt 
狩 243
hunting, game 
猟 1940
hurry 
急 1146
husband 
夫 838
husk 
殻 710
I
I 
吾 
17
I beam 
 
45
ice 
 
157
icicle 
氷 
131
idea 
意 608
ill 
病 1682
illuminate 
照 170
imitation 
模 229
immature 
稚 896
immersed 
浸 1149
impart 
授 736
imperial edict 
詔 342
imperial order 
勅 1667
in 
中 
39
in a row, 
 upside down 
 
366
in front 
前 290
incense 
香 
911
include 
含 1588
income 
収 1510
increase 
 
175
increase 
増 502
incur 
被 807
indications 
徴 887
individual 
個 973
infancy 
幼 1378
infant 
 
220
inferiority 
劣 862
inﬂ ammation 
炎 162
inﬂ ation 
騰 1989
inherit 
継 1370
ink, black 
墨 
175
inmost 
衷 1891
inn 
宿 995
inquire 
尋 1145
inscription 
銘 275
insect 
虫 
517
insert 
挿 1116
inside 
内 1019
inspection 
視 1093
Inst.  
院 1304
instant 
即 1462
instead 
却 1395
instruction 
訓 341
intelligent 
賢 852
intention 
志 600
inter- 
相 209
intercept 
遮 1192
interchange 
換 1043
interment 
葬 816
interpretation 
釈 1908
interval 
間 1620
interview 
遇 1956
intestines 
腸 544
intimate 
睦 1514
intimidate 
威 364
introduce 
紹 1359
intuition 
勘 1769
invariably 
必 635
inverted 
逆 1959
investigate 
査 1781
iron 
鉄 846
iron, pig 
銑 270
island 
島 1948
isolate 
隔 1312
Italy 
伊 1161
item 
箇 2029
ivy 
 
71
J
jail cell 
 
343
jammed in 
介 250
Japanese Judas-
  tree 
桂 198
jawbone 
 
295
jewel 
玉 256
jewel, squared 
圭 
155
join 
併 1030
journey 
往 880
jubilation 
慶 2001
Judas-tree,
 Japanese 
桂 198
judgment 
判 1205
jump 
踊 1409
junior 
徒 878
jurisdiction 
領 1405
just so 
是 388
juvenile 
童 436
K
kazoo 
 
170
ketchup 
 
323
key 
 
343
kidnap 
拐 656
kill 
殺 1493
kiln 
窯 1325
king 
王 255
knot 
 
260
know 
知 1223
Korea 
韓 1647
L
labor 
労 860

index iv: key words and primitive meanings | 451
lack 
欠 466
lacquer 
漆 932
lad 
彦 1716
ladle 
勺 
68
lady 
婦 1151
lagoon 
潟 2039
laid waste 
荒 488
lake 
湖 148
lament 
悼 621
lamp 
灯 165
land 
 
70
land 
陸 1513
lap 
 
129
large 
大 107
lass 
嬢 1530
late, grow 
更 694
laugh 
笑 938
laundry 
濯 577
lazy 
惰 629
lead (metal)  
鉛 794
leader 
将 
731
leaf 
葉 228
leak 
漏 1068
lean 
傾 1011
leap 
躍 1285
learn 
習 574
leather 
革 1893
lecture 
講 1816
left  
左 
77
leg 
足 1279
leg, wooden 
 
294
legitimate wife 
嫡 440
legs, animal 
 
34
legs, human 
 
34
legs, walking 
 
121
leisure 
閑 1625
lend 
貸 1007
length 
丈 691
lengthen 
張 1921
level 
均 160
levy 
賦 378
license 
允 765
lidded crock 
 
128
lie 
詐 1141
lie down 
寝 1150
life 
生 1555
lightly 
軽 717
lightning bug 
蛍 
518
likeness 
如 100
lily, water 
 
321
limb 
肢 714
limit 
限 1466
line 
 
236
line 
線 1339
line up 
陳 1301
lineage 
系 1391
linen 
布 405
liner 
舶 1869
lips 
唇 2013
listen 
聴 827
little 
小 105
livelihood 
暮 232
lively 
活 143
liver 
肝 1649
livestock 
畜 1384
load 
載 359
location 
場 545
lock 
錠 383
lock of hair 
 
386
locket 
 
344
logic 
理 265
loins 
腰 1605
loneliness 
寂 720
long 
長 1920
long time 
久 1016
long-distance 
距 1281
longevity 
寿 1565
longing 
欲 792
look back 
顧 1084
look to 
臨 854
loose 
漫 830
lord 
主 266
lose 
失 845
lot 
譲 1529
love 
愛 737
lovely 
麗 2002
lower 
低 1831
lowly 
卑 1511
loyalty 
忠 602
lucidity 
澄 1704
luck, good 
吉 320
lumber 
材 683
lunatic 
狂 260
lungs 
肺 414
luxuriant 
繁 1337
M
made in… 
製 419
maestro 
 
292
magic wand 
 
33
magnet 
磁 1390
mail 
郵 1847
mailbox 
 
311
majestic plural 
朕 2027
make 
作 1142
make a deal 
商 439
male 
雄 743
mama 
母 
101
man 
男 859
mandala 
 
230
mane 
 
387
maneuver 
操 671
manipulate 
掌 801
mannerism 
癖 1691
many 
多 108
many, how 
幾 1381
map 
図 1180
march 
 
141
market 
市 412
marketing 
販 726
marquis 
侯 1639
marriage 
婚 1830
marrow 
髄 1290
marry into 
嫁 542
marsh 
沼 
137
martyrdom 
殉 809
mask 
面 1892
masses 
衆 1857
mat, tatami 
畳 1784
matrimony 
姻 584
matter 
事 1156
mausoleum 
陵 1518
me 
僕 1794
meadow 
原 134
meal 
飯 1473
measurement 
寸 
45
measuring box 
升 
42
measuring cup 
 
278
meat 
肉 1022
mechanism 
機 1382
mediator 
媒 1761

452 | index iv: key words and primitive meanings
medicine 
薬 1736
mediocre 
凡 
62
meeting 
 
106
meeting 
会 752
melancholy 
憂 616
mellow 
熟 310
melodious 
朗 1469
melon 
瓜 1877
melt 
溶 791
membrane 
膜 233
memorize 
覚 325
mending 
 
146
mention 
述 1524
mercy 
慈 1389
merit 
効 1276
meritorious deed 勲 1677
metal 
 
111
method 
法 
751
metropolis 
都 1846
mid-air 
宙 1109
migrating ducks 
 
391
military oﬃ  cer 
尉 1095
milk 
乳 729
mimic 
擬 1411
mind, state of 
 
198
mineral 
鉱 
741
mingle 
交 1275
mirror 
 
170
mirror 
鏡 483
miscellaneous 
雑 562
miss 
喪 1926
missile 
 
213
mist 
 
33
mistake 
誤 1899
mix 
混 450
model 
塑 1960
monk’s cowl 
 
80
monkey 
 
117
monkey 
猿 403
monkey, sign 
  of the 
(申) 469
monme 
匁 1027
month 
月 
13
moon 
 
19
mop 
 
275
moreover 
且 2034
morning 
朝 
52
mosaic 
 
360
mosquito 
蚊 1728
mould 
型 680
Mount 
岡 1961
mountain 
山 768
mountain goat 
 
392
mountain pass 
峠 773
mountain stream 渓 840
mourning 
忌 599
mouth 
口 
11
move 
動 1676
Mr.  
殿 1805
mud 
泥 1055
mulberry 
桑 698
municipality 
府 1002
muscle 
 
234
muscle 
筋 941
music 
楽 1735
music, play 
奏 1571
musical score 
譜 1787
mutually 
互 757
muzzle 
 
169
mysterious 
玄 1383
N
nail 
 
50
naked 
裸 1124
name 
名 
112
name, family 
氏 1828
Nara 
奈 1094
national ﬂ ag 
旗 1764
nativity 
誕 393
navigate 
航 1870
navy blue 
紺 1758
near 
近 1129
neck 
首 
70
need 
要 1604
needle 
 
18
needle 
針 274
needle, eye of 
 
73
negate 
否 1218
negative 
不 1217
neglect 
怠 745
neighboring 
隣 1311
nest 
巣 1927
netting 
網 1373
new 
新 1502
newborn babe 
児 
58
next 
次 471
nickname 
号 1242
night 
夜 1037
nightbreak 
旦 
30
nightfall 
晩 1974
nine 
九 
9
nitrate 
硝 
115
No.  
第 1239
node 
節 1464
Noh chanting 
謡 1968
noon 
午 568
north 
北 445
nose 
 
28
nose 
鼻 678
nostrils 
 
28
not 
勿 1049
not yet 
未 216
notebook 
帳 1922
nothingness 
無 1775
notice, put up a 
掲 673
nourishing 
滋 1388
now 
今 1587
nucleus 
核 1520
number 
数 929
nun 
尼 1054
O
oak 
柏 199
oaken tub 
 
363
obese 
肪 494
obey 
順 129
occasion 
際 1296
occupation 
営 1034
ocean 
洋 549
of 
之 1214
oﬃ  ce,
  government 
庁 
591
oﬀ ering 
献 1615
oﬃ  cer 
吏 693
oﬃ  cer, military 
尉 1095
oil 
油 1107
old boy 
君 1162
old man 
老 1251
old man, 
  venerable 
翁 786
Old West 
 
339

index iv: key words and primitive meanings | 453
old 
古 
16
old woman 
婆 804
olden times 
旧 
35
once upon a time 昔 1184
one 
一 
1
oneself 
自 
36
one-sided 
片 1212
only 
只 
53
ooze 
泌 636
open 
開 1622
open sea 
沖 
138
or again 
又 696
order, imperial 
勅 1667
orders 
令 1401
organize 
整 1670
orphan 
孤 1879
other 
他 961
ought 
須 1718
outburst 
暴 1801
outhouse 
 
226
outline 
概 1482
outlook 
観 572
outside 
外 
111
outskirts 
郊 1844
outstretched hands  
210
oven ﬁ re 
 
73
overall 
統 1347
overcome 
克 104
overdo 
過 1293
overﬂ ow 
濫 1454
overgrown 
茂 360
overnight 
泊 147
overpowering 
豪 543
oversee 
監 1453
overthrow 
倒 980
owl 
 
388
oyster 
 
37
P
pack of wild dogs 
 
101
packed 
詰 343
paddy ridge 
畔 1204
page 
頁 
60
pagoda 
塔 254
pain 
痛 1690
paint 
塗 1663
painting of a deer 
 
399
pair 
双 697
paper 
紙 1829
paper punch 
 
300
parade 
 
140
paragraph 
項 
82
parcel post 
逓 1858
parch 
燥 
215
pardon 
赦 1744
parent 
親 1504
park 
園 585
parking 
駐 1982
part 
分 781
part of the body 
 
19
partial 
偏 1823
particularly 
殊 810
partition 
頒 783
parts of speech 
詞 1865
party 
党 797
patent 
彰 1715
path 
路 1282
pathetic 
哀 401
patrol 
巡 285
pattern 
範 1413
paulownia 
桐 204
pavilion 
亭 
311
pay 
払 738
pay respects 
伺 1864
peaceful 
泰 1570
peach tree 
桃 236
peak, mountain 
峠 773
pear tree 
梨 907
pearl 
珠 258
pedestal 
台 744
Pegasus 
 
193
pelt 
皮 802
penal 
懲 888
penalty 
罰 833
penetrate 
徹 886
pent in 
 
196
people 
民 1834
pepper, red 
 
323
perfect 
完 187
performance 
演 2007
perfumed 
芳 493
period 
期 1765
perish 
 
171
permit 
許 569
person 
人 951
person in charge 
係 1392
persuade 
勧 864
perusal 
覧 855
petition 
願 
135
phantasm 
幻 1862
philosophy 
哲 1131
phrase 
句 
65
pick 
採 733
pick up 
拾 667
pickling 
漬 1545
picture 
絵 1346
pierce 
貫 102
piety, ﬁ lial 
孝 1253
pig iron 
銑 270
pigeon 
鳩 1946
piggy bank 
 
187
piglets 
 
187
pillar 
柱 268
pinch 
摘 657
pine tree 
松 785
pining 
慕 633
pinnacle 
 
296
pipe 
管 1273
pit 
坑 306
pity 
惜 1187
place 
所 1127
place on the head 頂 
94
placement 
置 832
placenta 
胞 
531
plaid 
 
356
plains 
野 1596
plan 
案 214
plane 
削 
118
plank 
板 724
plant 
植 205
plant, rice 
稲 910
plantation 
栽 358
play 
遊 1047
play music 
奏 1571
pleasure 
愉 628
pledge 
契 1549
plot 
計 337
plow 
 
256
pluck 
抽 1106
plug 
栓 264
plug up 
窒 1321

454 | index iv: key words and primitive meanings
plum 
梅 460
plump 
太 120
plural, majestic 
朕 2027
pocket 
懐 828
podium 
壇 587
poem 
詩 346
Point 
岳 1330
pointed 
鋭 500
poison 
毒 1531
pole, wooden 
 
85
poles 
極 1903
polish 
研 675
politics 
政 
381
pond 
池 516
pony 
駒 1979
pork 
豚 538
portable 
携 687
portent 
兆 235
porter 
 
176
possess 
有 
79
post 
職 824
post, parcel 
逓 1858
posture 
構 1818
pot, ﬂ ower 
瓶 1032
potato 
 
346
potato 
芋 1655
pottery 
陶 1966
pour 
注 267
poverty 
貧 782
power 
力 858
pox 
痘 1684
practice 
練 1343
praise 
褒 998
pray 
祈 1128
precious 
貴 1771
precipitous 
険 1672
preface 
序 1594
prefecture 
県 
513
pregnancy 
妊 507
present 
現 259
presents 
贈 503
pressure 
圧 
152
previously 
既 1481
price 
値 978
priest, Buddhist 
僧 982
princess 
姫 849
printing 
刷 1069
printing block 
版 1213
prison 
獄 338
private 
私 902
prize 
賞 796
proceed 
赴 386
proclaim 
宣 188
products 
産 1560
profession 
業 1792
proﬁ t 
利 906
prohibition 
禁 1098
prolong 
延 392
promise 
約 1362
promontory 
崎 778
-proof 
耐 1164
property 
財 682
proportion 
割 1553
propose 
提 665
prosperous 
昌 
25
prostrated 
伏 962
protect 
保 997
provisional 
仮 966
provisions 
糧 926
prudence 
慮 1996
public 
公 784
publish 
刊 1650
pull 
引 1232
punish 
刑 679
pup tent 
 
353
pupil 
瞳 437
puppet 
 
291
pure 
清 1539
puriﬁ cation 
斎 1732
purple 
紫 1375
purse 
 
363
pursue 
逐 539
push 
押 1114
put in 
 
223
put up a notice 
掲 673
puzzle 
 
256
Q
quake 
震 2010
quandary 
困 579
quantity 
量 177
quarter 
 
283
quasi- 
准 560
queen 
妃 527
question 
問 1617
quick 
速 1669
quiet 
静 1540
quit 
罷 2032
quiver 
 
138
R
rabbit 
 
394
radiance 
輝 302
rag 
 
259
rain 
雨 422
rainbow 
虹 520
raise 
挙 1938
rake 
 
274
ram, sign of the 
(未) 404
range 
域 356
rank 
位 955
rapidly 
疾 1686
rapids 
瀬 1666
rare 
珍 1723
rather 
寧 834
rat, sign of the 
(子) 404
ratio 
率 1737
ray 
光 
119
re- 
戻 1081
reach out 
及 688
read 
読 348
reality 
実 1572
reap 
刈 1488
rebuke 
諭 352
receipt 
 
312
receive 
享 308
recess 
憩 
611
recitation 
詠 345
reclining 
 
164
recollection 
憶 632
recommend 
薦 2000
record 
録 1144
recreation 
娯 1898
recruit 
募 861
rectify 
矯 1221
red 
赤 1743
red pepper 
 
323
reed 
荻 242
reef 
礁 558
reﬁ ned 
精 1535
reﬂ ect 
映 1742

index iv: key words and primitive meanings | 455
reformation 
改 528
refreshing 
涼 
313
regiment 
隊 1306
register 
簿 949
regularity 
秩 903
reign 
治 746
reject 
斥 1138
rejoice 
喜 1445
relax 
安 190
reliant 
依 971
religion 
宗 1100
remainder 
残 808
remorse 
憾 
631
remote 
悠 958
remove 
撤 760
rend 
破 806
renowned 
著 1258
reparation 
償 985
repay 
酬 1432
repeatedly 
頻 373
repel 
拒 857
repent 
悔 625
report 
報 1507
repress 
抑 1700
repudiate 
排 1634
reputation 
誉 1939
request 
求 934
research 
究 1320
resemblance 
肖 
114
resentment 
恨 1460
reside 
居 1063
residence 
邸 1841
resign 
辞 1497
resin 
 
326
resist 
抵 1832
respect 
恭 1803
respects, pay 
伺 1864
responsibility 
任 1003
rest 
休 965
restore 
復 875
retainer 
臣 848
retreat 
退 1465
return 
返 725
revelation 
告 247
revered 
尊 1439
review 
閲 1618
revise 
訂 339
revolve 
転 420
rhyme 
韻 481
rhythm 
律 874
ri 
里 
173
rice 
米 919
rice ﬁ eld 
田 
14
rice, grains of 
 
242
rice plant 
稲 910
rice seedling 
 
325
ride 
乗 1585
ridge, paddy 
畔 1204
ridgepole 
棟 505
ridicule 
慢 829
right 
右 
78
righteousness 
義 641
rin 
厘 178
ring 
環 836
riot 
乱 
72
rise up 
昇 
43
rising cloud of 
 
155
rising sun 
旭 
27
risk 
冒 
18
ritual 
祭 1102
river 
河 146
road 
 
118
road-way 
道 277
rob 
奪 566
robust 
壮 
321
rod 
棒 1575
romance 
恋 1748
roof 
屋 1058
room 
室 754
root 
根 1461
roots 
 
267
rope 
 
35
rope, straw 
縄 1377
rot 
腐 1023
rotation 
旋 1046
round 
丸 
44
rouse 
起 526
route 
途 1661
row 
並 1785
rowboat 
艇 1876
rowing 
漕 1175
rub 
抹 644
rue 
慨 1483
rule 
則 
88
run 
走 384
run alongside 
沿 795
rut 
軌 288
S
saber 
 
83
saber 
剣 1671
sack 
袋 1006
sacriﬁ ce 
犠 643
sacriﬁ ce, animal 
牲 1559
sad 
悲 1635
safeguard 
護 700
sagacious 
俊 1014
sail 
帆 406
saké 
酒 1428
salad 
 
279
salary 
給 1349
salt 
塩 1458
salutation 
礼 1087
salvation 
救 936
same 
同 180
samurai 
 
129
sand 
砂 
117
sandwiched 
挟 1267
sane 
康 1159
sash 
帯 415
sated 
飽 1480
savings 
貯 194
saw 
 
272
say 
言 
335
sayeth 
曰 578
saying 
 
134
scaﬀ old 
桟 367
scale 
 
400
scarecrow 
 
334
scarf, top hat and 
 
150
scatter 
散 1189
scenery 
景 314
scheme 
策 948
school, cram 
塾 309
schoolhouse 
 
130
scissors 
 
292
score, musical 
譜 1787
scorn 
侮 989
scorpion 
 
181
scrapbook 
 
370
screwdriver 
 
279

456 | index iv: key words and primitive meanings
scribe 
記 529
scroll 
巻 1207
scroll, hanging 
幅 407
sea 
海 461
sea, open 
沖 
138
seacoast 
浜 1332
seal 
封 
156
search 
捜 1120
seasons 
季 912
seat 
席 1193
seaweed 
藻 2035
second 
秒 899
secrecy 
密 775
secret 
秘 904
section 
部 1845
seduce 
召 
86
see 
見 
57
seedling 
苗 234
seethe 
沸 1237
seize 
獲 701
self 
己 525
self-eﬀ acing 
謙 1600
sell 
売 323
semi- 
準 564
send back 
還 837
send oﬀ  
送 2016
sentence 
文 1725
separate 
別 
90
sequential 
循 1854
set 
据 1064
set aside 
措 1188
set free 
放 496
settlement 
納 1356
seven 
七 
7
severance 
断 1136
sew 
縫 1563
sex 
性 1558
shade 
陰 1592
shadow 
影 1712
shake 
振 2011
shaku 
尺 1070
shakuhachi 
 
262
shallow 
浅 369
shame 
恥 823
shape 
 
354
shape 
形 1711
sheaf 
 
321
sheep 
羊 547
sheet of 
枚 332
shelf 
 
364
shelf 
棚 202
shellﬁ sh 
貝 
54
shells 
 
37
shield 
盾 1853
shift  
移 898
shining 
昭 
87
shins 
脚 1396
Shinto shrine 
宮 1033
ship 
船 1874
shish kebab 
串 603
shoes 
靴 1894
shoot 
 
267
shoot 
射 1249
shop 
舗 1839
short 
短 1442
shoulder 
肩 1077
shouldering 
担 668
shout 
叫 1508
shovel 
 
276
show 
示 1086
shredder 
 
258
shrine, Shinto 
宮 1033
shrink 
縮 1336
sickle 
鎌 1599
sickness 
 
350
side 
側 975
sideways 
横 1751
siesta 
 
163
sieve 
 
275
sigh 
嘆 1579
sign of the bird 
酉 1427
sign of the cow 
丑 2040
sign of the dog 
(戌) 469
sign of the dragon 辰 2008
sign of the hare 
卯 2041
sign of the hog 
亥 1519
sign of the horse (午) 404
sign of the 
  monkey 
(申) 404
sign of the ram 
(未) 404
sign of the rat 
(子) 404
sign of the snake 
巳 2042
sign of the tiger 
寅 2006
signature 
署 1259
signpost 
標 1608
silage 
 
335
silence 
黙 240
silk 
絹 1368
silkworm 
蚕 523
silver 
 
317
silver 
銀 1459
silverware 
 
319
similar 
似 1029
simple 
単 1928
simplicity 
簡 1621
sincerity 
誠 363
single 
独 522
sink 
沈 1888
Sino- 
漢 1578
sire 
紳 1361
sister, elder 
姉 413
sister, younger 
妹 220
sit 
座 1024
sitting on the
 ground 
 
161
six 
六 
6
skeleton 
骨 1288
sketch 
描 670
skill 
技 712
skin 
膚 1992
skirt 
裳 800
skirt, grass 
 
327
skunk 
 
394
slacken 
緩 1952
slap 
撲 1793
slave 
 
233
slave 
隷 2036
sleep 
眠 1835
sleeve 
袖 1108
slender 
繊 1790
slingshot 
 
289
slip out 
抜 705
slippery 
滑 1289
slope 
坂 723
slow 
遅 1067
small bell 
鈴 1406
smash 
砕 
116
smoke 
煙 1612
snake 
 
183
snake 
蛇 519
snake, sign of the 巳 2042

index iv: key words and primitive meanings | 457
snapshot 
撮 822
snare 
 
288
snow 
雪 1143
so-and-so 
某 1759
sociable 
懇 1970
soft  
軟 470
soil 
土 150
soldier 
兵 1331
solely 
唯 556
solemn 
粛 1733
solicit 
請 1536
solution 
答 947
somebody 
身 1248
someone 
者 1256
son 
郎 1851
song 
歌 469
sort 
類 
931
sort of thing 
然 241
soul 
魂 2021
sound 
音 479
soup 
汁 140
source 
源 142
south 
南 1613
sovereign 
帝 435
sow 
 
186
span 
亘 
32
spare time 
暇 1882
spark 
 
58
sparkle 
晶 
22
sparkler 
 
357
speaketh 
申 1117
spear 
 
286
special 
特 246
specialty 
専 
46
species 
種 1679
specimen 
鑑 1455
speech 
 
134
speech, parts of 
詞 1865
sphere 
圏 1208
spicy 
辛 1496
spike 
 
50
spindle 
錘 1584
spine 
呂 
24
spinning 
紡 1357
spirit 
気 1885
spirits 
霊 1791
spit 
吐 
151
splash 
沫 218
splendor 
華 1581
split 
裂 
813
sponsor 
催 987
spool 
 
214
spoon 
匕 444
spot 
点 169
spread 
敷 1883
spring 
泉 
133
springtime 
春 1568
sprout 
 
267
spy 
偵 981
squad 
班 1229
squared jewel 
圭 
155
squeeze 
搾 1324
St. Bernard dog 
 
56
stab 
突 1319
stagnate 
滞 416
stalk 
茎 
715
stamp 
 
308
stamp 
印 1425
stand up 
立 431
standard 
規 841
staple gun 
 
376
staples 
 
313
star 
星 1556
stare 
眺 237
starve 
餓 1476
state 
州 128
state of mind 
 
198
station 
駅 1984
statue 
像 1977
stature 
背 446
status 
格 292
status quo 
状 239
steadily 
漸 1135
steal 
盗 1451
stealth 
窃 1322
steam 
蒸 1900
steel 
鋼 1962
step 
踏 1287
stern 
厳 1936
sticky 
粘 921
stiﬀ  
硬 695
stimulate 
促 1280
stinking 
臭 
122
stipend 
俸 1574
stirred up 
奮 565
stocks 
株 222
stomach 
胃 
29
stone 
石 
113
stop 
止 370
store 
店 588
storehouse 
蔵 850
storm 
嵐 777
story 
階 1309
straightaway 
直 
73
strand 
渚 1263
strange 
奇 126
strangle 
絞 1348
stratum 
層 1065
straw man 
 
282
straw rope 
縄 1377
stream 
川 
127
stream, mountain 渓 840
street 
丁 
91
stretch 
 
148
strict 
堅 853
strike 
打 653
strong 
強 1235
strung together 
 
367
stubborn 
頑 
61
study 
学 324
stupid 
痴 1683
sturdy 
剛 1964
style 
式 
353
subjugate 
征 881
submerge 
潜 844
submit 
供 1796
subscription 
購 1817
substance 
質 1137
substitute 
代 1005
suck 
吸 689
sue 
訟 787
suﬀ ering 
苦 225
sugar 
糖 1158
suitable 
適 441
sulfur 
硫 763
sultry 
暑 1260
summer 
夏 296
summit 
峰 1562
sun 
 
19
sun, rising 
旭 
27
sunﬂ ower 
 
24

458 | index iv: key words and primitive meanings
sunglasses 
 
229
sunglasses with 
 one lens out 
 
257
sunshine 
陽 1300
superﬂ uous 
冗 300
superintend 
宰 1499
supplement 
補 1840
suppose 
存 684
surface 
表 1546
surname 
姓 1557
surpass 
越 387
surplus 
剰 1586
surround 
囲 1807
suspend 
懸 1394
suspicious 
怪 716
sūtra 
経 1360
swamp 
沢 1072
sweat 
汗 1651
sweep 
掃 1152
sweet 
甘 1757
swell 
膨 1719
swift  
迅 280
swim 
泳 136
swing 
揺 1967
sword 
刀 
83
symptoms 
症 1685
system 
制 418
T
table 
 
315
tag 
札 212
tail 
尾 1915
tail feathers 
 
386
tailor 
裁 397
take 
取 819
take along 
連 287
tale 
話 344
Talking Cricket 
 
392
tall 
高 307
T’ang 
唐 1157
tariﬀ  
租 1778
task 
務 1227
taskmaster 
 
132
tassel 
房 1078
tatami mat 
畳 1784
tax 
税 895
tea 
茶 252
teach 
教 1254
team of horses 
 
396
tears 
涙 1082
technique 
芸 421
teenager 
 
54
teepee 
 
353
tempering 
錬 2030
temple, Buddhist 寺 
158
temporarily 
暫 1134
tempt 
唆 766
ten 
十 
10
ten thousand 
万 
64
tenacious 
執 1506
tender 
柔 1226
tenderness 
優 993
tense 
緊 1374
test 
試 354
texture 
肌 
66
Th anksgiving 
 
139
thick 
厚 
125
thin 
淡 164
thing 
物 1050
think 
思 605
third class 
丙 1020
thirst 
渇 451
thong 
緒 1344
thorn 
刺 417
thousand 
千 
40
thread 
糸 1333
threaten 
脅 871
three 
三 
3
throw 
投 706
thunder 
雷 425
thwart 
阻 1780
ticket 
券 1206
tide 
潮 
141
tie 
結 1351
tiger 
 
397
tiger 
虎 1990
tiger, sign of the 
寅 2006
tighten 
締 1340
tile 
瓦 1031
till 
耕 1808
timber-trees 
樹 1446
time 
時 
159
time, spare 
暇 1882
-times 
回 586
tin can 
缶 1965
tired 
疲 1688
together 
共 1795
toil 
努 865
token 
符 1001
tolerant 
寛 226
tomb 
墳 1198
tombstone 
碑 1512
tome 
冊 1826
tongue 
舌 
41
tongue wagging
 in mouth 
 
19
too much 
余 1657
tool 
 
44
tool 
具 
74
tooth 
歯 1171
top hat 
 
125
top hat and scarf 
 
150
topic 
題 389
tortoise 
亀 534
torture 
拷 1255
touch 
接 672
towel 
 
152
tower 
閣 1624
town 
村 208
tracks 
跡 1746
tracks, animal 
 
385
trade 
貿 1424
traﬃ  c 
通 1408
tranquilize 
鎮 276
transcend 
超 385
transit 
渡 1195
transition 
遷 1610
translate 
訳 1073
transmit 
伝 963
transparent 
透 
915
transport 
輸 289
tray 
盤 1872
tread 
践 1286
treasure 
宝 257
tree 
木 
195
tree trunk 
幹 1654
treetops 
梢 201
tremendously 
甚 1768
tribe 
族 1222
tribute 
貢 
81
triceps 
 
236

index iv: key words and primitive meanings | 459
trip 
旅 1048
trouble 
悩 1935
true 
真 
75
trunk 
胴 
182
trunk, tree 
幹 1654
truss 
縛 1376
trust 
頼 1665
tub, oaken 
 
363
tucked under
 the arm 
 
211
tune 
調 349
turf 
芝 1216
turkey 
 
190
turkey house/coop 
 
192
turn 
番 1909
turn into 
成 361
turtle 
 
100
tusk 
牙 1904
twenty 
廿 1190
twig 
条 298
twist 
糾 1509
two 
二 
2
two hands 
 
208
two-mat area 
坪 1486
tyrannize 
虐 1998
U
ugly 
醜 2020
umbrella 
 
115
umbrella 
傘 1026
un- 
非 1632
uncle 
叔 718
uncommon 
異 1797
undeﬁ led 
潔 1548
undertake 
企 375
undress 
脱 498
uneasiness 
虞 1995
unfold 
展 1925
United States 
 
242
universal 
普 1786
unlucky 
厄 1415
unravel 
解 1814
unusual 
変 1745
upbraid 
嚇 2026
upright 
貞 
55
upside down
 in a row 
 
366
urge 
迫 282
urine 
尿 1053
use 
使 990
usual 
常 799
utensil 
器 
121
utilize 
用 1181
utmost 
最 821
V
vague 
漠 230
valentine 
 
198
valley 
谷 788
value 
価 1603
valve 
弁 742
vapor 
汽 1886
various 
諸 1261
vase 
 
158
vast 
弘 1234
vat 
槽 1176
vegetable 
菜 734
vehicle 
 
120
vein 
脈 1856
venerable old man 翁 786
veriﬁ cation 
験 1980
vermilion 
朱 221
versify 
吟 1589
vertical 
縦 1338
vessels 
隻 699
vicarious 
摂 1739
vice- 
副 
89
victory 
勝 1209
vie 
競 434
villa 
荘 322
village 
町 
92
villain 
凶 1490
vine 
蔦 1945
vinegar 
酢 1434
violent 
激 497
v.i.p.  
賓 
511
virtuous 
善 1035
vis-à-vis 
対 1726
visit 
参 1720
voice 
声 1896
voiced 
濁 835
void 
虚 1993
volume 
積 1543
vow 
誓 1133
vulgar 
俗 968
vulture 
 
216
W
wagging tongue
 in a mouth 
 
19
wagon 
 
120
wait 
待 879
waiter 
侍 976
waitress 
 
320
walk 
歩 
371
walking legs 
 
121
walking stick 
 
27
wall 
 
219
wall 
壁 1500
wand, magic 
 
32
wandering 
浪 1470
war 
戦 1929
ward 
区 1696
ward oﬀ  
防 1302
warehouse 
庫 589
warm 
温 1452
warmth 
暖 1949
warrior 
武 377
warship 
艦 1875
wash 
洗 249
waste, laid 
荒 488
watch over 
看 638
watchtower 
楼 930
water 
水 130
water, hot 
湯 546
water lily 
 
321
waterfall 
滝 537
waver 
猶 1438
waves 
波 803
weak 
弱 1236
wealth 
 
49
wealth 
富 
193
weather 
 
156
weather vane 
 
35
weave 
織 1334
wee hours 
宵 189
week 
週 
318
weekday 
曜 576
welcome 
迎 1702
welfare 
祉 1091
well 
井 1806

460 | index iv: key words and primitive meanings
west 
西 1602
West, Old 
 
339
wet 
潤 1627
whale 
鯨 
315
what 
何 1012
wheat 
 
239
wheel 
輪 1822
wherefore 
由 1105
whirlpool 
渦 1292
whirlwind 
 
125
whiskey bottle 
 
313
white 
白 
37
white bird 
 
28
whole 
全 263
wholesale 
卸 1397
wicked 
邪 1906
wicker basket 
 
361
wide 
広 739
widow 
寡 617
wife 
妻 1889
wife, legitimate 
嫡 440
wild dogs, pack of 
 
101
willow 
柳 1421
wind 
 
35
wind 
風 524
winding 
繰 1369
window 
窓 749
wing 
翼 1798
wings 
 
194
wink 
瞬 817
winter 
冬 427
wisdom 
智 1224
wish 
念 1590
wisteria 
藤 1210
witch 
魔 2022
with child 
娠 2012
withdraw 
控 1318
wither 
枯 206
withstand 
堪 1770
woman 
女 
98
woman, beautiful 媛 1950
womb 
胎 748
wonder 
驚 1987
wood 
 
85
wooden leg 
 
254
wooden pole 
 
85
wool 
 
189
word 
語 347
words 
 
134
work 
働 1678
world 
界 
251
worship 
拝 1564
wound 
傷 996
wrap 
包 530
wretched 
惨 1721
write 
書 327
writing brush 
筆 943
Y
yarn 
 
308
yawn 
 
166
year 
年 1036
year-end 
歳 
512
yell 
喚 1042
yellow 
黄 1750
yesterday 
昨 1140
yield 
屈 1060
yonder 
向 
183
young 
若 223
younger brother 
弟 1240
younger sister 
妹 220
Z
Zen 
禅 1930
zero 
零 1402
zoo 
 
149

