HYLE – International Journal for Philosophy of Chemistry, Vol. 21 (2015), No. 1, 19-38. 
Copyright  2015 by HYLE and Guillermo Restrepo and Rom Harré. 
Mereology of Quantitative  
Structure-Activity Relationships Models 
Guillermo Restrepo and Rom Harré 
Abstract: In continuing with the research program initiated by Llored and 
Harré of exploring the part/whole (mereological) discourses of chemistry, we 
analyse Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships (QSAR) studies, which 
are widespread approaches for modeling substances’ properties. The study is 
carried out by analyzing a particular QSAR model, and it is found that differ-
ent mereologies are needed: from those regarding bulk substances as wholes 
and molecular entities as parts and to mereologies where the wholes are mole-
cules whose parts are atoms, structured subsets of atoms, nuclei and electronic 
densities. We suggest a relationship between successful QSAR models and a 
deep understanding of the mereologies used and the ways they are inter-
twined. We note that QSAR modelers prefer the mereology of substance-
molecule and then discuss how that is related to simplicity and computational 
capacity. Historical questions are opened, e.g. how the mereologies of sub-
stances have changed over time? and why they are mostly oriented toward or-
ganic chemistry? 
Keywords: mereology, Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships, substances, 
molecules, graphs. 
1. Introduction 
Mereology is the theory of part-whole relations, i.e. the relations of part to 
whole and the relations of part to part within a whole (Harré 2015). Exam-
ples of mereological relationships are: carbon is part of methane, stirring is 
part of a chemical reaction, alkanes are part of organic substances, molecules 
are part of substances, electrons of molecules, to name but a few. Mereologi-
cal discourses, as noted by Harré (2015), are at the core of chemistry and 
their study sheds light on the kind of reasoning that shapes the discipline. A 
major question for mereological studies concerns the distinction between 
predicates that can be ascribed both to a whole and to its parts, such as mass, 

20 
Guillermo Restrepo and Rom Harré 
and predicates which cannot, for example the color of a substance cannot be 
ascribed to its molecular constituents. 
 
Just recently philosophers of chemistry have started to pay attention to 
such discourses, where the results by Needham (2005), Earley (2005) and 
Harré & Llored (2011, 2013), Harré (2015), Llored (2014) and Llored & 
Harré (2014) are worth mentioning. 
2. Formal Rules for Mereological Reasoning 
A usual description (Varzi 2014) of mereology is by taking parthood as a 
primitive, which is based on the following statements: 
 
Everything is part of itself. 
 
Two distinct things cannot be part of each other. 
 
Any part of any part of a thing is itself part of that thing. 
Which are formalized as a binary relation meeting reflexivity, antisymmetry, 
and transitivity, i.e. a partially ordered set. In the current work we use a re-
laxed parthood relation that may fulfil some, or all, of the above conditions. 
If we say that x is part of y and we write it as xPy, then the mentioned condi-
tions are: 
 
xPx (reflexivity) 
 
xPy and yPx, then x=y (antisymmetry) 
 
xPy and yPz, then xPz (transitivity) 
Some other definitions of importance for the ensuing discussion are: 
 
x=y := xPy and yPx (equality) 
 
xPPy := xPy and ¬ x=y (proper parthood) 
 
xOy := ∃ z, zPx and zPy (overlap) 
 
xPPy, then ∃ z, zPPy and ¬ z=y (company) 
 
xPPy, then ∃ z, zPPy and ¬ zPx (strong company) 
 
xPPy, then ∃ z, zPy and ¬ zOx (supplementation) 
 
xPy and ¬ yPx, then ∃ z, zPy and ¬ zOx (strict supplementation) 
 
Ax := ¬ ∃ y, yPPx (atom) 
With this mereological background at hand, we now follow Llored & Harré 
(2014) suggestion that philosophers of science should be closer to the objects 
they study, which in fact they exemplified by analyzing the mereology of 
quantum chemistry studies by examining the actual procedures of quantum 
chemists. In the current paper, we analyze the mereological aspects of Quan-
titative Structure-Activity Relationships (QSAR) models, a widely used 

 
Mereology of Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships Models 
21 
method for estimating the properties of substances by combining, mainly, 
chemical and mathematical insights. 
3. Modeling in Chemistry 
Models are created by establishing a linkage for the transfer of predicates 
between a source, which the model makers draw on, and a subject, which the 
construction is a model of (Harré 2004). Some examples of models in chem-
istry are molecular formulas (Schummer 1998) and chemical reactions (Fial-
kowski et al. 2005). Some others are found in three special issues (5.2, 6.1 and 
6.2) of the journal Hyle devoted to the subject. In a molecular model the 
subject is a molecule and the source is a possible assembly of atoms along 
with their connectivities and sometimes with their spatial coordinates. One 
should note that these models are already mereological, consisting of parts 
assembled into wholes. Models of chemical reactions consider substances, 
whether or not they participate in chemical reactions, and sometimes concen-
trations as source; the subjects, at least initially, were chemical transfor-
mations occurring in natural processes. 
 
Other models in chemistry use functional thinking (Restrepo & Vil-
laveces 2012) and start by looking for the relevant variables characterizing the 
subject and by symbolizing them; in the final step variables are related to 
each other by functions. One of the most widespread cases of these models is 
the estimation of substances’ properties on the basis of descriptors, where 
the subject is a property P of some substances and the source is a set of de-
scriptors d. A descriptor is any experimental or theoretical feature character-
izing the substance; some examples are melting and boiling points, or alge-
braic calculations on graphs associated with the substance. Finally, the model 
takes the form P = f(d), f being a function. In modeling terms this modeling 
function maps the d predicates onto the space of possible predicates. That is 
it expresses a formal analogue representation. 
 
A widespread framework for estimating substances’ properties through 
descriptors is that of Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships (QSAR), 
where a property (response variable) of a set of substances is modeled by 
representing substances as molecules, which are further represented by de-
scriptors. These descriptors are worked out by different mathematical and 
statistical approaches to find a suitable function f for the relation P = f(d). In 
the following we explore the details of these models from a mereological 
perspective. 

22 
Guillermo Restrepo and Rom Harré 
4. Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships 
(QSAR) 
In a QSAR model1 the interest is on modeling a response variable, e.g. muta-
genicity or octanol/water partition coefficient, that is creating a formal ana-
logue of this variable. In general, every QSAR study involves the following 
steps (Todeschini & Consonni 2009): 
1. Selecting the response variable. 
2. Selecting substances to run the study. 
3. Characterizing of substances through the characterization of molecules. 
4. Splitting of the set of relevant molecules into training and test sets and 
the selection of molecules for external validation. 
5. Model development. 
6. Assessment of the model.2 
Based upon the characterization of models through their subject and source, 
Harré (2004) has classified them as homeomorphic and paramorphic. The 
former have the same type of predicates in both subject and source, e.g. the 
scale model of an air-plane which has wings, fuselage and so on analogously 
to the real air-plane; or a mathematical model of a property based on abstrac-
tions from other (experimental) properties. Paramorphic models have other 
types of predicates in the subject than in the source, by virtue of the model-
ing link, as for example in the models of the behavior of gases through the 
physics of a number of interacting, moving billiard balls, or mathematical 
models whose subject is an experimental property, say boiling point, and 
whose source is a set of theoretical descriptors.3 
 
Before continuing, we consider it important to discuss the mereological 
aspects of general approaches for modeling substances, which are a key point 
in QSAR studies. 
5. Mereological Aspects of Modeling Substances 
5.1 Mendeleevian mereology 
A part/whole chemical relationship that is at the core of chemistry is that of 
element/substance. Mendeleev made the point that substances that display or 
are ascribed properties (simple substances) are made of basic substances 
(transcendental elements, devoid of properties) and which are uniquely char-
acterized by a number – once the atomic weight, but currently the atomic 

 
Mereology of Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships Models 
23 
number. As Mendeleev stated, “[T]he atomic weight does not belong to coal 
or to the diamond but rather to carbon” (Mendeleev 1869). This entails a 
mereology where the simple substances are the whole and the basic substanc-
es (chemical elements) the parts. This is a mereology meeting reflexivity (an 
element is part of itself) and atom conditions (oxygen has no parts – it is not 
made of other elements) but lacking antisymmetry and transitivity, given the 
atomic character of the parts, which also lacks company and supplementa-
tion. Although this mereology is of great importance for chemistry, it is too 
general and needs further refinements to cope with contemporary chemistry, 
rooted in a structural chemistry tradition, where molecules play a central role. 
5.2 Substance-molecule mereology 
In this mereology, quite widespread in chemistry textbooks and contempo-
rary chemical discourses, substances (simple substances of Mendeleevean 
mereology) are the wholes and molecules the parts; but importantly, there is 
a one-to-one relationship between substances and molecules. This mereology 
is reflexive (a molecule is part of itself) and atomic (a molecule is not made of 
other molecules). It is neither antisymmetric nor transitive and lacks compa-
ny and supplementation given the atomic character of its parts. However, as 
Schummer (1998) has pointed out, it is easy to see how rough the one-to-one 
assumption between molecule and substance is with the case of water, where 
the substance has several molecular species associated with, e.g. H2O, H3O+, 
OH- and clusters (H2O)n with n taking different integers as values (Ludwig 
2001). This leads to a more refined mereology of molecules and substances. 
5.3 Substance-molecules mereology 
Here substances are the wholes and molecular species the parts, but in a rela-
tion one-to-many, as explained before for the case of water. To explore the 
properties of this mereology, let us take x, y and z as molecular species. As 
xPx, reflexivity is met; xPy and yPz leading to xPz indicates transitivity, which 
is the case of, e.g., H2OP(H2O)3 and (H2O)3P(H2O)12, with (H2O)3 and 
(H2O)12 being molecular clusters. This also shows that the parts of this mer-
eology are not atoms. In addition, if xPy and yPx, it is true that x=y; for 
overlapping is allowed, as seen in the case of H2O, (H2O)3 and (H2O)12. It 
also meets the demand of company, i.e. H2OPP(H2O)12, implying that there 
is, for example, a (H2O)3 such that (H2O)3PP(H2O)12 and (H2O)3 is not the 
same as (H2O)12. However, there is no supplementation, for (H2O)3 does 
overlap with H2O. 
 
Anyhow, most models in chemistry simplify this rich substance-
molecules mereology to the substance-molecule one, and QSAR models are 
no exception. 

24 
Guillermo Restrepo and Rom Harré 
 
The two latter mereologies and their strong reliance on molecules have led 
to the whole being replaced by the parts in chemical discourses. Such is the 
case of talking about the search of molecules with, e.g. antibreast cancer activ-
ity or of gaseous molecules. Perhaps authors really mean substances with 
antibreast cancer activity and molecules belonging to the gaseous phase of a 
substance, but we have observed that the confusion really exists at university 
chemistry courses and not surprisingly outside the university as well.4 This 
interchange of wholes by parts is what Harré & Llored (2013), following 
Hacker & Bennett (2003), have called a mereological fallacy, i.e. assigning 
predicates the meaning that is determined by their role in describing wholes 
to parts of those wholes or vice-versa. Some such assignments are legitimate 
but some are not. There does not seem to be a general criterion for making 
the distinction, and so far this problem has been solved case by case. 
 
The question arising is what kind of results and what kind of science 
would come about by using a different mereology, perhaps the substance-
molecules one. This would entail more computational capacity, for now a 
substance is modeled on the basis not of atomic parts but of overlapping 
ones, as in the case of water modeled by their different overlapping molecular 
species. Perhaps the time has come with the current computational capacity 
and the hope of improving it to a large extent. However, one needs to take 
care of Borges’ demon, i.e. developing models of the size of the modeled 
object, as Borges warns in his famous tale (Borges 2013). This latter risk is 
not taken with the substance-molecule mereology, but given its simplicity it 
loses more information than the substance-molecules one, for example lack-
ing interpretation of liquid properties of substances, e.g. water (Ludwig 
2001). 
6. Modus operandi and mereological aspects of QSAR modelling 
As the aim of the current paper is to explore QSAR modus operandi with 
mereological eyes, we analyze a recent paper (Luo et al. 2014) on the subject, 
which we think reflects and brings together several of the traditions of the 
QSAR community and which help us understand the mereologies implicit in 
developing the model. In the following we describe, step-by-step, the proce-
dure followed in such a study. 
 
1. The substance 5-hydroxytryptamine, commonly known as serotonin, is 
a neurotransmitter acting upon neurons involved in processes such as emo-
tions and memory. Serotonin receptors are cell membrane proteins that de-
tect substances outside the cell and activate cellular responses; the particular 
serotonin 1A receptor binds serotonin to it. As this receptor is found in brain 
regions with functions involved in mood and anxiety disorders, it has been 
studied as a target for antidepressant drug discovery (Roth et al. 2000, Luo et 

 
Mereology of Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships Models 
25 
al. 2014). In fact, several drugs like buspirone and tandospirone are agonists 
of this receptor (ibid.), i.e. these drugs bind to the receptor activating a bio-
logical response, which, depending on the drug, causes more or less efficacy 
of the receptor ‘tuning’ the biological response. 
 
Hence, 
knowing 
which 
substances 
have 
affinity 
by 
the 
5-
hydroxytryptamine 1A receptor is of interest for medicinal chemistry, as 
novel drugs for treating mood and anxiety disorders such as schizophrenia 
can be developed. The authors of the discussed paper look for QSAR models 
of 5-hydroxytryptamine 1A receptor binding activity, using data retrieved 
from the PDSP Ki database. 
 
The selection of the endpoint to model, in this case 5-hydroxytryptamine 
1A receptor binding, depends on the experience of the researchers on the 
subject and on the access to information for developing the model, normally 
a reliable and well managed/curated database, if possible. In this case the 
information came from the National Institute of Mental Health Psychoactive 
Drug Screening Program Ki database, which contains information on the 
receptor binding of several substances. Hence, the raw material for the study 
comes from an external repository, built up with knowledge from different 
sources and from different experimental approaches; that is the reason why 
the database needs to be refined. 
 
Here the whole is the binding between the receptor (R) and the molecules 
(ligands, L), i.e. R-L. This whole is understood as an assemble where L can be 
substituted by different molecules, then it is a mereology where one of the 
parts is constantly changing. This mereology meets reflexivity, for ligands 
and molecules are part of themselves; and it is atomic, with R and L as atoms. 
But it is not antisymmetric and transitive, for overlapping between R and L is 
not allowed, which also excludes company and supplementation. 
 
2. With the source of information at hand, the next step is to decide 
which substances to retain for further modeling.5 In the current case that is to 
look for a criterion to decide when a molecule is either active or inactive re-
garding its binding to the receptor, which is customarily done through disso-
ciation constant arguments. 
 
If the binding is understood as the relation R + L ↔ RL, the dissociation 
constant is given by Ki = [R][L]/[RL], with [x] indicating the molar concen-
tration of x. Hence, the smaller the dissociation constant, the stronger the 
binding R-L. 
 
The cut-off value to define active versus inactive molecules was set to 10 
µM, a decision that depends on the experience of the researchers, which in-
cludes, e.g. knowledge of the property to model and number of molecules to 
treat, which is also related to computational capacity. In former QSAR stud-
ies, less than one hundred molecules sufficed for the model, but now, with 

26 
Guillermo Restrepo and Rom Harré 
more computational power and more information, it is a common practice to 
work with hundreds and thousands of compounds. 
 
The cut-off value is also chosen taking into account the number of mole-
cules selected for the study (actives), which implies dropping some others. 
Hence, there is no general principle or criterion to select the substances for 
the model and the decision on which substances to include depends on the 
context of the study and on the resources to carry it out. 
 
The above procedure led to 180 active receptor compounds, to which 78 
inactives were added for statistical purposes. Here the authors decide on the 
number of inactive compounds to use, a decision that depends on the number 
of active compounds that have been selected. The idea is to have instances of 
inactive compounds to be able to develop a model that differentiates between 
active and inactive compounds regarding the receptor. 
 
As seen, the mereology is a substance-molecule one, which is context 
dependent, for both the whole and the parts are negotiated. 
 
3. It is important to consider also external data and compare the results 
for validation purpose, 66 additional actives were extracted from the World 
of Molecular Bioactivity (WOMBAT) database, which is different to the one 
of the source data. 
 
In former QSAR studies this step was omitted. Tropsha, one of the au-
thors of the analyzed paper, has repeatedly shown that lacking this step may 
lead to weak models, in statistical terms (Tang et al. 2009, Shen et al. 2004). 
However, even with Tropsha’s warnings, there are studies that did not con-
sider external validation. In short, this step depends on the experience of the 
researchers and on their ability to negotiate their results with the community. 
 
The number of external compounds is normally decided taking into ac-
count the number of compounds used in the model, and the selection of the 
alternative source of information is given by the knowledge of the researchers 
of other databases. Hence, social aspects of science turn out to be important, 
for database developers need to let researchers know about their resources 
such as researchers need to communicate their needs of information. Scien-
tific meetings, sometimes sponsored by database developers, scientific publi-
cations, and informal scientific communication are examples of these forms 
of communication (Björk 2007). 
 
The authors mention that all 66 WOMBAT compounds were structurally 
different from the compounds of the modeling set. That is important, for in 
current QSAR studies the trend is to have a diverse set of molecular struc-
tures to develop general models rather than one based on a particular family 
of closely related molecular structures (Basak 2014), which was a typical 
feature of early QSAR models. 
 
However the question is how the authors determined structural differ-
ences. As they did not mention that, it is likely that personal experience was 

 
Mereology of Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships Models 
27 
used. Even if they would have mentioned it, it would have been a decision of 
the researcher. Developing methods for assessing molecular similarity and 
molecular diversity is an own subfield of chemoinformatics (Leach & Gillet 
2007). Hence, the subject of molecular diversity involves much know-how 
and many pragmatic compromises. 
 
4. Even with a refined database as source of information, the selected 
molecules were ‘curated’, as it has been found that even the most reliable 
databases contain errors (Fourches et al. 2010). Small structural errors within 
a data set may lead to significant loss of the predictability of QSAR models. 
The process of refinement started by removing inorganic or organometallic 
compounds, because most of the molecular descriptors can only be computed 
for organic molecules. This reflects the kind of problems QSAR researchers 
and descriptor developers want to address, i.e. those of organic chemistry. An 
open question is on the lack of interest for inorganic and organometallic 
chemistry. Perhaps part of the reason is that, today, QSAR practitioners are 
closer related to the organic chemical industry than to other fields. 
 
In mereological terms this organic bias implies that the parts of the mere-
ology are also biased, not homogeneously covering the space of compounds, 
but a reduced region, which is oriented to a big extent by the exploration 
made by the pharmaceutical industry. In addition, the bias has a pragmatic 
reason related to the mereology in which it is framed. A mereology of sub-
stance-molecule entails the definition of a molecule, which is understood as a 
connected finite set of atoms. As descriptors calculation requires computa-
tion, the number of atoms is always a constraint, which makes it easier to 
compute small assemblies, typical organic molecules, rather than lattices, 
typical of inorganic chemistry. On the other hand the connections among 
atoms also need to be defined, which are set up through ideas of chemical 
bonding. Traditionally, perhaps determined by the number of atoms, these 
connections have been understood as covalent bonds, disregarding other 
sorts of bonding, which also helps to disregard non-organic compounds. 
 
The authors excluded inorganic substances by using an algorithm for 
detecting none-main group elements. Mixtures were also algorithmically 
removed because descriptors were calculated for single molecules, whereas 
the current chemoinformatics used for encoding molecules, i.e. SMILES (a 
text string), can also encode more than one molecule in a single representa-
tion. The SMILES data were then converted into 2D molecular graphs 
(where atoms are vertices and bonds are edges), as it has been found that 
calculation of descriptors from SMILES sometimes introduces errors (Luo et 
al. 2014). The graphs were normalized to attain a unique representation of 
same functional groups, which can also be made by home-made algorithms 
and commercial software. The authors, however, recommend manual work-

28 
Guillermo Restrepo and Rom Harré 
ing over of the original list, for there are reports of errors made by those 
algorithms. 
 
At this point a further mereological refinement is made, for a molecule 
(now the whole) is made of several parts (graphs for the molecule6). This is 
the case, e.g., of the tautomeric possibilities of a molecule where each tauto-
mer may lead to different descriptors. This mereology is reflexive, given that 
if Gi, Gj and Gk are three graphs for the same molecule, it is found that 
GiPGi, which in graph theory is called a graph isomorphism,7 i.e. GiPGi be-
cause Gi is isomorphic with Gi, which is called an automorphism. The mere-
ology is antisymmetric and transitive, given that if GiPGj and GjPGi, then 
Gi=Gj; and if GiPGj and GjPGk, then GiPGk, as subgraphs,8 e.g. backbones of 
tautomers, are common to graphs representing the molecule. The company 
requirement is also met, as GiPPGj implies the existence of Gk such that 
GkPPGj and it does not hold that Gk=Gj. Strong company, supplementation, 
and atoms are not part of this mereology, for there are common parts (over-
lapping) of graphs through common subgraphs. 
 
What is sought in QSAR studies is to attain a similar substance-molecule 
mereology, where a unique graph (with its embedded subgraphs) is associat-
ed to a SMILES. The question arising is how to select such a unique graph. 
What is done is that the selection is driven by chemical experience and 
knowledge of the context of study, e.g. pH conditions of the modeled situa-
tion, in this case R-L interaction (Young et al. 2008). 
 
Another step in the refinement and culling of the original list is the re-
moval of duplicate structures, which can be done by using canonical SMILES 
and then by algorithmically comparing the strings. But this brings the ques-
tion of which duplicate to keep, which implies, so far, a manual analysis of 
the properties of each duplicate to gather the information of all duplicates in 
a single molecule. Finally, the authors recommend a manual checking of the 
information. In the paper the structures retained after refinement of the list 
were 166 unique organic compounds (105 active and 61 inactive). 
 
As seen refinement and culling is a process involving both automatic and 
manual procedures, which require several decisions, pragmatic compromises 
and further mereological refinements that mix mereologies of chemistry and 
mathematics. 
 
5. The next step was the selection of training, test, and external validation 
sets, which was performed employing the external 5-fold cross-validation 
protocol, where the modeling set is randomly split into five subsets of ap-
proximately equal size. Each time, one subset is used as an external validation 
set, while the union of the other four subsets is used as the modeling set. The 
different modeling sets were further partitioned into multiple pairs of repre-
sentative training and test sets of different sizes using the Sphere Exclusion 
algorithm developed by the authors. 

 
Mereology of Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships Models 
29 
 
As noted, the authors used particular methods to achieve their goals, but 
there are other methods, also derived from statistics, that are currently used 
in QSAR studies (Leach & Gillet 2007). All of them look for an unbiased 
way of grouping chemical substances. Hence, it is a decision of the authors 
which method to select. 
 
6. The molecular descriptors for the curated molecules were calculated 
using Dragon (Tetko et al. 2005), a package of several commercially or freely 
available programs (Gugisch et al. 2014). There are more than one thousand 
molecular descriptors, i.e. more than thousand ways of numerically encoding 
particular features of the molecular graph (Todeschini & Consonni 2009). 
They range from constitutional ones, which count or assess the presence of 
particular functional groups or atoms or rings, to more elaborated de-
scriptors, such as quantum chemical ones that depend on the level of theory 
used to compute them. There are also topological descriptors that mainly 
consider the connectivity of atoms in molecules. In the end, the decision 
which software is used to calculate descriptors depends on the number of 
descriptors available in the software, the computational cost of their calcula-
tion, whether the software is commercial or freeware, and on several other 
aspects that are part of the researchers’ experience. 
 
This step involves a further mereological change. Now the whole is the 
molecular graph, made by vertices (labeled atoms) and edges (bonds), with 
edges defined as couples of atoms that are connected. This mereology meets 
reflexivity, for a vertex is part of itself; but it does not display antisymmetry, 
because if i, j and k are vertices and {i,j}, {j,k} and {i,k} are edges, then 
iP{i,j} holds but {i,j}Pi does not; likewise transitivity is not met. It entails 
company, for if iPP{i,j}, it implies the existence of a j such that jPP{i,j} and 
¬ i=j.9 It also holds strong company as iPP{i,j} implies the existence of a j 
such that jPP{i,j} and ¬jPi. It meets supplementation: iPP{i,j} implies the 
existence of a j such that jP{i,j} and ¬jOi, i.e. there is no vertex k for which 
kPi and iPj. For a similar argument based on the absence of overlapping, the 
mereology is also strictly supplemented. Finally, it is a mereology without 
atoms because vertices are part of edges. 
 
A further refinement of the above graph mereology, of importance for 
molecular graphs, is a mereology of subgraphs (see note 8) as parts of graphs, 
which is different from the already discussed mereology of molecule repre-
sentations as made of graphs. If G is the graph and Si, Sj and Sk are three of its 
subgraphs, the mereology fulfils reflexivity (SiPSi), antisymmetry (SiPSj and 
SjPSi implies Si=Sj) and transitivity (if SiPSj and SjPSk, then SiPSk). It also 
meets company (if SiPPSj, then there is a Sk such that SkPPSj and ¬Sk=Sj), 
supplementation (if SiPPSj, then there is a Sk such that SkPPSj and ¬SkOSi) 
and strict supplementation (if SiPPSj, then there is a Sk such that SkPSj and 

30 
Guillermo Restrepo and Rom Harré 
¬SkOSi). There are no atoms in this mereology, given the overlapping among 
subgraphs. 
 
Descriptors from molecular graphs are derived by mapping any of the 
graph mereologies onto real numbers. Once the descriptors are calculated, a 
decision is made on which ones to retain and which ones to drop. In some 
models, when the molecular features ruling a substance’s property are rough-
ly known, the descriptors are directly selected by the researcher, e.g. the 
number of rings and electronic properties in hepatotoxicity studies. In the 
paper, descriptors with zero values or zero variance were excluded and the 
retained ones were normalized. The way of selecting descriptors is also a 
matter of taste, here variance was used as the criterion, but other statistical 
measures may also be used, e.g. information content (Todeschini & Consonni 
2009). In general, variable selection methods are used to select a subset of 
relevant descriptors for the studied property. The step of normalization is 
also a decision, because one may decide to run the study with raw de-
scriptors, and even if one decides to avoid the different scales amongst de-
scriptors, the question is whether to normalize or standardize and how to do 
it. In this procedure chemistry, computer science, and statistics are interact-
ing; knowledge on data distributions and statistics to deal with them in a nice 
computationally smooth procedure, as well as time and cost are the most 
important factors. In fact, it is so important that it is customary to mention 
the specifications of the computers used in the study as well as the time for 
running the process, the algorithmic complexity is sometimes also men-
tioned. In the analyzed paper, computer features and computing times were 
published. 
 
7. In the next step QSAR models are developed. There are different kinds 
of mathematical approaches to finding f in the sought for P = f(d) relation 
(Todeschini & Consonni 2009). The authors used k Nearest Neighbours, 
Random Forest and Support Vector Machines as mathematical approaches. 
Once a model is generated it is important to assess whether the model is 
stable, i.e. if it yields similar results by perturbing it, for example by adding 
noise to the descriptor values or by introducing random values in place of 
them. The stability of the models was assessed through a Y-randomization 
test. 
 
The choice of the method to analyze the validity of the models is based 
on the experience of the researcher, including statistical knowledge, and fur-
ther decisions to be made while applying the validation method. Regarding 
the kinds of models to use, even if the authors used three, there are by far 
more possibilities (Todeschini & Consonni 2009), some simpler in mathe-
matical terms and some more elaborated. The point here is that the research-
er decides which model to use, which is basically rooted in experience. A 
decision that has to be made is if the QSAR model is intended to give insight 

 
Mereology of Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships Models 
31 
into the relationship between molecular structure and activity or if the model 
is used only as a tool to estimate the endpoint. In the current case, and in 
many contemporary QSAR studies, the aim is estimation. In former QSAR 
studies there was more interest in interpreting models on chemical and phys-
ical grounds, an approach that has been gradually abandoned given the diffi-
culty in interpreting mathematical combinations of descriptors (models) and 
even in the interpretation of descriptors. Currently, such interpretations are 
considered a plus of the models (see guidance document of the OECD 2007 
for QSAR). It is worth noting that QSAR approaches relate structure to 
activity whereas the reverse relation is very difficult to establish by these 
methods. 
 
8. The models with satisfactory results in the internal and external valida-
tion step were then used for virtual screening, which consists of exploring 
(screening) large databases of chemicals (libraries) that include information 
about one or several relevant properties. In this case the databases consisted 
of substances with potential 5-hydroxytryptamine 1A receptor binding activ-
ity. Hence, once the databases are selected, the QSAR models are run over 
the substances of the databases to estimate their 5-hydroxytryptamine 1A 
receptor binding activity and finally come up with candidate substances for 
experimental testing. 
 
However, QSAR models are not of general applicability, e.g. models de-
veloped for alkanes are not suitable for heterocyclic compounds. Before ap-
plying a QSAR model to an external set of substances, it is important to 
determine whether it is able to yield reliable results for the external substanc-
es. Those substances for which the model is able to yield reliable results are 
part of the applicability domain of the model. Applicability domains are root-
ed in the similarity between the substances used to develop the model and 
other substances, where, once more, the different ways of assessing molecular 
similarity come into play. 
 
In the discussed paper the authors used three sorts of libraries to run the 
screening. The selection of these libraries depended on previous knowledge 
of the authors and on the access they had to them, because sometimes they 
belong to pharmaceutical companies that provide access only on the basis of a 
contract or a common research project. In these cases the researcher must 
negotiate the access to the information and needs close contact to industry. 
The applicability domain of the models was calculated using a fingerprint 
based similarity approach, which characterizes molecules as a string (finger-
print) over which a distance function is run to measure the nearness of two 
structures. 
 
The similarity characterization of molecules implies an important deci-
sion; the authors selected fingerprints, but there are many other ways of 
doing it (Leach & Gillet 2007), e.g. by using the same molecular descriptors. 

32 
Guillermo Restrepo and Rom Harré 
Even if fingerprints were the single form of characterization, the question is 
what kind of dictionary is needed to build up the fingerprint. These diction-
aries are collections of molecular fragments that are searched in the molecule 
to build up the fingerprint, which in its simple version is a binary vector of 
presence/absence of information (Leach & Gillet 2007). But there are many 
dictionaries,10 and the selection of the appropriate one depends on the mole-
cules one is dealing with, and even on the access to the dictionary, for some 
of them are owned by companies. Now, supposing that the issue of the rep-
resentation is solved, the next decision is on the distance function used to 
determine the nearness of the molecules. There are many of these functions 
and it is a decision of the researcher which one to choose, on the basis of the 
derived knowledge on the performance of those functions over particular 
types of data or for a particular kind of structures and several other factors 
(Todeschini & Consonni 2009, Todeschini et al. 2012, 2015). 
 
Applicability domains are based on geometrical descriptions of the space 
of descriptors and on some other mathematical ideas, which in the end re-
duce subjectivities but do not make them vanish. In this particular case, the 
applicability domain was based on an Euclidean distance similarity threshold, 
but there are other methods to define it (Ellison et al. 2011). 
 
In essence, all QSAR approaches imply, directly or indirectly, a simple 
similarity principle: compounds with similar structures are expected to have 
similar biological activities. A fundamental concept, derived from this princi-
ple, is the one of pharmacophore (Van Drie 2007), which is an abstraction of 
what is structurally needed for a molecule of a drug to cause a pharmacologi-
cal effect (Wermuth et al. 1998). In mereological terms, the whole is the mol-
ecule and the part is the pharmacophore. When claiming that the molecule 
(whole) has a biological property and that a fragment (part) is responsible for 
that property, what is in play is a mereological discourse. 
 
9. The final part of the study involved the experimental testing of the 
binding of the selected molecules from the libraries with the 5-
hydroxytryptamine 1A receptor. 
 
The authors finally suggest 15 substances from the three screened data-
bases, which were experimentally tested on binding assays, obtaining nine 
actually active substances with binding affinity lower than 10 µM. 
 
Here the binding tests involve also decisions on the kind of techniques 
used to run the competing binding assays. Beyond that, this step includes a 
novel communication, this time between QSAR modelers and experimental-
ists, in this particular case chemists and biochemists. 

 
Mereology of Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships Models 
33 
Conclusions 
QSAR models of the properties of substances, exemplified by the case here 
studied, need different mereologies, for the wholes and their parts do not 
always agree. The whole, in principle, is a bulk substance, with experimental 
(wet-lab) measured properties. But this whole depends on the context, e.g. 
chemical, when the modeled property is a relational one amongst substances, 
as is the case of solubility in certain liquids; thermodynamic context, when 
the modeled property is boiling point, for example; biological context, when 
the property is a relational property between the substance and an organism, 
as the LD50 (Schummer 1998). 
 
As a first approximation, the parts of the whole are single molecules asso-
ciated to the bulk substance, in this case the whole is regarded as made of 
many equivalent parts. When this approximation does not enable the deriva-
tion of reliable models, a second level for the whole involves the further 
study of the associated molecular entities of the bulk substance, e.g. tauto-
meric forms or clusters. The selection of the molecule (the parts) to repre-
sent the whole is now based on a deep knowledge of the property to be mod-
eled and on the bulk substances, e.g. pH, temperatures, cellular external con-
ditions of the substances or even physical parameters associated to molecules 
such as volume in studies of interactions between molecules and pockets or 
particular regions on a protein. 
 
Once the whole and the parts have been set up, the parts now become the 
new wholes and are studied following another mereological approach, namely 
the one of the molecular descriptors. Here a wealth of descriptors is at hand 
which consider the whole as constituted by atoms (parts), structured subset 
of atoms in the form of functional groups or ring systems, assemblies of 
nuclei and electronic density in quantum chemistry mereologies, where also 
molecular orbitals constitute parts of the whole in a sense. There are also 
mathematical mereologies where the molecules are regarded as composed of 
atoms (vertices) and pairs of atoms (edges), which both constitute a graph, in 
this case the whole is the molecular graph and the parts are the sets of atoms 
and atom pairs. 
 
Different mereologies show up to treat a single target, i.e. modeling sub-
stances’ properties, and how they meet different properties. Some of them 
are simple, e.g. substance-molecule mereology, which meets reflexivity and 
atom conditions as well as Mendeleevean mereology. Other mereologies are 
richer in their properties as the molecular graph-labeled atoms and bonds 
mereology that has reflexivity, company, strong company, supplementation 
and strict supplementation. These results show the complexity and richness 
of chemical discourses and how chemists move across different mereologies. 

34 
Guillermo Restrepo and Rom Harré 
 
We also pointed out the different decisions researchers make when mod-
eling substances’ properties through QSAR methods, which are instances of 
the social and pragmatic aspects of chemistry. 
 
There are a wealth of QSAR models for different properties, for different 
substances, with different approaches and many other variations, which in the 
end are tested by exploring their ability to estimate properties or to bring 
new knowledge and understanding of the processes modeled. Perhaps, part of 
the key for satisfactory models lays on the clear definition of the used mereo-
logies, their limits, and the ways of intertwining them. 
 
There is a reduction/emergence debate in philosophy of chemistry 
(Hettema 2013). The current paper contributes to the debate by showing 
how the reduction of substances, even to mathematical concepts, is currently 
used to come up with insight on the behavior of substances, in this case re-
ceptor-ligand interactions, which are experimentally quantified by measuring 
concentrations of bulk substances. 
 
From the same perspective of the reduction/emergence debate it is worth 
noting that QSAR modelers prefer a mereology of substance-molecule rather 
than the finer one of substance-molecules, a trend resulting from an offset 
between computational capacity and simplicity. It would be interesting to 
explore how alterations of these two factors favor the use of the substance-
molecules mereology and how chemical discourses change thereby. 
 
By discussing mereological discourses used in chemistry, a question aris-
ing is on how those mereologies have changed throughout the history of 
chemistry and which factors have influenced them. 
 
We have pointed out the sociological aspects behind QSAR models; in 
this respect a question to be solved by the history and sociology of chemistry 
is why and how QSAR models began to focus on organic chemistry. Which 
conditions would have been needed to develop QSAR models for inorganic 
chemistry? 
 
Initial QSAR modelers looked for mechanistic interpretations of models. 
However, since contemporary chemistry is oriented to structural chemistry, 
why have those mechanistic interpretations been practically abandoned? 
 
Besides QSAR models, there are many other chemical discourses worth 
studying through mereology, which may help understand the kind of reason-
ing involved in chemistry. We hope the current work motivates other similar 
studies. 

 
Mereology of Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships Models 
35 
Acknowledgements 
Guillermo Restrepo thanks the Universidad de Pamplona and the Alexander 
von Humboldt Foundation/Stiftung for supporting this research. 
Notes 
1 
More general models, of which QSAR models are part, are Quantitative Structure 
Property-Relationships, which are open to any substance’s property and not only 
restricted to biological activities. 
2 
These steps may be combined with others, e.g. virtual screening of databases to 
select substances for biological tests. 
3 
QSAR models are more oriented toward paramorphic ones, for they are less ex-
pensive and even more environmentally friendly. 
4 
In a rapid search on the Internet, we found that ‘antibreast cancer molecules’ has 
several entries, many of them in scientific journals. See for instance the abstract of 
Oliveros-Ferraros et al. (2011) or Zaki et al. (2012). It is also found that ‘gaseous 
molecules’ is a section of the scientific journal Chemical Physics Letters. 
5 
The QSAR case aims at classifying substances (active/inactive) and the criterion 
for such classification is the cut-off value. However, for QSAR models where the 
aim is estimating the value of a property, where no classification is necessarily re-
quired, no cut-off value or any other threshold is needed. 
6 
In QSAR studies, if the descriptors are calculated from molecular graphs or di-
rectly from SMILES, there are some descriptors that require to convert the graph 
into a 3-dimensional assembly, i.e. the traditional stick-and-ball depiction of mol-
ecules, were geometry is important. This entails further decisions, now on the way 
to convert the graph into the geometrical assembly, e.g. the selection of the force 
field to apply. 
7 
If G and H are two graphs, they are isomorphic if there is a bijection between the 
vertex set of G and the one of H, such that any two vertices of G are adjacent 
(there is an edge for them) in G if and only if the bijection keeps the adjacency on 
the image of the vertices’ bijection. 
8 
A graph S is a subgraph of graph G if vertices of S are a subset of the vertices of G 
and if edges of S are a subset of the edges of G. 
9 
However, company is not attained by graphs with loops, i.e. having {i,i}, which 
are not used for molecular graphs, as discussed here. 
10 It is also important to know the kinds of molecules to characterize, for the dic-
tionaries may be created for particular subsets of molecules. 

36 
Guillermo Restrepo and Rom Harré 
References 
Basak, S.C.: 2014, ‘Molecular similarity and hazard assessment of chemicals: a com-
parative study arbitrary and tailored similarity spaces’, Journal of Engineering, 
Science & Management Education, 7, 178-184. 
Björk, B.C.: 2007, ‘A model of scientific communication as a global distributed in-
formation system’, Information Research, 12(2) paper 307 [Available at 
http://InformationR.net/ir/12-2/paper307.html, accessed 10 May 2015]. 
Borges, J.L.: 2013, ‘Del rigor en la ciencia’, in: El hacedor, Vintage, New York, p. 137. 
Earley, J.E: 2005, ‘Why there is no salt in the sea’, Foundations of Chemistry, 7, 85-
102. 
Ellison, C.M.; Sherhod, R.; Cronin, M.T.; Enoch, S.J.; Madden, J.C. & Judson, P.N.: 
2011, ‘Assessment of methods to define the applicability domain of structural 
alert models’, Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 51, 975-985. 
Fialkowski, M.; Bishop, K.J.M.; Chubukov, V.A.; Campbell, C.J. & Grzybowski, 
B.A.: 2005, ‘Architecture and evolution of organic chemistry’, Angewandte 
Chemie International Edition, 44, 7263-7269. 
Fourches, D.; Muratov, E. & Tropsha, A.: 2010, ‘Trust, but verify: on the importance 
of chemical structure curation in cheminformatics and QSAR modeling re-
search’, Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 50, 1189-1204. 
Gugisch, R.; Kerber, A.; Kohnert, A.; Laue, R.; Meringer, M.; Rücker, C. & Wasser-
mann, A.: 2014, ‘Molgen 5.0, a molecular structure generator’, in: S.C. Basak, 
G. Restrepo & J.L. Villaveces (eds.), Advances in mathematical chemistry and 
applications (Volume 1), Sharjah: Bentham, pp. 113-138. 
Guidance Document on the validation of (Quantitative)structure-activity relation-
ships [(Q)SAR] models. OECD environment health and safety publications, 
30 Mar 2007 [http://www.oecd.org/officialdocuments/publicdisplaydocu 
mentpdf/?doclanguage=en&cote=env/jm/mono%282007%292, accessed 20 
May 2015]. 
Hacker, P.M.S. & Bennett, M.R.: 2003, Philosophical foundations of neuroscience, 
Blackwell, Oxford. 
Harré, R. Modeling: gateway to the unknown, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2004. 
Harré, R. & Llored, J.-P.: 2011, ‘Mereologies as the grammars of chemical discourses’, 
Foundations of Chemistry, 13, 63-76. 
Harré, R. & Llored, J.-P.: 2013, ‘Molecules and mereology’, Foundations of Chemistry, 
15, 127-144. 
Harré, R.: 2015, ‘Mereological principles and chemical affordances’, in: E. Scerri & L. 
McIntyre (eds.), Philosophy of chemistry: Growth of a new discipline, Dor-
drecht: Springer, pp. 107-119. 
Hettema, H.: 2013, ‘Austere quantum mechanics as a reductive basis for chemistry’ 
Foundations of Chemistry, 15, 311-326. 
Leach, A.R. & Gillet, V.J.: 2007, An introduction to chemoinformatics, Dordrecht: 
Springer, chap. 5, pp. 99-118. 
Llored, J.-P.: 2014, ‘Whole-parts strategies in quantum chemistry: some philosophical 
and mereological lessons’, Hyle: International Journal for Philosophy of Chem-
istry, 20, 141-163. 
Llored, J.-P. & Harré, R.: 2014, ‘Developing the mereology of chemistry’, in: C. 
Calosi & P. Graziani (eds.), Mereology and the sciences, Dordrecht: Springer, 
pp. 189-212. 
Ludwig, R.: 2001, ‘Water: from clusters to the bulk’, Angewandte Chemie Internation-
al Edition, 40, 1808-1827. 

 
Mereology of Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships Models 
37 
Luo, M.; Wang, X.S.; Roth, B.L.; Golbraikh, A. & Tropsha, A.: 2014, ‘Application of 
quantitative structure–activity relationship models of 5-HT1A receptor bind-
ing to virtual screening identifies novel and potent 5-HT1A ligands’, Journal 
of Chemical Information and Modeling, 54, 634-647. 
Mendeleev, D.: 1869, ‘On the correlation between the properties of the elements and 
their atomic weights’, Zhurnal Russkoe Fiziko-Khimicheskoe Obshchestvo, 1, 
60-77 (paper two in Jensen, W.B.: 2005, Mendeleev on the periodic law, selected 
writings, 1869-1905). 
Needham, P.: 2005, ‘Mixtures and modality’, Foundations of Chemistry, 7, 103-118. 
Oliveras-Ferraros, C.; Fernández-Arroyo, S.; Vazquez-Martin, A.; Lozano-Sánchez, 
J.; Cufí, S.; Joven, J.; Micol, V.; Fernández-Gutiérrez, A.; Segura-Carretero, A. 
& Menendez, J.A.: 2011, ‘Crude phenolic extracts from extra virgin olive oil 
circumvent de novo breast cancer resistance to HER1/HER2-targeting drugs 
by inducing GADD45-sensed cellular stress, G2/M arrest and hyperacetyla-
tion of Histone H3’, International Journal of Oncology, 38, 1533-1547. 
Restrepo, G. & Villaveces, J.L.: 2012, ‘Mathematical thinking in chemistry’, Hyle: 
International Journal for Philosophy of Chemistry, 18, 3-22. 
Roth, B.L.; Lopez, E.; Patel, S. & Kroeze, W.K.: 2000, ‘The multiplicity of serotonin 
receptors: uselessly diverse molecules or an embarrassment of riches?’ The 
Neuroscientist, 6, 252-262. 
Shen, M.; Béguin, C.; Golbraikh, A.; Stables, J.P.; Kohn, H. & Tropsha, A.: 2004, 
‘Application of predictive QSAR models to database mining: identification 
and experimental validation of novel anticonvulsant compounds’, Journal of 
Medicinal Chemistry, 47, 2356-2364. 
Schummer, J.: 1998, ‘The chemical core of chemistry, I: a conceptual approach’, Hyle: 
International Journal for Philosophy of Chemistry, 4, 129-162. 
Tang, H.; Wang, X.S.; Huang, X.-P.; Roth, B.L.; Butler, K.V.; Kozikowski, A.P.; 
Jung, M. & Tropsha, A.: 2009, ‘Novel inhibitors of human histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) identified by QSAR modeling of known inhibitors, virtual screen-
ing, and experimental validation’, Journal of Chemical Information and Model-
ing, 49, 461-476. 
Tetko, I.V.; Gasteiger, J.; Todeschini, R.; Mauri, A.; Livingstone, D.; Ertl, P.; Pal-
yulin, V.A.; Radchenko, E.V.; Zefirov, N.S.; Makarenko, A.S.; Tanchuk, V.Y. 
& Prokopenko, V.V.: 2005, ‘Virtual computational chemistry laboratory de-
sign and description’, Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design, 19, 453-
463. 
Todeschini, R. & Consonni, V.: 2009, Molecular descriptors for chemoinformatics, 
Weinheim: Wiley-VCH. 
Todeschini, R.; Ballabio, D. & Consonni, V.: 2015, ‘Distances and other dissimilarity 
measures in chemometrics’, in: R.A. Meyers (ed.), Encyclopedia of Analitycal 
Chemistry, New York: Wiley, pp. 60. 
Todeschini, R.; Consonni, V.; Xiang, H.; Holliday, J.; Buscema, M. & Willett, P.: 
2012, ‘Similarity coefficients for binary chemoinformatics data: overview and 
extended comparison using simulated and real datasets’, Journal of Chemical 
Information and Modeling, 52, 2884-2901. 
Varzi, A. 2014, ‘Mereology’, in: The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
[http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/mereology/, accessed 20 
March 2014]. 
Wermuth, C.G.; Ganellin, C.R.; Lindberg, P. & Mitscher, L.A.: 1998, ‘Glossary of 
terms used in medicinal chemistry (IUPAC Recommendations 1998)’, Pure 
and Applied Chemistry, 70, 1129-1143. 

38 
Guillermo Restrepo and Rom Harré 
Young, D.; Martin, T.; Venkatapathy, R. & Harten, P.: 2008, ‘Are the chemical struc-
tures in your QSAR correct?’ QSAR & Combinatorial Science, 27, 1337–1345. 
Zaki, R.M.; Elossaily, Y.A. & El-Dean, A.M.: 2012, ‘Synthesis and antimicrobial activ-
ity of novel benzo[f]coumarin compounds’, Russian Journal of Bioorganic 
Chemistry, 38, 639-646. 
Guillermo Restrepo: 
Bioinformatics Group, Department of Computer Science, Universität 
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany;  
and Laboratorio de Química Teórica, Universidad de Pamplona,  
Pamplona, Colombia; guillermorestrepo@gmail.com & 
grestrepo@unipamplona.edu.co 
Rom Harré:  
Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA; harre@georgetown.edu 

