Rethinking Wholes and Parts:
Reflections on Reduction, Holism, 
and Mereology
Mark F. Sharlow

Rethinking Wholes and Parts: Reflections on Reduction, Holism, 
and Mereology
© 2011 Mark F. Sharlow
The excerpts in this document are from the  ebook version of the 
author’s book  God, Son of Quark (© 2008 Mark F. Sharlow).  A 
preliminary print edition of the book was released in 2006.  

About This Ebook
This ebook is a set of excerpts from one of my early 
books.   In  these  excerpts  I  discuss  the  relationship 
between  whole  objects  and  their  parts,  with  special 
attention to the type of reductionism that claims objects 
are “nothing but” their parts.
There are two page numbers at the bottoms of most pages. 
The upper number is the page number in the original 
book; the lower number is the page number in the present 
document.
  
Comments added after the publication of the original book 
are in blue and in a different font.
- MFS, 2011


God, Son of Quark
Much of the work I will do in this book consists of 
developing, and supporting with evidence, some new ideas 
about wholes and parts.  These ideas differ from the ones 
that we usually use when thinking about objects and their 
parts. The new conception of whole and part that I will 
present requires us to think about material objects in a way 
that is slightly unfamiliar.  This does not mean that I will 
propose any new scientific theories about the nature of 
matter.  Everything I say will be compatible with existing 
scientific theories and facts, and with any reasonable new 
theories that may someday replace the existing ones.  What 
I am going to propose is not a theory of matter or of 
ultimate particles, but a new view of the logic of the whole-
part relationship.  This view will not be a sweeping theory 
about what material objects “really are.”  Instead, it will be 
an  attempt  to  overthrow  certain  long-standing  ways  of 
thinking about wholes and parts, and to replace those ways 
with new concepts that may lead to less confusion. 
The new view I am proposing may seem unfamiliar.  It 
does not always agree with our everyday thinking about 
wholes and parts.  Yet despite its novelty, this view has 
many points of contact with previous philosophy. Some of 
the  pieces  of  the  new  view  already  exist  in  the 
philosophical literature. A few of the most important ideas
9
-1-
[First paragraph omitted]

God, Son of Quark 
 
10 
appeared earlier in the work of Donald L.M. Baxter1 and of 
David Lewis2.  Some of the ideas that I will explore in later 
chapters began in the writings of ancient Greek 
philosophers, especially Aristotle.  Most of my credits to 
previous authors are in the book’s many numbered 
endnotes, though a few of these credits are in the text.  (The 
spirit of Baxter’s and Lewis’s approaches to whole and part 
has influenced the book more than specific credits can 
show.)        
To begin the project, I will point out some of the 
intuitive beliefs that people normally hold about objects 
and their parts.  Usually we do not think about these 
beliefs.  These usual ideas may play an important role as 
background to our actions, but they seem so transparent and 
obvious that we do not reflect on them consciously.  Here I 
will try to bring these ideas into the light, and will suggest 
that some of them are wrong despite their “obviousness.”  
While doing this, I will lay the groundwork for a new view 
of the relation between wholes and parts.  Although I will 
offer arguments for this view, the main argument in its 
favor is its impact on other topics.  Once this view is in 
place, several extremely knotty philosophical issues will 
become much less tangled.   
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1  Baxter, “Identity in the Loose and Popular Sense.” 
 
2  Lewis, Parts of Classes.   
 
-2-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
11 
Three Thought Experiments3 
 
To kick off this project, I will present three thought 
experiments—that is, experiments performed in thought 
instead of in a laboratory.  These experiments contain 
nothing dramatically new.  They use familiar objects and 
actions; they even lead to the outcomes that you would 
expect.  (Only the last experiment needs any scientific 
background, and I will try to provide that on the spot.)  But 
despite the ordinariness of these experiments, when you 
think about their outcomes in the right way, you will see 
that these “ordinary” results are not so ordinary after all.  
The outcomes of these experiments run counter to some of 
our commonsense views about wholes and parts—and 
suggest that those views leave out something important.    
 
Experiment 1.  The Interloping Triangle 
 
Think about this box with some line segments inside: 
 
 
                                                           
3 This section informally introduces several new ideas, including 
some general ideas about the whole-part relationship discussed (either 
favorably or unfavorably) in the previous literature.  See in particular:  
Lewis, Parts of Classes, pp. 81-87, and Baxter, “Identity in the Loose 
and Popular Sense.”  Also, I should credit Minsky, in The Society of 
Mind (p. 27), for mentioning the question “What makes a drawing 
more than just its separate lines?”     
 
-3-

God, Son of Quark 
 
12 
Now answer the question:  “How many things are in the 
box?”   
 
To simplify this task, forget about the fact that the line 
segments are divisible.  Just count things consisting of at 
least one whole line segment.  (A mathematician might say, 
“Since a line segment contains an infinite number of points, 
there are an infinite number of things in the box.”  But that 
isn’t the answer we are after here.)  Also, don’t count sets 
of detached items, with no point of contact, as “things.”  
(Usually we wouldn’t think of a pair of unconnected lines 
as a thing or object.)  Just count the things in the box in a 
naive, intuitive way—that is, count only complete, 
internally connected things.   
 
If one follows these precautions, the answer to the 
question is obvious.  It is “three.”   
 
Now rearrange the line segments a bit, without adding 
anything at all to the contents of the box. 
 
 
 
How many things are there in the box now? 
 
Again, we ignore partial line segments and count the 
things in the box.  Clearly, the three original line segments 
are present; they now touch one another, but they haven’t 
-4-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
13 
gone away.  We also notice that there is a triangle in the 
box.  A triangle is as legitimate a geometric figure as a line 
segment, as anyone who has studied geometry knows.  It 
would be silly to count the line segments as things, and 
then to refuse to count the triangle (which is just another 
whole plane geometric figure made of points!) as a thing.  
To avoid such arbitrariness, we count each line segment, 
and then count the triangle.   
Counting in this way, we decide that there are four 
things in the box.   
It would be more correct to say that there are at least 
four things in the box.  One can argue that there are things 
in the box besides the line segments and triangle.  For 
example, any two adjacent sides of the triangle make up a 
V-shaped figure, and these V’s, though parts of a triangle, 
are themselves legitimate geometric figures.  But this is 
beside the point.  The point is that there are at least four 
things in the box.  We have gained an object—the 
triangle—that was not there before the rearrangement.  Yet 
we put nothing new in the box.  We brought a perfectly 
legitimate geometric object into existence by arranging the 
line segments in a suitable way.  And we did it using 
nothing but the line segments.  The triangle has no parts in 
it above and beyond the lines. 
Of course, there is nothing mysterious about this 
outcome.  No magic trick has happened here; we did not 
pull the triangle rabbit-style out of a hat.  Everyone knows 
that when you arrange line segments as we did, you get a 
triangle.  This is obvious because a triangle is just a figure 
formed from three lines arranged in a specific way.  We 
placed nothing new into the box—yet we were able to get a 
new object in the box.  Although this new object has the 
-5-

God, Son of Quark 
 
14 
line segments as parts, the new object was not there at the 
beginning of the experiment. 
Obviously, we did not bring anything new into the box.  
But this experiment also brings out another fact, equally 
obvious but less often noticed:  when we arrange parts to 
make a whole, we don’t just end up with the original parts.  
A new object comes into being.  Normally, we might 
dismiss the idea that anything really is “created” here.  We 
might do this by saying that the triangle is only an 
assembly of line segments.  And this statement is correct:  
the triangle indeed has no parts beyond the line segments—
except, of course, the three V shapes that the line segments 
form (and the parts, which we decided to ignore, that we 
can get by subdividing line segments and V’s).  But we also 
can shift the emphasis, and note that by rearranging the line 
segments, we can create a real geometric object that did not 
exist before.  We can create a real entity—a fourth entity—
simply by arranging the entities that already are there.     
The triangle is not among the entities that we had at the 
beginning of the experiment.  It can be counted separately 
and distinguished from the line segments; it has its own 
unique properties.  It is a new item created by the assembly 
of the lines.  The fact that the triangle is made up entirely of 
line segments does not change the fact that the triangle is 
new.  It is not any of the line segments.  Nor is it all the line 
segments together (note that all the line segments existed 
together before there was a triangle).  By rearranging the 
line segments, we have managed to create a whole new 
object, without having to add any new “stuff” to the box!   
People sometimes have a feeling that a composite 
-6-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
15 
object, like the triangle, is “nothing but” its parts in a 
certain arrangement.4  In a way, this is true; the triangle has 
no parts but the line segments, the V shapes (made of line 
segments), and the parts that we get by dividing up and 
combining these parts.  Also, the properties and relations of 
the line segments may, for all we know, completely 
determine and explain the properties of the triangle.  But 
this “explainability” of the triangle in terms of its parts does 
not do away with the arithmetical fact that there is a thing 
in the box that was not there at the beginning.  If you don’t 
believe it, count.  Arithmetic and logic tell us that there is 
something in the box besides the line segments.  This 
conclusion is inescapable once we grant some rather simple 
facts of plane geometry.   
The lesson of this experiment is that when parts come 
together to form a whole, that whole is an object distinct 
from the parts.5  The parts may explain the whole, yet one 
                                                           
4 David Lewis has taken this position, or one close to it, in his 
philosophical writings.  In Parts of Classes (pp. 81-87), Lewis argues 
that a whole just is its parts—in a slightly extended sense of the word 
“is.”  Donald L. M. Baxter, in “Identity in the Loose and Popular 
Sense,” has discussed the view that the whole is identical to the parts—
which he calls “the Identity view”—and has compared it to other 
competing views of whole and part.  The position that Baxter calls “the 
Non-Identity view” is essentially the view of whole and part that I am 
advocating in this book, though I will take this position several steps 
further.  Later in the book I will argue against some of the “whole-is-
parts” ideas.        
 
5 Bertrand Russell stated a similar thesis about part and whole, 
though he was thinking of certain mathematical and logical senses of 
“whole.”  See Russell’s The Principles of Mathematics,  par. 137 (p. 
141).       
 
-7-

God, Son of Quark 
 
16 
can count the whole separately from the parts.  Normally 
we think of a whole as being, in some vague sense, 
“nothing but” the parts that make it up.  That is, when we 
arrange the parts and hook them together properly, those 
parts are the whole.  But this is not quite true.  It is more 
correct to say that there are all the parts, and also there is 
the whole.  To borrow a comparison from Baxter, if there 
are N parts, then once we build the whole from those parts 
there are N+1 things, not just N things.6   
Are we right to think of the whole as nothing but its 
parts?  Would it not be better to think of the whole as a new 
object, whose existence depends on the existence of the 
parts but which is not the same as the parts?  Shouldn’t we 
think of the whole as an object brought into being when the 
parts are hooked together the right way?   
Or should we just look for a new way to count?   
 
Experiment 2.  Follow the Dots 
 
Many readers will remember the “follow the dots” 
pictures on which they worked as children.  Despite their 
simplicity, follow-the-dots pictures can teach us an 
important lesson about wholes and parts.   
Examine the follow-the-dots picture on the next page.   
 
 
 
                                                                                                                    
 
6 This observation is discussed in Baxter’s article “Identity in the 
Loose and Popular Sense.”  See p. 579 in that article. 
 
-8-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
17 
 
 
 
 
The objective of the puzzle is to draw lines connecting the 
dots, and end up with a drawing of a recognizable object.  
(Don’t do it yet, though.)  Normally, follow-the-dots 
pictures have numerals that show which lines to draw first.  
Here I have omitted the numbers to avoid cluttering the 
picture—and because the lines to draw are pretty obvious.   
I want to ask a question about this picture.  The 
question is:  “Is there an outline of a fish there?”  The 
answer is obvious:  Yes, there is.  Most people can see the 
fish immediately.   
Even without thinking about which creature the 
diagram resembles, you can say that the diagram shows a 
geometric figure, or shape.  This much is clear.  But when 
you look more closely at the picture, there’s nothing there 
but dots.  Indeed, if you viewed the picture in the right way 
(from very, very close in), you would find that there are 
only dots there, and no fish.  An ant crawling on the page 
could not see the fish.  At any given time, it would see only 
a dot.  Even if the ant somehow got the ability to think and 
reason, it would not be able to see the fish.  One can 
imagine what the picture would look like to a human 
-9-

God, Son of Quark 
 
18 
observer with a severe case of tunnel vision, whose visual 
field is only big enough to scan one dot at a time.  Such an 
observer would not see the fish, but would be perfectly 
capable of seeing all the dots (one at a time).   
It seems clear that there is nothing on the page above 
and beyond the dots.  What does this say about the fish? 
“There are only dots on the page.  Since there are only 
dots on the page, and nothing else, it follows that there is 
no fishlike pattern there at all.  Therefore, the fish design is 
not really there.”  Are you willing to stand up for this 
argument?  If so, are you willing to stand up for it in 
public? 
The geometric design—which appears fishlike to most 
of us but is just a geometric figure—really is there on the 
page.  To say that it is not there is to say something plainly 
false.  Yet at the same time, it seems correct to say “there is 
nothing on the page other than the dots.”  We have arrived 
at an intriguing pair of seeming truths.  There is a fish 
design on the page—yet there are only dots on the page.  Is 
there a contradiction here? 
The obvious answer to this “contradiction” is that the 
fish is made entirely of dots, so there is nothing special 
about the fish being on the page even though nothing is 
there besides the dots.  Of course, this answer is right.  But 
despite being right, this answer is rather fishy.  This 
trivially true answer serves to hide an important fact about 
the fish and the dots.  This is the fact that when the dots are 
put together to form a fish, there really is a fish design on 
the page.  There is another recognizable physical object, 
made of ink, that is not the same as any of the dots.  By 
putting together 34 dots, which are simple objects, we have 
created a new, more complex object—a thirty-fifth thing.   
-10-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
19 
This thirty-fifth thing is made entirely of dots.  Its 
presence on the page can be explained by the presence of 
the dots at certain positions on the page.  Despite all this, 
the thirty-fifth thing really is there—and it is not one of the 
dots.  Before the dots were drawn on the picture, there were 
no things in the picture.  But after someone drew the thirty-
four dots, there were thirty-five things in the picture (or 
even more things, if one counts the fish’s fins and other 
such pieces of the drawing, which are things made of dots).   
Of course, the fish is made solely of dots.  Once the 
dots come together in the right pattern, the fish is there.  
Nothing else is needed to make the fish come into 
existence.  No extra spark, no imposed property of 
“fishiness” or of “paternness,” must be added to make the 
dots into a geometric pattern that looks like a fish.  The 
dots can give rise to those properties by themselves, 
without any outside help.  Nor does the fish have any 
mysterious extra parts, such as extra dots hidden on the 
other side of the page.  Nevertheless, once the dots come 
together, a fish design begins to exist.  If the dots were 
separated and scattered, the fish design would cease to be.  
And as long as the picture on the page remains intact, there 
is something in that picture besides a dot.  There is the fish.  
If you don’t believe that, just count.   
It is possible, of course, to claim that this argument is 
misleading because, after all, the fish is only the composite 
of the dots.  Why should we worry about the fact that there 
is a thirty-fifth object on the page when that object is only 
the sum total of all the neatly arranged dots?   
If you feel an urge to argue in this way, think carefully 
about what you are saying.  You say that the fish is only the 
sum of the dots—or, to use other words, the composite, or 
-11-

God, Son of Quark 
 
20 
assembly, or whole, formed by the dots.  And what does 
“the sum of the dots” mean?  If it just means all the dots, 
then you are stating a falsehood.  The fish is not any of the 
dots, nor is it simply all the dots collectively (a scissors can 
make the dots exist without the fish).  But if “the sum of the 
dots” means something besides “the dots” or “all the dots 
together,” then you are admitting that there is something 
else on the page besides the dots.  In that case, what you are 
calling “the sum of the dots” is the same thing that I have 
been calling “the thirty-fifth object.”  You have simply 
given the extra object another name without making it go 
away. 
 
This experiment, like the previous one with the triangle, 
reveals a fact we already know.  This is the fact that when 
things are put together to form a larger whole, the whole is 
itself a thing.  No fact seems more trivial and less 
noteworthy.  Yet if we begin to think about this fact instead 
of just taking it for granted, we also begin to see how 
puzzling this fact really is.  Here are three lines; rearrange 
them, and now there are four things.  Here are thirty-four 
widely separated dots; rearrange them, and now there are 
thirty-five things.  By rearranging existing things, we bring 
new things into being.  We literally create new objects.  
And those new things exist in addition to the things we 
started with.  The act of assembling parts is a genuine act 
of creation.   
Normally, we might feel that because the fish is made 
of dots, we do not need to assume the existence of anything 
but dots to understand what the fish is.  This example 
suggests a different view:  we cannot fully understand what 
the fish really is without assuming the existence of the fish 
-12-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
21 
itself, as well as the dots.  If we took an inventory of all 
things that really exist, we would find both the dots and the 
fish on our list.  Listing the dots would not excuse us from 
listing the fish itself on a separate line of the list—for the 
existence of the dots is not equivalent to the existence of 
the fish.   
Of course, the fish is made of the dots, and the fact that 
the fish exists is “explained” entirely by the existence and 
arrangement of the dots. Normally, we take this to mean 
that the fish is, in some sense, “just dots.”  But should we 
think this way?  “All the dots” means thirty-four things.  
The fish is the thirty-fifth thing.  When we arranged the 
dots, the universe proved to be big enough to make room 
for one more thing.   
Perhaps our thinking about wholes and parts needs 
enlargement too.   
 
Experiment 3.  The Philosophy of the Surf 
 
Ocean waves are examples of an interesting and 
beautiful natural phenomenon.  They are of interest to the 
physicist, the marine biologist, the geologist, the surfer, and 
the artist.  Philosophers also have much to learn from ocean 
waves, though they do not always realize this.  The 
following experiment shows that ocean waves can give us 
an important clue about the nature of the whole-part 
relationship.   
A water wave results from the motion of matter on and 
near the surface of a body of water.  Water waves happen 
when some force (usually the wind) pushes the molecules 
of the water around and starts them moving back and forth.  
The moving molecules push against other water molecules 
-13-

God, Son of Quark 
 
22 
near them, making the disturbance move across the water.  
Wherever the wave goes, molecules in the water move to 
and fro.  If the wave is not too large and meets no 
obstacles, the pattern in which the molecules move is 
roughly circular.7 
 
 
 
 
 
A water wave has energy.  It can transfer energy to 
objects in the water, making them rock and bob, or to 
objects on the shore, causing erosion and other geological 
effects.  The sound of crashing surf comes from the release 
of some of the waves’ energy as sound waves. 
Physical science has shown that molecules of water 
carry the energy of a water wave.  Much of this energy is 
the kinetic energy associated with the motion of the 
molecules.  A moving molecule, like a moving train, has 
energy that it can pass on to other things.  The molecules 
also have potential energy because of the Earth’s gravity 
(an interaction between the molecules and the Earth) and 
because of the molecules’ interactions with other molecules 
through electrical forces.  All the energy in the wave results 
from the motion and interactions of the wave’s molecules.  
                                                           
7 This idea is well-illustrated in Serway’s text, Physics for 
Scientists and Engineers with Modern Physics (p. 347). 
 
-14-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
23 
The fact that the wave has energy is explained by the fact 
that the molecules moving within the wave have energy.  
We do not need any mysterious energy source, besides the 
energies of moving molecules and of the forces that 
connect them, to explain the effects of the surf on the shore.  
The energy of the impact is the energy of moving 
molecules—that is all. 
Physicists have established these facts about water 
waves.  Yet they have not, to my knowledge, fully 
addressed a certain subtle point about the nature of the 
energy in the wave.  This is the fact that the energy in the 
wave is the energy of water molecules in motion, but also is 
the energy of the wave as a whole.   
We know that physical objects have energy.  If you and 
I throw baseballs at the same moment, your baseball will 
have a certain amount of energy and so will mine.  Each of 
the baseballs has its own quantity of energy, which 
(according to a well-known principle of physics) can be 
lost to other objects but never can be destroyed.  Once we 
choose a scale for measuring energy, we can assign every 
material object a number that is a measure of the total 
energy of that object.  A water wave has a certain amount 
of energy.  Yet the energy of the wave, it seems, is not just 
the energy of the wave.  It also is the energy of the 
molecules that move inside the wave. 
There is a simple reason why the energy can belong to 
the molecules and still belong to the wave.  The reason is 
that the molecules are in the wave.  The argument about 
water waves is a lot like the fish experiment.  I am pointing 
out that the wave is a real, physically significant thing, with 
its own energy, despite being “just” a product of molecules.  
But this is not all that I am driving at, for the wave is not 
-15-

God, Son of Quark 
 
24 
simply a composite of molecules.  The molecules are not 
permanent parts of the wave; the wave can move from one 
area of the water to another, leaving behind one set of 
molecules and picking up another set.  The wave is more 
like a motion, first of this water here, later of that water 
there.  It is best to think of the wave as a process, or 
prolonged event, that happens to water molecules.   
The point of this water-wave argument is not that the 
wave as a whole is a new item (though that is true).  Rather, 
it is a point about the wave’s substance.   
Einstein’s special theory of relativity, with its famous 
equation E = mc2, implies that energy can be converted to 
matter and vice versa.  This implies that energy is a form of 
substance; matter and energy are the two expressions of the 
substance of the physical world.  Some philosophers have 
argued that a single substance which manifests as matter 
and energy, rather than matter or energy standing alone, is 
the true substance of the physical world.8  One often hears 
the alternative suggestion that matter is simply a form of 
energy.  But it would be arbitrary to regard matter as a 
substance while failing to regard energy as a substance.  
Indeed, the special theory of relativity implies that all 
energy has mass, just as matter does.    
The water wave, then, carries some substance with it as 
it goes.  When the wave moves from one part of the water 
surface to another, it might not carry along one single 
molecule of the water in which it originally traveled.  Yet it 
carries along much of its original energy—its original 
substance.  This energy is the kinetic and potential energy 
                                                           
8 For example, Haeckel.  See Reck, p. 123. 
 
-16-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
25 
of water molecules.  The wave is a real, concrete, 
substantial item with its own energy and mass—yet all of 
that energy and mass also belongs to other things, namely 
the water molecules currently inside the wave.  The wave is 
a physical phenomenon that shares the substance of other 
physical entities.  It gets its substance only through this 
sharing; it has no energy apart from the energy of water 
molecules.   
In a certain sense, the existence of the wave is 
independent of the existence of the water molecules that 
revolve within it.  Although the wave cannot exist without 
some water molecules, those molecules don’t need to be the 
particular ones that now happen to be in the wave.  Other 
water molecules, elsewhere in the sea, would do as well.  It 
does not quite make sense to say the wave is “just” the 
motions of the molecules within it, since other motions of 
other molecules can make the wave exist just as well. 
The lesson we learn from this is that something may 
have a real existence, and its own substance, even though 
all of its substance belongs to something else.  The wave 
has no energy that is solely its own—yet as any surfer 
knows, it has loads of energy.  The wave “lives on credit,” 
as it were—smashing into the shore, or rocking the boat, 
with energy that also belongs to a bunch of tiny, invisible 
molecules. 
Another lesson is that when many parts begin to act 
together in an organized way, this can create real wholes of 
a kind fundamentally different from the parts.  In the 
triangle and fish experiments, we created more complex 
geometric figures from simpler geometric figures.  In other 
words, simple what’s-its gave rise to complicated what’s-its 
of the same kind.  But in the wave experiment, objects gave 
-17-

God, Son of Quark 
 
26 
rise to a process.  The molecules gave rise to the wave, yet 
a wave is an item of a sort fundamentally different from 
water molecules.  The wave is not really a “thing” at all, 
but a prolonged event.  In this case, we could say the 
what’s-its didn’t just result in fancier what’s-its; they 
resulted in thingamabobs instead.   
This type of creation, which creates fundamentally new 
kinds of items, happens all the time.  Most processes and 
events in the physical universe are “non-objects” that result 
from the activity of objects.     
Common sense about wholes and parts says that when 
we put together bits of stuff, the most we will get is a 
bigger piece of stuff of the same kind.  According to this 
view, the worst we can possibly get is a bigger piece with 
shockingly fancy properties—like a computer chip, made 
of silicon atoms but having the ability to perform 
calculations.  But the wave example suggests there are 
exceptions to this rule.  If we put together enough water 
molecules in the right arrangement, we may get a wave—
but a wave is a process instead of a proper object.  Like the 
molecules, it exists, but it exists in a way different from the 
way that molecules exist.  A water wave differs from a 
molecule in other respects besides its physical properties—
though the differences in some of these properties 
(especially size) are obvious.  Apart from these differences 
in physical properties, the wave has a strikingly different 
kind of being or existence.  Using some long-standing 
philosophical jargon, we can say that a water wave and 
water molecules belong to two different ontological 
categories.  (Later I will have more to say about 
ontological categories.)   
 
-18-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
27 
The thought experiments in this chapter do not prove 
anything rigorously.  They do not pretend to be formal 
philosophical arguments.  These experiments only point out 
some features of the part-whole relation that people 
(including scientists and philosophers) don’t often think 
deeply about.  These features run counter to some of our 
usual intuitions about wholes and parts.  The three thought 
experiments presented here make these features seem more 
intuitively reasonable, and challenge the commonsense 
view that the whole is in some sense “just its parts.”   In the 
next few chapters I will challenge this view more 
systematically, and will begin to lay the foundations for a 
new understanding of the wholes and parts that we find in 
the natural world.   
-19-

God, Son of Quark 
 
28 
-20-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
29 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2.  
Is Reality Holistic? 
 
 
The urge to think about the connection between whole 
and part is nothing new.  Scientists usually use the ideas of 
whole and part without analyzing them, but philosophers 
have tried to understand these ideas in a more general and 
penetrating way.  The best-known philosophical problem 
about whole-part relations is the famous question “Is the 
whole more than the sum of its parts?”   
People have written a great deal about this question 
over the centuries, and have proposed several answers.  
Most, if not all, of these answers belong to one of two main 
groups.  Some thinkers have said that an object with parts 
is, in some sense, nothing more than all of its parts.  This 
line of thought is called reductionism.  (There also are other 
ideas called “reductionism,” but I won’t discuss all of them 
here.)  Other thinkers, equally qualified, have argued that 
an object with parts is something more than just its parts—
that bringing the parts together results in a whole that is 
something more than just the parts.  This line of thought is 
known as holism.   
 
 
 
-21-
Note added later: The type of reductionism that I critique
here is the ontological view that an object is "nothing but"
its parts.  I am not critiquing intertheoretic reduction
or other notions of reduction.  Similarly, the type of holism
I am discussing here is only one variety of holism.

God, Son of Quark 
 
30 
Reductionism:  Method or Ideology?   
 
In science, the reductionist approach has long been in 
favor.  Scientists try to explain the behavior of a complex 
object in terms of the behavior of its parts.  The supreme 
example of scientific reductionism is the biologists’ 
explanation of life in terms of chemical and physical 
events.  Modern biologists believe the chief features of 
living organisms result from the behavior of large numbers 
of physical particles (such as atoms and electrons) 
organized in a mind-bogglingly complex way.  Today, the 
physicochemical view of life is the one that scientists 
accept. 
If scientists ever explain the human mind in terms of 
atoms, molecules, and electrons, that would be a 
reductionistic accomplishment even greater than the 
physical explanation of life.  We do not yet have a full 
physical explanation of mind, though scientists have made 
progress in that direction.  Some of the simpler features of 
the mind (and even some complex ones) can be simulated 
by computers.  This suggests that those simpler features 
may have physical explanations that are not too hard to 
find.   
Many scientists think that a physical explanation of 
mind is possible.  This confidence comes partly from 
evidence that some features of the mind are physical.  But 
the chief motive for this belief might be other than 
scientific.  Some scientists and philosophers seem to 
believe that if we cannot explain the mind in terms of the 
brain, then we will have to leave the mind without a 
-22-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
31 
rational explanation.9  The idea that there is something 
unexplainable is taboo to many thinkers, who believe this 
idea amounts to accepting superstition.  Those who think 
this way trust that a physical explanation of mind will be 
discovered, because the absence of an explanation threatens 
the scientific worldview.  Thus, although the proponents of 
reductionism sometimes hold themselves out as advocates 
of reason, reductionist belief often is a matter of emotion as 
much as of science.  (Of course, this is true of some holistic 
belief, too.)     
Some thinkers who believe in a brain-based explanation 
of mind still feel that the mind is more than a machine.  To 
develop this view, such thinkers often turn to a holistic 
interpretation of mind.  According to the holistic view, the 
mind is a product of the activity of the brain—and yet there 
is something more to the mind than the simple, mechanical 
firings of neurons.  When the neurons come together into 
the complex pattern known as the human brain, the whole 
brain develops properties for which the properties of 
individual neurons cannot account.  This is the gist of the 
holistic view.   
Holism is not only an idea about the human mind.  One 
also can take a holistic view of other happenings and 
objects in the cosmos.  Living organisms form the chief 
target of holistic theorizing.  In living things there are many 
properties, processes and functions that do not have any 
counterpart in the tiny material parts that make up living 
things.  Living organisms digest other objects; atoms 
                                                           
9 Daniel C. Dennett takes a position close to this in Consciousness 
Explained (p. 37).   
 
-23-

God, Son of Quark 
 
32 
cannot digest anything, and there is nothing that an atom 
can do that is much like digestion.  Even the simplest 
“automatic” muscular motions of animals, or the water-
pressure-driven movements of plants, are far too complex 
to be carried out by an atom or a quark.   
There are different brands of holism, and some of them 
are not exactly like what I have described here.  A serious 
holist might regard my description as a mere caricature of 
holism.  Nevertheless, my description captures the essential 
point of holism:  that a complex system has features that 
are not fully explained by the properties of that system’s 
parts.   
Reductionists have offered their own caricatures of the 
holistic school of thought.  One of these caricatures is in 
Marvin Minsky’s book, The Society of Mind.  Minsky 
presents what he calls a “parody of a conversation between 
a Holist and an ordinary Citizen.”10  I will summarize this 
conversation here (the italics in the quotes have been 
changed).  The Holist sets out to show that “no box can 
hold a mouse.”  First the Holist claims that a box really 
doesn’t 
have 
a 
property 
of 
“‘mousetightness’ 
or 
‘containment’” at all.  To prove this point, the Holist points 
out that “no single board” in the box “contains any 
containment,” and concludes on this basis that “the box can 
have no mousetightness at all.”  Instead, the holist 
contends, “a good box can ‘simulate’ [mousetightness] so 
well that the mouse is fooled and can’t figure out how to 
                                                           
10 Minsky, The Society of Mind, p. 28.  I should mention that 
Minsky uses the term “Reductionist” in sense slightly different from 
mine (see The Society of Mind, p. 26). 
 
-24-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
33 
escape.”11   
It is good that Minsky admits that this conversation is a 
parody, for the ridiculous doctrine put forth by Minsky’s 
“Holist” has little to do with real holism.  A real-life holist 
would not claim that the mousetightness of the box is only 
simulated.  Such a holist would not disagree with a 
reductionist over the fact that the box really is mousetight.  
After all, to say that the box is mousetight is just to say that 
it is able to keep mice in—and both sides agree that it does 
that.  The disagreement between the holist and the 
reductionist 
lies 
in 
their 
accounts 
of 
what 
this 
mousetightness is.  A reductionist might say that although 
the box really is mousetight, there is nothing to this 
mousetightness besides certain features of the individual 
boards.  In other words, the box doesn’t need to have a 
separate property of mousetightness to keep the mouse in.  
The boards, when properly arranged, can do it by 
themselves.  (This seems to me to be Minsky’s view—that 
there is nothing to the mousetightness of the box besides 
the separate abilities of the individual boards to block the 
mouse’s movement.12)  But a holist might claim that the 
mousetightness is not quite the same as the impenetrability 
of the individual boards.  Instead, it is a new property 
which the box itself has, and which comes into being when 
one nails together the boards into a box.  Mousetightness is 
not the same as any property of the boards, or as any set of 
properties of boards.  A holist might concede that the 
                                                           
11 Minsky, The Society of Mind, p. 28 (italics changed in quotes).   
 
12 See Minsky, The Society of Mind, p. 28. 
 
-25-

God, Son of Quark 
 
34 
properties and arrangement of the boards are what cause 
the box to be mousetight.  However, the holist would say 
that the mousetightness itself is a new property which the 
boards do not have—a property of the box, not of the 
boards.  Since the mousetightness belongs to the box and 
not to any board, it is not a property of boards at all.  No 
part of the box has mousetightness or anything close to it—
yet the whole manages to have this property nonetheless, 
and therefore is more than the sum of its parts!       
The holist in Minsky’s story is a dupe.  The “parody of 
a conversation” which Minsky discusses is indeed a 
parody; it makes holism appear to be silly at best and 
intellectually dishonest at worst.  Actually, it is Minsky’s 
parody that lacks credibility.  Obviously, no serious holist 
would claim that a box that can confine a mouse isn’t really 
mousetight, or would make the ridiculous claim that the 
reason the mouse can’t escape the box is because the mouse 
is fooled.  Minsky’s argument substitutes ridicule for 
reasoned debate.  In reality, many first-class thinkers, both 
ancient and modern, have embraced holism of one kind or 
another.   
The founder of holism as a systematic philosophical 
outlook 
was 
the 
nineteenth- 
to 
twentieth-century 
philosopher J.C. Smuts.  In his book Holism and Evolution, 
Smuts set forth a well-reasoned view of nature as a system 
of wholes, each of which may have certain properties quite 
different from those of its parts.13  My view of whole and 
part is not the same as Smuts’s view.  Later I will mention 
some of the key similarities and differences between these 
                                                           
13 Smuts, Holism and Evolution; see particularly chapters 5 and 6. 
 
-26-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
35 
two views.  (Mostly I will do this in footnotes.)       
The reductionist approach to the problems of life and 
mind is indispensable for scientific work.  If we refuse to 
admit the possibility that the properties of the parts account 
for the properties of whole, then we have a much harder 
time understanding the properties of the whole.  Worse yet, 
we will lose the possibility of learning about such an 
explanation if one happens to exist.  The philosopher 
Daniel C. Dennett has pointed out a problem of this sort 
with mind-body dualism—the commonly held view that 
there is a nonphysical mind apart from the brain.  In a book 
describing his reductionistic theory of consciousness, 
Dennett once wrote that “accepting dualism is giving up”14 
(italics in original).  Part of what this means, I think, is that 
if we assume that the mind does not have a physical 
explanation, then we are stopping inquiry before we know 
whether such an explanation is possible.  Unlike many 
current philosophers, I do not believe that a dualistic 
explanation of mind has to be antiscientific.  (That does not 
imply that I am a dualist; more on that topic later.)  But 
Dennett’s remark can just as well be applied to the refusal 
to try to explain the properties of a whole in terms of those 
of the parts.  If such an explanation is possible, then the 
seeker of truth wants to know it, and the only way to find 
out whether there is such an explanation is to try to make 
one.  Assuming in advance that a reductionistic explanation 
is impossible cuts us off from the possibility of learning 
something potentially interesting.  Therefore we should try 
to find such explanations, whether or not we have faith in 
                                                           
14  Dennett, Consciousness Explained, p. 37. 
 
-27-

God, Son of Quark 
 
36 
the scientific worldview.     
Reductionism is useful as a methodological assumption 
for scientific inquiry.  Its usefulness, however, does not 
settle the question of the truth of the reductionist view of 
the whole-part relation.  It is logically possible that the 
whole is not reducible to the parts, and that there is 
something to a whole object that is not encompassed in any 
of that object’s parts.  The fact that scientists must pretend 
to be reductionists while working does not remove this 
possibility. 
 
The 
well-established 
usefulness 
of 
reductionistic methods in science does not prove the 
reductionist 
viewpoint 
in 
philosophy. 
 
Nor 
can 
philosophical holism be used to attack the use of 
reductionist methods in science.  It is important not to 
confuse the reductionist method that scientists follow, with 
the reductionist worldview that certain philosophers and 
scientists embrace.  It is possible to follow the method 
without buying into the ideology. 
 
Emergent Properties 
 
One criticism often leveled against holism is that it is 
vague.  Some reductionists have pointed out that holists say 
things like “the whole is more than the sum of the parts” 
without saying exactly how the whole is more than the sum 
of the parts.  Holists claim that there is something more to 
the whole than the individual parts and their properties.  
Yet often they decline to say what this “something more” 
is.  This coyness comes from the fact that the holists don’t 
always know what the “something more” is.  They have 
found clear signs that there is something to the whole 
besides the parts, but they do not know exactly what those 
-28-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
37 
signs point to—what the difference is between a whole and 
a “mere” sum of parts.   
The holists’ inability to say exactly how the whole 
differs from the parts has led some reductionists to claim 
that 
holism 
is 
unscientific 
or 
that 
it 
embraces 
mystification.15  There are two glaring mistakes in this 
reductionistic claim.  First, there is nothing unscientific 
about claiming to know something is real without knowing 
exactly what that “something” is.  Most natural phenomena, 
including radioactivity, meteorites, and life itself, were 
known, and even studied scientifically, before their true 
nature was understood.  The holist is in much the same 
position as an early scientist studying meteorites.  Such a 
scientist might have said “The evidence points to the 
existence of stones that fall out of the sky—but we don’t 
know where those stones come from.”  Similarly, the holist 
notes that there is a difference between whole and parts, but 
does not yet know what that difference is.  The reductionist, 
on the other hand, is more like those early scientists who 
believed that reports of meteorites simply must be wrong.16  
Of course, this loose analogy doesn’t prove reductionism 
wrong.  But it should teach the reductionist a lesson in 
caution.       
The other reason that holism is not mystifying is that 
we do know, at least in part, how an object can differ from 
                                                           
15 Minsky, in my opinion, comes close to this view in The Society 
of Mind, where he suggests that the word “holistic” acts “to anesthetize 
a sense of ignorance” (p. 27). 
 
16  Even some very smart scientists once held this view.  See Pearl, 
Rocks and Minerals, p. 165. 
 
-29-

God, Son of Quark 
 
38 
the sum of the parts.  Philosophers (holistic or not) who 
have thought about these issues have come up with one 
definite answer to the question “What is the difference?”  
That answer is emergent properties.  
Philosophers have thought of emergent properties in 
different ways,17 but at bottom, the idea of an emergent 
property is simple.  An emergent property is simply a 
property that an object has, but that the parts of that object 
do not have if the object is divided into sufficiently small 
parts. The mousetightness of Minsky’s box (which I 
discussed earlier) is one example of an emergent property.  
No piece of wood used to make the box can confine a 
mouse—yet the box, taken as a whole, can.  The shape of 
the triangle I discussed in Chapter 1 is another example.  
None of the parts used to make the triangle is triangular—
yet the triangle, as a whole, is triangular.  The triangle also 
has the emergent property of closure—it is a closed figure; 
one cannot get out of the figure without crossing a line or 
leaving the plane of the page.  No part of the triangle has 
this property.  Removing any part of the triangle will make 
the triangle lose the property of closure.  Thus, the property 
of closure depends on the “cooperation” of all the parts of 
the triangle.   
Emergent properties are called “emergent” because they 
emerge when things are put together into larger things.  
                                                           
17   The way that I define emergent properties does not necessarily 
agree completely with the way that some other authors have defined 
these.  Also, I should mention that I do not necessarily agree with the 
philosophical position known as “emergentism”—at least not in all of 
its forms.  In this book I am going to ignore some of the larger issues 
surrounding emergence and reduction, because these issues are not 
crucial to my point. 
-30-
Note added later: The "emergence" I am discussing here is a
rather weak version of emergence.  This should not be confused
with stronger versions found in the literature, which may make
emergent properties practically unpredictable or unexplainable.

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
39 
They are not present in the smaller things—but when the 
smaller things are assembled into a more complex whole, 
the emergent properties pop up. 
Emergent properties are all around us.  You notice this 
when you begin to look for them.  The page count of a 
book is a legitimate property of the book.  Yet the 
individual fibers of paper and splotches of ink that make up 
the book do not have page counts.  The color of any 
colored object is a real physical property.  Yet none of the 
atoms that make up the object is, by itself, colored.  An 
atom by itself is invisible and colorless.  The shapes of 
objects are emergent properties; they are results of the 
arrangements of the parts of objects.  The atoms that make 
up an object have shapes different from that of the object.   
Most of the properties that we deal with every day of 
our lives are emergent properties.  We call the world that 
we perceive with our senses the “physical world.”  Would 
it not be almost as correct to call it the world of emergent 
properties?   
Some of the most interesting emergent properties occur 
in the science of chemistry.  I am thinking especially of the 
properties of solidity and liquidity.  Everyone knows 
intuitively what solids and liquids are.  Solids are 
substances that have definite shapes and do not flow 
visibly, while liquids assume the shapes of their containers 
and seem “wet.”  Physical chemists have more precise 
definitions of these notions.  Scientists know that solids are 
substances in which the atoms or molecules making up the 
substance fall into repeating, lattice-like patterns.  (Some 
familiar “solids,” such as ordinary window glass, are not 
true solids but “amorphous solids,” which act like solids in 
many respects.)  Liquids are materials in which the atoms 
-31-

God, Son of Quark 
 
40 
or molecules move freely around one another, yet stick 
together enough that they do not quickly go flying off into 
space.  Liquids evaporate when this stickiness of the 
molecules is overcome by something—usually by the 
energy of heat.   
Liquidity, philosophers have noted, is an emergent 
property.18  When one looks at the molecules or atoms that 
make up a liquid, one finds nothing at all that is liquid.  
Individual atoms do not flow:  they can fly through space 
or be still, but they do not pour or slosh.  A sloshing atom is 
as silly an idea as a flowing baseball.  Yet an unimaginable 
number of atoms, clustered together and stuck to their 
neighbors by electrical forces, forms a mass of stuff that 
can flow.  We call that a liquid.   
It seems clear that emergent properties, as I have 
defined them, exist.  They are as real as any other 
properties of objects.  (Philosophers have long debated the 
question of whether properties really exist at all; some have 
argued that properties are mere fictions, and that only plain 
old objects are real.19  So perhaps I should say that 
emergent properties exist insofar as any properties exist.)  
A box that is mouseproof (to exploit Minsky’s example 
again) really does have the property of being mouseproof, 
even though all of its small parts lack that property.  A 
pond really is liquid; hence it really does have the property 
                                                           
18 Searle notes this in The Rediscovery of the Mind, pp. 111-112. 
 
19 I am referring, of course, to the nominalists.  For discussions of 
this and other positions on the problem of universals, see Loux (ed.), 
Universals and Particulars.  
 
-32-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
41 
of liquidity.  To deny that emergent properties are as real as 
other properties is to deny that a pond is liquid and that a 
solidly closed box is mouseproof.  Do you really want to 
claim that water, at room temperature and pressure, isn’t 
liquid?   
Some people are afflicted with the mistaken view that 
philosophers don’t believe in the physical world.  Those 
who hold this view think that philosophers have somehow 
denied the existence of the perceptible world around us.  
Some people find this alleged denial of reality to be 
amusing.  This allegation against philosophers has little 
basis in fact, but there seems to be a fairly common popular 
belief that philosophers think that way.  Now, would a 
philosopher who claimed that water isn’t wet be in a less 
ridiculous position than a philosopher who claimed that my 
chair doesn’t exist?  If we do not want to fall into 
skepticism about the existence and basic features of the 
world around us, then we should not try to deny that water 
is wet!  The case for the reality of emergent properties like 
wetness is as strong as the case for the existence of tables 
and chairs.  If any properties exist in the world, then 
emergent properties exist in the world.20   
Despite all this, the mere existence of emergent 
properties does not completely settle the holism vs. 
reductionism debate.  To settle that, we still must answer 
                                                           
20 Often I will speak of a property as existing if it is instantiated or 
exemplified.  A Platonic realist might dislike this usage on the grounds 
that existence and instantiation of an abstract object aren’t the same 
thing.  A nominalist might dislike it on the grounds that no properties 
really exist.  I am dodging these questions here and am using “exist” in 
the more intuitive sense I have just described.   
-33-

God, Son of Quark 
 
42 
the question I posed at the beginning of this chapter.  Is the 
whole (with all its emergent properties) just the “sum of its 
parts,” or is there something more to the whole than there is 
to the parts taken together?   
If some emergent property of the whole cannot be 
explained in terms of the properties and relationships of the 
parts, then there would seem to be grounds for believing in 
a form of holism.  In this chapter I will not ask whether all 
properties can be explained in this way.  Instead, I want to 
draw attention to a point of logic about emergent 
properties.  The point is this:  if we look at sufficiently 
small parts of the whole, then an emergent property of the 
whole is not identical with any property found in those 
parts.  Maybe an emergent property can be explained by (or 
reduced to) simpler properties of the parts.  But even if it 
can, we are stuck with the fact that the emergent property is 
not any of those simpler properties.  The mouseproofness 
of Minsky’s box is not the hardness of the box’s north wall, 
or the squareness of the box’s ceiling.  If it were any of 
these properties of the parts, then at least one of the smaller 
parts would itself have the property of mouseproofness—
and we know it does not.  We know that the 
mouseproofness of the box is real, and that it is not the 
same property as any property of a board in the box.  To 
know this, we do not need to know whether the 
mouseproofness can be explained in terms of the properties 
of the boards.  Even if the mouseproofness can be 
“explained away,” it still is undeniably real.  (If you doubt 
this, ask the mouse!)   
The fact that the emergent property is real, and is not 
identical to the properties of the parts, has an interesting 
consequence.  This is that if we count the properties of the 
-34-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
43 
box and of its parts, we will find at least one more property 
after we assemble the box than when we started.  Before 
the box is built, each part has a certain set of properties; by 
uniting all these sets into one big set, we find that the 
separate parts, taken collectively, have a certain set of 
properties.  After the box is built, another property springs 
up:  that of mouseproofness.  Of course, many other 
properties might come into play too, and some properties of 
the parts, like their independent movability, are lost as 
well—so the total number of properties (if one actually 
counted them!) might go up or down or remain the same.  
But the important fact is that there is at least one new 
property, a property that did not exist before the box was 
built.  This property came into being when the box did.  By 
building the box, we created this property.21  The box has a 
real property that, for all we know, was not present in the 
world at all before the box was built.   
We now see that emergent properties are in much the 
same position as the triangle and fish depicted in Chapter 1.  
An emergent property of an object is something that exists 
in addition to all the properties of the object’s small parts.  
To assemble an object having such a property is to create 
that property—to bring it into being, or to bring an example 
of it into being.  To have a full accounting of all the 
properties involved with the box, we must list the emergent 
                                                           
21 Some philosophers (a subset of the Platonic realists) might 
want to maintain that properties really exist always, and are not literally 
created.  If that is so, then we should say that the property was not 
exemplified before the box was built, and began to be exemplified when 
the box was built. 
 
-35-

God, Son of Quark 
 
44 
property as well as the properties of the parts.  It may well 
be that the emergent property can be explained in terms of 
the properties of the box’s parts.  But even if it can, this 
does not change the fact that the emergent property is 
something real, and something quite apart from any of the 
properties of sufficiently small parts.   
The position I have reached here is similar, though not 
identical, to certain ideas of the philosopher John R. Searle.  
Writing about mind and consciousness, Searle has argued 
that “consciousness is a causally emergent property of 
systems”22, and that mental states are caused by physical 
goings-on in the brain.23  Taken together, these two claims 
of Searle’s imply that a property (consciousness) of a 
whole (the brain) can be an effect of the presence of certain 
properties in the parts, instead of being identical to 
properties of the parts.   
The implications of Searle’s line of thought show up in 
his discussion of the philosophical idea of supervenience.  
Supervenience is an idea that often surfaces in discussions 
of complex wholes such as brains.  The word itself is 
somewhat vague;  Searle distinguishes more than one 
meaning for it.24  On one of these senses, to say that a 
phenomenon (like thought) supervenes on some other 
phenomenon (like brain activity) is to say, more or less, 
that there is nothing to the first phenomenon besides that 
                                                           
22 Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind, p. 112. 
 
23 Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind, p. 125. 
 
24 Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind, p. 125. 
 
-36-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
45 
other phenomenon.  On the other sense (which Searle calls 
“causal”), the supervenient phenomenon is merely caused 
by the other phenomenon, and is completely controlled by 
it.  Searle points out that “[t]he solidity of the piston is 
causally supervenient on its molecular structure.”25  This 
implies that the solidity of the piston is an effect of the state 
of the molecules in the piston.  The solidity isn’t a property 
of any of the molecules themselves, but is something that 
comes into being when the molecules come to be arranged 
in a certain way.  Searle’s views on supervenience come 
close to, and perhaps imply, my thesis that an emergent 
property has an existence separate from that of the 
properties of the parts of the object that has it.   
A scientific explanation of the mouseproofness of the 
box, or of the liquidity of water, may well explain those 
properties in terms of simpler characteristics.  Once the 
scientific explanation has done this, it is done with the 
mouseproofness or liquidity; it has nothing more to say 
about what these properties are.  But if we want to 
understand what the box or the water really is, then we 
must count the mouseproofness or the liquidity as real 
properties, along with the simpler properties used in the 
scientific explanation.  We cannot excuse ourselves from 
this duty by claiming that mouseproofness or liquidity is 
not a separate property or has a scientific explanation.  
Complex properties are real.  They are just as real as simple 
properties.  We may know that the emergent properties 
depend for their existence on other properties, but this does 
not imply that they are “just” those other properties, or that 
                                                           
25 Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind, p. 126. 
 
-37-

God, Son of Quark 
 
46 
they lack an existence of their own.  If you don’t believe it, 
just count!   
Emergent properties exist whether or not they are 
scientifically “reducible” to other properties.  Using a bit of 
philosophical jargon, we can say that emergent properties 
belong to the ontology of the physical world.  An ontology 
is a theory about what exists, or an inventory of the kinds 
of items that exist.  If we want to describe the ontology of a 
body of water, we must include in our account both the 
properties of the molecules and the liquidity of the whole.  
If we leave any properties at all in our ontology, we must 
leave in the liquidity too.  To do otherwise would be 
arbitrary and unjustified.  The only possible reason for 
leaving liquidity out would be to support a philosophical 
prejudice:  that things explainable in terms of other things 
are not quite real.  But does anyone—even an intelligent 
reductionist—want to claim that water is not really wet?   
 
The Triangle and Fish Revisited   
 
The real existence of emergent properties also has 
another interesting result.  It leaves no doubt that a 
composite object is more than just its parts.  If liquidity 
exists in the physical world, then there must be something 
to have the liquidity.  The property of liquidity that we find 
in the world is not some free-floating property, exemplified 
by nothing.  Liquidity is a property of objects—for 
example, of certain masses or blobs of water molecules.  
Such a blob can have a property of its own; therefore, the 
blob is not “just” the water molecules—that is, it is not all 
the molecules taken together.  Rather, the blob must be a 
distinct entity—presumably, an entity that comes into 
-38-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
47 
existence when water molecules are arranged in a suitable 
way.  Otherwise the blob could not have a real property.   
Take a zillion isolated water molecules, and you just 
have a lot of water molecules.  Put them together in roughly 
the same place, and let them stick together as they naturally 
do.  Then you have a sample of liquid.  Of course, you still 
have the zillion water molecules.  But now you have a 
zillion and one things.  The extra thing—the liquid 
sample—is different from its parts because it has a 
property—liquidity—that none of the parts can have.  Take 
the beaker in which the water molecules sit, and try to pour 
from it.  If something pours or glugs (instead of just flying 
through space as a collection of independent molecules, 
like so many minuscule billiard balls), then it is safe to 
infer that there is something in the beaker besides the 
molecules.  After all, a molecule can’t glug.  Of course, 
what’s in the beaker is made of molecules.  But that doesn’t 
mean that what’s in the beaker is just molecules.  Without 
the molecules, the stuff that pours would not be able to 
pour, would not have any of its other physical 
characteristics, and would not exist at all.  Nevertheless, 
that sample of stuff is not just molecules.   
The water sample, like the wave in Chapter 1, shares all 
of its substance with the molecules that exist within it.  It 
can have no properties except those to which a zillion 
molecules, acting together, can give rise.  Normally, we 
would think of the water sample as somehow being its 
molecules; we might think that in some ultimate sense, 
there is nothing there but molecules.  As I have argued here 
and in Chapter 1, it is more correct to say that the water 
sample is a thing in addition to its molecules, but which 
owes every bit of its substance to the molecules.  If we 
-39-

God, Son of Quark 
 
48 
condense this water sample out of isolated water molecules, 
we literally create a new object.  We also create properties 
that were not there before—properties that we must tally up 
if we want to count all the real properties of the water 
sample.   
This view of the water sample may seem contrary to the 
scientific approach to the study of liquids.  A little thought 
will show that it is not.  The scientific explanation of 
liquidity and the molecular model of water will remain 
verifiable and correct, whether the sample is a new object 
or is identical to the molecules that make it up.  Neither of 
these two views of the sample can contradict any scientific 
prediction about the behavior of the water or of its 
molecules.  The question of whether the water sample is an 
extra object is not a scientific question.  We cannot settle 
this 
question 
by 
doing 
experiments 
or 
making 
measurements.  (This is true of all genuinely philosophical 
questions.)  To settle these questions, one also must worry 
about the logical consistency and coherence of the different 
possible answers.  As we have seen, some rather simple 
observations about the logic of properties, and about ways 
of counting objects, suggest that one view is logically 
neater than the other.   
 
Elimination vs. Reduction:  A Technical Note         
 
Philosophers of science sometimes distinguish between 
reduction and elimination in scientific thought.26  To 
                                                           
26 The distinction between eliminative and reductive forms of 
materialism is outlined in Cornman and Lehrer, Philosophical 
Problems and Arguments:  An Introduction, p. 282. 
 
-40-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
49 
reduce an object or phenomenon is to show that it is 
“nothing but” something else.  A classic example of 
reduction, often mentioned in discussions of the philosophy 
of science, is the claim that water is nothing but the 
chemical compound H2O.  To eliminate something is to 
show that we can dispense with it altogether in our 
thinking, and can get by without claiming that it exists.  An 
example of elimination is the argument that we need not 
believe a drop of water exists, because if we just assume 
that the water molecules are there we can explain all the 
measured properties usually ascribed to the drop.   
If we wish to use these terms, we can restate our most 
recent conclusions as follows.  First, it is impossible to 
eliminate any composite object, if “eliminate” is defined as 
above.  Even if the existence and properties of the object’s 
parts completely explain the existence and properties of the 
object, it still is the case that the object is there.  Also, the 
object is not the same as any of its parts, or as several of its 
parts together.  Second, a reduction of a composite object 
may be correct, but only if that reduction does not involve 
elimination of the object.  Instead of saying that reduction 
of the whole to its parts is possible, we must first be sure 
we know what we mean by “reduction.”  If “reduction” 
means explaining the properties of the whole in terms of 
those of the parts, then we have not ruled out a reduction.  
If “reduction” means showing that the whole is nothing but 
a composite of its parts (that a water drop is nothing but a 
composite of molecules), then we have not ruled that out.  
The “composite” of the parts is, after all, just another name 
                                                                                                                    
 
-41-

God, Son of Quark 
 
50 
for the whole.  But if “reduction” means showing that there 
really is nothing there except the parts, or that the whole 
somehow is the parts and nothing more, then such 
“reduction” is out of the question.  It is elimination in 
disguise, and it is logically untenable.   
Of course, it may be convenient to ignore the whole and 
consider only the parts—for example, in a scientific 
calculation where we treat a macroscopic thing as a set of 
atoms.  But that way of thinking is a practical convenience, 
and says nothing about the reality of the whole.  If the 
whole is real but its parts control its properties, then a 
calculation that substitutes the parts for the whole may 
yield correct results.  But even if we can ignore the whole 
in our calculations, that whole still is there—and is not the 
same as its parts.       
Some scientists, and other scientifically oriented 
people, seem unclear about the difference between 
reduction and elimination.  They seem to think that just 
because physical objects are made of atoms or particles, 
there really is nothing in the physical world besides atoms 
or particles.  Many scientists would deny that a stone (for 
example) is unreal—yet when they discuss the nature of 
physical reality, they state or broadly imply that a stone 
“really is only atoms.”  Occasionally one reads statements 
like this in the literature of science and philosophy.27  More 
often, one hears them in conversation—with scientists, 
                                                           
27 The locus classicus is perhaps Democritus’ well-known 
statement that “atoms and Void (alone) exist in reality”  (p. 93 in 
Freeman (ed.), Ancilla to The Pre-Socratic Philosophers; italics 
unchanged by me).   
 
-42-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
51 
academic philosophers, or others.  The classic example is 
the old chestnut about a person really being a few dollars’ 
worth of chemicals.  But all such statements rest on a 
mistake.  The universe as portrayed by science does not 
contain only elementary particles of matter.  It contains 
those particles, plus the composite objects built up from 
those particles.  To speak as though the particles are all 
there is—as though once you’ve counted the particles, 
you’ve counted everything there is—is a grave logical 
error.  The composite objects are not redundant.  To get a 
full inventory of things in the physical universe, you must 
list not only the electrons, quarks, and so forth, but also the 
larger things built up from them.  If you count all the 
particles in a stone and then count the stone containing 
those particles, you haven’t counted up the same thing 
twice.28  The stone may be made of the particles, but the 
stone is not the particles.  The stone is an additional 
entity—one more thing, distinct from the particles that 
make it up.                     
The view that the physical universe really is only 
particles, or that human bodies really are only atoms, 
sometimes gets stated explicitly.  Far more often, this view 
lurks behind other viewpoints as an unstated assumption or 
an underlying attitude.  A psychobiologist might laugh at 
the view that people don’t exist—yet in practice, he might 
think of the human organism as though its only “real” 
properties were molecular ones.  A physicist might feel that 
                                                           
28 The concept of “double counting” also is used by Lewis (Parts 
of Classes, p. 81).  Lewis, however, draws a conclusion opposite to 
mine.   
 
-43-

God, Son of Quark 
 
52 
the discovery of a “theory of everything”—resulting in a 
complete physical description of elementary particles—
would reveal to us what the physical universe “really is.”  
A materialist philosopher might deny that chairs and tables 
are illusory—and yet might privately picture the material 
world as a set of interacting elementary particles.  Each of 
these attitudes rests on an unstated view that the ultimate 
parts of objects are somehow more important or 
fundamental to our picture of the world than are the objects 
themselves.         
 
Epilogue 
 
Nothing I have said in this chapter settles the entire 
holism-reductionism controversy in its usual form.  At 
every step in my argument, I have allowed for the 
possibility that the properties of wholes can be explained in 
terms of the parts.  Also, I have allowed for the opposite 
possibility.  I have asserted that when water molecules 
come together, new properties can appear that do not 
belong to the individual molecules.  However, I have 
neither asserted nor denied the strict holistic claim that 
some of these properties cannot be explained by the 
behavior of molecules.  I have merely pointed out that 
when the molecules come together, they may form a new 
object with new properties.  Also I have shown that the new 
properties that this object has are as real as any other 
properties in the world.  If believing that the whole object 
exists and has properties is a form of holism, then of course 
I am arguing for holism.  But this label would be unfair, 
since a reductionist does not have to give up all forms of 
reductionism to believe that a glass of water exists.  (I 
-44-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
53 
suspect that most reductionists do believe this, especially 
when thirsty.)   
Some of my observations about whole objects may 
seem like small technical points, or like restatements of 
commonplace truths.  One might want to ask whether such 
modest results have any real relevance to the holism-
reductionism controversy.  In the coming chapters, I will 
show that people (including scientists) often forget about 
these “small” points when thinking about wholes and parts.  
If we revise our usual thinking about parts and wholes 
while always keeping in mind that the whole is real, we 
will arrive at a view of the world and of human existence 
surprisingly different from our usual views.  This new view 
will make several long-standing philosophical problems 
much easier to think about.  Indeed, we will find that some 
of the knottiest problems in philosophy were partly 
illusions, created by our failure to grasp the implications of 
the separate existence of the whole. 
-45-

God, Son of Quark 
 
54 
-46-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
55 
   
 
 
 
Chapter 3.  
Walls, Bricks and Logic 
 
 
Earlier I said that scientists often ignore the larger 
questions about the connection between whole and part.  
This indifference is strange when we consider how much of 
science is about this connection.  As I pointed out earlier, 
the physicist’s search for the final building blocks of matter 
is just an attempt to answer a question about wholes and 
parts.  But the scientists’ unconcern with the general 
problem of wholes and parts becomes even more ironic 
when we learn that there already is a precise, “scientific” 
method for the study of these ideas.  This method is called 
mereology—a word of Greek origin meaning the science of 
parts.29   
Mereology is both a mathematical and a philosophical 
subject.  Mereology is not a science in the same way that 
physics and biology are sciences; it does not depend on 
experiments and scientific observations to prove its 
conclusions.  Like any part of mathematical logic, it is a 
                                                           
29 Mereology is discussed in a number of sources, including 
Woodger, The Technique of Theory Construction, and Lewis, Parts of 
Classes.   
 
-47-

God, Son of Quark 
 
56 
formal science—one that uses the methods of deductive 
reasoning to analyze old ideas and make up new ones.  It is 
best to regard mereology as a branch of philosophy rather 
than of science, though it belongs to the more “scientific,” 
or rigorous, end of philosophy.   
Mereology as a mathematical discipline was founded 
by the Polish logician Lésniewski in the first half of the 
twentieth century.30  (Mereological thought existed before 
that time,31 but earlier mereology did not yet take the 
rigorous form that Lésniewski gave it.)  Other philosophers 
have extended mereology further and have applied it to 
various scientific fields.  David Lewis, perhaps better 
known for his innovative ideas about “possible worlds,” 
has shown that one can use mereology to better understand 
the foundations of the mathematics of the infinite.32  Joseph 
H. Woodger used mereology to set up a precise theory of 
the main ideas of biology, including cell division and even 
the origin of life.33   
                                                           
30 Lésniewski’s work is discussed, and references are given, in 
Lewis, Parts of Classes, p. 72.  Lésniewski’s original papers on 
mereology are in Polish.         
 
31 Medieval mereological thought is discussed in Henry, Medieval 
Mereology.   
 
32 Lewis, Parts of Classes.  Lewis’s ideas about possible worlds 
are discussed in his books Counterfactuals and On the Plurality of 
Worlds.     
 
33 For an introduction to Woodger’s ideas, see his book The 
Technique of Theory Construction.  See p. 64 for a mereological 
version of the idea of abiogenesis (the origin of life from nonliving 
matter).         
 
-48-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
57 
In this chapter I am not going to go into the 
mathematical depths of the subject of mereology.  Instead, I 
am going to examine a few of the guiding ideas that have 
played important roles in shaping that field.  My aim is to 
review briefly (and non-mathematically!) this study of 
whole and part, and then to point out some unsolved 
problems about mereology that may point the way to a new 
understanding of the entire part-whole business.   
 
The Crucial Relation 
 
The central idea of mereology is that of the relation 
between a part and a whole.  When we say something like 
“This brick is part of the wall,” we refer to two things—a 
brick and a wall—but not only to two things.  We also refer 
to a relation—the abstract object or concept to which the 
phrase “is part of” refers.34  The first trick of mereology is 
to treat this relation in the same way that mathematicians 
and logicians treat all other relations.  Arithmetic deals with 
relations between numbers, especially the relations 
represented by the phrases “is greater than,” “is less than,” 
and “is equal to” (or “equals”).  Mereology deals with a 
relation between objects—the relation referred to by the 
phrase “is part of.”   
Like any mathematical discipline, mereology uses 
symbols for its basic notions.  I will not use symbols here, 
                                                                                                                    
 
34 Some philosophers of language will question my use of “refer” 
in this sentence and elsewhere.  Their point, though worthy of 
consideration, does not affect the subsequent argument.   
 
-49-

God, Son of Quark 
 
58 
since I am not going to set up any complex mereological 
proofs.  I will be able to do what I want to do using words 
alone, plus a few stray letters.  Mereology also uses 
axioms, or basic principles, as starting points for proving 
more complex results.  These axioms do not legislate in 
advance the answers to any questions; one always can 
revise the axioms if they do not hold true in the real world.  
Two principles of mereology that are useful as axioms are 
the following:   
 
Principle of irreflexivity.  Let x and y be things.  If x is a 
part of y and x is not the same thing as y, then y is not a 
part of x.   
 
Principle of transitivity.  Let x, y, and z be things.  If x is a 
part of y, and y is a part of z, then x is a part of z.   
 
These axioms are just ways of restating truths that seem 
obvious in everyday life.  If a brick is part of a wall, then 
the entire wall cannot be part of the brick.  If a page is part 
of a chapter, and a chapter is part of a book, then the page 
is part of a book.  One can, of course, ask whether there 
could be exceptions to rules like these.  But I will not do 
this here, since my goal is to do something else. 
Mereology takes the relation expressed by “is part of” 
to be another relation, on the same logical level as other 
relations like those expressed by “is greater than,” “is 
longer than,” and “existed earlier than.”  The relation of 
being greater than can hold between two numbers.  The 
relation of being longer than can hold between two 
physical objects.  The relation of being a part of also can 
hold between two physical objects, and perhaps (as Lewis 
-50-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
59 
has argued35) between two mathematical objects as well.  
When we do mereology, there are two things we have to 
think about:  the objects that make up the world, and the 
whole-part relation that links some of them together.   
Mereology is about the realm of things—a realm that 
contains at least physical objects, and (for all we know) 
perhaps other items as well.  Mereology begins with a 
domain of things or entities, and describes a relation—that 
of being a part of—which holds between some pairs of 
things and not others.  I take it for granted that this general 
view of the world is correct, at least for most practical 
purposes.  There really are a lot of things in this world 
(unless one wants to be an utter skeptic and claim that 
things are illusory).  Philosophical accounts of what things 
really are cannot change this practical fact.  Further, it is 
true that some of those things are related to each other in 
the way that we call the relation between whole and part.  
As long as one accepts the existence of a physical world 
and the fact that some things have parts, one should have 
no trouble with the basic way that mereology describes the 
world.  One might doubt the particular assumptions that 
mereologists sometimes use, but there would be no reason 
to doubt that the world contains things, and that things 
stand to one another in the relation of part to whole. 
 
A Shift of Viewpoint 
 
My aim here is not to go into mereological theory in 
detail.  Instead, I want to use mereology as a jumping-off 
                                                           
35 Lewis, Parts of Classes; see especially pp. 3-4.   
 
-51-

God, Son of Quark 
 
60 
point for an argument about the nature of wholes and parts. 
Consider the statements I made two paragraphs ago 
about the world as portrayed by mereology.  This view of 
the world—which is the view almost everyone uses without 
thinking about it—is logically sound.  However, this view 
does not fully agree with another view that some scientists 
seem to use.  The conventional scientific picture of the 
world regards the world as a world of parts.  According to 
that view, the smallest parts of the world explain everything 
in the world; once we have a description of the ultimate 
particles, we have, in principle, an explanation of 
everything in the universe.  All else is almost incidental; 
since a galaxy is nothing but elementary particles, we do 
not need a theory of what galaxies “really are,” apart from 
our views on elementary particles and their forces.  But 
common sense and mereology both portray the world as a 
world of objects, not just of invisible particles.  The 
ultimate particles may be among the objects, but are not the 
only objects in the world.  The world of objects is not the 
world of ultimate particles, for although everything is made 
of ultimate particles, the larger objects in the world are 
neither more nor less real than the particles.   
This last view is the one that actually underlies 
science—if we consider science as scientists really do it, 
instead of confusing science with some philosophical 
attitude that is supposed to be “scientific.”  Scientists 
working on problems of complex physical systems (like 
crystals or liquid drops) treat those systems as real objects.  
Such objects contain their own mysteries, perhaps as deep 
and difficult in their own way as the mysteries of subatomic 
particles.  Some scientists may say that the world is nothing 
but quarks and the like, and that a theory of quarks and 
-52-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
61 
similar particles would explain everything.  But in their 
work, scientists act as if larger objects were exactly as real 
as quarks—that is, as if the physical world were a world 
full of objects, and not just a set of tiny pieces.   
Apart from mereology’s correct picture of objects, there 
is something else about mereology that is equally right.  
This is mereology’s treatment of the whole-part connection 
as a relation.  The physical world is full of relations that 
link one physical object to another.  Among these relations 
are the spatial relations, such as relations of distance.  The 
phrase “is one mile away from” expresses a relation that 
can hold between two ordinary material objects, and 
perhaps even between two atoms or quarks.  Relations like 
these are important in scientific theories.  The relations of 
distance between two objects control the ability of those 
objects to collide with each other, or to push or pull on each 
other through gravity or other forces.  Mereology forces us 
to recognize that the link between a part and the whole also 
is a relation.  From a logical and mathematical standpoint, 
whenever we say “A is a part of B,” we are expressing the 
same general kind of fact as when we say “A is a mile 
away from B.”36  We are saying that A and B stand in a 
certain relation to one another.   
The observation that the whole-part connection is a 
relation seems obvious if you think about it long enough.  
                                                           
36 The philosophers who hold that the whole is somehow identical 
to the parts must deny this, and instead must hold that the whole-part 
relation is different from ordinary relations like that of being a mile 
away from.  See Lewis, Parts of Classes, pp. 84-85, for a position like 
the latter. 
 
-53-

God, Son of Quark 
 
62 
Yet in some respects, this observation runs counter to the 
usual ways of thinking about parts and wholes.  Normally, 
we do not think of the bricks in a wall as simply items 
related to the wall, in the same way that Chicago is related 
to Atlanta by the relation “is north of.”  We think of the 
bricks (together with any other wall-parts, like mortar) as 
somehow being the wall.  We do not think of the wall and 
the bricks as separate objects.  Instead, we think of the wall 
on the one hand, and the bricks and other wall-parts on the 
other hand, as the same piece of stuff—the same substance.  
The suggestion that the bricks are simply objects related to 
the wall seems to leave something out—the fact that the 
bricks and mortar are the same piece of stuff that is the 
wall.   
Now I am going to suggest a slight change in our way 
of thinking about material objects.  Normally, we think of 
the brick as related to the wall in a certain way, and we also 
feel that all the bricks and other parts in the wall, taken 
together, somehow are the wall.   The relation of “being a 
part of” seems different from all the other usual physical 
relations.  This is the way it seems:  if A is a part of B, then 
A, together with all the other parts of B, just is B.  This 
does not hold true for other physical relations, like “is north 
of” or “weighs more than.”   
In place of this usual view, let us think of the brick as 
being related to the wall—period.  That is, once we have 
said that the brick stands in the is-part-of relation to the 
wall, there is nothing more to say about the relationship 
between the brick and the wall.  Of course, there still are a 
lot of details to settle, like exactly where the brick is 
located in the wall or how much mortar was used to attach 
it to the wall.  But there is nothing fundamental left over.  It 
-54-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
63 
is not necessary to state the additional fact that the brick 
isn’t merely related to the wall, but also somehow makes 
up the wall—because there is no such additional fact.  To 
say that the brick is a part of the wall is to say that this 
object, the brick, stands in a specific relation to this other 
object, the wall.  That is all.   
According to the normal, intuitive view of the relation 
between part and whole, the bricks in the wall are what the 
wall is.  On this view, each of the bricks shares part of the 
existence of the wall, as it were, and there is nothing to the 
wall besides the bricks hooked together in a certain way.  
According to the new view I am proposing,  the bricks in 
the wall simply are related to the wall, just as a tree to the 
north of the wall is related to the wall.  Of course, the 
relations involved are different; the tree is linked to the wall 
by the relation is north of, and the brick is linked to the wall 
by the relation is part of.  But to pretend that the bricks are 
the wall in some way, while the tree is not the wall, is to 
miss the point.  Once we have said that the wall and the 
brick are objects, and that the relation is-part-of holds 
between them, we have said all there is to say about the 
relation between brick and wall, except for incidental 
details.  It is unnecessary to add something like, “But the 
wall really is just the bricks; it isn’t a different object.”  
Such a statement would not merely be redundant; it would 
be false.       
This conclusion is the one to which the thought 
experiments in Chapter 1 pointed us.  There I pointed out 
that a whole must be an object logically distinct from its 
parts.  When we reflected on some simple wholes, we 
found that it does not make sense to regard the whole as 
being nothing but the parts.  Even the arithmetic told us 
-55-

God, Son of Quark 
 
64 
that!  Someone might have misunderstood my purpose in 
Chapter 1.  The triangle, fish, and wave examples could be 
taken as arguments for a conventional holism which says 
that the behavior of the whole has no explanation in terms 
of the parts.  But those examples are not arguments for that 
doctrine.  Instead, they support the milder view that the 
whole is an object that exists in the world in addition to the 
parts.  The question of whether the parts explain all the 
properties of the whole remains open.  But the question of 
what kind of object the whole really is—an object in its 
own right, not identical to the parts that make it up—has 
been answered.  The whole, whether or not it has a 
scientific explanation, is something other than its parts.   
This new view of wholes and parts does not beg the 
question of the reducibility of the whole’s behaviors to 
those of its parts.  It is not a thesis about the behavior of the 
whole, but about what philosophers would call the ontology 
of the whole—that is, what kind of an entity, or being, the 
whole is.  Regardless of whether the parts explain the 
whole, the whole is not the same object or being as any of 
its parts, or as all of its parts collectively.   
There is a possible technical exception to this 
conclusion.  This exception will not affect any of my future 
arguments, but I should mention it for the sake of 
completeness.  Mereologists sometimes define the word 
“part” in such a way that an object is a part of itself.  That 
is, the brick wall as a whole is part of the brick wall.  If one 
chooses to define “part” in this way, then of course there is 
one part of the wall that is the wall; that part is the wall 
itself.  But usually, when we speak of “parts” we mean 
parts that are not the whole.  Throughout the book I will 
use the word “part” in this conventional way.  I will not call 
-56-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
65 
the whole a part of itself.  I will have only one more 
occasion, much later, to mention the technical sense of 
“part” which makes an object its own part.    
 
“The Sum of Its Parts” 
 
This is a good time for some further comments on one 
traditional form of the holism-reductionism question:  “Is 
the whole more than the sum of its parts?”  The argument 
of the last section underscores the well-known fact that this 
question is too unclear to be answered as it stands.  It is not 
clear what “the sum of its parts” really means.   
Sometimes people who claim that the whole is the sum 
of its parts may mean that the whole is just the parts.  In 
other words, if we have the parts, and arrange them 
properly, then that’s all there is to the whole.37  If this what 
we mean by “Is the whole the sum of the parts?”, then I 
already have given the answer:  no, the whole is not just the 
sum of the parts.  The view that the whole is all of its parts 
collectively is simply illogical.  But this is not the most 
reasonable reading of the question.  Arithmetic teaches us 
that the sum of a series of numbers need not be the same as 
any of the addends that go to make it up.  If we take the 
                                                           
37 J.C. Smuts, the founder of holism whom I mentioned earlier, 
once wrote “the whole is not something additional to the parts: it is the 
parts in a definite structural arrangement and with mutual activities that 
constitute the whole” (Holism and Evolution, p. 104).  Although Smuts 
assigned the whole a high place in the world, he would have disagreed 
with the view of part and whole that I am advocating.  My view of 
wholes and parts neither implies nor excludes holism of a Smutsian 
sort, although my view might be regarded as holistic in a broader sense.         
 
-57-

God, Son of Quark 
 
66 
expression “sum of its parts” to mean, not the parts 
themselves, but the object formed by putting together the 
parts, then it is no longer implausible to regard the whole as 
the sum of the parts.  Indeed, if the “sum of the parts” 
means whatever we get when we put the parts together, 
then the answer to the question is trivial.  Of course the 
whole is the sum of its parts, for “the sum of the parts” is 
just another way of saying “the whole”!   
If we read “the sum of the parts” to mean either just the 
parts, or what we get when we combine the parts, then the 
question “Is the whole the sum of the parts?” becomes 
easy.  In one case, the answer is no; in the other case it is 
trivially yes.  But these answers do not add up to holism or 
reductionism.  We know that the whole is not identical to 
the parts, and we know that the whole is the object formed 
from the parts.  But there still is plenty of room for holists 
and reductionists to disagree.  They can debate whether the 
properties of the parts fully explain those of the whole.  
They can ask whether the whole contains any special factor 
or principle not foreshadowed in the parts.  My claim that 
the whole is not the parts, and that it is an object existing in 
addition to the parts, may sound holistic.  But my position 
does not rule out reductionistic explanations and does not 
settle all the pieces of the holism-reductionism controversy.   
 
Substance Sharing   
 
It seems as if the part-whole relation is “special” 
compared to other relations38—that there is something 
                                                           
38  This intuitively appealing view has been well stated by Lewis.  
In Parts of Classes (p. 84), Lewis characterizes “mereological 
 
-58-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
67 
radically different between it and, say, the relation of being 
north of.  Some of our best established intuitions about 
reality suggest that the link between part and whole is more 
than just a relation—that somehow or other, the whole is 
just the parts.  The source of these intuitions might be the 
fact that the parts contain all the matter contained in the 
whole.  The bricks, together with the mortar (if any), 
contain all the matter that belongs to the wall; that matter is 
partitioned among these parts of the wall.  Outside the 
bricks and other parts of the wall, the wall has no matter at 
all.  But one must be careful before deciding that the wall is 
just the bricks and mortar, or that the being of the wall is 
just the being of the (properly arranged) bricks and mortar.  
In Chapter 1 I showed that two logically distinct objects 
can share the same energy and mass.  Even if the bricks and 
mortar contain all the matter that is in the wall, this does 
not automatically imply that the bricks and mortar are the 
same as the wall.  Instead, this may tell us that the bricks 
and mortar are distinct from the wall, but share substance 
with the wall.  The wave example in Chapter 1 was one 
illustration of such substance sharing.  To get an example 
of substance sharing which involves two objects of the 
same sort, visualize two water waves coming together and 
passing through each other.  (Breakers may have trouble 
doing this without crashing to bits, but smaller water 
waves, like the ones in boats’ wakes, do not.)  At the 
moment of their overlap, the two waves encompass the 
same matter.  Of course, the waves aren’t just “things,” 
they are processes.  But the same kind of substance sharing 
happens with the wall and its bricks.     
                                                                                                                    
relations” as “something special”. 
-59-

God, Son of Quark 
 
68 
The brick wall is not the bricks; the wall’s existence is 
not the existence of the bricks, for the bricks could exist 
without the wall.  The bricks are simply objects that share 
substance with the wall.  This substance sharing is of the 
same nature as the substance sharing in the wave examples, 
here and in Chapter 1.  Of course, the commingling of 
substance is more intimate in the wall.  All the matter of the 
brick belongs to the wall, and all the substance of the wall 
is shared out among the bricks (plus perhaps a little 
mortar).   
This sharing of substance by the part and the whole is 
what makes an object seem to be nothing but its parts.  
Early in life, we learn that every bit of stuff that makes up a 
physical object belongs to one or another of that object’s 
parts.  We learn that if you take away a part, you take away 
from the substance (and the mass) of the whole.  If you take 
away all the parts, the whole vanishes.  But this only shows 
that all the substance of the whole belongs to the various 
parts at the same time that it belongs to the whole.  It does 
not imply that the whole is nothing more than the parts.  
The distinction between these two implications may seem 
subtle, but when one thinks about it, it becomes more and 
more blatant.  The whole is there, and is not the parts—yet 
all the whole’s substance happens to be the substance of the 
parts.   (Perhaps this is part of the meaning of the idea of a 
part.  To be a part of a thing X is, at very least, to “own” no 
substance except some of what X also “owns.”) 
 
The Stonemason’s Argument 
 
For an object to be a part, it is enough for that object to 
stand in a certain relation to a whole.  No added equation of 
-60-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
69 
the whole to the parts is necessary or possible.  To make 
this claim more credible, I will point out that such an 
“added equation” could not be verifiable through 
experience.  That is, once we know that the brick is a part 
of the wall, no extra observation could confirm that the 
wall is, or is not, just the bricks.   
Consider a stonemason trying to build a section of a 
brick wall from a pile of bricks.  Suppose that the mason is 
trying to restore a damaged wall that originally contained a 
single green brick as well as many of the usual red bricks.  
The mason asks himself “Is the green brick still in the 
wall?”  He looks at the wall, and finds that the green brick 
still is there.  Now he knows that the green brick is part of 
the wall.  This knowledge enables the mason to do many 
things he could not do before.  He can avoid building more 
green bricks into the wall if he wants to restore the 
damaged wall to its original color scheme.  He can remove 
the green brick if he wants to make the wall more purely 
red.   
Now suppose a reductionist philosopher comes along 
and tells the mason, “You already know that the green 
brick is part of the wall, and that the other bricks in the wall 
are parts of the wall.  But there is another fact you should 
know:  the wall is just the bricks and mortar.  Strictly 
speaking, there is nothing there besides the bricks and 
mortar.”  Would this information enable the mason to do 
anything that he could not do before, when he only knew 
that the green brick was a part?  Of course it would not!  
Once the mason knows that the green brick is a part of the 
wall, he understands the practical results of this fact (for 
example, that the wall will get more uniform in color if he 
removes the green brick).  He does not need to worry about 
-61-

God, Son of Quark 
 
70 
the philosopher’s claim that the wall is just the bricks.  He 
can do the same things to the brick and to the wall, whether 
that claim is true or false.  Nothing that he experiences will 
tell him whether the wall is just the bricks.  All he ever 
needs to know is that the brick stands in a certain relation 
to the wall.  And of course, there is no doubt for him that 
the wall and the brick both are legitimate objects—that 
both bricks and wall really exist.  To work as a mason, he 
has to believe in the existence of the bricks and of the 
wall—or at least to behave as if those two facts were true.     
Reflection on this example, and on other examples like 
it, will reveal that no sensory evidence can tell us whether 
the wall is or is not just the bricks.  One can generalize this 
observation to all objects made of matter.  All possible 
observations of parts of material objects are compatible 
with the belief that parts are objects related to the whole 
and sharing substance with it, instead of objects 
constituting the being of the whole.  Even if the wall were 
just the bricks and mortar and nothing more, the mason 
would never find this out by doing masonry work.  An 
experimental scientist studying the wall would not find this 
out either.  Observations and experiments simply cannot 
answer the question of which belief is best.   
I do not want to take up the old and well-known 
philosophical questions about verifiability and meaning 
here.  For those who care, I will say that I am not a 
verificationist in any ordinary sense of that word.  There 
are significant questions that sense experience cannot 
answer.  Philosophy is full of questions of this kind.  The 
argument about the stonemason shows that the question “Is 
the wall just the bricks?” is just such a question.  We know, 
by inference from our observations, that the brick is a part 
-62-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
71 
of the wall.  We know, by inference from our observations, 
that the brick shares substance with the wall.  If we assert 
in addition that the wall in some sense is its bricks and 
other parts, then we are asserting a metaphysical thesis that 
science cannot confirm or challenge.  Also, we are adding a 
new relation—the identity relation between the whole and 
its parts—to the picture of what is happening.39  We will 
never need this new relation to explain the observable 
behavior of the wall, since the existence of the ordinary 
whole-part relation, plus substance sharing, can do that.  
Neither the mason nor the scientist can bump into this 
identity relation, and the logic and arithmetic of whole and 
part (recall Chapter 1) suggest that this relation does not 
hold between whole and parts.  It appears that there is no 
good reason to believe that this added relation of identity 
holds—and there are some good reasons not to believe it.  
                                                           
39 Lewis holds that there is an identity of this sort; see Parts of 
Classes, pp. 81-85.  D.M. Armstrong argues for a view in which the 
whole-part relation is a kind of partial identity (see A Theory of 
Universals, pp. 37-38).    
 
-63-

God, Son of Quark 
 
72 
-64-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
73 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4.  
Wholes or Just Parts? 
 
 
Not everyone who thinks about wholes and parts arrives 
at the conclusions that I reached in the previous chapter.  
The 
philosopher 
David 
Lewis40 
has 
suggested 
a 
philosophical interpretation of mereology which is, in some 
respects, opposite to mine.  Another philosopher, Donald 
L.M. Baxter, has discussed another version of the view that 
the whole is the parts.41  Baxter also has discussed an 
opposing “Non-Identity view” of whole and part42.  My 
conception of whole and part is a variation of what Baxter 
calls the Non-Identity view.   
In this chapter I will discuss some of these 
philosophers’ ideas about whole and part, and some of the 
arguments that philosophers have used to attack and defend 
these ideas.  I will devote special attention to Lewis’s view, 
as I understand that view.  Then I will show where Lewis’s 
interpretation of mereology goes wrong, and why his 
                                                           
40 In Parts of Classes.   
 
41 Baxter, “Identity in the Loose and Popular Sense,” pp. 578-581.   
 
42 Baxter, “Identity in the Loose and Popular Sense,” pp. 578-579.   
 
-65-

God, Son of Quark 
 
74 
objections to the opposite view do not hit my interpretation 
at all.   
Lewis claims that the relation between whole and parts 
is one of identity.  To understand this claim we must know 
what philosophers mean by “identity.”  Identity is the 
relation that holds between things that are the same thing.  
If Antarctica is the southernmost continent on Earth, then 
we can say that Antarctica is identical to the southernmost 
continent on Earth.  We also can say that Antarctica stands 
in the relation of identity to the southernmost continent on 
Earth.  The expressions “Antarctica” and “the southernmost 
continent on Earth” name the same object, so the object 
named by one of these expressions is related by identity to 
the object named by the other.   
In mathematics, the relation of identity is called 
equality.  It is the relation that mathematicians represent by 
the equals sign =.  If 2+2 is the same number as 4, then the 
number 2+2 is identical to the number 4.   
These examples point up the fact that identity is a 
relation that relates every object to itself.  Unlike other 
relations, which can relate one object to a different object, 
the relation of identity can only connect objects that are the 
same.  The fact that identity can never relate two different 
objects makes it an unusual relation.  Some philosophers 
have doubted that identity is a relation at all.43  But even if 
identity were not a genuine relation, this would not change 
the fact that identity acts like a relation and can be treated 
                                                           
43 These doubts are mentioned by Armstrong in A Theory of 
Universals, pp. 37-38.  Russell discusses identity as a relation in The 
Principles of Mathematics, par. 95 (p. 96).   
 
-66-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
75 
as one in formal reasoning.  Mathematicians and logicians 
usually represent identity with the equals sign, =.   
Philosophers have thought a great deal about the 
relation of identity.  One philosophical question about 
identity is whether there is any such thing as partial 
identity—that is, whether two objects can be distinct or 
different in some respects, and yet somehow or other be the 
same thing.  Some philosophers, including the philosopher 
of religion Charles Hartshorne, have argued that partial 
identity not only is possible, but also plays an important 
part in the world.  Hartshorne suggested that the notion of a 
partial identity among beings provides a fruitful way to 
think about the moral unity or interconnectedness which, 
according to some religious traditions, exists among 
persons.44  Another philosopher, D. M. Armstrong, has 
argued that the relation of part to whole is a kind of partial 
identity.45  Armstrong has used this conception of partial 
identity in the study of a classic philosophical problem, the 
problem of universals.46          
Mathematicians often use a trick like partial identity 
when they need to equate things that are not identical but 
only resemble each other in some respects.  The 
mathematical device known as “equivalence classes”47 lets 
                                                           
44 Hartshorne, Omnipotence and Other Theological Mistakes, pp. 
99-110.   
 
45 Armstrong, A Theory of Universals, pp. 37-38.   
 
46 Armstrong, A Theory of Universals, especially p. 38. 
 
47 This device is discussed in introductory texts on abstract 
algebra. 
 
-67-

God, Son of Quark 
 
76 
mathematicians make such thinking rigorous.  As the 
philosopher W. V. O. Quine has pointed out, in the 
foundations of mathematics it sometimes is practical to 
regard things as being equal even if those things actually 
are similar only in certain respects.48  But one does not 
have to believe in partial identity to do this.     
In this book, I am not going to argue for or against the 
reality of partial identity.  I am discussing these relations 
mostly to point out that one can ask serious philosophical 
questions about the seemingly simple idea of being the 
same.  I will look into a different problem about identity:  
the question of whether a single thing can be identical to 
several things together.  This is the kind of identity that 
Lewis claims to exist between any whole object and its 
parts.49  (I should mention that Lewis does not seem to 
deny the reality of composite wholes.50) 
In mathematical logic, statements about what exists are 
couched in the language of quantifiers.  A quantifier is a 
phrase like “There is” or “For all” which tells us how many 
objects or entities have some property.  For example, in the 
sentence “There is a brown dog,” the phrase “There is” acts 
as a quantifier.  Because of the presence of the phrase 
“there is,” that sentence tells us that there is at least one 
                                                                                                                    
 
48 See Quine’s remarks on equality and identity in his book Set 
Theory and Its Logic, pp. 14-15. 
 
49  See Lewis, Parts of Classes, pp. 81-85.   
 
50 I think this is clear from his remarks in the footnote on p. 70 of 
Parts of Classes.   
 
-68-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
77 
brown dog.  In the (false) sentence “All dogs have tails,” 
the word “All” acts as a quantifier.  It tells us how many 
dogs have tails:  they all do.  (Of course, “All dogs have 
tails” does not tell us the exact number of dogs that have 
tails.  Depending on how many dogs currently exist, there 
may be one tailed dog or a million.  But it does tell us how 
many dogs do not have tails:  zero.  Thus it is a statement 
about quantity.)  There are other quantifiers that are more 
complex, but I will not deal with them here.  My aim is not 
to provide a lesson in mathematical logic, but to say 
enough about quantifiers to make clear the central idea of 
Lewis’s argument.   
Lewis points out that not all quantifiers say something 
solely about individual objects.51  Quantifier phrases like 
“There is” and “All” say that there is an individual object 
of a certain sort, or that all individual objects have a certain 
property.  But people often reason about groups of objects 
as well as about individual objects.  For example, one could 
say “In this field, some dogs formed a pack.”  In this 
sentence (which is not Lewis’s example), the word “some” 
acts as a quantifier.  However, that word does not only say 
that individual objects exist.  Instead, it says something 
about a group of dogs—a group that formed a pack.  In this 
particular sentence, “some dogs formed a pack” means this:  
there are several dogs, which together have the property of 
having formed a pack.  It does not mean that there is at 
least one individual dog that formed a pack.  (After all, no 
individual dog, considered alone, can form a pack.) 
In “Some dogs formed a pack,” the word “some” acts 
                                                           
51 Lewis, Parts of Classes, pp. 62-71.   
 
-69-

God, Son of Quark 
 
78 
as a plural quantifier.  That is, it is a word or phrase that 
declares the existence of a plurality of things, or of several 
things, which together have some property.  This word or 
phrase does not simply declare the existence of individual 
things, each of which has some property.   
Lewis’s arguments imply that plural quantification is a 
legitimate part of logic that does not pose any fatal 
philosophical difficulties.52  According to this view, it is 
legitimate to speak of some dogs having the property of 
having formed a pack, just as it is legitimate to speak of a 
dog having the property of having joined a pack.  This 
subtle and technical thesis in philosophical logic has a great 
impact on our view of the relation between wholes and 
parts.  As Lewis knew, it suggests that there may be a 
logical way to regard a whole as being nothing more than 
its parts.   
Consider the claim that a particular dog is just some 
dog-parts in a certain arrangement—that there’s nothing 
else to the dog beyond that.  This is a claim that a 
reductionist might love.  But just what could a reductionist 
mean by this?  Mainly that a dog is identical to its parts.  
This claim implies that once we have listed the dog-parts, 
we do not also have to list the dogs themselves to get a 
thorough inventory of everything alive in the kennel.  
However, we cannot truthfully say that the dog is just the 
parts unless the parts can have the property of being a dog.  
This particular reductionist claim cannot possibly be true 
unless the parts can literally be the whole dog.   
It is plenty clear that the dog cannot simply be identical 
                                                           
52  Lewis, Parts of Classes, pp. 62-71.  
 
-70-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
79 
to any one of its parts.53  But it is equally clear that identity 
of the ordinary sort, which is mentioned in sentences like 
“2+2 is identical to 4,” cannot hold between the dog and all 
of its parts together.  For the dog-parts (as distinguished 
from the dog they make up) are many things.  The dog is 
one thing.  Ordinary identity or equality links objects which 
are the same—or, more correctly, it links an object to itself.  
But the relation between the dog and its parts does not link 
an object to itself.  It links an object which is a dog to many 
objects, none of which are dogs.  Therefore, the relation 
between the dog and its parts cannot be the ordinary 
relation of identity. 
Some philosophers already have made this objection to 
the identity of whole and parts.  The objection takes various 
forms in their writings.54  The objection seems airtight, but 
Lewis’s position shows a possible way around it.  Lewis 
has proposed that we think of the relation of whole to parts 
as a genuine relation of identity, but one different from the 
simple relation of identity that holds between 2 + 2 and 4.  
The relation between the dog and the parts is one of plural 
identity.  This relation relates a thing to some things, not 
simply to another thing.  And this is where Lewis’s ideas 
about plural quantification come to bear on the problems of 
whole and part.  If plural quantification is a legitimate part 
                                                           
53 Except itself, if one counts the dog itself as a part of the dog.  
As I said earlier, I elect not to count an object as a part of itself, though 
the opposite choice is commonly made and is just as logically sound.   
 
54 Baxter describes a similar, though different, objection in 
“Identity in the Loose and Popular Sense,” pp. 578-579.  Lewis (Parts 
of Classes, p. 84) mentions another similar-though-different objection.   
 
-71-

God, Son of Quark 
 
80 
of logic, then statements like “Some parts are a dog” make 
sense.  It is possible to say “Some parts are a dog” and 
mean that the dog is all the parts, instead of meaning 
(absurdly) that each part is a dog.  If we use plural 
quantification to describe the world, then we can describe 
the relation of plural identity between a whole and all its 
parts.  Therefore, if we allow logic to include plural 
quantification (as Lewis suggests that we do), we can easily 
extend it slightly further to allow for plural identity (as 
Lewis does).   
The use of plural quantifiers makes it easier to state the 
claim that the whole is just the parts.  If we can say that all 
the dog-parts collectively have a certain property, then we 
can say that those parts collectively are the whole.   
Of course, the fact that it is possible to make such a 
statement without contradicting oneself does not imply the 
that statement is true.  The statement “The earth is a cube” 
is not obviously self-contradictory, but it happens to be 
false.  And even if we accept Lewis’s views on the nature 
of plural quantification, this does not automatically imply 
that the dog really is its parts.  To see whether this further 
conclusion is true, we must examine in more detail Lewis’s 
views about mereology. 
On Lewis’s view, the whole-part relation of mereology 
is a relation of partial identity.  In other words, the dog-
parts taken together are identical to the dog.  Each of the 
parts is, as it were, credited toward the being of the dog; the 
dog’s being is nothing more than the being of all its parts, 
considered simultaneously.  On this view, the whole-part 
relation is a kind of identity.    
Lewis’s work shows that it is possible, using plural 
quantification, to speak of the whole-part relation as if it 
-72-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
81 
were a kind of identity.  But this, alone, does not imply that 
the relation really is a kind of identity.  Lewis himself 
recognized this; he gave examples of ways to speak of 
other relations, which clearly are not identity, as if they 
were kinds of identity.55  Lewis knew that even if we can 
talk about a relation in a way that makes it sound like 
identity, we cannot be sure that the relation really is a kind 
of identity.  But Lewis also decided that the whole-part 
relation is a kind of identity.  I am arguing for the opposite 
conclusion.  Plural quantification may let us speak as if the 
dog were its parts, but it leaves open the possibility that the 
“are” in the sentence “These parts are this dog” does not 
express genuine identity.  An opponent of Lewis could say 
“Yes, these parts ‘are’ this dog—but the ‘are’ in that 
sentence doesn’t stand for identity.” 
On Lewis’s view, the whole-part relation is one of 
plural identity, and is a legitimate kind of identity.  But an 
opponent of this view remains free to argue that the relation 
of plural identity is not really a relation of identity at all, 
and should be called something else.  Perhaps plural 
identity is not a kind of identity, just as a full house (in the 
poker sense) is not a kind of house.  Perhaps so-called 
partial identity only resembles identity in certain key 
respects.  (Lewis noted such a resemblance, but used it to 
support the view that partial identity is a type of identity.56)   
Mathematicians sometimes use relations that closely 
resemble identity but are not genuine examples of identity.  
                                                           
55 Lewis, Parts of Classes, p. 84.     
 
56 Lewis, Parts of Classes, p. 84.   
 
-73-

God, Son of Quark 
 
82 
This lends weight to our suspicion about Lewis’s view.  As 
I mentioned earlier, mathematicians often treat objects that 
are not identical at all as if they were identical—and 
mathematicians do this without the slightest threat to the 
consistency of their reasonings.  The trick is the method of 
equivalence classes, which uses the idea of an equivalence 
relation.57  An equivalence relation has many of the 
algebraic properties of the identity relation—for example, it 
relates each object to itself.  It also comes close to many of 
the logical properties of identity—for example, if two 
objects are equivalent, then they share some of their 
properties (though not necessarily all of their properties, as 
would happen with genuine identity).  But there is no 
question that most equivalence relations are not relations of 
identity.  Lewis has shown that the whole-part relation 
resembles identity more closely than we previously had 
suspected.  But does that prove that it is identity?   
This, then, is the first part of my objection to Lewis’s 
position:  our ability to treat the whole-part relation as an 
identity relation does not imply that it actually is an identity 
relation.  But Lewis’s argument for the identity of whole 
and parts does not rest solely on the fact that the whole-part 
relation is formally like identity.  Rather, it rests on 
weightier philosophical considerations.  What I take to be 
the crux of Lewis’s argument is summarized in the 
following quotes from Lewis’s book Parts of Classes.  
Speaking of “cat-fusions” (wholes built up from cats), 
Lewis argues that a cat-fusion is just identical to the cats it 
                                                           
57 Equivalence relations are discussed in various texts on abstract 
algebra.   
 
-74-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
83 
contains:  “Take them together or take them separately, the 
cats are the same portion of Reality either way[...].”  Lewis 
then goes on to say that in an accounting of all there is, “it 
would be double counting to list the cats and then also list 
their fusion.”58  These two quotes together express the view 
of wholes and parts that I have been trying to undermine 
throughout this book.  By asserting that one does not need 
to count the cat-fusion as well as the parts, Lewis 
presupposes that the cat-fusion is its parts, in some sense of 
“is.”  But more importantly, the quote reveals a central 
intuition that appears to underlie Lewis’s position.  This is 
the feeling that the cat-fusion must be the cats because it is 
made of the same stuff as the cats.  Add up all the cats, and 
you have the same portion of substance—or “portion of 
Reality” as Lewis puts it—that you find in the cat-fusion. 
This intuition seems to support the view that the cat-
fusion is just the cats that make it up.  But this evidence is 
not so weighty if one recalls the idea of substance sharing, 
which I set forth in Chapter 1.  Lewis used the phrase 
“portion of Reality,” but another way of putting it is that 
the cats share the same substance as the cat-fusion.  The 
substance of the cat-fusion is exactly the same stuff as the 
substance of all the cats together.  And the fact that two 
objects share substance does not automatically make them 
identical.  The water-wave experiment in Chapter 1 pointed 
to this fact.        
The main reason Lewis’s position seems plausible is, I 
think, the fact that the whole is made of the same stuff as 
the parts.  Presumably, this is at least part of what it means 
                                                           
58 Lewis, Parts of Classes, p. 81 (for both quotes). 
 
-75-

God, Son of Quark 
 
84 
to say that the whole is “the same portion of Reality” as the 
parts.  But this fact does not support the identity of whole 
and parts.  Our intuitions may make us feel that it supports 
this identity—but that feeling only shows that our intuitions 
about whole and parts are inadequate, as I argued in 
Chapter 1.      
Using Lewis’s cat-fusion example as a start, I will now 
set forth the rest of my objection to Lewis’s conception of 
the whole-part relation.  To do this, I will use the 
relationship between cat-parts and a whole cat rather than 
that between a cat-fusion (a less familiar object!) and a 
single cat.   
The first point in my second objection is this:  the claim 
that there is a separate cat, besides the cat-parts, is 
impossible to refute or confirm scientifically.  I argued this 
point in an earlier chapter, using a brick wall instead of a 
cat as an example.  But even if the assumption that there is 
a separate cat does not help us explain our experiences, it 
does help us to understand them properly.  Indeed, we must 
make this assumption if we want to avoid falling into 
nihilism—the view that nothing exists at all.   
The cat is the whole that exists when certain parts are 
united in a certain way.  Once we have admitted that the 
cat-parts exist, and have admitted that those parts are 
hooked together as they are, we no longer can deny there is 
a cat.  If we think that this denial is acceptable, then it 
would be sheer arbitrariness not to extend it to other 
composite objects besides cats.  And if we do this, we have 
to deny that any object divisible into parts is real.  In the 
next chapter I will show that this view is self-contradictory; 
for now I will simply point out that it is not a view that a 
sensible person should adopt.  If there are no composite 
-76-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
85 
objects, then there literally are no things other than the 
ultimate constituents of matter.  This means no atoms, no 
bricks, and no human bodies.  (As I will show later, this 
view also implies that if the subatomic structure of matter 
happens to be a certain way, then there is nothing at all!)   
Of course, Lewis does not adopt any of these 
conclusions.  But these conclusions do follow from Lewis’s 
view of identity, if we take that view to its logical endpoint.  
To escape these conclusions, we must stop short of that 
endpoint by changing Lewis’s view to allow a whole 
distinct from the parts into our picture of existence.  There 
are cat-parts—but we cannot fully understand the world 
until we admit that there is, in addition, a cat.  However, 
once we have admitted the existence of the cat in addition 
to the existence of its parts, then the whole-part relation 
cannot be an identity relation of any ordinary sort.  
Whatever kind of relation this partial identity is, it is not the 
kind of identity that would let us say, “There—we’ve 
counted all the cat-parts.  Now we don’t need to count 
anything else to find out which entities just went up into 
that tree.”  Even if the parts in some sense are the cat, that 
sense of “are” cannot be one which excludes the additional 
existence of the cat.   
Lewis’s part-whole “identity” relation is not like what 
we usually call “identity.”  Antarctica is identical to the 
southernmost continent on Earth; thus, Antarctica does not 
exist in addition to the southernmost continent on Earth. To 
be complete, our ontology needs to contain only one of 
these continents.  This is the hallmark of real identity:  
“two” things are identical if they really are one thing.  But 
if our ontology contains all the cat parts, and those parts are 
arranged in a catly way, we still have left something out 
-77-

God, Son of Quark 
 
86 
until we let the cat in.  The reality of the parts, plus the fact 
that the parts are connected in a suitable way, implies the 
reality of the cat.  Nevertheless, the parts are not the cat.   
The cat-as-a-whole helps us to interpret a certain fact in 
our experience.  I am speaking of the simple and obvious 
fact that cats exist.  The reductionist view may be “right” 
when used solely as a rule of scientific method.  For 
practical reasons, we should try to explain the properties of 
wholes in terms of the properties of their parts, and often 
(perhaps always) we can do this.  But even if the properties 
(including behavior) of the cat can be “explained away” in 
terms of cat parts, we still are stuck with the experienced 
fact that there is a cat.  Only the existence of a real cat can 
make this fact true.  If strictly speaking there is no real cat, 
then there simply is no cat at all—and adding the weasel 
words “strictly speaking” does not change the impact of the 
conclusion that Tabby does not exist.  If we do not want to 
drop cats from our picture of the cosmos, and embrace a 
skepticism about cats as total as the skepticism with which 
Descartes contended, then we must admit that “There is a 
cat” is true.  And once we have admitted this truth, we can 
assume just enough objects to explain why this fact is true.  
Only one object will do:  a real cat.   
The preceding arguments show that Lewis’s view of the 
whole-part relation cannot stand up to the facts of 
experience and to the demands of logic at the same time.  
Lewis suggests that we regard the relation between the 
whole and its parts as a type of identity.  This suggestion, if 
followed, would issue in the view that the whole is the 
parts, and that there is no whole at all beyond the parts.  
But we now know that we should not embrace that view. If 
we do decide that parthood is a kind of identity, we also 
-78-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
87 
must concede that this kind of identity is quite different 
from what we normally call “identity.”  In particular, this 
identity relation must leave room for the existence of a new 
object—the whole—as well as the parts.  If we believe that 
Lewis’s whole-part identity relation is like this, then it is 
not really an identity relation, and Lewis’s position loses 
force.  We can call this relation a very strange kind of 
identity, or if we prefer, we can call it not quite a kind of 
identity.  But no matter what we call it, it must relate the 
parts collectively to a whole that exists in addition to those 
parts.  If we count everything that’s up in the tree, we still 
must count all the cat-parts plus the cat.   
 
-79-

God, Son of Quark 
 
88 
-80-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
89 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5.  
The Vital Relation 
 
 
The “parts as whole” view fails to capture some 
features of the part-whole relation.  This failure supports 
my proposed view of that relation.  Earlier I said that 
people often think wrongly about the part-whole relation.  
We do not normally think of that relation as a relation 
between distinct objects, like the other basic relations of 
physical science.  We can see intuitively that spatial and 
temporal relations are relations between terms that may be 
distinct.  If object A is one mile due north of object B, then 
A and B are distinct, but are related in a certain way.  If 
event E is one second earlier than event F, then E and F are 
distinct but are related in another way.59  If X is a part of Y, 
then X and Y are related in still another way—but we tend 
to feel that this is a “special” relation, different from the 
rest.60  The spatial and temporal relations normally connect 
                                                           
59 These examples ignore certain possibilities suggested by the 
general theory of relativity.  In certain extreme examples of curved 
spacetimes, an object may be one mile north of itself, and an event may 
even be one second earlier than itself.  The examples here hold good in 
any reasonably “normal” spacetime.    
 
60 As I mentioned earlier, Lewis characterized “mereological 
 
-81-

God, Son of Quark 
 
90 
distinct objects.  For the whole-part relation, we feel that 
the whole is not distinct from the parts, that it is not 
separate from the parts.  Sometimes we feel that the part-
whole relation is not a relation of an object to another 
object, as much as it is a relation of an object to itself.   
These intuitive feelings are inaccurate, but it is 
understandable that we have them.  There is no point in 
denying that the part is just a piece of the whole, or that the 
part is not spatially separate from the whole.  Spatially, the 
part is inside the whole (provided that the whole is an 
object located in space).  And as I pointed out earlier, the 
substance of the whole is just the substance of its parts.  
The intuition that the whole-part relation is different from 
ordinary physical relations is well-motivated in this respect.   
However, there is another respect in which our 
unschooled intuitions about wholes and parts go grievously 
wrong.  We are in error if we feel that a whole object isn’t 
anything but its parts.  I have spent the last three chapters 
trying to demolish this seemingly natural view.  But there 
also is another error—one that creeps into much of our 
thinking about wholes and parts.  This is the feeling that the 
relation between whole and part somehow is contained in 
the whole or the part. 
We are not normally aware that we have a feeling of 
this sort.  Probably not everyone has this feeling.  But the 
following thought experiment will show that it is easy to 
get this feeling if we think just a little about wholes and 
parts.     
Imagine a ham sandwich.  Now mentally lift the bread 
                                                                                                                    
relations” as “something special” (Parts of Classes, p. 84).     
 
-82-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
91 
off the top of the sandwich, and move the displaced piece 
of bread to the opposite side of the room.  After this 
operation, the sandwich no longer exists as a whole; that is, 
the room contains no object that qualifies as a sandwich.  
(Of course, one could call what remains an “open-faced 
sandwich” plus a loose piece of bread, but this is not a 
sandwich in the strictest sense of the word.)  Now bring the 
piece of bread back across the room, and shove it back 
down on to the rest of the sandwich.  Presto—a sandwich is 
born.   
Ask yourself this question about the last step in this 
experiment:  When we brought the bread and the remaining 
part of the sandwich back together, what did we have to 
add to make sure they really formed a sandwich?  Answer:  
Nothing!  A sandwich consists of bread and other 
foodstuffs in a certain combination.  And when we say that 
the top slice of bread is part of the sandwich, we are 
admitting that the top slice of bread, with the other 
materials, is arranged in a way that creates a sandwich.  
There is no special tie, no special relation or logical “glue,” 
needed to make the bread part of the sandwich.  The 
bread’s being part of the sandwich is a consequence of the 
make-up of the sandwich—the way the sandwich is 
arranged.  Once we have made up the sandwich, then we do 
not also need to create an extra relationship between bread 
and sandwich to make the bread part of the sandwich.                
This simple kitchen experiment leads us to an 
interesting finding:  the relationship between a sandwich 
and its parts can seem to be an aspect or facet of the 
sandwich itself.  This relationship between bread and 
sandwich seems different from other relations, such as 
being north of.  For a piece of bread to be north of a 
-83-

God, Son of Quark 
 
92 
sandwich, the bread and the sandwich must be arranged in 
a certain way with respect to the Earth (the bread must be 
closer to the North Pole).  But for a piece of bread to be 
part of the sandwich, the Earth is not required, and neither 
is any other external object.  All one needs is the bread and 
the sandwich.  The relationship seems to be “in” the 
sandwich, not “outside” of it in the form of an extra, added 
relation.     
This feeling that the sandwich-bread relation is “in” the 
sandwich is a mild version of an old and honorable 
philosophical idea.  I refer to the traditional philosophers’ 
distinction between internal relations and external 
relations.61  Many philosophers have claimed that there are 
two kinds of relations.  Some relations are “external”:  that 
is, things can have them, but they are not “built into” the 
things that have them.  Being north of is an example of 
such a relation; it holds between two objects if those 
objects happen to stand in a certain relation to the Earth, 
and not simply because of what the objects are.  Another 
example is the relation of being older than; this depends on 
the time elapsed between the moments when different 
things begin.  The “internal” relations, on the other hand, 
are relations that are facets of the things themselves—
relations that link things because of what the things are, or 
relations that are “built into” the things they relate.62  An 
                                                           
61 This distinction is discussed in (for example) Armstrong’s 
book, A Theory of Universals, pp. 84-85.           
 
62 Armstrong gives a more precise and more adequate definition 
(A Theory of Universals, p. 85). 
 
-84-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
93 
example might be the relationship between a printed road 
map and a road shown in the map.  The map is a map of 
that particular road because of the characteristics of the 
map itself—namely, what is shown on the map.  The map 
is related to the road because of the map’s own internal 
characteristics.     
Not all philosophers have believed there is a difference 
between external and internal relations.  Indeed, many 
twentieth-century 
philosophers 
have 
ignored 
this 
difference.  I am not going to take up this issue here.  This 
much is clear:  normally, we think of the whole-part 
relation as if it were an internal relation.  That relation has 
the psychological “feel” of an internal relation.  It seems to 
hold just because of what the whole is, and not because 
both whole and part are joined by some third factor, some 
“external” tie or bond.   
The naive view that the relationship between whole and 
part is internal is one of several ideas that I am challenging 
in this book.  I maintain that the whole-part relation is not 
internal; it is not just a side effect of what wholes and parts 
are.  My earlier arguments against the identity of a whole 
and its parts should provide a clue to why I am making this 
claim.  One cannot think of the whole-part relation as 
internal, because one cannot equate the whole to its parts.  
Instead, the whole is one object, and the parts are other 
objects; by arranging the parts correctly, one can cause the 
whole to come into being, but that is not the same as saying 
that the whole is the parts.  Certainly the behavior of the 
whole is strictly regulated by that of the parts; if all the 
parts are moving east, the whole cannot simultaneously 
-85-

God, Son of Quark 
 
94 
move west.63  But the whole is not simply the parts; it is a 
separate, distinct object, whose existence and properties 
happen to reflect the state of the parts.  Thus the relation 
between whole and parts is more correctly thought of as an 
“external” relation between distinct objects.  That relation 
is not a built-in facet of the objects’ nature, but is a relation 
into which two objects may enter as a result of physical 
circumstances, and which ties those objects together in 
some way.  In this respect, the relation is part of is like the 
relations is north of, is older than, and is deeper in the 
ocean than.  If the relation holds between two things, it 
does so because those two things are joined or placed 
together in a certain way.  The fact that the relation holds is 
not simply a side effect of the nature of the things involved.                 
 There is another peculiarity of the external-internal 
relation distinction that suggests that if that distinction has 
                                                           
63 Baxter (“Identity in the Loose and Popular Sense,” p. 579) 
notes that there is something wrong with the idea that one can sell all 
the pieces of a parcel of real estate and still claim to own the parcel 
itself.  Baxter suggests that this example supports the identity of the 
whole with its parts.  But the view I am presenting can handle this 
example just as well as can Baxter’s view.  According to my view, the 
parcel is not identical to all of its pieces collectively.  However, the 
substance of the parcel—the land, or earth materials, of which the 
parcel is composed—is shared out among the pieces.  Because of this 
substance sharing, if one gives away all the pieces of the parcel, one 
has no land left.  Hence the scam artist in Baxter’s example, who 
claims to own the whole parcel and not its parts, is wrong in thinking 
that he still owns any land.  Of course, it is thinkable that the laws of 
the country in which the land is situated might still allow him some 
kind of formal ownership of the parcel.  But even if this were the case, 
he would not in fact have any land at all.     
 
-86-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
95 
any force at all, we must put the whole-part relation on the 
external side of the divide.  This is the fact that the whole-
part relation, at least for physical objects, involves space in 
an essential way.64  Most relations involving space—such 
as is north of, is above, and the like—seem to be external 
relations.  But the whole-part relation, at least as it applies 
to physical objects, clearly involves space.  A brick cannot 
be part of a wall unless its position in space is within the 
boundaries of the wall.  This tells us that the whole-part 
relation cannot hold between two space-filling objects 
unless the relation of being spatially within also holds 
between those objects.  If A is a part of B, then A is inside 
the spatial boundaries of B.  Of course, there is more to 
being a part than just being on the inside.  A brick in a box 
is inside the box but not a part of it, and a board driven 
through a tree by a hurricane is not a genuine part of the 
tree.  But a physical object A cannot be a part of another 
physical object B if A is somewhere else besides where B 
is.  Thus, the whole-part relation for physical objects 
depends on the presence of an external relation.  It cannot 
be simply a byproduct of the nature of the whole involved, 
since that external relation is not a byproduct of anything’s 
nature.  So the whole-part relation cannot be just an internal 
relation.               
 
 
 
                                                           
64 For an argument that this relation does not always involve 
space, see Armstrong, A Theory of Universals, p. 37.  But physical 
objects’ parts are related to them spatially in a certain way. 
 
-87-

[Pages Deleted Here]
-88-

God, Son of Quark 
 
102 
 
In Conclusion 
 
In the last three chapters, we began with a look at 
mereology and went on to do some experiments with 
wholes and parts.  Along the way, we drew several 
conclusions that will be important in the rest of this book.   
The first and most important conclusion is that an 
object made of parts is not identical to those parts.  A brick 
wall is not just a bunch of bricks—though it is made of 
bricks.  Rather, a composite object is a separate object, 
additional to and quite distinct from its parts.  Of course, 
the whole is not independent of its parts; it comes into 
being when the parts are arranged and interconnected in the 
right way.  The whole shares the substance of the parts, and 
its properties are largely (and perhaps completely) fixed by 
the properties and relationships of its parts.  But this does 
not imply that the whole is its parts.   
The relationship of parts to whole is not one of identity, 
but one of causation.  The parts, by occurring in a 
particular arrangement and in particular states, cause the 
whole to come into being.  If you start with N parts, and put 
them together in a suitable way, then (bam!) you have N+1 
objects on your hands.70  You create an extra object.  This 
object is not created out of nothing, for all of the substance 
that makes up the parts also belongs to that extra object.  
After the extra object comes into being, the substance of a 
                                                           
70 This is another variation on the comparison of N with N+1 
objects that I earlier credited to Baxter (“Identity in the Loose and 
Popular Sense,” p. 579). 
 
-89-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
103 
part no longer belongs only to that part.  Instead, that 
substance belongs to the part and also to the extra object.  
The substance is not divided among the part and the extra 
object.  Instead, it belongs in full to both, in an arrangement 
that a lawyer might call joint ownership.                
If one disbands the parts, the whole ceases to exist.  As 
long as the whole exists, the properties of the whole are 
determined by the properties and relations of its parts.  (A 
holist might amend the last statement to say that many, but 
not all, of the properties of the whole are determined by the 
properties of the parts.  But the existence of the exceptions 
would not undo my point.)    
To make the new picture of whole and part clearer, I 
have sketched this idea schematically on the next page, 
alongside a diagram of the conventional idea of whole and 
part.  Visual metaphors for abstract concepts can be 
treacherous, but hopefully this drawing may be a little more 
effective than words in getting my point across.  When 
parts come together to form a whole, something else 
happens besides the convergence of the parts.  Specifically, 
a new object comes into being—an object that is logically 
distinct from the parts, and not identical to them in any 
reasonable sense of identity.  This object is the whole.  In 
many respects, it is a product of the parts; the coming 
together of the parts, in the proper arrangement, gives the 
whole its existence and its properties.  But the whole is not 
the parts.      
 
 
 
 
 
-90-

God, Son of Quark 
 
104 
 
 
 
 
 
Classical (top) and new (bottom) conception of the whole-part 
relationship.  Traditionally, the whole is regarded as being nothing but 
the parts in a certain arrangement.  But it is more logically coherent to 
suppose that the whole is an object distinct from the parts, which comes 
into existence when the parts are properly arranged.      
 
 
 
-91-
Note added later: The lower half of this diagram is meant to suggest
that the whole is distinct from its parts, but not that the whole is
independent of its parts.  Read the text for details.

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
105 
One consequence of this new picture of the whole is 
that the relationship between wholes and parts is not what 
is called an internal relation.  The fact that something is a 
part of some whole is not merely a fact about the make-up 
of that whole.  Instead, it is a fact about a relationship 
between two distinct objects—analogous to the fact that a 
certain object is to the north of another, or is older than 
another.   
This picture of the whole-part relationship is radically 
different from the usual picture.  According to the usual 
picture, the brick wall is nothing but the bricks that make it 
up, and the human body is nothing but the atoms of which 
it is composed.  Our new view, despite its apparent 
oddness, is more logically coherent than the traditional 
view.  The view that the whole is the parts raises problems 
about identity and difference—problems that we cannot 
solve without some serious fudging of the concept of 
identity.  Also, the usual view makes it difficult to imagine 
how anything besides tiny particles could exist at all.  The 
new view, that the whole is a separate object and is an 
effect of the parts, does not have these defects.  The new 
view may seem repulsive to some intuitions and offensive 
to some philosophical positions.  Actually, it comes closer 
to common sense than does the old view.  In ordinary life, 
everyone assumes that there are brick walls and human 
bodies, ham sandwiches and planets.  The discovery that 
these items can be broken down into atoms and particles 
does not lead people of common sense to decide that ham 
sandwiches don’t exist after all.  Our “new” view of whole 
and part agrees with the commonsense attitude that 
composite objects really exist.  The opposing view is 
surprisingly difficult to reconcile with this attitude.   
-92-

God, Son of Quark
These  considerations  support  the  new  picture  of  a 
whole distinct from its parts. There also is another, more 
important consideration: the new picture simplifies some of 
the  major  problems  of  philosophy.  Some  of  the  most 
important traditional philosophical riddles rest on subtle 
confusions about the whole-part relation.  If we reread 
these problems with the new view of wholes and parts in 
mind,  we  will  find  that  the  problems  look  much  less 
puzzling than they did at first.  This is what I will do in the 
rest of the book. 
106
-93-
Note added later: Part of this page has been omitted.

[Pages Deleted Here]
-94-

God, Son of Quark
The Ultimate Reality of All Things         
The second and third important points in our new view
211
-95-
Note added later: Most of this page was irrelevant to
this shortened book and hence was blanked out.  Read on.

God, Son of Quark 
 
212 
of the universe are ideas that have come up again and again 
throughout the book.  These are the ideas that wholes are 
not identical to their parts in any sense, and that all wholes 
are constituents of reality as fundamental and irreducible 
as the ultimate particles of matter.      
Scientists, philosophers and others sometimes speak as 
though the universe consisted of elementary particles and 
nothing else.  This idea, which may have existed even 
before Democritus’s view of the universe as “atoms and 
Void,”141 crops up again and again in writings about 
philosophy and science, though usually in disguised or 
implicit forms.  According to our new view of reality, this 
idea is completely and utterly wrong.  If by “the universe” 
one means “the natural world,” then the universe consists 
of many kinds of objects—not just elementary particles.  It 
includes birds, and icicles, and silver crystals, and galaxies, 
and human brains—all of which are just as fundamental, 
and just as ultimately real, as the elementary particles.  If 
you want an answer to the age-old question “What kinds of 
things really exist?”, then one obvious answer, “Elementary 
particles of matter,” is wrong.  A more correct answer is:  
all things.  All objects made of material particles are parts 
of the irreducible foundation of ultimate reality.  All of 
them are constituents of the world and cannot be equated to 
simpler or more fundamental constituents.  And this is the 
case even though all of these things are wholes built up 
from elementary particles and from nothing else.       
An inventory of the ultimate constituents of reality—of 
                                                           
141 Democritus, quoted in Freeman (ed.), Ancilla to The Pre-
Socratic Philosophers, p. 93.   
 
-96-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
213 
the ontology of the world—would have to include silver 
crystals, starfish, the Mona Lisa, and galaxies as well as 
leptons, quarks, and bosons.  The doings of the leptons, 
quarks and bosons may cause those other items in the list to 
come into being.  But that does not mean that the other 
items are just leptons, quarks and bosons at bottom, or that 
the other items are less fundamental or real than the so-
called “fundamental” particles.      
All this does not lessen the importance of the 
physicists’ quest for the final constituents of matter.  This 
quest, which currently takes the form of the search for a 
“theory of everything,” is an important expression of the 
human spirit.  The success of this magnificent endeavor 
would immeasurably deepen our understanding of reality, 
and would provide an answer to another age-old 
philosophical question:  “What is the material world made 
of?”  But no scientific theory can prove that a brain, a 
flower, or a piece of silver is only elementary particles.    
 
Emergent Properties Again         
 
The fourth major thesis in our new picture of reality is 
perhaps a corollary of the second and third.  It is that the 
emergent properties that belong to complex wholes are as 
real, and as central to reality, as the measurable physical 
properties of simple material particles.   
This is an important point for several reasons.  With the 
second point, it enables us to find the place of values in the 
natural world.  Values, such as goodness and beauty, are 
emergent properties.  A situation or event is good because 
of its effects on people, and perhaps for other reasons as 
well.  The goodness is not in any one of the elementary 
-97-

God, Son of Quark 
 
214 
particles that take part in the good situation.  Instead, it 
belongs to the situation as a whole.  A flower is beautiful 
because of the way its parts are arranged.  Without that 
arrangement, there would only be atoms, not a flower.  (An 
atom may be beautiful too, but that is a different kind of 
beauty, best known to scientists. Presumably, that kind of 
beauty is emergent as well.)  Properties like goodness and 
beauty depend on the structure of complex wholes.  This is 
not to say that values always are emergent properties; the 
smallest constituents of matter might, for all we know, have 
goodness and beauty.  (My personal suspicion, which I 
won’t try to defend here, is that they do.  At very least, the 
final mathematical theory that describes these particles is 
likely to be beautiful.)  But the goodness we find in 
everyday life, or the beauty we find in art and nature, 
belong to complex wholes.  These values, in their present 
forms, would not be there if the wholes dissolved into 
particles.  Therefore, those values are emergent properties.     
One hears it said that the “scientific” view of the 
world—that of a world built from material particles—
leaves no room for values.  Our new conception of wholes 
and parts shows that this claim has no basis in fact.  If 
emergent properties are ultimately real, and values are 
emergent properties, then values are ultimately real.  The 
goodness of a compassionate deed is as much a part of 
fundamental reality as the charge of the electron.  The 
beauty of a wildflower is as much a constituent of the 
cosmos as the mass of the proton.  A worldview that leaves 
room for wholes and their emergent properties leaves room 
for values, which are, at least usually, emergent properties 
of wholes.                     
This does not mean that our theory of wholes and parts 
-98-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
215 
can settle any specific moral or aesthetic controversies, 
either about the natural environment or about anything else.  
But it can put to rest the old saw that a world made of 
matter has no room in it for values.   
 
Aesthetic Experience:  A Road to Truth 
 
This conception of value has another important 
consequence for our understanding of human experience 
and its relation to the world.  This has to do with the nature 
of aesthetic experience.  By “aesthetic experience,” I mean 
experience centered on emotions and feelings produced by 
something a person is observing.  This type of experience 
includes perceptions of beauty, such as the feelings 
produced by art and nature.  However, it also includes other 
feeling-centered experiences that may not fall directly 
under the heading of “beauty.”  For example, there is the 
sensation of mystery that one sometimes has in the 
presence of a lowering dark sky.  There is the distinctive 
sensation of “farawayness” that accompanies certain 
summer days.  There is the unique emotional tone that one 
sometimes feels around trees—a tone different from the 
one that one feels around, say, flowers or grass.  And there 
is the feeling, caused by some works of art, that there is 
more in the artwork than one sees—a feeling that one is 
about to discover something that is not visible at first 
glance.  All of these subtle and elusive feelings are 
examples of aesthetic experience.   
There is a common belief that aesthetic experiences are 
subjective—that they are “in the eye of the beholder,” as 
the familiar saying about beauty goes.  Many people think 
of aesthetic experience as something that lies entirely in the 
-99-

God, Son of Quark 
 
216 
mind of the observer, and does not accurately reflect any 
feature of the external world.  According to this view, 
experiences of physical properties, like the size and weight 
of an object, may yield real knowledge about external 
objects, but experiences of beauty and emotional tone 
cannot.  Those who hold this view believe that aesthetic 
feelings and experiences can tell us about our own states of 
mind, but not about things out there in the world.  Real 
knowledge, on this view, comes from science, and perhaps 
from philosophy and theology, but not from art.  The arts, it 
is believed, can reveal beauty, cause enjoyment, and even 
communicate ideas, but cannot supply us with any new 
truths or knowledge, except for some knowledge that we 
could obtain by other means.  This view, at least in its 
simplest and less reflective forms, seems to be very widely 
held.  Critics and philosophers have proposed more 
elaborate versions of the idea, arguing for example that 
poetry can have an “emotive” function but cannot reveal 
truths about the world as science can do.142     
If aesthetic qualities are ultimately real, then this last 
view is wrong.  Aesthetic experiences do teach us 
something new about reality—something that neither 
science nor philosophy can discover or verify.  The 
                                                           
142 I. A. Richards made a claim of this general sort.  Richards’s 
views are discussed briefly in the articles “Belief, Problem of” and 
“Pseudo-statement” in Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics (Preminger, 
ed.).  Various ideas on poetic truth, and on the question of whether 
poetry can reveal or convey truth, are discussed in the following 
articles in that reference volume:  “Belief, Problem of”; “Meaning, 
Problem of”; “Criticism” (especially pp. 161-162); “Poetry, Theories 
of”.    
 
-100-

God, Son of Quark
qualities of feeling that we find in our aesthetic experiences 
are real features of the world—emergent features that are 
not  reducible  to  the  physical  properties  of  material 
particles.  And since emergent properties belong to ultimate 
reality (as we saw in earlier chapters), aesthetic experience 
is a form of experience of ultimate reality.143
There  is  an  obvious  rebuttal  to  the  claim  that  the 
aesthetic qualities of the world are real.  This comes from 
the fact that different observers get different experiences 
when  observing  the  same  object.  This  common
observation is the root of the saying that “beauty is in the 
eye of the beholder.”  But actually, this does not contradict 
the reality of aesthetic qualities at all.  This observation 
simply shows that an object can have more than one set of 
aesthetic qualities, and that an observer who interacts with 
the object may find any one (or more) of these sets of 
qualities.  A poet who sees beauty in an apple tree is finding 
a particular set of aesthetic qualities in the tree.144  Another 
poet  may  find  different  aesthetic  qualities,  seeing
__________
143 Some philosophers, including some Platonists, have regarded 
art as affording contact with ultimate reality (see, for example, the 
article “Platonism and Poetry” in Preminger (ed.),  Encyclopedia of 
Poetry and Poetics).  Most such philosophers seem to regard ultimate 
reality  as  something  external  to,  or  distinct  from,  the  visible  and 
tangible natural world.  On my view, the natural world is ultimately
real (whether or not anything else is), and the ultimate reality with 
which aesthetic experience connects us may lie entirely within that 
world.  
144 Those familiar with my previous writings may find this apple 
tree example familiar too. 
217
-101-
[part of footnote omitted]

God, Son of Quark 
 
218 
the same tree as imposing rather than simply as beautiful.  
What the poet finds in the tree depends on the poet’s state 
of mind—but that only shows that the tree has a diversity 
of aesthetic qualities, and that different qualities are 
obvious to observers in different mental states.   
Aesthetic perceptions of external objects arise from the 
brain’s interpretation of sense data.  But the fact that 
aesthetic knowledge of the apple tree depends on sensations 
of the apple tree does not contradict the fact that the tree’s 
aesthetic qualities are objectively real and extramental.  
The perception of the rectangular shape of a wooden door 
depends 
on 
the 
brain’s 
interpretation 
of 
sensory 
information—but that does not change the fact that the door 
is rectangular.  And the fact that this perception depends on 
the observer’s mental state (if one is drunk enough, one 
may see the door’s sides as a rhombus instead of a 
rectangle) does not imply that the door is not really 
rectangular.  Similarly, aesthetic perception can reveal real 
qualities in objects, even though such perception depends 
on one’s mental state and on one’s reactions to sensations.      
The observer-dependence of aesthetic perception is 
analogous to what happens when one photographs an apple 
tree through several different kinds of colored filters.  What 
colors one finds depends on what instrument one uses to 
photograph them—yet from a physicist’s perspective, all 
the colors of light that one can photograph really are there.  
The poet’s mind may filter out some of the emotional 
“colors” of experience and record only one set of emotional 
tones.  Another poet may record different tones.  Yet all of 
these feeling “colors,” or aesthetic qualities of the tree, are 
-102-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
219 
equally real.145     
Aesthetic experience is not simply a matter of 
enjoyment.  It also is a cognitive process—a process of 
learning, in which we find facts of a special sort.  The poet 
who sees beauty in an apple tree learns something new 
about the tree.  This learning is not merely metaphorical; 
the poet actually learns new facts about the tree—facts that 
scientific methods cannot disclose.  These are facts about 
certain aesthetic qualities—tones of feeling, or emotional 
“colors”—latent in the tree.  Which of these tones one finds 
depends on one’s state of mind.  But these qualities are not 
“merely psychological,” since they depend on the tree as 
well as on the poet’s state of mind.  Perhaps we should 
think of them as potentialities of the tree—products of the 
tree’s ability to produce certain inner changes in an 
observer.  Whatever they are, they are real emergent 
properties (perhaps relational properties) of the tree.   
The idea that aesthetic experience yields knowledge of 
reality is not a new one.  I wish to stress that I did not 
invent this idea.  The view that aesthetic experience yields 
a special knowledge of reality is deeply embedded in the 
history of human thought.  It crops up at many points in 
that history, from Platonism to the views of some modern 
poets, artists and critics.146  Throughout most of humanity’s 
                                                           
145 Popular wisdom recognizes the parallels between emotional 
perception and seeing through colored glass.  This insight lies behind 
the familiar expression “looking at the world through rose-colored 
glasses.” 
 
146 Many of these views are mentioned in the above-cited articles 
in the Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics (Preminger, ed.).  The 
relations between Platonism and poetry are described particularly in the 
 
-103-

God, Son of Quark 
 
220 
existence, people have recognized that art is a path to truth.  
Only in recent times have we largely forgotten this fact, 
under the influence of the so-called scientific worldview.  
Yet this fact is compatible with all that science has 
discovered.  Nothing in the idea of aesthetic truth can 
contradict any of the claims of science.  Aesthetic 
knowledge is gained through feeling experience, not 
through sensation and thought alone.  Aesthetic knowledge 
does not deal with the same facts that concern science; 
therefore it cannot conflict with scientific knowledge.  Yet 
aesthetic experience explores the inner nature of reality as 
deeply as do the discoveries of modern physics.      
Some philosophers, notably some of the Platonists, 
have regarded art as affording contact, not only with 
reality, but also with the ultimate reality behind the visible 
world.147  This is more or less the view that I am trying to 
revive here, but I want to give this view a new twist.  
Proponents of this view often regard ultimate reality as 
something purely spiritual—that is, something transcending 
the visible world, or lying outside the world of things made 
of material particles.  On my view, the world made of 
matter is ultimate reality—or at least is one part or sector of 
that reality.  The ultimate reality with which aesthetic 
experience connects us lies within the natural world, not 
outside it.  Yet despite this, the realities we discover 
through aesthetic experience do belong to a different order 
                                                                                                                    
articles “Poetry, Theories of” and “Platonism and Poetry.”  
 
147 See the article “Platonism and Poetry” in the Encyclopedia of 
Poetry and Poetics (Preminger, ed.).   
 
-104-

[Pages Deleted Here]
-105-

[Pages Deleted Here]
-106-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
261 
 
 
 
 
Works Cited 
 
 
The following list gives bibliographic information for all 
works cited in the book.  In some instances, information 
used in the book was available from many sources; in these 
cases, the works listed are the ones actually consulted.   
 
 
 
(No author listed), “Editorial Commentary”, Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, vol. 13 no. 1 (1990), p. 94.   
 
D.M. Armstrong, Universals:  an Opinionated Introduction 
(Boulder, Colorado:  Westview Press, 1989).   
 
————————, A Theory of Universals, vol. 2 of 
Universals and Scientific Realism by D.M. Armstrong 
(Cambridge, England:  Cambridge University Press, 1978).   
 
Jonathan Barnes, Aristotle (Oxford:  Oxford University 
Press, 1982).   
 
Donald L. M. Baxter, “Identity in the Loose and Popular 
Sense” (Mind vol. 97 (1988), pp. 575-582). 
 
 
-107-
Note added later: These are the works cited in the original
book.  Only some of them are cited in this short book.

God, Son of Quark 
 
262 
Henri Bergson, Creative Evolution, trans. Arthur Mitchell 
(N.Y.:  Henry Holt & Co., 1911).   
 
Keith Campbell, Body and Mind (2nd ed.:  Notre Dame:  
Univ. of Notre Dame Press, 1984).   
 
Donald A. Cooke, The Life and Death of Stars (New York:  
Crown Publishers, 1985). 
 
James W. Cornman and Keith Lehrer, Philosophical 
Problems and Arguments:  An Introduction (2nd ed.:  New 
York, Macmillan, 1974).     
 
V. Csányi, “Are Species Gaia’s Thoughts?”, Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, vol. 13 no. 1 (1990), p. 76; references 
on pp. 105-108.   
 
Daniel C. Dennett, Consciousness Explained (Boston:  
Little, Brown & Co., 1991).   
 
—————————, 
Content 
and 
Consciousness 
(London:   Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1969).   
 
John C. Eccles, Evolution of the Brain:  Creation of the Self 
(London:  Routledge, 1989).   
 
Robert Eisberg and Robert Resnick, Quantum Physics of 
Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei and Particles (N.Y.:  John 
Wiley & Sons, 1974).   
 
Paul Fishbane, “Elementary Particle Physics”, in Serway 
(cited below), pp. 1096-1099.   
-108-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
263 
 
Kathleen Freeman, trans., Ancilla to The Pre-Socratic 
Philosophers (Oxford:  Basil Blackwell, 1956).   
 
Etienne Gilson, The Christian Philosophy of St. Thomas 
Aquinas (London:  Victor Gollancz Ltd., 1957).   
 
Charles Hartshorne, Omnipotence and Other Theological 
Mistakes (Albany, N.Y.:  State University of New York 
Press, 1984).   
 
Desmond Paul Henry, Medieval Mereology (Amsterdam 
and Philadelphia:  B.R. Grüner, 1991).   
 
Eli Hirsch, The Concept of Identity (N.Y.: Oxford 
University Press, 1982).   
 
David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, L.A. Selby-
Bigge, ed.; revised by P.H. Nidditch (2nd ed.; Oxford:  
Clarendon Press, 1978).     
 
Frank Jackson, “Epiphenomenal Qualia”, Philosophical 
Quarterly vol. 32 no. 127 (1982).   
 
Menas Kafatos and Robert Nadeau, The Conscious 
Universe:  Part and Whole in Modern Physical Theory 
(New York:  Springer-Verlag, 1990). 
 
David K. Lewis, Parts of Classes (Oxford:  Basil 
Blackwell, 1991). 
 
 
-109-

God, Son of Quark 
 
264 
David K. Lewis, On the Plurality of Worlds (Oxford:  Basil 
Blackwell, 1986).     
 
David K. Lewis, Counterfactuals (Cambridge:  Harvard 
University Press, 1973).   
 
Lawrence Brian Lombard, Events:  a Metaphysical Study 
(London:  Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1986).   
 
Michael J. Loux (ed.), Universals and Particulars:  
Readings in Ontology (Notre Dame:  University of Notre 
Dame Press, 1976).   
 
————————, “The Existence of Universals”.  In 
Loux (ed.), Universals and Particulars:  Readings in 
Ontology (cited above).   
 
Arthur O. Lovejoy, The Great Chain of Being (Harvard 
University Press, 1964).   
 
J. E. Lovelock, Gaia:  a New Look at Life on Earth 
(Oxford:  Oxford University Press, 1979; reprint ed. 1987).   
 
William A. MacKay, “The Way of All Matter”, Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, vol. 13 no. 1 (1990), pp. 82-83; 
references on pp. 105-108. 
 
D.H. Mellor, Real Time (Cambridge, England:  Cambridge 
University Press, 1981).   
 
Marvin Minsky, The Society of Mind (New York:  Simon & 
Schuster, 1988).   
-110-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
265 
Harold. J. Morowitz, “Rediscovering the Mind”, in The 
Mind’s I, ed. D.R. Hofstadter and D.C. Dennett (N.Y.:  
Basic Books, 1981).  Reprinted from Psychology Today, 
vol. 14 no. 3 (1980), pp. 12-18. 
 
Thomas Nagel, The View from Nowhere (N.Y.:  Oxford 
University Press, 1986).    
 
——————, “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?”, 
Philosophical Review, vol. 83, no. 4 (October 1974).   
 
Terence Parsons, Nonexistent Objects (New Haven:  Yale 
University Press, 1980).   
 
Richard M. Pearl, Rocks and Minerals (rev. ed.; New York:  
Barnes and Noble, 1956).     
 
Plato, Plato’s Republic, trans. G.M.A. Grube (Indianapolis:  
Hackett Pub. Co., 1974). 
 
——, Plato’s Timaeus, trans. Francis M. Cornford (New 
York:  Liberal Arts Press, 1959).   
 
Alex Preminger, ed., Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics, 
(Princeton, N.J.:  Princeton University Press, 1965).   
 
Willard Van Orman Quine, Set Theory and Its Logic (rev. 
ed.; Cambridge, MA:  Belknap Press, 1969).   
 
————————,  Word and Object (New York:  The 
Technology Press of The Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology and John Wiley & Sons, 1960). 
-111-

God, Son of Quark 
 
266 
Andrew J. Reck, Speculative Philosophy:  A Study of Its 
Nature, Types and Uses (Albuquerque:  University of New 
Mexico Press, 1972).   
 
Sir David Ross, Aristotle (5th ed., reprint; London, 
Methuen & Co., 1960).   
 
Rudy Rucker, Infinity and the Mind:  The Science and 
Philosophy of the Infinite (Boston:  Birkhäuser, 1982).   
 
Bertrand 
Russell, 
The 
Principles 
of 
Mathematics 
(paperback ed.; New York:  W.W. Norton & Co., 1996).   
 
————————, Logical Atomism, in The Philosophy 
of Logical Atomism, ed. David Pears (La Salle, Ill.:  Open 
Court, 1985).   
 
————————, Human Knowledge, Its Scope and 
Limits (New York:  Simon and Schuster, 1948).     
 
Jonathan Schull, “Are Species Intelligent?:  Not a Yes or 
No Question”, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 13 no. 1 
(1990), pp. 94-104; references on pp. 105-108.   
 
———————, “Are Species Intelligent?”, Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, vol. 13 no. 1 (1990), pp. 63-75; 
references on pp. 105-108.   
 
John R. Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind (Cambridge, 
Mass.:  The MIT Press, 1992). 
 
 
-112-

God, Son of Quark 
 
 
267 
Raymond A. Serway, Physics for Scientists and Engineers 
with Modern Physics (2nd ed.; Philadelphia:  Saunders 
College Publishing, 1986).   
 
J.C. Smuts, Holism and Evolution (N.Y.:  The Macmillan 
Co., 1926).   
 
Baruch Spinoza, The Ethics, in The Chief Works of 
Benedict de Spinoza, trans. R.H.M. Elwes  (reprint ed.; 
N.Y.:  Dover, 1955).   
 
W.T. Stace, The Philosophy of Hegel (New York:  Dover, 
1955).     
 
Kim 
Sterelny, 
“Learning, 
Selection 
and 
Species”, 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 13 no. 1 (1990), pp. 
90-91; references on pp. 105-108.   
 
Matt Visser, Lorentzian Wormholes:  From Einstein to 
Hawking (Woodbury, N.Y.:  AIP Press, 1995).   
 
John Archibald Wheeler, “Law without law”, in Quantum 
Theory and Measurement, ed. J. A. Wheeler and W. H. 
Zurek (Princeton, N.J.:  Princeton Univ. Press, 1983). 
 
Thomas Whittaker, The Neo-Platonists:  A Study in the 
History of Hellenism (2nd ed.; Cambridge University Press, 
1928).   
 
J.H. Woodger, The Technique of Theory Construction, vol. 
2 no. 5 in International Encyclopedia of Unified Science 
(Chicago:  University of Chicago Press, 1939) 
-113-

